THE Doctrine of Christianity; As held by the PEOPLE called QUAKERS,
VINDICATED: In ANSWER to GILBERT TENNENT's SERMON ON The LAWFULNESS of WAR.

Cease ye from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils: For wherein is he to be
accounted of? ISAIAH ii. 22. Trust ye in the Lord for ever: For in the Lord
Jehovah is everlasting Strength, ISAIAH xxvi. 4. I, even I, am he that
comfort you. Who art thou, that thou should be afraid (...) Man that
(...) all die, and of the Son of Man, which shall be made as (...) and
forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that has stretched forth the Heavens, and laid
the Foundations of the Earth; and have feared continually every Day, because of
the Fury of the Oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy: And where is the
Fury of the Oppressor? ISAIAH li. 12, 13. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by BENJAMIN
FRANKLIN, and DAVID HALL. MDCCXLVIII.

TO THE READER.
I HAVE expressed the Design of the following Treatise in the Title -- My
Motive to this Design was an Apprehension of Duty -- I thought the Scheme of
the Sermon was to prove That agreeable to the Doctrines of Christ, which is
absolutely forbid thereby, and that to support that Scheme, it perverted the
true Meaning of sundry Passages of the holy Scriptures; which, I hope, will be
esteemed a sufficient Apology for my Attempt to answer it -- I should have been
very well pleased if this Concern had fallen upon some Person endued with
greater Abilities, and more Experience in Religion. But however weak the
Performance may be, my Intention is honest and sincere -- As I had seen several
Treatises upon the same Subject, I thought myself at Liberty to make use of
some Arguments and Expressions therein, when they suited my Purpose -- I
dedicate it to the Service of the Christian Religion, recommend the serious
Perusal of it to the Impartial and Unprejudiced, and heartily wish Salvation
and Peace unto all Mankind.

Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect: But I
follow after -- I press toward the Mark for the Prize of the high Calling of
God in Christ Jesus, Phil. iii. 12, 14. JOHN SMITH.
Philadelphia, 11th Mo. 25. 1747-8.
A VINDICATION, etc.
THE Design of the Gospel Dispensation, was to redeem Man from the deplorable
Corruption which was the Consequence of his Fall, and to restore him into the
State of Purity and Peace, wherein he was created; by informing his Judgment,
rectifying his Will, governing his Passions, and making him a New Creature: In
Pursuance of, and to complete this Design, it pleased God, after the
Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of our Blessed Savior, to pour
forth the Holy Spirit upon the primitive Apostles and Believers. This Spirit
was to continue with all true Believers, through successive Generations,
agreeable to many Prophecies, particularly that of the Evangelical Prophet,
speaking of the Coming of the Redeemer to Zion -- As for me, this is my
Covenant with them, says the Lord, My Spirit that is upon thee, and my Words,
which I have put in thy Mouth, shall not depart out of thy Mouth, nor out of
the Mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed's Seed, says the Lord,
from henceforth and for ever, Isa. lix. 21. And our Savior confirms this, Lo I
am with you always, even unto the End of the World, Mat. xxviii. 20.

So long as the primitive Believers were faithful to the Appearance of this
divine Spirit, and obeyed the Teachings and Directions thereof, Christianity
remained in Purity; but when this was forsaken, the Apostasy began, which soon
spread, and became general; then Form was set up instead of Power, and Men
being vain in their Imaginations, their foolish Hearts became darkened, so that
they knew not the Nature nor Design of Christ's Kingdom, but under a Pretense
of being his Ministers, and of having the Right of explaining his Laws, they
got Power into their Hands, and enforced Obedience: Thus the Simplicity of the
Gospel being forsook for worldly Pomp and Power, instead of the peaceable,
loving, and forgiving Temper, which it enjoined, it was misconstrued to allow
of Violence and Oppression. In this Apostasy from the Life and Spirit of
Christ, many Evils which the primitive Christians were redeemed from, came to
be reckoned necessary and expedient.

But when it pleased Almighty God to visit our primitive Friends and Elders,
with the Discovery of his divine Light and Truth in their Souls, he showed
them, that notwithstanding there had been among Protestants a great Reformation
from the black and gross Corruptions of the Church of Rome, yet the Purity and
Perfection of the Gospel Dispensation, required a much further and more eminent
Change: And in Obedience to this Light, they proclaimed Deliverance from all
Sin, as a State attainable, through Faith in Christ, and true Obedience to his
Spirit, A Measure or Manifestation whereof, was given to every Man, 1 Cor. xii.
7. And that this Spirit was an infallible Teacher; that by it alone Men could
come to a right Understanding of the Scriptures; that it led into all Truth,
redeemed from all Unrighteousness, gave Victory over the fallen Passions, and
renewed the Image of God in the Soul of Man. This was the primary and chief
Article that they were first convinced of themselves, and found necessary to
publish to others.

By this Spirit they were convinced of the Sinfulness of many Things, which
other Professors of Christianity were in the Practice of, and thought
allowable, viz. War, Persecution for different Sentiments in Religion, a
Man-made and Hireling Ministry, Swearing, etc. These they thought inconsistent
with the Purity and Perfection of the Christian Religion -- And that War can be
now proved to be so, by fair and candid Interpretations of the Scriptures, will
I hope appear in the following Examination of a late Sermon on that Subject.

But to obviate Objections, let me here observe, that our Friends have never
(that I know of) condemned such in the Use of Carnal Weapons, who are not yet
convinced that the Dispensation of the Gospel forbids them: But they did, and
now do call all Men to believe in the inward and spiritual Appearance of Christ
in the Soul, who will teach all that so believe, and hearken to him, to deny
themselves, to forsake a Dependence upon human Means, and trust in God alone;
and they esteem it their Duty to testify that such are not in Unity with them,
who, making Profession of this inward Principle, manifest a Conduct contrary to
it.

The Sermon which I am about to consider, is upon Exodus xv. 3. The Lord is a
Man of War -- This was Part of a Song of Praises for a miraculous Deliverance,
wrought by the immediate Hand of God, without any human Contrivance or Force --
The Command to Israel, when closely pursued by their Enemies, was, Fear ye not,
stand still and see the Salvation of the Lord -- The Lord shall fight for you,
and ye shall hold your Peace.

The Author of the Sermon endeavors, from his Text, and some other
Appellations given to the Almighty in the Old Testament, viz. The Lord of
Hosts, The God of the Armies of Israel, etc. to prove that War was thence
agreeable to him. The Lord does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children
of Men, Lam. iii. 33.


Though some Wars under that Dispensation were commanded of God, and therefore
those Appellations were then suitable and proper, yet I cannot perceive that
they discover any Approbation of War begun and pursued at the mere Pleasure and
Will of Men -- I rather take them to denote the Greatness of his Power and
Superiority, and therefore the Justness and Propriety of an entire Dependence
upon him -- They convey an Idea of Sufficiency to disappoint the Enterprises of
the most numerous Hosts, or to bless with Success the Endeavors of a few at
his Command. The Instances of his manifesting this Almighty Power, in both
these Respects, are frequent -- The Case of Gideon, Judges vii. when he
prepared to go against the Midianites, is a very memorable One: He had an Army
of 32,000 Men, but the Lord said unto him, The People that are with thee, are
too many for me, to give the Midianites into their Hand, lest Israel vaunt
themselves against me, saying, Mine own Hand has saved me. Wherefore he at the
Command of God, reduced his Army to 300 -- And the Lord directed him in what
Manner to proceed, and as he obeyed, the mighty Host of the Midianites was put
to flight -- Here (though the Use of outward Means was permitted) a strong and
entire Dependence upon God was required, even in that Day: Can such a
Dependence be less necessary in a Day of Gospel Light?

Many Parts of the Old Testament have been considered by religious Writers, as
Types and Figures of future Times: Thus Solomon is in some Instances a Type of
Christ; and the Building of the outward Temple, a lively Figure of the
Gathering of the Church in the latter Days -- David had been a Man of War, at
the Direction of God: He had it in his Heart to build an House to the Name of
the Lord, but he was not permitted to execute that Design -- The Reader is
desired to remark the Reason in David's Words, 1 Chronicles. xxii. 7, 8, 9. And
David said to Solomon, My Son, as for me, it was in my Mind to build an House
unto the Name of the Lord my God; but the Word of the Lord came to me, saying,
Thou have shed Plood abundantly, and have made great Wars: Thou shall not build
an House unto my Name, because thou have shed much Blood upon the Earth in my
Sight; behold a Son shall be born to thee, who shall be a Man of Rest, and I
will give him Rest from all his Enemies round about, for his Name shall be
Solomon, and I will give Peace and Quietness unto Israel in his Days. If a
Cessation from War was necessary for the Building that outward Temple, how much
more so is it, for the Gathering of all Nations to be Members of the Church of
Christ? The Glory of this latter House shall be greater than of the former,
says the Lord of Hosts: And in this Place will I give Peace, says the Lord of
Hosts, Hag. ii. 9. Though the Almighty is styled by Moses, A Man of War, he is
called by the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. xiii. 11. The God of Love and Peace. And the
Apostle John says, God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God,
and God in him, 1 John, iv. 16.

The Sermon has in Page 8, the following Paragraph, Surely if Protection from
Injuries, Peace among Neighbors, and the Administration of Justice, be
desirable and valuable Benefits, which all Mankind must with one Voice
acknowledge, then of consequence, that which at times is the only Mean left to
procure them, must be lawful, necessary, and valuable also.

The "Only Mean" here, is War, and whether the Expression suits with the Belief
of an Overruling, Omnipresent Providence, without whose Permission no Evil can
happen, and who alone has the Control of every Thing, I would have a little
to be thought upon. -- It will appear from the Jewish History, that there were
Times when, to human Appearance, there was no Way for those valuable Benefits
to be preserved but by War, and yet they were delivered without the Use of this
Mean. -- The Case of the Children of Israel at the Red Sea when the Egyptians
pursued them, Exodus xiv. -- That of the coming up of Sennacherib, King of
Assyria, against Jerusalem in the Time of Hezekiah, 2 Kings, xviii. 19. -- That
of several Nations joining together against Judah in the Time of Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. xx. are Proofs of this. And there are several Instances, that when the
Mean of War has been used, 'till there was no Appearance to the natural Eye of
Preservation, the Almighty has provided a Deliverance without the Help of
human Means. What an unhappy Circumstance did he deliver Samaria from, when
besieged by the Syrians, 2 Kings vi. 7. when the Famine among the Besieged was
so great, that Asses Heads, and Doves Dung, sold for a very great Price, and
Women agreed to eat their own Children; in the midst of this sore Distress --
Elisha said, Hear ye the Word of the Lord, Thus says the Lord, Tomorrow about
this Time, shall a Measure of Fine Flour be sold for a Shekel, and two Measures
of Barley for a Shekel, in the Gate of Samaria -- This Prediction doubtless
appeared, to natural Reason, very unlikely to come to pass so soon, and yet the
Almighty caused it to be fulfilled -- And the Lord (upon whose Hand the King
leaned) who disbelieved the Prophecy, lost his Life in seeing it fulfilled,
without being permitted to partake of the Plenty.

Could the Almighty deliver in that Day? Could he then preserve without the
Assistance of human Strength and Abilities? And can he not equally do so now?
Behold the Lord's Hand is not shortened, that it cannot save: Neither his Ear
heavy, that it cannot hear, Isaiah lxix. 1.

We are told in the Sermon, Page 8. That the Light of Nature, the Law of God,
and the Gospel of Christ, conspire to evince the Divine Approbation of Lawful
War -- Lawful War is before defined in the three following Instances.

1st, When undertaken for necessary Defense against unjust Invasion of such as
design to do us Harm, either by assaulting our Persons, or robbing us of, and
ruining our Estates.

2dly, When commenced for the Recovery of something of great Importance
unjustly taken from us, which we cannot do well without, nor, after
Application, obtain by milder Measures; especially when the Consequences of the
Loss are like to be more prejudicial and distressing, than the Consequences of
the War entered into to recover it: Thus David pursued the Amalekites, who
carried his and his Peoples Wives away Captives, together with their Sons and
Daughters.

3dly, War is no doubt lawful, and consequently approved by God, when
undertaken by the Magistrate, for the Punishment of some great Injury or Wrong,
which much affects the Credit and Interest of a Nation or People, after all
softer Means for Redress fail of Success: Thus the Royal Psalmist commenced War
against the Ammonites for their contemptuous Usage of his Ambassadors.

In these three Instances we are told positively War is lawful; but before we
examine his Proofs of this, let it be observed, that in the second Case, where
David's pursuing the Amalekites is supposed to be a Parallel, though an
extremely afflicting one, when the Amalekites had, in the Absence of David and
his Men, smitten Ziclag, and burnt it with Fire, and had taken Captives their
Wives, and their Sons, and their Daughters, and to add to his Difficulty, the
People were so enraged that they spoke of Stoning him, yet David, before he
pursued, Enquired at the Lord, saving, Shall I pursue after this Troop? Shall I
overtake them? And he answered him, Pursue; for thou shall surely overtake
them, end without fail recover all: Upon which the learned Poole observes,
David was sensible of his former Error in neglecting to ask Counsel of God, by
the Ephod, when he came to Achish, and when he went out with Achish to the
Battle, and his Necessity now brings him to his Duty, and his Duty meets with
Success. It is very probable David likewise enquired before he went up against
the Ammonites, as he had before suffered for the Breach of this Duty.


If then it had been an Error not to have enquired of God, in so pinching a
Case as this, the Consequence fairly deducible is, That should we be in the
like Circumstances, we must make the like Enquiry, and receive the Divine
Permission and Command, otherwise David's Example will not be wholly followed.

The first Proof proposed (in the Sermon) That War in the foregoing Instances
is lawful, is from the Light of Nature; and I should not have attacked the
Arguments drawn from thence, had not this Writer asked, Who is the Author
thereof but God himself? The following Distinction seems therefore necessary to
be made.

God created Man good, upright and holy; and had he continued in this State,
there never would have been any War, and consequently no need of Selfdefence;
but Man falling, through Disobedience, his Nature became corrupted, his Faculties
depraved, and the whole intellectual System disordered: Thus began shedding of
Blood, and the Earth was early filled with Violence. This was the unhappy
Consequence of Sin -- I hope this Writer will not venture to say, that God was
the Author of Nature thus corrupted: The Nature, and the Light of Nature, that
he was the Author of, was holy, innocent, and perfect; but the Corruption in
Nature from whence proceeded Violence and Bloodshed, was occasioned by adhering
to the Voice of Satan. Let any Man therefore retain this Distinction, and he
will not at all wonder, that the universal Practice of all Nations, as well of
the most civilized, as of the most rude and barbarous, do all with one Consent
oppose Force to Force -- for it is not from the degenerate fallen Light of
Nature that Arguments are to be drawn for the Formation and Establishment of
Christian Principles, neither are any from it, of any Weight in Opposition
thereto. It would be easy however to prove from the Writings of the Gentile
Philosophers, that they were convinced Man had fallen from the Condition he was
once in, that he had been misled and corrupted by some evil Principle, and that
they could not conceive it possible that a holy, just God, should make him
subject to evil Passions, apt to commit Injuries, and fond of Revenge -- Lest
any should imagine they all thought Force the best Way to repel Force, hear
what Plato says (...) the Name of Socrates.

Gentleman's Magazine, 1737. Page 275.
Injury is to be done upon no Account; nor if you have suffered Injury, are you
at Liberty to take Revenge, as the Vulgar believe. He who suffers Evil, if in
like Manner he returns Evil to him, who did it, is not Just, as the Vulgar
says, but Unjust; for to bring Evil upon Men, differs nothing from doing them
an Injury -- It is not decent and right to do Evil to any Man by Way of
Revenge, whatsoever you may have suffered (or whatsoever Provocation you may
have received) from others.

Of the Proofs, under this Head of the Light of Nature, I shall take notice of
two or three other Paragraphs.

If it be not lawful (says the Sermon, Page 11) to oppose by Force unjust
Invaders, then the Goods of Providence are vouchsafed to us in vain; and Men of
the strictest Integrity, as well as Females of the most unblemished Virtue,
will ever be exposed as an easy Prey to the vilest Insults of the most
scandalous Scoundrels.

To banish Self-defence, though pursued by Force, would be so far from promoting
Peace, that it would rather contribute to the utter Ruin of the human Race.

If these extraordinary Consequences are true, what a strong Faith in and
Dependence upon God, do those manifest, who have embraced, and do religiously
maintain the peaceable Doctrine? Methinks this should have inclined the Writer
to remember, that whatsoever the Almighty commands or requires of his
Creatures, he gives them Strength to do, and will support them in -- That if
any Nation or People were fully persuaded in their Minds that the Almighty
required them to forbear the Use of Arms, he could, if he pleased, prevent any
such Misery happening to them; for to Him the Winds and Waves, and every Thing
else is subject, and nothing can do us any Harm, but by his Permission; by him
the very Hairs of our Heads are numbered, and whatsoever does happen, will, as
such keep faithful to him, work for their Good.

That he can disappoint the Designs of wicked and ambitious Men, without the
Use of the Sword, every Body may remark in the late great Destruction of the
Dunkirk and Jebucta Fleets -- The former threatened much Distress to our Mother
Country; and what a terrible Scourge was the latter likely to be to these
Colonies, if the Protection and Care of Heaven had not been sufficient, without
the Use of carnal Weapons.

He (says the Sermon, Page 12) that suffers his Life to be taken from him, by
one that has no Authority for that Purpose, when he might preserve it by
Defense, incurs the Guilt of Selfmurder, since God has enjoined him to seek
the Continuance of his Life, etc. -- and that it is every Man's Duty to love
his own Life, to desire its Continuance, and use proper Means for its
Preservation.

This Author should have consulted the Meaning of "Self-murder" before he used
that Term so freely in several Parts of his Sermon -- Murder is defined to
denote a wilful and felonious killing another, upon prepensed Malice, etc.
Felo de se, or a Selfmurderer, is he that commits Felony, by willingly and
deliberately killing himself; so that the Case in the Sermon does not reach
this Description, unless we can suppose, he who does not endeavor to defend
himself, is unactive from a wilful and deliberate Desire of being killed.

It is without doubt every Man's Duty to use proper Means for the Preservation
of Life; but if any Man is convinced that Christ has forbidden him the Use of
military Preparations, and yet will use them, they are to him very improper
Means -- Remember our Savior's Words, Matthew xvi. 25, 26. For whosoever will
save his. Life, shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his Life for my sake,
shall find it? For what is a Man profited if he shall gain the whole World, and
lose his own Soul? Or what shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul?

Poole annotates thus upon this Passage; Besides Bodies, which may be killed by
Persecutors, you carry about with you immortal Souls, of infinite more Value;
and besides a temporal Life, of which you are in Possession, there is an
eternal State which awaiteth you: You are Creatures ordained to an eternal
Existence, either in Misery or in Happiness. Admit you could by pleasing
yourselves, denying me, shifting the Cross, declining a Life according to my
Precepts and Example, prolong your temporal Life; yet what will you get by it,
considering that by it you must suffer Loss, as to your eternal happy
Existence; for I shall then deny you before my Father, and his holy Angels. Can
any Thing you can get or save in this World, be a proportionable Exchange for
eternal Happiness?

If any sincere Christian understands it to be his Duty not to make any Defense
at all, his forbearing to use any will never incur Guilt.

The Sermon, after describing the Wickedness of Self-murder, in Page 13, says,
Well, if Self-murder be a heinous Sin, it will follow by the Law of Contraries,
that Self-defence is an important Duty: Surely he who is unjustly attacked, and
does not endeavor by suitable Means to preserve his Life, especially if there
be any Probability of Success in so doing, betrays it; and so is guilty of
Suicide, etc.

Upon this Passage I would remark, that frequently the most suitable Means to
preserve Life, when thus attacked, is to deliver up that for which the Attack
is made, which is commonly for Riches, without fighting with the Robbers --
Fighting is very often the most "Suitable Means" to destroy Life when attacked
-- Especially if used by one who believes the Gospel prohibits it. -- If
however I were thus attacked by Villains who were so wicked as to determine to
take away my Life, were I in the meek and peaceable Disposition which the
Gospel inculcates, I believe that would have such an Effect even on the worst
of Men, that it would disarm their Malice; but if it did not, my submitting
calmly, and resigning my Life, rather than running the Risk of taking away
another's, would be so far from Suicide, that it would be acting agreeable to
the Nature and Temper of the Gospel, and consequently highly rewardable.

The Sermon says, Page 12, If we may not defend ourselves by Force, why did
the blessed God allow the Jews to kill a Night-robber with Impunity? And why
did the blessed Jesus enjoin his Disciples, that each of them who wanted a
Sword, should sell his Coat and buy one?

The former of these Cases, the Text thus expresses -- If a Thief be found
breaking up, and be smitten that he die, there shall no Blood be shed for him
-- Exodus xxii. 2.
That is to be understood in the Night, for the next Verse says, If the Sun be
risen upon him, there shall be Blood shed for him -- Though I do not look upon
this Instance to be at all applicable to the Question whether War is now lawful
or not -- Yet if it proves any Thing on the Side of the Sermon-writer, it is,
that if their Enemies attack them in the Night, they may defend themselves at
the Expense of their Lives; but if the Attack be made in the Daytime, they
must not -- The Person who killed the Nightrobber, is not said to be clear of
Guilt, though his Life was excused -- And yet the Defense of Property, with the
Loss of the Robber's Life in the Daytime, we see, was even under the legal
Dispensation to be punished with Death -- I suppose the Reason of excusing the
Life of him who slew the Nightrobber to be, that as they had a standing Law
from the Time of Noah, that Whosoever shed Man's Blood, by Man should his Blood
be shed, it was necessary the Jews should know what was an Exception to that
general Rule; that it was a reasonable Exception, appears from apprehending
that it might be done accidentally, whilst the Owner of the House was making a
necessary Defense, the Darkness of the Time in which the Attack was made, and
the Surprise occasioned thereby, might cause him, without Design, to take away
the Life of the Robber.

As to that Passage of Christ's enjoining his Disciples, that each of them who
wanted a Sword, should sell his Coat and buy one, upon which the Note at the
Bottom of the Page, has this Query, If Christ was against all Fighting and
War, to what Purpose did he counsel his Disciples to buy Swords; must they be
bought and never used, or bought for nothing. I answer, That we have no Account
of his Disciples ever using Swords after his Ascension, and we have several
very strong Intimations in their Writings that they did not -- Which
sufficiently demonstrates, That they did not understand the Text in its present
literal Acceptance. Upon Luke xxii. 35, 36. Poole has the following Remark:
-- Those who interpret v. 35, 36, as a Precept of our Savior's imposing a Duty
upon his Disciples, or a Counsel concerning the providing Arms, which they
might use for the Protection and Defense of themselves, will not only find a
Difficulty to reconcile their Notion of it to several other Precepts, and the
Will of God declared by the Apostle's Practice, who never went about by Force
and Arms to defend themselves in the first Plantation and Propagation of the
Gospel; but also to reconcile it to the last Words of our Savior, who said,
when his Disciples told him they had two Swords, It is enough.

Ambrose, one of the Fathers, so called, speaks thus, respecting that Passage,
O Lord! Why command thou me to buy a Sword, who forbiddest me to smite with
it? Why command thou me to have it, whom thou prohibitest to draw it? Unless
perhaps a Defense be prepared, not necessary Revenge: And that I may seem to
have been able to revenge, but that I would not; for the Law forbids me to
smite again: And therefore, perhaps, he said to Peter, offering two Swords ( It
is enough) as if it had been lawful until the Gospel Times, that in the Law
there might be learning of Equity, but in the Gospel a Perfection of Goodness.
Barc. Apol.

War (we are told in Page 14 of the Sermon) was lawful under the Old Testament
Dispensation, and therefore it is lawful under the New.

Let us see how this extraordinary Inference will hold in other Cases;
Burnt-offerings, Sacrifices and Circumcision, were lawful under the Old
Testament Dispensation, Are they therefore so now?

But we are further told, It is certain that God approved of, and appointed his
People to make War, under the Law of Moses, and by the moral Law: The sixth
Commandment does undoubtedly imply a lawful War; for if we must not kill
others, much less ourselves, and if we must have no Hand in our own Death, we
must defend our Lives, against unjust Violence, which sometimes cannot be done
without War. Now the blessed Jesus never came to destroy the moral Law of
Nature, which is in substance the same, but to fulfill it, etc.

There are such strange Absurdities in this Manner of declaiming, and drawing
Conclusions, a Man must be very blind that cannot see them.

A positive Precept, is made to imply its direct reverse. A Commandment not to
kill is implied to authorize killing: And in Consequence thereof, the blessed
Jesus is supposed to approve of War; whether this be agreeable to his Life and
Doctrines, the Reader is desired to consult.

I would now ask, Is the moral Command, Thou shall not kill, best fulfilled or
kept, by understanding the Gospel to forbid War, or to allow of it? Where there
is one of those that take it in its first Sense slain, are there not many
Thousands of the latter killed in the Practice of Fighting?

Moral Precepts are (says the Sermon) grounded upon invariable Equity, upon
the Nature and Reason of Things, and therefore cannot be altered.

Can any Man possibly think that War is a Part of the moral Law, couched under
this Precept, Thou shall not kill; and does it follow that therefore War must
for ever be lawful -- This Method of making Texts mean what they never meant,
our Author had taken in Page 9. with this Passage in the Prove. xxii. 3. The
prudent Man, foreseeing evil, hides himself; " i. e. (says the Sermon)
prepares for his Defense." so that hiding ones self, and preparing for Defense,
are so exactly alike, that they are taken one for the other.

Now (says the Sermon, P. 14) if the Almighty has approved of War formerly,
and there is still the same Necessity of it under the Gospel Dispensation as
before, it will follow, that it is equally lawful now: It is absurd to suppose
that the blessed God, who is infinite in Wisdom, and unalterable in his Nature,
would determine contrarily at different Periods of Time, concerning a Case that
is substantially the same.

If this Manner of Arguing proves any Thing, it proves offensive War, as lawful
as defensive. God approved of the Israelites taking away the Possessions of
many Nations: He commanded them to destroy some utterly; is it therefore
equally lawful to do so now, whether we have his Command or not? The War that
he approved of formerly, was undertaken by his Counsel and Direction.

The latter Part of the Paragraph does not belong to the Argument, unless it is
first proved, either that People nowadays have the express Command of God to
go to War, or that he has determined Man to be a sufficient Judge when it is
suitable, and when not.

The Nature of Man (says the Sermon, P. 15) in his fallen State, does not
alter by a Succession of Ages. Multitudes do now grasp after Wealth and
Dominion, as much as formerly, and do concert and pursue as unjust Measures to
obtain them; and if we are now deprived of that, which is the only Barrier
against Injustice and Violence, viz. Selfdefence, and must tamely suffer our
Lives, our Liberties, both Civil and Religious, and all that is dear to us as
Men and Christians, to be made an easy Prey of by insulting Enemies, our Case
is really miserable, etc.

The Forepart of this Paragraph is lamentably true; but how would the Face of
Things be altered, if the glorious Doctrines of the blessed Messiah did but
obtain, and were faithfully practiced among the Nations? Which in Time will
certainly be the Case, whatever Difficulties may at present appear to obstruct
it -- For he is faithful and true, who has promised it.

But is Self-defence then our only Barrier against Injustice and Violence? God
forbid it should be esteemed so; miserable shall we be indeed, when that is our
State; and easily made a Prey of by insulting Enemies, whether we use our
feeble Force or not: But there are many who depend and confide solely in
another Barrier, viz. The Eternal and Beneficent Providence, Whose Eye is over
the Righteous for Good, and his Ear is open to their Cry, Psalm. xxxiv. 15. To
such he has promised, In Righteousness shall thou be established: Thou shall
be far from Oppression, for thou shall not fear; and from Terror, for it shall
not come near thee, Isa. live. 14. And my People shall dwell in a peaceable
Habitation, and in sure Dwellings, and in quiet resting Places, Isa. xxxii. 17.

It is strange to think (says the Sermon, P. 15) and hard to reconcile it with
any just Notion of divine Goodness, that Almighty God should under this last
and brightest Dispensation of his Grace toward the Children of Men, instead of
enlarging, diminish our Privileges, and that in so tender and important a
Point. Indeed, methinks, such a Notion tends to cast a dishonorable and
inglorious Reflection upon the divine Benlgnity and Goodness, etc.

What Privileges are here meant, those of Fighting for our Possessions, gaining
Riches, enjoying Estates, etc. -- Though Riches acquired by honest Means, may
not be inconsistent with the Doctrines of Christ; and though we may possess in
the World many near and dear Enjoyments, yet Christ and his Testimony, ought to
be preferred above all Things, if we would render ourselves acceptable in his
Sight -- If any Man (faith he, Luke xiv. 26) come to me, and hate not (i. e.
comparatively) his Father and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and
Sisters, yea, and his own Life also, he cannot be my Disciple. Neither is this
at all inconsistent with the most just Notions of divine Goodness -- It would
not be difficult to show, that our Savior's enjoining the young Man ( Mat.
xix.) to sell what he had, and give to the Poor, would, had there been
Obedience on his Part, have proved his truest Interest. Man is a dependant
Creature; his Happiness consists not in Abundance of Wealth, Honor or
Worldly Pleasure; these are often his great Enemies: But it consists in being
what God his Maker would have him be. Every true Christian knows this, and will
be apt to think that this Allwise Being, as he is the Governor of the Universe,
and knows best what is suitable and necessary for him, will certainly dispense
it: Such an One therefore can be resigned in any Station or Circumstance,
because he is sure he is under the Care of a gracious Being, who permits
nothing to happen to him, but what is for his Good: And should he be in the
utmost Affliction, through an Adherence to what he knows to be his Duty, he
will be supported under it, and amply rewarded for it. These dare not murmur at
any Privation of their Privileges, nor think it A dishonorable and inglorious
Reflection upon the divine Goodness, that they thus are afflicted, or are
liable to be so; since the present Afflictions will certainly work A far more
exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory, 2 Cor. v. 17.

I have said thus much in Answer to the last quoted Paragraph, upon a
Supposition that a faithful Adherence to the Doctrines of Christ, may, in this
Age, as it has frequently in former Ages, be attended with the Loss of outward
Possessions, and suffering in the Flesh -- Let it however be remembered, that
these Things are not the Effects of Christ's Doctrines, but are occasioned by a
Disobedience to them in those to whom they are equally offered -- Whose
Condemnation will therefore be great, and the Reward of the Obedient will be
infinite.

Why, my Brethren (says the Sermon, Page 15) should it be now a Sin to perform
(in respect of Things of a moral Nature) that which was under the Jewish
Dispensation a Sin to neglect? Was not Meroz exposed to a bitter Curse, because
she came not to help the Lord against the Mighty, i. e. as appears by the
Context, because they came not to assist their Brethren engaged in Battle in a
good Cause.

The first of these Questions, I really think, not applicable to the Point in
Dispute, because there is not any Part of the moral Law which enjoins War; and
the Reason why Meroz was so severely cursed, Poole says, was, To show the
Sinfulness and Unreasonableness of their cowardly Desertion of this Cause,
because it was the Cause of God; and they had the Call of God to it, whom they
knew to be able easily to crush that Enemy whom they dreaded, and who had
promised to do it. So that upon this View of the Case, there is this only
proved by the Parallel, that it is a Sin to neglect going to War in the Cause
of God, when he calls to it. This, therefore, cannot at all operate against
those who refuse Fighting, because they apprehend God has forbidden it Now it
is well known, that the People called Quakers, who scruple Fighting, have never
been remarkable for being Cowards; their constant Practice of suffering
valiantly in Times of hot Persecution (when many of the same Profession with
this Sermon-writer hid themselves) is a Proof of Courage, when they thought the
Cause they were engaged in was right -- If the Reader will consult William
Sewell's History, and William Penn's Works, he will meet with sundry Passages
there, confirming the Truth of this Remark.
.

If it be a Difficulty with any to reconcile God's commanding War under the Old
Testament Dispensation, with his prohibiting it now, I beseech them to
remember, that he suffered and required many Things of the Jews, because of the
Hardness of their Hearts, which were not to continue in his Church, after the
bright Discovery of the Gospel was manifested. The World was then in very great
Darkness and Ignorance, and it pleased God to choose a peculiar People, whom he
determined to make great and famous: This was not to be the Case in the
Exhibition of the Gospel: The Partition Wall between Jew and Gentile was then
broken down, and all Nations were invited to become the People of God. The
Kingdoms of this World were to become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and his Christ
( Rev. xi. 15) Is it therefore reasonable to suppose, that this universal,
glorious Design, admits of War and Fighting? Especially between such Nations as
profess to be under the Government of the same Lord and Lawgiver.

Can we think, my Brethren (says the Sermon, Page 16) that God would enjoin
and approve of any Practice formerly, that was contrary to the moral Law and
Gospel which the Jews enjoyed? Surely no; that is contrary to his unalterable
Purity, of which the moral Law is a legible Copy and Exemplar. Well, if a just
War was not contrary to the moral Law, under the Jewish Dispensation, and
before it, why should it be so now, in the like Circumstances of Necessity? And
if it be not contrary to the moral Law, the standing and unalterable Rule of
our Conduct, Why should any scruple it, or oppose it now?

I have already observed, that the Almighty's Enjoining and Approving of some
Wars formerly, does not authorize any Wars begun and carried on at the mere
Will and Pleasure of Men. The like Circumstances of Necessity, must be, when we
have the Divine Command and Direction, and not otherwise.

If it be a Doubt why the dark and distant Prospects of the Gospel, which the
Jews had, did not discover to them in general, that the Time should come when
outward War should be laid aside, the same Difficulty recurs with respect to
Sacrifices, Burnt-offerings, Circumcision, etc. and yet some of the inspired
Prophets foresaw that Time. If it be objected, That Sacrifices, etc. were Types
and Figures; so, in my Opinion, were the outward Wars and Fightings of the
Jews, and are considered in that Light by religious Writers of many
Denominations.

That the moral Law is the standing and unalterable Rule of our Conduct, I
grant, as far as it reaches: But it is not from thence that a Scruple against
Fighting arises. The blessed Jesus has taught some Christians (both by the
immediate Dictates of his Spirit, and the Expression of his Will, when
personally upon Earth) that the best Way to keep the Commandments, Thou shall
not Kill; and, Thou shall love thy Neighbor; is not to harbor any Ill Will,
or Revenge against any, but to Love Enemies, etc. And that Thou shall not
commit Adultery -- is best kept by forbearing to look upon a Woman with a
lustful Eye, or to entertain such a Thought: And that Thou shall not forswear
thy self, etc. is best kept by Speaking the Truth, without Swearing at all.

The next Paragraph in the Sermon, and to Page 20, is to prove, That the Office
of the Magistrate necessarily requires War; and that it is his Duty to use it,
etc. Upon which I remark, That whenever the Magistrate is convinced that the
Doctrines of Christ forbid War, it will be as much his Duty, as any other
Man's, to render Obedience to those Doctrines. However, the People called
Quakers do not undertake to condemn our Superiors engaging in War, in the
present unhappy State of human Affairs: We rather think it probable, that as
they have shown a noble and Christian Disposition, in granting Liberty and
Protection to such as are of tender Consciences, it may please God to bless
their Arms with Success, and reward them for their Kindness to his People, who
desire to live in Obedience to the inward Appearance of his Spirit, which leads
to Purity and Perfection: And agreeable to the Advice of the Apostle Paul, we
find it our Duty to put up our Prayers for Kings and them that are in
Authority, That we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and
Honesty, 1 Timothy ii. 1, 2.

We are now come to the Sermon's New Testament Proofs, which are thus ushered
in, I may add, that the Lawfulness of War, especially Defensive, is signified
in the New Testament in diverse Instances -- If he makes this out to be true, I
will acknowledge myself to have been mistaken -- The Words, "Especially
Defensive," ^ould seem to convey an Idea, as if the Lawfulness of offensive War
was also signified in the New Testament -- Let us observe the Proofs.

The first is in Page 20, from the Behavior of John the Baptist to the
Soldiers, who asked him, What they should do? John told them, Do Violence to no
Man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your Wages, Luke iii. 14.
From whence this Writer argues thus:

While he counsels to be content with the Wages of War, does he not, of
Necessity, approve the Work? Or would he have Wages paid for Nothing? Can we
reasonably conjecture, that this inspired Person would give Directions how to
conduct a Manner of Life that was simply unlawful and hateful to God? Would he
not rather have condemned it absolutely, and exhorted the Soldiers speedily to
forsake and abandon it?

These ( Poole says) were the Roman Soldiers, kept by them to maintain their
Conquest of Judea. John was a Jew. Some of these Roman Soldiers hearing him
preach Repentance, apply to him for some Advice. He very wisely tells them
wherein to refrom their moral Conduct (which he did likewise to the Publicans,
who asked the same Question) as a preparatory Step to their receiving greater
and more sublime Doctrines. Now if abstaining from War be the very Perfection
of the Christian Religion, that is, a Point the most difficult to be learned,
and hardest for Nature to submit to, is it likely or reasonable to expect, that
John, upon the Pagan Soldiers first Application, should declare that to them? I
think not. Nor can I conceive, that while he counsels them to be content with
their Wages, that he of Necessity approves the Works they received it for -- He
might advise them to be content with their Wages, that they might not plunder
and rob those among whom they were stationed: And if I were in such a
Situation, that is, saw my own Nation subject to Soldiers of a foreign Power,
though my religious Principles might not permit me to fight, yet I could freely
advise such Soldiers to be easy, and content to live upon the Pay their Master
allowed them, without ravaging and plundering my Relatives and Countrymen.
There is not therefore the least Proof from this Argument, that War is lawful,
but the reverse; for John forbad doing Violence to any Man; Can War subsist
without Violence?

Nor did (says the Sermon, Page 21) our Lord Jesus rebuke the Centurion or
Roman Captain on Account of his military Employment, when he applied to him for
the Cure of his sick Servant; but commended his Faith, though he used his Calling
as an Argument to support it. This, and the Remainder of the Paragraph, which
puts the Proof upon our Savior's not taking that Opportunity to declare
against War, is likewise no Satisfaction to me on this Point -- Our Savior did
not initiate the Romans, or any others, upon their first Belief in him, into
the whole Nature and Design of the Gospel: His own Disciples, long after they
had followed him, were so ignorant, that they thought he intended to assume an
outward Kingdom: Our Lord knew that the best Method to deal with frail fallen
Mortals, was to lead them by Degrees, and not at once to Perfection. -- If the
Sermon-writer could have proved that after this Miracle, which our Lord wrought
upon the Centurion's testifying such an extraordinary Degree of Faith, that he
espoused the Doctrines, and joined himself with the Disciples of Christ, that
he became a faithful Asserter of the Principles of the Christian Religion, and
yet retained his military Employ, there would have been some Foundation for his
Argument; but as he has not, I cannot see that the Passage is any Thing to his
Purpose.

But methinks (says the Sermon, Page 22) our Lord signifies his Approbation of
War more expressly elsewhere, in these Words, My Kingdom is not of this World;
if my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants fight, that I should
not be delivered to the Jews John xviii. 36.
The Meaning of which is apparently this, That though War and Fighting is no
proper Mean to promote the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, yet that if the Nature
and Design of his Humiliation had permitted him to assume a Temporal Crown,
then his Servants ought to fight, in Defense of his Person and Dignity.

I think this apparent Meaning not deducible from the Text -- Pilate had asked
Christ, if he was the King of the Jews? In Answer he lets him know that his
Kingdom was not of this World, which himself might easily perceive, by his not
permitting his Servants to fight for him. Poole thus interprets that Passage;
-- I cannot deny but that I am the King of the Jews, but not in the Sense they
take it; not such a King as they look for in their Messiah; my Kingdom is
Spiritual, over the Hearts and Minds of Men, not earthly and worldly; and of
this thou thyself may be convinced: for was there ever an earthly Prince
apprehended and bound, for whom none of his Subjects would take up Arms? Here Is
none of my Disciples takes up Arms, or offers to fight for me; which is a
plain Evidence that I pretend to no kingly Power in Disturbance of the Roman
Government.

If this be the fair and genuine Meaning of the Passage, it does not imply that
"his Servants ought to fight" -- nor in the least Degree show an express
Approbation of War, as the Sermon-writer has vainly imagined -- And here I
shall desire him to consider, whether Christ's directing us to pray that his
Will may be done in Earth as it is in Heaven, does not much more clearly
express an Injunction to live in Love and Peace.

Does not (says the Sermon, Page 23) Luke the Evangelist highly commend
Cornelius, the Centurion of the Italian Band, without any Mixture of Invective
upon his martial Office? And is he not also adorned with the Angel's Testimony?
And why is all this but to signify the Lawfulness of War in Gospel Times? Acts
^.


But is Cornelius commended by the Evangelist, or the Angel, for his military
Post? Does either of them say a Word of the Consistency of it with the
Doctrines he was about to receive? No; he is commended for being A devout Man,
and one that feared God, with all his House, which gave much Alms to the
People, and prayed to God always: This Character he had, before he was
instructed in the Principles of the Christian Religion; Now he saw in a Vision
an Angel, who directed him to send for Peter -- He shall tell thee what thou
ought to do -- Which plainly shows he had something material yet to learn.
Whether he continued in his military Station, after Peter had taught him, and
he received the Holy Ghost, the History is silent; but to make the Comparison
of any Weight in support of War, it must first be proved that he did.

The Apostle Paul plainly (says the Sermon, Page 23) insinuates the Lawfulness
of War, in that Expression of his, where he enjoins us to live peaceably as
much as possible with all Men; which supposes that it is sometimes
impracticable, impossible.

Here again I differ in Sentiment from this Writer; the Apostle's Words are,
Romans xii. 18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with
all Men -- Which I think is as much as to say, Whatever Assronts or
Provocations you may receive, let it not anger you, or beget any Desire in you
to return Injury for Injury, though some may make War upon you, or try to disturb
you, yet let nothing appear on your Side but a meek and quiet Spirit, which is
willing to suffer ill Treatment, rather than let a quarrelsome or warring
Disposition appear. The Apostle had in the preceding Verse exhorted, Recompense
to no Man Evil for Evil -- And in the last Verse of same Chapter, he again
presses the same meek and forgiving Behavior, Be not overcome with Evil, but
overcome Evil with Good -- This Verse (faith Poole) is a divine Aphorism;
therein the Apostle anticipates an Objection: Some might be ready to say, if we
should follow this Advice, we should be counted Cowards and Dastards, etc. To
this he Answers, That it is the ready Way to be Triumphers and Conquerors. By
Evil here, he means the Wrongs and Injuries of Men; and to be overcome of Evil,
is to be moved and provoked thereby to Impatience or Malice; when it is thus
with a Man, he is overcome or conquered: In Revenge of Injuries, he is a Loser
that gets the better. Therefore he exhorts us rather to overcome Evil with
Good, that is a noble Victory indeed: This is the Way not to be even with him
that wrongs us, but to be above him; thus David overcame Saul, and Elisha the
Bands of Syria. This is the Way to overcome ourselves, and our Adversaries too;
ourselves, in denying our Lusts that egg us on to Revenge; our Adversaries, in
winning them to relent and acknowledge their Miscarriages.

Now Reader, consider this Interpretation, compare it with the Precept,
Recompense to no Man Evil for Evil, and then try if thou can conceive that
the Apostle intended (when he advised to live peaceably as much as possible
with all Men) to insinuate the Lawfulness of War.

The next Observation in the Sermon, is from the Improbability of the Apostle
Paul's recording the military Prowess and Exploits of diverse ancient Heroes, as
Gideon, Barack, Sampson, etc. without the least Hint of any Alteration in
Gospel Times in that Respect, and vet he himself of a contrary Sentiment. But
where is this Difficulty? Does not the Apostle in the same Chapter commend the
Faith of Abraham in leaving his own Country, and offering up his only Son Isaac
at the Command of God? Now will or can this be construed to infer, that because
Abraham did these Things at the divine Command, and the Apostle does not give
the least Hint of any Alteration in Gospel Times in that Respect, that
therefore a Christian may follow that Example without such Command? And yet
this Consequence is as fair, as to infer that because Gideon, etc. did go to
War at the Command of God (which this Writer grants those Worthies did) and the
Apostle commends them for it, etc. that therefore Christians may follow their
Example without such Command -- If, however, this Passage is intended only to
vindicate the Conduct of such who go to War in Obedience to the Command of God
-- I shall not pretend to say that such War is unlawful. The Object of the
Faith, through which those Worthies wrought such Wonders, was, Deus loquens,
etc. God speaking, and conveying to them a clear Knowledge of Duty, and
Assurance of Success.

But we are told that Paul virtually and consequentially signified his
Approbation of War by his Practice, in not rejecting the Protection of an armed
Force; and Acts xxiii. is referred to for a Proof -- I request the Reader to
peruse the Chapter, and he will not find that Paul did so much as make any
Application for the Protection of an armed Force, though he knew there was a
Conspiracy formed for the taking away his Life; he only took the necessary
Steps to inform the Chief Captain (in whose Custody he was) of that Design, not
doubting but he would have so much Justice, as to prevent such a private
Murder. The Chief Captain being thus informed of the Design, sends a Number of
Soldiers, who, as it was commanded them, says the Text, took Paul, and brought
him by Night to Antipatris.

Now, would it be reasonable or prudent, supposing the Apostle to have been
ever so clear in his Judgment, that War was unlawful to Christians, for him,
then a Prisoner, to refuse being conducted by the Soldiers, whither their
Superior had ordered them to take him.

We are told in the Sermon, Page 25, That the Apostle James, in Chap. iv. 1.
does not say, That War is ever unjust and sinful upon both Sides, or
unnecessary in Man's fallen State, but that the original Cause of War is Evil,
or proceeding from Lust. --

Can a true Christian then, who has known the Ax laid to the Root of the Tree;
i. e. The Spirit of God giving him Victory over Lust, join with, countenance or
encourage, that which has Lust for its Original? And should he not rather, by
his Doctrine and Practice, be concerned to open the Eyes of Men? and to turn
them from the Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God? Acts xxvi.
18.

But (says the Sermon) it is again objected, that the Apostle observes to the
Corinthians, that The Weapons of their Warfare were not carnal. 2 Cor. x. 4.
The Application of this, to mean no more than that they did not use carnal
Weapons against Sin and Satan spiritualy, is not doing Justice to the Text; it
is rather charging it with an Absurdity -- The Apostle had in the preceding
Verse told them, " For though we walk in the Flesh, we do not war after the
Flesh: This, therefore, is an express Declaration, that they did not use carnal
Weapons; and a positive Proof, that they did not War at all after the Flesh:
And his speaking in the plural Number, may be supposed to mean, that the
Christians in general were in the same Practice; for, in the foregoing Verses,
when he spoke of himself, he used the singular Language: So that this Objection
against the Lawfulness of War to Christians, remains in its full Force.

There is (says the Sermon) a great Difference between the War we must sustain
between Sin and Satan, and a War with wicked Men. To pretend to vanquish the
former by carnal Weapons, is as absurd, as to expect a Conquest over the latter
(always) without them.

Behold, Reader! what an absurd Company of People, according to this Writer,
the primitive Christians were! Though, agreeable to the Apostle's Testimony just
now quoted, they did not War after the Flesh; their Weapons were not carnal;
and yet they passed through a wicked World, and were Overcomers of Evil with Good.

It is presumptuous (says the Sermon) to expect an End without the Use of
Means adapted to it: To expect a Crop by the Dint of our Supplications, without
Plowing, Sowing and Fencing, our Ground, would be exceeding fond and vain: And
so to expect Protection from unreasonable and violent Men, without using proper
Means for Defense, on Account of our Piety and Prayers, is equally
unreasonable, etc.

The Means which the Gospel allows for Maintaining and Keeping of Peace, are in
the first, and chiefest Place, the Practice of Christian Virtues, Humility,
Meekness, Beneficence, Charity, etc. With and by these Means, the first
Settlers of this Province cultivated a good Understanding and Harmony with
numerous warlike savage Nations, which still subsists: And I really think, were
but these Virtues generally practiced, and Almighty God truly honored and
feared by us, and the Trust reposed in the Civil Power for the Punishment of
Evildoers, etc. faithfully discharged, we should be so blessed and favored
with the peculiar Care of Heaven, that no violent Men would be permitted to
make a Prey of us: When a Man's Ways please the Lord, he makes even his
Enemies to be at Peace with him, Prove. xvi. 7. I cannot think that to expect a
Crop by the Dint of our Supplications, and to expect Protection on Account of
our Piety and Prayers -- are similar Cases. The Means to procure a Crop are
necessary, innocent, and useful to the Creation; but War is ruinous and
destructive to it -- However true it may be, that it is unreasonable for such
as are not convinced that War is forbidden by the Dispensation of the Gospel,
to expect Protection without the Use of military Preparations, yet it is not so
to those who have learned of their Lord not to fight. Such can, with
well-grounded Assurance, depend upon Protection from Heaven, because they are
in the Use of the Means necessary to obtain that End, and so are not chargeable
with Presumption or tempting God. Such think, that the Perfection of human
Reason, consists in an humble Resignation and Acquiescence with the Mind of the
eternal Reason -- He has taught them to confide and trust wholly in him, both
for Food, Raiment, and Preservation of Life. Some Means, viz. Plowing, Sowing,
etc. has been made necessary, on our Part, for the obtaining those Ends: Were
these Means used only to provide the Necessaries of Life, without making
Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof; were God regarded in and
through them, as the alone efficient Cause of their being successful, and
humbly thanked for the Increase; we should then act like reasonable Men, and
Christians. But we do not, when we expect a Crop without those Means which are
necessary, and NOT FORBIDDEN -- And we esteem it unreasonable for us to engage
in War, or Preparations for it, because when God requires any Thing of Men, it
is in the highest Degree reasonable for them to obey him: And any People that
imagines they act reasonably, when they are in the Practice of any Thing which
the Divine Light has convinced them to be disagreeable to the Mind of God,
will, in the End, find themselves fatally mistaken. -- Now, as some Christians
are assured God has forbidden them to engage in outward War: Which, then, to
these is most reasonable, to use Means which he has forbidden, or to depend
solely upon him in the Use of such Means as are acceptable to him; that is,
Piety and Prayers, which have ever been blessed and favored of the most High,
sometimes by his delivering out of, sometimes by supporting under Difficulties,
Straits and Afflictions, and always by rewarding with infinite Bliss in the
World to come, whatever may have been the Circumstance in this Life? -- Give me
leave here to ask -- Is it not more consistent with the Duty of a Minister of
the meek, self-denying Jesus, to recommend Piety and Prayers as the only
acceptable Means necessary to obtain Protection from Heaven, than to represent
those Means unreasonable and insufficient without human Means?

We are now come to that excellent and glorious Prophecy of Isaiah, ii. 4. And
he (i. e. Christ) shall judge among the Nations, and shall rebuke many People,
and they shall beat their Swords into Ploughshares, and their Spears into
Pruning-books, Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn War any more. Upon which the Sermon says, It is probable that this
Scripture at least principally respects the spiritual and internal Peace of
Christ's Kingdom, and that there is a vast Difference between the internal and
spiritual Peace of Christ's Kingdom, and that which is political and external.

This seems designed to evade the Force of the Text, which plainly says that
Christ's judging among the Nations, and rebuking the People, shall occasion
outward War to be laid aside, and the very Art and Study of it to be disused;
that the Weapons used therein for Destruction, shall then be turned into
Impliments of Husbandry -- The Cause and the Effect are both foretold in this
Prophecy -- The Cause is the Judging of Christ internally in Individuals, and
the Effect that wherever this Judging is experienced, there is in such a
Cessation from all War. A good Tree brings not forth corrupt Fruit, Luke vi.
43. But War is corrupt Fruit, because it has Lust for its Original, and an
impure Fountain can never send forth clear Streams -- Therefore those who are
acquainted with this inward Judging and Governing of Christ in the Soul, bring
not forth such Fruit. They know the Efficacy of Divine Love shed abroad in
their Hearts to be such, that they can truly and sincerely love their Enemies;
and are so far from a Will to Injure or Distress them in any Shape, they could
suffer deeply to do them Good. A Disposition truly sublime! It has the very
Stamp of Heaven upon it. And there are many who bless and praise the God and
Father of all our Mercies, for his great Condescension and Goodness, in raising
up a People, in these latter Days, as a Kind of First Fruits (since the dark
and gloomy Night of Apostasy) in the Accomplishment of this Prediction -- May
these walk humble, and be faithful to the high and holy Calling! May they be as
shining Lights to the distracted World! O House of Jacob, come ye, and let us
walk in the Light of the Lord, Isa. ii. 5. And may all Nations become Partakers
of the Excellency and Perfection of this Dispensation! Then shall Peace be
extended like a River, and the Glory of the Gentiles be like a flowing Stream,
Isa. lxvi. 12.

He shall root out (says Poole, on Isaiah ii. 4.) those great Animosities and
Hostilities which were between the Jews and Gentiles, Ephesians. ii. 13. and
between several Nations; subduing Men's Pride, and Passions, and Lusts, which
are the Causes of all Wars and Contentions; and working Humility, and Meekness,
and Self-denial, and true and fervent Love to all Men, from whence Peace
necessarily follows. This was the Design of the Gospel in all, and the Effect
of it in those that rightly received it.

The Jews understood this Prophecy See the Bishop of Litchfield's Defense of
the Ancient Prophecies.
to relate solely to the Times of the Messiah; and allege it as a strong
Argument that the Messiah is not come: For, say they, War and Fighting is not
ceased, and the Sword is used as well by those called Christians, as other
People. How will our mighty Pleader for War answer this Objection? By telling
them, It is not necessary that Prophecies respecting the Messiah's Kingdom,
should be accomplished at the Beginning of it; it is enough that they be
fulfilled before the End of it. -- I believe this would not remove the Weight
of the Objection. The ancient Fathers of the first two Centuries after Christ
had much better Arguments; they did affirm these Prophecies to be fulfilled in
the Christians of their Times, who were most averse from War. -- Justin Martyr
(who lived in the second Century) in his Apology for the Christians, cites
these Words of this Prophecy; Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation;
neither shall they learn War any more -- And says, That this is thus fulfilled,
you have Grounds to believe; for we who in Times past killed one another, do
not War or Fight with our Enemies.

It is certain (says the Sermon) that the Gospel inclines all that receive it
in Truth, to live as much as is possible in Peace with all Men: It subdues, in
a Measure, Men's Corruptions, which are the fatal Sources of Contention and War,
and makes them humble and meek.

I think this Concession, would overset the whole of the Scheme, if the Words,
In a Measure, were omitted; for Humility and Meekness are quite opposite to War
and Fighting, which proceed from Pride and Covetousness -- But does not the
Intimation that the Gospel received in the Love of it, only in a Measure
subdues Men's Corruptions, imply a Deficiency in the Power? And can it be
consistent with our Lord's Doctrine -- Verily, verily I say unto thee, except a
Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, John iii. 3. A new Birth
implies an entire Change. It Is usual (says Poole on this Passage) by the civil
Laws of Countries, that none enters into the Possession of an earthly Kingdom,
but by the Right of Birth; and for the obtaining the Kingdom of Heaven, there
must be a new Birth, a heavenly Renovation of the whole Man, Soul, Body and
Spirit, to give him a Title by the wise and unchangeable Constitution of God in
the Gospel, and to qualify him for the Enjoyment of it. -- This is what the
Apostle Peter terms, Being born again, not of corruptible Seed, but by
incoruptible, by the Word of God which lives and abides for ever, 1 Peter i.
23. And the Apostle Paul says, If any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature:
Old Things are past away, behold all Things are become new, 2 Cor. v. 17.
These, and many other Passages in the New Testament, positively declare (if we
become the Children of God) the Necessity of having our Corruptions wholly
subdued; the Deeds of the Flesh thoroughly mortified, with the Lusts and
Affections thereof; and the Grace of God is entirely sufficient, as it is
believed in and obeyed, to complete this great Work -- The Gospel of Christ, is
the Power of God unto Salvation, to every One that believes, Romans i. 16. Such
faithful Followers of the divine Appearance, are redeemed from the fatal
Sources of Contention and War -- And whereas in their former Conversation, they
had Strife, Envyings, etc. they now witness pure Love to God and all Men, to be
the governing Principle in their Minds -- This Victory and Disposition, is a
State truly desirable, and worthy of our utmost Diligence and Pains to attain
-- It is real Happiness in this Life ( Such are redeemed from the Fear of Evil,
Rev. ii. 10) it gives the proper Relish and Taste of temporal Blessings --
Sweetens every bitter Cup, makes the greatest Pains and Afflictions tolerable,
chears the Mind in the most gloomy and distressing Circumstances, and carries
with it a sure and undoubted Evidence of Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory in
the Life to come -- Wherefore forgetting those Things which are behind, let us
reach forth unto those Things which are before, Phil. iii. 13.

The Sermon says (least the Prophecy before quoted, should be supposed to
intend an outward Peace) Christ himself assures us that an external Peace would
not be the immediate Issue of his Coming, I came not (says he) to send Peace
on Earth, but a Sword -- Though the Doctrines and Power of his Religion tend to
Peace, yet our Lord prophecies that those who reject them, would kindle the
Flame of an unjust War and Persecution against his Followers, upon a religious
Account.

The Sword which our Lord came to send, was that of the Spirit, Which is the
Word of God, Ephesians. vi. 17. And yet I do not contend that the aforesaid Prophecy
was to be universally fulfilled upon the first Publication of Christ's
Doctrines; all that I insist on from it is, that it was and is fulfilled upon
as many as did, or now do receive the Gospel in the Love of it, and faithfully
obey it; and the Means and Power of so receiving it, is offered to all.

When "the Flame of an unjust War" broke out against the Followers of Christ,
did they resist? Did they defend themselves? If not, how will the Sermon's
Conclusion in Page 24, stand good? If the Offensive be unjust, the Defensive
must of Consequence be just. Alas! those holy Followers of a meek and crucified
Savior, did not conceive the Justness of such a Defense; they, like their
Pattern, were led as Sheep to the Slaughter, they suffered patiently and
quietly, whatever Torments, Pains, or Sufferings, wicked and unreasonable Men
were permitted to inflict upon them, without flying to human Help, to make Use
of carnal Weapons, or to war after the Flesh, which is now declared by some
that would be esteemed Christian Ministers, to be absolutely necessary, and
consistent with the Christian Religion.

But (says the Sermon, Page 28) does not our Lord enjoin us not to resist
Evil, and that if one smite us on the right Cheek, we must turn to him the
other, and that if a Man take away our Coat, we should let him have our Cloak
also? And likewise that we should love our Enemies, bless those that curse us,
and show Kindness to those that despitefully use us. Matthew v.


It is probable our Author thought he should make this Objection too strong, if
he had given the Reasons which the Text uses, for enforcing Obedience to these
Doctrines, That ye may be the Children of your Father in Heaven, for he makes
his Sun to rise on the Evil, and on the Good, and sends Rain on the Just, and
on the Unjust -- Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in
Heaven is perfect.

Those Passages are construed by him to mean only That we should rather endure
smaller and tolerable Injuries with Patience, than contend or go to Law for
Satisfaction -- That we should not indulge private Revenge, etc. That we should
wish well to our Enemies, and treat them with Humanity and Kindness, when in
Want and Distress; and be ready to forgive the Injuries they have committed
against us, when they repent over them -- And that we should not exercise
Severity toward them, till the Case comes to Extremity, etc.

This Construction appears to me to be abundantly too much confined -- A
Prohibition of Injuries, and a Command to endure them, must be considered as
relative to the Consequence if allowed -- A small Injury is attended with a
Degree of Injustice, and the enduring it, rather than returning it, shows in
some Degree a Christian Disposition -- Now consider that Consequence with
respect to greater; the enduring of them rather than returning Evil for Evil,
does certainly show a much greater Degree of that Meekness and Lowliness of
Heart which Christ taught his Disciples to learn of him -- And indeed were but
his Example considered, as explanatory of his Laws, it would amount to a full
Proof that he intended to prohibit all Return of Injuries among his Followers.

Again, if every particular Member of the Church be forbidden Revenge, it is
because allowing of it would manifest a want of Patience and Fortitude to
endure, and encourage Envy, Strife, Malice, etc. which produces Destruction to
Particulars -- Surely then this Reason is much stronger for forbidding national
and public Revenge -- Because allowing it produces those wicked Fruits in an
abundant greater and more universal Manner -- Besides, Can those who are
separately forbid a Thing, be at Liberty collectively to do it -- Suppose ten
Men are each commanded by their Prince to abstain from a particular Diet,
because it is pernicious; it cannot surely be agreeable to that Prince that
these ten Men together should do, what separately he had forbid them -- Upon
this View of the Case, does it look reasonable to suppose that Christ intended
to prohibit private particular Revenge, and allow of national and public? Can
it be consistent with his Laws, to punish lesser Degrees of Evil, and justify
greater? Did he not reprove the Scribes and Pharisees for omitting weightier
Matters, whilst they tythed Mint, Annise and Cummin -- Ye blind Guides which
strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel, Mat. xxiii. 23, 24.

And according to the Reason given by Christ himself immediately after those
Precepts, they must certainly intend a Prohibition of all Injury and Revenge,
or else the Comparison is not very proper -- That ye may be the Children of
your Father in Heaven -- For he dispences his temporal Blessings upon all, even
upon the most publicly Profane; upon Blasphemers, Idolaters, and the vilest
of human Race. Will my putting up with small and tolerable Injuries, not
indulging private Revenge, but resisting with Violence great Injuries, and
returning with my utmost Force all the Evil in my Power, in Revenge for
national Grievances, be coming up to this Comparison of the Almighty's
universal Beneficence and Kindness to those that do their utmost to affront and
displease him? I conclude it does not; and therefore think the Precepts extend
to all Kind of Injuries whatsoever.

It may be further observed (says this Writer) that if the aforesaid Scripture
be taken in a strict and literal Sense, going to Law is as much contradicted
thereby as defensive War. But the former is absurd, and therefore the latter.
Where is this Absurdity? There are many pious Christians who look upon the
Precept to extend thus far, and therefore do not sue at Law at all: And if
there are others who think it may be done, without contradicting the Text,
provided it be in Uprightness, and without any Hatred, Malice or Revenge. Yet
the Practice of these does not in the least make void or lessen the Authority
of the Precepts, Resist not Evil, Love your Enemies, etc.

Robert Barclay, in his Apology, Page 559, has upon this Text the following
Observations:

And truly the Words are so clear in themselves, that (in my Judgment) they
need no Illustration to explain their Sense: For it is as easy to reconcile the
greatest Contradictions, as these Laws of our Lord Jesus Christ with the wicked
Practices of Wars; for they are plainly inconsistent. Whoever can reconcile
this, Resist not Evil, with Resist Violence by Force: Again; Give also thy
other Cheek, with Strike again: Also, Love thine Enemies, with Spoil them, make
a Prey of them, pursue them with Fire and Sword: Or, Prey for those that
persecute you, and those that calumniate you, with Persecute you by Fines,
Imprisonments, and Death itself; and not only such as do not persecute you, but
who heartily seek and desire your eternal and temporal Welfare. Whoever, I say,
can find a Means to reconcile these Things, may be supposed also to have found
a Way to reconcile God with the Devil, Christ with Antichrist, Light with
Darkness, and Good with Evil. But if this be impossible, as indeed it is, so
will also the other be impossible; and Men do but deceive themselves and
others, while they boldly adventure to establish such absurd and impossible
Things.

The primitive Christians thought themselves bound to comply literally with
these Precepts to that Degree, that it is recorded in ancient History, that
when their most bitter and severe Persecutors have been sick and afflicted,
they have tended upon, and wept around them with the Cordiality and Affection
of Brethren, and have rejoiced in Opportunities of Serving and Assisting them.

Athenagoras (who lived in the second Century after Christ, when those Precepts
were literally observed) in an Apology in Behalf of the Christians, to the
Roman Emperors M. Aurelius Antoninus, and M. Aurelius Commodus, has, in Answer
to their being charged with Atheism, among other Expressions, these. The
Apologeticks of Athenagoras, done into English by David Humphreys, B. A.
London, 1714.


And what are our Rules and Dogmas? Even these; I say unto you, love your
Enemies, bless them that curse you, pray for them that persecute you, that ye
may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven; for he makes his Sun to
rise on the Evil and on the Good, and sends Rain on the Just, and on the
Unjust, Matthew. v. 44, 45. Seeing then I make my Apology before Emperors who are
Philosophers, let me challenge any of the Tribe of Sophisters, who yet pretend
to give their Readers such Information and Happiness from th^se Studies, to
show such a mild Disposition of Soul, a Heart so cleared from Rancour and
Malice, (...) to return, even their Enemies, Love for Hatred; to bless those
who unjustly revile them; nay, to pray for those who attempt their very Lives:
Do not they always act the contrary Part? Do they not persecute any that injure
them, after the most revengeful Manner? Do they not always study a severe
Retaliation? Nay, do they not professedly teach an Art of Words, and not a Rule
of Actions? But among us you find unlettered Men, ordinary Mechanics, and even
Women, though they cannot by Words defend or advantage our Religion, yet adorn
it, and set it off by bright Examples in their Actions; they study not the
Fineness of Composition, but practice the Solidity of Virtue; when struck, they
strike not again; they prosecute not those who rob them; they are charitable to
such as stand in Need of their Assistance; and in a Word, love their Neighbors
(that is, all Men) as themselves. And can we be imagined to exercise such an
Innocence and Purity of Life, if we did not believe there was a God who
presided over Mankind? No certainly: But being thoroughly convinced, that we
shall one Day give an Account of our Lives and Actions to the great Creator of
us, and all the World, we choose such a gentle, meek, and GENERALLY DESPISED
Method of Life, assuring ourselves that we can suffer no Evil from our
Persecutors, no, though it were the Loss of our very Lives, which can be of any
Value or Consideration, when compared to that exceeding great Reward which God
will give us hereafter.

Here, Reader, were Disciples, that instead of construing away the greatest
Part of the Force of their Master's Precepts, took up their Cross, denied
themselves, and faithfully practiced them.

But here (says the Sermon, Page 30.) it may be further Queried, How Killing
of our Enemies is consistent with Love to them? I answer, it is more
consistent, than Self Murder is with Love to ourselves!

But are either of these Cases in the least Degree consistent -- Are they not
rather as opposite as East to West? A Man can never designedly injure what he
really loves; and it is his Duty really and truly to love Enemies. -- And
Self-murder is not proved to be in any Shape a Consequent of that Doctrine.

The Paragraph in Page 31, wherein the Sermon-Writer undertakes to prove, that
no more is meant by Christ's Command to love Enemies, than was enjoined under
the Jewish Dispensation, is (in my Opinion) a Piece of Sophistry, and cannot be
reconciled with the Manner in which our Savior introduces this Doctrine -- Ye
have heard that it has been said, thou shall love thy Neighbor, and hate
thine Enemy: But I say unto you, love your Enemies, etc. Matthew v. 43, 44.
And what is thus said in a Note, Page 30, It cannot be reasonably supposed,
that Christ opposes by this Doctrine, the Laws which the Jews enjoyed, etc.
does not at all operate against those who think War prohibited by the Gospel;
because they do not think that Christ opposed the moral Law, but improved it,
or showed the best Way to fulfill it: Thus the moral Law obliged the Jews to
love their Neighbors, which was construed to mean only those of their own
Nation, and that nothing in it prohibited them from hating their Enemies: Our
Lord therefore not only repeats that Command, but adds to it, Love your
Enemies. -- Now a Man who keeps the latter, must be supposed capable of Keeping
the former. Upon this Subject Tertullian against Marc. speaks thus: Christ
truly teaches a new Patience; even forbidding the Revenging of an Injury,
which was permitted by the Creator -- And Lib. de patien. The Law finds more
than is lost, by Christ's saying, Love your Enemies. Barc. Apol.

Neither is the Case where those put to Death by the Magistrate, and those
slain in a lawful War (which this Writer supposes to be substantially the same)
of any Force, unless the Lawfulness of War be first proved -- The Arguments
hitherto produced for it, I think I have shown to be insufficient.

As to the Command of Christ to Peter, Put up again thy Sword into his Place,
for all they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword, notwithstanding
the Sermon-writer's Opinion of it, Tertullian, that learned and able Apologist
for the Christians, thought it prohibited War -- Hear what he says, Tertulliani
de Idololatria Liber.
Quomodo autem bellabit, immo quomoda etiam in pace militabit sine Gladio quem
Dominus abstulit? Nam etsi adierant Milites ad Jobannem and formam
Observationis acceperant, si etiam Centurio crediderat, omnem postea militem
Dominus in Petro exarmando discinxit. How shall he fight whose Sword is taken
from him by Christ? For though the Soldiers came to John, and received a Form
of Observation, if also the Centurion believed, yet Christ, by disarming Peter,
disarmed every Soldier afterward.

Rigaltius notes upon these Words, (...) Tertullian takes away all Kind of War,
and an use of the Sword from all Christians; Christianis omnibus omne Militiae
genus, omnem Gladii usum adimit.

And in another Place Tertullian says, De Cor^na Militis.
Licebit in Gladio conversari, Domino pronunciante Gladi^ periturum, qui Gladio
fuerit usus? Et Proelio operabitur ^^lius pacis, cui nec Litigare conveniet? Et
Vincula and Carcerem, and Tormenta and Supplicia administrabit, nec suarum
ultor Injuriarum? Can a Soldier's Employment be lawful, when Christ has
pronounced, That he that uses the Sword, shall perish by the Sword? Can one who
professes the peaceable Doctrine of the Gospel be a Warrior, he who must not so
much as strive or contend? And shall he who is not to revenge his own Wrongs,
be instrumental to bring others into Chains, Imprisonment, Torments and Death?

This Tertullian lived in the early Times of the Gospel, about an hundred Years
after the Apostles.

I have now gone through the Arguments used in the Sermon to prove the
Lawfulness of War, I think I have not omitted any that are material, nor I hope
done any Injustice to them. I have expressed my Thoughts why they are not
sufficient for the Purpose for which they were intended, and shall take Leave
of this Writer, with remarking the great Difference between his Musing,
mentioned in Page 36, and the Disposition of a true Christian: The latter is
resigned in all Things; considers this Life as a State of Probation and Trial;
acknowledges an overruling Providence, who superintends human Affairs; and can
say, Come Life or come Death, thy Will, O God, be done -- Whereas the former
discovers the utmost Surprise and Consternation even at imaginary Dangers, and
in his Fright seems to forget his Maker -- The next Time he hears Great Guns go
off, I would recommend to him the Perusal of the following Observations from
John Wesley's Journal, Page 67.

Finding the unaccountable Apprehensions of I know not what Danger (the Wind
being small, and the Sea smooth) which had been upon me several Days, increase;
I cried earnestly for Help; and it pleased God as in a Moment to restore Peace
to my Soul. Let me observe hereon, 1. That not one of these Hours ought to pass
out of my Remembrance, till I attain another Manner of Spirit, a Spirit equally
willing to glorify God by Life or by Death. 2. That whoever is uneasy on any
Account (bodily Pain alone excepted) carries in himself his own Conviction,
that he is so far an Unbeliever. Is he uneasy at the Apprehension of Death?
Then he believes not, That to die is Gain. At any of the Events of Life? Then
he has not a firm Belief, That all Things work together for his Good. And if
he bring the Matter more close, he will always find, beside the general want of
Faith, every particular Uneasiness is evidently owing to the want of some
particular Christian Temper.

I would now offer something further to the Consideration of the Reader.

I think it is universally allowed that the Reign of Christ is described by the
Prophet Isaiah, in Chap. xi. where, among other Expressions which denotes that
wherever it came to be truly received, it would produce Meekness, Humility and
Peace, even in the roughest Tempers and Dispositions of Men, he has this, They
shall not burt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain; for the Earth shall be full
of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. Some of the ancient
Writers amongst the primitive Christians, as Justin Martyr, Theodoret, etc.
took the holy Mountain in this Prophecy to be spoken of the Church of Christ;
and they appealed to the Gentiles, whether they did not see and observe, by the
Behavior and Manners of the Christians, a Fulfilling of those glorious
Prophecies: Such was then the Peaceableness and Innocence of their Lives.

Poole likewise says, the Mountain here means the Church, and adds, Wherever
the Gospel comes and prevails, it will have this Effect.

The same Prophet, in Chap. xxxv. speaking of the Way of the Lord, says, No
Lion shall be there, nor any ravenous Beast shall go up thereon; it shall not
be found there, but the Redeemed shall walk there -- And again confirms this,
Chap. lxv. repeating, They shall not burt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain,
says the Lord.

The Prophet Hosea, speaking of Gospel Times, in Chap. ii. says, Verse 18. And
in that Day will I make a Covenant for them, with the Beasts of the Field, and
with the Fowls of Heaven, and with the creeping Things of the Ground; and I
will break the Bow, and the Sword, and the Battle out of the Earth, and will
make them to lie down safely.

Poole upon this Verse remarks, It is a full and gracious Promise of Abundance
of Peace, Safety, and Love among all through the Creation. But if brute Beasts
do not hurt, yet unless more brutish Creatures, bloody Men, be ^^med, there
will be little Safety to the Church; therefore God will put an End to Wars, and
make Men peaceable in their Dispositions, far more peaceable than heretofore
they have been.

The Prophet Micah, in speaking of the latter Days, uses much the same
Expressions with Isaiah -- And he shall judge among many People, and rebuke
strong Nations afar off, and they shall beat their Swords into Plowshares, and
their Spears into pruning Hooks: Nation shall not lift up a Sword against
Nation, neither shall they learn War any more, Chap. iv. 3.

These Predictions, and some others of the like Tendency, together with the
Examples and Testimonies of the Apostles and primitive Christians, that
Obedience to the Gospel had that Effect, not only to give them inward Peace,
but to take away the Use of carnal Weapons, are very strong and cogent Proofs,
that War cannot be consistent with the Purity and Perfection of the Christian
Religion.

And here I would further observe, that when the Angel had appeared to the
Shepherds, and declared the Birth of Christ -- There was with the Angel a
Multitude of the heavenly Host, praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the
highest, and on Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men Luke ii.
-- This first Declaration from Heaven after the Birth of Christ, of the
universal Benefit designed by his Coming, may, I think, be fairly construed to
intend, that he would not only give, to as many as received him, inward and
Divine Peace, but the Consequent of that should be a Disposition of Good Will
to all Men, even to Love Enemies, etc. as Christ afterward taught. I have
already mentioned some of the Testimonies of the Ancients on War, and it may
not be improper to add a few more. The first three of the following Instances
are taken from Barclay's Apology; the other two from an Appendix to Pearson's
Great Case of Tithes, by J. M. London printed, 1730. From this is likewise the
Quotations from, Tertuilian before mentioned taken.
.

In the Time of Clemens Alexandrinus (which was the Beginning of the third
Century after Christ) Christians were so far from Wars, that he testified, that
they had no Marks or Signs of Violence among them, saying, Neither are the
Faces of Idols to be painted, which so much as to regard is forbidden, neither
Sword, nor Bow, to them that follow Peace: As Sylvius Disc. de Rev. Belg.

The Emperor M. Aurelius Antoninus, about the Middle of the second Century,
writes thus: I prayed to my Country Gods, but when I was neglected by them, and
observed myself pressed by the Enemy; considering the Fewness of my Forces, I
called to one, and entreated those who with us are called Christians, and I
found a great Number of them, and I forced them with Threats, which ought not
to have been; because afterward I knew their Strength and Force. Therefore
they betook themselves neither to the Use of Darts, nor Trumpets, for they use
not so to do, for the Cause and Name of their God, which they bear in their
Consciences.

The Answer which Martin made to Julian the Apostate, as related by Sulpitius
Severus, which was 300 Years after Christ, is very full and positive, 'I am a
Soldier of Christ, therefore I cannot fight."

Origin (who wrote in the Beginning of the third Century) in his Answer to
Celsus, a most virulent Adversary, who had charged the Christians with refusing
to bear Arms, and to enter into military Employments, writes thus Origines
contra Celsum, Lib. 8. P. 426, Cantabrigiae Editio.
:

Lastly, Celsus exhorts us, That we should assist the Emperor with all our
Might, and aid him in all his just Undertakings and Engagements, and when
requisite, bear Arms, and fight for him. To this we answer, that we do assist
the Emperors, if I may so say, with a Divine Aid, having on us the whole Armor
of God; and this we do, in Obedience to the Words of the Apostle, who says, I
exhort, therefore, first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and
giving of Thanks to be made for all Men; for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority. And by how much the more pious any Man is, by so much the more he
lends Assistance to Emperors, yea more than they who stand in Battle Array, and
cut down as many of the Enemy as they can. We may also reply to you, who are
not of our Belief, and urge us to bear Arms and Fight; your own Priests, and
those who belong to your Temples, keep their Hands from being defiled with
Blood, by Reason of the Sacrifices they must offer with unbloody and unpolluted
Hands, to those you esteem your Gods. And when you go to War, you never take
any of the priestly Order for Soldiers. If then you think that reasonable, Why
should you not think it more so in those, who, when others go out to fight,
they, as Priests and Ministers of God, lift up holy Hands, and wrestle in
Prayer with God, for them who fight in a just Cause, and for the Emperor who
reigns well, that God would be pleased to remove every Thing that, is against
them? Therefore all evil Spirits, which stir up Sedition, break Treaties, and
disturb the public Peace, being quashed by our Prayers, we do greater Service
to Emperors than those who are for Fighting: And we labor for the common Good,
by putting up Prayers in Holiness; and by our religious Exercises and Practice,
we teach how to despise and shun the pleasing Baits of Sin. Thus we fight
better than others for the Emperor: But should he go about to compel us to
Fight, or bear Arms under him, we cannot do it. Sic nos prae aliis pugnamus pro
Imperatore: cum ipso, licet nos impellat, non militamus.

This is a full and plain Declaration of the Opinion and Practice of the
Christians -- It Is not Origen's single Opinion, but an Apology in Behalf of the
Christians in Origen's Time; and they were then very numerous.

And farther, to prove beyond all Contradiction, that it was held unlawful for
a Christian to bear Arms, and to fight, not only in the Days of Tertullian and
Origin, but later down, even to the Emperor Dioclesian's Time: I shall produce
the Testimony of one Maximilian, who suffered Death under that Emperor's Reign,
for refusing to bear Arms. ' This Narrative is entitled, Passio S.
Maximiliani, and is printed at the End of a small Book of Lactantius, de
Mortibus Persecutorum, Oxonii, Anno Dom. 1680. And also in Rainart's Acta
Primorum Martyrum, at Paris, in Quarto, Anno 1689. In Ruinart's Book the Reader
will find Instances of others who suffered Martyrdom for refusing to bear Arms;
particularly one Marcellus, a Centurion, who went and laid down his Arms before
the Ensign of the Legion, and declared before all the Soldiers, That he was a
Christian, for which he was put to Death. Rejecto cingulo militari coram signis
legionis, Christianum se esse testatus ceram omni popule.
Maximilian being brought before the Tribunal, Dion the Preconsul said, What is
thy Name? Maximilian answered, Why would thou know my Name? I must not Fight,
for I am a Christian. Dion the Proconsul said, Let him be enrolled. And when he
was enrolled, it was recited out of the Register that he was five Feet ten
Inches high. Dion bid the Officer mark him; and when Maximilian refused,
saying, I cannot Fight; Dion said, Bear Arms, or thou shall die. Maximilian
answered, I cannot Fight if I die: I fight not for this World, but for my God.
Dion the Proconsul said, Who has persuaded thee? Maximilian answered, My own
Mind, and he who called me. Dion spoke to his Father, and bid him persuade his
Son. His Father replied, he knows his own Mind, and what is best for him to do.
Dion then said to Maximilion, take thy Arms and receive the Mark It Is said the
Mark was made in the Hand, and they wore a leaden Ring about the Neck.
. He answered, I can receive no such Mark, I have already the Mark of Christ.
Dion the Proconsul said, I shall send thee quickly to thy Christ. He answered,
I would have thee, for that would be my Praise. Dion bid the Officer mark him;
but he still refusing, said, I cannot receive the Mark of this World; and if
thou should mark me, I shall break it, for it will avail nothing, I am a
Christian, and it is not lawful for me to wear such a Mark about my Neck, when I
have received the saving Mark of my Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the living
God, whom thou art ignorant of; who died to give us Life, and whom God gave for
our Sins: Him all we Christians obey; Him we follow as the Restorer of our
Life, and the Author of our Salvation. Dion said, Take thy Arms, and receive
the Mark, or thou will perish miserably. Maximilian answered, I shall not
perish, my Name is already enrolled with my Lord, I cannot fight. Dion said,
consider thy Youth, and bear Arms, for it is what becomes a young Man.
Maximilian replied, my Arms are with my Lord, I cannot fight for this World, I
am now a Christian. Dion the Proconsul said, among the Life-Guards of our
Masters Dioclesian, and Maximianus, and Constantius, and Maximus, there are
Christian Soldiers, and they fight The modest and Christian like Answer which
Maximilian gave Dion, when he told him there were Christian Soldiers in the
Lifeguard of his Masters, is worthy of our greatest Notice, Ipsi sciunt (says
he) quod eis Expediat: Ego tomen Christianus sum, and non possum male facere.
They know what is expedient for them; but I am a Christian, and cannot do Evil.
This is truly the very Language of a Disciple of Christ: But what Sort of
Christians those were that Dion spoke of that could fight, we can only guess
at; they might indeed bear the Name of Christians, as Multitudes do nowadays,
but certainly they were not so well convinced, or at least not such strict
Followers of Christ's Doctrine as this Maximilian, and some others, whose Names
are upon Record, who chose rather to die, than to bear Arms, and fight, which
they could not do, without transgressing the Precept and Command of Christ,
Mat. v. 44. And of the Apostle, 1 These. v. 15. See that none render Evil for
Evil unto any Man; but ever follow that which is Good, both among yourselves,
and to all Men.
Maximilian replied, they know what is expedient for them, but I am a
Christian, and cannot do Evil. Dion said, take thy Arms, despise not the
Business of a Soldier, lest thou perish miserably. Maximilian replied, I shall
not perish, and if I leave this World, my Soul will live with Christ my Lord.
Dion then said, strike his Name out; and when it was done, Dion said, because
with a rebellious Mind thou have refused to bear Arms, thou shall be punished
according to thy Deserts, for an Example to others: And then he read his
Sentence -- Maximilian, because thou have with a rebellious Mind refused to
bear Arms, thou art to die by the Sword. Maximilian replied. Thanks be to God.
He was twenty Years, three Months, and seventeen Days old. And when he was led
to the Place of Execution, he spoke thus; My dear Brethren, endeavor with all
your Might, that it may be your Lot to see the Lord, and that he may give you
such a Crown -- And then with a pleasant Countenance he said to his Father,
give the Executioner the Soldier's Coat thou had got for me, and when I shall
receive thee in the Company of the blessed Martyrs, we may also rejoice
together with the Lord, and thus he suffered. His Mother Pompeiana obtained his
Body of the Judge, and carried it to Carthage, and buried it near the Place
where the Body of Cyprian the Martyr lay; and thirteen Days after, the Mother
died, and was buried in the same Place. And Victor his Father return's to his
Habitation rejoicing and praising God, that he had sent before such a Gift unto
the Lord, himself expected to follow after.

The Reader has here a Testimony against bearing Arms and Fighting, remarkable
both for its Antiqeity, and the Tokens it bears of the Courage and Fortitude so
conspicuous in the primitive Christians. -- I shall conclude with a Quotation
from a late Treatise, entitled, A modest Plea in Behalf of the People called
Quakers, etc.

The more Men depend on their Creator for their own Preservation, rather than
do the least Evil, the more will Divine Providence be exerted in their Favor,
and a powerful Testimony be raised in the Hearts of others in Favor of the
Innocent; it will be in vain to talk and preach about loving and forgiving our
Enemies, unless we show the World by uniform Practice in what high Examation we
hold the Laws of Christ and his holy Example: And he who to a righteous Life,
and a meek Spirit, annexes (rather than do the least Evil) a firm Reliance on
Providence, will never be mistaken in the End, but find a full and gracious
Repay; Men may indeed devise very innocent Means fotheir own Safety, but this
is nothing to what Providence is able to do for his People. Jacob after a long
Absence from his Brother, and great Fear of falling by the Hand of Revenge,
very wisely prepares a Present to appease his angry Brother; but it looks to
me, as if the Lord his God, whose Providence had all along awaited his Servant
Jacob, had been beforehand with Esau, and softened his hard and rugged Spirit,
that sought Revenge, into a quite contrary Temper of Compassion and Brotherly
Love -- And there is one Thing remarkable in respect to our Testimony against
Fighting, that as we all of this Society profess to be led and guided by the
divine Spirit, it may perhaps be hard to find a single Person who can truly
aver a License to fight, was ever in his own Mind reconcilable with a strict
and devout Adherence to this inward Monitor: And I entreat our younger Brethren
to consider, that several of our former Friends were, without consulting each
other, brought in this Respect into a perfect Uniformity of Sentiment. The Case
of Thomas Lurting See Sowell's History.
is one ever memorable Instance of it; it is also worthy our serious
Remembrance, by what an innocent Stratagem he retook a Ship from the Turks, and
repossessed the Master with the Command, and with what Humanity he set all his
Prisoners ashore in their own Country -- I likewise earnestly beseech my young
Friends to consider, that unless something extraordinary had appeared to their
wise and pious Forefathers in this, and in several other Branches of our
Testimony, they would never have been so strict, or have sacrificed so much as
they have done on these Accounts: Let this then be at least a Reason for making
a decent Pause before we quit any of those Things, wherein we stand so
eminently distinguished from the rest of the World. --

FINIS.

