Brotherly LOVE recommended, by the Argument of the LOVE of CHRIST: A SERMON,
PREACHED at PHILADELPHIA, JANUARY, 1747-8. BEFORE THE SACRAMENTAL SOLEMNITY.
With some ENLARGEMENT.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M.

ROMANS xiii. 10. Love is the Fulfilling of the Law.

1 JOHN iv. 7, 8. Beloved let us love one another: For Love is of God; and
every one that loves, is born of God. He that loves not, knows not God, for
God is Love.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by BENJAMIN FRANKLIN and DAVID HALL. MDCCXLVIII.

EPHESIANS V. 2. And walk in Love, as Christ also has loved us, and has given
himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling Savor.


THAT Man is designed for Society, appears from the original Constitution of
the human Nature.

WE need and desire each others Assistance for mutual Support, Comfort and
Protection; and have a Disposition to communicate our Ideas to those of our own
Species, as well as Acts of Kindness and Beneficence. These Desires and
Dispositions being common and mutual, show that we are born for Society.

OF this, mutual Love is the Band and Cement; which, unless it be preserved and
expressed, Society becomes a Snare and Torment, and cannot comfortably or
profitably subsist, yea, hardly subsist at all, for any long Duration: For Men,
by the Neglect of its Exercise, and much more by its Contrary, will be tempted,
against the Law of Nature, to seek a single and independent State, in order to
secure their Ease and Safety.

AND as Love is agreeable to the Law of Nature, and the original Dispositions
of the Minds of Men; so, of consequence, it cannot but agree with the Moral
Law, the unalterable Rule of our Practice, and the Divine Nature, which is its
Prototype, or original Copy and Exemplar. Hence we are informed by the Apostle
John, that God is Love; i. e. inclined to vouchsafe upon his Creatures, Acts of
Kindness and Benignity, and does not inflict Penalties, till they be as it were
extorted by the criminal Conduct of his Creatures. Hence Judgment is
represented as his strange Work; and Mercy his Delight.

NOR are we only obliged to love by the common Ties of Humanity, as we are Men;
but likewise by the Laws of Christianity, as we are Brethren (at least by
Profession) Children of the same Father, Members of the same religious
Community (or Body mystical) Heirs of the same Hope, and Expectants of the same
Inheritance.

BUT the most powerful Incentive to the Love of our Brethren, is the glorious
Example of the Redeemer's Love to us, which the Apostle beautifully represents
in the Words of our Text, And walk in Love, as Christ also has loved us, and
has given himself for us an Offering, and a Sacrifice to God for a
sweet smelling Savor.

IN these Words we may observe an important Duty enjoined, Walk in Love; and a
powerful Motive exciting thereto proposed, viz. The Love of Christ to us;
expressed in the Giving of himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice of a
sweet smelling Savor to God.

IN order to prepare this Subject for Improvement, it is necessary to open and
explain the aforesaid Particulars:

AS to the Duty enjoined, let us enquire what is implied in Walking in Love to
our Neighbor? I answer, it implies our Esteem of him, for whatever is
excellent in him, either natural, acquired, or gracious. The All-wise God has
dispensed his Gifts variously upon the Children of Men; and that with this
Design, that universal Love to our Fellow Creatures might take place. There is
none whom we converse with for some Time, but we may perceive something amiable
in them, which deserves our Esteem and Respect. O! if Mankind were as quick in
Spying one another's Excellencies, as they are each other's Faults, how candid
and noble would it be? And how much would it promote universal Love and
Benevolence! But alas! the contrary Temper and Practice too much prevails
generally. If our Neighbor has not saving Grace, which is, no doubt, the
Ground of our special Respect and Complacence, perhaps he has some moral
Excellency; if not, he has at least an immortal Soul, which, in respect of its
Nature, may be said to bear the natural Image of God: But Love to our Brother
does not only imply our Esteem of him, but our hearty Desire after his Honor
and Benefit in the most extensive Sense; as well as our Complacence therein,
and Grief for the contrary.

AND this Love will doubtless manifest itself in kind and courteous Speech;
and, where Necessity requires, and Ability admits, in beneficent Action.

BUT more particularly, that special Love to pious People, which the Apostle
had chiefly in View in our Text, and which is proposed by the Apostle John, as
a Mark of true Christianity, has the following Properties:

IT is sincere, chiefly for their Goodness and Holiness: --

IT is universal, extending to all that we have reason to think are pious, from
their Soundness in the main Principles of Religion, their regular Behavior and
Acquaintance with experimental Christianity. If our Love be confined to those
only who are of our Way of Thinking in every minute Point, it is not true Love
to the Brethren, but the selfish Love of a Party or Faction.

FARTHER: Brotherly Love is proportional, suited to the different Degrees of
spiritual Good we apprehend to be in others. Such as we conceive to be more
holy than others, we love them more in Degree.

IT is likewise effectual; not consisting in Word, and in Tongue only, but in
Deed, and in Truth.

NOW to walk in Love, implies a Course of Kindness to our Brethren, in
Disposition, Speech and Action; as well as our taking Pains to this End. We
mustn't only begin to love them, but we should make Progress therein, and
continue to the End. And truly this cannot be done without Pains: For as our
Faith is tried variously, so is our Love; and indeed it is proper it should be
so: For this Life is altogether a State of Trial and Probation, in order to
another State after Death. Now there are three Sorts of Trials that the Allwise
God is pleased sometimes to suffer to come in the Way of our Love, viz.
Spiritual Desertion, Offenses in Conduct, and Difference in Sentiment, about
the circumstantial Points of Religion.

WHEN a Child of God is long deserted, his Savor of Religion does of
consequence decline. This must needs affect, in some Degree, his Conversation,
and make it more unsavory, and less edifying: He is, in this Situation, like a
Tree in Winter, which, though it has Life at the Root, appears, because of its
Want of Leaves and Verdure, as though it were quite dry and dead. Now, a Beginner
in Christianity, who has much Joy and Comfort, and is fired with his first
Love, not having been tried with Storms and Tempests, and being, on that
Account, comparatively unacquainted with the Devices of Satan, the Depths of
his own Corruption and Weakness, is apt to look upon poor deserted Creatures
with some Degree of Contempt, and censure them severely; and, perhaps, to judge
that they have no Good in them, because they have lost their first Love, and
fallen from their first Works, in some Measure. But this is exceeding cruel and
barbarous! Very displeasing to God, and hurtful to Society! And such who are
guilty of this Severity, if they will not, by gentle Measures, be brought to a
merciful Temper and Behavior, they must learn its Necessity and Excellency by
broken Bones, by their own Falls and Blunders; they must come down from their
Pinnacle of spiritual Pride one Way or other. O Sirs! let us be merciful, as our
heavenly Father is merciful.

BUT another Trial of our Love to the Brethren, is Offenses committed against
us by them. We are all imperfect Creatures, and in many Things offend all; and
therefore need each others Forbearance and Charity. -- Grace is in the best,
like Gold in the Ore, attended with Weaknesses and Defects. Now Satan, who is
the Accuser of the Brethren, in Case of Offense, excites us to impute it to bad
Design; which much aggravates the Matter, and so tends to inflame our
Resentments, and widen the Breach. In Opposition hereto, it is a necessary,
though difficult Duty, To hope all Things, and believe all Things that are Good
of our poor Brother; to impute his Offense to inadvertency or Mistake, or some
violent Temptation, and not to malicious Intention. This Method has a noble
Tendency to soften Offenses, and to conciliate Peace. And this Treatment we
expect and desire from others, and think we are wronged when we get it not; and
therefore we should render it to others. If our Brother offends, not only seven
Times, but seventy Times seven, when he repents, we should forgive him; and
walk in Love, as Christ also has loved us.

FARTHER: Another Way by which our Love to the Brethren is tried, is
Differences of Opinion in the smaller Points of Religion. This often occasions
great Uneasiness, Heart-burnings and Distance, though very unreasonably. We
should allow to another the same Liberty we take ourselves, and consider that
Men cannot alter their Opinions, or retain them according to their Neighbors
Pleasure; but must think and believe as Things appear to them from Time to
Time. Seeing that every Man has an equal Right to think for himself; and seeing
that Methods of Force cannot alter the Sentiments of the Mind, it is therefore
unreasonable and unjust; yea some Degree of Persecution to be offended with our
Brother, because he does not think as we do in every Thing. And inasmuch as our
Knowledge is imperfect, as well as our Graces; and we are bid to grow in
Knowledge, as well as in Grace; we may, by the Increase of Light, be obliged to
change our Sentiments in some circumstantial Points, and to need others Charity
and Forbearance toward us: And why then should we not express it toward them?
In the apostolic Times there was a Difference of Opinion between the Jewish
and Gentile Christians about Days and Meats; the Jewish Christians retaining a
Tincture of their Manner of Education, though it it was still necessary, even in
Gospel Times, to observe the ceremonial Sabboo^hs of the Jewish Church, as well
as the Difference of Meats enjoined by the ceremonial Law; and were tempted to
look upon the Gentile Christians as lax and profane, who made no Conscience of
such Observances.

ON the other Hand, the Gentile Christians, not being educated in their Way,
and better understanding the Extent of Christian Liberty, would not be bro't
into Bondage by them; but their Tempers being overheated by Debate, together
with the Temptations of the Enemy, they were inclined, not only to censure them
as superstitious, with an Air of Resentment, but to condemn their State and
Design; in a Word, the Ferment of Contention rose to such a Height, about the
aforesaid circumstantial Matters, that each Party were ready to un-church the
other: Between them the Apostle Paul acts as a Moderator and Peacemaker, in
the fourteenth Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans; and labors to assuage the
angry Flame, by proper Lenitives; he advises the strong Gentile, to receive the
weak Jew to Communion, or Church Fellowship, though in some circumstantial
Errors; and not trouble and plague him with doubtful Disputations, or Debates
about lesser Things, which are comparatively doubtful. There is indeed a
Promise that the Anointing which pious People receive, shall lead them into all
Truth; i. e. into all Fundamental Truth; all that Truth which is of absolute
Necessity to Salvation; to extend the Promise farther, will confine the true
Church of Christ to one Fold, to one Pale, and perhaps to a small Number in
that, which is very unreasonable and uncharitable. There are but a very few of
the Children of Men, who are in all minute Points of the same Mind; and seeing
the Promise of the Spirit, does not extend absolutely to every Circumstantial
in Religion, otherwise all that are truly Pious, would be unanimous in them;
which certainly is not the Case; then it will follow, that the proper
Foundation of our Certainty or Persuasion is not infallible; and therefore
however unreasonably confident Persons are, on both Sides of the Question, as
generally indeed there is too much of this; yet these Things may be truly
called, at least comparatively, doubtful Disputations. A modest Diffidence of
our own Judgment, as to those Matters, so far as to entertain honorable
Sentiments of such as are otherwise minded, is an amiable Character: It is an
Argument of a weak Mind, to raise a Superstructure disproportioned to the
Foundation; on the contrary, it is an Instance of true Wisdom to have our
Persuasion suited in Degree to the Grounds on which it is built, and the Degree
of our Zeal proportioned to the Weight and Importance of the Things we are
zealous about: Foundation Truths should be earnestly contended for, as well as
experimental and practical Religion, and Holiness: But as to Circumstantials,
we should be moderate and merciful, else instead of doing Good with our Zeal
devoid of Temper and Knowledge, we shall do much Hurt, and imitate the
pernicious Practice of the Pharisees of old, who were very warm about tything
Mint, and Annis, and Cummin, but in the mean Time neglected the weightier
Matters of the Law Mat. xxiii. 23. Kai aphecate, ta barutera tou nomou.
. But to proceed,

THE Apostle Paul advises the contending Jewish and Gentile Christians, in the
aforesaid Chapter, to abstain from despising of and judging one another, on
Account of smaller Differences in Opinion. To this End he observes, that
Persons were equally sincere and upright on each Side of the Question; He that
regards a Day, regards it to the Lord; and he that regards not the Day to
the Lord, he does not regard it: He likewise observes, That the Consideration
of all being to be judged by the great God at last, should incline them to
avoid rash judging of each other.

ANOTHER Argument that the Apostle uses to excite them to Peace and mutual
Love, is this, That the Substance or Life of Religion, did not consist in those
Things about which they contended; The Kingdom of God, says he, is not Meat
and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; he that in
these Things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of Men.
Almighty God, for wise Purposes, suffers his People to be of different
Sentiments about smaller Points in Religion; and particularly for this, that
the Truth of their Love may be brought to the Test. To have regard to those
only that are of our Way of thinking in Circumstantials, while more valuable
Persons, who agree with us in the Main, are slighted, because they differ in
lesser Things; it is an Argument of a party, factious, selfish Love: But true
Love to the Brethren, extends to all those that we have Reason to hope, from
their Soundness in Foundation-Principles, Acquaintance with experimental
Religion and practical Holiness, bear the moral Image of God, whether they be
of our Denomination or not: We should bear with one another's supposed or real
Weaknesses in Principle, as well as Practice, and, notwithstanding, love one
another; Men's different Capacities, different Ways of Education, the different
Books they read, the different Company they keep, lead them to different Ways
of thinking: Add to this, that sometimes Credit and Interest give a secret and
insensible Byas to the Mind.

IT is a singular Mercy and great Comfort, when Persons are agreed in the most
important Points; Whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same
Rule; let us mind the same Thing; and if in any Thing ye be otherwise minded,
God shall reveal even this unto you. It Is easy and natural to love those that
are of our Way of Thinking in every Thing, and that do not offend us: But when
the contrary of these happens, then it is difficult. Hence it may safely be
asserted, as a general and just Maxim, that the more Trials our Love meets
with, and yet it stands them, and proves Victorious, the more Evidence it has
of its being of a Divine Original; of its being that Love of the Brethren,
which ascertains our Translation from Death to Life.

BUT I proceed to speak of the MOTIVE exciting to the Duty aforesaid, viz. The
LOVE of CHRIST to his People; As Christ also has loved us, and given himself
for us. --

HERE let me speak of the Nature, Properties and Manifestations, of CHRIST'S
LOVE to his People.

AS to the general Nature of Love, I think it is commonly represented to be,
Affectus Unionis; a Desire of Union with, or Nearness to the beloved Object;
and it is Twofold, namely, of Benevolence and Complacency. The former
signifies God's kind Intention of conferring spiritual and special Benefits
upon his People in Time. In this Sense, no doubt, the Lord Jesus loved them
before the Foundations of the Earth were laid; but the latter signifies the
Delight he takes in his own Image conferred actually on those that fear him, in
Time, and the Application of his Righteousness to them through Faith. Hence are
these Expressions in the Song of Solomon, Thou art all fair, my Love, there is
no Spot in thee; thou have ravished my Heart, my Sister, my Spouse, with one
Chain of thy Neck. These Expressions seem to represent the Agreeableness of the
Divine Image in his People, to the Divine Nature and Will; as well as the
Necessity of a Change in Men's State and Frame in order to Salvation.

WE should carefully observe, that such a Love as is in us, must not be
ascribed to Christ, as he is God; for ours is passionate and imperfect, causing
a Commotion in our Blood and Spirits; whereas his Love, as God, is a most pure
and eternal Act of his Will, whereby he wills Good to us: Yet a human Love may
be properly ascribed to him, as Man, but with great Pre-eminence to ours: As
Man, he has a Soul and Body, Will and Affections, Blood and animal Spirits, as
we, but perfectly pure; his Love is without Excess in its Tendencies, and
without Tumult in its Effects; the Motions of his Will are entirely regular and
calm, agreeable to right Reason.

NOW the Love of Christ has the following Properties, viz.

IT is Everlasting; He has loved us with an everlasting Love, and therefore
with loving Kindness has he drawn us. The Reason why any are powerfully
inclined and enabled to believe, in Time, is, because they were loved before
it, with a Love of kind Intention. The Lord Jesus, the Wisdom of the Father, is
represented in the Proverbs of Solomon, as pleased with his Designs of Mercy
toward the Children of Men.

THE Love of Christ is free and unexcited: Our dear Lord loved us, when there
was nothing lovely in us! When we lay in our Blood, polluted and exposed, he
spread the Skirt of his Affection over us, and said to us, live! Yea, when we
were Enemies, he died for us!

THE Love of Christ is immutable: Whom he loves, he loves to the End. He gives
his Sheep eternal Life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck
them out of his Hand.

THE Love of Christ, my Brethren, is incomprehensible, it passes Knowledge.
Hence are these memorable Words of the Apostle, And may be able to comprehend
with all Saints, what is the Breadth, and Length, and Depth, and Height, and to
know the Love of Christ, which passes Knowledge. There was a great Love
between David and Jonathan; Jonathan loved him as his own Soul! The Mother's
Love to her sucking Child is yet greater! And the conjugal Love is doubtless
stronger than these! Am not I better to thee, said Elkanah to his Consort, than
ten Sons? But the noblest Instance of human Love is that of Paul to the
Israelites, who was willing to be accursed from Christ for them. Yet these
Affections glowed in human Bosoms, and so do not transcend human Knowledge; but
the Love of Christ passes Knowledge, and therefore has no Parallel in this
lower Globe, but resembles the Love which the Father has to him; As the Father
has loved me, says Christ, even so have I loved you: But how this is, we can
neither conceive or express.

BUT I proceed to speak of the Manifestations of Christ's Love.

NOW the Love of Christ manifests itself, by many Thoughts about them, and by
high Thoughts of them; hence they are said to be graven on the Palms of his
Hands, and set as a Seal upon his Heart; and we are further told, that though the
Mother may forget her sucking Child, the Son of her Womb, yet he will not
forget them; and what is still more amazing! is the high Thoughts he has of his
People; in which respect they are called his Jewels, his Treasure, his Diadem,
his Joy, his Glory!

FARTHER, the Love of Christ manifests itself by Love-Expressions, with what
surprising Familiarity, and humble Condescension does the dear Redeemer address
his worthless Bride, in the Song of Solomon! Open unto me my Love, my Dove, my
Fair One, for my Head is wet with the Dew, and my Locks with the Drops of the
Night! who is she that looks forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon, clear as
the Sun.

AND does not our dear Lord Jesus manifest his Love by beneficent Actions, by
what he has done for us, and given us? For us he assumed the human Nature, in
the most humble Circumstances of Distress and Abasement! For us he fulfilled
the divine Law, in all its Strictness and Rigor! And to us he gives not only
all needful temporal Mercies, but spiritual and eternal also! He admits his
poor People to a Marriage-union with his adorable Majesty; their Redeemer is
their Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his Name; and in Consequence of this dear
and valuable Relation, he makes them honorable, powerful, amiable; they are
called not Servants only, but the Friends of God! And to which of the Angels is
this Title given? God is our Father, Christ our elder Brother, the holy Spirit
our Guide, the blessed Angels our Guard, this Earth our Inn, and Heaven our
everlasting Home!

THIS dear Lord does likewise make us comely through his Comeliness, which he
puts upon us: He makes his People all glorious within, he sheds a Luster on our
Souls, that out-shines the Face of Moses, when the Israelites could not behold
him; that out-shines the Sun, in his unclouded Brightness, and Meridian Glory.

AND are not the Sheep of Christ, made by their dearest Lord powerful? Yes,
through him they have a Kind of Omnipotence! Through him they can do all Things;
for whatever they ask in his Name, he will do it for them; all Things are
theirs, whether Apollo, or Cephas, Life or Death. O the stupendous Prodigy of
the Goodness and Kindness of Jesus! Wonder, O Heavens, and be astonished, O
Earth, at this?

BUT Sirs, that which crowns all the divine Donations is, that the Love of
Jesus gives his People an Interest in the Persons of the sacred Trinity.

GOD the Father is ours in all his Attributes -- his Purposes -- his Operations
-- his Promises and Providence!

GOD the Son is ours, he has given himself to us, his Person -- his Purchase --
his Offices, and Relations!

GOD the Holy Ghost is ours, in all his Influences and Graces! -- I will pray
the Father, says Jesus to his Disciples, and he shall give you another
Comsorter, that he may abide with you forever! O the unsearchable,
inexpressible, unparalled, and amazing Love of our Lord Jesus Christ! Can
Men, Can Angels fully represent it? No! It is too big, too vast, for human
Language to express! Too bright, too glorious, for a human Mind to comprehend!
Yea; the Thoughts of the sublimest Seraphs, are swallowed up and lost, in this
immense, and unfathomable Ocean!

AGAIN, my dear Brethren, the blessed, the adorable Lord Jesus, has manifested
his Love to his poor People, by the most painful Passions for them! He has
loved us, and given himself for us. Here, Sirs, let us pause a little, and
enquire who it was that gave himself, to what, for whom, and how.

WHO? a God of glorious Majesty, a God of transcendant Excellency, a God of
unrivaled Beauty and Perfection! Fairer than the Children of Men! Fairer than
the Sons of God, the blessed Angels! Who? a Being of almighty Power! who by a
Word, and in a Moment, has produced the vast Bodies of the Heavens, the Earth
and Sea out of nothing, and preserves them in their present Order and
Existence! A Being of independent Sovereignty! who is absolute Lord of the
Universe, upon whose Power all Nature hangs and is dependant, and to whose
providential Government, the whole System of Beings within the capacious
Circuit of the vast Creation, must yield a speedy and silent Subjection! Who? A
Being that exsisted from the Days of Eternity, Whose Goings forth, have been
forever of old, even from Everlasting. One who is the Alpha and Omega, the
Beginning and the Ending; nor has Succession in Duration! A Being of absolute
Self-sufficiency, and All Sufficiency; who has enough of Beauty and of Good,
within the Verge of his own glorious Essence, to complete forever his own and
his People's Happiness! Nor can his essential Glory and Blessedness admit of
any Accession or Decay! A Being of infinite Knowledge, who perfectly fore-knew
all the present Unworthiness, and future Swervings of his People from his
Statutes: For to him the Depth of the Night is as the Dawn of the Morning; to
him the End is known, from the Beginning.

BUT to what did this great, this glorious Lord give himself? Why, to Shame, to
Misery, to Death! and that of the most ignominious, and formidable Kind! He
humbled himself to Death, even to the Death of the Cross! O! the severe
Chastisement of our Peace, was laid upon him, that through his Stripes we might
be healed! Such was the unutterable Grace and Goodness of the dearest, dearest
Lord Jesus, that though he was realty, and incomprehensibly rich, in the
Possession of all his Father's Excellencies, yet he became voluntarily, and, to
Appearance, poor, that we through his Poverty might be rich! The Brightness and
unapproachable Blaze of his divine Glory, was veiled with the humble Mantle of
Humanity! He who counted it not Robbery to be equal to God, assumed the Form of
a Servant, that we might be made the Sons of the highest! He who is the
unfailing Spring of Sweetness and Consolation, became a Man of Sorrows, and
acquainted with Grief! that we might drink of the River of Pleasures, that
flows from the Throne of God and the Lamb! He, who is the Center of Rest and
Motion, became weary, that he might give to the Weary Rest! He, who is
All-fullness, became hungry, that he might feed the Hungry with the Bread of
Life, the Apples of Salvation! He, who is Health itself, was wounded, that we
might be healed with the Balm of Gilead! He who is the Resurrection and the
Life, died that we might live, and that forever. O Miracle of Mercy! O
inexpressible Prodigy of divine Love!

BUT who were these for whom the blessed Jesus endured such intolerable
Agonies? Were they Angels, or perfect Creatures? No, They were Sinners, Rebels,
Enemies; such as had transgressed his righteous Laws; such as had revolted from
the Allegiance due to his equitable Government, and such as were possessed of a
deadly Enmity against his Person and Rule; such as were utterly unworthy of his
Love, and neither sought it, nor were able to requite it; such who, even after
Conversion, are in a Degree ungrateful, jealous, disloyal, make not suitable
Returns for Benefits received, suspect his Kindness, and are disposed to
spiritual Whoredom!

BUT how did the dearest Lord Jesus give himself? I answer; Most freely. In the
Volume of thy Book, says he, it is written of me, lo I come to do thy Will, O
God, and thy Law is within my Heart! All Manner of Miseries he endured most
patiently. He was led like a Lamb to the Slaughter, so he opened not his Mouth:
Yea he was streight'ned till his Sufferings for our Sakes were accomplished. O
astonishing Love!

AND though the Persons whom the blessed Lord Jesus set his Love upon, were such
as have been described, yet he loved them more than the best of Men love one
another; Greater Love has no Man, than that a Man lay down his Life for his
Friend; but Christ has laid down his Life for his Enemies.

YEA, the holy Jesus loves Man more then he loves himself. The unregenerate Man
loves not his Soul, the noblest Part of himself; nor does he love his Body in
Reference to Eternity -- And the Love of the regenerate Man is imperfect, but
the Love of Christ was without Defect.

I MAY add, my Brethren, That the dear Redeemer loves Men more than Heaven and
Earth; for he left the one, and rejected the Offers of the other for his sake.

AND didn't the Lord Jesus love Men more than the Angels? For he took not upon
him their Nature; nor is there any Offer of Mercy made through him, to those that
fell from their original State.

YEA we may say that the adorable Redeemer loved his People, in some Respects,
more than himself! He prayed for them more than himself; and that when he was
just entering upon the last Scene of his awful Sufferings! He expressed more
Joy at their Welfare, than his own, as Man: With what Keenness and Pungency did
he reprove the Apostle Peter, when he advised him to spare himself? Get thee
behind me, Satan! When the Disciples informed him of the Success of their
Ministry, though he was a Man of Sorrows, yet he rejoiced on that Occasion!

ADD to this, that he willingly suffered the Sword of Justice to pierce his
Heart, rather than Men should suffer eternally! He gave himself a Sacrifice to
avenging Wrath! A Prey to Murderers, and to all Manner of Miseries! This
Offering of Christ was, as our Text asserts, Of a sweet smelling Savor to God!
i. e. Propitiatory, and satisfactory for the Sins of Men.

AND indeed the Love of Jesus is such, as inclined him, not only to give
himself to suffer for us, all the Miseries our Sins deserved, if not altogether
in Kind, yet in Weight; but likewise to suffer by us, and with us. O! his Love
incites him to bear many Affronts from us, though we make him to serve by our
Sins, and he is as it were pressed under them, as a Cart under Sheaves: Yet
after all our Backslidings, which are, in some Respects, more heinous then the
Sins of others; because committed against greater Light and Mercy. He invites
us to return, and graciously promises upon our doing so, To heal our
Backslidings* and love us freely! And does not his Love dispose him to
simpathize with us, in all our Sorrows! In all our Afflictions he is afflicted!
We have not a High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
Infirmities, but was in all Things tempted as we are, yet without Sin.

I proceed to the Improvement of this Subject.

METHINKS what has been said, should excite us to enquire, whether Christ loves
us with a special complacential Love? If so, we have been made to see and feel
our absolute Need of his Righteousness, so as to be shut up thereto, as the
only Door of Hope: If so, Christ has manifested himself to us by his Gospel, in
Regard of his All Sufficiency and Willingness to save poor Sinners! So that we
have hereby been induced to venture our Souls upon the alone Foundation of his
Merit, for our Acceptance with God; and have hereupon received such
Communications of his Love, as have inclined us to love him habitually,
supremely, ingenuously; We love him (says the Apostle John) because he has
loved us first: And does our Love to Christ constrain us, to endeavor a
universal, willing, and persevering Obedience to his Precepts? Then are ye my
Friends, says Christ, if ye do whatever I command you.

FARTHER, my Brethren, we should enquire, whether we walk in Love, so as has
been before hinted? If so, it is a blessed Evidence of our being Translated
from Death to Life: Such as upon Enquiry, find the aforesaid Characters in
themselves, may safely conclude, that they are in a State of Favor with God;
And if God is for them, who shall be against them? They have great Reason to
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and again to rejoice, however difficult and
distressing their outward Circumstances may be! For all that they meet with in
Time, shall be turned to their Advantage in the Issue; They shall work together
for their Good: Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or Life, or Death, all is
theirs, and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's! Remember, dear Brethren,
That your Sufferings in this Life, which are but for a Moment, are not worthy
to be compared with the exceeding great and eternal Weight of Glory, which
shall be, in a little Time, revealed to you, and you made Possessors thereof.

BUT such as are destitute of the aforesaid Characters, have great Reason to
mourn and lament! For their prent State is unspeakably dangerous, and extremely
miserable! Without Christ there is no true Safety, nor solid Comfort: He is the
only Hiding Place, that can effectually screen us from the Storms of divine
Wrath! The only Fountain of Consolation, that can effectually sweeten our
Sorrows, satisfy our Desires, and support our Hopes!

YE should therefore be entreated, Sirs, to seek an Interest in the Love of
Christ, and the Evidence of it; the former makes your State safe, the latter
comfortable. The sensible Knowledge of Christ's Love to us, is a Heaven upon
Earth! This makes us bold in Danger, and patient in Adversity; this asswages
every Grief, and is as Oil to the Wheels of Devotion; this gives a fresh Spring
to our animal Spirits, a new Relish to our outward Comforts, and is the very
Life of Life! This makes the Mind calm and serene, when the Surges of
Difficulty swell, and the Tempest roars; it is enough if Christ be ours; of
whom then, or of what should we be afraid?

NOW to obtain an Interest in your Redeemer's Love,

LABOR to know your Need of him, as well as his Ability and Readiness to
relieve all that take their Flight to him.

BELIEVE on the Lord Jesus Christ.

THINK much on the Riches of his Love, contained in the precious Promises.

TRY to be like him in Heart and in Life; such as say they have Fellowship with
him and walk in Darkness, do lie, and know not the Truth.

AND such who have an Interest in Christ's Love, but want the Evidence of it,

LET them endeavor to know, and do the Will of God: He that has my
Commandments, and keeps them, says Christ, he it is that loves me, and he
that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest
myself to him.

CONVERSE much with Christ, by serious and delightful Study.

BEWARE of Unbelief, and unkind Returns for Mercies received; When he speaks
Peace, do not return to Folly. --

CRY for Assurance to a gracious God, for Christ's sake, with Hopes of
obtaining it. --

WALK IN LOVE, as Christ also has loved us; live in Love, let this be your
Element!

LOVE as Christ did, let your Thoughts be kind; For Charity thinks no Evil, but
hopes all Things, and believes all Things that are good of our Brother, as far
as there is any Reason for it. Let your Speeches be courteous, Put on, as the
Elect of God, Bowels of Mercy, Kindness, and Humbleness of Mind; be pitiful, be
courteous, and O let your Actions be beneficent: Say not to the Hungry, be fed,
and to the Naked, be clothed, when it is in the Power of your Hand to give: If
so, How dwells the Love of God in you? The Love of Christ is a long-suffering,
sympathizing, forgiving, and enduring Love; and so should ours be: In case of
Offenses, and different Sentiments in Religion, bear, forbear, forgive; In
Meekness and Long-suffering, says the Apostle, forbearing and forgiving one
another, even as God has, for Christ's sake, forgiven you.

MOREOVER, Sirs, ye should walk in Love toward your Brethren, because Christ
has loved you: He has forgiven much to you, and will not you forgive a little
to your poor Brother? He has graciously cancelled your Debt of a Thousand
Talents, and will you take your Brother by the Throat for a few Pence? Christ
bears with innumerable Weaknesses in you, and will not you bear with a few in your
Brother? No more powerful Argument can be offered to the Sons of Men, to invite
their Love, than the Love of Christ. Dear Sirs! by walking in Love to your
Brethren, you fulfill the second Table of the Law, and evidence to your selves,
as well as others, your gracious State: This is truly amiable, the right Way to
promote the Glory of God, and the Good of Society. O! How amiable is it for
Brethren to dwell together in Unity?

IS it not, dear Sirs! one great Design of the Ordinance in view, to promote
Brotherly Love? by setting before us, sensible Representations of the dying
Love of Christ? And hence it is called a Love-Feast.

THIS leads me to say, That another excellent Mean of obtaining Assurance, is,
to attend with Humility, Sincerity, and Hope, upon the blessed Ordinance of the
Lord's Supper, by which we show forth his Death till he come again. This is
designed not only as a Sign to represent the Strength of the Redeemer's
Affection, but as a Seal to confirm our Interest in it. O then! while the King
comes to his Table, let our Spikenard send forth the Smell thereof: Who is this
that comes from Bozra, with Garments died red, traveling in the Greatness of
his Strength? O how amiable is our Lord in his bloody Robes! Quot vulnera tot
ora; As many Wounds as he received for us, so many Mouths are open to plead for
our Love to him.

SUFFER me here, my Brethren, to enlarge a little upon this solemn sacramental
Occasion! Let us, dear Sirs! take a transient Survey of our Lord's ABASURE and
SUFFERINGS, by which he expressed the Strength of his Love to us!

IT is strange indeed! that the great GOD should stoop so low, as to make
himself of no Reputation for our sakes, and appear in the Fashion of a Man!
Strange! That the Ancient of Days, whose Goings forth are of old, from
Everlasting, should be born in Bethlehem, an Infant of a Minute old! Strange!
That He, whose Immensity fills Heaven and Earth, and infinitely extends beyond
the Bounds of the Creation, should be confined in a Virgin's Womb! Should be
wrapped in Swaddling Cloths! and laid in a Manger, a Stable! Strange! That the
immortal impassible Creator, and Lord of all, should assume, for our sakes, the
inocent Infirmities and Passions of his poor Creatures! and so come in the
Likeness of sinful Flesh! That he should begin to live and grow, should hunger
and thirst, should bleed and die!

WHAT a Wonder is this to Men and Angels? to behold Heaven and Earth, GOD and
Man, united in one Person! To see Immensity confined in a narrow Compass! and
to behold at once, a Virgin Mother, and an Infant-God!

STRANGE! That the Beauty of Heaven, whom all the Angels worship, should appear
without Form and Comeliness upon the Earth! Should be despised and rejected!
Should be deemed the Reproach of Men, and Outcast of the People! Should be
oppressed, and afflicted! taken from Prison, and from Judgment, and cut off at
last from the Land of the Living! Good God! What a Scene is this? What Love,
what matchless Love is here? O! Can we believe it, and not be fired with the
Thought, to love God and Man, And walk in Love!

SIRS, The venerable Name of our dear Lord! which is as fragrant Ointment
poured forth, and aromatic Spices broken! was covered with a Cloud of unjust
Scandal and Reproach! He was called A Friend of Publicans and Sinners, a
glutonous Person, a Wine-bibber, and one whom by Enchantment cast out Devils!
O! what sweet Support may this yield to those that endure unjust Invectives for
his sake! i. e. For their firm and inviolable Adherence to the Truths he has
revealed, and the Duties he has prescribed!

THE blessed Jesus had no worldly Substance but his Clothes, and these they at
last bereaved him of; They parted his Raiment amongst them, and cast Lets upon
his Vesture! O! Methinks! the voluntary Poverty of the Son of God, may serve to
reconcile the Poor to their humble Circumstances; especially when they consider
that the Son of God, who made the Universe, and all the Beings it contains, Had
no where to lay his blessed Head upon! No Horse! No House of his own, but lived
upon the Charity of others; for are they not hereby conformed to him?

AFTER a Life of Labor and of Grief, behold the dear Redeemer drawing near the
Period of this weary Scene! See he is betrayed by one of his own Disciples, and
deserted by the rest in his Extremity! O the Unkindness of Friends is
exceedingly distressing Is this Brutus my Friend, said Caesar in the
Senate House, when he was going to stab him!
! See Goodness itself unjustly accused, and cruelly condemned! See how a Heed
of Russians hurry my dearest Lord, from Court to Court, and treat the glorious
Majesty of Heaven with the utmost Rudeness and Contempt! See how they treat the
Fountain of Kindness, yea, Love itself, with Cruelty and Hate! See how they
wound his sacred Body with severe Scourges, so that he was all over of a bloody
Gore, and his Raiment bespattered with Blood! See how the inhuman Monsters
smite our Lord with the Palms of their Hands, and in Contempt, spit upon his
Face, the Seat of Majesty and Beauty! O horrid Indignity! O barbarous Villainy!
Look how they beat with a Reed the contemptuous thorny Crown into his sacred
Temples, and salute him in Disdain, Hail King of the Jews! Look how they drive
Nails into those blessed Feet, that were incessantly employed in unwearied
Travels, to diffuse Benignity and Good among the Miserable; to diffuse Light to
the Blind, Health to the Sick, and Life to the Dead! See how they bind with
Cords, and wound with Nails those Hands that were frequently lifted up to
Heaven, in humble Supplications for them, and in communicating Blessings to
them!

THE Kind of Death that our Lord endured, viz. by Crucifixion, was very
dishonorable, none but Slaves were subject to it; moreover he was put to Death
between Malefactors of the most scandalous Kind! and hung between the Heavens
and the Earth! as if he that had made both, was fit to be entertained by
neither!

FARTHER, the aforesaid Kind of Death, was exceeding painful, the whole Weight
of his Body being hung upon some sinewy nervous Parts, and the fatal Cross
being put into the Ground, by a sudden Jog, when it was raised up, after our
Lord was nailed to it, must needs cause the accutest Pains Ausonius calls it,
Pene extremum, the Extremity of Punishment; and Cicero, crudelishmum, and
teterrimum Supi^cium; a most cruel and horrid Punishment.
!

IN this Extremity of Anguish and Misery, they derided with ungenerous Sneers
and Sarcasms, our Lord, our Love! They reviled him, wagging their Heads, and
saying. Thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three Days, save
thyself: If thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross. This was an
Instance of horrid Inhumanity!

THEN was his Heart pierced with a cruel Spear, Whence came Blood and Water,
for the healing of the Nations; a Stream that waters the Garden of God!

BUT the Sufferings our Lord endured in his Soul, were infinitely greater than
those he suffered in his Body.

IN the Garden of Gethsemany, his Soul was sorrowful even unto Death! There he
prostrated himself upon the cold Ground! and through inward Anguish and Agony,
Sweat great Drops of Blood, shed through all his Pores a crimson Shower! It is
doubtless chiefly in regard of the Sufferings of his Soul, that he is said to
Drink the bitter Cup, and tread the Wine Press of his Father's Wrath, as well
as conflict with the Powers of Darkness! In his Soul he endured a Degree of
Pain, equal to the Demerit of the Sins of those he represented; and hence he is
said to make his Soul an Offering for Sin, and this Offering is said to be, as
a sweet smelling Savor to God? that is, pleasing and satisfactory!

HIS Father's deserting him, and causing the Sword of his Justice to awake
against him, bro't his Sufferings to the highest Crisis of Extremity! This, O
this! made the Lamb of God lament and cry to his Father, in the most dolorous
and piteous Accents, Eloi, Eloi, Lama Sabacthani? My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? O Cry! Enough to rend the Heavens!

THE Sun, that glorious Orb of Light, and Parent of the Day, justly refused to
behold so terrible a Tragedy, and therefore wrapped himself in Darkness! Then was
the Vail of the Temple rent in twain! the hard Rocks burst in Pieces! the Earth
shook at its Foundations, and trembled on its Axis! the Dead themselves awoke
out of their Iron Slumbers, and hast'ned out of their dark and silent Retreats,
to complete the Train of Mourners, and bewail the Funeral of a GOD!

O DEAR Brethren! let us behold these Sufferings of our Lord with Sorrow for
our Sins, the deserving Causes of them, as well as with Love to him, and in
Consequence thereof, with Love to Mankind in general, and to those that are
pious in particular.

O BRETHREN! If these Things do not affect us, we are blinder than Moles! and
more hardhearted than Rocks, than Adamants! For those relented, as it were,
when their Creator expired! If our Hearts are not fired with this Subject, we
are colder than Ice and Snow!

IF we are not moved with Gratitude for such Love, we are more sordid than the
Beasts that perish! for these express a Kind of Gratitude to their Benefactors!
The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib!

IF we will not accept of, and improve this inexpressible Love of our Lord
Jesus, we are more inexcusable than the impenitent Jews; seeing we enjoy, through
divine Goodness, a brighter Dispensation than they; the ceremonial, typical
Vail is rent, and Light and Day is poured upon the World, with a more liberal
and extensive Effusion, since the Messiah's Incarnation; now the Jewish Night
is banished; The Dayspring from on high has visited us, and the Sun of
Righteousness has arisen, with Healing in his Wings, and shone with unclouded
Luster, so that we may with open Face behold the Glory of God in the Face of
Christ! i. e. The harmonious Concurrence, and beauteous Manifestation of the
divine Attributes, in the Way of Man's Redemption and Salvation by Jesus Christ!

FARTHER in the Case aforesaid, we are more inexcusable than Pagans, who have
never had our Advantages, in respect of outward Privilege, but sit in
Darkness, and in the Region and Shadow of Death!

NAY we are, if we continue impenitent, in some Respect, more inexcusable than
Devils; for, so far as we know, they never had an Offer of Mercy, after their
Apostasy! How then shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation? A
Salvation purchased by the Blood of God; a Salvation freely offered, and that
to the very worst of Men, who will repent of their Sins and believe in Jesus! A
Salvation that has every Thing that is great and good, and valuable in it, and
that forever!

CAN we escape by Policy? No! Men may be imposed upon by false Pretexts, but
God is all Eye, yea, Wisdom and Knowledge itself, There is no Darkness or
Shadow of Death, where the Workers of Iniquity can hide themselves; No! To him
the Darkness is as the Light, and Midnight as Noonday!

CAN we by Power? No! Jehovah is almighty in Strength; when he speaks, the
Pillars of Heaven tremble, the Earth's Foundations shake, the Devils roar, and
all the Tribes of inanimate Creatures unreluctant obey his Word: Dare we, whose
Habitation is in the Dust, whose Breath is in our Nostrils, and who are crushed
before the Moth, rush upon Jehovah's Buckler? Have we an Arm like God, and can
we thunder with a Voice like him? He is wise in Heart, and mighty in Strength;
who has ever hardened himself against God, and prospered?

CAN we escape by Flight? No! He is every where present; Should we take the
Morning's Wings, and fly to the uttermost Parts of the Earth, or Sea, even
there God's Hand would lead us, and his Right Hand hold us. If I ascend to
Heaven, says the Psalmist, thou art there; if I make my Bed in Hell, behold
thou art there! Should we mount Carmel's Heights, or dive the Ocean's Depths!
Should we seek the obscurest Recess in the wide Circle of the Creation, we
could not possibly escape the Notice of his all-penetrating Eye, or the Reach of
his Almighty Arm!

O! It will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha, in the Day of the Lord,
than for any of us, that continue impenitent; This is the Condemnation, that
Light is come into the World, and we love Darkness rather than Light, because
our Deeds are Evil. Surely the blessed Jesus will be revealed from Heaven in
flaming Fire, to take Vengeance on those that know not God, who shall be
punished with everlasting Destruction, from the Presence of the Lord, and from
the Glory of his Power!

BUT let me speak a few Words to the Communicants, and then conclude; Come my
dear Brethren, to this Solemnity, with a Reverence of God's Majesty upon your
Spirits; How awful is this Place? Surely it is no other than the House of God,
and this is the Gate of Heaven; come with vehement Hunger and Thirsting after
the Bread and Waters of Life; come with a humble Sense of your Unworthiness of
the Privilege of coming to the Table of the King of Kings!

COME with a firm Resolution, To live to him, that died for you!

COME with a deep Sorrow for your Offenses, that have been the meritorious
Causes of Christ's Sufferings!

CAN ye, dear Sirs! behold in this Sacramental Memorial, the Symbols of those
Sufferings of the Son of God, which were before hinted, and not be affected? If
so, it is lamentable indeed! Surely a View of them, may justly strike the
Springs of your Grief.

BEHOLD the Tears of Humanity, Compassion and Love, which Jesus shed at the
Grave of Lazarus, and over the impenitent City of Jerusalem! when he addressed
it as follows: If thou, or as some render the Words, O that thou had known in
this thy Day, the Things that belong to thy Peace, but now they are hid from
thine Eyes! See his Sorrows, his Wounds, his Blood, his Death!

HARK and listen to his Sighs, his Groans, his dolorous Outcry on the Cross,
Eloi, Eloi, Lama Sabacthani; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.

See his compassionate Arms opened on the cruel Tree, opened to embrace in
tender Mercy, every returning Prodigal, how many and how great soever his
Transgressions have been notwithstanding.

BEHOLD with humble Astonishment, Innocence condemned, Beauty stained, and Love
it self despised, in all its Riches and Charms! See Salvation suffering,
Strength languishing, and Life expiring! The Angels wonder at the Tragedy! the
Earth quivers for Fear! the visible Heaven shuts its radiant Eye by a dark
Eclipse, and refused to behold so sad a Spectacle! so sorrowful a Scene! The
Rocks themselves expressed a Sympathy with their suffering Creator, to the
perpetual Reproach of Sinners, that are harder than they! And universal Nature
mourned!

BEHOLD, my dear Brethren! the blessed Bridegroom comes, clothed with Majesty,
as with a Robe; with Light, as with a Garment; with Zeal, as with a Cloak: See
he is girt with a golden Girdle, his Head and Hairs are white as Snow, and his
Eyes are as a Flame of Fire, his Feet like unto fine Brass, as if they burned
in a Furnace, and his Voice as the Sound of many Waters! See the unrivaled
Beauty of his Person, and the inexpressible Riches of his Love!

OUR adorable Jesus, Is white and ruddy, the chiefest among Ten thousand! He is
white in Regard of his unsullied Innocence, and red in Regard of his severe
Sufferings for us! See he comes from Bozra and Edom, with his Garments died
red! his Vesture is discolored, or rather adorned with his Heart's-Blood; O
amazing Sight! See those Wounds, Believer, he patiently and willingly bore for
thee! Wounds which are Scars of Honor, Signatures of Victory, and Arguments of
Love and Endearment!

SURELY his Garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia, out of the Ivory
Palaces. Now let the everlasting Doors of your Souls open to embrace your Lord;
now let your Bowels move for him; now let your Hands drop with Myrrh, with
sweet smelling Myrrh, upon the Handles of the Lock! While the King sits at his
Table, let your Spikenard send forth the Smell thereof; seeing the Marriage of
the Lamb is come, O let the Spouse make herself ready to embrace him. Amen.
Even so come Lord Jesus. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

