MEDITATIONS ON SEVERAL Divine Subjects:

I. On the HUMANITY of CHRIST. II. The Extensiveness of GOD'S good Design in
Selling Joseph into Egypt. III. CHRIST the KING sitting at his Table. IV. Of
the Love of CHRIST, and saving Knowledge of it.
WITH A Letter to a Friend, about the Affairs of his Soul.

By a Person unhappily taken off from his Ministry by bodily Disorders.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed by J. DRAPER, for D. HENCHMAN, in Cornhill. 1748.

TO THE READER.
THOUGH the pious and ingenious Author of the following Meditations will by no
Means allow his Name to be published; yet we think convenient to signify, that
he is a Person of Liberal Education, and had his Heart so set on the Work of
the Ministry, as he voluntarily quitted several Offices of Usefulness and
Honor in the Civil Order, to take the Care of Souls; and continued with great
Acceptance in his ministerial Labors, 'till in the mysterious Providence of
GOD, such bodily Disorders seized him as, to the great Sorrow of many, obliged
him to leave this his most delightful Employment.

Nevertheless, as religious Contemplations are still his main Bent and
Exercise; He has been prevailed upon by his particular Friends to write down
several of his Tho'ts upon diverse Subjects, which they with Pleasure have
occasionally heard him utter in private Conversation. Some whereof are the
following Pieces, which after great Importunity, he has at length resigned to
their Disposal, though with a positive Prohibition of divulging his Name. And we
are confident they will be very grateful, and by the Divine Blessing, hope will
be useful to the serious Peruser, as they have been to many who have read them
in Manuscript.

May our most gracious GOD restore him to the free and full Exercise of all his
former ministerial Abilities with greater Power and Usefulness than ever, to
the Advancement of the Kingdom of CHRIST, and Joy of many: And may the Reader
add his Prayers, for the same Favor, and reap everlasting Benefit by these
excellent Meditations.

February 15. 1747, 8.
MEDITATIONS UPON THE HUMANITY of CHRIST.
THE Manhood of JESUS CHRIST is not a Person, but a Nature. A Person is one
that is conscious to himself with respect to his own Acts. That is, he can say,
I did so and so: It was I, and not another. So in the Trinity, the Father can
say, I begat the Son, and not another: The Son can say, I was begotten of the
Father, I took humane Nature, and not the Father, nor the Spirit: And the
Spirit can say, I, and not another, proceeded from the Father and the Son. So
among Angels and Men, each has a Conciousness, a Sense or Apprehension within
himself; I did so and so, and not another; the Praise or the Blame of such and
such Things belongs to me, and not another. But thus it is not with the humane
Nature of CHRIST, considered as distinct from the Divine. The Manhood in him
cannot say, I did so and so, and the Acts are to be appropriated to me, and to
no other. No, the Words spoken come out of the Mouth of a humane Body, and are
conceived by a humane rational Soul; but that Body and Soul do belong to a
Person that subsisted before all Worlds, even that WORD which was with GOD, and
was GOD, etc. So, when the Man JESUS said, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful unto
Death; I thirst, etc. the true Meaning of it is, not that any particular humane
Person did so or so; but the Person of the Son of GOD did so or so in his
humane Nature; or the humane Nature of the second Person in the Godhead did so.
-- Hence, the Doings and Sufferings of that Nature have their Value and Merit;
for they properly belong to the Son of GOD. They are his personal Acts; though
not the Acts of the Divine Nature, yet the Acts of a Divine Person in humane
Nature, or the Acts of the humane Nature of a Divine Person. His Natures are
two, Humane and Divine; his Person but one, even that same Divine Person that
was with the First and Third Persons in the Godhead before all Worlds. Hence it
was impossible for the humane Nature to sin; because all it is Actions were the
Actions of a Person perfectly and infinitely Holy. -- If it be objected, That
by the same Way of Arguing, no natural Weaknesses and Infirmities could be
attributed to the humane Nature of CHRIST, as Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, etc.
to the Body Ignorance of some Things, Sorrow, etc. to the Soul; because the
Person of the Son of GOD was infinitely above all these Imperfections: -- It
may be answered, That though it was impossible for a Divine Person to be subject
to any of those innocent Infirmities in his Divine Nature; yet it was possible
and much for his declarative Glory to assume a Nature subject to these innocent
Weaknesses; but it would be infinitely dishonorable, and so infinitely
impossible, that the humane Nature of a Divine Person should be subject to any
sinful Imperfection. And then the Person of the Son of GOD has his own humane
Nature absolutely under his Power, and he cannot possibly suffer it to sin. --
Hence also the Man CHRIST JESUS, even when here on Earth in his Humiliation,
speaks in Language sometimes proper only to the Divine Nature as, Before
Abraham was I am; for though the Words were uttered by the humane Nature, yet the
Person to whom that Nature belonged was really and truly GOD. -- So the Man
JESUS made no Scruple of receiving divine Worship and Adoration from Men,
thereby making Himself equal with GOD; for he was conscious to himself that He
was truly and properly GOD, as well as Man. --

The humane Nature of CHRIST was every Way like the humane Nature of another
Man, Sin only excepted. While it was on Earth it was (with that Exception)
every Way like unto Men in their imperfect State: And it is no where asserted
in Scripture, that I know of, (whatever Tradition has been pretended to hand
down) that there was any Thing in his Countenance or outward Appearance (except
at his Transfiguration) that distinguished him from his Brethren; unless that
his Visage was more marred, etc. -- And the Endowments of his humane Mind
differed only in Degree from those of other holy Men: He had the same Kind of
Knowledge, Wisdom, Love, Courage, etc, but only in an high. Degree He was
always full of these Things; there was no sinful Deficiency: And these
Endowments increased and grew in him as he grew in Years. There was a Time when
he did not (as Man) know his Right Hand from his Left, nor his own Mother from
another Woman; but he increased in Knowledge, Wisdom, etc, as other Children
do, by the same Means and in the same Manner; but with this Difference, that he
improved his Powers and Advantages to the utmost. Even when a Child he never
omitted one Opportunity of getting Increase in Wisdom, Knowledge, etc; was
never chargeable with the least Degree of Indifferency, Negligence or
Carelessness; never spent one Moment's Time in Eating, Drinking, Sleeping,
Recreation, etc; but what ought to be so spent. And his Improvements were
vastly quick and large, but still gradual as he grew in Age and Stature.

What Degree of Wisdom, Knowledge, etc, the humane Nature had more for it is
Union with the Divine, was purely according to the Will and Pleasure of the
Divine Person. As our bodily Senses are in great Measure under the Command of a
Spirit belonging to the same Person (the Body often sees, hears, tastes, etc,
at the Will and Pleasure of the Soul;) So the humane Nature knew and acted
nothing beyond the Power and Reach of a mere humane Capacity, but only as the
Divine Person was pleased to communicate. Accordingly the humane Nature of
CHRIST knew not but there were Figgs on the Fig Tree, till he came near enough
to see; and yet at another Time that same humane Nature knew and could answer
the Thoughts of Men's Hearts, when the Divine was pleased to communicate that
Knowledge. So, the humane Nature while he did not know the particular Day and
Hour of the last Judgment; and yet at the same Time he knew and could foretell
the most remarkable Events that were to fall out, from the Time then present,
to the End of the World, and the very Circumstances of the Last Judgment.

[By the Way, it is so far from being a Dishonor to CHRIST'S Person, to speak
of the innocent Imperfections of the humane Nature, according to Scripture
Light, that it is the great Illustration of his condescending Love, that he
would take the humane Nature into personal Union with the Divine, under such
Circumstances.]

JESUS CHRIST had all the innocent Passions and Affections of the humane
Nature; such as Love, Hatred, Joy, Sorrow, Anger, etc: and they were moved and
wrought upon after the same Manner with those of other Men; still always
excepting any sinful Imperfection, which those who think aright of these
Things, will continually bear in their Minds. To instance here only in one
Particular, instead of many: Though he knew the present State of Jerusalem, and
was doubtless thinking of it all along his Journey from Galiiee, yet we read
not of any extraordinary Motion of the Passions, till his Eye affected his
Heart: Then, it is said, He beheld the City and wept over it. -- His Body also
was exposed to all those Uneasinesses and Pains, that another humane Body is,
and possibly much more sensible of them, as being prepared for that very
Purpose to be the Seat of Sufferings. As the Senses of Man in Innocence were so
contrived as to be so many Avenues of Pleasure from every Quarter; so the
bodily Senses of the LORD JESUS were designed as so many Conduits to convey
into his Soul the bitter Waters of the Curse due to the Elect. -- Whether the
humane Nature of CHRIST were liable to a natural Death by Sickness, or Age or
no, has been doubted; but we know it was subject to a violent one. And what
there should be in his Constitution (who was made of a Woman) that should
preserve him from the Decays of Age, and the mortal Diseases that Men in
General are exposed to, is not revealed. It was by special Providence that he
was preserved from Death, natural or violent, till his Hour was come.

And as the humane Nature of CHRIST was like unto sinful Flesh in this World;
so I know of no Reason to think now it is in Glory, that there is any essential
Difference betwixt that and those of Enoch and Elijah, that are there in their
whole Persons, and what those of all the Saints will be after the Resurrection.
The humane Nature of CHRIST in Heaven, considered as distinct from the Divine,
is no more than a Man perfect in all created humane Excellencies. It still
remains finite in every Power and Faculty and Endowment both or Body and Soul,
and must necessarily do so forever.

Whatever Alterations there may be in his Body, on the Account of which it may
be termed a spiritual Body; yet still it is a humane Body, and subject to the
same Laws of Matter and Motion that other Bodies are. The Alterations that
Bodies are subject to here below, are exceeding great and wonderful: To
instance only in that of a Tallow Candle, Suppose an Inch of it, What a norrow
Compass does it lie in? What a dull and motionless little Lump is it? yet do
but touch it to another that is lighted and what a Change is there made? It
flames and shines and diffuses it is Light, not only through the whole Room,
discovering that which lay hid in Darkness there, but spreads itself far and
wide, and lies (as they tell us, that Study those Things) after the Rate of
some Millions of Miles, in a Minute. All this spreading shining Flame is
nothing but that same little Piece of Tallow that lay a Minute before covered
in the same Darkness with other Things about the House, only putting on another
Form, etc. -- So the humane Body, though perhaps transformed into pure celestial
Light, (which is most like Spirit or any material Substance we can conceive of)
so that it may possibly spread it self many thousands of Miles round in a
Minute; and then in another Minute, contract itself into the narrow Compass of
a few Inches, and appear in what Shape the Soul pleases; as we read of his
appearing sometimes in one Form and sometimes in another; yet still it is but
the same Body in a different Form, that was confined within the Dimensions of
an ordinary humane Body while here below, and could neither extend or contract
it self into any other Limits, nor appear in any other Form.

And so whatever Change the humane Soul of CHRIST may have undergone by his
Glorification; how vastly soever the Powers and Faculties thereof are enlarged,
and all filled to the Brim with Knowledge and Grace, yea with all the
communicable Fullness of the Godhead; yet still it is but a finite, humane Soul,
infinitely below the Perfection of the Divine Nature, and must of Necessity
continue so sorever.

As CHRIST'S humane Nature is in all other sinless Respects like other Men, so
it has a humane Love. He had, when here, a natural Affection to his Relations,
and a peculiar Love to some particular Persons, that either had no Grace at
all, as the young Man in the Gospel, or that had no more Grace than some
others, it may be as the beloved Disciple John. And he had a common Love to all
Mankind: As he was in some Sense the Savior of all Men, so he had strong
Desires of the Salvation of every individual Person, without Distinction of
Elect and Reprobate. Nor could he know, as Man, unless it were made known to
him by special Revelation, who among the Unconverted were the chosen of GOD,
and who were not; and therefore did, as his faithful Servants do, labor for
the Good of all; and it was the Grief of his Heart that his Labors were no
more successful. And this was no doubt (next to seeing his heavenly Father
dishonored) one of the greatest Afflictions he met with while here, to see his
Neighbors, (whom he loved as himself, according to the Law he was made under)
continually wounding and destroying their own Souls, and slighting and
neglecting the only Remedy. That same Affection that glowed in the Heart and
flamed out of the Mouth of the Apostle Paul toward his Brethren according to
the Flesh, was in a far higher Degree (the Sinfulness of it excepted) in the
Heart of the Lord JESUS toward all Mankind, without Distinction: He did
actually make himself a Curse for them. Though as GOD he had his Eye and Love in
an especial Manner on the Elect; yet as Man (and that is the Nature we are
speaking of) he was not capable, as was said, of making the Distinction between
them and others. No, when he looked round from the Cross on the great Crowd of
People that were gathered together on that Occasion, he loved and pitied them
all, without Distinction, except one of a thousand perhaps, whom he knew to be
Converts by his personal Acquaintance with them. There was not one of that vast
Multitude, that (as Man) he could know was not to be converted about six Weeks
after, when the Spirit was to be poured out in such a wonderful Manner, unless
it were particularly revealed to him, and unless there were some among them who
he knew had committed the unpardonable Sin. And what large Additions, may we
suppose it made to the Floods of Sorrow and Distress that were then pouring in
upon him on all Sides, to see those whom he loved so as to be then actually
dying for them; yea, some Thousands of whom he knew were eternally to reap the
Benefit of his Sufferings, and to lie in his Bosom forever, all joining to mook
and deride him in his Agonies, and like the Philistines over Sampson, to shout
and triumph, as having got him whom they accounted the common Enemy of their
Nation, nailed to the Cross, and dying the Death of the worst of Malefactors?
It was a Man, the most loving, kind, tenderhearted Man, that ever was born of
a Woman that saw all this; they were his own Flesh and Blood, and the dearly
beloved of his Soul, who were the Actors in this bloody Tragedy. --

-- The humane Nature of the Lord JESUS CHRIST is mentioned as one great Thing
that qualified him to be the Judge of the World. All Judgment is committed unto
him, because he is the Son of Man. GOD will judge the World in Righteousness by
that Man whom he has ordained. The Judge will be, not only the Heart-searching
GOD, but one that had, and still has all the essential Properties of the humane
Nature: One that not only has the same Nature with the Persons to be judged;
but one that loved them, many of them personally, with a real strong Affection.

The Saints will be peculiarly happy in the Enjoyment of GOD in their own
Nature. A great Part of the rational Creature's Happiness consists in Society
that is suitable. Some have thought this is so essential to Happiness, that a
Plurality of Persons in GOD might be inferred from this Consideration alone;
That to have Communion in mutual Knowledge, Love and Enjoyment, is the very
Essence of Felicity, and that a Being in all Respects perfectly single and
alone, without any more Persons than one subsisting in his Essence, cannot be
completely happy. --

In order to Society's being suitable, it must be between Parties that have the
same Nature: So that though Adam, when he was first made might have Communion
with GOD, and with the holy Angels, and had a World of Creatures round about
him at his Command; yet he was said to be alone, and it was not good for him to
be so alone, and therefore GOD made him one of the same Nature to be an
Help-meet for him. And when his Companion was brought to him, he takes
particular Notice of it, that she was Bone of his Bone, and taken out of the
Man, one of the same Nature with himself.

GOD having a Design to make Creatures exceeding happy, probably far more so
than the Angels, the happiest Creatures he at first made; was pleased, in order
to this, to permit them to fall into the Depth of Misery (which was a
Circumstance greatly tending to inhance their Felicity) and then to advance
them, not only to Communion with the Angels, of a Nature different from their
own, and to Communion with Himself, of a Nature infinitely above them; but to
Communion with and Enjoyment of a Person that had really in Him all the Glory
and Excellency and All Sufficiency of the Divine Nature (for He is really and
truly GOD) and also all the Suitableness and Agreeableness of the Human Nature
in the utmost Perfection; and that in as strict and close a Union with him, as
it is possible for distinct Persons to be joined in, one to another, excepting
only the Persons of the blessed Trinity themselves. So that, as far as we can
learn, the Elect of Mankind are to be the happiest of all created Persons, and
the happiest of all created Beings, except the humane Nature of CHRIST; who in
all Things must have the Pre-eminence, and who is not a created Person, but one
of the two Natures (as was said) in the uncreated Person of the eternal Son of
GOD.

Though the humane Nature of CHRIST be now in a glorified State, and his
present Happiness is great, far beyond our Conceptions; yet it seems, that it
must needs be far short of that Perfection which he will enjoy when he shall
have the whole Body of his beloved Elect with him in Glory. According to our
Way of Thinking, it cannot but be an Alloy to his Felicity, to think that so
many Thousands of the Members of his mystical Body, more dear to him than the
Eyes of his natural Body, are still left in such a dismal State of Sin and
Sorrow, and are to continue so long in such a Condition; yea, that some of his
Elect are at present in a State of Enmity against him, and under the absolute
Tyranny of Sin and Satan, etc. -- If it be said, That he knows it is best it
should be so, it is agreeable to his Father's Will, and most for his Glory, and
will finally issue in the best Good of all his Chosen; It may be replied, That
he had the same Prospect of Things by Faith, when he was in his Agony in the
Garden, and on the Cross: He knew that all was for the best, infinitely so; yet
he was far from being then in the actual Enjoyment of perfect Happiness; so
far, that all his own Faith, which was sinless and perfect, and the Assistance
of an Angel strengthening of him, was but just sufficient to preserve him from
sinking under the amazing Weight that then lay upon him. And though his present
exceeding great Glory, together with a clear Prospect of what he, and all his,
are shortly to enjoy together in Perfection, and for ever, is abundantly more
than enough to overbalance every less comfortable View and Prospect of
Things, which he has more immediately before him; yet one would be apt to think
a finite humane Nature must needs be far less happy in the most realizing
Belief of Things to come, than in the present Enjoyment of them. It is spoken
of as necessary in order to the Perfection of Happiness, that what is in Part
should be done away, that what is perfect may come; and that Faith and Hope
should give Place to the perfect Rest of Love in actual Fruition.

It may be Matter of Doubt, whether any created Nature, even that of the Man
CHRIST JESUS himself is capable of enjoying so much Happiness at any one set
Time, as it may be by a Progression, or going forward; and whether it be not
the incommunicable Property of the Divine Nature, to enjoy so much Felicity at
once, that there can be no Addition made to it: And if so, Whether there is not
Reason to believe, GOD will add this one Property more to the unspeakable
Happiness of the humane Nature of CHRIST, that it shall be eternally
Progressive, or growing and increasing forever; and that this will be granted
to the Members, as well as the Head. Surely the blessed GOD is infinitely far
from grudging to the humane Nature of his own Son, and the Objects of his
special Love, any Qualification in their Happiness that shall render it more
desirable: Especially considering, that he designs his own Glory in the
Creature's Happiness, and that they are naturally and strongly inclined to give
him all the Praise of it forever; and that he himself (as it is infinite Reason)
will be never the less peerless and unrivalled in his own boundless Happiness,
how far so ever any of his Creatures shall advance in their's. For let
Creatures be advancing never so fast and never so far in Happiness, supposing
that of all the Saints and Angels in Heaven were to be doubled to each
particular Person every Minute to Eternity, yet this will never bring them one
Hair's Breadth nearer in Degree to the Felicity of the blessed GOD: For
Infinity has no Degrees. All Additions to what is Finite brings it no nearer to
what is Infinite, than it was at first.

If it be asked, why it was necessary that the Two Natures in the Mediator
should make but One Person? It is answered, That no other Being, but such a
one, could perform what was to be done for the Elect's Salvation. For if you
could suppose a Being consisting of two Persons, one humane, the other Divine,
(as the Godhead subsists in three divine Persons,) such a supposed Being could
not have been a suitable Mediator. For though the humane Person could have done
and suffered what was proper, yet it would have been only of a finite Value,
and so could not have answered the Needs of Sinners, who were infinitely
indebted to Divine Justice; and what the Divine Person could have done, would
not have been suitable, it being in another Nature than that of the Sinner's,
and such a Divine Person could not have suffered at all. -- But now, in the
Person of CHRIST there is a humane Nature that is capable of Doing and
Suffering as much and more than any humane Person, supposing him perfect, could
do, and all that is so done and suffered is really and properly the Act of a
Person infinite and divine, and so of infinite Value; and that divine Person
under no natural Obligations to do or suffer any Thing of this, and so it might
be imputed to the Persons who needed it for their Justification and Salvation.

THE Extensiveness OF GOD's good Design IN Selling Joseph into Egypt, etc.
GENESIS 50.20. GOD meant it unto good.


GOD is Love: That is his Name, that is his Nature; and all his Actions in all
Worlds, were there never so many Millions of them, proceed from Love: Are they
Effects of almighty Power, infinite Wisdom, unspotted Holiness, severe Justice,
inviolable Truth, etc; they are all only the Workings of the manifold Love of
GOD. Sin it self the worst of Evils, and Hell the next worst; the one was
permitted, and the other was prepared for the more clear and full Display of
the Love of GOD forever and ever. It Is mere pure unmixed Love that damns Angels
and Men: Love to Justice and Holiness; Love to GOD'S own Elect, whose Injuries
he avenges, and whose eternal Perseverance in Holiness and Happiness, as well
as their high Degrees of Gratitude, may be more promoted by the Consideration
of the Misery that Sin has brought upon their Fellow Creatures, than Men in
their present imperfect State are capable of conceiving. And what innumerable
Worlds of rational Creatures are to take everlasting Warning by the forlorn
State of the greatest Part of the Inhabitants of this little Spot of Clay, is
known only to the Maker of them; at least, whoever knows, it is a Secret to us
who are forbidden to be wise above what is written. And there is enough written
to vindicate the Goodness of GOD to an humble believing Soul in the most dark
and severe Dispensations that are ordered out to any of the Children of Men
here, or ordained for them hereafter. Of the former, Joseph the Person speaking
in the Words above written was as eminent an Example as almost any we read of
in Scripture; and perhaps no Instance in profane History does in any Measure
equal it: Very few if any among mere Men deserved better from the Hands of his
Fellow Creatures than he from his Childhood up, and few received worse. He was
dutiful to his Parents, faithful, loving, obliging, and officious to his
Brethren, and pious to his GOD from his very Childhood: And when he came to
sustain new Relations and Circumstances vastly different, yea quite contrary to
what he had been in before, yet still he exemplified in the whole of his
Behavior the same Spirit of Wisdom and Grace that he had shown before. But how
was this extraordinary Person treated? He was envied, hated, mocked, sold for a
Slave for Life, and very narrowly escaped being murdered by his obliged
Brethren: He was reproved by his fond Father, when perhaps he did not deserve
it; He was falsely accused after he had been wickedly tempted by his first
enamoured and then enraged Mistress; He was suspected, cast off, and imprisoned
by his Master, whose Conscience as well as his own had given Testimony to his
universal Faithfulness, the remarkable Presence of GOD with him, and His
extraordinary Blessing upon all his Affairs for Joseph's Sake. And whatever
Honor, Favor, Liberty and Trust he had during his Confinement, yet it seems
for some Part, and perhaps the greatest Part of the Time, (which was several
Years,) he was laid in Affliction and Iron, yea the Iron did eat into his Soul:
And after he was as it were tantalized with some Hope of Deliverance by the
Interest at Court, he might in all Reason expect the Justice and Gratitude of
the chief Butler would incline him to make for him, this Hope deferred made his
Heart sick for two Years more. What the Distresses of his Heart, and what the
more invisible Assaults and Temptations of his grand Adversary were all this
while, is not recorded; but besure his greatest and best Friend overuled and
ordered it all, and yet -- GOD meant it unto Good. -- Joseph himself tells us
so, and he was the greatest Sufferer, unless you will suppose his tender Father
(with whom you will easily conceive he bitterly sympathized) might possibly
endure as much as he. His hard-hearted Brethren besure by all that is revealed,
were very little affected, they sat down to eat and drink in the midst of their
poor Brother's Distress; and if they did not rise up to Play like the
idolatrous Israelites, yet they did that which was worse: All their Concern was
to contrive a Device to cover their own Guilt, and to deceive, not to comfort,
their poor Father, whatever they pretended. I say Joseph himself who had the
greatest Show of Reason to complain of Severity, as the best of Men under
extraordinary Afflictions have sometimes done, yet confesses as in the Words
once and again repeated, GOD meant it unto Good: -- He meant it for Good to
Joseph himself; to his mourning disponding and almost dispairing Father; to his
cruel Brethren; to the Egyptians, and Neighbor Nations; to the Church of the
Jews; to the whole Catholic Church; to the World of Mankind; and to the holy
Angels: All this may be easily gathered from Revelation; and what other Worlds
do, and shall reap Benefit by this mysterious Dispensation of Providence is not
for us to conjecture, we must leave it to GOD and Time or at least Eternity to
discover.

(1.) GOD meant it for Good to Joseph himself. It was to humble him and prove
him, and do him good in his latter End. -- He was by this Means early and
effectually taken off from the Vanities and Follies which Youth are exposed to,
and most of them forever undone by. For though his Circumstances in Egypt at
first were such as abundantly supplied him with all the Delights of Sense,
being soon made a Steward in the House of a rich Gentleman, yet it is plain
enough that he was in a wonderful Degree cold and dead to those youthful Lusts
that such a Condition might have exposed him unto. His early Piety was much
improved and advanced doubtless by a Course of sore Affliction, and we have no
Reason to think he was denied those inward Comforts and Refreshments which a
gracious GOD is wont to allow to his afflicted Children. It was true then, as
well as it has been often found by Experience since, that Tribulation works
Patience, Patience Experience, and Experience Hope, and Hope makes not
ashamed, because the Love of GOD is shed abroad in the Heart. As his
Afflictions abounded, we may well suppose his Consolations in CHRIST, in the
promised MESSIAH, in whom he believed, abounded also. -- He was hereby prepared
for great future Honor and Advancement, to be made the second Man in one of
the greatest Kingdoms then in the World, even Ruler over all the Land of Egypt,
to bind their Princes at his Pleasure, and to teach their Senators Wisdom. And
his Afflictions were ordered for his Humiliation, and the Mortification of his
Corruptions; without which Preparation his Prosperity in all likelihood would
have destroyed him, he would have been lifted up with Pride, and fallen into
the Condemnation of the Devil. So his living first in a Courtier's Family, and
afterward conversing so long and so familiarly with two great Men his
Fellow Prisoners, was wisely ordered (as in the Case of David, Nehemiah and
others) for his great Improvement in the Knowledge of State Affairs, and so
fitting him for the Post he was designed for. And he being an Interpreter of
Dreams, and having his own always in his Mind, and so being apprehensive in
some Degree what was before him; doubtless made the best Improvement he could
of all the Advantages he had put into his Hands to qualify himself for his
future Advancement, and his being useful and serviceable therein: And being
thus in one Respect and another, prepared for his Enlargement and Exaltation;
it was indeed good unto him, and really a Step toward the Crown of Glory
reserved for him in the Heavens, and that extraordinary Recompense of Reward,
that far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory, which his uncommon
Sufferings and special Services done for the Church of GOD and the World, and
the eminent Degrees of Grace exercised therein had wrought for him by working
him up to a suitable Frame and Temper to receive and possess the same. This was
the Good that GOD meant to Joseph: to say nothing particularly of the
unspeakable Comfort and Satisfaction he had in manifesting himself to his
Brethren, in sending such joyful Tidings to his dear Father; together with a
plentiful Supply for his present pinching Necessity, in receiving him into his
Arms when he came into Egypt, in requiting him for his seventeen Years tender
Care over him in his Childhood and Youth, by nourishing him for the like Number
of Years in his decrepid old Age; in rewarding Good for Evil to his penitent
Brethren; (a godlike Pleasure!) in being a Father to Pharaoh and his People,
and a sort of Savior and common Benefactor to the World round about him; and
which was the greatest Honor and Pleasure of all, (it may be) knowing himself
to be herein a great and remarkable Type of CHRIST, who is the Savior of all
Men, especially of them that believe: or if he had not so clear and distinct a
Knowledge how all the Steps of his Humiliation and Exaltation, his rough
Carriage to his Brethren at first, and his kind Treatment of them afterward,
and being a common Deliverer, were to signify glorious spiritual good Things to
come in the Fullness of Time; yet he has a perfect Understanding of these Things
in the heavenly World, which is the best of all: -- He was also a large Sharer
in the Good GOD meant more immediately

(2.) To his Father Jacob. He had said indeed in his Haste, All these Things
are against me, and threatened that he would go down to the Grave mourning for
his Son; but all those Things were made to work together for his Good. His
darling Son, whom it is to be feared he had too much set his Affection upon,
was taken away to make Room for his GOD to sit unrivaled on the Throne of his
Heart; and reserved (against he was prepared for so great a Favor) to be the
greatest Comfort and Blessing that ever a Son was to a Father. Instead of going
to the Grave mourning for his Son, he was to enjoy him in the most happy
Circumstances for many Years, to see his Children and Children's Children, and
to bless them and the rest of his numerous and prosperous Offspring by the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, wherewith he was filled in an extraordinary
Manner on his dying Bed: and by the same Spirit also he was to see the Day of
CHRIST'S Appearance, and be glad; and in the midst of these glorious Views to
expire in the Embraces of his beloved Joseph, and with his Hands closing his
Eyes, and to enter into the full Possession of that Salvation which his Soul
waited for; while his surviving Son was embalming his Body and celebrating his
Funeral in a princely Manner, and conveying his precious Dust into the Land of
Promise, the Type of Heaven, where it is to rest with those of Abraham, Sarah,
Isaac, Rebecca, etc, who were laid to sleep before, and Joseph and the rest of
his Sons, etc. who were to come after, when they had finished their Course,
which was at present through a Scene of great Prosperity, to rest I say till the
Resurrection of the Just, when they are all to be raised up in Glory. And they
will then have a full and clear and ravishing View of GOD's wise and gracious
Designs in all his Dispensations, and this dark Providence in particular: they
all, I say, for

(3.) GOD meant it for Good to Joseph's Brethren also. They meant it for evil:
But GOD'S Tho'ts were not as their Thoughts, nor his Ways as their Ways; No,
widely, infinitely different; as high as the Heavens are above the Earth, so
were his Tho'ts above their Tho'ts; as contrary as Heaven is to Hell, so were
his Ways to their Ways. Some think they were good Men at the Time that they
treated their pious loving Brother so treacherously and barbarously, and that
they lay under the Guilt of that horrid Crime for twenty Years together. On
what they build their large Charity I know not. Such a Superstructure had need
have a solid Foundation. But whatever their State was at that Time, it is
certain they were got into a very bad Frame. Any Man would have been tempted
(that had seen what Pride and Envy, Malice and Revenge, unnatural Cruelty and
diabolical Subtilty they were then a practicing) to have said unto them, Ye are
of your Father the Devil, and his Works ye will do. Yet GOD meant it for good,
even unto Them: For their temporal Good we are very sure: This was a necessary
Means of saving their Lives when in extreme Danger of Famishing, they and their
Families, and of changing their outward Circumstances much for the better; even
from the Condition of poor wandering Shepherds in the Land of Promise, (where
they had no Place of their own so much as to set their Foot on, except the
Possession of a Burying-Place) into that of a comfortable Settlement in the
best Spot of Ground in all the Land of Egypt, and to be employed in Places of
Trust and Profit as Herdsmen to the King of that Country, under the Care and
Nurture of a Brother, great and powerful like a King, and kind and tender as a
Father or Mother. And it is generally concluded this was not the best of it
neither: It Is thought they had Repentance given them for their high Crimes and
Misdemeanors, and Remission of their Sins. And perhaps while the Lord of the
Land was humbling them and distressing them, and afterward forgiving,
comforting, feasting them, and providing Inheritances for them, acting in all
under a divine Impulse, and as a Type of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, the Saints once
humbled but now exalted Brother; He (who was the principal Person offended and
abused in all their ill Treatment of Joseph, and who loved them notwithstanding
infinitely better than their natural Brother, loved them with an everlasting
Love) was now drawing them with his loving Kindness, and by his Spirit acting
over upon their Hearts and Consciences, what the Type was doing outwardly and
visibly. Who can tell, but the LORD was now representing Himself to them as an
offended, angry, holy, Sin-revenging Judge, and bringing their Sins to
Remembrance, and setting them in Order before them? They seem to intimate as
much, The Lord has found out the Iniquity of thy Servants; we are verily
Guilty, etc. And when Joseph put them in Prison, who knows but they had then a
lively Sense, how they deserved to be laid in Chains of Darkness in the Dungeon
of Hell forever? And when their Money was returned once and again in their
Sacks-Mouth, at which they were so terrified; Who can tell but GOD might be
flinging their Self-righteous Prayers and Tears and Vows which they poured out
before him, as Dung in their Faces? And when they were sufficiently humbled
under the preparatory Operation of the Holy Ghost, which lasted for several
Weeks, it may be, together; while they were held in Suspense how they should be
at last dealt with by the Governor of Egypt, who then to their Surprise and
Astonishment said unto them, I am Joseph your Brother, whom you sold into
Egypt; might not the Governor of the Universe, who has all Power in Heaven and
Earth committed into his Hands, discover himself to them as their reconciled
Friend and Brother, fill them with Joy and Peace in Believing, Joy unspeakable
and full of Glory, and give them a good Hope through Grace of an Interest in
the Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for them? And when afterward not only they, but all the Egyptians were
obliged to go to Joseph for the Supply of their Wants; Who dare deny that the
Holy Spirit might in his wonderful Way of Working, teach them savingly the
Doctrine of the Mediation of CHRIST; how He is the Head of all Influences to
the Church; how it has pleased the Father that in Him all Fullness should
dwell; and how of his Fullness all Believers receive and Grace for Grace, etc?
Such Things as these are implied when it is supposed that these Patriarchs were
true Saints; for all that are truly taught of GOD in all Ages do experience
these Things, as to the Substance; and even the lesser Circumstances of the
Experiences of Old Testament and New Testament Believers, may be more alike
than Christians are now generally aware of. But the Benefit of this wonderful
Providence was yet more extensive: For

(4.) GOD meant it for Good to the Egyptians and the Neighbor Nations. For had
it not been for this, Egypt would have been destroyed; and the Famine was sore
in all Lands, who also came to Egypt to buy Corn. And how useful such a Body of
Herdsmen coming into a Country where that Art had been but little improved,
might be, and how far by their Instructions and Examples they might be
Instrumental of bringing many of them to the Knowledge of the only true GOD,
and Faith in the MESSIAH to come; we are left at Uncertainties: But certain we
are from abundant Scripture-Evidence

(5.) That GOD meant it for Good to the Church of the Jews. For the whole Body
of them was comprehended in that Handful of People that then went down into
Egypt, as it had been before in the smaller Families of Abraham and Isaac. The
Church was now, as well as at many other Times, in imminent Danger; but GOD
said concerning it, Destroy it not, for a Blessing is in it: A Blessing indeed,
the Spring and Sum of all Blessings, even the MESSIAH, He of whom it is
prophesied and promised that in Him all the Families of the Earth should be
blessed: And so

(6.) GOD meant it for Good to the whole Catholic Church, to the Body of the
Elect in all Ages, and all Nations from the Beginning to the End of the World.
The Savior and so the Salvation of the whole Number of GOD'S chosen, was bound
up in that Family of Jacob: If they had perished, the whole Project of Man's
Salvation must have utterly failed and fallen to the Ground: If the Line of
CHRIST could have been cut off before he came into the World, and so his Birth,
Life, Death, Resurrection and Ascension, have been prevented; not one Soul
could ever have been saved: Yea, those that had been already admitted into
Heaven must have been expelled and sent down to suffer the Vengeance of eternal
Fire; for divine Justice must be satisfied, and if the Surety had failed, the
principal Debtors must have been siezed again, and the Demands of the Law must
have been answered, for not one Jot nor Tittle of the Law shall pass till all
be fulfilled. But this was utterly impossible, and therefore so it was that
Israel (in the Loins of some of whom CHRIST now was) should be cut off by
Famine or any other Way: And did GOD in very Deed mean this by the strange
Dispensations of his Providence toward Joseph? Well may it then be said, GOD
meant it unto Good, For, who can tell? who can conceive, how great that Good is
that is laid up for GOD'S Chosen, the Called according to his Purpose? Eye has
not seen, nor Ear heard, nor has entered into the Heart of Man, what GOD has
laid up and prepared for those that love him; and yet in the same Place it is
said, He has revealed the same to his People by his Spirit. This Good
comprehends all Good that can possibly be desired; yea, it is GOD himself the
Fountain and Author of all. The Happiness of the Blessed in Heaven is the same
as the Happiness of GOD, as far as a Creature is capable of partaking of the
same. GOD has no other Happiness, that we can conceive of, but to know and
love, enjoy and glorify himself; and this is Happiness: This Honor have all
the Saints, in their Measure; they are as full of it as they can hold. And
then, this Good is everlasting, without any Intermission, without any End. And
if what many holy as well as learned Divines have thought to be true, viz, That
the Happiness of Heaven is progressive; this adds infinitely to every other
Consideration we can make use of to raise our Apprehensions concerning the
Greatness of it, even that of Eternity it self. For, the least Degree of
Happiness to increase forever and ever, is infinitely more desirable than the
greatest fixed Degree of Happiness of the same Kind that can be conceived of:
for the least Measure will, if continually increasing, come to be equal to the
greatest that is fixed, suppose it were that of all the Hosts of Heaven put
together; and then after it is arrived to that Measure, it has as long to
remain increasing and growing, as when it first began. -- But however this
Matter be, there is enough revealed of the Good contained in this Salvation,
this Savior, to draw forth the utmost Desires and Endeavors of the largest
Soul, without making any more Suppositions that are not so plainly sounded in
the Word of GOD. This Good GOD meant to the Elect, in the Providence we have
been speaking of. And there was moreover,

(7.) A Design of good to all Mankind. For CHRIST, who as was said is included
in the Preservation then granted to the Church, is the Savior of all Men, though
especially of them that believe. Never was there one of the Humane Race, but
what received some Benefit by the Mediation of JESUS CHRIST. The Continuance of
Life, if but for an Hour, under the Possibility of Salvation, and all the
Comforts of Life which Men in general enjoy, and the special Privileges for the
obtaining Grace and Salvation which some are favored with, are the Purchase of
the Blood of CHRIST. The bare Offer of Salvation in the Gospel is a great
Favor, as all they will find to their eternal Cost, who do not accept of it,
and we find GOD every where speaks of it as such; though Men's Hearts reason to
the contrary from the secret Purposes and Decrees of GOD, by virtue of which
they say, it will be worse with Reprobates than if they never had those
Privileges: But such Persons know not what they say, nor whereof they affirm;
by the same Rule that they thus under-value this greatest of all common
Mercies, they may withold their Gratitude for every Favor they receive both
from GOD and Man; for it is certain, they will turn to the Aggravation of the
Misery of all that finally perish. Now this capital Mercy, the general Offer of
Salvation, has been more than once bestowed on the World of Mankind. It was so
in the Promise revealed in the Garden; it was so in Noah's Time; and after
CHRIST'S Resurrection the Disciples were sent to preach the Gospel to all the
World; and it is from the Negligence of Men, and not any Deficiency in the
Providence of GOD, that the whole World is not now gospelized. And wherever the
Gospel is preached, it is merely the Will of Man, and nothing else that hinders
the saving Efficacy of it; though it is only the Power of GOD that can subdue and
conquer that Will of Man. Nor is this Good confined to the Inhabitants of this
lower World only, But

(8.) GOD meant it for Good to the Angels of Heaven also. They are ministering
Spirits sent forth to minister to those who are the Heirs of Salvation. They
have a tender Concern for the good of Mankind, especialiy the Elect. They
rejoice in the Conversion of every Soul, and in every Providence whereby the
Glory of GOD and the good of Men is promoted; and especially in such remarkable
Providence whereby the Glory of GOD is so greatly promoted and the temporal,
spiritual and eternal Good of so many Men is advanced. And it is good for them
thus to rejoice, it is a Part of their Happiness. -- It has been all along
hinted, and is necessarily implied, that GOD means his own Glory in the whole
of this; which is the greatest Good of all, and which he cannot but have in
View as his last End in all his Dispensations toward all his Creatures, in all
Worlds, in Time and to Eternity. Besides the Manifestation of the Glory of all
GOD'S Attributes, in his bringing the Savior into the World and accomplishing
the great Work of the Elect's Salvation in general; In this Dispensation
toward Jacob's Family (wherein the Salvation of Men was said to be so nearly
concerned) there is discovered Abundance of the Wisdom, Power, Holiness and
Justice of GOD, and his tender Care of his Children; yea of his general
Goodness toward those of Mankind that are Aliens to the Commonwealth of
Israel and without GOD in the World.

Now, If GOD meant all this for Good, certainly every one that hears or reads
this Passage of holy Scripture, should fall in with the Design of GOD, and
endeavor to get what Good they can out of it. It seems more especially to
direct it is Voice to such as are under any Dispensation of Providence
peculiarly dark and difficult: They may be sure, (however Things may appear to
them,) GOD means it all for Good. Especially if they belong to GOD, they may
rest satisfied, not only that GOD aims at those great good Ends, his own Glory
and the Benefit of his Church in general; but at their best Good in particular.
All the Paths of the Lord are Mercy and Truth to such as they are. And he has
engaged himself by Promise, that all Things shall work together for their Good.
And he has always been faithful and true to his Word, and has never once
disappointed such as have put their Trust in him. And whatever dark and
discouraging Thoughts they have in the Time of their Difficulties, yet in the
Issue they have been bro't to acknowledge, not only the Sovereignty, Justice
and Holiness of GOD, but even his Love and Faithfulness toward them therein;
of which there are many Examples in the Word of GOD, and in other
Church-Histories.

How happy are they who are in such a State, that they may be sure the great
GOD means them Good in all his Dispensations. He never was, nor can be
frustrated and disappointed in any of his Designs. Those whose Good he aims at,
may be infallibly certain, that Good shall come unto them. It cannot possibly
be otherwise.

And,

How solicitous should every one be to get into such a Condition, and to make
it sure to themselves that they are so! No Man that has the due Exercise of his
rational Powers and the Belief of the Being and Attributes of GOD and a
Judgment to come, would be able to rest a Moment at Uncertainty about what the
Thoughts of the great and terrible GOD are concerning him in all his
Dispensations toward him, whether merciful or afflictive: He may believe that
GOD means all for Good; but that Good, for ought he knows, may be the Glory of
his own Power and Justice and Wrath in his eternal Destruction; and thereby
also his making known the Riches of Mercy, on the Vessels of Mercy, which he
had before prepared unto Glory.

To conclude, The Children of GOD should imitate their heavenly Father in this,
to see to it, that they mean all unto Good, that they set their Hearts or Hands
unto. And particularly, when they are constrained in Conscience to do such
Things, as may seem dark and strange and unaccountable to the World; then to be
able to show in the Meekness of Wisdom, how they meant it for Good, which they
will not be able to do only by their own bare Assertion, that they meant well:
This will not satisfy a rational Inquirer; but they must be able also to show
the Rule in the Word of GOD by which they have acted: For a good Meaning will
never justify a bad Action.

CHRIST the KING sitting at his Table.
CANT. 1.12. While the King sits at his Table, my Spikenard sends forth
the Smell thereof.


THE Grace of GOD in the Soul of Man makes a great Alteration there, the
greatest perhaps that the humane Soul is capable of: But still the Soul is
essentially the same. There is not another Soul, nor any new Faculty put into
the Soul; but only the same Faculties of the same Soul renewed and sanctified,
and disposed to act aright toward their proper Objects. Nor does Grace destroy
or wholly hide the particular natural Temper of a Person, but only govern and
regulate the same according to the Word and Will of GOD. When Grace is
perfected in Glory there may possibly be the same Variety of Tempers that there
is now, and each perhaps have their several Use in that World, where will be
discovered more than ever has been before or elsewhere, the manifold Wisdom of
GOD in the Works of Nature, as well as Grace. It is beyond all Doubt, that the
Grace of GOD in holy Men here exerts and shows it self according to their
vastly different natural Tempers and Dispositions. The same Degree of Grace
appears and acts quite otherwise in one good Man than it does in another, and
consequently they are fitted and prepared thereby, for several distinct Places
and Services in the Church of GOD. One Man is naturally of a contemplative and
tho'tful Soul, and Grace will incline him to be searching as far as he has
Scripture Light into the deep Things of GOD, etc. Another is of an active,
stirring Genius, and he will be full of Action here and there among his
Fellow Creatures, but still aiming at the Glory of GOD and the best Good of
Mankind in all. And so we might go on. -- Solomon the Penman of this divine
Song of Love was (to say nothing of his natural Temper in other Respects) of a
soft and loving Disposition; and being filled with the Grace of GOD, his Love
flowed out in an extraordinary Manner toward the Messiah, the Bridegroom of
the Church, and he was thereby the better prepared under the Inspiration of the
Divine Spirit to write on that glorious Subject. He was now also in the Vigor
of Youth, and in the Ardor of the Love of his Espousals to CHRIST, who had his
first Affections before they were polluted, as they were too much afterward by
meaner Objects; for it is though it when he wrote this Poem he was but about
nineteen Years of Age. -- It Is called the Song of Songs, as being the most
excellent of all the many hundreds he wrote, and possibly the most excellent
that was or will be written from the Beginning to the End of Time. It has been
observed, that the most lively Saints in their most lively Frames, have had a
peculiar Relish for this Portion of holy Scripture: Even such as have not
understood, or at least have not been able to communicate their Knowledge of
much of the Meaning of this holy Allegory, yet have been delighted in Reading,
Hearing or Singing of it. They have by a new spiritual Instinct as it were
perceived the Voice of their Beloved in it, though they could not so fully take
the Meaning of what he said. To allude to what the Apostle speaks about praying
in an unknown Tongue, their Spirit is moved, their Hearts are warmed with Love,
though their Understandings be in a great Measure unfruitful.

It Is thought that there is scarce any of all the different Frames of Spirit
both good and bad that a Believer is in but is suited and expressed in some
Part or other of this Song. And it is surprising to see what a vast variety of
spiritual and heavenly Matter some Expositors of eminent Experience in the
divine Life have found in this Poem. It was the Saying of a good Woman, after
she had been laid on a Bed of Sickness; That it seemed to her, GOD had by that
Affliction led her aside as it were out of the Hurries of the World to converse
more freely with her than he had done for some Time; and particularly he then
showed her by his Holy Spirit so many excellent Gospel Truths in this Book of
the Canticles, and made them so plain to her that it seemed as impossible to
her that ever she should read there again and not seem, as it would be to go at
Noonday into a Garden full of Flowers, and overlook them all; but for all
when she got out into the World again, and the Dust of it began to get into her
Eyes, she found by sad Experience it was possible for her to read this Song of
Love, and see little more in it, and be little more affected with it than with
a common Ballad. -- The Spouse of CHRIST, who is the Party speaking in this
Verse, seems to be in one of her best Frames; in that Temper of Soul which has
been often called a Being in the Mount with GOD: She was now in the Enjoyment
of the sensible Presence of her Beloved, whom she here styles the King, though
she often speaks of him under a more familiar Title; as particularly in the
very next Verse, where she calls him her Beloved: It Is perhaps to teach
Believers that how condescending soever their glorious Bridegroom is, and
whatever Freedom and Familiarity he is pleased to admit them to, yet they are
still to remember that he is the King. And as there is a wonderful Mixture of
infinite Majesty and Authority with the most condescending Love and Sweetness
in him; so that to answer this there should be an holy awful Fear and
Reverence, as well as a conjugal Affection and humble Boldness and child-like
Freedom in her. -- The King -- The Bridegroom of the Church is a glorious King.
-- He has all those royal Qualifications and Endowments that are necessary to
fit him for that high Office. He is infinite in Wisdom and Knowledge. The
first, and it may be one of the greatest Discoveries that Solomon made of his
Wisdom, was the Sense he expressed of the Need he had of Wisdom to govern the
large People of Israel: What Wisdom then does it require to govern and order
the whole Body of the Elect, consisting of so many Millions in all Ages; and
not only to rule the outward Man in their Behavior one toward another, but to
regulate all the various Thoughts and Passions of the Soul, with respect both
to GOD and Man? He must make Laws to govern them, and then govern them
according to those Laws; even the very Thoughts and Intentions of their Hearts.
He finds them in the utmost Confusion of a willful Rebellion, with their Hearts
full of reigning Enmity against him, and absolutely, but freely under the
Tyranny of Sin and Satan: What Wisdom is there necessary to manage them, and
bring them into Order and Subjection when they are in so forlorn a State? And
then he has not only his Church to manage and order, but the whole World, yea
other Worlds to order and govern for their Good: The Angels of Heaven, as
ministering Spirits, must be guided by Him; all the wicked Men on Earth, and all
the Devils in Hell must be under his Direction and Restraint, so as to do no
real Damage, but a great deal of Good to the Church, though they mean not so,
neither does their Heart think so. There must not one Thing be suffered to be
done, not one Word be spoken, not one Thought conceived, but shall be
overruled for the Glory of GOD and the Good of the Elect. And his Wisdom is
sufficient for all this. He is the Wisdom of GOD. He can manage all the great
Affairs of his vast Dominions in all Worlds without any Difficulty at all. He
has all Things every where in Time and to Eternity before him at once: and
takes as exact a View of every Person, and all their Concerns, and every the
least Motion of their Hearts, as if he had but one particular Action of one
single Person to observe: And as he sees every Person and Thing, so he knows
what is best to be done in every Case, be it never so perplexed and difficult:
He has had a thousand Cases before him that would have perplexed and nonplussed
all the created Wisdom of Heaven and Earth for ever: Nay, there is no one
Believer in the present State of Sin and Darkness, but what has Perplexities in
his Case every Day and Hour, whether he be always sensible of it or no, which
the wisest Angel is not able infallibly to direct him in. -- But this King is
wise. -- It would be endless to enlarge upon every particular Qualification of
this Royal Bridegroom, they are infinite in Number, infinite in Perfection, and
cannot be conceived of, much less expressed by any but an infinite Mind. -- Only
to hint briefly at a few Things. -- He has the Authority of a King. He has it
by Birth, for he is the only Son of the King eternal, immortal, invisible. He
has it by Divine Constitution and Appointment, GOD has set him as King on his
holy Hill of Zion: He has it by Conquest, he subdues Rebels, and makes them his
Subjects: He has it by Merit, and has done more than enough to deserve his
Royal Dignity: He has it by free Choice and Election, his People being made
willing in the Day of his Power, do choose him for their King for ever to rule
in them, and reign over them; they by Faith set him upon the Throne of their
Hearts, and set the Royal Crown upon his Head in the Day of his Espousals, in
the Day of the Gladness of his Heart. -- He has the Power and Influence that
becomes such a King: He has such Majesty, a when he is pleased to display it,
over-awes all Men and Angels, and Devils, and makes every Knee to bow before
him, and every Tongue to confess that He is Lord to the Praise and Glory of GOD
the Father. -- He has not only Authority, but Power to execute that Authority,
so as to have his Will accomplished in every particular Instance throughout the
Universe. -- He has the Righteousness of a King: It Is prophesied of Him, a King
shall reign in Righteousness, -- His Laws are holy, just and good, and they are
all executed in Righteousness: He shall judge the World in Righteousness.
Rewards and Punishments will be exactly distributed according to Men's Works,
whether they have been good, or whether they have been evil, agreeable to the
unnerring Rule of the Law and Gospel. -- He has the Goodness that becomes such
a King. His Name is Love: And he rules all by Love. His Laws are all contrived,
as far as we can see, as much for the Good of his Subjects, as if he had no Eye
or Regard to any Thing else in making them; and they all see it to be so when
their Eyes are opened, so that they would not have one of them repealed or
altered if they might. He shows his Love and Goodness in the whole Course of
his Managements. He treats all his faithful Subjects as so many intimate
Friends: They are all Favorites: Yea, as to his Subjects among Men, he adopts
them all to be his Children; yea, marries them, and takes them into all the
near and dear Relations to himself, that it is possible for them to sustain;
yea, such as none but infinite Wisdom could have found out, or made possible.
-- He condescends to all Manner of kind Offices for the Good of his beloved
Subject: Nay, to say all in a Word, he laid aside his Royal celestial Robes,
took their Nature on him, when they were in a State of Sin and Rebellion;
obeyed his Father's Law, suffered his infinite Wrath in all the amazing Effects
of it; and even now in his glorified Estate, He is doing the Office of an
Advocate for them, and is a Priest upon his Throne, making continual
Intercession for them. He sends out his Ambassadors to beseech Rebels to be
reconciled; yea, sends his Spirit to subdue their Hearts, and give them a loyal
Spirit to walk in his Statutes, etc. And, to say no more, he makes it his own
Happiness to make them happy, and to rejoice with them in their Happiness for
ever. -- He has the Truth and Faithfulness of a King. Lying Lips do by no means
become a Prince. If the Word of a King may not be depended upon, all his
Authority is gone at once. This King is Truth itself: He is the Amen: His Name
is Faithful and True: And as his Name is so is He. His Titles are none of them
empty (as it is often among Men) but all filled up with Substance and Reality.
He always fulfils all his Promises and all his Threatenings, according to the
true Intent and Meaning of them, to a Tittle: It will be said forever with
Respect to both, Not one Word has failed. All the Damned in Hell, all the
Saints in Heaven will be eternal Monuments of the Truth and Faithfulness of
this King. -- And as He has all manner of Royal Excellencies and Endowments
requisite in Himself, so He is an overflowing Fountain, communicating as there
is Occasion to others. By Him Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice, etc:
Yea, He makes all his Subjects Kings, and endows them with all that Wisdom and
Grace they need, to qualify them for that high Character and Station. -- But
broken Hints are all that must be expected. --

This is the King that sits at his Table. -- This may signify the friendly
Communion and Fellowship CHRIST has with his People. -- It denotes Friendship:
Enemies don't use to sit and eat and drink at the same Table; nay, it is made
use of often as a Token of Reconciliation between those who have been at
Variance, when they sit and eat or drink together; besure it is so here. --
There was an awful Distance betwixt CHRIST and his Spouse: She was an Enemy in
her Mind, through wicked Works; but she is now reconciled, and he holds Communion
with her in Testimony of it. He uses this as an Argument with Sinners to be
reconciled* -- If any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come into
him, and sup with him. -- It betokens Freedom and Familiarity. If a great
Person invites himself to the Table of one of meaner Rank, or invites him to
his, it is taken as a Favor, and it is expected that he will be free when he
comes there. It is so in this Case. There are Times when the Lord JESUS
manifests himself to his People: He converses freely with them; He opens his
very Heart to them, and lets them into the most secret Recesses of his Soul; He
lets them know what his Thoughts were concerning them before the Foundation of
the World; what passed between his Father and Him, with Respect to their
Salvation, in the Days of Eternity, etc; And what his present Thoughts are
concerning them, and how he stands affected toward them; what Love glows in
his Heart, what his gracious Designs and Purposes are, with Respect to Time and
Eternity. And his Ear is open to hear what his Spouse has to say to him: She
may at such Seasons pour out her whole Soul before him, unbosom her very Heart;
and the more free, full and unreserved she is, so much the better, always
provided, she maintains a due Sense of the infinite Distance there is betwixt
the King and herself, and how utterly unworthy she is of the Favor he now
shows her: -- Now she may make known her Requests to him; He does in Effect say
to her as Ahasuerus to Esther, What is thy Petition? and it shall be granted
thee; What is thy Request, and it shall be performed? Not to the Half of an
earthly Kingdom; but to the whole of an heavenly one. -- At a Table, especially
at a King's Table, there is the best of Entertainment, and Abundance of it; not
only for Necessity, but for Delight: It Is so here, in a transcendent Manner. --
The Spouse is hungry, and hardly bestead, in a pining, famishing Condition, has
not so much as a Sufficiency of Husks to fill her Belly with; she is ready to
die with Thirst, and just giving up the Ghost, parched with earnest unsatiable
Desires, parched and burnt up as it were with a Sense of the burning Wrath of
GOD in her Soul, and cannot come at so much as one Drop of Water to cool her
Tongue: But here at this Table she finds Relief; here is Bread for Hunger, Bread
enough, and to spare; Here Is Water enough for her Thirst, Water enough, even a
never-failing Fountain of it: Yea, Here are all Manner of rich and royal
Dainties and Varieties: Here Is Angel's Food; yea better Food than Angels were
ever feasted with, the Flesh of the SON OF GOD, which is Meat indeed; the Bread
of Life which came down from Heaven, and gives Life, eternal Life to the Soul:
Here Is not only Water to quench the Thirst, and preserve from immediate Death;
but Wine, royal Wine in Abundance, to raise and exhilerate the Spirits, and
cause the Lips even of those that are asleep to speak. --

It Is his Table, not here is. She attributes nothing to herself: She was as poor
as Penury itself, she had no Place fit to entertain the King in; nothing to
entertain him with: But He, of his royal Bounty and free Love, has provided
all. This is the Case of a Believer: He must of Necessity receive all from
CHRIST; This is the Spirit of every Believer, to ascribe all to Him; Not unto
us, not unto us, but to thy Name give Glory. The Spouse of CHRIST is free upon
all Occasions to acknowledge that she was so far from making any Provision to
entertain him at a Table of her own, that when he came to her Door, and stood
knocking there, she bolted and barred it against him; yea, though he stood
knocking and waiting with his heavenly Provisions to feast her with, she would
not let him in, till He of his rich, free, sovereign Grace put in his golden
Key, and turned back the Bolt, opened the Door, spread the Table, and supped
with her, and she with, him; -- And then it is, even while the King sits at
his Table, says she, that my Spikenard sends forth the Smell thereof. --
Spikenard is a sweetly-smelling Herb; an Ointment made of it, we read, is very
precious, and possibly that is meant here: The Meaning of this may be, that
when Believers enjoy the special sensible Presence of the Lord JESUS with them
in holy Ordinances, this draws forth the Grace that is in them into lively
Exercise: -- This is the Design of CHRIST'S gracious Visits, and this is the
natural Effect of them. It Is the Design of them. There is nothing more pleasing
to him in the World, than to observe the lively Working of his People's Graces:
It Is his Love makes it so: He loved her with a Love of Benevolence or good
Will, from everlasting, and this Love has been exerting itself in a wonderful
Manner in Time; but he has no Return. Though he wishes well to her, and is
continually laying out himself for her, yet while she is in her natural State,
he can take no Delight in her: She is a vile Creature, every way disagreeable,
and infinitely odious and abominable to his holy Nature, and so she must
continue totally, as to her State, till he is pleased to make her a gracious
Visit by his Holy Spirit; and even after she is in Part sanctified, she will
remain very much so, as to her Frame, till he is pleased to make her renewed
Visits, and sit at his own Table, which he has furnished for himself and her in
the Apartment of her Heart: This therefore is his Design. And then the sensible
Presence of CHRIST has a natural Tendency to draw out Grace: This may appear by
Instancing a little in some Particulars. -- The sensible Presence of CHRIST
draws out Faith: Here is the Object of her Soul's Confidence and Trust just
before her Eyes; She sees Him in his All sufficiency and Suitableness, and
cannot but reach out after him; She hears the gracious Words that proceed out of
his Mouth, and she cannot help believing and depending on them: His very Looks
speak his Sincerity: His Mouth is most sweet; she is sure within herself those
Lilly Honey-dropping Lips cannot possibly have any Guile in them: Nay, He so
opens himself to her that she does, as it were, see into his very Heart, and
compares the Copy of his gracious Words with the Original in his Breast: The
Rock of Ages is now, as it were, at her very Elbow; and she cannot but rest her
weary Soul upon him, especially when he kindly invites her so to do: The Son of
Man, the Antitype of the Brazen Serpent, is lifted up just before her Eyes; and
she cannot help looking on him, and so receiving his healing Influences: -- In a
Word, He is now actually accomplishing some of his sweet Promises to her; and
this mightily strengthens her Faith, as to the Fulfillment of the rest. My
blessed Bridegroom, says she, told me, He would come into me, and sup with me,
and I with him; and he is as good as his Word: Here he is, I see him, I eat and
drink with him, etc: -- The same Mouth has said, I will never fail thee, nor
forsake thee: I will be with thee in six Troubles and in seven: I will guide
thee by Counsel, and afterward bring thee to Glory, etc; and I will never
doubt nor distrust any more. --

So her Love is also drawn out into lively Exercise. Her Eye affects her Heart:
The Sun of Righteousness does now as it were shine full upon her, shines
through and through her, and is so near that it sets her very Heart all on a
light Fire, and like the Disciples it burns within her. [This Instance of his
Love to her calls to her Remembrance all former Instances, and his ancient
loving Kindness, and Love begets Love.] She sees his lovely Face; she hears his
sweet Voice, and feels his dear Embraces, and this quite overcomes her. The
Lodestone the nearer it is, the Stronger it draws. The nearer a heavy Body to
its Center, the swifter is it is Motion; so it is here.

The sensible Presence of CHRIST promotes Humility and holy Mourning under a
Sense of Sin. The Soul says with Job, I have heard of thee by the hearing of
the Ear; but now mine Eye sees Thee, wherefore I abhor my self and repent in
Dust and Ashes. When JESUS turned and looked on Peter, he went out and wept
bitterly. O the Soul now blushes inwardly, and covers it is Face, and in the
deepest Self-Abasement and Sorrow says within it self, "Is this the blessed
SAVIOR, whom I have so much, so often, so long affronted and abused? Is this
he that I suffered to stand knocking and calling and waiting without the Doors
of my Soul, till his Head was filled with the Dew, and his Locks with the Drops
of the Night? O I blush and am ashamed to lift up my Face to thee, O my GOD. Is
this the glorious Person whom I have grieved and wounded by my Pride, my
Worldliness, my horrid Ingratitude and Hard-heartedness and Unbelief? Break,
break, my Heart, Flow down, mine Eyes with Rivers of Tears for treating my dear
SAVIOR as I have done!"

This sensible Presence of CHRIST, draws forth holy Resolutions against Sin,
and holy Purposes to cleave to CHRIST for the Time to come in Love and new
Obediences. -- She now feels a holy Revenge working in her Heart: "Is this the
blessed Savior, says she, that my Sins have crucified afresh, and put to open
shame before the World! O they shall die for it; they shall die the same cursed
Death that my dear Redeemer did, Away with them, Crucify them! Crucify them! I
will pursue them and search them through all the various Windings and secret
Recesses of my Heart, till I have found, them out, and bro't them forth and
slain them before him: I will never sleep any Day of my Life henceforward, till
I have caused some or other of my vile Lusts to fall; I will wash my Feet in
the Blood of these wicked Canaanites every Night before I sleep, etc." Again,
says the Spouse, "Is this my GOD, from whom I have so often, and so far, and so
wickedly departed; and is he again returned; and does he sit with me, and allow
me to sit with him at his Table, and feast me with his Love? O I Will cleave to
him as long as I live: I charge you, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, do nothing,
tempt me to do nothing that shall grieve him away or provoke him to depart!
Shall I ever again leave the sweet Company of my dear Jesus to go and commit
Whoredom with the World, the Flesh and the Devil? GOD forbid!" The Soul is now
studying what it shall render to the LORD for all his Benefits. "How shall I
express my Gratitude for what the Lord has done for my Soul! O I will proclaim
his loving Kindness, and make Earth and Heaven ring and echo one to another,
with the high Praises of my GOD. I will, by the Help of his Grace, lay out my
self in his Service! Every Power and Faculty of my Soul, every Limb and Sense
of my Body, shall be employed to their utmost Capacity in the Service, and for
the Glory of him that has done and suffered so much for me, and is now kindly
visiting me again. O my dearest Lord, here I give my self to thee, I offer my
self as a living Sacrifice; O that it might be holy and acceptable to GOD, and
I Am sure it is but a reasonable Service"! -- The Spouse now sitting with the
King at his Table, and beholding with open Face, as in a Glass the Glory of her
Lord, is changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of
the Lord. The Sun of Righteousness as was said, drawing so very near and
shining so intensely hot, the Heart is melted and flows into the Mold prepared
for it in GOD'S Word. It receives the Impression of the divine Image in
Knowledge, Righteousness and true Holiness. In a Word, The Soul now seeing the
Amiableness and Excellency of Holiness, as exemplified in the bright and
perfect Pattern now shining before her, in her SAVIOR sitting with her at his
own Table, falls in love with it; and ardently wishes and longs to be more and
more conformed thereto, in Heart, Lip and Life. O she thinks, "Is there a
Possibility, a Probability, yea, an absolute Certainty, that if I seek it with
my whole Heart, I may attain to a Conformity unto this glorious Exemplar that
now shines before me? Then I will seek it Night and Day, I will look to JESUS
the Author and Finisher of Faith, till of his Fullness I receive and Grace for
Grace: I will never rest till I find and feel the same Mind and Spirit dwelling
in me, that dwelt in CHRIST JESUS; till I am enabled by his Grace so to walk,
even as he walked. And though I know I must of necessity fall short in
imitating every Letter of the fair Copy that is set before me, yet I will be
aiming and striving to do as well as I can; I will get my many Blots washed out
by the Blood of CHRIST, and endeavor to mend my Hand every Day." -- Thus the
Spikenard sends forth the Smell thereof, and every Room where the Spouse
comes, is filled with the Savor of the Ointment.

Of the Love of CHRIST,
EPHESIANS. 3.19, First Clause.

And to know the Love of CHRIST, which passes Knowledge. --


THE Apostle Paul, the Penman of this, and twelve or thirteen more of the
Epistles of the New Testament, if his Lot had been cast in these Days, and in a
British Dominion, would have been called by many the greatest Enthusiast that
ever was, and the very Ringleader of a Sect every where spoken against. Any
intelligent, unprejudiced Reader, if he were an utter Stranger to the Christian
Religion, and were to have the Journals of this Apostle as they lie in the
Acts, and those of some late zealous Preachers, laid before him; would say they
were both evidently under the Influence of the same Spirit and Principles, both
aiming at the same End, and carrying on the same Design, and both acting by the
same Rule. This great and good Man seems to be always full: Full to the Brim;
yea, overflowing with Light and Love. That Promise of the Lord JESUS was
eminently fullfilled unto him; He that believes on me, out of his Belly shall
flow Rivers of living Water: That spoke be of the Spirit. As the Dragon cast
out of his Mouth a Flood of Rage and Malice, Revenge and Persecution after the
Church: So on the contrary, this holy Man poured out of his Mouth a Flood of
pure Gospel Grace, a Flood of the River of the Water of Life, which flowed down
like the Waters of Ezekiel, and communicated Life and healing Virtue wherever
it came; turned the dry and parched Ground into Pools and Springs of Water, and
the barren, sandy Wilderness into a fruitful Field; Yea, overflowed the Heathen
World, overthrew their Temples, drowned their gods, and washed away all their
idolatrous Ceremonies, and (as they complained) turned the World upside down.
And his inspired Writings are a Fountain, from which the best of Preachers in
all Ages have been filled with Knowledge and Grace; which, by the Assistance of
the Holy Spirit, they have communicated for the spiritual and eternal Benefit
of Millions of Souls. CHRIST was the Favorite Subject of Paul's Preaching. His
Heart was always full of him: and his Tongue always as the Pen of a ready
Writer, to utter the Things which he was continually making concerning this
King of Glory. He was a Man of uncommon Parts and Learning, a great Moralist, a
strict Pharisee, and of great Fame among his own Countrymen; but his high
Esteem of, and his ardent Affection to a glorious CHRIST swallowed up all. He
accounted every Thing else but Dung and Drofs, for the Excellency of the
Knowledge of CHRIST JESUS.

The Copulative And, in the Words before us, point us back to the preceding
Context. He had, in the Beginning of this Chapter, entered upon a Sentence,
which he does not finish, till he comes to the next Chapter. He was going to
say, I Paul a Prisoner of Jesus Christ, beseech you, etc; but having mentioned
the precious Name of his dear JESUS, which was always to him as Ointment poured
forth, the bright Images came thronging so thick and fast into his Mind, that
he is lost (as it were) in a holy Maze and divine Confusion of Thought, and
does not recover himself again, till he had sweetly wandered the Length of
above twenty Verses, speaking of the Things concerning his beloved Savior. --

And, by the Way, this Manner of Preaching and Writing which this Prince of
Authors and Preachers does often run into, even though under immediate
infallible Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, does excuse (if not justify and
commend) the Practice of some fervent Preachers in their Digressions and
Excursions; by some of which they may possibly do more Good, than by their more
premeditated and methodical Performances. If the main End be answered; if
CHRIST be preached, and Souls convinced, converted and saved, all is well; for
all is well that ends well. But to return from this Excursion. --

The Apostle had been telling the Ephesians in the preceding Verses, what his
Wishes and Prayers for them were, when in his Closet and on his Knees, pouring
out his Soul before the Lord. He was now under Confinement, and it seems it was
some how or other on their Account: and though he was exceeding joyful in all
his Tribulations, experiencing (as thousands of others have done) most of his
blessed Master's sensible and comforting Presence, when he was suffering most
for his Sake; yet he was concerned for them, lest (as he expresses himself in
another Case) they should be swallowed up of overmuch Grief, lest they should
faint at his Tribulations, (which he tells them Verse 13. was their Glory;
'twas an Honor to them that their dear spiritual Father should be counted
worthy to suffer such Things for the Name of CHRIST:) he therefore asks of the
great Physician, that which he knew by long Experience would be a reviving
Cordial to their Spirits; viz. That he would grant them according to the Riches
of his Glory, to be strengthened with Might by his Spirit in the inner Man, that
Christ might dwell in their Hearts by Faith; that they being rooted and
grounded in Love, might comprehend with all Saints, what is the Breadth, and
Length, and Depth, and Height, -- AND TO KNOW THE LOVE OF CHRIST WHICH PASSES
KNOWLEDGE. --

But is not this a Contradiction in Terms? How could they know that which could
not be known? Does the Apostle pray for Impossibilities? So it seems. And
indeed this Writer takes Delight to express himself in an uncommon and
surprising Manner; for his Ideas and Conceptions of Things were so
extraordinary, that the usual Forms of Speech would by no Means express them to
the Life. He spoke as no mere Man ever spoke, because he thought, perhaps, as
no other besides himself ever though it. And after all, his Words fell exceeding
short of expressing his own high Conceptions to the Apprehension of others; and
yet it must be confessed that the Things themselves were infinitely more above
his Ideas, than these were above those of common Men. -- However, the Phrase
here may possibly admit of some intelligible Explication, so as to clear it of
that Absurdity, that seems to appear in it upon the first reading. -- The Love
of CHRIST, being a spiritual and divine Mystery, does indeed pass the Knowledge
of all natural Men; they can have no true Idea of it; and yet it is made Known
to every, even the weakest Believer by the Teachings of the Spirit of GOD. --
The Love of CHRIST passes all the Knowledge that any of the Saints have
attained to; and yet they may still know more and more of it every Day they
live, and by every Ordinance they attend. -- The Love of CHRIST passes all the
Knowledge that any have attained, or can attain to, in the present State; and
yet far more of it may be and will be known in the other World, that World of
perfect Light and Knowledge. -- Yea, may it not be added, that the Love of
CHRIST passes all the Knowledge that Angels and Men will attain for ever; and
yet they may know more and more of it forever. In a Word, the Love of CHRIST is
truly and properly boundless and infinite; and the Nature of the humane Mind
is such, that as far as we can judge of our own Powers, it will be forever
capable of still new and fresh Discoveries. And not only may it be said, that
the Soul can never know so much, but it may know more; but also, the more it
knows, the more capable it is of knowing: As the Circles that are made by
casting a heavy Body into the Water, not only go farther and farther, but still
grow larger and larger: Or as a Snow-Ball not only increases as it rolls, but
increases much faster the farther it goes: Or, to use a Scripture Comparison,
as a Grain of Wheat, when sown produces Thirty, Sixty or an Hundred Fold, this
sown again produces a vastly greater Quantity and so on -- Thus, possibly, it
may be in this Case: Believers may not only in this World, which the Apostle
seems more immediately to mean, but forever, to their unspeakable Happiness, be
knowing more and more of the Love of CHRIST which passes Knowledge. --

But, What is this Love of CHRIST? The Answer to this Question would lead us
into a large Field, larger than the Universe, large as Eternity, yea large as
the Immensity of GOD Himself; for, as was said, it is infinite. -- It Is not
only the Love of a Creature in the highest Degree of Perfection, and far beyond
any other Instance of created Love, as the humane Nature of CHRIST is the
Subject of it; but it is the Love of him that is truly and properly GOD; and
so is no other than GOD himself, even the very Divine Nature unfolding and
displaying it self in a Way of Mercy and Grace toward the Objects of this
Love. --

All that can now be offered here will be at best, but some imperfect Hints
that may serve to bring to the Remembrance of some Persons a few of those many
Things they have heard on this Subject more largely, frequently and
affectionately treated of than any other; and possibly, as much and often
spoken to, as in any other Place whatever, throughout the Land. --

The Love of CHRIST as Man was perfect in it is Kind; there was no Defect in any
Respect, or at any Time whatsoever. It was always exercised toward such
Objects, in such a Degree, on such Occasions, from such Motives and in such a
Manner, as a perfect humane Love should be. It answered the perfect Law of GOD,
under which he was made exactly, in every Particular, continually. His Love was
indeed the fulfilling of the Law. The piercing Eye of omniscient Justice it
self could find no manner of Deficiency in it. -- The Man CHRIST JESUS loved
GOD his heavenly Father with all his Heart, and with all his Soul, and with all
his Mind, and with all his Strength. He was as much concerned for his Honor
and Glory; He took as much Delight in Communion with him; He mourned as much
for the Dishonor done to his Name, by the Sins of Men and Devils; was as
ready, cheerful, constant and persevering in doing his Will and suffering
whatever GOD was pleased to lay upon him (even to the laying down his very Life
at his Command) as was possible. -- There was no Intermission, no Remission or
Abatement of the most intense Degree of Love, in any of these Respects. And
though his Body was sometimes weary, and his Animal Spirits exhausted, so that he
needed Refreshment by Sleep, etc. (as other Men do;) yet his Soul was always
lively, always flaming in Love to GOD more than any of the Seraphims that are
round about the Throne of GOD. His very Dreams, we may be sure, when his bodily
Senses were locked up in a State of Inactivity, were nothing but holy and
heavenly Meditations and Visions, of what was past, present, or to come,
without the least Degree of Vanity or sinful Imperfection; still nothing but
the pleasing or sorrowful Workings of perfect Love, according to the respective
Objects of his innocent Fancy and Imagination.

He loved the Creatures, just as it was fit and becoming he should do, and
loved them all just enough and idolized none of them. He loved the holy Angels
full as much as they deserved. And with respect to Mankind, he always came up
to the perfect Rule, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. And he loved
not in Word and in Tongue only, but indeed and in Truth. He loved all Mankind
universally with a Love of Benevolence or Good Will. Loved even his Enemies,
the worst of 'em: He pitied them, he wept over them, he prayed for them, even
when they were actually murdering of him. Father, forgive them, said he, they
know not what they do. He loved some with a peculiar and distinguishing Love.
He loved his earthly Parents with a filial Affection and was subject to them,
though still in subordination to GOD. A remarkable Instance of his tender Concern
for his Mother, was the Care he took of her in his dying Agonies; when one
would have thought it impossible for him to take Notice of any Creature, being
overwhelmed with a Sense of the innumerable Millions of the Sins of the Elect
imputed to him, and the Wrath of an infinite GOD flaming against him for the
same. He loved his Kinsmen according to the Flesh with an Affection exactly and
perfectly suitable to every Relation. In a Word, the whole Course of his Life,
from his early Childhood to his dying Day, was nothing but one perpetual Scene
of Love. He never gave the least just Occasion of Offense in Word or Deed. He
always rejoiced with those that did rejoice, and wept with those that wept, as
there was Occasion* He went about doing good, and was always ready to every
good Work. And he suffered as well as acted from a Principle of pure Love to
Man, as well as GOD. Was he a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief? Did he
endure the Contradiction of Sinners against himself? Did he not hide his Face
from Shame and Spitting? Did he bear the Sins of many in his own Body on the
Tree, after he had sweat Blood in the Garden? In a Word, Did he pour out his
Soul unto Death, and endure the hidings of his Father's Face, yea the very
Pangs of Damnation? It was all from mere, pure, unmixed Love. Yea, when he
sometimes did, as he could on proper Occasions, express his Anger and
Indignation; it was nothing but pure Love in another Form and Shape as it were,
even Love kindled into Zeal against Men for dishonouring GOD, and so wounding
and destroying their own Souls; as a tender Mother is angry with her dear Child
for cutting it is own Fingers, or needlessly exposing it is Life and Limbs, etc.

And as he showed all the Instances of a kind and tender human Affection his
Lifetime, more especially toward his Disciples, whom he always treated, not
as Servants, though he were their sovereign Lord, but as Friends, communicating
his Secrets to them, bearing with their many sinful Weaknesses and Infirmities,
and putting the best Construction on them, the Case would admit, and making
greater Allowances than they could expect, and than any besides himself would
have done, and condescending to minister to them, even in the very meanest
Offices, etc, in which it would be endless to particularlize; so he retains the
same humane Love, even since his Resurrection and Ascension, the Instances of
which are known to every one that reads his Testament with Care and
Observation. It must be acknowledged, that in some of the Particulars
beforementioned, there were Effects of Love beyond what was merely Humane, yea
beyond all Examples of created Affection: For the Love of CHRIST was also

A Divine Love. And if in giving a few brief Hints of some of the Properties
and Effects of CHRIST'S Love, as it is the Love of a GOD, something should be
said that may more properly belong to a created Affection, it may be no great
Matter; for he is GOD and Man in one Person, though there be two distinct
Natures. And the inspired Writers themselves seem not to be at all scrupulous
in distinguishing between the humane and divine Acts and Properties of the
Person of the SON OF GOD. They tell us of the Blood of GOD, and of the Son of
Man's being in Heaven, while CHRIST'S Soul and Body was on Earth, etc.

To say nothing of the mutual Love of the Father and Son, nor of the Love of
the Son of GOD to the elect Angels, to whom he is in some Respects an Head; nor
of his general Love of Beneficence to all Mankind, and his universal Goodness
to all the Creatures, every one of which from the highest Angel in Heaven to
the least Worm or Fly on Earth, or the worst Devil or damned Ghost in Hell,
either has experienced, or does experience some Effects of the common Love of
CHRIST; what follows is only, or principally what relates to his own chosen
People, the Bride, the Lamb's Wife. And his Love to them is,

An everlasting Love, that is, it had no Beginning, and it will have no End.

He loved them in the Days of Eternity. There never was any Period, when he did
not love them. He loved them as soon as he loved his Father. He loved them as
soon as he loved himself.

It is an endless Love. It will continue to Eternity in the Acts and Exercise,
in the Fruits and Effects of it. The Mountains shall depart, and the Hills
shall be removed, but his Loving Kindness will he not take away from his
Chosen. Having loved his own, he loved them to the End; yea he loves them
without End.

It Is a free Love. He loved them because he would love them. He loved them when
they were Nothing, yea when he foresaw they would make themselves infinitely
worse than Nothing. He loved them when they were actually all over filthy and
abominable, when they were full of Wounds and Bruises and putrifing Sores, cast
out in their Blood to the loathing of their Persons, none Eye to pity them,
etc. He loved them when they were condemned Traitors and Rebels, and doomed to
suffer the Vengeance of eternal Fire. He loved them, when he knew they were
full of Enmity against him, and could not endure him, and were not only every
Thing else that was bad, and destitute of every Thing that was good to
recommend them to his Love; but proud like the Devil, scorning the Offer of his
Love, as if it were quite beneath them, to take any Notice of him. As if they
sat as a Queen, or Princess, and he were a vile Beggar making Suit to them,
that were not worthy to carry their Shoes after them; when he at the same Time
is conscious to himself, that he is infinitely worthy of the highest Regards of
Men and Angels; and at the same Instant that he makes Offer of Love to them in
their forlorn Circumstances, he is adored by Millions of Angels, any one of
which could and would, were it not for the Love CHRIST bears to these vile
Creatures, and if permitted or commissioned, tear them in ten thousand Pieces,
or tie them Hand and Foot and cast them into eternal Burnings for the horrid
Affronts they offer to their dearest Lord. And as they have nothing personally
to recommend them, but infinitely the Reverse, so they have (or at least when
he set his Love upon 'em had) no Friend to recommend them, or speak a Word in
their Favor; but it was of his own mere Motion, and free good Pleasure. They
stood in no Relation, that should lay him under the least Obligations to them.
They were his Creatures indeed, but had brought themselves into such a
Condition, that he that made them might justly have no Mercy on them, and he
that formed them, might, in all Reason, show 'em no Favor. And his Love was
also perfectly free, as to any mercenary Views he could have. He knew full
well, that they would never be able to make him any Return for all his Love. --
Yes, He does foresee that they will love him, and thank and praise him, and
stir up others to assist them in doing so, that they will give themselves to
him, and devote all they are, all they have and all they can do to his Service
in Time, and to Eternity, and that they will make all Heaven ring with his
Praises for ever and ever, that they will love him in Perfection, and serve him
without ceasing Day and Night, as long as he and they have a Being; but all
this he knows will be the Fruit of his own Grace, and the Purchase of his own
Blood, and that the worst damned Sinner in Hell would have done the very same,
had he been pleased to bestow the same Grace upon them, and his Elect will see
and acknowledge this for ever; as also that after they were made the Subjects
of his special Grace, and knew themselves to be the Objects of his electing
Love, yet they were guilty of abundance of Pride, Covetousness, Ingratitude,
Unbelief, and innumerable other Sins, whereby they were a continual Exercise to
his Patience, and vexed and grieved his Holy Spirit, some of 'em forty Years
long, some more, some less. Yea, he knew that the Sins of his own Elect, after
Conversion would be in some Instances and in some Respects at least more
heinous than the Sins of Reprobates, yea than those of the very Devils of Hell;
as being committed against such Love, as neither of them, no nor the Angels of
Heaven were ever the Objects of: For it is

A distinguishing Love. The comparatively few, (though collectively considered
they are an exceeding great Multitude which no Man can number) that are the
Objects of this Love, are distinguished from all other Beings in the whole
Creation of GOD. They are distinguished from fallen Angels, whose Sins, as was
said, are in sundry Respects less aggravated than their's: Distinguished from
Multitudes of fallen Men, who never were the special Objects of Divine Love,
and who were, many of them, far less guilty in the Sight of GOD than many of
those who are thus beloved. And they are distinguished from the elect Angels
themselves: They are brought into a nearer and dearer Relation to CHRIST, and
of Consequence exalted to higher Honor than any Angel in Heaven. It Is certain,
they are represented as ministering Spirits sent forth to minister to those who
are the Heirs of Salvation in their present State of Sin and Imperfection; and
it seems to be represented in Scripture, as if they would continue so to
minister, even after the Saints are entered into Possession of their
Inheritance in Glory. Rev. 4.4, We read of the four and twenty Elders sitting
on Seats round about the Throne; this may intimate the near Communion the
Saints are to have with GOD: Again Chap. 7.11, We read that all the Angels
stood round about the Throne, and about the Elders. It Is certain all the Angels
in Heaven never cost the SON OF GOD so dear as each Soul of his Elect among Men
did: For

It was a most expensive Love that was exercised toward them. It cost him the
veiling his divine Glory in Flesh, and a Service of hard Labor and Suffering
for between thirty and forty Years together; and at last a shameful, painful
and accursed Death, of which something has been said already. It was indeed at
infinite Cost that he purchased his beloved Spouse from the Hands of Divine
Justice into which she was fallen for a Debt of Ten Thousand Talents, and had
not one Farthing to pay: And 'twas at infinite Expense that he redeemed the
forfeited Inheritance; yet he went on with his gracious Design: For

His Love is unchangeable. Many Waters cannot quench it, neither can the Floods
drown it, nor abate in the least Degree the Intenseness of it is Heat. It was
Love without Measure from Eternity, and it will continue so for ever. It never
alters in the least. It is the very same, in every Respect, under all the
different Frames and Circumstances his beloved is in, throughout all Time, and
to Eternity. It was the same when Adam was rejoicing in Paradise, as it was
when he was nothing, or a Handful of dry Dust; the same after his fearful and
aggravated Fall, that it was before; the same when Sinners are in an Estate of
Rebellion and Enmity, as it is after they are converted, and in part
sanctified, and filled with Love to him, and godly Sorrow for their past
Villainy, and Gratitude and Praise for his wonderful Love; all this does not
increase his Affection in the least Degree, for it was infinite before: And
when afterward they are forgetful of his Loving Kindness, and grow cold in
their Affections, and slack in their Duty to him, yea go a whoring after other
Lovers, though he sees all this, is present and looks on, and has them in his
very Arms, when they turn away from him, and commit spiritual Adultery; it is
very grievous to him indeed, and well it may, but it does not alienate his
Heart from them. -- All his Revenge is only in his Tears! He may hide his Face
from her for a Moment, and chasten her severely for a Time; but it is all the
Effect of the same unalterable Love. His Language to her still is, With
everlasting Kindness will I have Mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer;
nay, I have sworn that I will not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. -- And
when he shall have them with him in Heaven in Perfection of Holiness and
Happiness and Glory, adorned and beautified every Way as becomes the Royal
Bride of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and he rejoices over her with
Singing, and rests in his Love; it is but the same Love still which he had from
everlasting. He had the same Satisfaction in his own infinite Mind in the
Prospect (if we may so distinguish) that he has in the actual and eternal
Enjoyment. Thus his Love is unchangeable, as it is in his Heart, though the
Expressions of it are various according to the vastly different State and
Circumstances of the Object: It being

A wise, judicious Love; and not a fond and foolish Affection, which is always
expressing it self according to the present Feeling of the Lover, without a due
Regard to the future and best Good of the Persons beloved, rather than the
present Pleasure and Gratification of both. For want of this Wisdom and
Judgment in the Exercise of Affection, multitudes among the Children of Men
have been ruined; Hophni and Phineas, Absalom, Amnon and Adonijah for Instance,
and Millions more. But CHRIST'S Love is wise. He never ruined any of the
Objects of his Love by imprudent Management. He always does that which is most
for the spiritual and eternal Advantage of his Beloved. And accordingly, whom
he loves, he rebukes and chastens, and scourges every Son whom he receives.
If his Children forsake his Law and walk not in his Judgments, if they break
his Statutes and keep not his Commandments; then will he visit their
Transgressions with a Rod, and their Iniquities with Stripes, though he will not
utterly take his loving Kindness from them, nor suffer his Faithfulness to
fail. He looks forward and sees what the Consequences of Things will be Years
and Ages hence, yea for ever and ever; and has infinitely more Regard to what
his Elect will think of him and his Love far in Eternity, than what their
present Sense and Apprehension is. Though he does not willingly grieve nor
afflict the Children of Men, much less his own Spouse, whom he loves as
Himself, yea better than his own Eyes or Life; yet for the sake of her real and
eternal Advantage, he can bear to see her in all Manner of Sorrow and
Affliction, outward and inward, for such a Space of Time as he sees best. He
had rather she should weep now than howl for ever. He had rather she should cry
out of broken Bones now, than be broken on the Wheel of his Father's Wrath to
Eternity. He had rather shake her over Hell-Flames, though she shrieks and
shivers, and is ready to die with Fear, than to let her fall in and lie there,
World without End. Such Treatment makes her cling the faster to him and hang
about his Neck, and take heed how she runs away next Time, etc. -- It was said
that the Love of CHRIST is not a changeable Love: but it is

A manifold Love. There is an endless beautiful Variety in the Acts and
Exercises of it, according to the various Relations he is pleased to take upon
him toward his chosen. They are all filled up with Love. Love exerts and
displays it self in every one of them. Is he a King, a Father, a Brother, a
Bridegroom, a Friend, a Physician, a Head, etc. to his People? He is infinitely
the most kind and tender in every one of those Relations, that ever was, or can
be.

These are some of the many and glorious Properties of the Love of CHRIST. But
how is this Love to be known by Believers? What is that Knowledge of the Love
of CHRIST, which the Apostle sought of the Lord for his beloved Ephesians?

Doubtless he desired they should grow more and more in the doctrinal Knowledge
of this Love. And therefore, as he prays for it, so he uses Means to promote
it. He is large and particular, distinct and clear and plain in his Writings,
to instruct 'em in the Doctrine of CHRIST'S Love, and the various Properties
and Effects of it, and the Influence it ought to have on their Hearts and
Lives. This doctrinal Knowledge is necessary in order to a saving Knowledge.
For we don't know that GOD does ordinarily communicate any Thing to the Heart,
but what is first in the Head.

But it is

An experimental and saving Knowledge, which the Apostle principally intends.
It needs no Proof that he designed this; or if he did, the Manner in which he
brings it in, makes it very evident, that this was his Meaning. It is a Grant
according to the Riches of Glory: It is accompanied with, or rather is the
Effect of their being strengthened with Strength in the inner Man by the Spirit:
It Is the Consequence of CHRIST'S dwelling in their Hearts by Faith, and their
being rooted and grounded in Love; It is a Privilege peculiar to the Saints,
and common to them all: It is the Knowledge of CHRIST'S Love in all the
Dimensions of it, Breadth, Length, Depth and Height: It is that which was to
comfort them under their Affliction; and finally, it is that which was to fill
them with all the Fullness of GOD: And all this surely can never be ascribed to
a mere doctrinal Knowledge. --

It is granted according to the Riches of the Glory of the Giver. It is a rich
Gift indeed, and such as does exceedingly show forth the glorious Bounty and
Liberality of him that bestows it. There is nothing that he gives to Men,
separate from this, that is equal to it. It makes a vast Addition to the
Happiness of the Angels of Heaven. This Discovery of the Love of CHRIST to
fallen Men draws forth new Desires in, and gives new Gratifications to, those
blessed Spirits. These Things the Angels desire to look into. The glorious
Perfections of GOD appear in quite a new Light to them, as they are displayed
in this Love of CHRIST. The First Archangel never saw
So much of GOD before.
It is not revealed that GOD had any other Way to make known his rich and
glorious Grace to such a Degree, as by making known to his Creatures this Love
of CHRIST which passes Knowledge.

This Knowledge is the Operation of the HOLY SPIRIT, who was promised to lead
CHRIST'S Disciples into all Truth. It is a Work of Almighty Power; it is done
by a strong Hand. In order to the Soul's receiving of it, she must be
strengthened with Might in the inner Man. Her Powers were weakened by the Fall,
so that they are not able to receive this Divine Light. She is without
Strength. This Light, if it could shine into the Soul in her natural State,
would dazzle, overpower, confound and destroy it is Faculties. And therefore
the SPIRIT OF GOD gives a new Understanding, capable of receiving this
Knowledge of the Love of CHRIST.

This distinguishes it from that common Knowledge, which may be taught by Man,
and which the Soul is capable of receiving in the same Manner as she does other
Mysteries of Art and Nature. Or, if there be some common Illumination of the
Holy Spirit necessary in order to attaining that Knowledge, which some natural
Men have, whereby they may know more about the Love of CHRIST, and be more
affected with it, than they could otherwise have been, and than other Persons
are; yet they have no such Renewing of the Understanding as the Saints
experience. Their Knowledge is the same in Kind, though it differs in Degree,
from what it was before. As a Man that is born blind may know much of the
Philosophy of Light and Colors by humane Instructions, and be greatly assisted
and succeeded in his Studies on that Subject, by the common Influences of the
Spirit of CHRIST, in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge of
every Kind; so that he shall be able to speak of these Things for the
Instruction of others, and for the Glory of the GOD of Nature: Yet, after all,
he has no such Idea of Light and Colors in his own Mind as every Man that sees
has; but may be farther from it than he was at first, as he himself may see,
when his Eyes come to be opened, though he could not be sensible of it before. He
has formed all his Ideas of Light and Colors agreeable to Notions he had
received into his Mind by his Hearing, Smelling, Tasting or Feeling; and
whenever he thinks or speaks of Light and Colors, he does it as of something
that he has heard, smelt, tasted or felt; and the oftener and the longer he
thinks and speaks of them, though he does it in the same Words that other Men do,
yet his wrong Notions are but the more confirmed thereby. And so, when he hears
of any glorious Sight that is seen in the Heavens, or elsewhere, with which
others are much affected; why, he immediately forms an Idea in his Mind of some
extraordinary Sound, or Savor, or palpable Substance, and is affected with it
too, after his own Way; but still all his Conceptions are quite wrong, and as
far from the Truth, as Darkness is from Light, or Tastes from Colors. So it is
with the natural Man: He hears, and reads, and talks about the Love of CHRIST,
which passes Knowledge; and may be therein assisted by the Spirit of GOD, and
have some affecting Sense and Apprehension of it, in his Way; which may be
somewhat useful, in some Respect, to himself, and of saving Benefit to some
others, possibly: but he has no true Conceptions of CHRIST, or his Love, but is
farther and farther from any such Thing, the longer he continues in his present
Notions of Things. All the Progress he makes, be it never so great, is in a
wrong Way; every Step he takes must be trod back again, and all his Notions and
Apprehensions must be unlearnt, 'till he comes to be quite a Fool, if ever he
be right; and the sooner, and the faster he goes back, and gets out of Conceit
of his Seize in Knowledge and Practice, the better. And then,

Those that have this saving Knowledge of the Love of CHRIST have him dwelling
in their Hearts by Faith. The Soul has seen CHRIST, and been enamoured with
him. She has been convinced of her own hopeless and helpless Condition by
Nature, and of his All Sufficiency and Suitableness, and sees him freely
offering himself to her in the Gospel. And hereupon the Heart opens to CHRIST;
and he makes his glorious and solemn Entry into the Soul, turns out Sin and
Satan, seats himself on the Throne of the Heart; and says, This is my Rest
forever, here will I dwell, because I have desired it. This is Love indeed! And
now the Soul begins to know the Love of CHRIST, which passes Knowledge. Now
she cries out with Admiration, Joy and Thankfulness, "Is it indeed so? Has the
King of Glory in very Deed opened the everlasting Doors of my Soul? Has he
purified my Heart by Faith, from all those filthy Lusts that polluted it? Has
he prepared it, as a Palace, tor himself to dwell in? And do I see him, yea,
feel him seated here? Nay, does he spread a Table before me in the Presence of
my Enemies, and feast me with Royal Dainties? O this is the Love of CHRIST
indeed, which passes Knowledge!"

The Soul is also now rooted and grounded in Love. She feels her Heart drawn
out in Affection to her Savior, and to all that bear his Image. He is the
Chiefest of ten thousand, even altogether Lovely to her; and they are the
excellent of the Earth, in whom is all her Delight. Now her Heart burns within
her! Now her most ardent Desires are drawn out! O, how shall she come to enjoy
more and more of CHRIST, and his Love? How shall she be conformed more and more
to him? How shall she spread his Fame, and be any way instrumental of diffusing
the Savor of his good Ointments, that the Virgins also may love him? How shall
she secure his gracious Presence with her? What shall she do, that she may keep
the House of her Heart sweet and neat and clean as a fit Mansion for her
Beloved? How shall she do to prevent the Re-entry of those Goats and Swine,
those unclean Lusts and Devils, that heretofore had the Possession of her
Heart? She Is full of Love. And she is now rooted and grounded in this Love. It
grows more and more strong and firm; and she rests in her Love to him, as he
does in his to her: The more she sees of her Beloved, and the more she is
acquainted with him, the better she likes him. She likes her Choice too well to
change, if she might. Her Love, though but a small Plant at first, takes Root
downward, and bears Fruit upward; it flourishes like the Palm Tree, or like a
Cedar in Lebanon. And herein also she sees something more of the Love of CHRIST
that passes Knowledge. Surely, She thinks, if I love CHRIST, it is because he
first loved me. Here Is a surprising, astonishing Change wrought in me! This is
not the natural Frame and Temper of my Heart; far from it! I was an utter
Stranger to such Feelings as these. I conceited once, I loved CHRIST and
thought I knew something of his Love, and had always done so; but I found I was
deceived. I had embraced an Image formed in my own Brain and Fancy, instead of
a glorious CHRIST seen by Faith. The good Spirit was pleased to convince me of
my Error, and to show me, that I had no true Love to him; but was under the
Power of Prejudice and Enmity against him. It was the Language of my Heart, I
can see no Form nor Comeliness in him, why I should desire Him; neither will I
have this Man to reign over me. But it is quite otherwise with me now. I Am
fallen deeply in Love with him. I desire nothing in the World so much as to
know more and more of him, and be more and more conformed to him in Heart, Lip
and Life; and that he should rule in me and reign over me for ever. Verily,
This must be the Effect of that Love of CHRIST to me that passes Knowledge!

And now she begins to consider the several Dimensions of this Love, and to
take a Prospect of it every Way, as she is able.

It Is broad as Heaven and Earth; it comprehends the whole Body of the Elect in
all Nations and Ages. It Is broad enough to cover a Multititude of Sins, each of
them wide as the Sea; yea, Sins numberless and infinite in their Aggravations.

It Is Length is infinite. It reaches from Everlasting to Everlasting. Look
which way you will, you can see no End or Beginning to it. You are always at
the Middle of this infinite Line, and always will be. Yea, GOD himself always
was so, and always will be so. He himself remembers no Beginning of the Love of
CHRIST; for it never had any. He himself can see no End to it, for it never
will have any. Herein, as well as in every other Respect, the Love of CHRIST
differs from all created Love: For his is without any Limit at all. The Love of
Angels and Saints will be endless, it will never come to any Period; but it had
a Beginning. If it proceed never so far, yet you may always look back to a Time
when there was none at all; for they themselves were once Nothing. Yea, with
Respect to Men, it will always be true, that there was once Enmity instead of
Love. The Creature's Love, as to the Length of its Duration, will always be
short at one End. Yea, it will never be actually infinite. It will never be
said, Now it has endured for ever. Though it will be for ever mending as to that
Defect, if it may be called so; for it will be growing longer and longer to
Eternity. [And here, by the Way, perhaps, a common Form of Speech might be
amended, When instead of To Eternity, it is said, Throughout Eternity, or
Throughout the endless Ages of Eternity. It may be queried, Whether such
Expressions are not plain Contradictions, and whether the Scripture is not a
Stranger to them.] But CHRIST'S Love (as was said) is properly infinite in
Duration. There never was a Time, when himself, or his Love was not, or when he
had Enmity to his Elect instead of Love. -- His Love has endured eternally
already. Eternity to come will make no Addition, with respect to Eternity past,
as we distinguish. With GOD there is no such Distinction. That which we call
Time, and Eternity past, and Eternity to come, are all present to him at once.

He fills his own eternal NOW,
And sees our Ages waste. --
Hence it is said, "From Everlasting to Everlasting thou art GOD": Not Thou
have been from Everlasting, and Thou will be to Everlasting. His Name is I AM;
not I WAS, or I WILL BE. This is his Name, and this is his Son's Name; and as
his Name is, so is he, and so is his Love.

The Saints see something of the Depth of the Love of CHRIST. It Is deeper than
Hell: what can we do at fathoming of it? It Is a bottomless Ocean. It drowns the
largest Mountains of the most heinous Sin, as well as the least Sand; if any of
those vast Mountains may be called Sands in Comparison of others. When Sinners
were sunk down to the very Depth of Hell, as to their Frame and as to their
Desert; this Love sunk down lower, and was beneath them. Yea, this Love in some
Sense, extends so as to take in Hell it self. Though there are no Objects of his
Love there; yet he himself is there, by his essential Presence, and infinitely
beyond it: And he is Love, wherever he is. And his Love could swallow up Hell,
and turn it into a Heaven of Holiness and Happiness in a Moment, if the Will of
GOD were so. So deep is this Love, that though it will be the Business and
Blessedness of Saints and Angels to be diving into it for ever and ever, yet
they will never come any nearer to the Bottom of it: For, as was said, it is
bottomless.

Believers apprehend something of the Height of this Love of CHRIST; though it is
high as Heaven, what can we know? It Is Topless, as well as Bottomless. It Is
infinitely above the highest Flights of the glorious Angels, it is far above
their highest Thoughts, far above their highest Praises: You, high as the Most
High himself; for it is the Love of the MOST-HIGH. In a Word, this Love is every
Way boundless and infinite. It Is the Love of an immense Being, and it is itself
properly and absolutety immense. GOD fills an infinite Space, an infinite
Duration, and infinite Perfection of every Kind; and of equal Extent is the
Love of CHRIST, who is GOD. To illustrate this a little farther, with Allusion
to the Apostle's Way of Speaking in the Context: Suppose an Angel to fly with
the inconceivable Swiftness of a Thought, either backward or forward, upward or
downward, to the Right Hand or to the Left, take which Way he will, and let him
keep on strait forward for ever and ever; yet will he never get one
Hair's-breadth from the very Center of this Love; for it is all Center. The
Middle is every where. The Circumference or outmost Bounds are no where. Yea,
may we not venture to say, that GOD himself and his own infinite Mind is filled
with the Love of CHRIST; For he was daily his Delight, before the Foundations
of the World. The Love of CHRIST affords his Father an infinite and adequate
Satisfaction. In Him his Soul delights, nor has, he any greater Delight. In
Him he is ever well-pleased, nor has he any greater Pleasure. Well may it then
be said, That the Saints who are filled with this Love, are filled with all the
Fullness of GOD! If this Love dwells in them, then God dwells in them and they
in GOD; as the beloved Disciple, who lay in CHRIST'S Bosom and knew much of his
Heart, expresses it, Filled with all the Fullness of God! It Is a bold
Expression, but it is an inspired one; and but parallel with some other
Scripture Expressions, and particularly that of the Apostle John, but now
mentioned. It must needs imply something very great and glorious. There Is no
such Thing said of the Angels of Heaven; for to which of them said he at any
Time, Ye shall be filled with all the Fullness of GOD? Certainly, it must imply,
that the happy Subjects of this Privilege me greatly enlarged us to then
Capacity. How capacious must that Creature be, that is to take in all the
Fullness of GOD! -- It must imply, that this Capacity, great as it is, shall be
gloriously filled; for what so great and glorious as GOD, the Fullness of GOD,
all the Fullness of GOD! Every Thing seems to conspire to confirm the
Supposition, that Man, poor fallen, sinful miserable Man, is to be exalted to
the greatest Degree of Happiness, that any more Creature is capable of. The
blessed GOD is so far from grudging his Creatures any Happiness, that he never
thinks them happy enough (even some of the most vile, ^^^-deserving,
Hell-deserving of 'em all) till they come to have every Thing in them that
himself has, as far as they are any Way capable of receiving the same. He will
have them be holy even as he is holy, and consequently happy as he is happy, as
far as may be.

This is the Sum of the Apostle's Prayer for the Ephesians. And all this he
wishes for them to (...) 'em under the Uneasiness he was afraid they were
exercised with, on the Account of his Imprisonment. And it was abundantly
sufficient to revive them, if the Lord were pleased to set it home, whatever
their Trouble were; yea, though they were like Jonah, to their own Apprehension,
o^ out of GOD'S Sight into the very Belly of Hell. And it is likely, it had it is
desired Effect. Probably they were greatly affected, encouraged, rejoiced,
edified by this and the other Parts of this Epistle. Possibly that Church might
after this continue some Time in a flourishing Condition; and there are several
Things taken Notice of to her Commendation, in the Epistle sent to her from her
Savior in Heaven by his Servant John (Rev. 2.) But she had in a great Measure
left her first Love; for which she is there faithfully reproved, and severely
and solemnly warned; which plain Dealing not being improved as it ought to have
been, she (with the rest of the Seven Churches of Asia) degenerated and
declined more and more, till CHRIST was provoked to remove the Candlestick out
of its Place, and leave them to ^^^er Desolation, for a Warning to all
Professors to the End of the World, how they give Way to the Beginnings of
Apostasy and Declension.

But however the Ephesians took what the Apostle here says to 'em, it is plain
enough, that he himself was much affected with it. And he cannot finish this
song Digression, till he breaks out into a devout Doxology, with which the
Parenthesis and the Chapter concludes; Now to Him that is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the Power that works
in us, unto Him be Glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all Ages,
World without END:

AMEN.
THE Copy of a LETTER, sent by ****** ******, deceased, to her Brother at the
Eastward, written by one, at her Desire.
MY DEAR BROTHER,
IT is an Exercise to me to think of the Troubles and Difficulties, which you
and my dear Sister and the little ones are like to meet with in this Time of
the Rumor of War: But I must confess, that is not my greatest Concern for you
and them. No, since I hope, (through the infinite rich, free Grace of GOD to
the vilest of Creatures) I have had my Eyes opened to see something of the
Greatness and Certainty of the Things of another World; It seems to me, its not
so much Matter what becomes of me or my friends in this World, provided it may
be well with us for ever. O Brother, I cannot express to you how little,
nothing, less than nothing and Vanity every Thing here looks, when I stand as
it were on the Brink of Time, and by Faith look into the vast Ocean of
Eternity. Eternity! O that great Word FOR-EVER, quite swallows me up and drowns
my Thoughts: I am lost in Amazement and Astonishment. What if you or I, or our
dear Yoke-Fellows, or Children should be carried into Captivity, and there
suffer Hunger and Cold and Nakedness, and serve our Enemies in the Want of all
Things, for many Years, and then be tied to Trees and roasted alive, as some
better than we have been served? We shall scarce feel it at all, if we have the
gracious Presence of GOD with us, and a lively Sense of the Love of CHRIST; we
shall sing and rejoice and praise GOD in the midst of all, as Paul and Silas
did, in the Prison, with their Feet made fast in the Stocks, and the Martyrs at
the Stake. As our Sufferings abound, we have Reason to think our Consolations
in CHRIST would abound also. And then all those light Afflictions, which are
but for a Moment, would work for us a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of
Glory. The Sufferings of this present Time are not worthy to be compared with
the Glory that shall be revealed in us. But on the other Hand, What will it
profit us to gain the whole World, and lose our own Souls? These were to me
once only bear Words, and empty Sounds, and as a Tale that is told; but I have
since seen them to be the greatest Realities. I hope you have also had
something of the same Discovery. I was glad when I saw you last, to hear you
speak so sensibly of spiritual Things. I was rejoiced to hear, that you spent
one whole Night in Discourse with such a live Christian as Mr. S: for I
concluded that your Talk must be about heavenly Things. But, O my dear Brother,
you must forgive your loving Sister if I am jealous over you with a godly
Jealousy. When I consider, that many are called, but few are chosen, that many
shall seek to enter in at the straight Gate, and not be able; how far a Man may
go, and yet, through one Temptation or another, fall short at last; that some are
not far from the Kingdom of GOD, and yet never come thither; I am distressed
for you, left all your Convictions should come to nothing. I tremble for fear
you should be taken up with the Cares and Troubles of this present evil World,
so as to neglect the one Thing needful. O consider you cannot serve two
Masters, GOD and Mammon. If ever you escape that dreadful Hell, and obtain that
blessed Inheritance among the Saints in Light; you must make a Business of
Religion, you must be in earnest, and strive to enter in at the straight Gate;
for many shall seek to enter in, and not be able. You may think a great deal
about your Soul and Eternity; you may be glad to enquire of good People, What
you shall do to inherit Eternal Life; you may hear the Word with Joy and much
Affection, and do many Things; yea live in all good Conscience, as you may
think, and yet lack one Thing. And therefore I must entreat and beseech you, as
ever you expect to see the Face of GOD with Comfort another Day, that you will
never rest till you are sure you have experienced a saving Change on your Soul.
O cry to GOD Day and Night, that he would be pleased to show you Things really
as they are, and enable you to hate and abhor and forsake all Sin, and fly for
Refuge to lay hold on the Hope set before you; that he would make a saving
Discovery of CHRIST to you, and enable you to receive him as offered in the
Gospel. And if you should knock and seek and strive for a while and find no
Peace or Comfort, but rather more Terror, or, which is worse, feel nothing but
Deadness, Coldness and Senselessness of Spirit, and in every Respect seem to
grow worse and worse, and find Satan more busy with his Temptations than ever;
yet be not discouraged by any Means, but hold on seeking and striving to the
last Gasp: In due Time you shall reap, if you faint not. There Is no thinking of
looking bark: There Is nothing but Death and Damnation there. The Avenger of
Blood is close at your Heels. Flee! Flee! for your Life, or you are a dead Man,
a damned Man: But before you is a blessed City of Refuge, and the dear
compassionate JESUS pitying you, and praying for you, and with his Arms wide
open to receive you, as he has done many of late. O press forward and get in,
before the Door is shut; for then it will be too late for ever.

My dear Brother, entreat me not to leave you; I must cry after you to come to
JESUS, come to the Marriage, yet there is Room. I hope, through marvelous
Grace, your poor unworthy Sister, and many of your Relations will be admitted
to sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of GOD. And can I bear
to think my dear Brother should be cast out, bound Hand and Foot, and cast into
a Lake of Fire, everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels? But
how will you bear it? How can your Heart endure? How can your Hands be strong?
-- But I forget that I am speaking to a Brother, older, and for ought I know,
every Way better than my self. If you have had your Eyes opened, you will not
wonder, nor be offended with me for being so plain and earnest with you: And if
you are yet out of CHRIST, it is impossible I should be too earnest. After all
that I or any Man, or Angel, can say of the Danger of a Christless Estate, the
Evil of Sin, the Dreadfulness of Hell Torments, the Beauty and Excellency and
All Sufficiency of CHRIST, the Blessedness of a Child of GOD, the Glory of
Heaven, etc; the Things themselves will be far above the highest Expressions
that can be used about them.

O my dear Brother, I am full of this Matter; the Spirit within me constrains
me to speak. I can hardly help beginning again. I long that all my dear
Friends, and my dear Brother S, in particular should come and see what there is
in CHRIST. O that you could know, what I poor Creature have known, of the
Sweetness of Communion with GOD! All the Enjoyments of this World are mere
Trash and Husks and Dogs Meat to it. I have enjoyed more solid Satisfaction in
one Hour's Communion with GOD, and the ravishing Sense of the Love of CHRIST,
than all the Comforts of this Life are worth, to be enjoyed for an Age as long
as Methusalem. I have been so filled with spiritual Enjoyments, that I could
have no Manner of Relish for any Thing else: Riches, Honors, Pleasures seemed
like Dross and Dung to me, in Comparison of the Excellency of the Knowledge and
Love of CHRIST JESUS my Lord. O sweet! Sweet! Sweet! Beyond all Expression and
Comparison. Eight Days and Nights have I lain overwhelmed with Joy unspeakable
and full of Glory, and have not slept one Wink, that I was sensible of, Day or
Night. Still, still, the Joy of the Lord poured in upon me like a Flood, till
Nature was quite overpowered, and Reason was in great Measure drowned: And no
wonder; I rather admire that my poor feeble Frame could bear up so long as it
did under the Pressure of such a Weight of Glory. I must confess, I have too
much lost a Sense of these Things; but I firmly believe they came from GOD as a
free Gift to one of the least of Mortals and vilest of Sinners, even your poor
Sister T. And I expect a Revival again in GOD'S Time, and far more abundant
Communication; if not in this World, yet when I come to be with CHRIST, which
is best of all. Then, O then, I expect to have my Capacity enlarged, so as to
drink in whole Rivers, Seas, Oceans of the Love of CHRIST for ever. -- And my
dear Brother, will not you go along with me? There Is enough for you and me, and
ten thousand Mission more such; and you are sincerely and earnestly invited to
come and drink abundantly of the Wine of Consolation. The Spirit and the Bride
say, Come; and whosoever will, let him take of the Water of Life freely. O, my
dear Brother, take and drink and live for ever. What I say to you, I say to my
dear Sister and Cousine. I hope the young ones will be early Seekers and sure
Finders of CHRIST, as I trust, through free Mercy, the most of my Children have
been; though I have Reason to (...) over my own and their Declensions. I leave
you with a merciful GOD, hoping he will do more for you than I can ask or
think; and desire your earnest Prayers for us all, and particularly for

Your loving Sister, ***** *****.

FINIS.

