A NARRATIVE Of the Captivity OF Nehemiah How, Who was taken by the Indians at
the Great-Meadow-Fort above Fort-Dummer, where he was an Inhabitant, October
11th 1745.

Giving an Account of what he met with in his traveling to Canada, and while
he was in Prison there.

Together with an Account of Mr. How Is Death at Canada.

Psalm. cxxxvii.1, 2, 3, 4. By the Rivers of Babylon, there we sat down -- We
hanged our Harps upon the Willows, in the midst thereof. For there they that
carried us away captive, required of us a Song; and they that wasted us,
required of us Mirth, saying, Sing us one of the Songs of Zion. How shall we
sing the Lord's Song in a strange Land.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold opposite to the Prison In Queen Street. 174^.

A Narrative etc.
AT the Great-Meadow-Fort fourteen Miles above Fort-Dummer, October 11th 1745,
where I was an Inhabitant, I went out from the Fort about 50 Rods to cut Wood;
and when I had done, I walked toward the Fort, but in my Way heard the
crackling of Fences behind me, and turning about, saw 12 or 13 Indians, with
red painted Heads, running after me: On which I cried to God for Help, and ran,
and hollowed as I ran, to alarm the Fort; but by that I had ran ten Rods,
theIndians came up with me and took hold of me: At the same Time the Men at the
Fort shot at the Indians, and killed one on the Spot, wounded another, who died
14 Days after he got Home, and likewise shot a Bullet through the Powder-Horn of
one that had hold of me. They then led me into theSwamp andpinion'd me. I then
committed myCase toGod, and prayed, that since it was his Will to deliver me
into the Hands of these cruel Men, I might find Favor in their Eyes: Which
Request, God of his infiniteMercy was pleased to grant; for they were generally
kind to me while I was with 'em: Some of the Indians, at that Time, took the
Charge of me, oaths ran into the Field to kill Cattle. They led me about half a
Mile; where we stayed in open Sight of the Fort, 'till the Indians who were
killing Cattle came to us laden with Beef: Then they went a little further to a
House, where they stayed to cut the Meat from the Bones, and cut the Helve off
my Ax, and stuck it into the Ground, pointing the Way we went.

Then we traveled along by the RiverSide* and when we had got about threeMiles,
I espied aCanoe coming down on the further Side the River, with David Rugg and
Robert Baker, belonging to our Fort. I made as muchNoise as I could, by
Hammingetc. that they might see us before theIndians saw them, and so get
ashore, and happily escape; but the Indians saw them, and shot across the
River 20 or 30 Guns at them, and killed the first mentioned Person, viz. David
Rugg, but Robert Baker, the other Person got ashore, and escaped. Then some of
the Indians swam over the River, and bro't the Canoe over the River, scalp'd
and stripped the deadMan, and then went about a Mile further, when we came to
another House, where we stopped; while there, we heard Men running by theBank of
the River, whom I knew to be IonathanThayer, Samuel Nutting, and my Son Caleb
How: Five of the Indians ran to head them. My Heart ak'd for them, and prayed
to God to save them from the Hands of the Enemy. I suppose they hid under the
Bank of the River; for the Indians were gone some Time, but came back without
them, blessed be God.

We went about a Mile further, where we lodged that Night, and roasted the Meat
they had got: The next Day we traveled very slow, by Reason of he Indian who
was wounded, which was a great Favor to me. We lodged the second Night
againstNumb. Four; the third Day we also traveled slowly, andstop'd often to
rest, and to get along the wounded Man; we lodged that Night by the second
small River that runs into the great River against Numb. Four.

The 4th Day Morning, the Indians held a Piece of Bark, and bid me write my
Name, and how many Days we had traveled; for, said they, May be English Men
will come here. That was a hard Day to me; for it was a wet Day, and we went
over prodigious Mountains, so that I became weakandfaint; for I had not eaten
the value of one Meal from the Time I was taken, having nothing to eat but Beef
almost raw, without Bread or Salt. When I came first to the Foot of those
Hills, I though it it was impossible for me to ascend them, without immediate Help
from God; therefore my constant Recourse was to him for Strength; which he was
graciously pleased to grant me: and for which I desire to Praise him. We got
that Day a little before Night to a Place where they had a hunting House, a
Kettle, some Beer, Indian Corn, and Salt: They boiled a good Mess of it; I
drank of the Broth, eat of the Meat and Corn, and was wonderfully refreshed, so
that I felt like another Man.

The next Morning we got up early, and after we had eaten, my Master said to
me, You must quick walk to Day, or I will kill you. I told him I would go as
fast as I could, and no faster, if he did kill me: At which, anoldIndian who
was the best Friend I had, tookCare of me. We traveled thatDay very hard, and
over steepHills, but it being a cool windy Day, I performed it withmore Ease
than before; yet was much tired before Night, but dare not complain.

The nextDay theIndians gave me a Pair of their Shoes, so that I traveled with
abundant more Ease than when I wore my own Shoes; though I eat but very little,
our Victuals being almost spent; when the Sun was about two Hours high, the
Indians scattered to hunt, and they soon killed a Fawn, 'and three small Bears;
so that we had again Meat eno', some of which we boiled, and eat heartily of,
by which I felt strong*

The next Day we traveled very hard, and performed it with Ease; insomuch that
one of the Indians told me, I was a very strongMan: About three of the Clock we
came to the Lake, where they had five Canoes, and Pork, IndianCorn, and
Tobacco. We got into theCanoes, when the Indians stuck up a Pole about eight
Feet long with theScalp of David Rugg on the Top of it, painted red, with the
Likeness of Eyes and Mouth on it: We sailed about tenMiles, and then went
onShore; and after we had made a Fire, we boiled a good Supper, and eat
heartily.

The next Day we set sail for Crown-Point, but when we were within a Mile of
the Place, they went on Shore, where were eight or ten French and Indians, but
before I got on Shore two of them came running into the Water Knee deep, and
pulled me out of theCanoe; there they sang and danced round me, after which,
one of them bid me set down, which I did; and then they pulled off my Shoes and
Buckles, and took them with me. Soon after we went along to Crown-Point, and
when we had got there, the People both French and Indians were very thick by
the Waterside; two of the Indians took me out of the Canoe, and leading me,
bid me run, which we did; it was about 20 Rods from the Fort; the Fort is
large, built withStone and Lime; they led me up to the third Loft, where was
theCaptain'sChamber; aChair was bro't that I might set by the Fire and warm me.
Soon after the Indians that I belonged to, and others that were there, came
intotheChamber, among whom was one I knew, named Pealtomy; he came and spoke to
me, and shookHands with me; and I was glad to see him: He went out, but soon
returned, and bro't to me another Indian named Amrusus, Husband to Mrs. Eunice
Williams, Daughter of the late Rev. Mr. Williams of Deerfield: He was glad to
see me, and I to see him. He asked me after his Wife's Relations, and showed a
great deal of Respect to me. A while after this, the Indians sat in a Ring in
the Chamber, and Pealtomy came to me, and told me, I must go sing and dance
before the Indians; I told him, I could not: He told me over some Indian Words,
and bid me sing them: I told him, I could not. With that, the rest of the Fort
who could speak some English came to me, and bid me sing it in English, which
was, I don't know where I go; which I did, dancing round that Ring three Times;
and then I sat down by the Fire: The Priest came to me, and gave me a Dram of
Rum; after that the Captain bro't me Part of a Loaf of Bread and a Plate of
Butter, and asked me to eat, which I did heartily; for I had not eaten any
Bread from the Time I was taken 'till then. The French Priest and all the
Officers showed me a great deal of Respect: The Captain gave me a Pair of
goodBuckskin Shoes, the Priest fixed them on my Feet; and we stayed there that
Night; where I slept with the Priest, Captain and Lieut: The Lieutenant'sName
was Ballock, he had been a Prisoner at Boston, and had been at Northampton and
the Towns thereabouts. This Day, which was the Sabbath, I was well treated by
the FrenchOfficers with VictualsandDrink: We tarried there 'tillNoon, then went
off about a Mile, and put on Shore; where they stayed the rest of the Day, and
having Rum with them, most of 'em were much Liquor'd. P^altomy and his Squaw,
and another Indian Family went with us, and by them I found out that Wm. Phipps
killed an Indian, besides that we wounded before he was killed, for an Indian
who was with us, asked me, if there was one killed near our Fort last Summer? I
told him I did not know: He said he had a Brother went out then, and had not
seen him since, and that he heard he was killed at our Fort, and wanted to know
if it was true: But I did not think it best to tell him any such Thing was
suspected.

But the Indians now got into a Frolic, and quarreled about me; they made me
set in the Canoe by the Waterside: I was afraid they would hurt if not kill
me: They attempted to come to me, but the sober Indians hindered them that were
in Liquor. Pealtomy seeing the Rout went to the Fort, and soon after Lieut.
Ballock, with some Soldiers, came to us, and when the Indians were made easy,
they went away: We lodged there that Night, and the next Day was a stormy Day
of Wind Snow and Rain; so that we were forced to tarry there that Day and the
next Night; in this Time the Indians continued fetching Rum from the Fort, and
kept half drunk: Here I underwent some Hardship by staying there so long in a
Storm without Shelter or Blanket. They had a great Dance that Night, and hung
up David Rugg's Scalp on a Pole, dancing round it: After they had done, they
lay down to sleep.

The next Morning, which was the tenth Day from the Time of my being taken, we
went off in the Canoe, and the Night after we arrived at the wide Lake, and
there we stayed that Night; some of the Indians went a hunting, and killed a
fat Buck-Deer, so that we had Victuals plenty, for we had a full Supply of
Bread given us at the Fort at Crown-Point.

The next Morning, the Wind being calm, we set out about two Hours before Day;
soon after came to aSchooner lying at Anchor, went on Board, the French treated
us very civilly: They gave each of us a Dram of Rum, and Victuals to eat. As
soon as it was Day we left the Schooner, and two Hours before Sunset got over
the Lake, and next Day came to Shamballee, where we met 300 French and 200
Indians, who did the Mischief at and about Mr. Lydius's Fort. I was taken out
of the Canoe by two Frenchmen, and sled to a House about ten Rods off as fast
as I could run, the Indians flinging Snow-Balls at me. As soon as I got to the
House, the Indians stood round me very thick, and bid me sing and dance; which
I did with them, in their Way; then they gave a Shout, and left off. Two of
them came to me, one of whom smote me on Cheek, to'other on the other, which
made the Blood run plentifully. Then they bid me sing and dance again, which I
did with them, and they with me, shouting as before. Then two Frenchmen took me
under each Arm, and run so fast that the Indians could not keep up with us to
hurt me: We ran about 40 Rods to another House; where a Chair was bro't for me
to set down: The House was soon full of French and Indians, and round the House
they were looking in at the Windows. A French Gentleman came to me, took me by
the Hand, and led me into a small Room, where none came in but such as he
admitted: He gave me Victuals and Drink: Several French Gentlemen and Indians
came in, and were civil to me. The Indians who came in, could speak English;
they shook Hands with me, called me Brother. They told me they were all
Soldiers, and were going to New England: They said, they should go to my Town;
which was a great Damp to my Spirit, 'till I heard of their Return, where they
had been, and what they had done. A while after this, the Indians whom I
belonged to, came to me, and told me we must go; which we did; and after going
down the River about twoMiles, we came to the thickest of the Town, where was a
large Fort built with Stone and Lime, and very large and fine Houses in it;
where was the General of the Army I spoke of before: He asked me, what News
from London and Boston; I told him such as I though it convenient, and omitted the
rest; and then went down to the Canoes, when some of the Indians went and got a
plenty of Bread and Beef, which they put into the Canoes, and then we went into
a French House, where we had a good Supper: There came in several French
Gentlemen to see me, who were civil to me; one of them gave me a Crown Sterling.
We lod'd there 'till about two Hours before Day, when we arose, and went down
the River: I suppose we went a Hundred Miles that Day, which brought us into
the great River called Quebec-River; we lodged that Night in a French House,
and were civilly treated.

The next Day we went down the River, and I was carried before the Governor
there, which was the Sabbath, and the 16th Day after my being taken. We stayed
there about three Hours, and were well treated by the French; and then the
Indians were ordered to carry me down to Quebec; which was 90 Miles further: We
went down the River about three Miles that Night; then went ashore, and lodged
the remaind^^ of the Night.

The next Morning we set off, and the second Day which was the 18th from the
Time I was taken, we arrived at Quebec. The Land is inhabited on both Sides the
River from the Lake to Quebec, which is at least two Hundred Miles, but
especially from Shambelle very thick, so that the Houses are within Sight of
one another all the Way.

But to return; after we arrived at Quebec, I was carried up into a large
Chamber which was full of Indians, who were civil to me: Many of the French
came in to see me, and were very kind to me: I stayed there about two Hours,
when a French Gentlemen who could speak good English came in and told me, I
must go with him to the Governor; which I did; and after answering to a great
many Questions, and treated with as much Bread and Wine as I desired, I was
sent with an Officer to theGuard House, and led into a small Room, where was an
English man named William Stroud, a Kinsman of the Hon. Judge Lynde's in
New England: He belonged to South Carolina, and had been at Quebec six Years,
whom the Governor kept confined for fear he should leave them and go to
New England, and discover their Strength: Mr. Stroud and I were kept in the
Guard-House one Week, with a Sufficiency of Food and Drink: The French
Gentlemen kept coming in to see me, and was very civilly treated by them: I had
the better Opportunity of discoursing with them, as Mr. Stroud was a good
Interpreter.

After this we were sent to Prison, where I found one James Kinlade, who was
taken 14 Days before I was at Sheepscot at the Eastward in New England: I was
much pleased with hisConversation, esteeming him a Man of true Piety: We were
kept in Prison eight Days, with Liberty to keep in the Room with the
Prison-keeper. We were daily visited by Gentlemen and Ladies, who showed us
great Kindness, in giving us Money and other Things, and a pleasant Behavior
toward us; blessed be God therefore, for I desire to ascribe all the Favors I
have been the Partaker of ever since my Captivity, to the abundant Grace and
Goodness of a bountiful God, as the first Cause.

After this, Mr. Kinlade and I were sent to another Prison, where were 22
Seamen belonging to several Parts of our King'sDominions, three of 'em Captains
of Vessels, viz. James Southerland of Cape-Cod, William Chipman of Marblehead,
William Pote of Casco-Bay; this Prison was a large House built with Stone and
Lime two Feet thick, and about 120 Feet long. We had two large Stoves in it,
and Wood enough, so that we could keep our selves warm in the coldest Weather.
We had Provision sufficient, viz two Pound of good Wheat Bread, one Pound of
Beef, and Peace answerable, to each Man ready dressed every Day.

When I had been there a few Days theCaptives desired me to lead them in
carrying on Morning and Evening Devotions, which I was willing to do: We had a
Bible, a Psalm-Book, and some other good Books; our constant Practice was to
read a Chapter in the Bible, and sing Part of a Psalm, and to pray Night and
Morning.

When I was at the first Prison I was stripped of all my old and lousey Clothes,
and had other Clothing given me from Head to Foot, and had many Kindnesses
shown me by those that lived thereabouts, more especially by one Mr. Corby and
his Wife, who gave me Money there, and bro't me many good Things at the other
Prison. But here I was taken ill, as was also most of the other Prisoners, with
a Flux, which lasted near a Month, so that I was grown very weak, but after
that I was healthful, through divine Goodness, blessed be God for it: I was much
concerned for my Country, especially for the Place I was taken from, by Reason
that I met an Army going thither, as they told me: The 27th Day of November we
had News come to the Prison that they were come back to Shamballe, and had
taken upwards of a Hundred Captives, which increased my Concern, for I expected
our Fort, and others thereabouts, were destroyed, which put me upon earnest
Prayer to God, that he would give me Grace to submit to his Will; after which I
was easy in my Mind.

About a Fortnight after, a Dutchman was bro't to Prison, who was one of the
Captives the said Army had taken; he told me they had burnt Mr. Lydius's Fort,
and all the Houses at that new Township, and had killed Capt. Schyler and five
or six more, and had brought 50 Whites and about 60 Negroes to Montreal: I was
sorry to hear of so much Mischief done, but rejoiced they had not been upon our
River and the Towns thereabouts; for which I gave Thanks to God for his
greatGoodness in preserving them, and particularly my Family.

When Christmas came, the Governor sent us 24 Livres; the Lord Intendant came
into the Prison and gave us 24 Livres more, which was about two Guineas: He
told us he hoped we should be sent Home in a little Time; he was a pleasant
Gentleman, and very kind to the Captives: Some time after Mr. Shearly a
Gentleman of Quality came to us, and gave to the three Sea Captains 24 Livres,
and to me twelve, and the next Day sent me a Bottle of Claret Wine. About ten
Days after he sent me twelve Livres more; it was in all eight Pounds old Tenor.

January 20th 1745, 6. Eighteen Captives were brought from Mountreal to the
Prison at Quebec, which is 180 Miles.

February 22. Seven Captives more who were taken at Albany were brought to the
Prison to us, viz six Men and one old Woman 70 Years old, who had been so
infirm for seven Years past, she had not been able to walk the Streets, yet
performed this tedious Journey with Ease.

March 15. One of the Captives taken at Albany after 14 or 15 Days Sickness
died in the Hospital at Quebec, a Man of a sober pious Conversation, his Name
was Lawrence Plaffer, a German born.

May 3d 1746. ThreeCaptives taken atNumber Four, sixteen Miles above where I
was taken, viz. Capt. John Spafford, Isaac Parker, and Stephen Farusworth, were
brought to Prison to us; who informed me my Family was well a few Days before
they were taken, which rejoiced me much. I was sorry for the Misfortune of
these my Friends, but was glad of their Company, and of their being well used
by those who took them: Let God have the Praise.

May 14. Two Captives were bro't into Prison, viz. Jacob Read, and Edward
Cloutman, taken at a new Township called Gorham-Town near Casco-Bay. They
informed us that one Man, and four Children of one of them were killed, and his
Wife taken at the same Time with them, and was in the Hands of Indians

May 16. Two Lads, viz. James and Samuel Anderson, Brothers, taken at Sheepscot
were bro't to Prison.

May 17. Samuel Burbank and David Woodwell, who were taken at New-Hopkington
near Rumford, were bro't to Prison, and informed us (there were taken with them
two Sons of the said Burbank, and the Wife, two Sons and a Daughter of the said
Woodwell, whom they lest in the Hands of the Indians.

May 24. Thomas Jones of Holliston (...) was a Soldier at Contoocook, was bro't
to Prison, and told us, that one Elisha Cook, and a Negro belonging to the Rev.
Mr. Stevens, were killed, when he was taken.

June 1. William Aikings taken at Pleasant-Point near George's Fort was brought
also to Prison.

June 2. Mr. Shearly brought several Letters of Deacon Timothy Brown's of
Lower-Ashuelots, and Money, and delivered them to me; which made us think he
was killed or taken. A few Days after, Mr. Shearly told me he was taken: I was
glad to hear he was alive.

June 6. Timothy Cumings aged 60 was bro't to Prison, who informed us, he was
at Work with five other Men, about 40 Rods from the BlockHouse at George's,
when five Indians shot at them, but hurt none; the Men ran away and left him
and theirGuns to the Indians; he told us that the Ensign was killed as he stood
on the Top of the Fort, and that the English killed five Indians at the same
Time.

June 13. Mr. Shearly bro't to theCaptives some Letters which were sent from
Albany, and among them one from Lieut. Governor Phipps of the
Massachusetts Bay, to the Governor of Canada, for the Exchange of Prisoners,
which gave us great Hopes of a speedy Release.

June 22. Eight Men were brought to Prison, among whom was Deacon Brown and
Robert Morse, who inform me there was six or eightIndians killed a little
before they were taken at Upper-Ashuelots, and that they learnt by the Indians
who took them, there were six more of the English killed at other Places near
Connecticut-River; and several more much wounded; these last, were supposed to
be the Wife and Children of the aforesaid Burbank and Woodwell.

July 5. We sent aPetition to the chiefGovernor that we might be exchanged; and
the 7th Mr. Shearly told us we should be exchanged for other Captives in a
little Time; which caused great Joy among us: The same Day at Night John Beman
of Northfield was bro't to Prison, who told us, that anExpedition against
Canada was on Foot, which much rejoiced us: He also told us of the three Fights
atNumber Four; and who were killed and taken; and of Mischief done in several
other Places near Connecticut-River; and that my Brother Daniel How Is Son
Daniel was taken with him, and was in the Hands of Indians, who designed to
keep him.

July 20. John Jones a Seaman was brought into Prison, who told us he was going
from Cape-Breton to Newfoundland with one Englishman, and four Frenchmen who
hadsworn Allegiance to King George, and in the Passage killed the other
Englishman, but carried him to the Bay of Vert, where there was an Army of
French and Indians, to whom they delivered him; and by them was sent to Quebec.

July 21. John Richards and a Boy of nine or ten Years old, who belonged to
Rochester in New Hampshire, were brought to Prison, and told us, there were
four Englishmen killed when they were taken.

August 15. Seven Captives, who with eight more taken at St. John's Island,
were bro't to Prison, and told us, that several were killed after Quarters were
given, among whom was James Owen late of Brookfield in New England.

August 16. Thomas Jones late of Sherburne in New England, after 7 or 8 Days
Sickness died: He gave good Satisfaction as to his future State.

August 25. We had at Canada a Squal of Snow.

September 12. Robert Downing who had been a Soldier at Cape-Breton, and was
taken at St. John's, and who was with the Indians two Months, and suffered
great Abuse from them, was brought to Prison.

September 15. Twenty-three of the Captives taken at Hoosuck-Fort were bro't to
Prison, among whom was the Reverend Mr. John Norton: They inform us, that after
fighting 26 Hours with 800 French and Indians, they surrendered themselves on
Capitulation Prisoners of War: They also informed us, that Thomas Knowlton and
Josiah Read were killed when they were taken. The Names of those now brought in
Prisoners are as follows, viz. The Rev. Mr John Norton, John Hawks, John Smeed,
his Wife and six Children, John Perry and his Wife, Moses Scot his Wife and two
Children, Samuel Goodman, Jonathan Bridgman, Nathan Eames, Joseph Scot, Amos
Pratt, Benjamin Sinconds, Samuel Lovet, DavidWarren, and Phineas Furbush: The
two last of these inform me, that my Brother Daniel How Is Son was taken from
the Indians, and lives with a FrenchGentlemanat Montreal. There were
fourCaptives more taken at Albany the last Summer brought to Prison the same
Day.

September 26. Seventy-four Men and two Women taken at Sea were brought to
Prison.

October 1. Jacob Shepard of Westborough, taken at Hoosuck, was brought to
Prison.

October. 3. Ionath. Batherick was bro't to Prison.

October 5. Seventeen Men were brought to Prison, three of them taken with Mr.
Norton and others, viz. Nath. Hitchcock, John Aldrich, and StephenScot: Richard
Subes who was taken at New Casco, says, one Man was killed at the same Time:
Also Pike Gorden taken at Saco was bro't to Prison; he also says, he had a
Brother killed at the same Time.

October 12. 24 Seamen were brought to Prison.

October 19. Six Seamen were brought to Prison.

October 20. Jacob Read died.

October 23. Edward Cloutman and Robert Dunbar broke Prison, and went for
New England.

October 27. A Man was brought to Prison, and says the Indians took five more,
and brought ten Scalps to Mountreal.

Nov. 1. John Read died.

Nov. 9. John Davis taken with Mr. Norman, died.

Nov. 17. Nathan Eames of Marborough died.

Nov. 19. Mr. Adams taken at Sheepscot was bro't to Prison, and says that James
Anderson's Father was killed, and his Uncle taken at the same Time.

Nov. 20. Leonard Lydle and the Widow Sarah Briant were married in Canada by
the Reverend Mr. Norton.

Nov. 22. The abovesaid Anderson's Uncle was brought to Prison.

Nov. 24. John Bradshaw, who had not been well for most of the Time he had been
a Prisoner died.

It is a very melancholy Time with us; there are now thirty sick, and Deaths
among us daily.

Nov. 28. Jonathan Dunham died.

Nov. 29. Capt. Bailey of Almsbury died.

Dec. 1. An Albany Man died.

Dec. 6. Pike Gorden died, and we have Reason to think he made a happy Change.

Dec. 7. A Girl of ten Year's of Age died.

Dec. 11. Moses Scot's Wife died.

Dec. 15. One of Capt. Roberson's Lieuts. died.

Dec. 18. DanielWoodwell's Wife died; she was esteemed a pious Woman, and we
believe made a happy Change.

Dec. 23. John Perry's Wife died.

Dec. 26. Wm. Daily of New York died hopefully.

Ian. 3. 1746, 7. Jonathan Harthan died.

Ian. 4. The Rev. Mr. Norton was so far recovered from Sickness, that he
preached two Discourses from Psalm. 60.11. Give us help fromTrouble, for vain is
the help of Man.

Ian. 12. Twenty Captives were carried to another Prison, hoping thereby to
cleanse the other of the Infection; the same Night one of them died, viz.
Phineas Andrews of Cape-Ann.

Ian. 15. Jacob Baily Brother to Capt. Bailey aforesaid, died.

Ian. 17. Giat Braban, Capt. Chapman's Carpenter, died.

Ian. 23. Samuel Lovet Son of Major Lovet of Mendon in New England died.

February 10. William Garwafs died, as did also Moses Scot's youngest Child.

Feb. 15. My Nephew Daniel How and six more were brought down from Montreal to
Quebec, viz. John Sunderland, John Smith, Richard Smith, Wm. Scot, Philip
Scaffield, and Benjamin Tainter, Son to Lieut. Tainter of Westborough in
New England.

Febr. 23. Richard Bennet, died.

Feb. 25. Michal Dogan died.

March 18. James Magra died.

March 22. Capt. John Fort and Samuel Goodman died.

March 28. 1747. The Wife of John Smeed died, who left six Children, the
youngest of which was born the second Night after the Mother was taken.

April 7. Philip Scaffield died.

April 8. John Saneld died.

April 9. Capt. James Jordan and one of his Men died.

April 12. Amos Pratt of Shrewsbury died.

April 14. Timothy Cummings died.

April 17. John Dill of Hull in New England died.

April 18. Samuel Vaughn of Plymouth died.

April 26. Capt. IonathanWilliamson was brought to Prison; he was taken at a
new Town on Sheepscot-River.

The same Day three Men were bro't to Prison, who were taken at Albany three
Weeks before, and tell us, that thirteen were killed, Capt. Trent one of them,
they were all Soldiers for the Expedition to Canada.

April 27. Joseph Denning died.

April 28. Samuel Evans died.

The same Night the Prison took Fire, and was burnt, but the Things therein
mostly saved* We were kept that Night under a Guard.

May 7. Sarah Lydle whose Name was Briant when she was taken, and married while
a Captive, died.

May 13. Mr. Smeed's Son Daniel died.

May 14. Christian Teder died. The same Day died Mr. Hezekiah Huntington, a
hopeful Youth of a liberal Education, Son to Col. Huntington of Connecticut, in
New England.

May 15. Joseph Gray died.

May 19. Samuel Burbanks died.

At the same Time died two Children who were put out to the French to Nurse.

At this Time I received a Letter from Major Willard, dated March 17. 1747,
wherein he informs, my Family was well; which was joyfulNews to me.

May 19. Abraham Fort died.

By another Hand.
MAY 25. 1747. This Day died Mr. Nehemiah How, in the Hospital at Quebec in
Canada, in the 55th Year of his Age; who had been aCaptive there one Year,
seven Months, and fifteen Days: He enjoyed his Health 'till about the middle of
this Month: He was a loving Husband, and a tender Father; greatly beloved by
hisBrethren and Sisters, and indeed by every One who was acquainted with him:
Mr. How was a Person who had behaved himself as a Christian from his Youth. His
Death is a great Loss to his Friends; but I believe aGain to himself; and that
he is gone from a Captivity of Sorrow on Earth, to join in Songs of everlasting
Joy among the Ransomed of the LORD in the heavenly Zion.


