NECESSARY TRUTH: OR SEASONABLE CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE INHABITANTS of the CITY
OF PHILADELPHIA, AND PROVINCE of PENNSYLVANIA. In Relation to the PAMPHLET
called PLAIN TRUTH: And Two other WRITERS in the NEWS-PAPER.

He that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly. He that despises the
Gain of Oppressions: That shakes his Hands from holding of Bribes: That
stops his Ears from hearing of Blood, and shuts his Eyes from seeing
Evil. He shall dwell on High. His Place of Defense shall be the munitions of
Rocks,

Isaiah xxxiii. 15, 16. PHILADELPHIA: Printed in the Year MDCCXLVIII.

Necessary Truth, etc.
HAD the Writings I am about to consider, a sufficient Stock of genuine Truth
to support the Comparisons they contain: Were these Comparisons altogether Just
and Equal, Or did I conceive the Means proposed likely to effectually answer
the Purposes intended, Nothing here would have interfered at this Time. I
apprehended them to be materially deficient in these Respects, and therefore
would modestly put in a Claim to be heard with impartiality.

THE Author of the Pamphlet called PLAIN TRUTH, after laying open the
Probability of an Attack from the Enemy, gives us what he calls an early
Example from the Book of Judges, of the Children of Dan sending Spies to see
into the Situation of the People of Laish, and to search the Land, etc. Judges
xviii. 2. He lays down this Case, and observes upon it as a similar Instance to
the present Situation of Philadelphia and Pennsylvania. -- With how much
Justice and Propriety let us examine.

THE Children of Dan (it must be remembered) were at this Time departed from
the true Faith, had forsaken the God of their Fathers, and were gone into
Idolatry; from hence may be easily accounted their covetous Disposition of
invading their Neighbors.

THE People of Laish, we are told in the same Chapter, verse 7. dwelt careless,
after the Manner of the Zidonians, quiet and secure, and there was no
Magistrate in the Land that might put them to Shame in any Thing. This appears
to be the real State of the Case, they had thrown off all Restraint and were
arrived to that Degree of Extravagance as to be quite shameless, and therefore
no Wonder they were liable every Moment to be destroyed and to be smote with
the Edge of the Sword, and the City to be burnt with Fire, for there was no
Deliverer because it was far from Zidon. This I presume, cannot allude to the
beforementioned Zidon, because, according to the Comparison there introduced,
They, like themselves, dwelt careless. Nor can it be reasonably supposed to be
any other Zidon then upon Earth, because an evident Absurdity would follow, in
supposing that any such could afford a Deliverer; we are therefore under a
Necessity to extend the Application, and to suppose the Deliverer here alluded
to, to be that from Mount Sion, a Deliverer infinite in Power, and the only
Deliverer that could then, or can now do the Business effectually. But this
Deliverer it seems, was out of the Question. They possibly thought it timorous
and womanish to expect it, and therefore neglected the suitable Means to obtain
it, and the Consequence was Desolation and Ruin.

I would now ask, is it probable to suppose, that the People of Laish, at that
time of the Day possessed of a Country, where there was no Want of any Thing in
the Earth, ver. 19. and at a Time when the Nations around them were almost
continually at War, and they themselves likewise frequently engaged in it, for
any thing we know, when it was the Custom of the Times, an Eye for an Eye, and
a Tooth for a Tooth, and Men thought themselves at Liberty to do as they
pleased, for in those Days there was no King in Israel, but every Man did that
which was right in his own Eyes, Judges xvii. 6. Under these Considerations, is
it probable that the People of Laish were unacquainted with military Skill, or
destitute of any warlike Accoutrements then in Use? I think not: And therefore
must suppose that the Expressions, 'A 'People careless, quiet and secure, has a
Referrence to a People who thought themselves secure, by Means of some acquired
imaginary Strength of their own, such as Preparations of Defense, and the like,
and so being vain in their Imaginations became quiet and careless. As the
People of Laish appears to have been thus unhappily circumstanced, their
Ignorance and Unthoughtfulness, of which this is a recent Instance, may, I
should think, be usefully thought on by the present Generation, by the
Pennsylvanians especially, who it seems, according to our Author, page 7. are
if possible, more careless than they. I am sorry this should be the Case in any
Country, especially in a free Country. A Country enjoying all the boasted
Privileges of Reason and Nature, and the Thing is in itself so unaccountable,
that I must freely confess, I should have questioned my Author's Veracity here,
if the Ingenuity of his Performance did not depend on the contrary.

That corresponding Passage in his Title Page, which so feelingly prepares the
Reader for future Impressions, evidently illustrates, that his Sentiments upon
this Score are fixed and invariable, else why he applys a Passage to the People
of Pennsylvania, spoken to a Generation whom the Author he cites every where
Pictures in such dismal Colors, I am at a Loss to determine.

The Romans (says Salust) were arrived to that Pitch of Corruption that they
gloried in Extravagancy and Rapine, and made Sarcasms upon Virtue. Modesty and
a disinterested Mind passed with them, only for Sloth and Cowardice, those that
were in Power, neglecting Virtue and conspiring against Innocence, preferred
only their own Creatures. Innocents circumveniunt suos ad Honores tollunt.

I am sorry this, or any thing like this, should be the Case with any body, but
as the Thing seems to remain a settled Point with our Author (who must be
allowed to have all the Opportunities necessary to be sufficiently informed)
unwilling Necssity obliges us here (under some secret Restrictions) to give Way
to his better Judgment. And this being premised, we shall now take leave to
observe, that as the Consequence of these Things is a Matter of the last
Importance, CONSIDERATION becomes highly and immediately necessary, -- Is it so
then Plain Truth? Is there no Magistrate in the Land that might put them to
Shame in any Thing? Yes, we are, if possible, more careless. And what is the
Remedy? An Association thoroughly armed and disciplined, to defend Liberty and
Property; and then, we might with more Propriety, humbly ask the Assistance of
Heaven. Alas! Gentlemen, the Penetration of Heaven is unspeakable. It requires
not the most scrupulous Propriety in this Respect. Those I acknowledge who are
overmuch sollicitous to square the Articles of their Creed by the Touchstone
of Aristotle, may frame their Addresses to Heaven according to their own Rules
of Method and Propriety: But the honored Prophet has long since declared, that
the Lord sees not as Man sees, for Man looks on the outward Appearance, but
the Lord looks at the Heart. 1 Samuel xvi 7.
The Prayers of the Heart must therefore be those that are acceptable to him.
Prayers, that arise from a Sense of the Necessity of the Thing prayed for, and
which are the Result of a broken Heart and a contrite Spirit. These, he has
often graciously declared his Approbation of, without any where prescribing
preparatory Steps to be observed on the Part of his Creation (especially since
the ushering in of the Gospel-Day) with respect to the accomplishing or
chalking out any of their own Deliverances. Infinite Wisdom and Power, who has
reserved to himself the Disposition of human Events, very well knew the
Falibility and Weakness of human Expedients. And he who has said I am that I
am, can require no external Aid to bring about the Purposes of his Providence;
and notwithstanding he may sometimes be pleased to bless defencible Measures
with Success, it does not follow from thence that they are either lawful or
necessary; if it did, the same Argument would equally justify every Species of
War; even the most savage and cruel Depredations, seeing such are found
frequently to succeed according to very barbarous Contrivances. GOD annul'd
Circumcision among the Jews, but nevertheless permitted them to continue in the
Use of it afterward for a Time. So for his own wise Reasons, such Things are
doubtless permitted now, though directly contrary to the Temper and Spirit of the
Gospel of Peace.

Nothing I have hitherto said, I think, can reasonably subject me to any
uncharitable Imputations, with respect to those who are in Principle for the
Use of defencible Measures, for though I think all military Preparations
absolutely unlawful to some Christians, those who can neither wilfully swallow
the Commands of CHRIST, nor make the amiable Nature and Tendency of the
Gospel Dispensation to subside to any supposed worldly Inconveniences, yet I
would not be thought Censorious of those who have, upon mature Consideration,
deliberately formed their Judgment contrary-wise.

And with respect to the ASSOCIATION, I have before had Occasion to mention,
thus much I hold myself warranted to say concerning it, That the best Way to
render it prosperous and successful is, for every particular Member to
endeavor, as much as in them lies, to improve their respective religious and
moral Characters: Rectitude of Life, and Contrition of Soul in each Individual,
is the most likely Means to procure the Salvation of the whole.

Arms and Ammunition and a feasible Posture of Defense, have a natural Tendency
to buoy up the Mind with a presumptuous Dependency upon them, and, as in the
before cited Instance of Laish, to make the People careless and secure:
Therefore guard against these Things, He (says the Proverb) that will be his
own Councellor shall have a Fool for his Client. As you would avoid being
Fools, as your Reputation and every Thing near and dear to you is at Stake, let
your Councellor be in Dignity suitable to the importance of the Office he is to
perform, ever remembering, that except GOD be retained in your Knowledge, you
stand but too fair a Chance to be left to yourselves, and then one may venture
to tell the Consequence without pretending to a Spirit of Prophecy, the Drums
in your Companies will ultimately prove your best resemblance, they make a
great Noise, but look into them and behold what is there!

I have a fair Opportunity here to put in a few Words to another Set of Men
whom I have several Times remarked, using their Endeavors to find out some
colorable Pretext for their disunion with their Brethren the Quakers, in
Point of War and Preparations of Defense. One of these in the Pennsylvania
Gazette, No 986 gives a large Quotation from R. Barclay's Apology. page 568,
569. and thence deduces a Consequence which is in itself ludicrous and unfair,
and which, though we were to grant every Part of it, proves nothing; the chief
Point he aims at, seems to turn upon this Question: Whether Christians may be
so far attached to the World as to be vindictive of their Rights, Possessions
and Dues. I suppose it will not be denied but the Quakers are born under the
same natural Inconveniences with other People, and have as many natural Wants
to satisfy, and if so, it clearly follows, they have at least an equal
Necessity of looking after and vindicating their Rights, Possessions, and Dues.
How far they do this, consistent with Christian Perfection, is the next Point
to be considered: And here we must appeal to the general Practice of the
Society ever since its first Establishment, for it is by no Means fair to form
a Conclusion of any People by the particular Behavior or Practices of a few of
their Members: That there may be some such among the Quakers, who are too
vindictive of their Rights, Possessions and Dues, may, for aught I know, be
true; but that the Society are therewith chargeable, remains a Point to be
proved; the Contrary I think is abundantly manifest, their Care of their own
Poor, and their full Proportion of those of the Public, besides their Charity
to different Societies, and their Universal Benevolence to Mankind, are
standing Instances of this.

Another Writer of the same Stamp, who appears in the same Paper No 988
introduces his Performance by telling his Readers, That an Insight into the
Conduct of Mr. William Edmondson, during the late Troubles in Ireland, may
further explain the real Sentiments of the Quakers, on the Head of Defensive
War: As if the Sentiments of the Quakers were to be explained by the particular
Conduct of one of their Members. I have before taken Notice of the Injustice of
this Method of Proceeding, and shall now add, that supposing any Thing W. E.
either practiced himself, or has related in his Journal, were inconsistent with
the Principles and Practices of the main Body of the Quakers, Does that justify
or even tolerate Dissentions of the same kind? Now several Reasons may be given
on Behalf of them Times that are now of no Force.

The People called Quakers in those Days, had not very long been convinced of
the Truths they now entertain; their Numbers were but small to what they soon
afterward became, and their Discipline was likewise in its Infancy, and yet I
see no Jarring, no Inconsistency for all that, even in the Case of W. Edmondson
now before us, he appears to have acted upon the same Principle as the present
Quakers do in the Magistracy, and the same Arguments will avail for the
Practice of both: The People he acted against were Raparees, they were Thieves,
a vile licentious Crew, inconsistent with the Peace of civil Society, and a
Scandal to human Nature: And if the Magistrate be the Minister of GOD, if he
bears not the Sword in vain, it must, if ever, be certainly necessary to use it
upon such Extremities as these: but what Relation does this bear to defense
from a foreign Invasion? Very little indeed. The Difference between them is
manifestly this; The one, to wit, Government, is ordained of GOD, and
Magistrates are said to be his Ministers: But the other, to wit, War, is more
or less the Offspring of Lust. The Magistrate, in the Execution of his Office
is to be in all Respects upright, to know no Revenge or Lust of any Kind, a
thing exceedingly difficult, if not altogether impracticable in the Execution
of military Exploits. The one of these GOD has seen meet to ordain for the
Benefit of Mankind; but the other forbidden, to prevent their Destruction.

WAR and its ruinous Effects, is allowed by every body to be one of the most
calamitous Evils that can befall any People, a general Reformation from it is
every where acknowledged a most desirable Thing, and notwithstanding the Work,
if ever done, must have a Beginning, and the only Way to make it general, is,
to complete it in the Particular. Yet the People called Quakers are stigmatized
and reproached for beginning a Work so generally acknowledged glorious in
itself, and beneficient in its Tendency. To object the Inconvenience the
Particulars principled against Wars and Fighting are obnoxious to from the
Encroachment (...) an Enemy, is to doubt GOD's overruling Providence: One
would think the innate Goodness, and excellent Tendency of the Work, exclusive
of the Command to perform it, is sufficient to inspire all that are rightly
concerned, with an humble Confidence in GOD's Protection, and more especially
when to these salutary Views are added, a conscientious observance of the
divine Command.

I had like to forgot to have taken some further Notice of this last-mentioned
Writer in the News-Paper, who (as I have shown) begins his officious
Performance with an unfair Supposition, but which is not much to be wondered
at, for, from the pertinent Animadversions he afterward makes, we may easily
take the Dimensions of his Upper-Works, and from thence shall be enabled to
form a suitable Idea of the real Cause of such a mouthful of Moonshine; the
pert, important Air he assumes, puts me in Mind of a Saying I have somewhere
met with, That In the Kingdom of the Blind, he that has but one Eye is a
Prince. If my Author can find any Thing couched under this old Theorem worth
his Acceptance, it is at his Service, and before I part with him, I would just
put him in Mind, that one of the Six Things, which the wise Author of the
Proverbs says the Lord hates, is Him that sows Discord among Brethren, chapter
vi. ver. 19.

I shall now take my leave of my Reader, recommending to his Consideration, the
following elegant and significant Passages from the sacred Records.

If thou criest after Knowledge and liftest up thy Voice for Understanding. If
thou seek her as Silver, and searchest for her as for hid Treasures, then
shall thou understand the Fear of the Lord; and find the Knowledge of GOD, for
the Lord gives Wisdom. Out of his Mouth comes Knowledge and Understanding --
He lays up found Wisdom for the Righteous. He is a Buckler to them that walk
uprightly. -- The Lord will take Vengence on his Adversaries, and he reserveth
Wrath for his Enemies. -- The Mountains quake at Him, and the Hills melt, and
the Earth is burnt at his Presence, yea, the World and all that dwell therein.
-- The Lord is good, a strong Hold in the Day of Trouble, and he knows them
that trust in him.

Prove. ii. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Nahum i. 2, 5, 7.
FINIS.

