AN EXHORTATION TO THE INHABITANTS Of the PROVINCE of SOUTH CAROLINA, To bring
their DEEDS to the Light of CHRIST, in their own Consciences.

By S. H.

In which is inserted, Some ACCOUNT of the AUTHOR's EXPERIENCE in the IMPORTANT
BUSINESS of RELIGION.

God who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has joined in our Hearts,
to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face (or
Appearance) of JESUS CHRIST,

2 Cor. iv. 6. We also believe, and therefore speak,

2 Cor. iv. 13. That which we have heard, which we have seen with our (...) --
and our Hands have handled of the Word of Life, declare (...) unto you,

1 John i. 1.3. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by WILLIAM BRADFORD.

An EXHORTATION to the INHABITANTS of South Carolina, etc.
My Friends and Neighbors,
AFTER an Absence of near six Years from this Province (my native Country) and
my Arrival among you, I have beheld the Faces of many of the Inhabitants whom I
have known, and been known to, some Years: But the Novelty of my religious
Sentiments, and Meanness of my Appearance, has, I find, rendered me despicable
in your Eyes; which has been obvious, when a few of us, called Quakers, have
met to worship the Supreme Being in a Manner agreeable to the best of our
Understanding and Knowledge: And though some perhaps may style our Principles Any
Person who desire to be informed of the Principles of the Quakers, is referred
to Robert Barclay's Apology, since I find we are oftentimes condemned unheard.
But he that answers a Matter before he hears it, it is Folly and Shame unto
him, Prove. xviii. 13. The Apology may be had at Mary Blamyer's, in Charlestown.
and Tenets by the hard Name of Heresy, and our Mode or Manner of Worship,
rediculous or absurd; nevertheless, we are humbly of Opinion, they are neither
unscriptural nor unchristian, having, as we think, the Sanction and Authority
of our Lord himself, the Example of primitive Believers, and right Reason, on
our Side.

But notwithstanding, as I have noted, that I have suffered your Ridicule and
Reproach, as I am conscious it is for no other than Obedience to the Will of my
Heavenly Master, whose I am, and whom I serve, I am willing to become more vile
in your Eyes; which, it is more than probable, I shall appear, when I expose
the following Lines to your Observation and Censure. I would not have you
imagine that any Consideration, less than his Favor, could have prevailed with
me to have appeared thus publicly in Print, or otherwise; for could I, with
any ease to my own Mind, have evaded this, or been excused from returning to
this Place (as I apprehended it required of me by the Almighty) you had never
beheld my Face in the Province, much less any Performance of this Sort in
public. I am not insensible, that the Reason I have offered for writing, as
well as the Subject itself, may probably be considered as the Production of a
distempered and enthusiastic Brain; as it is possible, on such a novel and
uncommon Occasion, as a Woman's appearing on the Behalf of God and Religion,
you may (as others have done in the like Circumstances) be induced to consider
such an One under some unaccountable Delusion, or affected with religious
Madness; and more especially, as the Things recommended to your Consideration,
are offered by a simple Female of your own Country: Some, in this Case, I
expect, will afford me a Smile of Contempt, while others (acted by a more
generous Passion) pity my Folly and kindly wish me a Return of my Senses: But
however this may be, I have considered, that from the earliest Ages of
Christianity, and indeed in all preceding Time, those who refused to conform
to the Usage and wicked Customs of the Age, and lived a self-denying Life,
Their Lives were counted Madness by the World, and their End to be without
Honor: Not considering that Religious Minds despise and contemn all worldly
Honor, and earthly preferment, seeking that only which comes from God, and
which he is pleased to distinguish those by, who honor him (by walking in
Conformity to his Laws and Precepts) as he himself declares, Those who honor
me, I will honor; but those who despise me, shall be lightly esteemed.

But before I proceed to what the Title Page mentions, I shall premise one
Proposition, on which all I have to offer will greatly depend, viz. That all
Mankind have a Measure and Manifestation of the Light, Spirit, or Grace of God,
given them to profit withal. This Doctrine of the universal Extent of the Grace
of God, the People called Quakers, hold in a peculiar Manner, and are
distinguished by, from some other dissenting Sects, who generally limit God's
Gifts of his Holy Spirit, or saving Means, to what they call The Elect; and
assert, that the rest of Mankind are (as they term it) passed by, or denied the
Means of Salvation, being To refute the Doctrine of Predestination, read Doctor
Whitby on the New Testament; and his Discourses on the Five Controverted
Points; which may be had of John Whitter, on James's Island.
predestined from all Eternity to Destruction.

However, we say that this Gift of the Holy Spirit, or Grace of God, is
bestowed on all Mankind without Exception, agreeable to the Assertion of the
Apostle Paul; The Grace of God, which brings Salvation, has appeared to all
Men, teaching us, that denying Ungodliness, and the World's Lusts, we should
live righteously, soberly and godly, in this present World. But though all Men
have received this Talent of Grace, or Manifestation of the Spirit of Christ,
all are not saved, as Men may rebel against, or quench the Spirit; and, by
frustrating its Motions, render it ineffectual. Under the Law it is said, The
Almighty gave of his good Spirit to the Jews to instruct them, but they
rebelled against it, Nehemiah ix. 20. And the Prophet Isaiah also tells us,
They rebelled, and vexed God's Holy Spirit. And, under the Gospel, the Apostle
Paul cautions the Thessalonians against quenching the Spirit, or extinguishing
the Light, and hindering the consuming Force, that would destroy Sin and
Iniquity in the Heart.

Thus, according to the Testimony I have offered, and many I might produce, all
Men have received a Proportion of Light and Grace, but all have not obeyed its
Leadings; all have heard, but all have not obeyed: However, this internal
Monitor or Director, is ready on all Occasions (if we will apply to it for
Knowledge and Help) to instruct us in our Duty, and assist us in overcoming the
Temptations of the great Adversary of our Soul's Happiness; but we must
diligently attend to its Voice, and not only hear, but obey its Instructions,
that our Souls may live.

But some have said to me, We grant that Christians ought to walk agreeable to
the Dictates of the Spirit of Christ; but the Quakers make the Guidance and
Direction of the Spirit necessary in trivial and indifferent Matters; nay,
sometimes they offer its Dictates as a Reason for many Things accounted by us
irrational and absurd. -- I answer; With Reference to our Duty and Obedience to
the Almighty, I consider no Action indifferent; every Thing of this Nature must
tend to some Purpose, good or evil: And it is upon this Consideration that we
extend the Doctrine of the Cross, Self-denial and perfect Obedience to the
Precepts of Christ, farther then the Generality of those who profess the
Christian Name: And I take this Occasion to say, my principal Errand among you
is to recommend, as far as I am enabled, these Christian Doctrines; since our
Lord himself positively declares, That unless we take up a daily Cross, (to our
Corrupt Wills and Affections) we cannot be his Disciples: And farther, to
advise you to a strict Adherence to the Light or Grace of God in your own
Consciences or Understandings, as unto a more sure Word of Prophecy, or perfect
Director; whereunto you will do well to take Heed, as unto a light shining in a
dark Place: For the Nations of them that are saved, must walk in this Light of
the Lord.

But it may be objected, "That many of the People called Quakers, have
anciently bore Testimony to those Doctrines, and continue so to do; then what
need of my feeble Testimony or Evidence?" It Is true that numerous Pens have
been employed, and many earnest Endeavors, and fervent Desires of this People,
to recommend and propagate (as far as they are enabled by divine Assistance)
those Christian Doctrines, which they have proved by their own happy Experience
to be so beneficial and advantageous to themselves; and being through Grace made
partakers of that Charity or Love, which is the Bond of Perfection, and the
Characteristick of a genuine and real Christian; these, I say, by this
Gospel-love, are excited to wish well to all Mankind, and, as much as in them
lies, they endeavor to serve one another in it, as the Apostle exhorts, Gal.
v. 13. And their frequent Supplications ascend to the most High, on behalf of
Mankind in general, that all People may come to the Knowledge of the Truth, as
it is in JESUS, and be saved. And when our Hearts are thus enlarged, both to
God, and one toward another, then are our Mouths opened to declare of his
wonderful Works to the Children of Men, and show forth his mighty Acts, which
he is able and ready to perform, by the powerful Operation of his Holy Spirit
in our Hearts, in subduing every evil and inordinate Desire and Affection, and
bringing them under his Government, and into Subjection to his divine Will; and
by speaking well of his great Name, to invite and encourage others to come
taste and see that the Lord is good, and to partake of his Offer of great
Salvation, no less than the Redemption of the Soul (by Jesus Christ) from the
Bondage of Sin and Satan. And indeed the Peace that flows from, and the
Promises annexed, to a perfect Obedience to the righteous Laws of God, are
sufficient Inducements to excite us to a godly, righteous, and Self-denying
Life; for as the royal Psalmist greatly experienced formerly, so we at this Day
experience, and subscribe to this Truth, That in keeping the Commandments of
God there is great Reward; and that great Peace have they who love his Law, and
nothing shall offend them: For He speaks Peace to his People, and to his
Saints; but let them not turn again to Folly, Psalm lxxxv. 8. And the Lord will
ordain Peace for the Righteous, for the Effect of Righteousness is Peace and
Assurance for ever, Isaiah xxxii. 17. Agreeable to this our Lord tells his
Disciples, My Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you; not as the
World gives, but a Peace which passes the Understanding of the carnal Man,
And the Apostle Paul, to encourage and excite the Romans to the Obedience of
the Faith delivered, and a patient Continuance in Well-doing, tells them, Their
Reward should be, Glory, Honor, and Peace, to every Man that works Good, to
the Jew first, and also to the Gentile; Romans ii. 10. But, on the contrary, that
those who are contentious, and do not obey the Truth, but obey Unrighteousness,
Their Portion will be Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, upon
every Soul of Man that does Evil as there is no Peace to the Wicked; for what
have they to do with Peace, so long as they continue in Disobedience? Indeed
the Wicked may, as they often do, cry Peace to themselves, when there is no
Peace, or at least not a solid One; as a real and substantial Peace and
Happiness, can only result from an Acquaintance with God, and the Testimony of
a good Conscience: But a false and polluted Rest and Peace, which many are
erecting to themselves, will destroy them with a sore Destruction, without
timely Repentance and Amendment of Life; for instead of this Peace, they shall
have great Bitterness, Isaiah xxxviii. 17.

Many and singular are the Advantages and Privileges which I might enumerate,
that attend a Life of Piety and Holiness, no less than an Hundredfold of Peace
in our Bosoms in this Life, and the great and precious Promise of Life Eternal
in the World to come. And as I have, by the Grace of God, and through Obedience
of Faith, witnessed in Degree this Peace from God, (which is beyond the
Conception or those who have never enjoyed it) I became greatly concerned for
Mankind in general, and in a particular Manner for the Inhabitants of my native
Country, that they might witness this Peace; and I often petitioned the
Almighty, that he would in his wonted Mercy discover to you the Things that
belong to your Soul's Peace, before they might, by Unbelief, be hid from your
Eyes. Having had this Concern for some Time on your Account, the Almighty was
pleased to lay a Constraint upon me to declare it among you. This, and what
follows, I am sensible will sound as idle and ridiculous Tales in the Ears of
many; however, I shall go on to tell you, that I consider myself as a very
seeble Instrument in the Cause of God, and one of the least Servants in my
Master's House. I have also considered, how backward the Generality of People
are to receive Advice, even when it has been offered by religious, pious and
learned Men; and that the Labors of such have had but little Effect on the
Minds and Conduct of many called Christians; and reflecting on the greatness of
my Inability, as well as the Improbability of my being serviceable in God's
Cause, I have been induced to say, Lord! who will believe my Report, since so
many have labored (as I have thought) in vain? Shall I, a poor Female,
undertake for God? Can I presume to come up to his Help against the great
Adversary of Souls? No surely; rather, I beeseech thee, appear in the Glory of
thy Majesty, and by the immediate Act of thy mighty Power, in the Hearts of the
People, subdue and lay waste the strong Holds of Sin and Satan! And in the Room
thereof establish, I beseech thee, the Kingdom and Dominion of thy dear Son,
our Lord, whose Right alone it is to reign in the Hearts of the People, who is
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords! And farther, though I am but Dust and Ashes, I
thus presumed to excuse myself; Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore,
nor since thou have been pleased to discover thy Will to me. But to an Almighty
Power, who does according to his righteous Will, both in the Armies of Heaven,
and among the Inhabitants of the Earth, who shall say, What do thou? And
since he is pleased to send by the Hand of whom he will send, I no longer
resisted his Will, but became obedient to his Word and Power, against which I
had long reasoned, and objected my Unfitness; though the Apostle Paul informs us,
That as many as have been baptized into CHRIST (or with his Baptism of Fire and
the Holy Ghost, and have witnessed the chaffy Nature in them consumed, and by
this Means) have put on CHRIST (that then there is no Distinction or Difference
among Christians in a religious Sense) there is neither Jew nor Gentile, there
is neither Bond nor Free, there is neither Male nor Female: For, says the
Apostle, ye are all one in CHRIST JESUS. Thus he seems to allow our Sex the
same Gospel Privileges with the rest of Mankind. And the royal Prophet calls
on the female, as well as the male Part of God's rational Creation, to
celebrate the Praise of our common Governor and Benefactor. "Why then, says
one, should Woman be denied her Canticle of Praise in the general Chorus, since
out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings God will still ordain and perfect
Praise?" And we may further observe, when the Tabernacle of the Lord was
erected in the Wilderness, the Women, we are told, who were willing hearted,
brought their Free Will Offerings, and presented them toward the Building, or
at least embellishing of this moveable Temple, which, it is said, was a Type of
the true Church militant, and the Tabernacle which God has pitched, and not
Man. And if Females were allowed to assist and contribute to the Work of the
Lord, under the Law, why should any, or the least Essay toward the repairing
the Breaches in God's Building, be rejected under the Gospel; since we do not
offer or propose any new Doctrine, nor endeavor to lay any other Foundation
than that which is already laid, viz, "The Revelation of the Spirit of JESUS
CHRIST the Righteous, in the Soul of Man, on which the Church of CHRIST is
founded and built: Nor for the moral Disorders so visible among the Professors
of Christianity, do we prescribe new or untried Remedies; but having
experienced the Virtue and Efficacy of the old, we, in great Love and
Good Will, endeavor to persuade you to apply them: For the same Fountain of
Purgation is now open to Sinners, that was in Ages past set open for the House
of David, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for Sin and for Uncleanness; for the
Almighty is not only the God of the Jews, but of the Gentiles also.

But to proceed; I have told you that this Voyage to my native Place, was
undertaken in Pursuance of what I verily believed was the Will of God
concerning me, and required of me by him (I make no Doubt) as one amongst the
many Trials I have been exercised with, of my Faith, Love and Obedience;
wherein I believe it my Duty openly and freely to confess CHRIST before Men,
whose operating Power on my Heart I had fearfully and cowardly endeavored to
conceal before I left this Province; and I take this Occasion to declare to
you, that I am not ashamed of the Gospel of CHRIST, which I have in Measure
experienced to be the Power of God to Salvation to all them who believe, and
continue to obey it: And the more numerous the Testimonies, and greater the
Cloud of Witnesses, to the Efficacy of the Grace and Power of God, the more
will the Truths and Evidences proposed and produded, be strengthened and
corroborated. But some may possibly ask, 'How I certainly know that I am not
mistaken, and that instead of being led by the Spirit of Truth, I am not
deceived by the Spirit of Error?" To such I answer; I have one Rule to square
my Actions by, which never yet failed me, when I applied it; and that is, By
Application to the Divine Being, that He would be pleased to preserve me from
Error and Delusion, I examine, by his Divine Light and Assistance, the Motive,
Design, Tendency and End of my Actions; and if I find nothing repugnant to, or
inconsistent with the Honor of God, and Scripture Precepts or Testimony, I
make a rational Conclusion, that I am safe at least. And though I do not observe
from Scripture, that it is my particular Duty to exhort you to yours; nor do I
gather from thence, that I ought to declare, in this public Manner, of the
Goodness, Mercy and Loving Kindness, of the Almighty, to all who seek his Face
and Favor in Truth, Sincerity and Uprightness; yet I find it there, my Duty to
obey all God's Commands; and that the Almighty may, and does, lay particular
Injuctions, and special Commands, upon his Servants, by the Divine Direction of
his Holy Spirit, at this Day, as well as in former Ages, I firmly believe: And
that the Blessing our Lord promised to confer on his immediate Followers,
extends as well to all his succeeding Disciples, viz. "That he would pray the
Father, and he will (says he) send you another Comforter, that may abide with
you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, who will guide and lead you into all
Truth, and show you Things to come; for he that dwells with you, shall be in
you; and this Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, shall teach you all Things
and bring all Things to your Remembrance." And the Apostle Peter, at that
memorable Time, when he was preaching to People of various Languages, tells his
Audience, first quoting a Passage from the Prophet Joel, Acts ii. 38. It shall
come to pass in the last (or Gospel) Days, that I will pour out of my Spirit
upon all Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy, etc. And he
subjoins, Repent, and be baptized, every one of you, in the Name of JESUS
CHRIST, for the Remission of Sins, and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy
Ghost: For the Promise is to you, and to your Children, and to all that are
afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. And to you, O Men, he
calls, his Voice is to the Sons of Men, Prove. viii. 4. And we may further
observe, That the Spirit of CHRIST was not limited to his immediate Disciples,
to whom it was to be sent as a Comforter and Director; but he tells them, it
should appear to the World of Unbelievers in another Administration or Office,
viz. That of a Reprover for Sin. For when CHRIST ascended up on high, he gave
Gifts to Men, yea, even to the Rebellious, Ephesians. iv. 8. And the Gifts of the
Holy Ghost, Poole, in his Annotations, tells us, "Was not, as some imagine,
confined to the Apostle's Days, but that Christians, in succeeding Ages,
received as large Proportions of the Divine Influences and Gifts of the Holy
Spirit as formerly." And that Females did receive these Gifts, as well as the
Men, and on proper Occasions did exercise them, John Lock, in his Paraphrase
on Paul's Epistles, assures us, by Proof. He tells us, "That God, for Order
sake, had instituted in the World a proper Subordination of the weaker Sex to
the stronger; yet (says he) this hindered not but that he might make use of the
weaker Sex to any Function, whenever he thought fit, as well as he did the
Men." He says much more to the same Purpose; but I leave him to those who may
have an Opportunity and Inclination to read him further on this Subject Lock,
on a Corinthians 1^
; and return to illustrate, as well as I am able, the Rule of my Conduct in
religious Matters. I am sensible that it is my Duty, first and principally, and
above all other Considerations, to love, adore, honor and obey, the Supreme
Being; and next, I find it my Duty to love my Neighbor as myself; and to
observe to act in the same just and upright Manner in every Circumstance, that
I desire he should act in toward myself: Therefore, if, upon a Scrutiny, or
Examination, I find my Design or Action directly or indirectly tending to the
Dishonor of God, or in any Shape injurious to my Neighbor, I am immediately
instructed, by the inward Monitor, or Light of CHRIST in my Conscience, to
decline it; and if I forbear the Action, etc. I believe you will grant I am
right so far. Again, if I apprehend I am directed or commanded to do any
particular Thing; if, upon Trial, by the above Rule, it bears the Test, and has
any Tendency to promote God's Honor, Peace, Good Will, Charity and Benevolence
to my Neighbor, I believe I am safe, and may venture to conclude that this
Suggestion can proceed from no other than God; since it points to some small
Degree of Glory to his Name and Power. And further, any Deed that can stand
this Trial, cannot possibly have it is Rise, or be excited by a diabolical
Spirit; since we have our Lord's Testimony to the Truth of this Assertion, That
if Satan rise up against himself, and be divided, he cannot stand, but has an
End, Mark iii. 26. But whatever Judgment may be made of my religious Sentiments
and Conduct, it will be far from affecting me; my Peace and Happiness in no
wise depending on the Favor or Applause of Mortals, but on the Favor and
Approbation of God, by whose just and decisive Judgment I must stand or fall;
for God sees not as Man sees, Man judging by the outward Appearance only; but
the Lord looks at the Heart. And though we are told, The Heart is deceitful
above all Things; and the Prophet queries, Who can know it? The Almighty is
pleased to declare in these Words, I the Lord search the Heart, and try the
Reins; and behold he that forms the Mountains, and creates the Spirit, he
declares unto Man what his Thoughts are: Even he that makes the Morning
Darkness, and treads upon the high Places of the Earth, the Lord, the God of
Hosts is his Name, Amos iv. 13.

Further, I have thought you may possibly imagine, that in Pride and Arrogance
of Heart I am come to see, how you fare, with regard to your eternal Salvation:
But, give me Leave to assure you, my Visit proceeds from no such evil Motive;
neither have I any further Views than the Peace and Satisfaction that flows
from a Consciousness of having done my Duty, in coming to proclaim the glad
Tidings of Peace and Salvation among you, to all who will accept of it on God's
Terms, viz. Repentance and Amendment of Life.

I have no particular Person in View, nor Design to offend any One living; and
if at any time I should express myself a little warmly, my Zeal is aimed
against Sin, and the Irregularity of People's Lives in general; your Temporal,
as well eternal Interest, I wish as well to, as I do to my own. I do not
undertake to address you in pompous Words, nor, where it in my Power, to please
your Ear with fine Periods. The Laws of Method I know little of, therefore I
don't attempt any Rule of that Sort; neither do I presume to offer any Thing
new on the Subject of Religion; but if one Line of my own short Experience in
the Things of God, may have the least Tendency to excite some to the practical
Part of Christianity, or to mend the Heart of any One, I have my Reward; my
honest Aim, as far as my weak Endeavor will allow, being the Promotion of
God's Honor, and the Welfare of my Neighbor; and, to borrow the Words of one
of our Worthies, I have no Plot or Design, but an ardent Wish for the Salvation
of your Souls: And, if I may be allowed to use the Words of the great Apostle
Paul, I will further assure you, I covet no Person's Silver, Gold or Apparel.
On the contrary, having seen and lamented the diverse and hurtful Lusts I was
obnoxious to, when I was in Possession of a plentiful Estate, and that they
that are rich fall into many Temptations; my Business is to warn and caution
you that are rich, against the Misapplication of your Wealth. Riches, attained
lawfully, without Covetousness, and too anxious a Desire and Pursuit (which may
obstruct our godly Seize) I grant, are one of the Blessings of Heaven, if
rightly and properly applied; as they put us in a Capacity of providing a
necessary Subsistence for our Families, and doing Acts of Justice and Mercy to
our Neighbor: But then we must remember we are only Stewards of this, as well
as every other Gift of God; and that we are as culpable in his Sight, and as
accountable to his Justice, for the Waste and Abuse of Wealth, as for the ill
Use of any other of his Favors and Mercies.

Some plead for Extravagance, Vanity and Luxury, in the absurd Terms of an old
Proverb, that those who win Gold, have a Right to wear it; and that they may
apply their own Money to what Purposes they please: Not considering, that all
temporal Blessings are only lent us, and that we cannot properly call any Thing
our own. And if we will but look about us, we shall see this Assertion greatly
proved, by observing the many Vicissitudes in this one Article of Wealth.
Riches, metaphorically speaking, take to themselves Wings, and fly away from
one to another, and that we are as often snatched from them, as they from us; a
significant Instance of which we have in our Savior's Parable of the rich Man,
who, having laid up much Goods for many Years, sottishly addresses his Soul in
these Words, Soul, take thine Ease, eat, drink, and be merry, Luke xii. 19.
Thus being in this stupid Condition, blinded by the God of this World, he never
once reflects on the Possibility of being deprived of his Idols by any Means
whatsoever. But now observe the Equity and Justice of the Almighty in his
Judgments, which he often inflicts on those who adore the Gift, but despise and
neglect the Giver; who receive of his Bounty, but fail to acknowledge it; who
eat and drink, and rise up to play: By one Stroke of his Justice he breaks the
Enchantment this Man had been held in by Satan; discovers the Uncertainty of
temporal Goods and Enjoyments, and the Vanity or Folly of trusting and placing
our Happiness in them; and, by the Word of his Power, he commands this poor,
deluded Mortal to resign, not only his Wealth, but his very Soul, to him that
gave it; saying to him in these Terms, Thou Fool, this Night shall thy Soul be
required of thee; then whose shall these Things be which thou have provided?
Melancholy Situation indeed! and far worse than if his Goods had been taken
from him. This Man, as far as we may be allowed to judge by his Folly in this
Instance, must be in a very unfit State and Condition for Heaven, where it does
not appear he had been careful to lay up any Treasure, For where the Treasure
is, there will the Heart be also. And in our Lord's Observations on this
unhappy Person's Condition, he subjoins, So (or in such a Case) is he that
lays up Treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God.

But though I, as well as others, had received a Proportion or Talent of Grace in
my Heart, for the great Purposes before named, yet I was not careful to improve
it; and while I continued in neglect of my Duty, so long this Grace proved
ineffectual, and in vain: But the Gifts and Callings of God are without
Repentance, Romans ii. 29. for though many may neglect to answer his Call, or
improve his Gifts, nevertheless the Almighty repents not that he has dispensed
and bestowed them; but graciously condescends, by his frequent Visitations,
either immediately, or instrumentally, by Mercies, or by Judgments, to awaken,
persuade, excite or allure us to our Duty; and though in Time past we believed
not God, who in Effect we are said to deny, when we worship him not as God; yet
he repents not that he has called us, but repeats his Call to the Careless and
Negligent; of which Number I was, when the Almighty, whose Compassion fails
not, returned to visit my Soul. In this, the happiest Season of my Life, when
the Time was come, wherein, through Mercy I obtained Mercy; and in which the Most
High vouchsafed to favor me, by opening my Eyes, and discovering to me the
Things that belonged to the everlasting Peace and Happiness of my Soul. And at
the same time the Lord was pleased to display his excellent Glory, and to give
me a Sight of the Beauty of Holiness; and then I could say, I have heretofore
only heard of Thee by the Hearing of the outward Ear. But now mine Eye saw his
glory: This amazing though lovely Appearance of God to my Soul, caused me many a
time to bow down before the Majesty of Heaven, and, indeed to abhor myself in
Dust and Ashes, and frequently to mourn over him whom I had many time pierced
and grieved in his Holy Spirit, by my Vanities and Folly, in giving his Glory
to Idols, and the Praise that was his Due, to the Imaginations of my own Heart.
This was the first Day's Work of the new Creation in my Soul; the Almighty, by
the Word of his Power, had commanded the Darkness to be divided from the Light,
and, by this happy Medium, I continued to make new, and, to me, unusual
Discoveries; I saw that I had been an Alien from the Commonwealth of spiritual
Israel, and a Stranger to the Covenant of Promise, having no Hope in Christ, as
I had lived without God in the World; and, by neglecting to give that Honor
due to his Name, I had forfeited the Favor of the Almighty, and that heavenly
Paradise, which the Smiles of his Countenance and Presence alone can
constitute: Not for To refute this Doctrine, read Dr. Whitby's Treatise on what
is called Original Sin. In the Course of my Remarks, I choose to produce other
Authorities than those of our own Society; since such is the unaccountable
Prejudice of some People, that they will reject Truth and Reason, for no other
Cause, but that it is offered by one called a Quaker.
Adam's Fault imputed to me, but my own actual Disobedience, refusing that
reasonable Service and Homage which he expects and requires from all his
rational Creatures. I had been remiss in Acknowledgments to my great Creator,
and merciful Benefactor, at whose bountiful Hand I had received not only a
spiritual Blessing, or Gift of Grace in my Heart, but I was indebted to divine
Benificence for a large Share of temporal Blessings; neither of which was
received, or resented, with a proper Gratitude, nor applied to the Purposes (I
am since convinced and persuaded in my Understanding) they were designed for,
by the holy Dispenser. And I. The Seed (or Word) sown in my Heart by the great
Husbandman, was not suffered to fructify, or bring forth Fruit, agreeable to
the Praise and Glory of God, as the Cares of this Life, and the Deceitfulness
of Riches, entered in, and choked the Seed, and it thereby became unfruitful:
And not only the Cares and Concerns of the World, which sometimes become
accidentally unlawful, but the vain Pleasures, irrational Recreations,
trifling, unedifying and pernicious Books, with all the Train of idle
Amusements, to which the World commonly annex the soft and gentle Epithet of
Innocent, engrossed my precious Time; the proper Improvement of which wise Men,
in all Ages, esteemed the highest Point of Wisdom, and of so inestimable a
Consideration, as occasions a late pious Author to assert, that the Man was yet
unborn, who truly knew the value of an Hour. And the Apostle Paul, in an
earnest Manner, exhorts the Believers to redeem the Time, because the Days are
evil; and again, directs the Church to walk in Wisdom toward them that are
without, redeeming the Time. That Time was valuable, and to be well employed
and improved, I had often heard: but false, delusive Pleasure, unwilling to
hear, or at least to yield to the Voice of Truth, robbed me of that Blessing I
am now, through God's Assistance, endeavoring to redeem and improve, agreeable
to the Apostle's Advice: Pass the Time of your sojourning here in Fear (and
Reverence) fearing to offend the Infinite Majesty of Heaven, who takes
Cognizance of every Thought, Word, and Action. But alas! this Truth and
Consideration never so much as occurred, when I was spending my Days in Vanity,
and my Years in unprofitable Pursuits; forgetting the holy One of Israel, Days
without Number; never so much as remarking the royal Prophet's Assertion, That
(not only the flagrantly wicked) but those who forget God, shall be turned into
Hell. And the Prophet Jeremiah tells us, God will pour out of his Anger upon
the Families that call not upon his Name, Jer. x. 25. And God declares, that He
had suffered the Desolation of his People Israel, because they had forgotten
him, and burnt Incense unto Vanity; that they had forgot him, and trusted to
Falsehood; that according to their Pastures or Possessions, so (...) they
filled, and their Hearts thereby exalted, therefore have they forgotten me,
says the Lord. And the Prophet Hosea complains, that Israel had forgot his
Maker, and builded Temples to Idols; that the Calf (or Idol) of Samaria had
cast them out of his Favor; for they had sown Vanity and the Wind, and they
should reap the Whirlwind; that Strangers should swallow them up, the Enemy
should pursue them, and a Fire should devour their Palaces. These are some of
the dismal and deplorable Effects of Sin, and the terrible Penalties Sinners
who forget God, and make to themselves Idols of Vanity, are obnoxious to, in
this Life; where the temporal Consequences of Sin appear terrible and shocking,
which one would think a sufficient Reason to deter People from every Appearance
of Evil; but when we reflect on this Truth, viz. "That without sincere
returning to God by Repentance, and Amendment of Life, and being reconciled to
Him through Sanctification of our Spirits by CHRIST JESUS, the Punishment for our
Sins will attend us to all Eternity, and will assuredly deprive us of that Rest
and Peace prepared only for the People of God:" How should this Thought
speedily remove from every Heart, that is not quite insensible and obdurate,
the dangerous Sin of Unbelief in the Power of God, and excite them so apply to
the Father of Mercies for Remission of Sin by CHRIST JESUS. But some may
object, That though many, called Christians live in too much Forgetfulness of
God, yet they cannot be chargeable with worshipping of Idols, as the Jews were;
so that the above Scripture Passages cannot be altogether applicable to them. I
shall answer this Objection in the Words of one of the first Movers of the
Reformation, viz. Dr. John Staupitz: He that prefers any Thing that is outward
and temporal before God, prefers the Creature before the Creator; and robs God
of his Glory and highest Honor, and makes that to be his God, which is not
God: For that which the Heart loves most, the same it honors as God,
whatsoever the Mouth may say to the contrary. Who knows not, that if a
Christian should nowadays say, that his Goods, etc. were his God, he would be
condemned as a Blasphemer; and yet who is there of us, who does not see, in the
daily Practice and Actions of Men, that temporal Goods, Pleasure and Honor,
are preferred before God, and his Love, to that Degree, that it is Matter of
Lamentation? We will by no Means endure the Reproach of being Idolaters, though
indeed we are so, really and in Truth, no less than others were of old, At this
very Day, O gracious God! many in Christendom worship Gold, Silver, Wood, and
the Goods of this World, as the Heathen did Thousands of Years ago,
notwithstanding they say with their Mouths, Our Father, which art in Heaven:
But true Adoration consists in loving, not in speaking. He prays well, who
loves God most; and he who does not love God, neither does nor can pray, though
he repeat a thousand Psalms or Prayers: He who loves God, serves him; but he
who does not love him, neither does, nor can serve him, however great Works of
Devotion he may outwardly perform. But to return; In this careless and
forgetful Situation, which I have mentioned, was I when the Almighty dispensed
a Share of his temporal Favors to me, which I received with a stupid
Indifference, and without Thanksgiving, as they were common Mercies; "And like
a certain Brute Animal, who devours the Fruit which falls from a Tree, without
looking up to see from whence it comes:" So I received the Blessings of
Providence no otherwise, but as Things of Chance, or of Course, or the Effect
of Care and Industry; not considering whose Hand was necessary to render our
Endeavors successful and prosperous; nor that the same Power that bestows and
dispenses Blessings and Mercies, can in a Moment remand and call them back, and
deprive us of them, whenever he pleases; and that for every Morsel we eat, we
are indebted to God's Bounty and Goodness, and not to our own Wisdom or
Prudence: In a Word, that in Him we live, move, and have our Being. But how
insensible was I of these Truths, when, in Effect, I lived as if I had been an
unaccountable and independent Being, and vainly thought my Mountain was made so
strong, that it would never be removed. I was rich and full, and needed
nothing, when alas! I was poor and miserable, blind and naked, and wanted all
Things, when destitute of the Favor of God, and without witnessing the Smiles
of his Countenance. Thus, as the Psalmist confesses himself once, so foolish
and ignorant was I, saying, in Effect, to God, "Depart from me, for I desire
not the Knowledge of thy Ways, what is the Almighty that I should desire him?
Or what greater Profit would accrue, if we prayed unto Him, or served Him?" By
this false Reasoning is the Candle of the Ungodly extinguished; from whence
proceeds Destruction upon the Inconsiderate and Unrighteous, unless they
return, repent and amend. But now behold the Goodness, Lenity and
Long-suffering, of a merciful God! who had been long alluring me by his
Mercies, which I passed light by, or rejected; he has now Recourse to his
Judgments; but neither did I yet see that Afflictions arose not out of the
Dust, but that Mankind were naturally and promiscuously born to Trouble. I was
indeed afflicted, and I mourned; but it was for the Absence of temporal
Blessings; and as my Desires and Pursuits extended no higher, I endeavored to
support my Distress, by gratifying my Pride and Ambition to the Extent of my
Power. At length, in this Day of Adversity, I began a little to consider, and
applied to God, in Prayer and Supplication, that he would be pleased to deliver
me out of my Distress, or support me under it; still ignorant of the Joys of
his Salvation, or that there was spiritual Consolation in store for me on
certain Conditions, if I rightly applied for them; but being insensible of the
Want of them, I as yet asked them not, till the happy Season of my Life,
wherein I witnessed a religious Turn of Mind, and the drawing Cords of God's
Love inclining my Heart to seek his Face and Favor, with greater Ardency and
Fervor than I had ever been sensible of before: I now began to view and
consider Things in another Light than I formerly had done; and, by reversing
the Perspective, the fading Objects and Enjoyments of this Life lessened in my
View and Account; and as the Love of God and of heavenly Things increased in my
Heart, so in Proportion my Fondness for worldly Enjoyments decreased and
vanished. At length the warmest Returns of Love and Gratitude began to arise in
my Soul to God, who first loved me, and had done great Things for me, by
plucking my Feet out of the Mire and Clay of Sin and Folly, and fixing them
upon the Rock CHRIST JESUS. He also put a new Song in my Mouth, which none but
those who are in Degree redeemed by his precious Blood can sing, even Praises
to our God! Thus on my turning to God, I began to witness new Thoughts, new
Desires, new Affections, new Hopes, new Joys, and new Fears; and to see the
Necessity of Regeneration and a new Birth unto Righteousness, without which I
could not possibly enter the Kingdom of God; that all Things must be changed,
and become new, all of, and pointing to God. And farther, if I would be
CHRIST's Disciple, I must deny myself, take up a Cross to my own Will, be
subject to, and follow him, under whose Banner I had now listed; thus examining
and pursuing this Doctrine and Precept of our Lord's, I was naturally led, in
some Degree, to what is called Quakerism (though it appeared to me in no other
Form nor Name, than that of primitive Christianity) which, in my first Thoughts
of Religion, I had no more Intention of embracing than I had of receiving
Mahometism; knowing little more of the Quakers, than that They were a plain
People in their Garb and Speech. But it has been remarked to me, that my Mother
was some Time of this Persuasion, and no Wonder that I should have a warm Side
for her Opinion. I answered, My Father was a Member of the Church of England,
and educated me in that Way; and I well remember, I had a much warmer Side for
his Opinion; not that I knew what was the essential Difference in their
religious Sentiments, or at least that affected me, any farther than that one
allowed me something more Liberty in Dress; whereas the other would tell me
Plainness in Apparel was most agreeable to Christianity, and to the Divine
Being, who hated Pride in his Creatures. To be sure I thought this Doctrine
absurd, by the Reflection I remember I made at the Time, That God, I believed,
would not reject me, on the Score of wearing Lace, or a fine and gay Silk Gown.
I have thought since, any one might imagine I had fetched my Argument from
Lucretian Principles, that the Almighty could not descend so low as to notice
such Trifles, or mark little Follies, if Gaiety in Apparel should be One; but
no Wonder that when I was a Child, I should reason as a Child. I am sensible
that Silks, Ribbons and Lace, are not any where in Scripture directly
forbidden; but I learn from thence, that Pride, and all Manner of Superfluity,
is. And if, by wearing this rich Silk, or adorning ourselves with the other
superfluous Ornaments, we feed and nourish a proud, vain Desire, it becomes by
this Circumstance as unlawful as Pride itself; and that they do so, I have
greatly experienced: For though Religion stands not simply in Clothes, yet true
Religion stands in that which sets Bounds and Limits to the Mind with respect
to Clothes, as well as other Things. And to strengthen this Assertion, or
rather to prove it, I shall offer an Instance of my own Experience, viz. When
it pleased the Lord to visit my Soul, and to appear to me in his Glory, the
View of which discovered to me my own Unworthiness, and caused me not, only to
despise and abhor myself, but my splendid Apparel also: I had now no Delight in
Dress and Ornament, nor other Things I had usually taken much Pleasure in: True
Christianity, which I began to be acquainted with, set a Bound to my Desires,
and directed me to Plainness, before I had any Intention of joining the Society
of the People called Quakers; and indeed all earthly and transitory Objects
were, and are, in my View and Estimation, as Loss, Dross and Dung, in
Comparison of the Excellency, Glory and Beauty, I behold in God, and find in
the Enjoyment of his Divine Favor; and at times I am ready to cry out, O! how
great is his Glory, and transcendently great his Beauty!

But to return: When I was (by Marriage) removed from my Mother's Care and
Direction, I continued in my Father's Profession of Religion, for no other
Reason that I remember, but that it allowed me most Liberty in Dress and
Recreations, though my Father, as well as my Mother, did not fail to inculcate a
just Abhorrence of the Evils the moral Law condemns. However, when I considered
and examined religious Matters with more Seriousness, Sincerity and Attention,
than was usual with me, I found the little Religion (or rather the Profession
of it) that I had, was that of my Education, which I could not properly call my
own, as it was not the Religion of my Judgment, which I find absolutely
necessary, and highly reasonable to be concerned for. I read the Scriptures
with some Attention; and I have considered the following Text, that unless we
deny ourselves, and take up a daily Cross, we cannot be CHRIST's Disciples.
This Passage appeared to me to contain some other and further Construction and
Design than many People allow, who confine it to moral Precepts and Duties. But
before I proceed to say in what Sense others, as well as myself, understand
this Christian Doctrine, I think it may not be impertinent briefly to give some
Reason of my Faith and Hope, which I desire to do in the same Disposition the
Apostle recommends, viz. In Meekness and Fear. And first, upon examining the
Creed called The Apostles, I could subscribe to every Article therein
contained, except one, ( Christ descended into Hell) which, if it be meant no
other than the Grave, I subscribe to that also. Next, I have considered and
examined The Articles of the Church of England (of which I had professed myself
a Member some Years, without so much as knowing what Doctrines or Principles
they professed and held; this, I may venture to say, without Breach of Charity,
is the Case of many Professors at this Day) But upon perusing the above
Articles (as well as considering the Opinion of most dissenting Sects) I could
not reconcile some Opinions therein contained with Scripture Doctrine and
Testimonies; particularly a Paragraph in the fifteenth Article, where it is
said, "Though we are all baptized and born again in CHRIST, yet we offend in many
Things." This Opinion appears to me manifestly repugnant to Scripture Accounts
of many, who attained in this Life a perfect Freedom from Sin. And the Text
farther quoted by that Church will not import the Apostle himself to be
included in it, 1 John i. 8. And I am of Opinion, we may safely interpret the
Passage by some other Scripture Text; wherein the Apostles include themselves
with Sinners, yet by no Means can be understood, that they themselves were in
the like Circumstances. And now I shall offer the following Scripture
Testimonies, which appear to corroborate, and greatly to justify us, with
regard to a Tenet we particularly hold, viz. The Possibility (God's Grace
assisting) of obtaining a perfect Freedom This Doctrine being denied by most
Christians except the Quakers, I thought proper to transcribe Part of a
Conversation on that Subject, between a Clergyman and a Quaker --

Qua. Do thou own a Purgatory?


Cler. No.


Qua. When then must we be freed from Sin, and made fit for Heaven?


Cler. I believe God Almighty is able to forgive his People their Sins, and to
fit them for Heaven, a little before they depart.


Qua. How long?


Cler. It may be an Hour or two.


Qua. I believe a Day or two, as well as an Hour or two.


Cler. I believe so too. --

The Quaker carried gradually to a Month or two, till he brought it to seven
Years; to which his Opponent answered, He believed the same.



from Sin even in this Life. Noah was a just Man, and perfect in his
Generation. Job was a perfect Man, and one that feared God, and eschew'd Evil.
God made David's Way perfect. Blessed are the Undefiled in the Way, who walk in
the Law of the Lord. Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven
is perfect. Every one that is perfect shall be as his Master. We speak Wisdom
among them that are perfect. This also we wish, even your Perfection. Finally,
Brethren, be perfect. That the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished
to every good Word and Work. But the God of all Grace make you perfect. That
you may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing. Therefore leaving the Doctrines
of the Principles of CHRIST, let us go on to Perfection. Zachariah and
Elizabeth were both holy, walking in all the Commandments of the Lord
blameless. The Apostle Paul kept a Conscience void of Offense, both in the
Sight of God and Man. If we say we have Fellowship with God, and walk in
Darkness, we lie, and do not the Truth. Every Man that has Hope in CHRIST
purifieth himself, even as he is pure. Whosoever commits Sin transgresses
the Law, for Sin is the Transgression of the Law. Whosoever abides in him
sins not; for you know that CHRIST was manifested to take away our Sins.
Whosoever sins has not seen him, neither known him. Little Children, let no
Man deceive you. He that does Righteousness is righteous, even as he is
righteous; and he that commits Sin is of the Devil. For this Purpose was the
Son of God manifested, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil. Whosoever
is born of God sins not; but he that is begotten of God keeps himself, and
that wicked One touches him not, 1 John v. 18. If we say that we have not
sinned, we make him a Liar, and his Word is not in us; but if we confess and
forsake our Sin, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse
us from all Unrighteousness, which is Sin. And further, I observe, that both
the Old and New Testament abound with Exhortations to a Life of Holiness and
Purity. Let us cleanse ourselves, says the Apostle Paul, from the Pollution of
Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God. And I have never
remarked any Text yet, that leaves me the least Room to think, that a partial
Holiness will render us acceptable to God. And upon reading a certain Annotator
Doctor Whitby.
on the Subject, though he denies the Doctrine, yet is obliged to own this much,
That to require perfect Obedience to his Laws, is a Thing absolutely necessary
on God's Part, from the Perfection of his Divine Nature, and his Relation to us
as a Governor; to require that we should not sin; that is, says he, transgress
any of God's Laws: For Sin being the Transgression of the Law, and perfect and
unsinning Obedience being one and the same, if God requires under the new
Covenant that I should not transgress any of his Laws, as he most certainly
must do, he must require me not to sin against them; and so he must require
perfect and unsinning Obedience. Another Clergyman, discoursing on the Subject
of Holiness, has these Words: The Divine Being is transcendently holy, and
infinitely perfect; he is the Fountain of all Holiness, and sanctifies his
Saints, his People, and his Ministers; he requires perfect Holiness in those
who approach him, and to be honored by his Servants. And he further says, That
true Holiness consists in a Conformity to the Nature and Will of God; whereby a
Saint is distinguished from the unrenew'd World, and is not acted by their
Principles, nor governed by their Maxims and Customs. But farther, upon
perusing the Scripture, I have found no Room for Ceremonies under the
Gospel Dispensation, nor Precedent for Music in the Christian Church. The
Liturgy, or Form of Prayer, became quite useless to me, and singing David's
Psalms burdensome; I considered, and it appeared to me, we were endeavoring
rather to please and gratify our own Ear, than singing to the Praise and Glory
of God and I find that David's Psalms can no more be suitable to the State of
the Souls of a whole or numerous Congregation, than the same Form of Prayer can
be agreeable to all Conditions and spiritual Cases. I shall, among many, give a
few Instances of the Inconsistency and Unsuitableness of the Psalms of David,
to the Conditions of Men of the following Characters, who, when they are in the
Assemblies where these Psalms are sung occasionally, they customarily join in
this Part of the Worship. The Wanton, who spends his precious Time in Jollity,
he sings, I am weary with my Groaning, I make my Couch to swim with my Tears.
The proud Atheist, who has banished God out of all his Thoughts, he sings, I
have set the Lord always before me, etc. The vain Man, who delights in the
Company and Society of wicked Persons, he sings, I have hated the Congregations
of Evildoers. The withered Tree, dead to God, and consequently fruitless, he
sings, I am like a green Olive Tree in the House of God. He whose Heart is a
Cage of Uncleanness, sings, My Heart is inditing a good Matter. The daily
Feaster, whose Legs can scarce bear about his corpulent Body, he sings, My
Knees are weak through Fasting, and my Flesh fails of Fatness. Satan's Captive,
who wallows in the Mire and Filth of Sin, he sings, O Lord, truly I am thy
Servant. The lawless Man, whose Life is a Life of Rebellion, subject to Sin and
Satan, he sings, The Law of thy Mouth is dearer unto me than Thousands of Gold
and Silver. The proud and ambitious Person sings, Lord, my Heart is not
haughty, nor mine Eyes lofty; my Soul is even as a weaned Child, etc. It has
been objected, that we may as reasonably sing David's Psalms, as read them; but
I apprehend an essential Difference between reading them as David's Experience,
or Words he used in praising God (which were no Doubt suggested by the Holy
Spirit) and reducing them to our own Acts of Worship; unless the Words be
suitable to the State of our Souls, and brought to our Remembrance by the same
Divine Influence which presented them to the Mind of David, according as they
suited the Circumstance of his Soul, or were suitable or applicable to the
Condition of others, to whom he sometimes speaks, in a feeling Sense, of the
different States of the Godly and the Wicked. I have also considered it
irrational to limit and prescribe to a Christian, even the weakest, a set Form
of Prayer, since the Apostle Paul expressly declared, We know not what we should
pray for as we ought, but the Spirit itself makes Intercession for us with
Groanings, which cannot be uttered, Rom viii. 26.

I remember, when I experienced the Work of God's Grace operating on my Soul,
and discovering to me my State and Condition, the common Prayer became of no
Service to me, as I found it highly necessary that my Heart should be prepared
by the Lord to enable me to address him by his own Spirit; and when he is
pleased to touch and incline the Heart to himself, behold (as it is said on a
memorable Occasion) we pray; We are immediately taught to pray in Terms
suggested by the Holy Spirit, who best knows our Necessities, helps our
Infirmities, and causes us suitably to approach the Throne of Grace, and to
request and pray with the Spirit, and with the Understanding. And as we are not
to pray in our own Words, neither can we pray acceptably in our own Time; as I
have witnessed on a very particular Occasion, when I professed myself a Member
of the Church of England. Being returned from a Voyage, I, according to Custom,
sent Notice, that I should publicly give God Thanks for my Preservation at
Sea; thus when the stated Prayer of Thanksgiving was read, I was indeed on my
Knees, but my Heart was not properly warmed, nor influenced to address the
Almighty, at the Time the Congregation was told, I was giving God humble and
hearty Thanks for such a Mercy; I repeated the Form indeed, but it was only
with my Lips, my Heart had little Share in this formal Devotion; and
reflecting, while on my Knees, that I was wrong, consequently the Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving I had offered in so unacceptable a Manner, must be an Offense to
God. The above Reflection, I am not ashamed to say, caused me to tremble at the
very Instant. Thus I find, that waiting to be suitably influenced by the
Spirit, ought to be previous to this solemn Act of Worship. But farther, as I
have above noted, I find no Place in the Church of CHRIST for Ceremonies, as
they appear to be a very great Obstacle in the Way of spiritual Worship; for
bodily Exercise profits little; it is the Spirit of CHRIST must quicken us for
spiritual Worship. And though God winked at Times of Ignorance and Blindness,
when Men vainly imagined that Worship was most acceptably performed to him at
this Place, or the other Mountain; in this, or the other Ceremony; yet CHRIST
the Light, who came, and is come to dispel all the dark Clouds of Ignorance and
Error, and to direct Men to himself the Way, the Light, and the Truth, on a
remarkable Occasion explodes Men's Opinions in this important Matter, by saying,
that it was neither at Jerusalem, nor yet at the Mountain (of Samaria) the
Father was to be worshipped; but the Hour comes, and now is, when the true
Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth: For the Father
seeks such to worship him. God is a Spirit, and those who worship him
(acceptably) must worship him in Spirit and in Truth, not in Formality and
Ceremonies. The Author of the Preface to the Common Prayer tells us, The
Ceremonies retained in the Church (of England) were devised and instituted by
Man, and some that are thrown out, entered at first with a Zeal without
Knowledge, and grew daily to more and more Abuses; which not only for
Unprofitableness, but because they have much blinded the People, and obscured
the Glory of God, are rejected. Others, says he, though devised by Man, are
retained for Order and Edification: And at the same Time tells us, that
CHRIST's Gospel is not a ceremonial Law; but it is a Religion to serve God, not
in the Bondage of the Figure and Shadow, but in the Freedom of the Spirit. To
this last Proposition I heartily agree; then why should we return to the weak
and beggarly Elements, or desire again to be in Bondage? You observe, (says the
Apostle Paul) Days and Months, and Times and Years; I am afraid of you, lest I
have bestowed upon you Labor in vain: But as ye have received CHRIST JESUS the
Lord, so walk in him, aad beware least any Man spoil you through Philosophy, and
vain Deceit, after the Traditions of Men, after the Rudiments of the World, and
not after CHRIST. Why, as though living in the World, are ye Subjects to
Ordinances? Touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are to perish with the
using, after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men. But I shall no longer
insist on these Matters of Disputation; neither do I propose to give an Account
of the Tenets or Principles professed by us as a Society, that being already
done in a very ample Manner by our Friend Robert Barclay. I have only though it
proper to mention several Obstacles which lay in my Way when I began to search
for Truth: For as my Business is not Controversy, but Love, Good Will and
Charity, to all Mankind, I purpose to give you a short Account of the great
Disadvantages I labored under in a State of Forgetfulness of God; and the
inexpressible Benefits I have witnessed from a Return to, and Attention upon
God, and Submission, Resignation, and Subjection to his blessed Will and
Commands. And as far as my Testimony to the Power and Efficacy of the Grace of
God, and the Doctrine and Necessity of bearing the Cross, will go, to invite,
persuade and beseech you to draw nigh, and acquaint yourselves with God, through
JESUS CHRIST our Lord, who has said, and now says, Look unto me all ye Ends of
the Earth, and be ye saved. In vain is Salvation looked for from the Hills or
Mountains, or from our own exalted Imaginations, or high Pretensions to
Religion. And I have this Testimony to bear to God's Power, that I witnessed
Salvation from Sin only and alone, from the Omnipotent Hand of the Lord, giving
me Victory over my vain Thoughts, Affections and Desires, and bringing them
under the Power of the Cross of CHRIST, by which I am crucified unto the World,
and the World unto me. Therefore if you would enter into his Rest, harden not
your Hearts against the Call and Invitation our compassionate Lord continues to
give all (returning) Sinners; Come unto me, (says Christ) all ye that are
weary, and heavy laden, with the Burden of your Sins, be willing to part with
them, and he will give you Rest. Let not, I beseech you, the Sin of Unbelief,
in the Power of CHRIST, enter your Hearts: For if ye believe not (says Christ)
that I am He, (viz. the Savior of the World, who is come to save you from your
Sins) and continue in your Sins, you shall die in them; and then whither I go
you cannot come. Fly then for your Lives, I beseech you; fly from the Wrath to
come; apply to CHRIST for eternal Life, and he will inform you what you must do
to be saved; his Power is eternally and unchangeably the same; his Hand is not
shortened, that it cannot save, neither is his Ear heavy, that it cannot hear;
therefore give not Sleep to your Eyes, till you witness God in CHRIST
reconciling you to himself. The Time present, we all know, is only ours; then,
while it is called to Day, let us hear his Voice, who speaks as never Man spoke,
even with Power and Authority, saying, Rise up you that are at Ease in your
Sins; tremble ye careless Ones; cast your Idols from you, and look unto the
Rock and holy One of Israel; seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him
while he is near; let the Wicked forsake his Ways, and the unrighteous Man his
Thoughts, and turn unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy, and to our God, who
will abundantly pardon.

I would now observe to you who indulge yourselves in the false Pleasures, vain
Amusements and Recreations, of the Age, which once I had a Fondness for, as
well as you now have; that when the Almighty was pleased in his Mercy to open
the Eyes of my Understanding, I plainly perceived by that Light (he had placed
in my Conscience, which enabled me to discern between Right and Wrong, the
Precious and the Vile) that a Life of Pleasure and Diversion was inconsistent
with the Life of a Christian: I found, that to be thus carnally minded, has
been Death to my Soul; but as I gradually witnessed CHRIST, and the Power of
his Resurrection raising me from the Death of these Sins, I felt a Necessity of
parting with, and denying myself of them; and I considered them to be of the
greatest Obstacles in a religious Progress. But it has been objected, that
Recreations are absolutely necessary to unbend and relax the Mind, when it has
been occupy'd or employed in worldly Affairs, or in the more serious Attention
on divine Objects, to which it is not possible it can be attending always. I
grant, that our Lord's enjoining his Followers, to watch and pray continually,
and Paul's exhorting the Thessalonians, to pray without ceasing, does not, in a
strict and literal Sense, oblige us to be always on our Knees, nor occupy'd in
mental Prayer; for though we ought to be led and guided by the Spirit of CHRIST
in all our Actions, or, at least, that all we do by Permission, as well as by
immediate Direction, may be approved in his Sight; yet we are not at all Times
under an Influence necessary for addressing the Throne of Grace, in the solemn
Act of Prayer: Nevertheless, we should always be so far in a Spirit of Prayer
and Watchfulness, as we ought to be always in a Christian and virtuous Temper
of Mind; which is indeed truly and effectually worshipping the Divine Being,
when we do not confine our Service to set Days, or appointed Hours of Devotion,
but to a constant, steady and uniform Life of Virtue, Piety and Holiness. Some
are apt to think all is well, and they have done their Duty to God, when they
neglect not customary times of formal Prayer, or Devotion (as it is falsely
called) or their Diversions don't interfere with this Formality, which by some
is punctually performed. This brings to my Remembrance the absurd as well as
impious Character a certain Author gives of a Woman of this preposterous
Composition of Diversion and Devotion, or, in his own Words, of Religion and
Cards; he represents her, in some Interval of her Game, just recollecting it
was her Hour of Devotion or Prayer, upon which she rises in great
Precipitation, and desires her Neighbor to hold her Cards till she steps and
says her Prayers. To mention this Character, is sufficient to show the
Absurdity of it. Again, the Description another Writer gives of a Woman at her
Gaming-Table, is enough, one would imagine, to make the hardest Forehead blush:
And to say no more, than that it renders her unaimable in the Eyes of
reasonable People, one would judge, this would be a great Reason for her to
decline the Diversion; but when she is represented accusing her ill Fortune, as
she calls it, in Terms of Fury and Absurdity, the Portrait is horrid and
shocking, unbecoming a rational Mind, and most unworthy any Person who
professes Christianity. Compare this Character with humble Mary's sitting at
her Lord's Feet, waiting to hear the gracious Words that proceeded out of his
Mouth -- compare it with the Apostle's Description of a Woman professing
Godliness, whose Mind is adorned with Meekness, Quietness and Modesty; and see
if you can discover one similar Line in the Characters. Again, describe a Woman
dancing at a Ball, and adorned with all the Luxury and Pomp of Dress, tending,
according to the Opinion of a pious Writer, to excite a Passion I forbear to
name; and Country Dances, some of 'em, you know, are condemned by a Writer much
admired by the polite and fashionable Part of the World, who peruse him, I have
thought, to very little Purpose: Examine, I say, the Characters I have
mentioned, and see if you can observe the least Trace of Christianity in them:
In short, a dancing, gaming, masquerading Christian, appears as great a
Contradiction, and sounds as harsh and uncouth in one's Ears, as a polluted
Christian; which I have heard a learned Person say, was no Inconsistency;
however, he failed in his Proof, since I can as soon reconcile Light and
Darkness, CHRIST and Belial, as that a Person can be both a Sinner and a Saint,
at the same Moment of Time. But, further, though some Recreations, properly
chosen and adapted, may be lawful to a Christian; yet I have found those the
Generality of People allow themselves in, are pernicious and hurtful, in their
Consequences, and therefore unlawful to, and inconsistent with the Life of a
Christian. Upon perusing the Scripture, I find the Apostle Paul exhorting the
Corinthians in these Words, Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do
all to the Glory of God: From whence I also learn, that I ought not to do any
Thing that would obstruct or hinder, or may be in Opposition to God's Honor.
And though I don't find any direct Prohibition of Cards, Plays, Balls,
Assemblies, Masquerades, Musick-gardens, etc. yet I observe they are indirectly
forbid, as they have not the least Tendency to promote God's Glory; but, on the
contrary, if you will take my own Experience for Evidence, tend to hinder and
prevent any Taste or Relish for divine or spiritual Enjoyments; the Soul given
up to sensual Pleasure, lies sordidly grovelling on Earth, when it is desing'd to
contemplate and enjoy more rational, as well as sublime and heavenly Delights.
We are told by an Author (pretty generally read) who discoursing, in some of
his Writings, on the Design of the Almighty in placing Mortals here on Earth,
We were, says he, left here for a Time, to be educated for Heaven. But when we
look about, and observe what Methods for this Education are pursued, we cannot
well help concluding, the Generality of People have very unnatural, inadequate
and gross Ideas, of that glorious Kingdom; and that, if they reflect at all,
they must consider it no other than a Mohammedan Paradise; as the Plan of
Education nowadays, seems designed and calculated, to qualify for a Place
where the Senses are only to be gratified and entertained: And indeed I am
induced to think the Apostle's Doctrine quite reversed by those called
Christians, who, many of them, appear to live by Sight, and not by Faith. That
Christians ought not to indulge themselves in the usual Pleasures, Diversions,
and vain Customs, of the World, seems evident from the sacred Writings; as
these Amusements appear to be diametrically opposite to the Spirit, Temper and
Rules of Christianity; that System being absolutely of another Nature and
Tendency, calculated to subdue and regulate the Passions and Affections of the
Mind, by calling us to a Life of Self-denial, and instructing us to walk in the
Steps of an humble, lowly and crucified, Savior; for whoever will be CHRIST's
Disciple, must crucify the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts; and I think
the following Passages of Scripture greatly evince, that a Life of Pleasure is
inconsistent with the Life of Christianity; the Apostle Paul tells us, that
those who live in Pleasure, are dead while they live: Dead to God and spiritual
Enjoyments. Christians are by the same Apostle exhorted to redeem the Time,
because the Days are Evil; which I cannot reconcile to the fashionable Phrase
used by professed Christians; How shall we kill Time? Work out your own
Salvation with Fear and Trembling, is a Precept incompatible to spending the
greatest Part of our precious Time in Mirth, Wantonness, Gaming, Dancing, etc.
Be sober, be vigilant, because your Adversary, the Devil, is walking about like
a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour; whom resist, steadfast in the Faith:
I have considered this Passage also, and find it contrary to the Practice of
modern Christians; who, instead of resisting the Temptations of Satan, blindly
seek and run into them, by their frequent Attendance on profane and wanton
Plays, vain Musick-gardens, and wicked Masquerades, Opera's, etc. The Reason
why Christians are to be found in a watchful Posture, is here given; Because
our Adversary the Devil, is seeking whom he may devour; we are exhorted to take
Heed how we stand, lest we fall; to watch and pray, lest we enter into
Temptation; therefore a Life of Wantonness and Riot, Ease and Security, cannot
be agreeable to that Circumspection and Diligence requisite in every Christian,
in order to make his Calling and Election sure. And I have though it a Life of
Diversion and Pleasure, is very unsuitable to Sinners, who may be guilty of
immoral Acts, and, perhaps, have lived long in open Violation of God's Laws:
Surely it is high Time for such as these to awake out of Sleep, out of the
Lethargy and Death of Sin; for the Lord, by the Mouth of his Prophet,
pronounces a Woe against such as are at Ease in their Sins; and calls upon them
to reform, in these Words; Cleanse your Hands, ye Sinners, and purify your
Hearts, ye double-minded, be afflicted for your Sin, mourn and weep: Go to, you
rich Men, weep and howl for your Miseries that shall come upon you; for you
have lived in Pleasure on the Earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your
Hearts as in a Day of Slaughter, etc. And our Lord pronounces a Woe against
them that laugh now, for they shall weep and mourn; but blessed are ye that
weep now, for ye shall rejoice hereafter. Weep for yourselves, and for your
Children, was the Advice of CHRIST to the Daughters of Jerusalem; and very
necessary for us at this Day, that our Mirth should be turned into Mourning,
and the evil Rejoicing of many into Heaviness. These, and such like Sentences
of the sacred Records, appear to me to be irreconcilable with the common Study
and Practice of leaving Tokens of Mirth, Luxury and Wantonness, in every Place,
saying, To morrow shall be as this Day, and much more abundant; whereas we know
not what shall be on the Morrow: For what is your Life! It is even as a Vapor,
that appears for a little Time, and then vanishes away. The Wicked, says holy
Job, spend their Days in Mirth, and, in a Moment, go down to the Grave. But
some object, that Solomon seems to allow us Times and Seasons for Recreations
and Divertisements, you consider as unlawful Pleasures, viz. A Time to sing,
and a Time to dance, etc. Oh! what is called an Allowance, appears to me to
amount to no more, than that in Solomon's Days, as well as in all former Ages
of the World, there was Times in which People did those Things he enumerates,
and which he observes, only adds Vanity to all human Actions and Inventions;
but he does not determine whether they were lawful or otherwise: He tells us
also, of a Time to laugh, or rejoice; our Lord, as above, pronounces a Woe
against those that laugh now [ or in this Gospel-Day, wherein you are called to
Repentance, to fit and qualify you to receive the Gospel of Christ and his
Kingdom] for they shall mourn and weep. Solomon mentions a Time to hate; which
under the Gospel is positively prohibited, or forbid, by CHRIST's own Remarks
on the Jewish Law or Tradition; where he evidently shows, that there is no
such Passion of the Mind to be exercised by Christians (except against Sin, as
the Godly hate Sin, because it is a Breach of God's Law) no, not against our
Enemies; his Gospel being universal Love and Beneficence to all Mankind. But
granting that Solomon indulged himself in the Pleasures and Vanities of the Age
he lived in, which indeed, appears to be his Case; yet hear how he estimates
them, in what is commonly called his Recantion; having first proved worldly
Wisdom, he perceived that this was Vanity and Vexation of Spirit; For in much
Wisdom is much Grief, and he that increases Knowledge, increases Sorrow,
Eccl. i. 18. Then says he, I commended Mirth, because a Man has nothing better
under the Sun, than to eat, drink, and be merry -- Go to, I will prove thee
with Mirth, therefore enjoy Pleasure, but, behold, this is also Vanity; I said
of Laughter, it is Madness, and of Mirth, what does it? Eccl. ii. 1, 2. For
even in Laughter the Heart is sorrowful, and the End of that Mirth is
Heaviness, Prove. xiv. 13. And we have this wise Man's Opinion, 'That it is
better to go to the House of Mourning, than to the House of Feasting; and that
Sorrow is better than Laughter;' for by the Sadness of the Countenance, the
Heart is made better: The Heart of the Wise, is in the House of Mourning; but
the Heart of Fools, in the House of Mirth: Thus, thou may rejoice, O young Man,
in thy Youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the Days of thy Youth, and walk
in the Ways of thy Heart, and in the Sight of thine Eyes; but remember it is at
thy Peril; for know thou, that for all these Things God will bring thee into
Judgment.' Let us now hear his Conclusion of the whole Matter; The Fear of the
Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom, and to depart from Evil a good Understanding;
therefore fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of
Man: For God shall bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret Thing,
whether it be good, or whether it be Evil. But further, to evince that the
common Diversions and Amusements of the Age, are incongruous and unfit for
Christians to recreate themselves with -- do but propose to a pious, grave
Clergyman, to accompany any one of you to a Ball, a Play, a Masquerade, or
Assembly; or invite him to make a Party at Cards, Dice, or any Game; and see
what an Indignity he will tell thee thou have offered him, telling thee, that
these Amusements are inconsistent with his Function, etc. And indeed every one
who has, or does frequent Play Houses, knows that those Clergymen who take the
undue Liberty of frequenting them, go concealed and disguised in what they call
a Lay-habit: Whereas, if these Entertainments were suitable to a Christian
Spirit, and that solid, grave, pious Disposition of Mind, which it is the Duty
of every common Christian to labor for, and be found in; why may not the best
Christians frequent them openly, as well as those who pretend to a lesser
Degree of Piety and Holiness? I am not acquainted with any Text in the sacred
Writings, that allows me, or any one else, to be one Whit less pious, holy, or
virtuous, than our Teachers; nay, David did not scruple to say, 'In Matters of
Religion, or the Things of God, that he was wiser, and had more Understanding
than all his Teachers;' For thy Testimonies, O Lord, are my Meditation and
Delight; I understand more than the Ancients (who undoubtedly were well
acquainted with the outward and written Law) for this cogent Reason, because I
keep thy Precepts. And Paul exhorts the Philippians in these Words, Brethren,
be ye Followers of me, and mark them which walk so, as ye have us for an
Example; and whereunto we have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule,
and mind the same Things. And in his Directions or Council to Timothy, tells
him, To be an Example to the Believers, in Word, in Conversation, in Charity
[or Love] in Spirit, in Faith, and in Purity. He also directs Titus, 'To exhort
the young Men to be sober-minded; in all Things showing himself a Pattern of
good Works, in Uncorruptness, Gravity, and Sincerity.'

But it may be objected, that some of the Remarks on the fashionable Diversions
of the World, don't immediately affect you, as you have no Masquerades nor
Musick-gardens, to entertain you; neither are Theatrical Entertainments
frequent amongst you. This is true; but you have, in the Winter-season;
Assemblies once a Week, wherein you dance and game; Balls and Dancing at other
Times and Places, Card-playing at your own Houses, etc. And, suffer me farther
to say, That I am sensible you, many of you, fail not to give your Attendance
on every Occasion of Mirth and Jolity; and that you mimick Great Britain in
every Foppery, Luxury and Recreation, within your Reach; which discovers an
equal Inclination, but less Power of gratifying a Fondness for Pleasure and
Diversions: And though you may have few or no Opportunities of frequenting Plays,
your Closets, doubtless, are furnished with Books of this Sort; which, if it be
unlawful to see them exhibited on the Stage (as William Law, a Clergyman,
greatly proves it is) it is equally unlawful and unfit for Christians to read
them: And, permit me to remind you, that you have Bishop Burnet's, as well as
Bishop Tillotson's Testimonies against Plays; who, in a Sermon on the Education
of Youth, in so many Words, calls the Playhouse, the Devil's Chapel: And in a
Discourse against corrupt Communication, he occasionally mentions Plays, and
says, They are intolerable, and not fit to be permitted in a civilized, much
less a Christian Nation: They do most notoriously minister to Vice and
Infidelity: By their Profaneness they are apt to instill bad Principles into
the Minds of Men, and to lessen that Awe and Reverence which all Men ought to
have of God and Religion: And by their Lewdness they teach Vice, and are apt to
infect the Minds of Men, and dispose them to lewd and dissolute Practices: Thus
far Bishop Tillotson. Now hear the Archbishop of Cambray's Sentiments of these
Kind of Books and Entertainments: In his Treatise on the Education of Youth he
tells us; Young Persons, and especially Women, have roving Imaginations, and
for want of solid Nourishment, their Curiosity turns on vain and dangerous
Objects; they are extremely affected with Romances, and chimerical Adventures,
and Plays, in which profane Love bears a mighty Share, and fills their Minds
with empty Notions, which bear no Proportion to the true Motive or Spring of
our Actions in this present World: A poor Girl, whose Head is filled with
surprising Strains, is disappointed not to find, in the World, real Persons of
the Character of Romantic Heroes; and as she would live like one of their
imaginary Princesses, what Disgust must it be for her to descend from this
imaginary State, to the mean Parts and Offices of Housewifery? Thus you may
observe from the Sentiments of these great and pious Men, the mischievous
Consequences that attend the frequenting Play Houses, as well as reading
profane and unedifying Books; as they prove them hurtful in a civil or social,
as well as in a religious Relation. But further; though my Experience is short,
and Knowledge small, in the sublime Mysteries of Christianity, yet I have been
induced to consider it both absurd and irrational to propose vain Amusements
and Diversions to Christians, whose Conversation is in Heaven; who have tasted
of the good Word of Life, witnessed of the Powers of the World to come, shared,
in Part, of the Joys of Heaven, by divine Communion and Fellowship with God:
For, as the Apostle says truly, "The Fellowship of all real Christians is with
the Father, and with the Son, CHRIST JESUS; with whom, having sat in high and
heavenly Places, they look down with holy Contempt on lower Enjoyments: To
prescribe, I say, to these earthly Pleasures and Delights, nay, vain and
irrational Ones too, is, as the pious Boil justly observes, as unreasonable,
as if one should imagine an Eagle could be dazzled with a Glowworm, when, from
his high Station, he had been newly gazing at the Sun. And indeed were the
common Recreations both innocent and lawful, a true Christian could not
conceive any Delight in them, or in any Thing that tended to divert their
Meditation, and carry them so far from God, whose Words and Presence are become
more to them than their necessary Food; and even the Cares and Concerns of this
Life, which, on various Occasions, must necessarily occupy the Thoughts of
Christians, are irksome and burdensome to many; as they, in some Sort; deprive
them of more near and intimate Communion and Intercourse with God; who, though he
is that High and Holy One, that inhabits Eternity, and dwells in Light
inaccessible by mortal Eyes; though Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth his
Footstool, yet condescends by his Holy Spirit to tabernacle with Men, and stoop
so low as to stand at the Door of our Hearts, and knock for an Entrance.
Behold! says the Lord, I stand at the Door and knock, if any Man open to me, I
will come in and sup with him, and he shall sup with me. Thus, when we are made
Partakers of this blessed and divine Communion and holy Supper, we are ready to
cry out after this Manner, It Is good for us to be here; Lord! Evermore give us
this Bread! I sometimes thought the royal Psalmist seemed to be much in the
Case or State I have mentioned; thirsting after God, as he himself expresses
it, but often interrupted and carried away by the Avocations of his Kingdom,
and Perplexities from his Enemies, at a greater Distance from God than was
pleasing to him, and which he seems to have in View, and lament, when spreading
his Cause before the Almighty, he complains of the Oppression from Men of the
World, who, says he, have their Portion in this Life. And, on another Occasion,
he describes some of the same Disposition, enquiring, Who will show us any
(temporal) Good? But as for me, I shall be satisfied with thy Likeness; I will
behold thy Face in Righteousness; Lord, lift up the Light of thy Countenance
upon me, then shall I rejoice more, than when Corn, Wine and Oil, increases.
And again, When I awake (or am free from Interruption) I am still with thee,
where I drink in thy Presence of the Fountain of Life, and in thy Light I see
more Light; for blessed is the Man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach
unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts; for in thy Presence is fullness of
Joy, and at thy Right Hand are Rivers of Pleasures for evermore! And he
pronounces the Man blessed, whose Delight is in the Law of the Lord, and who
meditates therein Day and Night. Such Meditations of the Lord are sweet unto
his People, and makes them glad in his Presence; and the spiritual
Intercourses, with which the Almighty in great Mercy and Condescension is
pleased to favor his Servants and Children, are indeed in some Degree
Foretastes of Heaven: For though the Apostle tells us, Eye (the Eye of the
natural Man, who is devoted and enslaved to earthly Things) has not seen, nor
Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart (of such Men as these) to
conceive the Things which God has prepared for them that love him; but God
has revealed them unto us by his Spirit: For the Spirit searches all Things,
yea, the deep Things of God: Bat the natural Man receives not the Things of
the Spirit of God, for they are Foolishness to him, neither can he know them
(while he remains in his natural and carnal State) because they are spiritually
discerned.

But to proceed; I have partly told you what Recreations are considered by us
as unlawful for Christians to be exercised in; and shall now, in the Words of
one of our Worthies, tell you what we judge lawful or convenient. Innocent
Divertisements, says he, which may sufficiently serve for Relaxation of the
Mind, are these; Friends may visit one another; hear or read History; speak of
the present or past Transactions; follow Gardening; use geometrical and
mathematical Experiments, and such Things of this Nature; in all which we are
not to forget God. To this let me add the Concurrence of the Bishop of Cambray,
in his Rules for educating Youth; who, speaking of Recreations proper for a
young Person, says thus: There is no Need of fine Machines or Sights,
theatrical Pomps or Expenses, to recreate a young Woman; but an instructive
Reading; a Labor which is by herself freely undertaken; a Walk, or a little
innocent Conversation, which relaxes the Mind after hard Labor, and leaves a
purer Joy in her, than of the most charming Music, or studied Diversion. And
further, we may consider the Works and Order of Nature; for the Heavens declare
the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his Handywork; Day unto Day
utters Speech, and Night unto Night shows Knowledge: Thus the invisible
Things of God are discerned (by the Things that are visible) even the Eternal
Godhead. By such Observations, says one of our Authors, The Creation would no
longer be a Riddle to us; the Heavens, Earth and Waters, with their respective
various, and numerous Inhabitants; their Productions, Natures, Seasons,
Sympathies, and Antypathies; their Use and Benefit, would be better understood
by us; and an eternal Wisdom, Power, Majesty and Goodness, very conspicuous to
us, through these sensible and passing Forms; the World wearing the Mark of its
Maker, whose Stamp is every where visible, and the Characters legible to the
Children of Wisdom: This would direct People in the Use of the World; for how
could Man have the Conscience to abuse it, while they see the great Creator
staring them in the Face, in all and every Part of it. And he adds; As Man is
considered as the Epitome of the World, we should not be ignorant of our own
Make and Frame; a Glass, in which we should see that true, instructing and
agreeable, Variety, which is to be observed in Nature to the Admiration of that
Wisdom, and Adoration of that Power, that created and formed us. These and such
like Relaxations, from higher Attentions, do not exclude God; whereas it would
be impious so much as to imagine, that the Smiles of God's Countenance, or his
holy Presence, can in the least Degree be enjoyed in the common Pastimes and
Diversions of the World; it is not expected nor pretended to by any of the
Votaries to Pleasure. On the contrary, how is the sacred Name of the Almighty
daily and frequently profaned, not only by professed Gamesters, but by Persons
of both Sexes, who play, as they say, for Diversion, and who make no Scruple
frequently to take God's holy Name in vain, and use it wickedly and absurdly to
bless or curse their, as they term it, good or bad Fortune! And indeed it has
been often Subject of Amazement and Sorrow to me, when I so frequently meet
with, and observe this Impiety, even amongst Professors of Christianity of most
Denominations, who irreverently, and, without Fear, take God's sacred Name into
their Mouths in their ordinary and trivial Discourse, and vain Conversation;
not considering that this Practice is an open and manifest Violation of one of
God's Laws or Commands, in which he declares, He will not hold them guiltless
that take his Name in vain (which Precept they frequently repeat in their
Worship.) And our Lord assures us, that for every idle Word that Men shall
speak, they shall give an Account in the Day of Judgment; how much more then
for this daily Breach of One not the least, of his Precepts? I would beg Leave
to remind you, how careful and circumspect David was in his Words; I, says he,
will take Heed to my Ways, that I sin not with my Tongue; I will keep my Mouth
as with a Bridle, etc. And the Apostle James tells us positively, That Person's
Religion is vain who bridleth not his Tongue: That we suffer no corrupt
Communication to proceed out of our Mouths; but, on the contrary, such as is
good, to the Use of edifying, that it may minister Grace to the Hearers. One
Mark of the Enemies of God is, that they profane his Name. Thine Enemies, says
the Psalmist, take thy Name in vain, O God. In the Life and Character of Robert
Boil, as an Honor to his Memory we are told, That he never mentioned the Name
of the Almighty, but with the greatest Reverence, and always made a Pause at
the same Time: I wish the Example of so pious a Man may be more regarded, and
the evil Consequence of the above impious Practice more considered. But to
return: The Manner in which we think it allowable to spend our leisure Hours,
as has been observed, does not exclude God; but ever admits and suggests some
suitable edifying, moral and pious Reflections, never forgetting to have an Eye
to God; and as we live in a Sense of his Fear and Presence, short Ejaculations,
or Breathings, which come from, will often ascend to, God. On the contrary,
where is the least Room for God, among those People who are ridiculously termed
People of Fashion, especially in Great Britain, where the Hours of People of
this Name are spent in Folly, Impertinence and Wickedness? As Home is
burdensome to Persons of this Cast, it is now fashionable to go abroad to
Breakfast, and, like those profane Persons the Apostle Peter describes, They
count it Pleasure to riot in the Daytime; some of these dance great Part of
the Morning away, while others are entertained with Drollery, Mimick'ry and
Buffoonery. When they are sufficiently tired with this Levity and Wantonness,
the next Appearance, of the Women at least, is at the Mercer's, Milliner's, or
Toy-shop, spending in Folly, Superfluity and Extravagance, while the Husbands
of some of them are perplexing their Brains how to support his Wife's Vanity,
which is now become his own, as he proudly considers it a Reproach to himself,
that his Wife should be less fine and fashionable than his Neighbor's. The
Toilet claims the Remainder of the Morning, 'till called upon at perhaps Three
or Four o'Clock, for Dinner; and then she is so hurried and uneasy, that she
cannot stay longer at her Glass to admire her Fopperies, that she has little to
do but quarrel with her Dinner or Servants, 'till the Hour of Visiting or
Diversions, which possibly may continue till Three or Four next Morning. By the
Account you have of one Day, you may easily conjecture how the whole Week is
spent. The Business of this Week being over, let us now see how the first Day
of the next is employed, or whether any thing of the Christian appears in their
Behavior on this Day. Having no Business to do on this idle Day, as many make
it, some indulge and sleep longer than usual on other Days, except those who
use it as a Day of Exercise or Recreation, making Excursions into the Country
merely for Pleasure. But let us attend those who go to their respective Places
of Worship regularly; these, by the preposterous, fantastical and splendid
Dresses, of both Male and Female, would induce a Stranger to think were
Idolators, reparing to some Heathen Temple, rather than the Worship of the true
God, who beholds their Splendour Are God's Eyes charmed thy Vestments to behold,
Glaring in Gems, and bright with glittering Gold?
-- The Sacrifices he requires,
Are Hearts which Love and Zeal inspires,
And Vows with strictest Care made good.
WATTS
and Pride with Contempt, and every One that is proud will he abase; for it is
said, The Lord of Hosts has purposed to stain the Pride of all earthly Glory.
But next, let us observe them in their Worship; and here again, we might
imagine they were addressing some senseless dumb Idol, rather than the great
Searcher of Hearts: For if we may be allowed to judge by the Evidence of our
Senses, when we see the Eyes of the greatest Part of the Congregation wandering
abroad, on the Faces or Dresses of each other, we may certainly conclude their
Hearts are not at Home, or intent on their Worship: But how monstrous and
impious is the Behavior of these People, pretending to be employed in the
Service of the Supreme Being, when we behold them bowing and paying Homage to
each other, sometimes in the midst of their Worship. This irreligious Conduct I
have not only been an Eye Witness of, but in the Practice of it, when I
professed with you; on which Behavior, as well as other Parts of Indevotion, I
have since reflected with Horror; and found our Lord's Words, on several
Occasions, veryfied in myself; I had been indeed worshipping I knew not what;
therefore in vain was all the Formalities and Ceremonies I was performing
outwardly, when I received no inward or spiritual Benefit. A certain Clergyman,
now living, as far as I know, (in his Remarks on the Levity and irreverent
Conduct of People in this false Devotion) wishes Their Prayers may not be found
in the Catalogue of their Sins. And another advises them, when at their
Prayers, to pause, and ask themselves, if they really do pray? I have been
greatly concerned, when I have thought that such Pretenses to Worship can be
considered no other (if I may be allowed the Expression) than affronting the
Almighty to his Face; and that he may take up the same Complaint as he did of
old against the Jews, saying, This People draw nigh to me with their Tongues
and their Lips, but their Hearts are far from me. And now the Worship is over,
let us observe if we can hear any Remarks on the Sermon: No surely; that was
not the Business that principally concerned them; but the Fashions and Garbs of
one another ingross the whole Observation, as soon as they are dismissed, and
are commonly the Subject of Conversation most part of the remaining Day.

But when we consider the Practice and Preparation of the foregoing Week, the
Horror and Amazement we must certainly have been filled with, while we are
reflecting, will cease; and we shall conclude with Regret, That better cannot
be expected from People, while they remain in such an inconsiderate,
irreligious, and unhappy Situation! The Impiety of a Life thus spent in this
Circle of Madness, Folly and false Devotion, is sufficient, one would think, to
provoke and draw down the Indignation of the Almighty on the Heads of such
Transgressors, with whom he has long suffered, in order to bring them to
Repentance. And I have been led to admire and adore the long Forbearance and
Mercy of the Majesty of Heaven, who is thus daily affronted and provoked by his
Creatures; Creatures too of his Pleasure, whose Life, Breath and Being, depend
on his Will; and who placed us here on this Earth to serve him our Creator, by
glorifying him with our Bodies, Souls and Spirits. But alas! instead of giving
the Honor due to his Name, or acknowledging him in all our Ways, as we are
exhorted, it is impossible that People in this Course of Life that I have
described, can acknowledge God in any of their Ways; and that in the Room of
having him in all their Thoughts, they take certain and sure Measures to
exclude him from all their Thoughts. And when I have sometimes been reflecting
on the common Expression made use of by many of these Sort of Christians, when
they would confirm something they are going to assert for Truth, irreverently
use these Words, As I hope to be saved, I have been much affected; for how
People, who pursue these Steps, can rationally hope to arrive at Heaven, I
cannot conceive. But supposing it possible to obtain it in their own carnal
Way, how would, or could they relish the Pleasure said to be at God's Right
Hand, or delight in his Presence, when they have had no Acquaintance, Communion
or Fellowship, with him on Earth? What would they think of spending an Eternity
in his Service and Praise, when the very Mention of Religion, and the Things of
God, are irksome and troublesome in Time? And it is now become unfashionable
and mean, and the Mark of a pusillanimous Spirit, so much as to insinuate any
Care or Concern about their poor immortal Souls. But let not any deceive
themselves, and hope to obtain Heaven and Happiness on easier Terms than the
Almighty has proposed: For if we will credit the sacred Writings, none but
those who have sincerely repented of their evil Ways, and turned from them; who
have loved, feared and served God here below, and who have gained the Victory
over their sinful Lusts and Passions, can be admitted into this glorious
Mansion of Bliss (nor none but those who are properly qualified for a Part in
the heavenly Choir, who can sing the Song of the Redeemed) where the happy
Employment of the Righteous will be praising God, and giving Glory to his Name;
as John (called the Divine) testifies; I saw, says he, those who had gotten the
Victory, with Harps in their Hands, singing the Song of Moses, the Servant of
the Lord, and the Song of the Lamb, saying, Great and Mavelous are thy Works,
Lord God Almighty! just and true are thy Ways, thou King of Saints! Who shall
not fear thee, O Lord! and glorify thy Name! And every Creature which is in
Heaven praised God, saying, Blessing and Honor, Glory and Power, be unto him
that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb, for ever and ever! And every Order
of Angels continually crying, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts! And those
who are redeemed, whose Robes are washed in the Blood of the Lamb, who are
arrived at this holy Habitation, not through Pomp and Luxury, but through great
Tribulation, stand before the Throne of God, and serve him Night and Day in his
Temple, and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell amongst them, and lead
them to Fountains of living Water, and God shall wipe away all Tears from their
Eyes.

If this be the happy Situation of the Blessed above, as we have no Reason to
doubt but it is, examine yourselves, I beseech you, and see how you are
prepared and qualified for such a Place and Condition; and remember it is the
Living only, those whom CHRIST has redeemed from the Power of the Grave of
Sin, and quickened, by the Resurrection of his Holy Spirit, to a Life of
Holiness, that can truly praise God; those who are dead in Trespasses and Sin,
cannot celebrate his Praise, nor sing the Song of the ransomed Ones. Therefore
you who are as asleep, in a carnal, easy and careless State, hear the Voice of
the Son of God, which speaks in your Conscience, saying, 'Awake, arise from the
Dead, and CHRIST shall give thee Life; stand in Awe, and Sin not; commune with
your own Hearts, and be still; retire there, and see how the Case stands
between God and your own Souls; acquaint yourselves with God, and be at Peace:'
For I testify to you this Day, that I have witnessed his Peace and Favor to be
better than Life; for which my Heart, as well as my Lips, have often returned,
to his great Name, high Praises and Thanksgivings! O that many may be made
sensible of his Favor to their Souls! that they may see, and fear, and turn
unto the Lord, and trust in his Name: You who are afar off from God, draw near,
and behold his Goodness, and taste it; and you who are near, with me,
acknowledge his Might. 'Times of Ignorance God winked at; but now, in this
Gospel-Day, he commands all Men, every where, to repent; as Life and
Immortality is brought to Light, through the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST;' whose
Gospel you profess to rejoice in: But if those, called Christians (whom God
has known, above all the Families of the Earth) rebel against the Light, your
Punishment will be the greater, according to the Proportion of Knowledge and
Grace received: For that Servant who knows his Lord's Will, and prepares not
himself, neither does according to his Will, shall be beaten with many Stripes.
Bring your Deeds therefore to the Light of CHRIST in your own Consciences, and
see if they are wrought in God: Remember why some formerly refused to bring
their Deeds to this Light; it was because it would manifest that they were
Evil, and therefore reproved by it. And though the Prospect may appear gloomy and
unpleasant to some, and you may be unwilling to break your false Peace, and
disturb a Rest you have created to yourselves, and find a stronger Propensity
to gratify than cross your sensual Inclinations and Appetites; though you may be
averse to an Undertaking which is likely to prove troublesome; a Task so
disgustful and disagreeable, as changing our old Customs and Manners; which you
are told by the Apostle, must be done: All who are in CHRIST JESUS, must be new
Creatures; Old Things must pass away, all Things must become new, and all of
God. These you may possibly think hard Sayings; but remember, the Propensities
of Flesh and Blood cannot enter with you into the Kingdom of God; whose Love,
when you are really in Possession of it, will make hard Things, easy, and
bitter Things, sweet. Many are discouraged and afraid to enter upon a religious
Course of Life, as it will, they imagine, retrench their Liberties, and render
their Lives unpleasant, gloomy and melancholy: This, indeed, is one of the
Subtilties of Satan; one of his evil Reports of the good Land of Promise, which
it is his Advantage to prevent your Entrance into. But don't believe him, nor
his evil Spies; he was a Liar from the Beginning, and remains so to this Day.
Though the Path you must tread, is narrow, and will not admit of many Things
which Pride has introduced, and the Tyrant, Custom, maintains and supports (and
which by the Way, you will have no Affection for) yet there is Room enough to
enjoy the necessary Things of this Life, in Moderation: Lament, you will
indeed, because you have been so long Sinners, and did not turn to, love and
obey God, sooner; and now will you mourn over him, whom you often pierced with
your Sins: Grieve, perhaps, you may; but one Reason will be, That the World
lies in Wickedness: But I dare venture to assert, that no true and real
Christian, ever repented that he was so; for all such Experience, in Truth,
that God's Service, is perfect Freedom; and that all His Ways, are Ways of
Pleasantness, and all his Paths, Paths of Peace. But farther, you who may be
unwilling to enter upon this new but necessary Work, this one Thing absolutely
needful, remember and consider, that CHRIST positively assures us, That except
a Man be born again (of the Spirit) he can in no wise enter the Kingdom of
Heaven, John iii. 3. And that if ever you are saved, it must be according to
God's own Prescription, by the Washing of Regeneration, and Renewing (Power) of
the Holy Ghost; by his sanctifying Word and Operation; which is able to do more
abundantly for you, than you can ask or think: Therefore, let me entreat you,
not to forsake your own Mercies: God is waiting to be gracious to you; his Hand
is full of Blessings; accept, I beseech you, of the Offers of his Grace, and
answer to his Call, while the Day of your Visitation lasts, lest when you call,
he should not answer; for he has declared, That His Spirit shall not always
strive with Man, for that he also is Flesh. Comply then with the Almighty's
Terms of Salvation, and do not vainly hope or imagine He will be brought down
to yours: Don't think yourselves safe, though many of you may be innocent from
great Transgressions; remember, all and every Unrighteousness is Sin: But many
flatter themselves, and believe, if they are not chargeable with gross
Immoralities, that little Sins will not be noted by the Almighty; that Satan,
the World, and the Flesh, are so powerful, that they cannot get the better of
those little Weaknesses and Frailties so incident to human Nature: and as they
do not, on their Principles, expect to be freed from them on this Side the
Grave, they do not so much as desire or attempt to obtain a Conquest over them;
but depend on God's Mercy, hoping he will not be extreme to mark small
Offenses; and if they are exact in some moral Duties, they imagine the Almighty
will compound for little Reserves. That God is essential Mercy, I grant; but
don't forget, that he is also Sovereign Justice, and will not condemn the
Innocent; neither will he step aside from his Equity, to acquit the Guilty; for
as the Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him, so shall the
Wickedness of the Wicked be upon him, Ezekiel. xviii. 20. Say ye to the Righteous,
it shall be well with him, for he shall eat the Fruit of his Doings: But woe
unto the Wicked, it shall be ill with him; for the Reward of his Hands shall be
given him.

But farther, these trite Arguments and Excuses, which are so generally made
use of to defend evil Practices, appear as weak as the Frailties they plead
for; and I think, if I may be allowed the Expression, People make the Almighty
a very injurious Compliment, when they ascribe greater Power and Strength to
Satan, than to the Most High. But perhaps they may imagine the Almighty will
dispense with some of his Attributes, since they allow him one in a more
absolute Degree. And now give me Leave to tell you what the great Protestant
Advocate, Chillingsworth, says on this Subject, in a Sermon preached before
King Charles the First (if I remember right) which take it in his own Words and
Sense. Some ascribe a Sort of Omnipotency to the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil; and that God neither does, nor will give sufficient Strength to resist
them; which Opinion he labors to explode, and positively affirms, that, by the
Assistance of the Grace of God, it is in our Power to resist them; and shows
the Necessity of so doing, from what we are so frequently and plainly assured
of in the New Testament, viz. That without actual and effectual Mortification,
with actual and essential Amendment of Life, Regeneration and Sanctification,
no Hope, no Possibility of Salvation. Thus you see, says he, all the divine
Writers of the New Testament, with one Consent, and with one Mouth, proclaim
the Necessity of real Holiness, and labor to disenchant us from the vain
Fancy, That Men may be saved by sorrowing for their Sins, and intending to
leave them, without effectual Conversion and Reformation of Life: Which, it may
be feared, has sent Thousands of Souls to Hell, in a golden Dream of Heaven:
And therefore he very justly apprizes his Audience, That it was not the
pleasing themselves, of being of such a Sect or Profession, together with going
to Church, saying or hearing of Prayers, receiving of Sacraments, hearing,
repeating or preaching of Sermons; with Zeal for Ceremonies, or Zeal against
them; or, indeed, with any Thing else, than constant Piety toward God, Justice
and Charity to our Neighbors; Temperance, Chastity and Sobriety toward
ourselves; we shall one Day find we have not mocked God, but ourselves; and
shall have our Portion among Hypocrites! We make the Church a Stage whereon to
act our Part, and playing our Pageantry; there we make a Profession every Day
of confessing our Sins, with humble, lowly, penitent and obedient Hearts; and
yet when we have talked after this Rate, twenty, thirty, or forty Years, our
Hearts, for the most Part, continue as proud, as impenitent, and as
disobedient, as they were in the Beginning A certain Author, in some Remarks on
(...) and Litany in the Book of Common Prayer, exclaims after this Manner;
'What! always learning, and never coming to the Knowledge of Truth? Miserable
Sinners you find us, and miserable you leave us!, And, in the Case of
Confession, he thus states the Matter; 'Suppose thou had a Son, and should
daily let him know what thou would have him do, and he should Day by Day,
Week by Week, and Year by Year, provoke thee to thy Face, and should say,
Father, I have not done what thou commandedst me to do: but I have done quite
the contrary; and should continue to provoke thee to thy Face, once, or oftener,
every Week, would thou not think him a rebellious Child, and that his
Application to thee was mere Mockery? And would is not occasion thee to
disinherit him?
. We make great Protestations when we meet and assemble together to render
Thanks to Almighty God, for the great Benefits received at his Hands: And if
this were to be performed with Words, with Hosannas, Hallelujahs, Gloria
Patri's, Psalms, Hymns, and such like outward Matters; peradventure we should
do it very sufficiently: But, in the mean Time, in our Lives and Actions, we
provoke the Almighty, and that to his Face, with all Variety of grievous and
bitter Provocations; we do those Things which he has assured us to be odious
unto Him, and contrary to his Nature. And therefore he laments to see, that the
Power of Godliness, almost in all Places, was decried and vanished; the Form
and Profession of it only remaining; that the Spirit and Soul of Religion was,
for the most Part, gone, and only the outward Carcass or Shadow of it left
behind! His whole Discourse was to press the absolute Necessity of Conversion
from Sin, and to show that nothing short of it would stand one in any Stead.
That none were CHRIST's, but those who have crucified the Flesh, with the
Affections and Lusts: They that have not done so, let them be as sorrowful as
they please, they, as yet, are none of CHRIST's: And he cries out, Lord! what a
Multitude of Christians are there in the World, that do not belong to CHRIST!
And then goes on; It is not a wishing, but a working Faith: Not a wishing you
were a new Creature; but being a new Creature: Not a wishing you had kept, nor
a sorrowing you have not kept, nor purposing vainly to keep; but the keeping
his Commandments must prevail with Him, as it is not to the Willing, but to the
Obedient the Promise is given. But is not this, says he, preaching Works, as
the Papists do? No, certainly; but it is to preach Works, as CHRIST and his
Apostles do; it is to preach the Necessity of them, which no good Protestant,
no good Christian ever denied; but it is not to preach the Merit of them, which
is the Error of the Papists. By this Author's Manner of Preaching Works, we may
infer, that he includes all Christian, as well as moral Virtues; by saying, 'We
must become new Creatures, and keep all God's Commandments:' And I would
observe to some, whom I have elsewhere said seem to confine Christianity to
moral Duties, and, in some Sort, to exclude the Duties of the first Table,
which we are as punctually to perform, as those of the Second; what will it
avail us, though we be exact in moral Works, if the Motive of them do not come
from God; for though we do all imaginable Justice to Mankind, though we give all
our Goods to the Poor, and suffer for what we think our Religion, yet the
Apostle Paul tells us, we may be deficient in the most material Point, if we
have not Charity; or do not act from that which ought to be the Spring and
Motive of all our Actions, viz. Love to God. The young Man, who came to CHRIST,
had, as he said, kept the Commands contained in the second Table, and yet we
find him unfit for eternal Life; he was negatively good; he had not done any
Murder, nor committed Adultery; he had not stole from, nor defrauded his
Neighbor; he had refrained from these Evils; but we do not find he had yet
learned to do well: And when Obedience to a positive and particular Injunction
CHRIST, our Lord, was pleased to lay upon him (supposed) to prove his Love and
Obedience to God; when it was required of him to quit, or exchange, his earthly
Possessions, though with great Advantage, no less than an Inheritance eternal in
the Heavens, and take up a Cross to his own Will and Desires, and follow
CHRIST, in this Way of Self-denial; behold he Coward like withdraws, and
departs, we are told, sad and dejected, being grieved with the Saying: This
unhappy young Man's Refusal of the Kingdom, or Eternal Life, on our Lord's
Conditions, occasioned him, with an apparent Concern, to say, How hardly shall
they that have, or in his following Words, that trust in Riches, enter into the
Kingdom of God! And, on another Occasion, he further declares; That whosoever
came to Him, and took not up his Cross, and denied himself, and hated not
Father and Mother, Wife, Children, Brethren and Sisters, yea, and his own Life,
(when brought in Competition of his Duty and Love to God) he could not be his
Disciple; and, consequently, unworthy of eternal Life.

I shall now give you the Sense of Dr. Whitby, as well as my own, with
Reference to the Precept of Self-denial, etc. He introduces his Subject by
paraphrasing on Mat. xiii. 22. Luke viii 14. Mark iv. 19. all which Remarks I
shall pass over, and only observe what he says on part of the said 19th Verse.
The lusting after other Things; hurtful Things, which choke the Seed or Word of
Life in us -- The Lust of the Eye, he tells us, are our Desires of gay Apparel,
rich Furniture, and such like, as by St. John are styled, the Pride of Life:
Desire of popular Applause, or high Estimation in the World: Advancement to
high Posts, or great Places, above others: And, lastly, Our excessive Love to
our Relatives; as Parents, Wives, Children, Friends, etc. For when these
Affections prove Temptations to Sin, as the Excess of them certainly does; they
will then be obstructive of that Influence, the Word of Life should have upon
us: And St. John informs us, that all these are not of the Father; but of the
World, John ii. 15, 16. And that if we love or set our Hearts upon them, the
Love of the Father is not in us -- Therefore CHRIST requires us to deny
ourselves in all these Things, to love them less, or hate them (comparatively)
that we may be his Disciples. And next I shall endeavor to illustrate, by one
Instance, among the many I have experienced, how I understand the above
Precept, by saying how I conducted myself in a Circumstance wherein Self-denial
appeared requisite and necessary to be put in Practice by me: When I was
conducted, by my great Leader, into the narrow Path of Self-denial, I was
sensible that I must part with many hurtful and superfluous Things, I had been
accustomed to; the Way was too narrow to admit of Pride in any Shape or Form;
and as Superfluity in Apparel, as well as many other Instances of Luxury,
appeared to me inconsistent with the Doctrines of Christianity, and the more
particular Instructions and Admonitions of several of the Apostles, I laid
aside several Things I thought inconsistent with the Profession of a Christian;
and disused idle and unmeaning Compliments; and further, being convinced of the
Principles of the People called Quakers, I joined to that Society. Thus I
became singular, and consequently despicable to my Children, and some of my
Acquaintance and Friends; who not only professed a Dislike, but a Concern that
I should appear in so contemptible a Manner, and so very different from what I
usually had done. Here I had a Cross to bear. What was now to be done! I was
certain I had acted with Sincerity, and done, according to the best of my
Understanding, what I apprehended the Duty of every common Christian, viz. To
part with all Superfluities of Naughtiness, which were now beginning to be
burdensome to me, as I gradually experienced, Old Things passing away, and new
Desires and Affections to take Place in my Heart. I frequented the Meetings of
these People, as I was convinced the Doctrines they taught, and their Mode of
Worship, were free from Ceremonies and Superstition, and most agreeable to the
Observations I had made in reading the sacred Writings, etc, and what was most
valuable and worthy Imitation, that the true and genuine Members of this
Society, walk consistently and agreeably to the Rules and Maxims of CHRIST and
his Apostles. However, to be despised by my Acquaintance, Friends and Children,
was a Trial hard to bear: But whosoever he be of you, that takes not up his
Cross, and hates not (comparatively) Father, Mother, Children, etc. says our
blessed Lord, is not worthy of me, and cannot be my Disciple.

And, though, in this Instance, I endeavored to please God rather than Men,
I Will venture to assert, that few have a more natural Tenderness, and
affectionate Regard, in both, or all these Relations than myself. And, indeed,
when the Love of God is received into our Hearts, it is so far from lessening or
contracting our lawful Affections, that it enlarges our Hearts, in a peculiar
Manner, to our Relatives and Friends; and excites in us a loving and benevolent
Disposition toward all Mankind, whose Happiness we entirely wish: For if any
Man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar; for he who loves
not his Brother, whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen?
And this Commandment we have from him, That he who loves God, will love his
Brother also; and we love God because he first loved us: Therefore, if God so
loved us, we ought to love one another, and do Good to all; but, more
especially to the Household of Faith; with whom we are made one in CHRIST. But
further, among many Instances of Self-denial, as I have above remarked, I found
Pride, in Apparel, absolutely necessary to be avoided; and though Pride, in every
Species and Appearance, is abominable and odious in the Sight of the Almighty,
yet it seems particularly against this Branch of it, that the Prophet Isaiah
exclaims in his third Chapter: And, I am sorry to observe, that the Charge of
this odious, as well as irrational Passion of the Mind, equally affects the
Male, as the Female Part of my Species. But what renders it the more notable,
is, that we don't remark, in preceding Ages, any Prohibition, in the Article
of Apparel, ever so much as mentioned; or any Caution given to Men, to avoid
Superfluity, or Gaiety, of this Kind; as if this Folly and Weakness, was indeed
incident and peculiar to Women only. And we may remark, from History, that wise
Men always neglected and despised Gaiety in their Clothes; and, whenever any
Vanity of this Sort appeared, though in young Men, it was looked upon with
Contempt, and derided by reasonable Men, who considered it as a Mark or
Indication of weak Intellects. But however that be, I shall take the Liberty of
asking my own Sex, who seem most concerned in the Judgments pronounced by the
Prophet against the Pride of Women, their Opinion of the Chapter I have
mentioned. After the Prophet had been enumerating the great Disadvantages and
Calamities the Children or People of Israel had brought upon themselves by
their Sin and Disobedience, for which, he tells them, the Lord would assuredly
enter into Judgment, by bringing these Calamities suddenly upon them; he adds,
Moreover, the Lord says, because the Daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk
with stretched-forth Necks, and wanton Eyes, walking, and mincing as they go,
and making a tinkling with their Feet: Therefore, in that Day (the Day of his
Judgments) says the Lord, I will take away the Bravery of their tinkling
Ornaments from about their Feet, and their Cauls, and their round Tires like
the Moon, the Chains, and the Bracelets, and the Mufflers, the Bonnets, and the
Ornaments of the Legs, and the Head-bands, and the Tablets, and the Earrings,
the Rings, and Nose-jewels, the changeable Suits of Apparel, and Mantles, and
the Wimples, and the Crisping-pins, the Glasses, and the fine Linen, the
Hoods, and the Veils. And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet Smells,
there shall be a Stink; instead of a Girdle, a Rent; instead of well set Hair,
Baldness; instead of a Stomacher, a girding with Sackcloth; and Burning,
instead of Beauty. And hence let us observe the Effects of Pride, in Apparel
too, which many think so insignificant; and some have been so absurd as to say,
that the Ornaments, etc. enumerated by the Prophet, were only unlawful to the
Jewish Women, who possibly had borrowed their Fashions from the Heathen, with
whom they were forbid any Sort of Commerce; neither were they to walk after the
Customs and Manners of the Heathen Nations. But we may remark, these Things
were not to be taken from them, because they had borrowed the Forms of them
from the neighboring Nations; but because the Daughters of Zion are proud and
haughty, and walk with stretched-forth Necks, when they are adorned with all
the Bravery of these Ornaments; therefore the Lord will deprive them of the
Things they made subservient to their Pride and Vanity; the Sin of which is
equally odious and abhorent to God, in us, the Descendants of the Gentiles, as
it was in the Jews: Nor does the Prohibition of Sin, or the Command or Precept
of Holiness, lose one Whit of its Force and Energy, for being delivered two or
three thousand, or seventeen hundred Years ago. As the Almighty is unchangeable
in his essential Holiness; for with Him is no Variableness, or Shadow of
Turning: Sin, that was Sin some Ages back, must absolutely be so at this Day.

But hear now what some of the Christian Apostles enjoin, when they were giving
Directions to the Churches of CHRIST, 1 Timothy ii. 9. and which Dr. Whitby thus
notes: In like Manner also I will that Christian Women adorn themselves in
modest Apparel, with Shamefacedness and Sobriety; not setting out themselves
with broider'd Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or costly Array; but with that
Ornament which best becomes Women professing Godliness; that is, with good
Works. And next the Apostle Peter, in his particular Instructions to Christian
Women, he thus expresses himself; Whose adorning let it not be that outward
adorning of plaiting the Hair, and wearing Gold, or putting on of Apparel; but
let it be with the hidden Man of the Heart, in that which is not corruptible,
even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the Sight of God of
great Price: For after this Manner, in the old Times, the holy Women also, who
trusted in God, adorned themselves. And the above cited Author, in his Comment
on the Words of both these Apostles, gives you his Sense thus: It seems
evident, that all Attire, which, by the Richness and Costliness of it, shows
any Pride or Vanity of Spirit, or any Ambition to excel others, is forbid by
the Apostle 's Words: All great Concernment, Care and Study, to appear in such
Attire, as if it were our truest Ornament, and that which made us excel, and be
more honorable than others: This Vanity and Pride, this Esteem of, and Concern
for, these Things, being not well consistent with Sobriety, and much less with
the Profession of true Godliness. And here (continues he) it is worthy to be
noted by the Women, that this Precept ought not to be slighted by them, as of
little Moment, seeing it is so carefully inculcated by the two chief Apostles
of the Jews and Gentiles, St. Peter and St. Paul. And the contrary is
represented as a Practice opposite to Godliness: And he subjoins; Let them
especially remark the Character here given of a Christian Woman, viz. That she
is one who does not only profess and declare, that she serves and worships God;
but also does show forth Godliness in her Life and Conversation. And let the
Men note hence, that if it be so unbecoming a Christian Woman to be thus
concerned in adorning and tricking up her Body, it must be much more unbecoming
a Christian Man to put on such Attire, which makes him truly deserve the Name
of Fop. And next let us hear the Opinion of one of the Ancients, viz, Clemens
of Alexandria; he tells us, That Women, who wear Gold, and plait the Hair, have
not the Image of God in the inward Man; and that the apostolical Constitutions
forbid Women to wear exquisite Garments, which were fitted to deceive, or Gold
Rings, etc. And Jamblicus, in the Life of Pythagoras, says, That no free Women
wore Gold, but lewd Women only. Hence you may observe, that the People called
Quakers, are not singular in the Construction they put on, or Sense they
consider the Apostle's Words in, in the Article of Apparel; and that our
Particularity in this Matter does not proceed from Whim, Caprice or Fancy, or
any Affectation of being singular; but from a Conviction in our own
Understanding, that Superfluity and Luxury, which has its Rise from Pride, is
inconsistent and contrary to the humble, lowly, unambitious Temper and Spirit,
of Christianity. One Argument some have made use of to support the Vanity of
gay and costly Clothing, was this; That the Pride was not in the Clothes, but
in the Heart; An Assertion I have greatly proved true by my own Experience. I
could not imagine there could be any moral or inherent Evil in a Piece of gay
Silk; for I know full well, that Pride proceeds from a vain and ambitious
Heart; and that if it had not its Residence, and Seat there, it would not
appear in the Habit or Garb. But though some perhaps may allow me to be
acquainted with, and therefore a Judge of my own Heart; yet, would it not
border upon Uncharitableness, to allege that all Persons who wear gay
Clothing, are consequently proud and ambitious? I answer; Though it may not be
safe to judge in every Case according to the Sight of the Eye, yet our Lord
seems to allow us the Evidence of our Senses pretty generally. Every Tree, says
he, is known by its Fruit. Of Thorns Men do not gather Figs, nor off a
Bramble-bush Grapes. And then gives us the following Mark or Criterion to judge
by, Ye shall know them by their Fruits. Thus when I see Fruits of the same Kind
produced by others, which I certainly know proceeded from the bitter Root of
Pride in my own Heart, I do not think it an uncharitable, but a natural and
rational Conclusion, that they spring from the like evil Root in others. A good
Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit, neither can a corrupt Tree bring forth good
Fruit. A good Man, out of the good Treasure of his Heart, brings forth that
which is good; but an evil Man, out of the evil Treasure of his Heart, brings
forth that which is evil. I have heard it objected, that Persons, who have
always been accustomed to Finery from their Infancy, are not commonly proud of
it; it becomes thereby so familiar to them, that they have not such high
Thoughts of themselves when gaily attired as many imagine; neither value Dress
and splendid Equipages, etc. at so high a Rate, as those do to whom they have
not been so habitual; this I have thought may be partly true; but
notwithstanding I have considered, that though these Things are habitual and
familiar to many, yet People of this Character are not so ignorant, as not to
be sensible that they are respected and courted according to the Appearance
they make in the World; and should any One propose to such to lay aside their
Splendour and Gaiety, we should soon see these Matters are not so indifferent to
them as some may think; they only seem more careless and easy about them,
because they have been accustomed to Pride of this Sort longer than others, and
therefore less affected with it, having better learned the Art to conceal it:
And if every One would be so just to themselves, as heartily and impartially to
enquire and ask their own Hearts, from whence proceeds their Fondness for
Splendour, Show and Pomp, especially in this Article, they would be obliged to
confess, or at least not to deny, that Pride was at the Bottom.

Part of a Conversation I happened to have with a fashionable Woman in Great
Britain, will serve to confirm what I have observed. She asserted she was free
from Pride, though she did adorn herself in a gay and splendid Manner. I asked
her if she could be as well satisfied and content in a plain Dress, and Stuff
or Woollen Gown, as with the gay Silks she usually wore? She answered yes. I
queried why she then dressed so gay? She answered, that she might appear
agreeable to others. I asked her why she was so much concerned to please others
with her fine Clothes, etc. She said, it was least she should be despised for
the Meaness of her Appearance. I asked her whence proceeded that Fear? Here, I
think, she was silent, being reduced to an Extremity, which proved the Source
of her Vanity to be nothing less than Pride, in spite of all her boasted
Humility. I have often thought, our Fondness for Trifles, Pomp, Show and Noise,
may be attributed to Inconsideration: For did we reflect, examine and compare
Things, we should certainly make very different Deductions, Conclusions, and
Estimations, from what the Generality of Mankind are wont to do. And I am
certain, from our Ignorance of Divine and Heavenly Things, proceeds our
Fondness and inordinate Desires for sensual and earthly Pleasures and
Enjoyments. And indeed since I have thought at all, I mean to any good Purpose,
I have been amazed at my own Stupidity and Folly, when I have considered and
recollected how anxious I had formerly been till I was in Possession of this
gay Silk, and the other fine Lace; and I have blushed with an holy Shame, when
I reflected how I had sometimes doated on a Ribbon, or any other Toy or Bauble,
that had but the Title of new-fashion'd annexed to it! One common Argument for
Superfluity and Luxury of all Kinds, is, that it encourages and supports Trade;
and that the Bread and Subsistence of Thousands depend on new Fashions: But
those who offer this Reason, do not consider how many, on the contrary, are
ruined and undone by contributing to what is alleged the Support of Trade;
this being so manifest, especially in Great Britain, that it needs no other
Proof but the Evidence of our Eyes, if we will but look round and consider how
many Families are reduced to Poverty, Wretchedness and Misery, from this very
Source Pride, from whence springs Luxury, in all its hideous Forms and Shapes.
The Disorder, as a late Writer observes, is become almost epidemical, as the
inferior Class of People endeavor all in their Power to appear as grand and
fashionable as their Superiors. And when I have considered, how usual it is for
the lower Part of Mankind to be swayed by the Example of the higher, I have
thought it greatly behoved People of Rank and Condition to exhibit Patterns of
Humility, Temperance, Sobriety and Moderation, with every other Christian
Virtue, to their Inferiors. But I have heard it objected, that costly and
splendid Apparel, etc. is necessary to make and support a proper Distinction
between Persons of high and low Degree. The Argument I have thought weak, and
unworthy to be offered by a Christian, as I am of Opinion, every reasonable
Person will grant that Piety and Virtue (not Gold and tinsel Ornaments) ought
to distinguish and render truly honorable the higher Rank of People. Besides,
it is evident, that these Distinctions are not kept up and maintained by costly
Attire, etc. for we may daily observe, that Persons of the lowest Rank, with
Respect to their Offices and Employments, are oftentimes very wealthy; and
these adorn themselves in as pompous a Manner, and have as grand Houses,
Furniture, Equipages, etc. as those who are greatly superior to them in other
Respects.

But allowing many Things the Title of Superfluity and Luxury, and therefore
unlawful to be used by Christians; it has been queried how are all these
Fashion-mongers, who are supported by making and vending Things of this Nature,
to be provided for, if they should give up their Employments, which you Quakers
say are contrary to Christianity, and therefore unlawful? I would first humbly
propose to People to examine themselves, and see if they are Christians; not
nominal, but real Christians; such as are led, ruled, guided and directed, by
the Spirit of CHRIST; those who are not, are none of his, whatever they may
pretend to; for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they (and they only)
are the Children of God. These will find, that it is not lawful for them to
support any Trade, or use any Employment, which is inconsistent, or clashes
with the Doctrines and Rules they profess to be governed by; such are not often
at a Loss for some lawful Calling or Business, whereby they may obtain Food and
Raiment, with which they are content; Religion has bounded their Desires, and
they greatly experience, that the Happiness of a Christian's Life does not
consist in the Abundance of this World's Goods. I have the Authority of a
Clergyman for what I am now going to mention, viz. "That all those who profess
themselves Christians, should, in all their Actions, consequently in their
Callings or Professions of Business, ask themselves this necessary Question,"
Can I do this Thing as a Christian? Or, is it consistent with the Principles
and Precepts of my Christian Profession?" And if upon a serious and sincere
Examination, we find that the Calling or Employment on which our Bread depends,
be in any wise contrary to the Precepts of CHRIST, and the Example he left us
to follow; if it be either directly or indirectly so, I believe we are culpable
if we don't leave off. For CHRIST tells us, if our Right Hand offend us, or
cause us to act any Thing against his Laws, we must cut it off; we must quit
whatsoever causes this Offense, how near, dear, and useful soever it be to us,
as it is better to enter into Life halt and maimed, than having two Hands to be
cast into Hellfire. I am not insensible, that what I have here offered will be
thought hard Sayings by many; but for our Encouragement our blessed Lord
assures us, That any One who has forsaken any temporal Advantage or Enjoyment,
as Houses, Lands, Father, Mother, Wife or Children, Brethren or Sisters, for
his Sake and the Gospel's, shall receive an Hundredfold in this World, and in
that to come Life everlasting. For Godliness has the Promise of the Life that
now is, and of that which is to come. We have not only an Hundredfold of Peace
in our Bosoms, viz. The Comforts of an upright Conscience (a greater Blessing
than any we have parted with) and spiritual Bread to eat, which the World knows
not of; but our natural Bread is made sure, and Water fails not; for the Lord
oftentimes casts away the Substance of the Wicked, yet he rarely suffers the
Souls of the Righteous to famish. Agreeable to this the royal Prophet speaks, I
have been young, and now am old, yet have I never seen the Righteous forsaken,
nor his Seed begging Bread. And again, he exhorts to "trust in the Lord and do
Good, and thou shall dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall be fed," And
further, he calls to his People to fear the Lord, and believe in him; "Believe
in him, and he will help thee, and order thy Way aright; fear and trust in him,
and your Reward shall not fail." He shall save them, because they put their
Trust in him; for look at the Generations of old, and see, Did ever any trust
in the Lord, and was confounded? Or, did any abide in his Fear, and was
forsaken? Or, whom did he ever despise that called upon his Name in Truth,
Sincerity and Uprightness? But supposing that Christians, as a Trial of their
Faith, may sometimes be reduced to great outward Distress, which may possibly
be permitted to extend to want of Bread, etc. yet shall Famine, or Nakedness,
or Persecution, or Distress, etc. separate us (Christians) from the Love of
God? No surely; These (compararively) light Afflictions, which we suffer for a
Moment, work for us a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory, 2 Cor.
iv. 17. For though the spiritual Exercises, as well as temporal Troubles of the
Righteous, may be many, yet the Lord delivers out of them all. And then can
we say upon the Banks of Deliverance, "We will love the Lord our Salvation, he
having been our Strength and our Shield, and done great Things for us;
therefore will we be thankful to his Name, and rejoice in his Power: For who
among the Gods (or Idols many make to themselves) is like unto our God! Let us
therefore ascribe Strength and Power to God; for his Name is glorious in
Holiness; he is fearful in Praises and a God that has indeed wrought Wonders
for us." Thus are we excited to love God, who first loved us, and has called us
to Glory, which we have beheld, as of the Glory of the only begotten Son of
God, full of Grace and Truth, of whom we have received Grace for Grace; and
having thus seen his Glory, our Hearts are overcome with his Beauty, and we
endeavor to return in our Measure Love for Love, and can now say in Truth and
Sincerity, Whom have we in Heaven but thee, and there is nothing that we desire
on Earth in comparison of thee? Thou art indeed become the chief among ten
Thousand to our Souls. Thus the truly Godly love God above all earthly
Considerations, and in the highest Degree.

The Love of God, says a pious Writer, is of so noble a Nature, that the
Mediocrity, which in other Passions is an Excellence, is here an Imperfection.
The Man, after God's own Heart, is not afraid to own to his Maker an Ardency of
Love, which he expresses by the significant Metaphor of Thirst, My Soul is
athirst for God, etc. Other Passions like other Rivers, are best liked, when
they flow within their wonted Banks; but the Love of God, as of the River Nile,
the Overflowing makes it the more welcome. The royal Prophet indeed discovers
often a fervent Love to, and Desire after, the Enjoyment of God's holy
Presence: So he no less esteemed his Precepts; agreeable to what our blessed
Lord said in After-ages to his Disciples, If ye love me, keep my Commandments.
I hate, says David, vain Thoughts, but thy Law do I love; for how sweet are thy
Words to my Taste? Yea, sweeter than Honey to my Mouth. I love thy Commandments
above Gold, yea, I esteem them above fine Gold. Thy Testimonies have I taken
for an Heritage, for they are the rejoicing of my Heart. Thy Testimonies are my
Delight, and my Counselors. I delight to do thy Will, O my God! yea, thy Law
is within my Heart, Psalm cxix. The Apostle Paul also delighted in the Law of
God after the inner Man: And agreeably, the Righteous, in all Ages, decline not
from the Commandments of his Lips, but esteem the Words of his Mouth more than
necessary Food.

But let none imagine, that though it is our Duty to love God with all our Heart,
Soul and Strength, above every Consideration, and with the greatest Ardency,
that this Injunction clashes with, or hinders our exerting this Duty of Love in
it is full Force in every natural and social Relation; as it is not the same
Species of Love with which we love God, as that we extend to our Neighbor,
Children, etc. For as God is an infinitely perfect Being, and happy in his own
Perfections, we cannot add to his Happiness by wishing well to him; therefore
we cannot love him with the Love of Benevolence or Beneficence, with which we
love our Neighbor, etc. but with the Love of Desire, desiring to be with him,
and to partake of his Fullness, agreeable to what the royal Prophet speaks, One
Thing have I desired, and that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the House
(or Presence) of the Lord forever; to behold the Beauty of the Lord, and to
worship in his Temple! A religious Soul, says one, may obey the Command of
loving God entirely, though she allows her Affections other Objects, provided
they be kept in a due Subordination, and from entering into Competition with
that Love which ought to be appropriated to God. The Apostle Peter loved God
above all earthly Considerations, when he refused to obey the High Priest, who
charged him with the other Apostles, that they should not teach in the Name of
CHRIST: He answered, and said, We ought to obey God rather than Man. Though in so
doing they incurred the Displeasure of Men, and were in Danger of losing not
only their Liberty, but even their Lives; nevertheless, say they, we cannot but
speak the Things which we have seen and heard (and for which Purpose we have
been immediately commissioned by our great Master himself) viz. That by us
Repentance and Remission of Sins should be preached in his Name among all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. And the Apostle Paul expresses the greatest,
as well as the most fervent Love to God, when he thus queries, Who (or what
Consideration) shall separate us from the Love of God in CHRIST JESUS our Lord?
Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or Peril, or Sword?
No; in all these Things we are more than Conqurors through CHRIST, who has loved
us! Therefore I am persuaded, that neither Life nor Death, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Heights
(of Prosperity) nor Depths (of Adversity) nor any other Creature, shall be able
to separate us (Christians) from the Love of God. And indeed those inferior
Interests bear no sort of Proportion to the superior Advantage of supreme and
heavenly Enjoyments; they being of so precious a Nature, enough to engage us to
court Heaven, at the Rate of renouncing for them all those unmanly
Sensualities, and trifling Vanities, for which inconsiderate Mortals are wont
to forfeit the Interest their Savior so dearly purchased for them. And as I
have elsewhere said, we may attribute all the sordid Vices and growing Follies,
which the Generality of People indulge themselves in, to Inconsideration, as we
don't enough examine and compare the fading Enjoyments of this Life, with the
permanent Blessings of an happy Eternity; if we did, we should soon discover
the great Disproportion, and willingly part with all sinful and transitory
Pleasures. And when I have been reflecting that Vice and Luxury, in every
Branch of it, abounds not only in Great Britain, where I have so lately, and so
frequently, lamented this epidemical Disorder, among People, who nevertheless
assume the Title of Christians, and Disciples of CHRIST, without rememb'ring,
that all who take that sacred Name upon them, must depart from all Iniquity.
(CHRIST came to redeem us from all Sin, and to purify to himself a peculiar
People, zealous of good Works:) I say, when I have observed that Vice,
Softness, Effeminacy and Luxury, of most Kinds, has every where sown its
noxious Seeds, which flourish in most Climes or Countries, my Soul shrinks at
the Thought of the Possibility not to say Probability and Danger (without
timely Repentance and Amendment of Life) of careless, negligent and voluptuous
Sinners, being precipitated from a Life of Ease, Security and Diversion, to a
State of endless Woe and Misery! From the Conversation of wanton and gay
Companions, to associate with wicked and unhappy Spirits; whose melancholy
Bemoanings, and bitter Cries and Complaints, will be far different from the
melodious Strains of Music the Ears of the Voluptious have been accustomed to:
Therefore it greatly behooves Sinners to make a suitable Preparation for the
trying Time of Death, lest it surprise them at unawares; and the unhappy and
dreadful Season approach, wherein it will be said to him that is filthy, Be
filthy still. Thus will Fearfulness seize the Hypocrite, and Sinners will be
ashamed of the Idols they once delighted in, and then will they cast the whole
Train of them to the Moles, and to the Batts.

But after all that can be said against Pride or Vice, of what Nature soever,
the strong Man armed will keep Possession of your Hearts, till you suffer a
stronger than he to enter, and turn him out, and spoil his Goods. Those Sins
which do let or hinder your coming to God, will let, till you permit them to
be removed. Every wild Olive Tree of Vice and Folly will grow and flourish,
till you find it your Interest, and a Necessity of being ingrafted into the
true Vine and Nature of CHRIST, and suffer him to lay the Ax of his Power to
the Root of the old and corrupt Tree, and then will every Branch of Pride and
Wickedness fall of course. Therefore, as One who has obtained Mercy, in having
a Sight afforded me, to see the Things that make for my everlasting Felicity, I
would recommend to you to consider of these Things. It was the great Loss and
Disadvantage, as well as Folly of the Children of Israel, that they neglected
the great Law of Consideration, which occasioned the Almighty thus to lament; O
that my People were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter End! But, further, as I have above occasionally mentioned Music,
which before I had only considered promiscuously, as an Attendant at Balls,
etc. I shall now observe, that it was a Science I formerly greatly delighted
in, and spent much Time, both in the Theory, as well as in the practical Part:
But when Religion began to take place in my Heart, I found Music stood in my
Way, and I considered it only as an Amusement, which detained me from more
solid and useful Thoughts and Reflections: In short, it became so burdensome
to me, that I could not perform any of my airy Lessons, which had been usual,
as well as pleasing to me: And on further Consideration it appears to me to be
a merely sensual, and not an intellectual Pleasure (as some would fondly
assert) therefore I quitted the Study, as well as Practice of it, for what I
now esteemed a more useful, profitable and rational Science, viz. The Study and
Knowledge of my own Heart, which I have found worth all I knew of the other
seven. But further, on perusing the sacred Writings, I do not remember to have
read of one Christian Musician in all the New Testament: And in reading the
Old, it appears that the Prophet Amos, describing the Wantonness of the
Children of Israel, and enumerating the many Instances of their Luxury, he
mentions Music as a Mark of Levity and Wantonness; They chant, says he, to the
Sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves Instruments of Music like David;
but they are not grieved for the Affliction of Joseph. And the Prophet Isaiah
denounces a Woe against them; adding, the Harp, and the Viol, the Tabret, and
Pipe, and Wine, are in their Feasts; but they regard not the Work of the Lord,
neither do they consider the Operation of his Hands; not being moved with the
Calamities of the suffering Part of Mankind, so long as they can enjoy Ease and
Plenty.

And now hear what the Bishop of Cambray says on the Subject of Music. As for
Music, it is well known, that the Ancients believed nothing more pernicious to
a well regulated State, than to suffer an effeminate Melody to be introduced
into it: It enervates Men and renders their Souls soft and voluptuous:
Languishing Strains are only pleasant, because the Soul gives itself up to the
Charms of the Senses; and this, adds he, was one of their most important
Policies. Plato, in the like Manner, severely rejects all the soft Airs of the
Asiatick Music; and with much greater Reason Christians who never ought to
seek Pleasure for Pleasure's Sake, ought surely to have an Aversion for those
poisoned Allurements.

I have been the larger in my Objections on Diversions and Recreations, which,
by most People, are considered as innocent Amusements; as they seem to be most
hurtful and dangerous. Many Inconveniences, as well as unlawful Things, creep
into the Hearts and Conduct of People, under the specious Title of Harmless
Pleasures. Poole, in his Annotations on the Bible, tells us, when discoursing
on the Lawfulness of earthly Enjoyments, It Is to be feared, more Souls miss of
Heaven and Happiness, by indulging and allowing themselves in Things deemed
lawful, than by committing gross and enormous Evils; these, many shrink at with
Horror; but those Things considered lawful, which sometimes becomes
circumstantially unlawful, and Pleasures termed innocent, are used and embraced
without Fear or Caution; and with all their Train of mischievous Consequences.
For this Reason I have also dwelt the longer on Pride in Apparel; yet I am not
insensible that it appears in many other Forms besides that, or what I am going
to mention, viz. That all true Christians consider it as an Evil, when it
discovers itself in Houses, Equipages, Furniture, or our Tables: As one who is
endued with the Christian Virtue of Humility, discovers it in every Action, or
Thing, that he has the ordering and conducting of: Always keeping in Memory the
Assertion of the Apostle Paul, He that strives for the Mastery, or runs so as
to obtain, is temperate in all Things. And as he is temperate in the Use and
Enjoyment of the Things of this Life, so is a true Christian moderate in his
Desires and Pursuits after worldly Riches and Profits; he makes not Haste to be
rich; his greatest Concern and principal Care, agreeable to our Lord's
Direction and Advice, is, First to seek the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness; to lay up a good Foundation against the Time to come; a
permanent Inheritance, which fades not away: And as Heaven is the End of his
Hope and Desires, he is careful to lay up Treasure there; using the perishing
Enjoyments of the Things of this Life, with as little Concern, and as much
Indifference, as if he used them not, for this great and good Reason, "Because
the Fashion of them passes away.!" On the contrary, how do we observe the
sordid Worldling, pursuing with Eagerness, Solicitude and Warmth, the
perishing Riches of this Life? And, in direct Opposition to our Lord's Precept,
they seek first, and principally, the Things of this World, which he exhorts us
not to be greatly anxious or thoughtful about; but to such as seek first his
Kingdom, and the Righteousness thereof, he assures us, all these Things (that
are needful for our Support) shall be added. Nevertheless, when we come to
reason with People of this Character, who so ready to confess, and assent to
the following Truths? "That as we are in this uncertain and passing Situation,
it is great Folly and Stupidity to be over anxious or immoderate in our Pursuits
after Wealth, or to be so very careful as some are, in making large Provision
for these mortal Bodies; laying up Goods for many Years; whereas we have no
continuing City here; that it is appointed to all Men once to die, and we know
not how soon we shall be summoned to Judgment, to render an Account of the
Deeds done in those frail Bodies." Yet what has been Matter of Astonishment to
me, is, that this very Body, which People profess in Words to make so little
Account of, when they reflect on the Shortness of it is Continuance here in this
Life, engrosses the whole Care: "What we shall eat, what we shall drink, and
wherewith shall we be clothed," appears to be the chief Concern of the
Generality of Mankind? Not that I think the Body should be excluded from a
necessary and proper Proportion of our Care and Diligence; as it would be
absurd and irrational to suppose our Bodies can subsist without suitable Care
and Provision: On the contrary, it is every Man's indispensable Duty, to
provide a Subsistence for himself and his Household; such who do not, are
considered by the Apostle worse than Infidels; having, by this Neglect, denied
their Faith in CHRIST; But then let it be a rational, moderate and Christian
Care; let the Things appertaining to this Life, have their just and proper
Place in our Affections; and not rebelliously and unnaturally usurp an
Authority Almighty Wisdom thought fit to invest his Creature Man with, at the
Time when he presented him with the Creation, and put it under his Subjection,
saying, Have thou Dominion over every living Thing, etc. and subdue the Earth.
Here was all sublunary and earthly Objects placed under our Feet; that the
Creatures were, by the Wisdom and Order of God, placed in Subordination and
Subjection to us; to be our Servants, not our Lords (that our Reason should
rule them, not they govern our Reason) which they immediately become, when we
make an unlawful and improper Use of them; and which we certainly do, when we
employ them to fulfill the sinful Lusts and Vanities of the Flesh. And further,
is it not Matter of Wonder and Amazement, Compassion and Lamentation, to
observe so little Provision made for, or Concern employed about the immortal
Soul, which must absolutely and certainly have an eternal Existence, either in
Bliss or Misery? And though many who pretend to Religion and Virtue, acknowledge
that our Felicity consists in rightly knowing, truly loving, and reverently
serving the Supreme Being: And that Obedience, Submission and Resignation to
his divine Will and holy Commands, is the highest Point of Wisdom, and
indispensable Duty of all rational Minds; yet how small the Proportion of those
who act agreeable to this Confession, to those, by far the greater Number, who
inconsiderately and blindly follow the dark Imaginations of their own Wills and
Affections? This Consideration is indeed Subject of Mourning to those whose
Eyes and Understandings the Almighty has mercifully opened by the Hand of his
divine Power, and assisted by the Light of his Grace, to see their own
Mistakes; and has graciously afforded his holy Aid and Instruction, by which
they were enabled to rectify them. These, seeing the manifold Dangers all who
are in a State of Sin and Forgetfulness of God are obnoxious to, are concerned
to discover and point out the dangerous Rocks such must inevitably fall on, if
they continue to pursue the perilous Course of Sin and Folly; and to mark out,
as far as they are enabled, the Way and Means by which they may escape the
Pollution of, and Punishment due to Sin; and obtain Acceptance with the
Almighty, viz. "Repentance toward God, Faith in JESUS CHRIST, and, by the
Assistance of his holy Spirit, a constant and consistent Walking in the Paths
of Virtue and Holiness:" For we are not so ignorant as not to know, that his
Will concerning us, is our Sanctification; And that we may not be led astray,
nor be deceived by the grand Adversary of our Soul's Happiness, our merciful
and benign Creator, knowing our Weakness and Inability to perform any good
Action, or to resist the least Temptation, by any Strength or Power of our own,
without the Instruction, Aid and Assistance of his Almighty Arm, has provided
us a Leader and Conductor, who is mighty to save, and able to deliver to the
Uttermost, all who come to him with full Faith in his Power. We must, as the
blind Man did (who came to CHRIST to have his Eyes opened) believe that he is
able to do the same great Work for us in a spiritual Sense, which he performed
for him in a natural; and also say, with the Leper, Lord, if thou will, thou
can make me clean; and as CHRIST's Office was also to open the Prison Doors,
and to let the Captives go free; All you who may be in cruel Bondage, held in
Captivity by Sin and Satan, as it were, by Chains of gross Darkness, if you are
but willing to be released from this Slavery, apply to CHRIST, who is able to
bind the strong Man armed, to spoil his Goods, and to expel him out of your
Hearts: Are you willing to be free? CHRIST our Lord proclaims a Year of
Jubilee, wherein he is ready and willing to set you free on easy Terms, viz.
"Love and Obedience to his Will, whose Service is perfect Freedom; for if
CHRIST make you free, then shall you be free indeed; when the Law of the Spirit
of Life in CHRIST JESUS has made you free from the Law of Sin and Death, and
brought you into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God; glorious Privilege
indeed! Behold the stupendous Love of the Father, and the Dignity he bestows
upon those that are led by his Spirit, that they shall be called the Sons of
God! and if Sons, then Heirs, Joint Heirs with CHRIST, Romans viii. 14.17. of the
Kingdom he has promised to them that love and obey him. And permit me to
assure you, from my own happy Experience; (which I would always mention with
Humility and Reverence, never, I hope, forgetting, that what I am, I am by the
Grace of God) That whosoever looks into this perfect Law of Liberty, and
continues therein, this Man shall be blessed in his Deed, Isa. i. 25. For the
Effect of Obedience to the royal Law of God, is Quietness and Assurance
forever; which will afford us a well-grounded Hope of Acceptance with the
Almighty, agreeable to the Apostle; 'Beloved, if our Hearts condemn 'us not,
then have we Confidence toward God, 1 John iii. 21. And the Reason he assigns
is Because we keep his Commandments; and this is his Commandment, That we
should believe on the Name or Power of his Son CHRIST JESUS, ver. 23. And you
know that he was manifested to take away our Sins. But if any one ask, How
shall I apply to CHRIST, or where shall I go to meet with Him; since some say,
Lo, here is CHRIST; and others, Lo, he is there? Hear now where the Apostle
Paul directs all such Enquirers; Say not in thine Heart, who shall ascend into
Heaven? that is, to bring CHRIST down from above: Or who shall descend into the
Deep? that is, to bring CHRIST again from the Dead (for the Righteousness,
which is of Faith, speaks on this wise) The Word is nigh thee, even in thy
Mouth, and in thine Heart, that is the Word of Faith which we preach, Romans x.
6, 7, 8. And this is the Law and new Covenant the Prophet Jeremiah foretold God
would make with his People, which in these latter Days, or Gospel Dispensation,
our great Legislator puts into the Hearts of Mankind, and writes in the most
secret Recesses of our Consciences; instructing us more immediately in our
Duty, and saying to the Unrighteous and Disobedient, This is the Way, not that
which thou art walking in, of Sin and Folly; but this is the Way, the Way of
Righteousness, Holiness, and Obedience to all God's Commands; for the
Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is Light; and the Reproofs of Instructions
in the Way to Life, Prove. vi. 23. In this Way and Light the Righteous are
careful to walk; the Law of his God being in his Heart (if strictly adhered to)
none of his Steps shall slide, Psalm xxxvii. 31. To the Truth and Extention of
this Light, or Grace of CHRIST's Holy Spirit, in our Hearts, 'this more sure
Word of Prophecy,' the Apostle Paul bears ample Testimony, as I have elsewhere
noted, in these Words; "The Grace of God, that brings Salvation, has appeared
to all Men, teaching us that denying Ungodliness, and the World's Lusts, we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present World, Titus ii.
11, 12. With this Testimony of the Light the Liturgy of the Church of England
concurs. Col. Whit. Sun.
God, who at this Time did teach the Hearts of thy faithful People, by
sending to them the Light of thy Holy Spirit; grant us, by the same Spirit, to
have a right Judgment in all Things; and evermore to rejoice in his holy
Comfort. And in the Litany; Absolution.
May it please thee to endue us with the Grace of the Holy Spirit: Let us
beseech God to grant us true Repentance, and his Holy Spirit, that those Things
may please him that we do at present, and that the rest of our Lives may be
pure and holy. Col. 19 Sund. Trin.
Forasmuch, O God, as without thee we are not able to please thee, grant that
thy Holy Spirit may, in all Things, rule our Hearts; and because of the
Weakness of our mortal Nature, we can do no good Thing without thee, grant us
the Help of thy Grace, that, in keeping thy Commandments, we may please thee,
both in Will and in Deed.

Therefore as the Archbishop Tillotson's Sermons.
Dicourses and Prayers of others abound with Testimonies to the Necessity of
Christians being led and guided, and influenced by the Spirit or Grace of God;
which we sometimes express by the Scripture and significant Metaphor, of Light.
Why should this Doctrine, or these Terms, be considered and ridiculed as
Absurdities in our Words or Writings; since we understand and use them in the
same Sense and Acceptance, and pray for the Illumination and Aid of the Holy
Spirit, for the same good Purpose, viz. To give us a right Judgment in all
things. And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
Understanding. We know that he is come by the Gift of his Holy Spirit sent into
our Hearts; which shows us all that we do, or ever have done -- This is he of a
Truth, whom the Prophets and primitive Christians bore Testimony to; By his
Heart-searching Power, we know him; nor can we mistake him for another: And as
he thus knows the Secrets of all Hearts, and will judge them with righteous
Judgment, in the Day God has appointed for it; the only Way for us to be happy
here, as well as hereafter, is to obey the Dictates of this most holy Gift; and
refrain from every Thing it reproves for; and we, as well as those in the
Apostle's Time, shall feel the Peace of God to fill our Hearts and Minds. This
Holy Gift therefore is the Power of Godliness, which the Apostle foresaw some
would deny, though they retained the Form of it: To deny therefore this
influence, is to deny one of the essential Benefits of CHRIST's Death and
Mediation; for he leading Captivity Captive, that is, the Power of Hell, Death
and the Grave, ascended up on high, and mediated and obtained these divine
Gifts for Men; and as the Grave could not hold Captive the Body of this holy
One, so neither can the Heaven of Heavens contain or limit his spiritual
Influence; by which his Ministers and Servants receive Power, Knowledge and
Wisdom. Men may, with as good a Grace, go about to deny the Influence of the
Sun by its Light and Heat, as that of God upon Man. But poor, proud, finite
Man, because he cannot comprehend the Mode and Manner of it, would as
presumptuously as injuriously (to himself) deny it. Whereas he cannot so much as
understand or comprehend the Manner of the natural Sun's emitting its Rays of
Light and Heat, though he daily sees and feels the Necessity and Benefit of them:
How much more stupenduously sublime, and incomprehensible is the Diffusion of
the Holy Spirit! it is sufficient for us finite Creatures, to feel the Effects
of it, as we do of the Sun, without comprehending the Manner of its Emanation.
As the powerful Operation and Motions of God's Spirit, quickening the Heart
toward God, are compared to the blowing of the Wind; for as it is by the Wind,
Man perceives the Effect of it, that there is such a Thing, and that it does
blow; yet his Power cannot restrain it; neither can his Reason reach to know,
whence it rises, or how far it comes, or how far it reaches. However, it is fit
to be observed, that God does not act by a coercive or compulsive Power; but as
he has given Men spiritual Gifts, so he has given them spiritual Faculties to
use them, as well as natural Ones: But if Men will not hear, the Consequence as
naturally follows, as in any other Case, God remaining invariably the same, and
without the least Shadow of turning. I shall now produce another Testimony to
the Truth of the Operation of God's Spirit in Man, which the Archbishop of
Cambray gives us in the following Words; By Scripture it is certain that the
Spirit of God dwells in us; that it acts there, that it prays there
continually, that it groans there, desires there; that it asks for us, what
we know not how to ask for ourselves; that it excites us, animates us, speaks
to us in Silence, suggests all Truth to us, and unites us to itself, that we
become one Spirit with God: This is what Scripture teaches; this is what the
Doctors who are farthest off of inward Life, cannot but acknowledge: And yet,
notwithstanding their Principles, we always see by their Practice, that they
suppose the outward written Law, or; at most, a Light drawn from Scripture and
Reason, to be what enlightens us inwardly; and that it is not our Reason
afterward which acts of itself by that Instruction. These Men set not enough
by the inward Teacher, the Holy Spirit, who does all in us; he is the Soul of
our Souls; we cannot frame a Thought, or create a Desire, but through him.
Alas! how great is our Blindness! We make account as if we were by ourselves in
this inward Sanctuary; but, on the contrary, God is there more nearly than we
ourselves are. Perhaps you will say to me, What then, are we all inspired? Yes,
without Doubt; but not as the Prophets and Apostles were. Without the actual
Inspiration of the Spirit of Grace, we can neither believe, will, nor do any
Good. We are therefore always inspired; but we stifle this Inspiration
continually. God ceases not to speak; but the Noise and Hurry of Things
without, and our Passions within, deafen us, and hinder us from hearing Him. We
must silence every Creature, and ourselves too, to hear in a profound Stillness
of Soul, the inexpressible Voice of Christ, the Bridegroom of our Souls. We
must listen diligently; for it is a very still and soft Voice, which is not to
be heard, but by such as hearken to nothing else. O how seldom is the Soul
silent enough to let God speak! The least whisper of our vain Desires, or of
Self-love, attentive on Self, confounds all the Words of the Spirit of God. We
hear plainly what he speaks, and that he asks for something; but we don't
perceive what it is; and very often we are contented not to understand it. The
least Reserve, the least Regard for Self, the least Fear of understanding too
plainly, that God asks for more than we care to give Him, disturbs this inward
Voice. Shall we wonder then that so many, and even pious Persons, but full of
amusing Thoughts, vain Desires, worldly Wisdom, and Confidence in their own
Virtues, cannot hear it; but take this inward Voice to be a Chimera of
Fanatics! Alas, what do they mean by such scornful Language? To what Purpose
would the outward Expressions of Teachers be, and even of the Scriptures
themselves, if it were not for the inward Voice of the Holy Spirit; which gives
the other all its Efficacy. The outward Words of the Gospel itself without this
living, efficacious Word within, would be but an empty Sound. It Is the Letter
that kills, but the Spirit gives Life. O eternal and All-powerful Word of
the Father! it is thou who speak in the very Bottom of our Souls. The Words
that proceeded out of the Mouth of our Savior, when upon Earth, had not been
productive of so much Virtue, and so great Fruits, but because they were
animated by this Word of Life, which is the Word himself. This made Peter say,
Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou have the Words of eternal Life! Therefore it is
not the exterior Law or Rule of the Gospel, which God lets us see by the Light
of Reason and Scripture; it is his Spirit that speaks, that teaches, that
operates in, and animates us; so it is the Spirit that works in us, both to
will and to do what is good; as it is our Soul that animates our Body, and
regulates its Motions: It Is certain therefore that we are all inspired
continually; that we live not the Life of Grace, but in Proportion as we
partake of this inward Inspiration. These Positions and Principles being laid,
it must be acknowledged, that God speaks continually in us: He speaks in
hardened and impenitent Sinners; but they being stunned, as it were, by the
Noise of the World, and their Passions, cannot hear his Voice; it is to them a
Tale or Fiction: He speaks in penitent Sinners, they feel a Remorse of
Conscience, and that Remorse is the Voice of God, which reproaches them
inwardly for their Sins: When these Sinners are effectually reached and
smitten, they find no Difficulty in understanding this secret Voice; for it is
that which smites them so sharply; it is in them the Two-edged Sword St. Paul
speaks of, which divides asunder Soul and Spirit. God makes himself to be felt,
tasted, and obeyed: They hear this soft Voice, which gently smites them in the
very Secret of their Heart, and the Heart is tendered, and broken; and that is
true Contrition: God speaks in enlightened and learned Persons, whose Lives are
to Appearance, exact and regular; but commonly these Persons being full of
themselves, hearken too much to themselves, to hear God; they reason upon every
Thing, and do all by Rules and Principles of human Wisdom and Prudence; which
would be much better done through Simplicity, and a Docility to the Teaching of
God's Spirit: Such as these appear to have more Goodness than others; and they
have, in a good Degree; but then it is a mixed Goodness; they are great and big
in themselves, and value themselves in Proportion to their Capacity and Reason;
they are always swayed by their own Counsel, and strong in their own Eyes and
Opinion. O my God, I thank thee with JESUS CHRIST, that thou hidest these
Secrets from the Wise and Prudent in their own Eyes, but revealest them with
Pleasure to weak and humble Souls! It Is only Children thou art familiar with;
Children in Malice, and every other Vice; but behavest toward others in their
own Way: They will have Knowledge, and other splendid Virtues; thou give them
shining Parts, and make them a sort of Heroes; but this is not the best
Portion; there is some thing more hidden for thy dear Children; they lean, as
John the beloved Disciple did, upon thy Bosom. If these Arguments, drawn from a
sensible Experience and Feeling of God's Operation in the Soul, convince not
the Reader; if he be not one of those who think to have eternal Life by the
Scriptures; yet will not come to CHRIST, that they may have Life; he would do
well to examine and see, if he is not in the State the Author himself once was
in; seeking for God without, and never think to find him within, I tried, says
he, by collecting in my Mind all the wonderful Works of Nature, to frame an
Idea of thy Grandeur; I sought thee among thy Creatures, and did not think of
finding Thee in my own Heart; where thou art never absent. Consider these
Things, my Soul, and shut the Door of thy sensual Desires, that thou may hear
what God the Lord speaks; and with the Prophet Samuel say, Speak, Lord, for thy
Servant hears. Let not Moses, nor any of the Prophets, speak; but do Thou
rather speak, O Lord God, the Inspirer and Enlightener of all the Prophets! for
Thou, alone, without them, can perfectly instruct me; but they, without Thee,
can profit nothing. They sound forth Words, but cannot give Spirit; they speak
well, but if Thou be silent, they inflame not the Heart; they teach the Letter,
but Thou openest the Sense; they bring forth Mysteries, but Thou unlockest the
Meaning of them; they declare Thy Commandments, Thou helpest us to fulfill them;
they show the Way, Thou give Strength to walk in it; they act outwardly upon
us, but Thou enlightens and instructs the Heart; they water, but Thou give
the Increase; they strike the Ear with Words, Thou give Understanding to the
Heart.

Thus, my dear Fellow-mortals, I would hope by this Time you are all sensible
that you have a Portion of Grace or Light, which has manifested Sin and Folly
to you sometimes in the Cool of the Day, when you have been a little
sequestered from your Diversions; listen then, I beseech you, to its Voice; it
will speak, as I said before, as never Man did; it will tell you all you have
done, and continue to reprove when you do amiss. This is the Voice of that
Prophet which Moses told the Children of Israel would be raised up amongst
them; A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your Brethren
like unto me, him shall you hear in all Things. And whosoever will not hear
this Prophet, he shall be cut off from among the People, Acts iii. 22. Hearken,
I beseech you, to his Voice; receive him in his spiritual Appearance; kiss the
Son while he offers his Grace, lest he be angry, and cut you off in the great
Sin of Unbelief, in his Power to cleanse you from all Unrighteousness.

I don't purpose to particularize or consider singly every Sin the corrupt
Nature of Man is liable to; yet as there have several Iniquities occurred to me
which I have noticed, so I shall, as it now presents to my Understanding, make
a brief Observation on that black and cruel One, of Detraction, especially as I
have often observed how many fall into this Mischief inconsiderately, without
thinking it of so cruel and evil a Nature as it really is, this noxious Weed
being the Product of most Countries, I cannot forbear putting you in Remembrance
how many able Pens have been employed, to eradicate it, by Reasons and
Arguments, sufficient abundantly to convince us of its hurtful Nature, and give
as a just Abhorrence of it; as an Injury done to our Neighbor seldom fails to
recoil upon our selves at one Time or other; for he that diggeth a Pit shall
fall into it, and he that rolleth a Stone, it shall return upon him. And as I
have noted, this Vice has been exposed to the World long ago, in its hideous
Forms and cruel Consequences, I don't here presume to think myself capable of
painting it in more gloomy and disagreeable Shapes than others have done. What
I would remark is, That it is to be feared many don't peruse carefully the
Scriptures, and other Books, on the Subject of Moral, as well as Christian
Virtues; or at least do not sufficiently consider them; for did we but rightly
and justly reflect on this Precept of CHRIST's, Thou shall love thy Neighbor
as thyself, One would think it might be sufficient to prevent the Mouth of
Envy, Malice, Infamy and Detraction, from ever being opened; and were there but
Room for this Reflection in any Interval of such Conversation, how would it
silence all Uncharitableness! CHRIST mentions our Love to God in the first
Place, and in the superlative Degree; and in the next, Love (or Charity) to our
Neighbor, as the two (most material) Commandments (or Points) on which depends
the Law and the Prophets. And he has left us this Injunction, which is styled
the golden Rule, and ought to be an inviolable One, "Whatsoever ye would that
Men should do unto you, do you even the same to them." And on another Occasion
he adds, "A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another." And the
Apostle Paul recommends to the Romans the accomplishing this Commandment in
these Words "Owe no Man any Thing, but to love one another; Love works no Ill
to his Neighbor; therefore Love is the fulfilling of the Law." And after
enumerating the Laws of the second Table, he subjoins, "If there be any other
Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor
as thyself." But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not
consumed one of another." The Apostle James tells the Believers, if they
fulfilled the royal Law according to the Scripture, "Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thyself, ye do well." And the Apostle Paul, giving the Romans and
Galatians a Catalogue of the Fruits or Sins of the Flesh, among others he
mentions "Backbiting, Envy, Whispering, Malice, Emulation, etc." And he exhorts
the Ephesians to put away "all Bitterness, Wrath, Clamor and Evil-speaking,
with all Malice; and be ye kind to one another, tenderhearted, forgiving one
another, as God for CHRIST's Sake has forgiven you." And the Apostle Peter,
dehorting Christians from the Breach of Charity, speaks after this Manner;
"Wherefore laying aside all Malice, Guile, Hypocrisy, Envy, and all
Evil-speaking, by which you will become as new born Babes (innocent and pure)
fitted to recive (or desire) the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye may grow
thereby." And next let us observe, how that St. Paul exalts this Love to God,
and Charity (or Love) to our Neighbor, above all other Gifts and Virtues:
"Though I speak with the Tongue of Men or Angels, and have not Charity, I am
become as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal. Though I have the Gift of
Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries and Knowledge; though I have Faith, so as
to remove Mountains, and have not Charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all
my Goods to feed the Poor, and though I give my Body to be burned and have not
Charity (if I don't give and suffer from this Principal of Love to God and my
Neighbor) it profits me nothing. Charity or Love suffers long, and is
kind; Charity envieth not (the Happiness of another) Charity vaunteth not
itself, is not puffed up, does not behave itself unseemly, seeks not her own
(Honor or Reputation) is not easily provoked, thinks no Evil, rejoiceth not
in Iniquity, but rejoiceth in the Truth, or (when any act agreeable to the
Gospel of CHRIST) bears all Things, believes all Things, (all the Good it
hears, or can have any charitable Grounds to think of others) hops all Things
(that if our Neighbor is bad he may mend) endures all Things (patiently) as
all Things work together for Good to them that love God. This Charity never
fails; but whether there be Prophecies they shall fail; whether there be
Tongues they shall cease; whether there be Knowledge it shall vanish away. And
now abides Faith, Hope and Charity, but the greatest of these is Charity," as
it will continue when Faith shall end in Vision, and Hope in Enjoyment. And now
permit me to recommend to you a serious Perusal of these, as well as other
Passages of the Holy Records, which were written for our Learning and
Instruction: And amongst many which I might mention, who has wrote against the
Sin of Detraction, there is one in the Collection called The Lady's Library,
worth perusing, as the Arguments seem founded on Christian Principles and
Doctrines, and the Reasoning obvious and convincing. But suffer me now, without
Offense, to mention a Thought I have often had, when I have been reflecting on
this Fault in both Sexes. As I endeavor to cherish a more charitable Opinion
of Mankind, than to think any Person can delight in Evil simply as Evil; and I
would fain hope few are of so cruel a Disposition, as to receive a Pleasure in
hearing the Errors and Miscarriages of their Neighbors related. And if any be
guilty of the same Fault, or any other, our Brother may be charged with, the
Company of others in Evil, will by no Means extenuate our Crime, or render such
less culpable in the Sight of God, or less odious to good Men: But, on the
contrary (if I may be allowed the Expression) the Confederacy against Heaven is
the more strengthened by the Number of its Enemies; yet though they join Hand in
Hand, they shall not go unpunished: However, I have put the Conduct of People
of this Character on a more charitable and favorable Bottom; for I have
considered, that these sort of Conversations, or rather Conspiracies, against
our Neighbor's Fame, proceed from a Defect of that solid Nourishment the
Author I have before cited seems to recommend. And I have sometimes thought,
that it is our Ignorance of other Matters, and better Subjects, which occasions
our Neighbor's Conduct to be so frequently the Topic of our Conversations;
but I would not be here understood to call in question the Capacities of either
Sex, and would only desire the Liberty of giving a Caution against the
Misapplication of your Talent or Talents. This appears to me to be the Fault,
People's employing their Faculties so much, not only on vain, and trifling
Subjects, but frequently on pernicious and hurtful Things, so that they have no
Room nor Leisure to attend to more useful and important Subjects; and as I have
said, that though we may not be chargeable with the same Fault our Neighbor may
be guilty of, yet the Apostle Paul tells us, "All Mankind have sinned, and
fallen short of the Favor of God," and therefore all who have not yet
sincerely repented and amended their Ways, have need of Repentance and
Forgiveness. But if any commit an Evil, how are Christians to act in such a
Circumstance? Are we to expose, blacken and defame our Brother, or to rejoice
in his Miscarriage? No surely; the Gospel of CHRIST and his Ministers teach
other Things.

"Brethren, if any be overtaken with a Fault, you that are spiritual (endeavor
to) restore him;" How? "In the Spirit of Meekness, considering, least thou
thyself be also tempted," let his Miscarriage excite our Compassion toward
him, and Caution toward ourselves; and bear ye one another's Burthen's, and so
fulfill the law of Christ, "Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thyself;" and
whenever we call in Question our Neighbor's Conduct, let us remember we are
first to be spiritual ourselves, walking in all God's Commandments blameless:
And agreeable to the Doctrines and Principles of Christ, let us first pull the
Beam out of our own Eye, and then shall we see clearly to take the Mote from
our Brother's. And when we are converted then shall we be fitted to strengthen
our Brethren: Thus the royal Psalmist petitions the Almighty, "Create in me a
clean heart O God, and renew a right Spirit within me: Then will I teach
Transgressors thy ways, and Sinners shall be converted to Thee."

I shall now mention another particular Evil, not only as I find it greatly
blamed by others, but as it has often been Subject of Concern to me when I have
observed this unnatural Conduct, which relates only to the Female Part of the
World, so justly chargeable on them: But which I would charitably hope they
have not yet many of them seen, or at least reflected on the great Mischief it
produces, both to themselves, and their Offspring. The Fault I mean, is Neglect
of Duty, and natural Obligation to our helpless Infants, which is so obvious at
their first Appearance in Life, when we deny them that Nourishment Nature has
provided for them, and by framing some insignificant Excuse, forsake and leave
them to others. This inhumane Treatment of our tender little Ones, I cannot help
thinking has its Foundation in Pride Natural Affection to our Offspring seems
blended with our very Constitution; and it appears to me we must use uncommon
Violence to separate it from our Make. But behold the Effects of Pride! what
Mischief is there that it is not productive of! Even a few Weeks after our
tender Babe beholds the Light, lest it should occasion us some extraordinary
Trouble and Care, or prevent some little Delicacy in our Shape or Dress, or
detain us from making unedifying and impertinent Visits, etc. we consign the
poor Innocent into the Hands of a Stranger, to be fostered by Women,
oftentimes, of savage Tempers, and vile Affections, which some are of Opinion
the Infant imbibes with its Milk; though I cannot conceive this, as I apprehend we
are not Sinners by Constitution, but Corruption. However, it is manifest, and
often happens, that the Child imbibes an unwholesome Constitution from its
Nurse: And, it is the Opinion of some, that the Death of many an Infant (in
other Places at least) may be chargeable on their Parents, on this Score; as
also when the Nurse proves careless and negligent in her Office; and that this
has been frequently the Case, few will deny: For how can we reasonably expect
that a Stranger should take that due and tender Care, and faithfully discharge
so troublesome an Office, which a Parent, supposed to have a natural Engagement
for her Infant, declines and refuses, for this very Reason to take upon her. I,
who am a Parent, have been filled with Astonishment at the Parent, and
Compassion toward the Child, when I have beheld the delicate Mother sit
unconcerned and unrelenting, at the Time her little Offspring has been uttering
its tender Complaints, and, as it were, petitioning the obdurate Parent with
its little eloquence of Tears for its own Support, provided by Nature, without
her Care or Trouble. Dr. Whitby, in some Observations on Things natural, to
explain and illustrate his Subject, has these Words; It Is natural, says he, for
a Woman to suckle her Infant, because Nature has furnished her with proper and
suitable Means of Nourishment for that Purpose. But had that Author lived till
this Day; he had possibly been told Nature had changed her Order, and generally
withheld and denied the common Means. It has often been Subject of Reflection
to me, when I have observed that Women pretend they are so universally
disabled, that they are incapable of taking upon them this tender Office, and
discharging the natural Obligation of Suckling their Children. The general Plea
is, want of Milk, or Tenderness of Constitution, which renders them unfit to
take upon them so troublesome an Office: But as often as I have observed,
examined, and traced such Pretenses and Excuses for this Cruelty, I have found
(except in some few Instances) they absolutely center in Pride and Self-love.
But I only propose by this short remark, to remind some, and inform others,
that this unnatural Conduct has been justly condemned by Archbishop Tillotson,
to whose Discourses, on the Education of Children, I would refer you. However,
he (as well as others) does not propose Impossibilities to any; On the
contrary, he goes far in admitting real and reasonable Pleas and Excuses; but
where none of these appear, he is of Opinion, it is every Woman's indispensible
Obligation to nourish her Infant at her own Breast. His Arguments are bro't
from Nature, Scripture and Reason; and I heartily wish every Parent, in this
Circumstance, and of this Character, may peruse them impartially and heartily;
and that they may have the good Effect of restoring that natural Affection and
Tenderness, in the Female Part of the World, which has been so long lost. And
before I conclude this Observation, I shall transcribe a Passage from a
Pamphlet lately printed in London, entitled, Britain's Remembrancer; wherein
the Author (whom I have heard is a Nobleman) proposes a Method for improving
the present unhappy Situation of the Nation and Kingdom of Great Britain; and
shows that the Calamities they are involved in, are the Effects of the Vices
and Irreligion which prevail among the Inhabitants; against whom he brings a
general Charge: And then in a particular Address to the Women, he takes the
Liberty of telling them, That no small Share of the national Guilt is
chargeable on their Account, as, says he, You have given up yourselves to
Pleasures, Theatrical and Musical Entertainments, to the neglect not only of
all that is spiritual and sacred, but also of those Domestic Cares which are
your proper Province. The unavoidable Effect of a constant Pursuit of these
public Diversions, must be entirely to pervert your Minds from what is the
only natural Sphere of Womankind, and what they were originally intended for,
by the Ordination of Heaven; who formed you for the plain and homely, but
necessary and endearing Characters, of a Wife and a Mother; and that all the
various Ornaments of Pride, which fill a Woman's fantastic Brain, and
disfigure the native Beauties of her Person; and all the giddy Hours she passes
in a Round of guilty Follies, falsely called Pleasure and Diversion, tend to
make her more unfit for what Nature designed her. And whenever you aim at any
thing else, than to be dutiful Daughters, loving Wives, tender Mothers, prudent
Mistresses of Families, faithful Friends, and pious Christians, you aim at
something quite out of Nature, and beside the Intention of Heaven in making you
rational Creatures. Will Vauxhall improve you in Economy and Frugality? Or
Ranelagh's in the domestic Arts that make Families happy? Will the bombastick
Rant of the Playhouse furnish you with Maxims of Prudence? Or its obscene
Ribaldry store your Minds with the Graces of Modesty and Virtue? How long must
you die away to the soft Strains of Music, or study theatrical Excellencies of
Stage-heroes, before you will be the fitter Companions for Men of Sense? How
long must you practice curling the Hair, fluttering your Fans, and overloading
your Persons with false Ornaments, before your Conversation will be ever new,
and ever entertaining to a Husband of Knowledge and Worth. This, and much more
to the same Effect, says that noble Author, to whom I refer you; and shall only
add what he proposes in general as the best Expedient to improve the present
Juncture of Affairs, viz. That every Individual endeavor to reform One.

I have sometimes had a Concern on my Mind to recommend to your Consideration,
the Justice and Duty you owe to your Children in another Respect beside that I
have mentioned, viz. The Obligation every Parent is under to manifest an
especial Regard for the future Happiness of the Souls of their Children, by a
religious Care in their Education: But I have been discouraged from offering my
Sentiments on this Subject, when I consider the little Care and Regard too many
Parents have for their own Souls, whose future Well-being appears to be much
disregarded by many, though professing Christianity.

I don't purpose to say much on this Subject; yet think proper to offer a few
things to your Consideration, which though they may perhaps appear trifling to
some at first Sight, yet I have sometimes thought them of greater Consequence,
than I apprehend many others do. That Errors in the first Principles of
Education (as well as in other Cases) are dangerous and pernicious, is a
received Maxim; for if we set out with wrong Means to obtain a desired End; we
have not only lost our Time, but with great Difficulty and Labor must unlearn
our first Rules and Lessons. Upon reflecting on the Appearances of Anger and
Resentment, which we find so early and so often glow in the little tender
Breasts of Infants, and the early Propensities we observe in them to Pride, and
a Fondness for Trifles; it has appeared to me, they may be often attributed to
the ill Example of Parents, etc. and Errors in their Management from their
Infancy, as young Children we know commonly imitate and act from the Example of
their Parents, or those concerned in the Care and Education of them. To say
little of the superfluous Ornaments of Lace, Lace-work, and Ribbands, which the
Infant is adorned with, as soon as it comes into the World, as well to please
and gratify the Mother's and Nurse's Vanity, as that it may be admired by the
formal and ceremonious Visitors; as soon as the Infant is capable of the least
Notice, it is immediately presented with a Number of foolish Toys, which, though
some, suitably chosen, may be proper to give them an Idea of natural Things,
yet I have thought there are many Trifles presented and recommended to them as
Things of Value and Worth, which lead them afterward to entertain a Fondness
for Vanities and Toys, that are more expensive and hurtful. By this Time, some
little Dawning of Reason begins to appear in the Child, Care is taken to
inculcate the Principles of Anger and Malice, Resentment and Revenge, as the
Child is instructed to receive every little Contradiction, as an Injury or
Affront, which he is to revenge, by giving the Nurse the Blow to execute on the
Offender. Next comes in Course, to amuse the Child, a String of idle absurd
Sonnets and Ballads, which, as soon as it is lisping Tongue is able to form
Words, it is taught to repeat. The next Instruction is, in a Catalogue of vain,
amusing Stories, a Relation of Fairy Tales, Histories of Giants, Tom Thumbs,
and such like Stuff, are the young and tender Brains and Capacities of Infants
stored with; as proper Rudiments to fit them for, and introduce more ingenious
Lies and Romances. The next Thing Children are early instructed in, is Rule and
Authority, by teaching, and allowing them a Superiority over Servants. A
Servant though never so judicious and capable of knowing what is fit and
convenient for a Child, is nevertheless restrained by many Parents from keeping
Children in Subjection and Order, or crossing and disappointing their Will in
any Circumstance; this manifestly teacher the Child a Lesson of Self-will,
which many never unlearn all their Lives after. The next Cruelty we are guilty
of to our Children, is Flattery (at the same Time by Example or Precept
teaching them many little and mean Artifices and equivocal Turns, unworthy a
rational and generous, to say nothing of a Christian Mind) this is commonly
practiced both by Parents and Servants, by whom Children are instructed, when
adorned with all the Pomp and Vanity within the Parent's Reach, to set an high
Value and Estimation on themselves, on the Score of their fine Clothes, etc. or
the Perfections of their Bodies, and at the same time they are taught to
despise others, by persuading them they are both finer and handsomer than some
others. And now to finish and complete a modern Education, it requires the
following Accomplishments, viz. To be expert in Dress and Dancing, Ombre or
Gaming in general, to be able to make judicious Remarks on Opera Airs, and
stage Plays, and to repeat much of the Ribaldry and Prophanity they learn from
thence, and reading Romances and other pernicious Books. Add to all this the
Art of Visiting, where after those present are much flattered and complimented;
the Absent, on the contrary, are as ungenerously dealt with, and severely
handled. But with respect to the religious Education of Children, we do not
find many Parents employ much of their Time in giving Children an Idea of the
Supreme Being, suitable to their Understanding; and as far as their little
Capacities will admit, instruct and inculcate the Principles of moral and
Christian Duties: On the contrary, the Generality of Parents, seem to think
they have sufficiently discharged their religious Duty, if they are careful
their Children are taught to repeat the Duties the Catehism contains; and in
the same Manner say over a Set of Words, entitled, Prayers for Children; which
they neither do nor can understand, at the Age they are taught them; and which
I cannot but consider as great Impiety and Irreverence in both Parents and
School-mistresses, when they teach Children to speak Words, they do not
understand, to an Infinite Being; of which they, at the Time they are taught
them, can have no competent Knowledge, so as to enable them to address Him at
all; much less in the Terms commonly put into their Mouths. The Time I am
confined to, would fail to enumerate every Instance the Generality of Parents
are culpable in, with Respect to Injuries they inadvertently and
inconsiderately do their Children, in their Infancy, etc. but I cannot without a
seeming Absurdity, put them in Mind of the Justice they owe their Children,
when, with Concern, I observe so many fail in the Justice they owe themselves,
by the apparent Neglect of their own Souls. I desire them to permit me to
recommend to each of their serious Considerations, the inestimable Worth and
Value of your own immortal Souls, as well as those of your Children: For what
is a Man profited, if he gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or what
shall he give in Exchange for his Soul? No Man can give to God a Ransom for it,
seeing the Redemption is so precious, that it cease forever, (Psalm. xlix. 7.)
when once it is lost. 'Twould be an inexpressible Happiness, were every one
sensible of this Truth; there would be then Hope that they would enter upon the
great and necessary Work our Lord recommends; that is, 'First that our own Tree
be made good, and then the Fruit, it will necessarily produce, will be good
also:' And when we find a Necessity of doing Justice to ourselves, in the great
Duty and Care of our Souls, we shall, I am certain, feel a very strong and
sensible Concern for the real Happiness of our Offspring. Whether the Education
I have been above describing, is agreeable to Christianity, I leave all
Parents, in their serious Moments, to consider; and proceed with a Remark on
the Time called Christmas; which being so lately observed here, occasioned me
to pursue a Reflction I have heretofore had at such Seasons. I shall first
mention an Observation of Alexander Cruden's, a Clergyman (if I mistake not)
After he has given us a Catalogue of the Festivals observed by the Jews, he
adds; In the Christian Church, we have no Festivals that appear to have been
instituted by CHRIST or his Apostles: Nevertheless Christians have always
celebrated the Memory of CHRIST's Resurrection, and kept this Feast on every
First Day of the Week; which was called the Lord's Day, so early as in St.
John's Time: I was (says John) in the Spirit on the Lord's day. However, I
intend not here to enquire how, or when, this, or any other Feast, came to be
introduced among Professors of Christianity; but only briefly to say, Those who
observe Days and Times, should, as they profess, observe them to the Lord. You
have a pretty large Account (in Luke) how the Birth of the holy Child JESUS,
was ushered in. There were (says he) Shepherds abiding in the Fields of Judea,
near unto the Town of Bethlehem; watching their Flocks by Night. And lo the
Angel of God came upon them, and the Glory of the Lord shone round them; and
they were sore afraid: And the Angel said unto them, Fear not, for behold I
bring you glad Tidings of great Joy which shall be to all People: For unto you
this Day is born, in the City of David, a Savior, which is called CHRIST the
Lord. And suddenly there was with the Angel a Multitude of heavenly Hosts,
praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest! on Earth Peace, Goodwill
to Men! Then said the Shepherds, Let us now go to Bethlehem, and see the Thing
which is now come to pass, and which the Lord has made known unto us; and when
they had seen the Child, they made known the Saying abroad, and they that
heard, wondered at the Things that were told them by the Shepherds; who
returned glorifying and praising God, for all the Things they had heard and
seen, as it was told them by the Angel: And when eight Days were accomplished
for the circumcising the Child, they called his Name JESUS [a Saviour] which
was so named of the Angel before he was conceived in the Womb; for this Reason,
because he shall save his People from their Sins. Here are Glad-tidings of
great Joy to all People, expressed with the greatest Solemnity; For behold
suddenly a great Multitude of heavenly Hosts appeared with the Angel, praising
God for his Goodwill to Men; by introducing the Means of Peace on Earth, as God
is, in CHRIST reconciling the World unto Himself; and blotting out the
Handwriting that was against them, nailing it to the Cross; and putting
Mankind into a Capacity of Salvation. And next good old Simeon, who it appears,
had been waiting for the Consolation of Israel, celebrated the Birth of CHRIST
on this wise, Lord now let Thou thy Servant depart in Peace, for mine Eyes
have seen thy Salvation, which Thou have prepared before the Face of all
People: A Light to enlighten the Gentiles; and to be the Glory of thy People
Israel! Then Anna the Prophetess, coming into the Temple, gave Thanks likewise
unto the Lord, and spoke of CHRIST to all them that looked for Redemption in
Israel. And next we may observe how the wise Gentiles behaved on this Occasion,
when they came from the East to Jerusalem, twelve Days after the Birth of our
Lord: These Men though they were Heathens, and considered Him as a temporal King
(as well as a spiritual Savior) yet approach Him with no loud and clamorous
Acclamations of noisy and frantic Joy; no Drums, Trumpets, nor Fiddles; but
when they came into the House and saw him, prostrating themselves, they
worshipped him.

And now I would beg Leave to ask the Professors of Christianity, if they, on
these Occasions, act consistently with themselves, who tell us their Times
called Holy Days are more especially set apart for pious Purposes; are they
then agreeable to this Design employed in an Enquiry, whether you have any
rational Ground to hope you have an Interest in the Savior, whose Birth you
profess to commemorate? Do you examine whether your Practice keeps Pace with
your Profession? Do you live a Life of Humility and Holiness, agreeable to the
Example our holy Pattern recommends to our Imitation; who was holy, harmless,
and undefiled separate from Sin, and Sinners? Or, on the contrary, are not
these Times considered, by most People, no otherwise than Seasons of Mirth and
Jollity? And, as such, are they not chiefly spent, by Professors themselves, in
Feasting, and Dancing, Gaming, Jesting and Wantonness; not considering the Work
our Lord came to accomplish, neither do they regard the Hand of Power that
would save them! And among the inferior Class of People, what but one continued
Scene of Drunkenness, Riot, Debauchery and Madness, appears to every common
Observer? 'Twould be much more beneficial, That the Husbandman should till his
Grounds, and the Artist followed or worked at his Trade, than that they should
be thus idle, or, what is worse, doing wickedly on these Occasions, when, by
Reason of wicked Works they crucify afresh the Lord of Life and Glory, and put
him to open Shame! I would once more ask both Professors and Profane, whether
Men, etc. in these Circumstances, can possibly have any just Title to the
sacred Name of Christianity, while they act in direct Opposition to the Nature
of it? And whether this, and such like Conversations, becomes the Gospel of our
Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST? Examine, I beseech you, these Things seriously,
and solidly; and I dare venture to say, you will find, with me (who was once in
the Observation of Time, etc) that all such Rejoicing is Evil; And that the
appointed (...) and Feasts, in the Manner you observe them, are an Abomination
to the Lord, yea his Soul loathes them!

I have before told you, that it was not my Intention to examine and consider
every particular Transgression the Controversy of God is against, yet I shall
briefly mention the Catalogue of Sins the Apostle Paul gives us, and which he
says are the Fruits of the Flesh, and while People continue to produce such
Fruit, they cannot possibly have an Entrance administered to them into the
Kingdom of God, Now, (says he) the Works of the Flesh are manifest, which are
These, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies,
Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like. And in 1 Cor. "vi.
10. he adds, Theft, Covetousness, Reviling, Extortion, etc. of which (says he)
I have told you in Time past, that they which do such Things, shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God. And in the first of Romans, he describes such as did not
like to retain God in their Knowledge, by these Marks or Characters That they
were filled with all Unrighteousness, as Fornication, Wickedness, Covetousness,
Maliciousness, Full of Envy, Murder, Debate, Deceit, Malignity, that they were
Whisperers, Backbiters, Haters of God, Despiteful, proud Boasters, Inventors of
evil Things, Disobedient to Parents, without Understanding, Covenant-breakers,
without natural Affection, implacable and unmerciful. And to make the Contrast
or Opposition of such Thing to the Spirit of Christianity the more apparent and
obvious, he immediately opposes the Works or Fruits, which the Spirit of CHRIST
produces in his People, who follow its Leadings and Directions: But the Fruit
of the Spirit, is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentelness, Goodness,
Faith, Meekness, Temperance, Galations v. 22. And the Wisdom which is from
above, (or from God) is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of Mercy, and good Fruits, without Partiality and without
Hypocrisy, James iii. 17. After the Apostle had been ennumerating the Sins of
the Gentiles, etc. whch had been prevalent among them before their Conversion
to the Christian Faith; Such (says he) in time past were some of you; and he
tells the Ephesians you has Christ quickened, who were dead in Trespasses and
Sins; wherein, in Time past ye walked, according to the Course (or Customs) of
this World, according to the Power of the Prince of the Air; the Spirit that
works now in (the Hearts of) the Children of Disobedience, among whom also we
had our Conversation in the Lusts of our Flesh; fulfilling the Desires of the
Flesh, and of the Mind: But God, who is rich in Mercy, even when we were dead
in Sin, etc. has quickened us together in Christ Jesus, and made us sit
together in heavenly Places."

And now it seems fit we should examine how this great and glorious Work was
brought about and effected, viz. by a Resurrection from the Death of Sin to a
Life of Righteousness, which this same Apostle tells us, was (and is) done by
the washing of Regeneration and renewing (Power) of the Holy Ghost (in the
Heart) But now are ye washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in
the Name of the Lord JESUS, and by the Spirit of our God. Hence we may observe,
that these Believers, who were in Time past Sinners, are now, by the
sanctifying Power of CHRIST, and Obedience to the Faith delivered, become
Saints; agreeable to what the Apostle Paul writes to the Christian Churches,
Your Bodies (says he) are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, 1
Cor. vi. 19. The Ephesians were Fellow-citizens with the Saints, and Household
of God. The Conversation of the Philippians was in Heaven. The Collossians were
delivered from the Power of Darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of the
dear Son of God. The Hebrews were come to the City of the living God; to the
Heavenly Jerusalem: And the Apostle Peter tells the Churches, that they were a
chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, 1
Pet. ii. 9. But is this the State of Christians in our Age? Can we say that we
are come to the heavenly Jerusalem, where the great God is worshipped in Spirit
and in Truth? Or are we Strangers to those Things, that they experienced; and
yet persuade ourselves, that we are the People of God, and good Christians. The
primitive Churches had the honorable Title of Saints, we can give ourselves no
better Name than miserable Sinners. And what is the Reason, that we are so much
outdone by the Churches aforementioned; we cannot conclude, that the Kingdom of
CHRIST, that then appeared in Power, did, as the Sun in the Firmament sometimes
does, show itself in a Morning, and be no more seen all the Day; for the
Kingdom of Christ is an everlasting Kingdom, and his new Covenant an
everlasting Covenant. Neither can we conclude, that God has withdrawn Himself
from the Children of Men, for he never forsakes us, unless we forsake him, as
the Clouds hinder, that we cannot at all Times of the Day see the Brightness of
the Sun; so Iniquity hinders, that we do not remain sensible of the Presence of
God. The Apostle foresaw, that there would be a falling away from the Grace in
which many of the primitive Christians were established; and it soon after his
Decease came to pass. But we say, that the dark Night of Apostasy is over, and
we live in Gospel-days again; if so, where are the Fruits? We may, I confess,
hear Gospel-Words; but where is the Gospel Power, by which Believers come to be
Sons of God; to bear his Image in Righteousness? Why are not we, called
Christians, grown to the Stature of them that were the Children of Heathens?
The Reason to me is this, we have not built upon the same Foundation: Those
built on the sure Rock, and living Foundation, on CHRIST; as he, in all Ages,
was, and still is, in spiritual Appearance, the Light of the World, and the
Life of Righteousness; and taking his Eternal Spirit in themselves for their
Guide, turned from whatsoever they were reproved for. Thus their sinful Desires
came to be mortified; and such as were carnal came to be spiritual; and this
made them a peculiar People. Did we walk in their Footsteps, we might rise to
their Seize; but if we build on Words, and outward Services, without
Spirit and Life, we can never rise. For as Paul said in another Case, If I
speak with the Tongue of Men and Angels, and have not Charity, I am become as
sounding Brass, etc. So I say in this Case, if we hear Men and Angels; if we
could live continually under the Sound of good Words, if we have no Regard to
that inward Light, which discovers Evil, and gives Power to turn from it, we
can never mortify Sin, cleanse our Souls, and become an holy People. The Work
of Sanctification is inward in the Heart, and to be effected by inward Means:
Nothing but inward Light can expel inward Darkness: Since Men fondly persuade
themselves, that though they sow Tares, they shall reap Wheat; though they go down
into the Grave Sinners, they shall rise Saints; and attain in another World
what primitive Christians attained in this: Their Conversation has not been in
Heaven; but in Earth: They have walked in Darkness, and not in the Light; the
God of this World has been served, and not the God of Heaven. And
notwithstanding this is the unhappy and deplorable Circumstance of many of the
Professors of this Age; yet from the Mouths of such, how frequently do we hear
Exclamations and Complaints, against the daily Growth of Infidelity and Deism!
never so much as imagining that they are any way accessory or instrumental to
this Mischief; yet one great Cause thereof, I take to be, the irregular and
unholy Lives of Professors. And till such can be persuaded, that a consistent
Practice with the Religion they profess, is absolutely requisite, to recommend
the Christian Religion; and till they produce the most convincing and
prevailing Argument, Example, how can they hope or expect to be credited by
this Infidel Race, which so much abounds; as every one must be sensible of the
Difficulty of enforcing a Precept (though never so laudable in itself) in Words,
which in our Lives and Practices we notoriously deny? Therefore the only
Expedient that I know of, to stop the Mouths of Unbelievers, will be, To show
forth your good Conversation in CHRIST JESUS, coupled with the Fear of God; to
Let your Light so shine before Men, that they seeing your good Works, may
glorify God, and be excited to follow your good Example.

And now dear People, having, in a broken Manner, declared to you these Things
which lay as a Weight on my Mind, there remains little but to propose to you,
to try the Foundation of your Faith and Hope: Truth never loses by Examination,
but shines with greater Light and Splendour: Therefore, agreeable to the
Apostle's Advice, "Examine yourselves, whether you be of the (true) Faith; know
you not your selves, how that CHRIST JESUS is in you, except you be
Reprobates?" "That is, (says Grotious) Christians in Name, and not in Deeds."
Do not trifle, I beseech you, in a Matter of such Importance, as the future
Well-being of your immortal Souls! To be mistaken in this Point, will be of
fatal Consequence; Errors of this Sort being only to be rectified while we
remain in this Life; for we are positively told, That there is no Wisdom, nor
Knowledge, Work, nor Device, in the Grave, whither we are all hastening. And
our Lord tells us, He wrought while it was Day, and excites us so to do, by
saying, The Night comes wherein no Man can Work. Let us therefore enquire
whether our Faith is such an One as operates by Love: If ye love me, keep my
Commandments, says our blessed Lord. Let us remember what Obstacles this true
Faith removed for the primitive Christians, what Difficulties it enabled them
to surmount. Heb. xi. "Without this Faith (in the Power of CHRIST) it is
impossible to please God." "I will (says the Apostle James) show thee my Faith
by my Works; for as the Body, without the Spirit, is dead, so Faith, without
Works, is dead also. Ye are my Friends (says CHRIST) if ye do whatsoever I
command."

What will it avail us, though his outward Gospel be taught in our Land, if we do
not obey his Law written in our Hearts, and conform to its Rule and Government.
And though CHRIST our Lord is the Fountain to cleanse us from the Pollution of
Sin; yet if we refuse to be purified by his spiritual Baptism; "If he wash us
not, we can have no Part in Him," nor his Merits. And indeed my Friends, I have
taken some Pains, by divine Assistance, to examine and enquire how I might have
a well-grounded Hope to obtain Salvation, or, in other Words, eternal Life and
Happiness. And in all my Enquiries and Researches, I have not been able to
discover any other Way than this, which the Almighty continues to direct
Mankind in at this Day, as well as heretofore, "The Way of Holiness through
CHRIST," he being the Author of eternal Salvation to all Believers. "Be ye
holy, as I the Lord your God am holy;" and "without Holiness, no Man shall see
the Lord:" And I find I can be made so no other Way, but through "Sanctification
of the Spirit, unto the Obedience of Faith, and Sprinkling of the Blood of
JESUS CHRIST." For every one who has, or can reasonably have any Foundation of
Hope to be saved by CHRIST's Life, Sufferings, Resurrection, Ascension, and
Mediation, must, by his Grace assisting, purify himself, as he is pure; as no
unclean Thing can possibly enter his holy Kingdom. And it is by his Grace we
are saved, through Faith, operating by Love, "not of ourselves, it is the Gift of
God!" Thus, as I became obedient to the Teaching of this Grace received, I came
to witness Mercy and Peace multiplied to me; for which, in great Reverence and
Humility, I desire always to bless God, the Father of our Lord JESUS, for His
unspeakable Gift! and for his abundant Mercy wherewith he has visited my Soul
in his Dayspring from his high and holy Presence; and afforded me a good
Foundation to hope for his Salvation; and I desire to give all the Glory to
God, and to say, "Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy great Name and
Power, be the Glory!" Be ye holy, is a Precept which contains no Mystery; here
is no Enigma to unriddle; no Need of Commentators; no Room for Skepticism, nor
Controversy; but a plain and positive Command, so legible, that he that runs
may read; the Wayfaring Man, though a Fool (with respect to the Wisdom of the
World) cannot err here. Therefore suffer me to counsel you, to break off the
Sin that you find easily beset you, by Righteousness; and your Iniquities by
Amendment of Life; that so your Tranquillity may be lengthened, and attend you
beyond the Grave. And to you, as I have said before, who may not charge
yourselves with gross Immoralities, yet who prefer a Portion in this Life, to
the durable Riches and Righteousness in another; who say unto Gold, "Thou art
my Hope, and make fine Gold your Confidence; who have forsaken God, the
Fountain of living Waters, and hewn to yourselves, Cisterns, broken Cisterns,
that will hold no Water; who have changed the Glory of the incorruptible Being,
and given it to your corruptible Things: Remember, God will not give his Glory
to Idols, nor his Praise to your graven Images: Therefore keep yourselves from
Idols, and love not the World nor the Things of this World; for if any Man love
the World (inordinately) the Love of the Father is not in him." And to you who
are Lovers of Pleasure, more than Lovers of God; who delight and place your
Felicity in Grandeur, Pomp and Noise; consider, I beseech you, that all this
will afford you no Comfort nor Satisfaction in a dying Moment; but, on the
contrary, Remorse and Sorrow: They will each one abandon you in your greatest
Extremities; and you will then see how you have been deluded and mistaken, when
the undeniable Messenger of Death lays his Arrest upon you, and that important
Hour assures you, that a few Moments will decide your Judgment, and cast you
either for eternal Bliss or Misery! Of what Esteem then will be all your
Pleasures, and all your Toys? The greatest and most exalted of all human Glory,
"even Crowns themselves will then be Toys." This then will be our Rejoicing,
"The Testimony of a good Conscience, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity,
not by fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in
this World, 2 Cor. i. 12." And when we look back, and make our Appeal to God,
as good King Hezekiah did on his Deathbed; Remember now, O Lord, I beseech
thee, how I have walked before thee in Truth, and with a perfect Heart, and
have done that which is good in thy Sight. O happy State! O glorious Condition!
May God of his infinite Mercy so incline your Hearts to keep his Commandments,
that when the Time of your Dissolution approaches, you may all die the Death of
the Righteous, and that your latter End may be like his! On the contrary, how
will the Wicked look back with Horror and Affright on a Life spent in open
Defiance and Violation of God's Laws, or a total Neglect of and Indifference
for them? What will appear in such a melancholy Season to such as these, a
certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation, which will
devour the Adversaries of the Lord, whose Wrath will then be revealed in a more
extraordinary Manner against all Unrighteousness and Ungodliness of Men. This
will be a Day of Trial ( viz. the Day of Death) which will come on all the
Inhabitants of the Earth; wherein the Faces of the Unrighteous will gather
Paleness. A Day of Trouble and Distress! A Day of Darkness and Gloominess! A
Day of Awakening and Alarm! wherein neither Silver nor Gold shall be able to
deliver! Consider this in time, all you that forget God, lest he laugh at your
Calamities, and mock when your Fear comes. But some may object, this is not
always the unhappy Case and Situation of Sinners, who defer the Work of
Repentance to a sick or dying Bed; God is very merciful, and is he not always
willing and ready to accept returning, repenting Sinners, though at the eleventh
or last Hour? I shall reply in the Words of an Author known to some of you at
least; Death puts an End to our Day of Grace, and determines our final State;
then all Men must confess of what mighty Consequence it is to die well; we can
die but once, and if we miscarry that once, we are undone forever! And what
considering Man would make such dangerous Experiments as Sinners do every Day,
when their Souls are the Price of the Experiment? Who would try how long Death
will delay its coming? how long he may Sin on, without thinking of Death and
Judgment? Whether Death will give him timely Notice to repent? Or whether God
will give him Grace to repent? And if he does, who would venture the Hazard of
a Deathbed Repentance? Whether after a long Life of Sin and Wickedness, a few
distracted, confused and almost despairing Sighs and Groans will carry him to
Heaven, and commute for what ought to have been the Work and Business of our
whole Lives, viz. a Preparation for Death: If such could after they have
discovered their Mistake and Folly return and live over their Lives again; the
Hazard were not so great; but this is an Experiment not to be twice made. If
they Sin on till they harden themselves in Sin, and are forsaken of the Grace
of God; if Death come long before they expected, and cut them off by Surprise,
and without Warning, if their dying and despairing Agonies and Horrors, should
not prove a godly Sorrow, nor that Repentance to Salvation not to be repented
of, they are lost to Eternity! And what Man in his Senses would expose his Soul
to such a Hazard as this? Who would not take Care to make his Calling and
Election sure before Death comes, and in a Matter of such great Concernment
(wherein one Miscarriage is irreparable) to prevent Danger at a Distance. Some
Men talk of Death, as if it were a Thing that could be done in two or three
Days, and that the proper Time of doing it was a little before they die. But I
know of no other Preparation for Death, but living well, which is the only sure
Evidence for Heaven. Men may cheat themselves with vain Hopes and Imaginations
when they come to die; but nothing will be a solid Foundation for Peace, but an
universal Righteousness.

Therefore I entreat you, the Inhabitants of this Place, to disabuse
yourselves; don't sell your Birthright on such disadvantageous Terms, nor
barter eternal Felicity for momentary Pleasure; give not Sleep to your Eyes,
nor Slumber to your Eyelids, till you are become fit Temples for the mighty
God of Jacob to dwell in! Bring Presents to God (who ought to be feared) even
the Presents of humble and penitent Hearts; the Lord calls for your Hearts, not
for your Lip-Service; My Son, give me thy Heart; Lift up your Heads, O ye
Gates; even lift up the everlasting Doors of your Hearts, and the King of Glory
will come in, and dwell with you, and you with Him.

And now suffer me to remind you, that you no longer despise the Riches of
God's Goodness and Mercy, since his Long-suffering and Forbearance is designed
to lead to Repentance. By the Mercies of God I beseech you, that you present
yourselves a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is but your
reasonable Service. And be not conformable to this evil World, but be
transformed, that ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect Will
of God concerning you; which is no less than your Sanctification. And now I
think fit to observe to you, that while almost all Europe, and even the
Dominions of the King to whom you are Subject, are unhappily engaged and
involved in the miserable and deplorable Consequences of a cruel and bloody
War, you have enjoyed unmolested Tranquillity, your Rights at home have not yet
been invaded by your Enemies; indeed your Properties at Sea have sometimes been
wrested from you by unreasonable Men; but what is that Evil compared with the
Calamities and Distresses Thousands in Great Britain and elsewhere have felt
and suffered; Fire, Sword, Rapine and Plunder, dessolate Widows, and distressed
and fatherless Children, have been the dismal Effects of these unhappy Disputes
and Differences between the Powers of Europe. And cannot we yet discover a
Providence in all this Destruction, which is suffered to prevail among Men Are
we not yet convinced that there is a God of Justice that rules in the Kingdoms
of the Earth, and that he is about to take Vengeance on the Nations and
Families that call not upon his Name in Truth and Righteousness. What greater
Inducement can I propose to you to turn and love God, than his manifold
Mercies? Do not you think they call for your Gratitude? He allures you by his
Favors; he gives you Corn, Wine, and Oil; he gives you Vine-yards and
Olive-yards, or at least the Means of procuring them; he draws with the Cords
and Bands of his Love; he would take you by the Hand, and would heal you; he
would take the Yoke of hard Servitude from off your Necks; and, if you are but
willing to part with your Idols, he is ready to take the very Names of them out
of your Mouths, and to betroth you to himself in Righteousness, Loving Kindness
and Mercy. Though the whole Head be sick, and the whole Heart saint; though your
Soul's Enemy may have wounded and left you half dead; yet there is Balm in
Gilead; there is a Physician there, who offers you his Aid, and is willing to
recover you from your moral and spiritual Disorders. And though you may be never
so great Prodigals, if you have not sinned out the Day of his Grace, Resolve
upon returning, and the heavenly Father is ready, on your unfeigned Repentance,
to receive you into the Arms of his Mercy, and to put on you the best Robe you
ever wore, even that of his own Righteousness. Thus having briesty observed,
how greatly we are indebted to the Almighty, for his manifold Mercies; I would
wish you to examine what Returns of Love and Gratitude you have made; for
remember though God bears long, yet he will not always bear; but expects that we
should not only praise Him with our Lips, but with our Lives also: Turn then, I
beseech you, to God, while he visits you in Mercy; for unto his Power shall
every Tongue confess, and every Knee bow, either in Mercy or in Judgment.

I have sometimes thought it would be of singular Advantage to Professors of
Christianity of all Denominations, seriously to examine and enquire of your own
Hearts, what our Religion has done for us; or what Benefits have accrued to us
from it? Whether the Grace we have received has assisted us to resist the
Temptations of our Soul's Adversary; and whether we are nearer Salvation than
when we first believed? For a being invested with a Power to do a Thing, will
no longer be of Use to us than as we apply it. The Grace and good Spirit, though
it instruct us to deny all Ungodliness, is of no further Benefit to us, but as
we obey its Teachings, and follow its Leadings; therefore I am of Opinion it
would not hurt the best Christians, nor any others, sometimes to ask themselves
the following Questions: Have I witnessed the strong Man armed cast out of my
Heart, and his Goods spoiled, and a stronger than he in Possession? Have I who
assume the Name of a Christian departed from all Iniquity? Are all old things
done away ( for he that is in CHRIST is a new Creature) and do I experience new
Thoughts, new Desires, new Conversation, a total Change, all Things become
regular, uniform and consistent with my high and holy Calling? Is CHRIST the
best beloved of my Soul? Does my Heart pant and mine Eyes fail for his
Salvation? Is my Soul a thirst for God? Do I long for his Presence more than
for hidden Treasure? Do I love God above all other Considerations (and my
Neighbor as myself?) Am I careful lest I offend him? Do I live in constant
Observance of his Laws, do I live in his Fear? Am I circumspect in all my
Words, that I sin not with my Tongue? Does my Conversation become the Gospel of
CHRIST? And am I careful to adorn his Doctrines, which I profess to believe and
be guided by? If upon a candid Examination, this be the happy State of
Professors of Christianity, my Soul can rejoice with them, let them call
themselves by what Denomination or Sect they may: For happy is the People who
are in such a Case! yea blessed are they whose Portion is the God of Jacob! On
the contrary, if we are only professing, and not in the Possession of
Godliness; if we have a Form, but are insensible of the Power to work a Change
in our Hearts; our Religion as yet, has done nothing for us; therefore I
entreat all who are in this Case, to consider, it is an unfit State for Heaven;
for if we have not witnessed a being created anew in CHRIST JESUS; born of the
incorruptible Seed and Word of God; known a Death unto Sin, and a new Birth
unto Righteousness; born again of the Spirit; our Lord positively says, we
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Let the Time past then suffice; and for
the future redouble your Diligence; and no longer hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness, walk circumspectly as wise, redeeming the Time. The Kingdom of
God does not stand in Form, but in Power, neither is Religion to be taken up by
Fits and Starts, as it suits our Leisure and Convenience; nor by Imitation, but
Conviction, we must cleave to God, with full Purpose of Heart; what our Hand
finds necessary to do in this great Business of Salvation, we must do it with
all our Might; we must not indolently seek, but (by God's Assistance) ardently
strive to enter the Kingdom of God. Our Talent must gain another Talent; lest
as the unprofitable Servant was, we be deprived of that which we have received.
False Pretenses to Religion, and a bare Belief of the Truths of the Gospel,
will be of no Advantage to us: Crying Lord, Lord, will not avail if we do not
the Things which his Precepts enjoin: No Man can truly call CHRIST Lord, but
such as witness his Rule and Dominion in their Heart, bringing them into
Subjection to his Power: Not the Hearers of the Law, but the Doers, shall be
justified: Not he that hears CHRIST's Saying, but he that does them, is
accepted. On a memorable Occasion the sacred History informs us, the Almighty
heard the Voice of the Children of Israel's Words, when they spoke to Moses,
and he tells him that the People had well said all that they had spoken, but
knowing the Insincerity and Inconstancy of their Hearts, he says, O! that
there were such an Heart in them, that they would fear before me, and keep my
Commandments always, that it may be well with them and their Children forever!
Religion is an Heart Work, it must be begun, and carried on and completed
there: Nothing but keeping God's Commandments will entitle us to his Favor:
Nothing short of having discharged our Parts in the Christian Warfare, and
obtained a Victory over Sin, will entitle us to a Crown of Glory: Nothing less
than being true and faithful Members of CHRIST's Church Militant here on Earth,
will ever admit us Members of his Church triumphant in the Heavens. It Is to
those that overcome that our Lord will give to sit with him in his Throne; even
as he overcame, and is set down with his Father in his Throne. A being
convinced in our Judgments of God's Goodness, etc. and that his Laws are
righteous altogether, and therefore we ought to obey them, is not Conversion.
Faith is not Practice; therefore add to your Faith Virtue, to Virtue Knowledge,
to Knowledge Temperance, to Temperance Patience, to Patience Godliness, to
Godliness Brotherly Kindness, and to Brotherly Kindness Charity.

Thus my dear Friends and Neighbors, I have declared in great Truth and
Sincerity, my earnest Concern and Desire for the real Happiness of the
Inhabitants of my native Country in general; and having an especial and
peculiar Regard for many that I have known for a Series of Years, when I have
reflected on the bare Possibility of your missing Heaven and Happiness through
Inadvertency, Inconsideration, and an inordinate Love for the Things of this
Life, it has been Subject of Mourning to me; and especially as I have through
Mercy seen, that when I was in the like Situation, how dangerous a One it was,
and that all who are in this unhappy Case, stand indeed in slippery Places. And
many a Time has my Soul grieved secretly, when I have observed the Pursuits of
such, how earnestly they are running after Vanities, and pursuing Lies (which
will indeed deceive) and turning their Backs on God's Offers of Love, and
refuse to let him put his Beauty on them, and to make them glorious within; and
since I have witnessed the great Disproportion between the Love of God, and the
Love of the World, I am the more earnestly concerned to invite you to come
taste and see of the Goodness of the Lord; O make but Trial of his Love, and
you will say the one half was not told you. Then will you find the most exalted
Happiness this World can yield, will be nothing, and Vanity, yea, lighter than
Vanity; but were you once in Possession of the Love of God, you would be sensible
that you inherited Substance, substantial Joys, unspeakable Delight,
Satisfaction and Peace. O! that this unutterable Love of God might be once
impressed and engraven on your Hearts; Then would you confess with me, that one
Day in his Courts, Presence and Favor, is better than a thousand spent in the
Enjoyment of earthly Delights and Pleasures. But now I would stop a while, and
ask, If you have not been cheated by delusive Hopes and Promises of obtaining
Satisfaction from temporal Enjoyments? Have you never discovered their Fallacy?
Have they not Vanished into Air, even when you fancied yourselves just in
Possession? And don't you find they leave you dissatisfied and uneasy? I am
certain this is the Case with many; you still feel a painful Vacancy, even in
the midst of your sensual Delights and temporal Enjoyments; which, be assured
(I speak by happy though short Experience) nothing short of the Approbation and
Favor of God, and a Possession of his Love and Peace, can ever possibly
satisfy. I have told you already, that I have felt great Trouble and Anxiety of
Mind on your Account; but though my Head were Waters, and mine Eyes a Fountain of
Tears; and could I, or any one else, weep continually Day and Night for you,
that you may rest in the Day of Trouble; yet another's Concern cannot do this
great Work for you, without your own Hand in the Business which relates to your
Soul's Happiness; since an inspired Apostle assures you, you must, by Divine
Assistance, "work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling:" For no Man
can redeem his Brother, nor give to God a Ransom for his Soul. I may (as I do
earnestly) desire your Happiness, but I cannot procure it for you. I may wish
you Heaven, but I cannot obtain it for you: Yet I earnestly pray, That the God
and Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST may give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom, and
Revelation of the Knowledge of himself, whom (rightly) to know is eternal Life;
that the Eyes of your Understanding may be enlightened, and that you may know
what is the Hope of his Calling; and the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance
in the Saints, and what the exceeding Greatness of his Power to usward who
believe, according to the working of his mighty Power, by which he has
vanquished and brought down all the strong Holds of Sin and Satan in the Hearts
of them who confide in his mighty Arm, which is now extended over you for Good;
God has visited and called you often, and now waits to be gracious to you: The
Almighty I say, has long visited and tried you by his Mercy and Forbearance; He
has spoke to you by the Voice of his Holy Spirit, which some of you have
neglected, overlooked and quenched: Has not Wisdom long uttered her Voice,
even at your Doors? Is she not come up into your Chambers? Does not
Understanding cry in the most secret Recesses of your Consciences, saying, How
long, ye simple Ones, will you love Simplicity, and Scorners delight in
Scorning, and Fools hate Knowledge? Turn you therefore at the Reproofs of
Instruction, which is the Way to Life; and then behold he will more abundantly
pour out of his Spirit upon you; and if ye hearken and obey his Voice, he will
make his Words and Will known to you; on the contrary, if you continue to
refuse and rebel against his Light and Truth in your inward Parts, the
Consequence is sure, He will certainly forsake and leave you to your own
Delusions; because he has called, and you refused; he has stretched forth his
Hand, and no Man regards; but have set at naught all his Counsel, turned his
Word behind your Backs, and will hear none of his Reproofs. Therefore unless
you return and repent, with all your Hearts, and amend your Ways and your
Doings, he will, when your Distress comes upon you, laugh at your Calamities,
have you in Derision, and mock at all your Fears.

But I fervently pray, that this may never be your deplorable Condition; but
that you may be, not only the Visited, but the Redeemed of the Lord; not only
the Called, but the Chosen of God! And, in order to make your Calling and
Election sure, take to yourselves the whole Armor of God, that you may stand
against the Wiles of the Enemy of your Soul's Happiness; Having your Loins girt
about with Truth, and having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and your
Feet shod with the Preparation of the Gospel; but, above all, taking the Shield
of Faith, whereby you will be able to withstand and quench all the fiery Darts of
the Wicked One; and take the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit,
which is the Word (or Power) of God. Finally, Whatsoever Things are true,
whatsoever Things are honest, whatsoever Things are just, whatsoever Things are
lovely, whatsoever Things are of good Report; if there be any Virtue, if there
be any Praise; think on these Things and practice them. But we must remember,
in all these Things, that God be our Alpha and Omega: His Love must be the
Motive, and His Honor the End of all our Actions; and then the God of Peace
will be with us, and bless us. To Him, and to the Word of his Grace, I commit
and commend you; assuring you, my dear Fellow-mortals, that my fervent Desire
and unfeigned Prayer, unto the God of my Life, for you all, is, that you may be
saved!

SOPHIA HUME.
Charlestown, in South Carolina, the 30th, of the Tenth Month, 1747.
DIVINE LOVE COMMEMORATED. The AUTHOR unknown to me.
WHO can fathom the redeeming
Act of universal Love?
Human Thought, though ever teeming,
Yet will insufficient prove.
Holy Angels, ever lauding
Of the great and wondrous Scheme,
Seraphs, hymning and applauding,
Never can exhaust the Theme.
O! the Height and Depth! surprising!
O! the Length and Breadth, how great?
Generations past, and rising,
Will the Bliss participate.
Sure the Father's Love was burning
To poor lost and helpless Man,
Anxious for his safe returning,
Laid the medi'torial Plan.
Nor less was our Savior's Merit,
Who severe Obedience paid,
Died, to obtain the Holy Spirit,
For his Creatures Help and Aid.
Now, above, makes Intercession,
That the penetential Mind,
Who makes unreserv'd Confession,
And reforms, may Pardon find.
Wretched Man, if such Caressing
Work not on thy brutal Heart;
If thou spurn'st the heavenly Blessing,
Thou will not in it have Part.
Blame thy Conduct, charge not Heaven,
On thy Head thy Blood will lie:
Every Help to thee is given
Suiting Man's free Agency.
Do not, for a Moment's Pleasure,
Forfeit this thy dear-bought Right
To the Joy and endless Treasure,
Which the Gospel brought to Light.
Use thy Reason, Grace assisting
Every Faculty within;
Thou shall know a brave resisting
All the deadly Powers of Sin.
Taste Religion's chaste Embraces,
Faith with genuine Works adorn;
Virtue has eternal Graces,
Fresh and blooming every Morn.
All her Joys beyond expressing,
Peace that yields a golden Crop;
She Is in Life the choicest Blessing,
And in Death the grateful Drop.
Wing thy Soul, and qualify her
For the Converse held above;
Tip thy Tongue, to join the Choir
In melodious Strains of Love.
Utterly disclaiming Merit;
Praise the Father and the Son,
Jointly with the Holy Spirit,
An Eternal Three in One!
FINIS.

