A TREATY HELD BY COMMISSIONERS, MEMBERS of the COUNCIL of the PROVINCE of
PENNSYLVANIA, At the TOWN of LANCASTER, With some CHIEFS of the SIX NATIONS at
OHIO, and others, for the Admission of the TWIGHTWEE NATION into the Alliance
of his MAJESTY, etc. in the Month of July, 1748.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, at the New Printing-Office,
near the Market. MDCCXLVIII.

TO THE HONORABLE THE PRESIDENT and COUNCIL OF THE Province of PENNSYLVANIA.
WE, the Subscribers, having been honored with a Commission, authorizing us to
hold a Treaty with some of the Six Nations, Twigtwees, and others, at
Lancaster, do make the following Report of our Proceedings therein.

WE hope what we have done will be of Service to the Province, and to your
Satisfaction. We are,

HONORABLE GENTLEMEN, Your most Obedient, Humble Servants, Benjamin Shoemaker,
Joseph Turner. Thomas Hopkinson. William Logan.

Philadelphia, July 25, 1748.
A TREATY, etc.
At the Courthouse in Lancaster, Tuesday, July 19. 1748.
PRESENT, Esqrs. Benjamin Shoemaker, Thomas Hopkinson, Joseph Turner, William
Logan,
The Magistrates and Inhabitants of Lancaster County, Fifty-five Indians of
several Nations, viz. of the Six Nations, Delawares, Shawonese, Nanticokes, and
Twightwees; Conrad Weiser, Esquire Interpreter for the Six Nation Indians; Mr.
Andrew Montour, Interpreter for the Shawonese and Twightwees.


A PROCLAMATION was made for Silence, and then a Commission, in His Majesty's
Name, under the Great Seal of the Province, was read, constituting the
honorable Benjamin Shoemaker, Joseph Turner, Thomas Hopkinson, and William
Logan, Esquires, Commissioners to treat with these Indians; and the Interpreter
was ordered to tell them the Purport thereof, and to bid them heartily welcome
among their Brethren.

The Commissioners having been informed that Scarrowyady, a Chief of the Oneido
Nation, living at Ohio, was appointed Speaker for the Indians, but was to much
hurt by a Fall, that he was unable to attend; ordered the Interpreter to tell
them, that they condoled with them on this unfortunate Accident, but hoped, as
what they came to transact was of a public Nature, and well known to them all,
this would occasion no Delay. As the Government had shown them great
Indulgence, in granting them a Council at Lancaster, so far from the usual
Place of Business, and in so hot a Season, it was expected they would not
detain the Commissioners, but deliver what they had to say Tomorrow Morning at
Ten o'Clock; and further, to desire they would use no Manner of Reserve, but
open their Hearts freely and fully, the Commissioners promising to treat them
with the same Freedom and Plainness.

At the Courthouse at Lancaster, Wednesday, July 20, 1748.
PRESENT, Esqrs. Benjamin Shoemaker, Thomas Hopkinson, Joseph Turner, William
Logan,
The Magistrates, and many of the Inhabitants of Lancaster County, The same
Indians as Yesterday.


THE Interpreter informed the Commissioners, that Scarrowyady still continuing
ill, and unable to attend, had deputed Andrew Montour to deliliver his Speech,
which the Indians desired might be received on their Behalf, the Substance
thereof having been deliberated upon, and settled by them in Council.

The Commissioners saying they had no Objection to this, Andrew Montour said he
was now going to speak for the Indians of the Six Nations, living at Ohio.

Brethren, the Governor of Pennsylvania, and all the Governors of the great
King of England, over the Seas;

You have often sent pressing Messages to the Council Fire at Onondago, to
engage in your Interest as many of their Allies as they could influence: These
Messages they have transmitted to us, desiring we would take all Opportunities
of complying with your Request; in Consequence whereof we have now the Pleasure
to present to you some of the Chiefs of the Twightwee Nation, a large and
powerful Tribe, living on Ouabache, a great River running into Ohio, who come
as Deputies sent by the whole Nation, with a Request that you would be pleased
to admit them into your Amity. We join with them in the Petition; take their
Hands, and let them, together with ours, be locked close in yours, and there
held fast: We have opened unto you the Occasion of our Visit; and to make it
acceptable, we lay down this String of Wampum.

Brethren, Onas, and all King of England's Governors.

It will be necessary to lay before you what has passed between the Twightwees
and us, previous to our coming here, that you may be sensible of our Zeal for
your Service, and of the ardent Desire of that Nation to enter into your
Alliance.

Last Fall they sent a Message addressed to all the Tribes of Indians at Ohio
and elsewhere, in Amity with the English, which was delivered to the Shawonese,
as living the nearest to them, and by them communicated to us to this Effect.

Brethren,

We, the Twightwees, are desirous to enter into the Chain of Friendship with
the English; and as you are the next to us of the Indians in their Alliance, we
entreat you to signify this our Desire to the other Indians, and that you and
they will open us a Council Road to the English Governments: Make it so open
and clear for us, that neither we, nor our Wives or Children, may hurt their
Feet against any Log or Stump; and when once you have cleared a Road for us, we
assure you we will keep it so, and it shall not be in the Power of Onontio to
block up or obstruct the Passage. We further desire of you, that when you have
cleared a Council Road for us to the English, you, and the other Indians, will
join your Interest to recommend us in the most effectual Manner to them to be
admitted into their Chain. Upon receipt of this Message from the Twightwees,
the following Answer was sent them.

Brethren, the Twightwees,

We received your String of Wampum expressing your Desire to enter into
Friendship with our Brethren the English, and praying our Assistance to obtain
this for you. We are glad you are in this Disposition, and would by all Means
encourage you in it; but we are afraid lest you should have taken this
Resolution too hastily. Are you Proof against the Solicitations that the
Governor of Canada and his People will certainly use to engage your Adherence
to him? Can you withstand his Resentment? Consider this well, lest when we
shall have recommended you to our Brethren the English, you should prove
unsteady, and so we should lose their Esteem. Take, therefore, we urge you,
Time to consider, and let us know your Mind, and we will give you all the
Assistance in our Power. The Twightwees having received this Answer, sent in
the Spring a second Message, addressed to all the Indians on Ohio in Alliance
with the English, to this purport:

Brethren,

Our Message in the Fall was not sent rashly or unadvisedly. We thought many
Nights and Days of this Affair. We weighed every Thing well relating thereto
before we took the Resolution of seeking the Friendship of the English, and we
now repeat to you our Assurances, that this Request does not come from the
Mouth only; no, it comes from the Heart, and is what we ardently wish to
accomplish; and that we may not fail of Success, we desire your Assistance, and
that of all the Indians in the English Chain, to help us to obtain this Favor;
and particularly we desire some of you will go along with us, and present us to
Onas. Brethren,

We have now faithfuly related what passed between the Twightwees and us. We
deliver over to you the Strings of Wampum which we received with their
Messages. Their Nation has sent thirty Beaver Skins, which we desire you would
accept; and now be pleased to hear what their Deputies have to say.

Here were laid down two Strings of Wampum, and 30 Beaver Skins.

Then Andrew Montour acquainted the Commissioners, that he was now going to be
the Mouth of the Twightwee Deputies.

Brethren,

We present to you the Calumet Pipe, and pray we may be admitted to become a
Link in your Chain of Friendship, and give you the strongest Assurances, if
this Favor be granted to us, that we will keep it bright as long as the Rivers
run.

Here the Deputies laid down a Calumet Pipe, with a long Stem, curiously
wrought, and wrapped round with Wampum of several Colors, and filled with
Tobacco, which was smoked by the Commissioners and the Indians according to
Custom.

Brethren,

We the Deputies of the Twightwees, have it in Charge further to tell you, that
our Nation received a Calumet Pipe from some of the Allies, consisting of
twelve Towns or Nations, with a Message to this Effect: That they had a Report
among them that we intended to solicit the English to be received into their
Friendship and Alliance: That if such Report was true, they desired us to
acquaint them with our Success, that they might apply for the same Favor,
which they earnestly desire, and said they would wait a Day and a Night for an
Answer. N. B. A day and a Night in the Indian Language significs a whole Year.
Then the Deputies offered another Pipe to the Commissioners, not to keep, but
that they might speak to it, and return it, with their Answer.

Andrew Montour said he was now going to resume the Speech of the Six Nation
Indians at Ohio.

Brethren,

You have now heard the Twightwees speak for themselves. We heartily join with
them in their Petition. They are numerous, and, though poor, yet they are worthy
of your Friendship, and, as such we most heartily recommend them to you by this
Bundle of Skins.

Here they laid down a Bundle of Deer Skins.

Brethren,

We beg Leave before we conclude to become Intercessors for the Shawnese, who
have given you just Cause of Complaint. They have told us, that the Governor of
Pennsylvania sent them a Letter some Years ago, requiring them to come down;
but being conscious they had acted wrong, they had delayed hitherto to do it;
and have taken this Opportunity of our coming, to make use of us; desiring us
to ask that for them which they dare not ask for themselves; that is, That they
may be received again into Favor, they having owned their Fault, and given us
the strongest Assurances of their better Behavior for the future. Forgive us,
therefore, if we entreat you would be pleased to drop your Resentment; and
however they have behaved hitherto, we hope a Sense of your Goodness will
prevail with them to become good and faithful Allies for the future.

Gave a String of Wampum.

Andrew Montour informing the Commissioners he had delivered all that was given
him in Charge to say at present, the Indians withdrew.

At a Meeting of the Commissioners held at Lancaster, the 21st July, 1748.
PRESENT, Esqrs.
Benjamin Shoemaker, Thomas Hopkinson, Joseph Turner, William Logan,


THE Secretary having settled the Minutes of Yesterday, the same were taken
into Consideration, and that Part thereof which relates to the Shawonese not
giving the Commissioners Satisfaction, Mr. Weiser was sent to Scarrowyady to
consult with him thereupon; (...) returned, and informed the Board, that
according to Order he had consulted with Scarrowyady, and he, in the Presence
of Andrew Montour, delivered himself as follows:

Neucheconno, Kekewatcheky, Sonatziowanah, and Sequeheton, Chiefs of the
Shawonese, now left at Allegheny, met in Council, and addressed themselves to
the Delawares, and to the Six Nations on Ohio, in the following Manner: Grand
Fathers and Brethren,

We the Shawonese have been misled, and have carried on a private
Correspondence with the French, without letting you, or our Brethren, the
English, know of it. We traveled secretly through the Bushes to Canada, and the
French promised us great Things, but we find ourselves deceived. We are sorry
that we had any Thing to do with them: We now find that we could not see,
although the Sun did shine; We earnestly desire you would intercede with our
Brethren, the English, for us who are left at Ohio, that we may be permitted to
be restored to the Chain of Friendship, and be looked upon as heretofore the
same Flesh with them. Thus far the Shawonese Some of the Shawonese were seduced
by Peter Chartin a noted Indian Trader and Inhabitant of Pennsylvania, at the
Beginning of the French War, and removed from their Towns to be nearer to the
French Settlements on the Mississippi. Some Time after, several of these
Deservers returned; of which Neuchecouna and his Party were some; these, it
seems, together with Kekenatcheky, the old Shawonese King, and his Friends, who
had withstood the Solicitations of Chartier, joined together, and applied in
this submissive Manner to Scarrowyady.
. Whereupon the Indians of the Six Nations, and the Delawares, having received
these Assurances of their Concern for their past Behavior, undertook to become
their Intercessors, and have brought along with them three of the principal
Shawonese, to make their Submissions in Person.

At the Court House at Lancaster, Friday the 22d July, 1748.
PRESENT, Esqrs. Benjamin Shoemaker, Thomas Hopkinson, Joseph Turner, William
Logan,
The Magistrates and many of the Inhabitants of Lancaster County, The same
Indians as on Wednesday.


The Commissioners ordered the Interpreter to let the Indians know they were
going to give them an Answer.

Brethren, you who live at Ohio, of the Six Nations, and others,

WE are concerned that Scarrowyady continues so ill as not to be able to
attendy but are pleased to hear he is in a fair Way of Recovery, and that he
could give the necessary Instructions to Mr. Andrew Montour about the Business
which brought you here; We take it for granted, that your Sentiments are fully
and truly expressed in the Speeches delivered, and shall therefore answer the
several Matters contained therein in the Order they were spoke.

Brethren of the Six Nations, And others, living at Ohio,

It gives us no small Satisfaction to observe the Regard you have shown to the
Messages sent you by the Governors of his Majesty's Provinces, in endeavoring
to gain over to His Majesty's Interest as many of your Allies as you could
influence: This is agreeable to your Duty, and was recommended to you in a
particular Manner by the Governor of this Province at the Commencement of the
French War. As the Twightwees showed so great an Inclination to enter into our
Friendship, and desired you to conduct them hither, the Part you have acted on
this Occasion was kind and prudent, and we think ourselves obliged to you for
encouraging them, and showing them the Way.

Our Approbation of your Conduct is testified by this String of Wampum.

Brethren,

As there is Reason to think from the Manner in which the Twightwees have made
their Application for a Council Road to the English Provinces, that it is not a
sudden, or a hasty Step, but well considered by them, and may take its Rise
from the different Treatment which Indians of all Nations meet with at the
Hands of the English, from what they experience while in the French Interest,
we are inclinable to think them sincere, and that when admitted into our Chain,
they will not lightly break it.

A Council Road to this Province is a Measure which nearly concerns you, as it
is to be laid out through your Towns, and no doubt you have thought well of this,
and conceive you may depend on the Sincerity of their Professions, and that it
may be for our mutual Benefit, or you would not join with them in making this
Request. At your Instance therefore, and from the Opinion we have of your
Prudence and Integrity, we consent that such Road may be opened; and it may be
depended on, that on our Parts it will always be kept clean; not the least
Obstruction shall be suffered to remain in it. In Confirmation whereof

We give this String of Wampum.

Brethren of the Twightwee Nation,

At the Intercession of our good Friends and Allies the Six Nations, we have
granted you a Council Road, whereby you have free Access to any of His
Majesty's Provinces; we admit you into our Friendship and Alliance, and
therefore now call you BRETHREN, an Appellation which we hold sacred, and in
which is included every Thing that is dear. It obliges us to give you
Assistance on all Occasions, to exercise unfeigned Affection toward you, to
take you into our Bosoms, to use our Eyes, and Ears, and Hands, as well for
you, as for ourselves. Nothing is put in Competition by an Englishman with the
Faith and Honor due to those whom our gracious King pleases to take into his
Protection, admit into his Chain of Friendship, and make them our Fellow
Subjects: From that Moment they become our own Flesh and Blood, and what hurts
them will equally hurt us. Do you, on your Parts, look upon this important Name
of Brethren in the same Light; You must no more think of Onontio, and his
Children; all that sort of Relationship now ceases; His Majesty's Friends are
your Friends, and His Majesty's Enemies are Your Enemies. On these Conditions
we accept your Calumet Pipe, and shall lay it up very carefully, that it may be
always ready for Use when you and we come together. In Token of our Readiness
to receive you into our Chain of Friendship, we present you

With this double Belt of Wampum, as an Emblem of our Union.

Brethren of the Twigthwee Nation,

We understand that by an ancient Custom observed by your Ancestors, the
Delivery and Acceptance of the Calumet Pipe are the Ceremonies which render
valid, and bind fast your Alliances: We must now tell you what our Usages are
on these Occasions. The English when they consent to take any Nation into their
Alliance, draw up a Compact in Writing, which is faithfully intepreted to the
contracting Parties, and when maturely considered, and clearly and fully
understood by each Side, their Assent is declared in the most public Manner,
and the Stipulation rendered authentic by sealing the Instrument with Seals,
whereon are engraven their Families Arms, writing their Names, and publishing
it as their Act and Deed, done without Force or Constraint, freely and
voluntarily. This is the English Method of ratifying Treaties; this is the
grand Security each gives of his Faith; and our Brethren of the Six Nations,
the Delawares, Shawonese, and all other Indian Nations, when they first entered
into the Chain of Friendship with us, executed Instruments of this Nature; and
as you are now one People with us, in the same Manner with all other of our
Indian Allies, it will be expected by this, and His Majesty's other
Governments, that you will do the same. For your Satisfaction we now show you
some of the Deeds that the Indians executed when they first entered into our
Alliance.

Brethern, Deputies of the Twigtwees,

You say some of your Allies having heard of your Intentions to apply for
Admittance into the Friendship and Alliance with the English, desired you to
acquaint them with the Success of such Application, to the End that they might
have an Opportunity of asking the same Favor. As we don't know the Names of
those of your Allies, their Number or Situation, we cannot be more particular
at present on this Head, than to tell you, that we are always ready to receive
favorably the Applications of all those whom our Brethren of the Six Nations
shall recommend as worthy of our Friendship and Re^^^d.

In Testimony whereof we have wrapped a String of Wampum round the Calumet Pipe
sent by your Allies.

Brethren of the Six Nations, etc. at Ohio,

You perceive that at your Request we have received the Twightwees into our
Friendship: We take kindly your conducting them to us for that End; and as a
Proof of our being well pleased with your Cond^^t on this Occasion, we have
ordered our Interpreter to deliver to you at Mr. Croghan's some English Goods,
that are lodged there for the use of the Indians.

Brethren,

Your Intercession for the Shawonese puts us under Difficulties. It is at least
two Years since the Governor of Pennsylvania wrote to Cackewatcheka a Letter,
wherein he condescended, out of regard to him, and a few other Shawonese, who
preserved their Fidelity, to offer those who broke the Chain a Pardon on their
Submission, on their Return to the Towns they had deserted, and on their coming
down to Philadelphia to evidence in Person the Sincerity of their Repentance.
This they should have immediately complied with, and they would have readily
been admitted into Favor; but as they did not do it, what can be said for
them? You who live amongst them best know their Dispositions, and would not, it
may be hoped, become Mediators for them, were you not persuaded they would
return to their Duty. Some of them, it may be allowed, are weak People, and
were preverted from their Duty by the Persuasions of others; but this cannot be
thought to be the Case of Neucheconno, and a few more. As therefore you have
taken upon you the Office of Intercessors, take this String of Wampum, and
therewith chastise Neucheconno and his Party in such Terms as shall carry a
proper Severity with them, though the Expressions are left to your Discretion;
and then tell the delinquent Shawonese, that we will forget what is passed, and
expect a more punctual Regard to their Engagements hereafter.

Here was delivered a String of Wampum.

It Is but Justice to distinguish the Good from the Bad; Cackewatcheky and his
Friends, who had Virtue enough to resist the many fine Promises made by the
Emissaries of the French, will ever be remembered with Gratitude, and challenge
our best Services. To testify our Regard for these, we present them with this

Belt of Wampum.

And have ordered our Interpreter, who is going to Ohio, to give them a Present
of Goods.

The Commissioners gave a handsome Entertainment to the Deputies of the
Twightwees, and the Indians who conducted them from Ohio, and after Dinner
entered into a free Conversation with them about the Numbers and Situation of
their Towns, and those of their Allies; and by their Informations it appears
that the River Ouabache takes its Rise from a Lake at a small Distance from the
West End of Lake Eric, from which it runs South Westerly four or 500 Miles, and
falls into the Ohio, about three hundred Miles from the Mississippi; that on
this River, and another River called the Hatchet, the Twightwees and their
Allies have twenty Towns, and that they count One Thousand sighting Men; that
it is a plain Country, and of a rich Soil, abounding with Game. The principal
Deputy of the Twightwees laid down with Chalk the Courses of the Mississippi,
of Ouabache and of Ohio, marking the Situation of their own Towns, of Lake
Erie, and of two Forts that the French have on the Mississippi; whereby it is
manifest, that if these Indians and their Allies prove faithful to the English,
the French will be deprived of the most convenient and nearest Communication
with their Forts on the Mississippi, the ready Road lying through their Nations,
and that there will be nothing to interrupt an Intercourse between this
Province and that great River.

At the Courthouse at Lancaster, Friday, July 22. 1748. P.M.
PRESENT, The same as in the Morning.

Taminy Buck, one of the Chiefs of the Shawonese, stood up, and spoke as
follows:

Brethren,

WE, the Shawonese, sensible of our ungrateful Returns for the many Favors we
have been all along receiving from our Brethren the English, ever since we
first made the Chain of Friendship, came along the Road with our Eyes looking
down to the Earth, and have not taken them from thence till this Morning, when
you were pleased to chastise us, and then pardon us. We have been a foolish
People, and acted wrong, though the Sun shone bright, and showed us very clearly
what was our Duty. We are sorry for what we have done, and promise better
Behavior for the future. We produce to you a Certificate of the Renewal of our
Friendship in the Year 1739 by the Proprietor and Governor. Be pleased to sign
it afresh, that it may appear to the World we are now admitted into your
Friendship, and all former Crimes are buried, and entirely forgot.

The Commissioners received the Deed, but resused to sign it, letting them know
they were forgiven on Condition of better Behavior for the future; and when
they shall have performed that Condition, it will be time enough to apply for
such Testimonials. Orders were given for mending their Guns and Hatchets, and
then the Twightwees were told that the Secretary was preparing an Instrument
for rendering authentic our Treaty of Friendship with them, which would be
ready at Nine of Clock in the Morning, to which Time the Commissioners
adjourned.

At the Courthouse at Lancaster, Saturday the 23d July 1748.
PRESENT, Esqrs. Benjamin Shoemaker, Thomas Hopkinson, Joseph Turner, William
Logan,
The Magistrates, and many of the Inhabitants of Lancaster County, The same
Indians as Yesterday.


THE Instrument and Counterpart having been prepared and approved by the
Commissioners, the Contents thereof were read, and carefully Interpreted to,
and approved by the Indians, and then they were executed by the Commissioners,
and the three Deputies of the Twightwees, the other Indians mentioned therein
signing as Witnesses, together with the Magistrates (...) Inhabitants present.

The Commissioners then enquired if the Indians had any particular News to
communicate, and, after some Time spent in Conference, Suchraquery (...) as
follows:

The Indians of the several Nations, living at Ohio, return you Thanks for your
Acceptance of their good Offices in conducting the Twightwees, and admitting
them into your Alliance; likewise for your Goodness in accepting their
Mediation on Behalf of the Shawonese, and thereupon forgiving their late Breach
of Faith. Our new Brethren the Twightwees tell us, that they have brought a few
Skins to begin a Trade, and they desire you will be pleased to order the
Traders to put less Stones into their Scales, that their Skins may weigh more,
and that they may allow a good Price for them, which will encourage them and
their Nation to trade more largely with you. This the Commissioners promised to
do.

The Commissioners informed the Indians, that there was likely to be a Peace
between the King of England and the French King; that the News was but just
arrived, and imperfectly told; but that there was actually a Ces^ation of Arms.
The Indians making no Reply, the Commissioners, after ordering a Present to the
Twightwee Deputies, rose, and put an End to the Treaty.

FINIS.

