Word in Season TO ALL True Lovers OF THEIR Liberty and their Country; Both of
which are now in the utmost Danger of being forever lost.

By Mylo Freeman, etc.

We are now come to the Crisis and Extremity of our Danger; there is no
Resource or Recovery for us, if we now miscarry; it is no Time to throw away
any of the Helps which we have, but by all Means possible to acquire more. --
Good Gods! (I cannot speak it without a Sigh) there are some Enemies in the
very Sanctuary; some, I say, even in the Senate --

Middleton's Cicero. Page 193. Boston: Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in
Queen Street. 1748.

A Word in Season, etc.
Some few in that, but Numbers err in this,
Ten censure wrong, for one who writes amiss;
Careless of Censure -- nor too fond of Fame;
Still pleased to praise, yet not afraid to blame;
Averse alike to FLATTERY, or OFFEND;
Not free from Faults, nor yet too vain to mend --
POPE.
LIBERTY and Property, the Love of our Country, Truth and Disinterestedness,
are most unhappily become only mere Sounds and Words of Course, and now seldom
mean more than our common complimentary Cant, viz. -- Your most humble Servant,
I am exceeding glad, or exceeding sorry for you, andC. -- in which Lip Service
there is perhaps seldom one Word of Truth and Sincerity. And as most People
love to be in the Fashion, and seeing it is now very unfashionable to be guilty
of speaking the Truth (especially where Interest is concerned) and conforming
our Actions thereunto; so now there are many among us, who from some secret
Self Love disguise the Truth, and basely act now, as did Pilot of old, who
asked by Way of Jest, " What is Truth? and immediately fled from an Answer: And
although the Truth may not with Propriety be spoken at all Times, yet there is
the fit Time when it should be spoken; and then it is criminal to withold
one's Peace; and as Truth is Light which dispels Darkness, so when Clouds and
Darkness surround us, and imminent Danger hangs over our Heads, then how good
is it to have Truth break out upon us in a Flood of Day ^ ((...) we may be
indulged the Expression) -- Darkness was perhaps never more thick and gloomy
than at this Day. And as Party, Interest, the insatiable Love of Money, are
ever the most violent Enemies to Truth, Liberty, and the universal Love of
one's Country; so wherever these are predominant and daily grow more powerful,
they do forever endeavor to the utmost of their Skill and Strength, right or
wrong, to warp and bend every Thing, however unjust, unsociable and selfish, to
say in, fix and strengthen that Side, or Party they are of, however opposite,
detrimental, and pernicious it may prove in its Consequences, to the whole
Community, to their Country, either row, or hereafter: And the greater and more
powerful the Party, and the greater the Interest to uphold and carry it on,
consequently the greater must be the real Damage done to all those against whom
any such S^tt and Party of Men improve their Interest, and exert their Power.

Now, if these general Observations are true; it will we believe be readily
granted that there is a great Deal of Reason, for every honest Man, at this
critical Conjuncture of our Affairs of this Province, when Things are, we fear,
ripening for our final Destruction and Overthrow, to stand up unterrified and
unseduced, for the real Interest, Liberties and Properties of his
Fellow-Citizens, and for his dear Children, and his dearer Country. Now every
honest Man has a fair Opportunity to prove to the World, whether he most loves
his Country, or the Mammon; whether he is a true Patron, or a Demas, or a Judas.

Experience has dearly and woefully taught us all, That nothing in the World
will so powerfully set the Tongue, the Pen, the Wit, and Heart of most Men so
earnestly, so vigorously to Work as INTEREST, either real or imaginary. This it
was perhaps that sat the judicious Author to work to write and publish to the
World that Piece in a late Independent Advertiser, No. 13. Mar. 28. wherein the
good Author out of pure Zeal for Virtue and ardent Love to his Country, has
dictated and prescribed the only Scheme (as he says) that can possibly have any
direct and good Tendency to implant in us the moral Duties and Virtues; and
really make us, a wise, pr^^ent, industrious, honest, yea a prosperous and
completely HAPPY PEOPLE -- All which (according to this prodigious Genius) will
be immediately consequent upon the due Appropriation of the late Royal Bounty
graciously granted to the brave Sons of New England, for the glorious
Achievement in the happy Reduction of the mighty Fortress at Louisbourg. Which
Bounty cannot consistent with true Wisdom be any Way so well, and wisely
managed and disposed of by the Governments for the real and perpetual Good,
Welfare and Prosperity of the Public, As "Immediately to deliver it all up in
a Lump to the good M -- and redeem of them, all the great Emission of
Paper-Money, which they are now collecting together. This (says that pious
Scribble) will make us, more rich, more wise, frugal, industrious, more in Love
of Virtue, and averse to Vice, Vanity and Folly -- Glorious Scheme -- Taking it
( as he does) for granted, that the very large Emission of our Paper-Currency,
only, has absolutely involved and overwhelmed us in all our prodigious
Difficulties and Misfortunes -- Surely this Gentleman could see a vast Way, and
penetrate into the inmost Recesses of the political CONSTITUTION. -- But what
if any one should have the Front and Hardiness to say, that it is not so in
Fact, but far otherwise; and that our Difficulties are compounded of many
hurtful Ingredients, and that they have been a long Time coming upon us; and
that we have but just now as it were been favored with a Medicine that has
reached the Cause. -- It Is universally allowed that Peace, Industry, and good
Government, make most Things plenty, and consequently cheap: That War, is a
great Calamity, or rather the greatest of Calamities, and always brings on
Scarcity, Devastation and Distress of every Kind: That it is the PEOPLE which
are the true Riches, Beauty, and Strength of every Kingdom, Nation and
Province; and when the People are taken away, and the Country thereby thin'd
and made bare of Laborers and Inhabitants; then also, almost every Blessing is
taken away with them; and if this had not been, and were it not now very much
our Case with Regard to the People, we should not even now (with all our Paper
Money, as bad as it is) be in such sinking, such deplorable Circumstances. --
Does the Ground manure and till it self? And will the Earth yield her Increase
without the Labor of the Husbandman? What Benefit in many Respects is the
shining of the Sun, and the most refreshing Rains and Dews upon the Earth,
where few or no People are? Are not Things many Times very scarce, and very
dear, even where SILVER MONEY it self, is very plenty! -- And are Articles of
Life, etc. -- ever any where cheap and plenty (especially in War-Time) but
where there is constantly much People? -- Take away the Bees, and although your
Garden may for a Time be ever so beautifully stored and adorned with the
greatest Variety of Flowers, yet you shall have no Honey in the Hive, although
you would give ever so dear for it; but there always will be Honey where there
are Bees; and always the more Honey the better they are looked after.

If this will hold good with Regard to the Political Hive, seeing this is
pretty much our impoverished Case, who are now so drained of our robust and
able-bodied Laborers, the Consequence must be, that all our Difficulties don't
necessarily arise merely on Account of the great Emission of Paper Money. And
in Case the Paper Money had not been made, by the public Currency of which, we
carried on the great Expedition against our potent and common Enemies, and
happily (through divine Goodness) succeeded, we perhaps should have been in
much worse Circumstances.

And, notwithstanding the mighty Bustle and Clamor, that has been by some
cunning and selfish Men industriously raised and aggravated, about the Badness
of the Money, yet we are experimentally taught to know, that if the Articles of
Life had been, or were now very plenty, they must, and would be cheap; and be
sold very low even for our despised Paper-Money! This is also true with Regard
to the Money itself, which even the M -- themselves every Day are fully
demonstrating to every one that has Eyes to see, and Ears to hear; or else why
are they so greedy after it, hoarding of it up to make it scarce, in Order to
make it to them as good as so much SILVER. First they condemned it, and them
that made it, and jumpt a 100 per cent in the Principal, for every Article they
parted with for it; although they were for the Expedition it self; then settled
their Books and Accounts, fixed them at Silver from 26 s. 8. d. to about 30 s.
per Ounce; and now call in all their Silver Bonds, Notes, etc., -- to be paid
in these individual Bills, at between 50 and 60 s. per Ounce with 10 perCent
Interest; then put these Bills quite ^^^g into their coffers, in Order soon to
have them all redeemed for Silver Money at about 80 s. per Ounce, This is a
fine Whi^-Row, All this can be fully proved -- Him therefore that can reckon,
let him reckon: -- 100 per Cent Start upon the Principal, that is what they
just before sold at 6 or 700 perCent Advance, they now sold from 12 to 15, and
even 7 to 20 100 perCent Advance for this Money -- settled their Books and let
out a vast Quantity of this Money upon Bond, etc. at about 30 s. -- oz. and 10
per Cent Interest (I must repeat it) -- and now call it all in at almost L. 3
per Ounce, for these Bills -- for which they will demand the Silver Money
Bounty, according to the Face of the Bill -- Now, pray is it the Money, or is
it these Managers of it, that ruin and undo this Country. -- This is their wise
and pious Scheme. to enrich us, to make us so much the more wise, industrious,
frugal, yea more every Thing -- But this is not all, for some we have heard
have proposed a Scheme ten Times worse -- viz. To give these good M -- all the
Silver given, or granted to the Governments, for our Bills now extant; -- and
also, ^orrow at Home, fifty Thousand Pounds Sterling upon Interest; and so
immediately sink all Paper-Money at once.

But the Mischief is not laid quite so deep, but some have (...) a Glimpse of
it, and give Warning accordingly -- which Scheme, if it should take will as
inevitably ruin the Country, as (...) a Man to the Heart, will take away his
Life: For as our Produce and Export has never yet been sufficient to make any
proportionable Returns for what has been with a bad Design continually imported
from foreign Parts, we are consequently in this Case much in Debt; add to this,
all our other Debts, and the yearly Interest we must pay for 50,000 Sterling;
-- and the M -- indefatigable Industry, in experting all the Silver to make
Remittances for themselves, and to lodge their Estates in England, by all which
Money we shall in a few (...) neither Silver, nor ^^ People, and all (...)
Beggars, or Slaves -- And when in these Circumstances, how shall we pay this
vast-Debt, with the yearly Interest, which Interest, is a great Sum of it self,
how great then must the Burden he, to pay (...) both Principal and Interest,
especially when reduced to such a Condition -- This is perishing indeed! These
are such plain Truths, is perhaps some Men among us will not like, and for this
Reason, because they are plain Truths -- Though perhaps, they may be sneer'd at
as dry, husky Stuff, Windmills, Whir^^gigs, (...).

But we shall honestly depend upon our Representations to appear and act, not
only immediately for us, but also for the real Good of our Pos^^^i^y, with a
bountiful Eye, and Singleness of Hear^^ with a view and (...) Regard to the
whole Community, exclusive of Prejudice (...) Party -- And we hope our General
Court will (...) see through the bad Views and Designs of some Men, to involve us
all in Ruin -- we hope and pray, that all such ^^, will come off and fare like
the Dog in the Table, and so have neither the Substance, nor the shadow; to
teach them for the nature, and all others like them, not to be too greedy, and
the Lastful after the (...). For us the Love of Money is emphatically the Rent
of all Evil, so he that is guilty of this (...) is so far guilty of betraying
his Country, and just so (...), in whom this is their Ruling passion, just so
many violent Enemies to (...) Country there be, wherever they reside: For a
Mercenary Spirit is as opposite to the Love of ones Country as Virtue is as
Vice, (...) contrary as Light is to Darkness.

Now is the sit, you perhaps the only Time for Electors to look about their,
and if possible to nonplus and disappoint the unreasonable and exorbitant Hope,
of a certain Set and Party of Men (...); and rather than choose and elect any
that we have the least Reason, or (...) suspicion to imagine are susceptible of
^^, or being Tempted by Money, or Preserment to adhere to the destructive (...)
of these Compassionate Gentlemen; rather than (...) such, let us (...) them,
and if there are any such, let (...) with the utmost (...) and abhorrence Spue
them out, as ^^^estable Members of the Commonwealth; not only as unfit to be
entrusted with our Liberties, and to make New Laws, but as utterly unworthy
even to breath in the Air of a free, and well established Government. And as a
little heaven, (...) the whole Lamp, we ought therefore to be exceeding
cautious and watchful what sort of Men we choose for our Representatives; for
wh^^ver out of Interest real, or Imaginary, out of any s^^ister Views, or
particular Friendship, or any other Selfish Motives, should Vote for any Person
who has a mercenary Cast of Mind, let him now consider, that in so doing, he
actually does all in his Power, (by such a base Compliment) to give up all the
Liberties and Properties of the true Sons of New England: Every such Member is
as a (...) of (...) in the Constitution, and the greater Number of such Spots,
the sooner will the whole Body be ripe for Destruction -- But to return,

It is with the Political, as with natural Bodies, and as all great Bodies move
slow, so must all great and weighty Affairs; and Things of the greatest
Concernment and Consequence demand the greatest Seriousness and cool
Consideration, reflecting calmly on what is past, examining and meditating on
what is present, and laying a good Foundation for future Superstructures to be
built upon: This is true Wisdom. And as we in this Government have been for
many Years wearing our selves into mighty Difficulties, by Pride Idleness,
Extravagance, by being fooled and flattered out (...) Senses by an Arch, Shy
Set of Men, till we are arrived to a most horrible Precipice, we must expect to
be suddenly cast down by them, unless prevented by our Watchmen and Guardians;
and nothing will sooner and more infallibly bring this to pass, than suddenly
to come into any Schemes and Measures of the M -- let them be what they will;
for they cannot serve two Masters in one Capacity, and as they love Money, they
must consequently hate their Country. -- This we know, by at least fifty Years
Experience, and God grant it may not be so one Year longer. -- They have almost
ruined the Country by using such Means to beggar the Inhabitants, to aggrandize
their own private Fortunes, in order to make the Commonalty Slaves and Vassals,
and themselves Lords of Manors, and sole Possessors of our Lands, Liberties
etc. Is not this the Truth? We have no Interest to serve but what is general,
and for the Good and Welfare of our Country -- But we expect to meet with
Scepticks in Politics and Government as well as in Religion, whose Interest it
is not to believe in their Doctrine, but to murmur and cavil even at the most
self evident Truths, that run counter to their Designs and Views. -- As Riches
in general are said to take to themselves Wings and flee away, so we may depend
upon it, that in the most literal Sense, in Case these Men get the Silver into
their Hands, it will fly with the Wings of the Wind to some other Parts of the
World, and none more likely, than the Place to which they have constantly
already (...) all they could any ways possibly procure -- But seeing it is
still there, we would humbly offer to the Public our Opinion about it: --
Whether it would not be most for the true Interest of the Country, (although it
will be some considerable Time a coming to pass,) to keep all the Silver Money
B^^^^y granted, forever in the Bank of England, as the Government's Fund, and
Bottom; and to have the Interest thereof only, drawn for yearly by the
Government, which Interest will amount to about Eighty Thousand Pounds (as our
Money now stands) yearly; and so every Year, sink and burn Eighty Thousand
Pounds of our Paper Bills; and tax the Province in due Proportion likewise
every Year; and sink and burn them; and then it will not take up half so long a
Time to heal our Wounds, and redress our Grievancies, and case off our Burdens,
as it has by degrees taken to bring us into them; which would if let alone
unavoidably ruin us; and if we can yet be saved; better late than never. For a
Silver Fund is always absolutely necessary to keep up the Credit of all
negotiable Bills and Notes, not only in the Bank of England, but also in all
well established Communities, and for want of which here in our Government we
are so undone as to the Credit of our paper Medium, it therefore is of the
highest Conce^^^ent to our Government so to order and contrive their Schemes,
with Regard to the Silver we now have the Prospect of, and to keep (...) for a
perpetual Fund for the Sole Benefit of the Province to Support the Credit
thereof forever, the Interest of which will (...) but a moderate Tax yearly
laid on the Government be sufficient always to pay all our publicCharges of the
Government: and then as many Paper Bills as may at any Time be emitted for the
Government's Use will be forever, as good as (...) Bank (...) in the World; but
in Case any other Scheme should take, which by Degrees will consume this Silver
Fund, and reduce this Government to such unhappy Circumstances, as to be
obliged to emit Paper Money, as we have been forced to do without a Fund;
seeing we may never have such a Fund granted to us again on any Account, shall not
we be consequently in abundantly worse Circumstances than ever.

And when we have a well established Peace; when we have many more Laborers,
when the M -- and all other ^^ players, punctually pay off all Wages in good
Silver Money of their own importing; when they pay for our Ships, L^mber, Fish,
O^^, Tar, Provision, etc. -- always in good hard Silver Money; when they leave
off importing such vast Quantities of (...) Commodities, such as Velvets,
Laces, Silks of all Kinds, the finest Linnens, Cambricks, and Tea, and Lemmons,
in such prodigious Quantities; We say, when this is our happy Case, -- Then,
and then only shall we be a most industrious, thriving, and happy Province.
Then we doubt not, but these very Men who now act so contrary to this Scheme,
if they turn from Darkness to Light, they will with all Justice, by all honest
Men, be esteemed, true Friends to the Community; hearty Lovers of their
Country; studying and acting for the Peace and Prosperity of our Jerusalem. But
until they are actually seen and known to do these Things, and (...) in so
doing (for nothing less than occular Demonstration will do in this momentous
Case) we shall still have the same Opinion of them for the future, as we all
now have, viz. That they are using their utmost Endeavors by all Sorts of Ways
and Means to ruin our Country, and aggrandize their own private Fortunes: Who
sacrifice to Mammon, and do mind the Things by which they may get it: O
wretched Members of Society, who shall deliver us from them! But o go on.

It is thought a very low Way of Talking (...) use the Style in the late
forementioned Advertisor) to say if the M -- import more Goods than are really
necessary, and for the public Good (which it is thought they never yet had at
Heart, for they were not brought up to such a Trade) That the People are not
obliged to buy them! And in any such Case the Damage will naturally fall and
center upon themselves. --,But who of them ever did, or think ye, ever will pay
away good hard Pieces of Eight, if they had, or could get any Thing else to pay
-- Don't they perpetually import (...) amongst us, all Manner of unnecessary
and extravagant Articles and Commodities, on Purpose to delude, beguile, intic^
and (...) the less prudent and wary among us; to work them out of their Money,
and reward the Sweat of their Brows, with Trifles and Vanities -- Is not this
in Fact, basely tempting of others, or with yet more Propriety, the bring
actually guilty of other Men's Sins, Vanities, and Extravagances. Remove the
wicked Cause, and then see if the Effect c^^seth not. Let them always pay the
Laborers in good Silver Money (of their own importing, for they are obliged to
find their own Tools) and then see if they will constantly part with it all for
their G^w Gaws, unnecessary Apparel, Furniture, and the like; many, yea very
many Score Thousand Pounds of which, have been foolishly bought up and consumed
by the People in general, for Want of the Money they had faithfully earned but
they could not seasonably get it, and were in some Sort obliged to do so, or be
turned out of Employ, or work for nothing, which is still worse.

But if Silver Money new, (as our Author has hinted) is such an infallible
Remedy as Specific, when in the good M -- Hands against all Manner of
Idleness, Dishonesty, Luxury, Selfishness (in the worst Sense of the Word) mean
Spiritedness and the like; why have not pious M -- taken as much Pains and run
as great Risques for the Good of their Country, in order to procure and import
this precious Mo^^y, as they have forever been industrious to export and sent
it always out of the Country! -- If our Fish, Shipping, Lumber, Oil etc -- are
in any other Parts of the World (as the Climate will not perhaps alter their
Nature and Qualities) as good as Silver, and do actually procure, and would
always procure it (...) why then are they not esteemed to be as well worth it
here (...) and if it is, why is there never any sent, or imp^rted hard and paid
down for such necessary Commodities! more especially since (as these M -- now
say) our FISH TRADE ONLY, exclusive of every Thing else, would be more than
sufficient to procute us a Silver Medium forever? If this is absolutely the
Case, have (...) the M -- Right Hands forgot their Cunning, in not carrying as
such a Trade for Silver; seeing Money is as much their Tool, as the Brand A^ is
the Carpenters; who is full as good in his Place, as his Implayer; and the one
is as much obliged to find his own Tools (...) the other. -- If this is really
the Case -- we are thankful they have been left once to speak the Truth; as
also to infor their (...) and superlative Love to their Country, and
Fellow-(...) yet importing any Silver here, as a Medium of Trade; but on the
contrary, have all along kept it out of the Country -- And NOW, there, is a
happy Prospect of having a Silver Fund for the Good of the Public, which they
own to have in it so many moral Virtues and social Qualites, yet these Virtues
and Properties cannot be extracted, unless the Silver is first of all
deposited, or rather given up to them to pass through their Hands, to be
managed for the Good of the Community, in a Way past finding out!

But if Silver and Gold have those glorious Properties; why are not those Parts
of the World, where it is exceeding plenty, and where the People seem in other
Things to have their Senses about them; Why are they not much Wiser, and less
addicted to Scycophancy, Treachery, Covetousness, Pride, Luxury, Party Spirit,
Self Interest, and the like? -- Or does the Climate alter the Heart and Nature
of Men? Or are no M -- there whose Hands it must pass through! and seeing our
Paper Money (as they say is so big with Mischief and little worth, and so fatal
in its Consequences to the Government, for which Reasons these M -- have all
along so strongly appeared against it -- how comes it to pass, that these very
M -- are now boarding of it up? This seems to be a sort of Infatuation. -- As
they not long since raised a mighty Noise and Clamor against the Paper Money.
because there was no Silver Bottom, or Fund to support it and redeem it, why
did not they themselves establish one? And seeing we are now in a hopeful Way
of getting such a Fund and Bank without them; -- Why are they now so
prodigiously sitting themselves against it! -- but Murder will out. -- It is
not, they now think, so much for their Interest, as to have all the Silver if
possible in their own Hands: They now want to have it all for the very Bill
they (...) been so hot and spiteful against; by which they have already got so
much. This (say they) will now insallibly save the Country from Ruin. But,
nothing can save us, but having the Balance of Trade in our Favor; and this
can never be, unless our Produce by our Labor and Frugality, is constantly
exported, and greater than what is imported in Lieu thereof; and this will
never come to pass, while we are kept in Debt to foreign Parts, for so many
unnecessary Commodities: And that we are now overwhelmed in Debt for such
Things, and which are perpetually crowded upon us by these very M -- is too
true to make a Jest of -- "And while this is the abominable Practice, we shall
always be in Want; for nothing will bring Want so soon, as such ill Management,
when it is fed and nur^ed up by every expensive Vanity, and so strongly
enforced and recommended by such ill Examples, and while this is our unhappy
Case, (although we preach, and soft, and talk, and write incessantly it will
not avail one Mite, to make the Country thrive and prosper; but we shall still
be in miserable Circumstances: And nothing will prevent it, but putting a final
Period to such Proceedings.

And as to making the PEOPLE in general frugal and industrious, the only sure
Way that we know of, is, To set them a good EXAMPLE of such Things; to duly
administer all good and wholesome Laws; to allow them sufficient Wages for their
Labor, and pay them their Money as soon as they have earned it; for then they
have Right to it, and no Man has a Right to Money who has not earned it, or has
not Property to purchase it: To encourage our own Trade and Manufacturies, buy
them and wear them; to train up our Youth to Diligence and Industry, and
educate them in the true Principles of Religion, Honesty, and Love to their
Country; to keep our Lands in our own Possession, and encourage the tilling and
manuring of them. etc. -- By ^^ways taking due Care what Sort of Men we
constantly Choose and appoint for our Guardians and Representatives, to whom we
of Necessity do commit our Lives, our Liberties, our Estates, and every Thing
that is near and dear unto us. These are not vain Chimeras and idle
Speculations, but the very Truth itself and none but the wilfully Blind can
help seeing and confessing it to be so -- And, whosoever votes for a Fool, or
Knave, thereby endeavors to ruin his Country, himself, his Children; and if
the greater Part of the House should happen to be wiser, or honester, no Thanks
to him, for he did all in his Power to corrupt and debauch it, and if no Body
else were concerned with him, it would be Matter of Thankfulness, if he
forthwith was made a Slave, and his Children perpetual Vassals and Beggars.

But if the only effectual Method to make us a wise, frugal, and happy People,
is, To indulge the M -- in their Schemes. -- Then their jumping (upon the great
Emission of Old Tenor) so prodigious high upon all their Commodities, as
immediately in Hand to get about twelve Years Interest upon Interest; then
their exclaiming so loud Yesterday for Want of a Silver-Fund, to redeem the
Bills with, and to Day against it, because we have a Prospect of such an One:
then their letting out their Old Tenor, which they have so often and so
fiercely opposed for about 30 s. per Ounce, and calling in the very same Bills
now, at near 60 s. per Ounce with Interest, in order to bring about their good
Scheme to have them all redeemed with real Silver Money in Hand, at about 30 s.
per oz. and so they to have the sole Management of all the ROYAL Bounty: Their
exporting all the Silver out of the Country, and importing a Flood of English
Goods, etc. Year after Year to keep us forever in Debt; their Feeding our
Enemies, and Starving our Fellow Citizens; their Party and sycophantick Spirit,
Extortion, Oppression, and the like: If these are the only wise Methods, (and
these Methods they always have used) to make us an industrious, frugal,
thriving and prosperous People; then encourage them, let them rule -- For as
they have Riches, every young Tyro of a M -- will be fond to rule, and as
Riches are not always to Men to Understanding, we shall then have a Fine
Government! To conclude. We are of Opinion, none have suffered much by our
Paper-Money, except Salary Gentlemen, and they (it seems) have suffered
prodigiously; and no Wonder such have preached against it. All others, have all
along looked out, and by Way of Trade have pretty well-righted themselves, in
making every Body give for their Commodities, in Proportion as they have been
forced to pay^ so that with all such, it has been as broad as it is long, and
according to that ^njust Proverb, "Two Cheats is an even Bargain. -- But Salary
Gentlemen, have not had this Opportunity, and therefore have been greatly
injured: And they should all be honestly redressed by Those who have hired and
employed them; and they will do so -- if they are honest, and are willing to do
to others, as they would be done unto.

One Word more and we have done -- We will esteem and reverence all Men for the
Good they have already done, or are still inclined to do, and for no other
Reason ought any to be esteemed. But if under a false Pretense of doing us
Good, which we can neither see nor feel, they will pick our Pockets, and do us
all possible Harm and Mischief, or would do it if in their Power; how can we
help detesting and hating them.

May these Hints set much abler Men to Work for the real and true Interest of
our Country.

FINIS.

