Mr. Prince's SERMON Upon the DEATH of Madam Stoddard.

The Fullness of Life and Joy in the Presence of God.

A SERMON Occasioned By the DECEASE of Mrs. Martha Stoddard, Late CONSORT of
the HONORABLE Anthony Stoddard, Esquire Feb. 11. 1747, 8. AEtatis 62.

Delivered In the South Church in BOSTON, on the Lord's Day after her Funeral.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M. A. And a Pastor of the said Church.

BOSTON: Printed by Kneeland and Green in Queen Street. 1748.

A Funeral SERMON.
PSALM. xvi. 11. Thou will show me the Path of Life: In thy Presence is Fullness
of Joy, at thy Right Hand there are Pleasures for evermore.
THE Title of this Psalm is Michtam of David: and Michtam seems to signify a
Golden Ornament, or something made or embellished with the finest and brightest
Gold. But whether it intimates some peculiar Excellency in the Matter; or the
Name of a musical Instrument, Song, or Tune, which were to lead the Singing,
seems uncertain. See Page and Merc^r, M^ller, Pol Synops, and Martin Albert.


However, in this Divine Composure their appears a singular Excellency. And as
it is usual in Poetical Performances both sacred and profane, for the Writer to
express himself sometimes in his own Name, and sometimes in the Name of others;
so the holy Psalmist under the Conduct of Inspiration, sometimes here writes in
his own, sometimes in the Name of the MESSIAH, whose humane Nature, he rejoiced
in the View of deriving from him, and sometimes in the Name of both together.

Thus he writes in the Name of CHRIST in the four last Verses -- I have set the
LORD always before me: Because he is at my Right Hand, I shall not be moved:
Therefore my Heart is glad and my Glory rejoiceth: My Flesh also shall rest in
Hope: For thou will not leave my Soul in Hell; neither will thou suffer thine
Holy one to see Corruption: Thou will show me the Path of Life; in thy Presence
is Fullness of Joy, at thy Right Hand there are Pleasures for evermore.

For that these Speeches are meant of CHRIST in his human Nature; both the
Apostle Peter in Acts ii, and the Apostle Paul in Acts xiii, most clearly show
us.

By the Path of Life seems plainly to be meant the certain Way, which through all
the Sufferings, Temptations, Darkness and Perplexities of his State of
Humiliation his human Nature was to pass, to its desired Life of Glory and
Immortality. Of the Divine Conduct unto this, his human Soul is represented
here as (1) expressing its Assurance; and then (2) of that Felicity giving this
most agreeable Description -- In thy Presence is Fullness of Joy, at thy Right
Hand are Pleasures for evermore. And this doubtless was the Joy we read was
afterward set before him, and did animate his viewing Soul to endure the Cross
and despise the Shame, 'till he ascended and sat down at the Right Hand of the
Throne of God. Heb. xii. 2.

But though these Passages are meant of CHRIST in his human Nature; yet no doubt
the Psalmist, as far as was consistent with his own Condition, joined in with
them for himself: and while the SPIRIT of Prophesy presented him with that
lively Prospect and Assurance which should rise in the humane Soul of CHRIST,
of the Life and Joy at the Presence and Right Hand of GOD; the raised and holy
Soul of David rejoiced also in the Views of this Felicity, and triumphed in the
Prospect of his arriving to it.

The Words in the Original are exceeding full: both Life, Presence, Joy and
Pleasure, being all expressed in the Plural Number: as Montanus renders them
exactly thus -- Thou will make me know the Path of Lives; Fullness of Joys with
thy Faces Cum Fa^i^bus t^is:
in thy Right Hand Delights Jucunditates.
perpetually* And on this, a learned Man observes -- That the Prophet might
express this Fullness of Joy and Pleasure, he uses the plural Number, to
comprehend and signify every true Matter of Rejoicing, every Kind of Joy and
Delight, and their most abounding Plenty and Variety. Rivet.
And to this I may add, He might also express the Life in the plural Number, to
signify every Supply, Degree and Exercise of Life, as the immediate Source of
all.

By Life we are to understand that perfect Life which the Spirits of the
sanctified Spring into on their parting from their Bodies; which filled both
the Souls and Bodies of Enoch and Elijah at their Translation, and shall fill
the Bodies of all the Saints in their glorious Change and Resurrection. And an
excellent Interpreter observes, that the final Term -- For evermore -- is to be
applied to Life, as well as to the two following Terms: For eternal is that
Life as well as the Joy and Pleasure. de Muis.
And as Joy and Pleasure in the very Nature of Things imply a living Subject
that perceives them; the Life must needs be full and eternal, that the Joy and
Pleasure may be full and eternal also. Yea Moller judges, that this Fullness of
Joy and Pleasure is an amplified Description of that Life itself: As if the
Psalmist had said -- That Life has in it such an intimate Communion with the
blessed GOD, wherein as before his Face we have a Fullness of Joys and
Pleasures; not momentany, mixed or interrupted, as in the present State; but
most pure, abundant and perpetual.

And thou will show or make me know the Path of Life, intends both a clear and
sure Discovery made by the Divine Word and SPIRIT, to the enlightened and
apprehending Mind, of the Way thereto; as also a certain and effectual Conduct
till he should come to know by happy Experience what that perpetual Life and
Fullness of Joys and Pleasures are. Moller.
As if he had said; Thou will safely guide me unto Death; and then open to me
an Entrance to eternal Life, and make me experience that highest Joy which thy
Countenance or Presence, with the honorable Session at thy Right Hand, or the
Bounty of thy Right Hand bestows. de Muis.
Or as the inspired Asaph in Psalm. lxxiii. 24, Thou shall guide me by thy
Counsel, and afterward receive me to Glory.

But for the further Illustration of these Passages, I shall endeavor briefly
these four Things --

1. Consider what is that eternal Life which the Renewed upon their Dying are
led into.

2. Show what may be intended by that Presence and Right Hand of GOD.

3. Lay open the Springs from whence the Joys and Pleasures there arise.

4. And lastly, Take some Survey of the Fullness of Joys and Pleasures there for
ever.

I. Consider what is that eternal Life which the Renewed upon their Dying are
led into.

Now eternal Life is in Scripture used in these two Senses; (1) In a more
strict and proper Sense, to signify, the Advancement of all the excellent
Powers and Principles of the truly sanctified to their full Maturity or
Perfection; (2) in a larger Sense, to comprehend both this Perfection, and all
the Visions, Actions, (...) Pleasures, which the sanctified by Means of that
perfect Life shall be employed in and entertained with for ever.

But I shall under this General Head consider eternal Life, only in the former
or more restrained Sense, to signify the Advancement of all the excellent
Powers and Principles of the truly sanctified to their full Maturity. And as
this eternal Life may be considered, either as subsisting only in their
separate Spirits upon their Disolution from their Bodies; or as subsisting both
in their united Souls and Bodies, which is now the Case of many Saints in the
World above, and will be of all the rest at their General Resurrection, to
Eternity; I shall yet more strictly confine my Views to that eternal Life
subsisting only in the separate Spirits of the sanctified at their Dissolving
from their Bodies.

Now as there are two Sorts of Powers and Principles in the sanctified Spirit;
(1) Those which are called natural or essential; (2) Those which are called by
some moral, and by others more agreeable to Scripture, spiritual, because
produced by the Holy Spirit in his saving Work of Renovation, when he begins to
sanctify the Sinner; so this blessed and eternal Life of the separate Spirit
consists in the Advancement of these two different Sorts of Powers and
Principles to their full Maturity.

1. In this eternal Life of their separate Spirits, all their excellent natural
or essential Powers are advanced to Perfection.

Many of these are now known to us: As the Powers of perceiving Themselves and
other Objects and of being affected with them; the Powers of thinking,
conceiving, remembering, comparing, penetrating, understanding, judging, and
deciding; the Powers of approving and disapproving, of liking and disliking,
loving and hating, desiring and Aversion; the Powers of refusing, choosing,
resolving, contriving, moving, acting, pursuing, enjoying or delighting in
those Objects, Actions or Conceptions that are agreeable to us, etc.

Now all these known essential Powers of the sanctified Spirit, and all others,
though in the present State unknown, upon their Separation at once awake and rise
to their maturity of Strength, Activity and Vigor. Their Understandings are
entirely right and clear, strong, sure and satisfying in all their
Apprehensions, without Confusion, Darkness, Perplexity or Doubting: their
Memories, tenacious, ready, exact and faithful: their Self-determining,
Self-moving and active Powers of every Kind, exalted to their Ripeness or full
Degree of Strength and Liveliness, answerable to the full Extent of their
several original Capacities: though as their Knowledge or Ideas grow, these
Capacities may afterward perhaps by the infinite Power of GOD enlarge for
ever. Nor is their any Infirmity in any of their other essential Faculties, but
all advanced to their Perfection.

In short, they are made much like Angels in Activity and Power: And if they
are clothed with celestial Substances bro't by those holy Ministers from
Heaven, like their own, inexpressibly more fine and active than any here below;
as Origin the most learned of the ancient Fathers conceived, and as may
possibly be hinted in Zech. iii, and 2 Cor. v; the Celerity of Light is nothing
comparable to them. The All-sufficient GOD is their everlasting Strength: and
as in him there is an eternal Scource of Life; a Stream of vital Power from him
eternally flows through their Spirits, to quicken and keep them in their
perpetual, unwearied and delightful Views, Perceptions, Actions and Enjoyments.

2. In this eternal Life of their separate Spirits, all their moral or
spiritual Powers or Principles are advanced also to Perfection.

Their Spirits began to be made holy and righteous by the SPIRIT of Holiness in
their Renovation: they then began to have the holy Image of GOD produced in
them, began to be like him in all those Graces which resemble his moral
Excellencies. In particular, in their highest Love to and Delight in Himself
and all his Excellence and Blessedness; his Dominion, Sovereignty, Authority,
Will and Glory, especially as displayed in CHRIST the Mediator; with all the
grateful Homage, Submission, Services and Adorations paid him both by Men and
Angels: as also in their Love to Men, their Love of Benignity to all about
them, and their Love of Complacency to all who resemble and honor him. Then he
made them his Temples; took up his constant Dwelling; i. e. fixed his vital,
gracious, reigning and improving Influence in them: and by his Help they
persevered and grew in divine Light and Knowledge, Gifts and Graces toward
maturity. Yet they were still imperfect* and a great Degree of moral Blindness,
Error and Corruption remained in them, to their continual Grief, Abasement and
Excitation; as the Apostle observes in Romans vii, Phil. iii, etc.

But when their Spirits are freed from their vile and disordered Bodies; they
are not only fully delivered from every Kind and Degree of Temptation, but also
entirely purified from every sinful By^^^; yea they are made perfect in
Holiness, as the Apostle signifies in Heb. xii. 23. All is Purity, Light and
Holiness in them; and every Branch of Holiness made perfect.

With THEE, says David to GOD, is the Fountain of Life, in thy Light shall we
see Light. Psalm. xxxvi. 9. From the vital Power of GOD, there streams a
glorious Light, which so strongly shines and gives them such a clear View of
his transcendent Amiableness displayed in CHRIST, as perfects their Love to him
and Complacency in him. They see nothing dimly as they (...) before, but in
clear and open Vision, as of Face to Face when the Sun is risen. 1 Cor. xiii.
Then with open Face they behold the Glory of the LORD, and are by his Spirit
changed into his perfect Image in every moral Excellency: and this glorious
Light will shine without a Shade for ever. Then every Grace is perfected, both
in their Principles, Powers and Actings: and by the same almighty, quickening,
and eternal Spirit which inspired and bro't them to this Perfection, will they
for ever live and act without the least Decline or Weariness in their
delightful Exercise.

Thus much of that eternal Life which the Spirits of the truly Sanctified are
immediately advanced to upon their Expiration.

And as to the transformed Bodies of those now in Glory; -- They are also full
of this divine Life and Power, and in the absolute Influence of them. And I
cannot but think, that the separate Spirits of the Just made perfect, have such
like Powers and Perceptions, especially seeing, speaking, singing, making
Melody, and hearing, as the Angels and heavenly Hosts in Luke i, ii, and other
Places; and as the Saints in their glorified Bodies, inconceivably more
exquisite and perfect than any on Earth: though it is likely, those Bodies
appearing like the Body of CHRIST, display some peculiar Glories; which excite
in the others a Joy in the certain Prospect of their having in due Time also
their Bodies raised and making the like Appearances.

We now come

II. To show what may be especially meant by the Presence and Right Hand of
GOD* represented here as the Place of Happiness.

In thy Presence -- The Hebrew Particle signifies both -- With, Before and In:
and the Name signifies, both Face, Countenance, and Presence. See Bib Polyg,
Pol Synops, Page and Mercer, and Martin Albert.
The Septuagint renders the Passage, and from them the Writer of the Acts, for
the Sake of the Generality in those Parts of the World who then used that
Version, cites the same -- Thou shall make me full of Joy with thy Countenance.
And a learned Modern thus explains it -- In thy Presence; where I shall enjoy
the full Sight of thy Face appearing in the kindest and most paternal Manner.
Moller.


At thy Right Hand -- The Hebrew Particle sometimes signifies -- Out of, With
and At: But more properly, and chiefly -- In, Page and Mercer, Erpen and Mayer:
and so the Targ. or Chaldee Paraph. Sept. AEthiop. Vulgar Lat. and Mont. in
Bib. Polyglot; as also Jun. and Trem. De Muis etc. here render it In.
. And de Muis tells us -- The learned Rabbi Kimbi observes, that Presence and
Right Hand are Terms of Honor; citing Psalm. cxl. 13. The Upright shall dwell
in thy Presence; and Psalm. cx. 1. Sit Thou at my Right Hand:That the learned
Rabbi Ezra renders the Words -- Pleasures in thy Right Hand; accounting they
signify that highest Pleasure which the Soul enjoys in GOD; such Pleasure as
one perceives when a Friend with his Hand holds to him a Gift of singular
Excellence: And then adds, that this Term seems to represent the supreme GOD as
a munificent Prince, with a full Hand bestowing his Bounties on those about him.

In thy Right Hand (1) Because this is the Place of Honor, Joys and Delights
eternal: Ainsworth.
(2) This also signifies his Favor and Benignity, as being bestowed by his
Power and Munificence. Rivet.
As if he had said; With thy Right Hand thou bountifully give these Pleasures
to thy Children. Piscator.
Or, the Presence of God and his Right Hand may intend the same; Moller.
to give us the more raised Ideas of the superior Honors, Favors, Joys and
Pleasures of his pecular Presence, where this Life and Bliss of the Saints are
perfect and perpetual.

For, the essential Presence of GOD we know is every where; both in the
Heavens, Air, Earth, Seas and Hell; in every Part of the Creation, yea beyond*
without any Bounds, and the same for ever.

By his Presence must then be meant some peculiar Place in the Creation, where
he distinguishingly shows his Presence in the clearest, fullest and happiest
Manner to the holy Angels and Saints translated, both those who already have
their changed and raised Bodies, and those who have only their perfect Spirits;
with the human Nature of our ascended SAVIOR in the midst of all: and by his
Right Hand is meant the distinguishing Favors and Honors he most freely and
bounteously gives them there.

And this leads us on to these two Views --

(1) The Heavenly World, which he has made most suitable for the clearest,
fullest and happiest Manifestations of Himself to Saints and Angels, and giving
them the highest Favors and Felicities.

(2) The most glorious Manifestations of his Being, Presence, Excellence,
Designs and Love, to the happy Creatures there.

1. By the Presence and Right Hand of GOD, we are led to ^^ew the highest
Heaven or World above, sometimes called in Scripture the Heaven of Heavens, the
third Heaven, and his holy Heaven.

The Air surrounding the Earth being, as to us, the nearest, First or lowest
Heaven; the vast expanded Firmament, where the Planets, Comets, and fixed Stars
appear, being the Second; Beyond them all, though there be ever so many Millions
of Stars and Systems, there is the Third, the highest in Place, in Excellence
and Dignity. This third Heaven seems by the immense, almighty Power of GOD to
be formed round the other, as the fittest Place for the largest Display of his
Glories, and to receive all the Transportations of the perfectly prepared
Inhabitants from the Probationary Worlds below or comprehended in this mighty
Concave. And if those Probationary Worlds should continue or succeed for ever;
there is infinite Space adjoining beyond and round this Third Heaven,
sufficient to entertain them to Eternity; and both the Inhabitants* the Hosts
and Glories of that highest World may increase for ever.

But in the Contemplations of Immensity and Eternity, our most extended Tho'ts
are swallowed up: and before the infinite GOD, we see, that all Nations, yea
all Worlds are as nothing, and less than nothing, and Vanity.

However, of this Third and highest Heaven, there are glorious Things delivered
and hinted in the sacred Ora cles. It is represented, in the highest Sense, as
the Kingdom, the City, the Palace, the Temple, the Sanctuary, the Holy of
Holies, and the Throne of GOD: as the high and holy Place wherein in he dwells,
and the Habitation of his Holiness and Glory. It is described as being full of
Light; and the Light so dazzling, as no mortal Eye is able to approach and
(...)* Nothing of Impurity, nothing of Unloveliness, nothing hurtful, nothing
disagreable, nothing vain or mean, nothing but what is perfect in Holiness, and
in every amiable Excellency, shall ever enter there.

In fine, this is the happy Receptacle of all the glorified Saints of all
Nations, Countries, Worlds and Ages; to which they are constantly ascending.
This is the glad Resort from Time to Time of all the holy and blessed Angels:
Thence are they continually descending, with Pleasure to perform the Orders,
accomplish the Designs and advance the Glory of their Creator: Thither are they
constantly ascending with their glad Tidings and happy Charges of perfect
Spirits, to increase the Joy of Heaven itself, receive fresh Discoveries, and
join with all the heavenly Hosts in their new Songs of Praise and Adorations.
That is the holy Place whereinto CHRIST entered: There is the Throne of the SON
of GOD in human Nature: There he shines perpetually in the Brightness of the
FATHER's Glory, and the express Image of his Person: There both the perfect
Saints and Angels are continually beholding, and adoring him: and that is the
happy Place designed for the eternal Residence of all the Saints with their
most illustrious HEAD, when they shall have received their raised and glorious
Bodies, fashioned in a Likeness to his own, and presented to him in one vast
Assembly arrayed in all their glittering Attire, as a Bride adorned for her
Husband: Thither, after the Honors done them in the public Judgment, shall
they openly ascend together with him; and there admire and love, enjoy, praise
and serve him, with supreme and fresh Delight for ever.

2. By the Presence and Right Hand of GOD we are also led to take some View of
the most glorious Manifestations of his Being, Presence, Excellence, Designs
and Love to the happy Creatures there.

By all the created Glories of that highest World, and the Perfection of the
Saints and Angels there, that World is fitted to receive and bear the most
glorious and happy Discoveries of GOD.

It is true indeed, the most capacious of them all, even the highest
Archangels that were ever made, being but finite, can never fully see his
Excellence, or bear the full Display of his Majesty and Greatness: they want
unbounded Capacity to take the unbounded View; and they want almighty Power to
bear the Sight of infinite Degrees of Glory.

Not only Moses one of the holiest and highest Favorites of GOD among mere Men
that ever lived, even after he came down from Sinai, was not able to enter into
the Tabernacle when the Glory of the LORD filled it; Exodus xl. Nor had the holy
Prophet Isaiah a Vision of Him as setting on a Throne high and lifted up in
Solomon's Temple, without crying in Anguish, Woe is me, for I am undone: But he
also saw the Seraphims themselves, even while they were with two Wings flying
to fulfill his Pleasure or to minister before him, yet covering with two Wings
their Feet and with two more their Faces, and crying one to another, -- Holy,
Holy, Holy is the LORD of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of thy Glory! Isai. vi.

But what are the Manifestations of the Glory of GOD on the Earth his
Footstool, or in a transient earthly Tabernacle or Temple below, to the
Displays of his Glory in the Place of his Throne above, in that most holy and
splendid Temple, not made with human Hands, but by his almighty Power, eternal
in the highest Heaven? Surely these must be inconceivably more illustrious.

What these Manifestations are in particular, no mortal Eye has seen, nor Ear
heard, nor have entered into the Heart of any on Earth to conceive. It seems to
be vastly above our present Reach or Power, even to apprehend them: We are in
the present State like Children of two Years old, to such a great Philosopher
as Newton, or such a great Divine as Paul, in the Hights of their Improvements.
And this seems to be the Reason they are no more revealed.

But in the General, that the SON of GOD in our glorified Nature in that
heavenly World, is the principal, distinguished and visible Medium of those
Manifestations. There are the highest Beauties both human and divine that can
possibly appear, appearing in Him: In Him even the divine Perfections display
their Glories; and in his Face the Saints and Angels, in a Manner yet unknown
to us, behold them: In the Face of CHRIST they especially see the Rays of
divine Wisdom, Purity, Justice, Holiness, Grace, Truth, Kindness, Love,
Complacency, shining out, to their perpetual Wonder, Pleasure, Joy and
Satisfaction; in such surprising Radiations as we cannot now conceive. From his
transporting Voice they also hear and receive those Revelations of the Nature
and Love of GOD, and of the Excellence of his Designs and Works, which the
universal Assembly of Saints and Angels are unable to discover: He also by his
almighty SPIRIT helps them to the readiest, clearest and most surprising
Apprehension of those Revelations: and where Words and Voices are not adequate
to the Manifestations he would give them; there He by inward Inspiration in
their capacious, clear, strong and active Spirits, gives them such Discoveries
as raise their yet higher Delights and Wonders.

But this brings us

III. To lay open the Springs from whence their Joys and Pleasures flow.

Now the original Spring of all, is the infinite Excellence and All Sufficiency
of GOD: and thence his eternal Councils, Grace, Love and Designs of Happiness
to innumerable Millions of Men and Angels: and in particular, the sovereign,
wise kind and never to be broken Agreement of the Divine FATHER, WORD, and
SPIRIT, before they began the World, to save and bring to Glory Multitudes
which no Man can number, of the human Race, through all their Sinfulness and
Wretchedness and mighty Oppositions. His universal Providence answerable to
these most gracious and wise Designs and Resolutions. The Mediation,
Incarnation, perfect and meritorious Obedience, Sufferings, Purchase,
Resurrection, Ascension, and various Mediatorial Offices of the SON of GOD in
human Nature. His inspired Word and pious Ministers, and other Means of Grace
and Salvation. The enlightening, awakening, humbling, renewing, and effectually
calling them to repent and believe, by the ALMIGHTY SPIRIT; and thereupon their
federal and vital Union to CHRIST and Interest in Him; their being pardoned,
justified, reconciled to GOD, adopted among his Children to all their
Privileges given in the well ordered, sure and everlasting Covenant; and the
DIVINE SPIRIT dwelling and reigning in them, restraining them from Sin,
exciting them to Duty, maintaining and advancing them in Grace, making all
Things to work for Good, and ripening them for Glory. At their Dissolution, his
making their Spirits perfect in Power and Holiness, as we observed before: On
their ent^ing Eternity, giving them clear and open Views of heavenly Objects,
and by his holy Angels swiftly carrying them to the World above. Lastly, the
SON of GOD receiving and presenting them entirely spotless before the Presence
of his Glory; showing them all the lovely Objects, and giving all the glorious
Light and Manifestations there. And from all these Springs will rise in their
happy Souls, full and ever flowing Streams of Joys and Pleasures.

(...) might enlarge on these; but shall somewhat further open them under our

IV. and last General Head; which is to take some Survey of the Fullness of
their perpetual Joys and Pleasures in this glorious Presence in this heavenly
World and Company.

Now this in General, is a Fullness answerable to all the various and growing
Capacities of all the Saints and Angels there, and this continually and for
ever. Or as a learned Man expresses it -- As Vessels of various Sizes, though
ever so capacious, dipped in this infinite Ocean, are and shall be always brim
full of Joys and Pleasures, though they can never reach to comprehend the Ocean
itself: -- A Fullness beyond all that Faith or Hope [and I may add --
Imagination] is now able to conceive -- a Fullness that fills up all Desires
[tho' in the Light of GOD ever so far extended] -- a Fullness of Fruition and of
Satisfaction, without Satiety; Bp Richardson on the Text.
without the least Degree of Weariness, and without all Apprehension or
Possibility of ending, intermitting or Decay for ever. For the infinite and
perpetual Variety of Objects, Visions, Actions and Enjoyments, eternally
supported and supplied by the Power of GOD, will render the happy Subjects as
unweary of their full Joys and Pleasures, as that infinite Being is, of his own
eternal Blessedness.

And they have a Fullness of perpetual Joys and Pleasures in such Things as
These --

On the one Hand, they always most clearly and surely see and find themselves
delivered from every Kind of Sin and Trouble; Pollution, Guilt and Darkness;
Infirmities, Imperfections, Vanities; Enemies, Temptations, Dangers: and they
always know, that by the unchangeable Truth of GOD, they are also eternally
secured from them.

And on the other Hand, they always see and find themselves not only perfected
in all their Powers and Graces, and in a wondrous Measure made like to CHRIST;
but also all these Powers and Graces in a constant, various most lively and
delightful Exercise; all their Wants supplied, all their sensible Powers
completely entertained, all their active Powers fully employed, all their
Desires filled and satisfied: and they perpetually rejoice that they are
absolutely secure of all this for ever.

They have then a Fullness of perpetual Joys and Pleasures in their perfect
Views of all the glorious Objects, Revelations, Actions and Enjoyments of the
heavenly World; and in viewing them all, through the Purchase of their admirable
HEAD, their undissoluble Union to him, and the irrevocable Will and Gift of
GOD, as their own rightful, absolute, unalienable, actual and eternal
Inheritance.

They have a Fullness of perpetual Joys and Pleasures in seeing the innumerable
Multitudes of Saints redeemed by the Blood of CHRIST out of every Kindred and
Tongue and People and Nation, and made Priests and Kings with Themselves to
GOD; both those who are there in their shining Bodies, like Moses and Elias in
the Mount of Transfiguration, with those who are like themselves in their
perfect Spirits, and those who follow 'till the universal Resurrection and
Ascension, and thence to Eternity; and in particular Those, of whom they have
read in Scripture, with all their pious Acquaintance; appearing in all their
engaging Beauties, and eternally conversing and rejoicing with them.

They have a Fullness of perpetual Joys and Pleasures, in seeing the holy and
glorious Angels, the Seraphims and Cherubims, in all their Brightnesses; those
ready and joyful Messengers of GOD, and powerful, kind, ready and faithful
Ministers to them and all their Fellow-Heirs in the World below; receiving
wonderful Intelligences by them, both concerning Themselves and Others, and of
their Messages, Employments, Actions, Services, with the various Works of GOD
in all the Worlds they have visited, and the Multitudes of Kindnesses received
from them; and in their most friendly Converse will delight for ever.

They have a perpetual Fullness of yet higher Joys and Pleasures in viewing the
SON of GOD in our exalted Nature; the Sovereign Lord of all the Angels; yea the
Ruler of the whole Creation: the supreme Revealer of the divine Being, Nature,
Subsistences and Perfections; of his Will, Designs and Works, and of his
Excellencies in them: the personal Effulgence of his Glories: the Mediatorial
Purchaser, Head and Savior of innumerable Multitudes of the ruined Race of
Men, from their Sinfulness and Misery, to an eternal Likeness to himself, the
perfect Vision of Him, and the most delightful Services in the World above for
ever. And they have a Fullness of perpetual Joys and Pleasures in their most
perfect Converse with Him; in continually and sensibly receiving vital and most
delightful Influences and Improvements from Him; in his eternally beholding
them with smiling Pleasure; and filling them perpetually with intellectual
Light and Revelations.

They have a Fullness of perpetual Joys and Pleasures in the clear Reviews of
the original, ancient, sovereign Designs of Grace in the divine FATHER, WORD,
and SPIRIT, for them, even in the Foresight of all their Vileness and
Provocations; in reviewing their most condescending and kind Regard in their
united Councils and Covenant Transactions for them before the Foundation of the
World; -- and in tracing all the wondrous Steps of GOD agreeable thereto, from
his first creating of this Heaven for them to their being translated to it.

They have a Fullness of perpetual Joys and Pleasures in viewing the amazing
History of the SON of GOD from its Beginning, in the Rise and Progress of his
Work of Mediation, through its innumerable Branches; in his various and
mysterious Offices and Managements before he became incarnate, and then in his
State of Abasement to his Ascension, and ever since in his Exaltation.

They have a Fullness of perpetual Joys and Pleasures in viewing the Works of
the SPIRIT of Grace in all their wondrous Process from the Beginning, in all
his various common and special Influence among the Nations in the several Ages:
-- especially on those he sanctifies, and Themselves in particular, 'till he
made them fully meet for their heavenly Inheritance.

They have a Fullness of perpetual Joys and Pleasures in seeing their divine and
glorified MEDIATOR opening to them and to all the admiring Hosts about them,
the deep, extensive and full meaning of the inspired Scriptures -- the
mysterious Volumus of the vast and perfect Schemes, Designs and Works of GOD in
the various Parts of his Creation and successive Providence, both with respect
to Themselves and Others, both Men and Angels, both good and bad, both those
who perish and those who are saved: showing them the surprising Depths of his
Council, Wisdom, Justice, Grace and Faithfulness in all; and especially in
steering them through their innumerable Dangers, making every Thing conspire to
their Advantage, fulfilling all his Covenants and Promises, and bringing them
to Glory.

They have a Fullness of perpetual Joys and Pleasures in his revealing the
infinitely various Histories of their Fellow Saints and Angels from their
Creation; their various Genius's, Capacities, Situations, Helps, Improvements,
Employments; the various Trains of Dispensations toward them, the divine
Contrivance and Perfections in them; and all subserving and advancing the Glory
of their CREATOR, and the universal Joy and Blessedness of the heavenly World
for ever.

They have a Fullness of perpetual Joys and Pleasures in his opening to them and
all the heavenly Hosts about them, the most surprising Prospects of his future
fulfilling all the Scripture Promises and Prophecies, especially the Book of
the Revelations, with other Predictions, he doubtless gives them in that
lightsome World above, of wondrous Things to come: In particular, of his
illustrious Descent with the New Jerusalem and all the Saints from Heaven; his
changing the Dust of their Bodies into perfectly pure, fine, spiritual and
shining Substances; forming them in perfect Strength and Beauty, incorruptible,
immortal, and like that most glorious Body of his they behold in Heaven with so
much Admiration and Delight; the uniting and displaying of their perfect
Spirits in them, and rising up to meet him; his Restitution of all Things here
below to their pristine Excellence; the Glory of his long Reign on Earth; the
Scenes of the universal Judgment; and their open Ascent with Him and all the
Hosts of Saints in their glorious Bodies to that highest World again, to enter
into new and further Visions and Delights for ever: In the Views of which they
rejoice continually, with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

Lastly, they have a perpetual Fullness of Joys and Pleasures in the perfect
Adorations, Praises and delightful Services beyond our present Apprehension,
which they and all the heavenly Hosts are always yielding to the divine FATHER,
SON and SPIRIT, for all their Excellencies, Councils, Designs, Works and
Revelations: To whom with the highest Joys and Pleasures they return all the
Glory for ever and ever.

And thus have we taken some scant and faint Survey of the Fullness of perpetual
Joys and Pleasures in the Presence and Right Hand of GOD in the heavenly World.
And these are but some general Hints, which have risen in my Mind as I went
along, and might easily be branched into numberless Particulars. Nor have I
given the Scriptures which suggest them, least I had interrupted their
Connection and left out many of great Moment to enlighten the Subject.

We now conclude with some IMPROVEMENT. And

1. What a mean, contemptible, dark and wretched Place is this World below, in
Comparison with that World above?

We have here indeed many wondrous Displays of GOD continually both in his
inspired Word and in his Works of Nature, Grace, and Providence: But few alas
behold Him in them* few receive any sanctifying Influence by them; few are
thereby raised up to see his supreme Excellency, or supremely to admire and
love Him! How miserably dark and wrong are their Ideas both of his Word and
Works, and even of GOD Himself in his Designs and Glories! And with respect to
Multitudes of these, we are surrounded all about with Mysteries and live in
Darkness.

How wretchedly mean and low are the Apprehensions of GOD, in the Minds of
most; as if He were a Thing not worth the fearing, regarding, praying to, or
thinking of! Yea, even in the Light of Inspiration, how exceeding faint their
Belief of his very Being, Presence, Holiness and Justice; of his universal
Providence, of the coming Judgment, and even the future Existence of their own
immortal Spirits! And how much less their Belief of his Word and the glorious
and most important Things therein revealed; concerning GOD and his Perfections,
Laws and Government; of Hell and Heaven, of endless Misery and Blessedness; of
their numberless and aggravated Sins, and their constant amazing Danger of
sudden and eternal Ruin; of CHRIST the all-sufficient Mediator, of the HOLY
GHOST the almighty Sanctifier, and the absolute Necessity of being redeemed by
the one and sanctified by the other. They read and hear of these momentous
Truths, as mere Amusements, and are unconcerned about them.

How horribly full of all Kinds of Corruption and heinous Wickedness are the
Hearts and Lives of Men continually! of Impiety, Selfishness, Pride, Avarice,
Sensuality, Deceit, and all other vile and hurtful Lusts, which drown them in
Perdition! How full is this lower World of Idolatry, Profaness, Defiances of
GOD and Enmities to one another! Tyrannies and Contentions; Drunkenness,
Fornications and Adulteries; Stealing, Cheating, Lying and Defamations;
Briberies and Partialities; Robberies, Oppressions, Persecutions, Cruelties,
Murders, and all Kinds of Injuries and Violence! Multitudes a plundering,
wounding and destroying each other -- Distress of Persons, Families, Countries,
Nations, and great Perplexities! -- innumerable Crosses, Losses, Wants and
Troubles -- Diseases, Pains and Death afflicting and devouring all before them;
filling our Houses with Griefs and Cries, and leaving the Survivors to expect
soon to meet the same Fatality.

But now look up into the heavenly World -- where none of these shall ever
enter -- and There is nothing but Perfection, Light and Glory, perfect Purity
and Holiness -- all the Saints and Angels eternally united with each other and
with the blessed GOD in one common Interest and Desire -- entirely, purely,
fervently and incessantly loving and delighting in each other -- and There are
suprizing, satisfying, and perpetual Visions and Enjoyments -- the infinite GOD
for ever filling, but not over-bearing their enlarged and growing Capacities,
with such Views and Joys as he has Himself; eternally pouring the delightful
Streams of his own undiminished Excellence and Blessedness into them, and
eternally advancing them in their most joyous Likeness to Him.

2. How happy then are those who are got out of this sinful wretched World
below into the Life of Glory and Presence of the blessed GOD in that World
above; and with what sacred Pleasure should we by Faith behold them there?

In their sinful and imperfect Spirits, in their corrupt and vile Bodies, in
this low, wicked and vexatious World, in the View of themselves and others,
they groaned continually, as the Apostle signifies, being heavily burdened;
and nothing but the sovereign Will, the gracious Promises and the Power of GOD,
could bear them up from sinking in Dejection and Impatience.

But O the amazing Change at their Expiration! --

From the horrid Visage of Death, they suddenly open to the delightful Views of
most beauteous and friendly Angels round about them, receiving them into their
welcome Arms and transporting them to Glory; -- From hideous Darkness they
suddenly break into glorious Light; -- From rending and distressing Pains they
spring at once into ravishing Delights; -- From a Satiety of Sorrows to a
Plenitude of Joys: -- And the happy Change so sudden, so surprising, so
extreme; that nothing but the equal Increase of their Capacities and the
mightier Power of GOD could support them under it, or render them able to bear
it.

As they rise nearer the Glory of that World above, no doubt their Powers grow,
to their own increasing Joy and Wonder, and the increasing Pleasure of the
Angels about them.

But O! when they enter that blissful World -- who can imagine the mutual and
universal Joys, Congratulations, Looks and Triumphs between the REDEEMER and
them, and all the Hosts of Saints and Angels There! Even the Glories and Joys
of Heaven itself are enlarged, and more joyous Adorations than ever returned to
GOD the sovereign Source and Giver of all the Glory and Blessedness.

And There we have satisfying Reason to apprehend is the happy Spirit of that
honorable and excellent Gentlewoman, whose bodily Remains we last Week
attended to the Grave. Who was youngest Dau'ter of the Hon. ANDREW BELCHER, Esquire
deceased, and Sister of his Excellency Governor BELCHER, etc.


She was of a pleasant natural Temper; and this by Grace yet further improved
and sweetened. I am well informed, she has been piously inclined from her early
Days. And from my first Acquaintance with her, which was above thirty Years
since, I could not but admire her singular Modesty, Discretion and Humility in
all her Looks, Behavior and Apparel; and for the excellent Ornament of a meek
and quiet Spirit, which the Scripture tells us is in the Sight of God of great
Price. And this was the more remarkable in One of the chief of our Families
both by Blood and Alliance, which GOD has been pleased to raise to eminent
Honors in her Day; yet she never appeared in the least exalted or altered by
them, but to persevere in the same humble and even Temper as ever.

Extremely inoffensive and courteous in all her Conduct -- In every Company,
whenever she spoke, it was with a natural Guard and Prudence; and yet in both
her Looks and Voice, and even in her bodily Gestures, with graceful and unusual
Tokens of Respect and Deference. And she was scarce ever known to utter a Word
to the Disadvantage of any, not even of such as were unfriendly to those who
were nearest and dearest to her.

She was in her Family, frequent in her retired Devotions, avoided all
ostentatious Show of Religion, but was a constant and devout Attender on the
public Worship 'till prevailing Weakness hindered; and a Lover of all good
People.

She was many Years exercised with great bodily Weakness, Illness and other
Afflictions: but remarkably calm, submissive and patient in all: and in her
final Sickness these Graces appeared in an eminent Manner. She said, GOD had
weaned her from the World -- and blessed Him for helping her by his gracious
SPIRIT to prepare for her Change, before she came to her Deathbed, and that
she had not now this great Work to do. She renounced all Dependence on her own
Worthiness -- spoke most lowly of Herself, and most highly of CHRIST --
entirely trusted in Him, in his infinite Grace and Merits, in his Ability and
Willingness to save her and give her eternal Life and Blessedness.

And being favored with the Exercise of Reason and Speech to the last, she
endured the Pangs of Death with great Tranquillity. Being asked by one, a little
before her Expiration, whether her Faith in CHRIST continued steady? she
replied -- O my Faith in CHRIST the Almighty Savior is immovable. -- And with
the pleasing Prospect of going to that admirable PERSON, she cheerfully left
this World, and resigned her Spirit to Him; to perfect it in Holiness, and
receive it to Himself in Glory.

I might have justly said much more; but would rather keep within Bounds on
such Occasions: And this may suffice, with the divine Help, to excite our
Imitation of her amiable Virtues, and in particular the Wisdom of preparing
timely for Eternity.

3. and lastly, Then eternal Life, and the State, the Glories, the Visions,
Actions and Enjoyments of the heavenly World are highly worthy all our Seeking,
Prayers, Strivings, Labors and Sufferings; and the securing and preparing for
them should be the chief of our Thot's and Cares.

As there is no Proportion of Earth to Heaven, there is none of Time to
Eternity; no Proportion of this temporal Life to Life eternal; no Proportion of
the mean, scanty, momentany Joys and Pleasures of this World below, in the
Fellowship of vanishing, imperfect Creatures, to the Fullness of the sublime
Joys and Pleasures in the glorious Vision of GOD in the Face of CHRIST and the
most intimate Communion with Him in the World above for ever. And a just,
believing, and lively View of these Diversities in Comparison, would quickly
lessen all the seeming Glories of this lower World, even of Crowns and
Kingdoms, yea its universal Empire, to a Point or Nothing; and GOD alone,
especially as he shows himself in that highest World, would appear great in our
Eye.

If we should gain the whole Earth, which no mere Man ever did or can; what is
it we should gain but a Place of almost infinite Corruptions, Cares, Toils,
Disappointments, Dangers and Vexations? Or if we have all the earthly Pleasures
Heart can think of; they are every Moment utterly uncertain, grow insipid in
the Enjoyment; and we must quickly loose them, and therewith all the Comfort
and all the Light of our Souls for ever: yea plunge at once into horrible Deeps
of Darkness and Despair, surrounded with cruel Devils, deserted as they, vile
as they* and wretched as they.

O who can look down into that hideous Abyss, without shrinking back with
shuddering Horror, and without the utmost Efforts to avoid it! and who can look
up to the Life and Glory of the World above, without the most ardent Desires
and Labors to make them our own, and secure our Entrance into them!

Wherefore now to conclude -- Let us most earnestly and perseveringly pray and
labor, as in 2 Pet. ^. 1, etc. That we may obtain like precious Faith with the
Apostles themselves, through the Righteousness of our GOD and Savior JESUS
CHRIST: -- that he may effectually call us to Glory and Virtue: -- that he may
thereby give us exceeding great and precious Promises; and that by these we may
be Partakers of the divine Nature, or Likeness, and escape the Corruption in
the World through Lust: -- that Grace and Peace may be multiplied to us through the
Knowledge of GOD and of JESUS our LORD: -- that giving all Diligence, we may
add to our Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge,
Temperance* and to Temperance, Patience; and to Patience, Godliness; and to
Godliness, Love of the Brethren; and to Love of the Brethren, universal
Charity; and that these Graces may abound in us, that so we may not be
unfruitful in the Knowledge of our LORD JESUS CHRIST: -- Lastly, that we may
give Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure: For doing these Things,
we shall never fall; but an Entrance shall be ministered to us abundantly into
his everlasting Kingdom.

What is comprehended in that Word -- abundantly -- we cannot fully conceive
'till we come to experience: -- only This in General, that in Proportion to the
Abundance of our Grace and glorifying GOD on Earth, will be the Abundance of
our Bliss in entering Heaven. And every good Action, Suffering, Word,
Endeavor, Purpose and Desire; yea every Grace and every Exercise of Grace in
this World below, will so much the more increase the Glory of GOD, the Joy of
the World above, and our eternal Blessedness.

finis.

