Mr. Prince's SERMON ON The Agency of GOD IN Droughts and Rains.

The natural and moral Government and Agency of GOD in causing Droughts and
Rains.

A SERMON At the South Church in Boston, Thursday Aug. 24. 1749. Being the Day
of the GENERAL THANKSGIVING, In the Province of the MASSACHUSETTS, For the
extraordinary reviving Rains, after the most distressing Drought which have
been known among us in the Memory of any Living.

By THOMAS PRINCE, A. M. And a Pastor of the said Church.

JOB. xxxvii.14. Hearken unto This! -- Stand still, and consider the wondrous
Works of GOD!

BOSTON: Printed and Sold at Kneeland and Green's, in Queen Street, 1749.

IF it were not too assuming, and at so great a Distance, I would with the
utmost Submission ask Leave to Dedicate the following Discourse, To the Royal
Society;
-- in Token of Gratitude for the many admirable and useful Discoveries in
Nature which THEIR ILLUSTRIOUS MEMBERS have made and published for near ninety
Years since their Institution: Whereby they have not only advanced many
commodious and entertaining Arts and Sciences; but also improved the Humane
Mind in the sublimest Knowledge, cleared the Way for our admiring Views and
Adorations of the SOVEREIGN CREATOR and ACTUAL RULER of the UNIVERSE, driven
Atheism out of the knowing Part of the World, and obliged Multitudes in EUROPE
and AMERICA: With the most servent Wishes that they may go on and prosper in
their noble Designs to the Consummation of all Things --

By Their Most humble Admirer, Thomas Prince.

The natural and moral Agency of GOD IN Droughts and Rains.
PSALM. CVII.33, 34, 35. He turns Rivers into a Wilderness, and the
Water-Springs into dry Ground; A fruitful Land into Barreness, for the
Wickedness of them that dwell therein: He turns the Wilderness into a
standing Water, and dry Ground into Water-Springs.


AS there are two Sorts of Creatures in this visible World in general, viz. (1)
Material, as the Elements etc. (2) Moral, as the Race of Men, who are capable
of forming some Conception of the Being, Perfections, Operations, Works,
Designs and Will of God; so there must needs be a twofold Government of their
Creator over them, agreeable to their different Natures, viz. (1) Physical or
Natural, and (2) Moral.

The Physical or Natural Government of God is exercised in his continual
ordering all material Substances and whatever is formed of them, in the main,
according to those particular Methods which he sees most proper for the
Accomplishment of all those wise Designs for which He at first created them.
Thus he continually causes the Sun and fixed Stars to send forth their Rays,
the Moon and other Planets to reflect them, or the Rays themselves to fly; the
Revolutions of Day and Night, and the several Seasons of the Year; with various
Sorts of Attractions, Cohaerences, Repulsions, Ascentions and Descentions, and
other Operations among the Elements; the wondrous Formations, Growings and
Fruitfulness of a (...) Variety of Plants and Animals; the more wondrous Unions
of spiritual Substances to material Bodies, with (...) Faculties, Powers and
mutual Influences; the Preservation, Increase and Decay of those Powers, with
the Continuance and Dissolution of those Unions etc: and all these for a vast
Variety of extensive and wise Designs in continual Succession as long as he
sees proper.

In such Things as these does the Physical or Natural Government of God
consist. And as every Action and Effect of his have their most fitting Place in
his universal System, and he is every where equally always present; It seems
most likely that in every Action and Effect He always has a perfect View to
every other Action and Effect, both past, present and to come, throughout the
Universe.

But his moral Government in this lower World, is his accommodating all his
Operations even among material Substances, to the moral Nature of Man, the
principal Creature he has produced therein; and for whose immediate Use he has
chiefly made the Earth itself, with all the Elements, Plants, brutal Animals
and other Creatures; given and continues to them their various Natures, Forms
and Virtues: And for the Sake of Man, immediately and chiefly, next to his own
Glory, it is, that he therefore exercises even his natural Government above
described.

In his moral Government, I would say, He acts according to the moral Nature,
Faculties and Powers of Men; whom he has made to be moral Agents, capable of
some Knowledge of Him, of his Being, Perfections, Works, Designs, Will and
Government; are therefore under indispensible Obligations of paying Him a
suitable Respect, and must therefore be accountable to Him; must be wicked,
guilty and exposed to Punishment when they do not yield Him that Respect they
owe Him: and when they humble themselves before Him, through the Mediation of His
SON and his boundless Grace, may hope to see, sooner or later, the Tokens of
his undeserved Mercy and Benignity.

And both this natural and moral Government of God is abundantly observed in
Scripture, in this Book of Psalms especially, and in particular in the Words
before us.

1.] His natural Government; in two contrary Kinds of providential Operations,
viz.

1. In bringing grievous Droughts on a Land. Ver. 33, 34 He turns Rivers into
a Wilderness, and the Water-Springs into dry Ground, a fruitful Land into
Barrenness. i. e. By drying up the Brooks and Rivers, He turns the Channels
where they slowed, into silent, solitary and empty Spaces, like a Wilderness:
By exhausting the Springs of Water, He turns their Places into Ground entirely
dry; and by such a Drought he turns a fruitful Land into a State of Barrenness.

2. In changing his providential Operation to quite the contrary, by giving
plenteous and reviving Rains. Ver. 35. He turns the Wilderness into a
standing Water, and dry Ground into Water-Springs. i. e. By bringing on
abundant Showers, and therewith filling every vacant Place and covering the
lower Grounds, He turns a great Part of the Land which was like a parched
Wilderness into the Appearance of Pools of Water; and the Ground which was
entirely dry, he fills again with rising and overflowing Springs.

2.] We have then his moral Government in the former afflictive Dispensation to
a Land or People, signified by this Expression in Ver. 34. -- for the
Wickedness of them that dwell therein. i. e. As he continually exercises a
natural Government among the Elements, and wisely brings a great Drought on a
Land, and knows this Drought is very grievous; so he brings it for the
Wickedness of the People that dwell therein; and this he would have them know
by such an afflictive and corrective Work of his, and so be excited to humble
themselves before him, repent of their Offenses, return in their Submission to
Him, and implore his Mercy; especially seek him to forgive them, to change the
Course of his Dispensations, and to grant them needful and sufficient Showers.

And though in the following Verse, we have mentioned only the contrary Instance
of his mere natural Government in turning the Wilderness into a standing Water,
and dry Ground into Water-Springs; yet I think we must needs suppose that this
Change of Dispensation was an Instance of his moral Government also, as well as
the other: i. e. as he had brought on them an afflictive Drought for their Sins
against him; so thereby he brought them to some Confession of their Sins, some
Humiliation for them, with solemn Prayers for Deliverance and Rain: and then as
a Token of his approving their Confessions, Humiliations and Prayers, or that
just Homage they therein had paid him; He changes the Course of his
providential Operations, and gives them Showers in sufficient Plenty.

For there seems to be the same Reason why in the present probationary State He
should exercise a moral Government in one Case as in the other. -- i. e. When
he had signified his Displeasure by bringing on them a distressing Drought for
their Sins against Him, which would have a Tendency to lead them to
Humiliations and Prayers; (...) when they humble themselves and cry for Mercy,
He should equally signify the Removal or Abatement of his Displeasure, at least
in such a Degree as to change the Course of his Dispensation, take off his
chastizing Hand and give them the implored Mercy. And this seems therefore to
be implied also, though not expressed in the Text before us.

But for further Illustration, I shall endeavor as the Hour allows, to
consider briefly these two general Heads: 1. The natural Government, or Agency
of GOD in bringing grievous Droughts and plenteous Rains on a Land. 2. His
moral Government, or the moral Ends of these his various providential
Operations.


I. The natural Government or Agency of GOD, in bringing grievous Droughts and
plenteous Rains on a Land.

And here I desire you not to think, I am going to give you a Lecture of mere
Philosophy; unless you call the wondrous Government and Agency of GOD, to
accomplish his holy, righteous, kind and wise Designs, for his Glory and the
Good of Men -- Philosophy. No! I am going to treat on a noble Subject of
Divinity; viz. on the wise, mighty and constant Operations of GOD -- to rescue
some of you from that Branch of Atheism we are exceedingly inclined to by
Nature, in limitting our Views to the mere Operation of created Instruments --
and lead you to see the glorious GOD Himself acting in them; that you may be
moved to some becoming Adorations of him, and to yield him his due Returns of
Glory. Yea as all Things were made both by and for the SON of GOD, consist in
Him, and are governed by Him, I would have you raise your Views to him as Lord
of Nature in these various Actions and Dispensations.

[1.] In bringing grievous Droughts on a Land.

And that we may more clearly see the Government and Agency of GOD therein, we
may (1) Observe the principal Instruments he uses; and then (2) The Operation
of GOD in these various Instruments.

1.] The principal Instruments He uses. And they seem to be these Four; (1) The
Descent of the Waters into the Sea, (2) The Ascent of many into the Canals of
Vegetables, (3) The Beams and Atoms from the Sun, (4) and lastly, the Course of
the Winds, carrying the watery Vapor from us.

1. The Descent of the Waters into the Sea.

And as the want of Water is the main immediate Cause of Droughts, it may be
convenient to observe; that the Creator of all Things did at first from nothing
bring into Being a great Variety of material Substances for various Ends and
Uses in this lower World. Some are fixed; as all Sorts of earthy Substances,
Metals, Minerals, Stones, Salts etc: Others fluid; as Quicksilver, Water, Oil,
Air, etc: And it is likely, that by various Pressures, Fractures, Divisions, or
Coalitions, every Kind of material Thing may seemingly at least be changed into
any other.

Water is a great Part of the material Substance GOD has made for various Uses
in this lower World. And this wise and almighty Being has created every
Particle so solid round and smooth, as easily to slide by each other and by
other Substances; so exceeding small as to escape the Sight by the finest
Glasses: Dr. Nieuwentyt shows that thirteen Thousand Globules of Water may
stick to the extreme Point of a Needle so sharp as to be just visible; and that
a Drop of Water contains above twenty Million Globules; yea, according to Mr.
Leurwenboek's Discoveries, (...) a Thousand Times a Thousand Million.
and yet it is found, there are forty times more Vacuity in a Drop of Water than
of solid Matter. (...) Newton shows to his (...).
By these Properties and the various Operations of the GOD of Nature in and by
them, He has most wisely fitted them to roll along and carry all other Sorts of
material Substances through the Channels He forms in Plants and Animals to their
proper Parts, both to increase their Bulk, supply the Places of those that fly
off continually, and form their various Sorts of Fruit and Seed; yea to make up
a Part of their Consistency, and keep them moist and soft, or by the Beams of
the Sun and their Perspirations only they would soon grow dry, and either hard
or firm, or brittle and turn to Powder.

Without this Sort of Substance therefore there could be no such Thing as
Growth or Fruit either in Plants or Animals, nor Continuance neither: but were
they ever so well formed in the present State of Nature here below, they would
soon waste away, dissolve, and loose all their Form and Usefulness; yea no
living Creature could subsist, and 'twould not be wise to make them.

But upon every Shower of Rain we see a great Part of the Water hastily
descending to the lower Grounds, forming into Brooks, running into Rivers and
pouring into the Sea. And though a considerable Part soaks into the Earth, and
partly penetrates into the Roots of Vegetables, and rises in their Stocks and
Branches to promote their Nourishment; and another Part appears to ascend in
Vapors; yet it chiefly sinks into various Layers, Canals and Fountains, and
thence breaks out in Springs or runs through other Passages into the Sea, which
swallows all. And by this Descent the Ground grows drier every Day: and unless
recruited with a fresh Supply of Rain, the Surface of the Earth would soon lose
its Moisture, the very Springs and Rivers fail, and every Herb and Tree would
wither.

2. The Ascent of many into the Canals of Vegetables, partly adding to their
Nourishment, and partly perspiring through them into the Air.

Every green Leaf and Spire of every Tree and Plant is composed mainly of
Multitudes of little Bottles to receive a Part of the Rain and Dews: and from
those little Bottles are Canals dispersed into various Parts of the Plant, to
convey a quick Refreshment: while a Part of the Rain descending abroad and
sinking to the Fibers of the Roots, it enters them, and then ascends in
innumerable Vesicles and Tubes through every Part of the Plant, to give a further
Nourishment; and having done its Office, the Rest perspires into the Air and
dissipates: and without a fresh Supply in the Summer, the Plant grows drier and
drier, till it fades and dies.

3. The active, swift, piercing, ratifying Beams and Atoms of the Sun.

The Beams of the Sun are exceeding subtle, active, piercing; they proceed with
wondrous Swiftness, of above ten Million Miles in a Minute: they fly
perpetually and penetrate the Plants and Surface of the Earth: they are ever
making powerful Impressions on every Particle, and giving additional Powers and
Motions to every Atom of every Fluid they come to. They carry a wondrous
repulsive Power with them, Sir Isaac Newton observing the Rays of Light
reflecting and bending when they come near the Surface of Bodies without
touching them, supposes an invisible, extremely fine active and universal Fluid
as the Cause of this Repulsion. But with the utmost Submission to so superior a
Judgment, I would humbly suggest whether it be not as probable that every Atom
of Light and Heat if not of Water and other Substances, may have an elastical
Atmosphere about it, charged with a repulsive Power; and whether this elastical
Atmosphere may not be the main Source and Instrument of Thunder, Lightning, the
Aurora Borealis, Electricity, and some other Phenomenon in Nature?
and are of greater Force than both the Powers of Gravitation and Cohaesion in
the watery Globules, in case there be any Cohaesion in them: And by striking on
and in between them, and it may be forming into an Atmosphere round every
Globule of Water, I acknowledge this is a Conjecture also of mine, which seems
to solve many Difficulties.
divide and force them from the Sphere of Contact into the Sphere of Repulsion:
and so by expanding, ratifying and raising them up into the Air, continually,
leave the upper Parts of the Earth more and more dry and parched.

4. and lastly, The Course of the Winds carrying the watery Vapors from us.

For though the solar Rays and Atoms are continually raising vast Quantities of
Vapors from the Seas into the Air, sufficient to supply the Earth, with all
the Vegetables, Animals, Springs and Rivers thereon with Water; yet the Winds
are needful to bring them over the Land, in order to their forming into Clouds
above it, and shedding down in Rain upon it: or they would chiefly form in
Clouds above the Surface whence they rise and fall down to the Seas again. The
repulsive and expansive Powers among them may be indeed sufficient to bring so
many over the neighboring Shoars in the Day as to come down in Dews at Night:
But if the Winds either blow them not over us, or blow them quite beyond us
before they collect in Drops, and much more blow the Vapors rising from our
Land to the airy Regions over other Places; no Supply of Rain will follow here,
and the Drought among us will increase continually; 'till, as the Scriptures
represent it, the Heavens over us become as Brass, the Earth beneath as Iron,
and the Ruin of our Land only Dust and Powder. Deuteronomy. xxviii.23, 24.

These seem to be the chief Means the Ruler of the World employs in bringing
and continuing Droughts on a Land.

We go on to consider,

2] The Operation of GOD Himself in these various Instruments. And here,

1. As to the Descent of Waters into the Sea --

This is done by what is called by some the Power of Gravity, by some the Power
of Attraction, but by others, and I think more properly the Power of Pressure,
from some internal and invisible Agent; whereby all Sorts of material
Substances in this Planetary System within the Sphere of Saturn, above fifteen
Hundred Million Miles Diameter, Mr. Whiston computes the Diameter above fifteen
Hundred and fifty Millions; and Dr. Gregory above eighteen Hundred and ninety
Millions: But Mr. Whiston intends the mean Diameter, and Dr. Gregory the
longest.
are propelled toward all others with a just Degree of Force in exact
Proportion to their Quantities and Distances: so that every Particle, unless
hindered by other Kinds of Powers, is always moved exactly as if it knew every
other Particle within this mighty Sphere, and as if it always knew exactly both
where and how far off they are, and where and how they move; and as they all
are ever changing their Situations, so every Particle is pressed accordingly. I
should also mention what I call the Cometary Sphere, of at least a Hundred
thirty two hundred Million Miles Diameter round about our Sun, and within the
Compass of his Attraction; Sir Isaac Newton and Dr. Halley having from History
and Observation found therein about twenty several Blazing Stars of different
Magnitudes and Degrees of Motion and in different Orbits and Directions, by
virtue of the Sun's Attraction, coming down toward and wheeling round him, and
then by a projecting Force going up again, and so revolving at their several
Periods: But the Learned are waiting for more (...) Discoveries.


It Is by this powerful Impetus, that all the Waters in the Earth above the
Level of the Sea descend into it. But this Power can be no other than even the
actual Power of GOD Himself moving them along to that great Fountain he has
prepared for them. For material Substances are plainly unintelligent,
unvoluntary, unconscious, un-self-active, un-self-moving Things, and are only
subject to be moved by some other Kind of Agent: and it appears most clearly to
every careful Inquirer, that this Power which moves them is both every where
always present through out this vast planetary System, always acting on every
Particle therein, perfectly intelligent, wise and regular in all its Actions,
without the least Mistake or Intermission: and such a universal, powerful,
all-knowing, wise and constant Agent, can be none but GOD. Thus, as in Psalm.
civ.10. He sends the Springs into the Valleys, which run among the Hills;
Ver. 6, -- 8. The Waters go down by the Valleys unto the Place which Thou have
founded for them.

2. As to the Ascent of many Waters into Plants --

This is a Motion looking contrary to the former Power of Gravitation: and
seems to be owing partly to the wondrous Forms of the several Fibers, Tubes and
other Parts of Vegetables; partly to the Attraction between the Juices and the
Sides and upper Parts of their containing Vessels; partly to the elastical Air
within them ever contracting and dilating; and partly to the piercing and
rarifying Heat of the Sun, which putting their Juices into a State of Repulsion
and altering the elastical Consistence of the Air among them or in their
neighboring Vessels, forces the watery Particles upwards in their Vesicles and
Tubes to every Part and through their Extremities into the Atmosphere.

But so curiously and wisely formed is every Vegetable for this and other
Designs, that none who nicely examines them can think that any other than a
wise and universal Agent ever a working all over the Earth can be their Former,
which is none but GOD.

And as to the Air's Elasticity; it is that Sort of Power whereby it is capable
of being compressed and dilated, and when forcibly compressed, as the Pressure
ceases, the Air will ever immediately return to its natural Expansion, till it
comes at least to a Balance with the Power of Gravitation: and this expansive
Power is so wonderful as to be dilateable to above fifty Thousand times greater
Extent of Space at some Times than at others. Mr. Boil found fifty Thousand
times: Dr. Harris computes one Hundred and eighty Thousand times: But Mr. B.
Martin says, that by the bare Power of its Spring it will dilate into thirteen
Thousand times greater Space than it possesses on the Surface of the Globe, and
yet may be compressed by Force into sixty times less Space than this: So that
the Air may dilate itself to seven Hundred and eighty Thousand times greater
Extent than it may be compressed to.
But though the Author of Nature, for various Uses permits us to compress it to a
great Degree, and in some Degree compresses it Himself by his Power of Gravity;
yet in this he ever bounds our Power, as no Power of Man can so compress it as
to make its Particles touch or unite into a compact Body. And as this
irresistible Power on the one Hand, and this expansive Power on the other is
universally existing and continually and most regularly and wisely acting; it
is as evidently the acting Power of GOD, though acting in a different Manner, as
is that of Gravitation. By such Means as these the inspired Poet sings, in
Psalm. civ.16. The Trees of the Lord are full of Sap, the Cedars of Lebanon
which he has planted: And Ver. 14. He causes the Grass and Herb to grow.

3. As to the active, swift, piercing, rarifying Beams and Atoms of the Sun --

Of these there are many wondrous Properties: and every one displays the
universal Presence, Wisdom, Power and Agency of GOD. But I would now only
consider their surprising Force and Swiftness. And as from the Creation they
have been constantly and directly flying from that great central Source of
Light and Heat to its whole System of Planets and Satellits, above a Million
times faster than a Ball out of a Cannon in its greatest Celerity; Dr. Harris
computes above a Million, and B. Martin since -- above fifteen Hundred Thousand
times faster.
Who can imagine they could do so without a perpetual Source and Exertion of
Almighty Energy? And who can imagine these Millions of Millions of Millions of
Rays continually and most regularly and wisely emitted and carried along
directly, without a divine Presence, Knowledge Wisdom and Power in perpetual
Concert and Operation?

For such a Being must be perpetually present and active not only with these
innumerable Millions of Rays, but even with every one of the innumerable
Millions of Atoms in every Ray; giving this amazing Force to every Atom as it
leaves the Sun, forcing it up from this vast Body which has above two Hundred
Thousand Times more attractive Matter than our Earth, in Opposition to this
other Power of Gravitation, perpetually moving and guiding them in so quick and
exact a Manner that not a Ray or Atom should slide astray; and in so vast a
Multitude and Progress as continually to fill the Sphere of Saturn all round
about the Sun, above fifteen or eighteen Hundred Million Miles Diameter, as we
observed before: Yea were the whole concave Surface of this vast Sphere of
Saturn as solid as the Surface of that Planet; by the constant flying of the
Sunbeams to it and reflecting from it to us, the whole concave Surface of that
mighty Sphere all around us would continually shine as bright as he. But how
many Millions of Miles the Sunbeams are continually flying further, even as
far as some of the fixed Stars, which appear also to be other Suns at
immeasurable Distances, is yet undiscovered, and beyond Description. Mr.
Whiston and other Astronomers compute the mean Distance of the Sun from us to
be eighty one Million Miles; and Dr. Gregory the farthest Distance -- above
ninety four Million: And from Mr Bradley's wonderful Discovery of the Parrallax
of the bright Star in the Head of Draco; Dr. Desaguliers computes, that this
fixed Star shines so brightly to us above four Hundred Thousand times farther
than from the Sun to us.
But they all demonstrate the constant Agency of GOD Himself in these
innumerable, mighty and unceasing Actions. Agreeable to this we read in Psalm.
lxxiv.16 Thou have prepared the Light and the Sun: Mat v.45. He makes his Sun
to rise: Isai. xlv.7. I form the Light: And Job xxv.3. Upon whom does not his
Light arise?

4. and lastly. As to the Course of the Winds carrying the watery Vapors from
us --

Winds are only Air in Motion and directed in a sensible Current from one Part
of the Atmosphere toward another. And their instrumental Causes seem to be in
general, partly the solar Beams and Atoms either direct or reflex, or
dispersed, or all, making unequal Rarefactions, and partly Particles of Cold,
making unequal Condensations in the Atmosphere; whereby either a greater
expansive Force or a greater Power of Gravitation in one Part than another,
bares on the neighboring Part where there is the least Resistance, and drives
the Air before it, till the bearing and resisting Forces come to a Balance,
and then ensues a Calm.

But all those Actions both of Radiation, Gravitation and Expansion we have
shown already to be the Exertion of the Power of GOD in those Ways and
Instruments. And the same may be said of Particles of Cold and their powerful
Condensations. For though Heat and Cold are only contrary Sensations in us; yet
as some Sort of Atoms which may be called Sulphurous, seem to be peculiarly
fitted to rarify and give us the Sensation of Heat, so some other Sort of
Particles which may be called nitrous seem to be fitted to condense and give us
the Sensation of Cold. But they being alike material, must needs derive their
Force from GOD: and in all their Actions it must be his continued Power exerted
in them. So that all the Rise, Motions, Directions, Forces and Effects of the
Winds are justly to be ascribed to Him.

But though he may commonly operate in those various Substances according to the
particular Methods he has seen fit to appoint for his usual Action in them; yet
for certain Reasons I cannot but apprehend, that the Case of Winds is one of
those Cases wherein he does not always confine Himself to those usual Methods,
but has wisely reserved his Liberty of varying from them, and often improves it
when he sees proper: See something further of these reserved Cases at the End
of (...) general Head.
So that unknown to us, He raises, moves, directs, increases and abates the
Winds, both where and when, and in what Degree he pleases, to accomplish his
wise Designs.

Agreeable to this, Inspiration tells us, that ' He who creates the Wind -- the
Lord God of Hosts is his Name, Amos iv.13: that He commands and raises the
stormy Wind, Psalm. cvii 25: that He brings the Wind out of his Treasuries,
Psalm. cxxxv.7: that he causes his Wind to blow, Psalm. cxlvii.18: that he
makes the Clouds his Chariot, and walks upon the Wings of the Wind, Psalm.
civ.3: and that Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor, stormy Wind are fulfilling his
Word, Psalm. cxlviii.8.

Thus have we seen something of the natural Government and Agency of GOD in
bringing Droughts on a Land. And by such Means as these he puts forth his
Power, and we may say as Job, in Chap xii.15. Behold be withholds the
Waters, and they dry up: As Asaph, Psalm. lxxiv.15. Thou driest up mighty
Rivers: or as the Prophet, Nah. 1.4, 5. He dries up all the Rivers; Bashan
languisheth, and Carmel, and the Flower of Lebanon languisheth; the Earth is
burnt at his Presence, yea the World and all that dwell therein.

We go on to consider,

[2.] His natural Government and Operation also in giving plenteous Rains.

And here we may observe, that as the Instruments and Operations in giving
Rains are chiefly the same he uses in producing Droughts, though some he employs
in a different Way; we may be therefore briefer in treating on them. And that
these may be more distinctly viewed, we may likewise (1) Observe the principal
Instruments he uses; and (2) His powerful Actings in these various Instruments.

1.) The principal Instruments he uses in this Affair: And these may be reduced
to the following Articles; (1) The Seas; (2) The solar Beams and Atoms; (3) The
mutually attractive Powers between the Sun and Moon with our Atmosphere and
Waters; (4) The Course of the Winds in bringing the watery and nitrous Vapors
over us; (5) The condensing and uniting them in Clouds and Drops by the Powers
of Cold and Attraction, and their descending by the latter of these two Powers.

1. The Seas.

These are the great Reservatories and perpetual Fountains from whence the Rain
is drawn: The watery Substance in their Surface, being first divided from the
Salts adhering to it, then raised into the Atmosphere, expanded, carried about
by Winds, formed into Clouds, joined in Drops, distilled in Showers; some
infused and rising into Plants and perspiring in the Air, the rest running into
Springs and Rivers, then by constant Circulations returning to the Seas again;
and from thence employed on the same Kinds of Circuits and Designs, in
perpetual Revolutions. So Solomon observed above twenty seven Hundred Years
ago, Eccles. i.4. All the Rivers run into the Sea; yet the Sea is not full;
unto the Place from whence the Rivers come, thither they return again.

But as the Springs and Rivers run into the Seas, and without a fresh Supply
from thence would quickly fail, the Earth grow dry, and every Herb and Tree
would wither; the arduous Question is -- How shall the Water which is 800 Times
heavier than Air in Winter, 850 in the Spring and Fall, and 900 in Summer, So
Dr. Desaguliers in the Transactions of the Royal Society.
rise up against all the Laws and Power of Gravity, into this vastly lighter
Medium, and form in Clouds, and there for a Time suspend and float aloft on
this thinner Element, till it unites in Drops and falls in Showers? And
especially how can these Waters rise, when every square Foot Column of the
Atmosphere is found to press with a Weight of above two Thousand Pounds on
every Foot square of Water in the Surface of the Seas and Earth? Mr. Boil
found the Atmosphere to press on a square Foot with a Weight of twenty one
Hundred and sixty eight Pounds Averdupoise, or twenty six Hundred and ten
Pounds Troy.
One would be apt to think that here they would be bound down for ever.

But,

2. The primary Means of their rising seem to be, the exceeding active, swift,
peircing, separating, rarifying Rays and Atoms from the Sun.

How they operate we have considered before: And shall here only observe, that
as the Sun is computed about eighty one Millions of Miles from the Earth, they
fly this Distance in about eight Minutes; and in a hot Summer's Day, they
divide and raise a tenth Part of an Inch from the Surface of Water; which from
every four Foot square will make a Gallon, and from every square Mile above six
Thousand Tons. So Dr. Halley in the Transactions of the Royal Society.
And as these divided Globlues rise, they are by the repulsive and reflecting
Atoms of Heat, so rarefied or driven so far asunder from each other, as to
extend to two Thousand Times greater Space than they did as they lay in the
compact Form of Water; till the rarifying Force diminishes and comes to a
Balance with the other Power of Gravitation.

3. The mutually attractive Powers between the Sun and Moon above, and our
Atmosphere and Waters below.

For, to speak in the usual Style, as those great Bodies every Day pass over
the Seas, the Waters nearly under them rise up toward them: And though the Moon
be abundantly less than the Sun, yet she is so much nearer to us, being but
about two Hundred and forty Thousand Miles, that our Seas rise five Times
higher toward Her, than toward the other; Sir Isaac Newton in his Principia
says, when the Sea rises toward the Sun, one Foot eleven Inches and an Eighth
of an Inch, it rises toward the Moon eight Feet and eight Inches: which is a
little above four and an half Times more toward the Moon than toward the Sun:
But Mr. B. Martin says, Mr. Domkey has since found it to be five times more to
the Moon than Sun.
and this higher Rise is called the Tides. And though the Attraction of the Sun
and Moon conjunctly are insufficient to divide a single Globule of Water from
the Sea; yet as they either jointly or separately go over it, the Force of
Attraction in the Waters toward the Earth must in Proportion be abated, and
therefore more easily and plenteously raised by the solar Atoms; and the watery
Globules being once divided, rarefied and raised into the Air, the less is
their Attraction toward the Earth, and the greater in Proportion toward those
heavenly Bodies. And as the Sun and Moon are every Day passing round our Globe;
even the whole Atmosphere nearly under them, unless prevented by other Powers,
successively rises toward them, increases its Extension, and helps the Vapors
upward. Though after all, the superior Power of the Earth's Attraction, being so
near these Vapors, as long as it continues, will hinder every Atom of Air and
Water, though not of Light, from flying away.

Thus we in some Measure see how the Waters of the Sea, are raised into the
Atmosphere in great Abundance, and thereby Preparations made for plenteous
Showers. But how shall they come over us and rain down upon us? To this I
answer,

4. The Course of the Winds are a principal Instrument in bringing both the
raised Vapors and condensing Cold or Nitre over us.

For though the rarifying Powers we mentioned before have a Tendency to spread
the Vapors raised from the Sea into the Atmosphere over the Shoars and
Countries round about; yet as some particular Winds may either hinder their
coming over us in plenty, or carry them away before they contract in Clouds and
Drops, and thereby continue and increase a Drought among us; so other Winds may
both bring and make them meet and crowd above us in great Abundance, and both
drive the Atoms of Heat away, which kept up their Rarifaction and hindered
their Condensation, and may also bring a nitrous, cold or less warm Air, which
helps to condense the rarefied Vapors into Clouds and Drops.

5 and lastly, -- The uniting them in Clouds and Drops by the Powers of Cold
and Attraction, and their Descent in Rain by the latter of these two Powers.

Whether the Particles causing Cold be a peculiar Kind of Substance, or are
only without that Motion which causes Heat; it is enough that what we call the
Particles of Cold, help to contract the watery Vapors, or bring them so near
together as sensibly to intercept so great a Number of Rays of Light, that we
cannot see the Sky, and then they appear in the Form of Clouds. The Particles
of Cold seem to be unequally dispersed through the Atmosphere: And as there seems
to be a peculiar Repulsion between them and the solar or sulphurous Atoms on
the one Hand, so a peculiar Attraction between them and the watery Globules on
the other. And as Heat may be more or less, either according to the Number or
Degree of Activity of the sulphurous Atoms, so may Cold be more or less,
either according to the Number or Degree of Activity of the nitrous Particles.
When the solar or sulphurous Atoms therefore become in any Part of the
Atmosphere either fewer in Number, or weaker in Action; the less are the
nitrous Particles interrupted in their Action, and the more freely and fully do
they exert their Power. In their smaller Numbers or Degrees of Action, they
seem only to condense the watery Globules, or draw them nearer to each other,
and so form them into Clouds: but in greater Numbers or Degrees of Action,
freeze them: and in freezing act so powerfully as not only to fix the purest
and most fluent Globlues of Water into Snow, Hail and Ice, but even to break
the Barrel of an Iron Gun enclosing them; and in a strong brass Cylinder of two
or three Inches Diameter, to force up a Weight of two Hundred and fifty four
Pounds against all the Pressure of the incumbent Atmosphere: as Mr. Boil
observed.
And the like no doubt is also the Effect of the Attractive Power of these
watery Vapors, when it is not hindered by the contrary Force of Repulsion or
Expansion from the more powerful Atoms of Light and Heat.

Yea it is highly probable, that by the interchangeable Predominance of all
those Powers, occasioned by the Revolutions of Day and Night, and the different
Seasons of the Year and other instrumental Causes -- the Atmosphere round the
Globe, is continually in every Part, either expanding above or contracting
within it is Balance of Gravitation, and that this is a main, continual Source
of our Varieties of Winds and Weather. While by the Power of Heat, it is
expanding over us or kept above the Balance, we have droughty Weather: And
when by the contrary Powers of Cold and Gravitation it contracts and comes
below the Balance, the watery Vapors draw nearer to each other till they Form
in Clouds; and as their attractive Power predominates, they join in Drops and
descend in Showers.

These seem to be the various Instruments of plenteous Rains. But we must now
consider,

2.) The Agency of GOD in these various Instruments.

And in particular,

1. As to the Seas, the material Source of all.

These great and perpetual Fountains the wise CREATOR has provided for the
necessary and continual Supply of the Earth with sufficient Rain. They seem to
have been prepared at the Creation of this Globe: As both Up-Land, Mountains,
Valleys, Rivers and Seas, seem to be needful from the Creation, both for Health
and the full Supply of Water in every Region; so the inspired Psalmist
signifies the same in Psalm. civ.3 -- 9; where he plainly describes the State of
our Terraqueous Globe, both before, in and at the Ending of the Flood: which I
leave the Reader to consider.
and he has so wisely placed them, as to lie convenient for every Region. The
Northern Seas for the northerly Parts of Asia, Europe and America: the
Mediterranean for the southerly Parts of Europe, the northerly of Africa, and
the westerly of Asia: the East-Indian Seas for the southerly Parts of Asia and
the easterly of Africa: the Atlantic Ocean for the westerly Parts of Europe
and Africa and the easterly of America: and the pacific Ocean for the westerly
Parts of America and the easterly of Asia etc. I might also observe the needful
Situations of the Baltic, Euxine, Caspian and Red Seas, the Venetian and
Persian Gulph^, and other great Bays and Lakes in diverse Parts of the Globe,
for this Design: But the bare Sight of them in a Map will show the Wisdom of
their Situation.
And who could create and place them but GOD alone? Psalm. xcv 5. The Sea as
his, and he made it, and his Hands formed the dry Land Psalm. lxxiv.17. Thou
have set all the Borders of the Earth. Psalm. xxxiii.7 He lays up the Depth in
Storehouses.

But yet his continual Influence is needful to preserve not only the Lakes and
Rivers, but even all these mighty Oceans from being totally dried up and lost.
For by their watery Substance incessantly rising into the Atmosphere at the
Rate of about three Hundred thousand Million Tons in a Day; This Computation^^
make upon the Supposition that the whole Surface of the unfrozen Seas, Bays,
Lakes and Rivers round the Globe make but a Fourth Part of its Superficies.
without his more mighty and perpetual Influence in that Operation called
Attraction, the Earth in its exceeding swift Rotation in its annual Orbit, of
near a Thousand Miles in a Minute, would leave this watery Substance streaming
away behind it, as fast as it arises, until the Seas themselves were totally
exhausted without Recovery, and so this whole Globe itself deprived of every
Particle of Moisture.

And perhaps this might be one Way of the Earth being delivered from the
redundant Waters of the Deluge. And a Comet passing through or near the streaming
Vapor, might then attract and carry it quite away: or it might descend to the
lower Planets which might want them, or to the Sun Himself if the Rays would
let it, or be by them dispersed to the higher Planets or Satellits of the solar
System.

But by this his particular Operation which we commonly call Attraction, He by
an amazing Force continually makes the remaining watery Vapors to keep with
the Earth in its swift Rotation, from being left behind it. Thus therefore
should we own to GOD as that lightened People Neh. ix.6. Thou have made the
Seas and all that is therein, and thou preservest them all. And how wondrous
(...) the Exercise of his Mercy, Patience, Benignity and Power, for this
ungrateful and wicked World, continually!

2. As to the rarifying Beams and Atoms of the Sun --

We have already considered their Action as the Operation of GOD. To which I
may add -- that by the Computation above we may further see, that were our
whole Globe covered with unfrozen Water; such is the still mightier Power of
GOD put forth in these inconceivably diminutive Atoms of Light and Heat, as not
only to make them fly up hither with such an amazing Force against the Sun's
Attraction, as we observed before, but even to raise from hence four Times as
many Million Tons of Water in a Day, as we just now mentioned, i. e. Twelve
Hundred Thousand Millions, and this against the united Powers both of Cohaesion
and Attraction. Yea if the whole Sphere of the Earth's Orbit were a concave
Surface of Water, the solar Atoms would have the same Effect to raise them: and
how many Million of Million times more would be then raised by them, is beyond
our Capacity to comprehend. How amazing is the Power of GOD put forth in these
extremely diminutive Atoms. The Atoms of Light are so inconceivably small, as
Dr. Ni^wentyt shows, that the 14th Part of a Grain of Tallow consumed in the
60th Part of a Minute in a Candle of six to the Pound, produces a greater
Number of Particles of Light, than a Thousand Times a Thousand Million of Earth
equal to ours, would be able to contain Grains of Sand. And what a vastly
greater Number still, do the abundantly denser Beams of the SUN produce*


And all this Raising and Expansion of Waters is only, either by the reflexive
Power of the Sun Beams which is abundantly weaker than in their direct Descent;
or by the unaccountable Activity of their dispersed Parts, when the Rays being
intercepted in their rectilinear Motions have immediately lost their Light, are
dissolved into their innumerable Millions of Atoms, and these dark Atoms left
to innumerably various Motions from what they had before, and have need of GOD
both to guide them and continue their Activity for these wondrous Purposes.

Yea this Operation of his is both more evident and wonderful, in that he
continually steers both these reflecting Rays and dispersed Atoms of Light and
Heat with the watery Globules, and carries them up between the descending
Sunbeams; which else by their vastly greater Force would beat them down to the
Seas, or rather never permit them to rise against their mightier Current into
the Atmosphere: And yet these expanding Globules of Water continually cross
those descending Rays without Interruption. It must all be done by the wise
Direction and continual Agency of the Power of GOD. Thus he divides the Sea
with his Power, as Job declares in Chapter xxvi 12. So the Israelites in Psalm.
cxxxv.6, 7 Whatsoever the LORD pleased, that did he in Heaven and in Earth, in
the Seas and all deep Places; He causes the Vapors to ascend from the Ends of
the Earth etc.

Or if these Rays and Atoms touch not the watery Globules, but get under and
form Atmospheres around them, or raise and force them up before them by some
other elementary Power exerted at a Distance from them; it will be yet more
wonderful, and not less evidential of the Action of GOD, but lead us nearer to
view Him. For whether this be by a universal Fluid or their elastical
Atmospheres; this Fluid and these Atmospheres being all material, they can only
act, as they are acted on by that universal, all-knowing, all-wise,
all-powerful Being.

And after all, since Sir Isaac has computed, the Atoms of Light are so
inconceivably small and solid, that their Attraction is above a Thousand
Million Million Times greater than the Force of Gravity on the Surface of the
Earth, according to the Quantity of Matter in each; -- what but the Power of
GOD can first force them up from the Sun against the Sun's mighty Attraction?
and as soon as ever they have done their Office here; then in Opposition to the
great Attraction between them and the Earth, force innumerable Millions of them
back again; Multitudes up to the Moon, representing to her the Earth as a
glorious Luminary fifteen times greater than she appears to us, as Dr. Gregory
computes; Multitudes flying to the Sun again; and Multitudes of others to
unknown Distances successively in all the Etherial Regions round about. I said
successively -- Because the Sunshine Half of the Earth being always toward
the Sun, it in her annual Orbit turns successively to every Part of the starry
Region in the Course of a Year: Though it seems highly probable that this
Daylight Half of the Globe looking always toward the Sun, the greater Part by
far of his reflected Rays are in their Current toward Him retracted to Him.
The like may be said of all the Planets and Satellits wheeling round Him and
enlightened by Him; their Daylight Sides looking always toward Him. And though
he emits innumerable Millions of Rays continually to all the fixed Stars within
their Reach; yet it seems most likely that he constantly receives as many from
them as he sends forth to them: And so these innumerable Stars or Suns, by the
mighty and unceasing Agency of GOD may only exchange their Rays continually,
and constantly supply each other. Or if any be spent in the Comets or Planets,
He may send off the refined sulphurous Substance in them, with the Rays he
reflects, and make equal and perpetual Reparations.


3. As to the mutual Attraction between the Sun and Moon above and the Waters
with our Atmosphere here below --

We have already shown, that this Attraction or mutual Impulse toward each
other, acting always every where throughout the solar System, not only in every
Atom, even in the very Centers of every Body, but also with a perfect View to
all the other Atoms throughout the System in all their various Distances and
Situations -- must needs continually proceed from a universal, perfectly
knowing, wise and powerful Agent, always every where working in them: which can
be none but GOD. The like Agency of GOD we have also shown both in the Rise and
Course of the Winds, whereby he brings the watery and nitrous Vapors over us
-- in condensing them in Clouds, and uniting them in Drops by his Powers of
Cold and Attraction -- and in making them descend in Rain by the latter of
these two Powers.

But here we must also observe, that when he has raised so many Millions of
Tons of Water into the Air and hangs them over us like heavy Mountains; then he
by the same merciful Power restrains them, holds them up, and permits them not
to run into mighty Lakes or Cataracts at once, and overwhelm and drown us; but
joins the watery Globules only into Drops one after another, and so distills
them, sometimes for several Days together, as the Trees Herbs and Corn can bear
them. So Job observed with grateful Wonder, Chap. xxvi.8. He binds up the
Waters in his thick Clouds, and the Cloud is not rent under them.

This is Part of the Agency of GOD in giving Plenty of Rains. And thus the
Prophet even repeatedly assures us, Amos v.8. and ix 6 He calls for the
Waters of the Sea, and pours them out on the Face of the Earth. So the divine
Poet in Psalm. cxlvii.8. Who covers the Heavens with Clouds, who prepares
Rain for the Earth. And then, as Elibu describes it in Job xxxvi.27, 28. He
makes small the Drops of Water: they pour down Rain according to the Vapor
thereof: which the Clouds do drop and distill upon Man abundantly.

And thus have we briefly considered the natural Agency and Government of GOD
both in bringing grievous Droughts and plenteous Rains on a Land.

And yet after all our Searchings, his Ways of acting in these Matters are not
fully discovered to us. So Eliphaz seems to intimate, when he speaks of GOD in
such Terms as these, Job v.9, 10. Which does great Things and unsearchable,
mavelous Things without Number; Who gives Rain upon the Earth etc.

But as we observed under the Head of Winds -- In these and other Cases, we
should not dare to apprehend that the Sovereign GOD in governing this lower
World entirely confines Himself to act according to his common Course of
Nature; but most wisely and justly reserves the Liberty of acting otherwise on
all Occasions when he sees most fitting.

Such like reserved Cases seem to be Earthquakes, Hurricanes and Tempests;
Storms of Wind, Rain, Thunder, Lightning, Snow and Hail, with the raging of the
Seas; and indeed all Kinds of Weather, hot and dry, cold and wet; the Rising of
noxious Vapors out of the Earth, the Corruption of the Air, the Multiplication
of Insects and Animalcula, infectious and epidemical Diseases; Multitudes of
Alterations in human Bodies; personal Distempers and Mortalities; Lotteries and
Accidents; as also innumerable Changes of Ideas and Propensities both in brutal
and human Creatures. In all which He rules this lower World and brings about
his wise Designs: making all Kinds of Substances indeed, his fitting
Instruments and using them; but whenever he sees Occasion, giving additional
Degrees of Powers and different Directions, or abating their Degrees of Power
in other Ways than in his common Course of Nature, which is only his usual Way
of Operation in them.

In this Manner he may in the most proper Seasons send both Droughts and Rains,
and Sicknesses and Health, to particular Places; He may point his Lightnings to
particular Persons; He may raise a Storm to disperse a Fleet, and give
additional Powers to a Gust of Wind to overset a Vessel, or to the Waves to
break her; He may direct Physicians to a sufficient Knowledge of the Cases of
their Patients, and the suitable Means of their Cure, and give additional
Forces and Directions to the Medicines in their inward Operations, or
otherwise. And so in Multitudes of other Cases: Or there would be no more need
to pray to GOD for a safe Voyage, or a prosperous War, or to preserve from
Drought, or Plagues or Enemies, or to save in any Sicknesses or Dangers; than
to pray in an extreme hot Day, that he would make the Sun to go down at the
usual Time; or in a dark and cold Night, to rise again; or that he would make
the Tide to ebb or flow: which would exceedingly, if not entirely prevent that
Reverence of him, which in the present State of human Nature is highly if not
absolutely needful, to keep the Race of Men in any tolerable Order, and excite
them to pay him their suitable Acknowlegements, both for his own just Glory and
their Advantage.

In short, the Wisdom and Goodness of GOD seem to require a twofold Kind of
natural Operation among his Creatures in our terrestial World, answerable at
least to the present Condition of Men therein: -- the one Kind more stated, as
the constant Revolution of Night and Day, and the Seasons of the Year, the
Action of Gravitation, the Ebb and Flow of Tides, the shining of the Sun etc;
that so we may not be at all Uncertainties in ordering our Affairs, but may
have these universal Necessaries to depend on. But as we need powerful
Restraints from gratifying our evil Appetites, and Excitations to all Kinds of
Duties, especially to GOD our Maker, Owner, Sovereign and continual Upholder
and Benefactor; it seems both wise and kind that He should also in Multitudes
of Cases keep us in Uncertainty, and occasionally operate in all Sorts of
Substances; that we may constantly see our Dependence on Him, and Need of his
gracious Interposals for us, may fear to offend Him, and when he chastens us,
may be moved to humble our selves and implore his Mercy in the Change of his
Dispensations.

And such a wise Scheme of divine Government as this, the holy Scriptures
clearly give us, as I might easily show in the abovementioned Cases. In
particular, (...) Apprehensions of the Operations of GOD has the inspired Elibu
taught us, as to his ordering our Atmosphere, in Job xxxvi. and xxxvii.
Remember that thou magnify his Work which Men behold! Every Man may see it, Man
may behold it afar off. Behold GOD is great, and we know not. For can any
understand the Spreadings of the Clouds, or the Noise of his Tabernacle? Behold
He spreads his Light upon it, and covers the Bottom of the Sea. For by them
judges He the People, He gives Meat in Abundance. With Clouds He covers the
Light, and commands it not to shine by the Cloud that comes betwixt. -- Hear
attentively the Noise of his Voice, and the Sound that goes out of his Mouth:
He directs it under the whole Heaven, and his Lightnings unto the Ends of the
Earth: -- He thundereth with the Voice of his Excellency -- GOD thundreth
marvellously with his Voice: Great Things does He which we cannot comprehend.
For he says to the Snow, Be thou on the Earth; likewise to the small Rain, and
to the great Rain of his Strength: He seals up the Hand of every Man, that
all Men may know his Work: Out of the South comes the Whirlwind, and Cold out
of the North: By the Breath of GOD, Frost is given, and the Breadth of the
Waters is straightened. Also by watering he wearieth the thick Cloud: He
scatters his bright Cloud; and it is turned round about by his Counsel; that
they may do whatsoever He commands them upon the Face of the World in the
Earth: He causes it to come, whether for Correction, or for his Land, or for
Mercy.

But this brings us to consider,

II. His moral Government, or his moral Ends in these various Providential
Operations.

And here we may (1) take a View of his moral Government of Men in general; and
then (2) in causing Droughts and Rains in particular.

[1] As to his moral Government of Men in general --

The Scriptures are so clear and full in this, that whoever believes them wrote
by Inspiration, cannot doubt (...) shall therefore offer something to confirm
our Faith therein from other Arguments.

And that He always exercises such a moral Government over his moral Creatures,
such as Man, must needs arise from his own moral Nature and theirs, and from
his natural Relation to them.

For as to HIMSELF -- His necessary and eternal Self-Existence must needs be
owing to the most absolute Perfection of his Essence; an Essence so supreamly
and absolutely perfect, that it cannot but eternally exist. And this Essence
must be so absolutely perfect, as to comprehend every absolute Excellence
therein: their being an equal absolute Necessity of one as well as another, and
so of all as well as any: of absolute Spirituality, Ubiquity, Understanding,
Power and Knowledge, which are commonly called his natural Excellencies; as
also of absolute Wisdom, Justice, Goodness, Truth and Holiness, which are
commonly called his moral, as well as the other.

And as his natural Excellencies plainly include his moral; so the Exercise of
his natural Excellencies in any Action equally includes the Exercise of his
moral in the very same Action also. As they are all essentially undivided and
absolutely harmonious in Him, they must forever act in absolute Concert and
Harmony. In Particular; being absolutely spiritual, always every where present,
and always absolutely understanding, knowing and powerful; He must be always
absolutely wise: and being always absolutely wise, he must always have the
wisest Ends in every Exertion of his Power, both in creating, upholding and
ordering every Creature, and in every Act of his Power contained therein.

And as He has created Men with all their Faculties and Powers, and continually
upholds them, continually preserves them from innumerable Evils, and even such
as would be most afflicting and fatal, and is continually obliging them with
innumerable undeserved Kindnesses of the greatest Moment, according to his
sovereign Pleasure; as they absolutely depend on Him, and he has an absolute
Propriety in them, is infinitely full of the highest and most venerable and
amiable Excellencies, and has given them Power of knowing all This; they must
needs in Justice owe him the highest Gratitude and Love and Reverence and
Honor, with the most absolute Devotion, Service and Obedience: And all this he
must needs know; and both his own Perfections require of them, and also engage
Him to treat them in a Way agreeable to the very Nature of that most absolute
Knowledge, Wisdom, Goodness, Truth and Equity which are essential in Him.

And here I might easily show, that a moral Government of GOD is most
righteous, and therefore he must in Justice exercise it: that it is the best
Government both for Himself and his moral Creatures; and therefore his absoute
Goodness will effectually move Him to it: That it is the wisest and most
fitting, and therefore his absolute Wisdom will lead him to approve and choose
it: and that he perfectly sees all This, with his own absolute All Sufficiency
for this most perfect Government; and all this in the most united Harmony will
engage Him to undertake and manage it in the most perfect Manner. But the Time
would fail me.

And I would only now remonstrate -- How extremely absurd would it be to
assert, that such a Man is the most excellent Father, who only in general
provides Things needful and convenient for the natural Supply of his Children;
but takes no Care of their moral Good, neither to give them any Intimations
that Wisdom, Kindness, Justice, Truth, Hatred, and avoiding of all moral Evil,
or Love and Doing of all moral Good, are accceptable to him; but wholly lets
them alone to do as they list, to revile him and spoil his Works, and lie and
cheat, and gratify every inordinate Appetite, and hate, injure and destroy each
other; and yet never corrects them, or shows any Displeasure at their horrid
Crimes, nor ever helps those who repent, nor even those who honor him, when in
Distress they cry to him for Mercy! And as it would be extremely absurd to
assert that such a Man is the most excellent Father, and as GOD is infinitely
more excellent than Man can be; it must be infinitely more absurd to imagine
that GOD can in such a Manner govern the Children of Men, who are much more the
Children of his own Production.

Only we must here observe; that considering the moral Nature of GOD and Man
and our Condition in this Life; it is evidently inconsistent with absolute
Justice, Benignity and Wisdom, to limit our Existence to the present State: And
as the present State must needs be designed chiefly to be a State preparatory
or precedaneous to a Future; it is not a Thousandth Part of his absolutely
perfect Scheme of moral Government which is exercised here, and that we now can
see: Herein I speak much within Bounds; his absolutely perfect Scheme reaching
to endless Successions in Eternity: Though for the Satisfaction at least of the
Blessed, that they may not be ever kept in entire Suspense, it seems to be
requisite, that in this eternal Scheme, there must be such successive Periods
so complete, as to give the Saints and Angels a clear View of the perfect
Harmony of the divine Perfections in them: and then go into new ones, for their
further Wonder and Delight, and so successively for (...).
On which Account in Multitudes of Cases it must in the Nature of Things appear
exceedingly mysterious to us, and we must therefore refer the Completion with
our satisfying Views thereof to Eternity.

And now,

[2] As to his moral Agency and Ends in causing Droughts and Rains in
particular -- As GOD has made us the most superior of Creatures in this lower
World; He has also made this Terraqueous Globe and Atmosphere with all the
Substances and inferior Creatures in them in a gradual Subordination of Nature
to our Use and Benefit, and so he commonly orders them in his Course of
Providence: and as in this He makes them in the Course of Nature terminate,
this was his Design, and this Design He carries on continually: and herein is
not only the Exercise and Display of his natural Excellencies of Spirituality,
Ubiquity, Understanding, Knowledge and Power; but also of his moral, especially
Wisdom and Benignity.

And as not an Atom of Light or Heat, or Particle of Air, Cold or Nitre, or
Globule of Water, in his Course of Nature moves but by his active Power;
wherever He exerts this Power, especially in causing Droughts and Rains, He
therefore always acts in perfect Wisdom, for the wisest Ends; though to us in
their very Nature inscrutably various and extensive, in their numberless
Connections Branches and Trains of Consequences: and these wise Ends must needs
be moral as well as natural with Respect to Men; for whom they are chiefly
made, who are chiefly affected with them, and in whose Affliction or Advantage,
under GOD, they supreamly terminate.

But though I said Affliction or Advantage -- as these two Ends more clearly seem
to be different in a natural Sense; yet in a moral Sense, in our present
depraved and mixed State, which is a State of Probation, and so of needful
Discipline for our greater Benefit, all Afflictions may be advantageous, even
eternally advantageous, excepting those that hinder any in (...) preparing for
Eternity: And these must needs be mere Punishments to the particular Persons
utterly ruined by them, though they may be Advantages to others.

As to the natural End of God in Droughts it must in general therefore be as He
in his Course of Nature makes them terminate, viz. in afflicting us. And as to
Rains -- When they are unseasonable or immoderate, his natural End must be to
afflict us also: But when seasonable and moderate, it must be by reviving and
increasing the Fruits of the Earth, and the Cattle, to promote our Benefit.

But then those natural Ends with respect to us, must needs in Wisdom be
subservient to his moral. And as to these we may observe in general -- That as
his natural End in Droughts and unseasonable and excessive Rains, must be to
afflict us, his moral End must be by this Affliction to correct us: That as his
natural End in seasonable and reviving Showers, is our Advantage, his moral End
must be thereby to oblige us: -- And as in his constituting Nature He designed
and made the former Kind of Dispensation afflictive and the latter beneficial,
and sees they are; so he knows the natural and moral Sentiments and
Dispositions he has made them have a natural Tendency to raise up in us and
lead us to: And these must be his wise and moral Views in sending them.

In Particular therefore, they are such as these --

To cure us of those Degrees of Atheism that are apt to grow upon us in a
constant Course of agreeable and fruitful Seasons, and lead us to consider and
see his constant Operations, Being and Perfections, both in these and other of
his Works of Nature. -- To raise up in us an answerable Admiration, Esteem and
Reverence of Him. -- To move us to pay Him that Respect and Homage which are
his Due both on Account of his essential Excellencies natural and moral, and of
his wondrous Works both of Creation and continual Providence.

In a scorching Drought, to convince us of our entire and constant Dependence
on him in these particular Operations of Nature. -- To make us feel (...)
afflicting and chastizing us, and apprehend his awful Power, Justice and
Displeasure therein. -- To stir us up to consider our Relations, Obligations,
and various Duties and Behaviors to him. To excite us to a serious, diligent
and impartial Search both of our Hearts and Lives, that we may discover our
Sins of Commission and Omission in all their Kinds, Numbers, Aggravations and
Evil Nature, Fruit and Tendency. -- To move us to lament, confess and forsake
them, to humble our selves before Him, resolve on Amendment, and implore his
Mercy.

And as for us who live in the Light of the Gospel -- to bring us further on to
those peculiar Graces and Duties, which this highest Revelation of GOD on Earth
points out and requires us to seek and labor after: Such as the sanctifying
Change of our Hearts as the Source of all Sincerity and real moral Excellency,
and their being broken and melted for all our Dishonours of GOD and inward
Contrariety to him; our justifying him in all his Chastizements, and our
loathing and condemnng our selves before him; our hating and renouncing every
Sin both in Heart and Life; our Desire of mortifying every Inclination thereto
as offensive to Him, of being reconciled to Him as the highest and best of
Beings, of being conformed to Him in Holiness, and of glorifying Him by
universal Obedience; our rejoicing in CHRIST the Mediator, our earnest
Application to Him to reconcile us to GOD and procure us every Blessing; our
hearty embracing Him in all his Offices, and our trusting in Him to discharge
them for us; yea through Him our returning to GOD in the highest Affection, and
giving our selves entirely to Him in an everlasting Covenant; imploring not
only Pardon and temporal Help in the present Difficulty, but also his perpetual
Friendship, with his effectual SPIRIT to keep from every Sin, mortify every
corrupt Affection, grow in every Grace, abound in every Duty, and freely and
faithfully serve Him forever; and then humbly and patiently waiting for all
these Mercies.

And lastly, upon answering our Prayers, kindly changing the Course of his
Dispensations toward us, and giving us seasonable and suitable Showers; --
Then to rise in lively Thankfulness and Love and Praises, and proceed in all
other due Acknowledments of our Obligations to Him.

These are plainly the moral Ends of these his providential Operations, as the
very Nature of Things, as well as the inspired Scriptures fully show, had I
Time to mention them. But I must now conclude with some

IMPROVEMENT.

I. Let us then learn to see the Operations of GOD in Nature, with his Being
and various natural Profections; in particular his Presence, Understanding,
Knowledge, Wisdom, and active Power appearing in them.

It is even contrary to the real Truth and Connection of Things as well as
(...) Respect we owe the sole CREATOR and Preserver, Owner, Lord and Ruler of
the Universe, to look on the Operations of natural Causes as Operations without
his continual Influence, Support and Guidance. If we therefore had a due and
realizing View of Things, we should view them as Instruments in his upholding,
acting and directing Hands, which he continually uses to accomplish his
innumerable and wise Designs among his Creatures.

All the Operations of Nature round about us are his continual Actions: And in
every lucid Ray and Spark we should see a Glimpse of his universal Power and
Presence, as well as in every glowing Fire and in every Streak of Lightning. In
the diamond Drops of Dew on the morning Herbs, we should see it is he that
glitters in them, as well as in the Stars of Heaven. When we look and see the
Moon and Sun, we should see their Maker shining in them, and how he covers
Himself with Light as with a Garment. So we should see him acting in the
falling of every Drop and Atom, in the boiling of every Spring, in the running
of every Course of Water, in the moving of every Wave, in the growing of every
Spire of Grass: We should perceive him in every Breeze of Air, as well as in
every Pulse of Life: And we should hear him in every Rill and Wind, as well as
in the Roaring of the Sea and the Voice of Thunder.

But we should especially see his natural Operations in Droughts and Rains, and
in all the conspiring Actions of their instrumental Causes, as we have before
described; and view them with religious Wonder, Delight and Veneration.

2. Let us endeavor also to see his moral Government and Excellence, in
particular his Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Truth, and Holiness, with his moral
Ends in these Dispensations.

In afflictive Droughts we should see his Holiness or Hatred of Sin in those
natural Signs of his Displeasure -- his Justice in Chastizing us -- and as we
live in the Light of Inspiration, his Truth in answering those Intimations he
has given in Scripture of executing this particular Judgment, for acting and
pesisting in Contrariety to him; it being by Inspiration only that the Truth of
GOD can be displayed. Yea in correcting with this Kind of Discipline he shows
and we should see his Goodness, as it is useful to convince us of our Dependence
on him, that none but he can help us, and so reduce and bring us to implore his
Mercy; but much more still in answering our worthless Prayers, and giving
needful Showers in our Extremity -- And in all his Wisdom in displaying and
glorifying both his Excellencies and his Government both natural and moral,
promoting our Conviction and Veneration of them, with our present and
everlasting Interest, and accomplishing a Multitude of other wise Designs among
his Creatures.

And as He has a great Variety of Ends both natural and moral in the very same
Actions; so in his with holding Rains, we should see Him making the Vegetables
wither and fail in Fruitfulness, the Beasts decline in Flesh and Strength, and
so less fit for Food or Labor; and all to terminate both in afflicting and
correcting Us, and thereby awakening us to suitable Convictions of his Being,
Perfections, Providence, our Relation, Obligations and Duties to Him, Sins
against Him, his Displeasure with us, our Interest to return and seek to be
reconciled to Him, and implore his Mercy; and exciting us to a becoming
Reverence and Adoration of Him, and to all these Duties. And in his giving
seasonable Showers, we should see Him reviving the Vegetables and Animals,
promoting their Growth and Fruitfulness, and all to terminate both in relieving
and obliging Us, and thereby exciting our religious Gratitude, Esteem, Love and
Praise, and every just and grateful Duty to Him.

These moral Ends of his we should therefore also have in View continually in
these Dealings with us, and labor after an entire, just and wise Compliance
with them: Or we behave unnaturally; i.e. directly contrary to our moral
Nature, Obligations, Interest and Reason; as well as the apparent Tokens of the
wise, good, just and holy Will of our Sovereign RULER, Chastizer and Benefactor.

3. When we view those Things, we (...) Pleasure also see, how exactly the
Scriptures speak and how clearly the Works of GOD in Nature confirm their
Verity.

For besides the Passages before recited, we may (...) observe, -- That when
the wa^tery Vapors spread (...) in the Part of the Atmosphere over us, or form
not ^^to Clouds, or the Clouds only appear without shedding a Shower, and then
break away, and let the parching (...) pour out his insufferable Heat on the
thirsty Earth, (...) no Winds from other Quarters round us bring any Suppl^^s
Then we should look up to GOD and hear Him speaking with some Displeasure, as
in Amos iv.7. I have withholden the Rain from you; and as in Isai. I.2. I make
the Rivers a Wilderness: And then own to Him as Solomon, 1 King. viii.35. When
Heaven is shut up and there is no Rain, because they have sinned against Thee.

When the Vapors rise and gather in thick Clouds, and the Lightning flashes
with irresistible Power: let us then lift up our believing Eyes and see GOD in
them: Let us hear him speak with Majesty and Terror, as in Isai. I.3. I clothe
the Heavens with Blackness: and then believe and own as the Prophet, Jer. x.13.
When He utters his Voice, there is a Multitude of Waters in the Heavens, and
he causes the Vapors to ascend from the Ends of the Earth; He makes
Lightnings with Rain; He brings forth the Wind out of his Treasures. So Chap.
II.16.

When the desired Rain comes down; -- Then let us further see and speak of GOD
with Eliphaz as in Job v.10, 11. Who gives Rain on the Earth, and sends
Waters on the Fields, to set up on high those that be low, that those who mourn
may be exalted to Safety.

When the Showers descend on some particular Places and pass by or stop before
they arrive at others; -- Then let us with humble S^^^^ssion hear the supreme
Orderer of them say, as in Amos ix.7, 8. I caused it to rain on (...) City, and
caused it not to rain on another City: one Piece was rained upon; and the Piece
whereon it rained not (...): -- Yet have ye not returned unto me, says the
(...).

And when the Rains are plenteous and general; -- let us then gratefully see
and sing as King David with the Congregation of Israel, in Psalm. lxviii.9. Thou
O GOD, did send a plentiful Rain, (...)
whereby thou did confirm thy weary Heritage.

While we see the Corn and Grass a dying, and the Drought continuing, and
growing more intense; let us see the Burning of the divine Displeasure, and say
as h^, in Jer. xii.1.3. Righteous art Thou, O LORD, How (...) shall the Land
mourn, and the Herbs of every Field wither, for the Wickedness of them that
dwell ther^^! And when we see the Rain descending and reviving the Plants and
Animals and causing them to grow and flourish; Then let us speak of GOD and to
Him, as They in Psalm. civ.13, -- 15. He waters the Hills from his Chambers;
the Earth is satisfied with the Fruit of thy Works: He causes the Grass to
grow for the Cattle, and Herb for the Service of Man; that he may bring forth
Food out of the Earth, and Wine to make glad the Heart of Man, and Oil to make
his Face to shine, and Bread to strengthen the Heart of Man.

4. Let us now consider these various Works of GOD, both as to his natural and
moral Dispensations to Us in the present Summer -- The most remarkable on those
Accounts we have ever known.

Let us remember how greatly he distressed us in the late most extraordinary
long, extreme, destroying Drought, and in many Places Swarms of various Sorts
of Insects devouring all before them. I have met with none that remembers the
like Distress. The first Crop of Hay which was our chief, yea with many the
sole Dependence, to support the Cattle for our five Months foddering Season, so
far cut off; that most of the People had but a Fourth Part, many but a Fifth,
many but a Tenth of what they used to mow; and many none at all, being obliged
to turn their Cattle into their only mowing Ground to keep them from perishing:
And how affecting was it to see them empty, pining and go low^^g about for want
of Food; their Owners pitying, but unable to help them.

In many Parts of the Land, we saw innume^^^^ warmt of Worms and Grasshoppers
concurring to devour the remaining Herbage: -- In many, both the Beans, Pease,
and Barley withering up: -- In many, various So^^ of Vermin destroying the
Flax, the Potatoes, Turnips, and other Eatables: -- In some, Millions of little
Worms consu^^ng the necessary Leaves of Trees in Orchards: -- In others,
Multitudes of larger Worms cutting off the Roots of o^^ Indian Corn the main
Subsistence of the People: -- The Face of the Ground scorched to a reddish Hue:
-- The Brooks, Springs, and many Wells and Rivers dried away: -- The Roots of
the Grass so burnt as they seemed irreparable, and the remaining Corn folding
up and at the Point of perishing.

Never were those affecting Passages in Joel i. and Jer. xiv, more pertinent to
us than in that distressing Season.

And all the while we were languishing under the extreme Affliction, GOD was
raising up as great a Quantity of Waters out of the Sea into the Air as usual:
even in ten Miles of the Light-House, on every Day above nine Hundred Thousand
Tuns; and in a Hundred Miles, on every Day above ninety Millions; To keep
within Bounds, I take but half the Circles of 10 and of 10 Miles Radius: and
whereas Dr. Halley found the Sun exhales in a square Mile every warm Day 6914
Tuns; I here take no more than 6000 in every square Mile. And the like may be
said, of any 10 or 100 Miles of any Part of the Sea Shoars, or great Bays of
all the British Provinces and Colonies.
but directing them to other Quarters, and not permitting the Winds to bring
them over us; or if they did, He drove them on to other Parts of the Atmosphere
beyond us, kept up the Heat and Expansion Here, and would not suffer the
Vapors to join in Drops and Showers on our parched Land.

Let us never forget our great Extremity, our growing Difficulties, our
threatening Dangers; our affecting Prospect of loosing half our Stocks; being
obliged to send not only for Hundred Miles to Pensylvania, but even to England
above three Thousand, neither of which was ever done before, for Hay, to save
some of our Cattle alive; -- Yea the Prospect of more distressing Want of Bread
for Ourselves and Children; neither having it, nor wherewith to purchase it.

Let us remember how awful the Displeasure of GOD appeared, and how we humbled
ourselves before Him, fasted, confessed our Sins, and cried for Mercy. Thursday
June 15, was our Day of general Fasting and Prayer throughout the Province.

And now behold in what a wondrous Manner, he has heard and answered; given us
gentle and moderate Showers, almost every other Day, with most suitable
Intervals of warm Weather, revived many of those Fruits of the Earth which
seemed irrecoverable, causing them surprizingly to flourish, that we are like
them that Dream; destroying the devouring Insects, and even giving the Hopes of
a plenteous Harvest!

5. and lastly, Let us now consider what great Obligations we are thereby under
to this SOVEREIGN BEING, who has thus kindly answered us, even exceeded our
Prayers and Hopes, and what are the Duties we indispensibly owe Him.

And here we should see -- That this Kindness of his is not because we have in
the least Degree deserved it, but quite the contrary: That it therefore flows
from his mere Sovereign Grace through CHRIST the Mediator: That it is to testify
his approving our paying a Part of our due Homage to Him in our Humiliations
and Entreaties in this probationary State; and to signify how much more
acceptable would be our cordial, universal and continual Homage, and how
extremely to our Advantage.

Our first Duty then, even of every one among us and of this whole obliged
People, must be to be exceeding thankful to Him, and most heartily to Bless and
Praise Him -- To Sing, as David and his People in Psalm. lxv.1, 2, 9 -- e.
Praise waits for thee, O GOD, etc.

Yea our further Obligations -- are most highly and servently to love Him, to
forsake every Sin, and avoid every Thing offensive to Him, especially the abuse
of the Fr^^ts of his Goodness -- to devote ourselves through CHRIST ^^tirely to
Him forever: and make it our Business and Delight to do whatever pleases Him,
keeping in View (...) Glory as our highest End, and his revealed Will as our
unvaried Rule -- to value his Favor (...) above every Creature, and never rest
'till we know we have an Interest in it -- as also to reverence, adore, seek
and trust in Him for the future. -- Lastly to consider our Misery under the
moral Drought or Want of celestial Influences; to get a more affecting Sense of
this far more great and fatal Calamity; and to implore with unceasing
Importunity the Sovereign Grace of GOD to deliver us from it, by showering down
the heavenly Rain, or those efficacious Influences of his HOLY SPIRIT, which
will revive and wash our Souls and produce the Fruits of Holiness and
Righteousness and Joy abundantly throughout the Land. Hos. x.12. It is Time to
seek the LORD, till he come and rain Righteousness upon you.

And to conclude -- Let us long for and joy in the Prospect of the most happy
and universal Reign of CHRIST a coming on this lower World: And whenever we
feel a natural Drought, or see a Shower; let us with Pleasure think on those
reviving Predictions of HIM in Psalm. lxxii.6, 7, 16, 17. He shall come down
like Rain upon the mown Grass, as Showers that water the Earth: In his Days
shall the Righteous flourish, and Abundance of Peace so long as the Moon
endures: There shall be an Handful of Corn in the Earth, upon the Top of the
Mountains; the Fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon, and they of the City
shall flourish like Grass of the Earth: His Name shall endure forever; His Name
shall be continued as long as the Sun; and Men shall be blessed in Him; all
Nations shall call Him Blessed.

AMEN.

