A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE Rise, Progress, and Present State OF THE PAPER CURRENCY
OF New England.

And of the Measures taken by the Massachuset^^ Province, for establishing a
Silver Currenc^ for the Future.

Together with some PROPOSALS for rendering those Measures more effectua^

BOSTON: Printed by J. Bushel and J. Green, for S. Kneeland an^ T. Green in
Queen Street. 1749.

A Brief Account OF THE Rise, Progress, and Present State OF THE Paper Currency
of NEW ENGLAND. etc.
THE whole Mystery of Money, Trade, Exchange, etc. has been discovered and set
in a very clear Light by Mr. LOCK, who, as one of his Correspondents observes
to him, opened the Eyes of the World, which, until he (...) wrote, had used
Money as Indians do Wampum, it served them for buying and selling, and they
considered it no farther. Among other Things, he remarks, That, Supposing any
Island, separate from the rest of Mankind, whatever is their Money, if they
have but a certain Quantity, and can get no more, it will be a steady standing
Measure of the Value of all other Things; but this, he says, is a Supposition
that is not like to be found in the Practice of Mankind, since Navigation and
Commerce have brought all Countries acquainted with one another, and introduced
the Use of Gold and Silver Money into all trading Parts of the World; and it
serves rather to give Light into the Nature of Money, than to teach a new
Measure of Traffic.

But notwithstanding the great Truth of this Observation, the People of
New England, about forty Years ago, projected a Sort of Money, consisting of
Public Bills of Credit, and differing from the Money of all the rest of the
World. They argued justly enough, that these Bills have several of the most
essential Properties of Money. They are durable; or, in Case of Decay, others
may easily be provided to supply their Place. They are of light and easy
Carriage. They are as unlikely to be counterfeited as Silver or Gold: And they
may be proportioned in Quantity to the Trade and Circumstances of the People.
But then their Value is confined to the Governments of New England, which
Experience has shown them, cannot be preserved, whilst they have Commerce with
the rest of the World.

It was in the Year 1690, that the Government of the Massachusetts Bay issued
the first Public Bills of Credit that were known in New England: For upon the
Return of the Forces from an unfortunate Expedition against Canada, there was a
Demand for a larger Sum of Money than it was possible for the Government
immediately to raise. The Court laid a Tax equal to the Demand, and issued
Bills of Credit, with which they paid the Public Debt, and promised to receive
those Bills; and by a subsequent Vote or Resolve, allowed 5 per Cent. on them
in discharge of the Tax.

The Thing was new, and many of the Soldiers who received the Bills were forced
to part with them at a Discount of 30 or 40 per Cent. to supply their immediate
Necessities; but before the Tax was paid, the Bills were valued equal to Money,
or rather above it. This Emission was drawn in and finished without any bad
Influence upon the whole Currency.

In Queen Anne's War, the Government again issued a Sum in Bills annually,
which not being very considerable, and the Bills having a Preference in the
Treasury to Silver, kept up their Credit until about the Year 1711, when such
large Sums were issued, that Silver began to be hoarded by some, and exported
by others, in large Quantities, and the Bills became the only Measure and
Instrument by which all private Trade and Dealing were regulated and managed.
And to confirm the Currency of the Bills, and effectually to banish Silver and
Gold, the Massachusetts Province, in the Year 1712, made their Bills a Tender
in Discharge of all Debts, unless there appeared a special Agreement or
Contract otherwise. Thus there being a somewhat greater Scarcity of Silver than
common, a general Opinion prevailed, that the Currency of the Country might be
enlarged by issuing Paper; but like the Dog in the Fable, while they caught at
the Shadow, they let go the Substance.


In the Year 1714, the Silver being gone, and the whole Sum in (...) then
extant being less than was necessary to carry on the Trade, the People were
drove to great Straits, and a Project was set on Foot for a Private Bank of
Bills of Credit: To divert which, and satisfy the Inhabitants, the Government
issued L 50,000, being then equal to Silver at about 10s per Ounce, and lent to
such Persons as should give Security (...) pay 1 5th part of the Principal
annually, and an Interest of 5 per Cent: And as Bills of the same Form were
issued every Year by the Government; for their ordinary Charge, this Interest
was applied as Part of the Fund for drawing in such Bills. The whole Scheme of
this Loan seems to have been taken from a chimerical Projection for a
Land-Bank, printed in London in the Year 1684, and reprinted at Boston about
this Time. In 1716, a Loan of L 100,000 was issued: A few Years after, (...) of
L 50,000; and then one of L 60,000; the Bills of each being of the same Tenor.
None of the Loans were paid at the Periods promised, and the Borrowers were
indulged one Year after another, and several of them are not yet closed, though
the Sum outstanding is now inconsiderable. When a Tax has been engaged as a
Security to the Bills, by the Government, it never, but in one Instance, has
been postpon'd; but (...) this Fund, as it is called, is very fallacious, and
has no Tendency to (...) the Bills at any certain Rate or Value. For Instance,
In 17^^ the Government issued L 10,000, which they promised to draw in by the
End of 1703; but in the Beginning of 1703, they issued L 10,000 (...), exactly
of the same Form, and which at all Times were received in the Treasury
indifferently with the First, and engaged to bring in this (...) in 1705, which
in Effect is putting off the first Sum 'till then, and they continued this
Practice from Year to Year Here was a fatal Error. Had the Government made a
Tax every Year for such Sum as they issued, given the Premium of 5 per Cent. to
such as paid Bills, distinguished the Bills of each Year, and suffered no other
to answer the Tax of that Year, and allowed those Inhabitants that did not pay
Bills to pay Silver, (of which there was then sufficient) and so finished one
Set of Bills every Year, most of the Mischiefs that attend a Paper Currency
would have been prevented. Indeed it is probable, such Bills would have been
hoarded, and never served as a Medium, but the Government would have obtained a
Year's Credit, which was the Thing first aimed at.
. In the Year 1736, the Bills were so depreciated, that 26 of 27s was equal to
no more than one Ounce of Silver. All the Bills that were then extant were to
be drawn in by the Year 1741. A new Sort of Bills were then issued for the
Government Charges, one of which was to be equal to three of the Old, in
public and private Payments, and the Possessor was promised an Ounce of Silver
for every 6s8 of the New; and the same Promise seems implied for every 20s of
the Old, to be paid in the Year 1742. And it was proposed the Silver should be
raised in this Manner: Whenever Bills of the new Form were issued, a Tax was
actually laid equal to the Sum issued, on some Year before 1742, and without
any further Act of the Court, must have been levied in such Year. This Tax was
payable in Bills, or in Silver at 6s8 the Ounce: If it was all paid in Bills,
there could be no Demand on the Treasury: If any were left out, somebody must
have paid in Silver sufficient to exchange them. Thus there seemed to be full
Provision for enabling the Government to keep their Promise. But here was the
Leak. By the Acts of Government issuing the Bills of the old Form, it was
engaged, that the whole of them should be drawn in before the Year 1742, a
certain Sum each Year; but it was left to the Assemblies of each Year to
apportion this Tax upon the Towns: So that a further Act of the whole
Legislature was found necessary. When the Year 1741 came, the House of
Representatives were sensible that an extreme Difficulty would be brought upon
the People, by finishing the whole Bills in this Manner, when there was no
Silver and Gold in the Country, to serve as a Currency, in the room of them;
and when the late Governor, Mr. Belcher, insisted upon their apportioning the
Tax of that Year, they refused to do it, on failure of which, the whole Scheme
for paying off the new Bills must be defeated. And indeed there was so little
Expectation of the Bills being paid off in 1742, at 6s8, that in 1741, 9s of
them would not purchase an Ounce of Silver. In the same Year the present
Governor came to the Chair, and found the Currency of the Country thus
perplexed; and the first Assembly he met, refused to apportion the Tax, after
he had recommended it to them. This Refusal as effectually destroyed the
Security of the Bills, as any Act of Government could have done, and the best
Terms the House of Representatives could be brought to were, to carry the Tax
of 1741, part of it to the Year 1742, and the remainder to 1743; and they
provided by a Clause in the Act, that if the Assemblies of those Years should
not agree upon apportioning the Tax, the Treasurer should issue his Warrants
agreeable to the Apportionment in the last Tax Act. At the same Time Bills for
the future Charges of Government were issued, of a new Form, payable in Silver
at 6s8 the Ounce in 1746; one of these Bills to be equal to four of the first
Form (Silver being now about 28s per Ounce in the old Bills,) and full
Provision was also made for bringing in these new Bills in one or other of the
Years before 1746, or Silver in lieu of them: So that now it was not in the
Power of any Thing short of the three Branches of the Legislature, to prevent
all the Paper Currency extant being bro't in by the Year 1746. And to satisfy
the Possessor of the Bills engaged to be redeemed in 1742, they were made equal
to the new Bills in public and private Payments, and a Tax was granted for
such Sum as the former Taxes were rendered deficient by Means of raising the
Value of these Bills. This gave every Possessor of those Bills, when were
commonly called the Middle Tenor Bills, a great deal more than the Bill cost
him, though the Government neither did nor could comply with their Promise in
Form. Before the Governor consented to the aforementioned Act, he insisted,
in a Speech made to the Court, upon their coming into some Measures for
securing the Value of private Debts, in Case the Bills should depreciate; upon
which another Act was agreed on and passed, the Design of which was, That
although Bills were the only Instrument in all Trade and Dealing, yet that
Silver at 6s8 the Ounce should be the Measure. And the Bills then and after to
be emitted for five Years, were declared equal to Silver at that Rate: And in
Case the Bills should depreciate, compared with Silver and Exchange to London,
an Addition should be made on all Debts and Contracts equal to the
Depreciation; and the current Rate of Silver and Exchange, was to be determined
every six Months, either by the General Court, or by seven Counselors, or by a
Committee appointed by the Judges of the Superior Court. This has been commonly
called, the Equity Act; and it was generally thought, would prevent the great
Mischiefs of a Paper Currency, but yet it has proved of little or no Service.
For

As to the first Part of the Act, People were soon convinced that to make one
Thing the sole Measure, and another the sole Instrument of Trade, was
impossible. And all Persons continued to keep their Books, and make their
Agreements for Bills, as much as if the Act never passed. And the Allowance for
Depreciation run us into great Confusion: The Merchant seldom or ever demanded
it, for it would have been almost impossible in a running Account to have
settled it; and besides, he would have missed the Sale of his Goods by
insisting on it, and the Practice of it in any one Case, and not generally,
proved very unequal. Indeed it soon appeared, that the strict Observance of the
Rule would produce great Injustice. Silver and Exchange might rise 10 or 20 per
Cent. but it was several Months before this had a general Influence on Trade
even in the Town of Boston, and longer in other Parts of the Province, and some
Years before it had it is Effect on the Landed Estate of the Province. It was
then thought, if Provisions were taken in with Silver as the Standard, it might
be a good Addition to the former Law, and an Act passed accordingly, but the
Price of Provisions being governed by the Plenty or Scarcity of them, and a
scarce Year following immediately upon this Alteration of the Rule, made the
Observance of it more difficult than before.

Upon the breaking out of the French and Indian War, all Hopes of putting a
Period to the Paper Currency vanished; for the Defense of the four Governments
of New England, lays in a manner, though very unreasonably, upon the
Massachusetts Province, and such large Sums were necessary for carrying on the
War, especially for the Charge of the successful Expedition against Cap Breton,
that the Taxes for drawing in the Bills issued for those Charges were greater
than it was possible for the People to pay before 1746; and so the Funds for
the future Emissions were necessarily laid upon more distant Years. The Bills
being thus multiplied sunk in their Value faster than usual; so that 56 or 58s
now will purchase no more Silver than 30s would do five or six Years ago.

I have omitted a great many Circumstances relating to these Bills, designing
only to give a general Idea of the Nature and Operation of them.

The other Governments of New England soon went into the same Practice of
issuing Bills, after the Massachusetts had shown them the Way; and the Bills of
each Government, by common Consent, obtained a Currency through the Whole.

The great Mischiefs and infinite Injustice arising from a depreciating
Currency, which it is impossible to prevent or redress, are so glaring, and our
Ears have been so filled with the Complaints and Cries of those who have been
most sensibly affected, that there is no need of spending any Time in
describing or enumerating them.

During the Currency of these Bills, a Variety of Proposals have been published
for retrieving their Credit, and for furnishing a stable Paper Currency, but
all to no Purpose.

No Sort of Bills but such as are payable on Demand, can have an i^^^^able
Value; and in this Case there must be a Deposit, and it is as easy to provide
Silver to serve for a Medium, as for a Deposit, and it is as likely to stay in
the Country in one Case as in the other.

Bills that are payable at a distant Day, will be esteemed according to the
Time of Payment, and from their being issued, will gradually rise in their
Value, which will produce the same Injustice as a gradual Depreciation; for
whether the Creditor receives less or the Debtor pays more than the Contract,
the Injury is the same; somebody is defrauded: But then, the Rise would be more
intolerable than the Fall. The Creditors are few in Number compared with the
Debtors, the one generally envied, the other pitied. The Injury and Complaint
of the Creditors have been too much disregarded; but turn the Tables, and
oppress the numerous Debtors, and they will not long remain quiet.

I think therefore we may rest satisfied, no stable Currency can be projected,
other than that of Silver and Gold.

And here I expect to be asked: Why may not New England have a Currency of
Bills of Credit, as well as New York and Pennsilvania? I answer. At New York,
and Philadelphia Silver is their Medium, and milled Dollars pass current at a
known determinate Rate, and other foreign Coins in proportion: Paper Bills are
sometimes the Instrument in Payments, but the Proportion is small compared with
the Silver; and I have no Doubt that if either of those Governments should ever
issue a sufficient Sum in Bills to serve for a Currency, their Silver and Gold
would leave them, and their Bills depreciate as those of New England have done;
which, as has been observed, kept their Value while Silver continued current
with them.

The General Court of the Massachusetts seem at length fully convinced of the
Necessity of destroying the Paper Currency; and having a Sum granted by
Parliament to reimburse the Expense of the Cap-Breton Expedition, they have
passed an Act of Assembly for transporting the same in foreign Coin, and
exchanging it for their Bills by the last of March 1750, at the Rate of a
milled Dollar for 45s Currency; and have determined, that after that Time, all
Contracts shall be in Silver at the Rate of 6s a Dollar, which is agreeable to
the Rate established by Act of Parliament, and that all past Contracts shall be
discharged by a Dollar for 45s, and they have prohibited the Currency of the
Bills of the other Governments after the Redemption of their own Bills.

But this Act, notwithstanding all the Calamities brought upon the Province by
Paper Money, is not universally approved of.

One would think, that with a People making a high Profession of Religion,
there should need no other Argument to reconcile them to the Act than this,
viz. That Truth and Justice, after having been banished near forty Years, are
in a fair Way to return again. Remove the Case and the Effect will cease. In
this Case no imaginary or expected Dificulties that may attend the Trade of the
Province, ought to have any Weight.

However, we will consider the several Exceptions that are made to the Act, and
see what Force they have.

The principal Objection with a greater Number than publicly care to own it,
is this; That whenever the Bills are redeemed, the Possessor ought to be paid
as much as they would purchase in Silver at the Time they were issued, which
might be a Recompense for what he has suffered by the Depreciation. Here seems
to be an unwarrantable Desire of personal Advantage at the Expense of the
Public. There has been such a Confounding of Property that it is absolutely
impossible to remedy what is past. All Attempts have rather increased the Evil.
Besides, how unreasonable would it be, when the Course of Exchange for a Year
or two past has been at 900 per Cent. advance from Sterling, and almost
Nineteen in Twenty of the present Possessors, have received the Bills at that
depreciated Rate, they should now be paid double, or more, what they gave for
them. But we are told, the Bills promise a certain Sum, and it behooves the
Government to pay off their Bills according to their Promise, as much as it
does a private Person.

Promises made by private Persons, the Performance whereof will produce great
and extensive Injustice, may and ought to be dispensed with. I acknowledge, it
behoved the Government, by all Ways and Means possible, after they had issued
their Bills, to support the Credit of them, and great Injustice arises by their
Failure; but now it is produced, as the Case with these Bills is circumstanced,
there is no Remedy. The Bills have been sinking in the Possessors Hands ever
since they were issued, and every one who had been a Possessor ought to have
his Part of the Los^ made up to him, and not the Possessor of the present Day
run away with the Whole. But at first Glance it appears impossible to settle
what every Man's Proportion shall be. Besides, it may be considered in this
Light. Whatever Sum is outstanding in Bills, just so much is due from the
Inhabitants to the Government; and whatever the Bills sink in their Value, just
so much less, really, the Inhabitants have to pay, than they would have, if the
Bills kept their Value; and if they sunk in every Man's Hands in Proportion to
his Part of the Tax, he could complain of no Injustice, which all arises from
Persons being unequally possessed, though in what Proportion can never be
ascertained. Let us suppose then the Value of the Bills could be raised again,
this would advance the Value of the Debt to the Government, and as great
Inequality and Injustice will be occasioned by their rising as was by their
falling; for (...) they are continually passing from one to another, the same
Persons will not be possessed of them, in the same Proportion, when they rise,
as when they fell. -- It is said, the Parliament, in King WILLIAM's Reign, when
the clipped Money was called in, received it as if it had been of full Weight,
and voted a large Sum for the Deficiency occasioned thereby. It is very true:
But it was owing to the Necessity of the Times, which required an immediate
Stop to be put to the Currency of the clipped Money, which could be effected in
no other Way: And it has always been allowed, that Two Millions was given to
the Possessors of that sort of Money, more than in Equity they could claim.

Another Exception to the Act is, That it is in vain to think of a Silver
Currency, while the Balance of Trade is against us; for the Silver will be
immediately shipped off, and the Bills being destroyed, we shall be without a
Medium. By the Balance being against us, is, no Doubt, intended, that we import
more than we are able, by our Exports of every Kind, to pay for. Indeed there
is no making so certain a Judgment of the Truth of this from Time to Time, with
a Paper Currency, as with a Silver; which ordinarily would be more plenty or
scarce, according as the Balance was for or against us. But I think it plainly
appears, there is the bad Influence of the Paper Currency upon our Trade, viz.
That now the Profit arising to the Merchant, upon most Branches of our Trade,
is from the Goods imported; whereas, when Silver was current, all Commodities
for Exportation to the West Indies, the Southern Colonies on the Continent, and
the foreign Ports in Europe, were purchased at such Rates here, that they would
bear an Advance when they came to Market; and the Profit of the Adventure lay
in that Advance, more than in the Goods imported in Return, and West India
Goods were frequently so low here, that they made an advantageous Return to
England. Nay, even in our Trade to Great Britain, although the Profit of that
consisted principally in the Advance on the Goods imported hither, yet a Man
but of a middling Judgment in Trade, could ordinarily find a better Way of
making Returns than shipping Silver from hence: Now it is most natural to
suppose, that when we change our Currency, although a great Proportion of the
Silver may at first be exported, to satisfy the Debts due to Great Britain, and
perhaps to import more English Goods; and we may be greatly straightened from the
Scantiness of the Currency, yet in a short Time it will restore the Trade to
the State it was in before the Paper Currency commenced; for a Man of but small
Acquaintance with Trade, before he parts with his Silver will consider, whether
the Price demanded for any Commodity for Exportation, is so reasonable as that
he has as good a Chance of Advantage by shipping the Commodity as the Silver,
the Consequence of which will be, not that he must ship his Silver because he
cannot have the Commodity at a reasonable Price, but it will come down to such a
Rate as that he can better afford to ship it than the Silver; and there is no
Room to suppose the contrary, unless we could imagine that all the Produce of
the Country, of every kind, is not sufficient to pay what is absolutely
necessary for our Consumption; which Supposition is without the least
Foundation. If we have spent more than we have earnt while our Paper Currency
la^^ed (for there is no Country under Heaven where People who have no Estates
live so luxuriously as they do here) it will be one good Effect of the new
Currency, that it will make us better Husbands. But then I may perhaps be told,
if the Consequence of this new Currency will be the Lowering the Commodities of
the Country, so far it will be a Damage. Not at all: For those Things imported,
and which are necessary in the Business and Expenses of the Inhabitants, will
be cheap in Proportion. If a Trader has a reasonable Profit or Advance on the
Thing exported, he will have none on what he returns in lieu of it. No Doubt,
in the general Scramble that we have had for Twenty Years past, when the
Contest has been, who should raise the Price of (...) Business and Wares
fastest, some have done it in greater Propo^^^^^ than others, and it may be
expected they will fall accordingly; and after a little while all Things will
return to the Standard, and bear a just Proportion one to another.

Those Persons, I acknowledge, who have made a dishonest Gain by a depreciating
Currency, must be content, if they can rest so, with what is past, and live
honestly for the future. Of this Sort, in the Country, have been those who have
made a Trade of buying Lands at long Credit, and then paying for them in Bills
when they have depreciated so much that perhaps the Value of their Lands has
doubled. And, in the Town, may be reckoned, such Traders and Shopkeepers as
have bought large Quantities of Goods on long Credit, and after that greatly
exceeded the Credit given, and before Payment has been made the Value of the
Bills have sunk one Half, and their Goods advanced in their Shops in
Proportion. Now the Discouragement of this Trade, instead of being any
Disadvantage to us, will be extremely for our Benefit; for this unjust Gain had
encouraged great Numbers, with little or no Trading Stock, to leave the
Business they were bred to, and turn Shopkeepers; which has proved of
pernicious Consequence, by lessening the Number of Artificers and laboring
People, and by infecting those that remain with an Itch after living by their
Heads rather than their Hands. I would not be understood, that all Shopkeepers,
especially such as have been bred to the Business, or have a Stock to begin
with, should be discountenanced. A Number will always be necessary for the
convenient Supply of Goods to the Inhabitants in small Parcels; but they have
of late increased to a surprising Degree, and it looks as if almost all lived
one upon another, and that but a small Proportion was employed in producing any
Thing from the Earth or Sea.

There has been a further Exception made, which is not against the Design of
the Act, but the Sufficiency of it to answer the Purposes proposed. It is said,
That notwithstanding all the Provision that is made to the contrary, the Bills
of the other Governments will remain current in this Province, and if so, the
Act can have no good Effect, as to any future Regulation of the Currency.

It is, I confess, a great Unhappiness, that we are possessed of so large a Sum
in the other Governments Bills, and there is great Danger, That, unless the
Parliament interpose, the Bills will either die in our Hands, or the
Continuance of their Currency will prevent the Design of the Act. Of the two
Evils the first is the least; for though it will be a heavy Loss, we feel it at
once, and it is over; the other would be a continued Loss, and work our Ruin.
But there is all imaginable Reason to expect the Interposition of the
Parliament. The Affair of the New England Currencies has formerly been under
the Consideration of the House of Commons. The Massachusetts Province have now
voluntarily gone into the same Measures, or perhaps more effectual than any
formerly proposed in Parliament, that they should be compelled to. They have
twice invited the other Governments to join Commission^^^ (...) concerting
Measures that might suit the Whole, before they settled any for themselves, but
they all neglected or refused; though it is now generally supposed that
Connecticut will regulate their Currency in much the same Manner the
Massachusetts have done. -- Can it then be imagined that the other Governments
will be suffered, either greatly to injure the People of the Massachusetts, by
the Loss of the Bills they are possessed of, or else by the Currency of them,
defeat the Regulation of the Whole? And it will be much easier now to project a
Method for sinking these Bills without Loss, than it would have been if the
Massachusetts Act had never passed. In order to show how it may be effected, we
will first consider the State of the Bills of each Government, and then offer
some Proposals for putting an End to their Currency, in a Manner the least
burdensome that may be.

Connecticut are a wise People, and have conducted their public Affairs with
great Prudence, more especially with Respect to their Bills of Credit. They
have never run into any extravagant Emissions; they have shown a Desire to
preserve the Credit of those Bills they have issued, though without Success;
and, if I am not misinformed, they have very little more outstanding than their
Grant from the Parliament, at the Rate set by the Massachusetts, will redeem:
If, therefore, they should refuse to apply the Grant to this Purpose themselves
(which there is no great Danger of) the Way is very plain for the Parliament to
do it for them.

New Hampshire have about Four Hundred and Fifty Thou^^nd Pounds of the present
Currency, or, as it is commonly called, old Tenor. Their Grant will not sink
above One Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pounds, which will leave Three Hundred
Thousand. About One Third was lent to the Inhabitants, in like Manner as the
Massachusetts Loans, only for a longer Term, and the Estates of the Borrowers
are mortgaged to the Government for Security. The Remainder, except a small
Proportion for the Charge of their Government, was issued for the Canada
Expedition, and has no other Fund for drawing it in again, besides an
Expectation of being repaid the Charge of that Expedition by his Majesty. But
after they shall have received what may be allowed for those Charges, it is
probable they may have about One Hundred and Eighty Thousand Pounds remaining
outstanding.

Rhode Island, about three Months ago, had between Five and g^^^ Hundred
Thousand Pounds, the like Currency. They have lately sunk Seventy Five Thousand
Pounds by Bills of Exchange drawn on their Agent on Account of the Canada
Expedition. They expect by (...) Grant from the Parliament, to be able to sink
so much more as to leave about Four Hundred and Twenty Thousand Pounds (...),
the Whole of which has been lent to their Inhabitants, and their Estates
mortgaged for Security; but it is not to be all sunk until the Year 1763.

It is a Question whether New Hampshire have one eighth Part of their Bills
current within that Government. Rhode Island has more of theirs, perhaps one
third or one half. The rest of the Bills of both Governments are current in the
Massachusetts and Connecticut. There is therefore no Reason to expect that New
Hampshire or Rhode Island will be anxious about redeeming their Bills. It is
their Interest to have them depreciate until they become of no Value: The
Borrowers will so much the easier discharge their Debts to the Government, and
the Inhabitants pay what is due by Taxes. Nay there is great Reason to fear
that Rhode Island may speedily issue more Bills. The Governor and all the
Members of the Legislature are elected by the People, and it is sometimes made
a Test to the Candidates before their Election, that they shall declare in
Favor of more Paper Money, and this is as likely to be the Case at their
Election in May next, as it has been in Times past.

Massachusetts and Connecticut are able to sink all their Bills above the
Grant, by a Tax, in one Year. New Hampshire and Rhode Island have a Sum so much
greater in Proportion, that it will be extremely difficult, and perhaps
impossible, for them to do it.

Suppose then that by an Act of Parliament, all the Estates mortgaged, or other
Securities given to the Governments of New Hampshire and Rhode Island, for
paying in the Bills according to the nominal Value, should be made liable for
the Payment of a Spanish Dollar, or other Silver Coin in Proportion, for every
Forty five Shillings in Bills of the old Tenor, or every Eleven Shillings and
Three Pence in Bills of the new Tenor. That those Borrowers who have engaged to
pay the Whole in less than Ten Years, should be left to comply with their
respective Agreements as to the Time of Payment; but where any exceeded Ten
Years, they should be held to pay one Tenth annually, their former Agreements
notwithstanding; and that Interest of 6 per Cent. should be paid from Time to
Time, for all that remained unpaid. If any Borrower failed of making Payment
three Months after it became due, so much of the mortgaged Estate, as would
make up the Deficiency, to be forthwith sold, without a Process at Law. And for
the Bills that have been issued for the Charges of Government, the Assembly of
each Government to make a Tax for one Tenth part annually, with the Addition of
6 per Cent. Interest in the whole Sum that in each Year remain outstanding;
such Tax to be paid likewise in Silver at the Rates aforesaid.

When this is done, each Government should be obliged to call in all their
present Currency, and give the Possessors new Bills (none to be less than Five
Pounds Proclamation Money) payable in Silver with Interest of 6 per Cent. the
Whole in Ten Years, and one Tenth to be discharged annually. Every 45s of the
old Bills to be received for 6s of the new, and so in Proportion. And the
future Currency of those Governments to be regulated and established at the
same Rates with the Massachusetts.

The Members of the Legislatures might be compelled to (...) their Parts,
either by being made liable to the Possessors of the Bills, in Case of Neglect;
or by such other Penalties or Disqualifications as the Wi^^^^ of Parliament
should direct.

In this Way Nobody could complain of Injustice or Oppression. F^^

The Governments would have but a very small Burden. One Thousand Pounds
Sterling a Year, or thereabouts, would be sufficient for New-Hampshire's Tax,
and Rhode Island would not raise so much. And

The Borrowers will not pay so much as they received; many in Rhode Island not
half so much; and the Whole of New Hampshire Loan was issued when Silver was
about 30s per Ounce, and they will pay it at above 50s. -- If it be urged, That
when they made their Contract, they expected to discharge it by Bills of a
depreciated Value, and not by Silver. This was an unjust Contract, and
therefore ought to be void, or in Force so far only as it is equitable. And

The Possessors of the Bills will have the present Value of them; for the
Interest they will carry will make them as good as if they were payable on
Demand.

Thus, as briefly as I could, I have given an Account of the Nature, Rise, and
Progress of the Paper Currency of New England, and of the Measures taken by the
Massachusetts to sink the Bills of that Province (...) and have proposed a
Method, in which the other Governments may easily sink theirs: And I heartily
wish they may be compelled to it, that so Fraud, Injustice and Oppression,
which for thirty Years past have reigned triumphant among us, may be banished
for ever.


