Mr. Briant's SERMON AGAINST Depretiating MORAL VIRTUE.

THE ABSURDITY and BLASPHEMY Of depretiating MORAL VIRTUE. A SERMON Preached at
the WEST-CHURCH IN BOSTON, June 18th. 1749.

By Lemuel Briant, A. M. Pastor of the first CHURCH in Braintree.

1 JOHN iii. 7, 8. -- Let no Man deceive you; he that does Righteousness is
righteous. -- He that commits Sin is of the Devil. --

1 TIMOTHY iv. 11, 12. These Things command and teach. Let no Man despise thy
Youth. --

CHAP. vi. 3, 4. If any Man teach otherwise and consent not to wholesome Words,
even the Words of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and to the Doctrine which is according
to Godliness; he is proud knowing Nothing, etc.

BOSTON: Printed by J. GREEN for D. GOOKIN, in Marlborough-Street. 1749.

The Absurdity and Blasphemy OF Depretiating Moral Virtue.
ISAIAH LXIV. 6. -- All our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags.


AS we profess to believe (and undoubtedly are Orthodox in this Point at least)
that the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith and Manners; so it naturally
follows from this Concession, that it is of the last Importance to every Man
that expects finally to be judged by this Word, rightly to understand and
faithfully apply to practice the Truths it contains. And as those who sustain
the Character of Teachers in the Christian Church, have in a special Manner the
Oracles of GOD committed unto them, and are under special Obligations to search
the Scriptures daily, to give themselves to Study, Meditation and Prayer, in
order to find out the true Sense of every Passage they minister to their
People; so when in the diligent Use of such Means as they are furnished with,
they have made up Judgment upon the Text under Consideration, they will (if
they are honest Men) with all Openness declare their Sentiments, and by the
Force of right Reasoning endeavor to propagate them, wherever the Providence
of GOD occasionally calls them, as well as in their more stated Sphere of
Action.

CERTAIN it is, that the Word of GOD (as the best Things are liable to
Corruption and the Corruption of the best is the worst) has either through the
Weakness, Inattention and Ignorance, or more criminal Designs of its
Expositors, (by some such I say,) in all Ages of the World been wretchedly
abused to serve the Purposes of Error, Superstition and Vice. And perhaps
nothing has had a more fatal Tendency to delude the Simple and harden the
Profane, than judging of Scripture Doctrines from particular Scraps of
Scripture, and from the bare jingle of Words, without attending to the general
Drift and Design of the Author, and the whole Current of Inspiration as to the
Point under Examination.

HENCE it has come to pass that when Men read of God's choosing whole Nations
to certain Priveleges (and those in this Life only) they have rashly concluded
that particular Persons are unconditionally chosen to eternal Life hereafter.
-- That when they have laid before them the Character of a very loose and
abandoned People, who by their own long practiced Wickedness, have rendered
themselves the Children of Wrath, and fitted themselves for Destruction, they
are induced to vilify humane Nature itself with the same vicious Character. --
That when they hear of our being saved by Grace, they conceive of it so as to
destroy all moral Agency, and set themselves down with this vain Thought, that
nothing on their Part is necessary to Salvation, but if they are designed for
it, they shall irresistably be driven into Heaven, whether they will or not. --
And if they are not, no Prayers, nor Endeavors will avail. -- And finally;
when they meditate on the constant unchangeable Affection God bears to good
Men; they make this groundless inferrence from his Unchangeableness, that they
are unchangeable also.

THUS "stupefied and bewildered with Sounds, without attending to the true
Sense of Revelation," the pure and perfect Religion of Jesus, (which contains
the most refined System of Morality the World was ever blessed with; which
every where considers us as moral Agents, and suspends our whole Happiness upon
our personal good Behavior, and our patient Continuance in the Ways of
Well-doing) is in many Places turned into an idle Speculation, a mysterious
Faith, a senseless Superstition, and a groundless Recumbency; and in short,
every Thing but what in Fact it is, viz. a Doctrine of Sobriety, Righteousness
and Piety.

THE like Delusions, and by the same Means have been introduced in judging of
our spiritual State.

SOME (and those not a few) are full of Hope in God. Because as they imagine he
has from all Eternity, and that not only without any Reason, but in direct
Opposition to the very Nature and essential Constitution of his moral
Government, set his Love upon them. -- Others you will find amusing themselves
with a vain and groundless (however no Matter since it is a strong) Persuasion
that there is no Need of their being righteous themselves, because they have
the perfect Righteousness of Christ imputed unto them: But if they should
happen to think any Thing is required of them, they will be sure to fix their
Duty in some Thing of very cheap and easy Performance, many Degrees short of
actual, and much more universal Goodness. -- As in an affected Sorrow and
groaning for Sin, especially for the Sins of others they never had any Hand in,
without any Reformation of themselves. -- Or in an high Pretense to a peculiar
Spirit of Devotion and superlative Intimacy with Heaven, when perhaps in common
Life, they deify their Lusts and Passions, and by their sensual, covetous and
ambitious Designs evidence to all about them, this World is all the GOD they
adore; that like true Saints they love it with all their Heart and Soul, seek
it with all their Mind and Strength; and (let the Call of GOD for the support
of Truth and Virtue, or relief of the Distressed be ever so loud) had rather
part with their last Drop of their Heart's Blood, than one Atom of their
Interest in it. -- The Solemnities of a Fast Day in particular Preached the
next Sabbath after a public Fast.
your Saints that depend on their devotional Exercises not only prefer to all
other Duties, but are ready to imagine they are sufficient Atonement for all
their past Vices, and of greater Account to procure the Blessing of Heaven,
than all the Heathenish Morality the abominable good Works that can be preached
by all your legal selfr-ighteous Men on Earth.

AND (not to forget my Text) no Passage perhaps in the whole Book of GOD has
been more shamefully perverted to the propagating of such Libertine Notions
than this I have now chosen to discourse upon. The Words, as they are commonly
received, are a standing Reflection on all Virtue and good Manners; the most
effectual Discouragement that could be given to the Practice of Christian
Morality, and consequently one of the most fatal Snares that could be laid for
the Souls of Men. The common Notion of them is, that the Prophet is here giving
us a just and literal Description of the Righteousness of the best, while he is
only confessing and lamenting the aggravated Sins of the worst of Men. From
hence, this odious Character has been transferred to the moral Seize of
Men under the Gospel; and the best Righteousness of the most improved
Christians has been generally spoken of, as no better a Qualification (even
according to the merciful Tenor of the Gospel, and considered as the Condition
of that final Happiness which is in the Hands and at the Disposal of Jesus
Christ, who according to the good Pleasure of the supreme Father of all is
constituted the only Mediator between GOD and Man) no better a Qualification, I
say, even in this mediatorial and infinitely gracious Scheme, to appear before
GOD with Acceptance, than filthy Rags are to dress and adorn the Body for a
Visit to the King and Court on Earth.

BUT the true Sense of the Words (as I trust will appear in the Progress of
this Discourse) is not, that their Righteousness would have been as filthy
Rags, if they had really been a righteous People: (The sacred Writer suggests
no such Thing,) But his whole Design is to show that they had no real true
Righteousness, being, as to their general Character, of a corrupt Heart and
polluted Life, or as it is said in the former Part of the Verse, all of them as
an unclean Thing.

IT must therefore, be a Matter of great Importance, a Design richly worth our
Undertaking to deliver the Text (which is the Business of the present
Discourse) from this false Gloss, this horrid Abuse that has been put upon it;
and demonstrate to the contrary, (as may very easily be done) that neither all,
nor any part of our Righteousness when true and genuine, sincere and universal,
can possibly, consistent with Reason, Revelation, or indeed so much as common
Sense, deserve this odious Character of filthy Rags. And in Prosecution of this
Design; let us with honest, sincere and upright Minds; in meekness of Wisdom
and in real Love to the Truth wherever we find it, attend to these three
Particulars, which I shall lay down as the Groundwork of the whole Argument.

Is It. We will consider what was the true State and Character of this People the
Prophet here speaks of, and the special Grounds of his saying (as in the Text)
that all their Righteousnesses were as filthy Rags.

IIdly. We will advance some further Arguments to prove this is not nor ever
was designed to be a just Character of the personal Righteousness of truly good
and holy Men.

IIIdly, and lastly, Point out to you some of the dangerous Consequences of
admitting this Sense of the Text.

Is It. We are to consider what was the true State and Character of this People,
and c.

WHOEVER consults not only our Context, but other Parts of this Book, will find
that the People of the Jews were at this Time sunk into a wretched State of
Degeneracy, even beyond their common Character, which was always, at the best,
full bad enough: And in Consequence of their general extraordinary Wickedness,
were under the signal Frowns of Heaven; that the Drift and Design of the
Prophet's Discourse is not to depretiate true Righteousness; not to warn them
against placing any Dependence on it; but to convince them that they were
utterly destitute of it, and therefore must expect God's Hand would still be
stretched out against them, unless they mended their Manners. He says expressly
in the preceding Verse that it would have been well with them if they had been
truly righteous, and attributes all their present Sufferings to the preseut
Corruption of Manners among them. Thou meetest him that rejoiceth, and works
Righteousness, those that remember thee in thy Ways Verse 5.
: This would have been their happy Case if they had been such manner of
Persons: But as it follows, Behold thou art Wrath, for we have sinned.

THE same Character for Substance (with this in our Text) is given of them in
the 1st Chap. 4 Ver. etc. Ah! sinful Nation, a People laden with Iniquity, a
Seed of evil doers, etc. And because their State was so bad the Prophet
received those Orders in the 58th Chap. 1st Verse, To cry aloud, and spare not;
to lift up his Voice like a Trumpet, and show this People their Transgression,
and the House of Jacob their Sin. And for the same Reason he expresses such a
mighty Zeal against the Vices of the Times, in the 62d Chap. 1st Verse, For
Zion's sake I will not hold my Peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest,
until the Righteousness thereof go forth as Brightness, and the Salvation
thereof as a Lamp that burns.

IT is true we read in this Book, of their making great Pretenses to Religion,
and of their Excess in the external ritual Parts of it; of their abounding in
extraordinary Assemblies, offering a multitude of Sacrifices, making many and
long Prayers, insomuch that the Almighty declares (speaking after the manner of
Men) that he was troubled and quite worried out with them. And well he might,
considering he is a Being of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, for amidst all
this splended Form of Godliness, they had no more true Goodness in them than
the Scribes and Pharisees in our Savior's Day on Earth; but like them were
utterly averse to Duty and Obedience, and given up to the most detestable
Immoralities. Their Hands were defiled with Blood, and their Tongues with
Iniquity, their Lips speak Lies, their Tongues muttered Perverseness. 59th
Chap. 3d ver.
Yea, they persisted in transgressing, and lying against the Lord, and in
departing from their God, speaking Oppression and revolt, conceiving and
uttering from the Heart Words of falsehood. Judgment was turned away backward,
and justice stood afar off: Truth was fallen in the Street, and Equity could
not enter, etc. 13 ver. etc.


I will only add that all their crying Abominaons were committed among them
under the greatest Aggravations, while they enjoyed superior Advantages of
excelling in Virtue; while they had the constant Instructions and Warnings of
God's Prophets to the contrary; while God by a variety of signal Providence
both merciful and afflictive, endeavored to engage them in their Duty and
Obedience; Finally, while they themselves pretended to be the most precise
People under Heaven: So that in fact they made their Religion a Cloak for their
Immoralities, and imagined all was well, that they were very pious good People
though they Lied, Stole, committed Adultery, Swore falsely, and in short, in
common Life practice all manner of Villainy, so long as they could say, (which
was the common Cant of the Times,) The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord are we.

No marvel then, if this be a just Representation of their Case, (and whoever
consults the sacred History will find them vastly worse, rather than any ways
injured by this Character;) if their moral Character, I say, was at least as
bad as I have represented it, no Man can wonder that the Prophet says (nor be
at any loss to determine his meaning when he says) all their Righteousnesses
were as filthy Rags. And thus much for the 1st Head to show, what was the true
State, etc. And so I come

IIdly. To advance some further Arguments to prove this is not, nor ever was
designed to be a just Character of the personal Righteousness of truly good and
holy Men.

And here let me say,

1 st. THIS is directly opposite to the whole current of Scripture Language.
Search the Bible from the beginning to the end of it, and you will never find
any the least and most imperfect Degrees of real Goodness branded with any such
odious Character. But on the contrary it is evident to every one that reads the
Scripture with Understanding, and worthy particular Remark that when the sacred
Writers would express to us, "the most complete Character of spotless Virtue"
they make use of this very Metaphor of being clothed with Righteousness, not
as with filthy Rags, but as with a royal Robe. This Form of Speech is used by
the Prophet Isaiah 61 Chap. 10 ver. Where the Robe and not the filthy Rags of a
good Man's Righteousness is compared to the Ornaments wherewith a Bridegroom
decketh himself. And it is the very same Thing even universal Righteousness and
Virtue that our Savior means by the Wedding Garment which the Man in the
Parable was destitute of when he came to the Marriage-Supper, and was therefore
bound Hand and Foot and cast into outer Darkness. And finally; in pursuance of
the same Metaphor; it is worthy of special Remark St. John in the 19 Rev. 8 ver
expressly calls the personal Righteousness of the Saints, clean, white and fine
Linen. So utterly unacquainted are the Scriptures with this modern Style of
filthy Rags, as applied to the Virtues of good Men, that on the contrary as we
see, and shall be more convinced, the more we search the sacred Writings, they
constantly speak of them under the high recommending Character, of a Robe of
State, a Wedding Garment; and in a Word, the richest and best Attire, that Men
of the highest Rank, and upon the grandest Occasions can put on.

ANOTHER Argument against our thinking or speaking thus diminutively of the
Righteousness of good Men, is the horrid Reflection that this directly casts on
all the moral Perfections of the Deity, whose Image they wear and that on this
very Account that they are righteous holy Men. It is the immutable Rule of
right Action that God himself inviolably adheres to in all his Dispensations.
He is righteous in all his Ways and holy in all his Works. And this is the
highest Character and greatest Felicity of all his rational Creatures to
resemble him in these divine Excellencies. Every good Man is said to have put
on the new Nature of right Action, and true Holiness after the Image of God.
And shall we call this Righteousness (the same for Kind as the Righteousness of
God himself, and which in that infinite Perfection he enjoys it, is properly
speaking the Beauty of the divine Nature:) which renders us like to God and
stamps his lovely Image on our Souls; I say, shall we disparage this in the
World by giving it the odious Name of filthy Rags? We may hereby indeed make a
false Show of Humility, and recommend our selves to the unthinking Part of
Mankind, but the Sober, and the Sensible, who can never receive any Thing for
Truth only because it is spoken with an Air of Assurance and Godly Tone; who
consider with themselves, what the Righteousness of the Saints is. -- These I
say, whenever they hear personal Virtue and moral Goodness thus run down, though
it should be done by the highest Priest on Earth, will certainly be apt to
think, whatever they may say, Master in thus speaking, ye reproach GOD also.
Nor can this in Reason be thought a common Reflection on the Divine Being,
because it is blaspheming of him in his dearest Attributes, and denying him the
chief Glories of his Nature.

To this I would add; that it reflects equal Dishonor on Jesus Christ the Son
of God, and on the whole Christian Scheme which he came to set up in the World.
Our Savior was the great Preacher of Righteousness: For this End was he born,
and on this grand Design came he into the World, to propagate Truth and Virtue
among Mankind. It is this and only this Righteousness (which some are pleased
to style filthy Rags) which he preaches up through the Whole of that divine
Sermon on the Mount; which contains the Sum and Substance of his whole
Doctrine, or surely he would have never made that Application of his Discourse
in the 7 th. Matthew. 24. etc. Therefore whosoever hears these Sayings of mine
and does them, I will liken him to a wise Man that built his House on a Rock,
etc. In his Life and Practice he fulfilled all Righteousness, not to excuse us
from, but to set us an Example of doing likewise. Now is that which the Son of
God thought worth his coming down from Heaven to establish on Earth, that which
is the Basis and in short the whole Superstructure of this his divine Religion:
To recommend which to Mankind, he both lived and preached it up, and sealed the
Truth of his Doctrine with his most precious Blood, shall we call this I say,
filthy Rags? God forbid! God forbid! Such a Thought should ever enter our
Hearts: And if through the Wickedness of them it should happen to steal in, let us
look upon it as a greater Evil and be more sollicitous to cast it out than if
we were possessed with seven Devils.

IN the next Place, if we view the Righteousnesses or Virtues of real good Men
in another Light, viz. as the Fruits of the holy Spirit of God, it will appear
to be equally impious and absurd, to call them filthy Rags. As it is a plain
Dictate of Nature that the Maker is the Lover of Mankind, and ready to assist
them all, in all proper Methods suitable to their Make, and consistant with his
moral Government in the Attainment of that Rectitude of Mind which must lay the
Foundation of all true Happiness: And as the Scriptures (...) where speak of a
gracious Influence (...) Spirit of God has upon every well disposed (...) in
forming it to the same Image; so the Effects of his Operations which we
sometimes call the Graces, and sometimes the Fruits of the Spirit are nothing
else in the Language of Scripture (and properly speaking) but moral Virtues.
The very same Things (O shocking Thought!) that are commonly styled filthy
Rags. This you will soon see to be the exact Truth of the Case if you will
please to consult the 5th Chap. of St. Paul's Epistle to the Galatians, where
he treats professedly on this Subject, and gives us a particular Account of the
Fruits of the Spirit, see the 22d. and 23d. Verses. The Fruit of the Spirit is
Love, Joy, Peace, Long-Suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, (i. e. Fidelity,
Probity and Constancy.) Meekness, Temperance; against such there is no Law. The
same Account he gives 5th. Ephesians. 9th. Verse. The Fruit of the Spirit is all
Righteousness, Goodness and Truth.

Now if these same Virtues that constitute the Righteousness of a good Man, and
are spoken of in other Places of Scripture; (notwithstanding the concurring
Influence of the Spirit of God, in the Product of them) as his Righteousness,
are also the Fruits of, and consequently of the same Nature with the Spirit
that produces them; shall we not stand amazed to think with what open Contempt
they are treated by a great Part of the christian World? And that as we may
commonly observe, under the highest Pretenses to the Spirit; which certainly
very much aggravates the Case, as it makes the Spirit the Author of those
Reproaches they cast on his Fruits and Graces. Blaspheming the miraculous
Powers of the holy Ghost, was formerly called an unpardonable Sin; nor can any
Reason be given (if it be done with equal Light and Malice) why Reproaching his
Fruits and Virtues should be deemed less heinous or meet with a less fatal Doom.

To proceed; We needs must have an higher Opinion of the Virtues of good Men,
than that of filthy Rags, if we consider the high Account God makes of them;
the vast Use and Importance of them with Respect to ourselves. It is the
Righteousness of the Saints that renders them amiable in God's Sight, that is
the Condition of all his Favors to them, and the sole Rule he will proceed by
in judging of them; and dispensing eternal Rewards to them. The Scriptures join
with the natural Notions of our own Minds, in affirming all this in the most
plain express Language imaginable. Psalm 11. 7. The righteous Lord loves
Righteousness, and his Countenance does behold the Upright. 15 Psalm Beg. Lord
who shall abide in thy Tabernacle, who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? He that
walks uprightly, and works Righteousness, and speaks the Truth in his
Heart. Psalm 18. 23. etc. -- I also was upright before him, and I kept my self
from mine Iniquity. THEREFORE has the Lord rewarded me according to my
Righteousness, according to the Cleaness of my Hands, in his Eyesight. With
the Merciful thou will show thy self merciful; with an upright Man thou will
show thy self upright: With the pure thou will show thy self pure, etc. --

RIGHTEOUSNESS, the wise Man says, tends to Life. This is the natural Effect
and Product of it. The Work of Righteousness is Peace and Quietness here, and
the Consequence of it eternal Happiness hereafter. Of this Use and Importance
is the Righteousness of a good Man with Respect to himself, and without it he
never could be happy in himself; nor so well on it in Heaven as on (...), tho he
had the Righteousness of every other Being in the Universe imputed to him. For
it is demonstration; that the Foundation of final Hapiness must be laid in every
ones own Mind, in a personal good Turn and Rightness of Temper, to relish
caelestial Joys.

BESIDES these personal and private, temporal, spiritual and eternal good
Effects of this Righteousness; we are assured not only from the sacred
Scriptures, but can demonstrate from the Nature and Reason of Things, that it
is of the last Importance with Respect to the Prosperity and Happiness of
Society, and that the general Good of all Mankind essentially depends upon it.
It is this Righteousness (the personal Righteousness of the Saints) that
Solomon says, exalts a Nation: It secures the Persons, and establishes the
Thrones of Princes. It animates the Obedience, and draws a sacred Enclosure
around the Rights of Subjects. It stops the Course of divine Judgments against
a People, and opens all the Stores of Heaven to supply them with Good. And in
short, both by a natural and moral Tendency, secures the Felicity of all
Societies, and if universally practiced, would infalliby diffuse a
proportionable Degree of Happiness over the whole Globe.

AFTER all that has been said of the Nature, Use, and Importance of true
Righteousness, considered as the Image of God, the Substance of Christianity,
the Product of the Spirit, the Ornament of great Price in the Sight of God, of
particular and universal Influence on humane Happiness, in their present, and
in their future eternal State. After all these recommending Characters (I say)
of a truly good Man's own personal Righteousness, it would be too great a
Reflection on your Understanding, to suppose there is one Man that does not see
the Injustice and Wickedness, the Impiety and Blasphemy of calling this
Righteousness filthy Rags. And so I come,

IIIdly, and lastly; To point out to you some of the dangerous Consequences of
admitting this Sense of the Text. And 1 st. Thus to depretiate the moral
Virtues of true Christians, tends to prejudice the most Sensible against the
Christian Profession, and confirm Men in their Infidelity.

THE most rational and divine Scheme of Religion may become despicable in the
Eyes of the World, by Misrepresentations. Even Christianity itself, though
capable of a rational Defense, well attested by external Evidence, and when
viewed in it is native Purity and Simplicity, void of all corrupt Glosses and
human Additions, carrying in it the clearest internal Marks of it is divine
Original; even this Religion, I say, may be so represented, as to render it
ridiculous in the Opinion of sensible thinking Men. For with what Air of
Infallibility soever Men may vent the Fictions of their own weak or disordered
Brains for the Doctrines and Precepts of the Gospel; and though the greatest
Absurdities, the most palpable Nonsense; in Times of Ignorance and implicit
Faith may be winked at; though the unthinking Multitude may be best pleased with
that they understand least, and be carried away into any Scheme, that
generously allows them the Practice of their Vices, though every Article be a
downright Affront to common Sense; yea, by a few rabble charming Sounds be
converted into such fiery Bigots, as to be ready to die in the Defense of
Stupidity and Nonsense, as well as to kill (and that purely for the Glory of
God) all that are so heretical and graceless as not to renounce their Reason in
Complaisance to their sovereign Dictates; notwithstanding all this, I say;
There always was and always will be some in the World (alas that their Number
is so few) that have Sense eno' and dare trust their own Faculties so far, as
to judge in themselves what is right. That by no Arts, how sanctimonious
soever, can ever be bro't to believe, (and much less profess when they don't
believe) Things repugnant to the first Principles of Reason. And therefore are
naturally led to conclude, That no Scheme can be right, no Doctrine from God
that abates the Motives of Virtue, or discourages the Practice of any one Duty.
For the Existence of God is not more certain than this; That it must be the
grand Design, the ultimate View of God, in all his Dispensations, to promote
the moral Rectitude and Happiness of his Creatures. And exactly in Proportion
to it is Tendency this Way arises the true intrinsic Value of every Revelation
he gives us. But if this be Revelation and Grace, to vilify human Nature, and
disparage all our Improvements in those divine Virtues wherein essentially
consists all our Glory and Felicity; If the Scriptures are used to affront
human Reason, and debauch Men's Manners, and the most glorious Dispensation of
the Gospel in particular, instead of teaching us to deny Ungodliness, and every
worldly Lust, and to live soberly righteously, charitably and devoutly in this
present World, be conceived of only as a Scheme calculated to allow Men the
Practice of their Vices here, with Impunity hereafter; If this be the Liberty
and peculiar Privilege of the Saints to be discharged from their Obligations to
obey their Master, and they that break his Commandments, stand fairer for his
Grace, than they, who conscienciously keep them, for fear they should trust to
what they do; so far, I say, as any take their Conceptions from such
Corruptions of Christianity, they must necessarily be prejudiced against it. --
Thunder we ever so loud, without any previous Lightning, HE THAT BELIEVES NOT
SHALL BE DAMNED, it will signify nothing, for they will be DAMNED before they
will believe. 2 dly. The loading of moral Virtue with such opprobious Terms,
has a natural Tendency to encourage and harden wicked Men in their Vices. What
can tend more to dispirit Men's Endeavors after Purity of Heart and Sanctity
of Manners, to stop their Mouths from ever putting up one Petition to Heaven
for Assistance in carrying on the Work of Righteousness in them, than thus to
asperse moral Virtue, as nothing worth in the Sight of God, no more than filthy
Rags! It is evident to common Sense, that this must lead Men into an utter
Contempt of those Things that are of infinite Importance for them to esteem and
practice. Surely Men will never take much Pains for that, which will be of no
Service to them when they have got it. To speak freely, I confess I never yet
saw with what Face a Man can pretend to exhort others to the Practice of
Righteousness, who is constantly telling them, perhaps in the same Breath, that
all their Righteousness, when they have obtained it, will be nothing but filthy
Rags. God is already satisfied in all his Demands, his Law, his Honor, his
rigorous relentless Justice are all satisfied, and there is nothing left for
Man to do but to believe this undoubtingly, and the more surely, the less
Grounds he has for it, to rely upon it, that he is righteous, and shall finally
be accepted as such, though every Reflection he passes on himself is a standing
Demonstration that he is not righteous, and his own Reason assures him, that no
Being who understands his Character can look upon him any otherwise than what
he is.

THE Believer indeed may if he please, out of mere Generosity, add Works of
Righteousness of his own, but there is no real Need of it; for "his main
Interest is secure without it". He is already in such a State of Salvation, as
that his final Happiness is as certain as if he was now in the actual
Possession of it. The plain Truth of the Case is this; Either our Righteousness
is of some Use and Significancy in the Affair of our Salvation, or it is not.
Either it has some Connection with, and actual Influence on our Happiness, or
it is of no real Necessity as to us. If the Latter, then there is not one Word
to be said in favor of it, but the greatest Advocates for Licentiousness may
be the best Friends to Christianity, and the most Vicious the highest in the
Grace of God. But if the Former, then it is a sure Thing, that in Proportion to
it is real Worth, and final Advantage, arises the Folly of those who neglect it,
and the Strength of all our Arguments to recommend it to Mankind.

3 dly, and lastly; The Consequences of depretiating moral Virtue are very
injurious to such as are sincere upright Christians, in robbing of them of that
divine Comfort they are the proper Heirs of, and filling their Minds with
needless Fears and Scruples about their spiritual State.

THE great Rule the Scriptures lay down for Men to go by in passing Judgment on
their spiritual State, is the sincere, upright, steady and universal Practice
of Virtue. This they speak of as the only sure Rule, to which all others are
reducible, as what we may with Confidence rely on, and ought to adhere to, in
Opposition to all other delusive Marks whatever. 1 John 3. 7. Let no Man
deceive you: He that does Righteousness, is righteous. Ver. 10. In this the
Children of God are manifest, and the Children of the Devil: Whosoever does not
Righteousness, is not of God.

BUT now if we are persuaded to think that all our Righteousnesses, when we are
become sincere good Men are nothing but filthy Rags, we are naturally led to
seek for some other Evidence of our good State, than what results from our
Goodness; and it being impossible to find any other to be relied on, for the
Scriptures propose none but this, it necessarily follows that we must either be
filled with vain Hopes and empty Joys, or else after all our virtuous
Seize we must be subjected to all the Horrors we can suppose the most
vicious of Men to be exercised with. We must fear where no Fear is; And in a
Word, put the Matter in the most favorable Light, we must walk to Heaven on
the confines of Hell, while our Path would be smooth and easy, our Prospect
serene and bright, and we should anticipate future Enjoyments in our present
Hopes, if we were but allowed to think (and that while all necessary Evidences
are in our Favor) that our present Condition is safe.

THESE, to be brief, are the natural unfailing Consequences of thus
depretiating the moral Virtues of good Men. -- It ministers to the Growth of
Infidelity, and of Vice among professed Christians, and to the great Disquiet
of sincere good Christians, who are the proper Heirs of Comfort. And thus I
have finished what I at first proposed.

To conclude the whole Matter; I expect by this Time, some are ready to break
forth -- Ah! all this directly tends to build People up in their own
Righteousness -- Not one Word of Christ, nor the least Savor of true gospel
soul-saving Preaching in all this Discourse.

To the first Part of which Charge, I answer -- If by it is building People up
in their own Righteousness, be meant, That it recommends Hypocrisy and
counterfeit Virtue; that it places Religion in any external Duties separate
from a corresponding good Temper within (all which Sort of Righteousness would
indeed, as to our final Acceptance with God, through the Mediation of Christ, be
no better than filthy Rags) or, in short, in any Righteousness of our own
contriving and not taught of God; in any Thing but what the Bible, from the
Beginning of Genesis to the End of Revelations, makes the Substance of our
present Duty, and the Condition of our future Happiness; If this, I say, be the
Force of the present Objection, I have no other Answer to make, but to leave
every one to judge for himself, how groundless it is.

BUT if by it is tending to build People up in their own Righteousness be
designed, that it is any Ways calculated to encourage personal Goodness, and
promote the Practice of moral and christian Virtue in the World; the least
Tendency it has this Way, I shall heartily rejoice in, and instead of being
sollicitous to prove the Objection groundless, my greatest Concern, upon a
Review of the preceding Discourse, is really this, that there is not more
Ground for it; and that so good a Design is so poorly served.

IN the next Place; As to its not being preaching of Christ; the Difficulty,
perhaps will entirely vanish when we come to adjust our Notions of the Thing.
TO PREACH CHRIST (says a late very elegant Writer) is universally acknowledged
to be the Duty of every Christian Minister. But what does it mean? It is not to
use his Name as a Charm to work up our Hearers to a warm Pitch of Enthusiasm;
without any Foundation of Reason to support it. -- It Is not to encourage undue
and presumptuous Reliance on his Merits and Intercession, to the contempt of
Virtue and good Works. No: But to represent him as a Lawgiver as well as a
Savior, as a Preacher of Righteousness, as one who has given us a most noble
and complete System of Morality, enforced by the most substantial and worthy
Motives (among which I may venture to mention as one of the most powerful, The
Certainty of our Forgiveness of Sins, and final Acceptance with the Father,
through the Merits of the Son) upon the Condition of Faith, Repentance and
Good-living. In a Word; To show that the whole Scheme of our Redemption is a
Doctrine according to Godliness. -- And all those who decry moral Virtue, which
is the supreme Dignity of God himself, and inseparably connected with the
Happiness of all rational Beings, as a Thing of no Avail toward obtaining the
divine Favor, and the Privileges and Rewards of Christianity, do, in Effect
(though I am persuaded with a contrary Design, even to exalt, instead of
diminishing the Honor of the Gospel) subvert the very fundamental Principles
both of natural and revealed Religion. Therefore, to explain and press the
eternal Laws of Morality by all the peculiar Motives which the christian
Religion suggests, and making all it is Doctrines subservient to Holiness, is
beyond Comparison the most useful Way of preaching. -- To preach up chiefly
what Christ himself laid the chiefest Stress upon (and whether this was not
moral Virtue, let every One judge from his Discourses) must certainly, in the
Opinion of all sober Men, be called truly and properly, and in the best Sense,
preaching of Christ.

AFTER all; though this Sort of Preaching is evidently conformable, both to the
Design of the Gospel, and the Example of our Savior, yet I am sensible it is
not calculated for the general Taste of the present Age. It is not to walk in
the Way of their Heart, and in the Sight of their Eyes. It may not, at present,
be the Way to popular Applause, nor to priestly Favors. However, if it be the
Way of Truth (and I hope this is no certain Evidence that it is not) the Way, I
say, of Truth, of Honesty and Integrity, we are sure it is the Way that will
endure forever. And while this Assurance is fixed in a Man's Mind, though the
asserting of it should expose him to Poverty and Contempt, and, in short, all
Manner of temporal Inconveniences, a steadfast Faith and inflexible Virtue will
readily reply -- None of these Things move me, neither count I my Life dear
unto me, if so be I may finish my Course with Joy, and the Ministry which I
have received of the Lord, to testify the Gospel of his Grace. And both these
truly great and infinitely important Ends, will infallibly be secured, if we
not only in Doctrine, but in Practice, inviolably Adhere to that pertinent
Advice of St. Paul's to his beloved Son according to the common Faith, Titus 3.
8. This is a faithful Saying, and these Things I will that thou affirm
constantly, that they which have believed in God, be careful to maintain good
Works. THESE Things are GOOD, and PROFITABLE unto Men.

FINIS.

