THE STATE OF TRADE IN THE Northern Colonies Considered.

STATE OF TRADE IN THE Northern Colonies CONSIDERED; WITH An Account of their
Produce, And a particular DESCRIPTION of NOVA SCOTIA.

Salutis communis interest.

CIC. LONDON Printed, 1748. Boston Reprinted, and sold by Thomas Fleet, at the
Heart and Crown in Cornhill. 1749.

THE PREFACE
AS the following short Treatise was hastily wrote, it may probably appear
incorrect to the judicious; but as the Design was to represent the Value and
Importance of the Northern Colonies to this Kingdom, I hope it will answer my
Intentions of promoting the public Good.

Their Trade and Produce have not hitherto been properly encouraged, although
their Utility may be easily comprehended; a small Bounty on the several rough
Materials they are capable of raising, and shipping Home, would soon enable
them to supply the Nation with a Variety of Articles, in Return for its
Manufactures, which are now purchased of Foreigners with Cash, and imported in
their Ships.

The Settling of Nova Scotia will in a few Years render the present Inhabitants
industrious and useful, whereby it may be justly accounted a most valuable
Acquisition, which will be the more considerable, as the Conditions of its
Settlement may be so advantageously calculated as to fill it without draining
our Mother Country of its Inhabitants. For this Purpose I have described the
Soil, Quality, and Manner of improving the several Parts of it from my own
Observation, whereby it will appear how easily it may be effected at a very
small Charge, compared with the Benefits that will naturally result from it. --
But if they were doubtful, yet the Advantages the French might otherwise make
of this Province, and the Want of an effectual Barrier for securing the
Possession, Trade, and Fishery of the Northern Colonies against their Efforts
in a future War, sufficiently demonstrate the Necessity of keeping it out of
their Hands, without being diverted by the Consideration of the Expense; and
this is the more obvious, and important, as they will always be exposed to the
Attacks of the French, from the Neighborhood of Cape Breton.

I must here beg the Reader's Indulgence for saying a Word in Support of my
Remarks on that Island.

I am sensible that a high Opinion has been conceived of its Worth, and with
good Reason, from the concurrent Accounts of both English and French Writers;
but as the former have been principally copied from the latter, their Veracity
may be fairly called in Question: This I have a Right to do, from the exactest
Information I could obtain on the Spot, and I can safely appeal to the most
intelligent Persons, who have resided there long enough to make proper
Observations, to confirm what I have advanced.

By fortifying Nova Scotia, by encouraging the Importation of its Produce to be
wrought up here, and promoting the Fishery in Time of Peace; by stationing a
proper Naval Force there, and on the Coast of New England in Time of War, this
Kingdom may secure to itself all the Advantages that could have arose from the
Possession of Louisbourg, at a less Expense than would have been requisite for
keeping so large a Fortress in Repair, and defending it with a proper Garrison.

Settling of the Cape Sable Shore, will undoubtedly make a Winter's Cod-Fishery
practicable, and may soon become more considerable than any that has ever been
prosecuted, and as the Fish caught and cured in that Season exceeds all others,
they will of course come to a better Market in all Parts of the World.

Otis Little.

THE STATE OF THE North-American Trade and Settlements, considered; With a
particular ACCOUNT of NOVA SCOTIA.
GREAT BRITAIN has enjoyed the Benefit of a most extensive Commerce, since the
Discovery of America, which, if properly attended to, will contribute more to
its future Interest, than any other Branches of Trade, by enlarging the Demand
for all its Manufactures, and increasing the Means of its Naval Force.

That the Riches and Strength of this Nation depend principally on its Commerce
with foreign Countries, and its own Colonies, is a Fact that needs no
Illustration; it being equally true in Regard to all trading Kingdoms; for the
Increase of Wealth and Power has generally been proportionate to the
Englargement of their Trade, and History fully proves, that Ruin and Desolation
have always attended the Loss of it; the most flourishing are indebted to it
for their Grandeur, and the most opulent and powerful have been undone by the
Neglect of it.

As every State in Europe seems desirous of increasing its Trade, and the
Acquisition of Wealth enlarges the Means of Power, it is necessary, in order to
preserve an Equality with them, that this Kingdom extends its Commerce in
proportion; but to acquire a Superiority, due Encouragement ought to be given
to such of its Branches, as will most effectually enrich its Inhabitants.

As Trade enables the Subject to support the Administration of Government, the
lessening or destroying that of a Rival, has the same effect, as if this
Kingdom had enlarged the Sources of its own Wealth; it is evident from hence,
that it is not sufficient to support the Credit of a Country with its
Neighbors, that its Commerce be enlarged only, unless its Increase be
proportionate to theirs: But, as an Ascendency is to be gained by checking the
Growth of theirs, as well as by the Increase of our own, whenever one of these
happens to be the Consequence of the other to this Nation, its Figure and
Reputation will rise to a greater Height than ever.

My Purpose being to show how sar these good Effects may be produced by
encouraging the North American Trade and Settlements, I shall confine myself to
those Branches which are capable of the greatest Improvement.

That the Riches of a Country consists in the Number of its Inhabitants, is an
Expression that drops from the Pen of every Writer; but it must always be
understood, that those Inhabitants are properly employed, and suitably
encouraged; for, otherwise, it would appear to be an odd Position, that a
Country should be called rich, when it is only filled with Vagabonds and
Beggars.

But when it is considered, that the Northern Colonies, in less than five
Years, have lost above seven thousand of their most active and industrious
Inhabitants by an uncommon Ardour in exerting themselves for the public Good,
besides a Habit of Idleness that has been contracted by a large Body, which has
been long in Arms waiting for Employment; to which may be added three thousand
more, who having entered on board his Majesty's Ships of War, and Privateers,
are never like to return; their loss will appear almost invaluable, and not to
be repaired but by replacing a much superior Number of Men in the Country.
From the apparent Connection between the Northern Colonies and the West Indies,
and their joint Relation to this Kingdom, it is evident, that the Increase of
Inhabitants in the former, will contribute more to the common Interest, than
employing the like Number at Home. This, Mr. Wood in a Treatise on Trade, has
demonstrated to be nearly in proportion of five to one; from whence it follows,
that the beforementioned Loss is equal to that of fifty thousand Laborers and
Artificers here; and in regard to those Colonies vastly exceeds the Grant
lately made them by Parliament, as the Value of their Labor for three Years
only would have been equal to that Sum; and notwithstanding a Jealousy has been
frequently excited on account of their Growth, it will appear, that the
Commerce and Naval Power of this Kingdom will greatly depend on their future
Encouragement and Protection.

The Policy and Wisdom of a Covernment discovers itself in nothing more
evidently, than by proportioning its Influences so as to support, and cherish
the Circulation of Trade, and Manufactures, in its minute Parts, as well as its
large and more opulent Members; the smaller Wheels in a Machine being as
necessary to make it useful as the largest, and commonly require the nicest
Skill of the Artificer in their Regulation: And without a due Regard be had in
every State to the Trade of its Individuals, there is the greatest Danger of
the weaker Parts being oppressed by the stronger; and whenever this happens,
the Extremities are sure of being the first, and generally the greatest
Sufferers, as by their Remoteness from the Vitals, they feel less of their
Influences, and labor longest under their Distress; and although Disorders of
this Kind do not immediately affect the whole, yet the smallest Obstructions,
if not seasonably removed, often produce a general Stagnation, and may prove as
dangerous to the political, as to the natural Body.

It may not be improper to observe, before I proceed any farther, that some
Persons, either through Prejudice, or for Want of better Information, are too apt
to insinuate, that great Care ought to be taken, lest those Colonies grow too
powerful, and set up a Government of their own. This is so far from having the
least Foundation to support it, that I am positive no People on Earth are more
firmly attached to their Prince, than they are to his Majesty and the present
Establishment, being all Protestants, who have ever manifested the greatest
Abhorrence of Popery, by which Means Roman Catholics have been always deterred
from settling in the Country, and their constant, and repeated Demonstrations
of Zeal and Loyalty to the British Government, are sufficient to clear them
from every Aspersion of this Kind; but to make the Matter more evident, it may
be observed, that if they were ten Times more populous, and wealthy than they
are at present, no Motive could be urged of sufficient Weight to induce them to
a Revolt; neither the Love of Liberty, Force of Oppression, Burden of Taxes,
or Desire of becomeing more powerful, could possibly Influence them to struggle
for Independency: If the Love of Power and Liberty should be taken into
Consideration, it is apparent that they enjoy as great a Share of both as any of
his Majesty's Subjects, and much more than if they were (...) independent
Government; for, in that case, they must be supposed to put themselves into the
Hands of some foreign State, which could protect them from the just Resentment
of this Kingdom; and it is well known that is not to be done; but if it could,
to whom are they to apply that would continue to them the Liberties they enjoy
now? No People in their Senses would subject themselves to the French,
Spaniards or Dutch, with a View of securing their Privileges with greater
Tranquillity than they at present enjoy them; and should they aim at absolute
Independency, the Expense of defending themselves would infinitely exceed any
they have yet been subject to, and indeed, they could not subsist without the
Protection of their Mother Country.

As to any Discontents that might arise from Oppression, or the Burden of
Taxes, they are subject to none but such as result from the Laws of their own
making, an Indulgence they esteem themselves secured of under a Protestant
King, and which gives them a Share of Power equal to their Desires; and as
their very Being, in a Manner, depends on this Kingdom, their Trade is so
closely connected with, and grafted on it, that nothing would so effectually
ruin them, as to be deprived of it; for were they to be supplied with European
Goods by any other State, the Difference would prove fatal to them. Upon the
whole, nothing can, nor ever will, prevail upon them to attempt, or think of a
State of Independency, whilst they enjoy the Freedom of English Subjects under
so happy a Constitution.

But if, after all, it be thought dangerous to suffer the Colonies to grow too
large, lest they should take it into their Heads to revolt, it is pretty
extraordinary, that neither the French, Dutch nor Spaniards have ever been
discouraged from promoting their American Settlements; their Case is widely
different from ours; were the French or Dutch Colonies, for instance, to revolt
to the English, it would scarce be possible for France or Holland to regain
them; but as to the Spanish Dominions in America, not all the Force of Old
Spain, if it was contiguous to that Continent, would be sufficient to reduce
them; and although there is scarce a Native of America that is suffered to hold
a Post of Profit, they wear their Chains with great Contentment; but to suppose
a People subject to none of these Grievances capable of a single Thought of
setting up for themselves, is branding them with a Disposition so foolish and
unaccountable as cannot well be conceived.

To show what may be saved to the Kingdom, as well as gained by its enlarged
Trade to the Northern Plantations, it is to my Purpose to observe, that the
Sugar-Colonies could not subsist without them: Most of the Materials for their
Buildings and Works, as well as Provisions, Cask for Spirits, Sugars, Molasses,
etc. come from thence, and that they constantly send the greatest Part of their
Effects home in New England built Ships, without which they would not be able
to bear the Duties paid in this Kingdom, by reason of the excessive Price of
Freights.

This, if rightly considered, will appear to be an Article of great Importance
in regard to the French West Indies. Mr. Ashley has very justly observed, That,
should Plantation built Ships be discouraged, Freight would be so dear, as to
lose the British Nation one of the greatest Advantages over its Rivals in
Trade, -- a low Freight; and from the great Traffic of the Kingdom, they must
be compelled to buy Materials for building of Ships, of Foreigners, with Cash,
instead of their own Manufactures, to the enriching of such Foreigners, and the
Discouragement of our American Colonies: That instead of prejudicing that
Branch of Business here, the refitting and finishing Plantation built Ships
often gives as much Advantage to the Shipwrights, as the building of new Ships.
The French take the Benefit of our Plantation built Ships to carry their Sugars
to Spain, and commonly pay them in the Produce of their own Islands, and have,
in this Instance, a very great Advantage of us. "That the saving a Shilling or
Eighteen-pence only per Hundred in the Article of Freight, would go near to
enable us to under-sell them at foreign Markets, if the Ships employed in the
Sugar Trade were indulged with the same Privileges, as those which are commonly
called Act Ships. That the flourishing State of the British Commerce, and the
Revenues arising therefrom, are, in no small Degree, owing to a low Freight,
occasioned chiefly from our building Ships so cheap in our American
Plantations. That since the French struggle so hard to gather Strength in
America, surely it is the true Interest of this Kingdom to do so too, and to
encourage its Northern, as well as its Southern Colonies, so that they may both
contribute to the Support and Benefit of their Mother Country. "The Northern
Colonies are a great Support to the Naval Power of Great Britain, and assist,
in a great Measure, in giving us a Superiority at Sea over all other Nations in
the World: They supply the King's Yards with great Quantities of Masts, Yards
and Bowsprits instead of those of foreign Growth, with Pitch, Tar and
Turpentine, for all which immense Quantities of Goods are exported from Great
Britain, which prevents five Times the Value thereof from going out of the
Kingdom in Cash to Sweden, and other foreign Countries.

All the Articles with which the British West Indies are supplied, require a
great Number of Artificers and laboring Men to fit them for Shipping; and they
are in such Demand, as to be the most considerable Branch of the New England
Trade, although the Price of every Article is so high, as greatly to affect the
Value and Increase of the West India Produce; but if the Price of Labor in the
Northern Colonies could be reduced fifty per Cent. the West India Islands would
receive all their Supplies so much cheaper as to be able, in thirty or forty
Years, to double their Remittances, and, consequently, the Duties paid on
Importation.

By enlarging the Trade, and increasing the Number of Inhabitants in the
Northern Colonies, their Demand and Abilities to pay for British Goods would be
proportionable.

But the Price of the several Commodities with which the Sugar-Colonies are
supplied, and those which are returned to England, is much higher than if the
Country was fuller of Inhabitants, the Want of which disables the Merchant from
shipping its Produce, but to his own Loss, unless he carefully attends to such
Articles as, by a Fluctuation peculiar to Trade, come to a better Market at one
time than another; but were the Price of Labor reduced, every Cargo he shipped
would stand charged at a lower Price, and he would be enabled to pay more for
his Goods in England as soon as they are purchased.

The Reduction of the Price of Freight from the West Indies, by increasing the
Number of Ships, is an Article of great Consequence to the Sugar Islands, in
which they cannot well be eased, but by Means of the Northern Colonies; for
their Consumption of British Manufactures is so inconsiderable, compared with
the Effects they send Home, that the Owners of Vessels here must fit them out
for the common Profit of Freights from there only; but the Merchants in
New England are constantly employed in building Ships for their Correspondents
in this Kingdom, which are full freighted from Boston to the West Indies, and
very often the Profit is equal to, and sometimes exceeds that of the Freight to
England, so that the Increase of Ships will not only oblige them to carry their
Freights cheaper, but will occasion a constant and large Supply of all the
North American Produce, by which they will be enabled to increase their Stock,
settle new Plantations, and, in a few Years, pay double the Duty here upon the
Produce of their own Islands, which is an Event that principally depends on the
Increase of Inhabitants in the Northern Colonies.

The easier to comprehend the Certainty of this Observation, it is necessary to
cast our Eyes a while on the French Sugar-Islands, whose Supplies have commonly
cost them thirty or forty per Cent. more than our own; notwithstanding which,
the Progress they have made since the last War, bids fair for supplying all
Europe with Sugars, and whenever they are furnished with the Produce of
North America, as cheap as our Islands, they will be able to undersell us at
all foreign Markets.

An Objection has often been made against promoting the Interest of the
Northern Colonies, on account of the inconsiderable Proportion they pay to the
public Revenue, notwithstanding it is pretty evident, that neither the Southern
Colonies, nor the West Indies would be able to pay any Duties at all, were it
not for the Supplies and Assistance of the former: But supposing this was not
the Case, and that the Northern Colonies yearly receive six hundred thousand
Pounds in British Manufactures, which are paid for in such Articles as are
consumed in England, and pay no Duty; on the other hand, the West India Islands
yearly receive the Value of four hundred thousand Pounds in British
Manufactures, and remit six hundred thousand Pounds Sterling in Sugars, etc.
that pay Duty here, this Kingdom gains more by the former than the latter; this
follows from the Duty's being paid finally by the Consumer; for were it taken
off, certainly the Price of Sugars would fall in proportion, and, consequently,
the whole Amount of the Duty would be saved by the Consumers; and was it to be
laid on the Produce of the Northern Colonies in the same Proportion, all the
Difference would consist in shifting the Payment from the Consumers of the
former to the Consumers of the latter, and yet the Subject pays it here in
either Case.

But what most nearly concerns the Interest of Great Britain is, the surprising
Progress the French have made, and are so intent in pursuing, by Means of their
Plantation-Trade; it is evident, that the Supplies of Provisions from Ireland,
and both Provisions and Lumber from New England, have been no inconsiderable
Means of their Growth; but to leave them both out of the Question, the French
are endeavoring, by all possible Means, to furnish themselves with these
Articles from their own Northern Colonies.

The English were, for some Time, possessed of the Seacoast of North America,
before the French had made any considerable Progress in it; they at first
settled on the North Side of the River St. Lawrence, and gradually extended
their Settlements from thence to the Mouth of Missisipi River, cultivating the
strictest Harmony with the Natives, by inter-Marriages, and proselyting them to
the Romish Faith, whereby they maintain a regular Correspondence through
several Lakes, and large Branches of those Rivers, for near eight hundred
Leagues, on the Back of all the English Colonies; this not only makes them
Masters of the Furr Trade, but will in Time put it in their Power to furnish
France and the West Indies with all Sorts of Naval Stores, Ships, Iron, Hemp,
Flax, and every thing else they are in Want of that is produced in North
America.

I am sensible those Parts of New France that lie in the most Northern
Latitudes, are not likely to produce many of those Articles; but as they claim
a Tract of Land of vast Extent, viz. from New Orleans on the South, to the
Latitude of sixty Degrees North, which is above six hundred Leagues; and in
Breadth from the Streights of Bellisle in Longitude fifty-seven West, to the
Lake De Bois, is not less than six hundred Leagues from East to West, every
thing is to be found in it that the English Colonies can boast of.

Thus the French have artfully extended their Lines within our Colonies, not
only with a Design to cut off our Communication, and trade with the Natives,
but to crowd such of them into the Sea, as are too weak to make a Resistance,
and, finally, to master the whole Continent.

This is not an Event that may seem practicable in an Age, but yet the
Continuance of the same Zeal and Care in promoting their Settlements for thirty
Years to come, which has so manifestly evinced itself for thirty Years past,
would render it no difficult Undertaking; besides, the ambitious Views of
France leave no room to doubt, but they will attempt what their Interest so
evidently calls for; it is beyond Dispute that their Proceedings on this Plan
will soon put it in their Power; the Possession of Nova Scotia only for twenty
Years in Peace or War, would be no inconsiderable Means of effecting it.

Should the British Colonies be neglected, or not equally countenanced with the
French, or to make it worse, should an unseasonable and groundless Jealousy be
the Means of checking their Growth, and discouraging their Settlements, whilst
the French are striving with all their Might to cherish theirs, and spare
neither Art, Labor nor Expense to make them considerable, surely no one can
doubt but the Event must prove fatal to us.

It is evident what Stress the French lay upon North America, from the immense
Sums they have expended to secure their Possessions, and to reduce ours to
their Obedience; the Charge of fortifying Louisburgh and Quebec, the Pensions
and Salaries yearly paid in Canada, the Loss attending Duke D'Anville's
fruitless Attempt on Nova Scotia and Cape Breton, and the great additional One
of their Fleet the last Year, must amount to an immense Sum; one tenth Part of
which expended in the settling of Nova Scotia, would be productive of such
Advantages in the Increase of the most valuable Brances of Trade, as would
exceed the whole Expense the French have been at in promoting and securing
their Colonies.

The Whale-Fishery, which is now totally neglected, might be rendered very
profitable if properly attended to; how this Nation should have discontinued it
so long is difficult to account for, but it may be observed since the Merchants
here decline it, that the Manner of fitting Vessels, Boats, Craft, and killing
the Fish, in practice amongst the New-England-Men, exceeds that of any People
in Europe, makes their Successes more certain and their Voyages less expensive,
but the Want of Seamen prevents their prosecuting of it to Advantage; by
transferring this Business from the Dutch to the Colonies, they might not only
supply Great Britain with Bone and Oil for home Consumption, but with large
Quantities for Exportation, and increase the Demand for British Manufactures.

After having thus lightly touched upon these Points, I presume it will be
agreeable to give a brief Description of the Northern Colonies, more
particularly of those Parts which are most commodious for new Settlements.

NEW ENGLAND is bounded by New York on the West, New France on the North West,
Nova Scotia on the North-East, and the main Ocean on the East and South,
extending about one hundred and twenty Leagues from South to North, and eighty
Leagues in Breadth from East to West; these Limits comprehend four different
Governments, viz. the Provinces of the Massachusetts Bay, and New Hampshire,
the Colonies of Connecticut, and Rhode Island; the Province of the Massachusetts
being much the largest, contains several Districts of Territory, as the late
Colonies of the Massachusetts and New Plymouth, the Province of Main, the
Country called Sagadehoc and King's County, being all the Lands between the
Province of Main, and the River St. Croix, which is the western Boundary of
Nova Scotia; New Hampshire is a small Province, having little more than twenty
Miles of Sea Coast, and spreads its Jurisdiction, by a late Resolution of his
Majesty in Council, on the Back of the Massachusetts Province, as far as the
English Claim extends between that Province and the Province of Main;
Connecticut, being about twenty Leagues square, is bounded by the Sea on the
South, New York on the West, the Massachusetts on the North, and Rhode Island on
the East; Rhode Island being the smallest of the four in Extent, is bounded
southerly by the Sea, and is surrounded by the Massachusetts and Connecticut on
its other Sides.

NOVASCOTIA extends from North to South about one hundred and twenty Leagues,
and from East to West about one hundred, comprehending all the Land between
Cape Sable and Canso on the South East, and the River of St Lawrence on the
North-West; and besides its being equally commodious with Newfoundland for the
Fishery, its Harbors are so numerous and fine, as not to be exceeded in any
Part of the World. It abounds with Salmon, Trout, Eels, and several other Sorts
of fresh water Fish, a great Plenty of wild Fowl of different Sorts, its Woods
are stocked with Deer, Rabbits, and an uncommon Variety of furred Animals: Its
Soil is very fertile, produing all Kinds of Grain and Provisions: The Country
is covered with Ash, Beech, Elm, Firs, Maple, Cedar, and Pines fit for Naval
Uses, and abounds with Lime-Stones and fine Quarries for building.

CAPE BRETON lying a little to the Eastward of this Tract, is neither so
fertile, nor so capable of Improvement, as it is both rocky, cold and barren,
abounding neither with Furrs, nor Timber for building of Ships, its principal,
if not only Advantages consisting in its Situation, Harbors, which are in the
Center of all the Fishing-Banks on the North American Coasts.

The Island of NEWFOUNDLAND lies between the 46th and 52d Degree of North
Latitude, and is about three hundred Miles in Length, and near as broad, is
surrounded with Fishing Banks, and many fine Harbors, is very commodious for
the Fishery, having every Convenience for promoting it, and by its Situation,
being the most easterly Part of North America, has the Advantage of all other
Parts, on account of its Nearness to the European Markets, but it is not likely
to admit of any great Improvements, the Climate being too cold, and the Soil
but indifferent.

As there is very little Difference in the Temperature of the Air, in the
several Parts of New England, so its several Products, and Aptness for
different Improvements, vary but in a few Particulars, the Southermost being
most natural for Corn, and the Northern for grazing, and afford a much greater
Plenty of Timber and Fish.

The West India Islands are furnished from hence with Horses, and several Kinds
of live Stock; Flower, Bread, Pease, salted Beef, Pork, Codfish, Mackrel,
Herrings, Cider, Butter, Onlons, Oil, Turpentine. Ships, Timber, Plank, Boards,
Masts and Yards, Bricks, Shingles, Staves and Hoops; the Southern Colonies with
Rum, Ships, Deal-Boards, Bricks and European Goods; Newfoundland with Rum,
Molosses, imported Salt for the Fishery, and all Sorts of Provisions; Great
Britain and the rest of Europe with Codfish, Ships, Train Oil, Whalebone, Deer
skins, Peltry, Staves, Masts and Yards, Pitch, Tar, Turpentine, raw Hides,
Beeswax, and Bayberry Wax, the Profit of all which several Branches of
Business finally center in this Kingdom.

In these Colonies, the Lands which are already cleared of Timber, and improved
for Tillage and Pasture, are very far from yielding such Profit to the Owner,
as they are capable of, for Want of Manuring, and being properly subdivided
into smaller Allotments, which the great Price of Labor now makes
impracticable; but as Nature has furnished the Country with several Sorts of
Marle and Sea Ware, whenever the Farmer has been able to enrich the Soil with
them, the Produce of his Lands has paid his Expense, and greatly raised their
Value, yet by Reason of the Scarcity of Laborers, very few can bear the Charge
of so necessary a Cultivation; but by increasing their Number, the Country may
soon be enabled to do it, and consequently to supply the West India Islands at
a much cheaper Rate than they can now.

A Number of Inhabitants settled on the uncultivated Lands in Nova Scotia,
would not be able to furnish themselves with Provisions for the first Year, but
as the Country is full of fine Harbors, Lakes and Rivers, the Lands are
covered (as was before observed) with Timber, and the Seacoast plentifully
stocked with Fish and wild Fowl, it will soon be in their power to support
themselves The French King has commonly defrayed the Charge of transporting his
Subjects to America, and maintaining them a Year after their Arrival; and the
Interest of this Kingdom never called for a more necessary Expense, than that
of felling this Province with Protestants.
.

It will be of great Consequence to the first Settlers in this Country, that in
clearing and subduing their Lands, they will be paid for their Labor by
converting the Produce into Ship-Timber, Planks, Masts, Deal-Boards, Shingles,
Staves and Hoops, all which may be carried from their Plantations to Market, by
Vessels that will supply them with Horses, Cattle, Swine, and other
Necessaries, to stock their improved Lands.

With these Advantages, it is easy to foresee how soon it is practible to bring
forward new Settlements in a Country which is so well furnished with Supplies,
and is so near Boston, a Market that will always take off their Produce, and
enable them to raise their Provisions, to build their Houses, and stock their
Plantations, and in a few Years to export many valuable Commodities in Vessels
of their own, whilst they are promoting the Trade of their Country.

From what has been said it will appear, that if New England and Nova Scotia
were fully inhabited, and the Lands brought under Improvement, they would be
able to furnish the West Indies with Provisions, and other Supples in larger
Quantities, than they are capable of exporting now, and their Remittances to
England would not only become more considerable, but cheaper to the Merchant,
by reducing the Price of Labor.

The Advantages that may arise to this Kingdom from several other Improvements
in the Northern Colonies, when they are fully inhabited, is worthy of a
particular Attention; the Country is every where very apt to produce the very
best of Flax, and in many Places is natural for Hemp, both which are Articles
of very great Consequence to this Kingdom, as the Manufucture of Linen Cloth
within it, bears but a small Proportion to its Consumption. It would soon
become very considerable, and lessen the great Importation of Linnens from
Germany, Holland, etc. and the last brought home to be wought up into Cordage
and Canvas.

The great Plenty of Iron Ore in many Parts of the Country, will enable them
not only to supply this Kingdom with vast Quantities of Pig Iron, but Iron in
Bars, cheaper and equal in Goodness to the best Spanish or Swede's Iron, which
last, according to a late Calculation, draws above two hundred thousand Pounds
yearly from the Kingdom in Money, and it is well known that if Labor was
reduced a quarter Part in New England, they could furnish a Quantity equal in
Value to that Sum cheaper than it is now imported, and receive their Returns in
British Goods.

And lastly, it will enable them to secure the Cod-fishery to this Kingdom, by
making it more beneficial and extensive than it ever has been, as the Proceeds
of their Voyages will be remitted to England in Cash, and the Demand for fresh
Supplies of its Commodities will be increased, and its finest Nursery for
Seamen enlarged.

There is one Article which has excited the Jealousy of this Nation more than
all the Improvements the Colonies are capable of prosecuting, and that is, the
raising of Wool, and as this has never been properly represented, I conclude it
may be acceptable now; the Inhabitants of New England and New York are supposed
to consume one with another thirty Shillings Sterling yearly in British
Manufactures, two Thirds of which consist of Woollens, and according to Mr.
London's Pamphlet, in proportion to their Numbers is equal to the Consumption
within this Kingdom; It will appear from his Calculations, that five hundred
thousand Packs of Wool weighing two hundred and forty Pounds Weight each, are
yearly wrought up in Great Britain, amounting to twenty-one Millions, of which
more than one half being exported, the Number of Inhabitans, at twenty
Shillings each Person, exceeds the Value of the Remainder; This may be easily
demonstrated, by comparing the Number of People in these Colonies, amounting to
four hundred thousand, to the Value of their British Importations, which is
above six hundred thousand Pounds yearly, from whence it follows, that they
annually consume more Woollen Clothes than an equal Number of Inhabitants in
this Kingdom; but as they are known to raise Wool in New England, it will be a
Question, what becomes of it? to which it may be answered, that the Winter
Season being commonly longer, and severer than it is here, the Inhabitants
require more Clothes in proportion, which may be estimated at a sixth Part;
besides their usual Employments being very different from those of sedentary
Artificers, and indoors Manufacturers, may well be supposed to enlarge their
Consumption.

It will appear from the foregoing Computation, that these Colonies produce
about two thousand Packs of Wool annually, which is four hundred and ninety
nine less in Proportion to the Inhabitants, than grows in Great Britain. This
Account may the more easily be credited, by comparing it with the Number of
Sheep slaughtered in the Course of each Year, observing, that as they are
small, their Fleeces do not weigh above two Pounds one with another. But it may
serve more effectually to remove all Apprehensions of the Colonies being ever
able to prejudice this Nation in the Woollen Manufacture, to observe, that
their Sheep are not only liable to various Distempers, but are short-lived, and
their Wool is of a very coarse Staple; for when the Winters from Year to Year
admit of little or no Variation, they are frequently subject to a cutaneous
Disorder, which being renewed with every Spring, causes an Itching that seldom
leaves them till they wear off their Fleeces by frequently rubbing themselves
against every thing that presents itself to View, and when the Weather proves
dry, and hotter than common, they tear their Skins as well as Coats, and are
soon Fly-blown, rotten, and destroyed; this has often proved so contagious as
to end in the Destruction of half the Sheep in the Country; and when the Winter
has been longer than usual, it is a great Doubt whether their Losses don't
exceed their Increase; for it has twice happened within twenty Years, that a
third Part of all their Stock has been carried off by the extreme Severity of
the Weather.

It is uncommon to eat any Mutton in the Country of more than three Years
Growth, from whence it follows, that instead of slaughtering one fifth of their
Stock yearly, as is computed to be the Case here, they consume a third Part,
and their Fleeces falling short one half in Weight, they must necessarily raise
four times the Number of Sheep to produce an equal Quantity of Wool; but the
Coarsness of its Staple, which exceeds that of French Wool, puts it out of
their Power to fabricate fine Clothes; and its Shortness renders it of little
Use but to be wrought into Stockings, and an ordinary Cloth which is more
expensive, and less durable, than a much finer imported from hence.

It is evident from the preceding Account, that it is the Profit of their
Mutton, rather than their Fleeces, that induces them to raise any Sheep at all:
Whenever their Lands have been enriched by Manuring, they find that the raising
of Beef, Pork and Corn, which are Articles of Exportation, as well as Home
Consumption, is of greater Advantage; for the whole Business of Husbandry and
heavy Carriages being performed by Oxen, instead of Horses, the former are
doubly useful, and after a long Course of Servitude, by two Years Idleness and
fattening, produce Beef that would credit the Stalls in Leaden Hall Market.

The Increase of Inhabitants in these Colonies will then appear so far from
being injurious to the Woollen Manufactury here, that it will contribute more to
promote it, supplying an equal Number of People in any other Part of the
British Dominions; but if it should ever be otherways, it will proceed from
Necessity, rather than Choice; for if they are properly encouraged in raising
of Hemp, Flax, Iron, and other rough Materials by a suitable Bounty, and in
those Branches of Trade and Navigation which are not prejudicial to the general
Interest of the Kingdom, their Advantages would be infinitely greater, and
their Labor less, than if they prosecuted the Woollen Manufactury: But if on
the contrary, these several Articles are totally neglected, they will be
rendered incapable of making Remittances sufficient to pay for British Clothes,
and must of Course manufacture the best they can for themselves.

The general Advantages that will arise from fortifying and settling Nova
Scotia, are to be considered as they regard the Views of France, as well as
Great Britain.

The French have artfully labored to make the most of the Nova Scotians, ever
since their Subjection to the British Crown; they have not only secured to them
the Enjoyment of their Religion and Estates, but take care to furnish them with
Priests, who teach them to believe from their Infancy, that they are the
Subjects of France, and they have always been equally useful to them; before
the present War, they not only supplied the French at Louisburg with
Provisions, but with Wives, and were very serviceable to them in their Fishery,
in piloting their Vessels, and assisting them in their Fortifications; and
since its Reduction, have all contributed to support, and many of them have
actually joined a Body of French and Indians, in order, if possible, to get
Possession of Annapolis Royal.

The Zeal and Attachment of these Nova Scotians to the Romish Faith, will
always prevent the Settlement of Protestants in the Country, unless it be done
in compact Bodies, and under the Cover of Fortifications; but till this is
accomplished, it can no more be said that the Province belongs to the Crown of
Great Britain, because it is possessed of Annapolis Royal, than of the Kingdom
of Spain, from our Possession of Gibralter.

It is therefore absolutely necessary for the Safety and Interest of the
Northern Colonies, that some speedy, and effectual Measures are taken, to put
these Nova Scotians on a different Footing, or to remove them; the last cannot
well be done, and the first in nothing better than by encouraging a
considerable Number of foreign Protestants, and others, to settle amondst them.

This will not only be of immediate Service, but in a few Years will produce
various good Effects, as the Country abounds with Pines and Firs, it will be
capable of supplying this Kingdom with the finest Deal-Boards and Timber of all
Kinds, in Vessels of its own, which are now imported from Norway, the Baltic,
etc. in foreign Bottoms, and drains the Nation of immense Sums of Money; this
is not only practicable on the first Settlement of the Country, but in the
Course of a few Years will become a steady and useful Branch of Business: But
if none of these good Consequences ensue, yet settling the Province with
Protestants is of the greatest Importance, as the French will otherwise
continue to cherish the present Inhabitants, till they exceed the Number, and
are of more Consequence than those of Canada, and it requires no long Time to
effect this, in a Country whose Inhabitants are not only very healthful, but
very prolific; it must surely be deemed impolitic then to suffer such a Colony
of French Bigots to be reared up under the kindly Influences of a British
Administration, to cut our own People's Throats whenever the Priest shall
consecrate the Knife; notwithstanding they hardly know the Name of a Tax or
Duty, their Quit-Rent being but a Trifle, and those who are at a great Distance
from Annapolis, have seldom paid any; in the mean time, they have on all
Occasions manifested a Contempt of the British Government when they could do it
with Impunity, or were too remote from that Garrison to send their Resentment.

It therefore highly concerns this Kingdom, that some seasonable Steps be taken
to prevent their future Growth, and Defection; but it is very difficult to
attempt, and almost impossible to effect their Removal, without Bloodshed, and
if they were dispossessed, they would be a very great additional Strength to
Canada and Cape Breton, as we could not prevent their settling in those Places.

It seems then more eligible to continue them in the Country, to permit them to
hold such Lands as are under actual Improvement, and to which they can make out
a clear Title, for it is beyond Dispute but they claim much larger Tracts than
they have any Right to.

Their Estates are held by Patent from the French King, for which they pay a
very small Acknowledgment, their Right was reserved to them by the Articles of
Capitulation at the Reduction of Annapolis, and was finally ratified by the
Treaty of Utrecht; but as no civil Government has ever been established there,
they have no more to do with their new Masters than to pay their Quit-Rent,
which in the whole Province does not amount to forty Pounds a Year.

When the Form of Government was established, which is now exercised there, the
Instructions to the Governor and Council were copied from those of Virginia,
whereby the Power of granting Lands is vested in them, and is restricted to
such Conditions, as have hitherto proved a great Discouragement to his
Majesty's Subjects; for the Patentee is not only obliged to pay a Penny
Sterling per Acre for the whole, but is subject to a Penny more whenever the
Government shall demand it, and unless he has built a House, and brought Part
of his Lands under Improvement within three Years from the Date of his Grant,
he forfeits his Title: This attended with the constant Obstructions which both
the French It has always been found impracticable to settle here, without
entering into a Contest with the French, who either have a real, or trump up an
imaginary Title to the same Spot; and if that fails, the Indians are sure to
challenge the Property as Lords of the who'e. And indeed it is difficult to
determine what Right the present Inhabitants have, or how extensive it is,
without a special Enquiry and Survey.
, and Indians have made in Prejudice to any Protestant Settlements, when
compared with the easy Terms on which Lands are granted in other Parts of North
America, evidently accounts for the present Situation of the Province.

Since it is apparently for the public Interest, that the growing State of
these Nova Scotians should be checked, that they should either be rendered
useful, or prevented from becoming dangerous to the other Colonies, it cannot
more effectually be done, than by erecting such Fortifications, as will keep
their most populous Towns in Subjection, and at the same time serve as a
Protection to the proposed Settlements in the Province; a more particular
Description of which seems necessary in order to carry so useful a Design into
Execution.

ABOUT seventeen Leagues North from Cape Sable, the Entrance of the Bay of
Fundy commences, where it is about twenty Leagues wide, and extending near
forty Leagues, divides itself into two Branches, one of which terminates in
several Rivers, that discharge themselves into Minas Bay, and the other running
more Northerly to Chignecto, forms an Isthmus of that Name between this Branch
and the Bay of Vert, which empties itself into the Gulf of St. Lawrence.

Twelve Leagues from the aforesaid Entrance on the South Side of the Bay, lies
the Gut of Annapolis, which is about three Quarters of a Mile wide, and a Mile
and an half long, on each Side of which the Land is very mountainous and rocky;
the Tides are so impetuous, as often to render this a dangerous Passage for
large Vessels, but when they are once in, a most delightful Harbor presents
itself to View, called the Basin of Annapolis, from the gradual Declivity of
the Lands surrounding it, being about three Leagues in Length from North East
to South West, and two in Width, with safe and commodious Anchorage in most
Parts of it for all the Ships in England, on its South Side are two small
Rivers of little Consequence, and the Land is mountainous and rocky; on the
North-East Side a little Island forms the Entrance of Annapolis' River, which
continues navigable for large Vessels on that Course about ten Leagues.

At the Month of this River are several small French Villages, from whence it is
about two short Leagues to Annapolis Royal, which stands upon a Point of Land,
formed by this and another small River that ranges about South East: The
Situation of this Fortress being elevated sixty or seventy Feet above the Level
of the River, and standing on its Bank, renders an Attack from Ships almost
impracticable, for the Strength of the Tides makes it very difficult for them
to moor, unless it be in the Eddy or Counter-tide, which brings them too near
the Shore to do any Execution.

As it is situate on a Level with the Campain, there is nothing to prevent the
regular Approaches of an Enemy on two Sides of the Garrison; it is mounted with
a about forty Cannon on four Bastions, and has a Battery to command the River;
its Ramparts are of Earth, covered with large Stocks of Timber toward the
Fosse; and it might make a good Defense, were its Powder Magazine Bomb proof,
which is doubted; and as several of the other Magazines and Barracks are built
of Timber, its Garrison might easily be burnt out: It Is defended by about one
hundred and thirty Men, exclusive of the New England Auxiliaries, who, in the
Course of two or three Years, have, in a manner, rebuilt the Fort, under the
Direction of the Engineer Mr. Cowley.
. Upon both Sides of this River, several pleasant Villages are scattered for
thirty Miles, containing about three hundred Families, who being awed by the
Garrison are the most, if not the only tractable Inhabitants in the Province.

On the South East Side of the Bay of Fundy about thirty Leagues from the
Entrance of Annapolis, is the Bay of Minas, a Name derived from the Report of
some valuable Mines having been discovered in its Neighborhood, being twelve
Leagues long, and about three in Width, into which the Rivers Canard, Caobegat,
Pisegat, and some others discharge themselves.

On the other Branch, and at the Head of the Bay, are several Villages, and
about three Leagues up a narrow and deep River stands the Town of Chignecto, or
Chignectico, a Corruption, as it is said from Le Chignon du Col; here are about
two hundred Families, the Country is very healthy and pleasant, surrounded with
fine Meadows, which on its West Side are more extensive than any thing of the
Kind in this Part of the World, and abounds with Rivers, that at High water are
navigable for large Vessels; to the Northward of this Place, runs the most
rapid, and the longest Branch of the Bay of Fundy, about North North East into
the main Land which the French now call Gaspasia, on which are some small
Villages, but by reason of the Badness of its Navigation, they are very little
known; on the North Side of the Bay, about eight Leagues below Chignecto, and
upon a navigable River, lies a Village called Chipotee, containing about sixty
or seventy Families; from whence for near forty Leagues, the North Shore
affords neither Harbor nor River that is navigable for large Vessels, the Sea
Coast being very mountainous, and skirted with Rocks and Precipices, affords a
disagreeable Prospect to Navigators. North from the Entry of Annapolis lies the
fine River of St. John, with a capacious Road for Ships at its Entrance; on the
North Side of which is a narrow Straight, not a Pistol Shot over, through which
there is no passing but at the Top of the Tide, when the Water is upon a Level,
at other Times the Fall is so considerable, especially at low Water, as to make
a Descent of near thirty Feet, being lined on both Sides by a solid Rock, and
having more than forty Fathom of Water in its Middle; this River spreads itself
about half a Mile in Width, and with a gentle Current toward its Outlet admits
of a delightful Navigation for large Ships fifty or sixty Miles into the
Country, and much farther for small Vessels; from its several Branches the
Indians traverse this Part of the Continent, by transporting their Canoes by
Land across some short Spaces, called by them Carrying Places: Here are no more
than three or four French Families, the Forces from New England having
destroyed all their Settlements in the last War, most of the Inhabitants
removed to the other Side of the Bay; a few Leagues further Westward are
several fine Harbors, amongst which is Harbor l'Etang, so called from its
Resemblance of a Pond, as it is surrounded with Highlands, its Entry being
deep, narrow, and free from Danger, and its Surface always unruffled; this is
near the River St. Croix, the Western Boundary of the Province, from whence to
New Hampshire, the Sea Coast is covered with Islands that almost form a
continued Harbor for near two hundred Miles.

From the Entrance into the Bay of Fundy to Cape Sable, there are several fine
Rivers and Harbors, and two small Villages; from Cape Sable, so called from
the Sand Banks on its Shore, to Canso, the Islands and Harbors are so numerous
as not to admit of either Description or naming, the most considerable of which
are Chebucto, Malegash, Port Rossignol, Port Mutton, Port le Have, Port Rozoir,
Liscombes Harbor, etc. and Canso, which at present serve only as a Retreat to
fishing Vessels, and others in bad Weather, or to wood and water; a few
straggling Savages, who shift their Habitations as the Seasons for Fishing and
Hunting vary, are the only Inhabitants on this extensive Coast, except a French
Settlement at Malegash.

From Canso, a navigable Straight, called from it the Gut of Canso, severs the
Island of Cape Breton from the Continent, and leads into the Bay of St.
Lawrence, on the South-West Side of which is Tatamagauche a very good Harbor,
where the French formerly received their Supplies of Cattle and Provisions from
the Nova Scotians for Louisbourg, and it is one of the safest and shortest
Communications they can have with these Inhabitants; from hence about ten
Leagues North-West, lies the Bay of Vert beforementioned, on which, and all
the Eastern Side of the Province, as far as the Mouth of Canada River, lie a
great Variety of fine Rivers and Harbors very little known to us, as no Person
has ever been employed by the Government to attempt a particular Discovery of
them.

From this Description of the Country, several Places will appear necessary to
be fortified, of which I shall endeavor to point out the most convenient, as
well as those which are most commodious for bringing forward the proposed
Settlements.

Canso and Chebucto on the Seacoast of this Province, naturally present
themselves first to Consideration; the former from its having been a long Time
improved in the Fishery, and having once had a wooden Blockhouse, and a small
Detachment of Troops for its Protection, and the latter for its spacious and
fine Harbor, and having been the Rendezvous of Duke D'Anville's Squadron.

Canso is conveniently situated for the God Fishery, but claims the Preference
to the other on no account but its having been already improved, and probably
sooner known; But this last greatly exceeds the former in several Respects,
viz. its Situation, its Harbor, and Aptness for Agriculture.

Its Situation is such, that it has a short and easy Communication by Land with
all the Settlements on the Bay of Fundy, is equally commodious for the Fishery
with Canso, and is more in the Way of all Ships passing to and from Europe to
New England that may occasionally, or by Stress of Weather seek a Port for
Shelter, or Relief.

Its Harbor gives place to none in the World, and by its natural Form, and an
Island at its Entrance, is capable of being well defended by a regular
Fortification.

Its Soil exceeds that of Canso, and by the Vicinity of several fine Harbors,
will afford great Conveniences to the first Inhabitants; these several
Advantages it boasts beyond any other Place on this Side of the Country;
whereas Canso, though possessed for thirty-five Years, could show no
Improvements but on some small Islands, which produced little more than a few
Kitchen Gardens; its Harbor is complained of as not well defended from hard
Gales of Wind, has a very rocky and difficult Entrance, and the Communication
from hence to the Inland Parts of the Province is through Chebucto, or
Tatamagouche. This last Place seems also to claim some Share of Attention, and
may probably upon a critical Survey, be found suitable for a Settlement, and to
merit such a Fortification as may cut off all future Supplies to Louisbourg by
this Channel.

Leaving this Side, and the Sea Coast of the Province, I shall return to the
Bay of Fundy again, where the Soil, and Manner of improving Lands differs from
all other Parts of North America, and where two or three different Fortresses
will be necessary to awe the French and Indians, and to protect the proposed
Settlements from their Insults.

In all Parts of this Bay the Rivers are of great Length, and very numerous;
the Ebbing and Flowing of the Tides is from four Fathom at the Entrance, to ten
or eleven at the Head of its longest Branches; between their Banks, and the
Verge of the Upland, are fine and large Tracts of Salt Marsh, in many Places
extending themselves on a Plain for thirty or forty Miles without Interruption:
In the Bays of Minas, Chegnecto, and their several Branches, are Millions of
Acres that were never yet improved; the French, in order to save themselves the
Labor of subduing the Lands that are covered with Forest Wood, and
interspersed with Morasses, have surrounded part of these Marshes with Dykes
This Term by Custom is applicable to the Bank as well as the Ditch, and is
always used for both in Nova Scotia.
, without which they would often be flowed at high Water, and always by Spring
Tides; they are afterward ploughed up, and in three Years produce all Kinds of
Grain, and when fallow'd run into fine Grass. This Land, by Reason of its
natural Richness, requires very little manuring, and is not only easy of
Tillage, but affords a beautiful Prospect; their Gardens, with some Patches for
particular Uses, being all the Upland they have under Improvement.

It is obvious from this Account, which is far from being exaggerated, that no
Country is better calculated to yield an early Support to its infant Colonies,
with more Certainty and less Labor, and affording them, in the mean time, a
comfortable Subsistence.

The Highlands which commonly lie near the Sea Coast, and the Sides of the Bay
of Fundy, are rocky, and covered chiefly with Firs, but produce Plenty of Grass
when brought under Cultivation; the level Country is covered with several other
Kinds of Wood useful in Building, and when subdued and fitted for Tillage,
discovers a fine rich Mold, producing all Things in Perfection that are natural
to the Climate; and this will serve for a general Description of the Province,
for although some Parts of the Cape Sable and Canso Shores are rocky, and unfit
for Tillage, they are intermixed with valuable Tracts of low Lands, navigable
Rivers, and a great Number of Islands, where Fish may be taken all the Year
round, as the Harbors are seldom obstructed with Ice.

On the North Side of this Bay, St. John's River seems to be the fittest Place
for making a Settlement, and erecting a Fortress; about fifty Miles from its
Entrance, the most judicious and considerable, though not the most numerous Tribe
of Indians on this Part of the Continent are settled, and in the last War had a
slight Fortification erected by the French for their Defense.

Here the Land is fertile, and lies nearly on a Level very far into the
Country, having a gradual Declivity only toward the River, that serves to
direct the Course of several large Branches into its Sides.

By the Information of the Natives, the inland Parts of this Country are
capable of the finest Improvements, and although here is but a very little
Marsh-Land, the Goodness of the Soil makes ample Amends for the Want of it, and
here are no Claims of any Significancy to prevent the Settlement of it.

In order to show what Places within the Bay of Fundy are most proper to be
fortified, I shall begin with this, as it is not only a very valuable Country,
but is commodiously situated for the Fishery; from hence the direct Intercourse
with Canada is maintained through the Country, and continued across the Bay to
Minas and Annapolis, from which Places it is not more than twenty Leagues
distant.

Within, and very near the beforementioned Straight, the Land seems
conveniently elevated for erecting a Fortress that will command the Entrance,
and in time of War, a Boom Chain would effectually secure the Passage; this
Place might not only serve to protect Ships in the Road below, but would be a
sufficient Defense to a new Settlement, and if properly garrisoned, might cut
off the Correspondence between Quebec and the Nova Scotians.

The Indians of the St. John's Tribe might on this Occasion attempt to
interrupt a Settlement, but as they are in a State of Hostility with us, and by
the Treaty of Utrecht their Lands were given up by the French to this Crown, no
Peace ought to be concluded with them but upon our own Terms, for they were
actually the Aggressors, by joining the Enemy in the Siege of Annapolis,
contrary to several Treaties they formerly entered into with the Province of
the Massachusetts Bay.

From this Place to Chignecto, the Country has but two or three Harbors, and
the Sea Coast being very mountainous, and but little known, I can only assert
what the Natives say of it, that the inland Parts are fertile.

Chignecto forming the Peninfula, which the French call Accadie, is commonly
mentioned as a necessary Place to be fortified, in order to cut off the
Communication with Canada in time of War, the Isthmus not being here above two
Leagues wide: The foregoing Reason would have more weight, if the French
transported any Baggage or Train with them on these Occasions, but that is not
practicable, and therefore they commonly cross the Rivers below in Canoes with
their small Arms and Ammunition, their larger Stores being landed out of
Vessels from Canada at Tetamagauche. Several Places here seem well situated for
erecting a Fortress, upon one of which, an Eminence surrounded with Marsh, and
commanding both the River and the Town, appears to be the most eligible for
that Purpose It is well known that many of the Inhabitants of this Place have
actually bore Arms in Conjunction with the French and Indians, and were
concluded to be with them when they attacked the Auxiliary Troops at Minas in
the Winter 1746. Mons. Jonquier who commanded the French Fleet at Chebuct^
after D'Anville's Death, furnished all Persons in the Province who were fit for
Service, with Arms and Ammunition to assist him in the Reduction of Louisbourg.
. From this Place by Land to Caobegat on the Bay of Minas it is near twenty
Leagues, and from thence to the Town of that Name it is near twenty more.

MINAS being the principal Place in the Province, and the Center of all its
Settlements, requires a more particular Description.

It is composed of a Number of Villages and Farmhouses, extending six or eight
Miles in Length, and including some Towns a little more remote, contains about
a thousand Families; I don't mean so many Housekeepers, but such as would be
thus denominated among the English, for here it is customary when one of a
Family marries, to enlarge the Mansion House, and by the Addition of new
Apartments, they make Room for the expected Progeny; from this Practice it is
common to find three or four Generations under one Roof; it is computed that
they amount to about seven thousand People, and were the Inhabitants
industrious they might produce immense Quantities of Corn; the Soil of their
Marshes having been always subject to the periodical Overflowing of the Spring
Tides, is composed of the Fat and Slime that has been washed from the inland,
and mountainous Parts of the Country, by Rains, and the melting of Snow for
Ages past, and on that Account admits of a long Improvement without any
Manuring.

Whenever it happens that any of their Dykes are casually broke down, the
Overflowing of the Tide renders the Marsh incapable of bearing any Corn for
three Years, but afterward, by Means of the new Recruit of Salts, which are
incorporated with the Mold, the Soil is renewed, and produces as fine Crops as
ever; thus Nature seems by Accident to have pointed out a Process, whereby its
Fertility is restored without any Expense to the Owner: These Lands, after some
Years Improvement, produce several Kinds of Grass, and serve all the several
Uses of Husbandry.

The Inhabitants make a joint Business of Dyking in several large Tracts, which
serve first as common Fields, and being afterward sub-divided into smaller
Allotments are capable of the various Improvements beforementioned: Their
Dykes are made of large Sods of Marsh cut up in square Pieces, and raised about
five Feet higher than the common Surface, of a competent Thickness to withstand
the Force of the Tides, and soon grow very firm and durable, being overspread
with Grass, and have commonly Foot-paths on their Summit, which are both
convenient and delightful.

On the different Branches of Minas Bay are scattered several other Towns and
Villages, whose Inhabitants pursue the same Methods of improving their Lands.

There is one Thing peculiar to these People which has secured their Allegiance
during the present War, that is, the Dread of having their Dykes cut down, and
their Estates by that Means ruined by the English: this Practice they felt the
severe Effects of about forty Years ago, when their Lands were thus exposed by
the New England Forces, the Remembrance of which is pretty strongly impressed
on the old Inhabitants, and has had a very good Effect on their Posterity.

Minas is so situated, as to have a short and easy Communication with the
extreme Parts of the Province, being within a Days March of Chebucto, on the
South Shore, and not much farther by Land from Annapolis, is about thirty
Leagues by Water from St. John's River, and is not much farther from
Tetamagauche.

From this Account of the Country and its Inhabitants, it appears that Minas is
not only the most considerable Part of it, but is most properly situated for a
Metropolis, and consequently requires a strong Fortress for its Security;
several Places have been proposed in and near the Town for this Purpose, upon
one of which stands the Stonehouse which is Proof against small Arms; this is
built on an Eminence that commands great Part of the Town, but being overlooked
by high Land on three Sides, would be greatly exposed in case of an Attack:
There is another Eminence that stands by the River Gaspero to the Eastward of
the Town, which is subject to the like Inconvenience; but the most proper
Place, if not one of the finest in the World, on account of its natural
Situation, is an Island of Upland about a Quarter of a Mile long, that commands
the Mouth of the River, is surrounded with salt Marshes, and has no firm Land
within a Mile of it.

The Substance of these Marshes is so spongy and porous below the Level of the
common Tides, as that it is impossible to open Trenches, but they will be
directly filled with Water, and as they are commonly flowed at the Full and
Change without the Dykes, it will appear impracticable to make a regular Attack
against it by Land, or to proceed by sapping or mining, and it is equally so
from Ships, unless it be attempted at high Water, and this must be done in a
very short Time on account of the Rapidity of the Tide, which on such an
Occasion would be equally hazardous to them as the Opposition of a strong
Garrison.

This Island commands the Prospect of Minas Bay, so that no Vessel can come in
or go out undiscovered, and if it is regularly fortified, might be defended by
two hundred Men against the whole Force of Canada and the Nova Scotians.

If this Plan be approved of, it is very easy to make an open Road from hence to
Chebucto for all Sorts of Carriages, it not being above forty Miles through the
Country, and erecting a wooden Blockhouse midway, that is Proof against small
Arms, might serve as a Place of Security to Travelers, and deter the Savages
from interrupting the new Settlements.

It will be also requisite to fortify the Country immediately, that being a
preparatory Step which requires some time to execute, and will be found
necessary to precede the proposed Settlements, whose Neighborhood will
naturally raise a Jealousy among the French and Indians, that may create a
great deal of Trouble, and retard the designed Progress.

To prevent the latter from being troublesome, the Governor and Council should
be directed to take Hostages of them to secure the Performance of such Treaties
as shall be entered into; for unless some salutary Precautions of this Kind are
used, it is much better to continue the War till they are wholly extirpated;
it is evident that for many Years the Indians did as much Mischief in
New England during a Peace as in Time of War, which has proceeded from the
Instigations of the Romish Missionaries amongst them, and the Want of Power in
the English, to pursue and punish them in their wild Retreats. It is expedient
that a direct Enquiry should be made into the Claims and Titles of these
Inhabitants, that their Boundaries may be fixed; and to prevent future
Contentions, all the Lands that are in the Disposal of the Crown should be
surveyed, and the Nature of their Soil, and different Qualities for Improvement
enquired into; that a Report be made to his Majesty, of the most commodious
Places on navigable Rivers, and the Sea Coasts, for settling of Townships, for
the Convenience of the Cod Fishery, and the Prosecution of Agriculture.

The Settlement of this Province will be attended with some Charge to the
Government, and on that Account may probably meet with Interruption; yet as the
general Advantages are so conspicuous, nothing should be permitted to defeat
it; for although the Expense may at first be considerable, it will not be
durable, as the new Inhabitants, by a well regulated Militia, may be able in a
few Years to defend themselves; this was the Case with the Colonies in New
England from their Infancy, although they struggled under Difficulties infinitely
exceeding any that the proposed Settlements can be subject to, whilst
Great Britain commands at Sea: The French Inhabitants must continue to be
neutral, as they style themselves now, and the Indians are become so
inconsiderable that very little Danger is to be apprehended from them, if the
Settlements are made compact, and in a defensible Form; the Maintenance of
Forts, and Garrisons will then be a temporary Charge only, and soon cease to be
necessary; but if it should not, the Introduction of Protestants, and securing
the Country from France, will greatly overbalance the Expense, and exceed all
the real, and imaginary Advantages that have been suggested to result from the
Possession of Cape Breton: As this Assertion may be thought repugnant to the
several Importances of that Island, which have been laid before the Public, I
shall enter more particularly into the Consideration of it, and its Fishery,
than I at first intended: It has already been observed, that the Place is
barren compared with Nova Scotia, and will never admit of any considerable
Improvements: The Truth, and Reason of these Facts are very obvious; Cape
Breton was as soon known, as Nova Scotia or Newfoundland, but was never thought
to be of any Value to the Possessors of those Places, and it was the Exclusion
from them, that put the French on fortifying, and induced their Settlement of
it, and notwithstanding a thirty Years Possession, its Produce, exclusive of
Fish, will not subsist a hundred Families; its Winters are of great Length, and
extreme cold, it being common for the Frosts to continue till the latter End of
May, and it is near the Middle of that Month before it is free of Ice: For as
this Island forms an Eddy to the Current setting through the Gulf of St.
Lawrence, it draws such Quantities into its Harbors as to obstruct the
Fishery, and render the Navigation very dangerous: During the Summer it is so
frequently subject to Fogs, as to have neither Heat nor Sunshine sufficient to
ripen its Corn and Fruits. I cannot undertake to assign a philosophical Reason
for the Difference in the Temperature of the Air in two Places lying in the
same Latitude, and so near together as Nova Scotia and this Island, but to
observe, that as the Duration, and several Degrees of cold moderate, and warm
Weather in all Places vary with, and depend upon the prevailing Winds, in the
several Seasons of the Year, so in this, they commonly blow from such Points in
the Winter as bring on Storms of Snow and Frost, and in the Summer those are
most frequent, that blow directly from the Banks, accompanied with thick Fogs
and Mists, and although some Parts of Nova Scotia are subject to them, it is
neither in Degree nor Duration sufficient to affect the Produce of the Earth,
nor to interrupt the Course of Business by Land or Sea.

It is well known, that notwithstanding the Situation of this Island, four
Fifths of the French Fishery have been prosecuted in other Places: Their
Bankers, amounting to more than two hundred Sail of Ships in Time of Peace, who
cure their Fish in Pickle, commonly called Mud-Fish, make their Voyages on the
Banks of Newfoundland without entering a Port in America, and their largest
Ships to the Number of two hundred Sail, constantly use Fishot Captain Rous in
a Bilander of fourteen Guns and our hundred Men, with a Ship of near the same
Force attacked this Port in August 1744; It was defended by five Ships
navigated with four hundred and fifty Men; two of eighteen Guns each, one of
sixteen, one of fourteen, and one of twelve, drawn up in a circular Line round
the Harbor, and although both his Vessels grounded at the Entrance, and were
exposed to a continual Fire for five Hours from all the Ships within
point blank Musket Shot, he bravely took them all with the Loss of no more than
eighteen Men; he took another Ship at St. Julian's of sixteen Guns and ninety
Men, ten Ships on the Banks with three hundred and six Men, retook a British
Ship, burnt all the French Houses, and Stores in seven different Flarbours,
with four Vessuls, and upwards of eight hundred fishing Shallops, all within a
Month.
, St. Julian's, and other Harbors on the North-East Side of that Island,
Philip's Bay, and other Parts of the Continent of Labrador, and Gaspee in Nova
Scotia; in these several Places they have no settled Habitations, but having
erected Houses, and cleared small Places for Gardens, they raise Roots and
Herbage sufficient to serve them yearly for Soup and Sallad, until their Return
to France: It appears then, that they improve several Ports more commodious for
their Purpose than any on Cape Breton; it is true they have no Right to fish on
the Coasts of Nova Scotia, but their Claim on the North Side of the Gulf of St.
Lawrence has never been contested, and if it is in the Power of this Nation to
exclude them totally from the Amrican Fishery, or from our own only, the
Possession of Cape Breton cannot turn the Scale so much in their Favor as has
been apprehended: In short, its greatest Convenience to France consists in its
being a middle Port between Canada and the French Dominions in general, in
Europe and the West Indies and could any proper Means be devised to prevent
their future Intercourse with the British Colonies from whence they are
supplied with Stores and Provisions in return for the Produce of a contraband
Trade, the Inhabitants would be under a Necessity of returning annually to
France in their Fish-Ships, or spending a miserable Winter with little else
than Salt-Fish for their Subsistence.

In order to rival the French in the Cod-Fishery, it is necessary to confine
them to the Limits stipulated by the Treaty of Utrecht, which will exclude them
from all the Banks of Nova Scotia, and it does not appear by that, or any other
Treaty, that they have a Right to fish to the Southward of Cape Bonavista on
Newfoundland, between whose Banks and the former there are no others of any
Note or Consequence.

This would deprive them of a great Part of their Fishery, employing near two
hundred and Fifty Sail of Ships in Time of Peace, and furnishes the Markets in
France, Spain, Portugal, and the Streights with Mud Fish; and as to the
remaining Part, the Settlement of Nova Scotia, would soon enable the
Inhabitants to catch, and export larger Quantities, better in Quality, and
cheaper than the French could possibly afford their own, whereby the whole
would be of little Value to them more than for their own Consumption.

The Isle of Sable, and Cape Sable Banks on this Coast are so commodiously
situated as to admit of a fine Fishery in the Winter whenever the Country is
settled and stocked with Provisions: At present the Fishermen from New England
make three Fairs there in a Year, the first of which being prosecuted in March,
is worth both the other, as the Fish taken then exceed any in the World, and if
they could be landed and cured in the Winter Months, five Fairs might be yearly
made instead of three, and the two additional ones equal to the best of the
former, which would in a few Years be of more Consequence to Great Britain than
any thing the French are capable of prosecuting to support their Rivalship.

If this Point had been well attended to twenty or thirty Years past, their
Fishery might have been reduced before this Time to a contemptible Situation;
but the Case was so different, that they not only fished where they pleased,
but commonly insulted our Vessels whenever they met them, for excepting some of
their Fishermen which were seized by Captain Smart on the Canso Station, for
fishing without their Limits contrary to Treaty, they never met with any
Interruption, but to prevent such Accidents for the future, as our Ships were
earlier out than theirs, they ever after sent a superior Force to deter our Men
of War from the like Practice, and have ruled absolute Lords of those Seas.

As that Treaty is the Basis of the present Peace, and the Terms of it in
relation to the Fishery are plain and intelligible, it cannot be doubted but
the Administration will cause them to be punctually observed, more especially
as they fall under the Dominion of the British Flag, whose Honor is
immediately concerned in securing the Rights of this Kingdom against all
Encroachments, and in protecting its Subjects from Insults on every Part of the
Ocean.

FINIS.
Just Published,
A LETTER from Common Honesty to Common Sense; showing, how poor Honesty, being
in Distress, sought for Employment to an eminent Citizen in Trade, an Attorney,
a Recruiting Officer, a Bishop, a Treasurer, and a Parliament Man, etc. but was
refused by 'em all, and very ill treated, and at last obliged to apply to his
Kinsman Common Sense, Publisher of a News-Paper, where he readily found
Encouragement. Very diverting and instructive. Sold by T. Fleet, at the Heart
and Crown in Cornhill. Price Eighteen Pence, old Tenor.


