A SUMMARY Historical and Political, Of the first Planting, progressive
Improvements, and present State of the British Settlements in NORTH AMERICA.

CONTAINING

I. Some general Account of ancient and modern Colonies, the granting and
settling of the British Continent and West India Island Colonies, with some
transient Remarks concerning the adjoining French and Spanish Settlements, and
other Remarks of various Natures.

II. The Hudson's-Bay Company's Lodges, Fur and Skin Trade.

III. Newfoundland Harbors and Cod-Fishery.

IV. The Province of l'Accadie or Nova Scotia; with the Vicissitudes of the
Property and Jurisdiction thereof, and its present State.

V. The several Grants of Sagadahock, Province of Main, Massachusetts Bay, and
New Plymouth, united by a new Charter in the present Province of
Massachusetts Bay, commonly called New England.

By WILLIAM DOUGLASS, M. D.

VOL. I.

Ne quid falsi dicere audeat, ne quid very non audeat.

CICERO. BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in
Queen Street. MDCCXLIX.

The Author to the Reader.
THIS HISTORICAL SUMMARY concerning the British Continent Plantations in
North America, we published in loose Sheets by way of Pamphlet, feuille
volante, or los-blad; which in their Nature are temporary, and soon lost: but
as it is generally well received, that it may be more permanent, we publish it
in two large Octavo Volumes, each Volume divided into two Parts:

Vol. I. Part 1. contains general Affairs, viz. Some Account of ancient and
modern Colonies, the first Grants and settling of our Continent Colonies and
West India Islands, and the adjoining French and Spanish Settlements, with
Remarks of various Natures.

Vol. I. Part 2. contains, 1. The Hudson's-Bay Companies Settlements, Factories
or Lodges, and their Fur and Skin-Trade. 2. Newfoundland Cod-Fishery. 3. The
Province of Nova Scotia; the Vicissitudes under the British and French
Jurisdictions. 4. The several Grants united by a new Charter in the Province of
Massach^s^^ts Bay.

Vol. II. Part 1. Concerning the sundry other British Provinces, Colonies, or
Plantations in the Continent of North America, viz. New Hampshire,
Rhode Island, Connecticut, East and West-Iersies, Pensylvania higher and lower,
Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia.

Vol. II. Part 2. is by way of Appendix, containing miscellaneous Affairs, such
as the natural History, the Distempers at Times epidemical, and the endemial
Diseases in these various Climates, with their Paper-Currencies; as also some
Addenda and Corrigenda, particularly, if by Historical Freedoms used, any just
Offense ( humanum est errare) is given to Person or Persons, it shall be
heartily rectified.

The Writer with Candor acknowledges that in the Affair of Commodore Knowles's
Impress in the Harbor of Boston, Nov. 1747, there was somewhat of passionate
Warmth and Indiscretion, merely in Affection to Boston, and Country of
New England, his Altera Patria; but not with Rancour or Malice, having no
personal Acquaintance nor Dealings with Mr. Knowles; therefore from common
Fame, he (as Historians do) only narrate his peculiar Temper, his Severity in
Discipline, and not so much Regard as some other Sea-Commanders have for the
mercantile Interest, by impressing their Men, when he thought the public
Service required it: His general Courage as a Sea-Officer is not questioned;
the Insinuation concerning his personal Courage, has been construed amiss; the
refusing of passionate Challenges from private Masters of Merchant Ships, whose
Men he had impressed, which perhaps might deprive the Nation of his Service, is
no Slur.

The Writer declares that he had no other Intention, than by setting the Affair
in a strong Light, to contribute toward extending to the Continent Colonies,
particularly to New England, a late Act of Parliament against impressing of
Sailors in the Sugar West India Islands. Therefore as this Affair was
temporary, of no Use, and may give Offense, it is suppressed in the present
Publication of this first Volume of the Summary. Admiral Knowles since he
sailed from Boston, has been happy in successful Expeditions, particularly in
reducing the Fort of Port Louis of Hispaniola, and in beating a superior*
Spanish Squadron off the Havannah; he has been in a Course of Preferments; and
prosperous as to his private Fortune.

WILLIAM DOUGLASS.

CONTENTS.
PART I.
BOundaries between the British and French Colonies of North America 1 Ancient
and Modern Navigation, and Colonies in general 17 The first Adventures from
Europe to the East and West Indies 25 Dutch East India Trade 30 Scot's Darien
Company 44 Digression concerning Whaling 56 Spanish Discoveries and Settlements
63 English South Sea Company and Bubble 74 French Misissippi Bubble 79 French
Discoveries and Settlements 90 Portuguese Discoveries and Settlements 103 Dutch
Discoveries and Settlements 106 British general Discoveries and Settlements on
the Continent and Sugar-Islands 109 Digression, concerning Sugar 115 Barbados
130 Leeward Islands 136 Iamaica 141 Bahama Islands 145 Bermudas 146 The Eastern
Tribes of North America Indians, their Polity, Trade Religion, Food and
Language 151 Religion of ancient Nations in general 163 Our Wars with the
Indians 189 General Remarks concerning the Constitution of the British Colonies
201 Discoveries before Grants 205 Their religious Sectaries 224 Societies for
propagating the Gospel 231 Utopian Amusement concerning the regulating our
Colonies 233 Concerning the Magnetic Needle, and its Variations in
North America, etc. 263
PART II.
HUdson's-Bay Company and Trade 273 Cabots, Frobisher, Gilbert, Davis, Hudson
ibid Greenland Whaling 274 Middleton and Dobbs 275 Button, James, Baffin, Fox,
Danes, Guillam 276 Hudson's-Bay Charter 277 French Depredations there 278
Hudson's-Bay Weather 281 N. W. Passage 283 Middleton's Voyage 284 Newfoundland,
its Fishery 287 Fisheries of five Species, Whales, Herring, Cod, smaller Kinds,
and for present Use 294 Nova Scotia 305 Port Royal reduced by G. Nicholson 1710
308 A Canada Expedition under Sir William Phipps 1690 309 Paper-Currencies
animadverted 310 A Canada Expedition miscarries 1711 311 A Canada designed
Expedition abortive 1746 314 New England Indian War, 1722, etc. 317 French
Attempts upon Annapolis 1744, etc. 318 New England Indian War, 1744, etc. 320
Duke d' Anville's Expedition to North America 322 Island of Sables 334 Cape
Breton Islands 335 Reduction of Louisbourg 336, 345 North America Sea-Campaigns
1744, 1745, 1746, 1747 338 Affairs of Louisbourg 353 Paper Currencies
animadverted 359 Province of Massachusetts Bay 361 General Account 361
Historians fau^ 365 Irish Presbyterian Church in Boston 368 A general Account
of the settling New England 369 Massachusetts New Charter 372 Explanatory
Charter 1726 380 Sagadahock or Duke of York's Property 382 Province of Main 386
Late Plymouth Colony 394 Boundaries with Rhode Island determined 398 Islands
near Cape-Cod 405 Massachusetts Bay old Colony 406 Authors faulted 407 Old
Charter 408 Controversies with New Hampshire 410 Charter vacated and Revolution
412 Boundary Lines 415 Wheelwright's Grant 419 Million Purchase 419 Boundary
wit^ New Hampshire 421 General History under Old Charter 426 Governors 428 Laws
and Customs 431 Mint House 433 County Divisions 437 Religious Sectaries 438
Independent^ 439 Church of England 442 Brownists 443 Anabaptists 445
Muggletonians 447 Quakers 447 Witchcraft 449 Massachusetts Mountains and Hills
452 Rivers and Runs of Water 455 Promontories 463
The new Charter Massachusetts 464 America Post Office and great Road 465 Civil
Administration; General Assembly or Legislature 472 Governors 475 Secretaries
483 Admiralty 483 Surveyors of the Woods 484 Custom-Officers, and Auditor 485
Council Board 485 House of Representatives 488 Some political Plantation
Observations 490 Paper Currencies animadverted 493 The three Negatives in a
joint Capacity 497 House of Representatives, continued 499 Cape-Breton
Reimbursement 509 The Constitution of New England Townships 512 Provincial
Civil Officers of Massachusetts Bay 515 Executive Courts 517 Taxes and
Valuations 524 Annual Supplies 527 Reimbursement for Cape-Breton 528
Massachusetts Inhabitants, Produce, Manufacturies 529 Do. Establishments
military Sea and Land 532 Do. Fishery, Timber, and Grain 537 Rum, Hats, Iron
540 College in Massachusetts Bay 543 French and Indian Wars since the
Revolution, with a circumstantiated Account of our late French and Indian War
in the Administration of Governor Shirley 548 The French Claims to some Part of
Nova Scotia revived 566 Proceedings at the Court of Great Britain, toward
encouraging the Settling and Fishery of Nova Scotia 566
A Summary, Historical and Political, of the first Planting, progressive
Improvements, and present State of the British Settlements in NORTH AMERICA;
with some transient Accounts of the Bordering French and Spanish Settlements.
AS Distance of Place does equally or rather more admit of Latitude, for
imperfect, erroneous, and romantic Accounts of Affairs than Distance of Time;
the Author, after Thirty Years Residence in these Colonies, and C^^^espondence
with some inquisitive Gentlemen of the several Governments, does generously
offer to the Public, the following Collection, done with some Expense of Time
borrowed from the Business of his Profession, and Hours of Relaxation; without
any mercenary, sordid, scribbling View of Profit, or Ostentation of more
Knowledge in these Things than some of his Neighbors, but to contribute
toward a solid certain Foundation for the Histories of these Countries in
Times to come. The People in Europe (the public Boards not excepted) have a
very indistinct Notion of these Settlements, and the American Settlers are too
indolent, to acquaint themselves with the State of their neighboring Colonies.

Descriptions and bare Relations, although accurate and instructive, to many
Readers are insipid and tedious; therefore a little Seasoning is sometimes
used; where a mica Salis occurs, may it not be disagreeable, it is not designed
with any malicious invidious View. For the same Reason, a small Digression, but
not impertinent to the Subject, is now and then m^de Use of; as also some short
Illustrations.

SECT. I. Concerning the Boundaries, between the British and French Settlements
in NORTH AMERICA.
AS a Treaty of Peace seems to be upon the Anvil in Europe between
Great Britain and France; the Subject Matter of this Section, is to propose a
Scheme (the more Proposals or Projections, the more Choice) toward determining
and settling the Territorial Limits, and of an exclusive Indian Trade, between
Great Britain and France in North America. The Scheme must be short, else it
will not be attended to, and therefore requires some previous Elucidations, and
some short anticipating Accounts of Things.

Our principal Interest is to rival the French and Dutch in their Trade and
Navigation, without Distinction or Partiality to either. In this present War,
the French Court seem to neglect their Colonies, Trade and Navigation, the
principal Care of their late good and great Minister Cardinal de Fleury; and do
run into their former Romantic Humor of Land-Conquests. This is the
Opportunity to take the Advantage of their Inattention, more especially with
Regard to North America, our present Subject.

The FRENCH are the common Nuisance and Disturbers of Europe, and will in a
short Time become the same in America, if not mutilated at Home, and in America
fenced off from us by Ditches and Walls, that is, by great Rivers and
impracticable Mountains. They are a numerous* powerful, rich and polite Nation,
they have the Advantage of us in three grand Articles.

1. Their Government is absolutely Monarchical; Tax at Pleasure; not
accountable for Moneys expended in secret Services (in Great Britain, the
Article for secret Services in the Civil List, is small, and when the
Parliament allows any Sum extraordinary for that Use, it occasions a Grumbling
both within and without Doors) in this they have the Advantage of us, well
knowing that not only private Persons, but Ministers of State, Generals,
Admirals, even Sovereign^ may be bought or bribed; the late E. of Or -- d the
grand Master of Corruption, when he gave himself the Loose, at Times declared,
That there was no private Person or Community, but what might be corrupted,
provided their Price could be complied with. It therefore becomes the
Representatives of Great Britain, narrowly to inspect into the Conduct of their
Ministers, and other great Officers in Trust, especially in making Treaties
with France; the infamous Treaty of Utrecht, 1713, was procured by the French
Court bribing our corrupted Administration, that Part of it relating to the
British Northern American Colonies, will in Time be their Ruin, if not
rectified and explained. 2. By Custom Time out of Mind, they are above, and do
upon all Occasions dispense with the Principles of Honesty and Honor;
Supe^iority and Power is their only Rule, as LOUIS XIV. modestly expressed it*
in the Device upon his Cannon, Ratio ultima Regum: They occasionally make Dupes
of the other Princes in Europe; their Promises and Faith are by them used only
as a Sort of Scaffolding, which, when the Structure is finished, or Project
effected, they drop; in all public Treaties they are Gens de mauvaise Foy.
This may seem an unmannerly national Reflection; but at this Time it could not
be avoided, considering their perfidiously exciting a Rebellion in
Great Britain, contrary to their solemn Acknowledgment and Guarantee of the
Hanover Succession, by inciting the Highlanders to Rapine and killing of their
Countrymen; their re-fortifying of Dunkirk in Time of Peace; their violating of
their Guarantee of the Pragmatick Sanction, concerning the Austrian Succession,
by Invasion of Germany. 3. The greatest and most essential real Article is, The
Largeness of their Dominions in the best Country of Europe, and thereby are
become an Overmatch for their Neighbors, and more capable of swarming into
their Colonies than we are; in order to preserve a Balance in Europe, they
ought to be curtailed or dismembered there, which will effectually at the same
Time prevent their too great Growth in America.

Louisbourg being now in our Possession, there can be no great Difficulty in
reducing of Canada: at present it is not populous (perhaps not exceeding 12,000
Men capable of marching) neither is it compact (from the Mouth of St. Laurence
River to its Rise from Lake Ontario, at Fort Frontenac are about 800 Miles;)
and the French (without a Pun) are like Cocks which fight best upon their own
Dunghill: Witness, their late Behavior in Germany, in Italy, their late
Poltronnerie in Cape-Breton, and at Sea. Flanders is their own Dunghill, and
perhapsfor politic Reasons, the Allies allow them to overrun it, it will be
to them a chargeable Possession, and a Diminution of their Army in garrisoning
of so many Towns: Thus by giving them Scope, they may run themselves out of
Breath, that is, out of Men and Money, and become an easy Prey.

Cape-Breton Islands and Canada being reduced, would be to us an immense
Advantage, viz. The Monopoly of all the American Fish, Fur and Skins Trade,
provided these Acquisitions could be annexed to Great Britain, as a lasting
Possession: but unless in the present Treaty we could absolutely give the Law
to France, and persuade the other Powers of Europe to allow us this Monopoly,
we should to no Purpose, incur (if not reimbursed from Home) an inextricable
Expense or Debt, and by extending or stretching our Colonies, render them more
slender and weak; we are not capable of settling Inland Countries in a short
Time, our European Dominions, cannot allow or spare People sufficient for that
Purpose. The Phaenicians, Greeks, Venetians, Genoese, etc. formerly had many
Factories and Colonies in sundry Places, but for Want of People sufficient to
maintain these Possessions, (...) It is true, the Dutch, an (...) though a
small People, maintain their (...) But we may observe, they never (...) far
from their natural and tradin^ (...) Water.

Formerly Priority of Discovery, was (...) Claim. The Cabots coasted North
(...) were in Canada River) in the End of (...) Secretary Walsingham, being
(...) Westerly, North of North Virginia ((...) New England were soon after
called North (...) 1583, sent out Vessels upon the Discover^ (...) the River of
St. Laurence, took Possession (...) settled some Trade there. In Queen (...)
dispersed in Canada, Anno 1711, when (...) for the Reduction of it, was on
Foot, it (...) Canada belonged to the English by (...) and what the French
possessed there (...) from the English, and consequently held (...) therefore
where the Possessors turn (...) Quebec was taken by some private Englis^ (...)
Anno 1629. It was given up by Treat^ (...) 1632.

Afterward in Place of prior Discovery (...) the Indian Natives, and
Occupancy, was (...) just and equitable Title. In Case of a (...) happened,
upon a Peace, an u^i (...) Practice with the Turks and other (...) Right: But
at present in Europe, amon^ (...) and polite Nations, at the Conclusion of
(...) of the Treaty, is former Treaties (...) Bargains, Indentures, or Ius
Gentium) (...) Money, absolute Cession, or Exchange (...) for Damages received,
or supposed to be (...) of former Treaties, explained and (...) present Case
the Treaty of Utrecht 171 (...).

By Treaty of Peace and Neutrality for America, Anno 1656, Nov. 6, 16, between
Great Britain and France; in one another's Districts they are not to trade,
fish, or harbor (except in Cases of Distress to repair, wood and water) but
iniquitously by the Treaty of Utrecht, our corrupt Administration, granted to
the French the Liberty of catching, and curing of Fish in the most advantageous
Places "on that Part of Newfoundland from Cape-Bonavista to the Northernmost
Part of the Island, and from thence running down by the Western Side to Point
Rich:" There Cod-Fish are so plenty and fall in so near the Shore, that the
French Fishermen without the Charge or Trouble of Hook and Line, catch them by
a Kind of Grapling, as our Privateers discovered when they made Prizes of
several French Fish Traders in the Summer, 1744, in the Northern Harbors of
Newfoundland: By this unaccountable Concession, the French had already the
better of us in the Fishery Trade, and in a few Years more would have supplied
all the Markets in Europe, and by underselling, entirely excluded us from the
COD-FISHERY, which is more beneficial and easier wrought than the Spanish Mines
of Mexico and Peru.

It would be a vast Advantage to our Trade and Navigation, if by the ensuing
Congress for a general Peace, we could obtain the Monopoly of the North America
Cod-Fishery; there are Precedents of Monopolies allowed amongst sovereign
Princes: The Dutch have engrossed the Spice Trade (Pepper excepted) of the
East Indies. But if the French are still to be allowed some Share in this
Fishery, let them cure their Fish upon the Islands of the Gulf of St.
Laurence, and upon the S. E. Shore of Terra de Labaradore near the Straights of
Belle Isle.

By the said Treaty of Utrecht, our corrupted Court gave up to the French the
Island of Cape-Breton, and the other Islands in the Gulf of St. Laurence, with
this pernicious Clause, LIBERTY TO FORTIFY. Accordingly in Cape-Breton or L'
Isle Royale, was erected the Fortress of LOUISBOURG, the North American
Dunkirk, to annoy our American Navigation and Trade; but by good Luck it is
lately fallen into our Possession: As the People of NEW ENGLAND, from their
abundant Loyalty to the Crown, and Zeal for the British Interest, were the
first Projectors and principal Promoters of this most valuable Acquisition; if
it is confirmed to us by a subsequent Peace, it may prove a Kind of Monopoly of
the Cod-Fishery. New England deserves not only a pleniary Reimbursement, but
also some peculiar Favor or Bounty from the Parliament of Great Britain;
having upon this Occasion involved themselves deeply in Debt, and lost many of
their best laboring Men, not by the Enemy, but by an ill-condition'd Putred or
Hospital Fever and Flux. The high Encomiums of our Militia, ought not to give
any Umbrage of Jealousy to the British Government or Mother Country; that in
Case of any general Discontent here, concurring with a Dutch or French
(maritime Powers) War, they cast themselves into the Arms of the French or
Dutch; and occasion some Difficulty, for a British Squadron and Armament, to
reduce them to Reason; the People here are so loyal to the Crown, and so
affectionate to their Mother Country, that this cannot be supposed; it is true,
the King and Council of Great Britain, lately seem to be of Opinion, that the
Colony of Massachusetts Bay, with Regard to the neighboring Colonies, is too
large, and have accordingly CURTAILED it, by annexing a large Part of it to the
inconsiderable Government of New Hampshire, and some Part of it to the small
Colony of Rhode Island; as we have never settled our Line with New York
Government, we are told they design to put in for a Share.

Cape-Breton and the other Islands of the Bay of St. Laurence, before the Peace
of Utrecht, were in our Possession, as belonging to M. Subercasse's Commission,
in which he is called Governor of L' Acadie and Cape-Breton Islands; he was the
French Governor when we reduced that Country 1710; but by the Peace these
Islands were given to the French in Exchange for the Fortress (no Settlemen^)
of Placentia: while the Peace was negotiating Mr. More of the Board of Trade
and Plantations, was so barefacedly corrupt, when the Importance of Cape-Breton
was represented, he answered, Must the French then have nothing?

By the Treaty of Utrecht the Canada or French Line with Hudson's-Bay Company
or Great Britain, was ascertained, viz. from a certain Promontory upon the
Atlantic Ocean in N. Lat. 58 Degrees. 30 Min. to run S. W. to Lake Mistasin (which
communicates by Indian Water Carriage by P. Rupert's River with Hudson's-Bay,
and by Seguany River, with St. Laurence River at the Port of Tadousac 30
Leagues below Quebec) and from thence continued still S. W. to N. Lat. 49 Degrees.
and from thence due West indefinitely; this West Line takes in the Northern
Parts of the Upper-Lake, large as the Caspian Sea in Asia, one of the North
America five great Lakes or Inland Seas. By this Concession we gave the French
a Sea-Line Skirt of Terra de Labaradore (by Authors who (...) in Latin, called
Terra Laboratoris or Nova Britannia) the better to accomodate their Fishery:
Whereas if the British Interest had been in View, the West Line or Parallel of
49 D. N. Lat. ought to have been continued, East to a little above the Mouth of
St. Laurence or Canada River.

By said Treaty, the French were not to fish within 30 Leagues of Nova Scotia
to the Eastward, beginning at the Island of Sable; its South Side lies in 43 D.
55 M. N. Lat. and from thence in a S. W. Line indefinitely: N. B. There is no
Cod-Fishery to the Southward of N. Lat. 41 D. Salmon, Smelts and some other
North Climate Fish are under the same Restriction: to the Westward of this Line
was a mare Clausum.

In the Peace of Utrecht was omitted, to settle a Line between our Colonies and
those of France, called commonly Canada, and Mississippi, or New France and
Louisiana, from North to South; and the Line East and West between Carolina or
Georgia, and the Spanish Cape Florida Claims. In the proposed Negotiation for a
Peace, it would be much for the Ease and Quiet of all Parties to have the same
settled.

The natural and most effectual Boundaries of Countries or Territories seem to
be large Rivers (thus the Upper Rhine divides the French Acquisitions from
sundry German Sovereignties) and Mountains impracticable (the Pyrenean
Mountains in general divide France from Spain, the Dafforne Hills divide Sweden
from Norway, the Carpach, or Corpathian Mountains divide Poland from Hungary
and Transylvania) The Great River of St. Laurence, the Lakes Ontario and Erie,
and the Apalatian Mountains may answer the intended British and French
Boundary, without any Advantage or Acquisition, Disadvantage or Loss on either
Side; but merely for Peace and good Neighborhood.

The French Fur Trade, and their Settlements are almost entirely Northward of
St. Laurence River: let us take a cursory View of the Southern or British Side
of this great River, and of the Lakes Ontario and Erie, and of the Apalatian
Mountains or blue Hills: All the Advantage the French can have, by Indians in
their Interest, or small Settlements South of St. Laurence, is only upon
Occasion to distress their Neighbors, the British in Nova Scotia, New England,
and New York.

From Cape Rosiers at the Southern Side of the Mouth of the River St. Laurence
in N. Lat. 50 D. 30 M, to La Riviere-puante or the Indian Tribe, called the
Mission of Besancourt, over against Les Trois Rivieres, are about 400 Miles:
The Barrenness of the Soil, Impracticableness of the Mountains, which lie but a
small Way South of the great River, the Rapidity of the short Rivers or Runs of
Water from these Mountains; renders the Country unhospitable, especially there
being no proper Water Carriage for Indian Canoes: Here are no Indian Tribe
Settlements, and as if in a Desert, no humane Kind to be met with, only a very
few Indian Travelers. In Massachusett's New Charter, Anno 1661, the Claim is
kept up in its Extent, by express Words, "To the Gulf of St. Laurence and
Canada Rivers." By our last Treaty with the French, which was that of Utrecht
1713, L' Accadie or Nova-S^^tia was confirmed to us; the French Commission to
their last Governor Subercasse, was from Cape Rosiers to Quenebec River; this
River lies nearly in the same Meridian with Quebec, and the Head of it not
above fifty or sixty Miles distant from Quebec, the Metropolis of Canada, or
New France. (The Mouth of Sagadahoc or Quenebec River, lies nearly in 44 D. N.
Lat. Quebec, according to M. De l' Isle's accurate Observations, lies in 46 D.
55 M. N. Lat: from the Entrance of Sagadahoc to Norridgwag, the Head Quarters
on Quenebec River, of a considerable Tribe of the Abnequie Indian Nation our
Subjects, or Dependants; are not exceeding 100 Miles, thence up Quenebec River,
almost due North, so far as Indian Canoes with Paddles and setting Poles can
proceed, about 70 Miles; these 170 Miles, allowing for the Meanders or crooked
Turnings of the River, may be computed at 2 Degrees of Latitude; remains about
60 Miles only, to Quebec, hilly bad Traveling; the Norridgwag Indians Road to
Canada, is up to the Head of Quenebec River, and thence by several Lakes and
Carrying-Places, to the River La Chaudierie very rapid, which falls into St.
Laurence River about 4 or 5 Leagues above Quebec: Their best but longest
traveling Road is from Quenebec River to Connecticut River, up Connecticut
River, and thence to the River St. Francois, which falls into St. Laurence
River, about four or five Leagues above Les Trois Rivieres.

To render it evident, that we do not intend to project any large Extension of
^erritories Inland, we shall proceed to enumerate some (...) E^tents in sundry
Places of the projected (...). From Saratogoa a considerable British Settle^^^^
in the ^rook Elbow and long Fall^ of Hudson's River, the Carrying-Place, to
Wood-Creek, are 12 to 15 Miles (according to the wet or dry Seasons) thence
about 30 Miles to the Verdronken Landen, or drowned over-flowed flooded Lands,
thence 50 Miles to Crown-Point, a Pass near the Entrance of Lake Champlain
(Crown-Point is not well expressed in English, the proper Name is Scalp-Point,
from some Indian Battle which happened there, and many Scalps carried off; it
is better expressed in French Point Chevelure, and in Dutch Kruyn Punt) from
Crown-Point 100 Miles to Fort Chamblais at the Falls of Chamblais River, near
its Outlet from the Lake; thence 5 or 6 Leagues to Monreal the second good Town
of Canada, is in all 210 Miles from the New York Settlement of Saratogoa.

This Crown-Point not much exceeding 100 Miles from Monreal, is to this Day,
with the adjoining Country, called the Dutch Side of the Lake Champlain or
Corlaer (a Dutchman of Consequence who was drowned there in a Storm.) We are
sorry that the Levies of the several Northern Colonies, did not proceed in the
intended Expedition against the Fort of Crown-Point; Success or not, it would
have made some Noise in Europe, and naturally have led the Congress to settle
the Line or Boundaries.

We have a Fort and constant Garrison of Regular Troops at Oswego N. Lat. 43 d.
20 m. near the Mouth of Onondagas River on the south Side of the Lake Ontario
or Cataraquie; in the proper Seasons, here is kept a Fair for the Indian Trade;
Indians of above twenty different Nations have been observed here at a Time,
the greatest Part of the Trade between Canada and the Indians of the great
Lakes and some Branches of the Mississippi, pass near this Fort, the nearest
and safest Way of carrying Goods upon this Lake, being along the south Side of
it. The Distance from Albany to Oswego Fort is about 200 Miles West, and many
good Farms or Settlements in the Way.

The Apalatian Mountains or great Blue Hills (Land much elevated in the Air,
viewed at a considerable Distance, appears of a Sky Color) are only 200 to 300
Miles distant from the Sea Line of Virginia, Carolinas and Georgia; the British
People and some naturalized Germans have made some good Settlements at the Foot
of the East Side of these Mountains, the Wash of the Hills rendering the Soil
very rich. This Chain of Mountains, is not passable but in very few Places with
Pack Horses; it runs from the Sennekas Country near the Lake Erie, almost due
South to the Bay of Apalatia in the Gulf of Mexico. Sundry Deeds from the
Indians to the Proprietors of the Carolinas do expressly mention this great
Ridge of Mountains as a W. and N. W. Line or Boundary.

The CHIKESAW and Upper CHERAKEE Nations reach from the West Side of these
Mountains to the great River Mississippi; at present and for many Years past,
their Trade is and has been with the Virginia and Carolina Indian Traders, who
keep considerable Stores among these Nations. We have many trading Houses and
Stores all along the East Side of these Hills, and all the Indians who live
there are our fast Friends and Traders, exclusive of any other European Nation.
The Sennekas, Chouwans, the old Tuscaroras, Cuttumbas, the lower and middle
Cherakee Nations. All our long Rivers reach those Mountains, viz. Potomack and
James Rivers in Maryland and Virginia, Maratoke alias Raonoak River, Pemlico
River, Neuse River, and a Branch of Cape Fear River in North Carolina, Peddie
River the middle Branch of Wineaa in South Carolina, and the Savanna River of
Georgia.

The proposed Line cannot be of any great Detriment to the French Colony of
Canada; they have little or no Fur-Trade South of the River of St. Laurence,
and not exceeding 280 Friend Indian fighting Men, viz The Mission of Besancourt
over against Les Trois Rivieres 40 Men on La Riviere Puante; the Mission of St
Francois on the River of the same Name about 4 or 5 Leagues higher, 160 Men;
these two Tribes are of the Abnaquie Nation, and therefore naturally belong to
the New England Indians; above Monreal there are about 80 Men called Kahnuagus
or praying Indians; idle Fellows, who run about the Streets of Monreal, begging
with their Chaplets or Beads, they are Runaways from our Mohawk Indians.

As to our Boundary with the Spaniard South of Georgia, which a few Years since
occasioned considerable Disputes, and the stationing of a Regiment (Col.
Ogl^thorp's) of regular Troops; we may observe, That soon after the
Restoration, the Crown granted the Colony of Carolina to certain Proprietors,
extending so far South as 29 D. N. Lat. (this included St. Augustine, in the
Latitude of the Bottom of the Bay of Apalatia; and by the Treaties of 1667 and
1670 seems confirmed to us. St. Augustine is a barred Place, no Harbor for
Vessels, excepting small Craft, and seems of no other Advantage to the
Spaniard, but in Time of War to annoy our Navigation in these Parts, and to
disturb our adjoining Colonies by exciting the Creek Indians in their
Neighborhood to Rapine, as was the Case, Anno 1715. They improve no Territory.
The Florida Neck or Tongue, Southward is a barrenSoil, not worth contending
for. This Florida Shore appears to be of no great Benefit to Spain, but would
be of considerable Advantage to Great Britain, for the Tranquillity of our
Colonies in that Neighborhood.

A Scheme toward settling the Boundaries between the British and French
Colonies of NORTH AMERICA, and for the better Regulation of their Trade.
IT is further agreed and concluded, That the Boundaries between the British
Hudson's- Bay Company, and the French Colony of Canada, shall remain as settled
by the Peace of Utrecht, 1713. That in Conformity to the Treaty of Peace and
Neutrality for the English and French Colonies in America, Anno 1686: French
Vessels shall not enter any of the Harbors of Newfoundland (excepting in Cases
of Distress) shall not trade or cure Fish there, neither shall they fish within
-- Leagues of the same. That the exclusive fishing Line on the Coasts of
Nova Scotia and New England, shall begin at the Southerly Entrance of the Gut
of Canso, and run a direct Course to the Island of Sable, comprehending all the
Banks of said Island; and from thence to run South West indefinitely. That the
Inland Line shall begin at Cape Rosiers, the Mouth of the River St. Laurence,
up said River, and Catarequia River to the Lake Cataraquie or Ontario; along
said Lake and its Communication with Lake Erie; along Lake Erie so far as the
Senneka's Country extends, and from this Termination, the nearest Course or
Distance to the Apalatian Mountains; and along the Ridge of said Mountains to
the Bay of Apalatie in the Gulf of Mexico; St. Augustine and the Promontory of
Florida included. That the Islands in the Gulf and River of St. Laurence shall
belong to the French, but the Navigation of said Gulf, Rivers and Lakes shall
be free to both Parties. That the French shall not set up Lodges, Trading
Houses or Factories, nor travel with Goods, in the British American
Territories; neither shall theBritish Subjects in French American Territories;
Penalty, Confiscation of Goods: but the Indians shall have a free Passage, with
their Skins and Furs, and Return of Goods for the same, indifferently, to a
Market, in both Territories. That the Trade with the Chikesaw and Chirakee
Indian Nations (although West of the Apalatian Mountains) as being of many
Years Continuance, shall continue with the British Subjects exclusively.

THIS SECTION would have more naturally concluded, than began the ESSAY; but as
it may be supposed that at Negotiation for Peace between Great Britain and
France, is now on Foot in Europe; it was judged seasonable, and advisable not
to postpone it. This ESSAY toward a HISTORY of British North America, is
reduced under the following Heads.
SECT. I. A Scheme for Boundaries between the British and French Colonies in
NORTH AMERICA, and for regulating their exclusive Trade.

II. Some general and short Account of the Spanish, English, French and Dutch
Discoveries, Settlements and Claims (...) America.

III. Concerning the Indian Nations and Tribes; intermixed with, under the
Protection of, or in Alliance with Great Britain: As also some imperfect Hints
of those called the French Indians.

IV. Some Remarks in Relation to the general British Constitution of their
Colonies, in order to render the Accounts of the several Provinces more
succinct.

V. HUDSON'S BAY Company; their trading Lodges, Forths, and Factories; their
Boundaries with Canada, as settled by the Treaty of Utrecht Anno 1713.

VI. NEWFOUNDLAND Fishery; it is not colonized.

VII. NOVA SCOTIA, appointed to be colonized in Governor Philips's
Instructions, but hitherto neglected; and may be said (the Garrison of
Annapolis excepted) to be as much a French Colony as before its Reduction;
together with some short Account of the Islands in the Gulf of St. Laurence,
formerly included in the Government of L'Accadie or Nova Scotia, but given to
France by the Treaty of Utrecht, and lately reduced to Subjection of the Crown,
I wish I could say annexed to the Dominions of Great Britain.

VIII. MASSACHUSETTS BAY. In the Extent of their new Charter- Anno 1691,
comprehending Old Massachusetts Bay Colony, Plymouth Settlement, Province of
Main; and the Jurisdiction but not the absolute Property of Duke of York's
Grant from Quenebec River to River St. Croix in the Bay of Fundy; commonly
called Sagadahoc.

IX. NEW HAMPSHIRE, including the Northern Settlements of Massachusetts Bay,
lately adjudged to the Crown, and annexed to that Province.

X. RHODE ISLAND, including a Part of Plymouth late Colony, lately adjudged to
Rhode Island Colony.

XI. CONNECTICUT.; according to the Boundaries respectively settled, by
Commissioners with Massachusetts Bay, New York, and Rhode Island; and confirmed
by the King in Council.

XII. NEW YORK, according to their divisional Line settled with the Proprietors
of East-Jerseys, Anno 1719, by Commissioners appointed by the Legislatures of
both Provinces, and confirmed by the King in Council: and according to a
divisional Line, settled Anno 1725, by Commissioners from the respective
Legislatures of New York and Connecticut Colonies, and confirmed by the King in
Council: The Boundary between Massachusetts Bay and New York Colony we must
defer, as not ascertained; Notwithstanding the New York Commissioners agreed,
that the Basis of their Settlements with Connecticut, should be 20 Miles East
from, and parallel with Hudson's River; the Colony of New York, (as I am
informed) insist that Housatonick, alias Westenhoek, alias Stratford River,
shall be the Boundary with Massachusetts Bay; the Neutrality in Queen Anne's
War, between New York and their Indians, and Canada and their Indians, was
bounded Easterly by Housatonick River: some of the New York Politicians say,
that their Claim extends to Connecticut River: Their Line with Pennsylvania, is
limited by Delaware River, and the Parallel of 43 D. N. Lat.: Their Northern
Boundary with Canada, wants to be fixed in some subsequent Treaty.

XIII. The EAST and WEST J^R^^YS, two distinct Grants: the Proprietors
surrendered the Government to the Crown, Anno 1702: Being small the Crown has
united them, under one Jurisdiction or Government.

XIV. PENNSYLVANIA. Two distinct Governments or Legislatures, but under one
Governor; because the Property of one Family.

XV. MARYLAND. Lord Baltimore's Property. We cannot adjust his Line with Penn's
Family, it is not as yet settled.

XVI. VIRGINIA. According to their Line lately run and confirmed with North
Carolina.

XVII. NORTH CAROLINA; according to their late Line with Virginia to the North,
and South Carolina to the Southward.

XVIII. SOUTH CAROLINA. The other Government: the Grant of Carolina, being very
large, was divided into two Governments.

XIX. GEORGIA. An Utopian Property and Government; granted by Charter to
certain Trustees. A favorite and chargeable Colony, but hitherto unprofitable.

SECT. II. An introductory short Account of the ancient and modern Navigation,
Discoveries, and Settling of Colonies.
As this SECTION may contain a great Variety* Perspicuity, requires its being
divided or distinguished under the following Heads or ARTICLES.
ARTICLE I. A general View of Navigation and Colonies in remote Times.
IN Trade and Navigation, as in all other Affairs of Antiquity, we are not to
go too far back; in ^he very remote Ages, the Ancients did much indulge a
Poetical, florid Rhetorical, Enigmatical, and Mytholo^gical Vein; it is not
possible at this Distance of Time and Place, to distinguish between their true
and fabulous Relations: Their Histories and all other Matters were wrote in
Verse, admitting of many Poetical Fancies When we say that the most ancient
Records are Poet^^^^, Fabulous and Allegorical, not to be depended upon for a
real, simple, true Accounts of Things; we must except our Scriptural Book of
Religion, the Oracles of Mos^s and the Prophets, of CHRIST and his Apostles,
called, from its Excellency* The Bible or BOOK. Here we find Ships upon the
Medit^rran^^n, and Merchants, upon the Red Sea, as early as the Days of Jacob
and the primitive Israelites. Genes. XLIX.13^ Zebulon shall dwell at the Haven
of the Sea, and he shall be for a Ha^ven of Ships, and his Border shall be unto
Zidon. Judges v.17. Gile^d abode beyond Jordan: and why did Dan rem^^n in
Ships? Asher continu^d on the Seashore, and abode in his Breaches, the Orgin^
signifie^ in Creeks. Our Translation of the Bible requires to be revised The
Midianit^s and Ishm^elites, who bordered upon the Red Sea were Seafaring Men
and Merchants. Genes. XXXVII.28. Then there p^s^^ by Midianites Merchantmen.
.

Doubtless from Time to Time by Famine, Pestilence, and some implacable Sword,
whole Countries have been depopulated, and consequently their Records
destroyed; we find that we cannot with any Certainty go back exceeding 2500
Years. From what we may collect, we find, that China, the East Indies, and
Arabians are prior to us in Trade and Navigation; at present we have much the
Advantage of them.

In the Revolution of Ages, the several Countries upon the Earth have been
depopulated by Pestilence, Famine or Wars; and afterward settled from other
Countries; thus the Origin of the several Countries must be very various and
uncertain. The Plains and overflowed Lands, called Interval Lands in
New England, upon the Banks of the Tigris and Euphrates in Chaldea, and of the
Nile in Egypt, being very fertile and pleasant, enticed People to settle them
in a compact Political improving Manner; therefore our first certain Records of
Things seem to originate there. The Lunar Eclipses noted at Babylon by the
ancient Chaldeans are original Standards, for the Motions of the Sun and Moon,
with their several Inequalities for all future Ages. The Chaldean, was formerly
the universal or commercial Eastern Language, as at present the Arabian is
their learned Language, and the Latin the Western School Language. The
Thebaians in the Upper Egypt, for Sake of Navigation began to observe the
Stars, and from their Heliacal Risings and Settings, before CHRIST 1034 Years,
they rectified the Year from 360 to 365 Days.


Amongst the Aborigines, the ARABIANS or Saracens have been Time out of Mind,
and are at present the principal Aboriginal Navigators of the East India Seas.
The Arabian Moors or Mahometans, long before we navigat^d these Parts, sent
Colonies to almost all their Sea Coasts and Islands, and drove the Natives up
into the Mountains. The Arabians and Egyptians for many Ages navigated the Red
Sea and Indian Sea. We had Indian Spices in Europe above 2000 Years. Suez, the
ancient Arsinoe in N. Lat. 30 d. was the Barcadier or Seaport of Grand Cairo
for the Red Sea, distant 4 (...) The Arabian Gulf was the most (...) upon
Account of the East India Trade, (...) doubled the Cape of Good Hope. (...)
their Situation upon the Red Sea, drove (...) between the Indies and the
Egyptians, (...) Time the greatest Trade of the know (...) from the Saracen
Navigation and Colonie (...) and Africa, excepting the Tartars, China* (...)
insignificant Pagans; are of the (...) Doubtless, for the same Reason, all
(...) of Time will become Christians. The (...) was and is very considerable,
(...) is not one navigable River in all Arabia^^ (...) and Moors had several
Colonies in (...) totally drove out of Spain, until Anno (...)

After the Egyptians and Arabians, (...) became the principal Navigators, first
(...) the Tyrians, and afterward their famous (...). The Phaenicians were (...)
who fled from the Red Sea to the (...) CHRIST 1047 Years; being used to (...)
Traffic in the Indies; they began the (...) in the Mediterranean Sea to
Greece, etc. (...) of their Wars with the Edomites made (...) native
Habitations and settle upon (...) They were the first who directed the (...)
Stars in the Night Time (the Magneti^ (...) is a modern Discovery) their first
(...) Ships with Sails and one Order of Oars. (...) Colonies abroad, viz.
Byzantiun or (...) Byrsa or the famous Carthage in Barbary (...) in Spain,
Cassiteredes (Tin Islands) Sicily (...) in Great Britain, etc: Carthage (...)
trading ancient Phaenician Colony (...) before CHRIST, were Masters and set
(...) along the N. W. Coast of Barbary, in (...) or Canaries, and in the
Hesperides or (...) in N. Lat. 15 d: they had Colonies in the Baleares Insulae
(Majorca Minorca and Yvica) in Sardinia and Sicily. Carthage was for many Years
the Emporium or Mart of Trade in the West, as Corinth in Greece was the
Emporium of the East: they were both destroyed about the same Time by the
Romans 146 Years before CHRIST.

The Assyrians, an Inland People, had no Notion of Navigation: by conquering
Egypt and Phaenicia, put a Damp to Trade and Navigation: After some Time a new
Tire was built, and the Tyreans flourished more than before, until Alexander
the Great, a Royal Knight errant, destroyed the City and sold the Inhabitants
for Slaves.

In the History of Navigation and Colony Settlers, next were the GREEKS; at
first more for War Expeditions and Invasions than for Traffic. The first
Account, that we have of a long Ship was that of Argos (...) the (...) who
formed or delin^ated the Constellations, being for the U^e of the (...).
, who about 53 Years after Solomon, or 939 Years before CHRIST, according to
the Computation of the most ingenious (I wish our Language, as the Dutch, would
admit of a Degree of Comparison, above the Superlative) and penetrating Sir
Isaac Newton, in his Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms amended. The A^gonouts were
the Flower of Greece, fitted out to persuade the Nations upon the Coasts of the
Euxine and Mediterranean Seas, to revolt from Egypt; they were a Parcel of
Jolly young Gentlemen, viz. Castor and Pollux, Esculapius, Orpheus, Hercules,
Deucalion the Son of Minos, Bacchus's Sons, etc.

The several Grecian Republics had their Turns of Fortune of being more or
less potent at Sea, the Cypriots were the most noted for Commerce. They settled
Colonies in the Southern Parts of Italy and in Sicily, calling it Magna
Graecia; this Name was afterward confined to Calabria Superior in the Kingdom
of Naples; they built Marseilles in Provence in France; they had Settlements
near Barcelona in Spain.

Before CHRIST, 885 Years, The Corinthians began to improve Navigation by large
Ships and Triremes. The most ancient Water Conveyance (does not deserve the
Name of Embarkation or Navigation) was in Rafts or Floats, afterward (...) or
Canoes cut out of an hollowed Piece of Timber, as amongst the W^st India
Islands, and South Continent of America: as also Bark of Trees (generally
Birch) with Wooden Ribs, as amongst the Inland Indians of North America: Caesar
says, that upon his Expedition to Great Britain, he found no other Vessels
there, but small Boats made with Wicker and Hides, such may to this Day be seen
in Wales and in the West Highlands of Scotland. The Phaenicians introduced to
the Mediterranean Sea long Ships with Sails and one Tire of Oars. When War was
used at Sea, and the Manner of ^ighting was to strike their Enemies Ships with
their Restra or Prow (the Newcastle Colliers call it, giving them the Stern)
for a greater Stroke Momentum or Shock, the Bu^^ of their Vessels were
gradually increased to the enormous Size of Quinqueremes or five Tire of Oars.
-- Ships of War, were by the Romans called Clasicae, Merchantmen were called
Onorariae.


Thucydedes says, That in the 29th Olympiad was the oldest Sea Fight mentioned
in History, it was about 657 Year^ before CHRIST, between the Corinthians and
Corcyreans of Corfu. The Athenians (whose Continent Dominions were not larger
than Yorkshire) assisted the Corcyreans, the Lacedaemonians aided the
Carthaginians (the Lacedaemonians were more powerful by Land, but the Athenians
were more powerful by Sea) this gave Occasion to the famous Poloponesian War,
the Subject of Thucidades History: on one Side and the other, almost all Greece
were engaged. The Athenians and Lacedaemonians disputed the Empire of the Sea
for some Time.

During the intestine Fueds of the Grecian Commonwealths; Philip King of
Macedon, invaded and conquered the Countries in his Neighborhood, and at Sea
enriched himself by Pyracies, and put an end to the Grecian Liberties. His Son
Alexander the Great, proceeded to the Levant, and conquered (committe^ Murders
and Robbery) so far as the River Indus: The Grecian Empire extended so far
East as the River Indus, that is, they conquered, or rather made the several
Countries pay Tribute, or in the modern Phrase* raised Contributions to the
River Indus: The Romans did not bring the Country under Contribution further
East than the River Euphrates.
Upon his Return, intoxicated with Wine, and his youthful Vanity from
Conquests, he died at Babylon; and his Depredations (they deserve no better
Name) were cantoned amongst (...) Generals in their several Stations or
Commands, who, after some Bickerings, agreed to an Uti Possidetis.

Next in Course, at Sea appeared the ROMANS, who at first (like the present
Turks) did only mind Conquest, not Trade; but in Process of Time, finding that
the Corinthians and Carthaginians, having the Dominion of the Seas, so as to
land and make Depredations where they pleased; to keep them within Bounds, the
Romans were obliged to mind the Sea out of Necessity, At the Sea-Battle of
Actium before CHRIST 31 Years, Mark Anthony had 500, and Augustus 250 Ships of
War: this was the greatest Sea Force ever the Romans were Masters of.
and were both destroyed about the same Time by the Romans; a great Wound to
Trade.

Julius Caesar invaded Great Britain from France in very small Vessels or
Craft, they were all built and fitted in two Months: The Britains at that Time
had no Navigation; they were reduced to a Roman Province, not a Colony, and
continued so above 400 Years. As the People of Britain at that Time were a Sort
of Sylvestres, Wild People like our American Indians, Scots Highlanders,
Miquelets of Spain, or Montenagrins: all parti^^lar Accounts of Great Britain
may be reputed as fab^^^us before Caesar's Time. Upon the Swarming or
Emigration of the Northern Barbarians, the Roman Troops in Great Britain were
recalled to the Defense of their own Country: a Party of the same Northern
Nations called Saxons, embraced the Opportunity, invaded Great Britain in that
Part of it now called England; and one of their considerable Tribes, the
Angles, gave Name to the Country.

Pirates in the Mediterranean Sea have been formidable, BELLUM PIRATICUM is
sometimes recorded by the Roman Historians. Pompey was delegated for one of
these Pirate Wars, and in the space of four Months (to his great Honor and
Glory, as it is said) reduced all the Pirates.

The Romans with their Conquests and Colonies introduced their own Language The
Romans had Letters from the Greeks, and the Greeks had the Use of Letters from
the Phoenicians.
all over Italy, into France, Spain and Portugal, where it continues to this
Day, but much intermixed with the Languages of the Aboriginals, and of some
Foreigners, who invaded them from Time to Time. In other Nations, which
submitted to the Romans rather for Patronage or Protection than by Conquest
(the Romans were at that Time the general Arbitrators of all the known
civilized Nations The French have been aiming at this for above a Century last.
) the Roman Language or Latin did not prevail.

The GOTHS, Vandals and other Barbarous Nations, who swarmed from the Northern
Parts of Europe, and like Locusts or Caterpillars, overrun the Southern Parts
of Europe; may be said, generally, to have superseded the Romans; they had no
Notion of Navigation and a Sea-Trade, and did not in the least apply themselves
that Way. Of these only the NORMANS and Danes (a sort of Pirates became potent
at Sea; their first Expedition into Great Britain was about Anno 800. N. B. By
Anno -- we always mean Anno Christi, or the Year of the Christian Era.
They settled a Colony in the North Parts of France, and called it Normandy; in
a Course of Years they made Depredations and some Settlements along the Coasts
of Saxony, Flanders, Britain, and France; as a Monument of this, there is to be
found on the Seacoasts of those Countries, to this Day, Blond Complexions, red
and yellowish Hairs. This Norman Colony in France called Normandy, (I shall not
say, conquered England) in Process of Time gave a King to England, called
WILLIAM the Conqueror, whose Establishment continues to this Day.

While the Mohammedan Saracens prevailed, they were for a considerable Time
Masters of the Seas (especially of the Mediterranean from the Red Sea to
Hercules's Pillars) in the Southern Parts of Europe while the Normans ravaged
the Northern Parts. The Moors and Saracens reduced the greatest Part of Spain
Anno 714, and were not totally subjugated by the Aboriginal Spaniards until
Anno 1492 The commanding Land and Sea-Officers amongst the Saracens were called
Emirs, Mr. Burchette in his Naval History says, That, perhaps from thence we
may have our designation of Admiral.
: The Spanish Blood is much tainted with the Morasco.

The next and last Set to be mentioned in this Article, are the several
REPUBLICS IN ITALY ( Venetians, Genoes, Florentines, Pisans) and Catalonia in
Spain; they carried on the Trade and Navigation of the Southern Parts: and the
HANS TOWNS in Germany; they had the Trade and Navigation of the Northern Parts
of Europe. Their Intercourse was generally at Sluys and Bruges in Flanders; and
exchanged or bartered Naval Stores, Woollens, Linnens, etc. for Persian and
East India Goods, and Spices, etc. which in Part were purchased at Grand Cairo,
but mostly brought over Land in Caravans to several Barcadiers or Seaports in
the Bottom of the Mediterranean Sea.

The Genoes had many Colonies in Lesser Asia and upon the Euxine Sea, and drove
a great Trade there: In the beginning of the 13th Century, they were in
Possession of Nice and Uintimiglia in Italy, of Tire in Syria, of Ceuta in
Barbary, of Corsica and Sardinia: their Families of Doria and Spignola, had the
principal Administration.

The Venetians formerly were in Possession of Candia and of all the Islands in
the Archipelago and Ionian Sea: in short, their becoming so rich and powerful,
gave Jealousy and Umbrage to the other Sovereignties in Europe, and occasioned
the famous League of Cambray, Anno 1508.

The first Discoveries made in America were generally by Italian Navigators or
of Italian Extract (Columbus in the Spanish Service, Cabots in the English,
Americus Vespucius in the Portuguese, Veruzani in the French Service, etc.)
employed by several European Princes.

The Hans Towns were an Association of several Trading Towns in Germany, at a
Time they were in Number about 70 Hans Towns, they are at present reduced to
four (there is constantly an English Resident or Minister with the Hans Towns)
Lubeck on the River Trave the Principal; Dantzick on the Weissel or Vistula,
Hamburg on the Elbe, and Bre^^n on the Weser: all these are free Towns with a
territo^al District.

The Venetians, more particularly, becoming vastly rich by their Trade in
East India Goods and Spices; set sundry Princes of Europe upon projecting a
navigable (consequently less chargeable Way, so as to undersell the Venetians,
and out them of that Trade) and usefully practicable Passage from Europe, to
the rich Produce and Manufactures of the East. This leads to the Subject of the
following Article.

ARTICLE 2. Concerning the several Essays or Adventures, toward discovering
navigable Passages from Europe to the East Indies, China, and the Spice Islands.
IT is said, That one great Inducement to Columbus's Adventure Westward, was to
try for a Western Navigation to the Spice Islands; and luckily, by Islands and
a great Continent intercepting him, America was discovered.

As the several great Continents of Europe and Africa Eastward, and America
Westward lay in the Way; the Case was, how to double the extreme North or South
Points or Lands-Ends of these Continents; or to find some pr cticable Straits
or Thorough-Fares in these Continents.

Before we proceed, we shall insert by way of Amusement, as not impertinent to
the Subject, the following Digression.

Some Dutch Fishers missing of Whales, are said to have sailed in Quest of
them, several Degrees North of Cape Purchase of East Greenland, which lies in N.
Lat. 82 d; there was no Ice, only an open Sea, but very hollow. Whalers say,
that the further North, on Spitsbergen, or East Greenland, they found the
greater Plenty of Grass, and other green Herbs; therefore toward the Pole it
must be hotter: This seems to be probable from the Nature of Things: In June at
the North Pole the Sun is 23 d. 30 m. high, and for some Months always above
the Horizon; whereas, for Instance, at London, the Metropolis of Great Britain,
in N. Lat. 51 d. 30 m. the Sun in December is only about 15 d. high, and only
for one Third of its Revolution or Day, above the Horizon.

M. Frazier, a French Navigator, says, in the Account of his South Sea Voyages;
that on the 13th of March 1714, N. S. in returning to France, South of Cape
Horn, in Lat. 58 d. 30 m. and 68 d. 30 m. W. Longitude from Paris, he
discovered several Islands of Ice, whereof one was four or five Leagues long;
Ice is not frequently met with hereabouts, and as Ice is formed by an Adherence
to some Land or Shore, there must be Land toward the South Pole; but not
within 63 d. S. Lat. for the Extent of about 200 Leagues from 55 d. to 80 d.
West Long. from Paris; because this Space has been run by several Ships, which
the S. W. and S. S. W. Winds have obliged to stand far to the Southward, to
weather Cape-Horn, the Lands-End of South-America, in 55 d. 55 m. S. Lat. This
is the Reason, why that Chimera or Fancy of a Terra Australis is at present
left out of our Charts or Maps. If Lands are discovered South of 64 d. S. Lat.
they must be inhospitable and uninhabitable, considering that the Weather is
more stormy, and Winters more rigid, in the high South Latitudes, than in the
same Northern Latitudes; the same Climates South of the Equator, are much
colder than to the Northward of the Equator.

The Southern Latitudes are much colder, than in the same Degrees of Northern
Latitudes. 1. The Sun is annually eight Days longer on the Northern Side of the
Equinoctial than on its Southern Side. 2. The Sun in our North Country Winters
is in Perigee, that is, nearer the Earth, than in the Southern Winters, being
then in his Apogee. 3. The highest Cod-Fishery according to Capt. Frazier, in
the Southern Latitudes is in 31 d. S. Lat; our Cod Fishery in North America
(there are some straggling Cod-Fish caught more to the Southward) extends to
Nantucket New England in 41 d. N. Lat: Therefore 41 d. N. Lat. is nearly of the
same Temper or Coolness as 31 d. S. Lat.

To obtain navigable Passages, into the Indian and South Seas, the extreme
North and South Promontories or Lands-Ends of the several Continents
abovementioned, were to be doubled. They are reduceable to four, viz. 1. The
S. E. Passage by doubling the Cape of Good Hope the South Point of Africa. 2.
The S. W. Passage by doubling Cape Horn the South Point of America, Megallan's
Streights is a Thorough-Fare. 3. The N. E. Passage, North of the North Cape of
Europe, but hitherto not discovered. 4 The N. W. Passage, or rather
Thorough-Fare between the North Shore of America, and the South Shore of
West-Greenland, commonly called Davis's Streights (to double the North Parts of
this West-Greenland, has hitherto not been imagined) this has at Times been
endeavored in the last Century and half, M. Dobbs is at present, in Pursuit of
it. Lastly, We shall mention some Tentatives for discovering Thorough-Fares in
several Openings in the Body of the Continentof America.

The Ancients had no Knowledge of Countries South of the Equator. John I. of
Portugal, conquered Ceuta from the Moors, 1409; Henry, third Son of K. John,
much in the Humor of Navigation Discoveries; by his Encouragement, the
Portuguese began Anno 1418, to range the West Coast of Africa: 1438 Alphonsus
V. took Tongier, and ranged so far as Cape Negroe in 16 d. South Latitude, The
Portugue^e in their Adventures Southward on the East Side of the Atlantic
Ocean discovered, and are still in Possession of several Clusters of Islands.
1. The Western Islands formerly called A^^res or Terceres, laying from 36 to 40
d. N. Lat. about 300 Leagues West of Portugal, and 300 Leagues East of
Newfoundland; they are nine in Number. Mercator, and after him, many English
Charts, place the first Meridian at St. Michael's one of these Islands, about
15 d. more West than Ptolemy's Canon. 2. Maderas first discovered Anno 1410,
first settled Anno 1425; it was so called from its being well wooded: it
produces the Madera Wines, the D^liciae of the British American Colonies. 3.
Cape-Verde Islands 9 in Number, about 160 Leagues West of Cape de Verd in
Africa; they were anciently called H^sp^rid^^, were discovered Anno 1440, but
not settled until 1572; the New England Fishery bring some of their Salt from
their Island of May.
and to this Day have several Colonies with territorial Jurisdiction from
thence to 7 d. S. Lat. in Congo, Angola, and Loango. Anno 1442, the Portuguese
obtained of the Pope a Grant of all Lands, laying S. and E. of Cape Bajador on
W. Side of Africa, 26 d. 30 m. N. Lat. In the Reign of Emanuel 1497, Vasquez de
Gamma doubles the Cape, they had discovered this Cape Anno 1487, and called it
the Cape of Good-Hope, in Expectation of doubling it; thence they coasted along
the Eastern Shore of Africa, from Cape Negroe on the West Side of Africa, 16 d.
S. Lat. round ( Cape of Good-Hope, a Dutch Place of Refreshment excepted) to
Rio de Spirito Santo in S. Lat. 18 d. on the East Shore of Africa, is a very
wild and savage Country, no European Settlers; but from 18 d. S. Lat. to 5 d.
N. Lat. the Portuguese have Possessions, the chief being Mozembique in 15 d. S.
Lat. and Melinda in 2 d. 30 m. S. Lat.

From the Eastern Coast of Africa, the Portuguese sailed over to the Malabar
Coast on the Indian Peninsula. The next Portugal Expedition for the
East Indies, was drove upon the Coast of Brazil, and after taking Possession of
it, proceeded to the Malabar Coast. Anno 1510, Albukerk reduces Goa, takes
Amboyna, Banda, and some other of the Molucca Islands, and returns home richly
laden with Spices. They sailed along the Coast of China; thus during the Reign
of their good King Emanuel, who died Anno 1521, they carried all before them at
Sea, and superseded the Venetians in a Trade which they had enjoyed ever since
Anno 1260. Having purchased of Charles V, Emperor, his Claim as King of Spain,
of a pretended Priority of Discovery in the Spice Islands; they solely enjoyed
without Molestation for near a Century of Years the famous and profitable Trade
and Navigation to the East Indies; as Spain did that to the West Indies.

Henry, King of Portugal, dying without Children Anno 1580; K. Philip by a
powerful Army under the Duke d' Alva reduces Portugal, he claimed it in Right
of his Mother Elizabeth the Empress; Spain became Master of all the Portuguese
Dominions and rich Trade; ^eing in the Height of Glory, after a few Years; Anno
1588 the King of Spain fits out the Invincible Armada (as he calle^ ^it)
against England.

The Dutch Capt Drake, afterward Sir Francis Drake, by Way of the Straits of
Magelan and South Seas or Pacifick Ocean, 1579, in the Name of the Crown of
England, took Possession (according to the Formalities of those Times) of the
Moluccas or Spice Islands, and carried a Quantity of Spices to England. The
Dutch did not come to the East Indies until 1595, did not see the Spice Islands
until 1599. Some London Merchants Anno 160 (some Time before the Establishment
of the Dutch East India Company) obtained Letters Patent of Incorporation, and
formed themselves into a Company; their common Stock was 72,000 L. Sterling.
During the indolent Reign of James I. the English were not well supported in
the East Indies, and the Dutch overreached them, notwithstanding of a solemn
Convention between the English and (...), July 7. 1619, whereby the Trade of
Pepper at Iava was to be equal; and the Trade of the Molucca, Banda, or Spice
Islands, was to be two Thirds to the Dutch, one Third to the English: the Dutch
in Amboyna (a principal Spice-Island, in 3 d. 40 m. S. Lat. the best Dutch
Government next to that of Batavia) upon some frivolous Pretext, inhumanly and
cruelly massacred the English People Anno 1622: Soon after they seized all the
English Settlements and Factories in the Spice Islands, and have monopolized
the Spice Trade ever since. This violent Abuse or Transaction, can never be
forgot, and perhaps never to be forgiven: the Resentment and Reparation has
long lain dormant, from James I. indolence, the national Confusions during the
Civil War, the voluptuous Reign of Charles II. the sole Application of James
II, to introduce Despotism and Popery, and laterly from Indulgence and
Affection we bear to our natural and maritime Allies, so the Dutch are called;
at this Time from some Corruption of the leading Men, some evil Spirit, or some
abstruse Mystery of State, they have in the present War (...) Great Britain
with France, baulkt us very much. Cromwell, a very great Politician and General,
who though not legally, yet by Divine Permission, or as in some Designations,
Divina Providentia, or by the Providence of GOD, had for some Years the
Direction of British Affairs; in his Declaration of War against the Dutch, Anno
1652, demands Satisfaction for the (...) Affair, and the Arrears of a certain
Sum of 30,000 L. Sterling. (...) Annum, for Liberty of Herring Fishing on the
Coast of Schetland, (...) per Contract with the English Court in Charles I.
Reign; Cromwell's (...) with the Dutch being soon over, their Submissiveness and
Usefulness to him, made him drop it.
at this Time, as revolted from the Dominions of Spain, were prohibited by the
King of Spain, to trade to Portugal, the only Emporium of East India Spices and
other Goods: This occasio^ed their Endeavors to sail directly to the
East Indies, and Spice-Islands: they first attempted a N.E. Passage by Waygatz
Streights, but in vain; afterward Anno 1595, without Ceremony, they double the
Cape of Good-Hope, seized several of the Spanish or Portuguese Colonies, got a
great Footing in the East Indies, and have established a great Trade, and
settled many considerable Colonies.

Upon the Expiration of the 12 Years Truce between Spai^ and Holland, Anno
1621, the Dutch made several successful Expeditions to Brazil (at the same Time
made some Settlements in Guiana) and got some Footing there. P. Maurice was
appointed Governor, and resided there from Anno 1637 to Anno 1644; for Want of
Supplie^ he left it and returned home: the Dutch having a bette^ Game to play
in the East Indies, from whence they almost outed the Portuguese, they gave Way
in the Brazils, and after some Years the Portuguese recovered it entirely by
Anno 1660.

The following Digression, may perhaps be an agreeable Amusement to some
Readers.

To make some Estimate of the Dutch East India Whaling, and Suga^ Trade (which
with their Herring Fishery, and Carrying, are the Branches of their Traffic)
we shall instance the Year 1738 (perhaps a Medium Year of Business) that Year
arrived in the Texel, for Amsterdam, and the small Towns in the Zuyder Zee,
from the East Indies 15 Ships, from East Greenland, or Spitzbergen 92 Whalers,
from West Greenland or Davis's Streights Whalers 55; with Sugar, Coffee, Cocoa,
from Surinam 36, Curaso 11, other Places in the West Indies 14.

The Dutch at first carried on their Trade in the East Indies, by Factories in
several Parts; afterward they settle^ Colonies with a Territorial
Jurisdiction; they did not fully monopolize the Trade, until 1635. The
Subscription for a Company Trade was 6,440,200 Gilders or Florins.

The whole Trade is supposed divided into sixteen Parts, and the Company into
six Chambers, each Chamber having Parts nearly in Proportion to their
Subscription; o^ those sixteen Parts 8 belong to the Chamber of Amsterdam, 4 to
Zealand, 1 to Rotterdam, 1 to Delft, 1 to Horn, and 1 to Enchuysen: each
Chamber has a peculiar Board of Directors called in Dutch Bewindhebbers; the
Chamber of Amsterdam consists of 20 Directors, that of Zealand consists of 12
Directors, the other four Chambers each consists of 7 Directors: The grand
Affairs of the united Chambers, are managed by a grand Council, which sits at
Amsterdam for six Years, and at Middleborough in Zealand for two Years,
alternately; this general Council consists of a Deputation from each of the six
Chambers, Amsterdam sends 8 Deputies, Zealand 4 Deputies, the other four
Chambers send 1 Deputy each; and a seventeenth (this Council consists of 17) is
chose alternately by the six Chambers, and is President or Chairman.

This Company is vastly rich, an Original Share of 3,000 Gilders (3,000 is
reckoned a high Share) has been sold frequently at 20,000 Gilders;
notwithstanding of their great annual Charges in building and repairing
Fortifications, Ships, Storehouses, Salaries, Soldiers Pay, etc. amounting
sometimes to upwards of a Million and a half Gilders per Annum. They are the
most powerful private Society in the World, some think them more powerful than
the Government of their own seven United Provinces at home in Europe: they have
at Times lent the Government or States General, great Sums of Money for
continuing their Privileges; Anno 1688 they lent the States General 8,000,000
Gilders for continuing their Privileges to Anno 1740. It has been thought, that
if the Dutch (I mean their People of Quality and Fortune) should at any Time
foresee a certain Danger of being reduced by a more potent Neighbor; they
would transport their Families and Effects to the East Indies, where they are
Masters of the Sea: thus, in ancient Times, the Tyrians when in apparent Danger
of being reduced by Alexander the Great, sent their Wives, Children and Effects
to Carthage. This Company exports very little Bullion from Holland (the English
East India Company export too much Silver) their Spices vended in that Country,
purchases all the other Goods they may have Occasion for. The English East
India Company in some Articles of Trade, have the Advantage of the Dutch; for
in Fact, the Hollanders buy near half the Goods sold at the English East India
Sales.

The Seat of Government for all the Dutch East India Colonies and Factories is
at Batavia; here resides their Governor-General with much greater State, than
the President of the States General of the United Provinces. The
Governor-General is chosen by the Company, with the Approbation of the
States General; he is elected only for three Years, but frequently continued
for Life; he has a Council of Six, viz. The Major General, a military Officer;
Director-General, who has the Inspection of the Trade, and gives Orders or
Instructions to all under Directors, Factors, Supercargoes, and Masters or
Skippers, with Four more named by the Company. In very good Policy, they have
an Independent Court of Judicature for civil and criminal Matters, to whom the
Governor-General is subject, and by whom he may be condemned even to Death.
Under the Governor-General are six considerable Governments or Colonies; each
has a Governor, Director of Trade, etc; besides several lesser Governments,
Commanderies and Factories. This being only a Digression, I must forbear to
enumerate more Particulars. As the above Observations are not public, that is
in Print, I hope they may be acceptable.

II. A short History of the S. W. Passages (...) to the Mare del Zur South Sea,
or Pacifick (...) to the East Indies, or China and the Spice (...) the
Portugueze formerly claimed an (...) by the S. E. Passage, in like Manner the
(...) to the exclusive Navigation of the S. (...) to the East Indies. For the
better (...) Affair, we may previously observe In the Course of this Narrative
concerning the (...) Europe settled in America, to render Matters more (...) we
do sometimes premise introductory Accounts of (...) tim^^ subnect by Way of
Notes or Annotations (...) of inciden^al Things, which although in ever^ (...)
consistent with our intended Brevity, neither strictly (...) of our Design,
they may be of Use for a general (...) not disagreeable Amusement.
,

The Reason why several Princes of (...) other Passages besides that of the S.
E. (...) Good Hope to the Spice Islands and the (...) as follows. Ever since
Anno 1410, the (...) with infinite Labor and much (...) the West Coast of
Africa to gain a Passage (...) Indies; Anno 1442, they obtained of the (...) a
Grant of the sole Navigation of Seas and (...) Lands laying S. and E. of Cape
Bajador N* (...) W. from London 15 d. in Africa; this (...) Good Hope and the
S. E. Passage.

The Pope Anno 1493, having granted to (...) all Lands beginning 100 Leagues
West (...) or Western Islands (belonging to (...) indefinitely; occasioned a
Dispute between (...) and Portugueze. The Portugueze reckoning (...) Discovery
of America Anno 1492, and this (...) upon their Right to the Ocean, (...)
Navigators of this Ocean, complained to (...) VI. Anno 1493: He composed this
(...) the Limits of a Meridian called, the Line of (...) on Degrees West of St.
Antonio the (...) the C^pe de Ver^ Islands: St. Antonio lies 25 d. West from
London Cape St. Augustine, the Westermost Point of the Brazils (and of all
America) lies in 35 d. W. from London* The L^^e of Dimarkation cuts off a Slice
of the Eastern Coast of America, now called Brazils: Thus the Brazils belong to
the Portugueze, not only by Priority of Discovery and Occupancy (this is at
present the (...) Title by the Law of Nation^) but by the Pope's antiquated,
obsolete, divisional Decree: And as the opposite Line of Dimark^^^on must be
180 d. E. and W. from this Line, it is thought that some Part of the Moluccas
or Spice-Islands, if the Pope's Decree were of any Force or Obligation at this
Time, would fall within the (...) Division.
.

As the Pope at that Time, and for many Years following, was universally in
Europe regarded, as the sole and absolute Arbitrator, or rather Disposer of all
Dominio^^ upon Earth; the other Princes of Europe did implicitly acquiesce in
this fantastical, or rather FANATICAL Division of the Globe of Earth (its Parts
to be discovered) between the Spaniards and Portugueze; and for near a Century
all the Traffic of the East and West Indies was engrossed respectively by the
Portugueze and Spaniards; but in Process of Time, the British, French and Dutch
have got into their Hands the greatest Part of this Traffic; Gold, Silver, and
precious Stones excepted.

There are three different South West Passages.

1. The Straits of Magellan (it is properly a Thorough-fare, but near the
Land's End of America) the East Entrance lies in 52 d. 30 m. S. Lat. its West
Entrance in 53 d. S. Lat; in all its Turnings about 116 Leagues long, Cape
Q^aad not above 4 Miles wide, at Batchellors River 50 Leagues from its East
Entrance the Flood begins to come from the Westward and makes a ripling with
the Ea^^ern Flood. After the beginning of May to the End of Sept. these Straits
are so full of Ice with fixed stormy Westerly Winds there is no passing; at
other Times It is very difficult and tedious, therefore it is now disused.
Trees grow here to a considerable Bigness; there are no (...) Trees in these
Southern Latitudes, the like Northern Latitudes abound with them. Here are
large Trees with a pepperish aromatic tasted Bark, formerly of good medical
Use, the Botanical Name is, C^rtex Winterianus Laurifoliis Magellanica cortice
acri; Winter's Bark from the Name of the first Importer; it is not at present
to be found in the ^^^thecaries Shops in Europe, and the Name is transferred to
the C^rtex Eluth^ri, from the Bahama Islands, called Cina^^mum ^ive C^^^lla
alba tubis minoribus C. B. P.


Ferdinand Magellanez a Native of Portugal, not sufficiently rewarded for his
many good Services in the Portugueze Discoveries, offered his Service to the
Emperor Charles V. King of Spain, to find a Passage to the Spice Islands by
sailing Westward, without any Violation of the Pope's Bull or of the Agreement
with Portugal: with five Ships and 300 Men he sa^l'd from S^vile in Sp^in
August 10. Anno 1519; he wooded and watered on the Coast of Brazil in 22 d. S.
Lat; he first, but in vain, attempted a Passage by the River of Plate, he
discovered and passed the Straits of his own Name November Anno 1520, he
proceeded to the Ladrones and Philippine Islands where he was killed in a
Skirmish with the Indians; his Ships proceed and arrived at the Moluccas or
Spice Islands in November 1521, The Spaniards were soon drove from the Spice
Islands by the Port^g^eze, and the Emperor King of Spain having pressing
Occasions for Money, for a certain Sum renounced all his Pretensions to the
Spice-Islands.
and settled a Colony, they loaded with Spices, and by Way of the Cape of Good
Hope, in three Years returned to Spain. After Megellan's Pass^ge, it was
discontinued (being represented so very difficult) for many Years. Camerga a
Spaniard is said to have passed it Anno 1539.

Capt. Francis Drake is reckoned the Second who circumnavigated our Globe or
Earth by passing the Straits of Magellan, w^^h five Ships 164 Men, he sailed
from Plymouth, Dec. 13. Anno 1577, he passed the Straits of Magellan in Sept.
Anno 1578, after a very difficult Navigation of sixteen Days, he got much
Treasure along the Coast of Chili and Peru, sailed so far North as 43 d. N.
Lat. the Inclemency of the Weather obliged him to return Southward, he took
Possession in Form of the N. W. Parts of California for the Crown of England,
and called it NEW-ALBION. He arrived at Ternate one of the Molucca or
Spice-Islands Nov. 14, Anno 1579, and loaded a Quantity of Cloves; arrived in
England, Nov. 3. 1580. He was knighted aboard of his own Ship by Queen
Elizabeth. Good Queen Elizabeth excelled in many Things, particularly by
encouraging of Trade and Navigation: She settled a Trade with the Grand
Seignior, with the Czar of Muscovy, with India, and begun our America Colony
Settlements. To encourage Navigation Discoveries, she knighted the Discoverers;
she was called the Restorer of naval Glory and the Mistress of the Ocean. Her
Expeditions against the Spaniards (the Dutch being under her Protection) gave
Occasion to many of our Discoveries and Settlements of Colo^ies and Factories.
She formed an English East India Company by Letters Patent of Incorporation
Dec. 30. Anno 1600, there were 180 Persons named in the Patent, their common
Stock was only 72,000 L. Sterling, whereas the Dutch East India Company
incorporated by the States General Anno 1602, their common Stock was 6,440,200
Gilders or Florin^, being about 600,000 L. Sterling, and consequently soon
out-did us in East India Trade and Settlements.
His Journal differed one Day from the Account of Time in England. In Fact the
Spaniards of Manila differ from the Portugueze of Macao an Island near Canton
on the Coast of China, about one Day, the Spaniards came by the Western
Navigation from New-Spain or Mexico, the Portugueze came by an Eastern
Navigation from Europe; this occasions a Clashing in their Sundays, and other
holy Days; and is a Demonstration, that the same identical seventh Part of
Time, for religious Worship, Festivals and Fasts, can not in the Nature of
Things be observed, and consequently is not I^re Divino, but admits of a
Latitude or Variation naturally or by civil Institution^* thus naturally our
New England Sabbath differs four Hours forty-five Minutes from our Mother
Country's Sunday, and is observed according to the Course of Nature; since the
seventh Part of Time for Rest and Divine Worship, can not possibly be
identically the same, but must differ as Longitudes do. Some other Differences
in Observation of Times, are not essential to Religion, some reckon the Day
before the Night, some the Night before the Day, as do the Mahometans and
others: The Old and New (...) makes a conside^^ble Difference in our holy Days;
they who follow the Old (...) holy Days, are to a Demonstration, in the wrong;
yet notwi^^standing, some of the Church of England, and ot^^r Churches who
follow the Old Style, clamor much against the No^conformists who do not
observe their Christmas, Easter, and other erroneously established holy Days:
In short, it would appear to a Man of an indifferent Persuasion or void of
Prejudice, that in the Nature of Things, Divinity has left it with the Civil
Power to regulate these Matters.


Capt. Thomas Cavendish (he was afterward knighted) was the third Adventurer
and Circum-navigator by this Strait, having passed, he distressed the Spaniards
very much along the South Sea Shore, he touched at ^^^^fornia, took an
Aquapulco Ship, touched at the Philip^^^^ Islands and Iava, he doubled the Cape
of Good Hope, touched at St. Helena in 15 d. S. Lat; with much Booty and Glory,
he arrived at Plymouth, Sept. 9. Anno 1591.

The Spaniards having found two Land-passes or Conveyances, viz. The Isthmus o^
Darien, and from the River of Plate cross the Andes to the South-Seas, they
discontinued this Navigation. Oliver Nort, Anno 1598, and George Spilbergen,
Anno 161^, Dutch Men passed. Sir John Narborough, fitted out by King Charles
II. and the Duke of York, sailed from England May 15. Anno 1669, was only six
Months from B^ldivi^ in ^^ili to England, he repassed the Straits of Magellan,
and made the Lizard, June 10, 1671, was only one Year and nine Months in his
Voyage. M. de B^^^chesne a French Man (perhaps the last in this Navigation)
passed Anno 1699, he returned S. of Cape-Horn without making Land.

2. The Passage by Straits Le Maire and Cape Horn. This Strait lies between
Terra del Fouego and Staten Island, in 55 d. S. Lat. 5 Leagues long, 8 Leagues
wide, good Soundings; from thence they double Cape-Hor^ the South Land's End of
America, in 57 d. 50 m. S. Lat.

Cornelius Schouten of Horn, and Jacob Le Maire of Amsterdam, Anno 1615, were
the first who adventured South of Magellan-Straits. The Island which makes the
Straits had its Name from the States of Holl^nd, the Straits were called by the
Name of one of the Discoverers, the Cape was called after the Name of the
Birthplace of the other Discoverer. They performed their Circ^^-navigation in
two Years and eighteen Days. Thi^ Passage has been much practiced.

Commodore Anson's (now Admiral Anson) Voyage through these Straits round our
Globe or Earth, is the l^^est we have any particular Account of; he sailed from
England, Sept. 18. 1741, to annoy and distress the Spa^iards in the South-Seas,
his Squadron consisted of Ships, one 60 Guns, two 50 Guns, one 40 Guns, one 20
Guns, ^ Sloop or Snow of 8 Guns, 2 Victuallers, he had twelve Months Provision
aboard, 500 Marines and Invalids, but returned to England a single Ship: Of the
510 Men aboard the Centurion the Commodore, when he sailed from England, not
exceeding 130 returned to England. He was unfortunate as to wrong Seasons all
the Voyage, he set out too late, was 38 Days in his Passage to Maderas, did not
leave St. Catherine's In this Navigation in Time of a general Peace, the proper
^aiting Places, Places of Refreshment, or to wood and water, are the Cape de
Verde Islands, the Coast of Brazil, and the Island Ferdinando, in the South
Seas, 34 d. 10 m. S. Lat. 100 Leagues West from the Coast of Chili.
on the Coast of Brazil, in 27 d. S. Lat. until Jan. 18, passed in Sight of the
Magellan Straits in March, through Straits Le Maire, he was off of Cape Horn in
the Height of their Winter, with hollow Seas, and boisterous adverse Winds (we
before hinted that the South high Latitudes, are in their Winters more
tempestuous, than the like North high Latitudes in the Northern Winters; thus
Cape of Good Hope, although in 34 d. S. Lat. was at first called Cape
Tormentosa, the N. W. Winds in May, June, July and August being as it were
fixed and very tempestuous) here he parted from all his Fleet; the Severn and
Pearl of 50 and 40 Gun Ships, tired out (as it is supposed) with ^edious
contrary Winds, dismal Storms, and an overgrown Sea, left him and put back:
Some of his Fleet joined him again at the Island of Iuan Fernandez (...)
South Sea, which is generally used as a Place of Refreshment by Enemies and
Interlopers. He had a ^^dious Passage of 148 Days from St. Catherine's (...)
thi^ Island. He did not arrive off of Aquapulco until the End of January, O. S.
the Manila The Aquapulco or Manila Ships, are annually sometimes three,
generally two, sometimes only one, they sail from Aquapulco ^^tter End of
March, near or in N. Lat. 13 d. as freest from Islands have a Run of 2100
Leagues from Aquapulco in 16 d. 30 m. N. Lat. and 106 d. 30 m. W. from London,
to Guyam one of the Ladro^^s in 13 d. 30 m. N. Lat. 220 d. W. Long. from
London, or 140 d. E. from London (their Governor is subordinate to the Spanish
Captain-Ge^er^^ of the Philippines) the Ladrones, particularly Guyam, are of
the (...) Use of Refreshment for the Manila or Aquapulco Ships, as the Cape of
Good Hope is to the Dutch East-Indi^ Ships, and the Island of St. H^lena to the
English East India Company Ships. -- From (...) they sail 400 Leagues to
Manilas (the Distance is the same to the Moluccas or Spice-Islands) where they
arrive sometime in (...): They set out from Manilas for Aquapulco in August,
and are so^^times under a Necessity to stretch so high as 50 d. N. Lat. to
(...) at the variable or rather the Westerly Winds. They never discover any
Land but have frequent Soundings in the high Latitudes. They arrive at
Aquapulco in December or January, the first Land they have made has sometimes
been St. Sebastian off California in N. Lat. 42 d. and 133 d. W. Long. from
London, being the most Westerly known Part of America, generally they make Cape
St. Luca^ the South Po^^t of California in N. Lat. 22 d. 30 m; sometimes the
first Land they make is Cape Corientes on the West Coast of Mexico in N. Lat.
19 ^.

From the City of Mexico by their Barca^^^er of Aquapulco, they ship much
Silver to Ma^llas (Commodore An^^^ accoun^^^ for 1,300,000 Pieces of Eight in
the Manila Prize of 1743 I^n^ 20.) which purchase in Iapan and China (they have
a continued Tr^d^ with these Places) all Sorts of rich Goods for Mexico.


Ship being ^ot in January 9. From the West Coast of Mexico he (...) 109 Days
to the Ladrones (it is generally performed by heavy Sailers in 60 or 70 Days)
from thence he (...) to Macao a Portugueze Settlement upon an Island (...)
Canton the chief Place of Trade in China, here he co^^inued from November 1742
to April following. June ^^. Anno 1743, Commodore Anson by good Chance ((...)
Manila Ship might have got into her Port, but ^^ing informed at Aquapulco of
Anson's bad Condition, he bore up to him to take him) took the Manila Ship
bound from Aquapulco to Manila, about 6 Leagues S. E. of Cape Spiri^u Sancto
off the Island Mindora near Luconia or Manila Island July 11, he anchored again
in Macao Road, and left it December 15, bound for England. Anno 1744, April 3,
he left Cape of Good Hope, and June 12, made the Lizard Point. The Prize Money
of the Manila Ship, and of some small Captures on the Coast of Peru, accounted
for was in Value 355,324 L. Ster.

3. The Navigation East of Staten Island, clear of all Land giving Cape Horn
the Land's End of South America a good Birth. This is the present Practice of
the French South-Sea-Men, and is the most advisable.

Capt. Sh^rp a Bucanier, The Bucaniers originally were a vagrant vicious
seafaring piratical People, chiefly English and French: They were ^sed to kill
wild Bulls and Cows with long Fusees called Bucanier Pieces for their Hides and
Tallow; At first they committed Depredations only upon the Spaniards and
Spanish Settlements ( Morgan took Porto-Bello and Panama, Anno 1671) and
although a notorious Pirate was knig^ted by that Prince of Pleasure and Whim K.
Charles II, but afterward was in Disgrace. They carried on this Bellum
Piraticum against the Spaniards in the West Indies from Anno 1666 to Anno 1688.
Madman like, for small Booty, and that soon consumed, they suffered the
greatest Fatigues, Hunger and Risque of Life. They first formed themselves upon
a small Island called Tortugas, North of Hispaniola (all Island^ where Tortoise
or Turtle frequent, are by the Spaniards called Tortugas; that Island near the
Margaritas upon the Coast of New-Spain, from whence by a Spanish Treaty at
Madrid Anno 1716, New England brings Salt for their Fishery is called
Salt-Tortugas) a^ also upon the N. W. Parts of Hispaniola; the Court of France
sent th^^ over a Governor and colonized them, this is the Original of the
French rich Settlements there; it is true, when the French had the Spanish
Assiento Contract for Negroes, Spain consented to their having a Lodge and
Place of Refreshment there, by their usual Way of encroaching upon their
Neighbors, they are now become superior to the Spanish of Hispaniola.
Anno 1681, came from the South Seas to the North Seas without making Land; it
was in their Summer-Season, Nov. 17, he was in 58 d. 30 m. S. Lat. to the
Southward of Cape Horn, where he met with several Islands of Ice and hard
Frosts; he crossed the Equator or Line Ianuuary 7.

Capt. Woods Rogers (afterward Governor of Provid^nc^ and the other
Bahama-Islands) with two good Privateers, set out from Bristol in August, Anno
1708, (his Pilot was Dampier, formerly a Logwood Cutter, who had been three
Times in the South-Seas, and twice round the Globe) he wooded and watered at
Cape de Verde Islands, at Brazils end of November, and at the Island
Ferd^^^^d^, in the South Sea; having Sea-room sufficient be passed into the
South-Seas without seeing of Land; Jan. 10, he was South of Cape-Horn in Lat.
61 d. 53 m; 10 Weeks from the Brazils, he was upon the Coast of Chili and Peru,
where he continued making Depredations till the Month of December, then he lay
in Want near the South End of California. He took the small Manila Ship Dec.
22. He left California Jan. 12. arrived at Guam, March 11, left Guam, March 22,
arrived in Batavia June 20, left Iava-head October 24, arrived in the Harbor
of Cape Good-Hope Dec. 28, sailed from thence April 8* with the Dutch
East India Fleet (they are generally 17 to 20 Sail home^ard bound) passed in
Sight of St. Helena April 30, off of Schetland Islands North of Scotland July
16, and arrived in the Texel, July 23; having encroach'd upon the exclusive
Trade and Navigation of the English East India Company, they did not think it
convenient to come to England, until they had settled the Affair with the
Company.

III. This was designed as the last Head of Passages from the North to the
South Sea, but as it seems to fall in more naturally in this Place, we proceed
with it accordingly.
Thorough-Fares in the Body of the American Continent from the Eastern Ocean to
the Western Ocean, commonly called from the North Se^ to the South Sea and
East Indies.

1. The Straits of Magellan, already discussed.

2. Rio de La Plata. John Diaz de Solis a Spaniard, sailing Southward fell in
with this River of Plate Anno ^515; the Name was occasioned by the first Silver
from Peru, coming down this River (the native Indians call this Country
Paraguay) they went up the River so far as was convenient, and thence traveled
by Land, to the Country that afforded so much Silver and Gold, and made Returns
of it. Garcias a Portu^u^ze was up this River An. 1524. he was cut off by the
Indians. Sebastian C^b^t in the King of Spain's Service An. 1525 sailed 200
Leagues up the River of Plate. Anno 1535 Don Pedro de Mendoza, with 12 Ships
went up this River; he left some Forces there, they conquered the Country to
the Mines of P^tosi; and Town of La Plata 500 Leagues from their first
Settlements; the Spaniards did not begin to work the Mines of Potosi, until An.
1545. Buenos Airs is 50 Leagues up from the Mouth of the River of Plate; one
Branch of this River is called Paraguay, here is the famous Country Tucuman of
the Jesuits; Jesuits having in some Degree civilized the native Indians, they
divided it into Districts or Missions, under the Direction of the Jesuits to
this Day. St. Iago in 29 d. S. Lat. is the Capital of the Jesuits Country. At
present there is a good Land Communication from the River of Plate to Peru and
Chili, so the Assiento Negroes are conveyed from Buenos Airs to Peru and
Chili: the Road passes through La Plata (the great River comes near to it) in
21 d. S. Lat. the Capital of the Audience of Los Cher^as in Peru: the Silver
Mines of Potosi and Porco are in its Neighborhood.

3. The River of Amazons Bachus when he conquered Thrace had a Corpse of Lybian
Women in his Army, called Amazons, Minerva was their Leader. Upon a^ Spanis^
Expedition this Way, a Number of Indian Women with their Hus^ands upon this
River, opposed the Spaniards; this was the Occasion of the River being so
called.
. Its Mouth lies near the Line or Equinoctial, it is of a very long Course,
about 1800 Leagues (it is the largest River upon Earth) from its many Windings
and bad Navigation, it is relinquished as a Thorough-Fare. Gonzalo Pizarro
(Brother to the famous Pizarro) Governor of Quito in Peru, Anno 1540 with a
small Army crossed the Andes, and fell down this River in Quest of Gold; here
he built a Briga^^ine which sailed down the River, which went home to Spain by
the East or North Sea; Pizarro himself returned by L^^d to Quito, he found no
Gold. Father d' Ac^na from Quito went down this River, and by the East Sea to
Spain, and published an Account of the Country. The Spaniards endeavored a
Settlement upon the River An. 1554, but soon relinquished it. By the Peace of
U^recht, France (the French have some small Settlements in Guiana, North of
this River) renounces both Sides of the River (...), and the Navigation thereof.

4. The River Oronoque. Its Mouth lies in about 9 d. N. Lat. by this River no
Thorough-Fare ever was effected; it is the South Easterly Boundary of the
Spanish Settlements on the East or North Sea of America: St. Thomas is the only
Settlement, the Spaniards have South-East of this River, some New England
Privateers in the Beginning of the present Spanish War made some Attempts upon
this Place Sir Walter Raleigh Sir Walter Raleigh for himself and Associates or
Assigns A. 1584* obtained a Patent from the Crown of England, for discovering
and planting Lands in Am^rica, not actually in Possession of any Christian
Prince. His first Settlement was at Roanoke in North Carolina, and encouraged
Adventurers to plant some of those Lands now called Virginia: But his Whim
after Metals, Minerals, and precious Stones, was the Reason of his Neglect of
Settlements. He was fitted out by Queen Elizabeth An. 1592 to annoy the
Spaniards (Drake and Hawkins were fitted out An. 1595 upon the same Account,
they both died in the West Indies) he neglected his Adventures to Virginia, and
made three unsuccessful Voyages up the River Oronoque in Quest of Metals and
precious Stones: He was told (as it is said) and was so credulous (...) to
believe, that, in that Country Gold was so plenty as to be heaped up like
Firewood. In the Beginning of King James Ist's Reign, he was convicted and
condemned to die for a Conspiracy, was reprieved from Time to Time and after
being kept Prisoner in the Tower 12 Years, he proposes to find Gold-Mines in
Guiana, and notwithstanding his being under Sentence of Death, was fitted out,
but returned ^^ in^ecta. Cun^amor the Spanish Ambassador at the Court of
England, in the Name of the Court of Spain, clamoured and strongly complained
of the Infraction of Peace and Amity; to m^ke an Atonement Sir Walter was the
Sacrifice, and his former Sent^^ce of Death was allowed to take Place, he was
executed An. 1618.
took Possession of the Country of Guiana, The Country of Guiana lies between
the Rivers Oron^que and Amazons: The Spaniards to the Northward, and Portuguez^
to the Southward, but have no Footing here. It Is Southern Parts has some small
French Settlements, Cayenne, etc. the English settled the middle Part called
Surinam, the Dutch took it from the English in the Beginning of K. Charles II's
Reign, it was quit-claimed to the Dutch by the Peace of Breda An. 1667, in
Exchange for the Dutch quit-claiming to the English their Colony of
New-Netherland, now called New York; the Dutch settled i^s Northern Parts of
Esquibe Barbice, etc. Sir Walter Ral^igh An. 1595, had taken Possession of the
whole Country for the Crown of England.
Anno 1595 for the Crown of England.

5. The Gulf of Mexico and Isthmus of Darien. Vasco Numes de Balboa with 290
Men Anno 1513 was the first who crossed this Isthmus, and discovered the
South Sea in 8 d. 30 m. N. Lat. between Porto Bello and Carthagena; at this
Place the Isthmus is about one Degree wide. This Vasco received no Benefit by
this Discovery, being soon superseded by Padracias, who was by the Court of
Spain appointed Viceroy of Panama, originally and at that Time Capital of the
South Sea Spanish Colonies: There is a great Ridge of Mountains; or rather of
many distinct Hills running along this Ihstmus, into the Gulf of Darien there
comes from the Mountains many Rivers, which formerly afforded much Gold Dust or
Grains; this was the principal Inducement to that romantic, ill-contrived,
badly executed, and therefore short-lived Scots Settlement here called the
Darien or CALEDONIA Anno 1695, by an Act of the Scots Parliament several
Foreigners as well as Natives of Scotland with a Joint Stock with perpetual
Succession were incorporated by the Name of, The Company of Scotland, trading
to Africa and the Indies. One half at least of the Stock, to belong to
Scotish-Men residing in Scotland; not any one Subscription less than 100 L. and
not exceeding 3000 L. Sterling: To plant Colonies, to build Forts, etc. in any
Part of Asia, Africa and America, with Consent of the Natives and Inhabitants
thereof, and not poss^ssed by any European Sovereign; with an exclusive Trade,
but may grant Permissions to other Traders, to all Asia, Africa, and America,
for 31 Years. The Company to have the Jurisdiction in their own Colonies, where
they may impose Duties, Customs, etc. Their Trade in Scotland to be exempted
from all Duties for 21 Years. All concerned in the Company are declared free
Denizons of Scotland. For Form's Sake King William did grant to the Company
Letters Paten^ agreeable to this Act. By the Interest of some Gentlemen deeply
concerned, the Parliament in the same Sessions passed a^ Act, of bad
Consequence, impowering the Managers for Boroughs, Companies incorporate or
collegiate, to invest any Part of their Stock in this Company.

They began to settle at Darien, 1699; the said Act and Letters Patent were
rectified by a Scots Act of Parliament Anno 1701; and when the Affair labored
much by an Act of Queen Anne in a Scots Parliament, Anno 1703; All Persons and
Ships, Natives and Foreigners, trading to their Colonies by the Permission of
the Company, and returning to Scotland, are invested with all Privileges and
Immunities of the Company.

The Project of settling a Colony at Darien, well deserves the Name of a Scots
FOLLY: A Country under Subjection to Spain at that Time in Peace with us, and
upon any Emergency by a Fleet from Spain, capable of swallowing them up;
besides its being inhospitable from its Unhealthfulness. If instead of this
they had procured of Spain an Assiento N^gro Contract, with an annual Dry-Goods
Ship, if they had followed a Factory-Trade to China, to the Bay of Bengal, to
Hugly River, to Arabia, etc. perhaps it might have turned to some Account; they
soon were in a ruinous Condition, and a little before the Unio^ with England,
100 L. Stock sold for 10 L.

As Good sometimes comes out of Evil and Folly, it happened so in this
Instance: Many of the Scots Members of the Union Parliament and their Friends
were concerned and involved in this Company, the happy Union was much promoted
by inserting a Clause in the Articles of Union; that all concerned should be
repaid their Principal with 5 per Cent. from the Time of paying in their Money
to May 1. 1701; the whole amounted to 232,88 L. Sterling. to be paid out of the
398,085 L. Sterling, Equivalent Money granted by England to Scotland, for that
Part of the English public Debts which would be paid, by rising the Customs
and Excise of Scotland, to an Equality with those of England; the Malcontents
in Scotland, called this, The Selling of the Country.


Company, An. 1699.

Anno 1680, some of the Bucaniers went up the Gulf or River of Darien, and
from thence by a short Land-Passage to St. Maria in the Bay of Panama: Some
Bucaniers returned the same Way to the North Sea. At some Distance to the
Westward 6 Leagues is Nombre de Dios, (nomen Dei) 18 Leagues from Panama, here
the Galleons formerly loaded, but because of the sickly Air here and in the
Gulf of Darien, they were both relinquished by the Spaniards, this is the
narrowest Place of the Neck; Negroes from Iamaica Interlopers, have carried
Letters of Advice from Nombre de Dios to Panama, and brought back Answers in 36
Hours. Six Leagues West from Nombre de Dios is Porto-Bello, Porto-Bello was
taken by a small Squadron under the Command of Admiral Vernon, November Anno
1739, much to his Credit and the Honor of the British Nation. Porto-Bello
taken from the Spaniards, and Louis^ourg on Cape-Breton from the French, are
the most celebrated Exploits this War, of the British People from Home and in
America; perhaps the most remarkable Instances in History of the Spanish and
French Pusilanimity and Cowardice, and of the British Temerity and Bravery. The
Cuba and Carthagena very chargeable, but ineffectual late Expeditions, are
notorious Instances of a Ministry (from Corruption or to humor the Populace)
wantonly playing away Men and Money; particularly, their unnatural and
barbarous Demand of some Thousands of able Men from our Infant Colonies (who
rather required large Additions of People, for planting and defending their
Settlements) as a Sacrifice; of the 500 Men from Massachusett^-Bay, not
exceeding 50 returned.
it is the North Sea Barcadier of Panama, about 20 Leagues distant, and the
Fair for the Spanish Galleons and the British South Sea annual Ship. A few
Leagues West of Porto-Bello is the River Chagre (here Vernon An. 1740 seized
the Spanish Factory and carried off Goods to the Value of 70,000 L. Sterling.)
from the Head of their River is the shortest Land Carriage to Panama, not
exceeding seven Leagues.

5. The early Adventurers to America, where they found any large Opening or
Inlet, they had some small Hopes of a Thorough-fare to the South Seas, but
proceeding only a small Way they were balked: thus it happened in
Chesapeak-Bay of Virginia, in Hudson's River of New York, in St. Laurence's
River of Canada the longest and largest of these Inlets: John Cartier a French
Man An. 1535 sailed up the Gulf and River of St. Laurence so far as Monreal in
Canada. Sir Humphry Gilbert from Engla^^ hearing of a Strait North of Virginia
(New England (...) Nova Scotia were at that Time comprehended in the (...)
nomination of Virginia) imagined, it might be a (...) fare to the East Indies;
he sailed up the Gulf and (...) of St. Laurence An. 1583 and took Possession
for (...) Crown of England.

6. The next and last Thorough-fare Northward, (...) Davis's Straits; but as
this is a very wide Opening (...) rather Sea dividing North America from a
North^^^ distinct Continent called West-Groenland or New-(...) we must refer it
to the Paragraphs of a North (...) Passage, and the Section of Hudson's-Bay
Lodges (...) Trade.

IV. Essays toward a Nor^^ East Passage to China (...) the Indian Seas, come
next in Course of Time, these A^^ventures were prior to the Outsets for a
North-West ^^^^covery. The Cabots in Quest of a North-East Passa^^ first
weathered the North Cape of Europe in 72 d. (...) Lat; by much Solicitation,
our Sovereigns of these (...) were prompted to make some Advances this Way in
(...) of Trade. In King Edward VI's Reign, was (...) corpora^ed a Company of
Merchants for discovering (...) Lands unknown; in Consequence of this some
(...) Ships, by the White Sea, came to Archangel; and (...) Grand (...) of
Muscovy or Russia, grants to an (...) Russia-Company sundry Privileges.
AnnoRegni 1, 2. (...) and Mary, by Patent, a Society was incorporated, by (...)
Name of the Governor, Consuls, Assistants, Fellows^^^ and Commonality of
Merchant-Adventurers to (...) Territories, etc. unknown or unfrequented; this
(...) were in Possession of the Russia Trade 25 or 30 (...) before the Dutch
attempted it.

Toward the End of the sixteenth Century the (...) and Dutch began to try for
a North-East Passage, and many Years lost Ships and their Labor in
impractic^^^ Adventures: It had an incidental good profitable (...) it brought
them into the Russia Trade and Whale-Fishery. The North-East and the North-West
Discoverers introduced the whaling Business. The Dutch have wintered in 75 d.
N. Lat. in Nova-Zembla, the English have wintered in 78 d. N. Lat. in
Greenland, it was remarked that Nova-Zembla although Southward of Greenland, is
colder than Greenland. The English Russia Company were the first who went a
Whaling at East-Greenland, at that Time they employed Biscayers; afterward the
Dutch came into it, followed it more closely, an^ a^e better acquainted. A few
Years since, the English South-Sea-Company fitted out a great Number of goo^
large Ships Whalers; they sunk much Money from Mismanagement, and soon
abandoned the Affair.

A North-East Passage has been essayed three different Ways, viz. East of
East-Greenland or Spitsbergen, between East-Greenland and Nova-Zembla, and by
Wygatz Straits between Nova Zembla and Russia upon the Continent.

The Southermost Point of East-Greenland lies in 76 d. N. Lat. almost due North
from the North Cape of Europe. This Greenland may reach the North Polar
Regions, but hitherto Point Purchase (so called by the Name of the Discoverer)
in 82 d. N. Lat. is the furthest North that has been discovered. The
Southernmost Part of East-Greenland lies about 150 Leagues from Nova Zembla.

Anno 1671 a Whaler sailed the Coast of East-Greenland to 81 d. N. Lat. there
they found the Ice firm, it did not float; therefore it must adhere to some
Land backwards, consequently there can be no North-East Passage that Way. As
the Northerly and Easterly Winds in these Parts, cause very intense Frosts,
there must be to Windward vast Continents covered with Snow or large Fields of
impenetrable Ice. Thus the very hard Frost^ from the North and North-West Winds
in Baffin's Bay, Davis's Straits, and Hudson's Bay, indicate vast Continents of
Snow and Ice to the North-West.

Anno 1676 Capt. Wood was fitted out by the Court of England in his Majesty's
Ship Speedwell with the Prosperous Pink, to discover a North-East Passage to
the Indian Seas; the Speedwell was cast away upon Rocks of Nova Zembla in 74 d.
30 m. N. Lat. (the Men were saved and came home in the Prosperous Pink) they
found Ice along to the Northward with Soundings, therefore Land is not far off,
and Nova Zembla (a Conjecture) may range North Westward, until it meets with
East Greenland, consequently no North-East Passage between them, unless by some
Straits; the Flood sets from the S. or S. W, therefore no Passage Northward,
besides the Water is rather salter than common Sea or Ocean Water.

In endeavoring a N. E. Passage Nova Zembla was discovered, and Waygatz
Straits between Nova Zembla and the Continent of Tartary or Russia: Those
Straits in N. Lat. 70 d. are always froze and full of Ice, excepting when for a
very short Time by a N. E. Hurricane or Storm it is cleared; but this Time
being short and Weather tempestuous, it may be deemed impracticable.

There was a Contest of many Years standing, between Sir Isaac N^wton with his
Fo^lowers, Members of the Royal Society in London, and the Cassinis with their
Followers, Members of L' Academie Royale d^s Scienc^s in Paris concerning the
Figure of the Earth. Sir Isaac affirmed, It was an oblate Sph^roid, that is,
the Earth rises higher toward the Equ^tor, and falls in toward the Pole;
Cassini pretended from actual Mensuration, that it was an oblong Sph^roid. The
King of France (the French Court are much to be extolled for their Generosity
in encouraging and promoting of useful Discoveries, but their Agents or People
employed, are not always to be depended upon in the Exactness and Truth of
their Reports) at a great Charge employed his Astronomers, and other
Mathematicians, to measure the Degrees of Latitude from the North to the South
of France, by Stations and Triangles: Their Reports at that Time, are now by
their own Confession found to be false by two of their own Missions consisting
of a Parcel of Acad^mi^ia^^; one was sent to Peru in America, to measure a
Degree of Latitude near the Equator; they are lately returned to France: The
other Detachment was sent to Torneo in Finland in Sweden, to take the
Dimensions of a Degree of Latitude under the Polar Circle, they returned Anno
1737 ( Torneo is at the Bottom of the Bothnick Gulf in N. Lat. 65 d. 50 m, and
1 h. 23 m. East from Paris, from an observed Eclipse of the Moon and some
Occultations of fixed Stars, Variation W. 5 d. 5 m, the Refractions did not
differ much from those in France, the River was not shut up with Ice until Nov.
2. they found the Length of a Degree of Latitude that cuts the Polar Circle ^o
be 57,437 Toises or French Fathoms, that is, 1000 Toises longer than it should
be according to Cassini: They pretended to French Gascon, or Romantic
Exactness, exceeding not only Credibility but Credulity itself, viz. to find an
ascertained Basis for the Mensuration of their Triangles, in me^suring by two
Companies, upon the Ice, each with four wooden Rods 30 Feet long, in 7,406
Fathoms 5 Feet they differed only four Inches.
Sundry Writers give us various small Accounts or Hints, some favoring some
discouraging a N. E. Passage, none of them are sufficiently vouched. Some have
wrote, that upon the Coasts of Iapan and China, drift Whales have been found
with Dutch Harping Irons, these must have come by a N. E. Passage. Some relate
Russian Barks that have sailed from the Mare Glaciale East of Wygatz Straits by
Cape Suotainos in N. Lat. 60 d. to trade with the People who live on the
Oriental Ocean in N. Lat. 50 d. therefore Asia and America are two separate
Continents. The Dutch (as it is said) Anno 1646, tried this Passage backwards,
from Iapan to the North Ocean, but to no Purpose; they were not obstructed by
the Ice, but puzzled by broken Lands, Head-Lands, Islands, Bays, Coves, Inlets,
and Creeks. Some Dutch Whalers missing of Whales proceeded further North than
Cape Purchase of East Greenland in N. Lat. 82 d. and found an open Sea clear of
Ice but very hollow. N. B. Why did they not proceed in Quest of a Passage? If a
clear Sea could be found, that is without Continents or Islands to fasten and
fix the Ice, a Passage might be possible: But a Passage through Straits cannot
be practicably safe, their Ice is generally fixed; if accidentally in the
Height of some Summers they be open, it can be only for a short Time, and the
Uncertainty, when a Frost may set in, renders the Navigation too hazardous to
run the Risk of the Vessel being froze up, and the People perish: Spitsbergen
or East Greenland seems to be a Cluster of broken Islands.

V. Adventures of a North West Passage to the West or Indian Seas for the
Spice-Islands and China. Sebastian Cabot a Native o^ England, was fitted out by
Henry VII. of England, Anno 1497, to discover a North-West Passage to the Spice
Islands and East Indies, he made Land in West Greenland in N. Lat. 67 d. and
called it Prima Vista, and from thence coasted to Florida, taking Possession,
according to the Forms of those Times as he sailed along for the Crown of
England; but endeavored no Passage.

St. Martin Frobisher, at first fitted out by private Adventurers, made three
Voyages Anno 1576, 1577, 1578 to a Straits in N. Lat. 63 d. called by his own
Name, but Ice and the Inclemency of the Weather successively obliged him to
return, without any North-West Passage Discovery. He took formal Possession of
the North Continent of Greenland, for the Crown of England, but the Norwegians
(at present the Subjects of Denmark) pretended to have had Settlements there
prior by 200 Years, from Island (its North Parts are in N. Lat. 66 d. 20 d.
West from London); but our first North-West Adventurers Frobisher, Davis,
Hudson, Bassin, Smith, etc. did not find the least Vestige of the Norwegians
ever being there: There was no Bread-Corn, no Herbage, the Aborigines had not
altered their Way of Living, being clothed with Skins, and lodging in Caves.
This North Continent the Danes call New Denmark, and have a small miserable
Settlement there in Davis Straits in N. Lat. 64 d. and a Guard Ship in the
Whaling Season: The Soil and Indian Trade are not worth contending for; the
best of Beaver and other Fur is from hence, but in small Quantities; it is
unhospitable. Hans Egeda in his natural History of Greenland, 4to, 1741, says,
that Greenland was first discovered by the Norwegians and Islanders Anno 982,
but the Inclemency of the Climate, occasioned their abandoning of it; his
Relation of many Colonies, Abbeys, and Churches is too Romantic to obtain
Credit. Anno 1721 a Company of Merchants or trading Men, by a Royal Danish
License set up at Bergen of New-Denmark in N. Lat. 64 d. where the Author and
his Family continued 15 Years: He says that Barley does ripen there, There is a
peculiar Seed of Grain for various Climates, in Lapland, they have a Species of
Barley ripe in six Weeks from its being sowed; the Barley Seed of the Lands
further South, as of Stockholm do not ripen there: Thus Mais or Indian Corn of
Virginia does not ripen in New England, that of New England does not ripen in
Nova Scotia and Canada. The further North, the more vegetable Growth is stunted
and degenerates; far North grow only Pine, Fir and Birch Wood. Further North
only Brush such as H^ath, Juniper, Vitis. Idoea Cranber^ys, etc. Still further
North only a loose Moss.
some Tillage and Pasture-Land, only Brush Wood, several Shellfish, Land
constantly covered with Ice and Snow, excepting near the Seashore, Turnips
grow well; Muskitoes very troublesome in July and August.

There is no good Whaling amongst the loose Ice, the Whales when struck, dive,
and it is uncertain where they may come up to blow, but near great Islands of
Ice, and Fields of Ice or fast Ice, they must come up by the same Side; as the
American or West Shore belongs to Great Britain by the Treaty of Utrecht, Anno
1713, the Winds, being generally from the North and North West, it is the Lee
Shore and Field of Ice; therefore if a Monopoly of Whaling could be allowed, by
the Law of Nations, in Davis Straits, it must belong to Great Britain; thus we
claim, but for political Reasons do not prosecute our Claim, to an exclusive
Herring-Fishery at Schetland or North Parts of Scotland; this Controversy is
well canvessed pro and con by Seldom in his Mare Clausum and by Grotius in his
Mare Liberum. At present the King of Denmark assumes the Sovereignty of the
Seas in Davis Straits.

John Davis upon the North-West Passage Discover^* Anno 1583 made Cape
Desolation about 62 d. N. Lat. and sailed to no Effect, so high as 66 d. 40 m.
He made another Voyage Anno 1586 found among the Natives some Copper. Anno 1587
he made a third Voyage and sailed so high as 72 d. 10 m. this Opening is still
called Fretum Davis or Davis Straits.

The King of Denmark, upon Pretense of renewing his Claims, fitted out some
Vessels for this Discovery Anno 1605, 1606, 1607, etc, their Adventures were of
no Consequence. Anno 1619 John Munck sailed into the Northern Parts of Davis
Straits and called it Mare Christianum (the Name of the King of Denmark at that
Time) he wintered in 63 d. 20 m. N. Lat. and called it Monk's Winter Harbor,
and the Country he called New-Denmark, few of his Men survived so as to return
Home and live.

In the Beginning of last Century Henry Hudson, by two Adventureshaving
satisfied himself that there was noNorth-East Passage to China, was sent from
England to try aNorth West Passage; as the West Northward Navigation had no
Success, he sailed by the West Southward Opening, through the Straits called by
his Name into a Bay called Hudson's- Bay, where he perished by the
Insidiousness of his villainous Crew.

Sir Thomas Button (in these Times many seafaring Commanders were knighted, to
encourage Discoverers) Anno 1611 encouraged by Prince Henry, pursued the N.
West Discoveries, passed through Hudson's Straits and Bay, navigated and looked
into the several Creeks and Inlets of its Western Shore (Water generally 80
Fathom deep) he gave it the Name of New Wales, he in much Misery wintered in 57
d. 10 m. N. Lat. he called the Place Port Nelson; this West Coast was
afterward called Button's- Bay.

Sir. Thomas Smith's Sound discovered Anno 1616 is in N. Lat. 78 d.

After Davis, M. Baffin prosecuted the North North-westward Passage, in the
North Parts of Davis Straits, there he found a great Bay called Baffin's- Bay,
he did not prosecute to the Bottom or further Extent of this Bay, but despaired
of finding a North West Passage. In N. Lat. 78 the Compass varied 57 d. W. the
greatest known Variation.

No more Voyages were made from England upon that Design until Anno 1631. Capt.
Thomas James of Bristol made some additional Discoveries to those of Hudson,
Button, and Baffin (here we anticipate a little* the Hudson's Bay Account) he
wintered at Charleton Island, near the Bottom of Hudson's- Bay; in this Island,
he says, in Summer-Season, the Days are excessive hot, and in the Nights Frost;
in the Months of June and July the Musketoes are intolerable, several Kinds of
Flies and Butterflies, no Fish nor Fish-Bones or Shells upon the Shore
excepting Cockle-Shell; here were several Kinds of Fowl, Deers, Foxes, Bears,
and some small Quadrupedes; full of Spruce, Firs, and Juniper. He printed his
Journal (a good Performance) 4to London 1633. He gives it as his Opinion, that
there can be no North West Passage.

Several others in the Beginning of the Seventeenth Century made Attempts for a
North-West Passage, West Greenland and Fields of Ice obstructed them; but an
incidental very considerable Benefit accrued, viz. the Davis Straits
Whale-Fishery. None have prosecuted the Navigation along the West Side of West
Greenland into very high Latitudes, to discover whether West Greenland and East
Greenland do converge so as to join, or if there be a Passage along by the
North Pole.

The many Dis^ppointments and Discouragements, as also the intestine Bro^s and
Confusions in England did put a Stand to all Discoveries and other
Improvements. Upon the Restoration of King Charles II, the Discovery Projects
were again set on Foot by some Noblemen and Merchants. Prince Rupert was
concerned: Capt. Guillam in the Nonesuch Ketch was fitted out, Anno 1667; he
sailed up Baffin's-Bay so high as 75 d. N. Lat. and returned to Prince Rupert's
River in N. Lat. 51 d. and laid the Foundation of an advantageous Fur-Trade in
the Hudson's- Bay Company, established by Royal Patent Anno 1670 to Prince
Rupert and Associates.

Capt. Middleton in his North West Discovery Voyage Anno 1742* says, it is
impossible in any Part of the Western Coast, lower than 67 d. N. Lat, called
Cape Hope West from London 87 d; he pretends to have inspected this Coast
narrowly; and if there be any Passage further North it must b^ impracticable,
because (if at all clear) it can not be clear above one Week in the Year. His
main Attempt was in Wager River N. Lat. 65 d. 25 m. the Entrance 6 to 8 Miles
wide, Tide 5 or 6 Knots, Soundings not less than 16 Fathoms (many Savages came
aboard but had no Trade, they spoke of Mines Many of our Adventurers to North
and South America (witness Sir Walter Ral^igh in the River Oronok^; seem to
have been more intent upon Metals and Minerals, than upon Passages to the East
Indies, Indian Trade, or settling of Colonies.
) the further he went up Wager River, the Tides did rise less (whereas Sir John
Narborough in his Passage through the Straits of Magellan, the nearer he
approached the Western Flood, the Tide did rise more) the Water from salt
became brakish, and gradually more fresh, therefore it must proceed from some
fresh Water River, and is no salt Water Thorough-Fare.

If there were discovered a N. E. or N. W. Passage to China, the Difficulties
in Navigation, would render it of little or no Use, other, than to amuse the
Curious in the Hydrography of those Parts.

There is a River which the French Coureur des Bois, call St. Lawrence coming
from the Westward, falls, into the Northern Parts of the upper Lake, nearly 100
d. W. from London, and the same Latitude with the Bottom of Hudson's- Bay, and
communicating with it by Water Canoe Carriage; the North Parts of Calefornia
lie in about 130 d. West from London (according to Dr. Hally's accurate laying
of it) and in Lat. 42 d; thus the Difference of Longitude is only 30 d; which
at the Medium Lat. of 45 d. (14 Leag^es to a Degree) makes only 420 Leagues;
and if Calefornia is divided from the Continent by a Sinus or Straits, this
will render the Distance to that Straits still shorter. By going up this River
so far as Water Canoe Carriage will allow, and then perhaps only some short
Land Carrying-Place to some Rivulet or River running Westward toward the Seas
of California or Western Ocean, if some Ridge or Chain of impracticable
Mountains do not interveen. But cui bono all this Puzzle? only to ascertain the
Geography of that Country; it can be of no Use in Navigation.

Mr. Dobbs who faulted Capt. Middleton very much for his bad Management and
Unfaithfulness, did Anno 1745 procure an Act of Parliament, viz. Whereas a
North West Passage through Hudson's Straits to the Western American Ocean will
be a great Benefit to the Trade of Great Britain; there is enacted a public
Reward of 20,000 L. Sterling. to any Ship or Vessel belonging to Subjects of
Great Britain, that shall find out any such Thorough-Fare or Passage. Upon this
Encouragement the Dobbs Galley and California sailed from England in May 1746;
hitherto we have no Account of them.

A Digression concerning Whaling.
The New England Whalers distinguish 10 or 1^ differ^^^ Species of the
Whale-Kind, the most beneficial is the Black Whale, Whale-Bone Whale, or True
Whale as they call it; in Davis Straits in N. Lat. 70 d. and upwards they are
very large, some may yield 150 Puncheons b^ing 400 to 500 Barrels Oil and Bone
of 18 Feet and upwards; they are a heavy logy Fish and do not fight, as the
New England Whalers express it, they are easily struck and fastened, but not
above one Third of them are recovered; by sinking and bewildering themselves
under the Ice, two Thirds of them are lost irrecoverably; the Whale Bone Whales
killed upon the Coast of New England, Terra de Labradore, and Entrance of Davis
Straits, are smaller, do yield not exceeding 120 to 130 Barrels Oil and 9 Feet
Bone 1400 lb. with. they are wilder more agile and do fight.

Sperma Ceti Whales are to be found almost every where, they have no Bone so
called, some may yield 60 to 70 Barrels Oil called Vicious Oil the fittest for
Lamps or a burning Light. It is from this Whale that we have the Parmacitty or
Sperma Ceti (very improperly so called) the Ancients were at a Loss whether it
was an Animal or Mineral Substance, Schroder a celebrated Pharmacop^^ia* Writer
about the Middle of last Century, calls it Aliud Genus Bituminis quod Sperma
Ceti Officinae vocant, he describes it Pinguedo furfurosa producta exhalatione
terrae Sulphureae. We now find that any Part of its Oil, but more abundantly
the Head-Matter as the Whalers term it; if it stand at Rest and in the Sun will
shoot into Adipous Fleaks resembling in some Manner the Chrystalisation of
Salts: Instead of Sperma Ceti, it ought to be called Adeps Ceti, in the Materia
Medica. This same Whale gives the Ambergrease, a Kind of Perfume, as is Musk*
Anciently it was by the natural Historians described as a Kind of Bitumen,
hence the Name Ambra-grisea. Dale a noted Author, in his Pharmacologia not long
since publishes it as such; it is now fully discovered to be some Production
from this Species of Whale, for some Time it was imagined some peculiar
concreted Juice lodged in a peculiar Cystis; in the same Manner as is the
Castor^um of the Beaver or Fiber Canadensis, and the Zibethum of the Civet-Cat
or Hyena, in Cystis's both Sides of the Any (...)* thus not long since, some of
our Nantucket Whaler^ imagined, that in some (very few and rare) of these male
or Bull Whales, they had found the Gland or Cystis in the Loins near the
Spermatick Organs: Late and more accurate Observations seem to declare it to be
some Part of the Ordure, Dung, or Alvine Excrement of the Whale; Squid Fish one
of the Newfoundland Baits for Cod, are sometimes in Newfoundland cast ashore in
Quantities, and as they corrupt and fry in the Sun they become a Jelly or
Substance of an Ambergrease Smell; therefore as Squid Bills are sometimes found
in the Lumps of Ambergrease, it may be inferred, that Ambergrease is some of
the Excrement from Squid Food, with some singular Circumstan^es or Dispositions
that procure this Quality, seldom concurring, thus the Nantucket Whalers for
some Years last, have found no Ambergrease in their Whales. The Sperma-Ceti
Whale has no B^ne or Baleine in his Mouth, but fine white Teeth; they are most
plenty upon the Coast of Virginia and Carolina.

The Fin-Back, beside two small Side Fins, has a large Fin upon his Back, may
yield 50 to 60 Barrels Oil his Bone is brittle, of little or no Use, he swims
swifter, and is very wild when struck. The Bermudians some Years catch 20 of
these Whales, not in Sloops, but in Whale-Boats from the Shore as formerly at
Cape-Cod, their Governor of Bermudas has a Perquisite of 10 L. out of each old
Whale.

The Humpback has a Bunch in the same Part of his Back, instead of a Fin: The
Bone is not good; makes 50 to 60 Barrels Oil.

The Scrag Whale has several of these Bumps.

Black Fish, i. e. Grampus of 6 to 10 Barrels Oil, Bottlenose of 3 or 4
Barrels, may (like Sheep) be drove ashore by Boats.

Liver-Oil is reckoned the best, especially for Leather-Dressers.

Whales are gregarious and great Travelers or Passengers, in the Autumn they
go South, in the Spring they return Nor^hward. They copulate like neat Cattle,
but the Female in a supine Posture. The True or Whale-Bone Whale's Swallow is
not much bigger than that of an Ox, feed upon small Fish and Sea-Insects that
keep in Sholes, has only one small Fin each Side of his Head of no great Use to
him in swimming, but with a large horizental Tail he sculs himself in the
Water. The North Cape (in N. Lat. 72 d. in Europe) Whales, are of the same
small Kind as are the New England, and Entrance of Davis Straits: here we may
again observe, that the high European Latitudes, are not so cold as the same
American Latitudes, The Cold is much more intense in the North Parts of
America, than in the same Latitudes in the Northern Parts of Europe. Capt.
Middleton gives a dismal Account of his wintering Anno 1742, at Churchill River
in Hudson's- Bay N. Lat. 59 d. whereas the French Mathematical Missionaries at
Torn^o in Lapland. N. Lat. 66 d. Anno 1737, to s^ation their Tri^ngl^s for the
Mensuration of a Degree of Latitude there under the Polar Circle, in Winter did
traverse the Mountains. At Enarba near Ener^ Lake in N. Lat. 69 d. the Country
is so populous as to have annual Fairs for Trade. At Wardhus 70 d. 45 m. in
N^rway, the King of D^nmark keeps a Garrison. The Dutch wintered in Nova Zembla
N. Lat. 75. the English in Greenland N. Lat. 76 d.

High North and high South, the most constant Winds are Westerly, being eddy or
reflux Winds, of the Easterly Trade Winds between the Tropicks. In the European
high Latitudes, as also in the Northern American high Latitudes, the Winds are
generally from the Polar Regions; the cold denser Air, by Reason of its
Gravity, pressing toward the Equator, where the Air is more rarefied lighter
and less Elastick; to preserve an Equilibrium which is natural to all Fluids:
In the European high North Latitudes this Wind (it is frequently N. W, being a
Sort of Diagonal or Compositiun between the Southerly Direction toward the
Southern rarefied Air, and its Westerly Reflux or eddy Direction) crosses a
deep large Ocean, consequently warm and mellow: In the American high North
Latitudes, these Winds glide along vast Continents of Snow and Ice, and
consequently more and more chilled; this enpassant, may be a good Surmise,
against a practicable N. W. Passage, because the warm Ocean and its Influence
must be at a great Distance. This Way of Reasoning does not hold good in the
high Southern Latitudes, where from this Doctrine the Winds ought to be S. W,
whereas they are in a Manner fixed at N. W, but perhaps may intimate, that
there is no Continent of Land or Ice to the S. W, and a vast Ocean to the West
Northward to Windward which by a boisterous hollow Sea carries the Wind along
with it; in Fact the Ships that sailed to near 70 d. S. Lat. seldom found any
floating Ice.


because 72 d. is the proper N. Lat. in Davis Straits for the large Whales, and
the Dutch fish for them long-side of Fields or large Islands of Ice, they use
long Warps, not Drudges as in New England.

Nantucket Men, are the only New England Whalers at present; this Year 1746 not
above 3 or 4 Whales caught in Cape Cod, the Whales (as also the Herrings, our
Herrings are not of a good Quality) seem to be drove off from thence. Last Year
Nantucket, brought about 10,000 Barrels to Market, this Year they do not follow
it so much, because of the low Price of Oil in Europe, notwithstanding, this
Year they fit out 6 or 7 Vessels for Davis Straits, and sail End of March; they
sometimes make Cape Farewell in 15 Days, sometimes in not less than six Weeks.
Upon a Peace, they design to fish Whales in deep Water, so far as the
West Indies, and Western Islands. A Whale may keep half an Hour under Water
without blowing (breathing) but is obliged to blow many Times before she dives
again.

Some New England Men a few Years since attempted whaling in the Entrance of
Davis Straits, but to no Advantage: They generally arrived there too late, in
keeping too near the Labaradore Shore (they kept within 50 Leagues of the
Shore, they should have kept 150 Leagues to Sea) they were embay'd and impeded
by the Fields of Ice.

Whales seem to have some Degree of Sagacity. When much disturbed, they quit
their keeping Ground, and the Tracts of their usual Passages (the Whale is a
Passenger from North to South, and back again according to the Seasons) thus,
as to New England, formerly for many successive Years, they set in along shore
by Cape-Cod, there was good Whaling in Boats, proper Watchmen ashore by Signals
gave Notice when a Whale appeared; after some Years they left this Ground, and
passed further off upon the Banks at some Distance from the Sho^e, the Whalers
then used Sloops with Whale-Boats aboard, and this Fishery turned to good
Account: At present they seem in a great Measure, to be drove off from these
Banks, and take their Course in deep Water, that is, in the Ocean, thither upon
a Peace our Whalers design to follow them. In Davis Straits, at the first
coming of the whaling Ships, Whales are plenty, but afterward being much
disturbed, they become scarce, and the Ships return Home, before the
Inclemencies of the Weather set in. The whaling Season in both Greenlands is in
May and June; the Dutch set out for Davis Straits Beginning of March, sometimes
they are a Month in beating to weather Cape Farewell, they do not arrive in the
fishing Ground until May. An. 1743, perhaps a Medium Year, the Dutch had in
(...) Straits 50 whaling Ships (at Spitsbergen or East-(...) they had 137
Whalers) and got seventy six and (...) Whales.

Observation and Experience or Practice improves (...) Affair, formerly the
Whalers (even at Spitsbergen) (...) to tow the Whales they killed into Harbo^^s
to cut (...) up; at present they cut them up at Sea and save (...) Time:
Formerly they whaled in New England (...) only with Boats from the Shore (at
Bermuda^ (...) continue so) afterward by Sloops upon the (...) Banks, and do
now proceed to catch them in deep (...) Formerly it was imagined that the True
Whale (...) upon a Kind of Alga or Sea-Grass, or upon an ouzy (...) now it is
certain that they feed in Sholes of small (...) and Sea-Insects; formerly our
Naturalists judge^ (...) Sperma Ceti and Ambergrease to be Bitumina Suige (...)
at present it is obvious that the first is only a (...) Oil or fleaky Adeps of
a certain Species of Whal^ (...) other is an indurated Part of the Ordure of
the sam^ (...) of Whale when it feeds upon Squids, with other (...) of Sex,
Season, etc. and therefore but rarely (...)

Some Years since the South Sea Company (...) 24 large fine whaling Ships, from
Mismanagement (...) to no Account, they sunk about 100,000 L. St. (...)

The British Parliament to encourage Whaling, (...) an Act Anno 1733 to
continue during the Whaling (...) George II; That there should be paid by the
(...) General of the Customs upon their Return as a (...) 20 s per Tun of
Shipping, under the following (...); the Ships not be under 200 Tuns, havi^^
(...) board 40 Fishing-Lines of 120 Fathom at least (...) Harpoon Irons, 4
Boats with 7 Men to each ((...) the Harponeer, Steersman, and Line-Manager
(...) employed in such Voyages) with the Master and (...) in all 30 Men. For
Ships exceeding 200 Tuns, for (...) exceeding of 50 Tuns, an Addition of 1
Boat, 6 (...) 10 Lines, and 10 Harpoon Irons: Must carry six Months Provision:
The Oil and Bone to be Duty free.

This Prolix Digression as containing some Things that are not generally
attended to, may be Amusement to the Curious; and does by Anticipation
abbreviate the Article of Fishery, in the History of New England.

ARTICLE 3. Some Account of the Discoveries and first Settlements in America
from Europe.
Considering that the Accounts of the Discoveries and first Settlements in
America from Europe, published in English by our Historians, Geographers and
Atlas-Makers are so confused and false, so romantic and imperfect; I am
induced by some Friends to insert some better vouched and digested short
Account of the Matter; this, though not inconsistent with our Subject, will
render the Introductory Section, out of all Proportion and Symmatry too prolix.
The only Europeans Navigators and Planters of America are the Spanish,
Portuguese, Dutch and English; the English are the proper Subject Matter of
this Hist^^^, and their Discoveries shall be related in Course, the others are
the Subject of this Article of the Introduction.

The Continent of America at a medium Estimate is about 1000 Leagues (by
Leagues we always mean the twentieth Part of a Degree on the Meridians) from
Europe and Africa, upon the intervening Atlantic or Northern, and the
Ethiopick or Southern Ocean, the Spaniards call the whole Mar del Nort; from
Asia about 2500 Leagues upon the intervening South Sea, Pacifick Ocean, or
Mar-del Zur which is reckoned to extend two Fifths of the East and West
Circumference of the Earth.

At first the America Navigations were via Canaries and the Caribee-Islands; a
more direct Navigation to its several Parts is now practiced; the Ancients
imagined that within the Tropicks (non est habitabilis Aesta) theEarth was not
habitable, whereas the fine rich Countries of Mexico and Peru lies mostly
within the Tropicks.

America may be divided into the Continents of North America called by the
Spanish Writers America Mexicana, the Continent of South-America called by the
Spaniards America Peruviana, the intermediate Isthmus or Audience of Guatimala,
and Groenland North of Davis Straits.

I. Spanish Discoveries and first Settlements.
Christopher Colon or Columbus a Genoese Mariner or Pilot, a curious Man in his
Way, sedulous in making coasting Cards of his Voyages, and naturally a
Projector; he was for some Years an Inhabitant of Terceras one of the
Portuguese Western Islands, distant from Newfoundland not exceeding 300
Leagues. He went to the Court of Portugal, proposed Discoveries upon the West
Coast of Africa: having for some Time frequented that Coast and the Canary
Islands so called, from many Dogs found there; the Insu^^^ ^^rtuna^ae of the
Ancients; were discovered by some Guipiscoans for (...) King of Castile, about
100 Years before Columbus's Discovery of America; after being relinquished for
many Centuries by the Europeans: the Phaenicians, Carthaginians and Romans are
said to have planted Colonies, it is certain they visited these Islands,
although not the least Vestige of their having ever been there appears.
Ptolemy's Canon was wrote in Alexandria of Egypt in the second Century, and
reckons his Longitudes from Palma one of the Canary Islands, 26 d. N. Lat.
Long. from London, W. 19. d. 44 m. Louis XIII. of France, by an Edict commands
all French Geographers, Hydragrophers, and Mariners in their Journals to begin
their Accounts of Longitude from Ferro (L' Isle de F^r) the Westernmost of the
Canary Island 20 d. West from Paris* accordingly Sanson, a noted French
Publisher of Maps, places his first Meridian at Ferro* this is two Degrees
further West than Teneriff, where De Wit the Dutch Map-Maker fixes his first
Meridian.
Canary Islands, as he formerly did the Western Islands; considering the Sun's
diurnal Motion, the Westerly Winds in certain Seasons blowing with Continuance,
driving Pine and other fallen Wood ashore, with some other Symptoms, he
conceived that there must be Land to the Westward.

Anno 1486. He proposed to the States of Genoa, to discover some Countries
Westward, or to find a Western Passage to the Spice-Islands; they deemed it an
idle Fancy and took no Notice of it. This seemingly whimsical Projection, had
the same Fate at the Court of Portugal, and with Henry VII. of England, though
a Lover of all Projects to get Money, and at the Court of France: After 6 Years
Solicitation at the Court of Spain, the Moors and Saracens being fully
expulsed, (they were in Possession about 800 Years) he obtained 3 Ships and 120
Men: He sailed from St. Lucar upon the Discovery in August 1492, touched at the
Canaries, and from thence in 36 Days (in those Times a tedious Voyage without
Sight of Land) and landed October 11, on the Island Guanchini one of Bahama or
Lucayo Islands (so called because he arrived there on St. Luke's Festival) he
called it St. Salvador now Cat-Island in N. Lat. 25 d; 76 d. West from London,
and from thence he sailed to Hispaniola and Cuba Islands, and Home, carrying
with him some Indians, as a Specimen and Vouchers of his Discoveries* He
returned by Way of the Azores and arrived March 13 following.

Anno 1493 Sept. 25, he set out again with his Brother Bartholomew, 17 Sail
1500 Men; he fell in with the Caribee-I^^ands, and gave them Names at Pleasure,
which they generally retain to this Day, he touched at Iamaica, and at
Hispaniola (his 39 Men left there last Voyage were all killed by the Indians)
and at the Bahamas.

In his third Voyage, Anno 1498 he made the Island Trinidad near the Mouth of
the River Oronoke, and coasted from thence 200 Leagues to Porto-Bello and
called that Part of the Country Terra Firma, from thence he crossed over to his
first Settlement in Hispaniola.

His fourth and last Voyage was Anno 1502: Upon his Return to Spain, for
Misdemeanors he was in Disgrace at the Court of Spain, while others were
makin^ further Discoveries; he died in Spain, Anno 1506* Ae^. 64. His Son Diego
(the other Son died a Bachelor) succeeded him in the Admiralty of the Indies,
married the Duke d' Alva's Daughter, but died without Issue.

Americus Vespucius a Florentine was with Columbus in his first Expeditions.
Anno 1502, he left the Spanish Service, and was employed by Emanuel King of
Portugal, to make Discoveries in this new Part of the World; he crossed the
Equinoctial and made Land in 5 d. South Lat. on the Coast of Guiana, now called
^^^inam, he discovered Brazil, and took Possession for the King of Portugal, in
the Formalities of those Times, and continued his Range to 50 d. S. Lat. the
Severity of the Winter stopped his further Progress, he returned Home by Way of
Africa; next Year he attempted the same Voyage, but falling in with the Coast
of Africa, he returned, and nothing further is recorded of him. The whole
Continent was called by his Name AMERICA. Here is a notable Instance of the
Caprice of Mankind in giving this newly discovered Continent, the Name America
inste^d of Columbia: Americus made no Settlement, Columbus was not only the
first, but also the more general Discoverer of this Land.

In the Beginning of the Spanish Settlements there were only two Governors,
both deputed by D. Diego Son of Columbus, Admiral of the Indies, viz. the
Governor of Cuba and the Governor of Panama.

Velasquez the first Governor of Cuba, entirely reduced that Island Anno 1512,
and successively sent Forces to reduce the main Land to no Purpose; Ferdinando
Cortez a Native of Spain, and well acquainted with the American Navigation,
upon a private Adventure, (...) 1519, sets out from Spain with eleven Ships 550
Men, arrived in the Island St. Croix, and from thence Westward to the
Continent, where, as he was informed there was much Gold, he landed on the East
Side of Iucatan, and thence in the River Tabasco now called Vittoria in the Bay
of Campechee 17 d. N. Lat, and destroyed some of Montezumas, tributary Indians:
Having coasted further West, he landed his Men at La Vera Cruz, and burnt his
Transport Ships; not with a Design as it is commonly imagined, by cutting off
any Retreat for his Men, to make them the more desperate; but le^t any of his
Men should draw off and return to Cuba and occasion the Adventure to mis^arry,
Velasquez Governor of Cuba, did frequently send him supe^seding Orders, which
he disregarded; and marches with 400 Spanish Foot, 15 Horse, and 7 Pieces of
Cannon, together with some malecontent Indians who joined them. Navar^z with
considerable Force was sent by Velasquez to recall Cortez, Cortez defeated him,
and drove off his Party. Cortez had many Skirmishes with the Indians or
Mexicans, with various Success: Montezuma the Chief or Emperor of the Indian
Tribes and his two Sons, were found dead after one of these Skirmishes; at
Length August 13 Anno 1521 Mexico and the Mexican Indians submit to Spain.
Notwithstanding of Cortez repeated Refusals or Disobedience to superior Orders,
and of his Cruelty to the Indians; being rich, he bought off all Complaints at
the Court of Spain; he is made Captain General of New Spain, and continued
Generalissimo until Anno 1539, he was recalled and in Spain died a Prisoner at
large Dec. 1545, Aet. 62, his Body was transported to Mexico and buried there.

Vasco Nunez de Balboa was the first who crossed the Isthmus, Anno 1513, he
settled at Panama, which continued for some Time the Capital of the South Sea
Colonies; he was soon superseded by Padrarias one of Cortez's Commanders, he
gave Commissions to Piza^ro and Almagra Partners, private Traders for making
Discoveries in Peru; for Want of suf^icient Force, they returned from their
first Expedition, and differing with Padrarias Governor of Panama, Pizarro went
home to the Court of Spain, and obtained a Commission distinct from that of
Panama. Pizarro had a Royal Pate^^ for 200 Leagues along the Shore of Peru, and
Almagra for 200 Leagues South of this.

Pizarro a healthy stout Man, of mean Parentage, of no Learning, but very
credulous; set out with 150 Foot, and a few Horse to conquer Peru, he was
afterward reinforced by more native Spaniards under Almagra; he arrived Anno
1532 at Cusco the Indian Capital of Peru, inhumanly massacred many Indians, and
A^abaliba the Indian Chief by the Contrivance of Pizarro was insidiously
executed by the Spaniards. Three Articles were alleged against him. 1. Killing
of his Brother. 2. An Idolater. 3. Disaffection to the Spanish. Pizarro and
Almagra from Anno 1528 to Anno 1538 subjugated Peru, and LIMA the present
Capital was founded. Don Castro Anno 1530 with 700 Men from Spain, was sent
Governor of Peru, Almagra opposed him, defeated, tried and executed him.
Alvaredo Governor of Guatimala, hearing of Pizarro's acquiring great Riches in
Peru, sets out for Peru with an Army of 700 mostly Horse, Anno 1535, Pizarro
bought him off, h^ returned to Guatimala and left his Troops with Pizarro.

Almagra was the first who went upon an Expedition from Peru to CHILI Anno
1535, but soon returned, being jealous of his Partner Pizarro. Anno 1540
Pizarro sent Baldivia from Peru to conquer Chili; Baldivia 154^ built its
Capital St. Iago in S. Lat. 34 d. 18 Miles from the Ocean, Valparizo is its
Barcadier; he built Baldivia in S. Lat. 40 d. calling it by his own Name Anno
1552, he continued his Conquests to the Island of Chiloe in S. Lat. 43 d. at
present the most Southern Part of Chili or Spanish Settlements. This Settlement
of Chili labored hard for about 50 Years, having continued Wars and
Conspiracies with the Indians; Baldivia was killed in a Skirmish with the
Indians. There was a general Revolt of the Chiloese Anno 1559.

Pizarro and Almagra differed much; Pizarro at (...) made Almagra Prisoner, and
by a formal Court of Justice was put to Death, and the Pizarro's seized his
Government, Property and Treasure. Almagra's Partisans Anno 1541 did
assassinate Pizarro at Lima, and seized his Treasure. Almagra's Son assumes the
Government. Blasco Nunez Vela a new Viceroy was sent from Spain, he was
opposed by the Pizarro Faction, and killed in an Engagement Anno 1546. Thus the
Pizarro's became Masters of all America in the South Sea, and to save Peru, the
Court of Spain was obliged to temporize, and appointed one of the Pizarro's
Viceroy of Peru; but soon after this Gasco a cunning Man with 1600 veteran
Spaniards, was sent over as President of the Royal Court with great Powers: The
Vice Roy Gonzallo Pizarro had a Difference with him; Pizarro is defeat, tried
and executed. There were several other Insurrections, so that until Anno 155^
King Philip of Spain could not be said to be in peac^able (...) of Peru.

I here annex some miscellaneous loose Hints concerning the Country and Affairs
of the Spanish West Indies.

In the considerab^e Seaports where the Latitudes, Longitudes, and the
temporary Variations of the Compass or Magnatick-Needle are well ascertained, I
mention them and adduce my Voucher^.


For above Fourscore Years after the first Spanish Discoveries in America no
European Nation attempted any Settlement there.

Cortez's Ships sent to the Moluccas or ^pice Islands by Way of the South Sea
were destroyed by the ^ortuguese, and the Project miscarried.

The Spaniards had scarce any Communi^a^ion with the PHILIPPINE and Ladrones
Islands until Anno 1542, they made no great Progress in s^ttling of them till
Anno 1564, when the Viceroy of Mexico sent a Fleet to settle Colonies and
establish a Trade there between Mexico, and Iapan and China. The Philippines
have no Trade with Europe. The Ladrones are a Place of Refreshment between
Mexico and the Philippines. It is said, that Anno 1732, the Court of Spain had
formed a Project to settle an East India Company to the Philippine Islands by
Way of the Cape of Good-Hope, it came to nothing.

The Coast of New-Spain (properly Mexico only is called New Spain, as that Part
of the British Settlements in America, between the Provinces of New York and
Nova Scotia, only is called New England) or Spanish America, may in a few Words
be described thus. The Garrison of St. Augustine in the Gulf of Florida N.
Lat. 29 d. here is no Settlement. The small Settlement of Pensacola in the Bay
of Appalachie of the Bay of Mexico about 120 Leagues due West from Augustine
and only 15 Leagues East from L' Isle Dauphine a French Fort and Settlement,
consequently in a bad Neighborhood. After an Interruption of a French Sea-Line
( Louisiana or Missisippi Country) upon the North Shore of the Gulf of Mexico
of about 180 Leagues, from Pensacola to St. Bernard or St. Louis's Bay; the
Coast of New-Spain begins again and extends to the River Oranoke in about 9 d.
N. Lat. After another Interruption of a Sea-Line settled by the Dutch called
Surinam, and the following small French Settlement of Cayenne, and the ^ine
rich large Portugues^ Settlement of Brazil; to the River of Plate: The
Spani^rds have not settled much upon the Ocean, but run up this River and
communicate with Peru and Chili. From the River of Plate in S. Lat. 35 on the
East Ocean to Cape-Horn, and from Cape-Horn along the Shore of the West Ocean
or South Sea, to Chiloe in S. Lat. 43 d. the Coast is a desert. From River of
Plate to Cape-Horn, the Navigation is good, the Soundings are very regular,
being 60 to 80 Fathom, at 30 to 40 Leagues from the Land. From the Island of
Chiloe in S. Lat. 43 d. to Cape St. Lucar of California in N. Lat. 24 d. is the
South Sea Spanish Coast of Chili, Peru, the Isthmus, and Mexico.

Many of the Spanish Settlements o^ Provinces are so separated by Mountains and
Deserts, they cannot be assisting to one another. The Spaniards have not
settled exceeding 200 Leagues North from the City of Mexico. In the Country of
Mexico scarce any Gold, their Silver Mines are not so rich, but are easier
wrought than those of Peru. The Quicksilver for refining, comes from Old Spain
and is a considerable Article in the King of Sp^^n'^ R^^^nue. Peru produces
Quicksilver sufficient for (...) self* In Chili Silver is scarcer than Gold.

From Mexico to Lima in Peru the Country is full of roc^^ Mountains, scarce or
very ill inhabited: North of Mexico and South of Peru are good Countries. Upon
(...) Coast of Peru and Chili from 7 d. N. Lat. to 38 d. S. Lat. the Winds are
generally Southerly, and extend 140 to 150 Leagues West from the Shore. Chili
reaches from the Island Chiloe 43 d. to 25 d. S. Lat. Peru from thence to the
Equinoctial. Chili and Peru are narrow Strips of Land upon the South Sea; from
the Andes a Chain of Mountains running North and South, not exceeding 20 or 30
Leagues from this Shore. Peru may be divided into the Sea Coast, the high
Lands, and this Ridge of Mountains, where all the cloudy Vapors seem ^o
condense and settle into Rain, there it ^ains almost incessantly, but upon the
Sea Coast scarce any Rain.

In the West India Islands the Shores are generally, eitheir S^ndy ^^ys or
Mangrave Trees. In the West Indies between the Tropicks, they have Tides or
Reciprocations of Air or Winds, as well as of Seas, but not from the same
Cause; the first arises from the Viciffitudes of Day and Night, that is from
the Shore or Land being heated and cooled alternately, the other is from the
Influence of the Moon.

In South-Americ^ is the longest Chain of Mountains upon Earth, called the
Andes or Cordilleras, extending from 10 d. N. Lat. to above 50 d. S. Lat. near
the Straits of Magellan, not many Leagues from the Shore of the West or South
Sea.

In all New-Spain there are but four great Rivers, and they all fall into the
East Sea viz. 1. Rio Grande, or de l^ (...), venting into the Bay of Mexico
near (...); upon this River up the Country stands St. Fe, the Capital of the
Audience of Terra-Firma. 2. River of Oranoke which discharges into the East
Sea, as do the following. 3. River of Amazons. And 4. Rio de la Plata near
(...) stands the City of La Plata, the Capital of the Audience of L^s Charcas,
a Branch of it called Paragua comes from the Northward, and seems naturally to
be the Western Boundary of Brazil. From the Andes there run few Rivers into the
South (...) of short Course, small, and very rapid.

In all the Spanish Settlements I find only two (...) Lakes mentioned (in the
Northern Parts of North America we have many, especially the five great Lakes
or Seas in Canada.) 1. The City of Mexico stands between two communicating
(therefore called the Lake of Mexico) divided by a Casway leading to the City,
built in this Situation for its better Security, the upper Lake is fresh, the
other salt, From the gradual Increase of the salt Impregnation of this La^^,
that of Titacaco in Peru, the Mediterranean Sea, and others in Europe, in a
Succession of many Ages; Dr. Halley proposed to find out the Age or Standing of
our Earth: This with his two Se^^s of ^^^natick Poles to account for the
Variations of the Compass are the only Whims (though pleasantly amusing) that
perhaps this Man of great Genius and Industry, ever published.
they receive Runs of Water, but have no Vent. 2. Titiaco in Peru, S. Lat. 17
d. of about 80 Leagues Circumference, it communicates with a lesser Lake Paria,
about 50 Leagues further South, it is salt, receives Rivulets, but has no Vent.

The Viceroys, Presidents, Governors, and all other principal Royal Officers,
are Natives of Old Spain; as are also their Archbishops and Bishops.

The Church-Jurisdiction consists of five Archbishops, Mexico, St. Domingo,
St. Fe, Lima, and La Plata; and about 30 Bishops.

The Civil Jurisdiction consists of, the Viceroy of Mexico comprehending the
Audiences are supreme royal Jurisdictions and Courts, to which (...) Provincial
and other Courts may appeal; but from these Audiences there lies no Appeal but
to the Council of the Indies in Ol^ Spain.
Audiences of Mexico, Guadalagara and Guatimala, the Viceroy of Peru
comprehending the Audiences of Quito, Lima, and Los Charcas, and the
independent Audiences of St. Domingo (for ^ll the Islands) St. Fe, Panama and
Chili, I observe that the Orders from the Court of Spain Anno 1728, for a
Suspension of Arms to the several independent Comman^^rs in New-Spain, are
directed to the Viceroy of Mexico, to the Viceroy of ^eru, to the
Captain General of the Province and City of Carthagena, to the Governor and
Captain General of the Province of Terra-Firma, to the President of Panama, to
the Governor of Buenos-Ayres, and to the Commander of the Galeons.

Their most considerable Towns and Seaports are MEXICO the Metropolis, in
about 20 d. N. Lat. inland, no Water-Carriage near it; its Barca^ier for the
Philippines is Aquapulco upon the South Sea 16 d. 40 m. N. Lat. Distance 90
Leagues; further North of Aquapulco are no Places of Note, and for 140 Leagues
South of Aquapulco is a mere Desert. Its Barcadier for Europe is La Vera Cruz;
the Mart or Fair for Goods from Europe by the Flo^a, ^otilla Azogues, and the
British annual Ship is at I^lapa 30 Leagues inland. Mexico sta^^s upon more
Ground, but is not so populous as Bristol in England, is built with a rough
hard Stone (no free Stone); an open Town. La Vera Cruz by the Observations of
Mr. Harris who resided there, Anno 1727, and as adjusted by Dr. Halley, is in
N. Lat. 19 d. 12 m. W. from London, 97 d. 30 m. Variation at that Time 2 d. 15
m. Easterly.

CARTHAGENA is the second good Town belonging to the Spaniards upon the East
Side of America: From the same Immersions and Emersions of Jupiter's first
Satellite, observed at Carthagena Anno 1722 by Don Harrare principal Engineer,
and by M. Pound and Bradley at Wansted (28 horary Minutes East from London)
Carthagena is W. from London 75 d. 30 m. Longitude. Carthagena was taken by Sir
Francis Drake Anno 1585, he brought away in Money, Cannon and other Effects the
Value of 60,000 L. Sterling. the Sickness amongst his Men obliged him to return,
sooner than he designed, by the Gulf of Florida, and a beginning Settlement in
Virginia: Ponti with a large Squadron, a private Adventure, Anno 1699, reduced
it and brought off the Value of eight Millions of Livres: Admiral Vernon with a
very large Sea and Land Force of Great Britain and of British North America
came off re infecta, Anno 1742.

BUENOS AIRS is from London W. 3 h. 52 m, or W. Long. 58 d. by Pere Feuille's
Observation of the Occultation of a fixed Star by the Moon, Anno 1708, and as
computed by Dr. Halley for London. From the Entrance of the River of Plate on
the East Ocean, to St. Iago the Capital of Chili on the West Ocean, nearly in
the same Latitude of 3^ d. South, the Width of South-America is 18 d. in
Longitude, or 300 Leagues only.

All the Trade from Old Spain to New Spain does not employ exceeding 50 Ships
(a small Nursery for Navigation) The Spaniards have generally a Squadron of
King's Ships at Carthagena, a small Squadron at Callao, the Barcadier of Lima;
a Ship or two at La Vera Cruz called the Barlevento Armada, being generally one
50 Gun Ship and one Snow; they set out from La Vera Cruz of Mexico in December
with Money to pay the Judges, Clergy and Troops in the Havana, St. Domingo,
Porto-Rico, and Comanas; a private Ship is hired to carry the Pay to St.
Augustine. The Ships at the Havana are only occasional: The Armada does not
touch at Carthagena, it being the Barcadier of St. Fe, the Capital of Terra
Firma, which produces much Gold.

There is yearly a License for 4000 or 5000 Tun of dry Goods to be shipped for
New-Spain from Cadiz, annually but alternately by the Flota for La Vera Cruz,
and by the Galeons for Carthagena, the Barcadier of St. Fe or Terra Firma, and
for Porto-Bello the Barcadier for Panama and Peru. The Indulto or Duty to the
King upon shipped and registered Gold, Silver, Cochineal, etc. is from 7 to 14
per Cent: The Azogues or Kings The Azogu^s Quick Silver is only for refining
the M^^i^o Silver Peru produ^e^ native Cinnabar, the Oar of Quick Silver; the
(...) ^^^ver Mines of Peru were discovered Anno 1567.

Virgin Silver is spungy and brittle, being so called from its having no
mixture of alloy or Impregnation, but in the state in which the Quick Silver
left it. Other Metals with the Denomination Virgin (Gold, Copper) signify
Grains or Lumps of natural Metal, requiring little or no re^in ng


Quicksilver Ships have Licenses for some dry Goods. The Galeons from
Porto-Bello may at a Medium bring home 25 Millions Pieces of Eight, the Flota
from La Ver^ Cruz about 16 Millions, besides what is shipped off in the Register
Ships. N B. The Council of State in Holland Anno 1708 made a Report that Spain
brought from the West Indies during the Course of the last Century about 20
Millions Dollars per Annum.

The Register Ships are all upon the same Footing* we shall only instance from
the Canaries, they are allowed 4 or 5 Register Ships of about 150 Tuns each,
viz. 2 to Havana, 1 to Caraccas, 1 to Campeche, 1 to St. Iago de Cuba, to carry
no dry Goods, only Wines and Brandies, may bring home Silver, and coarse Goods,
viz. Sugar, Hides, Snuff, etc. but no Cochineal, Indigo, etc. are generally 12
Months upon the Voyage.

A Digression. A short History of the South Sea Company Affairs.
This was projected by Harley Earl of Oxford, and Prime Minister at that Time,
to induce the Creditors of the Government to be easy, and to incorporate their
Debts into a joint Stock, with Prospect of great Profit: But as they are not
properly a British Settlement in America, I am obliged to annex this to the
introductory Article of Spanish Settlements.

9. Annae. A Parcel of the public Debts and Deficiencies were incorporated by
the Name of the South Sea Company, being in all 10,000,000 L. Sterling. with an
Annuity of 6 per Cent. The Company to remain for ever, though the Funds
appropriated to them should be redeemed; their Limits are, on the East Side of
A^^rica, from the River Oronoke to Cape Horn (Surinam and Brazil not included)
and from thence on the West Coast of America, to the Northernmost Part of
America (all other Traders, within these Bounds, to forfeit Vessel and Cargo)
to go and return by the South Capes of America, and never to sail above 300
Leagues West of the American Continent. N. B. This seems to interfere with the
Limit^ of the East India Company's exclusive Navigation, which by Charter is to
the West Entrance of Magellan's Streights.

I find from the public Reports, that the Balance or neat Profit of the
South Sea Trade for 10 Years preceding Anno 1734, amounted only to 32,260 L.
Sterling. The South Sea Company was only a Cant Name. Their whole Trade and
Business was only the Assiento for 4800 Negroes per Annum, and an annual Ship
of dry Goods of 600 Tuns, whereof the King of Spain had one Quarter of the
Profits, and the Crown of England another Quarter.

The Spaniards have no Guinea Trade of their own, and but little Navigation
^^om Old Spain to New or America Spain; they have been obliged from Time to
Time to contract with some European maritime Power for a Supply of Negro
Slaves: In King James II. and King William's Reigns, they contracted with Don
Nicolas Porcio a Spaniar^; his Agent Don Castillo resided in Iamaica, and was
knighted by King William, Sir James Castillo. The Portuguese lost by their
Contract; and by the Treaty of Baden, Spain was to pay to Portugal 600,000
Crowns, for Money due on the Assiento Contract and otherways. After the
Portuguese, the French had the Contract, but never furnished the Num^^^s
stipulated. Their Place of Refreshment was on the N. W. Side of Hispaniola or
St. Dominque as the French call it, which gave them a further Footing upon that
Island: The Time of their Contract being expired, the British South Sea
Company, had the Contract upon the following Terms.

The Contract was for Thirty Years from May 1. 1713, and upon the Expiration
thereof three Years more allowed to settle their Affairs; the South Sea Company
or Assientists to furnish annually 4800 merchantable Negro Slaves of both
Sexes, paying to the King of Spain Thirty Three and a Third Pieces of Eight per
Slave in Lieu of all Duties upon 4000 of that Number; may import if they please
more than the stipulated Number, the Overplus paying only half that Duty, may
carry 1200 of these Slaves yearly in four Ships to the River of Plata for the
Use of that Country and of the Country of Chili; may be brought into any Port
of New-Spain where are Spanish Royal Officers; may be sold for any Price,
excepting upon the Windward Coast, viz. at Comana, Maracaibo, and Sancta
Martha, where the Price shall not exceed 300 Pieces of Eight; may transport the
Slaves Coast Ways from Panama along the Shore of the South Sea in Ships of
about 400 Tuns; they are allowed not exceeding six British in one Factory; may
have in each Factory a Judge Conservator, a Spaniard of their own choosing; the
Assiento Ships not to be detained or embargo'd upon any Account; may make their
Returns in the Company's Ships, Flota or Galeons Duty free; may search and
seize any Vessels trading with Slaves upon the Coast; they are not to trade in
any other Merchandise; the Crown of Great Britain and the Crown of Spain to be
concerned each one Quarter in the Trade, and to settle Accounts once in five
Years. In Case of a War the Assiento shall be suspended and eighteen Months
allowed to carry off the Effects. Considering the Losses which former
Assientists have sustained, and to prevent any other Kind of Trade, the King of
Spain during the Continuance of this Contract, allows a Ship of 500 Tuns yearly
with dry Goods, one Quarter of the clear Profit to the King of Spain, and 5 per
Cent Duty upon the other three Quarters; they are not to fell their Goods, but
in the Times of the Fairs upon the Arrival of the Flota or Galeons, the Queen
or Crown of Great Britain was also to have one Quarter of the neat Gain, but
this was afterward given up to the Company.

The South Sea C^^pany Assiento Agents were settled for some Time at B^^^adoes
for the Caraccas and Maracaibo Business, and at Iamaica for the Rest of that
Trade. Iamaica lies the most convenient for carrying on this Affair.

The South Sea Company have tried three Methods of carrying on their Negro
Business, viz. by their own Ships, by Contract, and by Chance purchase from
private Traders, this last was the cheapest: Anno 1721 they contracted with the
African Company for a Supply of 3600 Negroes, two Thirds Males, Six Sevenths to
be from 16 to 30 Aet. the other Seventh to consist of equal Numbers of Boys and
Girls, none under 10 Aet. the contracted Price was 22 L. 10 s. Sterling. per Piece
for Gold Coast, Iackin, and Whidaw Negroes; 18 L. 10 s. Sterling. for Angola
Slaves. For some Years they farmed out some of their Assiento Factories.

The South Sea Company's Effects in New Spain have been twice seized, Anno 1718
upon our destroying the Spanish Armada near Sicily, and Anno 1727 when
Gibralter was besieged; I shall not in this Place mention the Seizures in the
Beginning of this present War. Mr. Keen for several Years had from the Company
1500 L. Sterling. per Ann. as their Agent at the Court of Spain. The Court of
Spain make a Demand of 68,000 L. Sterling, arising mostly from a different Way
of reckoning the Dollars payable as Duty; the South Sea Company reckon at 42 d.
Sterling. per Dollar, the Court of Spain reckon at 52 d. Sterling. per Dollar, the
rest was the King of Spain's Quarter of the neat Gains of the annual Ship the
Royal Carolina. On the other Side the South Sea Company all^dge the frequent
Seizure of their Effects, and Refusals of Licenses or Chedulas at Times, as
Damag^^ to be taken to Account being one and a half Million Dollars Damages
sustained; this Affair is not as yet determined; it is said that the Majority
of the South Sea Directors, at the Desire of the Ministry of that Time, had
agreed to pay the 68,000 L. Sterling. upon a Prolongation of the Term of their
Trade, and a speedy Reimbursement of the one and half Million Damages.

The next Part in the South Sea Company History, is a dismal, and for many Ages
not be forgotten Transaction, A Bubble, an Epidemical, Malignant, and Mortal
Distemper of Bodies Politic; it came by Way of France, where it was called
Missisippi, with us it was called South Sea; laying aside Allegory, it is a
notorious Instance of the bad Constitution of Paper Effects, I mean Paper
common Currency and Transfers; and as it has some Affinity with our Plantations
Paper Currency, I hope it may be of Political Use, with the cotemporary
Missisippi This Note naturally should belong to the transient Account to be
given of the French Colonies; but as it serves to illustrate our South Sea
Bubble, a fatal Imitation of Mr. Law's Project; we have previously introduced
it here; and the annexed Ac^ount of the Fate of the Royal Bank of France (which
was linked to the Missisippi-Bubble) projected Paper-Currency for France may be
a proper Warning or Beacon to our America Paper-Money Colonies.

Never was such a barefaced iniquitous Scheme endeavored to be put in
Execution; their Confidence was in the legislative Power, which they imagined,
could do any Thing, though inconsistent with natural Justice. The Subject of
this Annotation, will remain a curious Incident in History. That a private
Person Mr. Law, Projector of the MISSISIPPI Company Bubble (this Name appeared
too chimerical, it afterward assumed and still retains the Name of the French
India Company) should so infatuate, impose upon, or bubble, in a most public
Manner, the politer Part of Mankind; future Ages will be astonished, scarce
credit, but admire. He rose the Stock of a Chimerical Company from 60 to 70 per
Cent. discount (their first Stock or Subscription was 60 Millions of Livres in
State Bills, or national Debts settled at 60 or 70 per Cent. discount) to 19
Hundred per Cent. advance.

By adding to this 60 Million Subscription in State Bills, 40 Millions more,
Money Subscription; their Stock became one Hundred Millions, and by the King's
assigning to them the Farm upon Tobacco which then was farmed at 4 Millions
with the Farmer's Profit, computed to 3 Millions more, made 7 per Cent. to the
Proprietors: This gave them a great Credit, and their Stock rose much above
Part; next, the East India and China Company was incorporated with it, Anno
1718, and Actions rose to 200 for 100 original. By seven successive
Subscriptions of 60, 40, 25, 25, 50, 50, 50 Millions, it became in all
300,000,000 Livres Principal or Original Stock. Their Fund or Government
Annuity upon which they were to divide, was given out by Mr. Law to be as
follows, The Farm, and its neat Profits of Tobacco 7 Millio^^ Profits in the
India Trade 12 Out of the Crown's general Revenue 45 Out of the five great
Farms of Imposts 30 Profits (imaginary) in Time from Missisippi 7 Fishery, sole
Traffic of Bullion, etc. 25 Coinage 5 131 Millions is better than 43 per Cent.
on the Original Stock.

In Sept. 1719, the Subscriptions (as above) taken in for increasing their
Stock were at 10 for 1, and those Subscriptions were negociated at Cent per
Cent, that is 1 Principal sold for 20, the Subscription^ were to be made good
by partial Payments: But as many of the Subscribers could not make their
subsequent Parts of Payments, without selling out their former Stock; old
Actions fell to 760 for 100, (notwithstanding of this precedent Warning, our
South Sea Bubble split upon the very same Rock) but by enlarging the Times for
the Subscription Payments, and the Interest of their Loans to the Crown being
augmented, Stock rose again to 1200 or 1300, their Privileges being continued
to Anno 1770.

The Money which the Company gained by the advanced Prices upon the several
Additions from Time to Time made to their Stock was lent to the King at a
certain Interest; with this Money the King paid off or reduced the State Debts
or Annuities in the Townhouse of Paris, from 4 to 3 per Cent Interest; which
was a Saving of about 12 Millions per Annum to the King.

In January N. S. 1720 the King had granted to the Missisippi alias India
Company, the Management and Administration of the Royal Bank. About the same
Time the King sold to the Company, his Stock* consisting of 100 Millions of
Livres Original, for ^00 Million^ Livres in partial Payments. Thus the King
sold all his Stoc^ at once by Contract for Money: Thus the Directors and other
great Men who were in the Secret, sold out their own South Sea (...) when the
Affair was tending toward a Crisis.

This Missisippi-Bubbl^ began to co^^ap^e in the End of May ^^20, and Mr. Laws
became a Profugus; to keep up the Affair so far and so long as it could be; the
Company not being able to comply with the Payment of the 900 Million Liv^e^ in
Money, the King accepts again of his 100 Millions Livres in Original Actions
(an Original Share or Action was 1000 Livres); and upon the King and Company's
annihilating some of their Actions, they were reduced to 200 Millions of
Actions, the old Actions were called in and a new Tenor of Actions given for
the same, and it was resolved that for three Years next following, the Dividend
per Annum, should ^e 200 Livres per Action which is 20 per Cent; and a Royal
Society is erected to insure this at 3 per Cent Premium. As there remained a
Number of Actions, the Property and in Possession of the Company; all Persons
who formerly sold out, were ordered to buy in again, ^t the Rate of 13500
Livres per Action, in Bank Bills to be burnt. Notwithstanding of all these
laboring Expedients, the People's Pannick could not be stopped, and the Company
fell into a languishing State, it is not to our Purpose to prosecute this
Affair any further.

This Spring 1747, the French India Company's Actions are at 1045.

That a Paper Currency with any Profit or Duration can never (...) a Gold and
Silver Currency will appear by the following (...) History of the Royal Bank of
France.

Mr. Law in Aid of the Missisippi Bubble, projected the Royal Bank in the
following ^radations, 1. All Officers of the Revenue, were to ^^ceive
Bank-Bills or Notes. 2. By the King's Edict Anno ^^19, Bank Notes were fixed at
5 per Cent better than Gold or Silver Coin; Bank-Bills in the Beginning of
Summer Anno 1719 were in^reased to 400 Millions of Livres (a Livre is in Value
about 11 d. Sterling.) in the End of Summer the French Court gave out (thus do
some of the Legislatures in our Paper-Money Colonies) that this Sum was not
sufficient for a Circulation, and 120 Millions more were made. In October 1^0
Millions more, and soon after 360 Millions more; being in all 1000 Millions of
Livres, which is about 46 Millions (...) Sterling, which is more than all the
Banks in Europe put together do circulate. 3. Next Spring in March, N. S. Anno
1^^0 by an Edict Gold and Silver was gradually to be lowered, and (...) ^^me
Months forbid to have any Currency, with the Penalties of (...) Goods, if found
in any Person's Possession; Bank-Notes and Missisippi Transfers to be the only
Currency, the Impor^ation of Gold and Silver Species is forbid; even the
Payment of foreign Bills of Exchange, though specified, must be made in
Bank-Notes. 4. As the Court of France had been for many Years in the Practice
of altering the current Coin, for the Profit of their King* Mr. Law proceeded
to make a like Experiment, upon their Paper Currency; by an Edict of May 21.
1720, Bank Notes were to be reduced gradually (the Missisippi or India
Company's Actions, were at the same Time and in the same Manner, reduced from
10,000 Livres, their stated Price, to 5,000 Livres) so that after some Months
v. g. 1000 Livres Bank-Note was to pass for only 500 Livres: This occasioned
such an universal Murmuring, that Mr. Law was obliged, to save himself from the
Rage of the Populace, by leaving the Kingdom, and thereby confessing himself, a
most E^REGIOUS ^REAT: To appease the People, who suspected Frauds in the India
Company and ^an^, the Cour^ appointed sham Commissaries to inspect their Books;
they soon made a favorable Report, and that they found in the India Company a
Fund for above 300 Millions Livres Original Stock, the Nation were not
satisfied, it still remained in a Ferment or Fret, Mr. Law was obliged to
abscond May 29, and resign his great Office of Controller General of the
Finances, and the Seals were taken from M. d' Argenson his Accomplice: May 31,
the Edict of last March for gradually abolishing a Gold and Silver Currency was
revoked; and by October following Bank-Notes had no longer a Currency, nothing
was taken in Payments, but Gold and Silver Species.


and French Bank History annexed by Way of Annotations; it does also by
Anticipation take off some Paragraph, which must have been premised in the
Article of Plantation Paper Currencies. Perhaps it may be some Amusement to the
Curious, hitherto it has not by any Writer been set in a strong full and
compacted Light.

Mr. John Law born in Edinburgh Scotland, began His Plan of the Missisippi
Bubble in France, Anno 1717, of which he was afterward constituted Principal
Director, and at Length Controller General of the Finances of France. He was
the most noted Man in Europe for a Gamester and Bubler; he was persuaded that
Paper Effects of Paper Currency, and Transfers, admitted of the greatest
Latitude for public Cheat. In our American Colonies, after having reduced the
Denomination of Five Shillings Sterling. to a heavy Piece of Eight and from this
having reduced it to light Pieces of Eight so far as the Cheat could go; they
fell into a Paper-Currency, whose intrinsic Value being nothing, its imaginary
Value admitted of any Reduction; at present in New^England, by this Connivance
and Management, a Person who pays an old Debt, of Book, Note or Bond, in the
present Paper Currency; pays only one in ten or two Shillings in the Pound.

Impregnated by the Projection of Mr. Law (excuse the Metaphor) a national
Bubble began to be hatched in England; at Length End of January Anno 1719, 20
the Bank and South Sea Company bid handsomely (that is apparently great Sums
for the Benefit of the Public, upon one another; to have all the other public
Debt^ ingrafted into their Stocks; the South Sea Company carried it by bribing
some of the Legislature and some in the Administration by taking up great
Quantities of Store for their Use. Mr. Walpole, doubtless, had a feeling, but
secret and cautious Conce^n in this Affair of Corruption; and as the South Sea
Bubble came near its Crisis, he skreened himself, by being made Play Master
General of the Landforces, the Earl of Sunderland May 27. 1720 being made
first Commissioner of the Treasury in his Room: Walpole did not re-enter
himself, as first Commissioner of the Treasury, until April 1721, the Storm
being over; and we may observe that next Month, the Parliament allowed the
South Sea Company Directors, large Sums out of their forfeited Estates, the
Parliament being then under the Direction of Mr. Walpole; and toward the End
of the same Year, by the Direction of our Prime Minister, Admiral Norris landed
Mr. Laws, a Fugitive from France, in England (Mr. Laws at that Time was in
Cash, the proper Bait for Corruption) he introduced himself by buying off the
Appeal of the Relations, and producing at the Bar of the King's Bench, the
King's Pardon for the Murder of Edward Wilson, Esquire (Beau Wilson) An. 1694, he
was discharged; but his Arrival in England being canvassed in Parliament, and
his infamous Bubble in France being much clamoured against by the Populace (Mr.
Walpole, a consummate Politician, by Experience, at Times found that the Vox
Populi was the Suprema Lex, witness the Excise Projection upon Wines and
Tobacco) his Address, his Money, the Countenance of the Court, availed nothing;
he went off, and died obscurely in Germany; may this be the Exit of all
notorious Cunning leading Impostors in any human Society or Government!

The South Sea Proposals were accepted by the House of Commons Feb. 1. 1719,
20, and had the Royal Assent April 4. following. They were allowed to ingraft
the irredeemable long and short Annuities, and the Redeemables of 5 and of 4
per Cent per Annum Interest (the Bank and East India Company Annuities or Stock
not included) to the Value of 30,954,000 L. Sterling. by Purchase or by
Subscription: The annual Payments from the Government upon these ingrafted
public Debts, to be continued as a^ present, until Anno 1727 Midsummer, and
from thence the whole to be reduced to an Annuity of 4 per Cent; the South Sea
engage to circulate one Million Exchequer Bills gratis, and to pay Seven
Millions Pounds Sterling to the Government for this Liberty and Benefit of
ing^afting so much of the public Debts, the increased capital Stock to be
divided amongst all the Proprietors. The prec^eding Year Anno 1719 the South
Sea Company by Act of Parliament for a certain Sum to the Public, had
ingrafted a great Part of the Lottery Anno 1710, by which, and by this great
Engraftment, added to their original Stock of 10,000,000 L. Sterling. their
Capital became 37,802,483 L. Sterling. (about 4,361,930 L, Sterling of the
Principals which they were allowed to take in, by Purchase or Subscription
could not be obtained, and remained as before) a vast and impolitick Capital.

Next Day Feb. 2, after the Bill passed the Commons, South Sea Stock rose to
150, in May it was sold at 375, all July (the Transfer Books being shut) it
sold at 930 to 1000. In August the South Sea Bubble began to lose its Credit;
and the Directors to keep up the Cheat, published, that 30 per Cent Cash,
should be the half Year's Dividend at Christmas next, and not less than 50 per
Cent per Annum for the next following 12 Years. August 17, Stock was at 830,
Sept. 8. at 550, Sept. 29, at 150; at Michaelmas South Sea Bonds were at 25 per
Cent discount.

At this Time all the Stocks (Bank Stock in July rose to 245, but it soon fell
again to its intrinsic Value 130) and many Schemes were made Bubbles, the
Capitals proposed by the several Projectors and Bubblers did not amount to less
than 300 Millions Sterling. Most People neglected their other Business and
attended some favorite BUBBLE, and John Blunt of London, the Arch-Bubler, was
erected a Baronet, a Scandal to that honourrble Order of Knighthood.

This grand national Cheat, became a Parliamentary Enquiry. In the Report of
the secret Committee, forty Members of the House of Commons were charged with
having Stock taken up for them in Broker's Names; it was found that the
Directors bought Stock for the Company at very high Rates, while they were
clandestinely selling out their own; that the Directors had lent out by
Collusion, about Eleven Millions of the Company's Money, with none or not
sufficient Security. In the House of Lords, the whole of it was called a
villainous Artifice; and it was resolved in Parliament, that the Directors so
far as their Estates would reach, should make good the Losses the Company had
sustained by their fraudulent Management; the Estates of the Directors Deputy
Cashier, and Accountant amounted to 2,014,123 L. Sterling. properly forfeited, but
by Management a great Part of it was remitted to them: The Reliefs allowed by
Parliament is too long to be related here; to the Company was forgiven the
Seven Million which they contracted to pay to the Government, upon Condition of
two Millions of their Capital being annihilated, but this was soon after
restored to them. Anno 1722 the better to disengage themselves from
^ncumbrances, they sold to the Bank 200,000 of their Annuity which is four
Millions Principal.

Several Government Debts were by the Earl of Oxford incorporated into one
joint Stock of Annuities, and were called, The Corporation of the Governor and
Company of Merchants in Great Britain trading to the South Se^ and other Parts
of America, and for ^ncouraging the Fishery. As Mr. Law borrowed his sham Name
of Missisippi Company, from our cant Name of South Sea Company; so we copied
our South Sea Bubble from his Missisippi Bubble.

After a further Ingraftment of all the public Debts (the East India and Bank
Government Debts remained distinct as formerly) that could be obtained, and the
South Sea Bubble being settled, 1723 June 24, their whol^ Capital, was found to
be 33,802,483 L. (without including the 4,000,000 L. of their Stock which they
had assigned to the Bank) the Parliament converted 16,901,241 L. one Moiety of
it in South Sea Annuities, the other half to remain a Joint Stock in Trade.

Anno 1733 This Moiety of joint Stock in Trade, by sundry Government Payments
made from the sinking Fund, The sinking Fund was a Projection of Mr. Walpole's,
a consummate Politician, especially in the Affair of Finances; it arises from
public Savings (the Funds continuing the same) by reducing the Interest of the
public Debts first to 5 per Cent, Anno 1717, afterward to 4 per Cent, and
some ( East India Company) to 3 per Cent. This was not iniquitous but natural
Justice; common Interest had been reduced by Act of Parliament to 5 per Cent
ever since Anno 1714. It was left to the Option of the Creditors of the
Government either to be paid off, or to accept of a lower Interest, they
accepted of a lower Interest: None of the Companies or incorporated Stocks
chose to be paid off, but make Interest that the sinking Fund may not be
applied to them: All the national Debt (Navy-Debt, Army-Debentures, and the
like excepted) consists in the Stocks* these are as transferable as is common
Cash, and therefore may be called Cash in Chest bearing Interest. 2. When paid
off, they loose the Advance which the Part paid would sell at, v. g. the East
India Company would loose about 70, the Bank about 40 per Cent on any Part paid
off.

The annual Produce of the sinking Fund is upwards of 1,200,000 L. and to this
Time Anno 1747 may amount to upwards of 33 Millions of Pounds, whereof about 12
Millions has been applied to redeem so much of the public Debts, and the
remaining 22 Millions has prevented our running 22 Millions more in Debt; it i^
a Help at Hand against any extraordinary Exigency, to raise Part of the Supply
(since the Beginning of the present War Anno 1739* it has cont^ibuted one
Million yearly to the Supply) upon Emergencies any Sum may be raised upon
Annuities, charged on the sinking Fund for a Time, until further settled.

Walpole's Scheme 1733 of an Excise upon Wine and Tobacco would have been of
public Advantage, but it was prevented taking Ef^ect, by the strong Fears of
the Populace, least it should introduce a general Excise upon the Necessaries
of Life (as in Holland) as well as upon Comforts and Extravagancies: Besides it
would have multiplied the Officers of the Revenue, Creatures of the Court and
Ministry.

The Stocks or Government Debts continued, and the Church Lands in Lay
Possession, are infallible Preventives against Popery and a Revolution in the
civil Government.

Our bad Administration in the End of Q. Anne's Time, after a successful War
carried on for many Years by a former good Admi^istration, instead of procuring
advantageous Terms of Peace, conceded to the following disadvantageous Articles
with Spain by the Treaty of Utrecht, Anno 1713. 1. An entailed Charge of
maintaining large Garrisons in Gibraltar and Minorca. 2. The precarious
Demolition of Dunkirk by their Friends the French. 3. The Assiento of Negroes,
which had proved a loosing Bargain to all former Contractors. And 4. A sham
Renounciation to the Crown of France.


became 14,651,103 L. at Midsummer, three Quarters of this was separated, by
the Name of new Ioint-Stock of South Sea Annuities; the remaining 3,662, - 775
continues as a trading or capital Stock, solely chargable with all the
Company's Debts, and not to divide above 4 per Cent per Annum until their
present Debts are cleared and paid off. The Qualifications in their present
trading Stock (in the former Stock the Qualifications were higher) are a
Concern at least of 5,000 L. for Governor, 4,000 L. for Sub-Governor, 3,000 L.
for Deputy Governor, 2,000 L. for a Director: At a general Meeting a 500 L.
Concern has one Vote, 2,000 L. has two Votes, 3,000 L. has three Votes, 5,000
has four Votes, no single Person to have more than four Votes: No Part of the
trading Stock to be redeemed, until the new joint Stock of Annuities become
reduced to 3,500,000 L. No new Bonds to be made, but at the Direction of a
general Meeting.

The sinking Fund has at Times paid off to the Old and New South Sea Annuitants
about 6,500,000 L. and at this Time the Government Debt to the South Sea is
27,302,203 L. viz. Stock 3,662,775; Old Annuities 13,651,100 L. New Annuities;
9,988,328 L. At present, Spring 1747 the Price of South Sea Stock is 103; East
India Company Stock being 177. Here we may en passent observe the great
Difference of Credit and Interest in the Affections of the People, in Relation
to a Tory, Iacobite and Popish Administration; and to a Whig (excuse the cant
Name) Revolution, and true Protestant Ministry: In the Tory Administration in
the four last Years of Queen Anne, South Sea Stock, though bearing an Interest
of 6 per Cent sold at a Discount exceeding 20 per Cent, at present though the
Interest or Annuity is reduced to 4 per Cent, it sells at a considerable
Advance per Cent.

I must here insert (I cannot find a Place more proper) two Affairs, not of
Property, but of Indulgencies and solemnly stipulated Concessions from the
Court of Spain, to the Subjects of Great Britain, and more particularly in
Favor of our Settlements in North America, viz. Logwood from the Bays of
Campeche and Honduras, and Salt from the Spanish Island of Tortuga.

The cutting and carrying of LOGWOOD, formerly from the Bay of Campeche, and
laterly from the Bay of Honduras, in the Gulf of Mexico to Great Britain and
sundry European Markets; has been for some Time a Branch of the British America
Trade, but more especially of New England. This Logwood Business has been
carried on for about eighty Years, ever since Anno 1667, by a Sort of
Indulgence; this Indulgence was confirmed Anno 1670 by the American Treaty with
Spain, viz. The English to remain in the Occupancy of all Territories and
Indulgencies of which they were then in Possession.

Anno 1716 The Spanish Ambassador at the Court of Great Britain entered a
Complaint to the King in Council, against the English Subjects Cutters of
Logwood in the Bays of Campeche, etc: This was referred to the Board of Trade
and Plantation; they made Report that "By the American Treaty Anno 1670, there
was confirmed to the Crown of Great Britain, a Right to the Laguna de Terminos
(Bay of Campeche) and Parts adjacent in the Province of Iucatan; these Places
at the Time of the Treaty, and some Years before, being actually in Possession
of the British Subjects through Right of Sufferance or Indulgence." This same
Right or Liberty is absolutely granted and confirmed by the Treaty of U^recht
1713.

Notwithstanding of this Representation, and without allowing sufficient Time
for the Logwood Cutters to withdraw (if the Court of Great Britain had judged
it proper) the Spaniards from Tobasco, drove them off, it has never since been
used by the British.

This Bay lies on the West Side of the Promontory or Province of Iucatan:
Campeche is a good Town, large as Newport of Rhode Island, built with a white
free Stone, it stands on the Sea. This Port or Branch of the Assiento was
farmed out by the South Sea Directors to Blockwood and Cathcart; at 40 Pieces
of Eight for every Negro Slave they imported; they sent four or five Ships of
about 300 Tuns each per Annum, with a few Negroes for a Blind; their Profit
being from dry Goods, which they sold by the Connivance of the Royal Officers
bribed at 12 to 15 per Cent; their chief Returns were in Logwood bought from
the Spaniards, and carried to London and Holland; they also carried off some
Drugs viz. Gum. Elemi, Rad. Contragara, Rad. Sarsaparil, etc. That Year in
which this Logwood-Bay was cut off, Anno 1717, were imported into the Port of
London 5,863 Tuns Logwood.

Since our People have been dislodged faom the Bay of Campeche, they followed
the same Business in the Bay of Honduras on the East Side of Iucatan, their
Dye-(...) is not so good, and the Mouths of their Rivers (...) and New River)
are more shallow. Because of (...) sent War with Spain, this Trade for some
Yea^ almost been discontinued.

Logwood is their Currency or Medium at 5 (...) Tun Denomination.

From this Logwood cutting Maroon Life, the (...) small incidental political
Advantage; as the (...) Cutters called Bay-Men, live a maroon licentious (...)
Life, it becomes in Times of Peace a Receptac^^ (...) and diverts some Sailors
and others from the more (...) Life of Pirating.

A little to the Eastward of the Bay of Hondur^^ (...) a small Tribe of
Indians, the good Friends and (...) of the Bay-Men, and Spaniard Haters: That
is (...) affect the English more than they do the Spaniar^ (...) they reckon
the Governor of Iamaic^, as the (...) tron and Protector: Our Trade with them
is of (...) sequence, being only some Tortoise-Shell, wild (...) and
Sarsaparille.

The Island of Ratan lies about eight League (...) the Musci^oe Shore, and
about 150 Leagues (...) from Iamaica; here we have lately fixed a (...) and
Station-Ships, but cui bono I cannot say.

The Privilege of making and carrying Salt (...) Island of SALT TORTUGAS, in
the Gulf of (...) the Comanas or Windward Part of the Spanish (...) was
expressly confirmed to us b^ the Treaty of (...) between his Catholic Majesty
and the (...) Great Britain at Mad^^d, December 14. Anno (...) "Whereas
notwithstanding the Treaties of (...) Commerce, which were concluded at
Utrecht, (...) and Dec. 9, 1713; there still remained some (...) standings,
concerning the Trade of the two Nation (...) the Course of it. Article 3.
Moreover his (...) M^j^sty permits the said Subjects of Great-(...) gather Salt
in the Island of Tortuga, in the Gulf of Mexico; they having enjoyed that
Privilege in the Reign of King Charles II. without Hin^^^nce or Interruption."

Notwithstanding of this plain Stipulation; Anno 1733 in the Spring, a British
Plantation's Salt-Fleet under Convoy of a 20 Gun British Man of War, as they
came to sail from Tortugas, (...) attacked by two large Spanish Men of War from
the Margaritas, and four of the Fleet were carried off, hitherto no Recompense
has been obtained.

In Times of Peace, for the Use of the dry Cod Fishery are imported into
Massachusetts Bay, Communibus Annis 1200 Tuns Tortugas Salt; and about as much
more from other Ports, viz. Isle of May or Cape de Verde Islands, Exeuma or
Bahamas, St. Martins or Rochel, Lisbon, Ivica, Caglieri in Sardinia, etc.

The Reason why New England dry Cod is frequently Salt burnt, is from the Use
of Tortuga and Isle of May Salt, which are too hot. In Newfoundland they
generally use Lisbon and French Salt.

By late Acts of the British Parliament; Salt is allowed to be imported
directly from any Part of Europe, to the Colonies of New York and Pensylvania;
in the same Manner as Salt may be imported into New England and Newfoundland,
by an Act made 15 Car. II. for the Encouragement of Trade.

II. French Discoveries and Settlements.
The French American Colonies, may be distinguished into their North Continent
America Settlements, (...) those of the West India Islands Cayenne near the
Coast of Guian^ or Surinam included. Their Islands do not fall within the
Compass of our Design; and having only trans^ent^y visited them without any
View of Enquiry, my fixed Resolution is not to borrow or transcribe from common
Authors; No Person can trace me as a Plagiaty; my own Observations, Hints from
Correspondents and well-approved Authors, and from public Records are the
Materials of this Essay.
therefore the Reader may excuse my laying them aside.

The Continent French Settlements, I divide into C^nada or New France, and
Misissippi or Louisiana: Some French Writers, mention a French Province called
Hanoise, inhabited by above 16,000 Whites, about half Way between the Mouth of
the River Misissippi and Quebec in Canada; this is only an imaginary or
romantic Colony, we take no Notice of it, leaving it to the professed Writers
of Novels.

1. CANADA. The Original of the Name is uncertain, some say, it was named from
Monsieur Cane, who early sailed into that River: If so, O Caprice! why should
so obscure a Man (his Voyage is not mentioned in History) give Name to
New-France, as it is called.

Verazani a Florentine in the King of France's Service ( Francis I. was an
active Prince) coasted along the East Side of North America and went ashore in
several Places, according to the Humor of those Times, took a nominal
Possession for France from 37 d. the Mouth of Chesapeak Bay, to 50 d. N. Lat.
the Mouth of the River St. Laurence, so called, because first discovered upon
that Saint's Day; he sailed up the River of St. Laurence. Two Ships from
England sailed up that River, Anno 1527. I. Cartier a Native of St. Malo, made
two Voyages to this River Anno 1534 and 1535, he proceeded so far as Monreal,
and called the Country New-France. Anno 1542 Roberval from Rochelle carried
thither, a few People to settle; they did not continue their Settlements. About
the middle of the sixteenth Century, the French and Spaniards disputed
Settlements upon the Coast of Florida. Secretary Walsingham of England, being
informed of an Opening South of Newfoundland, fitted out Sir Humphry Gilbert,
he sailed up St. Laurence River, and took Possession for the Crown of England.
Anno 1604 Henry IV. Henry IV. was the first of the French Kings, who, to any
Purpose, encouraged Trade and Manufactures. After him, for some Time in the
Reign of Louis XIV, Colbert (of Scots Extraction) Secretary of State in France,
was a great Patron and Promoter of the same, as also of all polite Learning,
viz. The Academy of Sciences for all Parts of Natural History,. Geometry,
Astronomy, Mechanics, Anatomy, Chimistry, and Bo^^ny; the French Acad^my, for
the French Language and other Parts of the Belles-Lettres, the Acad^my for
Inscriptions and Medals; the Academy for Architecture, Painting, and Sculpture.
of France made further Discoveries in L'Acadie, now Nova Scotia; and in Canada
or New-France he planted a Colony which subsists to this Day, may it not
subsist long, it is a Nuisance to our North America Settlements, Delenda est
Cartbago. Anno 1608, Quebec Quebeis in the Indian Algonquin Language signifies
a Strait. Quebec from De Hayes Observations, Anno 1686 lies in 46 d. 55 m. N.
Lat. and W. from Paris 72 d. 30 m. ( Paris is E. from London 2 d. 30 m.
circiter) is 70 d. W. from London; Variation 15 d. 30 m. Anno 1649 it was 16 d.
W.
on a Narrow upon the River St. Laurence began to be settled, and is now
increased to about 7,000 People of all Colors, Sex and Ages; it is the
Residence of the Governor-General, Intendant, and supreme Council; Tide flows
about 18 Feet.

Canada is no otherways a Company, only for the Castor or Beaver Fur-Trade; as
they have no Settlements, but upon Rivers and Creeks, by giving some
Delineation of these, we describe that Country. The Gulf of St. Laurence, from
Cape Raze of Newfoundland to Cape Rosier in 50 d. 30 m. N. Lat. the Mouth of
the River St. Laurence (here the River is about 30 Leagues wide) about 88
Leagues; in this Gulf are the Islands of Cape-Breton, Cape-Breton is a late
Acquisition, or New England Conquest from the French; may it be permanent, but
without any extraordinary Garrison Charge! it stretches from 45 d. to 47 d* 5
m. N. Lat. s^parated from Nova Scotia by the Gut of Canso 5 Leagues long, and 1
League broad. Cape-Breton Island lies in Length from N. E. to S. W. scarce 50
Leagues, its greatest Breadth East and West about 33 Leagues. Louisbourg
formerly called English Harbor, is a good Port and strong Fortress: As this
formerly belonged to Nova-Scoti^, we shall refer any further Account of it ^o
that Section.
Anticosti, St. John's, Madalene and some other small Islands, given to the
French by the infamous Treaty of Utrecht 1713. From Cape Rosier to Tadousac on
the North Side of the River are 80 Leagues bad Navigation, Tadousac is no Town,
but a good Harbor for large Ships, navigable for Ships 25 Miles, has a Water
Communication by the River Seguany etc. with Hudson's- Bay. From Tadousac to
Quebec are 30 Leagues, from Quebec to Les Trois Rivieres on the North Side of
the River 30 Leagues; this was the first French Settlement, it abounds with
Iron Ore, is the Residence of a Sub-Governor, this Government (there are three
Governments in Canada) extends 12 Miles up the great River and 12 Miles down
the River: the Tide does not flow much higher; from Les Trois Rivieres to
Monreal the Seat of the next Sub-Governor are 30 Leagues.

From Cape Ros^ers along the South Side of St. Lourence to Monreal, is an
almost continued Chain of Hills or Mountains, and the Runs of Water short and
rapid, it is scarce habitable. A little above Monreal, the two Rivers of
Outauawas (comes from a Country N. W. belonging to a large and powerful Indian
Nation) and Cataraqui meet: Cataraqui River comes about 50 Leagues S. W. from
the Lake of the same Name; from Fort Frontenac at the Head of this River by
Water Carriage to Monreal are 4 Days Travel, but from Monreal to Fort Frontenac
are 10 or more Days Travel, because of many Carrying-Places at several
Cataracts called Falls or Sauts.

The communicating five great Lakes of Canada, viz. Cataraqui or Ontario, Erie,
Ilenois, Hurons, and Upper Lake may be called Inland Seas, laying from 39 d. to
51 d. N. Lat. the smallest Ontario is about 80 Leagues long, 35 Leagues wide,
the Lake Superieure is 200 Leagues long, it is larger than the Caspian Sea.
They do no freeze over* Snow does not lay long within 10 or (...) Miles of
them, their sof^ mellow circum-ambient Vapor molifies the Air; the Indians say
that in hot Weather the Wind blows from the Lake, and in cold Wea^ther into the
Lake, as do the Land and Sea-Breezes (...) the West Indies within the Tropicks.

All the French Colonies are under the Direction of the Council of the Navy in
France, and of one of the four Secretaries of France, called Secretary for the
Marin^ and Plantations, at present Anno 1747 M. Maurepas. The French King's
Charge per Annum for Canada is about 200,000 Crowns; but the high Duty upon
Salt se^^ from France, and the Duty upon Furs and Sleins sen^ from Canada to
France, over-ballances this Charge^* The King's Bill^ of Exchange upon the
Treasury are paid at 15 Days Sight; the Castor Bills upon the Company are paid
at three Month's Sight. Their Currency is the same as in France, being 25 per
Cent better than that of the French West India Islands.

By Information from Capt. La R^^dde and Lieut. de R^^sey, Envoys from the
Governor-General of Canada, concerning the French instigating and furnishing
our Enemy Indians* with War Ammunition; Anno 1723 there sailed from Quebec 19
Vessels for the Ocean* built in the River St. Laurence 6 Vessels fit for the
Ocean. N. B. Up the River to the Southward, is good Ship-Timbe^, lately they
have built two or three Men of War for France.

The Season of Navigation in the River St. Laurence, are the Months of August
and September, for the Store-Ships and Castor-Company Ships. Ships have sailed
from Quebec to Rochelle in 18 Days. Besides (...) they send to France a small
Matter of Lumber, Timber, Staves, Tar, Tobacco. Ships from France bring Wines,
Brandies, and dry Goods, and sail with Flower, Pe^^^, and Pork to the
West India Islands; and from then^e home to France with Sugars, etc. In Canada
from the ^^tting in of the Frost 'till Summer, no News from France and other
foreign Parts, excepting wh^t is conveyed to them by Way of Alb^^y: Many of the
French (...) are clandestinely carried to Alb^^y, this is the R^^son, why our
Dutch Subjects there, are averse from a (...) the Canada French, and their
Indi^^s. At Os^^g^ the Mouth of Onondaguas River upon the East Side of Lake
Ontario, there is a trading Fair from (...) all S^mmer; Indians of above 20
different Nations res^^^ thi^her, from South Carolina in N. Lat. 32 d. to the
Bottom of H^^son's-Bay in N. Lat. 51 d. therefore there certainly (...) good
Water Communication inland, in all th^^ Extent, and consequently a vast Indi^^
Skin and ^ur Trade* Furs are more plenty to the Southward, bu^ not of so good a
Staple as to the Northward.

Canada is settled only near the Rivers and Creek^* they so^^ no Winter-Grain.
The Produce of the Country is not much more, than is requisi^e for their own
Subsistence: The Quality of their Summer Wheat (...) such* that a Baker gives
38 lb. with. fine Bread, for a Bushel of Wheat: Apples grow well; Pears, Plum^^,
and Cherries not plenty; Peaches will scarce do: They kill (...) Score of
Poul^^ey when the Frosts set in, and keep them froze in their Garrets during
the Wint^^ Season, which s^ves Grain, their Food.

They have only three Towns of any Consideration* viz. Quebec the Metropolis
and Residence of the Governor General of Canada or New France, it is their
principal Fortress; the Cathedral is their only Parish Church, in the lower
Town there is a Chapel of Ease; here are two Convents ( Iesui^s and Recolects)
of M^n, and three Convents of Women or Nunneries. Monreal more plea^^^^ly
situated, the Residence of a Deputy Governor, 60 Leagues above Quebec upon the
same River, is near a^ populous as Quebec, but not so well fortified. Le^ Trois
Ri^ieres a small Town and trifling Fortification lies midway upon the River,
between these two, it is the Seat of the third Government.

The Country is divided into about 80 Districts, somewhat in the Manner of our
New England Townships (the New England Townships, in Old-England would be
called Country Parishes, and their several Precincts, Chapels of Ease.

All their Militia or sencible Men capable of marching, at this Writing, Anno
1747, do not exceed 12,000 Men, with about 1000 regular Troops independent
Marine Companies, and about 1000 Indians that may be persuaded to march.

Besides the three Towns or strong Places already mentioned, there are, 1.
Crown-Point as above, a late Intrusion upon the Jurisdiction of New York, last
Year it was proposed to reclaim it by Force, but the Projection seems to
vanish. 2. Fort Chamblais, a considerable Fort or Pass from the English
Settlements to the upper French Settlements in Canada. 3. Fort Sorrel where the
River Chamblais the Discharge of Lake Champlain enters the River of Canada or
St. Laurence, an insignificant Fort. 4. Fort Fr^ntenac, where the Discharge of
Lake Ontario and the other great inland Lakes forms the Calaruqui Branch of the
River St. Laurence. 5. Fort Denonville near Niagara Falls (Governor Vaudrueil
had it accurately examined, it was 26 Fathom perpendicular) between the Lakes
Ontario and Erie. 6. La Trouette at Les Detroits between the Lakes Erie and
Hurons. N. B. These three last mentioned Forts, have Bread and Pease from
Monreal, but no other Provisions.

Besides these by Way of Ostentation, we find in the French Maps of Canada and
Misissippi, many Forts marked out: These are only extempore Stockades or
Block-Houses made for a short Time of Residence in their traveling Trade with
the Indians; some French Indi^^^ Traders when they set out, obtain (a certain
Perquisite) from the Governor an Escorte of a Sergeant and a few private
Soldiers for Protection against any Indian Insults.

There is an annual Patroul of this Nature from Qu^bec (...) C^nada to Fort
Orleance near the Mouth of the Missi^^ppi, it is about 600 Leagues Travel with
its Detours of Rivers and Carrying-Places; the direct Distance or Difference in
Latitud^ falls short of 400 Leagues: This long Rout is not attended with such
Difficulties and Hardships, as is commonly imagined; there is ^ River falls
into the South Side of Lake Erie, which leads to a Carrying-Place to the River
Ohio, a Branch of the River Missisippi; the Indians hereabouts, are by the
French called Miamis.

The French in their West India or America Settlements, have four
Governor-Generals, the small Settlement at Cayenne in Guiana not included, 1.
The Governor-General of Canada, in his Commission is styled Governor and
Lieutenant General of French North America; he has under his Direction the
Governments of Quebec, Les Trois Rivieres, and Monreal, with the Commandans of
the several Out-Forts already mentioned. 2. The Governor-General of Louisiana
or Misissippi, his Residence is at Orleance upon the River Misissippi, the
other Government upon the River Mobile, or Moville is under his Direction, the
Distance is about 40 Leagues. 3. The Governor-General of the The present
Constitution of the West India French Governments, is: A Governor-General, an
Intendant who is their chief Judge in all Aff^i^^ and a Check upon the General,
and a Supreme Council; under their Direction are several small Governments*
Dep^rtements or Commanderies, but under the immediate Command of a Sub-Governor
or Lt. ^^ Roy, or Commandan; and these Districts are divided into Parish^^
under the Command of a Kind of Militia Offi^er ^^d (...) called Captain d^
Quartier.

Under the Governor-General of the French Cari^^^ Islands are the Governments
of Martinique (this is divided into three, viz. Fort Royal, St. Pierre, and La
Trinitee) Guardaloupe (including the Commandaries of Grand Terre and of Les
Saints) Marigalente, Grenades (including the Commandaries of the Granadillas)
upon the Death of the Governor-General or in his Absence, the Governor of
Granad^s commands in chief; as happened Ann^ 1717, when L^s Ha^itants or
Planters, by an Insurrection seized their Governor-General Le Marquis de
Var^nnes and the Intendant, and sent them Home Prisoners, with a Process
against them. In the Fr^n^h Cari^^^ Islands in Time of Peace are kept 3
Companies Swiss, of 100 Men per Company, 10 Companies Fr^nch Independent
Marines not exceeding 50 Men each. The present Governor-General is -- who
lately superseded Le Marquis de Ch^mpign^, the Intendant is De la Cr^ix. St.
Bartholomew is a neutral Island, the Property and Jurisdiction of it, has not
been settled by any Treaty, it is frequented by some French Marooners.
Fort-Royal in Martinique (from P. Feuill.) N. Lat. 14 d. 43 m; W. from Paris 63
d. 22 m: Anno 1704 Variation 6 d. 10 m. E. increasing about a Degree in ten
Years; a Pendulum that vibrates seconds in Martinique, is in Length 3 Feet, 6
and half Lines, French Measure. N. B. Such Pendulums increase in Length in some
Proportion or Regularity from the Equat^r to the Poles, but hitherto have not
been reduced to a Table; at Paris its Length as observed by the Academy Royal
of Sciences, is 3 Feet, 8 and half Lines.


French Caribee-Islands, or Les Isles au Ven^, his Residence is at the Island
Martinique. 4. The Governor General of St. Domingue Upon the West Part of the
Island Hispaniola the French are become more numerous, and have much more
considerable Settlements, than the Spaniards upon its East Part; they have
about eight Shipping or Delivery Ports, each with a military commanding
Officer, whereof some are called Governors, others only Li^ut. du Roy, some go
by the Name of Commandans, all under the Governor-General who resides at
Leogan^. Cape St. Nicholas of St. Domingue and Cape Mayez^ of Cuba Distance 12
Leagues make the Windward Passage. Nearest to the Spaniard on the North Side is
their Settlement of Ville du Cape, N. Lat. 19 d. 48 m. W. from Paris 73 d. 35
m. we call it Cape-Francois, it is their principal Settlement, and sends off
more Produce of Sugars, etc. than all the other French Settlements there, and
has a Resident Governor: On the South Side next to the Spanish Settlements is
Fort Louis, N. Lat. 18 d. 18 m. in the Bay of L' Isle des Vaches; here lay Anno
1741 the famous French Squadron under the Marquis d' Antin, designed either to
convoy the Spanish Plate-Fleet to Europe, or to hinder the Junction of Vernon
and Ogle, or to invade Iamaica upon Admiral Vernon's proceeding against
Carthagena: Although they escaped an Engagement, with our Fleet (Reasons of
State are above my Reach) in the utmost Distress for Want of Provision with the
Death of many Men and Loss of some Ships, they returned to France having
effected nothing, and d' Antin soon after died, some say killed in a Duel by
Marquis de Rocheville a Commodore under him in this Expedition. The
intermediate Settlements are Port de Paix, Le^gane, Grande Gou^ve, P^tite
Gouave, etc; they have several independent Marine Companies, but depend much
upon their Militia. The present Governor-General is M. de Larnage, the
Intendant is M. Maillot. Some of our Northern Colonies at all Times carry on a
clandestine Trade with them, lately, though in Time of War, a neighboring Colony
has been dete^ted in carrying Supplies thither, and Returns from thence in
Molasses and Indigo under the Blind of Flags of Truce.
( Hispaniola is so called by the French) or Les Isles sous le Vent, his
Residence is ^t Leogane the middlemost of their Settlements in N* Lat. 18 d. 40
m.

In the Dominions of Canada, Quebec is the Metropolis and Place of greatest
Strength; The Reduction of Canada might have been effected without the least
Risk of Miscarriage, and the Possession maintained (not by putting the French
Inhabitants to the Sword, as was the Spanish Principle in the^^ ^^dian
Conquests) by transporting the French Settlers to France, par^^, at their own
Charge where able, partly at our Charge where poor; and cantoning a great Part
of the Country in Property, to the Soldiers who served in the Reduction. The
British Freedom of the Press allows of Surmises, where nothing is positively
asserted. Perhaps our Ministry may judge, that no Peace could be made with
France unless France were so reduced, as to accept the Law, in making of Peace
at any Rate, this might require many Years expensive War; or without delivering
up Louisbourg, the British People would never be reconciled to this, and might
occasion a Dislike to the Ministers in Administration, and perhaps a
Disaffection to the present civil Government or established Succession. This
probably may be the Reason with our Ministers, that the Fleet and Land Forces,
apparently designed to observe Duke d' Anville's Squadron with Landforces on
Board for recovering of Louisbourg, did not proceed to prevent Louisbourg's
falling again into the French Possession; that they might obviate a popular
Puzzle in making of Peace: Thus our Fleet and Landforces aboard, apparently
designed against Canada, were by Way of Blind, sent upon that Romantic
Descent, on Britany in France. It has been thought that our Reduction of
Louisbourg the Key of the North America COD-FISHERY and FUR-TRADE, was not so
agreeable to our Ministry, as to the Populace of Great Britain; A real War
between People of the different Nations, but only a collusive War between their
Ministers. But Providence, or as some express it, a Concurrence of many
extraordinary Chances or Incidents, in our miraculous Reduction of Louisbourg,
and a Train of Disasters attending the French Fleet and Land-Troops designed
for its Recovery, seem to encourage that Fondness which ^he Bri^ish People have
for keeping of Louisbourg. This Year Anno 1747 notwithstanding many American
Troops are kept on Foot, by the Direction of the Court of Great Britain, at a
great Charge designed for the Reduction of Canada, the Landforces destined
from Home for this Expedition, are diverted from a Canada Expedition this
Season, and sent to Flanders, for a grand Effort or critical Trial of Skill,
and likely may prove the Crisis of the present War.
when this is reduced, all their New-France falls instantly. Our Pretensions to
Canada shall be enumerated in the Section of Nova Scotia. Quebec (from De
Hayes) is in N. Lat. 46 d. 55 m. W. from Paris 72 d. 30 m. that is from London
70 d. 30 m. Boston (from T. Robie) is in N. Lat. 42 d. 25 m. West from London
71 d. 30 m. therefore Quebec is 4 d. 30 m. North, and 1 d. 30 m. E. of Boston;
that is in Geographical Miles 270 North, and 68 Miles (reckoning 45 Miles to a
Degree of Longitude in these Parallels) East from Boston.

Champlain was their first Governor, he gave Name to the Lake Champlain (the
Dutch call it Corlaers Lake) the Passage from Albany or New York Government to
Monreal or the West Parts of Canada, it is 1^0 Miles long and 30 Miles wide. M.
Frontenac who succeeded Anno 1672 gave Name to the Fort at the Discharge of
Lake Ontario, being the Source of the Cataraqui Branch of the River St.
Laurence. Le Marquis de Nonville succeeded to the Government Anno 1685, he gave
Name to the Fort near Niagara Falls between the Lakes Ontario and Erie; Anno
1687 with 1500 French and Indians he invaded the Senekaes Country: The Year
following Anno 1688 in Revenge the Five Nations with about 1200 Indians invaded
the Island of Monreal (the Governor-General and Wife being then in the Town of
Monreal) ravaged the Country, killed about 1000 Persons, and carried off a few
Captives; to return this in some Measure, in the Beginning of K. William's
Reign the French and their Indians to the Number of about 300 Men, in the Night
Time surprised Schenectaday in New York Government, and murdered 63 People. In
the Beginning of Queen Anne's War, the Colonies of Canada and New York agreed
for a Neutrality between their respective Indians during the War, and an
advantageous Dutch Trade all that Time was carried on from Albany to Monreal by
Means of the Indians.

The Commanders in Chief formerly were called Admirals of New-France,
afterward Viceroys, at present Governor and Lieutenant-Generals. Anno 1665 M.
de Traci Viceroy of French America, brought to Canada four independent
Companies of regular Troops; and in September the same Year, M. Coursal
Governor-General of Canada, arrived with a Regiment of Soldiers, and some
Families for Settlers; at present their regular Troops consist of about 28
independent Marine Companies very incomplete, a Parcel of Racaille or
Goal-Birds from France not to be depended upon. Anno 1714 Father Charle^oix
writes, that Vandrucil, Governor-General of Canada, at that Time, acquainted M.
Ponchartrain Minister in France, viz. Canada has actually in it but 4480
fencible Men; the 28 Companies of the King's regular Troop amount only to 628
Men (like our late Nova Scotia Companies) and dispersed in the Extent of 100
Leagues. Their present Governor-General is Le Marquis de Beaubarnois (some
returned Prisoners, say, he is lately dead) the Intendant is M. Champarni.

The French Canada Indians. On our Side which is the South Side of the River
St. Laurence they are Tribes of the New England Nation of Abnaqui Indians, viz.
De Lorette a very small Tribe a little below Quebec; Wanonoak on the River
Besancourt or Puante over against Les Trois Rivieres, not exceeding 40 fighting
Men; about 10 Leagues higher is the Tribe of Arousiguntecook on the River St.
Francois, about 160 fighting Men; on the East Side of Lake Champlain, is the
Tribe of Mesiassuck 60 fighting Men; a little above Monreal are the Kabnuaga^
about 80 Men, being a Parcel of idle Ave Maria praying Indians, Runaways from
the New York Mohawks and River Indians. Their Indians on the North Side of St.
Laurence River, are Les Eskimaux or Barbares of Terra de Labradore, they eat
their Flesh and Fish raw, and go naked or covered with Seals and other Skins,
they are in small Clans, very idle, and of no great Benefit to Trade, are much
dispersed; Papinchois near the Mouth of the River St. Laurence; Algonquins
about 1500 Men about Quebec in fast Friendship with the French; Outawawaas a
very large Nation, extending back of the other N. W. to near the Bottom of
Hudson's-Bay; S. W. are Les Ranards; further South we must leave the Indians
for future Discoveries. The General farms out the Indian Trade to private
Companies or Partnerships of Indian Traders in certain Districts.

2. MISISSIPI or Louisiana. It was first discovered by Ioliet a Frenchman, Anno
1673. De la Salle Commandant of Fort Frontenac, traversed the Wilderness with
much Fatigue equal to the greatest of Pennances, Anno 1679, 1680, 1681, 1682
and 1683, he went by the Way of Lakes Erie and Ontario (in their Communication
he built a Fort called La Trouette) to Misissipi. Anno 1684 he obtained of the
Court of France 4 Vessels with 200 Soldiers aboard, and sailed from Rochelle to
discover and fall in with the Mouth of the River Misissipi; it lies about the
Middle of the North Shore of the Bay of Mexico; he expected to find it in the
Westermost Parts of this North Shore, according as it was laid down in the
erroneous Sea-Charts of that Time, and accordingly landed in the Bay St.
Bernard, which he called Bay St. Louis, here he built Fort St. Louis but soon
neglected, it is nearly in the same Meridian with St. Cruz 97 d. 30 m. W. from
London: The French Maps extend the Louisiana further South to Rio Bravo in 25
d. N. Lat. From Bay St. Louis he traveled by Land and discovered the Mouth of
the Misissippi 1685; in his Return for Canada, Anno 1686, he was killed by a
Mutiny of his Men.

The Source of the Misissipi is near Hudson's-Bay West of the great Lakes; the
French have traveled up this River in Canoes to 45 d. N. Lat.

The first Establishment of the Colony was by Capta^^ d' Iberville Anno School,
and although a natural and (...) Spanish Property, the French Settlements were
conniv at by Philip V. King of Spain, Grandson to Louis XI of France. Anno
1712. M. Crozat Secretary of Finan^^ or Treasury, obtained from the King of
France the (...) Privilege of trading to and from the Misissipi for (...)
Years; this turning to no Account, he relinquished it ^he Regent of France, and
by the Projection of M. (...) t was converted into the memorable Bubble of the
M^^sissipi-Company (any out of the Way remote, not (...) to be investigated
Scheme of Colony and profitable (...) would have answered) this Misissipi sham
Company (...) began to be hatched Anno 1717.

This Misissipi Colony extends from Bay St. Louis Pensacola in a Sea-Line of
near 200 Leagues, but all (...) the Water is so shoal, it is of no Use in Trade
(...) the Mouth of Misissipi, and there the Country is unhealt^^ful from the
Inundations or Floods at certain Seasons (...) the dissolving of the Northward
Snow, they have a (...) Fur Trade and begin to plant Indigo, the Bay of ^word
or L' Isle Dauphine admits only of Vessels of (...) Draught.

From Bay St. Louis or Bernard to Orleance upon sma^^ Misissipi the Residence
of Governor-General are abo^^ 140 Leagues, thence to L' Isle Dauphine where a
Sub-G^^vernor resides are 40 Leagues, thence to Pensacola a Spa^^ish Settlement
are 15 Leagues: From L' Isle Dauphine N. Lat. 30 m. 30 d. W. Long. from Paris
92 d. or 89 d. (...) m. West from London, are 7 d. 30 m. Long. East Cape
Florida.

As a few additional Pages may conduce toward a full and (...) but contracted,
View of all the American Colonies from the sever^^ Eur^pean Nations, we
dispease a little with our Limits first prop^s^
III. Portuguese Discoveries and Settlements.
Brazil is a narrow Slip, its Sea-Line extends from (...) River Amazons under
the Equinoctial, to Rio de la Plat^ By Treaty of Baden Anno 1714 Spain resigns
to Portugal in full Property and Jurisdiction, the Territory and Colony of the
Sacrament on the North Branch of Rio de la Plata; Portugal not to allow of any
Traders to Brazil but the European Portuguese. The Portuguese have a Fort on
the North Side of the Entrance of La Plata in S. Lat. 34 d.

Brazil was a Portuguese accidental Discovery; in sailing for their Settlements
and Factories in the East Indies Anno 1500, a Brazil Fleet by the Easterly
Trade Winds was drove upon the Coast of Brazil. They made no Settlement of
Consequence until Anno 1549. King John sent over Settlers and Soldiers.

It is divided into 14 Captain-Ships, whereof 8 belong to the King and 6 to
private Proprietors; all under one Viceroy who resides at Bahia or Bay of all
Saints in S. Lat. 12 d. 45 m.

The Portuguese upon their first Arrival in Brazil cruelly murdered the Indians
in the same Manner as the Spaniards had done in Mexico and Peru; doubtless the
political Reason was, their being too numerous to be kept under a continued
Subjection; but their religious Evasion was, Dominion is founded upon Grace,
therefore none have any Right to Life or Land but the true Roman Catholics,
Tantum potuit suadere malorum Religio.

Portugal, consequently Brazil, was in the Spanish Jurisdiction from Anno 1580
to 1640; Philip II. of Spain claimed as he was the Son of the eldest Daughter
of K. Emanuel of Portugal; whereas the Duchess of Braganza, was a Daughter of
the Son of K. Emanuel, a better Title. The Dutch revolted from and at War with
Spain, become Masters of the Northern Parts of Brazils for some Years; upon the
Revolution of Portugal in Favor of the House of Braganza Anno 1640 the Dutch
gradually lost Ground* the Dutch choosing rather to out the Portuguese from the
Spice-Islands, than divert their Force to keep Possession o^ Brazil; by
Cromwell's War with the Dutch, Anno 1642 May, to Anno 1654 April, they could
not afford sufficient Protection to their Conquests there (Anno 1641 the Dutch
made a Truce with the Portuguese (Uti possidetis) for 10 Years) and from the
above Considerations and their small Country not affording spare People
sufficient to settle there, the Dutch made a total Surrender by a Treaty Anno
1661.

Their rich Mines diverted them from their former Sugar Business, and the other
European Colonies have got into it. The yearly Import of Gold to Portugal, for
some Years past has been about 3 Million Sterling per Annum.

Anno 1711 The French took Rio de Ianiero and brought it to Contribution; it is
from thence that most of their Gold is shipped. The Brazil Fleet for that Port in
S. Lat. 23 d. sets out in January; for Babia, in near 13 d. S. Lat, they set
out in February; for Fernambu^ in 8 d. S. Lat. they set out in March; and upon
their Return leave these Parts in May and June. Most of the Brazil Harbors are
a dangerous Navigation, because of sunken Rocks at a small Depth.

The most valuable Imports to Portugal from Brazils are Gold (generally coined
there at Babia marked B. and Rio de Iainero marked R.) found in separate Grains
or small Pieces, or intermixed with Spar, but not extracted or separated from
Silver and other Metals as in Mexico; and of late Diamonds generally We have
lately in the Newspapers from Europe, a romantic Account, of a huge Diamond
sent Home from Brazils to the King of Portugal of 1680 Carats (a Carat is 4
Grains) the News-Writers to heighten the Romance, put it 224 Millions Sterling
Value; whereas even according to the ancient high Valuation of Diamonds
(formerly a Diamond of one Carat of a good Water and well polished was valued
at 10 L. S^erling, or 110 Dutch Florins, the Value of those more weighty was
the Square of Carats mul^iplied into the Value of o^e C^rat; Diamonds most in
Demand are from 1 and half Grains to 6 Grains) if cut and polished of the best
Water would not exceed 28 Millions Sterling, and if only brute or not cut, not
above half that Value, and if we suppose it of a bad Water, as are most of the
Brazil Diamonds, perhaps not much better than some curious well cut and
polished Peebles, this will reduce the Value very much. Formerly the largest
Diamonds known were. 1. Tha^ of the Great Mogul formerly all Diamonds of any
Value came from the M^gul's Dominions) of 279 Carats. 2. That of the Grand Duke
of Tu^^an^ of 139 Carats but inclining to a Citron Color. 3. Governor P^^t's
Diamond sold to the Crown of France for 2 Millions of Li^res or 135,000 L.
Sterling, it was of 127 Carats.
small and of a bad Water.

IV. Dutch Discoveries and Settlements.
The Dutch West India Company is of little or no Consideration; the Price of
their Actions (or Stock as it is called in London) 30 to 35; whereas the Dutch
East India Company Actions at present are about 350. In AMSTERDAM-BANK, there
is no Sale of Act^ons or St^c^, it is not properly a Company. It was
established Anno 1609 by a Placa^rt or Act of the Vroedschap or Town Council,
the State of Amsterdam oblige themselves to make good all Moneys lodged in this
Bank. They retain the same intrinsic Value of Denom^nations, as they were at
the Time of the Erection of this Bank, thus for Instance. a Ducatoon at that
Time was three Guilders, and so continues to be received and paid away there;
whereas in the common Currency of Holland, it is reckoned 63 Stivers, and the
Par of the Agio i^ 5 per Cent. N. B. Here is a Method to prevent Depreciation,
and qualifies thi^ Bank for that universal Credit which it has obtained in all
foreign Trade; notwithstanding we may observe that the best Constitutions upon
Earth may be shocked by very extraordinary Events, Anno 1672 upon that sudden
rapid Invasion of the seven united Provinces by France, the Transfers in this
Bank were sold at 10 per Cent discount, for current Money, which with the
Addition of the Agio is in Effect 15 per Cent. This Bank is the Merchant's
Cashire, and he negotiates his Affairs by Transfers in his Folio, a Bank
Transfer is a legal Tender; when the Bank pays out Specie, which seldom
happens, they retain one Eighth per Cent for keeping, telling, etc. Merchants
of great Dealings, for 10 Ducatoons per Annum have the State of their Account
sent to their Lodgings every Morning; the Charge of transferring a Sum
exceeding 300 Gilders cast only one Stiver or Penny. There was a Bank
established at Roterdam Anno 1636, it is of no Note.
For many Years their whole Business was Depredations or Piracies upon the
Spaniards and Portuguese, in which they were very successful; first they took a
Brazil Fleet in Bahia or Bay of All Saints, next they took two Ships of the
Spanish Plate-Fleet near Cuba, some Time after they took a Spanish Plate-Fleet
worth twelve Millions of Florins. At present the Interloopers run away with the
Company's Trade and Profits.

After Anno 1621, upon the Expiration of the Dutch 12 Years Truce with Spain,
they disturbed the Brazil Settlements (the Portuguese Dominions were at that
Time under the Spanish Jurisdiction) and were troublesome in Chili, they got
some Footing in Guiana and retained a considerable Footing in the North Parts
of Brazil, for some Years.

The D^tch Settlements in America are not considerable, viz.

1. Amongst the Caribee Islands, the small Island of Statia or St. Eustace, a
few Leagues West from St. Kits; here is a Dutch West India Company Governor;
notwithstanding the Dutch Interloopers carry on here, a considerable Trade with
the French and British People of the Caribee Islands; in this Port the British
and French Americans carry on a considerable Intercourse of Trade; and from St.
Kits much Sugar and Molasses are brought clandestinely to save the 4 and half
per Cent, and the Plantation Duty, and Plantation-Bonds. This Island is not
capable of making above 100,000 lb. with. Sugar per Annum. The Governor of Statia
sends a Commandant to the small I^land of Sabia, which raises only some Stock
or Market Provisions; he has also a Commandant in St. Martin's Island, this
seems to be a neutral Island, at present a few Dutch and some French live
there, but of no Consideration.

2. Amongst the lesser Antilles (Cuba, Iamaica, Hispaniola, and Porto-Rico are
called the greater Antilles) upon the Coast of Caraccoes or Windward Coast of
the Spanish Main, their principal Settlement is the small Island of Curaso,
lies about 8 Leagues from the Terra-Firma in 12 d. N. Lat. The Dutch took it
from the Spaniards, Anno 1634; their chief Business is an interlooping
smuggling Trade with the Windward Coast of the Spanish Main. Adjoining to it
are the Dutch small Islands of Aruba Eastward, and Westward are Bonaire, Aves,
Roca, and Orchilla of no Consideration.

3. Guiana; their chief Settlement is Surinam. It was taken by the Dutch from
the English in the Beginning of King Charl^s II^^ Reign, and confirmed to them
by the Treaty of Br^d^ Anno 1667 in Exchange for New York confirm^d to the
English. Here are three Proprietor^ (...), vi^. The Dutch West India Company,
the Town of A^sterd^m, and Admiral Semelsdikes Heirs. It i^ ^^rri^on'd by a
Detachment of one Man out of each Dutch Foot Company of regular Troops. It is a
S^gar (...), they keep their Books in light Pieces of Eight, (...), and
Stivers; 6 Stivers make a Royal, 8 Roy^l^ ^ake a Piece of Eight. Their Currency
is 20 per Cent worse than the Currency in Holland, a Holland's Guilder passes
for 24 Stivers; their large Currency is trans^^rri^g Bills of Exchange upon
Amsterdam, at the Difference of ^0 per Cent; a heavy Piece of Eight passes for
^^ree Guilders.

New-E^^la^d has a considerable Trade with Surinam for Mol^^ses. Surinam
Government by Proclamation Ian. 27. 1705 N. S. allow the Importation of In
New England ^here is a (...) small mean Horses called Iad^^ or Suri^^mers,
t^ese (...) the waste Lands at l^ttle or no Charge, and are (...) for the Use
of their (...) in (...) Suga^ Plantation^*
Horses (...) Cattle from our Colonies, at an Impost of seven Guilders per
Head, with Tunnage of seven Guilders par l^st of two Tun shipping; there is
also a Duty of 5 perCent out (6 per Cent inward) upon two Third Value of Goods.

West or to the Leeward of Surinam is Barbice a new Settlement, belonging to a
separate Company, i^ a very thriving Way, Shares are sold at a very great
Advance.

West of Barbice is another Dutch Settlement Esquib^ (the English Seamen, much
guilty of corrupting foreign (...), call it, Ise a Cape) this furnishes good
Mill Timber for all the West India Sugar Settlements, and produces Quantities
of Balsam Capivi, the best of all the medicinal natural Balsams.

Cayenne a small French Settlement in Guiana, East, that is to Windward of
Surinam, it lies in N. Lat. 4 d. 55 m. it is a Sugar Colony. New England sends
2 or 3 Sloops to Cayenne yearly for (...)

We annex the following short Paragraphs to render our Enumeration of the
American Settlements from Europe complete.
St. Thomas, one of the Virgin Islands, (...) comprehended in the Commission of
the Governor-General of our Leeward Islands; at present it is in Possession of
^ Danish Company, seldom any Company's Ships to be (...) there; the King of
Denmark has a Negativ^ in all (...) Proceedings, they may raise about 2500,000
(...) of Sugar per Annum, they raise some Cotton; here is (...) Br^ndebourg or
Pr^ssi^n Factory. All their (...) and public Writings are in Hollands or low
Dutch, which is the Mother Tongue of the Island. Their Currency (...) as in
Surinam. It is a Sort of neutral Por^, but under good Economy.

Tobago lies in 11 d. 30 m. N. Lat* 59 d. W. from London, about 40 Leagues
South from Barb^does, near the Spanish Island Trinadad, which lies near the
Mouth of the River Oranoke. K. Charles II. made ^ Grant of it to the Duke of
Courland to be settled only by the Subjects of England and Courland. The Duke
of Courland made several Grants in it to Englishmen, but continues not-sett^^^.

St. Crux. The English, French and Danish have at Times claimed it; it
continues a neutral Island, lies Sou^^ from the Virgin Islands.

V. British first American Discoveries, and West-Indi^ Island S^^^lements.
I come to a Close of the introductory Account of American Affairs in general
it has insensibly swelled in the handling much beyond my first Plan; I hope it
is not ^edious to the curious and intelligent Reader. We now enter upon the
principally intended Subject, the (...) Settlements in America. An Author,
without Ostentation de^igning a common Good, may endeavor to conciliate
Attention and Faith in his Readers. As no Man is born with the Instinct or
innate Knowledge of his Native or Mother Country, and does not generally enter
upon such Researches until 25 Aet. the Air of the Soil and juvenile
Conversation do not much contribute toward this: Therefore a Person not a
Native, but not a Foreigner, who comes into any Country at that Age, and enters
upon and prosecutes such Investigations from personal Observations, and
credible Correspondencies for a Course of thirty Years, may be said, as if born
in the Country. I hope Critics, Natives of any of these our Colonies, will not
reckon it a Presumption in me to essay the following Accounts; especially as at
present, no Native appears to undertake this laborious but useful Performance;
I acknowledge it to be a Performance not of Genius, but of Labor, and Method
to render it distinct and clear.

The American Colonies can not be claimed by the several European Nations from
Preocupancy (they were not Derelicts but in Possession of the aboriginal
Indians) nor by Inheritance, nor by what the Law of Nature and Nations deem a
justifiable Conquest; therefore the adventuring European Powers, could only
give to some of their particular Subjects, an exclusive Grant of negociating
and purchasing from the natural Proprietors the native Indians, and thereupon a
Power of Jurisdiction.

Formerly Priority of Discovery, even without a continued Occupancy or
Possession was deemed a good Claim: Thus we originate our Claims in North
America from the Cabots coasting from Prima Vista in 66 d. to 34 d. N. Lat.
although for near a Century following, we made no Settlements there, and did
not so much as navigate the Coast; because Henry VIII was a vicious Prince, the
Affairs of his Wives and Perplexities with the Church gave him full Employment;
Edward VI was a Minor; Q. Mary a wicked Woman and bigoted Roman Catholic, her
sole Attention was to re-establish Popery, at that Time wearing out of Fashion,
in a most inhumane, execrable, furious, zealous Manner; good Queen Elizabeth a
great Encourager of Trade and Navigation in some Respects, but had the
distressing of the Spaniards, and Protection of the Dutch, more in her
Intentions, than the making of Discoveries and Settlements in America. Royal
Grants of Lands if not occupied, and in Process of Time if another Grant (with
Occupancy) is made to others, the first Grant becomes void. Thus Duke
Hamilton's Grant in the Naraganset Country, Mr. Mason's Grant of New Hampshire,
and many Grants in the N. E. Parts of New England are become void.

The Cabots of Venetian Extract, Anno 1695 obtained from K. Henry VII a Patent
for the Property of all Lands they should discover Westward of Europe, one
Fifth of the clear Profit is reserved to the King. Henry VII. was a Lover and
Hoarder up of Money. They fitted out from Bristol Anno 1496, ^roceeded along
the North Shore of America till obstructed by the Ice; then they turned their
Course Southward, and at Length their Provisions proving scanty, they were
obliged to put off for England. Thus the Cabots in the Name of, and by
Commissions from the Crown of England began to range the Continent of
North America, before Columbus from the Crown of Spain discovered any Part of
the Continent of America, from 1492 to 1498 Columbus discovered only the
Islands in the Gulf of Mexico. The Cabots were good industrious Navigators,
they were the first who weathered the North Cape of Europe.

The next Patent for Discoveries and Settlements in America was March 25. 1584
to Sir Walter Raleigh, of a good but reduced Family in Devonshire, was
handsome, robust, and eloquent, had a liberal Education, and was brought up at
the Inns of Court; he was much in Favor with Q. Elizabeth, and discovered
Guiana Anno 1595. He was in the Plot against K. James I. with Lord Cobham,
Gray, etc. convicted and con^emned for High Treason; he was 13 Years in Prison
and wrote the History of the World; he projected a Scheme to liberate himself,
by propo^^ng to the Court the Discovery of a Gold Mine in Guiana, (he was
naturally a mighty Hunter after Mines of Minerals, Metals. and precious Stones)
was fitted out, proceeded, and returned empty; being unsuccessful, and by the
Resentment of Gund^m^^e the Spanish Ambassador at the Court of England, his
former Sentence was averred and he was beheaded.
Sir Walter Raleigh and Associates, for discovering and planting Lands in
North America, not actually possessed by any Christian Prince: That same Year
two small Vessels were sent via Canaries and the Caribee-Islands (this, in
these Days was reckoned the only Rout of Navigation for any Part of America) to
trade upon that Coast, upon their Return, in Honor to the Virgin Queen
Elizabeth, it was called Virginia, reaching so far North as the Gulf of St.
Laurence. Anno 1585 Sir Walter sent Sir Richard Greenville with several Vessels
and 108 People to begin a Plantation; they landed upon the Island Roanoke near
the Mouth of Albemarle River in North Carolina. Sir Francis Drake from the
Spanish West Indies by Way of the Gulf of Florida Stream, touched in at
Roanoke Anno 1586, these People Settlers dissatisfied, most of them returned
with him to England. Anno 1587 and 1589 Mr. White with the Character of
Governor, brought over some People to Cape-Hatteras, but effected no Settlement.

No further Attempt worth mentioning, was made until Anno 1606, Sir Walter
Raleigh by his Attainder having forfeited his Patent, several Adventurers
petitioned the King for Grants, and a Grant was made to two Companies, in one
Charter, viz. to the London Adventurers from 34 d. to 41 d. N. I at. the other
Company was the Bristol, Exeter, Plymouth etc. Adventurers, from 38 d. to 45 d.
N. Lat. Thus perhaps the in-common and consequently neglected Part from Cape
Charles to Connecticut might fall into the Dutch Hands. In the first Company of
Adventurers several Noblemen and Gentlemen, obtained a Patent with Power of
Government for a certain District, the Jurisdiction to be in a President and
standing Council* they fitted out Capt. Newport with 3 Ships and 100 Settlers;
they sailed into Chesapeak-Bay and 50 (...) up James River, and began a
Settlement called Iames-Town. Here properly begins the first Planting of our
eldest Colony Virginia; the further Narrative of this Colony belongs to the
Section of Virginia.

The other Company in the same Charter of Anno 1606, called the Company of
Plymouth, or West-Country Adventurers, viz. Sir John Popham Chief Justice, Sir
Ferdinand Gorge Governor of Plymouth, etc. began their Adventures in Trade and
Settlements at Sagadahock in New England, about the same Time.

Their first Adventure was taken by the Spaniard* Anno 1608 they fitted out
Captains Popham and Gilbert with People or Settlers, and Stores, and built a
Fort St. George near Sagadahock; it came to nothing. Anno 1614 Capt. Smith
sometime President of Virginia, called the Traveller, a good solid judicious
Writer in general, fitted out two Ships and made a good Voyage in Trade; upon
his Return to England, he pre^en^ed a Plan of the Country to the Court, and it
wa^ called New England. As after a few Years the London Company dissolved, so,
it seems was the Fate of this Company, and Anno 1620 Nov. 3. King James I. did
grant to a Company of Adventurers called the Council of Plymouth, 40 in Number,
all Lands from 40 d^ to 4^ ^. N. Lat. keeping up the Claim to New Netherlands
(...) Nova Belgia, at that Time in Possession of the Dutch, at present the
British Colonies of New York, New-I^r^ies, and Pensylvania. This The Company or
Council of Plymouth, by their Charter or (...) had a Power t^ convey any
Portion of their granted Lands to any of his M^j^sty's Subjects: After having
made many indistinct and interfering Grants, did surrender their Charter to the
Crown, by an Instru^^nt under their common S^al, June 7. 1635.
Council of Plymouth made several Grants which were found faulty from their
Indistinctness, and having no Power to delegate Jurisdiction. Here we must
break off, and refer the further Narration to the Sections of the New England
Colonies, which were the Council of Plymouth Grants.

The first Inducements of the English Adventurers to take out Patents for
Countries or Lands in America, and to suffer so much in Settling, were the
Hopes of finding rich Mines of Minerals, Metals and Precious Stones, and a
Thorough-Fare to the East Indies or Spice-Islands. After some Time these
Projectors finding themselves disappointed, the old Patents were neglected or
annihilated; in the End of James I. Reign, and Beginning of Charles I. new
Grants were procured: But by Reason of the following civil Confusions and
Divisions, the Conditions of these new Grants were not complied with; and
People sit down at Pleasure and at Random; upon the Restoration of King Charles
II, these Settlers petitioned for peculiar Grants (as we shall observe in the
several Sections of Colonies) particularly of Maryland, Carolina, New York,
Connecticut, Rhode Island.

The first Grants from the Crown, were generally expressed to run back Inland
100 Miles; afterward the Style was due West to the South-Seas, or until they
met with some other Christian Settlement; sometimes it is expressed from Sea to
Sea, East and West: At present the Words are to run back indefinitely. Many of
the first Grants were by false or uncertain Descriptions, and did interfere
with one another; as we may observe in the History of their several Boundaries
in Process of Time rectified and at present settled.

The Settling of our sundry Colonies, have been upon several Occasions and from
various Beginnings. New England was first settled by People from England,
tenacious of their own Nonconformist Way of religious Worship, were resolved
to endure any Hardships, viz. a very distant Removal, Inclemencies of the
Climate, Barrenness of the Soil, etc. in Order to enjoy their own Way of
thinking, called Gospel-Privileges, in Peace and Purity. Our West India Islands
have been settled or increased, some of them by Royalists, some by
Parliamentarians; some by Whig and Tory, originally were reciprocal Party cant
Names of Contempt, they began in the Reign of King Charles II. Tories asserted,
Passive Obedience and Non Resi^^ance as a Prerogative of the the Crown; Whigs
maintained that Liberty and Property was a natural Privilege of the People.
Tories, some by Whigs, at different Times Fugitives or Exiles from their
native Country. Virginia and Maryland have been for many Years and continue to
be a Sink for transported Criminals. Pennsylvania being the Property of Mr.
Penn, a Quaker, he planted it with Quakers (as Lord Baltimore for the same
Reason at first planted Maryland with Roman Catholics) it is lately very much
increased by Husbandmen swarming from Ireland and Germany.

2. The British Island Settlements.
The British American Colonies, especially their Islands in and near the Gulf
of Mexico, are the Spanish Leavings; the Spaniards their first Discoverers,
made no Account of them; and when the English began to settle them, they were
not disturbed by the Spaniard, as if below their Notice. The English at first
had no other Design there, only to distress the Spaniards; thus Sir Francis
Drake made several Depredations there, but no Settlement, Anno 1585 he took St.
Domingo, Carthagen^, and St. Augustine, and soon quitted them. Anno 1597 Porto
Rico was conquered by the English, but dropped.

The British American Island Governments, may be enumerated under these Heads,
viz. The two small Settlements of Bermudas and Providence or Bahama-Islands,
and the three general Governments of Barbados, Leeward Islands, and Iamaica:
These three Governments are called the British Sugar Islands. As at present
Sugar is of general Use, and occasions a vast Branch of public Revenue to the
Nations of Great Britain, France, and Holland, a Digression concerning Sugar
may be acceptable.

A Digression concerning Sugar.
The ancient Greeks and Romans used Honey only for Sweetning, Sugar was not
known amongst them: Paulus Aegineta, a noted Compiler of Medical History, and
one of the last Greek Writers upon that Subject, about Anno 625 is the first
who expressly mentions Sugar, it was at first called, Mel Arundinaceum, that is,
Reed or Cane Honey. It came from China, by Way of the East Indies and Arabi^ to
Europe. As Spirits (Spiritus Ardentes) not above a Century ago were used only
as officinal Cordials, but now are become an Endemial Plague ^v^ry where, being
a pernicious Ingredient in most of our Beverages: So formerly Sugar was only
used in Syrups, Conserves, and such like Arabian medicinal Compositions. It is
at present become of universal and most noxious Use, it fouls our animal Juices
and produces Scrophulas, Sc^^vys, and other putrid Disorders; by relaxing the
Solids, it occasions watery Swellings and catarrhous Ails, it induces Hysteric
and other nervous Disorders; therefore should be sparingly used especially by
our weaker Sex, they are naturally of a Fibra laxa.

The Island Colonies (in a peculiar Manner they are called the West Indies) had
the Sugar-Cane from the Bra^^ls; the Portuguese of Brazil might have them from
their Settlements in the China boasts much of the Antiquity of i^s Policy, and
not without Reason, they seem to be the elder Brother of all the Nations in
Asia, Africa and Europe; we can trace, even in our Records, which do not go
back exceeding 2500 Years, many notable Things from thence, such as the Silk
Worm, the Sugar Cane, the Small Pox, etc. America having ^o known Land
Communication with those, and the intermediate Navigation so long, that until
the late Improvements in Navigation, America and the Moon were much upon the
same Foo^ing with Respect to Europe, Asia and Africa: Hence it is, that upon
our Discoveries of America, excepting Speech, which is natural to Mankind, they
seem to have been only a gregarious Sort of Man Brutes; that is they lived in
Tribes or Herds and Nations, without Letters or Arts ^ur^her than to acquire
the Necessaries of Life.
East Indies: At present the Flavor and Smell of our Sugars, and of those from
Bra^ils differ considerably, this may be attributed to what the French call, Le
Gout de Terroir; thus it is with Wines from transplanted Vines; Virginia
Tobacco, and Brazil, and V^rinas Tobacco differ upon this Account.

Arundo Sacharifera C. B. P. Sugar-Cane, are the Botanical Latin and English
Tribe Names; it grows to five six or more Feet high; articulated or jointed
(...) Gramineous or Reed Leaf. The Canes are (...) planted in August, and cut
down from Christmas to (...) of the following, not the same Year; they are
(...) 16 to 22 Months upon the Ground; this (...) of a great Latitude as to
gathering in, without (...) considerable Loss: If cut seasonably and soon,
(...) yield more Juice, but less rich than if let standing (...) Months longer:
Moreover Canes that might have cut end of December, the Planters are under a
(...) to keep some of them growing 'till June, ^o furnish (...), which is
Cane-Tops for their Cattle. One (...) of Cane Liquor may yield about 1 Pound 3
Quarte^ (...) Sugar, a Pot of 60 with. of Sugar, may drop about 3 (...) Molasses,
1 Gallon Molasses if good, yields (...) Gallon Rum or Proof Spirit; by claying
Sugars (...) 2 sevenths, which runs into Molasses: The (...) upon the
Improvement of Sugars generally* (...) ^his Proportion, viz. If Muscovado^ sell
at 25 s (...) with, first Clays sell at 35, second Clays at 45, third (...) at 55.

The Manufacture is reckoned equal in Value to Produce or Cultivation; it has
many chargeable (...) the Mill, the Boiling-House, the Curing-House, (...)
House* Storehouse: Sugars are distinguished into (...), by the French called
Sucar Bis or Br^^e, (...) second, and third Clayings or Refinings.

The Cultivation of the Cane; a Length of few (...) or Knots laid flat or
horizontally in Holes, these (...) are half Foot deep or better, 3 Feet long, 2
Feet (...) 30 good Field Negroes may hoe one Acre a Day; (...) each Joint or
Oculus proceeds a Reed of Canes.

In Barbados the Charge of Cultivation and (...) of Sugar (supposing the Labor
hired, as it (...) in some particular Circumstances) is about 15 L per (...) an
Acre at a Medium is reckoned to produce 2500 with. Sugar; therefore all exceeding
12 s per Ct. with. the Price of Sugars, is clear Profit to the Planter. (...) The
Rum defrays the ordinary Expense of the Plantation. They allow one good Field
Negro for one Acre Canes, all Labor included. The Labor is very considerable
(supposing the Ground well cleared and brought too) viz. holling, planting,
dunging, weeding, hilling, and cutting.

After the first Purchase, the Charge of a Sugar Plantation Negro, is very
small, not exceeding 40 s. per An. for Clothing and Feeding; when full
clothed, it is Jacket and Breeches for the Men, Jacket and Pettycoat for the
Women of Oznabrigs at 9 d. per Yard, and a coarse red mild Cap; the Negroes of
one Plantation live in contiguous Huts like an African Town; are allowed some
short Time, viz. Saturday Afternoon and Sundays, with a small Spot of Ground to
raise Provisions for themselves; or if new Negroes are allowed one Pint of
Guinea Corn, one salt Herring, or an Equivalent per Day in other Provisions of
salt Mackrel, dried Salt-Fish, Indian Corn, etc. Barbados requires a Supply of
4000 or 5000 new Negroes per Annum.

The Planters divide their Cane-Lands into Thirds, viz* one Third standing
Canes, another Third new-plante^ Canes, and the other third fallow. In Barbados
they plant every Crop or second Crop, in the other Islan^^ they have Ratoons,
or second, third, fourth etc. Crops from the same Roots, but every succeeding
Year they yield less.

The Quantity of Sugar imported per Annum from the British Sugar-Islands to
Great Britain is about 80,000 to 85,000 Hogsheads at 1000 with. per Hoshead.

In Imitation of the French, by an Act of Parliament 1739, British Sugars are
allowed to be carried directly, without entering in Great Britain, to any
foreign Port South of Cape Finisterre, under certain Restrictions too long for
our Enumeration. About 50 Years ago the French were chiefly supplied with
Sugars from Great Britain, at present they supply themselves, and can afford to
undersell us in all Markets, the Mediterranean, Holland, Hamburgh, etc.

An exact minute List of the successive Governors in the several Islands, are
scarce of any Historical Use, unless where some Things remarkable have happened
during their Government; therefore without making much Enquiry, I shall only
mention those who easily occur.

The West India Islands, together with Virginia, Maryland and Carolinas, are of
vast Profit to Great Britain, by the Labor of above Three Hundred Thousand
Slaves, maintained at a very small Charge. Here we observe a Sort of
puritanical gross Error, in the Utopian Charte^ Constitution of the Colony of
Georgia not allowing of the Labor of Slaves, and by the Experience of several
Years, this seems to be a principal Reason of the Settlement coming to nothing.
By Acts of their Assemblies Slaves or Negroes are real Estate, but may be sued
for and recovered by personal Action. If it were not for the Negroes and
Molatoes born in these Colonies reckoning themselves Natives, it would be
impossible to keep so many able-bodied Slaves in Subjection by a few
valetudenary white Men: There have been from Time to Time Insurrections of
Negroes; but were discovered, and the Ringleaders executed in the most cruel
and deterring Manner that could be contrived. Slaves in any felloniousCase are
tried, not by a Jury and Grand Sessions, but by two Justices and three
Freeholders, a Majority condemns them and orders Execution. They generally
value new Negroes in this Manner, a Negro of 10 Aet. and of 40 Aet. are upon a
Par, from 20 to 25 Aet. is reckoned their Prime; from 40 Aet. upwards, their
Value gradually decreases, as it does from 10 Aet. downwards.

The Voyages from London to Barbados or Leeward Islands is 6 to 7 Weeks; but
home to London not so much, when out of the Trade Winds, the Westerly Winds and
a Westerly Swell or Sea generally prevail.

In these Islands the Rains (within the Tropicks, the Indians number their
Years by Rains, without the Tropicks they reckon by Succession of Winters)
begin End of May, continue frequent for three Months, and abate gradually to
December. Hurricanes are from the middle of July to the middle of September:
Barbados and the Leeward Islands are not much troubled with Hurricanes* but
have at Times violent Gusts of Wind, when the Trade or Easterly Winds, change
per North (Sailors call it going against the Sun) to West, with a rolling Sea
from Leeward. The Sea Breeze begins between 8 and 9 Hours Morning, increases
till Noon, retains its full Strength till 3 Afternoon, and gradually decreases
to about 5 in the Evening.

Even in their Breezes, the Air seems to resemble the suffocating Breezes along
the Sands of the Deserts of Lybia, or like the Steam and Exhalation from
burning Charcoal: Their Air seems to be impregnated with some volatile acid
Sulphur, which to a very inconvenient Degree ru^ts Iron, and cankers other
Metals: It keeps the Blood and Spirits in a continued Fret; in that Climate I
never could apply my self to a serious intense Way of Thinking exceeding half
an Hour; some Constitutions are kept in a continued small Degree of a Phrenzy,
hence proceed the many rash passionate Actions amongst the (...). In the North
Continent of America for two or three Weeks in July (Dog Days are only
Astrological cant Names amongst the Vulgar; the hot Weather of the Season, not
the Influence of the Stars are in the Case) the Weather is sometimes so hot, as
to rarify the Air too much, by relaxing its Spring and Action occasions sudden
Deaths, Palsies, and the like nervous Affections ( inassu^tis) in the human
Species and other Animals; Beginning of July 1734 unusually hot for a
Continuance of some Days 8 or 9 People die suddenly: At the writing of this
July 8, and 15, 16 little Wind South Westerly, intensely melting hot, but not
sulphurous and stiffling as in the West Indies, scarce any Thunder hitherto.

Besides regular Tides, they have uncertain Windward and Leeward Currents: With
a Windward Current, new and full Moon, Tides flow about 3 Feet; they flow
longer than they ebb.

Their general Supply for Charges of Government, (...) a Pol Tax upon Negroes,
and an Excise upon Liquors imported. They have a very good Regulation, that no
Freeholder's Person ca^ be arrested for Debt; thus his Labor is not lost to
(...) Public by a Time of Confinement, and he cannot readily run in Debt
exceeding the Value of his Freehold. It is to be wished, that this wise
Regulation, may be introduced into our Continent Colonies.

The Spaniards and Portuguese in their first American Navigations, very
providently put on Shore, upon the interveening Head-Lands and Islands, some
Live-Stock, particularly neat Cattle and Swine to multiply by Propagation,
toward a future Refreshment and Supply of Provisions in their Voyages.

The general Food of the Europeans there, and of their Slaves comes next in
Course, it is mostly vegetable. Dr. Sloane, afterward Sir Hans Sloane, Anno
1696, published ^ Book " Catalogus Plantarum quae in Insul^, Jamaica, Madera,
Barbados, Nevis, and St. Christop^^ri nascuntur; seu Prodromus (...) naturalis
Iamaicae, Pars prima." He ha^ been sufficiently (...) on this Affair; he gives
no Account of any Part of natural Histor^ excepting of Plants, and of those, no
Description only pedantick long Lists of insipid Syno^yma from various Authors:
Dr. De Ruisean of Barbados told me, that he was only eleven Days upon that
Island, (...) pretends to give the natural History of the Island. Thus de la
M^tray published several Volumes in Folio of his Travels, amongst others, his
Travels in New England; to my certain Knowledge he resided there only a few
Days, and very constantly at Home in his Lodging^ in Boston, with Company of no
Intelligence.
Here we may previously observe, that the Plants or Vegetables between the
Tropicks, are so vari^^s from our European Tribes, they seem to require a
distinct System of Botany, or ought to be reduced to some Order by annexing to
each Tribe of European Plants some (...) of the Affines; but without coming
much into natur^^ History, I am afraid some Readers judge me too proli^.

The Food of their Negro Slaves and of the common Laborers and white Servants
may be divided into,

I. Their Bread Kind. 1. Cerealia viz. Rice is referred to the Section of
Carolina.
Rice, Milium Indicum album et nigrum Plinij; Camer; Sorgum. Tab. Guinea Corn;
it may be called a Perennial, holding good many Years from the same Root; the
Grain is more nourishing and wholesome than Indian Corn, and goes further: The
Leaves and Tops are good Provinder for Cattle.
Guinea Corn, Mays Granis Aureis T. Frumentum Indicum M^ys Dictum. C. B. P.
Indian Corn: This is a principal American Bread Kind: A further Account of it
is referred to the Sections of New England.
Indian Corn. 2. Legumina or Pulse Kind, viz. Phaseolus Indicus annuus Glaber,
fructu tumidio^e mi^^re variorum col^rum absque hilo. Kidney Beans which in
North America are called Indian or French Beans: This we refer to New England.

Phaseolus maximus perennis, floribus spic^ti^ sp^^i^sis albis, siliquis
brevibus latis, semen album hilo albido. Sloane. White Bonavista, large as a
common Kidney-Bean, much eat with boiled Meat.

Do. Semi^e rufo, Red Bonavist.

Phaseolus erectus minor, semine sphaerico albido, hilo nigro; Pisum quartum
s^u Pisa Virginiana. C. B. P. Calavances, this properly belongs to the Section
of Virginia.

Do. Fructu Rubro, Red Calavances.


Kidney-Beans, Pisum hortense majus, flore fructuque albo C. B. P. Garden
Pease, from Europe planted, thrive well.

Anagyris Indica loguminosa, siliquis torosis. Herm. Par. Bat; Pigeon Pease;
this Shrub or small Tree grows to 12 or 15 Feet high, and holds for some Years,
the Fruit resembles a Vicia, called Horse Pease* they eat it with boiled Meat.


Pease. 3. Roots, viz. Volubulis nigra, radice alba aut purpurascente, maxima
tuberosa, esculenta, farinacea caul membranulis extantibus alat^, Folio
c^rda^^ nervoso. Sloane; Inhama Lu^i^anorum Clusiii H. LXXVIII. probably it
came from Guinea. It is the principal and best Food of the Negroes, hence it is
that in general to eat, is called to Yaam. This Root grows, sometimes big as a
Man's Thigh, the redish are more spungy, the white are best, and not so
cloyingly sweet as the West India Potatoes; many of the best white People use
it for Bread, t^ me it was more agreeable than Bread of Wheat Flour.
Yams, Potatoes of two different Kind or Tribes.

Convolvubus radice tuberosa esculenta dulci, spinachiae folio, flore mag^^
purpurascente patulo. Batatas Clusii H. LXXVIII. West India, Bermudas, Carolina
Potatoes; they are Natives of America, but do not thrive to the Northward of
Maryland, because of the Coldness of the Climate. Clusius Description and Icons
are good; it is planted from small incipient Roots, or some Slices of the large
Roots, having an Ocu^us or Bud, in the same Manner as the Solanum Tuberosum,
called Irish Potatoes, the Leaves spread along the Ground like C^^volvulus^*
the Flower is p^ntapetalous, the Pistillum becomes the Fruit containing many
small Seeds.

Do. Radice R^^^sc^nte.

Do. Radice Alba.

Do. Radice Caerni^scente.

These continue permanently the same, are lusciously swe^t; wh^^ too ripe or
long kept they become fibrous or stringy; the yellow is the most common and
best flavoured.

Solanum ^s^ulentum tub^rosum, C. B. P. Arachi^n^ Th^^p^rasti fort^, Pap^s
Peru^norum Clusii. H. LXXIX his Icons are very good. Irish Potatoes; they grow
kindly all over America, in ^he Northern Parts the Frost takes them soon; the
Roots are a Number of ^^bers of various Sizes connected by Fila^ents, Stalks 2
or 3* Feet erect, the Leaves alternate congugated with an Impar, of a dark
Green, the whole Habit hairy* the Flowers Mon^^^^alous in Umbels which, Fruit
soft with many stat Seeds; the large ^ulbs are used for Food, the small Bulb^
are committed to the Earth again, and are called Seed Potatoes; an Irish Idiom,
Roots for Seed. They are planted in the Spring, and dug up in S^pt^mb^r for
Use. (...) Bauhin says they were brought from Virginia to England, thence to
France and the other Countries of Europe. Clusius thinks, it was carried from
New Spain to Old Spain, and from thence to Italy and the Netherlands, and
propagated at present all over Europe.

Do. Radice Alba, whitish Potatoes.

Do. Radice rufuscent^; redish Potatoes.

Do. Radice flav^scant^; Potatoes with a blueish Cast.

Do. Flore Albo. H. R. P. French Potatoes; these are flatter, larger, less
lobated, of a finer Texture, this at present is much adm^red, do not yield so
well, are not so easily hurt by the Frost.


Pot^toes, Ri^inus minor viti^is obtuso folio, caul verrucoso, flore
pe^tape^^^o albido, ex cujus radice tuberosa (suc^o venenato turgido) Americani
p^nem conficiunt. Cassada. The English after it is well dried, grind it, and
bake it into Cakes. The French eat it in Crumbles called Farine, or (...) de
Manihot, they victual their West India coasting Vessels with this.
Cassada. 4. Fruits, viz. Musa Fructu C^cumerino longiori, Plumer, Musa caudice
viridi, fructu longiori Succulento Anguloso. Sloane. Palma Humilis Longis
Latisqu^, Folijs, Plantans. This Tree grows 16 to 20 Feet high; a very large
firm long Palm-Leaf, used in thatching of Huts, and good Bedding for the Poor;
boiled or roasted it is used in Place of Bread.
Planta^es, Mu^a candice macul^to fructu recto rotundo, breviore o^orat^* H^rt*
Beamont. Bananas: Does not differ much from the former.
Bananes.

II. Fish and Flesh, are mostly a foreign Importation, (...)* Salt Herrings
from Scotland and Ireland, one Barrel Herrings is reckoned equivalent to two
Quintals dried Salt-Fish, dried Refuse Salt-Fish (Cod, Haddock, Haake, and
Polluck) from New England and Newfoundland, barrel'd sal^ Mackrel from
New England; they sometimes use the Country fresh Produce of (...), Catesby:
The Flying-Fish called also by the Natives Herrings. By a Pair of large Fins it
bears it self up in the Air for a short Time and to a small Distance.
flying Fish and Cancer t^^restris cuniculos sub Te^ra ag^n^. Sloane; they are
very plenty, and good Food, called Land-Crabs.
Land Crabs and Canc^llus trrestris. Carib. The Hermit Crab, or Soldier, from
their red Color. Their Forepart and Claws are crustaceous; their hinder Part
soft, only a Membrane integument, which they secure in the empty Shells of
sizable Buccinum^, and carry the Shell along with them not as original Property
but as a Derelict.
Soldiers. They seldom are allowed any Irish Salt Beef, it is reserved for the
Planters or Landlords, their Managers, Overseers, and other white Servants.
Some Negroes are allowed for their own Account and Profit (...) raise young
Pork ( West India young Pork i^ delicious) and Poultry which they carry to
Market, (...) seld^^ o^t of it. Their most delicious Dish for a ^egale, is a
Pepper-Pot or Negro-Pot compounded of salt Fish, salt Flesh of any Kind, Grain
and Pulse of all Kinds, (...) seasoned with There are many Kinds of Capsicums,
we shall only mention three; monapetalous, membranous Fruit.

Capsicum siliqua lata et rugosa. Park. B^ll or Long Pepper; it is annual, has
a longer Leaf than most Capsicums, is larger than a Walnut, and when first
ripe, red, membranous. Planted in New England it comes to Maturity, but is
pickled when green.

Capsicum minus fructu parvo pyramidali erecto. Sloane. Piper Indicum minimum,
surrectis ^iliquis oblongis erectis parvis: This is much used in Barbados, and
is called Barbados Pi^mento or Barb^rry Pepper.

Capsicum minus fructu rotundo erect^ parvo acerrimo. Sloane. Bir^ Pepper.
These last two dried and powdered, are intensly hot (almost ca^^^ick) and sold
over America, by the Name of Cayenne-Butter or Surrinum-Pepper.


Capsicum or Guinea-Pepper; it is (...) like a Spanish Oleo, or Newfoundland
Sho^^^^er.

The Provinder for their neat Cattle and Horses besides Cane-Tops, and Tops of
Guinea Corn already mentio^ed; Panicum vulgar Spica multiplici asperiuscula.
T. Gram^n Paniceum spica divisa C. B. P. Scots Grass: Perhaps so called because
plenty in the District of Barbad^s called Scotland; and not as a Plant or
Herbage from Scotland in Great Britain: It is peren^ial and affords many
Cuttings or Crops per Annum.
is Scotch Grass.

Scorpions, Scolopendras or forty Legs, Chigoes, Sand-Fli^^, Vena Medini, or
Guinea Worm, Mus^ito^s, Ants, Bed^^g^ Cimices Lectularii, etc. very troublesome
and great Nusances in these Climates, we shall not describe, having already
tired the Readers who have no Notion of natural History: But we cannot omit
that great Nuisance to Navigation called the Teredo or Xylophogus mari^us,
tubulo Con^hoidis, from one ^nch to one Foot long, the Extremity of their Head
resembles a double Bit of that Kin^ of Borer called an Augur.
Worm, pernicious especially to (...) Ships; at first only in the West Indies,
but have from thence been carried with Ships* and do prop^gate in Carolina,
Virginia, Maryland, they have got so far North a^ New England, and lately have
done considerable Dam^^^ in the Port of Newport, Colony of Rhode Island: It is
to be hoped, that a severe freezing Winte^ may destroy them, as it did in
Holland Anno 1730, when thos^ Worms by eating and honey-combing of the Piles of
their Dikes, between the highest and lowest Water-Marks, did put the Country in
Danger of being undam'd or drowned.

I insensibly deviate into something of the natural History of these Countries;
but as it is not within the Compass of my original Design, which was their
current and political History in a summary Way: I shall only briefly relate and
describe by the proper classical Names which hitherto has not been done by
Authors; that Part of their natural Produce which is used in common Food, in
Delicacies, and as Commodities in Trade.

1. The common Food is mostly already mentioned, (...) these we may add Ducks
of several Kinds, Plover, wild Palumbus migratorius. Catesby. Palumbus
torquatus. Aldro^and. The wild Pigeon, Pigeon of Passage, or ring Dove* These
are plenty at certain Seasons, all over America, and of great Benefit in
feeding the Poor. The French call them Ramier, the Dutch call them Ringle Duif,
wild Duif, boom Duif.
Pigeons, wild H^gs Astacus marinus; Lobster.
Lobsters, Astacus f^^viatilis, the Cray-Fish.
Cray-Fish, Cancer f^^viatilis; River Crab. These two periodically quit their
old crustaceous Exuviae, and at that Time have a Kind of Sickness (as we
observe in Silkworms in their S^^iums, so called) and do disgorge from their
Stomach some L^pilli, Calculi, or B^zoar called Oc^li Can^ri or Crabs Eyes. N.
B. The Te^^acea so called, viz. Bez^ars, Corrals, Corralins, Crabs Eyes, and
Crabs Claws are insipid, useless Medicines; they are generally exhibited in
small Doses, but if given in Doses of ten Times the Quantity, they do no Good
nor no Hurt, as I have frequently tried; if in a continued Use and in large
Q^antities, they have the same bad Effect, that Chalk, Clay and the like have
in the Pica Virginum.
River-Crabs, Cancer mari^us chelis rubris.

Cancer marinus chelis nigris.


Sea-Crabs, the Testudo marina. They are two Weeks in Coitu, hatch their Eggs
in the Sand; they are caught either by turning them upon their Back, or by
harpooning. They are of various Kinds, I shall mention only two Sorts.

Testudo marina viridis. Green Turtle, so called from the Color of its Fat;
this is reckoned wholesome and delicious Food.

Testudo Care^ta. Rochefort. Hist. des Antilles; Hawks-Bill Turtle, so called
from the Form of its Mouth; the outside Plates or Scales of its bony Covering,
Workmen call Tortoise-Shell.


Sea-Tortoise or Turtle as the Sailors call them.

2. Some of their Delicacies are many Sorts of Cucumbers, Melons and the like
of the Gourd Kind, Malus Citr^a sive Medica. Raij. H. The Citron Tree, o^
Pomme-citron: Folijs laurinis rigidis, like the Orange Tree, but wi^^ out an
Appendix. The Fruit is larger and rougher than a (...) with a thick Rind which
is made into Succades or Sweetmeats, and is (...) in making Citron-Water,
called by the French Leau de Bar^^^e, (...) grow mostly in Scotland District of
Barbad^s and are sold a Ryal per(...)
Citro^s, Aurantium medulla dulci vulgar. Ferrar. Hesp. (...) Orange:
perennial large rigid Leaves, with a Heart like Appendix; the Fruit is
fragrant, of a redish, yellow Color and tough Peel.

Aurantium acri medulla vulgar Fer. Hesp. Aurantia malus. J. B. Sevil, or
sower Orange. This is the medicinal Orange.

Aurantium Sinense Fer. Hesp. China Orange, is eat only for Pleasure.

Aurantium Sylvestre medulla acri. T. Aurantia Sylvestris. J. B. fructu Limonis
pusilo, Limas de Oviedo. The Lime-Tree; this a more pungent and less agreeable
and not so wholesome as the Limon; it is much used in the American Beverage
called PUNCH.

Aurantium maximum, Ferrarij, Shadock-Tree. It is sometimes large as a human
Head, with a thick Rind, a flat disagreeable Taste to my Palate.


Oranges, Limon vulgaris. Ferr. Hesp. Malus Limonia acida. C. B. P. Sower
Limons; like the others of this Kind, has perennial thick (...) green Leaves,
but without an Appendix: The Fruit is more oval than the Orange and with a
nipple like Process at the Extremity or En^* of a pale Yellow, it is the most
delicious Sowring for that Julep-Fashion Drink called Punch.

Limon dulci medulla vulgaris. Ferr. Hesp. Sweet Limon, it is not in much
Esteem.


Limons, Sugar-Cane already mentioned, Cocoa we refer to the Paragraph of
Produce for Trade, and Palma Indica nucifera C^ccus dicta Raij H. Palma
nucifera arbor J. B. Coco-Tree; Palme^a Leaves very large; every Year it emits
a Ra^emus of Coco-Nuts, whereof some hold a Pint of cool, pleasant Lymph or
Drink; this Nut remains upon the Tree, good for many Years.
Coco, Palma altissima non spinosa, fructu Pruniformi, minore race^os^ sparso.
Sloane. Palma quinta seu Americana fructu racemos^. C. B. P. Cabbage-Tree. The
Wood is very spungy or pithy, grows very tall, every Year near its Top, about
Mid-summer, is emitted a large Racemus of Flowers, which make a good Pickle.
Cabbage-Tree, Ananas acul^atus fructu pyramidato, carne aureo. Plumer.
Pineapple, see T. I. R. Tab. 426, 427, 428, where it is most elegantly
delineated. They plant it as Artichocks are planted in Europe. It is a most
delicious Fruit, not luscious, but a smart brisk fragrant Sweetness, it may be
called the Ambrosia of the Gods; but as the highest Sweets degenerate into the
most penetrating and vellicating Acids; so this if eat in Quantities, occasions
most violent Cholic Pain^, for the same Reason, Sugar and Honey are cholicy.
Pineapple so called from its Resemblance of the Fruit or Cones of some
Pine-Trees.

3. Produce that are Commodities in Trade Cacao, Raij. H. Am^gd^lus sexta s^u
Amygdalis similis Gua^^male^sis. C. B. P. Cacao Tree: At a Distance it
resembles a small European Tilia or Lime Tree. It is planted from the Seed or
Nut. Distances five Feet, after 3 Years i^ begins to bear, and may continue to
bear from 12 to 20 Years; rises to the Height of 20 Feet or more, Flowers and
Fruit at the same Time, not from the Ends of the Twigs, but from the Trunks of
the Body and large Branches of the Tree: The Flowers are whitish (...) petala,
without a Calix; the Fruit when ripe resembles a large Cucumber, i^ red or
yellow, containing 20 to 40 Cocoa Nuts in a Pulp. In some Par^s of New-Spain
they are used as Money for small Change, in Guatimala, Comanas, etc. These Nuts
made into Pa^te called Chocolate, and this dissolved in boiling Water, is
become a very general Sorbition or liquid Food for Nourishment and Pleasure.
Cocoa, Zingiber. C. B. P. Ginger. A tuberous Root as an Iri^, Reed or
Flag-Leaves, the Flower is of five Pata^a, anomalous, as if bilabiated, fructu
trigono, triloculari. They do not allow it to Flower because it exhausts the
Root. It is planted from Cuts of the Roots and continues 12 Months in the
Ground, it requires 6 or 7 Weeks to cure it or dry it in the Sun as the French
do; in Barbados they scald it, or scrape it, to prevent its sprouting: It it a
very great Produce, but forces and impoverishes the Land very much.
Zingiber or Ginger, Anonis Americana folio latiori subrotundo. T. Annil five
Indigo Gu^daloupensis. H. R. P. Indigo. A pinnated Leaf, red papilionaceous
Flowers, Seed ^^^embles Cabbage-Seed. It is planted by throwing 10 or 12 Seeds
into each Hole, after three Months it is fit to be cut, and cut again several
Times or Crops in the Year. Indigo is the Expression from the Leaves macerated
in Water, and dried in the Sun; the Roots afford Crops for several Years. There
are several Degrees of its Goodness, viz. Copper, Purple, Blue, Iron-coloured
the worst. They have lately with good Success gone into this Cultivation in
South Carolina and have three Crops per Annum.
Indigo, Xylon Brasilianum. J. B. Gossipium Bras^lianu^ store fl^vo. Herm. Par.
Bat. Cotton. A Shrub 8 to 10 Feet high, resembling the Rubus or Raspberry at a
Distance. An Acre of Cotton Shrub^ may yearly produce 1 Ct. with. Cotton; the
poorer Sort of Planters follow it, requiring no great Upset, and is a ready
Money Commodity.

Xylon lana Flavescente. Yellow Cotton.


Cotton-Wool, Aloe Diascoridis et alior^m. Its Leaves are like those of the
Iucca, from their Juice is the Aloes Hepatica or Barbados, of a da^k Liver
Color, and nauseous Smell. The Succ^trine Aloes of the Shops comes from the
Levant in Skins; Barbados or Horse-Aloes is put up in large Gourds.
Aloes, Cassia fistula Americana: Cassia. A large Tree, w^nged Leaves
resembling the Walnut, yellow five Petal Flower^, the Pistillum becomes a long
round woody Pod, Inch Diameter and under, a Foot long more of less, Inside is
divided into many transverse Cells, covered with a black sweet Pulp, and in
each Cell a flat smooth oval Seed. The Cassia fistula Alexandrina C. B. P.
which comes from the Leva^^ i^ pref^rable to that of the West Indies.
Cassia Fistula, Tamarindus. Ray H. A large Tree with pinnated Leaves no ^mpar,
the Flowers are rosaceous and grow in Clusters; the Pisti^^um becomes a
^latish, woody Pod three or four Inches long, in 2 or 3 Protuberances,
containing a stringy dark acid Pulp with hard ^lat Seeds. The Tamarinds from
the Levant and East Indies are of ^ better Kind.
Tamarinds, ^ui^^um, Lignum S^^atum, sive Lignum Vita^. Park. Pock Wood. A
large Tree, smooth Bark, ponderous Wood, in the middle, of a dark Color,
aromatic Taste; small pinnated Leaves no Impar Flowers of six Potala in
Umbels, the Seed Vessel resembles Shepherds Purse. In the West Indies they call
it Junk-Wood. It was formerly reckoned a Specific in the venereal Pox; it has
lost that R^putation, but is still used in Scorbutic Ails, and its Rosin in
Rheumatisms.
Lignum-vitae, Ricin^ides El^^gni folio, Cort^x Eluth^riae, so called from one
of the Bahama^ Islands, almost exhausted; it is a greatful aromatic Bitter,
gives a good Perfume; Bay Tree Leaves, Berries in Branches, this Bark is of a
yellowish White rolled up in Quills like Cinnamon, but much thicker; it is used
in Place of the Cortex Win^eria^^^.
White Cinnamon, (...) Arabicum castaneae folio, flore albo od^^atissi^^ cuj^^
fructus, Coffy, in officinis dicuntur nobis. Comm. Coffee-Tree Brita^^^s*
Plukn. The Dutch East India Company carried some Plants from Mecca N. I at. 21
d* in Arabia faelix to Iava, and from thence to Amsterdam in Holland where the
Berries may be seen in Perfection, lately it is cultivated in Surri^am,
Martinico and Iamaica.
Coffee, Morus fructu ^iridi, lign^ sulphur^^ tinctorio, Buxei coloris, lig^^^
Americanum; Fustick Wood. It it a large Tree, Leaf like the Elm* grow in the
Manner of Ash-Tree Leaves.
Fustick, Pseudo santalum C^o^^um. Slo^ne; Braziletto used in dying* It is
almost exhausted in the Bahama Islands.

Thus, I hope, I have given an exact and regular Account (such Accounts are
wanted) of the useful Part of the Produce of the British West India Islands
under the Heads of Food, Delicaci^^ or Friandises, and Commodities in Trade: I
am sensible, that it will not suit the Taste of some of our Readers, therefore,
henceforwa^d shall not distaste them much with the like Excursions.


Braziletto, Campeche Wood or Logwood, Nicaraga Wood by the Dutch called
Stockfish-hout; these last two Commodities or Dye-Woods are not the Produce of
our West India Islands, but are imported to Iamaica from the Spanish Main.

The general Supply for Charges of Government in all our West India Islands is
a Pol Tax upon Negroes and Excise upon Liquors.

Generally for every 20 to 30 Negroes a Planter is obliged to keep one white
Man, two Artificers or Handy crafts Men are allowed equal to three common
Laborers; 120 Head of Cattle requires also one white Man.

The regular Troops from Great Britain to the West India Islands are allowed by
their Assemblies for further Subsistence per Week 20 s. to a Commission
Officer, and 3 s. and 9 d. to the other Men.

In some of these Islands, the nominal Price of the same Sugars differ, for
Instance Sugar per Ct. with. if paid in ready Cash at 16 s. in Goods it is 18 s.
in paying of old Debts 20 s.

The 4 and half per Ct. upon the Produce Exports of Barbados and the Leeward
Islands granted to the Crown by their several Assemblies in Perpetuity, seems
to be in Lieu of Quitrents. L. Baltimore some few Years ago in Maryland, to
make an Experiment of this Nature, procured an Act of Assembly for 3 s. 6 d.
per Hogshead Tobacco in Room of Quitrents: It was found inconvenient, and
Quitrents were allowed to take Place again.

Being prolix in the general Account of the Sugar Islands, will render the
Accounts of the particular Islands more succinct.

Barbados.
Barbados is the most Windward of all the Islands in or near the Gulf of
Mexico; it lies in about 13 d. N. Lat. 59 d. 30 m. W. from London by the
Observations of Capt. Candler. Capt. Candler in the Launceston Man of War, was
sent (...) 1717 by the Board of Admiralty, to ascertain by good (...) the
Latitudes and Longitudes of the British West India Island the respective
Variations of the Compass at that Time.
Sir William Curteens an ^^^venturer in Trade, Anno 1624 in sailing home to
(...) from Farnambuc of the Brazils, at that Time (...) Possession of the
(...), touched at this Island, (...) it is said, gave the Name Barbados, from
large (...) of a bearded Tree Fians arbor Americana, Arbuti folijs non
serratis, (...) magnitudina, funiculis e ramis ad terram demissis prolifera.
Barbados Fig Tree. It is a large Tree, with a Laurel or (...) Leaf; the Fruit
adheres to the Trunks of the Body an^ Branches, large as the Top of a Man's
Finger, containin^ Seeds, Fig-fashion.
growing there, it was spread with a Sort of Purslane Portulara Curasavica
procumbens folio s^bro^undo. (...) Not much differing from that Purslan^, which
is a (...) spreading W^ed in many of our Gardens in Boston of England.
: Here he (...) human Bones, but no living Mankind: (...) Swine.

The Earl of Carlisle, a Court Favorite, in (...) of the Reign of Charles I,
had a (...) from the Crown; this Island continued in the (...) of the
Proprietary and his Heirs about 30 Anno 1661 the Crown purchased it of Lord
(...) Heir to the Earl of Carlis^e, their Family (...) Hay, and allows to the
Heirs 1000 L. per An. out 4 and half per Ct. Duty.

The greatest Length of the Island is about 26 its greatest Width about 14
Miles; Contents (...) 100,000 Acres. Every Freeholder is (...) to keep a Plan
of his Land attested by a sworn (...) 10 Acres valued at 20 ^ per An. per Acre
(...) Voter in Elections.

At first they planted Tobacco, some Indigo, (...), and cut Fustick a dye Wood;
at present they no Tobacco, no Indigo. Their first Sugarcanes they had from
Brazils Anno 1645: This Island was generally settled by Cavaliers in the Time
of the Civil Wars in England.

The Governor's Style in his Commission, is Captain General and chief Governor
of the Islands of Barbados, St. Lucia, St. Vincents, Dominica, and the rest of
his Majesty's Island Colonies and Plantations in America, known by the Name of
the Caribee-Islands, laying and being to Windward of Guardaloupe: Excepting
Barbados, the other Islands are called Neutrals Anno 1722 a Patent passed the
great Seal of Great Britain, granting the Government and Property of St.
Vincent and St. Lucia in the West India Caribee Islands, to the Duke of
Montague: He attempted a Settlement at a considerable Charge, but was drove
off, by the French from Martinique, because of its being a neutral Island not
adjusted: This Island is about 7 Leagues East of Martinique, and about 25
Leagues West from Barbados.

Upon St. Vincents, are subsisting some Aboriginal Indians: As also a Community
of Negro^s, which began from the Negro Cargo of a Guinea Ship cast away there,
and daily increases by the Accession of runaway N^groes from Barbados.

At Dominique is a large Tribe of Aboriginal Indians; they affect the French
most.


, because the Government and Property of them, hitherto has not been settled by
any solemn authentic Treaty between Great Britain and France.

In Time of the civil Wars Barbados and Virginia were settled by Cavaliers and
Ruffians (excuse my coup^ling of them, I mean no Reflection) in the Summer 1650
Lord Willoughby proclaimed K. Charles II. in Barbados, and administered the
Government in his Name; but in January Anno 1651, 2 he surrendered Barbados and
the neighboring Islands to Sir George Ascue Admiral for the Parliament. About
the same Time Virginia submitted to the Parliament.

Their Legislature consists of three Negatives, viz. the Governor, the Council
(their full Compliment is twelve) and House of Representatives (in all our
Colonies, in a particular Manner called the Assembly) composed of 22 Deputies,
that is two from each of the eleven Parishes without Wages, or any Allowance;
the eldest Councellor in the Parish is generally appointed the returning
Officer: Their Assemblies are annual.

Their Courts of Judicature. The Courts of Error* Chancery, and Probate of
Wills, are in the Governor and Council. The Courts of common Law are in five
Districts, viz. Bridgetown District consists of 3 Parishes, the others of 2
Parishes each: Each Court has one Judge and 4 Assistants.

Only one Collection or Custom-House Office at Bridgtown; there are three more
Entry and Delivery-Ports, viz. Ostines, Holetown, and Speights; this Collection
is under the Inspection of a Surveyor-General of the Customs residing at
Antigua.

Their Currency is Silver Mexico Standard, by Weight, whereof 17 d half d. with.
passes for 6 s. Upwards of 40 Years since they borrowed from New England by a
Projection of Mr. Woodbridge, the fallacious Scheme of a public Paper Credit
or Paper Currency; but by Orders from the Court of England it was soon
suppressed, and Governor Crow had an Instruction, TO REMOVE FROM THE COUNCIL,
AND ALL OTHER PLACES OF TRUST, ANY WHO HAD BEEN CONCERNED IN THE LATE PAPER
CREDIT. These Bills, soon after their Emission, fell 40 per Ct. below Silver;
and occasioned a great Confusion, and Convulsion in the Affairs of the Island.

Anno 1717 peaceable Times, when I was in Barbados, all along its Lee-Shore was
a Breast-Work and Trench, in which at proper Places were 29 Forts and
Batteries, having 308 Cannon mounted: The Windward Shore is secured by high
Rocks, steep Cleefs, and foul Ground. Anno 1736 in the Island were 17,680
Whites; whereof 4326 fencible Men, disposed into one Troop of Guards, two
Regiments of Horse, and seven Regiments of Foot. Beginning of King William's
War, Barbados furnished 700 to 800 Militia, Sir Francis Wheeler 1693 with a
Squadron of Ships, 2 Regiment^ of regular Troops from England, and some Militia
from Barba^^^, and Leeward Islands, made Descents upon the French Islands,
April 2. they landed in Martinique at Col de sac Marine, plundered and cam^ on
Board again; April 17. they landed at St. Pierre, did nothing, and returned to
Barbados; and from thence to New England; they unluckily imported a malignant
Fever (from 1692 to School Barbados continued sickly) from thence to
Newfoundland, and home to England.
with some Militia from our Leeward Islands to join the regular Troops and
Squadron from England against the neighboring French Islands.

There may be about 80,000 Negroes in Barbados, may ship off about 30,000 Hds
Sugar, besides Ginger, scalded and scrapt, Cotton-Wool and Aloes. Their Duty of
4 and half per Ct. in Specie upon Produce exported, is perpetual, and given
immediately to the Crown's Disposal; out of this the Governor has 2000 L. per
An. Salary, besides large Gratuities and Perquisites. The Tax on Negroes, Mills
and Potkils is generally 10,000 L. per Annum, Excise upon Liquors imported
7,000 L. per Annum, for defraying the ordinary Charges of Government.

Returned protested Bills of Exchange are allowed 10 per Ct. and all Charges.

They generally worship or profess to worship after the Mode of the Church of
England; no dissenting Congregation, a few Quakers excepted: New England had
some of their first Seminary of Quakers from Barbados.

Some loose Account of their Governors. Lord Willoughby of Parham at the
Restoration was appointed Governor of Barbados under the Earl of Carlisle, he
was at the same Time Governor-General of the Leeward-Islands, and a Proprietor
of Antegoa.

Upon the Restoration James Kendal, Esquire was appointed Governor.

Upon Kendal's returning to England, Col. Francis Russel, Brother to the Earl
of Orford, came over Governor, with a Regiment of regular Troops and subsisted
by the Country; he died Anno 1695 and Bond was President until July School.

School Ralph Gray, Esquire Brother to the Earl of Tankerville arrived Governor; he
went to England for his Health Anno 1701, and John Farmer Esquire was President and
Commander in chief.

1703 Sir Bevil Greenville, appointed Governor; his Home Salary was increased
from 1200 L. to 2000 L. per Annum, that he might not desire Gratuities from the
Country, they also built for him a Governor's House in Pilgrim's Plantation.

1707 Milford Crow, a London Merchant succeeded him.

1711 Robert Lowther, Esquire succeeded, and was continued upon the Accession of
King George ^; by Reason of several Complaints (the chief Complainer was the
Rev. Mr. Gordon of Bridgetown, an eminent Martinico Trader) he was ordered into
the Custody of a Messenger and called to Account in the proper Courts of
Westminster Hall, and cost him a considerable Sum of Money: This with the
Affair of my Namesake General Douglass, of the Leeward-Islands, may be a
Warning to all Governors, that they are liable to be called to Account upon
small Suggestions when their Friends die or are otherways out of Place.

After a Presidentship of some Continuance; Henry Worsley, Esquire (who for some
Time had been British Envoy at the Court of Portugal) Anno 1721 was appointed
Governor, besides his Salary of 2,000 L. out of the 4 and half per Ct. by his
Finesse the Assembly voted him 6,000 L. per An. during his Government: They
soon found, that this was more than they could afford. There interveened two
Commissions which did not take Effect, viz. Lord Irwin, who died of the
Smallpox before he set out from England; and Lord Belhaven, upon his Passage
aboard the Royal Anne Galley was cast away and drowned near the Lizard Point.

After this Sir Olando Bridgman and others were appointed but never in
Possession.

L. How was a much esteemed Governor and died in Barbados.

1742 Sir Thomas Robinson, of him we have not much to say.

1747 Arrives Mr. Greenville Governor, over and above his Home Salary, they
allow him 3000 L. per Annum, during his Administration, and to his Satisfaction.

British Leeward Islands.
These were first discovered in the second Voyage of Columbus, the Spaniards
despised them, and made no Settlements there: They were severally settled by
the English at different Times, and are all under the Command and Inspection of
one Governor-General; in each of the four Islands of Antegoa, Montserrat,
Nevis, and St. Christophers, there is commissioned from Great Britain a
Lieutenant Governor; in the small Islands are Militia Captains or Capitain de
quartier commissioned by the Governor-General.

The General's Commission is in this Style. Captain General and Commander in
Chief of the Islands of Antegoa, Montserrat, Nevis, St. Christophers, and all
the Caribee Islands from Guardaloupe to St. John de Porto Rico. In the Absence
of the Captain General and Lieutenant General (the Lieutenant General resides
at St. Kitts) formerly the Commander of Nevis, as being the oldest Settlement,
was Commander in chief of these Caribee Islands, but by a new Regulation, the
Senior of the Lieutenant Governors is to command. Each of the four Islands has
a distinct Legislature, of a Gov^rnour, Council and Representatives.

Out of the 4 and half per Cent Duty on Produce exported, are paid Salaries per
An. to the Governor-General 1200 L. to each of the four Lieutenant-Governors
200 L. St. The present General Matthews obtained an Instruction, that
considering the 1200 L. per An. was not a sufficient and honorable Support, he
was allowed to accept of additional Gratuity Salaries, and the respective
Islands settled upon him during his Administration, viz. Antegoa 1000 L. Nevis
300 L. St. Kitts 800 L. per Annum; Montserrat did not settle the Gratuity, but
do generally give about 300 L. yearly: The Perquisites are of the same Nature
with Barbados.

Anno 1736 in all the Leeward Islands were 10,520 Whites; whereof fencible Men
in Antegoa 1500, in St. Kitts 1340, in Nevis 300, in Montserrat 360, in
Anguilla 80, in Spanish-Town or Virgin Gorda 120.

Soon after the Restoration Lord Willoughby of Parham was Governor-General of
the Leeward-Islands, and at the same Time Governor of Barbados.

Sir William Stapleton.

K. James II. appointed Sir Nathaniel Johnson, upon the Revolution he abdicated
and withdrew to Carolin^, and was succeeded by

Christopher Codrington, Esquire he died School, and was succeeded by his Son
Christopher Codrington, Esquire the greatest Proprietor in Antegoa, a great
Proprietor in Barbados, and sole Proprietor of the Island of Barbuda. This
Family has been a great Benefactor in pious Uses and in Seminaries for Learning.

Sir William Mathews succeeded Col. Codrington Anno 1704, he died soon.

1706 Arrived for Governor-General Col. Parks, he had been Aid de Camp to the
most renowned Duke of Marlborough, and carried to the Court of England, the
News of the critical and great Victory at Hochstat near the Danube in Germany,
Anno 1710 he was murdered by an Insurrection of the People or Inhabitants; he
is said to have been a vicious Man, especially in his Amors with the Planters
Wives.

He was succeeded by Col. Walter Douglass, who was superseded Anno 1714, and in
the Courts of Westminster Hall, was called to Account for Male administration;
and Nov. 19. 1716 by the Court of King's Bench was fined 500 L. Sterling, and
five Years Imprisonment.

1714 Col. Hamilton appointed Governor.

To him succeeded General Heart.

1726 To General Heart succeeded Thomas Pit, Lord Londonderry, he died in
Antegoa Sept. 1729.

Lord Forbes, next Col. Cosby were appointed.

April 1733, Mathews, formerly Lieut.-General, is appointed Captain General,
and is at present continued in the Administration.

During these 40 Years last and upwards, a Regiment of regular Troops from
Great Britain, has been stationed in the Leeward Islands, always very
incomplete; our Troops, as also the French in the Plantations, generally
speaking, are only Corpse of Officers at a very great Charge.

Their Medium, is Produce at settled Prices from Time to Time, their Cash
consists of Black ^ogs (old French Sols Pieces) 9 Black-dogs make a Ryal, 8
Ryals make a light or current Piece of Eight, 10 Ryals make a heavy Piece of
Eight.

ANTEGOA began to settle about Anno 1632, generally settled by the moderate or
Low Church, afterward called Whigs. May contain about 56,000 Acres, 20,000
Negroes. No River, scarce any good Springs of fresh Water, they generally use
Cistern Water. The Negro Pol-Tax is generally very high, Excise upon Liquors
imported about 2000 L. per An.

Their Assembly or lower House consists of 24 Representatives from 11
Districts, viz. Four from the District of St. John's, and two from each of the
other Districts. Six Parishes, each Minister or Rector is allowed as Salary
16,000 with. Muscovado Sugar, with a Mansion House and Glebe-Land of 10 or 12
Acres. Only one Collection with four Entry and Delivery Ports, viz. St. John's,
Parham, Falmouth, and Willouby Bay: The Collector keeps his Office at St.
John's, where also resides the Surveyor-General of the Customs o^ all the
Islands, Iamaica excepted. About 250 Vess^ls enter in per Annum.

Courts of Justice. For Common Law, there are two Precincts, St. John's and
Falmouth, each one Judge, and four Assistants; there is also a Court Merchant,
being a summary Way of dispatching Debts, owing to transient Traders. The
Governor and Council are the Judges of Errors, Chancery and Probates.

St. John's is a good Harbor, smooth Water, with good Wharffs: English Harbor,
lately fortified by the Care of Commodore Charles Knowles, is a safe Retrea^
for King's Ships and others.

Chief Produce is Sugar and some Cotton; no Indigo.

MONTSERRAT is a small hilly Island, settled mostly by Irish, two Thirds Roman
Catholics; about 4500 Negroes; their whole annual Charge of Government does
not much exceed 1500 L. per Annum: Not above five Vessels per Annum exports
their Produce. One Collection at Plymouth, have three Entry and Delivery-Ports,
viz. Plymouth, Old-Harbour, and Kers-Bay: Three Parishes; four Divisions, each
Division sends two Representatives, being eight in all; the Parish Ministers
have 130 L. per Annum from the Country-Treasury. Two Regiments Foot, one Troop
Horse Militia.

Courts of Judicature. For common Pleas only one precinct Court held at
Plymouth: The first Court to which a Case or Action is brought, is called a
Court of Grace (the Inferior Courts of the Province of Massachusetts Bay in
New England, in some Respect may be called Courts of Grace) the next Court is a
Court of Judgment, and may appeal to a third Court, their Grand Sessions
consists of the Lieut.-Governor, Council, and chief Judge.

Their Sugars are very ill cured in Cask, are sold green, retaining much
Molasses: A Planter if much pressed by a Merchant for Debt, in 5 or 6 Days from
cutting the Canes, the Sugars are aboard; they plant also some Cotton, and much
Indigo of the Iron Color or worst Sort; have four Crops of Indigo per Annum;
viz. April, Midsummer, Michaelmas, and Christmas.

NEVIS. Is one Conical Hill; good Harbor, but great Surf at landing, as is
generally in the West Indies; have about 6000 Negroes (the French Squadron
under M. d'Iberville in Queen Anne's War carried off so many Negroes as were
afterward sold to the Spaniards for 400,000 Pieces of Eight. Only one
Collection at Charlestown, three Entry and Delivery Ports, viz. Charlestown,
Morton's Bay, and Newcastle; they load about 20 Vessels per An. for Europe.

Five Divisions or Parishes; each Division sends three Representatives, in all
fifteen Assembly Men. Judicature, only one Precinct, Courts as in Antegoa.

They cure their Sugar in square Pots, is better than that of Montserrat; some
Cotton; no Indigo, no Ginger. Cistern Water chiefly.

ST. CHRISTOPHERS about three or four Leagues from Nevis. Upon its East End are
Salt-Ponds and many small naked Hills. The French formerly were in Possession
of its East End to Palmeto-Point, and of its West End to near Sandy Point, but
by Treaty of Utrecht An. 1713, quit-claimed the whole to Great Britain. Have
only one Collection at Old-Road the Court ^or Shi^e-Town, several Entering and
Delivery Ports: Basse-terre ships off most, next for shipping off is
Sandy-Point. They bring their Sugars to the shipping Places in Hds, not in
Bags, as in Nevis and Montserrat: They ship off much Molasses, do not raise
much Cotton, no Indigo, no Ging^r: They run much Sugar aboard the Dutch
Interloopers at Statia, to save the 4 and half per C^. the Plantation Duties,
etc.

May have about 25,000 Negroes; about 9 Parishes, each sends two Assembly Men.
Good River Water from the Mountains.

VIRGIN ISLANDS. The Easternmost is called St. Thomas, at present in Possession
of the Danes, a good Harbor, scarce any Surf at landing; good careening at
this Island, a good Town, the Governor is Lutheran, the Congregation and Mother
Tongue is Low Dutch. The Island is small; they raise Cotton and Sugar; it is a
neutral and free Port, some say, to Pirates not excepted. Salt-Key, from which
some Vessels bring Salt. -- St. John's Island, two or three Gentlemen of Antegoa
have a Patent for; they raise Cotton, and cut Iunkwood, or Lignumvitae. --
Tortola produces the same. -- Beef-Island cuts Iunkwood. -- Spanish-Town or
Virgin Gorda is the Westermost of the Virgins; they plant Cotton only, being a
Mixture of Curaso whi^^ and yellow Revel indifferently planted together.

OTHER SMALL ISLANDS straggling between the Virgins and St. Christophers, viz.
Anagada not settled, Sambrero not settled, Anguilla raises Cotton, St. Martins,
some Dutch in one Part and some French on another Part, St. Bartholomew a
neutral Island not settled; Barbuda the Property of Codrington, is improved for
grazing.

Iamaica.
Iamaica is a long Oval of about 50 Leagues in Length; the Discoverer Columbus
and his Heirs were Proprietors of the Island: He called it St. Iago or St.
James, we call it Iamaica in our Idiom.

Cromwell without declaring War Sovereign Powers frequently dispense with the
Law of Nations (Honor and Honestly) thus the Spaniards in the Spring 1727 laid
Siege to Gibr^ltar; the French lately refortified Dunkirk, before any
Declaration of War; there can be no other Restraint upon Princes but a Balance
of Power; thus France, a Nation too potent, can never be bound over to the
Peace, without being dismembered.
sent Admiral Pen and General Venables with a considerable Sea and Land-Force,
to annoy the Spanish West Indies: They miscarried at St. Domingo; but reduced
Iamaica, Anno 1655, and remains with the English to this Day.

Iamaica is much subject to Hurricanes and Earthquakes. Anno 1693 Port Royal
during an Earthquake was swallowed up: It may be supposed, that for many Years
preceding, the Sea did gradually undermine it, and upon Occasion of this
Earthquake Port Royal subsided.

They carry on a considerable illicit but profitable Trade to the Spanish Main,
and return Pieces of Eight; and with the French of Hispaniola or St. Domingue
the Returns are mostly Indigo.

Port Royal of Iamaica is 76 d. 37 m. West from London, By the same Eclipse of
the Moon June 1722 observed by Capt. Candler of the Launceston Man of War at
Port Royal in Iamaica, and by Christopher Kirch at Berlin in Brandeburgh of
Germany; allowing Berlin 52 horary Minutes East of London. The Difference of
Longitude between two Places found by actual Observation of the same Eclipses,
Appulses, Occultations of the Celestial Bodies, called Luminaries, in both
Places, for the same Phaenominon; is more exact, than where an Observation is
used for one Place, and a Calculation from Tables for the other: Thus I judge
the Difference of Longitude, between London and Boston or Cambridge adjoining,
is well determined by the same Eclipse of the Moon, March 15. Anno 1717
observed at Cambridge near Boston by Mr. Thomas Robie, Fellow and Tutor in the
College there; and observed at Paris by Cassini and de la Hire, Accadamiciens
of the Royal Accademie of Sciences; the Difference in Time was 4 h. 55 m. 40
Se^* as Paris is 9 m. 40 Se. horary East of London; therefore the horary
Difference is about 4 ^* 46 m. or 71 d. 30 m. Cambridge and Boston are West
from Lond^^.
and in about 18 d. 30 m. N. Lat.

The Quitrents were generously given by the Crown, to the Treasury or Revenue
of the Island. Lands granted before Anno 1684 were at 2 s. 6 d. per 100 Acres
Quitrent, the new Grants are Halfpenny per Acre per Annum Quitrent. The Rent
Roll was lost or pretended to be lost, in the great Earthquake, and never
settled since, the Quitrents sometimes amount to 2000 L. per Annum. Their
Revenue Acts are temporary, but for a long Period; these Acts made Anno 1684,
expired Anno 1722, and were not renewed and confirmed (by the Interest and
Application of Governor Hunter) till Anno 1726.

A few Years since in Iamaica were 3000 fencible Men Whites, in 9 Regiments,
besides 8 Independent Companies of regular Troops, 100 Men per Company is their
full Compliment. The Receiver-General Mr. Cross some Years since in Boston for
his Health, told me, that some Years he had 90,000 Negroes in his List.

From Iamaica are exported Sugar about 25,000 Hds very large, some of a Tun
Weight; lately they have altered Freights from Number of Hogsheads, to Weight,
and their Hogsheads will be smaller in Consequence. They have only Water Mills
and Cattle Mills for their Canes; about 19 Parishes. Lately they begin to raise
some Coffee, and have planted some Logwood Trees.

There is always stationed here a Squadron of British Men of War, generally
under the Command of an Admiral. The Governor has a standing Salary of 2500 L.
per Annum out of the Country Treasury in Course: The Assembly generally allow
him a Gratuity of 2500 L. per Annum more; these with Escheats and all other
Perquisites do make it a Government of about 10,000 L. per An.

Duke of Albemarle concerned in Sir William Phips's fishing for a Spanish Plate
Wreck, had good Success; and in Case such another fishing Voyage should
present, that he might be near at Hand, obtained the Government of Iamaica: He
soon died and was succeeded by Col. Molesworth.

Upon the Revolution Anno 1690 the Earl of Inchaqueen appointed Governor, he
died upon the Island, and was succeeded by Sir William Beeston
Lieutenant Governor and Commander in chief Anno 1692, he died Anno 1700.

Major General Selwijn was appointed Captain General and Governor Anno 1701; he
died soon.

1702 The Earl of Peterborough (famous in Queen Anne's Wars in Spain) was
appointed Captain General of the Island, and Admiral in the West India Islands;
he never set out for this Government, and Col. Handasyde was appointed
Lieutenant Governor of Iamaica. Anno 1696 Ponti with a French Squadron made a
Feint against Iamaica, but without making any real Attempt, he put off for
Carthagena, where he had good Success.

1710 Lord Archibald Hamilton was appointed Governor, and superseded the
Command of Col. Handasyde; he was continued Anno 1714, upon K. George I's
Accession.

1716 Mr. Pit (formerly Governor of Fort St. George in the East India Company,
commonly called Diamond Pits) was appointed Governor, and Col. Otway Lieutenant
Governor.

1717 Mr. Pit resigns in Favor of Mr. Laws a Planter, afterward Sir Nicholas
Laws; Col. Dubourgay Lieutenant Governor. About this Time the Militia of
Iamaica were disposed into one Regiment Horse, eight Regiments Foot.

1721 Duke of Portland appointed Governor (a Retreat from South Sea Disasters)
he died in Summer 1726, and was succeeded by

Col. Hunter, who went thither, by Advice of his Physicians, for his Health;
and thereby did certainly obtain a Reprieve for some Years.

1734 Upon Col. Hunter's Death; Henry Cunningham A. 1734 went Governor; but
soon died after his Arrival.

1736. Edward Trelawney, Esquire appointed Governor, Anno 1744 he was appointed
Colonel of a Regiment of Foot to be raised in England, for his good Services.
He continues Governor at this Time 1747.

Bahama Islands.
Commonly called the Government of Providence the principal Island. One of
these Islands called St. Salvidor or Cat-Island was the first Discovery that
Columbus made in America.

They were granted by the Crown of England to the eight Proprietors of Carolina
Anno 1663; but as the Proprietors took no Care to prevent Enemies and Pirates
from harboring and rendez using there, Anno 1710 it was resolved in Council of
Great Britain, "That the Queen do take the Bahama-Islands into her immediate
Protection, and send a Governor to fortify Providence."

The Proprietors formerly granted a Lease of these Islands to a Number of
Merchants called the Bahama-Company: This turned to no Account.

In the Spring Anno 1720. There set out from the Havana an Expedition of 1200
Men in 14 Vessels against Providence and South Carolina; they visited
Providence ^ut doing any Damage, and were scattered in a Storm.

The Ba^^s belonging to this Cluster of Islands and Keys are called
Bahama-Banks, and make the East Side of the Gulf Stream of Florida; Providence
the chief Island where the Governor and Garrison are stationed, lies in about
25 d. N. Lat. It is a Place of no Trade, and seems to be only a preventive
Settlement, that Pirates and Privateers may not harbor there, and that the
Spaniards may not be Masters of both Sides the Gulf Stream. Their small Trade
has been Braziletto Dye-Wood, Cortex Elutherae from the Island of that Name,
Salt from Exeuma, and Ambergrease by Drift-Whales: At present they afford
Sea-Turtle, Lime* and sour Oranges for the Bons Vivants of North America.

They have one Company Independent Regular Troops from Great Britain. Capt.
Woods Rogers Commodore of the two famous Bristol South Sea Privateers in the
End of Queen Anne's Reign, was Anno 1717 appointed Governor with an Independent
Company. 1721 He was superseded by Capt. Finny. 1728 Upon Capt. Finny's Death,
Capt. Woods Rogers is again appointed Governor. Capt. Rogers died Anno 1733,
and Richard Fitz Williams, Esquire is appointed Governor. Fitz Williams resigned
Anno 1738, and John Tinker, Esquire, Son-in-Law to Col. Bladen, late of the Board
of Trade, succeeded; and continues Governor at this present Writing August 1747.

Bermudas.
This Name is said to be from John Bermudas a Spaniard, who discovered i^, in
his Way to the West Indies. Henry May a Passenger aboard Barbotier cast away
here, 1593, and tarried five Months, we do not mention, because of no
Consequence. Sir George Summers and Sir Thomas Gates, Adventurers in the
Virginia Company, were shipwrecked here 1609, found Abundance of Hogs, a
certain Sign that the Spaniards had been there; these Islands are sometimes
called in public Writings Summers, or corruptly Summer-Islands. Some Gentlemen
obtained a Charter from King James I. and became Proprietors of it: Mr. Moor
was their first Governor, Mr. Thomas Smith appointed Governor 1612, and after
three Years succeeded by Capt. Daniel Tucker 1616. Mr. Richard Norwood a
Surveyor was sent over by the Company to make Divisions; 1618 he divided it
into eight Tribes by the Names of the eight Proprietors or Adventurers, viz.
Marquis of Hamilton, Sir Thomas Smith many Years Treasurer, Earl of Devonshire,
Earl of Pembroke, Lord Paget, Earl of Warwick, Earl of Southampton, and Sir
Edwin Sands. Each Tribe was divided into 50 Shares; every Adventurer to have
his Share by casting of Lots in England, some had from one to twelve Shares;
besides a great deal of Land l^ft for common or public Uses; each Share
consisted of about 25 Acres, and remain so to this Day; the Value of a Share is
300 to 500 L. Proclamation Money; no Wheel-Carriages, no Enclosures, they
tether their Cattle; High Ways only from 5 to 7 Feet wide.

At first they went upon Tobacco as the Humor then was in all the West India
Islands -- 1619 Capt. Butler with a large Recruit of Settlers from England was
Governor, and the Legislature was settled in Governor, Council and Assembly;
being formerly in a Governor and Council.

Anno School Samuel Day, Esquire was Governor; Anno 1700 Capt. Bennet was appointed
Governor.

The present Governor is -- Popple, Esquire Anno 1747 upon his Brother's Death he
succeeded; his Brother Alured Popple Esquire formerly Secretary to the Board of
Trade and Plantations, was appointed Lieut.-Governor (the Commander in chief is
designed only Lieut.-Governor) Anno 1737.

Bermudas is in 32 d. 30 m. N. Lat. about 65 d. West from London, lies 200 to
300 Leagues Distance from the nearest Lands* viz. New England, Virginia,
South Carolina, and Providence, or Bahama-Islands. Tide flows 5 Feet, is well
secured by sunken Rocks, but Water sufficient, in narrow Channels and Turnings,
requiring a good Pilot. Their only Settlement of Notice is upon St. George's
Island about 16 Miles long from E. N. E. to W. S. W. scarce a League wide in
the broadest Place, in some Places the Spray of the Sea crosses the Island. The
Winds from the North to the North-West, are the most prevalent; subject to
smart Gusts of Wind, Thunder and Lightning. March, April and May is their
whaling Time, but of no considerable Account; their Whale-Oil and Ambergrease
are inconsiderable; the Governor has a Perquisite from the Royal Fish about 10
L. per Whale.

In Bermudas there may be about 5000 Whites, their fencible Men not much
exceeding 1000 Men, and many of these generally at Sea, their Militia consist
of 100 Horse, and one Company Foot from each of the eight Tribes, there is in
Garrison one Company Independent Regular Troops from Great Britain always
incomplete (as are all our Plantation Troops for Want of a proper Check) the
Perquisite of the Governor.

Their Diet is mean, and the People generally poor, simply honest; but gay in a
rustic Manner ( Bermudas Giggs) they have the best Breed of Negroes, equal to
white Men in their Navigation.

Their Trade is of small Account; they build their own Sloops of Cedar C^drus
Bermudiana vulgo H. Iuniperus Bermudiana H. L. Bermudas Cedar, it is harder
than the Cedar of Carolina and Virginia; they are all distinct Species, as are
the red and white Cedars of New England: We shall give a more classick,
practical or mechanic and commercial Account of them when we come to treat of
Timber and Naval Stores used in, and exported from New England.
of their own Growth, fit for Use in 20 Years Intervals or Growth; their
Keel-Pieces, Wales, and Beams are of Oak; their Mast are of white Pine, from
New England.

Their chief Business is building Sloops of Cedar, their own Growth, light
Runners; their Exports are inconsiderable, viz. Some Pot Herbs and Roots for
the other Parts of America, a white Chalk-Stone easily chizeled for building
Gentlemen's Houses in the West India Islands, Palmeto Palma prunifera Bermud.
(of the Palms some are cocciferous, some pruniferous) with a very long and
wide Leaf.
Leaves manufactured into Plait, better than the Straw-Work of Italy and of
Nuns in some Countries: They are noted for going to fish upon Spanish Wrecks,
they excel in diving. Bermudas is noted for Diverse: An Indian born there, of
Florida Parents dived 18 Fathom (common Diving is 8 to 10 Fathom) and clapped
Lashings to an Anchor, was near three Minutes under Water, upon his Emersion or
coming up, he bled much at Mouth, Nose and Ears.


This Island (or rather Islands) is generally healthful. The famous Mr. Waller
a Gentleman of Fortune and Wit, a Member of the long Parliament, resided here
some Years during the civil Wars of England, says of Bermudas, This Notion of a
healthful Climate, gave Occasion to a late Scheme projected by a whimsical Man,
Dean B -- ly since Bishop of Cl -- ne in Ireland, of sounding in Bermudas, an
University College or Seminary for the Education of the British American Youth.
Projectors are generally inconsiderate, rash, and run too fast: He did not
consider that Places for Health are accommodated for Valetudinarians and old
People; whereas young People, where the Stamina Vitae are good, seldom want
Health (at Harvard-Coll^ge in Cambridge near Boston New England, not exceeding
one or two per Ct. per An. die) this Place is of very difficult Access or
Navigation: does not produce a Sufficiency for the present parcimonious
Inhabitants. This abstracted Notion seems only adequate to the Conceptions of a
common Schoolmaster, to keep his Boys together (as a Shepherd does by folding
of his Sheep) while they learn to read English, and labor at the Rudiments of
the Latin Language; whereas young Gentlemen, Students of the B^lles Lettres,
Civil History, Natural History, or any of the three learned Professions,
require a larger Field than that of a small Island divulsed (if we may so
express it) from the World or Continents of the Earth. He hired a Ship, put on
Board a good Library (some Part of it, he bountifully bestowed upon the
Colleges of Massachusetts Bay and Connecticut New England) and in Company with
some Gentlemen of great Worth; after a tedious Winter-Passage, put in at
Rhode Island, a small Colony of New England; built a kind of a Cell, lived
there a recluse Life for some Time, 'till this Fit of ENTHUSIASM did
devervelce, and was convinced of the Idleness of the Whim, did not proceed, but
returned to England.

There are Enthusiasts in all Affairs of Life, this Man of himself was an
Enthusiast in many Affairs of Life; not confined to Religion and the Education
of Youth; he invaded another of the learned Professions, Medicine, which in a
peculiar Manner is called the learned Profession; he published a Book called
Siris ( the Ratio Nominis I cannot investigate) or Tar-Water, an universal
Medicine or Penacea; he never knew it fail, if copiously administered, of curing
any Fever; whereas many Fevers, viz. That of the Plague, of the Smallpox with
Symptoms of Purples and general Haemorhages, etc. in their own Nature to most
Constitutions from first Seizures are mortal, by an universal Necrosis or
sudden Blast of the Constitution: It cures the Murrain, Rot, and all other
malignant Distempers amongst Cattle, Sheep, etc. The continued or long Use of
it does Violence to the Constitution; in Asthmas and Rheumatick Disorders a
short Use of it, has been beneficial, but our Materia Medica affords more
efficacious and safe Medicines; it is at present, almost wore out of Fashion.
Tar is only Turpentine by Fire rendered of a caustic Quality; whereas
Turp^ntine (and consequently its Water or Decoction) by the Experience of many
Ages, has been found a most beneficent medicinal natural Balsam.

He ought to have checked this officious Genius (unless in his own Profession
Way, he had acquired this Nostrum, by Inspiration) from intruding into the
Affairs of a distinct Profession: Should a Doctor in Medicine, practice public
Praying and Preaching (though only in a Quack or W -- d vagrant Manner) with
pious, private, ghostly Advice and Exhortations to his Patients alias
Penitents; the Clergy would immediately take the Alarm, and use their Bruta
Fulmina against this other Profession; this seems to be well expressed in a
London News-Paper by Way of Banter or Ridicule. The Bishop's Book annoys the
learned Tribe:
They threaten hard "We'll preach, if you prescribe.


As his Bermudas College Projection, and his Residence in New England, have
rendered him famous in North America; perhaps it may not be impertinent to give
some further History of Mr. B -- ly, in his proper Character as a Divine: I
shall take it from his Minute Philosopher, a Book composed in New England, and
confine it to his wild Notions of Mysteries in Religion. He says, that from a
certain Enthusiasm in humane Nature, all Religions do sprout. From the Faith
which Children have in the Directions of their Parents, from the great Share
that Faith has in the Policy of Nations (he means the Arcana Imperij) and in
common Commerce or Trade; we are led to Faith in religious Revelations. Since
we cannot explain many obvious Things in Nature, why should we be obliged to do
so in Religion? In a very very loose Expression, he compares Mysteries in
Religion to the Enthusiastic, and to Demonstration Non-Entities, of the
Philosopher's Stone in Chemistry, and of perpetual Motion in Mechanics. The
abstracted Idea of a Triangle, is as difficult as that of the Trinity; that of
the Communication of Motion, as difficult as that of the Communication of
Grace. We ought to have the same Reason for trusting the PRI^ST in Religion,
that we have for trusting the Lawyer or Physician with our Fortune or Life;
thus every Man ought to have a Liberty of choosing his own Priest and Religion,
this is too general a Toleration, and puts an End to all social Religion.

To conclude, The Right Rev'd the Bishop of Cl -- ne notwithstanding of his
Peculiarities, is a most generous, beneficent and benevolent Gentleman, as
appears by his Donations in New England.


None sickly lives, or dies before his Time,
So sweet the Air, so moderate the Clime.


Formerly Pine-Apples and some other delicious Fruits of the Caribee Islands,
were cultivated in Bermudas; but by cutting down the Timber and Wood, the
Island is become so open and exposed to the bleak Winds, tender Exaticks do not
thrive.

SECT. III. Concerning the Indian Tribes and Nations; intermixed with, under
the Protection of, and in Alliance with Great Britain: Also some Hints of the
French Indians.
THAT the Contents of this Section may be the more easily comprehended, perhaps
it may be convenient to distinguish it into some separate Articles. 1. A
general History of the West-Indians, or aboriginal Americans. 2. Their
Religion, Language, Manners, Arts and Improvements in Nature. 3. Their Tribes
or Nations laying upon, or near the Eastern Shore of North America. 4. Their
Wars with, and Incursions upon the British North America Colonies.

ARTICLE 1. A general History of the aboriginal Americans.
AS to the Origin of Things, particularly of Mankind, we have no other Account
in Credit with Christians, whether allegorical or literal is not my Affair, but
that of Moses in the Scriptural Books of our Bible or Religion: Doubtless there
have been at Times general or almost universal Pestilences, Famines, Deluges,
implacabl^ Wars; which have almost extinguished the Race of Mankind in the
Countries where these general Calamities prevailed; and must require many
Centuries to repeople them, from the small remaining Stock, and to reduce them
by Gradations From a Country or Continent thus reduced to a very small Stock*
we may investigate the various Degrees of Civil Government. At first they were
only distinct Families, left Isole, and their Government was patriarchal, that
is by Heads of Families; these Heads of Families soon became acquainted and
neighbourly, and for mutual Protection and good Neighborhood, entered into
Associations, by us called Tribes, Cantons, or Clans; several of these Tribes
upon Suspicion of some ambitious Design of some neighboring powerful Tribes,
or Confederacy of Tribes; for their better Defense were obliged to enter into a
federal Union, and at Length were incorporated into one general Direction
called a Nation or Empire. Perhaps we may suppose, that, such were the Empires
of Mexico and Peru in America.

Sir Isaac Newton in his Chronology of ancient Kingdoms amended, by his
incomparable Sagacity investigates, that in ancient Times Greece and all Europe
were peopled by wandering Cimerians and Scythians; the Emigrations or Excursions
which in several Ages have occasioned Revolutions and new peopling of the
Southern Parts of Europe; Goths, Vandals, etc. came from thence by swarming,
that is leaving their native Country for Want of Room or Subsistence, Northern
Countries are the least liable to the abovementioned Calamities, and may be
called Nurseries: they had lived a rambling Life, like the Tartars in the
Northern Parts of Asia.

We should have previously observed, That Mankind is naturally a gregarious
Animal, does not love Solitude, but has a strong Passion or Prop^nsity for
Society; their natural Reason, and Capacity of Speech or Communication of
Thoughts, inclines them to it.

Dr. Heylin, from him most of our modern Historians of this Kind transcribe,
gives a very easy novel Manner of the peopling the several Nations from the
Posterity of Noah; we shall not impose this upon our Readers: He says the
Americans proceeded from Noah, by Way of Tartary.

Others publish their Conjectures, that North America was peopled from Scythia
and Tartary; that South-America was peopled from China and Iapan, without
reflecting, that according to the Situation of these Countries it is
impracticable; our modern large Ships cannot perform the Navigation from China,
in less than 6 or 7 Months: How can it be performed in Canoes? The Americans
had no large Embarkations, this requires no serious Animadversions.

Some Authors whimsically allege, that the Ph^^nicians or Carthaginians, might
have been drove thither by some continued fresh Easterly Winds; but the
Ph^enicians, Carthaginians, Gre^cians, Romans, and Arabians who were
successively the great Navigators, make no mention of America; and upon our
Arrival in (...), we could not find the least Monument or Token of their ever
being there.

Therefore we can carry the History of the American Countries no higher than
Columbus's Discovery Anno 1492. See P. 25.63.


to large Societies called Tribes or Cantons, Nations, and Empires.

The Boundaries of their united Tribes, called Nations or Empires, are natural,
viz. Seas, Bays, Lakes, great Rivers, high Mountains, thus for Instance, our
neighboring Nation of Abnaquies are bounded by the Atlantic Ocean, or rather
at present by the English Settlements upon the Atlantic Shore, by the Bay of
Fundi, by the great River St. Laurence, by Lake Champlain and Hudson's River.

The Tribes which, at least nominally, compose their general Denomination of a
Nation, are generally named from the Rivers upon which they live; as in Lapland
of Sweden, the Laplanders are distinguished by the Names of the Rivers Uma,
Pitha, Lula, Torneo, and Kimi.

As China seems to be the elder Brother of all the Nations of Mankind as to
their Politia and Improvements in Nature; so America may with much Propriety be
called the youngest Brother and meanest of Mankind; no Civil Government, no
Religion, no Letters* the French call them Les Hommes des Bois, or Men-Brutes
of the Forest: They do not cultivate the Earth by planting or grazing:
Excepting a very inconsiderable Quantity of Mays or Indian Corn, and of
Kidney-Beans (in New England they are called Indian Beans) which some of their
Squaas or Women plant; they do not provide for Tomorrow, their Hunting is
their necessary Subsistence not Diversion; when they have good Luck in Hunting,
they eat and sleep until all is consumed and then go a Hunting again.

The higher the Latitudes, the Indians are fewer in Numbers and more
straggling, Nature not affording necessary Subsistence for many, and only in
small Bodies or Herds: Their Trade or Commerce is trifling, having no Produce,
no Manufacture, but little Game; the Difficulty of subsisting requires almost
their whole Time to provide for themselves.

Excepting that Constitution of Body, which by Use they have acquired from
their Birth, of enduring Hardships of Hunger and Weather; they are tender, and
not long-lived, and generally very simple and ignorant, some of their old Men
by Use and Experience in the World, acquire a considerable Degree of Sagacity.
New Negroes from Guinea generally exceed them much in Constitution of Body and
Mind. In the Province of Massachusetts Bay New England, there was formerly a
very good Project or Design, to educate at College, some of their most
promising Youths, to serve as Missionaries for civilizing, instructing and
converting of the wild Indians: This good Purpose turned abortive from the
Tenderness of their Constitution and Aukwardness in Learning, and at present is
laid aside.

They are not so polite as the wandering Tartars, no Dairys. Like the wild Irish
they dread Labor more than Poverty, like Dogs they are always either eating or
sleeping, excepting in Traveling, Hunting, and their Dances; their Sloth and
Indolence inclines them to Sottishness; before Christians arrived amongst them,
they had no Knowledge of strong Drink; this Christian Vice not only destroys
their bodily Health, and that of their Progeny, but creates Feuds, Outrages,
and horrid Murders. They are much given to Deceit and Lying, so as scarce to be
believed when they speak Truth. See Annotations Page 116. Their Temper is the
Reverse of the East Indians, whereof some Casts or Sects will not kill any
Animal; the West Indians or Americans are barbarous, and upon small
Provocations kill their own Species; some of them exceed in Barbarity, and in
Revenge and Fury eat the Flesh of their Enemies, not from Hunger or Delicacy;
such formerly were the Florida Indians, they said that the Flesh of the English
eat mellow and tender, that of the Spaniard hard and tough, the Bermudian fishy.

The Aboriginal Americans have no Honesty, no Honor, that is, they are of no
Faith, but mere Brutes in that Respect. They generally have great Fortitude of
Mind; without any Appearance of Fear or Concern, they suffer any Torture and
Death. In Revenge they are barbarous and implacable; they never forget nor
forgive Injuries; if one Man kills another, the nearest in Kindred to the
murdered, watches an Opportunity to kill the Murderer; and the Death of one Man
may occasion the Deaths of many; therefore when a Man is guilty of Murder, he
generally leaves the Tribe, and goes into a voluntary Kind of Banishment. They
are a sullen close People. The Indian Wars ought to be called Massacres, or
inhumane barbarous Outrages, rather than necessary Acts of Hostility.

The Indians have their Hunting, Fowling and Fishing Grounds, by a forked
pointed Pole, they strike or harpoon their Fish; but their Wives and Children
reside mostly on their planting Grounds, they plant but little. They do not
wander like the Tartars; there are said to be some wandering Indians, they
cannot be many; because the settling Indians are very jealous of their hunting
and fishing Grounds or Properties.

Their ancient Navigation was only crossing of Rivers upon Bark-logs,
traveling along Rivers, Rivulets and Sides of Lakes in Canoes or Schuyties,
portable by two Men in their Carrying-Places from one River or Pond to another,
they are of Birch-Bark upon Ribs of Ash, sowed together by some tough wooden
Fibers, and paid (as Sailors express it) with Rozin from some Pine Kind; they
use no Sails and Oars, only Paddles and Setting-Poles; they are capable of
carrying a Man, his Wife, Children and Baggage. Narrow Rivers are better
traveling than Ponds or Lakes, because upon the Lakes, if stormy or much Wind,
they cannot proceed, but must put to the Shore.

Many of our intermixed Indians are of good Use as Servants. It is observable,
that amongst the Indian Servants and Negro Slaves; the silly, thoughtless, and
pusilanimous answer best; some perhaps may observe from this, that the blind
passive Obedience and Non-Resistence Men, make the best Subjects and Court
Slaves in Europe.

The Indians between the Tropicks, their Complexion is not of so good a
metaline Copper Luster, but paler, Stature smaller, not so robust and
courageous; but by Reason of the Fertility of the Country are in larger Tribes
and consequently more civilized; and from being civilized, their Confederacies
and federal Unions reduced them into vast Empires A Spanish Bishop of the
West Indies, a Man of Observations many Years since wrote, "That the Indians
are of a tender Constitution: No Part of Europe was more populous than Mexico,
upon the Spaniards first Arrival. The Spaniards in the first forty Years,
destroyed about 20 Millions of Indians; they left but a few Indians in
Hispaniola, none upon Cuba, Iamaica, Bahama-Islands, Porto-Rico, and
Caribee-Islands excepting upon Dominica and St. Vincent where they remain to
this Day.
: Such were the Empire of Mexico, their Moderator or principal Man was
Mon^ezuma; and the Empire of Peru, Attabaliba was their leading Man. The Empire
of Mexico seems to have been the more polite, that of Peru the more rich, as
having vast Treasures of Silver and Gold.

The Northern Tribes are small and distinct; a large Parcel of Land laying
waste (in Winter-Countries) for many Months in the Ye^^, not fertile, and not
cleared of Woods, cannot subsist many People, but these small In Bible-History
we read that all Mankind anciently lived in small Tribes; Abraham and his
Allies could muster only 318 Men; with these he defeated four great Kings, who
had conquered several Kings. Where ^ands lie not cultivated, the Tribes must be
small and Inhabitants few for Want of Subsistence.
Tribes, though much dispersed are allied by Contiguity, Language, and
Intermarriages; thus it is with our neighboring Abnaquies who border upon
New England; the Iroquois or Mohawks who border upon New York, Pensylvania and
Virginia; and the Chirakees who bo^der upon Carolina; these may be called three
distinct great Nations.

The Indians in the high Latitudes are paler, short, thick, squat; clothed
with Skins (generally Seals-Skins) sowed with Thongs; no Bread-Kind, no Fire;
live upon Whale and Seal-Blubber, and other Fish; and what Beasts they may kill
with their Arrows and Darts; their Boats and Canoes are of a singular Make,
adapted only for one Person; in the Winter they live in Caves.

Indians in general paint their Bodies, especially their Faces (they affect red
Color) as the Picts and Britons of Great Britain formerly were accustomed.

In the higher Latitudes the Indians reckon by Winters (Years) Moons (Months)
and Sleeps (Nights.) Between the Tropicks they reckon by Rains (the Seasons of
Rains, End of Summer and Beginning of Autumn are periodical, as are our
Winters) Moons and Sleeps. In computing Distances, they reckon by Sleeps or
Days Travel (as the Dutch do by Hours) viz. so many Sleeps or Days Travel from
one Place to another.

Notwithstanding of the Unpoliteness and Want of Firearms amongst the American
Aboriginals, the Europeans could not have effected their Settlements because of
vast Disparity in Numbers; if some disaffected Tribes, to be revenged of the
Impositions and Encroachments of some neighboring Tribes, had not joined the
European Small-Arms; thus Cortez against Mexico was joined by several
disaffected Tribes; when the Settlers of New Plymouth first landed, Massasoit
was glad of the Countenance of their Small Arms against the Naragansets.

As to their Make and Complexion. We cannot account for the aboriginal
Differences of Complexions in the various Nations, and the Variety of their
Features. The People of the middle and South Parts of Africa are Black, of
various constant permanent Shades or Degrees, with flat Noses, thick Lips,
short frizled or crisp black Hair; perhaps the Complexion of the tawney Moor of
Barbary the ancient Mauritania, is not aboriginal, but a Complication of the
European White and the African Black; our American Complexion seems to be
native and sincere. The Natives of the Indian Peninsula, betwixt the Rivers
Indus and G^nges in the East Indies, have the African black Complexion, the
Europ^an Features, and the American lank black Hair or Crin, but all native and
genuine, not from a mixed Breed. Extreme hot or extreme cold Weather, do
equally tawn white People but not permanently; Transplantation or
Transportation recovers their native Complexion.

It is not various Climates that gives the various Complexions* America lies
from 65 d. N. Lat. to 55 d. S. Lat. comprehending all the various Climates of
Europe, Asia and Africa; the American Complexion is permanently every where the
same; only with a more or less of the metaline Lusture. Salmon, a late
disaffected Scribler, in his Modern History; says, the Blacks after some
Generations will become white; in New England there are Guinea Slaves in
Succession of several Generations, they continue the same in Feature and
Complexion; it is true, that in the West India Islands some dissolute Planters
are said to wash the Blackemore white, by generating with the Successive Shades
of their own Issue, Children, Grand Children, etc. the Progeny at Length
becomes blonde, or of a pal^ White.

Upon this Subject there are several Intricacies in Nature not to be
un^avelled. Why the Negroes of Guinea should have woolly crisp black Hair, and
those of the Indian Peninsula have lank black Hair? Why the Wool of Northern
Sheep carried into a hot Climate becomes like Goats Hair, and returned to a
Northern Climate, they recover their Wool again? How near neighboring Nations,
if they do not intermarry, dif^er in Features and Complexions? The Circassians
are very beautiful, their neighboring Tartars are extremely ugly: The
Laplanders are ruddy and fresh, the adjoining Russians and ^artars are tawney
and squalid.


They have thin Lips, flattish Faces, languid Countenance, small black Eyes,
imberbes and impuber^^, Stature various as in Europe; in the high North and
South Latitudes, they are taller and more robust, than between the Tropicks;
their Hair jet black, lank (between the Tropicks not so lank) stiff, called by
the French Crin. The Spaniards found it more tedious and much more difficult to
reduce Chili, than in their other American Conquests. Their Complexion is of a
splendid redish Brown, or metaline Luster, which is well expressed by a Copper
Color; thus a splendid White, is called Silver Color: Not of an Olive-Colour
or tawney (a tanned Leather yellowish Color) as are the Aborigines of Barbary,
and some of their Progeny in the South Parts of France, Spain, and Portugal.
Some Indians upon the Isthmus of Darien, are of a milk-white Complexion, which
is not natural and hereditary; but proceeds from a tender morbid Constitution,
their Parents were copper-coloured, and their Children become copper-coloured.

Their Posture is not cross-legg'd as among the Asiaticks; accumbent as
formerly with the Greeks and Romans, laying on their left Side, leaning upon
their Elbow; nor cowring as the Women call it, the Manner of the African
Negroes, Knees bent and Legs parallel to their Thighs; nor sitting upon their
Buttocks and Thighs with their Legs dependant as in Europe; but sitting on
their Buttocks erect with their Thighs and Legs in a strait Line extended
horizontally.

Our general Trade with the Indians is Firearms, Powder, and Shot for War and
Hunting; Strouds and Blankets for Clothing; Spirits, Rum and Brandy for
Indolence; formerly Toys, which were as considerable though silly Amusement to
them, as Jewels are to us.

In Traveling they direct their Course by noted Mountains, by the Sun when
visible, by the mossy or North side of Trees. As most Insects avoid Oils, the
Indians grease themselves as a Defense against Muskitoes and other troublesome
Flies.

Many of our European's Purchasers of Lands can scarce be said, for valuable
Considerations: But a long Possession and in Consequence Prescription have made
our Title good. Father Ralle a late ingenious Jesuit and French Missionary with
the New England Abnaquie Indians, about 26 Years since, did kindle a War or
Insurrection of those Indians in New England; by inculcating, that they held
their Lands of GOD and Nature in succeeding Generations, that Fathers could not
alienate the Earth from their Sons. We use no other Artifice to keep the
Indians in our Interest, but, by undersell^^^^ the French, and giving a higher
Price for Indian Commodities; this is fair and just.

Our printed Histories of the Indian Countries, their Governments, Religion,
Languages, and Customs; are credulously copied from credulous Authors, and full
of silly Conceits; a very late and notable Instance of this, we find in the
Journal of Anson's Voyage to the South-Seas, published by the Mathematical
Master of the Centurion, Anno 1745.

Strictly speaking, they seem to have no Government, no Laws, and are only
cemented by Friendship and good Neighborhood; this is only a Kind of tacit
federal Union between the many Tribes, who compose the general Denomination of
a Nation; every individual Man seems to be independent and sui juris, as to
Government, and is only in Friendship and neighbourly Relation with others of
the same Tribe: Notwithstanding we sometimes find Heads of Tribes mentioned as
if in Succession, nay even Female Successions; in the New England Pocanoket,
Mount-Hope, or King Philip's War Anno 1675, there is mentioned the Squaa-Sachem
of Pocasset, and a Squaa-Sachem amongst the Naragansets. In other Parts of the
Earth all Societies or Cohabitants have Government, and an absolute compelling
Power is lodged somewhere and in some Manner; but the American Indians have no
compulsive ^ower over one another: When a Tribe or Neighborhood send
Delegates, to treat with other Bodies of Men Whites or Indians; the Conclusions
are carried home memoriter, and the young Men must be persuaded to come into
these Articles; when the Indians at any Time are forced into a Peace, the Blame
of the War is laid upon their young Men.

The aboriginal Clothing of the Northern Indians was Skins of Seals cut in
particular Fashions, and sowed together with Thongs (they had no Threads of
Flax, Hemp, or any other Herbs) in other Parts they wore Skins of the various
Beasts of the Forest: At present the Indians who have Commerce with the
Colonies from Europe, wear Duffils and Blanketing of about two Yards square,
which the Romans called a Toga seems to be the most ancient natural and simple
Wear used by Mankind; the Scots Highlanders have wore it further back than our
Records do reach, striped and chequered variously according to Humors of
different Ages; but as of late Years it seems to be used as a Badge of
Disaffection to the present happy established Government in Great Britain, the
Parliament in their great Wisdom have abolished it.
Toga; their Segamores or Sachems wear Blankets with a Border of a different
Color, and may be called Praetextati.

ARTICLE 2. The Religion, Language, Food and Medicine, with some other loose
Particulars relating to the American Indians.
AS the Americans before the Arrival of Colonies from Europe, seem to have been
and still continue in general, the most barbarous and the least polished People
upon Earth; a clear, exact and full Account of these Things cannot be expected,
but for the greater Perspicuity we reduce them under distinct Heads.

I. Religion of the Americans.
Some Indians of Sagacity, a little civilized and instructed toward the
Christian Religion, can give no distinct Account of any Indian Religion, and do
stumble much at the Mysteries of our Christian Religion, being indiscreetly
crowded upon them at once, and with too much Impetuosity, without previous
Instruction, if you do not believe immediately, you will be damned, is the
Expression of our Zealots; whereas they ought to be first tamed by Familiarity
and fair Dealing, in friendly Conversation upon proper Occasions, without any
Appearance of Officiousness, ins^ruct them in natural Religion and Morality,
these are plain and easily comprehended; afterward with Discretion, they may
be by degrees initiated into the Mysteries of our Religion: Our Missionaries,
void of common Prudence, in a reverse preposterous Manner begin with the
abstruse Articles of the Christian Religion, and thence proceed to instruct
them in the plain easy Dictates of Nature. In a silly, low cant Way, some of
our Preachers tell the Indians, that the Christians GOD is a better GOD than
the Indians GOD; whereas, they ought to inform them, that there is but One
supreme GOD, and that our Man^er of worshipping this GOD is more agreeable to the
GODHEAD, as being more natural and decent. If some of our Indian Traders were
instructed, and at a public Charge capacitated to sell cheap amongst the
Indians, they would gain their Affections in this trading familiar friendly
Manner, and lay a good Foundation for their Conversion toward Christianity: An
abrupt Christian religious Mission amongst them seems absurd; if the Emperor of
China, or the Grand Turk should send Missionaries into Great Britain to convert
the People there to the Doctrines of Confucius or Mahomet, instead of gaining
Proselytes, it would avert them. The following Digression may be acceptable to
some of our Readers.

A Digression concerning the Religions of ancient Nations.
I do not presume to write concerning the controversial or devotional Points of
our modern Religions, national, or private Opinions; that is the Business of a
peculiar Profession or Craft, called Priests.

Religion improves in Nations, Hand in Hand with good Policy, and as they
become more and more civilized. It may be called the Cement of Society. The
Romans did fight pro aris et focis, for their Religion, as well as for their
Country. Amongst the West India Bucaneers the most morally vicious of Mankind;
the French immovably adhered to one another because of their being all Roman
Catholics, the English to one another as being Protestants, and not from any
other Regard. Otherways both agreed and acted jointly as Pirates.

As to Religion, all Mankind may be divided into three Sects.

I. They who believe in a supreme Intelligence (or Intelligences) who by
Omnipotence created and framed the World, and by infinite Wisdom manages it:
They may be called the Godly. With this Class, the divine Attribute
INCOMPREHENSIBLE ought to resolve and compose all Altercations concerning this
Being: Plutarch says, there is but One and the same supreme Being or
Providence, that governs the World, though worshipped by Multiplicity of Names,
by various Nations and Sectaries. This Sect admits of three Sub-divisions.

1. Theists, commonly called Deists, who admit of no Modifications in the
Deity; in ancient Times and to this Day, they are improperly called Atheists.
Amongst us, he who denies the Trinity, is in Law deemed Atheist and Blasphemer.
Anaxagoras the Philosopher passed at Athens for an Atheist, because he denied
that the Sun, the other Planets and the Stars were Gods. Socrates is said to
have been a Martyr for the Unity of the Godhead, refusing to pay Homage to the
various Gods of Greece. This is the national (if we may thus express) Religion
of the Mahometans, having the largest Extent of all national Religions. It is
the private Opinion of many who are intermixed with and go by the Name of
Christians, and are generally designed Arians, or Socinians, (Socinus of Sienna
in Italy) they also deny Original Sin and Providence.

2. Tritheists or Trinitarians. The distinguishing Tenet of all true Orthodox
Christians: They worship Divinity under three distinct Modifications, which I
shall not pretend to explain or illustrate, because a Mystery.

3. Polytheists. Such were the ancient Egyptians, Greeks and Romans: The Poets
had a greater Variety of Gods than the Philosophers, many of them to be looked
upon as a Machinary introduced to embellish a Poem, and to amuse the Mind: They
deified various Parts of Nature, and were great Promoters of Polytheism. All
the Gods and Goddesses of the Ancients were only Modifications, Words or Names,
to express several Attributes of a supreme Being, the Excellencies in Nature,
and the Virtues of Heroes and very eminent Men; as if in Britain we should say
NEWTON the God of Natural Philosophy and Mathematics, ADDISON, the God of the
Belles Lettres and polite Learning.

II. They who admit of no supreme Intelligence, but say that blind Matter is
the Extent of our Knowledge* these are the literal and true Atheists.
Anaximander was the first noted Atheist upon Record, about 600 Years before
CHRIST; his noted Followers were Lucippus, Democritus, Epicurus, Lucretius etc;
in these late Times, Spinosa a Jew in his Tractatus Theologico-Politicus.

Vanini born at Naples in Italy, taught Atheism in France, was convicted
thereof, and burnt at Thoulouse, An. 1619.

Iord^no Bruno, wrote a Book, De tribus Impostoribus; meaning Moses, CHRIST,
and Mahomet.

Hobb's in his Leviathan, advanced several wild Notions of this Kind, but not
consistent; he died An. 1679. Aet. 91.


some singularly self-conceited of their own Penetration, have avowedly
declared themselves such, in Despite of all the polite Part of Mankind.

III. The third Sect made its first Appearance by Means of Pyrrho, in the 120
Olympiad, they doubted of every Thing. Cicero and Seneca two great Men were
inclined this Way; late D. of Buckingham, an ingenious Man, the Epitaph which
he made for himself begins, Dubious vixi, incertus morior, etc: Dr. B -- ly B.
of Cl -- ue seems to affirm, in a whimsical Manner, that every Thing we see is
an Illusion, that the whole Series of Life is a continued Dream.

To these we may add, that, There is with all soberminded Men only one general
Religion. THE PRACTICE OF TRUE AND SOLID VIRTUE. The Belief in certain Vague
Opinions, the observing of fixed or appointed external Rites and Ceremonies, do
not enlighten the Understanding, or purify the Heart by rectifying the
Passions. Mr. Pope in his Essay upon Man, well expresses it.

For various Modes of Faith, let wicked Zealo^s fight:
He cannot be wrong, who is Life is in the right.
Sir Isaac Newton used to say, when the Conversation run upon Differences in
Religion, He knew of no Heretics or Schismatics but the Wicked and the
Vicious.

Let us investigate the Origin and Progress of Religion from the Nature of
Things. Mankind is naturally a superstitious pavidum Animal, some few cunning
designing Men, take the Perhaps Priests of all Religions are the same, we must
except a sober-minded, regular, truly pious and exemplary Clergy, they are of
the greatest Use in cementing Society.
Advantage of this general Weakness of humane Nature; and as Nurses do frighten
and awe Children by Hobgoblins and Bugbears, so they by Vociferations,
Gesticulations, and pretended Familiarity with some superior invisible Being,
promise to conciliate his Benevolence, in procuring Good luck in their Affair
of Life (thus Powowers promise Good-luck in Hunting to the Indians) they avert
Sickness and other Calamities; sometimes from the said Familiarity, they impose
pretended Dreams, Visions and Impulses, as do our present New Light Disciples
of a vagrant or strolling Actor of Enthusiasm. The Chinese, though a polite
People, their Commonalty are much addicted to Superstition and Magic.

From this the Wisemen, that is the Lawgivers and Ministers of State in Greece
and elsewhere took the Hint, and set up Oracles, which were absolutely under
their own Direction and Influence, these were of good Use to reconcile the
silly (but varium et mutabile vulgus) People, to what the State in Wisdom had
proposed upon any extraordinary Occasions: These Oracles were delivered by
Women; the Sybils were called Fatidicae, that is, prophesying and
fortune-telling Women; our Women Exhorters among the Quakers and Methodists are
not of the same good Use.

Herodotus writes ( Cicero calls him the Father of History) that the ancient
Persians had neither Temples, Altars nor Statues; in this Condition we found
the Aboriginal Indians or Americans. When Nations began to be civilized, we
find the first Objects of Adoration (proceeding from Admiration) were the Sun,
Moon, other Planets, and the Stars, in Egypt; and the Periods of their
Revolutions were used in the Computation of Time. The Revolution of the Sun was
called a Year, that of the Moon a Month; every Planet had one Day assigned him,
and these seven planetary Days were called a Week: If there had been more or
fewer Planets, the Days of the Week would have been more or fewer; Moses
brought up in all the Learning of the Egyptians, retained the same in his
History-Part of our Bible, and carries on the Allegory (as some Free-Thinkers
call it) of the Creation accordingly. Our American Indians had no Knowledge of
the Planets, and therefore had no Reckonings by Weeks or Returns of seven Days.
The planetary Names of the Days of the Week, at first View, seem confused and
at Random; but in Fact they were methodically so called: They began by the Sun
as being the most glorious Planet, and assigned to him the first Day of the
Week, Dies Solis or Sunday (Sabbath Day is of a Jewish Signification and
properly the Seventh Day of the Week, Lord's Day is novel and peculiar to
Christians) from thence reckoning in the natural Order of the Planets, allowing
a Planet to every Hour of the 24 which compose a Day, the next in Course
according to the Astronomy of these Days was Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, and consequently the Sun had the eighth Hour, the fifteenth and
twenty-second Hour, Venus the twenty-third, Mercury the twenty-fourth,
consequently the Moon had the first Hour of the next Parcel of 24 Hours, and
gave Name to the second Day of the Week, Dies Lunae or Monday; and in the same
Rotation Mercury gives Name to the third, Jupiter to the fourth Day of the
Week, etc. In Britain we have substituted four of our North-Country or Gothic
Gods in Place of Mercury, Mars, Jupiter, and Venus.

So far back as ancient Records do inform, we find that amongst the Egyptians
and Orientals, Religion first began to acquire a national Consistence or
System. The Philosophers of Greece went to Egypt and Asia to study Wisdom,
Learning, and Religion; those of Rome went to Greece: They all did so much
indulge a poetical or mythological Vein, that it is difficult to distinguish
between their true established Religion and Gods, from the Fabulous.

The various Religions at this Time amongst the Nations of this Earth (the
several Parts of the Earth that can be of any Consequence, are now well
explored, and the Americans may be well said to be of no Religion) may be
reduced to these general Heads. 1. The Christian, or Believers in Jesus Christ,
which perhaps is that of Moses with Additions and Emendations; this may be
called the Religion of Europe, some few Turkish Dominions in Europe excepted.
2. The Mohammedan, which is much more extensive* and does prevail in a great
Part of Africa, in a great Part of Asia, and in some Part of Europe. 3. That of
Confucius, being the Followers of the Doctrines of Confucius in China and the
neighboring Parts of Tartary. 4. May be comprehended under the general Name of
Idolaters, wh^ worship the Objects, or the Images and Representations of the
Objects which they adore from Love or Fear* the Lama of the Eastern Tartars I
call an Idol.

The Negroes of Africa have a Kind of Religion, which may be called Idolatry;
they worship some material Objects, which in their Nature may be extremely
beneficial or very hurtful to Mankind, the first through Admiration and Love,
the other through Fear: but our stupid America Indians had no Temples, no
Altars, no Idols or Images, no set Times for Worship, if it may be called
Worship, it is only occasional with frantic and ridiculous Vociferations and
Gesticulations, in Cases of Sickness or great Calamities, performed by some of
their cunning Men called Powowers: They never harrass European Captives to
change their Religion; no religious Wars, The civil Administration in England,
from Experience are sensible of the Inconveniences arising from the Meetings of
the Convocations of the Clergy, and for many Years have not allowed them to
fit: They are not ^ssential to Episcopal Church Government, and when they meet,
they naturally ferment or rather effer^esce, and occasion feverish Paroxysms in
the Church, and sometimes Convulsions in the State.
no Confusions from Convocations.

The Powowers are not Parish Priests or Clergy, regularly set apart to initiate
the People into the Mysteries of Religion, and to perform some Rites and
Ceremonies called religious; they are of the same Nature with rascally Cheats
and pretended Conjurers, that in the most civilized Nations of Europe (entirely
distinct from any Sort of Religion) impose upon ignorant and weak People, by
pretending to some familiar Conversation with some superior secret Being. Their
Powowers by Aid of this Influence become also their Physicians, this seems to
be natural; even with us a civilized People, our Priests or Gospel Ministers,
by the same Aid, are very apt officiously to intrude into the Office of a
Physician, and use the Sick as their Patients as well as their Penitents:
Priests and Old Women of both Sexes (as Dean Swift humorously expressed it) are
the great Nu^sances to a regular Medical Practice. Expertus loquor. This
perhaps may be the natural Reason, why some Physicians use the Clergy with
Contempt.

I do not find that Christianity is like to have any good Footing among the
Indians: 1. We are not exemplary enough in common Life and commercial Dealings:
The Indians say, that they cannot perceive Mankind the better for being
Christians; Christians do cheat them out of their Lands and other Effects, and
sometimes deprive them of their Lives. 2. Our Missionaries are generally void
of Discretion; the Indians are in all Respects wild, know nothing of the
general Rudiments of Religion: Mr. Brainerd a Missionary from a Society in
Scotland for propagating Christian Knowledge by Indian Conversions amongst the
De la Ware and Sesquahana Indians; in his Journal printed at Philadelphi^ Anno
1745, says that his Station was from Crosweeks^ng in New-Iersies, about 80
Miles from the Forks of De la Ware River, to Sha^making on Sesquahana River
about 120 Miles West of ^a^d Forks; that he traveled more than 130 Miles above
the English Settlements upon Sesquahana River and was with about 7 or 8
distinct Tribes there, speaking so many different Languages, mostly belonging
to the Sennekas: He was 3 or 4 Years upon this Mission, sometimes did not see
an Englishman for a Month or six Weeks together; all his Exercises were in
English. Mere Journals are dry, but otherwise it seems naif or natural. At that
Time there was no other Missionary amongst the Indians of Iersies and
Pennsylvania. Notwithstanding of all his personal Penn^nces, and Charge to the
Society, he effect^d nothing* though a pious laborious Missionary.
The Missionaries instead of first taming and civilizing the Indians, and next
instructing them in the Principles of natural Religion and Morality* do begin
with the sublime Mysteries of our Religion, such as, How many Persons are there
in the Godhead? and the like. Thus from the Beginning they are bewildered and
lost for ever. 3. Some Piae frauds which at first may amuse, but afterward
when discovered, leave a permanent Prejudice against the Christian Religion;
thus it is said, that some French Missionaries in relating to the Indians, the
History of our Savior's Birth and Sufferings, tell them that the Virgin Mary
was a French Woman, that the English crucified JESUS CHRIST.

Language.
Their Manner of Expression is vehement and emphatick; their Ideas being few,
their Language is not copious, it consists only of a few Words; and many of
these ill-contrived, by a rumbling Noise or Sound of many Syllables, they
express an Idea or Thing, which in the European Languages is done by a Syllable
or two: As their Ideas increase, they are obliged to adapt the European Words
of adjoining Colonies. In numbering they use the same natural Way of reckoning
by Tens, as in Europe, Ten being the Number of humane Fingers. No Chronicles,
scarce any traditionary Accounts of Things extending back further than two or
three Generations; scarce any Indians can tell their own Age.

They had no There are sundry Ways of expressing our Thoughts and Sounds. 1.
The Egyptian Hieroglyphics seem to be the most ancient: They were
Delineations, Drawings, and Paintings, or Images of m^terial Things, or
allegorical Expressions of Transactions in Figures real or chimerical; Mutes
seem to express themselves in Hieroglyphical Motions: The Defect of this
Character seems to be, that Idea^ which have no material Figure could not be
well expressed, and the Writing too tedious and imperfect.

2. The Chinese have no Letters or compounding Characters; every Word has a
peculiar Character, and instead of being unreasonably long, as with the
Americans, there is in some Manner a Necessity for all their Words being
Monosyllables; thus their Characters are so numerous, that a Man of Letters is
a Trade, not soon to be learnt.

3. In Europe a few arbitrary Characters called Letters, were first brought to
us from Phaenicia via Greece, and are in different Nations in Number from 20 to
24; by th^se variously mixed, all European Words are composed and
well-distinguished; they express Words or Sounds only, not Things as in
Hieroglyphick^.


Characters, that is, Hieroglyphics or Letters; they had a few Symbols or
Signatures, as if in a Heraldry Way to distinguish Tribes, the principal were
the Tortoise, the Bear, the Wolf. There was not the least Vestige of Letters in
America; some Years since a certain credulous Person, and voluminous Author,
imposed upon himself and others; he observed in a tiding River, a Rock, which,
as it was not of an uniform Substance, the ebbing and the flowing of the Tide
made a Sort of vermoulure, Honey-combing or etching on its Face; here he
imagined, that he had discovered the America Indian Characters, and overjoyed,
remits some Lines of his imaginary Characters to the Royal Society in London:
See Philosophical Transactions, No. 339. "At Taunton by the Side of a tiding
River, Part in, Part out of the River there is a large Rock, on the
perpendicular Side of which, next to the Stream, are 7 or 8 Lines, about 7 or 8
Feet long, and about a Foot wide each of them, engraven with unaccountable
Characters, not like any known Character." This may be supposed wrote Anno
1714: At present Anno 1747 by the continued ebbing and flowing the
Honey-combing is so altered as not in the least to resemble his Draught of the
Characters.

As the Indians were so rude, as to have no Letters or other Characters, there
is no certain Way of writing their Names of Things; all we can do is to express
their Sounds or Pronunciations as near as may be in our own Letters. Father
Ralle of Noridgwog, and some other scholastic French Missionaries, have
imagined that the Greek Alphabet suits their Pronunciation best. The Indians
have a figurative Way of expressing themselves as if in Hieroglyphics; thus,
renewing of Alliances they call brightning of the Chain.

There is no general fixed Way of writing India^ Words, therefore we shall not
mind any particular Orthogra^hy in that Respect, only we shall endeavor to be
understood: For Instance the Indian Tribe upon Quenebeck River in New England
we write and pronounce it Naridgwoag, the French Missionaries write it
Narantsoack: The Tribe of the Iroquois or five New York allied Indian Nations
which we call Sennekas, the French call them Sonontouans.

There is not the same Reason for preserving the Indian Names of their
Countries, Nations, Tribes, Mountains and Rive^s; as there is for preserving
the Greek, Roman, and other more modern Names of such Things in Europe; The
Indians have no civil or classical History to require it. The Indians change
their own personal Names, and the Names of other Things upon trifling
Occasions: Our Indians affect to have English Names; thus Massas^it's two Son^
desir^d of the Court of Plymouth to give them English Name^, they were
accordingly named Alexander and Philip; this Philip formerly Metacomet, was
chief in a subsequent Indian War called King Philip's War. Capt. Smith the
Traveller, resided 19 Years in Virginia and New England, and wrote a History of
those Parts, Anno 1624, he enumerates the Names of many Tribes, Rivers and
other Things, which are now irrecoverably lost.

As the Indian Dealings and mutual Correspondence is much confined, their
several Languages are of small Extent. Mr. Elliot formerly Minister of Roxbury,
adjoining to Bost^n, with immense Labor translated and printed our Bible into
Indian* it wa^ done with a good pious Design, but must be reckoned among the
O^iosorum hominum negotia; it was done in the Natick Language; of the Naticks
at present there are not twenty Families subsisting, and scarce any of these
can read: Cui Bo^o*

The Countries in Europe being well civilized, with a great (...) Intercourse,
(...) Use of Letters; their general Languages (...) in various Dialects are
very extensive, the an^ient Latin in its (...) Dialects and Words adopted from
neighboring Nations, (...) Italy, France, Spain, and Portugal; the Celtic in
Bretaig (...) France, Cornwall and Wales of England, Isle of Man, great (...)
Ireland, and the Highlands of Scotland; the Teutonic in (...) Great Britain,
Low Countries in Belgia, Danemark, Sweden (...) Norway; the Sclavonian in
Muscovy and Russia, in Poland, in (...) and the other Countries West of these
so far as to the (...) Dominions.




III. Food and Medicine of the Aboriginal Indians.
Our Indians do not imitate the Bees, Ants, etc. in (...) up Stores, but like
rapacious Animals, live (...) Hand to Mouth; after long Fasting, they are (...)
and upon a gluttonous Repast, can fast many Days, (...) bracing in or reefing
their Girdles or Belts.

The far North Indians of West Greenland, (...) Labarador etc. live upon the
Blubber of Whales, (...) and other Fish, and their most generous Beverag^^
Fish-Oil; scarce any Quadrupids or Fowls, not (...) from the Severity and long
Continuance of their (...) W^^ther, Frost and Snow, but also because their
(...) and other Lands instead of Grass and other (...), bear only Moss.

The Indians in the more moderate Climates live (...) Hunting, Fowling and
Fish: They do not cle^r (...) cultivate the Forest, by planting and grazing;
(...) some of their Squaas or Women improve in plantin^ (...) Mays and Indian
Beans. Their Bread Kind are (...) This History was not composed into a regular,
full Body, (...) it began to be published; and its being published only at
(...) ^imes of Leisure, and Humor of the Writer, it seems to be (...) too much
of a Miscellany, but without neglecting the (...) View or Design:
Notwithstanding of the d^signed Brevity, (...) or Summary (which spoils the
Fluidity or Fluency of (...) it swells too much; therefore at present to ease
some of our (...) we lay aside or defer, the designed short Description or
natural (...) of these Things, which are used by the Indians as Food, (...) or
Traffic.
or Indian Corn, Phaseolus Kidney or Indian-Beans, sev^ral Sorts of tuberous
Roots called Ground-Nuts; several Sorts of Berries, particularly several Sorts
of Vitis Idea, in New England called Huckle-Berries. Upon a continued March,
where Hunting and Fowling is inconsiderable, they carry with them, for
Subsistence, parched Indian Corn called No-cake.

The Abnaquies or New England Northern and Eastern ^ndians, because of the
Hunting and Fowling failing* during the Winter are obliged to remove to the
Seaside, and live upon Clams, Bass, Sturgeon etc.

Their medical Practice, resembles that of officious old Women in some remote
Country-Villages of Europe; mere Empiricism, or rather a traditionary blind
Practice; they regard only the Symptoms that strike the gross Senses most,
without Respect to any less obvious principal Symptom, which may be called the
Disease, or to Constitution, Sex, and Age. The Powowers Conjurers or Wizards
are their principal Physicians.

They do not use our Way of V. S. but Practi^^-cupping; they vomit and purge by
particular Herbs or Roots: Instead of Vesicatories and Causticks they burn with
Touchwood. Their principal Remedy is sweating in Hutts, warmed by heated
Stones, and thereupon immediate Immer^ion in cold Wate^* this seems to be a
rational Practice, first by relaxing to give a free Passage to the obstructed
circulatory Juices; and after a free Passage is supposed to be obtained, by
cold Immersion, to brace up again: In inflammatory and eruptive epidemical
Fe^ers v. g. Smallpox, this Practice depopulates them.

Their Medicines are only simple indige^ous Herbs; they use no Exotic Plants,
no Minerals, ^o Medicinal Compositions, or Chimical Preparations. The Vi^tu^s
or proper Uses of their Herbs were discovered by Chance, and their Simples
which have had a peculiar continued Success, have been handed down or
transmitted from Generation to Generation. As it is amongst Brutes of a simple
steady ^^nner of Regimen and Living, so with our Indians (...) is no
Multiplicity of Distempers, therefore their In Europe our Materia Medica is too
luxuriant, and the greatest Part of it trifling; many of our medicinal
Preparations and Compositions are silly and of no real Use to the Patient; it
is with Pleasure that I observe, the various Conserves, Syrups, distilled
Waters, and some other Arabian Medicines, wear out of Fashion in Great Britain
amongst the regular Physicians, and ^re used only by Quacks, and Practicing
Apothecaries. A proper Regimen, Diet, and not exceeding ^ Dozen notedly
efficacious Medicines properly applied (this by some of the Clergy, old Women
and Nurse^, is represented as doing nothing) i^ the true effectual Materia
Medica: Where the Nature of the Distemper and Indications of Cure are
ascertained (in these consist ^he Art of Physic) D. Pitcairns Problem, Dato
morbo remedium ^^venire, is not very intricate, where incurable is not in the
Case.
Materia Medica is not copious.

Our Indians are so tender, and habituated to a certain Way of Living; they do
not bear Transplantation: For Instance, the Spanish Indians captivated in the
St. Augustine War Anno 1702, and sold for Slaves in New England, soon died
consumptive, this occasioned an Act of Assembly to discourage their
Importation. Europeans seem to thrive the better for being transplanted; the
^rogeny of Europeans born in America do not bear Removals, the Reasons I cannot
assign: For Instance, from Massachusetts Bay Province in New England 500 Men
upon the Cuba and Carthagena Expedition, not exceeding 50 survived; 3000 Men
upon the Cape Bre^on Expedition, near one half died naturally in Louisbourg, or
soon after their Arrival in New England; of about 300 Persons late Prisoners
and Captives in Quebec of Canada about 70 died there.

They are not so LASCIVIOUS as Europeans, (Asiaticks are more lascivious than
Europeans, witness the Seraglios and Harams of the great Men in Turkey and
Persia, and the dispersed Jews in Europe) they never offer Violence to our
Women Captives: but are not so continent, as is generally represented by
Authors; Mrs. Rowlandson, Wife to the Minister of Lancaster in New England,
captivated by the Indians Anno 1676, writes, that her Indian Master had three
Squaas or Wives; Mr. Brainerd a Scotland Missionary, in the Journal of his
Mission, printed Anno 1746, mentions "the abusive Practice of Indian Husbands
and Wives, putting away each other, and taking others in their Stead."

IV. The Indian Americans Trade and C^rrencies.
TRADE. Their chief Trade is Skins and Furs, the Produce of their Hunting,
mostly Deer-Skins and Beaver.

Beaver the further South, have less Furr and more Hair; the further North the
Staple is the longer: They reckon eight Sorts of Beaver, viz. Winter, and
Summer, fat, and dry etc; the Winter Fat is the best, next to Coat-Beaver,
which is Beaver wore till it is well greased. A Beaver-Skin may weigh from one
Pound and a half to two Pound; an Indian Pack of Beaver may weigh about 80lb
With. Beaver breed once a Year, 10 to 15 at a Litter. In the very high Latitudes
there are no Beaver, because no Wood, Beaver require Wood, which they cut or
rather gnaw with their Teeth (thus Squirrels and Rats gnaw Timber) into Lengths
called Junks or Logs for making their Dams, and Part of their Food or
Subsistence is the Bark of Trees. Three Quarters of the Return^ of the Hudson's
Bay Company, is in Beaver to about the Value of 40,000 L. Ster. per Annum. The
same good Animal affords another Commodity, Castoreum, called Beaver-Stone;
this is not according to a vulgar Error, the Testicles, but some inspissited
Secretion contained in a Couple of Glands near the A^us of both Males and
Females.

Deer-Skins much more plenty Southward; South Carolina does export per An. the
Value of 25,000 L. to 30,000 L. Ster. in Deer-Skins.

In the high Latitudes, they deal with a small Matte^ of Feathers, Whale-Bone,
and Blubber, or Fish-Oil.

CURRENCIES. Their commercial Standard of Currencies, is to the Northward (I
mean in North America) per Pound Beaver-Skin Value, to the Southward per Pound
Deer-Skin Value.

They formerly had, and in some Places still retain for small Currency (in
New England in old Charter Times, they were a Tender for any Sum not exceeding
Forty Shillings) Wampum or Wampum-Peag, being small Bits of a the spiral Turns
of a Buccinum or Whelk; this done up into Strings and certain Plaits or Belts,
was a large Denomination, and large Sums were reckoned by the Number of Fathoms
of this Wampum-Plait: Thus we read in the Histories of former Times, for
Instance, that the Naraganset Indians, sent 200 Fathom of Wampum, to pay in
Part a Debt to Boston Colony; Uncas Sachem of the Moheags in Connecticut, paid
100 Fathom Wampum, for Moneys due to the English.

ARTICLE 3. The Indian Nations and Tribes upon the Eastern Side of
Northern-America.
WE may distinguish the Indians by their Relation or Position with Regard to
the European Colonies settled in North America. 1. The Indian Nations (we
cannot particularize their several Tribes or Clans) without, but bordering upon
the British Grants, such are the French Indians of Canada, and the Spanish
Indians of Florida. 2. Indian Tribes within our Grants or Charters, but without
our Settlements, such are the Mikamakes of Nova Scotia, the Abnaquies of
New England, the Mohawks, or Five Nations of New York, the emigrant
Tuscar^ro^s, I do not call a Nation, etc. 3. Indian Families, interspersed with
our Settlements upon Indian reserved Lands; these are useful to the Europeans,
particularly to the British, as domestic Servants, Laborers, Sailors,
Whalers, and other Fishers* Many of the Indian Reserves are extinct, and their
Lands lapsed to the Provinces.

The present Names of the several Indian Nations, or general great Divisions,
may continue in Perpetuity, as classical Names in History: The many particular
Tribes included or which compose the several Nations or general Divisions;
their Names are so various and changeable, we cannot enumerate them; and still
less known are the Names and Numbers of the Villages or Castles in the several
Tribes.

The Indian Nations or general Divisions which lie upon or near the Eastern
Shore of North America are the Indians of West-Greenland, commonly called
Davis's Streights, Eskimaux, Algonquins, Tahsagrondie, Owlawaes, Miamis,
Chikesa^s: Mikamakis, Abnaquies, Irocois or Mohawks, Chawans, Old Tuscararoes,
Cuttumbaes, Chirakees, and Creek Indians: Some short Description or Delineation
of these, will make the Face of the East Side of North America more apparent
and familiar to us, before we set down the several modern Colonies settled
there; in Imitation, Si parva magnis componere, of the Europae antiquae et
modernae, Tables or Maps.

I. The Indians of WEST-GREENLAND, or of a North East Continent from Davis
Streights reaching from Cape Farewell in N. Lat. 60 d. Northward indefinitely,
and ^ll the Indians in the same Latitudes; are a few straggling miserable
People, live in Caves or Dens under Ground, because of the Severity of the
Cold, Extremity of Cold, may equally be called Hell, as Extremity of Heat; our
scriptural Writers lived in a hot Country, not in a cold Climate. In the
Government of Muscovy or Russia, Translation or Exile to Siberia the Northern
Parts of Russia in a high Latitude, is used as a Degree of Punishment next to
Death, in fellonious criminal Cases, particularly in ministerial Treachery.
have no Fire (no Fuel) eat their Flesh and Fish raw, are clothed in
Seal-Skins, much subject to the Scurvy Their Fish course Diet, Extremity of
Cold, and long Winter Consinements; renders their circulating Juices rancid or
putrid, and consequently are very sco^butick.
or Itch (the French call those of Terra de Labradore South of Davis Streights,
for this Reason, the scabed Indians) have no Produce or Subject for Trade.

The ESKIMAUX extend from Davis's and Hudson's Streights North, along the West
Side of the Atlantic Ocean to the Mouth of St. Laurence River South; thence
range Westward cross the lower Parts of the several Rivers which fall into the
Bottom of Hudson's- Bay, and then Northward along the Western Shore of
Hudson's- Bay to the Polar Circle Here I cannot understand what Mr. Dobbs and
Capt. Middleton write; they mention Northern Indians in Lat. 62 d. and 63 d.
and some Eskimaux in Lat. 66 d. to 67 d. and these two Nations in a natural or
continued Enmity; how shall we reconcile this Intermixture?
in 66 d. or 67 d. N. Lat. as Mr. Dobbs writes. Thus the Esquimaux, excepting a
small narrow Tract upon the Labradore Shore, are all quit-claim'd to us by
France in the Treaty of Utrecht, Anno 1713* Excepting those who frequent the
Bottom of Hudson's- Bay, the others can be of no commercial Benefit, they
afford a very small Matter of Feathers, Whale-Oil, and Blubber.

Mr. Dobbs of Ireland, the present Enthusiastic Follower of a N. W. Passage
Projection, very credulous, gives the Names of many imaginary Tribes West of
Hudson's- Bay; but as in high Latitudes not many People can subsist, In the
high Latitudes, toward Winter some of their Animals, become gray or
Silver-coloured, and next Summer recover their native Colors; not from the
same Hairs or Feathers reassuming their native Color, but by a new Growth or
Coat: Perhaps a like Decay of native Heat in the Aged of Mankind, occasions
their becoming gray.
and his Tribes not well vouched, we cannot mention them: Mr. Dobbs is an Enemy
of the Hudson's- Bay Company; he says, that Trade is got into the Hands of
about 9 or 10 of their principal Men, who export not exceeding 3,000 L. St. per
An. in British Produce and Manufacture, and keep up their Prices so high; the
French supply them cheaper and carry the Trade; whereas if their Charter was
vacated, and the Trade laid open; many Traders would settle Factories or
trading Houses up the Rivers toward the French, and by underselling of them,
much increase our Fur-Trade.

ALGONQUINS in several Tribes reach from the Mouth of St. Laurence River along
its North Side, extending about 150 Leagues; they are ^he French best Indian
Friends; but frequently upon little Differences give the French Settlers much
Disturbance; may be about 1500 fighting Men.

TAHSAGRONDIE Indians are between the Lakes Erie and Hurons, perhaps from the
Barrenness of the Country, they are of small Numbers, dispersed and of no great
Notice: They are Friends of the New York Nations.

OUTAWAES. A great and powerful Nation, they live upon the Outawae River, which
joins upon the Cataraqui River (the Outlet of the great Lakes) a little above
Monreal, and upon the great Lakes, and extend N. W. to near the S. W. Parts of
Hudson's- Bay; they deal considerably with the New York trading Houses at
Oswego Indians of above 20 Nations or large come here to trade in the Season of
their Fairs; these Indians are distinguishable, by the Variety and different
Fashions of their Canoes, the very re^ote Indians are clothed in Skins of
various Sorts, they all have Firearms; some come from so far North as Port
N^ls^n in Hudson's Bay N. Lat. 57 d. and some are from the Chirakees West of
South Carolina in N. Lat. 32 d. this seems to be a vast Extent of Inland
Water-Carriage, but it is only for Canoes the smallest of Craft: In Europe our
Inland Water-Carriage vastly excells this: for Instance, (I do not mention the
Royal Canal in France from the Western Ocean to the Mediterranean Sea, nor the
many Canals, some were finished, projected in Muscovy and Russia, by Peter the
great, because they are artificial) from Asia and the Black Sea, up the Danube
River, to near the Head thereof; and thence a small Carrying-Place to the Head
of the River Rhine, which by its many Branchings has an extensive
Communication, and falls into the Northern Ocean in Holland; and from the
Sources of the Danube a small Carrying-Place to the Head of the River Rhone,
which falls into the (...) Sea, in the South of France* up the River Rhine, and
the S^on^, and the Ousche, then a small Carrying-Place to the Head of the Seine
River, which by Way of Paris, Rouen, and Havre de Grace carries into the
Northern Ocean; and from the Seine by a Canal to the River Layre by Way of
Orleans and Nants to the Western Ocean. Our Navigation and Carriages in Europe
are much improved beyond this wild Manner, incommoded by Cataracts, Falls, or
Sautes; by Tree^ which accidentally fall across their Rivulets, etc: In Europe
their Carriage is in Ships and large Craft for the Ocean, Seas, and large
Rivers, and from thence an easy Wheel Land Carriage at Pleasure.
upon the Lake Ontario in the Onondagues Country. In May, Anno 1723, about 80
Men besides Women and Children, from a large Tribe belonging to the Outawaes
came to Albany in the Province of New York, and desired to be admitted as
another Friend Nation amongst the Mohawk Nations; this Tribe lies between the
Lake of Hurons and the upper Lake, and call themselves Necaragees, of 6 Castles
or Villages, near the Streights between these two Lakes, adjoining to a Tribe
called by the French Mr. Kellogg Anno 1710 from Massachus^tts-Bay, captivated
by the Indians; in Curiosity, and from a laudable public Spirit for
In^formation, traveled with six French Indian Traders, from Monreal in Canada
up the Owtawaes River, N. W. to Matawaen, thence they carry a little Way to a
small Lake Ni^ising, and by the French River to the great Lake of the Hurons (a
miserable Country) about 50 Leagues in Length, never froze over, but is like an
open Sea (^o Spruce that is Fir, or Pine in this Country) they coasted to its
N. W. Corner, and wintered at a Village or Tribe of the Owtawaes called
Misilimackinac in N. Lat. 46 d. upon the Streights between Lakes Hurons and
Ilinois; this Straight is froze over in Winter, here he wintered, he killed
Trout of 50 l. with; from this Streights they entered the Lake Ilinois and coasted
in Course of its Length S. S. W. to its South-Westerly Corner; thence they
carried one League (the longest Carriage in their Journey or Voyage) to a
Branch of the River Ilinois: The River Miamis which gives Name to a large
Nation of Indians, and comes from near the Lake Ilinois, and by which these
Traders with Mr. Kellogg returned to Monreal, falls into the River Ilinois. The
River Ilinois runs a Course of about 130 Leagues and falls into the River
Misissippi. Mr. Kellogg upon the River Ilinois, see the Remains of some former
French Settlements, but no present Inhabitant, some Tufts of Clover, and a few
European Fruit Trees; this is what some French Writers call the Province of
Hanois (perhaps corruptly for Ilinois) inhabited by above 16,000 W^ites; on the
River Ilinois was a French Fort called Fort Louis or (...). Five Leagues below
the Mouth of River Ilinois falls into the Misissippi the great River Misouris
from the North-West. Further down is a French Village and Windmill, some Mays,
a few Vines and other European Produce. A little further down the Misissippi,
falls in the River Owbache, Ohio, or Belle-Rivier, it heads near ^he West
Branch of the S^squahana in Pennsylvania. This is another Rout for the French
Trade, and Patroul to the Mouth of the Misissippi. Hereabouts the French
Traders and Mr. Kellogg ended their Voyage and returned to Monreal in Canada by
the River Miamis. We man suppose that about 37 d. N. Lat. is the Boundary
between the French two general Colonies of Canada and Louisiana or Misiss^^pi,
and that their Canada trading License extended no further.
Misilimackinac. There is a large Nation South West of the O^^^waes, called by
the French, (...) R^nar^^; they are not within our Knowledge.

MIAMIE^, so ^alled by the French (we call them Twig^^w^e^ or Ilinois they live
generally upon the River Miami^ and the Lake and River Ilinois which receives
the River Miamis: This Ilinois is a great River, and by it is one of Canada
Routs for their Patroul and Trade to the Misissippi.

CHICK^SA^^ seem to lie next to the Miamis on the Eastern Side of the
Misissippi; they are Allies of and Traders with the People of Carolinas. The
Chirakees are next in Course upon the East Side of Misissippi River; but as
they lie both Sides, and upon the Apalatian Mountains; we shall for Method's
Sake (Method renders every Thing distinct and easy) refer it to the next Range
of Indian Nations.

We have given a general View of the more remote Nations of Indians, that is,
of the Nations that live North, and West, and South-West of the great River
(...). ^aurence, and West of the Apalatian Mountains to the great River of
Misissippi: We now proceed to the next Range that lie from the Mouth of St.
Laurence, River North, to the Bay of Apalatie in the Gulf of Mexico South;
being upon the South and South East Sides of the River St. Laurence, and East
Side of the Apalatian Mountains or great Blue Hills, which reach from the M.
V^udr^uel late Governor-General of Canada caused these famous Falls to be
narrowly examined; reduced to a perpendicular Height, they were only 26 Fathom;
Father H^nnopin writes it 100 Fathom: It is true that from the great Falls, it
continues still to descend somewhat further by Ledges or Stairs.
Niagara Falls in the Streights between Lake Ontario and Eri^ N. Lat. 43 d. to
the Bay of Apalachie in N. Lat. 30 d. these Mountains are generally 300 Miles
from the Atlantic Shore; all the Runs of Water from their East Side, falls
into the Atlantic Ocean, and these from the West Side into the grand River
Misissippi.

II. The MIKAMAKES of L' Accadie or Nova Scotia, some of them live along
Cape-Sable Shore, some at Green-Bay, Menis, and Chicanicto, some in Cape-Breton
Island, and St. John's Island: They do not much exceed 350 fighting Men; they
continue in the French Interest, from our bad Management, notwithstanding that
the whole Province was quit-claim'd to us by the Peace of Utrecht 1713; from
this same Neglect or wrong Conduct it proceeds, that the French are allowed to
keep five Missions in this Province, viz. That of Annapolis River, of
Cape-Sable Shore, of Menis, of Chicanicto, and St. John's River; the Bishop of
Quebec in Canada is allowed to be their Superior and Constituent, and they act
by his Direction.

The ABNAQUIES, properly the New England Indian Nation, reach East and West
from the Bay of Fundy (to describe the Indian Nations as Geographers in Europe
do Countries, by Latitudes and Longitudes; would be stiff, pedantick, not
accurate, and of no Use) to Hudson's or New York River and Lake Champlain or
Corlaer; North and South from the St. Laurence or Canada great River, to the
Atlantic Ocean: They are in many Tribes, but dwindle much and become less
formidable; their Intercourse with the British and French has introduced
additional Distempers amongst them particularly those which proceed from the
immoderate Use of Spirits, Brandy or Rum; hence they become more indolent, and
are straightned for Subsistence; their Hunting fails them, they have but few
Deer and Beaver; a small Matter of Indian Corn and Kidney-Beans which their
Squaas or Women plant, is at present a considerable Part of their Subsistence;
they consisted of many Tribes, some extinct, some extinguishing, and the others
much reduced, The Proprietors of the Eastern Lands in New England, for some
Scores of Years have been much incommoded by the Incursions of these Indians,
which renders their Interest there a mere dead Stock; but very soon these
Indians will not be capable to annoy them any more, and by a Law for settling
quiet Possession (this Country's being so often settled and unsettled, bought
and sold, the various Claims are very intricate and Title precarious) the Lands
there will become valuable
let us enumerate them in their natural Order. 1. The Indians of St. John's
River, these belong to Nova Scotia, and have a French Missionary Priest; the
Mouth of St. John's River in the Bay of Fundy, is about 10 Leagues from
Annapolis-Royal. The St. John's River Indians in traveling to Quebec go up
this long River, and carry to a short rapid River which falls into the River of
St. Laurence a few Leagues below Quebec; they do not exceed 150 fighting Men.
2. Penobscot Indians are within the Massachusetts Bay Grant, have a French
Missionary; they lay upon a great Bay of the same Name, their Numbers not
exceeding 150 Men fit to march; they travel to Quebe^ up the small River of
Penobscot which comes from the Westward, and carry to Quenebec River a little
above Taconick Falls, and thence follow the same Rout with the Quenebec
Indians. 3. Sheepscut Indians in the Massachusetts Grant, upon a River of the
same Name, which falls into Sagadahock (formerly called Sagatawooke) River or
rather Bay, from the Eastward; not exceeding two or three Families existing
Anno 1747. 4. Quenebec Indians, in the foresaid Grant, upon the River of the
same Name, being the middle and principal River of Sagadahock, their principal
Settlement or Headquarters is at Norridgwoag about 100 Miles up Northward from
the Entrance of Sagadahock; they were much reduced in their War or Rebellion,
in the Time of the wise Administration of William Dummer, Esquire They have a
French Missionary, and travel to Quebec up Quenebec River, and from the Head
thereof, by several Ponds and Carrying-Places to the short rapid River La
Chaudiere which falls into St. Laurence River about four Leagues above Quebec;
at present they do not exceed 60 fighting Men. 5. Amerescogin Indians upon
Pegepscut or Brunswick River, which falls into the West Side of Sagadahock,
they may be said extinct. 6. Pigwacket Indians on Saco River (they are in two
Settlements Pigwoket and Ossepee (at Ossepee Pond, Lovel and his Party of
Volunteers were cut off by the Indians, Anno 1724) lies about 50 Miles above
Winter-Harbour, the Mouth of Saco River; at present not exceeding a Dozen
fighting Men, and formerly did travel (at present they are in the British
Interest) to Quebec via Connecticut River up, and St. Francois River down to
Canada River. 7. The Pennycook Indians, upon Merrimack River in New Hampshire
Jurisdiction, but lately quite extinct. 8. The Wanonoak Indians, on the Rivier
Puante, called the Mission of Besancourt, over against Les Trois Rivieres 30
Leagues above Quebec, at this Time in the Canada Jurisdiction, about 40
fighting Men. 9. The Arouseguntecook Indians, upon the River and Mission of St.
Francois, about 40 Leagues above Quebec, in the Canada Jurisdiction, not
exceeding 160 Men fit to march. 10. Masiassuck Indians, on the East or Dutch
Side of Lake Champlain; in the French Interest, do not exceed 60 fighting Men.
Thus the Abnoquie extensive Nation of Indians, does not exceed 640 fighting Men
fit to march.

The IROQUOIS Indians. We call them Mohawks, the Name of one of the Five or Six
united Nations; thus the seven united Provinces of the Baligick Netherlands are
called Holland from the Pro^ince of Holland, and the ten Spanish, now Austrian
Provinces there; are called Flanders from the Province of Flanders: They head
or lie North of our Provinces of New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and some
Part of Virginia; the Senacaas reach a great Way down Sesquahana River, the
Tribe of about 100 Souls called Shaumakins, lie below the Forks of Sesquahana
about 120 Miles West from the Forks of De la Ware River. In all public
Accounts they are lately called the Six Nations of New York Friend Indians, the
Tuscararoes, Emigrants from ^he old Tuscararoes of North Carolina, lately are
reckoned ^s the Sixth; we shall reckon them as formerly. 1. The Mohawks, they
live upon the Mohawks or Schenectady River; they have a Castle or Village
Westward from Albany 40 Miles, another 65 Miles West from Albany: The Number of
their fencible Men about 160. 2. Oneidaes about 80 Miles from the Mohawks
second Village, consisting of near 200 fighting Men. 3. Onondagues about 25
Miles further (the famous Oswego trading Place on the Lake Ontario, about 200
Miles West from Albany, is in their Country) consist of about 250 Men. 4.
Cayugaes about 70 Miles further, of about 130 Men. 5. Senekeas further West,
about 700 marching fighting Men. The fighting Men of the Five or Six Nations of
Mohawks, may be reckoned at 1500 Men, and extend from Albany West about 400
Miles, laying in the New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia
Governments, in about 30 Tribes or Villages. Besides these, there is settled a
little above Monreal, a Tribe of Scoundrel Runaways from the Mohawks, they are
called Kahnuages of about 80 Men.

The CHOWANS on the East Side of the Apalatian Mountains, or great Blue-Hills,
are reduced to a small Number, they lie West of Virginia and North Carolina;
they live North of Roanoke River. Lately our Indian Traders have found several
pr^c^icable Passes cross these Mountains, and keep Stores in their West Side,
or Intervals of Ridges; they are in continued or natural Enmity with the
Tuscararoes.

The TUSCARAROES lie between Roanoke and Pen^lico Rivers in North Carolina, do
not exceed 200 fightin^ Men; being much reduced upon their North-Carolin^
Insurrection, Anno 1711; and many of their Nation drove off, now settled with
the New York Five Nations.

CATABAWS in Course lies South of the Tuscararoe^ a small Nation, of about 300
Men. The Catabaw^ Chirakees, and some of the Creeks, are not styled Subject but
Allies and good Friends of Great Britain.

The Chirakees are a constant and sure Barrier betwee^ the French upon the
Misissippi, and the British Colonies (...) Carolina: Why should not the
Abnaquies by good Manage^ment be made a good Barrier between New England and
Ca^nada?
CHIRAKEES live upon the Southern Parts and bo^^ Sides of the Apalatian
Mountains, are a populous exte^^sive Nation of about 6000 Men. Anno 1722 in a
Co^^gress with Governor Nicholson of South Carolina, the^^ were present of the
lower and middle Chirakees the Chie^ of 37 Towns or Tribes; and with their
Consent G^^neral Nicholson appointed Wrosetasatow their Command^ in chief. The
People of South Carolina have a consid^^rable Trade or trucking Factory at
Tunisec, a Chirak^^ Tribe upon the River Misissippi.

CREEK Indians of Florida about 2000 Men. The lower Creeks consist of 8 to 10
Tribes, and run West (...) Flin^ River which falls into the Bay of Apalachie or
Gu^ of Mexico, by Instigation of the Spaniards, particular^^ of St. Augustine,
are very troublesome to our Carolina an^ Georgia Settlements: Especially the
adjoining Tribe (...) Yamasses: For Instance, Anno 1719, there was some French
and Spanish Projection against Great Britain i^ Embrio; the Abnaquies of
New England by the Instig^^tion of the French began to be troublesome upon the
sam^ Projection: This Projection in Europe came to (...) Maturity.

III. Indian Families, or small Tribes upon reserve^ Lands interspersed with
the British Settlements in Nort^^America. Upon the lower Parts of the several
(...) which run into the Atlantic Ocean in the Britis^ Settlements, are
several small distinct Tribes or relat^d ^amilies, which are not reckoned as
belonging to the ^urther Inland large Nations: They extinguish ^pace from the
Infection of our European Distempers and Vices, it can be of no Use to follow a
Detail of these perishing transitory small Tribes or Families; as a Sample, I
shall enumerate those in the Province of Massachusetts Bay.

By Act of the Massach^setts-Bay Assembly Anno 1746, the Indian Reserves being
distinguished into eight Parcels, Guardians or Managers for these silly Indians
were appointed. 1. Upon the Eastern Part of the Promontary or Peninsula of
Cape-Cod, in the Townships of Truro, Eastham, Chatham, Harwich, and Yarmouth;
these Indians go by the several Names of Pamet, Nosset, Pach^e, Potowmaket
(here is an Indian Congregation with a Minister) Sochtoowoket, and Nobscusset.
2. The Western Part of said Peninsula of Cape-Cod in the Townships of
Barnstable, Sandwich, and Falmouth; called the Indians of Wayanaes (the Name of
a formerly greatest Sachem in that Country) or Hyanaes, Costoweet, Mashpe,
Waquo^t (Oyster Harbor) Scootin, and Saconosset or Woods Hole, the Ferry-Place
to Martha's Vineyard. 3. The Indians of the Island of Nantucket about 900
Souls, being more than all the others together, are very useful in the Whale
and Cod-Fishery. 4. Indians of Martha's Vineyard Island about 450; lately many
of them have gone to settle in Nantucket, being a Place of better Employment.
5. The Indians of Plymouth, Pembroke, and Middleborough, called Namasket. 7.
The Nipmugs (formerly comprehending all the small Inland Tribes from
Connecticut River to Merrimack River; Blackstone or Patucket River, which falls
into the Naraganset-Bay, was formerly called Nipmug River) formerly known by
the Names of Cutamogs or Nipnets in the Townships and Districts of Dudley,
Oxford, Woodstock, Killinsbay, and Douglass; the Hasanamissets (...) from (...)
small Tribe of (...) called (...), upon a River of that Name called (...) by
the (...)* they are lat^ly (...) with the English in the Townships of S^effield
and (...).

Excepting the Indians of (...) and M^rtha's- Vineyard (better employed) all
the others in a few Years will be extinct, most of their M^n were perswad^d to
^nlist as Soldiers in the lat^ Expeditions to Cuba and Carthagena against the
Spaniards, and to C^pe-Breton and Nova Scotia against the Fren^h; scarce any of
them survived, and the Names and Memory of their Tribes not worth preserving.

In the other British Colonies, where any Tribes intermixed with our
Settlements require Notice; they shall be mentioned in the proper Sections.
This Article I prosecute no further.

ARTICLE 4. Indian Wars with the British Colonies in North America.
WHEN the Country of the Indians at War with us, lies upon our Frontiers but
without our Grants, I call it a War in the common Acceptance; if within our
Grants, but without our Settlements, I call it an Eruption, in our
Proclamations against them it is called a Rebellion, as in all the New England
Wars with the A^^^quies* if intermixed with our Settlements, it is an
Insurrection, such were the Wars of the Pequods, Anno 16^7* and of King Philip
and his Confederates Anno 1675.

In this Article I only mention the I ndian Insurrections or Commotions which
happened from the first Landing of the English in these A^erican Countries,
until the Bri^ish The Rev^lution in a strict Sense, was not the landing of
Pr^nce of (...), afte^ward^ (...) of blessed Memory; it was a parliame^tary
Exclu^^^n of all (...) Branches of the (...) Roy^l Family, and (...) the (...)
to the Crown in the (...).
Revolution in Favor of the Prince of Orange, Anno 16^^: After this Period,
though our Indian Wars were generally executed by the bordering Indians, they
were under the Influence, and by the Direction of the (...) Fr^^c^* therefore I
do not reckon them as (...) W^^^* but (...) French Wars in America, they (...)
with the British and French Wars in (...)* and (...) with the European and Ne^
Engl^^^ Briti^^ Expeditions against Canada, Nova-(...) (...), we (...) short
Account of them in the properSections.

(...) of the small (...) Skirmishes, at our first (...) be of ^^ useful
Information, and at this (...) Time is no Amusement. A rascally Fellow Cap^
(...) Anno 1614. by S^^alth carried off some Indians* and (...) of Europe, sold
them to the (...) Moor^ captivated from B^rb^ry; this occasioned a (...)
Disgust against the English Traders upon that Coast for some Time: In
New England, excepting the Indian Wars with the (...) 1637* and with the (...)
(called King Philip's War) and their Confederates (...) 1675* and the French
Indian Wars with us during King William's and Queen Anne's Wars in Europe; and
an Eruption Anno 1722 to 1725, when the French and Spaniards were hatching a
War against us in Europe, which proved abortive; and our present War with the
French and their associated Indians; we had no Indian War of any Kind, it is
true, there have been private Rencounters between the English and Indians at
Times, from sudden Flights of Passion or Drunkenness, as happens all the World
over.

Upon good Enquiry it will be found, that our properly speaking Indian Wars
have not been so frequent, so tedious, and so desolating, as is commonly
represented in too strong a Light (Hunger-starved, and Cold-starved were our
greatest Hardships in settling) in New England our only Indian Wars properly so
called were the Pequod War, Anno 1637, it lasted three Months, and King
Philip's War, Anno 1675 and 1676 was of about 14 Months Continuance, and the
War of 1722 to 1725.

In our Northern Parts, the Indians generally appear in small skulking Parties
with Yellings, Shoutings and an^^^ Postures, instead of Trumpets and Drums;
their Indian Wood-Cry is Io-han, their War-Cry may be expressed, Woach, Woach,
Ha, Ha, Hach, Woach.

The Indians are not Wanderers like the Tartars, but are Ramblers, and in Time
of War, according to the Seasons, they may be annoyed at their Headquarters,
and ambuscaded or Waylaid, at their Carrying or Land traveling Places. Their
Retreats or strong Places are the Swamps (Copses in a Morass) Dr. Cotton
Mather, with good Propriety calls it, being inswamped, in Imitation of the
European Term entrenched. Like the French in Europe, without Regard to Faith of
Treaties, they suddenly break out, into furious, rapid Outrages, and
Devastations; but soon retire precipitately, having no Stores for Subsistence,
the Country is not cleared and cultivated. Their Captives if they sicken or are
otherways incapable of traveling, they kill them and save their Scalps; the
English thus captivated are sold to French Families in Canada, but redeemable
upon reimbursing the Price paid, by an Order from the Governor-General of
Canada.

Their Head-Warriors are Men noted for Strength and Courage; sometimes in their
Wars they choose a temporary Chief of all the Tribes of one Nation engaged (at
Times some particular Tribe or Village have declined joining in War with the
general Nation, thus the Nianticks in the Pequod War, thus the Saco Indians in
the present War or Rebellion of the Abnaquies; but not with a Roman dictatorial
Power, Anno 1676 Madacawando of Penobscot was chief of all the Eastern or
Abnaquie Indians and Squando of Saco was his Second; Anno 1637, Sassacous was
chief of the Pequod Castles or Villages.

Our Scouts or Indian Hunters in Time of War, carry Packs, which at first
setting out may weigh 70 With. being about 30 Days Provision of Biscuit, or
parched Indian Corn, salt Pork, Sugar and Ginger to qualify and animate their
Drink, which is Water: Their Method of lodging, pitching, or camping at Night,
is in Parcels of Ten or Twelve Men to a Fire, they lie upon Brush, wrapped up in
a Blanket with their Feet to the Fire.

Toward the better understanding of the Pequid or Poquot, and King Philip's
Wars, it may be proper to know the Situation and Circumstances of their
adjoining Indians as they were Anno 1637. Along Shore first were the Cape-Cod
Peninsula Indians in several Tribes, the Nantucket and Martha's- Vineyard
Island Indians; these were always in Friendship with the English Settlers: Next
were the Pocassets (at present called Seconet) of about 300 fighting Men: The
Pockanokets or King Philip's Men about 300 fighting Men: The Nipmugs adjoining
to the Pockanokets Inland, in several Tribes, extending from Connecticut River
to Merrimack River: The Naragansets from Naraganset-Bay to Pakatuke River, the
Boundary between Connecticut and Rhode Island Colonies, about 1000 Men: The
Pequods from Pakatuck River to near Hudson's or New York River: The Moheags at
the Head of New London or Thames River about 400 Men: The Connecticut River
Indians in several Tribes.

PEQUOD WAR. The Occasions of this War, were, 1. A barbarous warlike Nation,
they killed Anno 1634, Captains Stone and Norton, Traders. 2. Lords Say and
Brook 1636, building a Fort at the Mouth of Connecticut River, near their
Headquarters offended them. 3. Their continued killing upon Connecticut River
of English Traders, upon frivolous Pretenses to the Number of 30; at Length the
English could not avoid a proper Resentment.

Anno 1635 July 15. The associated Colonies of New England made a League
offensive and defensive with the six Naraganset Sachems; by one of the Articles
the Naraganset Indians confirm all former Grants of Lands made to the English:
The Naraganset and Pequods were not cordial Friends with one another.

1637 In May 20, a Body of 77 English, 60 Connecticut River Indians, 200
Naraganset Indians, 100 Nianticks (a Village of the Pequods in Friendship with
the Engli^^) and 20 Men from the Garrison of Saybrook Fort, under the Direction
of This Capt. Mason for his good Services, had a Colony Grant of a large Extent
of Land; these Lands are now in Dispute between the Colony of Connecticut and
Mr. Mason's Heirs.
Capt. Mason, afterward Deputy Governor of Connecticut (the 160 Men from
Massachusetts Bay under Mr. Stoughton, and the ^0 Men from Plymouth Colony had
not then joined them) took and burnt the Pequod Fort near Mystic River (this
River divides Stonington from Groton in Connecticut) and killed about 140
Indians; a great Body of Pequods came down from their neighboring principal
Fort, but the English and their auxiliary Indians made a good Retreat to their
Boats, in all they had only two Men killed, and 16 Men wounded. The English
pursued the Pequods from Swamp to Swamp with great Havoc; at Length in a Swamp
of Fairfield toward New-Netherlands, they were routed; their captivated
Children were sent to Bermudas and sold for Slaves: Sassacous their leading
Sachem with about 30 more Pequods fled to the Mohawks and were murdered by
them. In less than three Months War about 700 Pequods were destroyed, and that
Nation reduced to about 200 Men, who sued for Peace; which was granted them
upon Condition of their abandoning their Name and Country, which accordingly
they did, and incorporated themselves with the (...) and Moheags Perhaps some
Expedient of this Nature might be used with Regard to some of the incorrigible
Clans of Highlanders in the Northern and Western Parts of Scotland.
. N. B. They had not many Fi^^ Arms.

After the Pequod War, there were at Times between the Indians and English,
private mutual Injuries, sometimes more general Misunderstandings and threatened
Ruptures; but the Union offensive and defensive of the four united Colonies of
New England, awed them; by this Union the Proportions were Massachusetts 100,
Plymouth, Hartford, and New Haven each 45 Men, this Union was made Anno 1643
the 19th Day of the third Month.

Anno 1645 and 1646, the Naragansets were privately hatching of an
Insurrection, but were soon brought to an open Declaration of a settled
Friendship with the English.

1653 The Dutch have generally been called our natural and good Friends, but as
there can be no real Friendship amongst Rivals in Trade; It is a Maxim with
Merchants, there is no Friendship in Trade; the Dutch carry this higher, that
there is no Humanity in Trade; we ought to be equally jealous of the French and
Dutch: The French Faith is in our Times as notoriously bad, as the Punica and
Greeca Fides was in ancient Times, therefore I shall not enumerate any
Instances of it: I shall give a few Instances how faulty the Dutch have been in
(...) Respect. 1. Not long after we had relieved them from the Spanish ^ondage
in their V^derland or native Country, they massacred our ^actory at Amboyna in
the East Indies, never to be forgiven nor forgotten. 2. In our New England Wars
with the Pequod Indi^ns Anno 1637, and with King Philip's Indians Anno 1675,
they supplied our Enemy Indians with Ammunition etc. from New York and Albany.
3. Anno 16^3 when the English and Dutch were at War in Eu^^p^, our Dutch
Neighbors of New-Netherlands, had formed a Plot, in Conjunction with the
Mohawks and Eastern Indians, to cut off the British Colonies in New England;
but a Peace in Europe soon happening prevented this Massacre. 4. A few Years
since in the Island of I^va in the East Indies, in the Suburbs and Country
adjacent to Batavia, were settled about 90,000 Chinese multiplying very fast;
the Dutch jealous of their Numbers and Growth, upon a pretended Umbrage of an
intended Insurrection, surprised in cold Blood, and massacred many Thousands of
them, in Order to reduce their Numbers: Gain is their God, to this they
sacrifice every Thing, even their own Species, Mankind. 5. In the Autumn Anno
1746, when a French Squadron invaded Fort St. George in the East Indies, the
English Women of the Town and its Territory fled to Pallicut a Dutch Settlement
three Hours or 12 Miles North from St. George's; but the Dutch would not
receive them. 6. The silent Consent of the Dutch, to the French attacking and
taking of the Austrian Towns in the Netherlands; it is suspected in all our
Battles or Engagements against the French in Flanders this War, that the Dutch
General Officers, had private Instructions, to give Way, as if in Collusion
with the French Court. The Dutch is an Oligarchy, or a Government of few, and
therefore liable to Corruption, and would even bring their own Country to a
Market and sell one another upon Occasion. The Dutch if they could be sincere,
are our most natural Allies against the encroaching French.
The Dutch of New-Netherlands were forming a Confederacy with our Indians, to
cut off all the New-Eng^and Settlements, but a Peace between England and
Holland prevented it.

Anno 1654, The Naraganset and Niantick Indians, made War against Montaoke
Indians East End of Long Island, but the united Colonies of New England by
fitting out 270 Foot, 40 Horse, soon brought the Naragansets to Accommodation.

PACONOKET OR KING PHILIP'S WAR. Massasoit, Chief of the Wampanogoes, whereof
Pockanoket or Mount Hope Neck was a Tribe, was a good Friend to the first
Plymouth Settlers: He left two Sons, Wamsucket and Metacomet, at their own
Desire the Government of Plymouth gave them the English Names of Alexander and
Philip; Alexander died Anno 1662: Philip by a formal Instrument to the
Government of Plymouth Anno 1671 restricted himself from disposing any of his
Lands without their Consent.

This Philip Sachem of the Wampanogoes or Pacanoket Indians, was naturally a
Man of Penetration, Cunning, and Courage; he formed a deep Plot Anno 1675, to
extirpate the English of New England: With profound Secresy he effected an
extensive Confederacy with other Tribes of Indians, viz. Pocasset, Naragansets,
Nipmugs, Connecticut River Indians, several Tribes of the Abnaquies our Eastern
Indians; the Canada French were in the Scheme, and by their Emissaries
endeavored to keep up the Spirit of Insurrection; the Dutch from Albany were
suspected of supplying these Indians with Ammunition. By the New-Plymouth Grant
we find the Pocanoket Indians extended up Patuket or Blackstone formerly Nipmug
River to the Nipmug Country; but this Boundary could not be ascertained, by the
late Commissioners for settling the Line between Plymouth and Rhode Island
Colonies.

Philip began his Insurrection June 24. 1675, by killing of nine Englishmen in
Swanzey, adjoining to Mount-Hope his Headquarters. The English suspecting the
Naragansets, a powerful Nation, might join Philip, marched an armed Force into
the Naraganset Country, and awed them into a Treaty of Peace and Friendship;
but notwithstanding (such is Indian Faith) they joined Philip as does appear in
the Sequel.

Beginning of July the Pocassets beg^n Hostilities. In a Pocasset Swamp, King
Philip and his confederate Pocassets, were environed by the English, but by
Night made their Escape to the Nipmug Country, leaving about 100 Women and
Children. Middle of July the Nipmugs begin Hostilities by Depredations in
Mendon. August 25 the Connecticut River Indians begin Hostilities by annoying
the neighboring English Settlements.

In August the Eastern Indians, viz. Pennycooks of Merrimack, Pigwokets of
Saco, and Amarescogins of Pegepscut Rivers, break out and by December they
killed about 50 English, with their own Loss of about 90 Indians. The Severity
of the Winter brought these Tribes of Eastern Indians to a formal Peace, but by
Solicitation of Philip they broke out again next Summer and were joined by the
Quenebec Indians, kill several English, and destroy their Stock; but Philip
being killed they soon came in and submitted.

The Enemy Indians, imagining that upon the Footing of the late Treaty, the
English would deem the Naragansets as Neutrals, in Winter retired to the
Naraganset Country; but for very good Reasons the English, jealous of the
Naragansets, send thither 1000 Men, whereof 527 from Massachusetts, under the
Command of Governor Winslow of Plymouth, they were increased to 1500 Men by an
Addition of some neighboring Friend Indians; December 19, they attack the
Indians in their Fort or Swamp, and killed about 700 Indians, besides Women and
Children, with the Loss of about 85 English killed, and 150 wounded; the Swamp
is called Patty-squamscut.

Notwithstanding of this Disaster, the Indian^ (...) skulking Parties out all
Winter, they kept the Field better than the English, and harassed our People
much; they did Damage in the Town of Plymouth, and within a few Miles of
Boston, and the English were obliged to keep close in Garrison-Houses. In the
Spring the Mohawks having some Difference with the Abnaquies favored the
English; and the Indians being much harassed by Famine (they had little
Produce, because of the War, from their planting Grounds last Crop) Fevers and
Fluxes; the Massachusetts Government very wisely issued a Proclamation July 8.
1676, promising the Hopes of a Pardon to all Indian Enemies or Rebels, who
should come in within 14 Days; many submitted, many withdrew to their
respective peculiar Abodes; some traveled Westward toward Hudson's River, were
pursued and killed. Philip was reduced to skulk about, and in a Swamp of Mount
Hope his own Country, with 6 or 7 of his Followers was killed August 12, 1676.

During Philip's War about 3000 Indians were killed, captivated and submitted,
the Naragansets from a large Body reduced to about 100 Men. The War being over,
about 400 Indians by Order met at Major Waldron's of Catchecho; 200 were culled
out, who had been notoriously wickedly mischievous; of these a few suffered
Death, the others (of the 200) were transported and sold forSlaves.

King Philip's or Bristol Neck was sold toward defraying the Charges of the
War, and afterward by the General Court incorporated by the Name of Bristol
with some peculiar Privileges and Exemptions.

The Colony of Connecticut was scarce touched in this War. We have no Record of
Rhode Island Assistance.

After Philip's War, there were no more Insurrections or Rebellions of our
intermixed Indians: The following Wars were by Eruptions and Incursions of the
Indians within our Grants, but without our Settlements, by Instigation of our
natural Enemies the French of Canada, viz. from Autumn Anno 1688 (some short
Truces interveening) to January 7. Anno School, 9, and from August 16. Anno 1703,
to July 17. Anno 1713: and from Spring 1744, when there were mutual
Declarations of War in Europe of the British and French; this War still
subsists at this present writing September 1747. Here we may observe that our
Eastern Indians in this pending War have not annoyed our Settlements Eastward,
being called off by the French to Crown-Point; from Crown-Point the French and
their Indians have done considerable Damage upon the New York and Massachusetts
Western Frontiers; and to Nova Scotia, by investing of the Fort of
Annapolis-Royal, and by the Massacre of our People at Menis, they have
considerably incommoded us. The late Disasters of the French Expeditions under
Duke d'Anville and M. La Ionquiere against Cape-Breton, Nova Scotia, and our
other Settlements in North America, have made the French desist from any
farther Enterprises in Nova Scotia, and our Eastern Indians being dismissed
from that Service, have lately appeared against our Forts of Pemaquid and
Georges.

Our Wars with the Indians in the Reigns of King William and of Queen Anne, and
the present War are intermixed with Expeditions from Europe, they are not
merely Indian; we refer them to the subsequent Sections.

GOVERNOR DUMMER'S WAR against the Indians may be reckoned purely Indian, we
shall give some short Account of it. The Canada French perceiving our Eastern
Settlements advance apace, set their Quenebec Missionary Father Ralle a Jesuit
to Work; he made these Indians jealous of the English by telling them, that
these Lands were given by GOD unalienably to the Indians and their Children for
ever, according to the Christian sacred Oracles. Anno 1717 The Indians began to
murmur, and after some Time gave the English Settlers formal Warning to leave
the Lands within a set Time, at the Expiration of the Time they committed
Depredations by destroying their Cattle and other Stock: The Missionary, with a
Priestly Heat began the Affair too precipitately, before the receiving of
Directions from France, as appears by a Letter from M. Vandreuil
Governor-General of Canada to this Father "he could not tell, how far he might
intermeddle in the Affair, until he had particular Instructions from the
Council of the Navy in France;" all the French Colonies are under the Direction
of that Board: And the Smallpox (which the Indians with good Reason dread)
prevailing in New England, Anno 1721, prevented a declared Rupture until Anno
1722. July 5. the Government of Massachusetts Bay proclaimed them Rebels, and
ordered 100 L. per Scalp to Volunteers fitted out at their own Charge, and
afterward 4 s. per Day besides: Our most considerable Action against them was
at Noridgwoag of Quenebec River August 12. Anno 1724, their fighting Men being
just come Home from Scouting; Capt. Harman with 200 Men in 17 Whale-Boats go up
Quenebec River, surprise the Indians at Naridgwog, bring off 26 Indian Scalps,
and that of Father Ralle; Indians killed, and drowned in their Flight cross the
River, were computed to be Eighty: Capt. Lovel a Voluntier, with 44 Men sets
out, via Ossipy Pond, for Pigocket* was intercepted by about 70 Indians, he and
about 14 of his Men were killed, and many wounded.

The French and Indians of Nova Scotia were concerned in this War, they made a
vain Assault upon the Fort of Annapolis-Royal, and did some Damage at Canso.

The Delegates from the 5 or 6 New York Indian Nations, and from the Mohegin or
Hudson's River Indians, and from the Scatacooks, came to Boston, received
Presents, gave fair Promises of acting in our Favor, but did nothing.

We sent Commissioners to the Governor-General of Canada, to expostulate with
him concerning his encouraging the Indian Depredations, and to reclaim
Captives: His Answer was, that these Indians were independent Nations, and not
under his Direction; this was a mere Evasion.

After many Bickerings, by good Management in the wise Administration of
Lieutenant Governor Dummer, the Indians begged and obtained a Cessation of Arms,
December 15, Anno 1725, and a Peace the May following at Casco; saving to the
Indians all their Lands not hitherto conveyed, with the Privilege of Hunting,
Fowling, and Fishing as formerly: Signed by the Noridgwoag, Penobscot, St.
John's, and Cape-Sable Indians.

Three or four Years since, some interspersed Indians in Maryland were
troublesome and occasionally killed some English Men; they were soon quelled.

In Virginia, in the Beginning, the Indian Incursions retarded them much, and
Anno 1610, from 500 they, were reduced to 80; from 1612 there was uninterrupted
Peace with the Indians till 1622, by a sudden general Insurrection they
massacred 347 English People, reckoned at that Time half of the Colony. Sir
John Harvey a very arbitrary Governor encroached much upon the Indians by
making enormous Grants of their Lands, this occasioned another Massacre from
the Indians Anno 1639* 500 English were cut off, especially about the Head of
York River; this was soon over, and Peace lasted many Years. Anno 1676 some
mutual Murders happened between the English and Indians in the Out-Settlements.
Bacon a hotheaded young Gentleman of the Council, because, as he thought, the
Assembly was too dilatory in fitting out against the Indians; in Contempt of
the Government, and without a proper Commission, inlists Soldiers of his own
Accord, and occasioned an intestine civil Mutiny of the white People against
the Government, and obliged the Governor Berkley to fly t^ the remote County of
Accomack upon the Eastern Shore of Chesapeak Bay: To quell this Commotion a
Regiment of Soldiers was sent from England, but Bacon dying, the Commotion was
over, before the Regiment arrived, this Corpse continued there three Years, and
were dis^anded in Virginia; Bacon's Body could not be found to be exposed to
Infamy. This does anticipate, but at the same Time it helps to shorten the
Section of Virginia.

In NORTH CAROLINA, Anno 1711, in November the Cape Fear Indians broke out, and
destroyed about 20 Families, and much Stock: by Succors from Virginia and
South Carolina, they were soon reduced; and many of the Tuscararoes obliged to
^ake Refuge amongst the New York Indian Nations, where they continue, and are
generally called the sixth Nation.

SECT. IV. General Remarks concerning the British Colonies in America.
THE Subject-Matters of this Section according to my first Plan are prolix,
being various and copious, and perhaps would be the most curious and informing
Piece of the Performance to some Readers; but as many of our Readers in these
Colonies seem impatient for our entering upon the Affairs of their several
Settlements, we shall contract the present Section, and shall defer several
Articles to the Appendix; such as, the Rise, Progress, and present State of the
pernicious Paper-Currencies; some Account of the prevailing or Endemial
Diseases in our North America Colonies, and many other loose Particulars, the
various Sectaries in Religion, which have any Footing in our American Colonies
shall be enumerated in the Section of Rhode Island, where we find all Degrees
of Sectaries (some perhaps not known in Europe) from Some f^cetious Gentlemen,
perhaps, use too much of a sarcastick Freed^m with our Co^ony Governments: For
Instance, that, the small Colony of R -- de I -- d, ANARCHY is their Civil
Constitution; NO RELIGION is in Room of an Ecclesiastical Constitution, and
they who are of any well regulated Religion are Non-Conformists; in Sea-Af^airs
they are the PORTO-RICO of New England, for many Years they have been the most
noted Paper-Money Bankers or BUBLERS in New England, but at present are in this
Case eclipsed by a more eminent enterprising neighboring Colony: By this
Contrivance in over-stretching a Provincial public Paper Credit, they may in
some Sense be said to have become Bankrupts, at present they pay 2 s. 3 d. in
the L.* such is the present Difference between 3 L. (the Price of one Ounce of
Mexico Silver Standard, October 1747) Denomination depreciated, and 6 s. 8 d.
the Price of Silver, the Rate at which their Notes of Credit were first emitted.

To render this intelligible to the lowest Capacities: If this loosing
Negotiation of public Bills of Credit proceeds, a British Halfpenny will
exchange for a Shilling New England base Currency, and a Corkin Pin for a Penny
in small Change.

Oldmixon, an erroneous Scribler, in his British Empire in America, printed in
London 1708 (he died 1742) without any Design seems to favor the other
Colonies of New England; he writes, the Government of Rhode Island is still
separate from that of New England.

No Religion (I hope the above Character may admit of considerable Abatements)
is inconsistent with Society. The Form of the Judicial Oath in that Colony
"Upon the Peril of the Penalty of Perjury" seems not to answer the Intention of
an Oath, which is a solemn Invocation of GOD's Judgments hereafter, over and
above the Penalties which may be inflicted in this World; thus by Cunning and
Secresy they may evade the one, but by no Means can be supposed to escape the
other: It is true, that in Great Britain the Affirmation of Quakers, and in
Holland the Declaration of the Menists, are equivalent to our Oaths. Upon the
other Hand the Frequency of Oaths upon small Occasions, makes them too
familiar, and by taking off the Solemnity and Awe of an Oath renders them
nearly upon a Par with common profane Swearing; the many Oaths in the several
Branches of the Revenue, particularly in the Customs, are of bad Effect, hence
the Proverb, A Custom-House Oath, that is, an Oath that may be dispensed with;
Oaths give a profligate Man of no Religion (that is who does not think himself
bound by an Oath) a vast Advantage over an honest conscientious religious Man:
The same may be said of the sacramental Tests of Conformity, and occasional
Conformity practiced by the Church of England.


NO RELIGION to that of the most wild Enthusiasts. Religious Affairs, so far as
they may in some Manner appertain to the Constitution of the Colonies, do make
an Article in this Section.

ARTICLE I. Concerning our first Discoveries of, and Trade to the British
North America; before, it was by Royal Grants, Patents, and Charters divided
into the Colonies at present subsisting.
IN Page 109, etc. I gave some anticipating Account of these our first
Discoveries. I shall further add.

Sebastian Cabot commissioned by King Henry VII. of England, to endeavor
Discoveries of a North-West Passage to China and the East Indies, Anno 1497,
did discover and take Possession, according to the Forms used in those Times,
of all the Eastern Coast of North America, from about the North Polar Circle to
Cape Florida, (as is related) in the Name of the Crown of England; the Cabots
had a Royal English G^ant of the Property of all Lands they should discover and
settle Westward of Europe, they made no Settlement, and their Grant dropped.

Sir Walter Raleigh a Favorite, by Order of Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1584, sent
two Vessels to North America, to land People that were to remain there; they
landed at Roanoke in North Carolina, where they remained and planted for some
short Time. Raleigh gave to all that Part of America the Name VIRGINIA, in
Honor or Memory of the Virginity of Queen Elizabeth; a continued but small
Trade was carried on from England to these Countries for some Time, and by
landing at Times in sundry Places, took further Possession for the Crown of
England.

Anno 1606 April 10. King James in one Patent incorporated two Companies called
the South and North Virginia Companies; the South Virginia Company to reach
from 34 d. to 41 d. N. Lat. they began a Settlement Anno 1607 on Chesapeak-Bay,
and this Part of the Country retains the Name Virginia in a peculiar Manner to
this Day; here we must drop it, and reassume in the proper Section of Virginia:
The North Virginia Company called also the West-Country Company, had Liberty to
settle upon the same Eastern Coast of America from 38 d. to 45 d. N. Lat. they
kept a constant small Trade on Foot, and sometimes wintered ashore, as, for
Instance, at Sagadabock Anno 1608; but made no formal lasting Settlement, until
that of New Plymouth Anno 1620; here we must stop and reassume in the Sections
of New England Colonies. These Settlements were to have been at 100 Miles
Distance from one another, that is, from their chief Place each Territory or
Colony was to extend 50 Miles both Ways along Shore, and 100 Miles back into
the Country, so as to make a District of 100 Miles square: Thus from the Gulf
of St. Laurence to Cape-Fear we should have had seven Colonies of equal
Dimensions, but not of equal Quality; at present in that Space we have about a
Dozen Colonies very unequal and irregular, because granted at different Times,
most of them run back into the Wilderness indefinitely. This Pat^nt did not
subsist long, the Companies were managed by Pr^sidents and Council, but in a
few Years made a Surrender. The Dutch took the Opportunity to sit down in some
Parts of the Degrees of Latitude, that were in common to both Companies, and
kept Possession of Prop^rty and Jurisdiction, almost threescore Years.

Capt. Henry Hudson Anno 1608 discovered the Mouth of Hudson'^ River in N. Lat.
40 d. 30 m. upon his own Account as he imagined, and sold it, or rather
imparted the Discovery to the Dutch; the Dutch made some Settl^ments there, but
were drove off by Sir Samuel Argol, Governor of a second Virginia Company Anno
1618, because within the Limits of that Company's Grant; but Anno 1620 King
James gave the Dutch some Liberty of Refreshment for their Ships bound to
Brazils, which they afterward in the Times of the Civil Wars and Confusions in
England, improved to the settling of a Colony there, which they called New
Netherlands, comprehending all the present Provinces of New York and
New-Iersies, and some Part of Pennsylvania; their principal Settlements were
New Amsterdam, at present called the City of New York on Hudson's River, and
Fort Casimier, since called New Castle upon Delaware River, West Side of it;
Hudson's River was called by the Dutch, Nord Rivier, and Delaware River was
called Zuid Rivier. Beginning of King Charles II. Reign, by Conquest 1664 and
the subsequent Cession by the Breda Treaty 1667, it reverted to the Crown of
England. The further Account of this Territory belongs to the Sections of
New York and New-Iersies.

We may in general observe; that Spices, Precious Stones, Gold, Silver, other
Metals and Minerals, were the first Inducements and Objects of our East and
West India Discoveries; (the Trade for Tobacco, Rice, Fish, Furs, Skins, and
Naval Stores, seem to have been only incidental) as these did not succeed, our
first Endeavors or Adventures for Settlements, did not proceed.

From Historical Observations during the last Century and half, we may learn
many of the successful Methods to be used, and the Inconveniences to be
avoided in settling of Colonies.

ARTICLE 2. Concerning the general Nature and Consti^ution of British
North-American Colonies.
ALL our American Settlements are properly Colonies, not Provinces as they are
generally called: Province respects a conquered People (the Spaniards in Mexico
and Peru may perhaps in Propriety bear this Appellation) under a Jurisdiction
imposed upon them by the Conqueror; Colonies are formed of national People v.
g. British in the British Colonies, transported to form a Settlement in a
foreign or remote Country.

The first Settlers of our Colonies, were formed from various Sorts of People.
1. Laudably ambitious Adventurers. 2. The Malcontents, the Unfortunate, the
Necessitous from Home. 3. Transported Criminals. The present Proportion of
these Ingredients in the several Plantations varies much, for Reasons which
shall be mentioned in the particular Sections of Colonies, and does depend much
upon the Condition of the first Settlers: Some were peopled by Rebel Tories,
some by Rebel Whigs (that Principle which at one Time is called Royalty, at
another Time is called Rebellion) some by Church of England Men, some by
Congregationalists or Independants, some by Quakers, some by Papists (Maryland
and Monserrat) the most unfit People to incorporate with our Constitution.

Colonies have an incidental good Effect, they drain from the Mother Country
the Disaffected and the Vicious (in this same Manner, subsequent Colonies purge
the more ancient Colonies); Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, drained
from Massachusetts Bay, the Antinomians, Quakers, and other wild Sectaries.
Perhaps in after Times (as it is at Times with the Lord Lieutenants and other
high Officers in Ireland) some Malcontents of Figure, capable of being
troublesome to the Administration at Home, may be sent in some great Offices to
the Plantations.

In our Colonies we have four Sorts of People. 1. Masters that is Planters and
Merchants. 2. White Servants. 3. Indian Servants. 4. Slaves for Life, mostly
Negroes. White Servants are of two Sorts, viz. Poor People from Great Britain,
and Ireland mostly, these are bound or sold, as some expres^ i^, for a certain
Number of Years, to reimburse the transporting Charges, with some additional
Profit; the others are Criminals judicially transported, and their Time of
Exile and Servitude sold by certain Undertakers and their Agents.

In our American Settlements, generally the Designations are, Province, where
the King appoints a Governor; Colony, where the Freemen elect their own
Governor: This customary Acceptance is not universal; Virginia is called a
Colony, perhaps because formerly a Colony, and the most ancient.

We have some Settlements with a Governor only; others with Governor and
Council, such are Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, Hudson's- Bay, and Georgia,
without any House orNegative deputed by the Planters, according to the Essence
of a British Constitution: These, may be said, not colonized.

There are various Sorts of Royal Grants of Colonies. 1. To one or more
personal Proprietors, their Heirs and Assigns; such are Maryland and
Pennsylvania; both Property and Government. 2. The Property to personal
Proprietors; the Government and Jurisdiction in the Crown; this is the State of
Carolinas and Iersies. 3. Property and Government in the Crown, viz. Virginia,
New York, and New Hampshire commonly called Piscataqua. 4. Property in the
People and their Representatives; the Government in the Crown; as is
Massachusetts Bay. 5. Property and Government in the Governor and Company,
called the Freemen of the Colony, such are Connecticut and Rhode Island.

This last seems to be the most effectual Method of the first settling and
peopling of a Colony; Mankind are naturally desirous of Parity and Leveling,
without any fixed Superiority; but when a Society is come to Maturity, a more
distinct fixed Subordination is found to be requisite. Connecticut,
Rhode Island, and some of the Proprietary Governments, are of Opinion, that
they are not obliged to attend to, or follow any Instructions or Orders from
their Mother Country or Court of Great Britain; they do not send their Laws
home to the Plantation-Offices to be presented to the King in Council for
Approbation or Disallowance: They assume the Command of the Militia, which by
the British Constitution is a Prerogative of the Crown: Some Time ago, they
refused not only a Preventive Custom-House Office, but likewise a Court of
Vice-Admiralty's Officers appointed from Home; but these Points they have given
up, especially considering that the Royal Charter grants them only the
Privilege of trying Causes, Intra corpus Comitatus, but not a-float or Super
altum mare.

As a small Country, though rich and thriving, cannot afford large Numbers of
People; it ought not to run upon Discoveries and Conquests, beyond what they
can well improve and protect; because by over-stretching, they weaken or break
the Staple of their Constitution: But they may in good Policy distress as much
of the Enemy's Country as is possible, and for some short Time keep Possession
of some of their most important Places, though at a great Charge, even, by
hiring of foreign Troops; in Order to obtain some suitable profitable
Equivalent. New England with the incidental Countenance of a small British
Squadron, did easily reduce the North America Dunkirk, or Louisb^urg in
Cape-Breton Island; and perhaps luckily, without waiting for the Direction of
the British Ministry. Considering our large Sea and Land-Force, well fitted,
upon the Expeditions, against Havanah and its Territory in the Island of Cuba,
the Rendezvous of all the Spanish Plate-Fleets; and against Carthagena the best
Strong-Hold the Spaniards have in America; and against Canada called the
New-France in North America, which would have given us the Monopoly of the
Cod-Fish and Fur-Trade, many of our American Militia voluntarily formed
themselves into Companies and Regiments for that Purpose; but the Ministry at
Home perhaps for good Reasons best known to themselves, seem to have baulkt
these Affairs; the above apparently intended Conquests would have been ^asy.

Great Britain does not, like France, swarm with a numerous People, therefore
cannot settle Colonies so fast, without allowing of a general Naturalization.
From Germany we had many emigrant Palatines and Saltsburghers, and in Time may
have more: Foreigners imported, should not be allowed to settle in large
separate Districts, as is the present bad Practice; because for many
Generations they may continue, as it were, a separate People in Language, Modes
of Religion, Customs and Manners; they ought to be intermixed with the British
Settlers: English Schools only allowed for the Education of their Children;
their public Worship for the first Generation or 20 Years, may be allowed in
their original Language in the Forenoon, and in English in the Afternoon,
according to any tolerated Religion: as our Missionaries do not attend the
Service of Indian Conversions, some of them may be employed in this Service;
after the first twenty Years from their first Arrival, their public Worship,
shall for ever be in English; all their Conveyances, Bonds, and other public
Writings, to be in English; thus in two or three Generations (as de Foe
humorously expresses it) they will all become true born Englishmen. We have an
Instance of this in New England, where many Irish in Language and Religion (I
mean Roman Catholics) have been imported some Years since; their Children have
lost their Language and Religion, and are good Subjects: We have a notorious
Instance of the bad Effects in not observing this Regulation, in Nova Scotia;
the French Inhabitants though in Allegiance to the Crown of Great Britain ever
since Anno 1710, by allowing them a separate Residence, with their Language and
Religion continued, are at present, as much estranged from and Enemies to the
British Interest, as they were 37 Years ago; witness their Behavior in our
present French War, by their favoring and concuring with our French Canada
Enemies, and the late Expeditions from France: The D -- ch in a neighboring
Province, because not well dashed or intermixed with the English, though in
Allegiance above Eighty Y^ars; do not seem to consult our Interest so much, as
might be expected.

Although the Colonies of various Nations may learn the Iuvan^ia and the
Laedentia, from one another; there may be several Political Regulations in
Colonies foreign to us, which may have a good Effect with themselves, but may
not fit our Constitution; for Instance, 1. The Spaniards say, that their vast
extensive Settlements in America, have continued in due Subjection about 250
Years, by their principal Officers; Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military, being
from Old-Spain; In China (a polite Nation) no Man can be a Mandarin in his own
Country or District, where he was born. 2. The French, Spanish, and Portuguese
Colonies, are not allowed to make Wines, and distill Spirits of Sugar for
Merchandise, because it would hurt the Vent of the Wines and Brandies of their
Mother Countries: Some such Regulations with Regard to T^ings commonly
manufactured in Great Britain, not to be manufactured in the Plantations, have
from Time to Time been laid before the Court of Great Britain, by People
disaffected to the Plantations v. g. by Col. D -- r not long since; but
happily, have had little or no Effect.

The several Colonies, particularly those of New England the most suspected,
have it neither in their Power nor Inclination to withdraw from their
Dependence upon Great Britain: Of themselves, they are comparatively nothing,
without the As^istance and Protection of some European maritime Power; amongst
those, the French, Spanish, and Portuguese differ so much from them in
Religion, the most popular Affair, and in an absolute, monarchial Government
inconsistent with our Plantation, levelling Spirit; that we have nothing to
fear from them; the Dutch being nearly the same with us in Religion, and
apparently (though not really) the same as to a popular Government; they bid
the fairest for carrying off our Plantations from their Allegiance, and ought
in a particular Manner to be guarded against; if in Time of some general
Disconte^t, a W^r should happen with the Dutch.

As in natural Parentage, so Infant Colonies, ought to be tenderly and fi^ally
used, without any Suspicion or Surmise of a future obstinate Disobedience,
Desertion, or Revolt. Some of the American Colony-Legi^latures, have at Times
been drawn into Errors and I^advertencies, by some popular, wicked, leading
Men, which has obliged the Court of Great Britain to make some Alterations in
their peculiar Constitutions; we shall enumerate them in the respective Colony
Sections, a^ present we shall only instance a few relating ^o this Province of
Massachusetts Bay. 1. Upon a Quo War^nto from the Court of King's Bench issued
in Trinity-Term Anno 1635 against the Governor and Company of the Colony of
Massachusetts Bay; and in Trinity Term Anno 1^37 Judgment was given for the
King to seize said ^olony, an^ to take Governor Cradock's Body i^to Custody;
but by Reason of the ensuing Troubles, t^is Judgm^^t was never put in
Execution. 2. The ^eirs of Mas^^ and Gorge, Proprietors of the Provinces of N^w
^am^^hire and Main, complained to the King of the Usu^^^t^ons of the Government
of Massach^^^^^s^^ay; the ^i^g by a mandatory Letter Anno 1676 to Ma^sachuset^s
Bay Colo^y required an Answer to those Com^lai^ts: The Agents for
Massachusetts Bay, before the Count of King's- Bench, disclaimed these Lands,
and by an Act of Assembly of the Colony 1679, all their encroaching Grants were
vacated. 3. Upon several pretended Complaints their Charter was vacated in
Chancery 1684, but they obtai^ed a new and more perfect Charter Anno 1691. 4.
Governor Shute Anno 1722 carried Home seven Articles of Complaints concerning
their House of Repres^ntatives encroaching upon (...) Prerogative; by their
Agent in England* they submis^ively g^ve up five of these Articles, and the
general Assembly accepted of an explanatory Charter, whereby the other two
Articles were explained away; all these shall be related more at large in their
proper Place. 5. Several bubling Banks and Schemes designed to defraud
Creditors and others, by depreciating the Currency in New England, being on
Foot, and not suppressed by the proper Legislature, perhaps because many of
their leading Membe^s were concerned; several worthy Gentlemen applied Home for
Redress, and obtained Anno 1741 An Act of Pa^liament against unwarrantable
Schemes in America.

Upwards of thirty Years since, upon some Complaints concerning the Colonies,
particularly of South Carolina; the Court of Great Britain judged, that it
might be for the general British Interest, to have all Charter and Proprietary
Governments vacated by Act of Parliament, and accordingly a Bill was brought
into the House of Commons; but the New England Agent Dummer by an ingenious
Piece which he published at that Time giving the true State of the Colonies, by
his Vigilance, Assiduity, proper Solicitations and personal Address, and
Interest with some of the leading Men, occasioned the Bill to be dropped.

The vacating of all Charter and Proprietary Governments is not the ultimate
Chastisement that may be used with delinquent Colonies; the Parliament of
Great Britain may abridge them of many valuable Privileges which they enjoy at
present; as happened in an Affair relating to Ireland; the Parliament of Great
Britain Anno 1720 passed an Act for the better securing the Dependence of the
Kingdom of Ireland upon the Crown of Great Britain: Therefore the Colonies
ought to be circumspect, and not offend their Mother Country; as for Instance,
1. In abusing that Privilege which our Colonies have of raising Taxes and
assessing of themselves; South Carolina had not supplied the nec^ssary Charges
of Government, for four Years preceding Anno 1731; New Hampshire for five
Years preceding Anno 1736. 2. In Time of Peace emitting of depreciating
public Bills of Credit for a Medium of Trade and Commerce, and making them
legal Tenders; this is equivalent to Coinage (and of a base Standard) a
Prerogative of the Crown.

Our British American Colonies have many valuable Privileges. 1. Enacting of
their own Laws, with Condition of their not being repugnant to the Laws of
Great Britain, but may be otherways various from them. 2. Raising their own
Taxes. 3. No Act of the British Parliament made since the first settling of our
Colonies, exten^s to the Colonies, unless expressly extended in the British Act
of Parliament. 4. No private Purchase from the Indians shall be valid (formerly
much Deceit and Cheat has been discovered in these Purchases, tending to
alienate the Indians from the British Interest) without the Confirmation of the
Governor and Council in some Coloni^s, and without the Approbation of the
Legislature in the otherColonies. There are Lands in some of our Plantations,
where it is not possible to show any Indian Conveyance, (...) they were
Derelicts; such are all our West India Island Settlements, no Indians being
there at our first landing: The ^ossessors who were prior to Patent or King's
commissioned Governor, have no other Title to their Lands but long Possession,
a Sort of Prescription; thus the old Setlers of New Hampshire hold their Lands,
it being supposed that Mr. Mason had neglected or relinquished his Grant.

In the Beginning of our Colony Grants, there was only one House of In Saxon
Times the Parliament did not consist of two distinct Houses; the Peers being
Freeholders of great Territories, were deemed the hereditary Representatives of
their Vassals and Tenants: In the Scots Parliament, there ever was only one
House, consisting of three States, viz. The Peers, the Commissioners or
Representatives of Shires or Counties, and the Commissioners for Boroughs; they
all vo^^ed together indifferently, but in Committees and the like, the
Pr^por^tion of Committee Men from each, was limited.
Legislature; the Governor or President, the Council or Assistants, and the
Representatives voted together. At present in Conformity to our Legislature in
Great Britain, they consist of three separate Negatives; thus, by the Governor,
representing the King, the Colonies are Monarchial; by a Council they are
Aristocratical; by a House of Representatives or Delegates from the People,
they are Democratical: These Three are distinct and independent of one another,
and the Colonies enjoy the Conveniences of each of these Forms of Government,
without their Inconveniences, the several Negatives being Checks upon one
another. The Concurrence of these three Forms of Governments, seems to be the
highest Perfection that human Civil Government can atta^n to in Times of In
Times of War, perhaps a Dictatorial Power in one proper (...), would be
requisi^e, upon Account of Dispatch and Secrecy, but accou^^able ^o the three
Negatives. This was the Practice amongst many of the ancient polite Nations,
particularly amongst the R^mans; the only I^co^ve^ie^cy seems to be, lest, this
Dictator in the Height of his Power and Glory, should render himself a
perpetual Di^tator, as Julius C^s^r did, and introduce a Monarchial Tyranny.

Both i^ Ti^es of Peace and War; if a continued Succession of knowing and
virtuous Princes were possible in Nature; absolute Monarchy would be the
Perfection of Civil Government, because of the Wisdom, Secresy and Dispatch
that would attend it; bu^ as no such Race of Men, are to be found upon Earth, a
limited Monarchy is eligible. The Political Constitution, like the Human, is
ticklish; and in the Hands of a s^l^ Fool, would suffer much; there are but few
who understand politic Health and Sickness.


Peace with the neighboring States; if it did not sound too profane, by making
too free with the mystical Expressions of our Religion, I should call it a
Trinity in Unity.

The second Negative in our Legislatures, differs from that of Great Britain.
In Great Britain it is an Hereditary Nobility, and other great Officers, where
any considerable Trust attends, are great Incitements to good Actions in
Progenitors, who are ambitious of entailing Honors upon their own Memory or
Posterity; but in Nature seem absurd, as if Wisdom were heredit^ry. This does
not hold good as to hereditary Monarchs, (...) Elections of a Monarch would put
the Nation in most (...).
hereditary Horse of Lords, in our American Settlements, the Members of their
Councils so called, are only temporary, appointed by the Court of Great Britain
durante Beneplacito, or by annual Elections in some of our Colonies. In
Carolina at first the^e was designed an hereditary second Negative (in Place of
a Council) of Palatines and Cassiques, Lords of large Manors, this is dropped.

There are a few Irregularities or Exceptions from these three Negatives in
some of our Colonies, which shall be taken particular Notice of, in the proper
Sections, and doubtless in Time will be rectified. 1. In Connecticut and
Rhode Island their Elective Governor has no Negative. 2. In Pennsylvania the
Council has no Negative. 3. In Massachusetts Bay, the Council is not
independa^t; it is obnoxious to the Caprice of a Governor's Negative, and to
the Humor of the House of Representatives who elect them: In some Elections
the Council and Representatives vote together.

Notwithstanding of a Colony Assembly's being upon the Point of dissolving in
Course, according to their several and various municipal Laws; the Governors
^issolve them in Form, as in Great Britain, to keep up the Prerogative of the
Crown.

In Proprietary Colonies, where the Proprietors have retained the Jurisdiction,
the Proprietors nominate the Governor, with the Approbation of the King in
Council. Excepting in Proprietary and Charter Colonies all Patents for Lands
are in the King's Name, Test hi^ Excellency in Council.

The municipal Laws, or Laws peculiar to the several Colonies are too various
and variable, as well as bulky to be inserted in a Summary; they are remitted
Home from Time to Time, and are to be found in the Plantat^on-Offices in
London; excepting those of the Proprietary and Charter Governments; (...) their
Patents they are not obliged (this was an origin^l Defect in such Pate^^s, and
may be rectified by Act of Parliament) to transmit them to the Crown for
Approba^ion or Disallowance. The Laws of a Colony may be various from, but not
r^pugnant to the Laws of Great Britain.

In our Colonies, the Courts of Judicatur^ are variou^, but all of the same
Nature with the Courts in England; viz. Chancery (in the Charter Governments
Ius and Aequum are in the same Court) Common Law, Probate of Wills and
Appurtenances; a Court of Vice-Admiralty for Sea-Affairs; and a Iusticiary
Court of Admiralty, by Q. Anne's Commission Tertio Regni, pursuant to an Act of
Parliament 11, 12 Gul. III, called, An Act for the more effectual Suppression
of Piracy; consisting at least of seven of the nominated from their Offices,
and for Want of that Number complete, any Three of the nominated may appoint a
Compliment.

Cases in Chancery, and common Law may be carried Home by Appeal or Petition to
the King in Council; from thence it is referred to the Lords of the Committee
There are ^our standing Committees of Council. 1. For foreign Affairs, 2.
Admiralty and Navy, 3. Trade and Plantations, 4. Grievances; in France these
several Departments, are called distinct Councils.
of Council for Plantation-Affairs; from this Committee of Council, it is
referred or sent down to the Lords Commissioners for Trade and Plantations,
this last Board frequently take the Advice of the Attorney and
Sollicitor-General; and Reports are returned back from one Board to another,
and issued by the King in Council.

The Officers of the Customs Receiving or Preventive, are immediately under the
Direction of the Commissioners of the Customs in Great Britain.

The Commission of Vice Admiral to our Plantation-Governors gives no Command
a-float; their Jurisdiction is only, relating to Wrecks, etc. cast on Shore, to
low Water Mark; being of the same Nature with the several Vice-Admirals along
the Coast in Great Britain.

Every King's Commission with Instructions to a Governor in the Plantations; is
a Sort of Charter to that Colony or Province, durante Beneplacito.

Our Plantation Governors, have no Power without Orders from the Court of
Great Britain, to grant Letters of Reprisals. The French and Dutch Governors
have thisPower.

All our Plantation-Governors are liable to be called to Account (on
Complaints) at the King's Bench Bar in Westminster; for Instance Douglass of
the Leeward Islands, Anno 1716, and Lowther of Barbados 1720.

Formerly Governors, if Court-Favourites, had at Times Plurality of Governments
(as some Clergymen Favorites of leading Men, have Plurality of Benefices, Lord
Willoughbay was Governor of Barbados and the Leeward Islands; Sir Edmond
Andros, in the Reign of James II, was Governor of all New England, New York,
and the Iersies; Lord Bellamont was Governor of New York, Massachusetts Bay,
and New Hampshire: It is not so at present, except in the two distinct
Governments of Pensylvania, therefore under one Governor.

In the Colonies their Revenue-Acts are generally annual; in Iamaica, they are
temporary, but of a long Period; in a few of the Colonies there are some
perpetual Taxes; thus in Barbados and Leeward Islands the four and half per Ct.
upon Produce exported, and in Virginia 2 s. per Hogshead Tobacco. All their
Provincial Treasurers are appointed by their own Assemblies; excepting the four
and half per Ct. in Barbados and the Leeward-Islands; the King's Collectors
are the Receivers, and also receive the Plantation Duties laid on by Act of
Parliament 1673, as not appropriated for the Use of the Treasuries of the
several Plantations, but at the King's Disposal: The 1 d. per Ct. upon Tobacco
of Virginia and Maryland is appropriated for the Benefit of the College or
Seminary at Williamsburg.

In the several Colonies their general Revenue is by a Tax of some Pence in the
Pound, upon the Principal of real Estate, personal Estate, and Faculty; and a
Pol-Tax, Imposts, and Excises.

The Produce for Export in the several Colonies shall be enumerated in the
proper Sections. Upon our first Discoveries of America, we found no Horses,
Asses, Cows, Sheep, and Swine. In the Inland Parts of the Continent, especially
upon the Misissippi, there was Plenty of Buffaloes, and in the West India
Islands, several Sorts of Wild Hog Natives; every where much Deer, and the
American Stag or Buck-Moose, which differ from the German Elke, by its branched
Brow Antlers: Variety of Geese, of Ducks, and of wild Fowl called Gibier by the
French.

In the Colonies of the several European Nations, they have a national
exclusive Commerce amongst themselves and with their Mother-Countries. St.
Thomas, a Danish Settlement only, admits of a free general Trade. The French
and Dutch Governors (perhaps by a private Instruction from their Courts at
Home, and as a considerable Perquisite, do at Times allow, or connive at a
foreign Importation of Necessaries (Provisions, Lumber, Horses, black Cattle,
etc.) with which they cannot otherways be accomodated, and are much in Want of.

By Act of Parliament Anno School, no Vessels, unless registered in England,
Ireland or the Plantations (by the Union, Scotland is included) upon Oath that
they were built there (foreign Prizes are also qualified) and that no Foreigner
is directly or indirectly concerned.

Plantation Produce or Goods as enumerated (commonly called enumerated Goods)
by several Acts of Parliament, are not to be carried, but to Great Britain; and
Plantation Bonds are given, and a Certificate to be returned to the Officers of
the Shipping Ports, of their being loaded accordingly. The enumerated Goods are
naval Stores, viz. Pitch, Tar, Turpentine, Masts, Yards, and Bowsprihts;
Sugars, Molasses, Cotton-Wool, Indigo, Ginger, Dying-Woods, Rice, Beaver, and
other Furs, Copper Oar. Rice and Sugars by late Acts of Parliament, are
indulged under certain Conditions (too long to be enumerated in a Summary) to
be carried to certain foreign Parts: Logwood is not the Growth or Produce of
our Plantations, and by the Construction of the Commissioners of the Customs,
is exempted from being an enumerated Commodity, (as we have no Logwood the
Growth of our Plantations) being imported from the Spanish West Indies to our
Colonies and re-exported to Europe.

By an Act of the Parliament of England Anno 1673, there are imposed
Plantation-Duties (Produce carried from one Colony to another) upon certain
enumerated Goods for a genera l national Use, not for the particular Colony.
viz. s. d. d. Muscovado Sugars 1.6 pr Ct. with. Tobacco 1. pr lb. White Do. 5.
Cotton half 1. Ginger 1. Indigo 2. Dying Woods.6. Coco Nuts 1. that upon
Tobacco has been appropriated to the College in Virginia at Williamsburg.

Our North America Trade to Great Britain, is, the enumerated Commodities above
mentioned, Pig Iron, and Fish Oil, sometimes Wheat and Staves to Ireland. To
Spain, Portugal, and Italy, dried Cod-Fish. To the West India Islands, Lumber,
Refuse dried Fish, salt Beef and Pork, Butter; and Cheese, Flower, Horses and
Live Stock, the Returns from the West India Islands, are, Sugar, Molasses, Rum,
Cotton, Indigo, Dye-Woods, Spanish Money, and Cocoa: Sugar, Rum, Tobacco, and
Chocolate are much used in our Colonies.

Anno 1729 The Attorney and Solicitor General, gave it as their public
Opinion, that a Negro Slave coming to Europe, or baptized any where, does not
make him free.

In our Colonies It is not advisable in any Case religious or civil, though for
the better, to make Alterations in any Affair where the Populace have acquired
a general standing Prejudice (the Reformation from the Church of R^m^ about two
Centuries since, is an Exception) imbibed from their Infancy, or first habitual
Way of thinking. The Solar Years and Lun^r Months according to the O. S. are
not within a popular Ken, and being very erroneous, are perhaps at present,
under the Consideration of the British Legislature, to be rectified* Measures
and Weights, might be ascertained for all Nat^o^s upon our Earth, and prevent
much puzzling by Reductions, by ^aking the fixed Length of a Pendulum, that
vibrates Second^ in any noted Place v. g. in London or Paris, and allowing for
the small Variations, easily investigated for some very distant Latitudes, v.
g. a P^ndulum vibrating Seconds at Po^^o B^ll^ near the Equ^tor, is found to
differ one Line, or the 12th Part of an Inch, from that at Paris: Let this
Pendulum's Length be called A MEASURE, and this divided into Decimals (being
the most easy and general Way of expressing Fractions* be called TENTHS, and
this subdivided into Tenth^, call HUNDREDS: Thus all Measures might be reduced
to three Denominations* as in England Money is reduced to Pounds, Shillings,
and P^nce: Contentive Measures are easily reduced, upon this Foundation* to a
like Certainty: Such a Vessel of such certain Dimensions, containing a certain
Quantity of sincere Rain Water (which is nearly the same all over the Earth)
may be called a POUND, and this mult^plied or divided may be called by some
fixed Denominations of Weights.
Computations of all Kinds, Weights and Measures are the same as in England.

Our Settlements upon the Easterly Side of North America, are much colder in
Winter, and much hotter in Summer, than the same Latitudes, in the Westerly or
European Side of the other vast Continent; the Globe of our Earth may be said
to consist of two large Continents viz. the ancient Continent of Europe Asia
and Africa, and the new Continent called America. Every Man who h^s resided
some Time in Europe, and some Time in North America, is personally sensible of
this: in Europe Northern Fisheries, for Instance, Cod and Salmon extend
Southward to 51 d. N. Lat. in North America they extend no further than 41 d.
N. Lat.

Mariners observe, that in their Passages between Europe and America, Winds are
The Trade Wi^d^ may be reckoned to extend 30 d. each Side of the Equator being
further than the common formal technical Way of Reckoning, to the ^ropicks)
which proceeds not only from the Sun's* in his repeat^d Course, Raresation of
the Air Westward, and consequently the ^la^^ick Air na^urally expending it self
toward those Westward rar^fied Spa^es by an ^a^^erly Current; but is
complicated with another Cause (...) much a^tended to, viz. the circumambient
Air ^ear the (...), being of a less considerable specific Gravity* than (...)
co^^^^ponding Part of the Earth, it is less susceptible of the Earth's da^ly
rotatory Motion, and with Respect to the solid Earth, has an effectual Motion
Westward, that is in the Appearance of an Easterly Current of Wind. The
Westerly Winds, in Latitudes higher than 30 d. N. Latitude; are natural Eddies
of the E^sterly Trade Winds. A Northerly Wind, is the natural Tendency of a
co^densed very Elastick Air, from the Polar cold Regions, toward the rarefied
Air near the Equator. A Complication of this Current of Air, from the Northern
Polar Regions to the South; and of the Eddy of the Trade-Winds from the
Westward, makes the frequent North America Winds from North to West; and the
North-West is the most frequent, especially in the Winter Months.

In the Summertime, when the Sun is much to the Northward of the Equator, our
Northern Continent is much wa^med, and these North to West Winds gliding along
a vast warmed Continent, acquire more and more Degrees of Heat. Therefore
considering the general Current of the extratropical (retaining the classical
Terms) Winds: The vast C^ntinent of N^rt^-America being Westward of our
Settlements, our Leeward North America Settlements must be in Summer much
hotter than the European Windward Settlements in the same Latitudes.


almost three Quarters of the Year Westerly; Baron Lahontan a Canada Officer
writes, "That, the Winds from Canada to Europe are Easterly for about 100 Days
in the Year, and Westerly about 260 Days:" This with an attending Westerly
Swell or heaving of the Sea, is the Reason, that the Passages from
North America to Europe are much shorter than from Europe to North America.

In North America the dry freezing Winds are from North to West, in Europe the
dry freezing Winds are from North to East; proceeding from that great Continent
which receives and retains the Northern Effects of Cold, viz. Snow and Ice,
laying to the Westward of America, and to the Eastward of Europe; the Current
of Air gliding along, becomes more and more impregnated with the Cold, the
Terms of frigorific Particles, or of a peculiar Salt of Nitre, I leave with the
virtuoso idle notional Philosophers. The Situation of Lands occasions
considerable Differences in the Temper of the Air; the Weather in Canada is
generally in Winter colder (in Proportion to its Latitude) than in New England,
and more settled; as being surro^^^ed with Land of some Extent, and therefore
the Land Influence from all Corners of the Winds, of the same Nature; whereas
in New England to the Eastward is Water or Sea of a very different Influence
from the Land or Earth's specific Gravity or Solidity in receiving or
retaining Cold or Heat. By the Softness of the Vapor from the Water, the
Seashore is warmer than the Inland, the Sea warmer than the Shore, and the
Ocean or deep Water warmer than the Sea: Thus the Island of Great Britain and
its appertaining Islands are much warmer in Winters than the adjacent
Continent, but with this Inconveniency (a Digression) that this soft Vapor or
Damp, disposes the Inhabitants to a catarrhous or colliquative Consumption;
this Distemper, Time out of Mind, is recorded as an English Endemial Distemper.
The Situation of the various Countries as to Islands, and Head-Lands, as to
Variety of Soil, sandy Lands which retain the Heat, Morass, Swamps, and
Wood-Lands which retain Damps; these a Summary cannot enumerate, with Regard to
the Winds or Current of the Air and as to the Temper of the Air in our various
Colonies.

Georgia excepted ( Nova Scotia and Cape-Breton I do not call Colonies) our
American Colonies have been no Charge to Great Britain; a small Matter of
Artillery to some of them must be acknowledged, but without Ammunition. The
British Men of War or King's Station-Ships, of late, have been of no Use only
by their Countenance: The Commanders are either indolent, or in Collusion with
the Pursers (not long since they had the Perquisite of Pursers) take Advantage
of the Provisions of the Non-effectives, connive at their Ships being ill
manned, and upon an Exigency or when called Home, distress the Trade by pressing
Sailors: There are Exceptions, I shall only instance Sir PETER WARREN an
assiduous, faithful, good, and therefore fortunate Man. Our Provinces have
frequently grumbled upon this Account, and have lately made an Experiment by
fitting out a Province-Frigate at a great Charge in Massachusetts Bay; but for
these last two Years seem to be under the same Censure, where the Fault lies, I
shall not, at present relate.

In all our Colonies are many good, industrious, frugal, pious, and moral
Gentlemen; I hope the following, general Character of many of the Populace will
give no Offense. 1. Idleness, Intemperance, Luxury in Diet, Extravagancies in
Apparel, and an abandoned Way of Living. Our Planters, especially their
Children, when they go Home to Great Britain, distinguish themselves too much
by their Dress, and expensive Way of Living for a short Time. 2. The People of
all Colonies ( British, French, etc.) do not seem to have so much Solidity in
thinking as in Europe; but exceed the European menu peuple, as to some little
Tricks and Arts in Business acquired by Education, and a continued Practice. 3.
By importing and expending too much of Superfluities from Europe; and in some
Colonies by substituting a Paper-Currency, they impoverish themselves, and are
under a Necessity of sending their Gold and Silver, as Returns, to Europe. 4. A
present Profit prevails over a distant Interest.

To avoid Prolixity, but with Impatience, I must defer the Iniquity of a
multiplied Plantation Paper Currency to the Appendix; it is of no Benefit only
to the fraudulent Debtor, they are not ashamed to acknowledge that Equity and
natural Justice, they ought to repay the same in real Value which they
received; but they say, their Province Laws excuses and indemnifies them, by
paying any nominal Value; and that the compassionate good Creditor, must blame
himself for his Forbearance and long Credit, while Money is depreciating: That
a multiplied Paper-Currency naturally depreciates it self, I shall at present
only evince by the Instance of the Province of Massachusetts Bay, November
1747; where are about Two Millions, One Hundred Thousand Pounds current public
Bills of Credit not cancelled or burnt, whereof a small Matter is in the Hands
of the Receivers of the Taxes; the Operation is, Bills of Exchange with
Great Britain are risen to the extravagant incredible Height of One Thousand
Pound New England, for One Hundred Pound Sterling.

Timber Trees, especially White-Oaks for Ship-building, the best grow in
New England; further North they are dwarfish, and of an untoward Grain; further
South they are spungy and soft, and do not afford compass Timber.

In Countries far North the Mould is light and spungy, being much distended by
the hard long Frosts.

ARTICLE 3. The Ecclesiastical or Religious Constitution of the British
Colonies in North America.
IN all the Royal Patents and Charters of our Colonies, the principal Condition
required of the Patentees, s^ems to be the Conversion of the Indians; and ^he
Crown on the other Part conditions for the Encouragement of Settlers, a free
Profession or Liberty of Conscience: Therefore a Religion and Civil Government
in a general Sense are Iure Divino; but the various particular Churches and
States, seem to be only de Facto, because none of them have escaped
Revolutions: An Indulgence or rather a legal explicit Toleration for all
(Communions they are called) Communities of Religion which are not inconsistent
with a virtuous Life, and the Good of Society, in good Policy ought to be
allowed* the Rom^ns, a very polite People (their Ius Civil^ is practiced every
where in Europe to this Day) made the Gods (Religions) of all Nations free of
their Cit^ (...) Empire; the Dutch by an universal Toleration (but their
public ^^aces of Worship must be licensed) have become rich; the D^ssenters in
England by their Riches are a great Prop to the Protestant Establishment; being
excluded by Law from several vain idle ambitious Offices and Posts, they apply
themselves the more to Trade and Manufactures, and become generally richer than
the Churchmen. The various decent Mode^, consi^tent with Society or Humanity,
of worshipping a Supreme Being, may be tolerated; as proceeding innocently from
the Bias of Education, from the various Constitutions and Tempers of Mankind,
and Fashion^ of the Age: but all with a good Intention or Conscience.

The Differences in Religion generally amount only to this, viz. Different
People worshipping the same GOD in different Modes and Fashions: Priestcraft (I
do not mean the pious, meek, charitable Clergy) sets them by the Ears to the
Discredit of all Religion, and they make Mountains of Mole hill Differences.

Amongst all Sectaries, there is a Canker-Worm called Bigots; which put their
Sect in a ridiculous Light, they are in a tacit sullen Enmity with all Mankind
who are not of their frantic or fanatical Persuasion, they believe implicitly
in some Parson, an Idol of their own making, but not properly in GOD Almighty.


TOLERATION for all Christian Professions of Religion, is the true
Ecclesiastical Constitution of our American Colonies; the The Roman Catholics
commonly called Papists, in all well-regulated Governments, from most evident
civil political Reasons, ought to be excluded; the Constitution of their
Religion, renders them a Nuisance in Society; they have an Indulgence for Lying,
Cheating, Robbing, Murdering, and not only may, but are in Christian Duty
bound, to extirpate all Mankind who are not of their Way of thinking, they call
them Heretics: Unless the Pope (the Head and Oracle of their Religion) by some
public accepted Bull explain this Article of their Religion, Popery by the
Laws of Nature and Ius Gentium ought to be deemed, inconsistent with human
Society.

A Doctrine or Law, though iniquitous, if not put in Execution, becomes
obsolete and of no Effect, and its evil Tendency ceases; but this most
execrable Doctrine, has in a most dismal horrid Manner, frequently been put in
Execution; I shall give a few Instances. 1. The Popish Persecution of
Protestants by the Papists in England in the Reign of Queen Mary from Anno 1553
to 1557; Bishop Burn^t says that she was a good-natured Woman, but of a very
ill-natured Religion. 2. The bloody Massacre of the Hugenots by the Papists in
Paris of France. De Serres one of the best French Historians begins his Account
of this Massacre thus, O ma France! les Ch^ve^x me herissonnent, j'ay horreur
de voir sur le Theater de ton Histoire jouer une tres inhumaine tragedy. Upon
a Sunday being St. Bartholom^w's Day 1572 in the Reign of Charles IX; they took
the Opportunity of the Time when the Marriage of Henry of Bourbon King of
Navarre a Protestant, to Marguerite de Valois Sister to the King of France was
to be celebrated; most of the Princes of the Blood and Grandees of France, who
were of the Protestant or Hugenot Religion, being expected in Paris upon this
Occasion, they thought it a proper Opportunity to extirpate them by the
Surprise of a Massacre. At this Blow they massacred Ten Thousand Persons in
Paris. 3. The Popish Gun-Powder-Plot discovered Beginning of November 1605,
designed to blow up and destroy the Peers of England at that Time in Parliament
assembled: Thus they imagined to cancel one of the three Negatives of the
Englis^ Legislature. 4. The Butcherly Massacre of the Protestants in I^eland.
Anno 1641. by the Irish Papists. Many suspected, that it wa^ by the Instigation
and Direction of the Court of E^gland, at that Time making precipitate great
Advances toward the Roman Cat^^l^^k Religion.


Roman Catholic only is excepted; the Nature of our Constitution, the horrid
Principles of thatReligion, and at present the Popish Claims to our Royal
Succ^ssion, can by no Means admit of it; the Papists of Maryland Pensylvania
and Montserrat, seem to be too much indulged. By an Act of the English
Parliament incorporated with the Act of Union of Scotland and England, Anno
1707; the Church of England is, and forever hereafter shall be the established
Religion in the Territories belonging to England, viz. in the Plantations:
Therefore, the Church of England is at present, and must continue in Perpetuity
the established national Religion of the Plantations, being one of the
fundamental Articles of the Union; Earl of I -- lay a great Lawyer, upon a
certain Occasion in a Speech in the House of Lords well observed, "That there
were only two Articles of Union ^^alterable, viz. Those relating to Religion,
and the Proportion of Taxes." Antecedent to Anno 1707 it seems that a general
Toleration limited as above was the religious Establishment of our Colonies; 1.
In their Charters and Grants, there is no Preference given to the Church of
England. 2. The Act of Uniformity in the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
was prior to the Colonies in America. 3. In the Act of Uniformity, Beginning of
King Charles IId's Reign, are mentioned only "the Realm of England, Dominion of
Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed." 4. By a late Act of the British
Parliament for the naturulizing Foreigners in the Plantations; receiving the
Sacrament in any Protestant Congregation is a Qualification; therefore it did
not extend to the Plantations.

I know of no doctrinal (...) and Free Will seem to be only private Opinions,
but not a national Church Doctrine, with u^; they seem both to be Orthodox, the
first from the Omnis^^ence and Pre^cie^ce of a supreme Being, the other from
the Constitution and inward Feelings o^ Mankind: How to reconcile them is a
Mystery and not to be canvassed; here we must say with the simply good
Laplander (when questioned concerning some of ourChristian Mysteries, by a
(...) Mission^^y) GOD KNOWS.

Free Will, That all the physical and moral Evils which we perceive amongst
Mankind, proceed from the Ab^se we make of this Liberty: This Opinion seems the
most consistent, with the Good of Society.

Predestination, That every Thing comes to pass by a fatal N^^essity, in a
strict absolute Sense, is pernicious to a good Life and to Society, and
encourages an ab^ndoned wicked Life: It annihilates all Religion, if good Works
do not forward, nor bad Works hinder Salvation, the Fear of GOD and the keeping
of his Commandments are of no Effect. We must acknowledge that Predestination
in some political Views has a good Effect; this turns me into an Annotational
Digression.

There are many Things, which in a cursory, not well pointed View (as Painters
express it) seem shocking, but in a proper political View are beautiful and
unavoidably consistent with Society; I shall mention a few Instances. 1.
Predestination for military Men; Ma^omet, and Cromwell, found a vast Advantage
by this Doctrine; the M^hometans have improved this Doctrine very much amongst
their Militia, viz. If they conquer they have Profit and Glory in this World,
if killed in Battle, (...) have Paradise in the next. 2. A dissolute
thoughtless Way of Life, but so regulated, as not to be enormous and
prejudicial to Peace and good Neighborhood; without this tacit Allowance, we
should be at a Loss for a sufficient Number of Soldiers and Sailors upon
Occasion. 3. Pinching of the very mean Laborers or working People, by lowering
or keeping their Wages much under; hereby our Merchants can afford in foreign
Markets to undersell the Merchants of other Countries, and consequently vent
more of their Produce or Manufacture: Besides, let us suppose, their Employers
in Generosity and Beneficence to allow more Wages, than are merely sufficient
to provide them the Necessaries of Life, perhaps, some few of them, may lay up
this Surplus, and in a short Time aspire higher than this their mean Labor,
thus their Labor is lost; but the greatest Part would idle away so much Time
(a Day or two in the Week lost to the public Good) as this Surplus could
supply with Necessaries, to the lessening of our Manufacturies, etc. 4.
Encouraging of a great Consumption of British Goods by Luxury and extravagant
Equipage in our Colonies, is thought by some wrong-headed Men to be a Benef^t
to the Mother Country: this is a grand M^stake, because Industry and Frugality
in all Subservients, i^ requisite, othe^ways they cannot long afford to
continue this Consumption reckoned a Benefit to Great Britain. 5. Running in
Debt produces depreciating Money-making Ass -- lies (having secured the real
Value of their own usual Salaries and Wages toward Romantic etc. Expeditions
or any Paper-Money requiring Affair; and procures Volunteers for such
Expeditions by (...) Debtors from theirCreditors, thus, and by other (I must
not say (...)) Acts for the Relief of Debtor^, hurt Creditors and the Credit of
the Country very much.


Difference between the Laity of the Church of England, and the Laity of the
three Deno^^nations of Protestant Dissenters; who are thus distinguished from
other Dissenters, because they take out Licenses for their Meetings or
religious Assemblies in England, I mean the Presbyterians, Independents, and
Anabaptists* these last at present seem to differ from the others only in the
Manner and Age proper to receive Baptism. My being prolix in this Point, is
designed not to dictate, but to contribute toward conciliating their
Affections to one another; their doctrinal Religion is the same, their
Establishment or legal Toleration the same; they differ only nominally, or in
Denominations; if any of these Denominations should be angry with me, I give
them this short anticipating Answer, I am independent and of no Party, but that
of Truth.

The Differences in the Modes of BAPTISM are not essential; my Voucher is the
Bishop of London our Diocesian, noted by his printed pious super-excellent
Pastoral Letters; in a Letter to the Reverend Mr. Miles, a Rector of the Church
of England in Boston, dated Fulham Sept. 3. 1724. I have been informed within
these few Days, by a Bishop who had a Letter from Boston, that some of the
Ministers there, begin the Dispute about the Validity and Invalidity of
Baptism; administered by Persons not episcopally ordained. This was advanced in
England some Years ago, by the Nonjurors, Enemies of the Protestant Religion
and present Government. The Bishops in Convocation then assembled, set forth a
Paper, proving and declaring, that Baptism by Water in the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, by what Hand soever administered or however irregular, is
not to be repeated: This Doctrine, the great Patrons of our Church maintained
against the Puritans in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James I.
Considering the Views wit^ which this Doctrine has been lately advanced here,
by the Nonjurors, if any Missionary shall renew this Controversy, and advance
the same, I shall esteem him an Enemy to the Church of England, and the
Protestant Succession, and shall deal with him accordingly. Dodwel carried this
Affair of Baptism to a ridiculous Height, viz. That the Souls of Men were
naturally mortal, but Episcopal Baptism makes them immortal.

The Differences in offering up their PRAYERS, to the Supreme Being are not
essential; whether, 1. By Liturgy, a printed Form, called in the Church of
England, Common Prayer. 2. Memoriter, though generally composed by some
Directory, or Custom, or Habit; as amongst the three Denominations of
Protestant Dissenters. 3. Random extempore Prayers of the Sober-minded; I do
not mean the profane enthusiastic Prayers of New-Lights and others, which they
impiously call, Praying as the Spirit shall give them Utterance; Inspirations
are ceased* 4. Mental Prayers, these are called Qui^tists, such are the English
Quakers, the Dutch Mennists or Mennonites, the Spanish, French, and Italian
Molinists, they are of Opinion that in our Devotions, we are to r^tire our
Minds from all Exteriors, and sink into a pious Frame of Silence; that using of
Words or attending to Words, interrupts Devotion, and they reduce all the
Exercise of Religion to this Simplicity of Mind: In short, Quietists are of
Opinion, that the great GOD ought to be adored in Silence and Admiration; that
Words and Ceremonies divert true Devotion, to material Sounds and Objects. Our
Quakers say, that their silent Meetings are the most edifying. A strict
Uniformity in Religion does not people a Country, but depopulates, and
particularly sends away the best of their People, the industrious peaceable
conscientious Dissenters. The Revocation of the Edict of Nantz hurt France very
much by sending away many of their best Ma^ufacturers and Artificers; to the
great Benefit of Great Britain and Holland, where an extensive compassionate
charitable Toleration is established by Laws and Plakka^ts.

3. In our Colonies, People of all Religions are under the coercive Power of
the Civil Government; therefore at present, any other Government in the several
Denominations of Churches, might have the bad Effect of Imperium in Imperio, i.
e. Confusion: In Fact, in our Plan^ations, at this Time, there is no real
Provincial Church Government, and consequently do not differ in this Respect;
the Bishop's Commissary is only a nominal Office; the annual Meetings of the
Independent or Congregational Clergy, in Boston End of May at the Solemnity of
the Election of a Provincial Council; and the yearly Pilgrimage of some
Quakers, are only upon a laudable friendly Account. Perhaps a Superintendant of
the Missionaries from the Society of 1701, might have a good Effect; with a
Power, and Instructions, to remove Missionaries from one Station to another, as
the Interest of propagating the Gospel might require. As an Historian, every
Thing is in my Province. Some who do not understand Propriety of Characters,
think, I ought not to mention the Clergy; but as a Writer of History, I cannot
avoid it, without being reckoned deficient, and partial in the Affairs of the
Clergy.

4. The Vestments of the Clergy are not to be faulted: They are not essential
to Religion; all Communions seem to affect something peculiar in this Respect;
the Gown, Cas^ock, Girdle, Rose, Surplice, etc. of the Church of England; the
plain black Gown of the Officiating Clergy in Geneva, Switzerland, and Hugenots
of France; the black Gown with Frogs in the Country Ministers of Scotland; the
black Cloak of the Independants; the antiquated Habit of the Quakers,
particularly of their Exhorters.

Perhaps, at present, many Religions, are so loaded with verbal Differences or
Controversies, and with enthusiastic devotional Terms; that they are become an
Affair not of Piety, Sincerity and Truth, but a Jumble of insignificant
technical Words and Cant-Phrases: As formerly, instead of true solid Philosophy
and natural History, there was in the Schools only a pedantick metaphysical
Iargon, which by this Time has received a notable Reformation; so I doubt not,
that Religion in Time may admit of the like Purity and Simplicity.

In Great Britain there are three distinct Societies for propagating Christian
Protestant Knowledge or Religion in foreign Parts, incorporated by Royal
Charters.

1. Anno 1649. The Parliament of England, granted a Charter to a President and
Society, for propagating the Gospel in New England; at the Restoration it was
laid aside, but by Solicitation a newCharter was granted 14 Car. II. February
7, to a Society or Company for propagating the Gospel in New England, and Parts
adjacent in America, the Number of Members not to exceed 45, and the Survivers
to supply Vacancies; they appoint Commissioners in New England to manage
Affairs there: This Charity has been helpful to some of the Preachers in
New England who have small Provision.

2. Anno 1709 by Charter there was established in Scotland a Society for
propagating Christian Knowledge amongst the Highlanders; 4 Geor. I. their
Charter was extended to all Infidel Countries beyond Seas; they have a
considerable Fund, they have had a Missionary upon the New England Western
Frontiers, and another upon its Eastern Frontiers; the laborious Mr. Brainard,
lately dead, was their Missionary amongst the Indians upon the Northern
Frontiers of Pensylvania and the Iersies.

3. A Society for propagating the Gospel in foreign Parts, established by
Charter June 16. Anno 1701, their certain Fund is very small, they depend upon
Subscriptions and casual Donations; their subscribing and corresponding Members
at present, are upwards of 5,000; in the American Colonies, near 60
Missionaries; their annual Expense exceeds 4,000 L. St. We may find by their
Charter, by their annual Society-Sermons, and by the yearly Narratives of the
Progress of thi^ Society; that the principal Design is to propagate Christian
Knowledge, that the Indians may come to the Knowledge of CHRIST; to preach the
Gospel to the Heathen; the Care of the Indians bordering upon our Settlements,
and such like Expressions: A secondary Design is, to officiate where there is
no Provision, or only a small Provision for a Gospel Ministry. Many good Things
were originally intended by this Charter, and doubtless the same good
Intentions continue with the Society; but in all public distant Affairs the
Managers at Home may be imposed upon: here I beg Leave of the Missionaries, as
an Historian to relate Matters of Fact; if any Missionary thinks that I deviate
from the Truth, he may correct me, and I shall be more explicit and particular
in the Appendix. The Remarks which I shall make at present are 1. The
Missionaries do not concern themselves with the Conversions of the Indians or
Heathen; the Missionaries of Albany in the Province of New York, have at Times
visited the Mohawks. 2. Instead of being sent to reside and serve their
Missions in our out Town new Settlements (where, in the Words of their Charter)
"the Provision for Ministers is very mean, or are wholly destitute and
unprovided of a Maintenance for Ministers, and the public Worship of GOD,"
they are sent to the Capitals, richest, and best civilized Towns of our
Provinces; as if the Design and Institution were only to bring over the
tolerated sober, civilized Dissenters, to the Formality of saying their Prayers
I do not intend to derogate from the Liturgy or Common Prayer of the Church of
England, from their Vestments, and other Deco^ations and Ceremonies (which some
Puritans call Ecclesiastical (...) from th^^r Fasts and Festivals. Because 1.
So much of the Roman Breviaries and Ceremonies, were to be retained, as were
consistent with the Reformation; that the Transitus or Change with the Vulgar
might be more easily complied with. 2. Those of the Confession of Ausbury, and
Heidelb^^g in G^^many, the (...) of France, the Dutch established Church, and^
have printed ^orm^ (...) Prayer, and a fixed Psalmody. 3. The Greek and
Arm^nian Churches tolerated in the Turkish and Persian Dominions, must have
vanis^ed many Centuries ago, if it had not been for the outward Show of the
Vestments of their Clergy, Decorations of their Churches, their Fasts and
Festivals. 4. To the Westminster Presbyt^rian Confession of Faith, is a^nexed a
Directory for the public Worship of GOD, amongst other Things the sev^^al Heads
to be observed in their public Prayers are directed.
Liturgy-Fashion. In the Colony of Rhode Island, discreet able Missionaries are
requisite.

The British Missionaries of the three distinct Societies, are much d^ficient,
when compared with the Missionaries of other Nations amongst the Heathen. 1.
For many Years last past, we have frequent Accounts of many numerous
Conversions of the Heathen in the East Indies by the Danish Christian
Protestant Missionaries* which not only propagates our Christian Religion, but
i^ a political View brings over the Aborigines and secures them in a national
Interest. 2. The French Missionaries in Canada are indef^tigable, and thereby
serve the Interest of France, equally with that of Christianity. 3. The Popish
Missionaries in China from several European Nations, by their Mathematical
Ingenuity, and their Omnia Omnibus, have been very useful to Christianity.

A DIGRESSION Concerning the Settling of Colonies in general; with an Utopian
Amusement, or loose Proposals, toward regulating the British Colonies in the
North Continent of America.
It is a common but mistaken Notion, that sending abroad Colonies, weakens the
Mother Country: Spain is generally adduced for the Instance; but Spain being
ill peopled does not proceed from thence, it is from their native Sloth, from
driving all the Moors out of that Country, from a rigorous Inquisition in
religious Affairs, from vast Numbers of Friars and Nuns who do not labor, and
who are not allowed to propagate their Species, for this Reason, and from the
Popes being Landlords only for Life; the Popes Dominions in Italy are almost
desolate of People, but not from sending out of Colonies; they have no Colonies.

The Grandeur of Phoenicea, Greece, and Rome, was much owing to their Colonies;
they made no Complaints of their Colonies depopulating their respective
Mother-Countries. The many and large Dutch Colonies in the East Indies, do not
depopulate Holland, but are the chief Foundation of their Wealth. How vastly
rich, must France have been in a very short Time, if the good Cardinal Flury's
Scheme of Trade and Colonies had been followed, in place of their idle
Romantic Land-Conquests in Europe.

The People sent from Great Britain and their Progeny make vastly more
profitable Returns, than they could possibly have done by their Labor at Home:
I do not m^an Idlers and Soldiers sent only for the Defense of unnecessarily
multiplied Colonies; this seems to be bad Policy, by exhausting their
Mother Country both of Men and Money. If any neighboring foreign Settlement
becomes noxious, let us demolish or dismantle it, when in our Power; and
prevent, by Treaty or Force any future Settlement; this will be sufficient and
profitable.

The Nations of Great Britain are not a numerous People, and therefore cannot
swarm so much (in Allusion to Bees) as some other Countries of Europe: We have
found and do practice two considerable Expedients, to supply this Defect. 1.
Importing and naturalizing of Foreigners; witness the late incredible Growth of
the Province of Pensylvania, from the Importation of Palatines and
Strasb^rghers from Germany. By an Act of P^rliament, any Foreigners who after
the 1st of July 1740* shall reside in any of his Majesty's Colonies seven Years
or more, without being absent above two Months at a Time from the Colonies, and
shall bring a Certificate of his having received the Sacrament within three
Months in some Protestant Congregation, and of taking the Oaths to the
Government before a Justice, and registering the same, shall be deemed as
natural-born Subject. By an Act of Parliament 1740, every foreign Seaman who
shall after 1st Ian. 1739, 40, have served during the War, on board any British
Man of War, Merchant Ship, or Privat^er for two Years, shall be deemed a
natural born Subject of Great Britain, and shall enjoy all Privileges as an
actual Native of Great Britain with some Exceptions as to Offices of Trust. 2.
Importing and employing of Slaves from Africa* in the West India or
Sugar-Islands, and in the Southern District of the British Colonies in
North America, they are about 300,000, at the Charge of about 30 s. St. per An.
per Head: These Negro Slaves are employed in the Produce of all our Sugars,
Tobacco, Rice, and many other valuable Commoditi^s.

The Discouragements and Hindrances of the Growth of our Plantations, which
require to be remedied, are all IMPRESSES, because hitherto our Plantations
have no spare Hands. 1. Inlisting of Landmen as Soldiers to serve without their
several Provinces or Colonies: All the Colonies want more People, and Whites,
Natives of America, do not well bear Transplantation; of the two Companies sent
from Massachusetts Bay in New England many Years ago for the Relief of Iamaica,
not above 5 or 6 returned; of the 500 Men sent to Cuba Expeditions, not
exceeding 50 Men returned; of the 4000 Men Volunteers upon the Expe^ition to
Louis^ourg, o^e Half died of Sicknesses; and they who returned, came Home with
a Habit of Idleness, and generally consumed more than they earned, and
consequently were worse than dead: Inlistments to be allowed only occasio^a^^y
in Case^ of Invasions or Insurrections in the neighboring Provinces. 2.
Impressing of Seamen for the Servi^^ of the Navy, this prevents the Increase of
Shipping and Seamen in the Colonies, and occasionally makes Ri^^s and dangerous
Tumults; out of many Instances I shall mention one which lately happened at
Boston in New England, Nov. 17. Anno 1747, Commodore Mr. (...) Commander,
perhaps may be (...) the future Histories of (...) insulting the Government
(...)

An occasional short Character of him may be agreeable. He is of obscure
Pa^entage, in his Youth served aboard the Navy in the meanest Stations, and
from some unaccountable Whim or Humor of some of the Officers (thus some
Ladies take a Liking or Fancy to a Monkey, Lap Dog, or Parrot) at present in
high Stations, and some Smattering in the Engineering Business; he is arrived
to be a Warrant Commodore in America, where, like a Beggar on Horseback, he
rides unmercifully; a Succession of such Commodores would contribute to
alienate the Aflections of the Colonies from their Mother Country; such petty
Tyrants in the Colonies answer no Intention.

This Gentleman (a Gentleman by Office, not by Birth) has for many Years been
of a valetudinary Constitution, a Distemperature of the Nerves (I do not mean
ludicrous) which sometimes seizes his Bowels by violent Cholicks, sometimes his
Head with a Kind of Fury or Frenzy: His Courage is not genuine and true, but a
Sort of Frenzy, witness his ill conducted, therefore unsuccessful Expeditions
against La Guira and Port^ Cavallo in New-Spain, Anno 1743: This Foible renders
him naturally incapable of any chief Command, but qualifies him to act under
Direction, pointing his Courage right, as Master of a Fire-Ship, or as a
private Captain, upon some desperate Attempt, or forlorn Hope. Madmen will run
into the greatest general Dangers, but at the Frown of their Keeper, or austere
Threatening of any single Person, are intimidated; thus our Commodore dreads any
private Challenge, as appears by Vouchers which may be produced. What I now
write, I hope will not be construed as Scurrility but as seasonable and
important Truths.

His present State, is; Rash, inconstant, valetudinary Friendship, hated by the
common Sailors, and not beloved by his best Officers, laboriously indefatigable
in running too and fro, and in expending of Paper; true Symptoms of Madness.
This genuine Character of our present Commodore, in Contrast, gives a grand
Relievo to the universally acknowledged good Character of our late Commodore
Sir Peter Warr^n, a Gentleman of paternal Estate, naturally good and humane,
always friendly to Trade, benevolent and beloved by his Officers and common
Sailors, assiduous and constant, therefore successful and fortunate. Mr. K --
l^^ is very apt to misplace his Application; we have a plain Instance of this,
last Summer, while he resided in Command at Louis^ourg; instead of blocking up
the Mouth of Canada-R^ver, to prevent Supplies being sent to Canada, at that
Time much in Want of Stores, and preventing the Fr^nch Cod-Fishery in the
Northern Harbour^ of N^wfoundland; he busied himself in small Concerns which
properly belonged to some inferior Officers, viz. Cleaning the (...) of
L^uisbourg, the Business of Scavangers; disc^^li^ing the Tippling Houses, the
Affair of orderly S^rje^nts, inspecting and distressing of our Coasting Vessels
that carri^^ ^ive Stock, Liquors, and other Provisions for the Comfort of the
Garrison, this mig^t have been delegated to the Naval Officers.

I shall give a few Instances of his Madness and bad Conduct. 1. In Ant^goa he
impressed all the Men of Capt. Purcel's Private^r, which had been hired by the
Island for the Protection of their Trade, and made a Property of the Vessel;
the Owners were afterward^ upon Complaint Home, reimbursed the Value. 2. His
insulting the Government and Forts of Barbados, and the Custom-House Office
there. 3. The La Guira and Porto Cavallo unsuccessful Affair, with the Loss of
many Men, and great Damage of the King's Ships. 4. Last Summer instead of
cleaning his Ships when at Bos^^n (the properest and most convenient of all the
Colonies for that Use) he carried them to Annapolis in Nova Scotia, but because
the Officers of the Garrison did not do him the Honors which he expected,
pretending the Tides were too slack, he returned to Louisbourg. 5. This ^utumn
1747 he left the Trade of the Southern District of the British North ^^^rica
exposed to the Enemy's Privateers (they took several of our Vessels) by
ordering the Station-Ships of Carolina and Virginia to ^ende^vous at Boston, to
form a Fleet of Parad^ or Vanity for the Commodore; if there had been a
Necessity for their leaving their Station^* they might notwithstanding have
continued longer in their Stations and have sailed directly for the West India
Islands, what small Repairs they wanted might have been done there. 6. His
unprecedented Impress Nov. 17. of Ship Builder's Apprentices in their ^abour of
Rafting, and whole Crews of Merchant-Ships outward bound and cleared out,
without leaving any of his own Men on Board to take Care of the Interest
(impressing of Idlers and of some Sailors from the inward bound Trade, leaving
proper Persons a^oard to take Care of the Interest, is sometimes connived at,
though in it self not legal) thus Trade both outward and inward was wholly
interrupted, an^ the Demurrage or Damage to the Merchant amounted to many
Thousand Pounds. If Commodore Kn -- l^^ had had the least Degree of Discretion,
he would not have attempted such a rigorous unprecedent Impress in New England
which had already furnis^^d, much above their Quota and Ability, Numbers of Men
to distress the common Enemy: Considering that not long since, a Pr^ss (...)
had murdered two Men in Boston, and still recent in Memory; such an Impress
must unavoidably occasion a furious Mob: Considering that this dangerou^
Experimen^ was made, while the worthy Capt. (...), late of the Warwi^k, now of
the C^nterb^ry, and many other O^^icers were as^ore, a sacrifice to the Fury of
the Tumult; [(...) Way of Reprizal they were seized by the Mo^, but well used
and soon dismissed* The Commodore when his Frenzy subsided, and by Solicitation
dismissed a very few of the Impressed; he pretended the Merchant Ships
harboring of Deserters, but he found none, such People generally take
Sanctuary in Rhode Island Colony: He pretended, his Officers exceeded Orders,
but we have heard of no Reprimand. The exceeding Frenzy of our Commodore
appears in a stronger Light, by his Resolution to bring up his Squadron to
bombard Boston, or t^ land his Men; accordingly Part of the Squadron advanced
into the Channel which is narrow, and small Drift in Case of a Storm, if ^he
Squadron had come up, and made any such mad Attempt; some desperate Fellows
animated with Rage and strong Drink, perha^^ at all H^zzards would have cut the
Men of War's Cables, the ^^ips would have stranded and been burnt to the
Disappointment (...) the Expedition, and Loss to the Navy; if he had landed his
Men a^ they generally have him, many would have deserted, and perhaps (...)
joined the Tumult, and this Tumult might have increased to a ^eneral
Insurrection: Thus we see how a Spark kindled by a (...) might have occasioned
a general C^nf^^gration in a Province. ^^is Beginning of a Tumult is expressed
in strong Terms, by the Governor in his Proclamation, "A (...) and dangerous
Insurrection." and by a Vote of a Meeting of the Town of Boston, it is called*
"The (...), which insult^d his Excellency the Governor, (...) of the
^egislature, and committed many other (...)*"

(...) and (...), where the Drawings are just and pertin^^t, are Beauties in
H^^^ory. I have no private Pique against Mr. Kn -- ^^^* (...) I (...) my self
in insulting the Authority with which he is vested (...) Ma^ness in the
West India Is^ands perhap^ (...) to a late Act of Parliament against (...) late
Frenzy Fit in (...) England.


Knowles made a general Imp^^ss in a most illegal, unprecedented Manner,
seized, or rather in the Night Time in Surprise by his Press-Gangs STOLE away
Ship-Builders Apprentices, and whole Crews of Ships, not only outward bound but
actually cleared out, without leaving any of his own People on Board to take
Care of the Ships and Merchants Interest: This naturally occasioned a
considerable Tumult; the Rioters seized the Sea-Officers that the Commodore had
imprudently left ashore, by Way of Reprizals, but used them well; the Commodore
threatened, and did actually make some Advan^es with his Fleet toward the Town
of Boston, to bombard it or land his Men there (doubtless if he had arrived to
the Point of putting this furious Madness in Execution, his Officers would have
confined him as a Maniack) but this Paroxysm abated, and he returned a few of
the impressed Men: Such a dangerous Experiment might have occasioned a general
The Poss^ Comitatus or Militia of Boston were by Order of the Governor called
to Arms, but did not appear: A subsequent Town-Meeting in their Vote, term it,
"A Tumult which insulted the L^gislature th^n sitting in Boston"; the Governor
in a subsequent Proclamation for discovering of the Ringleaders, calls it " an
Insurrection;" in Fact, the Governor thought it advisable to retire to
Castle-Island, and after a few Days was welcomed to Town again by the Regiment
of Militia under Arms, as is usual upon the Reception of a new Governor, or
Reassumption of the Government.

Our Province in a peculiar Manner (I am apt to call Massachusetts Bay our
Province, because, at this Writing, of my Residence there) requires some more
severe Acts against Riot^, Mobs, and Tumults. The least Appearance of a Mob (so
called from Mobile Vulgus) ought to be suppressed, even where their Intention
in any particular Affair is of it self very good; because they become Nurseries
for dangerous Tumults; I shall give an Instance or two in Boston. 1. A few
Years ago, a House of notorious evil Fame, known by the Name of Mother Gr --
n's, was ransackt by a small Mob in Presence of, some sa^ by Instigation of
some well meaning Magistrates, the Consequence was, the Mob a few Days
afterward demolished the public Mark^t House, and carried off the Materials
for their own private Use. 2. For some Years past upon the 5th of Nov. being
the Anniversary Gun-Powder-Tr^ason Day, several Mobs, have carried about
Pageants of the Pope, the Devil, and Pr^^^nder; those Gun-Powder-Treason Mobs
yearly Increase; the imprude^t, unprecedented Affair of Commodore Knowles's
Impress h^ppened a few Days after the annual and most numerous and outrageous
Muster of this Mob; this with the recent Memory of two Men being not long
since, murdered by a Pr^ss*Gang, ^as the Occasion of Knowle^'^ Tumult being so
outrageous.


Insurrection o^ the Province.

The impressing of Seamen has in Part been redressed by a late Act of
Parliament. There had long subsisted a Dispute between the Admiralty, and the
Trade, concerning the impressing of Sailors: The first insisted that,
Commanders of Privateers, and Masters of Merchantmen, did encourage Desertion
from his Majesty's Ships of War by entertaining and hiring Deserters; the
Merchants complained of the great Hardships upon Trade and Navigation, from the
arbitrary unreasonable Impress of Hands by indiscreet Captains and Commanders:
To accommodate this Affair the Parliament of Great Britain in their Wisdom
passed an Act Anno 1746, that Privateers or Merchantmen harboring Deserters
from the King's Ships, should forfeit 50 L. St. per Man; and any Officer of a
Man of War impressing any Sailor (Deserters excepted) on Shore or on Board
should pay 50 L. St. for each Man impressed. This Act is only in Relation to
the Sugar-Island Colonies; it might easily when in Agitation have been extended
to the Continent Colonies of North America by proper Application of their
several Agents; in a particular Manner New England claimed this Exemption (if
their Agents had had that Address, Interest, Vigilance and Assiduity which
their Duty required) by having lately suffered so much in their Persons and
Purses by a voluntary Expedition in Favor of their Mother Country against
Louisbourg: I am apt to think that being too forward beyond our natural
Abilities, may give the Ministry at Home some Reason to imagine, that
New England is so increased in People, as to have many Idlers to spare; as
appears by their Order for two Regiments of Soldiers (or 2000 Men) from hence,
in Addition to the Garrison of Louisbourg: At present I hope the Ministry are
convinced that New England can not spare Idlers sufficient to make one Regiment
complete. I speak for the Interest of the Country, and impartially in general,
my Interest being in that Country some may wrongly think that I am partial.

Before the Plantation or Colony-Trade took Place, the Trade of England
consisted only in the Exportation of some Lead, Tin, Leather, Grain, and Wool;
by Colonies our Trade and Navigation is vastly improved; Cromwell and the
Rump-Parliament, had good Notions of Trade in general, and particularly of the
Plantation-Trade; they had a Scheme to bring the Dutch to Reason, for some
Outrages they had done us in our Spice-Trade and other Affairs, but the
subsequent Reigns of the indolent Charles II, and of the Popish-Priest-Rid
James II, were great Damps. The Addition which the Factories and Colonies have
made to our Trade and Navigation is immense, viz. The India Trade, Fur and Skin
Trade, Cod-Fishery and Fish-Oil, Naval Stores, Tobacco, Rice, Sugar and other
West India Island Produce. Besides theProfits they afford to the Planters,
Merchants and Navigation Owners; they yield great Branches of Revenue, to the
public Treasury, the East India Trade about 300,000 L. St. per An. Tobacco
200,000 L. St. Sugars 150,000 L. St. etc.

In multiplying of Colonies there are Boundaries which to Advantage cannot be
exceeded; thus our Sugar-Colonies produce as much Sugar as we can vent to
Profit, the same may be said of Rice, and perhaps of Tobacco; if we increase in
these, their Prices at Market from their Plenty must fall, and not yield a
sufficient Profit.

The Regulations in the Colony-Trade, ought to be altered according as
Circumstances of Time, etc. may require, for Instance, seeing by an Arret of
the Council of State 1726, the French Colonies are allowed to carry their
Produce directly to other Ports of Europe, but the Vessels to return directly
to the Ports of France from whence they set out; therefore Great Britain seems
to be under a Necessity to take off all Enumerations (that of Sugar and Rice is
lately in Part taken off) but that the Vessels which carry Plantation-Goods to
foreign Ports, shall clear out from Great Britain, before they return to the
Plantations, this would prevent their carrying foreign Goods to our Plantations
directly, and would maintain the proper Dependency of the Colonies upon their
Mother Country.

The Utopian Amusement.
I shall conclude the general History of the British North America Colonies,
being the first Part of our Summary; by a Scheme for the better regulating
these Colonies: It is not to be expected that such considerable Alterations,
are to be made, and therefore may be called an idle Scheme; but, perhaps, it
may give some Hints, toward rectifying several Things, which much require
Emendations.

By the general Patent of King James I. Anno 1606, the Sea-Line of the English
North America, at that Time called North and South Virginia, was to have been
divided into Colonies ^
of 100 Miles square, being for each Colony, 100 Miles upon the Sea; but this
Patent was soon vacated, and the proposed Divisions did not take Place:
Afterward Royal Grants were made at sundry Times, to various Grantees of
single Persons or Communities, of different Humors and Views; so that
Boundaries (the Countries not being well explored, Instance, Merimack River
with Relation to the Boundaries of Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire
Colonies) were uncertain, and their Constitutions different. The Colonies at
this Time are arrived to a State of consider^ble Maturity, and the Conveniences
and Inconveniences of the Politia or Polity of the several Colonies are now
apparent; perhaps it would be for the Interest of the Na^ions of Great Britain,
and for the Ease of the Ministry or Managers at the Court of Great Britain, to
reduce them to some general Uniformity; referring to their several General
Assemblies or Legislatures, the raising of Taxes and appropriating the same,
with the Affairs relating to their different or sundry Produces and Trade;
these may be called their municipal Laws.

Previously, at the Court of Great Britain, there may be constituted A BOARD OF
TRADE AND PLANTATIONS for Direction; to be composed of Gentlemen returned Home
who have formerly been Governors of Colonies, Judges of Vice Admiralty, Consuls
at foreign Ports of Trade, Commodores who have served some Time in
Plantation-Stations, Surveyor-Generals and Collectors of the Customs in the
Colonies, Planters, Merchants and Factors who follow the Plantation Trade: Some
few of these may have Sallaries, and obliged to a close Attendance; the others
may be honorary, and with equal Power of Management when present: The Agents
(they are properly their Attorneys) of the Colonies to attend when called upon.

This Board being constituted, their first Business may be to compose a Draught
of a Body of general Laws for all the Plantations (it may be called the MAGNA
CHARTA OF THE BRITISH COLONIES IN AMERICA) by perusing the present Law Books of
the several Colonies, and from their own personal Experience and Observation,
with the Assistance of the Attorney and Solicitor-General, or of some other
eminent Lawyers. This Draught of general Laws for the Plantation to be laid
before the British Parliament for their Approbation, and to be passed into a
public Act of Parliament; in Process of Time, and as Things may require,
subsequent Parliaments may make Additions and Amendments. All these general
Laws may be comprised in The Laws of Nations of long standing have (...)
reduced with great Utility into a small Compass. The Roman (...) are in 51
Titles. L^wis XIV. of France, reduced all the Law^ of that great Country into
two small Pocket Volumes, called, Code de Louis des Affairs de ^^r, and Code
de Lewis des Affairs de Terr^. The Laws of Scotlan^ preceding the Union are
in three Duodecimo Volume^. The Laws of Denmark are in one Quarto Volume.
one Pocket Volume.

Some of these Plantation general Laws may relate to the following Articles.
I. Property shall permanently remain as at present and tranferable according
to Law, with a Clause for quieting Possessions.

Proprietary and Charter-Governments to be vacated for Equivalents, either in
Money, or ^ furth^^ (...) of Land-Property, and all Governments of the Co^onies
to be vested in the Crown. To some Original Grantees, the Government of the
Colo^^, was equally their Property, as that of the Soil. It has been a Pract^^e
Time out of Mind, with the British Legislatures, for a p^blick goo^ Use, to
take away private Property, allowing proper adequa^e Compensation. In such
Grants of Colonies, Government and (...) Pr^^perty are not to be deemed forever
inseparable; the Earl of (...) (formerly Lord (...)) had one Eighth of the
(...) as of the Soil of Carolinas; lately he resigned his Part of the
Government to the Crown, retaining his eighth Part of the Soil which is laid
off distinct, but some think too amply, either as an Equivalent for resigning
his Share in that Government, (...) Way of Indulgence as a Court-Favourite; the
People of New-Iers^es were so mutinous for two or three Years, that the
Proprietors (the Proprie^^^s are many) for their own Ease surrendered the
Government to the Queen in Council, by an Instrument dated April 17. 1702.


The Government of all the Northern American Continent Colonies being thus in
the Crown; that Country may at the Pleasure of the Court of Great Britain, be
divided into sundry Governments more uniform, equal, and convenient for the
Attendance of Persons concerned in their Provincial Courts, than at present;
without any Damage or Infraction of Where the Prope^^y belongs to one Family
(as Earl of Granville, Lord Fairfax, Lord B^^^imore, and Pen's) there is no
Difficulty, because no Damage is done to the Property of the Soil, by
subjecting some Part of it, to the Jurisdiction of one Government, and the
other Part of it to the Jurisdiction of an adj^cent Government; but where the
Property of the Soil belongs to a Community, as in three of the Colonies of
New England; in splitting of Colonies for Uniformity and Convenience, there
seems to be some Difficulty in dividing or adjusting the Property of
Colony-Lands remaining, not granted to private Persons; this Difficulty
vanishes in Course of Years. The Colony of Rhode Island has made Grants of all
their Community Lands to sundry private Persons many Years since: The Colony of
Connecticut sold the Remainder of their Colony-Lands, Anno 1737, being Seven
Townships in its North West Corner, to private Persons by public Vendue, the
Interest of the Purchase-Money, is wisely applied toward the Support of Free
Schools: In the Province of Massac^^^^tts-Bay ^their Government is in the
Crown, but the Property of the Lands o^ Soil is in the Community) of their old
Charter Colony Lands, not exceeding the Value of 4 or 5 Townships or Parishes
of s^x Miles square ^ach, remains not granted to private Persons; in their
additional Province of Maine, a Line of two Townships deep (the valuable Part
of that Country) along the Sea and Rivers is already become private Property,
so that the Remainder of less Value, may be resigned to ^he Crown for some
valuable Consideration, to be applied (...) paying the Province Debt: Besides
by Treaty with the (...) all those ^ands hitherto not conveyed to private (...)
re^er^ed to the Indi^ns.

N. B. In these Community Colonies, when they made Grants to private Persons,
if they ^ad subjected the granted Lands to some small certain Quitr^nts, these
Quitrents would have been a permanent Branch of the public Revenue toward the
Charges of Gov^rnm ^t; and wou^d have prevented large Tracts of granted Lands
from being engrossed laying idle and waste.


Property; moreover, the several Colonies will be more adequate Checks upon one
another in Cases of Mutiny or Insurrections. The several Colonies as at present
are at length and with much Difficulty become well-bounded and distinguished
(the Line between Maryland and Pensylvania excepted) and therefore without any
Trouble may be reduced into the following Governments. 1. Nova Scotia. 2.
Sagadahock, Province of Main, and New Hampshire. 3. Massachusetts Bay. 4. Rhode
Island, and Connecticut. 5. New York, and New-Iersies. 6. Pensylvania, and the
three lower Counties upon Delaware River. 7. Maryland. 8. Virginia. 9. North
Carolina. 10. South Carolina. 11. Georgia.
Hudson's-Bay is not a Colony, and consists only of very much separated small
Factories or Lodges, at the Mouths of some considerable Rivers, where the
Indians in their Canoes come to trade with Furs and Skins. Newfoundland is not
a Colony, but only a Number of good Harbors for curing of Cod-Fish; the Soil
is good for nothing.

As the Country and Rivers are now well explored and known, if the Colonies
were to be new-modelled, they might be more distinctly bounded as follows.

Nova Scotia, which is bounded by the River and Gulf of St. Laurence, by the
Atlantic Ocean, and Bay of Fundi, shall be further bounded by Boundary, No. 1.
being St. John's River, etc.

In the Boundaries of the several Colonies according to this Scheme, I mean a
due true Course, but not according to Compass or Magnetic Needle, because of
the continued irregular progressive Variations.

1. St. John's River from its Mouth up to -- N. Lat. and thence in a Course true
North to St. Laurence River, called Canada River.

2. Sagadahock Entrance and up Quenebec River to N. Lat. -- and then North to
the River of St. Laurence.

3. Up Merrimack River to its Fork in N. Lat. -- near Endicot's Tree, and
thence North to St. Laurence River.

4. Up Connecticut River to -- N. Lat. and thence North to the River of St.
Laurence.

5. Up Hudson's River to the Carrying-Place to Woodcreek, by Woodcreek and the
drowned Lands to Lake Champlain, by Lake Champlain and down the River Chamblai^
to St. Laurence River.

6. Up Delaware-Bay and River to N. Lat. --, and thence North to Lake Ontario.

7. Up Chesapeak-Bay and Sesquahana River to N. Lat. -- and thence North to
Lake Ontario.

8. Up Chowan Sound and Roanoke River to -- Long. West from London, and thence
due West to the Apalatian Mountains, or further West to the River Misissippi.

9. Up Wi^ea-Bay and Peddie River to -- W. Long. and thence West to the
Apalatian Mountains or further to the River of Misissippi.

10. Up the Savanna River to -- W. Long. and thence West to the Apalatian
Mountains, or further to the great River Misissippi.

11. Finally, is the New Utopian Colony of Georgia, which may extend South and
West indefinitely.

Islands in the dividing Bays and Rivers may be annexed in whole to one of the
adjoining Provinces, or partly to one and partly to the other.

II. In each Colony or Province, there may be a Legislature for raising of
Taxes, and for appropriating the same to the sundry Articles of the Charges of
Government, and for enacting of Municipal Laws, adapted to the peculiar
Circumstances of the Colony, to be sent Home (if for any considerable Period)
for Approbation* If presented and not disallowed by the King in Council after
-- Time, such Plantation Laws, shall be deemed good, as if ratified.

The Legislatures may consist of three Negatives:

1. The Governor with Advice of the King's or Governor's Council In all our
Colonies, P^nsylvania excepted, the Council is one of the three Negatives in
the Legislature; in King's Governments it seems unequal (I do not say absurd)
because as the Crown has the appointing of the Governor, and of his Council;
the Crown is vested with two Negatives in three: therefore it is proposed, that
the King's or Governor's Council, shall have no other Concern in the
Legislature, than by Advice to the Governor in his Negative.
appointed by the Crown, with Recommendation of the Board of Trade and
Plantations; this may be called the King's Negative.

2d Negative may be some particular hereditary Lords of large Manors (v. g.
Renslaer, Livingston, Beekman in New York Government) appointed by Royal
Patents: The Qualifications may be a Land Estate in constituted Townships or
Parishes, not less than three thousand Acres, and who shall pay at least -- L.
Ster. value in every thousand Pound Province Rate; something of this Nature was
designed in the beginning of Carolina Settlement. These Patricii or hereditary
Optimates will be a Credit to the Country, and may be called the Upper House of
Assembly. Those Lands to be in tail general, that is to Femal^s in defect of
Males (while in Females that Vote lies dormant, until a Male the Issue of this
Female shall appear) indivisible and unalienable: This seems to be consonant to
the second Negative in the Parliament of Great Britain.

3d Negative is the Representatives of the common People from their several
Districts; and may be called the Lower House of Assembly, or the Commons House
of Assembly. At present they are variously represented, a^ may appear in the
following Sections, concerning the several Colonies. Perhaps a general
Uniformity might be exped^ent, that is, two o^ more Representatives from each
County, and two Representatives from each Shire Town: The Qualification for the
Electors to be 40 s per Annum Sterling Value of Freehold, or 50 L. Sterling
Value Principal in any Estate Real or Personal; the Qualification of the
Elected, Representative or Deputy to be -- per An. Land Rent, or -- principal
Estate of any Kind clear of all Encumbrances. As the Representatives of
Counties and Towns are not elected as Agents for these Counties or Townships at
the General Court, but as their Quota of the Commons Representation in the
Province; when they find a Person well qualified in Knowledge and Honesty
though not a Town Resident (in the out Townships it cannot be supposed that the
Residents or Settlers do understand much of State Policy Affairs) they may have
the Privilege of electing that Person though a I^ the Massachusetts Bay Colony*
5 William and Mary it was (...), that no Town in the Province shall choose any
Representative, (...) he be a Freeholder and Resident in such Town for which
they are (...) to represent.
Non-Resident, but with some natural Interest of Freehold in the County or
Townships.

As upon frivolous Occasions Disputes sometimes happen between the several
Negatives; and thereby their General Assemblies spend much idle Time, attended
with extraordinary Charge, and Delay of Business: Therefore in Times of Peace,
they shall not sit at one Session exceeding -- (...) Di^t of Pola^d for this
R^ason, have such a Regulation, (...) ^^rpetuity.
Days; which will oblige the Representatives of the People to a quicker
Dispatch of Business, and will prevent the Governors from forcing them into
his own interested Measures, by an inconvenient long Attendance.

As in some Colonies, their Assemblies have refused or neglected for some Years
following, to supply the ordinary Charges of their Governments: therefore if
such a Neglect happen in any Colony for two Years running, the Board of Trade
and Plantations shall be empowered to tax that Colony, and make an Assessment
in Proportion to some former Assessment, and the usual or last chosen
Collectors and Constables be obliged to collect the same, and carry it into
their respective Treasuries, to be applied as the said Board shall direct, but
for the Use of the Charges of the particular Colony, and for no other Use.

III. RELIGION. "For the greater Ease and Encouragement of the Settlers, there
shall for ever hereafter be a Li^erty of Conscience (this is in the Words of
the Charter of the Province of Massachusetts Bay) allowed in the Worship of
GOD, to all Christians, Page 225.
Papists excepted;" and without any peculiar religious Qualifications for
Offices. As the Church of England by the Articles of Union is the national
Church of all the British Plantations, their Ministers must be licensed by
their Diocesian; but all other Communities, their Places for religious Worship,
may be licensed by the Quarter Sessions and registr^d. Upon any Complaints in
Cases of Life or Doctrine of the Ministers, the Quarter Sessions may appoint
some knowing discreet Ministers of the Gospel in the Neighborhood (this is a
Jury of their Peers) to enquire into the Matter, and make a Report of their
Opinion to the Quarter Sessions. Preachers and Exhorters Vagrant Enthusiasts,
such as are, at this present Writing, Mr. W -- s -- l, and his Brethren; if
they could be so (...) or ^am^d, as to submit to Regulations, the Edge of their
fiery Zeal might be turned toward I^^ian Conversion^, which would be of good
Use i^ a Political as w^ll as Religious Vi^w, this is practiced with go^d (...)
by our French Neighbors of Canada. At present their Zeal is ill-pointed; in
Towns of Business, poor deluded Tradesmen and Laborers ^whose Time is their
only Estate) are called off to their Exhortations; to the private Detriment of
their Families, and great Damage to the Public; thus, perhaps, every
Exhortation of W -- s -- d was about 1000 L. Damage to Boston in New England.

That the Missionaries be cantoned along the Indian Frontiers, especially at
the Truck or Trading-Houses, under the Direction of a (...) or traveling
Missionary, one for each of the Northern and Southern Districts of our
Continent Colonies; these Missionaries are also to off^ciate in the poor
Out-Townships or Parishes not able to maintain a Gospel Ministry.


not licensed by the Quarter Sessions, who shall intrude without the Invitation
or Consent of Town or Parish Minister (as by their Noise and Nonsense they may
alienate the Minds of weak People from their own settled Ministers) shall be
deemed as Fortune Tellers, idle and disorderly Persons, Vagrants and Vagabonds.
That the Parsons of the Church of England, and the Ministers of the tolerated
Communities be enjoined to live in exemplary Charity and Dr. Humphrey,
Secretary to the Society for propagating the Gospel in foreign Parts, in Answer
to some Complaints sent to the Society against some of their Missionaries by
the Rev. Mr. William Williams of (...), b^ his Letter dated London, Warwick
Court, in Warwick Lane, May 2^* 1735, writes, That "the Ministers of the Church
of England, we^e as little as may be, to meddle with any Matters of
Controve^^^, but only to preach the Gospel and administer the Sacraments
according to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of (...).
Brotherhood. That their Pulpit Discourses may principally relate to Things
which do not fall within the Cognizance of the municipal Laws; to preach up
Industry, and Frugality; to preach down Idleness, a dissolute Life, and Fraud;
never to intermeddle in Affairs of State; no Pulpit Invectives against
tolerated religious Sects, that as Dr. Swist humourously expresses it, "Their
religious Zeal having no Vent by their Tongues, may be turned into the proper
Channel of an exemplary Life.

IV. JUDICATORIES. That in the several Colonies, the Legislatures or General
Assemblies, may have a Power to erect Judicatories for Crimes capital or not
capital; for Pleas real, personal, or mixed; and to elect Judges and Justices
not annually or durante Beneplacito, but for Life, or Quamdiu se been
Gesserint; and when by Reason of Age in the Judges, their intellectual
Faculties become languid, and their Memories fail; they may be allowed a
certain yearly Pension; thus these Gentlemen will make the Law their Delight,
Study, and only Business; and be under no Temptation of being mercenary to
provide for a rainy Day. It must always be supposed that the Officers of the
Court of Vice-Admiralty, the Officers from the Board of Customs, and the
Surveyors of the Woods or Masting-Trees, are to be appointed by the Court of
Great Britain; the Justices of the general Sessions of the Peace, of the
Inferior Court of Common Pleas, of the Superior Court of Judicature, Assize and
general Jail-Delivery, and of Probates to be elective in the several Provinces.
That Appeals from the Colonies shall be to a Court of Delegates being a
Committee of the Board of Trade and Plantations; and from thence in Cases of
great Consequence to the House of Lords in Great Britain, the dernier Resort of
all Justice for the Dominions of Great Britain, which is a Court of Law and
Equity in it self, as all other Courts of Judicature ought to be. In all
Nations of Europe, England excepted, Law and Equity are in the same Court, in
our Colonies it would shorten Lawsuits, and prevent much unnecessary Charge,
by uniting two Courts into one; a Number of good Judges may reasonably be
supposed to have a greater collective Knowledge, and (...) impartial, than a
sole Judge in Equity, Ch^ncellor or Mast^r of the ^olls; several Chanc^llo^s
have been convicted of Iniquity.


The four principal Executive Offices ought to be in four In Virginia from bad
Policy they are all vested in one Board, the Governor and his Council* In
several other Colonies two or more of them are in the same Person or Board
distinct Persons or Boards. 1. The Governor with his Council. 2. The Chancery.
3. The Judges of the Superior Court of Common Pleas. And 4. The Judge of
Probate of Wills and granting of Administration.

As an Estate Qualification, the Judges of Probates and Judges of the Superior
Courts, shall have a clear Estate of any Sort, above what will discharge all
Encumbrances; paying -- in every Thousand Pound Tax: Inferior Judges and
Justices of the Quarter Sessions a like Estate paying -- in every Thousand
Pound Colony or Province Tax.

Some Regulations to prevent Delay of Justice, that Cases may speedily be
brought to Issue and Execution; some Exception may be made in Cases, where are
concerned, Infants, femme couverte, Non-compos, and Persons beyond Sea^. In all
the Ports, a Court Merchant, for the summary Dispatch or Recovery of Debts
belonging to Strangers and transient Traders.

That the real Estate of Intestates Intestate real Estate divided among all the
Children or Collaterals, and in the next Generation subdivided amongst their
Children or Collaterals; will r^nder a Colony for ever poor, because depending
upon a small Pittance of Land, scarce sufficient to produce the Necessar^es of
Life, and being under no absolute Necessity of using further Industry, they
continue idle, and miserable for Life; whereas the younger Children, if instead
of being Freeholders, they become Tenants (as a public Good) they must be more
industrious, and raise, besides a mere Subsistence, a sufficient Rent for the
Landlord, and acquire a Habit of Industry: Some of their Male Children will
become a Nursery for the public Land and Sea Service; as for the Female
Children, their Want of real Estate will not disqualify them from being good
Breeders, but incite and oblige them to accept of Husbands when they offer.
be indivisible, and go to the next in Kin.

V. TO ENCOURAGE THE GROWTH OF THE COLONIES. No Person shall be carried out of
the respective Colonies, or required to march, without their own Consent, or by
a particular Resolve of their Legislature, no Levies of Lands Men for Soldiers,
excepting in Cases of foreign Invasions, great Incursions of the Indians, or
general Insurrections in any of the Colonies: These There has been no
Repartition for many Years; the last was in thi^ Proportion, M^ssa^husetts Bay
350 N^w-Hampshire 40 Rhode Island 48 Connecticut 120 New York 200 East-Iersey
60 West-Iersey 60 Pensylvania 80 Maryland 160 Virginia 240


Carolina at that Time was of no considerable Account. Since that Time
Pensylvania, from the great Importation of Foreigners and (...) become near
equal to (...)-Bay, and the Iersies equal (...)


Levies to be in certain Proportions or Quotas for each Colony, to be settled
from Time to Time, according to their proportional Growths by the Board of
Trade and Plantations. No Impress of Sailors, it hinders the Growth of their
Trade and Navigation, the Profits center in the Mother Country; Impresses may
occasion Tumults and Mutinies in the Colonies, a noted Instance we have from
that rash unprecedented Impress Small Mobs do happen in all Seaport Towns upon
Impresses; the Occasion being extraordinary this was a larger Mo^, and may be
called a Tumult; this Occasion in a Vote of a legal Town-Meeting, is termed an
unwarrantable Impress, and in a Resolve of the House of Representatives Nov.
19, it is expressed "A Gri^vance which may have been the Cause of the aforesaid
tumultuous disorderly assembling together." The Mob began early in the Morning,
by Night were intoxicated with strong Drink, and used the Governor, upon his
admonishing them from the Balcony of the Courthouse, with very indecent, rude
Expressions; but with no rebellious Design* as drunk, they were void of Sense
or Design.

With some Difficulty I persuaded my self to publish this Annota^tion; because,
1. The Inhabitants of the Town of Boston legally conveened, alleging that
Governor SHIRLEY in his published Letters with Regard to this Tumult, had set
the Town of Boston, in a disadvantageous Light, and that their Character and
Reputation were much affected thereby; occasioned Misunderstandings; but have
since by mutual Explanations, been amicably composed, and therefore ought to be
buried in Oblivion. N. B. An Expression in a former Sheet of this History, is
said to have occasioned these Misunderstandings; as the Author hopes that this
History may live, he thinks himself obliged to explain that Expression. The
Governor's Letters were wrote and delivered though not printed, prior to the
Publication of that Sheet) (or Pamphlet as it is termed) which was done by a
private Person, not by the Direction or in the Knowledge of the Town of Boston,
consequently the Town was not in the Question; the Author hims^l^ was under no
Temptation to offend one Party, or to pleasure the other Party; he holds no
Place under the Governor, he is not a Town-Officer, he never had, nor ever
shall desire to have any Influence among the Populace; Government he adores,
Tumults he abhors. The Expression is, "He was welcomed to Town again (the
Town-Address or Petition to the Governor, says "on your Return to Town") by the
Regiment of Militia under Arms, as is usual upon the Reception of a new
Governor, or REASSUMPTION of the Governme^^ in Allusion to his Reception when
he arrived from C^pe-Breton to reassume the Chair of Government; there was no
designed Insinuation of weak Conduct; if any Thing in the Expression is
exceptionable, i^ ought to be construed only as an Impropriety in Diction, a
Lapse may be incident to any Author. 2. I do not affect such occasional
Articles, they debase a History of permanent Design, to the low Character of a
transitory News-Paper: But as this Affair is too much magnified, and is
represented Home in a false and bad Light to the Disadvantage of this Town and
Province; I thought it incumbent upon me as an Historian in Place and Time, to
give a short impartial Relation of this Incident, more especially to obviate
the Imputation of being rebellious, which amongst other bad Effects, might
retard the Reimbursement of the great Expense incurred by New England in the
Reduction of Cape-Breton, and occasion a jealous Regard from the Court of
Great Britain; from thirty Years Residence in New England, I am convinced that
no British Subjects have a better Regard for the Hanov^rian Race or Succession.
Rebellion implies concerted Measures, with Provision of Money and warlike
Stores (this is not alleged) no Firearms, they did not attempt to take
Possession of Town-^a^teries and Stores, they did not take Possession of the
Town-Gates Boston is a Peninsula with only one Gate open by Day and by Night)
or Courthouse, its lower Floor or Walks, is open and free to every Body
without being reckoned Trespassers. The Governor's Letters to the Secretary,
which surprised the Town, do not seem to be wrote with any premeditated Design
of hurting the Character of the Town; but perhaps with some Degree of Warmth,
and in "utmost Haste*" and calls it an "illegible Scrawl."

Commodore K -- s, naturally rash and imprudent, without advising with the
Governor and Council, and cautioning his Officers ashore in Boston concerning a
Mob which might probably ensue upon such an extraordinary Impress; in the
Nightime with armed Boats did kidnap or steal Ship-Builder's Apprentices, and
did rob Ships (cleared out) of their Crews. Some of these Vessels belonged to
Glascow in Scotland, therefore he imagined, or was ill-informed, that the
Glascow Masters and Factors were the Managers of the Mob; and in a Transport of
Passion, as it was rumoured, said, that all Scotchmen were Rebels; if this be
made apparent, in Quality of a warrant Commodore he is of Notice, and may be
obnoxious to Scand^lum magn^tum of all the Scots Peers, and to the Resentment
of every (...) Loyal Subject, in History, or otherwise, even to the minutiae of
his (...).

In the Mo^ning Nov. 17. 1747. Upon this arbitrary unprecedented too rigorous
Impress, some Sailors, St^angers, belonging to two or three Vessels bound to
Guinea and Privateering, fearing the like Fate, did in their own Defense
assemble or associate, but without any Firearms, only with the rusty Cu^lasses
belonging to their Vessels, some Clubs and Cat-sticks; this Appearance, as is
usual, attracted some idle Fellows of low Circumstances, and lower Character,
^oys and Children, which made the Mob appear large: This Mob suspecting that
some of the Press-Gangs were in Town, went in Search for them, and some wicked
abandoned Fellows (a Mob is like a Brute Flock of Sheep, they implicitly and
without Reasoning follow a Ringleader or Speaker; therefore a Ringleader or
Speaker, if convicted as such, ought to suffer for all Felonies and other
Damages committed by the Mob) proposed to make Reprisals of the Commodore's
Officers, as Hostages for the Release of the Town Inhabitants.

This Mobish Assembly imagining that those Officers had sheltered themselves
(the Government was in Duty obliged to protect them) in the Governor's House,
or in the Provincial Courthouse; at Noon they appeared before the Governor's
House, and in the Evening before the Provincial Courthouse; by this Time being
much intoxicated (which after a few Hours Sleep subsides) they used the
Governor, who appeared in the Balcony, with indecent Language; and some
naughty Boys and Children, who in Frolicks take Pleasure in the rattling of
Glass (sometimes they use the Window-Glass of their Parents Houses with the
same Freedom) with Brick Batts broke some Window-Glass of the Courthouse, but
were reproved by the real Mob.

This Mob was less impetuous than the Generality of Mobs; they used the
Sea-Officers well and dismissed them, before the Commodore had dismissed the
impressed Town Inhabitants: They did not seize Capt. Auscough or Erskine, but
left him at large upon his Parole.

After the Tumult had subsided, the Commodore advanced with his Fleet to insult
Boston, which he imagined had insulted him. The Governor in his Letter from
Castle-Island to the Secretary, Nov. 19. writes, "I will endeavor to divert
him from such Thoughts, and to influence him to discharge the Inhabitants, and
as many as I can in the End, but I cannot promise Success from the present
Temper he is in;" this insinuates that the Commodore was not Master of his
Temper, which is absolutely requisite in a Statesmen, Commander of an Army, or
Commodore of a Squadron of Men of War Ships.

Nov. 19. in the Morning after the Tumult had subsided, the Commodore makes an
Offer to the Governor, to come in Person to the Castle for the Defense of the
Governor's Person and of the Fort, this appears with an Air of Vanity and
Assuming; but the Governor in Answer, justly and with Propriety of Character,
acquaints him, "That he did not retire to the Castle for Safety of his Person,
and that he had not the least Apprehension of the Castle's being in Danger from
any Mob." Finally the Commodore found it advisable to retire with his Squadron,
and after a few Days put to Sea for the West India Islanas.

The Affair of the Town-Militia not appearing in Arms when called upon, is not
easily to be accounted for. Some say, that 1. The Militia apprehended that the
Tumult was at an End, upon the Rioters leaving the Governor's House in the
Forenoon. 2. That as they were called upon, in Quality of Posse Comitatus, that
is, in Aid of the civil Officers, and as the civil Officers did not appear to
do their Duty they might think it preposterous to appear first; but in
Exigencies such Formalities must not be insisted upon. 3. There was no legal
Alarm, and no written signed Orders to the Militia; especially in Case of b^ing
assaulted by the Tumult, in going to their Rendezvous, or at their Rendezvous,
in their own Defense to fire sharp Shot. 4. I conjecture, that they were so
s^unned by this rigorous unprecedented Impress, and imagining the Affair was in
Support of the Impress, as being illegal, they thought in Consequence they
could not be required to support it. I am convinced it was not from any
rebellious Motive; that is, Disaffection to the King and his Su^cession, or to
the ^ree Bra^^^es of (...) the^ convened in B^s^on.


at Boston New England by Commodore Knowles, Nov. 17. 1747. 2. Importing and
naturalizing of Foreigners conform to two Acts of Parliament, An. 1740, see P.
234; naturalized Foreigners are not to settle in separate peculiar Districts,
but intermixedly with the original British, see Page 209. Papists or Nonjurors,
shall register their Names and Estates.

VI. PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS. For the Education of Youth, there shall be
one public School or more in each Township or District, for teaching of
reading English, Writing, and Arithmetic: In each Shire Town a Grammar School
for the learned dead Languages of Greek and Latin, for Hebrew Roots Recourse
may be had to the Divinity Colleges; the Masters of the Town and Country
Schools to be approved of by the Quarter Sessions: In each Province, a Schola
illustris, or College, for what are called Arts and Sciences, to be regulated
by the Legislatures: And near the Center of the North America Continent
Colonies (therefore not in Bermudas, Dr. Barclay's Scheme) an University or
Academy to be regulated by the Board of Plantations, to initiate young
Gentlemen in the learned Professions of Divinity, Law and Medicine; in the
modern, commercial and traveling Languages of Frenc^ Spanish and Dutch; in
other curious Sciences of Mathematics, Belles Lettres, etc, and Gentleman
Exercises of riding the great Horse, Fencing and Dancing; from School to
College, from College to Travel, and from Travel into Business, are the
Gradations of a liberal Education, but for Want of Effects the Link of Travel
is frequently wanting.

In every Shire-Town there shall be a Work House, to oblige and habituate
Idlers to some Work: It is a better Charity to provide Work for the idle Poor,
than to feed them; as also an Almshouse for the aged, infirm, and incurable
Poor of the County: But This Sort of Charity I admire, it is Charity in a
Political View, as well as in Humanity; they may become useful Members of the
Common Wealth: The Aged, Infirm, and Incurable, are for ever useless, and a
dead Weight upon the Community; in Countries le^s humane, as in some Provinces
of China, where there is scarce necessary Food for their Multitudes of People,
as Encumbrances they deprive them of Life.
principally and especially, an Orphan-House for poor Children; where Parents
are dead or unable to provide for their Children, these Children become
Children of the Commonwealth, not to be brought up to Some Gentlemen of
Observation take Notice, that the late Humor of erecting in Great Britain, a
Multiplicity of Free Schools and Charity ^chools, is a Detriment to the Common
Wealth: Bringing up so many Youth to Learning, renders them feeble, idle, and
abo^e common hard Labor; the Life of a Country.

The prevailing Humor in the English Universities, of making a Business
(called Criticism) of using and per^sing the Gr^^k and Ro^an Cl^ssicks, to
discover typographical Errors, and the Inadverte^^ie^ of a Translator, are of
no Use to the Community; the Cri^^ck ^o^s not acquire more Wisdom, and is of no
Benefit to Arts and (...)* but may prove an innocent, idle Amusement to (...).


idle Learning (Reading and Writing excepted) but to Trades and Labor:
Generally these poor Children may be bound to proper Masters, as Apprentices or
Servants, the Boys to 21 Aet. the Girls to 18 Aet. by the County Courts, or by
three Justices Quorum Unus.

VII. The enumerated Commodities (i. e. which are (...) directly to any other
Ports, but to those of (...) Pitch, Turpentine, Hemp, Masts, Yards, Bowsprits,
Beaver-Skins, and other Furs, Copper-Ore, Tobacco, Rice, Fustick, and other
Dying Woods, Indigo, Cotton-Wool, Ginger, Sugar and Molasses.
TO ENCOURAGE TRADE AND NAVIGATION IN THE COLONIES. 1. All Enumerations be
taken off, excepting upon such Commodities, that are the peculiar Produce of
our Plantations, and which no foreign Nation can purchase of any other Nation.
2. As Most of our Col^nies have passed, at Times, such Acts in Despite to some
other Colonies; for Instance, Anno 1721 Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire by
Acts of their General Assemblies, did impose unreasonable Duties upon their
mutual Imports and Exports.
Animosities sometimes happen between Colonies, from the mutual imposi^g of
high Duties upon the mutual Importation or Exportation of Goods, which may tend
to alienate their mutual Affections, and may prevent or much obstruct a very
useful national Intercourse amongst the Colonies: Therefore no such
Colony-Duties shall be imposed, but by special Acts of Parliament. 3. That all
This is conform to an Act of British Parliament Anno 1726, with Relation to
Workmen employed in the Woollen Manufactures.
Combinations and Agreements, between Workmen concerning Wages* etc. shall be
unlawful: That the Employer shall pay the full Prices agreed on, in Money, not
in Goods, or by Way of Truck, with certain Penalties. 4. That the Legislatures
in each Colony, may make their own Roman Colonies, were foreign Lands peopled
(Coloniam ducere) by native Roman Families, though governed by Roman Laws and
Officers; they had also municipal Bylaws, made by the Praefectus, Senatus,
Populusque of the Colony, that is, in our Idiom, by the Governor, Council, and
Representatives.
municipal or local Laws. 5. That the Governors of the several Colonies or
Provinces, shall have their Salaries out of the Civil List from Home, but shall
have no Salaries, or Gratuities from the respective Assemblies; it has happened
at Times in all our Colonies, that some designing evil Men, having obtained a
wicked Majority in the Assembly have thus biassed and corrupted their
Governors. 6. When Townships exceed 500 legal Voters for a Town-Meeting; the
Legislature, or the Governor with his Council, may appoint a certain In the
Towns of Holland the Vroedschap is generally from 20 to 40 Men.
Number for Life, or Number of Years, of the most knowing, discreet, and
substantial Men of the Town, to act in every Thing, in Place of a general
Town-Meeting; excepting in Elections of Representatives or Deputies for the
General Assembly; in every Township all Papists to register their Names and
Estates. 7. That all Vessels, those from Great Britain not excepted, be liable
to Tunnage or Powder-Money, it being toward the Protection of their Trade and
Navigation. 8. That no Man (even with his own Consent) shall be inlisted in
actual Land or Sea-Service under 20 Aet. nor above 52 Aet; this is conform to a
late Act of Parliament, for enlisting Marine Soldiers.

VIII. TAXES. The different Nature of the several Colonies, will not admit of
any general Taxations; therefore the various Taxes must be local, adapted to
the Conveniences of each Colony; here I shall only observe, 1. That in these
Colonies (in North Carolina there is no other Tax) where there is a Poll-Tax
upon all Male Whites from 16 Aet. and upwards, it seems not equitable that a
Chimney-Sweeper or the meanest of the People should pay as much (as at present
in Massachusetts Bay) as a Counselor or Prime Merchant; the People ought to be
classed and pay in Proportion, according to their Rank and Substance, 2. That
as Wines and Spirits are not the Necessaries of Life (and therefore Hardship
upon the Poor, is not in the Case) there may be a considerable Impost or Custom
upon this Importation, and where Spirits are manufactured (for Instance Rum in
Boston) an Excise at the Still Head. Thus private Tippling Houses that pay no
Excise, will have no Advantage over the licensed Houses; upon Exportation to
draw back the Duties of Impost or Excise. 3. That there be a License-Tax upon
all Taverns, Inns, and other public Houses of that Nature. 4. A Sumptus
amongst the Romans was used to signify Luxury, and their Sumptuaria Lex, was
also called Cibaria Lex; but at present it i^ ^^nerally used to signify Excess
in Apparel and Equipage.
sumptuary Excise or Duty upon Extravagancies used in Diet or Apparel,
excepting upon Materials that are the Produce or Manufacture of Great Britain.
5. As vexatiou^ Suits in Law, are a great Nuisance in all Countries; and the
smaller the In Massachusetts Bay since the Law Charges have been enhansed by
Acts of Assembly, Lawsuits in Number are much diminished.
Charges of Courts, the greater is the Encouragement to such Suits: Therefore
there shall be a stamp Duty upon all Writings or Instruments used in
Law-Affairs. Whereas Appeals from one Court to another are generally vexatious,
no Appeal to be allowed, unless the Appellant As in private Life all good Men
learn from the Example and Practice of one another; so it is or ought to be
amongst Nations or Countries: In Holland upon an Appeal from the Laage Raad to
the Hooge Raad 75 Guilders is deposited, and if he reviews from the Hooge Raad,
he deposites 200 Guilders.
deposite -- Sum of Money; if the Appellant is cast, this Money to be applied
toward the Charges of the Province or County. 6. In the Affair of In
Great Britain, Taxes are generally of these three Denominations, Land Tax
(which comprehend the Income of Real Estate, of Personal Estate, and of
Faculty) Customs or Impost, and Excise or Consumption.
Rates as in Great Britain, the principal Gentlemen of the County in the
Land Tax Act are nominated as Commissioners for the County, whereof but a very
few are acting: In the Plantations the Justices of the Quarter Sessions in the
Counties seem to be the proper Commissioners to appoint Assessors in each
Parish of the most substantial Men; and in Cases of Grievance, Appeals in first
Instance may be made to the Quarter Sessions.

IX. Many Vessels have been lost near the Channel of England and elsewhere, by
not giving proper Allowance for the Difference of Variation since the Date of
Dr. Halley's Chart Anno 1700.

The Utility of frequent well vouched general Maps of the Variations is
apparent also in Inland Affairs; I shall only instance in the Affairs of
Massa^husetts-Bay Colony (the Place of my Residence) in settling the Lines or
Boundaries with the neighboring Colonies. Anno 1719, they agreed with
Rhode Island to run their Line West 7 d. N. Anno 1713 they run their Line with
Connecticut W. 9 d. N. Anno 1741 according to the Determination of the King in
C^uncil, upon an Appeal from the Judgment of the Commissioners appointed to
settle the Lines; their Line with New Hampshire was run W. 10 d. N. as if the
Variation were constant or upon the Increase, whereas it was upon theDecrease:
1. About Anno 1700, Dr. Halley's Period, the West Variation in
Massachusetts Bay was about 10 d. and without giving any Allowance for its
Decrease in the Space of half a Century, did in the last Case settle it
according to Halley's Chart; Anno 1741, the Variation was scarce 8 d. and the
Error or Gore was in Favor of Massachusetts Bay. 2. The other Line, between
Massachusetts Bay Purchase called the Province of Maine, and New Hampshire, was
adjudged to N. 2 d. W. true Course, and was laid out with the same Error N. 8
d. E. Variation, and the Gusset was in Favor of New Hampshire. 3. Line, or the
Rhode Island Line with Massachusetts Bay was settled Anno 1719, when the
Variation was about 9 d. laid out by Agreement, W. 7 d. N. and the Error or
Gusset was in Favor of Massachusetts Bay; these Gussets contain no
inconsiderable Tract of Land, for Instance, this Gore though from the Station
called Saffries, and Woodward, it runs only about 24 Miles, it acquires a Base
of 360 Rod, being one Mile and forty Rod, commonly called the Mile of Land; it
is true, that after some Time Massachusetts Bay gave to Rhode Island an
Equivalent in waste Lands, as to Property, but not Jurisdiction. 4. The Line
between Massachusetts Bay and Connecticut (a Government of wise, circumspect
Husbandmen) was laid out just, being 9 d. Variation, Mr. Brattle, an ingenious,
accurate Man, observed in Boston, the Variation W. 9 d. N. Anno 1708.

Doubtless sundry Navigators have good Accounts of Variations in their
Journals, and some curious Landsmen have (...) Times amused themselves in this
Affair, but scarce any have been published to the World; the only continued Set
of Variation Observations, in my Knowledge, is that of the Royal Academy of
Sciences for Paris, these Observations are annual and generally made in the
Months of D^cember, from Anno 1700 down to this Time, and are to be continued
by learned Men well disciplined, in Pay, and therefore obliged to regular Duty
Our Members of the Royal Society for Philosophical Transactions in L^ndon are
Volunteers, not in Pay, not obliged to Duty; some of them at first setting out,
perform some Coup d' Eclat, but are soon ti^ed


That for the Benefit of the British Trade and Navigation more especially with
Regard to the American Colonies, and Factories in Africa, the East Indies, and
China: And for the better adjusting the Boundaries of the Colonies or Grants in
North America, there shall be fitted out at certain Periods of Years by the
Board of Admiralty or Navy Board, a few small Vessels, such as are the Man of
War Snows called Sloops, with able Observers or Mathematicians, and a proper
Apparatus; in different Routs along the Seas of Trade, TO OBSERVE THE
VARIATIONS for the Time being; and to reduce them, to a general Chart of
Variations, in Imitation of the Ch^rt (the first of that Kind) for Anno 1700,
delineated by the ingenious, assiduous, learned, and of blessed Memory Dr.
Halley; from his own Knowledge and Observations, from the good Accounts of
others, and from the Analogy of the whole; it was soon cavil'd ^t by our
Competitors the French Academicians and Navigators; but afterward conceded to
and applauded by the French The French are our Rivals in every Thing, and mo^e
particularly in Matters of Learning; they keep up a laudable Emulation* thus
Sir Isacc Newton and his Followers did investigate the Earth to be an oblate
Spheroid, the French Academicians asserted it to be an oblong Spheroid; that
is, the Degrees of the Meridian are shorter t^wards the Poles; from actual
Measurations (by Triangles) of Degre^s of the Meridian, from the North to the
South of France; but lately (after a Contest of above 50 Years) by their
Missions to Torne^ under the Polar Circle, and to Peru under the Equinoctial,
they have give^ up the Point.
Academicians. In these Voyages, when on Shore by observing the Eclipses of
Jupiter's Moons, and of our Moon when to be had, they may adjust the The
Longitudes determined by Sea Journ^ls, by Eclipses and Occultation^, before the
Use of Telescopes, Micrometers, and Pend^l^ms, were not so exact as at present;
formerly the South-America Shore w^^ reckoned 6 d. of Longitude too much
distant from Europe; by ^n Observation of the Moon eclipsed, Dec. 21. Anno
1740, from Capt. Leg of the Severn Man of War at the Island St. Catharine, on
the Coast of Brazil. S. Lat. 27 d. 30 m. 49 d. 20 m. W. from Greenwich. Sen^x's
Maps have placed that Coast about 6 ^. too much Eastward. The China
Missionaries (they carry the Credit of able Mathematicians to enforce the Truth
of their Religious Doctrines) find that formerly the Eastern Coast of China was
reckoned 25 d. Long. too much distant from Paris. Dr. Halley, Anno 1677 was
sent at a Government-Charge to St. Helena, to observe and take a Catalogue of
the fixed Star^ in the high Southern Latitudes, which he accordingly reduced to
a Catalogue and Tables* At that Time the Variation was 40 ^. E. of St H^l^na.
Longitudes, and other Requisites of Places. The other Nations of Commerce,
particularly France and Holland may do the same at a public Charge, thus by
Means of so many Checks, we may attain from Time to Time some Certainty as to
the Variations; this insensibly brings me to a Digression.

A Digression concerning the Magnetic Needle, commonly called the Mariner's
Compass.
That the MAGNET or Loadstone attracted Iron, was known to the highest
Antiquity in Record: But the Polarity of an Iron Rod or Wire, touched by a
Magnet and afterward poised, was not observed until the 13th Century of the
Christian Era. The Mariners Compass is said to have been first used in Italy
(the principal Place of Traffic in those Days) Anno 1301. Cab^t a Ve^etian
makes the first Mention Anno 1544 of the Variation or Deflection of the
Magnetic Meridian from a true Meridian, various in various Places. Gasse^di
about a Century and half since, discovered that this Declination of the Needle
in each particular Place, in Process of Time, had some Variation. It is not
long since that the Dip of the Needle, various in various Places; and the
Variation of this dip Variation in the same Place, has been discovered: A
Needle poised before it is touched, upon the Magnetic Touch, its North Point
with us dips from a Horizontal Position; for Instance, Anno 1723 Mr. George
Graham in London observed it to dip 75 d; he observes, the stronger the Touch,
the greater the Dip: This Needle must be afterward properly loaded to bring it
again to an horizontal Poise to serve in the Compass. As the Variations of the
Dip are at present of no Use in Navigation, therefore having no Relation to our
History of the British American Colonies, we drop them.

Magnetism is some Power in Nature, hitherto inexplicable, as are Gravity and
Electricity; whereby a Loadstone (an Iron Ore or Mineral) draws to it self
Loadstone or Iron. No interposed Body can hinder this Influence or Attraction;
a large Magnet broken to Pieces, each ^rustum or Fragment, retains the
Attraction and Polarity* Steel is more receptive and retentive of Magnetism
than common Iron. The North Poles of touched Needles do not attract but repel
one another, and attract South Poles: Likewise South Poles do not attract bu^
^epel South Poles. If the different Directions of the Magnetic Needle were
permanent for the same Place, it might be imagined to proceed from different
Accumulations of Magnetic Matter in these different Parts of the Earth.
Halley's amusing Fancy, that the Globe of the Earth was one great Magnet, with
two contained Nuclei (which humorously may be termed Wheels within a Wheel)
whose four Poles are different from those of the Earth, and from one another;
and in Case a third Line of no Variation should be discovered in the South Seas
(which he seems to suspect from the Accounts, Anno 1670, of Sir John
Narborough, of the Variation upon the West Coast of South-America decreasing
very fast) he was to introduce a third Nucleus: These Nuclei he supposes
detached from the Earth and from one another, and to have a circulatory or
libratory Motion, equal or inequal, according as the Solution of the Phaenomina
might require; but this pleasant Novel does in no Manner account for the
Irregulaties in the Variations, as hereafter related; and until by future
Observations they be reduced to some Rules, it seems in vain to attempt any
Hypothesis.

Dr. Halley upon his Return from his long Voyages, delineated the Variations as
they were Anno 1700 in all the Oceans and Seas, the Pacifick Ocean excepted,
from 58 d. N. Lat. to 58 d. S. Lat; Delisle delineates the Variations 20 d.
further N. than Halley. This Chart of Halley's being the first of its Kind,
will perpetuate his Memory better than Brass or Marble, and will be a permanent
Credit to our British Nation. Since Dr. Halley's Chart of Variations for Anno
1700, near half a Century is elapsed, which has produced great Alterations in
the Variations, seeing Halley's Atlantic and Ethiopick Line of no Variation,
in about the Space of a Century from 1600 to 1708, had moved (it passed Anno
1600 by Cape Agulhas, the Southernmost Cape of Africa, by the Morea, and the
North Cape of Europe, in N. Lat. 71 d. 24 m. and 22 d. 10 m. E. Long. from We
(...) ^^om (...), if not otherways (...)
London) by its North Parts through Vienna Anno 1638, through Paris Anno 1666,
Westward in all about 1400 Leagues, and by its South Parts only about 500
Leagues.

The Anomalies or Bizarreries of the Variations, are unaccountable, and no
Length of Time or Series of Years is likely to bring them to a Mean.

1. The Variations for the same Place, sometimes have a direct progressive
Motion but unequally, sometimes are stationary, and sometimes retrograde: I
shall instance the Variations at Paris for about a Century and three Quarte^s
of a Century; Anno 1580 the Variation was 11 and half d. E. Anno 1666 no
Variation, is at a Medium about 8 m. per An. Anno 1715 Variation was 12 d. 30
m. W. for that Interval, is about 14 m. per An. from that Time to Anno 1720 it
was generally retrograde; from 1720 Variation about 13 d. W. for five Years it
was strictly stationary; from Anno 1725 it was at a Medium directly increasing
or progressive to Anno 1732, Variation 15 d. 45 m. W. from 1732 to 1743 (so far
the Memoirs of the Paris Academy of Sciences are published) the Variation was
15 d. 5 m. W. tha^ is a little upon the Decrease with a libratory Motion:
Therefore (as I may conjecture) the general Increase of the European West
Variations seem to be retarded, or stationary, or upon the Decrease.

2. Mr. George Graham of London, an ingenious and accurate Mechanicien observes
Anno 1722 from February 6 to May 10 (the Compass-Box remaining unmoved all that
Time) above One Thousand Times; the greatest Variation (Westward) was 14 d. 45
m. the least 13 d. 50 m. he observes, that the Variation is considerably
d^^ferent in different Days, and in different Hours of the same Day; without
any Relation to Heat or Cold, dry or moist Air, clear or cloudy, Winds or
Calms, nor the Height of the Barometer. In the same Day he observed the
greatest Variation from Noon to 4 Hours Afternoon, and the least about 6 or 7
Hours in the Evening. Mr. Joseph Harris in his Return from Iamaica to London,
Anno 1732 observed, that the Westerly Variations were less in the Morning than
in the Afternoon. The Curves of no Variation, and of each particular Variation,
do alter their Curvatures so irregularly and undulatory; they are not reducible
to any Equation expressive of their Nature.

3. The Variations have no Relation to Meridians; according to Halley's Chart
Anno 1700, at the Entrance of Hudson's Streights, Variation was 29 and half d.
West; at the Mouth of Rio de la Plata, nearly under the same Meridian, the
Variation was 20 and half d. East. As to Parallels of Latitude it is observed,
that the further North or South from the Equinoctial, the Variations are the
greater, but in no regular Progression either as to Distance from the
Equinoctial or Difference of Time. M. des Hayes and Du Glos Anno 1682 at
Martinique, found the Variation 4 d. 10 m. East; Anno 1704 it was 6 d. 10 m. E.
this is 2 d. in 21 Years; in the same Interval of Time, it increased at Paris 5
d. 30 m. The further from the Lines of no Variation, the Variations seem to
increase or decrease the faster.

4. Capt. Hoxton from Maryland, relates a strange Phenomenon of his Magnetic
Needles orCompasses, Anno 1725, Sept. 2, a little after Noon, fair Weather,
small Sea, in N. Lat. 41 d. 10 m, 28 d. E. Long. from Cape Henry of Virginia,
all his Compasses (an Azimuth, and 4 or 5 more) carried to several Parts of the
Ship continued for about one Hour, traversing very swiftly, so as could not
steer by them, but all of a sudden, every one of them stood as well as usual.
Capt. Midleton in his Hudson's-Bay Voyage of 1725; says, that his greatest
Variation was 40 d. W. in N. Lat. 63 d. 50 m, 78 d. W. from London; where the
Compass would scarce traverse: He says, a great Cold or Frost hi^^ers the
Needle from traversing: where near a great Body of Ice, there were great
Complaints of the Compass not traversing: He suspected, that the Age of the
Moon had some Influence upon the Variation.

5. The three Lines of no Variation seem to be of different Natures; that Line
in the Atlantic and Ethiopick Ocean gives Easterly Variations West of its
Line, and Westerly Variations East of its Line; that Line in the Indian Ocean
reversly gives Westerly Variations West of its Line; and Easterly Variations
East of its Line; that in the Pacifick Ocean or South Sea, unexpectedly gives
Easterly Variations both Sides; Dr. Halley and others, before this third Line
was discovered, seem to have laid it down as a Law in Nature, that where an
Easterly Variation terminated, a Westerly Variation must begin, and where a
Westerly Variation terminated an Easterly Variation was to begin, but further
Observations evince this to be no stated Law.

There is a Magnetic Influence all over the Surface of our Globe or Earth; the
Magnetic Needle in some Places has a true Meridian Direction, in others the
Magnetic Meridian has a Deflection more or less in different Places, East or
West: The Points or Places of no Variation, and of the several Quantities of
Variation, when connected, form Curves, but so irregular as not reducible to
any Equation, and of no permanent Figure, and not easily to be classed: We
shall only observe,

There are at present three Lines of no Variation. 1. Between Europe with
Africa, and America in the Atlantic and Ethiopick Ocean; the Variations East
and North of this Line are Westerly, and the further distant from this Line,
the greater and their Increase or Decrease the swifter, this is a general
Principle in Variations; Halley says that in the Beginning of this Century, all
over Europe the Variations were Westerly and upon the Increase; but at present,
these West Variations in the Eastern Parts of Europe seem to be stationary (at
Nuremberg in Germany the W. Variation was stationary at 11 d. from 1700 to
1708) or upon the Decrease; for Instance at Torneo in N. Lat. 65 d. 50 m, 23 d.
E, from London; M. Bilberg Anno 1695 found the Variation 7 d. W. Anno 1736 the
French Academiciens ^ound it 5 d. 5 m. W. therefore upon the Decrease, and
perhaps belonging to the System or Class of the Indian Ocean Line of no
Variation (the Line is not ascertained where the Increase ends, and the
Decrease begins) as in the Northern Parts of Asia they belong to this Class of
Indian Ocean Variations; for Instance, at Astracan near the Caspian Sea, N.
Lat. 46 d. 15 m. and 45 d. E. Long. while the East Variations decreased at
London, there the West Variations increased even to 24 d.; and as the West
Variation increased in London it diminished at Astra^an. Our North America
Variations belong to this first Line of no Variations, and are Westerly N. and
E. of this Line, and Easterly S. and W. of it; these E. Variations along the
Coast of South-America increase very slow; at La Vera Cruz, in N. Lat. 19 d. 12
m. Anno 1727 it was only 2 d. 15 m. E, at Pariba in Brazil beginning of this
Century S. Lat. ^ d. 38 m, it was 5 d. 35 m. E; at Buenos Airs S. Lat. 34 d.
^0 m. it was Anno 1708, 15 d. 32 m. E.; at Cape-Horn 20 d; South of Cape-Horn
in S. Lat. 56 d. 42 m. it was 17 d. E. being upon the Decrease, and stretching
along the Pacifick Ocean Westward or Northward these East Variations decreased.

This Line of no Variation moves the quickest; Anno 1600 it passed Cape Agulhas
(about 2 d. E. of Cape Good-Hope) the Morea, and North Cape of Europe; at this
Cape Agulhas the Variations afterward became West, viz. Anno 1622. 2 d, Anno
1675. 8 d, Anno 1691. 11 d, Anno 1732 17 d; at St. Helena the Variations were
Anno 1600. 8 d. E, Anno 1623. 6 d. E, Anno 1677 Halley found 40 m. E, Anno
1690. 1 d. W, Anno 1700 Halley found 2 d. W, Anno 1732. 8 d. W. Halley Anno
1700 ascertains this Line of no Variation from four Observations N. Lat. 31 d.
W. Long. ^4 d, N. Lat. 2 d, Long. 18 d. W; S. Lat. 17 d, Long. 10 d. W* S. Lat.
37 d, Long. 4 d. W. Th^s L^ne of no (...) seems to move quick to the Westward,
in S. Lat. 35 d. from Anno 17^^ to 1709, it moved 50 Leagues Westward. A French
Ship Anno 1706 (being the first that made this Traverse) from Rio de Galleguas
upon the East Coast of America in S. Lat. 51 d, 68 d. W. Long. from Paris,
Variation 23 d. E. made 1350 Leagues to Cape of Good Hope in 34d. 15m. S. Lat.
17d. 45 m. E. Long. from Paris, found the Variation Lines tending toward the
S. Pole, to become nearly parallel, and in some Places alters only one Degree
for two Degrees of Longitude.

The second Line of no Variation, in the Indian Ocean Anno 1600 passed through
the Moluccas or Spice-Islands and a little East of Canton in China; in a
Century following that is Anno 1700 it had not advanced Eastward above 100
Leagues* the W. Point of Iava (and in the Influence of this Line) Anno 1676 was
3 d. 10 m. West Variation; Anno 1732 it was only 3 d. 20 m. but the further
West these Variations increased, the quicker to the common Axis of the
Variation Parabolick Curves, and th^^ began to decrease and terminate in the
first Line of no Variation. The common Axis of the inscribed Parabolick Curves
Anno 1700 passed through Madagascar and the Streights of Babelmandel about 50
d. E. Long. from London, where the increasing W. Variations terminate, and the
same W. Variations begin to decrease; Halley place^ the highest of these West
Variations 27 d. S. Lat. about 530 Leagues East of Cape Good Hope.

The third Line of no Variation was found by Capt. Rogers in the Pacifick Ocean
in N. Lat. 14 d, W. Long. from London 125 d; and in N. Lat. 13 d, W. Long. 193
d, was 12 d. E; (and afterward decreasing to the second Line,) the largest of
these East Variations which reign all over the Pacifick Ocean; French
Navigators since Anno 1710 have traversed this Ocean Southward of the
Equinoctial Line, as Capt. Rogers did Northward of it, and found the no
Variation Line nearly upon the abovesaid Meridian, and the other
Variation-Lines nearly paralle^ with the Meridians. Sir John Narborough, Dr.
Halley* and Capt. Rogers were mistaken in (...) Co^jecture tha^ South of the
Equinoctial in the middle Parts of this Ocean there must be a Tract of Western
Variations.

This 3 d no Variation Line seems to be a Continuation of the first inflected
Westward into a circular Arch whose Vertex at present seems to be in about 34
d. N. Lat, and 80 d. W. Long. from London.

All Variations within this Curve made by the first and third Line, being a
Space of 140 d. upon the Equinoctial, are Easterly; all without it, on its East
Side, being a Space of 115 d. to the second Line are Westerly; all without it
on its West Side are Easterly, being a Space of 105 d. to the said second Line.
It is observable, that all Variation Lines the nearer they approach to the
Poles of our Earth, the more they converge toward a Parallelism with the
Meridians, as if to terminate in the Poles. The several Variation Lines seem to
receive their Flexures from the Influence of their Easterly and Westerly no
Variation Lines, so as to form Parabolick Curves or circular Arches.

The Alterations in the Variations are not from any uniform circulatory or
libratory Power; but as these magnetic Powers seem to be accumulated and act
connectedly, it must be by some Kind of Fluctuation; in Opposition to this, it
may be said, that the Fluctuation of any dense or specifically heavier
considerable Part of the Earth would alter the Equilibrium and diurnal Rotation
of the Earth, and make strange Changes in the fluid Surface of the Earth by
Inundations and Ebbs.

This Digression is too abstruse and philosophical for most Readers: The Design
of it is, to incite the Curious, to attend the useful Speculation of
Variations, more than heretofore.

As the Variations of the Magnetic Needle or Compass have not been much
attended to in the Colonies; I cannot pretend to be particular in that Affair,
and shall only relate some loose Hints that are come to my Knowledge. The L^ne
of no Variation (which for Distinction I call the first) from the Eastward,
enters the Continent of North America, in Carolina about 33 d. N. Lat. at this
Writing Anno 1748; and by a flattish Flexure crosses the Continent of
North America, and in the Pacifick Ocean converges Southward, and forms what is
now called the third Line of no Variation. Capt. Rogers Anno 1708 in 14 d. N.
Lat, 125 d. W. Long. from London fell in with this Line of no Variation.

To the Northward and Eastward of this No. 1* no Variation Line upon the
Eastern Coast of North America, the Variations are West; and the further North
the greater, but all upon the Decrease; and the further North, the quicker is
the Decrease.

The greatest Variation known was Anno 1616, in N. Lat. 78 d. at Sir Thomas
Smith's Sound in Baffin's-Bay, the Variation was 57 d. West.

Capt. Midleton publishes that at the Mouth of Churchill River (N. Lat. 59 d,
W. Long. from London 94 d. 50 m, from an Immersion of Jupiter's first
Satellite) Anno 1725 the Variation was 21 d. W. Anno 1738 it was 18 d. W. Anno
1742 it was 17 d. W. decreasing very fast.

At Quebec in Canada Anno 1649 the Variation was 16 d. W. Anno 1686 it was 15
d. 30 m. is half a Degree in 37 Years; but after this, according to M. Delisle,
it varied 1 d. in eleven Years.

In New England Mr. Brattle observed at Boston, Anno 1708, the Variation 9 d.
West; Anno 1741 upon a Commission for settling Lines between Massachusetts Bay
Province, and the Colony of Rhode Island, a little to the Southward, the
Commissioners found the Variation 7 d. 30 m. West.

In New York City (by Eclipses of Jupiter's first Satellite, Governor Burnet
found it 74 d. 57 m. W. of London, being in N. Lat. 40 d. 40 m.) Mr. Wells,
Surveyor-General of the Province-Lands Anno 1686, found the Variation 8 d. 45
m. West; Governor Burnet Anno 1723 found it 7 d. 20 m. West.

In New-Ierseys Anno 1743 the Line, between the Proprietors of East and West
Ierseys wa^ run 150 Miles, (...) Chains, 9 d. 19 m. West; but because of the
Diff^rence of Variation which must be supposed at the South and North
Terminations of this Line, it was alleged that it m^st not be a direct Line:
And upon Examination it was found that this Line was in all Respects erroneous,
at the South Point near Egg-Harbour the Variation was only 5 d. 25 m. West, and
at the North Point on Delaware River in 41 d. 40 m. it was 6 d. 35 m. West,
this was to the Prejudice of the East-Iersey Proprietors.

The Streets of Philadelphia Anno 1682 were laid out with g^^at Pr^cis^n^ss N.
18 d. E; Anno 1642, they were found to be 1^ d. East; this is 3 d. in 60 Years.

In the Parallel of 39 d. running the Line between Pensylvania and Maryland
Anno 1686, the Variation was fo^nd to be 9 d. Westerly. Anno 1739, in running
this E^st and West Line it was found 5 d. 30 m. W; Difference is 3 d. 30 m. in
53 Years.

In Virginia, Cape Henry in 37 d. N. Lat. 75 d. West from London, Anno 1732 the
Variation was 4 d. 40 m.

In the Carolinas, Navigators upon the Coast, give no A^^owance for Variation,
because near the Line of no Variation; Inland, in running a divisional Line
between the two Governments or Jurisdictions of South and North Car^lina, and
in laying off Cart^^^'s eighth Part of the Pro^^rty of Carolina, no Account was
made of Variation.

from the Line of no Variation in N. La^. 33 d. Southward the East Variation
takes Place, increasing very slow; ^^cause at L^ Vera Cruz, N. Lat. 19 d. 12 m.
W, Long. 97 d. ^0 m, Anno ^727 the Variation was only 2 d. 1^ m. East.

Here ends the first or general Part of the Summary, concerning the British
Colonies in America, with some int^rs^^^sed ^^ints relating to the Colonies of
the other European Nations. In the following Part we shall give (...) Accounts
of our several Colonies, in Order, as (...) enumerated Page 15 and 16.
The END of Part First.
PART II.
SECT. V. Concerning the Hudson's-Bay Company, their Territories and Trade.
THE Adventurers who endeavored a N. W. Passage to China, the Spice-Islands,
and the East Indies; and in Search for Copper-Mines; gave Occasion to the
Discovery of Hudson's-Bay, and its subsequent Fur and Skin Trade.

(...) R^petitions or Reca^itulatio^^ are sometimes used t^ r^nd^^ (...)
distin^^ and (...).
The Cabots Anno 1496 obtained from Henry VII of England, a Grant of all Lands
they should discover and settle Westward of Europe; in Quest of a N. W.
Passage, they coasted the Eastern Shore of North America, and took a general
Possession for the Crown of England, but made no Settlement; the first Land
they made was West-Greenland in N. Lat. 66 d.

(...) Page 110.
From that Time this Navigation and these Discoveries were entirely neglected
until Anno 1576, 1577, and 1578 Sir Martin Frobisher made three Voyages to a
Strait which retains his Name, but he made no Discoveries.

Si^ Humphry Gilbert by Direction ^f Secretary Walsingham, coasted the North
Easterly S^ore of America: particularly he took Possession of Newfoundland, and
St. Laurence or Canada River, for the Crown of England, and b^g^n some fishing
Trade there, Anno 1583.

Capt. John Davis from Dartmouth, made three Voyages this Way, Anno 1583, 1586,
and 1587, but made no Discoveries; that Branch of the Opening (the Opening at
Cape Farewell in 60 d, N. Lat. a little further at Cape Desolation branches
into two Openings) which reaches North Westward retains the Name Davis Straits,
and is the Whaling Ground of West-Greenland where the Anno 1732 The South Sea
Company had 14 Ships in East Greenland, and 7 Ships in West-Greenland or Davis
Straits, and got 24 and a half Whales; this Fishery did not answer the Charges
of fitting out, and it is dropped, notwithstanding of the Encouragement given by
Act of Parliament, Anno 1724. That any of his Majesty's Subjects may import
Whale Fins, Oil and Blubber of Whales, taken and caught in Greenland Seas in
British Ships navigated according to Law, without paying any Custom, Subsidy,
or other Duties for the same.
English, Dutch, Biscayers, Hamburgers, Bremers, and Danes kill large Whales of
500 to 600 Barrels Oil, and 18 Feet Bone; this Whaling continues for about
seven or eight Weeks.

Henry Hudson after two N. E. successless Trials, and one in vain North
Westward Navigation, he essayed the other Opening above mentioned, and sailing
Westward, and Southward he discovered the Straits and Bay called by his Name:
Anno 1611 proceeding upon further Discoveries, he was never more heard of; in
his Time he was as much an Enthusiast for a N. W. Passage, as Mr. Mr. D -- ^s
of Ireland was the Projector of Midleton's N. W. Discovery Voyage; because it
did not succeed, he charges Midleton with Neglect, Misconduct, and Suspicion of
Corruption; he says, Midleton was bribed by the Company, not to make any
Discovery, or to conceal, or to falsify a N. W. Discovery; Midleton told Mr. D
-- bs by Letter I^n. 21. Anno 1737, the Company judged it their Interest,
rather to prevent, than to forward a N. W. Discovery in that Part of the World;
and that they offered him 5000 L. to act and report in their Favor; some of
Midleton's Officers made Affidavits concerning his bad Conduct; upon the Design
of the Admiralties fitting out Capt. Midl^ton for a N. W. Discovery, the
Governor and Council of the Huds^n's Bay Company wrote to the Governor at
Prince of Wal^s Fort upon Ch^^chill River, to refuse them Refreshment, but
afterward upon further Consideration, they revoked this Order, and allowed the
Governor to supply Capt. Midleton if in Distress. Notwithstanding of this
Disappointment Mr. D -- bs procured an Act of Parliament for 20,000 L. Public
Reward for a Discovery, and accordingly the Dobbs Galley and California sailed
from England in May 1746.

Mr. D -- bs runs much into the Novel, he seems to be a wild Projector and
notoriously credulous. He gives particular Accounts of large Countries and
Islands in the Pacifick Ocean, especially from S. Lat. 9 d. to N. Lat. 15 d,
very rich and populous, abounding in Nutmegs, Mace, Ginger, Pepper, Cinnamon,
Silk and Ebony; the Natives with reddish Complexions, gray Eyes, high Noses,
Beards and Hair curled: In the N. W. Parts of America were Vessels or Ships
with Prows (Heads or Lions we call them) of Gold and Silver: W.S.W. the Indians
come to a Sea, where were great Vessels, and M^n with Caps an Beards gathering
of Gold: About a Century since, A. 1640 Bartholomew de Fontes Viceroy of
Mexico and Peru, hearing that the English were endeavoring a N. W. Passage, he
sailed to the River of Los Reys in 53 d. N. Lat. upon the W. Side of America;
and detached Capt. Bernardi who sailed to 77 d. N. Lat. (here he found it as
warm as 10 d. less N. Lat. upon the E. Side of the American Continent) upon
this Coast he met with Capt. Shapley from New England (this is an unaccountable
Stretch to prove a N. W. Passage) there is no Record nor Tradition of this in
New England in my Knowledge. Mr. D -- bs is as particular in giving Accounts of
distant not frequented Countries, as if he were describing Great Britain or
France; and proposes, that Great Britain shall settle an Extent of Countries,
more than all Europe could effect.

Mr. D -- bs from the Stories of the French Fathers, and of the Coureurs des
Bois, relates strange Things. From Lt. Ieromie (doubtless a Native of Gascony)
he relates, that in the District of Hudson's- Bay, are to be seen 10,000 Rain
Deer in a Herd, and large Mines of Virgin-Copper.

The French were, at this Rate, most egregious Fools to give up so easily by
the Treaty of Utrecht Anno 1713 two such valuable Articles of Deer-Skins and
Copper* Northward is a Strait with floating Ice, probably a Passage to the
Western Ocean or South-Seas, the N. Wind rising the Tide 10 Feet above the
ordinary Tides* At the Peace of Utrecht, in Quebec were 4000 to 5000 Troops in
Garrison: On the West Main are the Copper Mines, on the East Main are the Lead
Mines: He gives large Lists of Names of imaginary Tribes of Indi^ns* their
Lakes and Rivers; whereas the several Islands, Head-Lands, Bays, Rivers, etc,
do not retain their Indian Names, as in some of our Colonies, but are called by
the Names of the several Adventurers or Discoverers; Mr. D -- ^s names and
describes all these Things minutely and with the same Ease, as if they were the
best known, most polite, and well-regulated Countries upon Earth.


D -- bs is at present, as appears by the present Paper-War between D -- bs and
Midleton.

Sir Thomas Button fitted out by Prince Henry, Anno 1612 passed Hudson's
Straits, and sailing Westward, discovered a large Continent, and called it New
Wales; its Sea and Bay retains the Discoverer's Name; he could not proceed
further than 65 d. N, Lat, and called it Ne Ultra, he wintered miserably upon
that West Continent at Port Nelson in 57 d. N. Lat.

Capt. Thomas James from Bristol, Anno 1631 made further Discoveries in
Hudson's- Bay, he wintered near the Bottom of the Bay at Charleton Island in N.
Lat. 52 d. and published a good Journal of his Voyage.

Anno 1616 Mr. Baffin, by the North Westerly Opening called Davis Straits,
carried the N. W. Affairs so high as N. Lat. 80 d. to no Purpose, and gave his
Name to the Sea or Bay in that high Latitude.

Capt. Fox Anno 1632 sailed into Hudson's Bay upon the Discovery, where he see
many Whales End of July, he proceeded no further than Port Nelson in N. Lat. 57
d. he wintered there; Tide 14 Feet.

Beginning of the last Century the Danes went upon the N. W. Discovery, and
took Possession of the N. Easterly Shore of Davis Straits, and called it
New-Danemark, and made a miserable Settlement in N. Lat. 64 d: From that Time,
they have assumed the Sovereignty of the Seas in Davis Straits, and keep a
Royal Frigate stationed there, duri^g the Whaling Season, which does not
continue above 7 or 8 Weeks.

The Civil Wars in England prevented any further Attempts of such Discoveries
for some Time, until Prince Rupert and Company Anno 1667 sitted out Capt.
Guilam; he landed at Rupert River in N. Lat. 51 d. upon the East Continent of
Hudson's Bay, built Charles ^o^t, trad^d with the Indians to good Advantage,
and laid a Foundation for the Companies Fur and Deer-Skin Trade.

A Royal Charter was granted May 2. Anno 1669 to a Governor and Company of
Adventurers of England trading into Hudson's Bay; whereof h^re f^llows an
Abstract. To (...) Rupert Count Palatine of the Rhine, to G^or^e Duke of
Albemarle, to William Earl of Craven, and to Fifteen Others, and to others whom
they shall admit into said Body corporate, Power to make a common Seal, and to
alter it; to choose annually sometime in November, a Governor, a
Deputy Governor, and a Committee of Seven, any Three of the Committee with the
Governor or Deputy Governor, to be a Court of Directors: Freemen to be admitted
(their Factors and Servants may be admitted Freemen) at a General Court, a
Power to dismiss the Governor, Deputy Governor, or any of the Committee, before
the Year expires; and upon their Dismission, or Death, to elect others in their
Room for the Remainder of the Year: To have the sole Property of Lands, Trade,
royal Fishery, and Mines within Hudson's Straits, not actually possessed by any
Christian Prince, to be reputed as one of our Colonies in America, to be called
(...) Name has never been used, it is called Hud^^n's (...) Colony.
Rupert 's Land, to hold the same in free and common Succage, to pay the Skins
of two Elks, and two black Beavers, as often as the King or Queen shall come
into those Lands: Power to assemble the Company and to make Laws for their
Government and other Affairs, not repugnant to the Laws of England; an
exclusive Trade, without Leave obtained of the Company, Penalty Forfeiture of
Goods and Shipping, one half to the King, one half to the Company. In their
General Meetings for every 100 L. original Stock to have one Vote; may appoint
Governors, Factors, and other Officers in any of their Ports; the Governor and
his Council to judge in all Matters civil and criminal, and execute Justice
accordingly: Where there is no Governor and Council, may send them to any Place
where there is a Governor and Council, or to England for Justice: Liberty to
send Ships of War, Men, and Ammunition for their Protection, erect Forts, etc:
To make Peace or War with any People who are not Christians, may appeal to the
King in Council.

Anno 1670 Mr. Baily with 20 Men was sent over by the Company to Rupert River.
Port Nelson was the next Settlement Anno 1673; and Mr. Bridge was sent over
Governor of the West Main from Cape Henrietta Maria. Anno 1683 the Factory was
removed from Rupert River to Moose River. Rupert River is not used because
exposed to the Depredations of the French; from Tadousac 30 Leagues below
Quebec upon Canada River, there is Water Carriage to Lake Mistasin which
communicates with Rupert River. The Trade at the Mouth of all the Rivers which
fall into Hudson's Bay is secured to Great Britain by the Treaty of Utrecht,
but the Heads of the Southern Rivers are within the French Bounds, and the
French have Trading-Houses which do very much intercept and lessen our Indian
Trade: The Company do not much use the East and South Parts of the Bay, because
of the bad Neighborhood of the French.

In the Summer Anno 1686 in Time of Peace, the French from Canada became
Masters of all our Hudson's Bay Factories, Port Nelson excepted. Anno 1693 The
English recovered their Factories, but the French got Possession of them again
soon after. Anno 1696 two English Men of War retook them. In Queen Anne's War,
the French from Canada were again Masters of these Factories; but by the Peace
of Utrecht Anno 1713, the French quit-claim'd them to the English so far South
as 49 d. N. Lat; hitherto we have not heard of any Attempt made upon them by
the Canadians in this French War which commenced in the Spring 1744.

Mr. Dobbs reckons that this Country called Hudson's Bay, may be esteemed from
51 d. to 65 d. N. Lat, and from 78 d. to 95 d. W. Long. from London; the true
Definition of it, is, from the Treaty of Utrecht 1713; viz. From a certain
Promontory on the Atlantic Ocean N. Lat. 58 d. 30 m. runs S. W. to Lake
Mistasin (this includes the Western half of Terra Labradore) thence S. W. to N.
Lat. 49 d. and from this Termination due West indefinitely; the Northern
Boundary may be reckoned Davis Straits because of the Danish Claim, and
otherwa^^ North indefinitely.

The Entrance of Hu^^^n's Straits at Resolution Island is about 15 Leagues
wide, Tide flows 4 Fathom, Winds N. W. about 9 Months in the Year, not free of
Ice above 2 Months in the Year; Sails and Rigging freeze in July, it is 140
Leagues in Length to the Bay: At the Bottom of the Bay only 4 Feet Tide. Capt.
Midleton in 23 Voyages never could arrive at the Factories, above 5 or 6 Times,
before the 10th of August; and it is a standing Order not to attempt coming
back the same Year, unless they can fail from the Factories by Sept. 10; it is
generally pleasant Weather; Midleton in all his Voyages never suffered
Shipwreck; August is the proper Month for the Navigation of Hudson's Bay and
Straits; always good Soundings.

This Grant is divided into the West Main or Continent formerly in Charts
called New-North and South Wales, and the East Main called Terra de Labradore
or New-Britain: The French claimed the Bottom of the Bay as belonging to New
France or Canada, but they disclaimed it by the Treaty of Utrecht.

Because of the Unhospitableness of the Country, no Towns or Plantations, can
ever be settled there; it must (...) ever remain a Number of scattered dismal
Lodges o^ Factories. Hudson's Bay and Georgia are improperly called Colonies,
they have no House of Representatives; the Hudson's Bay Company in London make
their Laws and Regulations, as the Trustees for Georgia in London do for the
Settlers in Georgia.

Hudson's Bay Colony as it is called, consists of several ^odges at the Mouths
of several Rivers for Trade with the Indians, viz. on the West Continent are
Churchill River, Nelson's River, Severn River, Albany River, and Moose River;
on the E. Continent are Rupert River and Slude River.

Churchill River (Prince of Wales Fort) is the most Northerly, being in about
59 d. N. Lat, and 94 d. 50 m. W. Long. from London, the most Westerly Part of
Hudson's Bay; here Capt. Midleton Anno 1742, upon a N. W. Discovery wintered
miserably. At the Mouth of this River, the Tide comes from N. b. E. 2 Knots;
they return about 20,000 Beaver-Skins pr An. the Company keeps here about 28
Men: It is navigable 150 Leagues.

Nelson's River (Fort York) called by the French Bourbon River; its Port lies
in N. Lat. 57 d; it is the finest and largest River in the Bay, it communicates
with great Lakes, and Branches of Rivers of Indian Trade: Tide 14 Feet; the
Company have here 25 Men.

New Severn River, the French call it St. Huiles, in N. Lat. 55 d; it is at
present slighted or neglected, a barred River.

Albany River in N. Lat, 52 d. W. Long. 85 d. 20 m. 4 Feet Tide: From the
Middle of May to the Middle of September fine warm Weather; Anno 1731, 118
Canoes came there to trade, the Company keep here 25 Men.

Moose River in N. Lat. 51 d. 4 Feet Tide; it is a much larger and finer River
than Albany River; the Company have here 25 Men.

P. Rupert River on the E. Side of the Bay, N. Lat. 51 d; is at present
neglected.

Slude River on the E. Side of the Bay in N. Lat, 52 d; here are 8 or 9 Men
kept by the Company.

The Company's Profits are very great, and engrossed by a few; their Stock has
been sold at 300 for 100 Original; they may export annually about 3,000 L. St.
Value, and their half yearly Sales are about 25,000 L. St* 8 or 9 Merchants
have engrossed about nine Tenths of the Stock; the Charge of the Company is
about 120 Servants, 2 or 3 annual Ships, having in Time of War about 120 Men
aboard. They import Deer-Skins, Castoreum or Beaver-Stone, Feathers, Whale-Bone
and Blubbor; but Beaver-Skin is two Thirds of the whole, and is the Standard of
their Truck or Currency.

Mr. Dobbs thinks it would be a public national Benefit, that the Hudson's Bay
Companies Charter were vacated, and the Trade laid open; thus we shall
under^^ll the French and carry on a greater Trade with the Indians (the Company
keep the Price of Goods too high) and we would have Trading Houses up the
River, the Company have no such Trading Houses, the Company by their Charter
are obliged to endeavor a N. W. Passage, which on the contrary they discourage.

As this is a Country of exclusive Trade and Navigation, we are too much
confined to the Accounts of their own Navigators. As a Specimen we shall take a
Medium Voyage of Capt. Midleton's Anno 1735. He set out from London May 21,
June 12 made Cape Farewell in N. Lat. about 59 d, W. Long. 45 d. 50 m. Var. 29
d. W. July 1. in N. Lat. 61 d. W. Long. 70 d. 10 m. Var. 41 d. W, he was fast
in thick Ice with Fogs and Rain; August 3. he arrived in Moose River, N. Lat.
51 d; W. Long. 83 d, Var. 22 d. W; he sailed from thence Sept. 1. makes no
Mention of Ice in his Return; arrived in England Oct. 7. As for the Climate,
Midleton in the Journal of his N. W. Discovery Voyage Anno 1741 and 1742, says,
He arrived in Churchill River August 10; first Snow was Sept. 1. Geese flying
to the Southward; Sept. 27 Thermometer as low as in London, Time of the
greatFrost; Oct. 21. Ink and Water froze by the Bedside; Beginning of Nov. a
Bottle of Spirits full Proof froze in the open Air: After Nov. 11, no going
abroad without being froze ( N. B. forgetting himself, he frequently mentions
the Company's Servants, and Indians being abroad after that Tim^ (...) 2.
begins to thaw in the Sun, about this Time the Ice at the Ship was 10 Feet
thick with 13 Feet Snow over the Ice. April 10 large Fleaks of Snow (in the
preceding Months the falling Snow was as fine as Dust) a Sign of the Winter's
being spent; April 22 a Shower of Rain (no Rain for 7 Months preceding)
Beginning of May Geese begin to appear; May 13 got the Ship into the Stream,
and July 1. we sailed upon the N. W. Discovery; he proceeded no farther North
than 66 d. 44 m. because Beginning of August from a high Mountain we perceived
to the S. E, at about 20 Leagues Distance a Straits covered with an
impenetrable solid Body of Ice, and therefore no Communication with the Eastern
Sea; and the Tide of Flood coming from thence, we had no Hopes of passing that
Way, into the Western or Pacifick Ocean, and August 8. we bore away to the
Southward.

In the Northern Factories, the great Thaws begin End of April; the Waters
inland are froze up from the Beginning of October to the Beginning of May. In
North America we judge of the Inclemencies of their several Climates, by the
Times of the Flights of their Passenger Birds: In these Factories wild Geese
and Swans fly Southward Beginning of October, and return Northward End of April
and Beginning of May. Seldom a Night in Winter without an Aurora Borealis. Some
Deer 12 to 13 Hands high, here are white Bears, Swans, Ducks of several Kinds,
and other Waterfowl; in their Mea^ows instead of Cerealia and Gramina, that is
Bread-C^rn, and Grasses, they have only Moss, some scurvy Grass, and Sorrel.
Hares, Rabits, Foxes, Patridges, beginning of October, from their native
Color, become Snow-white, and continue so for 6 Months, till the Season
produces a new Coat: Wind blows from the N. W. about 9 Months in the Year, they
have 9 Months Ice and Snow; the cold Fogs and Mists damp the Pleasure of their
short Summers.

I formerly hinted the vast Advantage that the European Western North Latitudes
had of the American Eastern North Latitudes; by Way of Amusement, I continue
further to observe that in 50 d. (for Instance) N. Lat. in the N. Easterly
Parts of America, it is as cold as in 60 d. or upwards N. Lat. in N. Westerly
Parts of Europe; the Ocean and its mellow Vapor being to the Windward of
Europe; but a rude, rigorous, chilly, frozen and snowy Continent is to the
Windward of the other. I vouch this by a few Instances. 1. From Churchill River
Fort there was no going abroad without being frozen in Winter; from Torneo in
Lapland Anno 1736 nearly under the Polar Circle, to investigate the Length of a
Degree of Latitude there, the French Academici^^s in the Severity of the
Winter, were 63 Days in the Desert, procuring a complete Set of Triangles. 2.
The Bottom of Hudson's-Bay is scarce habitable in Winter, though scarce so far
North as London, a most agreeable Caelum or Air. 3. In the Orkneys (where the
Hudson Bay Ships call in to hire Men and Boys at 5 to 20 L. St. pr An.
according to the Years of their indented Continuance; they are called N. W.
Men) there is good ^i^tering; Barley, Pease, and Oats, Cabbages, other Pot
Herbs, and usual Roots, grow kindly; not much Snow and Ice; Orkneys is a little
North of Churchill-River.

These are not designed as strict stiffly connected Historical Accounts, but as
loose occasional Observations, in some Manner, red^^^d under general Heads,
therefore although we have already made a Di^gression concerning Variations,
this may be admitted.
Capt. Midleton in his too minute Journals of his many Voyages from England to
Hudson's Bay; observed that in Hudson's Bay, in the same Longitudes from
London; in sailing North, the Variations increase faster than in any known Part
of the Earth; for Instance, in one of his Voyages he observed, that in about 84
d. W. Long. from London; the Variations increase thus, In N. Lat. 50 d.
Variation was 19 d. W. 55 25 61 30 62 40

Capt. Serogs Anno 1722 (he had Mr. Norton late Governor of Churchill Fort
aboard, with two Northern Indians to discover the much enquired after
Copper-Mines) he traded with the Indians for Whale-Bone, at Whale-Bone Point in
N. Lat. 65 d, here the Tide flowed 5 Fathom.

A DIGRESSION Giving some further Accounts of late Endeavors toward a
North-West Passage to China.
A Passage by the North Westward or Davis Straits seems to be given up or
relinquished by all European Adventurers; but the Passage by the West Southerly
Branch or Hudson's Bay is still in Prosecution: The British Parliament lately
enacted a Reward of 20,000 L. St. to theDiscoverer, if from Hudson's Bay; upon
this Encouragement, the Dobbs Galley and California, as a private Adventure,
sailed from England May 1746; in our Knowledge, they are not as yet returned to
England. Their original Proposal was to sail Eastward to the East Indies and
China (but there is no Act of Parliament to indemnify them, in a Trespass upon
the exclusive Navigation granted to the East India Company in these Seas, by
Charter and Act of Parliament) and from the Eastward to sail to the Northward
of California, and from thence to endeavor an Easterly Passage to Davis
Straits or Hudson's Bay.

The last Tentative for a N. W. Passage was by Capt. Midleton from Hudson's B^y
Anno 1741 and 1742, according to Order and Instructions from the Lords of the
Admiralty May 20. Anno 1741: There was no Occasion for his wintering in
Hudson's Bay, before he set out upon the Discovery; he should have sailed from
England, so as to arrive in Hudson's Bay, Middle of July; push the Discovery,
Month of August; and return in September.

A short Abstract of his Discovery Journal, is. We sailed from Churchill River
July 1; in N. Lat. 65 d. 10 m, F. Long. from Churchill River 9 d. we doubled a
Head-Land, and called it Cape Dobbs; and the following Opening, we called Wager
River, Tide 5 or 6 Knots from the East, and full of Ice, Eskimaux Indians came
aboard but had no Trade: Proceeding further North, we doubled another
Head-Land, and called it Cape Hope; and sailing further to N. Lat. 67 d. E.
from Churchill Fort 12 d. 20 m; from the Mountains we see a narrow dangerous
Strait frozen over, and no Probability of its being clear this Year, deep
Water, no Anchorage; being afraid of f^eezing up, we returned to N. Lat. 64 d,
here were many Whale-Bone Whales; we examined all along to N. Let. 6^ d, Tide
from the Eastward: August 15 we bore away for England, and Sept. 1^, we arrived
at Kerston in the ^^kneys.

I shall by Way of Amusement mention the Arguments used both Sides of the
Question, in Favor of, and in Prejudice against a N. W. Passage to China.

In Favor of a N. W. Passage. 1. The Whales found in Plenty on the West Side
of Hudson's Bay, as there is no Mention of Whales in Hudson's Straits, they do
not come that Way; they cannot come from Davis Straits by the frozen Straits of
Midleton, because of a wide and large Field of Ice; Whales cannot pass under a
large Tract of Ice, they cannot live without blowing at Times in the open Air;
therefore these Whales must come from the Western orPacifick Ocean, by some
Straits or Thorough-Fare in Hudson's Bay: It is more probable that the great
Whales in Davis Straits, when the Sea there begins to be froze up, pass into
the Ocean, or deeper Water, because warmer; Thus the Cod-Fish upon the Coast of
New England in very cold Winters, retire into deep Water: Mr. Dobbs affirms
that Midleton see no Whales near Cape Hope or the frozen Straits; he judges the
frozen Straits to be only a Chimaera; therefore the Whales in Button's Bay must
come from the Westward. 2. Wager River, where was Midleton's principal Enquiry,
in N. Lat. 65 d. 24 m. W. Long. 88 d. 37 m; from 7 Miles wide at its Entrance,
further up increased to 8 Leagues wide, and from 14 to 80 Fathom Water, and
Whales were seen 20 Miles up the River. Dobbs conjectures that these Whales
came from the Western Ocean, by some Strait or Passage South of Wager River
from N. Lat. 65 d. to 62 d; here it is where the Eskimaux Indians follow
Whaling, and traded with Capt. S^rogs Anno 1722. 3. Midleton from some undue
Influence, did not well inspect the Coast, where the greatest Probability was
of a Passage, designedly he kept too great an Offing; and descried pretended
Land and Mountains in the Clouds; concluding there were no Thorough-Fares, he
did not send his Boats ashore to try for Inlets. Fox, Anno 1632 sailing upon
this Coast, see much broken Land and Islands, and Plenty of Whales end of July.
4. Midleton's Officers said that the Tide was three Hours sooner at the Mouth
of Wager River than at Cape Frigid; therefore the Tide did not come from the
frozen Straits and Baffins Bay Eastward, but from some Straits Westward; the
same malecontent Officers assured Mr. Dobbs, that the higher up Wager River,
the Water became the salter, and the Flood was from W. S. W. Midleton says the
Tide came from North-Easterly.

To evince the Impracticableness of a N. W. Passage. 1. The French very
inquisitive and mindful of their Interest, seem to give up any Prospect of this
Passage, (...) by the Treaty of Utrecht they readily renounced for ever to
Great Britain, the sole and exclusive Benefit of a N. W Passage to China from
Hudson's Bay or Davis Straits when discovered. 2. The Whales on the WestSide of
Hudson's Bay, by the frozen Straits, came from Davis Straits where they are
plenty. 3. Midleton says (we cannot answer for his Vouchers) that Indian
Travelers have gone by Land from Churchill River, as high as the Aretick
Circle, but met with no Thorough-Fares; his Northern Indians which he took on
Board, in Churchill River were chiefly designed to show him theCopper-Mines. 4.
The further up Wager River, the Tides rise less; the Water from salt becomes
breakish, and the higher the more fresh. 5. Midleton writes, that from his own
Experience, there is no Thorough-Fare from Churchill River in N. Lat. 59 d. to
N. Lat. 67 d; and further North, if there be any Straits or Thorough-Fare, it
cannot be clear of Ice (if ever clear) above a Week or two in the Year, and
therefore impracticable: From the River Wager to N. Lat. 62 d, he stood into
every Bay and ^^arched the Coast narrowly. 6. As the Winds there are ^enerally
from the N. W. and excessively cold, there must ^e a long continued or
connected Tract of Land Westward, covered with perpetual Snow and Ice and
therefore impracticable. Moreover, if there is any such Strait, it is narrow
and long; the Adventurers would run a certain Risk of being froze up and of
perishing.

SECT. VI. Concerning the Island of Newfoundland, and its Cod-Fishery.
THIS is a Fishery of longer standing, than are any of our Colony or Plantation
Settlements; it is noColony, it is not confined to any Patent or exclusive
Company, but is an open general British Cod-Fishery, consisting of many Lodges,
or commodious Harbors for curing of Cod-Fish, for the Spanish, Portuguese, and
Italian Markets.

The Cod-Fishery, profitable, and sufficient to supply many and large Markets;
is peculiar to Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, and New England: A Monopoly of this
Fishery in these Seas, to be called a Mare Clausum, would be a vast Advantage
to the Trade and Navigation of Great Britain, if it could be obtained at the
ensuing Congress for a general Peace amongst the States in Europe: it is true,
the French and Spaniards have a considerable Claim to some Interest in the
Newfoundland Cod-Fishery, because the Guipiscoers of Spain, and the Bayonners
of France were contemporary, if not more early in that Fishery than England. By
the Treaty of Utrecht, the Guipiscocans and the other Subjects of Spain, were
allowed their claimed Privilege of fishing at the Island of Newfoundland: by
the same Treaty the French were allowed to fish, and cure their Fish on that
Part of Newfoundland from Cape Bonavista, N. Lat. 49 d. 30 m. to the
Northermost Part of the Island in N. Lat. 51 d. 30 m; and from thence running
down by the Western Side to Point-Riche in N. Lat. 50 d. 30. m; by the Cod-Fish
being more plenty, and by falling in nearer the Shore, the Cod-Fishery of the
North Part of the Island, seems to be more profitable than upon the Southern
Harbors of the Island; by this Concession before the War An. 1744 the French
had the better of us in the Cod-Fishery Trade. -- King Charles I. bubled by the
French, gave them a Liberty of fishing and curing Fish in Newfoundland, upon
the silly Pretext of supplying an English Convent in France with Fish.

This Cod-Fishery is not only a considerable Addition to the Trade and Wealth
of Great Britain; but by the many Men employed in catching and curing of the
Cod-Fish, is a good Nursery for our Navy and other Navigation (the Plantation
Trade, the Fishery of Newfoundland, the Coal Trade of Newcastle, and the
Watermen upon the River of Thames, are the great Nurseries or Seminaries of our
Navigation) if the Fr^^ch could by Treaty be excluded from this Fishery, it
would contract their Navigation Seminary very much. Can^da does not incr^as^
their Navigation much, their Trade employs a very (...) inconsider^ble Number
of Ves^^l^: Their inla^d Fur and Ski^^ ^^sin^ss is managed by a few Fr^n^h
C^urcur^^ d^s Bois, and Indians ca^^ed Les (...) des Bois: therefore Canada
(...) people (...).


Our Claims of Discovery, not Occupancy, run so high as the Times of the Cabots
coasting along the Eastern Shore of North America upon a N. W. Discovery, and
their taking Possession for the Crown of England, from Place to Place; they
settled no Fishery there, but gave it the Name Anno 1507 of Terra de Baccaleos
with good Propriety; that is, Cod-Fish Land: The French called it Terre Neuve,
we retain their Name and call it Newfoundland

Secretary Walsingham Anno 1583 (about this Time all the trading Nations of
Europe were intense upon a N W. Passage to China and the East Indies) being
informed of a Westerly Opening North of North-Virginia (the present
Nova Scotia) sent out Sir Humphrey Gilbert, a Gentleman of Estate upon the
Discovery; this Gentleman sailed up the Gulf and some Part of the River St.
Laurence; and in Form, took Possession of Newfoundland and Canada for the Crown
of England; he settled a Fishery at Newfoundland, but being cast away upon his
Return to England, the Fishery was soon relinquished; but prosecuted by the
French, Spaniards and Portuguese.

Anno 1608 this Fishery was again undertaken by John Gu^y of Bristol Merchant;
several English Men, Women, and Children wintered there, Anno 1613.

Anno 1610 King James gave to the Earl of Southampton Lord Keeper, and others,
a Grant from Bonavista to Cape St. Mary W. of Cape Raze; some Families were
sent over; it did not answer, they returned to England.

Anno 1620 or 1623 Sir George Calvert principal Secretary of State, afterward
Lord Baltimore, obtained a Pat^^t for some Part of Newfoundland, from the Bay
of Bulls to Cape St. Marys; he s^ttled a Fort and Plantation at Fairyland; but
in the Time of the Troubles in the civil War of England, it was discontinued,
and was outed by Sir David Kirk. A. 1654. having retained some Claim until that
Time, Lord Baltimore a zealous Roman Catholic came abroad (as the first
Settlers of New England did in their Religion Way) to enjoy the free Exercise
of his Religion in Quiet: from Newfoundland he removed to Virginia, but the
Virginians being as zealous for the Church of England Way, as he was for the
Church of Rome Way, he became uneasy, and went further up the Bay of C^esapeak
above the Virginian Settlements; and afterward obtained a most beneficial
Patent of those Lands now called Maryland, which the Family enjoy to this Day;
at present this Family is Christian Protestant.

The French made a Settlement at Placentia in the South Part of the Island
where the Cod-Fish first set in yearly; this was relinquished to Great Britain
by the Treaty of Utrecht A. 1713, and by Way of Equivalent, the French had
given to them, the Islands of Cape Breton, and all the other Islands in the
Gulf of St. Laurence, and Liberty to catch and cure Fish in the northern
Harbors of Newfoundland: the French pretend, that they have had a constant
Fishery at Newfoundland ever since it was taken Possession of, for Francis I.
King of France, by Verazano a Florentine. In Cromwell's Time Sir David Kirk's
Family resided some Years in Newfoundland, he invaded Canada several Times, and
had a Grant of Lands North of St. Laurence River, called Canada: but King
Charles II. always more in the French Interest (Kings may be bought to betray
their own Countries Interest) than in that of Great Britain, Quit claimed
Canada, as also Placentia, St. Peter's etc. of Newfoundland in the Gulf of St.
Laurence, to the French.

The English have been for a long Time in the Use of this Fishery, A. 1545
there was an Act of the English Parliament, for Encouragement to the English
Merchants trading to Newfoundland: the first Family Settl^ments with
Continuance seems to have been A. 1610, at present there are nine or ten
Settlements called Harbors, not Towns, where they cure and ship off their dry
Cod Fish^ at this Writing A. 1748 there are about 4000 People winter there:
they fish and cure Fish from May to October, the Fishery is generally off the
Mouths of their Harbors, they do not fish much upon the Banks.

M. Bellin says, that from good Observations Cape Raze, its Southernmost Point
lies in N. Lat. 46. d. 50 m; its Northernmost Land in the Straits of Belle
Isle, lies in N. Lat. 51 d. 30 m: its greatest Breadth (the Island resembles an
Isosceles Triangle) or Base is from Cape Raze to Cape Raye about 80 Leagues.
From the Nothern Part of Cape Breton Island or St. Paul are 15 Leagues to Cape
Raze or rather Cape Sud the Entrance of the Gulf of St. Laurence: the North
Cape of Breton Island lies in N. Lat. 47 d. 5 m.

The great Bank of Newfoundland lies from N. Lat. 41 d. to 49 d. and 90 Leagues
from E. to W; Distance from Cape Raze about 35 Leagues.

As to the Regulations, Discipline or Economy of Newfoundland. Differences
amongst the Fishermen of the several Harbors, are at first Instance determined
by the Admirals so called, being the first Ship Masters who arrive for the
Season in the respective Harbors; from this Judgment, Appeal lies to the
Commodore of the King's station'd Ships, who determines in Equity. Felonies in
Newfoundland are not triable there, but in any County of Great Britain.
Newfoundland having no Legislative Assembly or Representative of the Debtors of
the Country, their Currency is not perverted but continues at a sterling Value.
At present the Commodore of the King's Ships stationed for the Protection of
the Fishery of Newfoundland, is Governor of Newfoundland, during his
Continuance there, by the Title of Governor and Commodore in Chief of
Newfoundland, and of the Forts and Garrisons there; there are also Lieutenant
Governors of the Forts of Placentia and St. John's at 10 s. Sterling. per Day. As
we hinted, the Master of the Vessel who first arrives in the several Harbors,
is called, Admiral of that Harbor, and acts as a Magistrate, and is called
Lord of the Harbor

The Estimates in a late Pamphlet, called, The Importance of Cape Breton
considered, are too much at Random, and erroneou^.
The annual Quantity of Cod-Fish shipped off by British Subjects from
Newfoundland is various from 100,000 Quintals to 300,000 Quintals; generally
they make double the Quantity in Proportion to what is made in New England.

Capt. Smith, a Man of Credit, writes A. 1623, that there fished upon the Coast
of Newfoundland yearly about 250 Sail of English Vessels, at a Medium of 60
Tuns, and returned the Value of L 135,000 Sterling annually: their Method of
sharing at that Time, was one Third to the Owners, one Third for victualling,
and one Third to the Ship's Company.

The Commodore of the King's Ships at Newfoundland, when the Fishing Season is
over, receives from each Harbor a Report in distinct Columns. I shall Instance
the Year 1701, being in Time of Peace, a medium Year, and the Accounts the most
distinct.

The State of Newfoundland Anno 1701.
Number of Ships, Fishers, 75 Sacks or Purchasers 46 Burden of said Ships
7,991 Tuns Number of Men belonging to said Ships Number of Fishing ^hips Boats
338 Number of Inhabitants Boats 558 Number of By Boats 97 Quantity of Fish made
by Ships 79,820 Quint. Quantity of Fish made by Inhabitants 136,500 Quint. Q.
of Train or Liver Oil made by Ships 1,264 Hhds. Train or Liver Oil made by
Inhabitants 2,534 Hhds. Number of Stages 544 Number of Men 461 Number of Women
166 Number of Children 256 Number of Servants 2,698

Anno 1716 exported to Spain, Portugal and Italy 106,-952 Quintals.

The Fish shipped off from the several Harbors, I shall instance a Year of small
Fishery.

Anno 1724 were shipped off
From the Harbors No. Vessels Quantity of Fish St. Peter's and Placentia 2
3,500 Quint. Trepas^ay 3 3,700 Formoos^ 2 3,300 Renuse 1 1,200 St. John's 20
37,000 Conception Bay 4 11,000 Trinity 5 11,200 Bona Vista 1 4,000 Fairyland 17
29,000 Bay of Bulls 4 7,200 59 111,100

Anno 1732 were shipped off from Newfoundland about 200,000 Quintals, last Year
being A. 1747. were exported somewhat more.

In Newfoundland they reckon, when well ^isht, 200 Quintals to the Inhabitants
Boat or Shallop, and 500 Quintals to a Banker.

The Liberty allowed by the Treaty of Utrecht to the French, for fishing and
curing of Fish in the Northern Parts of Newfoundland, abridges us of an
exclusive Navigation; such as the French fully enjoy, by an Edict A. 1727 (by
Virtue of the 5th and 6th Articles of Peace and Neutrality in America concluded
November. 6. A. 1686) it is peremp^o^ily declared, that all English Vess^ls
sailing within a League of the Shores of any French Island, shall be seized and
confiscated, without any other Proof of Trade. St. Malo and Granville are the
principal French Cod-Fishery in North America; there are some from St. Iean de
Luz, Bayone, and N^^les; before Cape Breton lately ^ell into the Possession of
Great Britain, the (...) Bank^rs when long out, went to water and refr^sh at
(...).

Four to five thousand Newfoundland fresh Cod Fish are reckoned to make one
hundred Quintals of well cured dry Cod or 3 Quintals wet Fish make 1 dry. The
^^vers from 100 Quintals dry Cod, afford about one Hogshead or 60 Gallons of
Liver Oil. After the Fish are headed, boned, split, and salted, the Shoremen
deliver one half the Weight, the overplus goes for their Labor.

The Cod-Fish annually appear first at St. Peter's and Placentia in May, and
thence proceed Northward along Shore to St. John's, Trinity etc, and in Autumn
are fisht by the French in the North parts of Newfoundland. Cod follow the bait
Fish, as they appear near the Shore successively during the fishing Season;
first are the Caplin, next come the Squid, the Herrings take their Course in
Autumn, at other Times a Muscle is their Bait.

Their Fish Ships are distinguished into, Fishing-Ships which by their own
Boats and Men catch and cure their Fish-Cargoes, and Sack-Ships which purchase
their Fish from the Inhabitants.

The Soil is Rocks and Mountains No Sledding, no Wheel Carriages; their Fire
Wood is carried some Miles upon Men's Should^rs.
inhospitable; their Trees are Pine, Fir called Spruce, Spruce Leaves and Bud^
decocted in Place of Hops, make an agreeable Beer or Drink, and is esteemed
good in the Scurvy.
and Birch; Strawberries and Raspberries here are good and plenty. In
Newfoundland there are no Land-Estates; but many of their Salmon Streams or
Falls belong to Patentees. In the Winter, they make Seal-Oil, and save their
Skins. The great Islands of Ice which appear upon or near the Banks of
Newfoundland, come from Davis Straits.

Goods imported to Newfoundland and consumed there, are only Salt, Bread,
Flower, Rum, and Molasses; payable either in Fish as the Price shall break,
which is generally (...) 10 s. St. per Quintal, or in Bills of Exchange upon
Great Britain; these Bills of Exchange are from the Sack Ships who purchase
their Fish or Cargo from the Inhabitants by Bills: Bills purchase these Goods
cheaper, than the Fish Truck, because the Fishermen impose any Fish in Pay.

The several Bickerings that have happened in Newfoundland between the British
and French, cannot be rehearsed minutely in a Summary; we shall only mention a
few. Anno 1704, August 18, about 140 French and Indians, in two Sloops from
Placentia, land in Bonavist^ Harbor, and burnt four Vessels. Anno 1705 in the
Winter, M. Subercasse Governor of Placentia, afterward Governor of Nova
Scotia, with 550 Soldiers and Inhabitants of Placentia, and from Canada with
some Indians, ransack all the Southern Settlements in a few Days, carried away
140 Prisoners; laid Consumption-Bay, Trinity, and Bonaviste under
Contributions, having burnt their Stages and Craft; they besieged the Fort of
St. John's (Capt. Moody and 40 Soldiers in Garrison) 5 Weeks in vain; St. John's
is the principal British Fishery Settlement in Newfoundland; Anno 1710 the
Garrison of St. John's was reinforced by two Companies of Marines.

Placentia was quit-claim'd by France to Great Britain, and Anno 1714 June 1st
Col. Moody being appointed Lieutenant Governor of Placentia, received
Possession from M. Castabella who succeeded M. Subercasse as Governor of
Placentia Anno 1706, when Subercasse was removed to the Government of L'
Accadie or Nova Scotia; this Castabella was made Governor of Cape-Breton
Islands and continued in that Government many Years. Anno 1719 Col. Gladhill
was appointed Lt. Governor of Placentia in Place of Col. Moody. This present
Anno 1748 Lt. Governor of Placentia is Major Hamilton; and Lt. Governor of St.
John's is Capt. Bradstreet.

The following Accounts of Fisheries fall in naturally with this Section, and
carries along with it some Account of the New England Fishery.

A DIGRESSION concerning Fisheries.
The principal and extensive Branches of Fishery in Commerce, are 1. Whaling,
which is in common to all maritime Nations, but followed to best Advantage by
the Dutch, it is called the great Fishery, as Herring, and Cod fishing are
called the small Fisheries. 2. Herrings, of these the Dutch also make the most
Gain, although the only herring Fishery, known to us, of Quantity and Quality,
sufficient and proper for the Markets, is confined to the British Seas which is
a Mare Clausum, and in all Respects is the British peculiar Property, excepting
that it is a natural Thorough-Fare or high Way to all Nations in their outward
bound and inward bound Voyages; and Great Britain, with greater Propriety, may
be called Herrings Island, than Newfoundland called Terra de Baccaleos: The
Dutch in the Reign of Charles I. agreed to pay annually to Great Britain, L
^0,000 Sterling for License or Liberty of fishing for Herrings upon the Coasts
of Great Britain, they paid only for one Year 1636 and no more (...) Cromwell in
his Declaration of War against the Dutch, made a Demand of the Arrears of this
license Money (at the same Time he insisted upon Satisfaction for the Amboyna
Affair) but the principal Differences which occasioned the War being soon
accommodated, these Demands were dropped. 3. Cod-Fish. The European North Sea
Cod, the Cod from the Banks of Holland and Coast of Ireland are much superior
in Quality to the American Cod; but in no Degree adequate to the Spanish,
Portuguese, and Italian Markets: the Cod Fishery to supply Markets, is peculiar
to Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, and New England: If Great Britain, pending this
French War, continue with Success to reduce the French Trade and Colonies, we
may give the Law; and have Newfoundland, the Islands in the Gulf of St.
Laurence, Nova Scotia and New England, confirmed to us in Perpetuity; with an
exclusive Trade and Navigation upon the Coasts thereof to the Extent Seaward of
-- Leagues; thus we shall have the Monopoly of the Cod-Fishery; at a low
Estate, we can afford at a Medium 300,000 Quintals per Annum, whereof Bilboa
the dry Cod-Fishery Barcadier takes off from 70,000 to 80,000 Quintals per An.
to supply Madrid, and some other inland Countries of Spain

To render these Accounts distinct, I shall reduce them to five Heads. 1. The
Whale-Fishery. 2. Herring-Fishery. 3. Cod-Fishery. 4. The smaller Fisheries
exportable but of no great Account. And, 5. Some Fish not exportable or
merchantable, but of great Benefit in present spending especially for the Poor.

1. WHALES. See a Digression concerning Whaling, P. 56. we shall further add
the following Remarks; Whales, that is the true or Bone Whales go Southward
(they are Passengers according to the Seasons) toward Winter, and return
Northward in the Spring. Formerly in New England Cape-Cod embay'd them, but
being much disturbed (they seem to have some Degree of Reason) they keep a good
Offing. The smaller Whales, viz. Sperma Ceti, Fin-Backs, Hump-Backs, etc. which
never go far to the Northward, but stroll considerably Southward, are apt to
strand upon the Shoals of North Carolina and Bahama Banks: They become Drift
Whales, and some afford drift Sperma-Ceti. In their Passages North and South,
having kept an Offing to the Banks, though they were incommoded by the
Whale-Fishers; at present in their Passages they keep deep Water; and upon a
Peace the Whalers are to fish for them in deep Water.

New England Whaling at present is by Whaling Sloops or Schooners with two
Whale-Boats and 13 Men; each Boat has an Harpooner, a Steersman, and four
Rowers: The Whale-Boats do not use Thaughts but Nooses for their Oars, upon
Account of Expedition; because only by letting go their Oars, without loosing
of them, they keep expeditiously long Side of the Whale. The best Place of
striking a Whale is in her Belly, about one Third from her Gills; the Fast is a
Rope of about 25 Fathom; then a Drudge or Stop-Water, a Plank of about 2 Feet
square, with a Stick through its Center; to the further End of this Stick, is
fastened a Tow-Rope, called the Drudge Rope of about 15 Fathom; they lance,
after having fast^ed her by the Harpoon, till dead.

The New England Whalers reckon so many Ct. With. Bone, as Bone is Feet long: For
Instance, 7 Foot Bone gives 700 With. Bone: New England Bone scarce ever e^ceeds
9 Feet; and 100 Barrels Oil is supposed to yield 1000 With. of Bone Whales killed
in deep Water, if they sink, never rise again.

Sperma Ceti Whales do not go far North; they are gregarious, or in Sholes;
they go Southward to the Bahama Islands in October, and return in the Spring:
Most of the Bermudas Whales are Finbacks, 20 to 30 pr. An. caught.

A Whale stranded back of Cape-Cod, yielded 134 Barrels Oil, and -- With. of
Bone; this Whale was so fat, that, some poor People tried the muscular Flesh,
and made 30 Barrels more Oil. In New England Whaling, they go upon Shares, one
Quarter to the Vessel or Owners, the rest to the Company, finding themselves
victualing and whaling Geer. The Whalers in deep Water, or at a considerable
Distance from Nantucket, fit out in the Beginning and Middle of March. Third
Week of July Anno 1738 arrived our Whalers from Davis Straits. The New England
True Whale, is the same with the European North-Cape Whales, are not easily
killed, being agile and very wild; the Dutch do not fish them. Sperma Ceti
Whales do not go far North, they pass by New England in October, and return in
the Spring. Grampus's, Bottle-noses, and the other small Cetaceous Kind are
called Black Fish.

It is not easily to be accounted for, that Whales do not in Course of Years
become scarcer; considering the continued great Slaughter of them by the
Whaling Nation^, they bring only one Calf at a Time after many Month^
Gestation, whereas other Fish spawn Multitudes.

Fish-Oil is, 1. That from the True or Whale-Bone Whale, and the other large
Whales. 2. Vicious Oil from the Sperma Ceti Whales. 3. Black Fish Oil from
Grampus's* Bottle-noses, Porpus's, etc. of the small Cetaceous Kind. 4.
Liver-Oil from the Livers of sundry Fishes, especially of Cod-Fish. 5. That
from the Blubber or Penicula adiposa of Seals and Sea-Cows. There are two Sorts
of Seals, one Sort has its Skin dappled or in small Spots, the other Sort
called the Ice-Seal, has a large black Patch, runs slow, and is killed by a
small Blow on the Head; 500 have been killed in a Harbor at Newfoundland in a
Morning; the Skins and Blubber is their mercantile Produce. The Sea-Cow or
Morse is plenty upon the Coasts of Nova Scotia and the Gulf of St. Laurence,
particularly at the Island of St. John's; it is of the Bigness of a midling Cow
(it is not the same with the Manatee of the Gulf of Mexico) a very thick Skin
with Hair like that of a Seal.

In cold Winters the Whales, as do other Fish, keep in deep Water. The
New England People whale with a Drudge or Stop-Water, not with long Ropes or
Warps as the Hollanders. Upon the Coast of New England, Whales go Northward
from the Middle of March to the Middle of May. About 30 Years ago, Communibus
Annis were exported from New England about 5,000 Barrels of Fish-Oil, at this
Writing Anno 1748, about 10,000 Barrels, notwithstanding the Whales keeping a
greater Offing.

2. HERRINGS. In this Tribe of Fishes there are many Species or distinct Kinds,
viz. The Shadd, the true Herring, the Alewife, the Sardinia, the Anchovie, etc.
In this Article, I write only of the true or merchantable Herring; in good
Quality and large Quantities, they seem peculiar to the Coasts of the British
Islands, and I shall in the first Place mention these as a Standard.

Upon the Coasts of Great Britain, Herrings make their first Appearance
Northward (at the Western Islands of Scotland they appear in the Spring) as it
is commonly said, at the Sh^tland Islands are the ultima Thule of the Ancients:
In the Winter the Seas ar^ o^en, but harr^ssed with c^^tinued Storms, so as to
have no Communication with the other Parts of the Earth. The Dut^h East India
Ships by a standing Order always return between the Orkn^y and Sh^tland
Islands. In Sh^tland their Mother or indigenous Tongue or ^anguage is Norse or
No^^egian, it w^^ originally a Dan^^^ Property, and upon King Iam^^ VI. of
Sco^l^nd ma^rying a Daugh^^r of Dan^mark it was quit-claim'd to Scotland. The
People of any conderable Business the^e, speak English, No^s^, and Dutch.
Shetland Islands in N. Lat. 61 d, beginning of June; by Custom the Hollanders
do not begin to fish until By a Resolve of the Senate of Hamburg, no H^rring^
are deemed t^ be in Maturity, ^it to be import^d to a Market until Mid^ummer.
H^m^u^g is a principal Mart for (...), it supplie^ the Nor^h East Parts of
(...) by the River (...) and its Branches, as (...) sup^plie^ P^lan^ by the
(...) or (...) and its Branch^^.
June 24th, and return to Holland in August and September: 2000 Busses (a
Pink-sterned Catch of about 40 to 50 Tun) have at one Time fished in Brassa
Sound; about Midsummer Herrings are in the greatest Perfection. It is said,
they come from the Northern deep Waters (we hear of no Herrings about Iseland
under the Northern Polar Circle; a Cod-Fishery has been attempted there, but
turns to no good Account) in a large Body or Shole, and meeting with the
Islands of Great Britain this Shole is split; one Part or Wing takes along the
Eastern Shore, and make in successively into all the Friths of Scotland, more
especially in August to the Frith of Forth at Dunbar and Fife Side; their next
great Appearance is at Yarmouth Roads upon the Coast of England, where the
Dutch presume again to fish for them; thence to the Mouth of the River Thames,
and thence to the Southern and Western Parts of England; at Ilfracombe, N. Lat.
51 d. 10 m. within the Mouth of the Severn River about two Leagues to Sea, they
fish Herrings from Michaelmas to Christmas, and make 10,000 to 12,000 Barrels
pr An. In the Autumn the Herrings spawn, become lank or lean, and are only fit
for being cured by smoking called Red Herrings; it is imagined that soon after
spawning they disappear in deep Water South of the British Islands: The Western
Shole or Wing of this great Body, pass amongst the Lewis's or Called by the
ancient Geographers A^^uda or Hebrides, here are Plen^y of Cod and Long Fish:
May consul of about 4^,000 Souls or (...).
Scots Western Islands, thence this Part of Body of Herrings subdivides when
they meet with Ireland, one Column proceeds to the Western Coast of Ireland,
the other Column, pass along St. Georges or the Irish Channel to the Mouth of
the Severn.

It seems more reasonable to think, that these Herrings are constant Retainers
to the Islands of Great Britain, some Times disappearing in deep Water, and at
other Times appearing in Shole-Water, according to their various feeding and
spawning Grounds; so as annually to make the Circuit of these Islands; and as
is the Manner of all Passenger Fish, go Northward toward Summer, and Southward
toward Winter or cold Weather, and in very cold Weather take to deep or warmer
Water. And in Fact or Observation we find the Herrings appear amongst the
Western Islands of Scotland in Spring, they are at Shetland and the North Parts
of Scotland in Summer, they are along the East and South Coasts of Great
Britain in Autumn, and in St. Georges Channel in Winter.

The British Herrings spawn in August and September: When they spawn, the
Fishermen call it fouling of the Water; it is said they go by Pairs to the
Bottom, and rub their Bellies in the Mud and Sand until their ^
Milts and Rows are discharged; soon after this the Herring-Fishery is supposed
to be over, and that the Herrings take to Sea or deep Water.

Dantzick is the principal Market for the Scots and Dutch white or pickled
Herrings, next are Hamburg and Stockholm; the Dutch re-pickle their Herrings in
Holland.

The Herrings of Newfoundland, Nova Scotia and New England, are either of a
different Species, or of a bad Quality, and if in curing their Quality could be
remedied, they are not of a sufficient Quantity to supply the Herring Markets:
They are caught in Seans or Mashes, they have been pickled and barrelled for
the Negroes in the West India Islands, but turned out not merchantable, and
that Branch of Fishery was dropped. In Newfoundland they come in by Autumn, being
their last bait Fish. In New England notwithstanding of their being a
periodical Fish, their Periods are uncertain; at present they are not so plenty
as formerly, and generally set in to spawn toward the End of Winter.

Periodical Sholes or Passengers of North Sea Fish upon the Eastern Shore of
North America, are not found South of 41 d. N. Lat. some straggling Cod and
Salmon are some Times caught to the South of Nan^ucket or this Latitude, but do
not answer the curing.

3. COD-FISHERY. The Scots or North Sea dry Cod, and the New England Winter dry
Cod, are of the prime Quality; they will bear watering; Summer Fish of
New England when watered, breaks. Large Winter Cod dry Fish, is the best for
Bilboa Market, it retains its Mellowness and will bear Land-Carriage to Madrid,
smaller Fish will answer in other Markets; in Great Britain and Ireland, they
are not reckoned merchantable if under 18 Inches in Length, from the first Fin
to the setting on of the Tail, and are allowed no Salt Debenture or Bounty.
August and September are the best Times for selling a Fish Cargo in the Roman
Catholic Countries, their Lent Stock by that Time is expended.

The New England Fishery have their Salt, from Saltortugas, Cape de Verde
Islands, Turks Islands or Bahamas, Lisbon, and Bay of Biscay. The Fishermen
victual with salt Pork only, Biscuit, and Rum. All Cod-Fish caught from the
Beginning of June to the Beginning of October are called Summer Fish, the
others are called Spring and Fall Fish or Winter Fish, and are of the better
Quality. The Salt Fleet from Tortugas generally arrives in New England about
the Middle of April.

New England dry Cod-Fish, is more Salt burnt than those of Newfoundland,
because in New England they generally use Salt from Tortugas and the Isle of
May, which is too fiery; at Newfoundland they make Use of Salt from Lisbon and
the Bay of Biscay, of a milder Quality: In Newfoundland they work their Fish
Belly down, in New England they work them Belly up, to receive more Salt, and
add to their Weight. No Sunburned, Salt-burnt, or that have been a considerable
Time pickled before dried, are to be deemed merchantable Fish.

Marblehead in New England ships off more dried Cod, than all the rest of
New England besides; Anno 1732 a good Fish Year, and in profound Peace,
Marblehead had about 120 Schooners of about 50 Tuns Burden, 7 Men aboard, and
one Man ashore to make the Fish, is about 1000 Men employed from that Town,
besides the Seamen who carry the Fish to Market; if they had all been well
fished, that is 200 Quintals to a Fare, would have made 120,000 Quintals; at
present Anno 1747 they have not exceeding 70 Schooners, and make 5 Fares
yearly; first is to Isle of Sable, the Cod-Fish set in there early in the
Spring, and this Fare is full of Spawn; formerly they fitted out in February,
but by storm^ Weather having lost some Vessels, and many Anchors, Cables and
other Gear, they do not fit out until March; their second Fare is in May to
Brown's Bank, and the other Banks near the Cape-Sable Coast, these are also
called Spring-Fish; their third and fourth Fares are to St. Georges Bank,
called Summer Fish; their fifth and last Fare is in Autumn to Isle of Sables,
these are called Winter Fish. New England Cod is generally cured or dried upon
Hurdles or Brush. Anno 1721 were cured at Canso of Nova Scotia 20,000 Quintals
of Cod-Fish; but, as it is said, the Officers of that Garrison used the
Fishermen ill, and no Fishery has been kept there for many Years. At present
Anno 1747, there is cured in all Places of British North America about 300,000
Quintals dry merchantable Cod.

There are several other Particulars relating to the Cod-Fishery interspersed
in the former Sheets, which we shall not repeat, left we should deviate from
the Character of a Summary. We shall observe, that the French have been too
much connived at in carrying on a considerable Cod-Fishery near the Mouth of
the River St. Laurence a^ Gaspee contrary to Treaty, because it lies in
Nova Scotia. Continued Westerly or dry Winds are not requisite in curing dry
Cod, because they must be sweated in Piles by some damp Easterly Weather.
Winter Fish ought not to be shipped off 'till May; for although the preceding
Frosts makes them look fair and firm, if shipped off too soon, the subsequent
Heat of the Hold, makes them sweat and putrify. The Stock Fish of Norway and
Iseland, are Cod cured without Salt, by hanging in the Frosts of Winter upon
Sticks, called Stocks in Dutch.

4. SMALLER FISHERIES used in Commerce; we shall mention a few.

Scale Fish so called, viz. Haddock, Hake, and Polluc, which in New England are
cured in the same Manner as dry Cod; those together with the dry Cod that is
not fit for European Markets, are shipped off to the West India Islands, toward
feeding of the Negro Slaves, and make a considerable Article in our Trade to
the Sugar-Islands.

Mackrel, split, salted and barrel'd for the Negroes in the Sugar Islands, are
caught either by Hook, Seans, or Mashes; those by Hook are the best, those by
Seans are worst, because in Bulk they are bruised; Mackrel will not take the
Hook, unless it have a Motion of two or three Knots, if quicker they will take
the Hook, but their Jaw being tender gives Way and the Mackrel is lost. There
are two Seasons of Mackrel, Spring and Autumn, the Autumn Mackrel are the best;
those of the Spring appear about Middle of May, very lean, and vanish in two or
three Weeks.

Sturgeon very plenty; some are 12 Feet long, and weigh 400 With. formerly a
Merchant of Boston, contracted with some Fishmongers in London, Anno 1721 he
sent 1500 Cags of 40 to 50 with. (the Contract was for 5000 Cags per An.) the
Fish were good but too salt or ill-cured; this Fishery did not answer, and it
was dropped. London is supplied with Sturgeon from Dantzick, Hamburg and Pilau.

Salmon are plenty in all the British North America Rivers from Newfoundland to
about N. Lat. 41 d. they set in to Massachusetts Bay about the Middle of April,
they do not choose warm Weather, therefore do not continue there long after
having spawned; further North they continue many Months. This Salmon is not of
a good Quality, and is not so good for a Market, as the Salmon of Great Britain
and Ireland.

Alewives by some of the Country People called Herrings; they are of the The
Pilchard or Halecula is not found in these Parts; it is no where heard of, but
upon the Coast of Devonshire and C^^nw^ll in England; Dartmout^ lies in the
Center of the Pil^^^rd Fi^hery; they are caught from the beginning of August to
the beginning of November; it i^ (...) than a (...).
Herring Tribe, but somewhat larger than the true Herring, they are a very
mean, dry, and insipid Fish; some of them are cured in the Manner of white
Herrings, and sent to the Sugar-Islands for the Slaves, but because of their
bad Quality they are not in Request: In some Places they are used to manure
Land, they are very plenty, and come up the Rivers and Brooks into Ponds in the
Spring, having spawned they return to Sea, they never take the Hook.

5. FOR SPENDING FRESH. Besides the above mentioned Fish, which are also eat
when fresh, there are many Sorts which are not cured and shipped off. In
New England they are generally well known, and are much the same as in Britain:
We shall refer them to the Sections of New England.

Many Fish go up the Rivers, and into Ponds, earlier or later in the Spring to
spawn, viz, Salmon, Shad, Alewives, Tom-Cod, Smelts, etc; and many good Laws
have been made in New England, to prevent their Passages from being stopped by
Wares etc. as they are of gre^^ Benefi^ to the Inhabitants near these Rivers
and Ponds.

SECT. VII. Concerning Nova Scotia, or L'Accadie.
THIS Country was called Nova Scotia by Sir William Alexander, Se^retary of
State for Scotland; by Means of Sir Ferdinando Gorge, President of the
New England or Plymouth Company, he obtained a Royal Grant, Sept. 10. Anno
1621; he was afterward created Lord Alexander, Viscount of Canada, and Earl of
Stirling Anno 1633. The French call it L'Accadie, an Abreviation or Corruption
of Arcadia in the Morea of Greece, a Northern hilly Country of the Peloponesus:
Hitherto, it cannot be called a Colony; it is only an impotent British Garrison
in an ill-regulated French Settlement: The French Settlers and the British
Garrison Officers (with much Impropriety) call the Inhabitants Neutrals, though
under the Protection and in Allegiance to the Crown of Great Britain; there are
no British Settlers to compose an Assembly or Legislature for making of Laws
and raising of Taxes.

The French had early Settlements in L'Accadie or Nova Scotia; Capt. Argol from
Virginia Anno 1613 visited Port Royal and St. Croix and brought away two French
Vessels. M. Biencourt was at that Time Governor of Port Royal: Argol broke up
some French Settlements in Sagadahock and L'Accadie called Part of New France,
or Terra Canadensis; at present the Country North of St. Laurence River, only,
retains this Name: This Expedition of Argol's made Way for Sir William
Alexander's Patent. Sir William admitted some Associates, Anno 1623 they sent
over a Ship with some Settlers, but they all returned to England the same Year,
and the French proceeded in their Settlements. K. Charles I, Anno 1625 upon his
Marriage with Henrietta Maria, a Daughter of France, quit-claim'd Nova Scotia
to the French.

There have been many Revolutions in the Property and Dominion of Nova Scotia.

1. Anno 1627 and Anno 1628, Sir David Kirk and Associates, upon a private
Adventure, but by Commission from the King or Crown of England, conquered the
French Settlements in Canada and Nova Scotia; and Patents were obtained from
the Court of England, by which the Lands called Canada, North of the River St.
Laurence were granted to Sir David Kirk, and the Lands called Nova Scotia South
of said River were confirmed to Sir William Alexander.

2. Sir William sold the Property to M. Claude de la Tour D'Aunay a French
Protestant, and Anno 1632 March 29, by Treaty King Charles quit claimed it to
France.

3. Cromwell sent Col. Sedgwick, he reduced it Anno 1654, and it was confirmed
to England by Treaty in the Year following; M. St. Estienne, Son and Heir of
the above Claude de la Tour, came to England, made out his Claim, and had the
Property surrendered to him; this La Tour sold the Property to Sir Thomas
Temple, who was Governor and in Possession of the Property until Anno 1662, it
was then delivered up to the French by K. Charles II. (that Race ought to be
called Sons of France, not Sons of Great Britain) who agreed with the Temples
for a Sum of 10,000 L. St. to be paid them (but it never was satisfied) upon
Account of their Right.

Menival was appointed Governor, and built a small stockaded Fort, called Port
Royal, upon a Basin, 9 Miles from the Bay of Fundi; Nova Scotia was confirmed
to the French by the Breda Treaty Anno 1667, in the Manner of a Quit Claim. La
Tour a French Protestant, upon his returning to the Roman Catholic Way of
Worship, had it confirmed (as to Property) to him by the Court of France. La
Tour in the various Vicissitudes, was Protestant when the Country was under the
Dominion of England, and Roman Catholic when it was subject to the King of
France. La Tour built a Fort at St. John's River; M. Donnee the French Governor
of L'Accadie, deemed it irregular, and inconsistent with the Royal Prerogative;
while La Tour was in France, he reduced it, and inhumanely destroyed La Tour's
Wife and Family. La Tour became poor, borrowed a large Sum of Money of M. Belle
Isle, a rich Merchant and Trader to North America, and assigned over to him one
half of the Province, or Seigneurie.

4. The French of L'Accadie being troublesome Neighbors, New England ^itted
ou^ an Expedition of 700 Men under Col. Phipps, at their own Charge An. 1690 (
Menival Governor, the Fort ill fortified, and ill provided) they demolished the
Fort; the French took the Oaths of Allegiance and Fidelity to the Crown of
England, but soon revolted in Conformity to Roman Catholic and Frenc^ Faith,
and continued their Settlements; and by the Treaty of Reswick An. 1697,
Great Britain quit-claim'd it to France. N. B. The New England Expedition
sailed from Boston (Nantasket is in Boston Harbor) 28th April, came before
Port Royal 11th May, in 2 or 3 Days Meninal surrendered, and the French Garrison
was shipped off.

Anno 1704 Major Church with 550 Volunteers visited Penobscut, Passamaquady,
and Les Mines; they brought off about 100 Prisoners; in July they attempted
Port Royal, but in vain.

Capt. Rowse of Charlestown Anno 1706, as a Flag of Truce was sent to Annapolis
to exchange or redeem Prisoners; he with some of his Owners and Associates in
Boston, were under Suspicion of secret Contracts, At present Anno 1747 and
1748, the same Game is played, im^^ne, from Rhode Island, New Y^^k and
Philadelphia; if this illicit Trade supplied the Enemy only with Superfluities
and Extravagancies at a good Price, perhaps in Policy it might be co^^ived at;
but to relieve their Necessities instead of distressing them (which the
Proclamation of War in express Word require^) (...) to be a D^g^^e of ^rea^on,
or at least of high Mi^demeanor.
to supply the French Enemy, Indictments were laid against them for high
Misdemeanors; they were fined, but their Fine remitted: One Trip they brought
Home 17 Prisoners, next Trip only 7 Prisoners.

Anno 1707, 8, March 13, from New England, there proceeded an Expedition
against Port Royal, under Col. March, with 2 Regiments Militia, Wainwright and
Hilton, covered by the Deptford Man of War from England, and the
Province-Galley; this Expedition had no Effect, and the Officers of the
Deptford were blamed as negligent or refractory.

Anno 1709 Col. Nicholson and Capt. Vetch apply at the Court of Great Britain,
for Sea and Land Forces to reduce Canada; there being at that Time a Sort of
Court War, it was not attended to, but upon their soliciting an Expedition of
less Consequence, viz. to reduce Port Royal and the Country of Nova Scotia,
this was obtained.

5. Nova Scotia continued with the French from Anno 1662 (Sir William Phips's
Reduction and Possession of it Anno 1690 may be said to be only momentary)
until An. 1710, it was then reduced by a Force from Great Britain, and from New
England under Col. Nicholson, and confirmed to Great Britain by the Treaty of
Utrecht, and thus it remains to this Day.

This Expedition under General Nicholson (with Instructions to all the
Governors of New England to be assisting) and Adjutant General Vetch was as
follows, Anno 1710, July 15* Nicholson with some British Officers, and Col.
Reading's Marines arrive at Boston from England, for the intended Expedition:
The Armament set out from Boston Sept. 18, consisting of the Dragon, Falmouth,
Leostaff, and Feversham Men of War, the Star Bomb, and the Massachusetts
Province-Galley, with Transports, in all 36 Sail; the Landforces aboard, were,
One Regiment Marines from England, Two Regiments of Massachusetts Bay, One
Regiment of Connecticut, and One Regiment of New Hampshire and Rhode Island,
commissioned by the Queen, and armed by her Gilt; they arrived at Port Royal in
six Days (the Grenadiers of Walton's Regiment were commanded by Mascarene the
present Governor of Annapolis Fort, and Commander in Chief of Nova Scotia)
after a small Affair of cannonading and bombarding, the French Governor
Subercasse did capitulate, and October 5, the Fort was delivered up, and Col.
Vetch according to Instructions becomes Governor. The Terms of Capitulation
were, that all the French, being 481 Persons within the Banlieu, or 3 Miles of
the Fort, shall be under the Protection of Great Britain, upon their taking the
proper Oaths of Allegiance; the other French Settlers were left to Discretion,
that in Case the French make Incursions upon the Frontiers of New England, the
British shall mak^ Reprisals upon the French in Nova Scotia, by making some of
their chief Inhabitants Slaves to our Indians; yet notwithstanding, the French
of L'Accadie commitHostilities, but the Port Royal and Cape-Sable Indians
desire Terms of Amity and Alliance; the Garrison allowed to march out with 6
Cannon and 2 Mortars, afterward bought by Nicholson for 7,499 Livres 10 Sols:
The Garrison consisted of 258 Soldiers, with their Officers and other
Inhabitants in all 481 Persons Male and Female, were shipped to Rochelle in
France; General Nicholson sent Major Livingston, and M. Subercasse sent Baron
St. Casteen to Marquis de Veaudrueil General of Canada, to acquaint him with
this Event, they arrived at Quebeck Dec. 16. The Men of War and Transports sail
for Boston Oct. 14, leaving a Garrison in Port Royal now called
Annapolis-Royal, of 200 Marines and 250 New England Volunteers; they were
relieved next Year by 400 of the Troops destined for Canada. The New England
Charge in this Expedition was upwards of 23,000 L. St. reimbursed by Parliament.

The French Governor's Commission, was in these Words; Daniel Auger de
Subercasse, Knight of St. Louis, Governor of L'Accadie, of Cape-Breton Islands
and Lands adjacent from Cape Rozier of the great River St. Laurence, as far as
the East Parts of Quenebec River.

Here it is not improper to annex the following Digression.

A DIGRESSION concerning some late British Expeditions against Canada.
Anno 1690 the New Englanders having reduced Port Royal, and all the rest of
Nova Scotia or L'Accadie, were encouraged to attempt Quebec in Canada the same
Year; they set out too late in the Year, want of Experience in their principal
Officers, Sickness amongst their Men, and the Army of 1000 English with 1500
Indians, who at the same Time were to march from Albany, by the Way of Lake
Champlain to attack Monreal by Way of Diversion to divide the French Forces,
not proceeding; occasioned a Miscarriage, with the Loss of 1000 Men, and a Loss
of many of their Transports in their Return, with a great Charge incurred,
which Charge occasioned the first Emission of a pernicious The Odium which I
bear to this fallacious and designed ^heat of a Plantation Government public
Paper Currency, leads me to anticipate a little upon the Article of Paper
Currenci^s designed for the Appendix; this Pindarick or loose Way of writing
ought not to be confined to Lyri^^ Poetry, it seems to be more agreeable by its
Variety and Turns, than a rigid dry connected Account of Things: some perhaps
of no Taste blame me for want of Method; and on the other lay a strict
Observance of the Propriety of Words, they call Pedantry.

I have obs^rved, that all our Paper Mon y making Assemblies have been
Legislatures of Debtors, the Representatives of People who from Incogitancy,
Idl^n^s^, and Profusen^ss, have been under a Necessity of mortgaging their
Lands; Lands are a real permanent Estate, but the Debt in Paper C^rren^y by its
Multiplication d^preciates more and more; thus their Land Estate in nominal
Value incr^^s^s, and their Debt in nominal Value d^cre^s^s; and the large
Quantities of Paper Credit is pr^portionably in Favor of the Debtors, and to
the Disadvantage of the Creditors or industrious frugal Part of the Colony:
this is the wicked Mystery of this (...) Paper Currency.

A public Credit Paper Curren^y, is a great Promoter of Expeditions. 1. These
Bills to defray the Charge are soon expedited, but with a consequent distant
but certain ruinous Effect. 2. This Affluence of Paper Credit invites or
encourages People to borrow and run in Debt, beyond what they ever can
extricate. 3. Debtors when called upon by their Creditors, from inlisting, by
Acts of their Legislatures, are indulged or respited for some considerable
Time; thus toward the C^pe-Br^t^n Expedition Anno 17^5, in less than two
Months, in the Province of Massachusetts Bay, out of 20,000 fencible Men
capable to march, 3000 inlisted and were a dead Loss to the Province: 2000
mo^e, that (...) two Regiments, were proposed by -- to be added to the G^r^i^^^
of (...), but can not be completed* and two or (...) more toward d^molis^ing
of a French Out-Fort called (...) we ca^^ot p^e^^nd to maintain, but abandon to
be rebuilt by the French for one Tenth of the Charge which it may cost us in
reducing it: ( Quebec reduced by a Force from Great Britain, will save us both
Men and Money, and effectually bring all Canada into our Hands) Some evil
Genius seems to preside or prevail at present, by the apparent Destruction of
the Persons and Effects of this jaded Province of Massachusetts Bay.

When I happen upon this Subject, I cannot avoid being more sanguine (but in
Truth) than some Paper-Money-Patriots may judge seasonable; that I may not
preclude what is to be said in the Appendix, concerning Plantation Paper
Currencies, I shall only instance the vast incredible Damages that Personal
Estates have suffered in New England by Depreciation of Denominations from the
multiplying of a nominal Paper Currency. Anno 1711, by Act of Assembly the
Exchange of the Government Bills upon Account of the Sham Canada Expedition was
fixed at 140 New England for 100 Sterling. At present in the Spring Anno 1748, it
is with Merchants 1000 New England for 100 Sterling; perhaps from
Maladministration only.


Paper Currency by Way o^ public Bills of Credit to pay this Charge: There
sailed from Boston Frigates and Transports 32, having 2000 Land Men aboard; the
Admiral called the Six Friends carried 44 Guns; they sailed from Boston August
9, did not arrive before Quebeck 'till October 5, landed 1400 Men under General
Walley about one League and half from the Town, were repulsed two or three
Times with great Loss. Baron La Hontan who was then at Quebec, says, "The
New England Men did not want Courage, but wanted Military Discipline; that Sir
William Phipps's Conduct was so bad, that he could not have done less than he
did, if he had been hired by the French, to stand still with his Hands in his
Pockets; if they had come directly against the Town, it would have surrendered,
but they were dilatory in their Consultations at a Distance, which gave Time to
reinforce the Place with regular Troops, Militia, and Savages; Sir William
bombarded the Town from four Vessels, and did Damage to the Value of five or
six Pistoles; in the Town were only 12 great Guns, and very little Ammunition."

Anno 1711, the Scheme and Expedition for reducing of Quebec and Placentia, and
consequently all Canada and Newfoundland, to ingross the Cod-Fishery, Or rather
to draw off some of our Troops from annoying the French in Flanders, and
finally by miscarrying to contribute toward making the People of Great Britain
tired of the War with France.
was concerted by the new Ministry, solicited by Nicholson; Four of the
principal Men of the five Indian Tribes or Nations, who lie between our
Settlements and Canada, called The Four Kings, were sent over to England to
persuade this Expedition.
the Reg^ments of Kirk, Hill, Windress, Clayton, and Kaine from Flanders,
together with Seymours, Disnays, and a Battallion of Marines from England,
under the Command of Brigadier Hill, Brother to the new Favorite Mrs. Masham;
in 40 Transports, with a Squadron of 12 Line of Battle Ships, several Frigates,
two Bomb-Vessels, a fine Train of Artillery under Col. King with 40 fine Horses
and six Store Ships: They sailed from England, April 28, arrived at Boston,
June 25: By Order from Home there was a Congress at New London of all our
Plantation Governors North of Pensylvania with Nicholson, to concert Measures;
to the British Troops were joined two Regiments from Massachusetts Bay,
Rhode Island and New Hampshire to attack Quebec, while the Militia from
Connecticut, New York and Iersies, with the Indians of the Five Nations, so
called, under General Nicholson marched by Land from Albany August 20, to
attack Monreal for Diversion: It Sir Hovender Walker wrote to Governor Dudl^y
in Boston, "I concur with the Opinion of all the Sea and Land Officers here,
that the Government of this Colony have prejudiced the present Expedition
instead of assisting it."

Admiral Walker having demanded a Supply of Sailors, the Governor and Council
represent, That the ordinary Guards for the Seacoast and Inland Forces, with
these detached for the present Expedition, are upward^ of Two Thousand Men;
which upon a strict Examination into the Muster^Rolls, is more than one fifth
of all the Persons within this Government capable of bearing Arms: therefore it
was inconsistent with the Safety of this Her Majesty's Province to spare any
more Men: there were 1160 effective Land Forces and 160 Sailors in our
T^a^spo^^^*


was alleged that they were retarded at Boston for Want of Provisions, they
did not sail till July 30; there were 68 Vessels carrying 6,463 Troops; August
18 they anchored In Bay or Harbor of Gaspee on the South Side of the Entrance
of St. Laurence River, to wood and water, Aug. 23 in the Nightime, contrary
to the Advice of the Pilots, in a Fog they fell in with the North Shore, and
upon the Islands of Eggs lost Whereof one was a New England Victualler, whose
Men were saved.
eight Transports, and 884 Men. In a Council of War, it was resolved, that by
reason of the Ignorance of the Pilots, it was impracticable to proceed; and
that Advice should be sent to recall Genesis Nicholson from proceeding to Monreal.
The Fleet anchored in Spanish River of Cape-Breton, Sept. 4. and in a general
Council of War, it was resolved not to attempt any Thing against By an
intercepted Letter from Casta Bella Governor of Placentia, to M. Pontchartrain
French Secretary of State, it appears, that the French had not ^^ceeding 700
Men in that Garrison and Country, consequently must have proved an easy
Conquest.

When they m^^tered at Spanish River, the Number of Men aboard the Men of War
and Transports were 7,643; although they had not exceeding 10 Weeks Provision,
at short Allowance; in two or three Days Placentia might have been reduced,
garrisoned, and the Fleet dispatched to Great Britain without suffering for
Want of Provisions; I cannot say such was the Fatality, but such was the
Destination of the Affair by a wi^^ed Ministry.


Placentia, but to return to Great Britain. They sailed from Spanish River
Sept. 16, and in 21 Days were in Soundings near the Channel of England. Oct.
16, at St. Helens, the Edgar, with the Admiral's Journals and other Papers, was
blown up, and the Voyage (as some say) in that inhumane wicked Manner settled.
The Charge incurred by the Province of Massachusetts Bay was something more
than 24,000 L. St. allowed by Parliament, and converted into Debentures
transferable, and bearing interest; it is probable the Massachusetts Demand of
178,000 L. St. Charges incurred in reducing Louisbourg, may be satisfied in the
same Manner; these Debentures to be transferable only toward cancelling the
Provincial Bills of public Credit, that ACCURSED PAPER CURRENCY, in which the
honest, industrious, frugal People have lost almost the Whole of their personal
Estates by Depreciations; but not to be entrusted in any Shape with fallacious
Money-making and indebted G -- rs and A -- lies.

Our Romantic Expeditions have been the Bane of our Northern Colonies, by
incurring a Paper Public Credit, made a Currency and legal Tender. The ill
concerted, and worse executed, Expedition Anno 1690 against Canada, introduced
this vicious Currency: The very, very very rash, but very very very fortunate
Expedition against Cape-Breton or Louisbourg, I hope may terminate public
Paper Currency; the Damage to all industrious frugal People is flagrant; that
is, Silver (by this Expedition from 30 s. per oz. was depreciated to 60 s. per
oz. thus all good honest Men (real Estates, Specialties, the Salaries and Wages
of our Legislatures excepted) lost one half of their Estates; and by Taxes to
cancel this Debt, do lose in Course of Years, perhaps one Quarter more of their
principal Estates; that is the Industrious and Frugal, from the Beginning of
the Project of the Cape-Breton Expedition, in the Space of two Years have lost
three Quarters of their Estates: if reimbursed from the Parliament of
Great Britain the Taxes being only one Quarter will be eased: Some say this is
the natural Consequence from the indebted Members of the Legislature.
next Canada Expedition proved abortive in a shorter Time from the Conception;
but may be supposed to have been occasioned by some natural good Vulgar Minds
can not dive into Mysteries of State, no more than into Mysteries of Religion;
that is, whether this not followed Canada Expedition was only a Feint, to make
the French secure and guardless upon the Coast of Britany; that the Ships,
Merchandise, and Stores at Port Lewis, Port L'Orient, etc. might fall an easy
Prey: Or whether the allowing Duke d' Anville's Squadron with Landforces to
sail early in the Summer without Molestation in Europe and America; was, that
Cape-Breton might fall into the French Hands again, or that they might reduce
Annapolis with N va S^^tia to be delivered up again to Britain at a Peace, a^
an Equivalent for Loiusbourg with C^pe-Breton Islands, if not retaken by the
French; this may be imagined from the Delay of Lest^^k and Lieut. General St.
Clair's sailing, 'till too late in the Year, and afterward by a Feint,
converting the Expedition into a Descent upon the Coast of Britany, to abate
the popular Clamor for their not proceeding against Canada; all this to
prevent puzzling in a subsequent Congress for a Peace.
Policy Causes, and not from premeditated designed Means of Miscarriage, as in
the former. By Orders dated -- April 1746 from the Duke of Newcastle, Secretary
of State at the Court of Great Britain; all the British Governors in
North America are required to raise each of them, so many Independent Companies
of 100 Men, as they can spare and effect: Those of New York, New-Ierseys,
Pensylvania, Maryland, and Virginia, to be formed into one Corpse, to be
commanded by Brigadier Gooch Lieut.-Governor of Virginia; the King to be at the
Charge of arming, paying and clothing of these Troops, but the several
Colonies to furnish Levy-Money and Victualling; Virginia sent 2 Companies,
Maryland 3, Pensylvania 4, Ierseys 5, New York 15, being 29 Companies; these
were designed against Crown-Point, and from thence against Monreal; the two
Virginia Companies remained in the Fort of New York, the regular Troops were
sent upon the Expedition; the yellow Fever at this Time prevailed at Albany,
therefore the Troops for the Expedition rendezvous at Saratago about 30 Miles
higher up Hudson's River: Massachusetts Bay raised 20 Companies, Connecticut
10, Rhode Island 3, New Hampshire 2, being 35 Companies; these were to join the
British Landforces under Lieut.-General St. Clair, with a Squadron of Men of
War from England to reduce Quebec and all Canada, while Gooch was making a
Diversion at Monreal, 60 Leagues further up the River of St. Laurence; these
Colony Militia were to receive Part of the Booty, and to be sent Home when the
Service is over.

Admiral Leflock's being appointed Commander of the Squadron destined for this
Expedition, in Place of Admiral Warren, a Man of Integrity, and the Delays
until too late in the Year, plainly evinced that the Reduction of Canada at
that Time was not intended. As the Governors of the several Colonies had no
Instructions to dismiss their Levies; these Levies were continued on Foot; the
Massachusetts Men were disposed into two Regiments Waldo's and Dwight's; at the
Request of Governor Mascarene 5 or 6 of Waldo's Companies, the 3 Companies of
Rhode Island and the 2 Companies of New Hampshire, were The three Companies
from Rhode Island were shipwrecked near Martha's Vineyard, the two Companies of
New Hampshire went to Sea, but for some trifling Reason put back, and never
proceeded; the Want of these five Companies was the Occasion of our Forces
being overpowered by the Canadians at Minas with a considerable Slaughter, I
use this Expression because many of them were not fairly killed in a military
Manner.

Here I cannot avoid mentioning the Impropriety of the Expression AUXILIARIES,
which properly signifies foreign Troops in Aid; whereas the Troops sent from
New England for the Protection of Nova Scotia, belonged to the same Crown or
Dominion, and perhaps may more properly be called Succors, or Re-Inforcements.


sent for the Protection of Nova Scotia; the other 1500 Men were designed to
join the Southern Levies, in Order to reduce Formerly New England was generally
in Time of the French Wars annoyed from the North-Eastward: But this War our
Annoyance is North-Westward, that is from Crown-Point: In former Wars there was
a Neutrality between the New York or Mohawk Indians, and the French Indians; so
that a considerable Trade was easily carried on between Albany and Monreal, to
the Advantage of the People of New York and Disadvantage of Canada: The French
erected this Fort, 1. To prevent this disadvantagious Intercourse of Trade. 2.
To extend their Claims of Dominion and Soil. 3. The better to disturb our
Settlements in Times of War; New York Government in former French Wars did not
suffer, in this War they have suffered much.
Crown-Point Fort, built by the French as a Rendezvous and Place of Arms for
disturbing our Settlements of New England and New York, see P. 11; some
Misunderstandings between the several Governments* and the contagious
Sicknesses which prevailed about Albany, prevented the Prosecution of this
Design: The Order for dismissing or disbanding of the Canada Levies, did not
arrive until October Anno 1747, they were accordingly dismissed, and have
produced another Crop of Idlers, the Bane of all Countries.

Here we shall continue the History of the several Bickerings or Skirmishes
which we have had in Nova Scotia with the Canadians, the other French, and
their Indians.

After the Reduction of Port Royal or Annapolis-Royal by General Nicholson Anno
1710, notwithstanding that by the Capitulation, the Inhabitants without the
Baulieue were to be At present it seems an Impropriety in the Officers of the
Troops and Garrison of Annapolis, and in the neighboring Governments of
New England, to call the French Inhabitants of Nova Scotia, NEUTRALS, because,
1. These French Inhabitants with their Indians continued our Enemies, and in
Fact did kill and captivate many British People, in Breach of this Neutrality.
2. By the Treaty of Utrecht, the whole Province of Nova Scotia or L' Accadi^,
was absolutely ceded to Great Britain. 3. The principal Men of the French
Inhabitants have taken the Oaths of Allegiance to the Crown of Great Britain.
Neutrals, they continued their Hostilities; Hostilities continuing, the French
Missionary Priest, and five of the principal Inhabitants upon the River of
A^napolis, were seized and kept as Hostages, for the Inhabitants future good
Behavior; even notwithstanding of this Precaution, Capt. Pigeon with 60 Men
being sent up the River for Timber to repair the Fort, they were waylaid by the
French and their Indians, this Party were all killed or made Captives. -- Many
other Hostilities were committed.

After the Peace of Utrecht, a continued Tranquillity till the War between
New England and their Eastern Indians; the French Missionaries persuaded the
Indians, that the English had encroached upon their Lands. Anno 1721 in June,
Capt. Blin a Nova Scotia Trader, Mr. Newton Collector of Nova Scotia, and
others, were captivated by the Indians at Pasamaquady, but were soon released,
because Gov. Doucet of Annapolis had made a Reprisal of 22 Indians. Along Cape
Sable Shore the Indians began to insult our fishing Vessels: In July these
Indians take several fishing Vessels on the Cape-Sable Coast, kill and
captivate many of their Men; Governor Phillips at Canso fits out two armed
Sloops, they kill and captivate many Indians, and put an End to the Indian
Sea-roving, Anno 1724. Anno 1723 July 15 the Indians, at Canso upon Durrel's
Island kill Capt. Watkins, two more Men, one Woman and one Child. Anno 1724 in
July, a Party of Indians attack Annapolis of Nova Scotia, they burn two Houses,
and kill one Sergeant, and one private Man of a Party that sallied: In the Fort
they In some Christian Countries such Reprisals in cold Blood upon People not
personally guilty, would have been deemed barbarous and inhumane.
shot and scalp'd one of the Indian Prisoners as a Reprisal for the Indians
shooting and scalping of Sergeant Mc Neal; and burn two French Houses as a
Reprisal for the two English Houses burnt; several English living without the
Fort were captivated, but soon ransomed by the French.

From this Time until the French War in the Spring, Anno 1744, this neglected
non-effective Garrison of Annapolis continued in a profound Peace, and supine
Indolence. In the Beginning of the present French War, the Fort of Annapolis
was in a miserable Condition; the Garrison Soldiers did not exceed eighty Men,
capable of fatiguing Duty; Hogs and Sheep from without, passed the Fossees or
Ditches, and mounted the Ramparts at Pleasure.

War was declared by Great Britain against France (the French had declared War
some Weeks before) Anno 1744 March 29; the Proclamation of War did not arrive
in Boston until June 2; the French of Cape-Breton were more early in their
Intelligence, and the Garrison of the not tenable Post of Canso could not (in
Case the general Instructions were such) have timely Advice to abandon it;
accordingly about 900 Men, regular Troops and Militia, were by M. Duquesnel
Governor, sent under M. Du Vivier from Louisbourg; they seize Canso May 13,
there were four incomplete Companies of Phillips's Regiment inGarrison, not
exceeding 80 Men, with a Man of War Tender; the French burn the small
Settlement, Conditions were, to be carried to Louisbourg, and to continue there
one Year, and thence to be sent to Boston or Annapolis; but were sent to Boston
sooner.

In June a few small Vessels ( Delabroiz, afterward taken by the
Massachusetts Bay Province Snow Privateer, commanded) from Louisbourg annoy St.
Peter's, and some other small Harbors of Newfoundland West of Placentia, and
threatened Placentia Fort.

Here we may observe the Forwardness and Activity of the French Nation, upon
the breaking out of a War, who thereby have a considerable Advantage over the
Unpreparedness and Dilatoriness of their Enemies: from that national Nuisance,
Cape-Breton, an effectual French Place of Arms to distress the British North
America Colonies, at once and before we had Notice from Home of a French War,
there issued three Expeditions, viz. against Placentia, Canso, and
Annapolis-Royal; Duquesnel (otherwise a good Officer) Governor of Cape-Breton,
erred in being too forward; he had Instructions along with the Declaration of
War, not to attempt any Expedition (this I learnt from M. la Marquis de la
Maison fort, Commander of a French Man of War, the Vigilant of 64 Guns, taken
by Commodore Warren and Captain Douglass) until further Orders from the French
Court; perhaps, as Louisbourg was ill garrisoned, it was suspected that such
Expeditions might Alarm the neighboring populous British Colonies, and prompt
them to the Reduction of Louisbourg, as it really happened with good Success.
Beginning of June about 300 Cape-Sable and St. John's Indians, under the
Direction of a French Missionary Priest M. Luttre, did attempt the Fort of
Annapolis; they burnt the Outhouses, destroyed some Cattle, killed two Men,
summoned the Garrison to surrender, promising good Quarters, otherwise
threatened to storm them, upon the Arrival of some French Forces which they
expected from Louisbourg; but upon the Arrival of the Province Snow Privateer
beginning of July from Boston with the first Company of Militia (the Government
of Massachusetts Bay raised 4 Companies to reinforce the Garrison of Annapolis)
they broke up, and returned to Minas (or les Mines) and the Women and Children
of Annapolis removed to Boston for Safety.

In September, Du Vivier with 60 regular Troops from Louisbourg, and about 700
Militia and Indians (the above mentioned Indians joined him) upon the Arrival
of all the Massachusetts Succors, particularly of Capt. Gorham's Indian
Rangers, ( Du Vivier had lain some Weeks near Annapolis Fort) he retired to
Minas: Several Messages which have been censured, passed between him and the
Garrison Officers of Annapolis: The most favorable Account, is, That Du
Vivier, acquainted them that he expected (in the mean Time they might have good
Terms of Capitulation) from Louisbourg some Men of War, one of 70 Guns, one of
56 Guns, and one of 30 Guns, with Cannon, Mortars and Stores, and a
Reinforcement of 250 more Troops; the Answer of the Garrison, was, That when
this Force arrived, it was Time enough to make Proposals: After he had tarried
there three Weeks, disappointed and discontented, he retired to Minas; next Day
after his decamping some trifling Vessels with Cannon, Mortars, and warlike
Stores, arrived in the Basin of Annapolis, and hearing of Du Vivier's being
withdrawn, they were afraid of our Frigates annoying of them, they soon
removed, and as it happened, they narrowly escaped our Vessels: Du Vivier from
Minas went to Bay Vert is the Embarkadier from Canada to annoy Annapolis, and
other Places in Nova Scotia; here are only four Miles Land-Carriage to
Chiconecto Bay, which falls into the great Bay of Fundi of Nova Scotia: Upon
this Pass a Fort would be of good Service to prevent Canada Incursions, and to
obviate the perverting of the French Inhatants of L' Accadie from their
Allegiance to the Crown of Great Britain.
Bay Vert, and thence to Canada, and from thence Home to France.

As the Cape-Sable and St. John's Indians, persisted in their Hostilities
against the Subjects of Great Britain; in November 1744, the Government of the
Massachusetts Bay declares War against them, declaring them Enemies and Rebels;
because they had joined the French Enemy in blocking up of Annapolis, had
killed some British Subjects, and had committed other Depredations; the
Pasamaquady, Penobscot, Noridgwoag, Pigwocket, and other Indians Westward of
St. John's, are forbid to have any Correspondence with those Indian Rebels; for
all Indians Eastward of a Line, beginning at three Miles East of Pasamaquady,
and running North to St. Laurence River; The Government settles for a short
Time Premiums, viz. 100 L. New Whereof at present Anno 1748, 50 s. is equal to
20 s. St.; Old Tenor is only o^e Quarter of New Tenor.
Tenor, for a Male of 12 Aet. and upwards scalp'd, and 105 L. New Tenor if
captivated, for Women and Children 50 L. Scalps, 55 L. Captives. Sometime
afterward it was found that the Penobscot and Noridgwog Indians, also joined
with the French; the Assembly of Massachusetts Bay Colony August 23. 1745,
extend the Premiums for Scalps and captivated Indians to all Places W. of
Nova Scotia, 250 L. New Tenor to Volunteers, and 100 L. New Tenor to Troops in
Pay. If Du Vivier with his 900 Men, which reduced Canso, had directly proceeded
to Annapolis, and been joined by the Cape-Sab^e and St. John's Indians, he must
infallibly, and with Ease have reduced Annapolis.


Anno 1745 in May M. Marin a Lieut. from Canada, Captain of a Company of
Salvages or Indian Rangers, a true Partizan, with about 900 Reggamuffins;
Canadians, other French and Indians; comes before Annapolis, they continued but
a short Time and returned to Minas, and I suppose by Orders from Louisbourg,
went to relieve Louisbourg at that Time besieged: Capt. Donahew in the Service
of the Massachusetts Colony met with them in Asmacouse Harbor June 15, being 2
Sloops, 2 Scooners, and about 60 large Canoes; upon the further Appearance of
Beckett and Fones, this Body of French and Indians retired and returned to
Minas. From that Time until de Ramsay's Attempt in Sept. 1746, the Garrison of
Annapolis suffered no Insults.

From the Beginning of this French War there have been quartered at Minas and
Chiconicto and the neighboring French Villages a dispersed Number of Officers
and Soldiers from Canada; but from Marin's leaving of Annapolis in the
Beginning of July 1745 to the Arrival of de Ramsay in September 1746 the
Garrison of Annapolis enjoyed their wonted Rest.

In the Summer 1746, a Force of about 1600 Men, regular Marine Troops, Canadian
Militia, and Coureurs des Bois, with French Indians under the Command of M. de
Ramsay, arrive in Minas, to join the Forces expected from France under In the
Spr^ng 1746, the French fitted a strong Armament at Breast to be commanded by
Duke d' Anville Lieut.-General des Armees nav^^^, to recover Louisbourg, and
distress the British North America; they did not ^ail from Roch^l^ until June
22, they escaped or were overlooked by the British Admiral M^rtin's Squadron of
Observation* the Court of Great Britain had certain Information of their being
sailed, and o^ their Destination; but perhaps for certain Reasons of State, did
not send after them, though we had at that Time an equal or better Armament
ready to sail. This French Fleet after a tedious Passage, and having suffered
in a Storm near the Island of Sable, did not arrive off of C^^bucto in
Nova Scotia until Sept. 10. The Armament consisted of 11 Line of Battle Ships,
some Frigates, 2 Fireships, Transports, etc. having 3150 Landforces aboard.
Duke d' Anville's Instruc^ions were* to proceed a^^inst Louisbourgh, and when
taken to dismantle it, thence to proceed against Annapolis in Nova Scotia, and
when taken, to garrison it; thence he was to sail for Boston, and burn it;
afterward in ranging along he was to annoy and distress the Coast of North
America, and finally to visit our West India Sugar Islands.

D' Anville detached 3 Capital Ships and a Frigate under the Command of M.
Con^^ans to convoy the Trade to Cape Francois in Hispaniola, and to return and
join the grand Squadron; these were the 4 French Men of War which near Iamaica
fell in with a British Squadron commanded ^y Commodore Mitchel; but Mitchel, in
Effect, refused taking of them. M. Con^^ans's Orders were, that for Advice, he
was to cruise upon the Cape-Sable Shore between Cape Negroe and Cape Sambro for
a limited Time, and then to sail directly for France, they received no Advice,
and never joined D' Anville's Squadron* these were the Ships that spoke with
some of our fishing Scooners, and ^ave a s^int Chase to the Him^inbrock Man of
War Snow Sept. 15, they avoided giving any Alarm to our Louisbourg Squadron.

This French Arm^^ent from their being long aboard before they sailed, and from
a ^^dious Passage were become very sickly (Duke D' Anville died and was buried
at Ch^bucto) they put in to Chebucto Harbor, landed and encamped to recruit
their Health; in this Place, near one half of their People di^d of (...) putrid
Fevers and (...) frequented them much, and this Camp (...) becoming conatgious,
the No^a Scotia Indians were reduced by (...) supplied with fresh Provisions
from our (...) the French (...) Squadron pa^d according to Instructions, (...),
but for (...) the (...) furnished to the Canadians and their Indians from the
Commencement of this War. Our Squadron at Cape-Breton under Admiral Townshend,
did not visit the French Fleet when distressed.

The Season of the Year being too far advanced, their Strength much impaired,
the detached 4 Men of War not having joined them, and from Disappointments, and
theOfficers in a Fret with one another; it was resolved in a Council of War to
proceed against Annapolis-Royal of Nova Scotia; they sailed from Chebucto Oct.
13, after four Days they met with a Storm off of Cape Sables* and in a Council
of War it was resolved to return directly for France. Two of the Squadron were
in the Bay of F^ndi, Ships of 60 and 36 Guns, that of 36 Guns came into the
Basin; our Ships, the Chester, Shirley, and Ordnance Frigate, well manned with
Land-Force^, went in Chase of them, the Chester run aground; the French Ships
after having put ashore, an Express with Advice to de Rams^y, that the French
Fleet were returned to France, escaped and continued their Voyage Home.

This French Armament upon the Coast, for very good Reasons alarmed Boston; in
a few Days with great Expedition, it was reinforced by 6400 Country inland
Militia; the Militia of the Seacoast Countries remained at Home for their own
Defense, to prevent Depredations: Upon Occasion Connecticut was to have sent us
6000 Men, being about one half of their Militia.

The French in Chebucto were 8 Ships of the Line; whereof the P^rfai^ was
burnt, as incapable to proceed; upon the Coast of (...) the Nottingham took the
Mars, the Ex^ter drove the Ardent ashore and burnt her. This was the Fate of
the great French Arm^da or Armament against the British North American Colonies.

The British Squadron, commanded at first by Admiral Warren, and afterward by
Admiral Lestock with Landforces under the Command of Lieut. General St. Clair
which seemed destined against Canada, and to observe the French Squadron in
North America; after many Delays on Account of contrary Winds and other
Pretenses, was converted to an Invasion upon the Coast of Britany: The Troops
landed at Quimp^rl^y Bay Sept. 20, and bombarded Port ^'Orient; Sept. 26, the
Troops retreated and left 4 Pieces of Cannon, and a 10 Inch Mortar. Ammunition
and Stores; some Marines and Sa^^ors were left behind* Oct. 1 embarked at
Quimper^ey; afterward some land at Quib^ron, and did a (...) Matter o^ Damage.


the Duke d' Anville, they were much caressed by our French Subjects there; and
our Minas Subjects, gave to the Garrison of Annapolis DECEITFUL, and no other
Intelligence: Here they continued some Months, but the Winter-Season
approaching, and no Tidings of the French Armament; the French Troops, deemed
it advisable to return to Canada; in their Return, Duke d'Anville's Armament
arrives in Chebucto of Nova Scotia, and an Express was sent to recall them;
about 400 of them were overtaken, and returned with de Ramsay, Culon, and La
Corn three Captains of Marines and Chevaliers or Knights of St. Louis. Toward
the End of Sept. de Ramsay comes before Annapolis, made no Assault, but
encamped at some Distance; the Chester Man of War of 50 Guns, the Shirley
Frigate of 20 Guns, and the Ordnance Scooner at that Time, were in the Basin of
Annapolis; three Companies of Reinforcements for the Garrison from Boston were
arrived, and de Ramsey having had Advice of the French Fleet being returned to
France, made the French decamp October 22, and return to Minas.

His Design was to quarter at Minas and Chiconicto, during the Winter, and to
join the French Fleet and Land Forces which were expected to reduce Annapolis,
in the Summer; Governor Mascarene of Annapolis, judged that in Addition to the
three Companies of Volunteers which arrived from Boston in Autumn; 1000 Men of
Reinforcements from New England, might be sufficient to dislodge the French
Enemy, and to consume (by Purchase) all the French Inhabitants Provisions
produced there, in Time coming to prevent the Subsistence of the Enemy who
might lodge there and corrupt the Inhabitants; and British Forces being
quartered amongst them, might influence them to continue in their Allegiance to
the Crown of Great Britain: Massachusetts Bay Assembly vote 500 Men to be sent,
Rhode Island 300 Men, and New Hampshire 200 Men; the Rhode Island Men were
shipwrecked near Marthas-Vineyard, those from New Hampshire set out but put
back upon some trifling Excuse, and never proceeded, the 500 Men from Boston
only arrived; the Disappointment of the Rhode Island and New Hampshire Men was
the Reason of our subsequent Disaster at Minas.

Our first Parcel under Capt. Morris arrived at Minas, Dec. 12; when all were
arrived they did not exceed 470 Men besides Officers; Water Carriage in the
Winter Season being impracticable, they marched by Land, 30 Leagues, with much
Har^^hip in eight Days, every Man (...) ou^ with 14 Days Provision upon his
Back; the (...) was quartered at Grand Pre, in a very loose, ill contrived
scattered Situation, but upon Alarm to repair to the main Guard; Col. Noble
superseded Col. Gorham in the chief Command; Gorham and Major Phillips with a
small Escorte set out for Annapolis Jan. 29, they were but nine Miles on their
Way when the French began their Attack.

The French well informed of our scattered Situation as to Cantonment, and not
regularly provided with Ammunition and Provision; set out from Chiconicto Jan.
8, for Minas, which by heading of Creeks and Rivers is about 30 Leagues
Distance, and by Excursions to bring along as many of the Settlers and Indians
as possible, did not arrive in Minas until Jan. 31, and began about three Hours
in the Morning by many distant Attacks or Onsets at the same Time, in Parties
of 70 to 50 Men; they were about 600 of the Enemy Canadians, Inhabitants and
French Indians; they killed many of ourMen in a most inhumane base Manner; Col.
Noble, Lieuts. Lechemore (Nephew to the late Lord Lechemore) Jones, Pickering,
Ensign Noble with about 70 Sergeants, Corporals and private Men; made Prisoners
Capt. Doane, Lieut. Gerrish, and Ensign Newton, in all about 69 Men, the
wounded included; many of the Prisoners were set at Liberty.

The French were well provided with Snow Shoes, this necessary Winter marching
Article we neglected; However, a considerable Number of our Men got together;
but as they had not exceeding 8 Shot per Man, and Provisions being scanty they
capitulated, 1. We are to march off with Arms shouldered, Drums beating,
Colors flying, through a Lane of the Enemy with rested Firelocks. 2. To be
allowed six Days Provision, one Pound of Powder with Ball. 3. Not ^o carry Arms
in the Bays of Minas and Chiconicto for six Months.

De Ramsey being lame was not in this Onset, M^ Culon had the Command, and
after Culon was wounded, M. La Corn commanded; this Affair being over, they
returned to Chiconicto, and expecting la Ianquiere's Squadron with Land Forces
from France in the Summer; they continued at Minas and Chiconicto, until they
received Advice, by some Store-Ships for Canada, which had escaped (of Anno
1747 in the Spring, the French Breast and Rochefort Fleets joined at Rochelle
and sailed from thence; they consisted of 38 Sail, viz. Seven Men of War from
74 to 44 Guns; of these the Invincible of 74 Guns, and a Frigate of 44 Guns
(the only Man of War that escaped being taken) were to convoy the six
East India Ships; the other 5 Men of War, with Transports and Merchantmen
having Soldiers, Stores and Goods aboard, were designed for Nova Scotia and
Canada. Admirals Anson and Warren with 13 Line of Battle Ships, 2 Frig^^es, and
a Fire-Ship fell in with them May 3, in N. Lat. 43 d. 46 m. and frustrated two
French Expeditions to North America and to the East Indies; 6 of the Men of War
were taken, all the six East India Company Ships* and many of the Transports;
we had 4000 to 5000 French Pri^oners with their Commodore or Admiral M. de la
Ionquiere chef d' Escodre, an old Man of 70 Aet.; all this was effected with a
very inconsiderable Loss of Men; seven Companies of Frampton's Regiment were
aboard (the other three Companies were in the Grand Ba^^ery of Louis^ourg in
Cape-Breton) and behaved well. M. de St. George a Knight of Malta commanded
that Part of the Fleet, which was (...) ^o the East Indies.

I shall but just (...) (because not nearly related to our Subject) the Action
of Admiral (...), Oct. 14. 1^47 near Cape Fi^is^^^; with a Squadron of ^^
Capital Ships, (...) f^^l in with a French Fleet commanded by (...) d' ^^carde
of eight large Line of Battle Ships and (...) Men; four of the Men of War were
destined to (...) from (...); only two of the (...) ^^r^hant Men in Time of the
Action (...) picked up by our (...).


la Ionquiere's Fleet) being destroyed May 3, 1747: Then they returned to
Canada, and have given no further Disturbance to Nova Scotia: Notwithstanding,
for the better Security of the Fort and Garrison of Annapolis,
Massachusetts Bay this Spring ^748 sends a Reinforcement of 7 Companies of
Militia.

Having briefly related the French Bickerings with us in Nova Scotia, we
proceed to some further Accounts of that Country.

ANNAPOLIS in 44 d. 40 m. N. Lat; Tide 33 Feet* lies upon a fine Basin, but the
rapid Tides in the Bay of Fundi make a difficult Navigation; into this Basin
comes a River of good Water-Carriage without Falls for 25 Miles, and near it
are several small Villages or Parcel^ ^f French Settlements, which in Time of
Peace, plentifully and cheap supply the Garrison with fresh Provisions and
other Necessaries: From Cape Anne near Boston Harbor to Cape Sables are 87
Leagues, from Cape Sables to Annapolis are 30 Leagues; Capt. Campbell in the
Squirrel Man of War sailed from Marblehead near Boston Harbor (s^ortest
Course) in 23 Hours. The English have no other Footing in this Province,
besides the Fort of Annapolis; and before this French War, a small Fishery at
Canso.

Aglate la Tour Granddaughter to the before mentioned La Tour, by Management
and for small Considerations, obtained Procurations and Quit-Claims, from all
the Heirs of La Tour, and Belle-Isle; she married a Subaltern Officer in
Phillip's Regiment; she went to England and sold the Seignurie or Property of
all the Province to the Crown of Great Britain Anno 1731, for 2000 Guineas; the
sole Property of all the Province is now in the Crown, and at present yields
not exceeding seventeen Pound Sterling pr. An. Quit-rent: By the Peace of
Utrecht, the French in Nova Scotia upon their taking the British Government
Oaths, were to continue in their Possessions; the not appropriated Lands by the
King of Great-Britain's Instructions were reserved for Protestant Subjects;
Perhaps Governor Philips and Lieut.-Governor Armstrong for secret valuable
Considerations; made to the French Inhabitants some Concessions, Indulgencies,
or Connivances. When we recollect such mercenary Co^nivances of Governors; and
while our French Inhabitants* retain a Language and Religion the same with
France our natural Enemy* but entirely different from that of Great Britain;
they must naturally and unavoidably, upon any Misunderstanding betw^en the
(...) and French, favor the French Interest: Therefore they must be removed by
some subsequent Treaty, or be elbowed out, or their Language and Religion must
gradually be changed.
notwithstanding of this Instruction, the French Roman Catholic Subjects, as
they swarm (as they multiply in Families) make free with these Crown Lands.

Anno 1717 Col. Phillips was appointed Governor of Nova Scotia in Place of
Vetch, and of Newfoundland in Place of Moody; the four Independent Companies of
Annapolis, and the four Independent Companies of Placentia, with two more
additional Companies were regimented in his Favor, making a reduced or
reformed Regiment of 445 Men, Officers included. After the French Reduction of
Canso, our Soldiers Prisoners arrived at Annapolis, being about 60 Men, the
poor Remains or Representatives of four Companies; three of these Companies
were incorporated with the five Companies of Annapolis, and with the fourth
Company of Canso: Thus at Annapolis were six Companies, at Placentia one
Company, and the three new Companies to be sent from England to St. John's in
Newfoundland made up the Regiment of ten Companies, to be completed to 815 Men
Officers included, the Compliment of a British marching Regiment: The
Reinforcements and Recruits for this Regiment from England by Mismanagement and
Neglect were very unfortunate; and the Regiment remains in an abject low
Estate, though in Time of War, and continual Jeopardy, from our neighboring
French, and Armaments from France.

In Order to colonize this Country, Governor Philips had a Royal Instruction to
form a Council for the Management of the civil Affairs of the Province; and
accordingly in April 1720, did appoint 12 Counselors, viz. John Doucet
Lieut.-Governor, Laurence Armstrong, Paul Mascarene, Cyprian Southack, John
Harrison, Arthur Savage, John Adams, Herbert Newton, William Skeen, William
Sherriff, Peter Boudrie, and Gillam Philips, Esqrs; By the fifth Instruction,
if any of the Council be absent from the Province, exceeding 12 Months, without
Leave from the Commander in chief; or absent two Years without the King's
Leave; his Place shall be deemed void or vacant. In the Absence of the Governor
and Lieut.-Governor, the eldest Councellor is to act as President of the
Council, and to take upon him the Government: Thus An. 1739 upon the Death of
Lieut.-Governor Armstrong, Major Mascarene a Soldier from his Youth, a
Gentleman of Probity and exemplary good Life, became and continues President of
the Council, and Commander in chief for the Time being, of the Province of
Nova-Scoti^. As Mascarene was only Major of the Regiment, and Cosby Lieut. Col.
of the Regiment, and Lieut.-Governor of the Fort of Annapolis, and consequently
his superior Officer; C^sby seemed to dispute the Command of the Province, but
by an Order from Home, it was determined, "That whatever Rank any Person may
have out of the Council, he must submit to the Laws of Seniority, which in
civil Government ought never to be dispensed with, but by his Majesty's special
Order under his Sign Manual." The Governor Phillips disputes the Moiety of the
S^llary which the Commander in chief of the Province claim^ in the Absence of
the Governor; but by an Instruction o^ Order from Home, the 42 Instruction to
the Governor of Virginia, is also directed to take Place in Nova Scotia, viz.
Upon the Governor's Absence, one full Moiety of the Sallary, all Perquisites,
and Emoluments whatsoever, shall be paid and satisfied unto such
Lieut.-Governor, Commander in chief, or President of our Council, who shall be
resident upon (...) Place for the Time being, for the better Support of (...)
Dignity of the Government."

Col. Phillips, Governor of Nova Scotia and Newfoundland, and Col. of a
Regiment in Garrisons there, arrived in Boston 1720 Oct. 4; upon his Arrival in
Nova Scotia 880 effective Men of the French Inhabitants, took the Oaths to the
Crown of Great Britain; at this Time Anno 1748 we reckon French Inhabitants in
Nova Sco^i^ from 3000 to 4000 fencible Men; Indians in Nova Scotia not
exceeding 250 marching Men, the contagious Distempers of D'Anvilles's Fleet
reduced them very much.

Col. Phillips with Advice and Consent of his Council is empowered to grant
Lands under cer^ain Limitations, but in general at 1 d. St. pr. An. per Acre
Quit Rent, Roman Catholics are excepted. Col. P^ -- ps had sundry Sums allowed
by the Board of Ordnance for repairi^g Fortifications and the like, at
Annapolis and Canso; and were converted, as is said, to his own proper Use. In
Time of Peace the Garrisons in Nova Scotia and Newfoundland, with a reduced
Regiment of Foot, and Detachments from the Train, cost Great Britain about
15000 L. per Annum.

When Massachusetts Bay Colony obtained a new Charter (their former Charter was
taken away at the same Time with many Corporation Charters in England in the
End of the Reign of Charles II. and Beginning of the like or more arbitrary
Reign of James II.) 7 Oct. 1691, Nova Scotia at that Time in Possession of the
French, was annexed (as was also Sagadahock or Duke of York's Property) to the
Massachusetts Jurisdiction, to keep up the Claim of Grea^-Britain; Nova Scotia
has since been constituted a separate Government; and has continued about 40
Years to this Time, a nominal British Province without any British Settlement,
only an The Regiments in Garrison at Louisbourg, may be conveyed to Nova
Scotia, and cantoned amongst the French Settlements; after some short Time to
be disbanded, with some Encouragement of Lands and other Things as Settlers:
Thus we may by Degrees ELBOW the French out of their Language and Religion, and
perhaps out of their Lands, as many of them dissatisfied with our
Neighborhood, will choose to remove Home to France, or retire to Canada; the
Remainder will in Course continue in their Allegiance to the Crown of
Great Britain. Nova Scotia has continuedly been in the Jurisdiction of
Great Britain, for about 40 Years, and from the bad Management of those
concerned; in all that Time, not any Family Natives of Great Britain or of
British Extract, have been induced to settle there; there are a few Families in
and belonging to the Garrison of Annapoli^.

Notwithstanding of the Expediency in giving up and demolishing of Louisbourg,
it may prove a puzzling Affair, 1. Because contrary to the prevailing popular
Opinion. 2. As the French have made no Land-Conquests in any of the British
Dominions, the F^^nch have no equi^alent Restitution to make for Cape Breto^,
unless by Connivance of our Ministry, in neglecting the Defense of Annapolis
and Nova Scotia, we give it to the French, to be made Use of as an Equivalent;
if thi^ could be supposed, the present Ministers will not heartily thank the
bold N^w England^r^, for their great Expense of Men and Money in ^he Reduction
of L^u^sbourg, and Preservation of Annapolis, but reckon them officiously
daring: Notwithstanding the Reprieve which these Expedi^ions give to Debtors,
and by stretching our Paper Credit, depreciate the nominal C^rrency in Favor
of our landed Debts* perhaps a Majority of the ^^g -- ture; we m^^ favorably
con^^rue it as done, in Duty to their Country, and ^o the ^nter^^^ of all the
Dominions of Great-B^i^^in.


insignificant Preventive, but precarious Fort and Garrison.

As this Country is rude, a Geographical Description of it cannot be expected;
it is a large Extent of Territory, bounded Westward by the Bay of Fundi, and a
Line running Northward from St. John's River to St. Laurence or Canada great
River; Northward it is bounded by the sai^ St. Laurence River; Eastward it is
bounded by the Gulf of St. Laur^nce and Gut of Canso which divides it from the
Island of Cape Breton, and South-Easte^ly it is bounded by Cape Sable Shore.

The most valuable Article in this Province is the Cape Sable Coast, where is a
continued Range of Cod-fishing Banks, and many good Harbors; it is true, that
along the Cape Sable Shore and Cape Breton, for some Weeks in Summer, there are
continued Fogs (as upon the Banks of Newfoundland) from the Range of Banks to
the Eastward, that the Sun is not to be seen; but without Storms or bad
Weather; the rest of the Year is clear Weather, very suitable for dry Cod-Fish
-- along this Coast to keep clear of Lands-Ends or Promontories, of Rocks, and
of Shoals, the Courses are, from Cape Anne near Boston to Cape Sables E. b. N.
87 Leagues to Cape Sambro E. b. N. half N. 50 to Canso E. N. E. 45 to
Louisbourg E. Northerly 18 200 Leagues

Some of these Harbors are called Port Latore, Port Rosway, Port Metonue, Port
Metway, La Have, Malagash, Chebucto. In Chebucto in the Autumn 1746 lay the
French Armada under Duke d' Anville, des^ined to destroy or distress all the
British North America Settlements: This Bay and River of Chebucto bids fair in
Time to become the principal Port of Nova Scotia and its Metropolis; from this
there is good Wheel Land-Carriage Communication with the Bay of Minas; that is,
with La Riviere des Habitants or La Prarie, with the River of Cobaquid, with
the River of Pisaquid, and the best Parts of the Province. It is true Annapolis
lies upon a fine Basin, and is more inland for a large Vent or Consumption
(thus London, Bristol, Liverpool, Glascow h^^e become rich) but the Country
round it is bad, and the Tides of the Bay of Fundi renders the Navigation
difficult.

Upon the opposite or Westerly Shore of the Bay of Fundi are the Rivers of
Pasamaquady and St. Croix* being about 17 Leagues N. W. from the Gut or
Entrance of the Basin of Annapolis; the River St. Croix is the Boundary between
Nova Scotia Government, and the Territory of Sagadahock or the Duke of York's
Property; for the present in Jurisdiction, annexed to the neighboring
New England Province of Massachus^^ts Bay. Upon this Shore further No^thward is
the River of St. John's 10 Leagues distant from the Gut of Annapolis, this is a
profitable River of long Course, a considerable Tribe of the Abnaquie Indians
are settled here, but always (from the Indolence of the Government of Nova
Scotia) in the French or Canada Interest: The prodigious Falls or rather Tides
in this River near its Mouth of 30 Fathom, are not a Cataract from Rocks, but
from the Tide being pent up in this River between two steep Mountains: By this
River and Carrying-Places there is a Communication with Queb^c ^he Metropolis
of Canada; when we reduced Port Royal 1710, Major Livingston and St. Casteen
went by this River to acquaint the General of Canada concerning that Event.
Higher or more Northward is Cap Door about 30 Leagues from Annapolis; here is
Plenty of mineral Coal for firing; some Years since, this Affair was undertaken
by a Company, but soon dropped with Loss; here are some s^ender Veins of Copper
Ore, some thin Laminae of Virgin Copper, and a Gold Su^phur marcas^^e.

Upon the Easterly Shore or Gulf of St. Laurence, is Canso Gut, a safe and
short Passage from the British Settlements to Canada River, 6 Leagues long, 1
League wide; a good Navigation, from the Journals of Capt. Gayton Anno 1746,
upon a Cruize to Bay Vert^. About 25 Leagues further is Ta^amaganahou, a
considerable Nova Scotia French District or Settlement, and good Road for
Vessels; 14 Leagues further is Bay Verte, shallow Water, but the Embarquadier
from Canada, to disturb us in Nova Scotia, from this are only 4 Miles Land
Carriage to the River of Chiconicto; here we may observe, that upon the
Chiconicto Bay Side are 11 Fathom Tide, upon the Gulf of St. Laurence or Bay
Verte Side, are only 4 to 5 Feet Tide. Further ( Isle Bonaventure and Isle
Percee interveening, where the French by Treaty of Utrecht do rightfully cure
dry Cod Fish) at the South Entrance of the River of St. Laurence, is Gaspee, a
deep Bay and good Harbor; here unrighteously the French dry Cod Fish; I
observe in the late French Charts published by Authority, there is a Territory
pricked off, called GASPEE, as if not belonging to Nova Scotia or L'Accadie,
ceded to Great Britain by the Treaty of Utrecht; such a Paper Encroachment, if
not attended to, may be construed after many Years a just Claim by
Prescription; such is at present the Dispute between the Baltimore Family of
Maryland, and the Pen's Family of Pensylvania concerning the old Dutch Charts,
and our new Charts in Relation to Cape Cornelius the South Cape of Delaware
Bay, and Cape Henlopen 20 Miles South Westerly from the Mouth of Delaware Bay,
in running the Line between the three lower Counties of Pensylvania and
Maryland.

Nova Scotia is divided into 10 or 12 Districts; each District annually chooses
one Deputy to be approved by the Commander and Council at Annapolis; he is a
Sort of Agent for the District, and reports the State of the District from Time
to Time; they are in no legislative, or executive Capacity; the French
Missionaries who are not only appointed, by the Bishop of Quebec in Canada, but
under his Direction (a Scandal to the indolent Government and Garrisons of Nova
Scotia) in their several Districts and Villages, act as Magistrates and
Justices of the Peace; but all Complaints may be brought before the Commander
in chief and Council at Annapolis.

The New England Bills of public Credit; ever since the Cession by the Treaty
of Utrecht, have been their common Currency; until the late intolerable
Depreciation by immensly multiplying this Credit beyond its Bearings, by
Expeditions, and in Fact the Credit of those Bills is almost sunk, In a Message
Nov. 5. 1747. from the House of Representatives o^ the Province of (...)
relating to the Pay of C^n^da ^orce^, to their Governor, i^ (...) represented,
"Should such a further (...) emitted, as is necess^^y for the Purpose mentioned
in your Excellency's Message, (...) it mu^^ be followed by a great Impa^^* if
not (...) Credit, which has already been greatly wounded." (...) of this
iniquitous or base Money (...) upon Mr. ^ -- ly, by the proper Money Branch
(...).
or rather lost; the French Inhabitants absolutely refuse them in Currency.

Island of Sables.
ThisIsland must be deemed in the Jurisdiction of the Province of Nova Scotia,
as it lies upon the Latitudes of that Coast, though at a considerable Distance;
and the British exclusive Line of Fishery by the Treaty of Utrecht 1713
beginning at this Island, implies the same to belong to Great Britain; the Name
is French, and we retain it with much Impropriety; we ought to have translated
it SANDY ISLAND, in the same Manner, as we have turned Point de Sable (a former
French District in St. Christophers) to the present British Name Sandy Point.
The Property is loudly (that is in the public News Papers) claimed by some
private Persons; I shall not inquire into the Merit of the Affair.

I am informed by People who were shipwrecked there, and lived some Months upon
the Island, that, from Canso to the Middle of the Island are 35 Leagues South;
it is a low Land, with small rising Knowles of Sand called Downs, in Form of an
Elbow, the Bite to the Northward, about 20 Miles in Length, and narrow; by
Reason of Sholes of Sand, small Tides 5 or 6 Feet, and a great Surf, it is
inaccessible, excepting in the Bite where Boats may land. Formerly some Persons
of Humanity, put Cattle ashore to breed, for the Relief of the Shipwrecked, and
by multiplying, they answered that benevolent charitable End; until some
wicked, mean, rascally People from our Continent, destroyed them to make Gain
(these Robbers of seafaring People, called these Depredations, making of a
Voyage) of their Hides and Tallow. The South Side is in 43 d. 50 m. N. Lat; no
Trees, their principal Growth is Juniper Bushes, Vitis ldaea angulosa I. B.
Vaccinia Nigra. Park, Black Whort^ or Bill-Berries.
Huckle-Berry Bushes, Oxycoc^us sive vaccinia pulustris I. B. Moss-Berries, or
Marsh Whortle-Berries; the French of Canada call it Canneberge* it is plenty
all over the Northern Parts of North America; and is a most exquisitely
agreeable acid Sauce for all roast Meats, and for Pastry Tarts.
Cranberries, Gram^n Spicatum, secalinum, maritimum. maximum, Spica lo^^^o^e T.
Spartium, Spiculum, pung^ns (...) J. B. English or Dutch Sea Ma^we^d.
Bent-Grass; some Ponds, Abundance of Foxes and Seals; great Snows in Winter,
but do not lay long.

At this Island which is deemed 30 Leagues Eastward from the Cape Sable Shore
of Nova Scotia or L'Accadie, by the Treaty of Utrecht 1713, begins the British
exclusive Line of Fishery, running S. W. indefinitely, and including the
Fishing Banks belonging to the Island.

CAPE BRETON Islands.
Cape Breton cannot properly be called a British Colony, until confirmed by
some subsequent Treaty of Peace, and annexed to the Dominions of Great Britain;
but notwithstanding its retarding the Prosecution of this History* I cannot
avoid taking Notice of the Reduction of Louisbourg, being in our Neighborhood,
an Event recent and very memorable. I shall endeavor to relate it with
Exactness and Impartiality; by ascribing every Step of it to Providence, I hope
it will not be construed as detracting from the Merits of the Country of
New England, the Place of my Abode or Home. The Motto may be Audaces Fortuna
juvat, and with good Propriety may be termed Dignus vindice nodus, and without
Imputation of Cant, be ascribed to some extraordinary Interposition of
Providence in our Favor: Governor Shirley in a Speech, observes, that "scarce
such an Instance is to be found in History:" A Colonel in this Expedition, gave
it this Turn "That if the French had not given up Louisbourg, we might have
endeavored to storm it with the same Prospect of Success, as the Devils might
have stormed Heaven." The annual Convention of the New England Ministers, in
their Address to the KING, call it, "The wonderful Success GOD has given your
American Forces:" A Clergyman from London writes "This prosperous Event, can
hardly be ascribed to any Thing short of an Interposition from above truly
uncommon and extraordinary: These Expressions of the Governor's, etc. ought not
to be construed as derogating from the most bold Adventure of the
New-Englanders.

The Reduction of Louisbourg was much above our Capacity; in short, if any one
Circumstance had taken a wrong Turn on our Side, and if any one Circumstance
had not taken a wrong Turn on the French Side, the Expedition must have
miscarried, and our Forces would have returned with Shame, and an inextricable
Loss to the Province; as this was a private or Corporation Adventure without
any Orders from the Court of Great Britain, the Charges would not have been
reimbursed by the Parliament; and the People of New England from Generation to
Generation would have cursed the Advisers and Promoters of this unaccountably
rash Adventure.

In the Congress of Utrecht when the French demanded Cape-Breton Island, it was
proposed, that it should lie in common for the Use of the British and French
Fishery, without any Settlements or Forts, but open; the Fr^nch would have
acquiesced, but in this as in some other Artiticles, our abandoned wicked
Ministry of that Time, gave the French Nation more than they really expected,
viz. the exclusive Property and Dominion of the Island, with the Liberty of
fortifying. It is generally thought, that by next Peace, Louisbourg will be
demolished, and the Island laid open and in common to both Nations: It is
certain, that the Duke D'Anville had an Instruction, if he succeeded in
recovering of Louisbourg, to demolish it.

As this was a private Adventure, upon Surrender, we might have demolished it
soon, and converted the Artillery, other warlike Stores, and many other
valuable Things, to the Use and Benefit of the New England Colonies concerned*
and so have put an End to a great accruing Charge: The Charge of maintaining a
Garrison there with Men, Provisions, warlike Stores, and Repairs in Time of
Peace, will be a great and unprofitable Article of national Expense, and as
both Nations are much in Debt, neither of them will incline to be at the
Charge, but agree to demolish it. As Great Britain are a small People, but at
present Masters at Sea; their Game is to procure all the Advantages of an
extensive Commerce, we are not capable of peopling and maintaining
Land-Acquirements: Perhaps the Promoters of this very popular Adventure do not
receive the sincere Thanks of the Ministry or Managers at the Court of
Great Britain (this may be the Reason of the Remoras in our soliciting a
Perhaps our Agent or Agents at Home (who are in the Nature of A^tornies for the
Province or Corporation) to ingratiate themselves with our Legisla^ure, have
represen^ed the Affair wrong, which has induced them in Quality of a Colony
Legislature, to count their Chickens before they are hatched* and in some
Sense, to prescribe to the sovereign Legislature of Great Britain, concerning
the Disposition of this Money. There is a late Incident not in our Favor, Duke
of Ne^cas^le conce^ned in all our Colony Expedi^ions is removed from being
eldest Secretary, that is of the Southern Province, to which Irel^^d and the
Plantations are annexed.
Reimbursement) because thereby they have incurred, to please the Populace, an
annual Charg^ (...) we 60,000 L. Sterling. pr. An. or 600,000 L. New-Englan^
Currency, a considerable Article where Ways and Means were difficult.

If the Act of Parliament against impressing of Seamen in the Sugar-Islands,
had been extended to the Northern American Colonies; we should have been easy
under a British Squadron stationed at Boston, and their Bills home for
Supplies, would have made good Returns for our Merchants; our Traders could not
have suffered above 2 or 3 pr. Ct. Difference of Insurance, which is a Trifle
compared with the great Charge incurred by reducing of Louisbourg, and of
maintaining it during the War.

Here I shall give some short Account of Evenements in the Northern Parts of
North America from the Commencement of the present French War to the present
Time May 1748; I shall not notice small Affairs, which do not require Mention
in a general History.

The French declared War against Great Britain March 15. 1744. N. S.
Great Britain declared War against France March 29. 1744. O. S. The French in
these Parts had more early Intelligence of the War: at Boston we did not
proclaim this War until June 2. May 13. M. Du Vivier with a few armed small
Vessels, and about 900 regular Troops and Militia from Louisbourg, tak^^ Canso
without any Resistance, and carries the nominal four Companies being 70 to 80
Soldiers, and the few Inhabitants Prisoners to Louisbou^^.

Here is a notorious Instance of the French too forward rash Conduct; contrary
to express Instructions sent by the Court of France to the Garrison of
Louisbourg, along with the Declaration of War (my Information was from M. le
Marquis de la Maison Forte Capt. of the Vigilant) that considering the weak and
mutinous State of their Garrison, it was not advisable for them, until further
Orders, to attempt any Expedition which might alarm the populous neighboring
British Colonies. 2. If instead of taking the insignificant Post (did not
deserve the Name of Fort) of Canso in their Neighborhood, the sooner to humor
the Vanity of an Eclat; had they with the same Force gone directly to
Annapolis, by Surprise it would have easily submitted.

About the same Time a small inconsiderable Armament from Louisbourg, commanded
by M. de la Brotz, made some Depredations about St. Peter's of Newfoundland, and
threatened Placentia Fort. This de la Brotz in a French Privateer Sloop of 18
Guns and 94 Men, was soon after this, taken by the Massachusetts Province Snow
Capt. Tyng, upon the Coast of New England, and carried into Boston. A small
Privateer from Louisbourg takes a Sloop with Whale-Oil aboard from Nantucket
Island bound to Boston.

See the Section of Nova Scotia P. 319, for the Attempts against Annapolis in
June, by some Indians under the Direction of M. Lutre, a French Missionary
Priest* and in September, by some French and Indians commanded by M. Du Vivier,
who burnt Canso in May.

End of July Capt. Rouse in a Boston Privateer, arrived at St. John's Harbor in
Newfoundland from the great Banks, he brought in 8 French Ships with 90,000
Mud-Fish. In August, Capt. Rouse in Confortship with Capt. Cleves in a Ship and
some small Craft, and 50 Marines, fitted out by the British Man of War
stationed at Newfoundland, sail in Quest of the French Ships that cure Cod-Fish
in the Northern Harbors of Newfoundland; August 18 at Fishot, ^hey took five
good French Ships, some dried Fish bu^ not well cured, and 70 Tons of
Liver-Oil; thence they proceeded to the Harbors of St. Julian and Carrous.
Capt. Rouse hereby merited, and accordingly was made a Post or Rank Captain in
the British Navy.

In September dies Du Quesnel the French Governor of Cape-Breton, a good old
Officer, and was succeeded in Command by M. Du Chambon an old Pol^roon.

In October Capt. Spry in the Comet-Bomb, upon the Coast of New England, takes
a French Privateer in her first Voyage or Cruize Capt. Le Gro^z 16 Guns 100
Men, whereof some were Irish Roman Catholic Soldiers formerly of In this
Reg^ment they have been much guilty of inlisting Roman Catholick^, because
cheap and easily to be got.
Phillips's Regiment from Canso; this Privateer was called Labradore, from a
Gut in Cape-Breton where she was built; she had taken two or three of our
Coasters, from Philadelphia. About this Time Capt. Waterhouse in a Boston
Privateer refused a French East India Ship richly laden; and Capt. Loring in a
small Boston Privateer, was taken by a new French Man of War from Canada bound
to Louisbourg.

Nov. 19. sails from Louisbourg the French grand Fleet of Fish Ships, of Fur
Ships from Canada, etc. This Fleet consisted of 3 French Men of War, 6
East India Ships, 31 other Ships, 9 Brigantines, 5 Snows, and 2 Scooners; 7
Vessels remained to winter at Louisbourg.

This is a short History of the Sea Campaign (as the French express it) in the
Northern Parts of North America for Anno 1744.

Anno 1745 in March, This was the best A^vice Boat ^he F^^nch had, she was
taken in a Voyage to Hi^p^niol^
La Renommee a French Frigate of 32 Guns, 350 Seamen, and 50 Marines, charged
with public Dispatches, and designed for Observation; in cruizing along the
Cape-Sable Coast, met with several of our small armed Vessels, and with the
Connecticut Transports, which upon any other Occasion, she might have destroyed
with Ease: If she had put into Louisbourg, by the Addition of good Officers, of
Men, and of Stores; the Garrison would have been encouraged, and perhaps have
rendered our Expedition vain: But having discovered an Expedition against
Louisbourg in great Forwardness she made the best of her Way to carry immedia^e
Advice thereof to France; and a Squad^on under the Command of M. Perrier was
so^n fitted out at from Breast for the Relief of Louisbourg, la Renommee sailed
in this Squadron, she was an exquisite Sailer, and at length taken by the
Dover, 1747.

In May the Commanded by M. le Marquis de la Maison Forte, Son in Law to M.
Chi^oneou first Physician to the French King. This Gentleman was too rash in
firing; as he met with British Men of War, he should have made the best of his
Way to Port* and only have put hi^ Men in a Posture to prevent Boarding,
without firing* which stops the Ships Way, and have received the Fire of our
Ships (...) Notwithstanding of this Misconduct, the Marquis wa^ a Man o^ ^ood
Sense and Observation, he made this good Remark; that the French Of^icers of
Louis^ourg, in bad Policy, hindered the English from viewing at all Times the
Strength of their Forts; because if the English had been well inform^d of its
Strength, the most sanguine, rash, wrongheaded Person, if not a natural Fool,
could not have imagined such a Reduction without regular Troops, and without
Artillery; our proper Cannon (the 10 Guns of 18 lb. Shot lent us from N^w-York
excepted) were bad, old, and Honey comb, 4 of them split in firing. He further
well obs^rved; that our allowing the French Officers Prisoners freely to view
Bos^on and the Country of New England, would effe^tually discourage and forbid
any French Attempt to invade a Country so well peopled.

Here we may observe, that the warlike Names of the French Men of War, sound
more elegant, proper and bold, than the flat Appellations of the British Men of
War by the Names of Counties, Towns* and Persons: For Instance, in the French
Navy there are, le Terrible* l' Ard^n^, l^ Fougu^ux; le Mars, le Nep^un^, le
Jason; le Vigilant, le Glori^, la R^n^^m^e, etc. In the English Navy our Names
are flat, the Ken^, ^he D^v^nshire, the Cumberland; the London, the Edinburgh,
the Ch^st^^; the Prince (...), the Princ^ss Mary, the Wag^r, etc.


Vigilant, a French Man of War of 64 Guns and 560 Men with a good Land Fall,
instead of going directly into the Harbor of Louisbourg, attacked British Man
of War of 40 Guns, the Mermaid Capt. Douglass, this prudent Officer by a
running Fight decoyed the French Ship into the Clutches of Commodore Warren in
the Superbe of 60 Guns, in Company were also the Eltham of 40 Guns, the
Massachusetts Frigate of 20 Guns, and the Shirley Galley of 20 Guns; the
Vigilant struck to the Mermaid May 18, and was manned chiefly from New England:
If the Vigilant had arrived in Louisbourg considering the many good Officers
aboard, a large Number of Sailors and Marines, with great Quantities of Stores,
we should have been disappointed in the Reduction of Louisbourg.

If the Proposal made three Days before the Vigilant was seized, had taken
Place, viz. of laying up the Men of War in Chapeau rouge Bay, and landing
theSailors and Marines to join ou^ ^^eging Army; the Vigilant would have got in
and f^ustrated the Reduction of Louisbourg.

M. Marin, after an invain Attempt against Annapolis in Nova Scotia, with 900
French and Indians, in small Sloops and Canoes, was bound to the Relief of
Louisbourg by molesting theSiege, in AsmacouseHarbour they were di^persed by
some of our small armed Vessels June 15; see Nova Scotia Section, P. 321.

The French Squadron of 7 Men of War, commanded by M. Perrier, designed for the
Relief of Louisbourg, set out from France too late. July 19, in N. Lat. 43 d.
45 m. W. Long. from London 40 d. 30 m, E. off the Banks of Newfoundland, took
our Prince of Orange Mast Ship, Lieut.-Governor Clark of New York aboard, here
the French learnt that Louisbourg had surrendered; without this Intelligence,
they would have become a Prey to our Louisbourg Squadron; the French altered
their Measures, and in a Storm were dispersed; la Galette of 32 Guns did not
rendezvous; the Mars 66 Guns, St. Michael 62 Guns, and the Renommee of 32 Guns,
put back to France; the P^^fait 46 Guns, Argonoute 46 Guns, and le Tournoir 32
Guns, put into the Harbor of Carrous in the Northern Parts of Newfoundland 51
d. ^ m. N. Lat, lay there three Weeks, and sailed a Convoy for the French Fish
Ships.

Some homeward-bound rich French S^ip^, ignorant of this Event, came before
Louisbourg ^o refresh, and were taken by our Ships; as all the British Men of
War had entered into a Contract of joint sharing, I shall not particularize the
Ships that made the Seizures: July 24 they took an East India Ship from Bengal,
Value 75,000 L. St. soon after they take another East India Ship. August 22 was
taken a South Sea Ship (decoyed by the Boston Packet Capt. Fletcher) Value
about 400,000 L. St.

In July we sent some small Craft to St. John's Island to bring away the French
Inhabitants, to be transported to France: Some of our Men imprudently and too
securely went ashore, they were ambuscaded by some French and Indians, we lost
28 Men killed and captivated.

Oct. 5. sailed 5 Men of War, via Newfoundland with the two East India Ships
for England, to be condemned there, conform to an Act of Parliament; the
South Sea Ship for certain Reasons was condemned as unfit to proceed: The
Vigilan^, Chester, and Louisbourg Fire Ship were left to winter there.

Our Provincial Privateer Snow Capt. Smithurst, was lost in a Storm and all the
Men drowned.

Our Sea Campaign Anno 1746 was as follows. In the Autumn 1745 were shipped off
from Gibralter the two Regiments Foot of Fuller and Warburton with three
Companies of Frampton's Regiment, they arrived in the Winter upon this bad
Coast (I mean the Winter Coast of New England, Nova Scotia and Cape-Breton) and
therefore put into Virginia to wait the Spring Season; they arrived at
Louisbourg May 24. 1746, and relieved our New England Militia of about 1500 Men
that had kept Garrison there at the Charge of Great Britain from the Surrender
of the Place June 17. 1745; Commodore Warren received a Commission as Governor,
and Col. Warburton as Lieut.-Governor of the Garrison of Louisbourg and
Territories thereunto belonging. Admiral Warren's Occasions called him Home,
and Mr. Knowles was appointed Governor and ^ommodore of a small Squadron there,
it is said, he behaved in a most imperious, disgustful Manner.

Admiral Townshend with a Squadron, was ordered from our West India Sugar
Islands, for the Protection of Louisbourg, he continued there in Harbor all
the Time that Duke d'Anville's French Squadron was upon our Coast* without
giving them any Molestation in their great Distress, doubtless from some secret
Instr^ctions, which he did not think proper to communicate to Mr. Knowles*
Townshend with eightShips sailed in November from Louisbourg for England.

The Story of d'Anville's Expedition that Autumn in these S^as, we have already
related in the Section of Nova Scotia, P. 322.

In the Summer by an Order from Home, the several Nothern Colonies did raise
Forces toward the reducing of Canada; see Page 324: this was perhaps only a
State-Amusement, without a real Design to prosecute the Affair: The
Massachusetts Bay voted 3000 Men, whereof 2000 were inlisted, and by an Order
from Home, they were dismissed in October 1747, after having further involved
the Province in a considerable Debt for inlisting, victualing, and providing of
Transports.

Anno 1747. In theSpring, a French Squadron with Transports and Land Forces,
fitted out in France, for the Annoyance of Cape-Breton, and Reduction of
Annapolis in Nova Scotia, were intercepted, beginning of May by Admirals Anson
and Warren's Squadron; see P. 326: M. de Ramsay, with his Party of Canadian
French and Indians, had wintered at Chiconicto, to join the Land Forces from
France; but upon the News of La Ianquiere's Disaster, they returned to Canada;
and from that Time to this present Writing May 1748, Annapolis has been in
perfect Security and Tranquillity; there is at this Time a Rumor of some
Expedition on Foot in Canada.

Beginning of Winter Commodore Knowles from Louisbourg with a small Squadron,
was joined at Boston by the Station Ships of North America, leaving their Trade
exposed to the Depredations of French and Spanish Privateers; he sailed to our
Windward Sugar Islands, and from thence to Iamaica; having made up a
considerable Squadron with Land Forces aboard, he was to distress the French
Harbors and Settlements on Hispaniola (the French call the Island St.
Domingue) as much as possible, he has already reduced and demolished a strong
Fort in Port Louis; here 1741 lay a large French Squadron under the Marquis d'
Antin designed to prevent the Junction of Vernon and Ogle, or to awe our
Expedition against Carthagene, or to carry Home the Spanish Plate Fleet;
neither of these were effected, but returned to France in a very distressed
Condition.

Anno 1748. The adjacent British Provinces or Colonies, are negotiating an
Expedition against a French Fort at Crown-Point, upon the Dutch Side of Lake
Champlain, and consequently within the Jurisdiction of New York; When the
Affair is narrowly canvassed, perhaps it will be deemed As to the Reduction of
Crown-Point a French Fort, and lately a Place of Arms for the Annoyance of the
British Settlements of New York and the N. W. Frontiers of New England. 1.
Unless all Canada were in Course to be reduced, which we cannot pretend to
effect without an Armament from Great Britain; this when reduced, must either
be demolished, but soon rebuilt again by the French, at one Tenth of our Charge
in reducing it; or garrisoned strongly, at a great Charge because of its great
Distance from us, and Vicinity or easy Water Communication with Canada. 2. It
is not in the New England District, Jurisdiction, or Government, and
consequently not under our Direction so as to make any Advantage of it in the
Skin and Fur Trade. 3. If we were to act with the same sordid private Interest
Views, as has formerly been practiced by the Dut^h Settlement, (...) at present
English Government of New York; for Instance, in the late Queen Anne's War with
the French, these our Dut^h ^ubjects contrived a Neutrality between the New
York or 5 Nation Indians and the French Indians, and thereby engrossed the
French and Indian Trade of those Parts, and the French of Canada with their
Indians were all let loose to distress No^^ Scotia and the Eastern Settlements
of New England; at present it might ^e advisable, tacitly to consent to the
Continuance of C^^wn Point as a Rendezvous and Place of Arms for the French and
their Indians; thus the Eastern Frontiers of New England would be safe,
formerly much harrassed by the Enemy Indians; this War they have not suf^ered
much; our Western Frontier exposed to the Excursions from Crown Point are
covered by New York and the late Addition to the ^overnment of New Hampshire
when settled.
silly, but chargeable Affair: As hitherto nothing is concluded upon, we must
drop it.

Cape Breton was formerly in the Nova Scotia District, the French call it L'
Isle Royal; by Commission, M. Subercasse the last French Governor of L'Accadie,
is called Governor of L'Accadie and Cape Breton Islands, from Cape Rosiers at
the Entrance of St. Laurence River, to Quenebeck River: By the Treaty of
Utrecht 1713, all L'Accadie or Nova Scotia was quit-claim'd by France to
Great Britain; excepting the Cape Breton Islands, that is, all the Islands in
the Gulf of St. Laurence; these Great Britain quit-claim'd to France.

The great Island of Cape-Breton, lies from 45 d. to 47 d. N. Lat, its most
Northerly Point distant 15 Leagues from Newfoundland, the Gulf of St. Laurence
interveening, here a few Cuizers might preclude the French Canada Trade; it is
separated from Nova Scotia by a Thorough-Fare, which we call the Gut of Canso,
the French call it the Passage of Fronsac; the Mermaid a British Man of War of
40 Guns 1747 upon a Cruize, sailed through this Gut, found it six Leagues long,
is narrow but good Anchorage, Flood from the North; from the Gut of Canso 40
Leagues to Bay Verte, where are about 10 or 12 French Huts, upon the Nova
Scotia Shore, shallow Water; here is the Communication of the Canadians with
our perfidious French of Nova Scotia, by a short Land-Carriage or Neck of about
4 Miles to Chiconicto. Tatamaganabo^ is a large French Village, 14 Leagues West
Southerly from Bay Verte, a Harbor for large Ships.

Louisbourg formerly called English Harbor, is in N. Lat. 45 d. 55 m. the
Passage by Sea from thence to Quebec is about 200 Leagues, and has been
performed in 3 Days. In Cape Breton Island, there is a Gut Lake or inland Sea,
called Labradore about 20 Leagues long, and 3 or 4 Leagues wide, here they
build small Vessels; the French Privateer called Labradore, Capt. Le Grotz
taken by the Comet Bomb 1745, was built there. In the North Part of the Island
is a good Harbor St. Anne's in a good Soil, here was laid out Fort Dauphin, to
be found in the French Charts, as if finished.

The other Islands in the Gulf of St. Laurence are private French Property; St.
John's and the Magdalene Islands were granted to the Conte de St. Pierre; St.
John's is about 20 Leagues long, good Land, many French and Indians; Governor
Knowles of Louisbourg neglected the Possession of it: the Island of Anticosti,
is the Property of Sieur Ioliet a Canadian, it lies in the Mouth of the River
St. Laurence, is large but inhospitable, no good Timber, no good Harbor,
Plenty of large Cod-Fish; below Gaspee on the Coast of Nova Scotia at L' Isle
Percee and L' Isle Bonaventure already mentioned, the French make Cod-Fish.

After a short Description of the late French Colony of Cape Breton Islands, I
shall briefly, without Interruption, and at one View relate that memorable
Event of reducing Louisbourg, the French American Dunkirk, by a few New England
Militia, with the Countenance of some accidental British Men of War.

When Louisbourg was given to us by the French, we found 600 regular Troops in
Garrison, with about 1300 Militia, whereof about one half were called in from
the adjacent Settlements; the main Fossee or Ditch 80 Feet wide, the Ramparts
30 Feet high (the Scalado or Scaling Ladders which we sent by the Direction of
Mr. Bradstreet at present Lieut.-Governor of a Fort in St. John's Harbor
Newfoundland, were too short by 10 Feet, and never were used) upon the Town
Ramparts were mounted upwards of 65 Cannon of various Sizes; the Entrance of
the Harbor defended by a Grand Battery of about 30 Guns of 42 Pound Ball, and
by the Island Battery of 30 Guns of 28 Pound Ball; Provisions for six Months,
Ammunition sufficient, if well husbanded from the beginning; ten Mortars of
thirteen Inches, and six of nine Inches.

Mr. Vaughan of Damarascote, in the Territory of Sagadahoc, in the Dominions of
New England; a whimsical wild Projector in his own private Concerns, entirely
ignorant of military Affairs, and of the Nature of the Defense or Strength of a
Place regularly and well fortified at an immense Expense; dreamt or imagined
that this Place might be reduced by a Force consisting of 1500 raw Militia,
some The Ladders sent with this Expedition were 10 Feet too short from ^ad
Inte^ligence; but if sufficiently long, they were not practic^ble.
scaling Ladders, and a few armed small Craft of New England.

It is said, that In our Plantations some Capt* Generals, and Colonels even of
reg^^ar Troop^, are not to be supposed military Men.
Governor Shirley was taken with this Hint or Conceit, but imagined that 3000
Militia with 2 forty Guns King's Ships might do better; this Expedition was
resolved upon and prosecuted, without any Certainty of British Men of War to
cover the Siege and prevent Supplies; a Packet was sent to Commodore Warren
stationed at our West India Sugar Islands, by a loaded Lumber Sloop, desiring
the Assistance of two Ships of 50 or 40 Guns, and if he could not spare two, to
send one which perhaps might be sufficient; Mr. Warren's Answer was, that for
Want of further Instructions from the Admiralty, he could in Course send only
two Ships to the New York and Boston Stations; but soon after this he received
Instructions to proceed to North America with the Superbe 60 Guns, Launceston
40 Guns, and Mermaid 40 Guns, in Order to succor Annapolis or any of his
Majesty's Settlements against Attempts of the Enemy, and to make Attempts
against the Enemy; in proceeding to Boston for Provisions and other Supplies,
some fishing Scooners, by Letters from Governor Shirley informed him, that the
Expedition had proceeded, and desiring that he would immediately cover them by
his Protection without touching in at Boston; the good, assiduous, and
publick-spirited Commodore Warren directly proceeded and joined this Adventure,
he is now an Admiral in the Navy, and Knight of the Bath in Reward for his good
Services.

The Assembly of Massachusetts Bay; Jan. 25. 1744, 5, by a Majority of one
Vote, resolved upon this Expedition; Feb. 2, the Inlistments began for
Volunteers, and sailed end of March for Canso 3000 Men complete; we had in good
Conduct and Precaution, three Weeks before this, sent out some Privateers to
block up the Harbor of Louisbourg. At Canso they remained three Weeks, at this
Time the Shore of Cape Breton was impracticable from Fields of Ice which came
down by Thaws from the River of St. Laurence or Canada, and by Easterly Winds
drove upon that Coast: At Canso was built a Block House of 8 small Cannon,
garrisoned with 80 Men. The Expedition sailed from Canso April 29, and next Day
arrived in Chapeau rouge Bay a little South of Louisbourg; here in landing our
Men we were opposed by a Body of upwards of 100 regular Troops (whereof 24 were
of the Swiss Company) commanded by Maurepang, formerly a noted Sea Rover; we
suffered no Loss, the French retired with the Loss of 8 Men killed and 10 made
Prisoners; from Canso we had sent a small Party to St. Peter's a small French
Settlement upon Cape Breton, and burnt it.

May 2. We detached 400 Men to march round, under Cover of the Hills, to the N.
E. Harbor of Louisbourg; upon the Surprise of our Men's burning the Store
Houses and Fish Stages there, about one Mile from the Grand Battery; the Troops
in the Grand Battery (to reinforce the Town, the Harbor being sufficiently
guarded by the Island Battery) retired to the Town precipitately, without
destroying the Trunnions and Carriages of their Cannon, only spiking (...)
^ailing of them which were soon dril'd and did serve against the Town, Here we
may observe, that by the Hercul^an Labor of our Mili^^^ (many of them were
used to M^sting and Logging) whose great Achievements were most remarkable in
Quality of Pioneers or Laborers; they dragged these heavy Cannon upon Sledges
over Morasses not practicable by Horses or Oxen: By good Providence, they had
no Occasion to show their Conduct and Courage in repulsing of Sallies ( May 8.
there was a small insignificant Sally from the Town; it was said, that the
mutinous discontented Garrison could not be trusted without the Works, for Fear
of Desertion) or storming of the Works; some capricious Writers have called in
Question the New England Conduct, but not their Courage.
we took Possession of it May 3, and found 350 Shells of 13, and 30 of 10
Inches, and a large Quantity of Shot.

The New England Militia before the Town were in all about 3600 The New England
Armament for the Reduction of Louisbourg, and in Consequence toward the
Acquisition of the Province of Cape-Breton Islands, or Islands in the Gulf of
St. Laurence was as follows, Province of Massachusetts Bay
Land Forces. Regiments of Lieut.-Genesis Pepperrell Brigadier-Gen. Wald^ Colonels
Moulton Hale Willard Richmond
Col Gorham, called of the Whale-Boats Col. Dwight and Lieut. Col. Gridley of
the Train of Artillery Capt. Bernard's Independent Company of Carpenters or
Artificers
Sea Forces Ship Massachusetts Frigate Capt. Tyng 20 Guns Caesar S^elling 20
Shirley-Galley Rouse 20 Snow Prince of Orange Smithurst 16 Brig. Boston Packet
Fletcher 16 Sloops Donahew 12 Saunders 8 Bosch 8 Ship hired from Rhode Island
Griffin 20
Colony of Connecticut.
Land Forces 1 Reg. of 500 Men. Major General Wolcot.
By Sea Thompson 16 Guns Colony Sloop 16

Province of New Hampshire.
Landforces. 1 Reg. of 350 Men. Col. More.
By Sea Their Province Sloop

Colony of Rhode Island.
Land Forces None. By Sea their Colony Sloop.


The Colonies South of New England furnished no Quotas of Land o^ Sea Force,
they made some small Presents of Provisions: The Governor of New York lent 10
good Cannon of 18 lb. Shot, without these, and the French unexpectedly
abandoning their G^and Battery, our Expedition must have been ineffectual; Gov.
Shi^l^y says, "That without these Cannon, we could not have had the same
Prospect of Success, and all other Preparations must have been frustrated.

At the Desire of General Pepperrell and Commodore Warren, in June the
Massachusetts Bay sent a Reinforcement of 400 Men, and Connecticut sent 200
Men, they did not arrive until after the Siege was over. When the Town or Fort
was in our Possession, the New England Militia Garrison proving very sickly,
they were recruited from Time to Time by the Colonies of New England.

The British Men of War that arrived from Time to Time before Louisbourg,
intimidated the Garrison; they were,

Commodore Warren's Squadron from the West India Sugar Islands, the Superbe of
60 Guns, Launceston and Mermaid 40 Guns each, they joined in the Adventure

The Vigilant a French Ship of 64 Guns, designed to reinforce Louisbourg with
Men and Stores, was taken by Warren's Squadron May 19, and added to the
Squadron; she was afterward manned mostly from New England May 22. The
Princess Mary of 60 Guns from England, via Boston The Hector of 40 as ditto
June 10. The Chester of 50 from England 12. The Canterbury of 60 called in from
Newfoundland Sunderland of 60 Lark of 40 Eltham of 40 called in from convoying
the New England Mast Ships for ^^gland.

These effectually covered the Siege by cruising, two small French Vessels only
got in by a Fog; and when it was resolved by the Sea and Land Officers, to
storm Town June 18. the depended upon Attack was by Sea, while our Land Forces
by Way of Diversion made a Feint (but without any practicable Breach) to storm
it ashore; at that Time we had British Men of War One of 64 Guns Four of 60
Guns One of 50 Guns Five of 40 Guns
And upon Capitulation Commodore Warren's Boats took the first Possession of
the Town, and his Marines mounted Guard for some Days.


Volunteers, whereof not exceeding 150 Men were lost (the Prince of Orange Snow
excepted, lost in a Storm) by Fortune of War, viz. killed by bursting of
Cannon, by Shot from the Town, killed and drowned in the rash Attempt against
the Island Battery: upon our first encamping, from the Damp of the Ground,
there happened a general Flux or rather simple Diarrhea or mere Looseness, not
mortal, and soon over. After we got into the Town a sordid Indole^ce or Sloth
for Want of In military Discipline there are sundry Articles besides the manual
Exercise of the Musket and the Evolutions; I shall mention upon this Occasion
only two, 1. A due Subordination to superior Officers or Command, which the
levelling Spirit of our Plantations does not well admit of. 2. A proper Care of
their Men as to clean Dress, Wear, Eating, Drinking, Lodging, and a proper
Regard to their Sick.
Discipline, induced putrid Fevers and Dysentaries, which at Length in August
became contagious, and the People died like rotten Sheep; this destroyed, or
rendered incapable of Duty one half of our Militia.

During the Siege, the French made only one insignificant Sally May 8; the
Garrison was mutinous, and could not be trusted at large; this rendered us
secure and the Siege was carried on in a tumultuary random Manner, and
resembled a Cambridge Commencement.

In the Beginning of the Siege, some of our Men inconsiderately stroll'd, and
suffered from a Body of French Indians.

May 16. A Party of about 100 Men in Boats, landed i^ the Night near the Light
House Point, to surprise our Men who were erecting a Battery there to play upon
the Island Battery of the French; this Party was timely discovered and obliged
to fly into the Woods, and being joined by some Indians, had several Skirmishes
with our Scouts.

May 26. In Whale-Boats (so thin and light that a few Musket Balls are
sufficient to sink them (about 400 Men, rashly attempted the Island Battery,
where is bad landing, 30 Guns of 28 Pound Ball, and 180 Men in Garrison; we
lost in this mad Frolic 60 Men killed and drowned, and 116 Prisoners to the
French.

I shall further mention only a few Instances of Misconduct in the Managers of
this Expedition, we cannot lay the Blame upon the Province in general, viz. 1.
Hiring into the Government's Service, Capt. S^elling's Ship that had lately
imported the Small Pox. 2. While the Country Levies were in Boston, in one Day
March 5, the Small Pox appeared in three different Parts of the Town, no Care
was taken to remove these Levies to some of the many convenient Islands in
Boston Bay; miraculously by the Care of some Guardian Angel or Genius they
escaped the Small Pox, which would have rendered the Expedition abortive in
Embrio. 3. Some Companies were fitted out with unserviceable
Bristol-Guinea-Arms (some of those Arms notoriously bad, were called in)
instead of allowing a small Bounty to those Men, that would have carried their
own good Arms. 4. Slops or Clothing were no sent to our Troops sooner than
October; during the Siege, that is, our being in the Field, was constant dry
favorable Weather; next Day June 18 after we had Possession of the Town, the
raining Season set in, which, for Want of our Men being clothed and well
lodged, would have broke up the Siege.

By Way of Amusement, I may take Notice of some New England Poems, upon this
Occasion (not in Disparagement to the Country, here at present some true
poetical Genius's begin to appear) I shall mention only two Instances; the
first is by Mr. Niles in the lowest doggrel Rhyme, in Imitation of Homer's
Lists and Characters of the commanding Officers at the Siege of Troy; the
Instance is Waldo commissioned is a Colonel,
And over Land Force Brigadier General.
The other is by an anonymous Author in the highest Bombast, And that
New England Schemes the Old surpass
As much as solid Gold does tinkling Brass
And that a Pepperrell's and a Warren's Name
May vie with Marlborough and a Blake for Fame.



As to the Affair of the Siege of the Town, it was in this Manner. In the
beginning upon Greenhill 1550 Yards distant from the King's Bastion called the
Citadel, we erected a Battery of a very few small Cannon, one 13 Inch, one 11
Inch, and one 9 Inch Mortars; they could do no Execution; May 7, a Battery was
made at 900 Yards Distance, and we summoned the Town; May 17, a Battery was
advanced to 250 Yards Distance from the West Gate; May 20, on the other Side of
a Creek was erected aBattery of five 42 Pounders, called Tidcomb's Battery, to
batter the Circular Battery and Magazine.

We made no regular Approaches by Trenches, that is, by Parallels and Zigzags,
but bombarded the Town at Random, and did much Damage to the Roofs of the
Houses; the West Gate was defaced, the adjoining Curtain and Flank of the
King's Bastion were much hurt, but no practicable Breach.

The Canterbury and Sunderland being arrived it was resolved to storm the Town
by Sea June 18, by three 60, one 50, and four 40 Gun Ships, while the Land
Forces ma^e a Feint or Diversion ashore: The French were afraid to stand it,
and capitulated June 17, to march out with the Honors of War, not to serve for
12 Months, to be allowed all their personal Effects, and to be transported to
France, at the Charge of Great Britain.

The Place was put under the joint Administration of Pepperrell and Warren; and
all future Charges were to be defrayed by their Bills upon the Play Master
General and Ordnance. According to the enlisting Proclamation, our Militia were
to be discharged so soon as the Expedition was over; Governor Shirley arrived
in Louisbourg Aug. 17, and persuaded them to continue; but notwithstanding, if
the Vigilant, the Chester, and Louisbourg Fire Ship had not continued there
over Winter, the Militia might have been discouraged, and the Place in Danger
of being surprised by the French and their Indians from Canada, Nova Scotia,
and St. John's Island.

When the Launceston's Guns were landed and mounted upon the Ramparts; we had
266 good Cannon mounted in the Town and Batteries. Capt. Montague of the
Mermaid carried Home the Advice of Louisbourg being surrendered.

As it is probable that Louisbourg will be demolished upon a Peace, I shall not
give any Description of the Town and its Fortifications; I only mention that
from the Grand Battery, erected to range and defend the Entrance of the
Harbor, to the Light House at the Mouth of the Harbor, are about 2000 Yards;
after we were in Possession of this Battery, and dril'd some of the great
Cannon which the French had nailed and relinquished; the Town and Battery
cannoned one another with a great and useless Expense of Ammunition; this Folly
was less excusable in the French, as they could not possibly have any Recruit
of Stores; the Distance from the Grand Battery to the Circular Battery of the
Town, is 1857 Yards, which is too great for much good Execution. From Ma^repas
Gate to the Island Battery E. N. E. 1273 Yards. From the Island Battery to the
Light-house N. E. 1133 Yards.

As the French royal Navy at present are much A little before the Commencement
of the present Spanish War, the French Royal Navy consisted of 1 Ship of 90
Guns 7 Ships of 62 Guns 9 of 74 6 of 60 4 of 72 8 of 50 4 of 64 8 of 40 to 46
all these may be called Line of Battle Ships; but in the Progress of this
present French War to this Writing, they are reduced to near half the Number.
reduced, and not capable of sending any considerable Squadron so far abroad;
perhaps in good Economy and with sufficient Security; the present nominal
chargeable Corpse (besides the large Detachment from the Train or Ordnance) in
Garrison at Louisbourg of about 4000 Men, may be reduced to 2000 effective Men,
and the reformed Men may with proper Encouragement be sent to settle, and be
intermixed with the French in Nova Scotia* continuing them in Corpse and in Pay
for some Time.

The present Garrison Troops of Louisbourg, if complete, consist of Men
Fuller's Reg. 815 Marching Regiments Warburton's 815 Officers included
Frampton's 3 Comp. 245 Sir Wm Pepperrell's 1000 for Officers not included add
80 or more to each May be called Marines Col. Shirley's 1000 3875 The Project
of raising two Regiments in New England was faulty in two Respects. 1. A young
Settlement, already much reduced in their young Men, by late Expeditions; to
exhaust them more by standing Levies, is a grievous Hardship; it not only
retards or stunts the Growth of the Colony, but in Fact, miniorates them, and
puts them backwards; this is the general Complaint of the Country, extravagant
Price of Labor, and Want of Laborers. 2. The public Disappointment of the
Interest of Great Britain, where 2000 Men are depended upon; of these 1000
perhaps are and ever will be Non-Effectives, it being impracticable for the
Country to spare so many Men, for standing or continued Regular Troops.

Perhaps the speculative original Design, at Home might appear specious, that
is, 1. A Garrison of Men indigenous, Natives of, or habituated to the Climate.
2. That by reserving some Officer's Commissions, to the Disposal of the
Colonels; the Gentlemen of our Militia, who had distinguished themselves in the
Expeditions, might have some Reward for their Merit; this last Design was
attended with the When I write with Freedom, impartial, disinterested Readers,
will excuse me in Quality of a disinterested Historian; I have no personal
Disregard or Malice, and do write of the present Times, as if these Things had
been transacted 100 Years since.
Inconveniency of being perverted; by bestowing these Commissions to
Purchasers, to Relations, and to Friends.

Some of our good Farmers, Artificers, and other Laborers, leaving their
several Occupations for a short Time, to serve their Country upon an Exigency,
in a military Way, is very laudable; this was in Practice amongst the Romans;
some of their great Generals have upon this Account left the Plough, and when
the Expedition was over, have returned to it again; such ought to be rewarded
with Places of Profit or Honor, without Purchase, Subscriptions for Presents,
Assignments of their Pay for a Time, and other Hungry or indigent Animals are
voracious, and amongst Mankind this may proceed further, to a Crescit amor
Nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit, which is in itself indefinite.
avaricious Contrivances.

In the Summer 1746 the Assembly of Massachusetts Bay, sent to the Court of
Great Britain These Accounts were in sundry Articles,

1. Account of the first Muster Rolls in the Expedition to Cape Breton, as made
up and paid by Order of the General Assembly of the Massachusetts Bay Province.

2. Account of the several Sums paid by the Committee to the Officers and
Soldiers who continued in your Majesty's Garrison at Louisbourg, until they
were discharged by your Majesty's Order.

3. Account of the Charge of Transport Vessels employed in your Majesty's
Service, in the Expedition to Cape Breton, and for the Service of the Garrison
at Louisbourg; exclusive of such as were laden with Stores by express Order
from the General and Admiral.

4. Account of the Charge of the Vessels of War in the Pay of the Massachusetts
Province, in the Expedition to Cap^ Breton, and after Reduction of the Place.

5. Account of the Cost and Charge of transporting warlike and other Stores,
for the Service of your Majesty's Forts and Garrison at Louisbourg, by Order of
Admiral Warr^n and General P^pperrell.

With some contingent Charges.


, Accounts of their Provincial Charge in reducing of Louisbourg, to the Amount
of about 178,000 L. Sterling; this Affair is still depending, and is imputed,
rather to the Inactivity and improper Application of our Agents, than to
Dilatoriness in the Ministry and Parliament; the Righteousness and Generosity
of our Parliaments are notorious, and a Reimbursement is unquestionable; and if
properly pushed to Effect, we might have had for some Time past, an annual
accruing Interest upon Debentures of 7,000L. St. pr. An. which at present is
70,000 L. New England Currency, this would much lessen our yearly Provincial
Tax.

At Louisbourg their Currency sounds as if it were Sterling Value; British Coin
cannot be exported, therefore Spanish Coin, which is the most general in all
the commercial Countries of our Globe, reduced to a Sterling Value, is called
Sterling by us. Immediately upon our possessing of Louisbourg, the Gibraltar
and Colonies Currencies Cheat, began to take Place; that is, the Commissaries
or Pay-Masters, what was charged to the proper Offices or Boards at Home at 5
s. St, they paid off (to their own private Advantage of 11 pr. Ct. a Cheat) by
a milled Piece of Eight Value 4 s. 6 d. St. If Louisbourg should continue a
Garrison, a considerable Article in the British annual Supply; those
Commissaries from the Example of our American Colonies and Gibraltar, would
soon improve their Profits, to pay away a light Piece of Eight, Value 3 s. 6 d.
St. for a British Crown or 5 s. St. The Imposition at Gibraltar of 1 s. St. for
16 d. Currency and Pay, it is said, has lately been under Consideration of the
British Parliament; may it introduce the Consideration of the Abuses in our
Plantation Paper Currencies, where the Abuse is vastly more; in Gibraltar 1 s.
Sterling. is paid away for a nominal 16 d; in Massachusetts Bay from a Loosers are
indulged to complain, and naturally do complain and are clamorous; is it
possible for a Man in the Space of a Year or two, to be gradually robbed of one
half his personal Estate without complaining? The Complaint is seasonable,
being at the opening of the new Assembly of the Province of Massachusetts Bay,
the most considerable of all our Colonies.

Some Men do not care who sinks if they swim; if our Estates are still more to
be reduced by this cheating Game, so^e Persons will complain more loud; and
perhaps some Anectdotes or private History of these Affairs, gathered from the
unguarded Information of some blabbing Confidents, may require to be
communicated to the Public* to a Man aggrieved, there is some Pleasure or
Satisfaction in venting himself by complaining, even where there is no Redress.

From Time to Time, anticipating the Affair of Currencies referred to the
Appendix, may be excused: this pernicious desolating Torrent becoming more and
more violent, requires a more speedy Resistance.

The Colony of Massachusetts Bay was the Leader of Paper Currencies in the
British Plantations, and have now at Length carried this Fraud to the utmost
(even beyond North Carolina Management) if carried further the Staple must
break, and the Fraud of the wicked Projectors (in all Affairs there are Limits
which in the Nature of Things cannot be exceeded) cease.

I shall enumerate some of the many Mischiefs attending the bad fraudulent
Management of Paper Currencies. I. From an Equality with Sterling, afterward
with Proclamation Value, they have reduced the Value of our Currency to 10 for
1 8t. II. The Governor and Legislature keep up their Salaries and Wages to the
Sterling Value, but seemingly allow all other Transactions to run into
Confusion and ruinous Depreciations. III. The Depreciations might have in a
great Measure been obviated, even when there were great Exigencies for present
Money; thus after the first Emissions being 40,000 L. Anno 1690 and 1691 to pay
off the public Debts incurred by Phips's Canada Expedition, when there was an
Appearance of an ensuing Depreciation, if more were emitted; the Government did
wisely borrow the Bills already emitted, from the Possessors, with good Effect,
and these Bills did not depreciate: If, in the Cape Breton, and amusing late
Canada Expeditions, we had done the same* it would have had the like good
Effect with Respect to the Public, but would not have answered the
wickedIntentions and Occasions of thePromoters of these Bills, viz. 1. Of those
who had acquired the Craft of negotiating (in troubled Waters good Fishing)
these depreciating Bills to their own Advantage. 2. Of those who were to
liberate their mortgaged Estates by defrauding their Creditors with a
depreciated nominal Value, instead of the true contracted Value* well knowing
that a multiplied Paper Credit, depreciates itself more and more. IV. By Act of
Assembly a public Bill of Credit explicitly in its Face promising only ^ oz.
13 d. 8 gr. Silver, shall be equal to a Bill promising 3 oz. Silver* that is,
in common Arithmetic, 8 shall be equal to 9. V. In the same Kind of
Impositions, used by L^wis XIV. of France, who by Recoinages from Time to Time
miniorated his Money, at Length finding his People reduced to insensible Dupe^,
he saved the Charge of recoining, and uttered the same Coin with only some
little Mark or Stamp, at a further depreciated Value; in June 1744, to save the
Charge of New Plates, we miniorated the Value of the Emissions of Nov. 1741, by
a few Dashes upon the same Plate.

Finally, some say, that as it is a Maxim in the civil Law, Qui Civem servare
potest, et non servat, occidit; the proper Check negative in the Legislature,
ought to bear all the Blame of these iniquitous Depreciations, and Absurdities
which expose the Province.


very b -- d Administration, we have exceeded all our Colonies, even North
Carolina where their Paper Money was at a Discount with a fallacious cheating
Truck, it is 10 for 1 St.; ours is somewhat worse in good Bills St.

From the Surrender of Louisbourg and Territories thereto belonging, June 17,
1745 to June 1748, there have been several transient Commandants, but no
continued established Governor; if the Court of Great Britain were in earnest
to retain this Place, many Candidates would have appeared, and some Person of
great Interest established; whereas from a Col. ( Warburton) being
Lt.-Governor, it is now reduced to a Lt.-Col. being Governor. The Commandants
in Succession have been as follows from the Surrender,

1. The General, Pepperrell; and Commodore, Warren, naturally joint
Administrators.

2. Admiral Warren went Home, and has since done great Service, acquired much
Glory, and a very great Fortune.
Admiral Warren Governor; Col. Warburton Lt.-Governor.

3. Commodore Knowles went to command a Squadron from Iamaica, to reduce St.
Iago de Cuba, a Nest of Spanish Privateers or rather Pirates: His Conduct and
Success was as formerly; no Benefit to the Public, no Profit to himself; in
sailing out, the Norths (as he writes) would not allow him, and in returning to
Iamaica he visited St. Iago, but could not be reconciled to their Preparations
for Defense; as a By-blow, he surprised in March 1747, 8, the French Port Louis
of Hispaniola, with the Loss of two good Captains Re^ton and Cust, and several
other Men, and the fine Man of War Scooner Achilles, built by the ingenious
Ship-Builder Mr. Hall^wel of Boston, in carrying Advice from Mr. Knowles to
Iamaica, was taken by two Spanish Privateers. Admiral Knowles destroyed and
carried off some Iron Guns; it is said, that by Capitulation it was to be
deemed a free and neutral Port, and consequently proper to supply the French
with Provision and Ammunition from all Nations* this cannot be credited in the
worst of Conduct.
Commodore Knowles Governor; Col. Warburton Lt.-Governor.

4. Hobson Lt.-Col. to Fuller, Governor; Ellison Lt.-Col. to Pepperrell,
Lt.-Governor.

SECTION VIII. Concerning the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
THE next four following Sections concern the Dominions of New England, at
present divided into four several Colonies or Governments; to render the
Accounts of them more clear and distinct, we shall begin this Section with an
introductory Article, in general concerning the sundry Grants and Settlements
made, before they were colonized by Royal Charters and Patents: As
Massachusetts Bay Province, is composed of many different Grants, united at
present in one Charter; some general Account of these several Territories may
be useful; afterward we proceed to more particular Accounts of these
Territories in so many distinct Articles, beginning from the Northward.

ARTICLE I. Some general Account of the Dominions of New England, and a general
Account of the Territories incorporated by royal Charter into one Province or
Colony by the Name of Massachusetts Bay in New England.
This is a laborious Affair, being obliged to consult MSS Records; the many
printed Accounts are, 1. Too credulous and superstitious. 2. Too trifling; must
the insipid History of every Brute (some Men as to Intellects do not exceed
some Brutes) or Man Animal be transmitted to Posterity? 3. The Accounts of
every white Man and Indian mutually killed or otherways dead, would swell and
lower History so much, as to ^ender the Perusal of such Histories (excepting
with old Women and Children) impracticable. 4. The Succession of pious Pastors,
Elders and Deacons, in the several Townships, Parishes or Congregations; I
leave to Ecclesiastic Chronologers; Canonization or Sainting seems not
consistent with our Protestant Principles. 5. The printed Accounts in all
Respects are beyond all Excuse Mankind are not only to be further informed, but
ought also upon Occasion to be undeceived; for this Reason, and not as a
sna^ling Criti^^, I have subjoined the following Annotation, concerning some of
the most noted Writers of New England Affairs; at present I shall ment^on only
two or three of those that are generally read: and in the Sequel of this
History, may animadvert occasionally upon some others. I find in general, that
without using Judgment, they borrow from old credulous Writers, and relate
Things obsolete for many Years past, as if in the present State of the Country.

Dr. C^tton M^t^er's Map of New England, New York, Iersies and P^ns^lvania, is
composed from some old rough Draughts of the first Discoverers, with obsolete
Names not known at this Time, and has scarce any Resemblance of the Country; it
may be called a very erroneous antiquated Map.

Capt. Cy^^ian Southack's Land-Map of the Eastern North America, is worse; it
is as rude as if done by an Indian, or as if done in those Ages when Men first
began to delineate Countries; it gives no Information, but has ^o other bad
Effect, than turning so much Paper to waste: But his large Chart of the Coast
of Nova Scotia and New England, being one continued Error, and a random
Performance, may be of PE^^ICIOUS Consequence in Trade and Navigation;
therefore it ought to be publicly advertised as such, and destroyed wherever
it is found amongst Sea Charts.

Oldmixon's (he died Anno 1742) British Empire in America 2 Vol. 8vo. L^nd.
1708. He generally writes, as if copying from some ill-founded temporary
News-Paper. Dr. C. Mather says, that Oldmixon in 56 Pages has 87 Falsehoods. He
prefixes Mather's silly Map; and con^^sses that he borrowed many Things from
Cotton Mather's Magnalia; leaving out, the Puns, Anagrams, Miracles, Prodigies,
Witches, Speeches and Epistles: Mather's History he calls a miserable Jargon,
loaded with many random learned Quotations, Schoolboy Exercises, Roman l^ke
Legends, and barbarous Rhimes. Neal writes, the Colony of Connecti^ut
surrendered their Charter 1688, and have holden no Courts since. N. B. Upon Sir
Edmund Andrews's Arrival 1686 as Governor of the Dominions of New England etc,
they dropped the Administration according to their Charter; but their Charter not
being vacated by any legal Trial, upon the Revolution they were allowed to
prosecute the Administration, and to hold Courts as formerly -- 400 Students in
Cambridge, New England -- His Account of the Indian Religions, or rather
Worship, is false and ridiculous -- The Indians live commonly to 150 Aet. --
Plymouth-Bay is larger than Cape-Cod, and has two fine Islands, Rhode Island
and Elizabeth Island -- New England is bounded West by Pensylvania --
Dorchester is the next Town to Boston for Bigness -- At Boston there is a Mint.
N. B. Perhaps he meant the Mint 1652 assumed in the Time of the Troubles and
Confusions in England -- An indefinite Number of more Errors, the Repetition of
them would be Confutation sufficient.

Neal's History of New England 2 Vol. 8 vo. London 1720. He is much upon the
History of the low Ecclesiastics, borrowed from the noted Mather's Magnalia
Christi Americana. He gives a tedious silly ridiculous conjecture Account, of
the settling of North America from Scythia and Tar^ary, and the Southern Parts
from China -- Natick is an Indian Town, consisting of two long Streets, each
Side of the River; as if he were describing one of the large Dutch voting Towns
with a River or Canal running through it: N. B. This Indian Town at present
consists only of a few str^gling Wigwams -- Orange Fort of Albany is 80 Miles
up Hudson's River -- The Indian Government is strictly monarchial. N.B. The
Indians of a Tribe orClan, live together like friendly, but independent
Neighbors* their Senators or old Men, have no coercive or commanding Power
over their young Men, all they can use is only Persuasion. -- Queb^c has 5
Churches and a Cathedral; N. B. Only one Parochial Church, which also serves as
a Cathedral, and a conventual Chapel in the lower Town. -- The great fresh
Water Lakes behind New England, are constantly froze over in Winter from
November; which occasion the long and hard Winters of New England; N. B. These
Lakes are upon a small Storm of Wind, tempestuous, and never frozen over; and
because of their soft Vapor, not much Snow lies within 12 ^r 20 Miles Distance
from these Lakes. -- The Whale Fishing is almost neglected in New England;
Newfoundland has almost engrossed it. N. B. In Newfoundland they make only a
small Quantity of Liver Oil. -- The Clergy of N^w-England are not renowned for
Humanity and Politeness. -- The French in New England are very numerous -- The
Convenience of Fishing renders Cape-Cod populous as most Places in New England.
N. B. At present Cape-Cod called Province Town, may consist of two or three
settled Families, two or three Cows, and 6 to 10 Sheep -- To enumera^e the
other Errors and Blunders of this Performance, would be copying of it; but it
will not bear such a new Impression.

This Annotation is already too prolix for an Amusement, we must defer to some
other Occasion the Amusements from Cotton Mather's MAGNALIA, or History of
New England, from Salmon's Modern History, from Atlas maritimus and
comm^^cialis, from I^ss^lin, and from Hubbard.


intolerably erroneous.

The first English Discovery of the Eastern Coasts of North America was by the
Cabots in the End of the 15th Century. The first effectual royal Grant of Soil
or Property was Anno 1584 to Sir Walter Raleigh and Associates; he gave the
Name Virginia to all the Continent in general, so called from the English Queen
of that Time Elizabeth, a Virgin Queen because never married.

New England was first discovered to any Purpose, by Capt. Gosnold 1602, and
the Fish, Train Oil, Skin, and Fur Trade thereof, with the Indians for some
Years, was principally carried on by some Bristol Men. A rascally Fellow Capt.
Hunt, carried off some Indians, and in the Mediterranean Sea of Europe sold
them to the Spaniards, as Slaves, Mores of the Coast of Barbary; during some
following Years the Indians had an Aversion to, and Jealousy of the English
Traders; but at Length Anno 1619 they were brought to a thorough
Reconciliation, which made the Beginning of the New Plymouth Settlement more
easily carried on.

This Capt. Gosnold of Dartmouth, was an Associate of Raleigh's; Anno 1602 from
England instead of the former wide indirect Course to Virginia by the Canary
and Caribee Islands; he sailed a more direct or Northern Course, and fell in
with this Coast, was embay'd in N. Lat. 42 d. 10 m, where he caught many Cod
Fish, and called it Cape Cod; thence sailing Southward he gave Q. Elizabeth's
Name to one Island; and to the next Island, where he found Quantities of wild
Grape Vines, he gave the Name of Martha's Vineyard; these Names are retained to
this Day.

Capt. Gosnold at his Return to England gave a good Character of this new
Country, which induced several Gentlemen jointly to obtain a Royal Grant Anno
1606 (Sir Walter Raleigh from his Attainder having forfeited his Grants in
North America) April 10, they were two Companies in one Charter to plant and
dispose of Land^ there: See P. 204. They were much the same Districts as are
our present Southern and Northern Districts of Custom Houses; the Southern
District was called the London Company which does not belong to this Part of
our History. The other was called the Northern District, North Virginia, or the
Company of Plymouth or West Country Adventurers; Lord chief Justice Popham and
Sir Ferdinando Gorge were of this Company; Lord chief Justice Popham was their
Patron and principal Promoter, he dying soon after, the Settlement dropped, but
some Trade for Fish, Skins and Furs was carried on for some Years. Their first
Adventure was taken by the Spaniards Anno 1606. Capt. George Popham appointed
President or Director of a Settlement to be made there, came over with Capt.
Gilbert in 2 Ships with Families and Stores Anno 1607; some Families wintered
at Sagadahoc near the Mouth of Quenebec River (here many good Rivers meet and
discharge themselves into a Bay called Merry-meeting Bay) Anno 1608, but soon
left it with the Character of a cold, barren, inhospitable Desert.

Capt. Smith called the Traveller, sometime President of Virginia, an ingenious
Man, Anno 1614 with two Vessels came upon this Coast for Trade and Discovery of
Mines of Minerals, Metals, and Precious Stones, Auri sacra fames promoted most
of our American Discoveries; he surveyed the Coast well, and gave Names (still
upon Record) to many of the Head Lands, Bays and Rivers, which are now
obsolete, and other Names have taken Place: He presented a Plan of the Country
to the Court of England, and it was called NEW ENGLAND, which Name it retains
to this Day.

About this Time there were several voluntary Companies of Adventurers to
America, but without Grants or Patents; the London, Bristol, Exeter, Plymouth,
etc. Companies, who soon dissolved of themselves.

The Northern Company of Anno 1606, insensibly dissolved of it self; and a new
Company of Adventurers was formed, called the Council of Plymouth or Council of
New England; their Patent reaching from N. Lat. 40 d. to 48 d. is dated Nov.
18. Anno 1620 to Duke of Lenox, Marquis of Buckingham, Marquis of Hamilton etc,
the Corporation to consist of 40; upon Deaths the Vacancies to be supplied by a
Vote of the Survivors; being in Process of Time divided amongst themselves,
they surrendered their Patent 1635, and some of them, v. g. Duke of Hamilton,
Sir Ferdinando Gorge, etc. obtained from K. Charles I. peculiar Grants or
Patents: Their Patent was designedly extended much North and South, to include
and keep up the English Claim to New Netherlands in Possession of the Dutch to
the Southward, and to L'Accadie, since called Nova Scotia, then in Possession
of the French to the Northward; Thus Nova Scotia and Sagadahock, or the former
Duke of York's Property, at that Time in Possession of the French, were by the
Massachusetts Charter annexed in Jurisdiction to Massachusetts Bay; the Court
of Great Britain, notwithstanding, seem to reserve their Property and
Jurisdiction there, and accordingly have withdrawn Nova Scotia from the
Jurisdiction of the Province of Massachusetts Bay and constituted it a King's
Government to no Purpose; perhaps if it had continued annexed to a popular
Government, some Progress might have been made toward a Settlement.
see a large Account of these Affairs, P. 109, and 205. To be a Body corporate,
to have a common Seal, make Laws, and dispose of any Parts thereof, but could
not Lately the Commissioners appointed from Home to determine the Bound^^ies
between the Colony of Rhode Island, and that Part of the Massachusetts
Province, formerly called the Colony of New Plymouth; the Defect of a
subsequent royal Charter to New Plymouth, was the Reason why the Commissioners
determined, and afterward confirmed by the King in Council, strictly according
to the royal Charter of Rhode Island, though 38 Years posterior to the New
Plymouth Grant.
delegate the Jurisdiction without an additional Royal Charter.

This Council of Plymouth or New England made many indistinct and interfering
Grants; at this Time many of their Grants are become obsolete, such as Duke
Hamilton's of the Narraganset Country, Mr. Mason's of New Hampshire, some
Grants upon Kenebec River, etc. The Members of this Council of Plymouth
differing amongst themselves, occasioned the Surrender of their Charter to the
Court, by an Instrument under their common Seal dated June 7. 1635; there has
been no general British Company in America since that Time.

Here we may observe in general, That Laud Archbishop Laud may be called the
Father of New England; he was a considerable Statesman, prime Minister or
principal Adviser to Charles I: His Administration was rigid against the good
and religious Nonconformists, he was accused and convicted of a Design to
introduce Popery, and subvert the Constitution: for which he suffered Death by
the Ax, Ian. 10. 1644.
, Archbishop of Canterbury, noted for his immoderate Zeal to promote Uniformity
in the Church, occasioned an Emigration of Non-Conformists in great Numbers to
New England, preceding Anno 1641; but from that Time, until the Restoration of
the Family of Stuart, being about 20 Years, very few came abroad; the
Independent or Congregational Manner of religious Performances having the
Ascendent in England, as most Cromwell's reducing the Church of England to
separately covenanted independent Congregations, was a Master Piece in
Politics; in true Policy all civil Governments, ought to encourage the
congregational Scheme. A national established Church, Episcopal or
Presbyterian, in a civil national Government is Imperium in Imperio, a Wheel
within a Wheel, as i^ is commonly expressed; which renders the Movements more
perplexed; and by a national Church assuming the Direction or pointing of our
natural Enthusiasm, it clogs and endangers the civilConstitution. Our
New England Congregationalists seem to deviate from their primitive Discipline:
In Imitation, perhaps, of a new Convocation of the Clergy of the Church of
England, at the Opening of a new Parliament; our congregational Ministers of
New England have a formal Synod or Meeting at the Time of the General Election
or Opening of new Legislative civil Assembly; they assume the Constitution of a
Synod, v. g. at Times they address the King in this Style, The Pastors of the
Churches in his Majesty's Province of Massachusetts Bay in New England,
assembled at their annual Convention in May* their Papers are signed in Form by
the Moderator, in Imitation of the legal national (by Act of Union established
in Perpetuity) General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of Scotland, my Alma
matter. The Quakers have fallen into the same Error, by their quarterly and
annual itinerant Meetings, which in Time by cunning Men, that is Statesmen, may
be improved to the Disadvantage of the Civil Government.

A national Church Administration distinct from the national civil
Administration, is very inconvenient: The most absurd notional Opinions in
Religion, if not established by the penal Laws of a national Church, are of no
Consequence, and from their Absurdity do drop, if allowed to take their
Courses; but if forcibly stopped, or damned up, they gather, and in Time may break
out into a rapid Torrent carrying all before them; the civil Wars in England
Car. I. are a notorious Instance of this. To qualify this Imperium in Imperio,
the Roman Emperor was Ponti^ex Maximus, and the King of England is called Head
of the Church.


suitable to the civil Administration of those Times. In the Reigns of Charles
II, and of James II, many Dissenters came over. Lately the long Leases of the
Farmers in the North of Ireland being expired, the Landlords raised their Rents
extravagantly: This occasioned an Emigration of many North of Ireland Scots
Presbyterians, with an Intermixture of wild Irish Roman Catholics; at first
they chose They erected a Presbyterian Meeting House in Boston, Mr. John
Morehead their Presbyter; as appears by in Inscription, in two Columns, and not
elegant; the first Column This Chh of Presbyterian Strangers, was congregated
Anno Dom. 1729
Anno Dom. 1744 by a small but generous
Illa manebit. Labilis ^ contra si sit erana
Suprema. Desiderio I. M. hujus Ecclesiae.
The second Column.
This Building was begun Anno Dom. 1742, and finished
Number. Hujus fundamen saxum est. Domus
Peribit. Gloria Christi lex nostra
Christiqu Pastor, and first preached in May 6th.


Latin and English interlarded is new excepting in Burlesque, likewise the
Disposition of these Lines is singular, and to be rightly understood must be
read by joining the several Lines of each Column. This Church is a neat
convenient Building, and doubtless in Time may be endowed with more learned and
elegant Pastors of the Presbyterian Mode.


New England, but being brought up to Husbandry or raising of Grain, called
Bread Corn, New England did not answer so well, as the Colonies Southward;
therefore at present they generally resort to Pensylvania, a good Grain Colony.

This Council of Plymouth parcel'd out their Grant, into several Colonies or
Settlements.

Robert Brown, a Mr. Wb -- ld a young Clergyman of the Church of Engl^nd, has
lately appeared in the same Manner, preaching against the bad Conduct of the
Clergy of England; his Disciples are called Methodists, Separatists, or New
Light. N. B. This New Light is an unnatural Composition of free Thinking, and
devotional Cant.
hotheaded young Enthusiastical Clergyman began Anno 1580, to preach against
the C^remonies and Discipline of the Church of England; he was persecuted or
baited and teazed by the Bishops Courts, he with some Disciples left England,
and formed a Church as Midleborough of Zealand, in the Dutch Low Countries;
after some Time this Esservescence or Ebulition of Youth subsided, he returned
to England, recanted, and had a Church of England Cure bestowed upon him, and
died in that Communion, Anno 1630.

A Congregation of these Brownists wa^ formed in Y^rmo^th 1602, being harrassed
by the established Church of England, with their Pastor they transported
themselves to Leyden in Holland; here they became more moderate under the
Direction of their Pastor Mr. Robinson's Son Isaac died at Barnstable, New
England 1706, Aet. 106.
Mr. Robinson; and from Brownists changed their Denomination to that of
Independents: Being of unsteady Temper, they resolved to remove from amongst
Strangers after 10 Years Residence, to some remote Country in some Wilderness,
where without Molestation they might worship GOD in their own de^^^ional Way:
Thus the first Settlements in New England were upon a religious Account, not
properly for Produce, Manufacturies, and Trade, but as Recluses: Amongst the
Roman Catholics are many Communities or Convents of unmarried or single
Persons Recluse; but these were recluse Families.

After having obtained an Instrument from King James I. for the free Exercise
of their Religion in any Part of America; they sold their Estates and made a
common Bank, and entered into Articles of Agreement with the Adventurers called
the Council of Plymouth, to settle on the Banks of Hudson's River, now in the
Government of New York; after the Misfortune of being twice put back, they
sailed 120 Persons in one Ship from Plymouth (they gave the same Name to their
new Settlement) Sept. 6, 1620, and fell in with Cape Cod Nov. 9; being too late
in the Season for proceeding to Hudson's River; although without the Limits of
their Agreement they were obliged to sit down in a barren Soil, and formed
themselves into a voluntary Association or Colony, subscribed by 41 Men, but
had no Communication with the Indians of the Country until the Middle of March
following; about this Time these Indians by some ep^demick malig^a^t Illness
and intestine Wars had been much reduced. They choose Mr. Carver Governor for
one Year, but he died in April following, and was succeeded by Mr. Bradford;
from the Length of the Voyage, other Fatigues, and extreme cold Weather, about
50 of their Number died the first Year, of putrid Fevers, and other scorbu^ick
Ails; all was in common for the first two or three Years, having divided
themselves into 19 Families, Menages, or Messes; yearly they rec^ived a few
Recruits of People; Anno 1624 when they received their Grant, the whole
Settlement consisted of only 180 Persons in 32 Messes: From so small a
Beginning in the Space of about 125 Years, New England is arrived to its
present Glory. They purchased their Lands of Massassoit, the Indian Sachem; he
was glad of their Alliance and Assistance, being then at War with the
Nar^ganset Indian numerous Tribe.

They had no Grant of their Lands from the Council of Plymouth until Anno 1624,
this Grant was not to the Company (...) Adventurers and Freemen, but to William
Bradford, his Heirs, Associates, and Assigns; he was afterward persuaded to
assign this Grant to the Freem^n in general: This Assignment (as I understand
it) was afterward confirmed by a new Grant from the Council of Plymouth to the
Company of Freemen, Ian. 1629, 30; they never had any Royal Charter or Patent,
conseque^^^ly no Jurisdiction; the Council of Plymouth could convey Property,
but could not delegate Jurisdiction. Here we must break off, and reassume the
History of Plymouth old Colony, when we come to the Article of Plymouth as a
constituted Colony.

It is certain that the first Settlers of New England, did not (as in some of
our Colonies) come over indigent or Criminals, but as devout religious These
Puritans were piou^, honest, well meaning People; but too contracted, rigid,
and singular in their D^scip^^^^ and Practice of Devotion: They would not allow
of the English St. Georges Red Cross in the m^l^tary Ensigns, Colors and
Standards. In common Affairs of Life, they affected to use Scripture Terms, and
these not always proper; our Translation is not good. Ancient Terms in common
Life used by the polite Greeks and Romans, they called profane, and did not use
them* for Instance, (...) of December 25, they wrote, the 2^th Day of the Tenth
Month, instead of Monday, they said the second Day of the Week; some of them
made Conscience of a P^n or Rebus; thus some good old Women would not brew on
Saturdays, because the Ale or Beer, would in Course work upon the Lord's Day
following.

The Generality of the first Settlers soon became more moderate and social,
while others became more obstinately and intracticably Enthusiastic; these
last removed, and gave Birth to the Voluntier Settlements of Providence,
Rhode Island, Connecticut and New Haven, in the Dominions of New England.


Puritans, they were not Servants to the Adventurers as in some Colonies.

Before we enter upon the four well settled and constituted Colonies of
New England, we shall but just mention some Grants which have in Process of
Time been incorporated with these four Colonies, and their Memory lost or
swallowed up in them, and of others become ^bsolete. Some of them shall be
related more at large in their proper Places.

Muscongus or Lincoln Grant of 30 Miles square.

Pemaquid Grant.

Shepscut Purchase or Nagwasack Purchase of Robinhood an Indian Sagamore, Nov.
1. 1639, between Sagadahock Bay and Shepscut River, these three are in the
Territory of Sagadahock.

Nehumkin Purchase of the Indians October 13. 1649, both Sides of Quenebec
River, in this lies Richmond Fort.

Plymouth Grant Ian. 1629, to William Bradford and Associates, lies both Sides
of Quenebec River; in this is Cushnock Falls; is in all about 280 Acres.

Taconick Purchase of the Indians 1653, here are Taconick Falls about 40 Miles
from Noridgwog; these three are upon Quenebec River, one half in Sagadahoc, one
half in Province of Main.

Pegapscot Purchase each Side of Pegapscot River extending to the West Side of
Quenebec River; Mr. Wharton purchased it of the Indian Sagamores 1683, being
about 500,000 Acres; at present belongs to nine Proprietors, Thomas Hutchinson,
etc. it interferes with Nahumkin Purchase and Plymouth Grant.

Province of Main granted 15 Car. I. to Sir Ferdinando Gorge, extending from
Piscataqua and Newichewenock Rivers to Quenebec River, and 120 Miles inland;
includes the Pegapscot Purchase, was purchased by the Colony of
Massachusetts Bay, and is annexed by the new Charter.

Province of New Hampshire; from Piscataqua River, to within three Miles of
Merimack River, granted to Mr. Mason 1624, sold by Mr. Mason's Heirs to Mr.
Allen of London; at present that Grant and Conveyance seem to be obsolete; the
Property of the settled Lands is in the Settlers, the Property of the waste
Land is in the Crown, and the Jurisdiction of the whole in the Crown; it
extends 60 Miles inland, and lately there is annexed an indefinite Quantity of
Territory, belonging to the Crown, formerly claimed by Massachusetts Bay.

Colony of Plymouth, the Mother Colony of New England; extending from Old
Massachusetts to the Seas, viz. to Massachusetts Bay, the Ocean, and within
three Miles of Naraganset Bay; it is now annexed to Massachusetts; they began a
Voluntier Settlement 1620.

Mr. Weston one of the Plymouth Adventurers, obtained a separate Grant of some
Land; and in May 1622 sent over about 60 Men to make a Settlement at Weymouth
about 15 Miles South from Boston, they managed ill, became idle and dissolute,
and soon broke up, and their Memory is lost.

Mr. Gorge, Son to Sir Ferdinando Gorge, Anno 1623 brought over some Settlers;
he had some Commission from the Council of Plymouth, as Governor General; soon
discouraged, he returned Home.

About the same Time Mr. David Thompson attempted a Settlement at Piscataqua,
the Memory of it is lost.

Some Adventurers proposed to make a Settlement North Side of
Massachusetts Bay, Anno 1624 they began a small Settlement at Cape Anne, the
Northern Promontory of this Bay, and are now become the most considerable
British America Settlement, and by Way of Eminence i^ commonly called
New England; they have had a first and second Charter, as shall be more fully
related.

Anno 1626 Capt. Wolaston and some others, with Servants, Provisions, and other
Stores, began a Settlement at Braintree, but not answering Expectation, after
two Years they entirely broke up: Some went to Virginia, some to New Plymouth.

Anno 1630 Earl of Warwick had a Grant of a Tract of Land along Shore from
Naraganset River, 40 Leagues West Southerly, and back Inland to the South Seas.
Earl of Warwick assigned his Grant to Viscount Sea and Seal, and to Lord Brook,
and nine more Associates; finding many Difficulties in settling they assigned
their Right to the Connecticut and New Haven Settlers; these Settlers were
Emigrants from Massachusetts Bay; originally they had no Title, but did sit
down at Pleasure, and do at present enjoy a Royal Charter by the Name of the
Colony of Connecticut. Part of this Grant, viz. from Naraganset Bay to
Connecticut River, when the Council of Plymouth surrendered their Patent, was
given Anno 1636 by the King to Duke Hamilton, he never was in Possession, and
the Claim is become obsolete.

Anno 1642 Mr. Mayhew obtained a Grant of the Islands of Nantucket, Marthas
Vineyard, etc. and began to make Settlements there.

There were several other Grants and Purchases for small Considerations, and
now become obsolete; for Instance, the Million Purchase from Dunstable six
Miles each Side of Merimack River to Winapisinkit Pond or Lake, granted by
Governor Andros and Council in the Reign of James II; a Claim of this Grant was
by some of the Grantees revived about 25 Years ago; but as illegal and odious
it was dropped.

Originally according to Capt. Smith's Map, approved of by the Court of
England; New England extended from 20 Miles East of Hudson's River, Northward
to the River St. Croix; or perhaps to the Gulf of St. Laurence, including Nova
Scotia, a subsequent peculiar Grant; when James II. sent over Sir Edmund.
Andros Governor, his Commission or Patent was for the late Colonies of
Massachusetts Bay, Plymouth, Connecticut, and Rhode Island, called the
Dominions of New England; distinct from New York and Sagadahoc, of which he was
also appointed Governor. N. B. New Hampshire and Province of Main, at that Time
were of no Consideration, being under the Protection, and as it were tacitly
annexed to the good flourishing Colony of Massachusetts Bay.

The Dominions or rather Denominations in New England at present consists of
four Colonies, or severally independent Legislatures, viz. Massachusetts Bay
Province, Province of New Hampshire, Colony of Rhode Island, and Colony of
Connecticut: For Sake of Perspicuity, to each of these is assigned a distinct
Section.

The new Charter of Massachusetts Bay Anno 1691, is a Anno 1643 there was a
Union of 4 Colonies or Settlements in New England for their mutual Protection
against the Enemy, French and (...), to be managed by a Deputation of Two from
each, in Church ^ellowship; they were quoted, Massachusetts Bay 100, Plymouth
45, Connecticut 45, New Haven 45, Rhode Island at this Time and Mason's Grant
of New Hampshire, and Sir Ferdinando Gorge's Grant of the Province of M^in were
of no Consideration. This was a Sort of Amphictonic Council, si pa^va magnis.
The ancient Amphictonic Council met at the ^h^^moyl^e; they were a General
Assembly or Congress of Deputies from several of the most noted Communities,
Republics or Sovereignties of Greece, who met Spring and Autumn upon general
Affairs, especially for mutual Protection.
Union or Consolidation of several separate Grants into one Legislature and
Jurisdiction; for the more effectual Protection of the whole, against the
Incursions of our neighboring French and Indians. Their new Charter
comprehends the following Territories; Sagadahoc or Duke of York's Property;
Province of Maine; Old Colony of Massachusetts Bay, old Colony of Plymouth; and
the Islands of Nantucket, Elizabeth, Marthas Vineyard, etc. Before we reduce
these into separate Articles, to make the whole more apparent, we shall insert
an Abstract of this incorporating second or new Charter (although a late Event
or Transaction) as it affords a general Idea of the Constitution of all our
British Colonies.

This new Charter of Anno 1691, bears Date 3 W. and M. Oct. 7, countersigned
Pigot. After Recital of the former Grant or Charter, it proceeds thus, "
Whereas the said Governor and Company of Massachusetts Bay in New England, by
Virtue of said Letters patent, are become very populous and well settled; and
whereas said Charter was vacated by a Judgment in Chancery in Trinity Term,
Anno 1684; the Agents of that Colony have petitioned us, to be reincorporated
by a new Charter; and also to the End that our Colony of New-Plymouth in
New England, may be brought under such a Form of Government, as may put them in
a better Condition of Defense: We do by these Presents, incorporate into one
real Province, by the Name of the Province of Massachusetts Bay in New England;
viz. the former Colony of Massachusetts Bay, the Colony of New-Plymouth, In the
Delineation of the Province of Main, in the Impressions of the new Charter, are
left out (for what Reason I know not) the following Words " And up Sagadahoc
River, to Quenebec River, and through the same unto the Head thereof, and into
the Land Northw^s^w^rd, until 120 Miles be ended, being accounted from the
Mouth of Sagadahoc.
the Province of Main, the Territory of Acadia or Nova Scotia, and the Nova
Scotia and this Tract called Sagadahoc were annexed to this neighboring
Charter to keep the English Claim, they being at that Time in Possession of the
French: Since that Time by the Treaty of Utrecht 1713, they have been
quitclaim'd by the French to the Crown of Great Britain; and Nova Scotia has
been constituted a separate Property and Jurisdiction or Government. Sagadahoc
hitherto continues annexed to Massachusetts Bay Province; but as it is not the
absolute Property of the Province, perhaps from a large Extent of a Frontier
defenseless in it self, it is more of an Encumbrance, than of any Advantage.
Tract laying between Nova Scotia and Province of Main, the North Half of the
Isles of Shoals, the Isles of Marthas Vineyard, and Elizabeth Islands.
Capawock, and Nantucket near Cape Cod, and all Islands within ten Leagues
directly opposite to the main Land within said Bounds. To our Subjects
Inhabitants of said Lands and their Successors. Quit-Rent, a fifth Part of all
Gold, and Silver, and Precious Stones that may be found there. Confirms all
Lands, Hereditaments, etc. formerly granted by any General Court to Persons,
Bodies corporate, Towns, Villages, Colleges or Schools; This relates to the
New Hampshire Claim from Merimack River, to Necamkeag or Salem; but the late
Determination of the Boundaries between Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire by
the King in Council, has removed that Claim.
saving the Claims of Samuel Allen under John Mason, and any other Claim.
Former Grants and Conveyances not to be Governor Andr^s in the arbitrary Reign
of James II, made a Handle of Want of Form to disturb Possessions, by
compelling the Possessors to take new Patents for their own Lands with
extravagant Fees; and to pay Quit-Rents to the Crown.
prejudiced for Want of Form. The Governor, Lt.-Governor, and Secretary to be
in the King's Nomination; 28 Counselors whereof 7 at least make a Board. A
General Court or Assembly, to be convened last Wednesday in May yearly;
consisting of the Governor, Council, and Representatives of the Towns or
Places, not exceeding By uninterrupted Custom (Prescription) the Town of Boston
sends four Representatives; the Qualification of 40 s. Freehold for an Electo^,
is become nominal Value, instead of the designed Sterling Value, that i^ 4 s.
instead of 40 s.; the Qualification 50 L. St. Personal Estate (...) set at 40
L. St.
two for one Place; Qualification for an Elector 40 s. Freehold, or 50 L. St.
personal Estate. The Perhaps the natural Meaning of this, was, the
Representatives of the People; but at present the Council of the former Year
jointly with the Representatives choose a new Council.
General Assembly to elect 28 Perhaps, The Council of the present Constitution
of the Massachusetts Bay, labors under two Disadvantages or Imperfections. 1.
To be arbitrarily led, or rather drove by the Governor, to prevent future
Negatives. 2. As their Election is annual they may be biassed by the Humor of
the Majority of the Representatives (this I have particularly observed in
theCases of multiplied Emissions of Paper Currency) lest they should be dropped
next annual Election: A notorious Instance of this happened Anno 1741, when the
Representatives dropped about one half of the former Years Council, because
averse to a certain pernicio^s CHEAT, or Paper-Money Scheme called the
LAND-BANK; the Words of the Act of Parliament "Mischievous Undertaking^ and
unlawful" this Scheme was disannul'd by an express Act of the British
Parliament 1741; and Governor (...) could not avoid negativing 13 of the new
elected Councello^s.

Mr. (...), at p^esent Governor of New Iers^^s, is generous, void of
Covetousness, studious of the real Good of the Countries under his Direction,
and a strict Observer of Royal Instruc^ions: If he had continued two or three
Years longer in the Administration of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay,
their Paper Currency would happily h^ve been obliterated or cancelled, and must
naturally and gradual^y have fallen into a Silver Currency, the general
Currency of the commerc^^l Wo^ld; Mr. B^lcher was not a Paper Money Governor,
he was well acquainted in the commercial World.


Counselors; whereof 18 from the Old Colony of Massachusetts Bay, 4 from
Plymouth late Colony, 3 from the Province of Maine, 1 for the Territory of
Sagadahoc, and 2 at large. The Governor with Consent of the Council to appoint
the Officers in the Courts of Justice. All born in the Province, or in the
Passage to and from it, to be deemed natural born Subjects of England. Liberty
of Conscience to all Christians except Papists. TheGeneral Assembly to
constituteIudicatories for allCauses criminal or civil, capital or not capital.
Probate of Wills and granting of Administrations, to be in theGovernor and
Council. In personal Actions exceeding the Value of 300 L. St. may appeal to
the King in Council, if the Appeal be made in fourteen Days after Judgment, but
Execution not to be staid. The General Assembly to make Laws, if not repugnant
to the Laws of England to In the Election of all such civil Officers the
Council and Representatives vote together, but not as two separate Negatives;
these Officers are, the Treasurer, the Impost Officers, the Excise-Officers;
the General Commis^ary of Provisions, Stores, and Traffic for Garrisons and
Indian Tr^^k Houses; Attorney General, and Notaries for the several Sea Port^.
appoint all civil Officers, excepting the Officers of the Courts of Justice,
to impose Taxes to be Anno 17^2 The Council and Representatives of the Province
of Mas^achusetts-B^^, applied to the King in Council, concerning the Right
which the House of R^presentatives had, to pas^ upon Accounts, bro't against
the Public before they were paid: It was determined by the King in Council,
that the House of Representatives had no such Right.
disposed by the Governor and Council. The Conversion of the Indians to be
endeavored. The Governor to have a Negative in all Acts and Elections. All
Acts of Assembly, to be sent Home by the first Opportunity to the King in
Council for Approbation; if not disallowed in three Years after their being
presented, shall continue in Force until repealed by the Assembly. By the
former Charter the Provincial Lands were granted to 26 Proprietors, and such as
shall be admitted Freemen; but by this new Charter, these Lands are granted to
the Inhabitants in general, to be ^^^posed of by their Representatives or
General Assembly.
The General Assembly may grant any Lands in late Massachusetts Bay and
Plymouth Colonies, and in the Province of Maine; but no Grant of Lands from
Sagadaho^ River, to St. Laurence River shall be valid, without the Royal
Approbation. The Governor to command the Militia, to use the Law Martial in
Time of actual War, to erect Forts and demolish the same at Pleasure. No Person
to be transported out of the Province, without their own Consent, or Consent of
the General Assembly. The Law Martial not to be executed without Consent of the
Council. When there is no Governor, the Lt.-Governor is to act, when both are
wanting the Majority of the Council to have the Power. The Admiralty
Jurisdiction is reserved to the King, or Lords of the Admiralty. No Subject of
England to be debarred from fishing on the Seacoast, Creeks, or Salt Water
Rivers, and may erect Lodges and Stages in any Lands not in Possession of
particular Proprietors. All By an Act of the British Parliament Anno 1722, this
Clause is extended; viz. That after S^pt. 21. 1722 in New England, New York,
and New Iers^y in America, no Person shall cut or destroy any white Pine Trees,
not growing in any Tow^sh^p or its Bounds, without his Majesty's ^icense; on
Pain to f^rfeit for every white Pine Tree, of the Growth of 12 Inches Diameter
and under, at 3 Foot from the Earth, 5 L. St.; for every such Tree from 12 to
18 Inches, 10 L.; from 18 to 24 Inches, 20 L*; from 24 and upwards, 50 L. to be
sued before the Judge of Admir^lty: And ^ll white Pine Trees. Masts or ^ogs
made of such Tre^s, wh^^h shall be fo^nd cut or falled without the King's
^icen^e, shall be forfeited and seized for the Use of the Crown. By an Act of
Parliament 1729, the Penalty in this Clause of the Charter is confirmed; and
the Act of 1722 is extended to all the (...) Provinces in America; and confines
the Exception to the Property of private Person^ only, notwithstanding they
grow within the Limits of any Township.
Trees fit for Masts of 24 Inches Diameter and upwards 12 Inches from the
Ground, growing upon Land not heretofore granted to any private Persons, are
reserved to the Crown; Penalty for cutting any such reserved Trees 100 L. St.
per Tree.

About 20 Years since, the Assembly of Massachusetts Bay, received and accepted
an additional or explanatory Charter from the Court of Great Britain; the
History of the Affair is as follows. In the Administration of Governor Shute, a
good-natured Gentleman, and though no great Politician, was tenacious of the
Prerogative; a few hotheaded turbulent Men who had got the Ascendent over
their Fellow-Representatives, and in some Measure over the Council, endeavored
the same over the Governor, by assuming some Articles of the Prerogative: In
the End of Anno 1722 Mr. Shute in Person carried Home seven Articles of
Complaint against the House of Representatives encroaching upon the Prerogative.

1. Their taking Possession of Royal Masts cut into Logs.

2. Refusing the Governor's Negative of the Speaker.

3. Assuming Authority jointly with the Governor and Council to appoint Fasts
and Thanksgivings.

4. Adjourning themselves for more than two Days at a Time.

5. Dismantling of Forts, and ordering the Guns and Stores into the Treasurer's
Custody.

6. Suspending of Military Officers, and mutilating them of their Pay.

7. Sending a Committee of their own to muster the King's Forces.

Upon a Hearing before the King and Council Mr. Cook Agent for the House of
Representatives, and his Council or Lawyers in the Name of the House of
Representatives, gave up or renounced the 1, 3, 5, 6, and 7 Articles,
acknowledging their Fault, induced by Precedents of former Assemblies, but
wrong and erroneous; and that it was a former Assembly, not the present, that
had been guilty; the other two Articles were regulated by an explanatory
Charter, and they directed to accept the same.

This explanatory Charter is dated 12 Regni Geo. I. August 20, and
countersigned Cocks. "Whereas in their Charter, nothing is directed concerning
a Speaker of the House of Representatives, and of their adjourning themselves:
It is hereby ordered, That the Governor or Commander in chief, shall have a
Negative in the Election of the Speaker, and the House of Representatives may
adjourn themselves not exceeding two Days at a Time. By the prudent Conduct of
Governor Dummer, the Assembly were induced to accept of this explanatory
Charter, by a public Act of the General Court, Anno 1726.

We may observe in general, that the Economy or Mode of Jurisdiction is much
the same in all the four Colonies of New England, by Justices of the Peace and
their Quarterly Sessions, by Inferior County Courts of Common Law; and by
Provincial ambulatory Superior Courts for Appeals, where Cases are issued, it
is also a Court of Justiciary or Oyer and Terminer.

They are divided into constituted Districts called Townships; they are a Kind
of Bodies corporate, may sue and be sued, elect all proper Officers, send
Deputies to the Legislature House of Representatives, and make Bylaws. The
Management of Township Affairs is in a few (called Select-Men) annually elected
by the qualified Voters of the Townships or District. In most of the other
British Colonies, their constituted Parishes, by Custom, act as Bodies
corporate, the Management is in Perhaps so named, because they commonly meet in
the Vestry Room of the Church, where the Priest is supposed to keep his
sacerdotal Vestments, and may be called the Dressing Room.
Vestry-Men so called, who generally are for Life, and the Survivors supply
Vacancies.

In the four Colonies of New England Juries are returned to the several Courts
by Election in certain Quotas from the several Townships, but not by the
Appointment of the Sheriffs.

In the rigid, and furiously zealous Church and State Administration of Laud,
Archbishop of Canterbury (he carried both Church and State beyond their
Bearings, and consequently in the Nature of Things they did overset) many
Puritans and other Nonconformists flocked over to New England; this occasioned
a State Proclamation April 30. 1637, forbidding any Subjects to transport
themselves to America, without License from his Majesty's Commissioners. Anno
1640, the People in New England did not exceed 4000, and in the 20 following
Years many went It is said that amongst others, Oliver Cromw^ll was stopped from
coming over: This seems to be an idle Surmise; Cromwell was an active politic
Man, it cannot be imagined that a Man of that Genius, and in the Prime of Life
would choose a Wilderness or Desert for his Scene of Action; besides a Person of
his Cast, and who probably might prove turbulent at Home, in good Court Policy
ought to be allowed to withdraw.
Home from New England, their Way of Worship was then in great Vogue in Old
England.

N. B. Many of the first English Set^lements in America, were by Companies of
Adventurers, with a joint Stock: Annually in London, each Company chose a
President and Treasurer for Managers.

We proceed to the several Articles concerning the Colonies or Territories,
united into one Province by the new Charter of Massachusetts Bay.

Each Article goes no further than the Time of this Charter Union: From that
Time the History of their joint Affairs, is carried along in the Article of Old
Massachusetts Bay Colony.

ARTICLE 2. Concerning Sagadahoc, formerly called the Duke of York's Property.
KING Charles II, March 12. 1663, 4 granted to his Brother the Duke of York, a
certain Territory or Tract of Land, thus described, "All that Part of the main
Land of New England, beginning at a certain Place, called or known by the Name
of St. Croix adjoining to New-Scotland in America; and from thence extending
along the Sea Coast, unto a certain Place called Pemaquin or Pemaquid, and so
up by the River thereof, to the furthest Head of the same, as it tends
Northwards, and extending from thence to the River of Quenebec, and so up by
the shortest Course to the River of Canada Northwards." This was called the
Duke of York's Property, and annexed to the Government of New York. The Duke of
York upon the Death of his Brother K. Charles II, became K. James II; and upon
K. James's Abdication these Lands reverted to the Crown.

At present the Territory of Sagadahoc, is supposed to extend from the River
St. Croix Eastward, to the River of Quenebec Westward, and from each of these
two Rivers due North to the River of St. Laurence, thus St. Laurence or Canada
River is its Northern Boundary, and the Atlantic Ocean is its Southern
Boundary. When Nova Scotia was in Possession of the French, Sagadahoc Territory
was included in the Commission of the French Governor of L'Accadie or Nova
Scotia; thus it was in the Time of granting a new royal Charter to
Massachusetts Bay, therefore to keep up the English Claim to this Territory, as
well as to Nova Scotia, the Jurisdiction of both were included in that Charter.

Upon the Peace of Utrecht 1713, Nova Scotia and Sagadahoc were quit claimed by
France to Great Britain; and the Court of Great Britain reassumed the
Jurisdiction of Nova Scotia, and after a few Years more, the Crown purchased
the Property of the Soil or Seigneurie of all the French Claimers; it is now a
separate King's Government, with the Property in the Crown: But this Territory
of Sagadahoc remains in the Jurisdiction of Massachusetts Bay, and sends one
Member to the Council, but hitherto not any to the House of Representatives of
Massachusetts Bay: The General Assembly cannot dispose of Lands there, without
the Consent of the King in Council. The Property of peculiar Grants there,
remain good to the several Claimers, until the Crown do purchase the same as
was the Case in Nova Scotia.

Col. Dunbar projected Sagadahoc Territory to be set off as a separate
Government for himself; this was introduced, by obtaining a royal Instrument or
Instruction, to set off 300,000 Acres of good Mast and Ship-Timber Land, for
the Use of the Crown or Navy; it was forwarded by a royal Instruction to Col.
Phillips Governor of Nova Scotia April 27, 1730. to take Possession of the
Lands between St. Croix River and Quenebec River; accordingly a Detachment of
30 Men with an Officer, was made from the four Companies of his Regiment in
Garrison at Canso in Nova Scotia, was sent to take Possession of that Country,
to keep Garrison at Frederick's Fort on Pemaquid River, here the Detachment
kept for some Time: Upon Application Home of the Muscongus Company, Proprietors
in Part of Sagadahoc, by their indefatigable Agent Mr. Waldo, this Instruction
was revoked August 10, 1732, and Col. Phillips's Detachment was called off. At
present, the Province of Massachusetts Bay to obviate Cavils or Complaints; of
their relinquishing the Occupancy of this Territory; keep a Truck-House and
Garrison at Georges, and a Garrison at Fort Frederick, and is likely to
continue under the Jurisdiction of Massachusetts Bay, and is at prepresent
annexed to the County of York, or Province of Maine.

In the Beginning of this French War Anno 1744, the sencible Men in this large
Territory of Sagadahock were only at Georges and Broad-bay 270 at Pemaquid 50
at Shepscut 50 370
but at this Writing 1748, very few of these remain, being much exposed to the
Canada French Coureurs de Bois, and their Indians.

In the Beginning of the last Century England and France indifferently traded
to Sagadahoc; under the Direction and Countenance of Chief Justice Popham, the
English made the Where a Repetition is short, it ought to be allowed, because
it sav^s the Reader the Trouble of turning back by a Reference.
first New England Settlement 1608 at Sagadahoc, but of short Continuance.

Anno 1613 Capt. Argol from Virginia broke up some French Settlements at
Sagadahoc.

The Claims to Lands in the Territory of Sagadahoc, are of various and
perplexed Natures, viz. Some by old Indian Grants in drunken Frolicks for none
or not valuable Considerations; some by Grants from the Council of Plymouth;
some by Patents from the Governors of New York, when under that Jurisdiction,
particularly from Governor Dungan a Roman Catholic in the Reign of James II.

Some Part of this Territory was granted by the Council of Plymouth 1629 to Mr.
Beauchomp of London Merchant, and to Mr. Leverett of Boston in Lincolnshire,
and their Associates, called this Lincoln Company or Society, viz. from
Muscongus, now called Broad-Bay, a little Eastward of Pemaquid to Penobscot Bay
10 Leagues along Shore, and from this Termination and that of Muscongus 10
Leagues inland, so as to make a Parcel of Land of 30 Miles square. This
Plymouth Grant se^ms to have been confirmed by a Royal Grant of Charles II.
signed Howard Privy Seal; that was about the Time when the Connecticut and
Rhode Island Charters were granted.

Leverett's Title laying dorma^^, Sir William Phipps purchased of Madakawando,
chief Sachem (as it is said) of the Penobscot Indians, the Lands each Side of
Georges River, so high as the second Falls; Spencer Phipps adopted Heir of Sir
William Phipps, made over his Right to the Heirs and Associates of Leverett;
Anno 1719, it was conveyed to several Associates, so as to make 30 equal Shares
in the whole; the new Associates obliged themselves to settle two Townships
upon Georges River, of 40 Families each; but an Indian War breaking out, the
Conditions were never performed: The Indians hitherto have not formally
quitclaim'd it. Mr. Waldo, a Gentleman well qualified for an Agent, a Partner,
who effectually negotiated the Affair at Home, against the Contrivances of Col.
Dunbar to annex it to the Crown* has acquired a very considerable Part in this
Grant.

Georges Truck-House and Fort lies near the Center of thisGrant, is about 12
Miles up this River; at the Mouth of the River is a Bar of a very small Draught
of Water; 5 Miles higher are the first Falls of Georges River; Broad-Bay or
Muscongus is only a large Creek or Bay with a small Rivulet running into it.

In the Territory of Sagadahoc not much good Ship-Timber, some white Pine for
Masts; may be of good Service to Boston in supplying it with Firewood. The Soil
is not bad.

The Grants of the Shepscut Lands, and of the Pemaquid Lands, seem not included
in theD. of York's Property.

Most of the Grants and Conveyances in this Territory, are not to be found upon
Record, which occasions great Confusion in Claims.

ARTICLE 3. Concerning the Province of Main.
THIS being the first of the Territories at present called New England that
falls in our Course; for the Readers more ready Conception of the New England
Affairs, we shall ab initio, recapitulate some Matters already delivered.

King Iame^ I, by Letters Patent bearing Date Nov. 3. 1620, granted all that
Land and Territory in America, laying between the N. Lat. of 40 d. to 48 d,
unto the Duke of Lenox, Marquis of Bucki^gham* Marquis of Hamilton, and others
their Associates Noblemen and Gentlemen, in all forty Persons, and to their
Successors; and incorporated them by the Name of the Council established at
Plymouth in the County of Devon, for settling, planting, ruling and governing
all that Country by the Name of New England; to have and to bold, poss^^s and
enjoy, all the Continent Lands and Islands, between the said Latitudes to them
and their Successors for ever; with Power to alienate, assign, convey and set
over, under their common Seal any Part or Portion thereof to any of his
Majesty's Denizens or other Adventurers.

In the End of James Ist's Reign Sir Ferdinando Gorge, President of the Council
of Plymouth, and Capt. Mason had sundry Grants from Neumkeag River, which
divides the present Towns of Salem and Beverly, to Sagadahoc or Quenebec River,
which were afterward altered into the Grants of the Province of Main, and of
New Hampshire as at present.

The Council of Plymouth Nov. 7. 1629, granted to Gorge and Mason, all that
Tract of Land from the Heads of Merrimack River and Sagadahoc or Quenebec
River, to the Lake Iroquois, now called Ca^araqui or Ontario, and the River
which empties it self from said Lake into Canada River to be called LACONIA,
but as they never occupied it, this Grant is become obsolete, and may be said
to have reverted to the Crown; and at present since the late Settlement made of
the Line between Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire, may be said to be in the
Ju^isdiction of New Hampshire.

Sir Ferdinando Gorge, President of the Council of Plymouth, or Council of New
England, obtained a Grant from this Council April 22. 1635, of a Tract of Land
called the Province of Main, extending from Piscataqua River to Sagadahoc and
Quenebec River. This Grant was confirmed by the Crown April 3. 1639. The Agent
or Agents of Massachusetts Bay, purchased 15 Car. I. July 20. 1677, this Grant
of the Heirs or Assignees of Gorge.

The Grant of the Province of Main begins at the Entrance of Piscataqua
Harbor, up the same to Newichewanock River, and through the same to the
furthest Head thereof, and thence North Westward, till 120 Miles be finished,
and from Piscataqua Harbour's Mouth aforesaid, North-Eastward along the
Seacoast to Sagadahoc, and up the River thereof to Quenebec River, and through
the same to the Head thereof, and thence into the Land North Westward till 120
Miles be finished; and from the Period of 120 Miles aforesaid, to cross over
Land, to the 120 Miles before reckoned, up into the Land from Piscataqua
Harbor through Newichewanock River: As also the North half of the Isles of
Shoals.

The Lines of the Territories belonging to the Province of Massachusetts Bay,
and of the Province of New Hampshire, being in Dispute for many Years:
New Hampshire petitioned the King in Council, that their Boundaries with
Massachusetts Bay might be determined; accordingl^ with Consent of the Agents
for Massachusetts Bay, Ap^^l 9. 1737 The Charge of passing the Commission was
13, L. 4 (...)
a Commission under the great Seal of Great Britain was issued, appointing five
of the eldest Counselors from each of the neighboring Provinces of New York,
New Iersies, Nova Scotia and Rhode Island (five to be a Coram) as
Commissioners, reserving Property and an Appeal to the King in Council: The
Appeal was heard before a Committee of Privy Council, March 5th 1739; the
Commissioners, and afterward the King in Council, settled this Line N. 2 d. W.
true Course. Accordingly New Hampshire ex part (Massachusetts Bay refusing to
join in the Survey) by Mr. Bryant a Surveyor of Lands, settled the Line with
the Province of Main, viz. From the Mouth of Piscataqua River to the Head of
Newichewanock a little North of Lovel's Pond, upon a great Pond from whence
proceeds Moussum River, about North-Westerly 40 Miles, thence N. 8 d. E. by
Needle (the Commissioners, and as afterward confirmed by the King in Council,
settled this Line N. 2 d. W. true Course) which is by allowing 10 d. Variation;
30 Miles; this Survey was in March, the Snow and Ice melting rendered the
further Survey Progress impracticable; thus 40 Miles of this Line remains to be
run.

Both Governments of Massachusetts Bay and of New Hampshire were in one and the
same Person at that Time; and it was suspected that the Governor favored
Massachusetts Bay; therefore the General Assembly of New Hampshire brought on a
Complaint against the Governor, previous to the Appeals coming on. The
Commissioners began to sit August 1; the General Assembly of New Hampshire was
adjourned by the Governor to the 4th of August, which retarded them 3 or 4 Days
in appointing Managers and giving in their Pleas: The Commissioners pronounced
Judgment Sept. 2, the Governor prorogued the Assembly from Sept. 2. to Oct. 13,
that they might not have an Appeal ready to give into the Commissioners in six
Weeks from Judgment given, the Time limited by the Commission. The Complaint
was heard before a Committee of the Council, they found the Complaint just, and
their Report was approved of by the in Council. To prevent the like
Inconveniences a separate Governor was appointed for New Hampshire; and the
Governments of Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire have been in two distinct
Persons ever since.

TheMethod used before the newCharter by theColony of Massachusetts Bay
Purchase of the Heirs or Assigns of Gorge, to convey or dispose of Lands there,
was in this Manner, for Instance, July 26, 1684. The President of the Province
of Main, by Order of the General Assembly of the Colony of Massachusetts Bay,
makes a Grant of the Township of North Yarmouth to sundry Persons. In a strict
Sense the Colony of Massachusetts Bay could not exer^ise any Jurisdiction
there, because theHeirs etc. of Gorg^ could not delegate Jurisdiction;
notwithstanding, we find Orders of Jurisdiction signed in Boston; for Instance,
in the War against the Indians, an Order to Sheriffs, Constables, etc. to
impress Boats and Land Carriages, is signed Boston, Sept. 16. 1689, Thomas
Danforth President of the Province of Main.

The North and South Lines running inland are 120 Miles, the Front or Sea Line,
and the Rear Line may be about 80 Miles; that is the Contents of the Province
of Main may be about 9600 square Miles; whereof at present granted in Townships
or Districts, are only the first or Sea Line consisting of the Townships of
Kittery, York, Wells, Arundel, Biddiford, Scarborough, Falmouth, North
Yarmouth, GeorgeTown or Arrowsick, Brunswick, and the Settlement of Topsam; and
a second or inland Line consisting of Berwick, Philips Town, Naraganset No. 1.
Naraganset No. 7. Marblehead Township, Powers and others Township, and Cape
Anne Township.

In this Territory of Main, there are some private Purchases from the Indians,
which the Proprietor General the Assembly of the Province of Massachusetts Bay,
seem not to dispute; for Instance, Anno 1683 Mr. Wharton a Merchant in Boston,
purchased of six Sagamores, about 500,000 Acres called the Pegepscot Purchase;
bounded five Miles West from Pegepscot River, by a Line running at five Miles
Distance parallel with the River, to a certain Fall in said River, and thence
N. E. about 44 Miles in a strait Line to Quenebec River; it includes the
Eastern Divisions of Nahumkee Purchase, and of Plymouth Purchase, Plymouth
Purchase extends 15 Miles each Side of Quenebec River. Wharton dying insolvent,
the Administrator sold this Purchase for not much exceeding 100 L. New England
Currency Anno 1714 to eight or nine Proprietors, viz. Winthrop, T. Hutchinson,
Ruck, Noyes, Watts, Minot, Mountford, etc: It is bounded S. Westerly by
North-Yarmouth, which takes in a small Part of this Grant at small Point;
George-Town, Brunswick and Topsam are in this Grant.

At the breaking out of the French War, in the Province of Main were Militia or
fencible Men 2485. Men Township of Kittery 450 York 350 Wells 500 Arundel 95
Biddiford 120 Berwick 150 Philip T. 150 Sir W. Pepperrell'sReg. 1565 Men
Scarborough 160 Falmouth 500 N. Yarmouth 150 Brunswick 50 NaragansetN. 1. 20
NewMarblehead 40 920 Sagadahoc 370 Col. Waldo's Reg. 1290 but at present many
of these have left their Towns and Habitations, being exposed to the French and
their Indians.

For some Time during the old Charter of Massachusetts Bay Colony they extended
their Claim to 3 Miles North of the Northernmost Part of Merimack River, called
Endicots Tree, near the Crotch or Fork where Pemagawaset River, and the Wares
or Discharge of Winipisiakit Pond or Lake do meet, and from thence extended
their due East and W. Line to the E. and W. Oceans, that is from the Aethiopick
Ocean to the South Sea or Pacifick Ocean; thus they assumed (as being prior)
almost the whole of Mason's Grant or New Hampshire, and the S. E. Corner of
Gorge's Grant or the Province of Main so far as Black-Point, near Saco River,
both in Property and Jurisdiction; and did accordingly make Grants of Lands and
constitute Townships which sent Representatives or Deputies to the General
Assembly of Massachusetts; but upon Complaint of the Heirs of Gorge and Mason
to the King in Council and the Courts in Westminster Hall, Massachusetts Bay
disclaimed these Lands, as hereafter shall be more fully related.

The whole of the Province of Main at present constitutes only one County
called the County of York, and to this County is The Lands East of Quenebec
River were never a settled French Property with Possession and Jurisdiction;
and the Fr^^ch transitory Conquest of it, was only a Suspension of the former
Bri^^^h Owners Property; and upon Re-conquest or a Peace, returned to the
former Owners Iure post Liminii, or a Right to one's former Inheritance;
therefore in Col. Dunbar's Case the Board of Trade, and Committee of Council
reported to the King in Council, that the Muscongus Associates should not be
disturbed in their Possession, and to be under the Defense or Protection of
Massachusetts Bay as formerly.
annexed the Territory of Sagadahoc.

In the Province of Main and New Hampshire, from the first settling of the
English, for about 50 Years, that is until King Philips War, the English and
Indians kept a good friendly Correspondence; but ever since, during the
European French Wars, the French of Canada have made Use of the several Tribes
of our neighboring Abnaquie Indians to distress our Settlements; vide Sect.
III. Article 4.

Prior to the Massachusetts Bay Purchase, the Settlers in the Province of Main,
never had any other Protection, but that of the Colony of Massachusetts Bay.
When the Court of England, much corrupted, began in an arbitrary despotick
Manner to reassume Grants, Charters, etc; it was ordered by the King in
Council, July 24. 1679, that the Massachusetts Bay Government, upon the
Reimbursement of 1200 L. St. paid Gorge's Heirs for the Province of Main, shall
surrender it to the Crown, being a Purchase made without his Majesty's
Permission. The new Charter of Massachusetts Bay 1691, put an End to that and
all other pretended Claims.

Geography and Chronology, are two the most considerable Elements of History.
The most essential and invariable Things in the Geography of a Country, are its
general Position upon the Surface of the E^rth as to Latitude and Longitude;
the remarkable Mountains and great Hills; the Seacoast; and the Runs of Rivers
and Rivulets from the inland into the Sea.

In the Province of Main, the remarkable Mountains and Hills are, 1. The White
Hills or rather Mountains, inland about 70 Miles North from the Mouth of
Pisca^aqua Harbor, about 7 Miles W. b. N. from the Head of the Pigwoket Branch
of Saco River; they are called White not from their being continually covered
with Snow, but because they are bald, a-top producing no Trees or Brush, and
covered with a whitish Stone or Shingle; these Hills may be observed at a great
Distance, and are a considerable Guide or Direction to the Indians in
traveling that Country. 2. The Pigwoket Hills at a small Distance from the
WhiteHills, are much inferior to them, and scarce require to be mentioned. 3.
AquamanticusHills well known amongst our Sailors, are in the Township of York
about 8 Miles inland; it is a noted and useful Land-making, for Vessels that
fall in Northward of Boston or Massachusetts Bay.

Upon the Seacoast, Casco-Bay is a large, good, and safe Harbor or Road for
Vessels of any Burden; being sheltered or covered by many Islands: Here some of
the Contract Mast Ships take in their Load. Along this Coast are many Harbors
commodious for small Craft in loading of Lumber and Firewood for Boston.

The Capes, Promontories or Head-Lands belong properly to Sea Charts; I shall
only mention Small Point at the South Entrance of Sagadahoc, Cape Elizabeth in
the S. E. Corner of Casco-Bay, Black Point 4 Miles N. E. of Saco River, Cape
Porpus in Arundel, and Cape Neddick in Wells.

The considerable Rivers are, 1. Quenebec and its Mouth called Sagadahoc, which
divides the Province of Main, from the Old Bristol Purchase of Pemaquid,
including the Shepscut Purchase, and from the Territory formerly called the
Duke of York's Property, all which at present are called the Territory of
Sagadahoc. From the Entrance of Sagadahoc to Merry meeting Bay are 18 Miles,
thence to Richmond Fort and Truck-House near the Mouth of Quenebec River are 12
Miles, thence to the first Falls, though only a Ripling called Cushnock Falls
are 18 Miles; thence to Taconick Falls are 18 Miles, here in Mr. Dummer's
Indian War our People left their Whale-Boats, and marched 40 Miles by Land to
the Indian Village or Town called Naridgwoag; they destroyed the Settlement,
brought away the Scalp of the French Missionary Father Rale a Jesuit with about
26 Indian Scalps, some Indians were drowned in crossing the River
precipitately: Thus from the Mouth of Sagadahoc to Naridgwoag about 106 English
Miles, and the Province of Main cannot extend above 20 Miles higher; these
Indians in traveling to Quebec, with their Canoes go much higher up the River:
The Naridgwoag Indians with their French Missionaries, have in the French Wars
been very troublesome to the English Settlements; but by Dummer's well managed
Indian War, and a late Mortality from a putrid Fever and Dysentery, received,
when in Curiosity they visited Duke D'Anville's sickly Troops and Squadron at
Chebucto upon the Cape-Sable Coast of Nova Scotia; they are now reduced, to
very inconsiderable impotent Numbers. 2. Amerascogin River; up this River, not
many Years since was a Tribe of Indians, but are now extinct; near the Mouth of
this River, is Brunswick Fort; this River is particularly noted for Plenty of
good Sturgeon; not many Years since a Merchant of Boston contracted with some
Fishmongers of London to supply them with a certain Quantity of well-cured
S^urgeon every Year, but whether from the bad Quality of the Fish; or rather
from the Negligence of the People employed in curing of it, there was no Sale
for it in London, and the foresaid Indian War breaking out, that Fishery is
given up. 3. Saco River, its co^^^^era^le Branches ar^ Pigwacket River, it
rises about 70 Mil^^ North of Piscataqua Harb^ur, and Ossipee River from
Ossipe^^ ^ond about 55 Miles N. Westerly from Piscataq^a Harbor: About 50
Miles from the Mouth of Saco formerly were Pigwacket, a considerable Tribe o^
Indians with a French Missionary, they are now almost extinct; this River is
navigable only a small Way to the Falls for small Vessels; here is a Fort and
Truck-Houses; at the Mouth of Saco River is Winter Harbor, so called from Mr.
Winter, who had a Farm there. 4. Mausom River comes from some Ponds near the
famous Lovell's Pond, about 40 Miles above Piscataqua Harbor, at these Ponds
Bryant the Surveyor began to set off the N. 8 d. E. Line between the Province
of Main and New Hampshire; this River falls into the Ocean in the Township of
Wells. 5 Piscataqua River, which for the Space of 40 Miles divides
New Hampshire from the Province of Main* from the Mouth of this River or
Harbor to the Inlet of Exeter Bay are about 10 Miles, thence to the Mouth of
Catechecho River, which comes from the W. N. W. are 5 Miles, from this upwards,
Piscataqua River is called Newichawanock River, and higher it is called Salmon
Falls River.

The small Rivers or Runs of Water and of short Cours^ are many; Recompense
River, Royals River running through Cape-Anne Grant or Township, and through
North Yormouth to the Sea; Presumpscot River, comes from Iabago Pond, by
Naraganset No. 7. through Falmouth; where it falls into the Sea; Falmouth River
or Stroud Water of Casco-Bay; Quenebunc River dividing Arundel from Wells; York
River in the Township of York.

ARTICLE 4. Concerning the late Colony of Plymouth.
WHAT relates to this Colony, prior to their more fixed and determined Grant
Anno 1629 from the Council of Plymouth, see P. 370.

Some English Puritans belonging to Mr. Robinson's Church in In Leyden to this
Day, an English Presbyterian Congregation is maintained in their Works by the
States.
in Holland, with some of their Friends in England, obtained of the Council of
Plymouth, an indistinct imperfect Grant of Lands in North America; their Design
wa^ for Hudson's River, but falling in with Cape Cod late in the Year Nov. 11,
they were obliged to winter there, and in a shallow Bay and poor Soil within
the Great B^y of Massachusetts, they sit down and call it New-Plymouth, in
Remembrance of Plymouth in England, from whence they took their Departure.

They had no particular Grant from the Council of Plymouth of the Country where
they settled, until 1624; and this was so indistinct, that they obtained a
newGrant 1629, but still so obscure as not to be understood at present, as
appeared at a hearing 1741, before Commissioners appointed by the Court of
Great Britain, to settle their Line with the Colony of Rhode Island.

We shall only briefly observe that Capt. Smith the Traveller, with two Ships
1614 made a good Voyage upon these Coasts, and by his Means the Country was
named New England by the Court of England.

Anno 1616 four or five Sail of fishing Vessels from London, and as many from
Plymouth, make good Fares of Fish.

Anno 1618 only two Sail from Plymouth in England fish upon the Coast of
New England.

Anno 1619 only one Ship of 200 Tuns, made a good Voyage.

Anno 1621, ten or twelve Ships from the West of England, fish upon the Coast
of New England, and make good Voyages with their Fish to Spain.

Anno 1622 there were upon the Coast of New England 35 Vessels from the West of
England.

Anno 1623 Capt. Smith writes, that there were for that Year 40 Sail from
England, fishing upon the Coast of New England. That Canada and New England in
six Years last past, had shipped off 20,000 Beaver-Skins.

After some Time, a Number of People from New Plymouth, purchased of the
Indians, a Parcel of Land called Nosset near Cape-Cod, and gave it the Name of
Eastham; their Purchase upon this narrow Promontory reached about 30 Miles from
North to South. The first two Years, they lived without any Supply from
England, cleared and planted 60 Acres with Indian Corn. At first they seemed to
have a Sort of Lex Agraria for each Mess or Menage; or rather their Possessions
seem to have been in common.

Mr. Winslow died in Cromwell's Hispaniola Expedition 1655, Aet. 61.
Mr. Edward Winslow their Agent, Anno 1624, imported the first Cattle, being a
Bull and 3 Heifers; about this Time Plymouth Settlement consisted only of 180
Persons; the Adventurers, as it is said, had expended 7000 L. St. being
entirely carried on by Adventures, but being discouraged, they sold their
Interest to the Settlers for a Trifle; the Grant at first was sole to Mr.
Bradford, his Heirs, Associates and Assigns; but at the Request of the General
Assembly, he assigned his Right to the Freemen: Upon Governor Carver's Death,
April 1621, he was annually chosen Governor while he lived (excepting one Year
Mr. Winslow, and two Years Mr. Prince) he died May 9. 1657. Aet. 69.

GOVERNORS.
Mr. Carver from Nov. 1620 to April 1621.

Mr. Bradford the Grantee succeeded, and annually chosen Governor until his
Death May 1657, excepting for three Years; he was a Man of no Family and of no
Learning.

Mr. Prince, who had twice been chosen Governor in Mr. Bradford's Lifetime,
succeeded, and was annually chosen Governor till Death, Aug. 29. 1673, Aet. 71.
He was a Man of good natural Parts, but of no Learning.

Mr. Prince was succeeded in annual Elections by Josiah Winslow, who died Dec.
18. 1680.

Next Richard Trent was unanimously elected, until their Charter was dropped or
superseded.

I find that upon the Revolution, the Commander in chief of Plymouth Colony is
called President, not Governor: Thus Major Church's Commission from Plymouth to
go against the Eastern Indians is signed Sept. 6. 1689, Thomas Hinkley,
President.

N. B. At first this Colony was only a voluntary Association; in the Beginning
the Governor had only one Assistant, afterward three, and sometime after five,
at length Anno 1637 they chose 7 Assistants.

As the Boundaries by their Grant were ill determined, there were continual
Disputes between this Colony and that of Rhode Island. By a Commission from
Charles II. 1664 to Col. Richard Nichols, Sir Robert Carr, George Cartwright,
and Samuel Maverick; to determine Controversies, concerning several Boundaries
in the Continent of North America; they passed Judgment concerning the
Boundaries between Rhode Island and Plymouth Colony; as it was only by Way of
Amusement to quiet the Mind^ of the People in these Colonies, and never
confirmed by the King in Council; it had no Effect.

Ever since the Colony of Plymouth has been annexed to the Province of
Massachusetts Bay, those Disputes have continued or been revived from Time to
Time; the chief Dispute was concerning Attleborough Gore, which if
Massachusetts Bay had quitclaim'd to them, Rhode Island would have given a
general Quit-Claim in all other Concerns; and prevented the Loss of Bristol,
and some Part of Barrington, Swanzey, Tiverton, and Little Compton; but the
Influence of a few ill-natured, obstinate, inconsiderateMen, Here we may
observe the pernicious Consequence of blindly following the Dictates of
inconsiderate, imprudent, clamorous or violent leading Men.
prevailed in the Legislature to the Damage of the Province of
Massachusetts Bay.

Rhode Island by Memorials sent Home, the Agents of Massachusetts Bay giving
Consent, obtained a Commission for the eldest Counselors of the neighboring
Governments to meet and adjust their Boundaries, accordingly they meet at
Providence in Summer 1741, and found that the last determined Grant for
Plymouth Colony 1629, specifies it in this Manner, viz. between Conohasset Now
called Bound Brook.
Rivulet toward the North, and The Mouth of Tau^ton Gut or River, or Seaconnet
Point.
Naraganset River, toward the South; and between the Or Bay of Massachusetts.
Ocean toward the East, and a strait Line extending directly into the main
Land from the Mouth of said Naraganset River, to the utmost Bounds of the
Packanoket Country alias Sawamset Country, the famous King Philip of Mount-Hope
his Country, to the Plymouth Grant was up Blackstone, Patucket or Nipmug River
to the Nipmug Country; this Nipmug Country, could not be ascertained by the
late Commissioners for settling the Line with Rhode Island.
Nipmug Country which Determination is now forgot, and from Cohasset back into
the main Land Westward to the utmost Bounds of the Packanoket Country.

The better to understand the Boundaries of the late Colony of New Plymouth
(now annexed to the Province of Massachusetts Bay) with the Colony of
Rhode Island; I must in Anticipation, give the Boundaries of In Matters not as
yet upon Record in public Histories, it is proper to be particular.
Rhode Island Colony as delineated in their Charter, viz. bounded Westerly by
the middle Channel of Pakatuk River, and up said River Northerly to the Head
thereof, and thence in a strait Line due North to Massachusetts South Bounds;
extending Easterly three English Miles to the E. N. E. of the most Eastern and
Northern Parts of Naraganset-Bay as it lies or extends itself from the
Ocean; bounded Southerly on the Ocean, unto the Mouth of the River which comes
from Providence; and from the Town of Providence, along the Easterly Bank of
said River called Seaconck River up to Patucket Falls; and thence due N. to
Massachusetts South Line, where is the most Westerly Line of Plymouth Colony.
-- The Rhode Island Claim was 3 Miles E. N. E. of Assonet Creek of Taunton
River, and thence due S. to the Ocean East of Seaconnet Point; and from the
said E. N. E. Point, a Westerly Course to Fox Point, being the Mouth of the
River that comes from Providence Town, thence along the East Side of Seaconck
River to Patucket Falls; and thence due North to to Massachusetts South Line.

Upon a hea^ing at Providence in Summer 1741 of the Committees or Agents of
both Colonies before the Commissioners appointed by royal Patent to settle this
Line or Boundary; the Council of Plymouth Patent, nor any Copy of it was
produced; therefore the Recital of said Letters patent, in their Deed to
Bradford and Associates, was not sufficient Evidence against the King's Charter
to Rhode Island; this Commission was not to meddle with Property, but only with
Jurisdiction, which is ascertained to Rhode Island by Royal Charter,
notwithstanding of their Charter being posterior to the New Plymouth Colony
Grant; because the Council of Plymouth could only delegate Property, but not
Jurisdiction. By no Evidence it was made appear that the Water (a salt Water
Sinus, commonly called a Continuation of Taunton River, it is called Taunton
great River in their private Deeds) between the main Land on the East, and the
Island of Rhode Island on the West, was ever at any Time called Naraganset
River.

The Determination of the Commissioners Anno 1741 was by the King in Council
1746 confirmed as final. And is to this Effect, viz. From the Province of
Massachusetts Bay South Line, a Meridian Line (allowing S. 7 d. W. Variation)
to Patucket Falls; and thence down the Easterly Side of Seaconck River, to the
S. W. Corner of Bullocks Neck; and thence N. E. 3 Miles (supposing a N. E. Line
of 3 Miles from the North-Eastermost Parts of the Bay on the W. Side of
Romstick Neck) in a strait Line, until it meets with the Termination of this
imaginary Line; and from this to the Bay near Towasset Neck, so that this Line
touch the N. E. Extremity of an imaginary Line running N. E. from the N. E.
Corner of Bristol Cove or Harbor. On the East Side of Naraganset Bay, it
begins at a Point 440 Rod Southward of the Mouth of Fall River in Tiverton;
thence runs East 3 Miles; and from thence runs Southerly parallel with the
Easternmost Parts of Naraganset Bay or Taunton great River to the Sea.

By this Determination the late Colony of Plymouth, or rather the present
Province of Massachusetts Bay, lost, in Favor of Rhode Island, a triangular
Piece of Land commonly called, the Attleborough Gore This Gore has been for
many Years in Dispute between Massachusetts Bay and Rhode Island, and if some
of our Managers hotheaded obstinate Men had conceded it to Rhode Island, it
being plainly their Due; they would have given to Massachus^tts-Bay a general
Quitclaim, and their other Claims would not have been revived. Something of the
same Nature shall i^ Course be taken Notice of, with Regard to N^^-H^mps^ire.
; bounded S. 7 d. W. from an Intersection with Massachusetts S. Line, to
Pautuket Falls 9 and half Miles; from Pautuket Falls up Patuket or Blackstone
River, to the Intersection of this River with Massachusetts South Line, in a
direct or strait Course 12 Miles, W. 55 d. N; from this Intersection E. 7 d. S.
about 10 Miles; this Gore is constituted a Township of Rhode Island, by the
Name of Cumberland, so called from Prince William Duke of Cumberland. Bristol
is entirely adjudged to Rhode Island Colony Jurisdiction, and retains its
former Name. Part of Swanzey being forty seven Families, and a great Part of
Barrington are constituted a Township, by the Name of Warren, in Honor of Sir
Peter Warren, Knight of the Bath, and an Admiral in the Navy, an honest
benevolent Gentleman always propitious to Trade. The three Mile Strips of
Tiverton and Little-Compton, on the East Side of the Bay or Taunton great
River, continue by the Name of Districts of Rhode Island.

The Line between Old Massachusetts and Plymouth, is no more as a Colony Line;
but continues to divide the County of Suffolk in the Massachusetts, from
Plymouth and Bristol Counties of the late Plymouth Colony; this former dividing
Line of the two Colonies, begins at the Intersection of Attleborough Gore and
runs 3 and half Miles E. 7 d. S. to the Station-Tree of This Station Tree is
120 Rod distant from the Angle where the several Colony Lines were set off; it
is called Wood^ard and Saffries Station, from the Names of two obscure Sailors,
who were assisting in the Survey.
Woodward and Saffries, from this Station to a Notch in Bridgwater E. 18 d. N.
are 23 Miles; thence 1 Mile and qua^ter North on Bridgwater; thence E. 9 Miles
to Accord Pond; thence still East to Conobasset at the Mouth of Bound Brook on
the Bay of Massachusetts, six Miles; in all about 41 Miles.

From Conobasset in Massachusetts Bay, to the race Point of Cape-Cod, is to
this late Colony of Plymouth, an East South and West Boundary; by the Flexure
or Hook of the Cape; the Back (as it is called) of Cape-Cod to Cape Malabar or
Sandy-Point is an East Boundary, from Sandy-Point, further along the Back of
the Cape to Elizabeth Islands, and thence along Buzard's Bay, to the Boundary
Line near Seaconnet Point is a South Boundary; Westerly it is bounded by the
Line settled by Commissioners Anno 1741, as before delineated; Northerly it is
bounded by the Line dividing the old Colonies of Massachusetts Bay and Plymouth
already described.

In this Colony are no remarkable Mountains or great Hills.

The considerable Harbors are, 1. Plymouth Bay, Water shallow, a considerable
Trade to West India Islands for Sugar, Rum, Molasses, and Cotton; it is a
Branch of Boston Custom-House or Collection, Distance 40 Miles; three small
Rivulets, called Jones, Herring^, and Eel Rivers, fall into this Bay. 2. Cape
Cod Harbor, safe, and deep Water; but from the Hook or Flexure, and
consequently different Courses, Vessels with Difficulty get out to Sea; it is
no Seaport or Place of Trade. This Cape by its particular Capt. Sout^^ck in a
most false, therefore pernicious Sea-Chart of the Coa^^ of (...) and N^w
England, delineates a Thorough-Fare from the great Bay of Massachusetts to the
Ocean in Eastham, near Sandy (...) ^o Person, himself excepted, ever imagined
or ^^eamt of this Thorou^h-Fare, his Dream or Words are "the Place where I came
(...) with a Whale Boat Ap^il 26. 1717, to look after (...) the (...)."
Form and by stretching into the Sea becomes a S^are for itinerant or passenger
Fish, viz. Whales, Herrings, Mackarel, etc; but the Whales by Expe^^ence have
^^arnt to keep further to Sea in traveling; the other Fisheries are neglected,
from the Fishermen, w^o were generally Indians, being carried away upon
^omantickExpeditio^s: The Tide flows within the Cape about 20 Feet, upon the
back of the Cape it ^lows only 5 or 6 Feet; Billingsgate, a Precinct of
Eastham, is noted for Oysters.

The smaller Inlets or Harbors from the Discharge of Rivule^s are as follows,
1. Upon the Inside of the great Bay of Massachusetts (that Part of it is called
Barnstable Bay) Situate, a bad Harbor, no considerable Run of Water. All the
Harbors in Barnstable Bay to Cape-Cod are shallow, because of a sandy slow
Slope of the Shore, and the inland Runs are short and small, not capable of
making Channels. In Sandwich is Mill River. In Barnstable is a small Inlet. In
Yarmouth a small Inlet. In Harwich a Harbor called Point of Rocks, not safe.
In Eastham is Stage-Harbour, and Billingsgate, the best of t^^se small
Harbors. 2. Upon the outside or Ocean Side of Cape Cod Promontory; Head of
Pamet, no proper Harbor, it is in Truro, and high Tides, as Anno 1723, pass
over the Meadows from Sea to Sea. Sandy-Point or Monymoy in Chatham, is a good
Harbor for small Vessels, but the Bar shifts. Bass River in Yarmouth. Hyanaes,
the best of th^se Harbors, in Barnstable, is much used. Osler Bay in
Barnstable. Falmouth Bay. Woods Hole or Cove, called Soconosset; here is a
Ferry of about one Mile to Elizabeth great Island; and of about 3 Leagues to
Marthas Vineyard. We may observe, that along this Shore is a Bar at about half
a Mile's Distance, with small Inlets, within the Bar is Water of some Fathoms.
3. In Buzard's Bay are many good Creeks, salt Water Rivers, or Harbors;
excepting in Rochester, the Runs of Water that fall into these Creeks are of
short Course: Agawam, Wagwagantit or Mill River, Sipacan Harbor, Matapoisset,
Accushnot, Polyganset, and Coaxit. The Sea Line of the late Colony of Plym^uth
is abo^t 220 Miles. but have only one Seaport for foreign Trade, viz.
Plymouth; the other Harbors are very small, and used only by Fishermen and
Coasters: The other New England Territories, do much exceed it in Trade,
although their Sea Lines are much smaller; the Sea-Line of the Province of Main
does not exceed 80 Miles, of N^w-Hampshire 20 Miles, of Old Massachusetts 80
Miles, of Rh^de-I^l^nd 60 Miles, of Connecticut 1^^ Miles.


The considerable Rivers in Old Plymouth Colony, are 1. North River, divides
Situate from Marshfield; deep Water, but Vessels in a Storm cannot put in
there, the Entrance being rocky. The Tide flows 9 or 10 Miles up this River;
here Ships and other Vessels are built to Advantage, Timber being plenty; from
this River, Boston has a considerable Supply of Firewood. 2. Taunton River;
from about 17 Miles up Taunton great River on the East Side of Naraganset Bay,
according to the late royal Determination of Boundaries with Rhode Island,
begins Plymouth Colony upon Taunton River; the Tide flows up this River from
440 Rod below Falls River, the Boundary between Free^own and Tiverton about 25
Miles, to near the Mouth of Sawamset or Midleborough River, which comes from
Asawampsit Pond in the South Parts of Midleborough, and falls into Titiquit or
Taunton River: In this River and the adjacent Townships of Dighton and Swanzey
are built good Ships and other Vessels. 3. P^tuket or Blackstone, formerly
Nipmug River, navigable from Rhode Island Boundary at Bullock's Neck, 10 Miles
to Patucket Falls; in Rehoboth or Seaconick are built some good Vessels.

The Capes, Head-Lands, or Promontories are, 1. The Gurnet Head, being the
North Point of Plymouth Bay* it lies West Southerly from Cape-Cod 7 Leagues,
and that Part of Massachusetts Bay within this Line or Course is called
Barnstable Bay. 2. Cape-Cod, a noted Promontory on the West Side of the
Atlantic Ocean, in N. Lat. 42 d. 10 m, lies from Boston E. b. S. Southerly,
about 18 Leagues: This is a narrow long Promontory stretching into the Ocean,
and from the Pitch of the Cape to Buzard's Bay may extend upwards of 60 Miles,
which with a Medium Breadth of 6 Miles, makes about 230,000 Acres; consists of
the Townships of Falmouth, Sandwich, Barnstable, Yarmouth, Harwich, Chatham,
Eastham, Truro, and Province Town; these make the County of Barnstable. 3.
Sandy-Point, in the Charter it is called Cape M^labar, about 10 Leagues North
from the Island of Nantucket.

I am afraid, that by being so particular in the Description of our Territories
or Colonies, I may be found guilty of an Impropriety, in giving the Geography
instead of the History; but we must consider, that these Countries, young and
dependent, cannot afford many State Revo^u ^ons, therefore our History must
chief^y consist of Delineations, and of some Accounts of their various Produce
and Commerce.

I shall not be very minute in the Inland Geography: In my Amusement Hours, I
have composed the actual Surveys (as upon Record) of each Township and District
in the four Colonies of N^w-England, into a Plan of about 3 and half Feet
square, by a Scale of 5 Miles to one Inch. This Plan of many Years collecting,
and perfected at a considerable Charge, is a free Gift, for a public Benefit
to the Provinces of New England, ea^h Township or District is to have a Copy
gratis, to be lodged in the Town Clerk's Office.


Besides* the Promontory of Cape Cod, the late Plymouth Colony may be in Value
of 40 Miles square, is 1600 square Miles, or 1,024,000 Acres; is in the whole
bout 1,254,000 Acres. In this old Colony, there are no vacant or Colony Lands;
all the Lands are the Property of Townships or private Persons, as granted by
the General Assembly from Time to Time.

Plymouth was called one of the associated Colonies of New England before the
stricter Consociation (the 12th Day of the third Month 1643) of the four
Colonies o^ New England, it was an Alliance like that of the Swiss Cantons.
This Colony assisted in the Pequod Indian War 1637; this War was only of a few
Months Continuance, and ended with the entire Reduction or Extinction of that
Tribe; see P. 193.

Concerning the Islands near Cape-Cod.
The noted Islands are Nantucket, Capawock or Marthas Vineyard, and the
Elizabeth Islands.

The North Side of Nantucket or the Town of Sherburn lies in N. Lat. 41 d. 10
m. about 10 Leagues from the main Land; contains about 23,000 Acres, the Value
of six Miles square, Beach included; it is in twenty-seven Proprietorships, but
all in common, excepting 40 Acres home Lots to each Proprietorship; each
Proprietorship may keep 560 Sheep. It is a County of it self, a very
industrious People; they make some dry Cod-Fish, their principal Business is
Whaling, Anno 1744 in the Beginning of the French War, they had about 40 Sloops
and Schooners in the Whale Fishery, 13 Men to a Vessel, do make from 7000 to
10,000 Barrels of Whale Oil, per Annum; their Bone seldom exceed seven Feet. A
Whale of 100 Barrels yields a 1000 with. of Bone. In this Island are about 900
Indian Souls, of great Use in their Fishery.

Marthas Vineyard about 8 Leagues West from Nantucket, and 3 Leagues South from
Woods Hole in Falmouth upon the Main, is about 20 Miles in Length; the East End
is about 8 Miles wide, and tapers away to GuyHead, at the W. End 3 Miles wide;
much of the Island is very barren, being Heaths and Pine Land; 3 poor
Townships, Edgar-Town, Tisbury, and Chilmark; about 200 fencible white Men,
about 450 Indian Souls. With the Elizabeth Islands it makes Before the
Massachusetts Bay new Charter, all these Islands belonged to the Government of
New York; and the Receiver of the Quit-Rents of New York does make Demands of
the old Arrears of their Quit-Rents.
Dukes County.

Elizabeth Islands lie in a Range, S. W, half Way between Marthas Vineyard, and
the Shore of Buzard Bay; they make Buzards Bay; the largest Island one Mile
from Woods Hole or the Main is about 8 Miles long, but very narrow, belongs to
Thomas Lechmere, Esquire and Mr. Bowdoin's Estate, it is called Nashawn Island,
here is a good Harbor Tarpaulings Cove, on Marthas Vineyard is another good
Harbor Holms's Hole, of good Use to Vessels that navigate this Channel; next
is Tinker's Island, Slocum's Island, and Cattehunk Islands, these belong to
Slocum, Ward, and Sanford's Heirs.

Slocums Island lies one League South Westerly from the West End of Marthas
Vineyard, is in Value one Mile square, it belongs to Mr. Norton.

ARTICLE 5. Concerning the Old Colony of Massachusetts Bay.
THE old Writers of the History of New England are so trifling and erroneous,
that the late At present I shall only instance, Salmon's Modern History, and
the Atlas M^ritimus and Comm^rcialis.

Salmon seems to be a Tory, or rather a Iacobite, he vindicates the Treaty of
Utrecht, and discov^rs a very silly Prejudice against New-Engl^^d* first
Settlers, viz. That they came over to secure a Retreat for their Brethren, in
Case they did miscarry in subverting Church and State at Home* this is a very
idle Surmise, because the first Set of Emig^ant did not exceed 100 Persons,
and of these not above 60 survive^ the first Winter.

From (...) I shall only g^ve ^ few Instance^, which at first Sight are very
ridiculous, without any Comment -- "In Virginia Abundance of Cod-Fish --
Virginia is separated from Florida by the Ap^lachian Mountains -- In the Fort
near Newport are 300 Cannon -- North Carolina is a well peopled flourishing
Colony." N. B. It is the Sink or nauseous Drain of all our Colonies, in all the
Colony only two or three Gospel Ministers, very sickly, and very bad
Navigation. -- "In New England both Men and Women are put to Death for Adultery
-- Cambridge University consists of three Colleges;" N. B. They are only three
Buildings (the Scholars are all of one College) making three Sides of a
designed Quadrangle. -- "The New York Forces against Monreal were to go by the
Lake Ontario." N. B. It was by Lake Champlain. -- "Our Indians go naked in
Summer, and wear Deer-Skins in Winter;" N. B. They wear Blankets Summer and
Winter. -- " Penobscot River divides New England from Nova Scotia." N. B. The
River of St. Croix, more Eastward, is the Boundary -- " Hudson's River divides
the Southern Parts of New England from New York." N. B. The dividing Line is 20
Miles East of Hudson's River." -- His enlarging much upon trifling and fabulous
Things, to multiply Sheets, and hi^ many obvious Inconsistencies, show him to
be a Scribbler, and no accurate Historian -- His Abstract of the Laws of
New England, are from an obsolete old Charter Law-Book.

A few Instances of Absurdities from the Atlas Maritimus et Commercialis,
printed London 1728, sold to Subscribers at 3 L. 15 s. St. -- " New England is
four Governments in one Charter -- New London Colony -- Connecticut and
New Haven Colonies, have Rhode Island and Providence under the same
Jurisdiction -- Turmerick from New England -- Most of the Towns in
New Hampshire are fortified. -- New York apply chiefly to Whale-fishing, and
whale the most." N. B. They do not whale in any Respect. -- " Merimack River
rises in Nova Scotia. -- In the two Colleges of Cambridge about 400 Students."
N. B. They exceed 100 Scholars. -- "In New England 62 Market Town^, and 27
fortified Places. -- I^rsies has two Sea-Po^ts Pe^th and Amboy."

Iosselin, Hubbard, and Math^^'s Magnalia, we shall for the present defer.


Scriblers and Hackney Writers who copy the Affairs of New England from them,
appear, by their obsolete and erroneous Account of Affairs, in a very
ridiculous Light, and do afford me no Assistance.

Anno 1625 Mr. Conant and Company in Trade, made some Settlement at Cape Anne,
the North Easterly Promontory of Massachusetts Bay; they were mostly from
Dorchester, and the West of England: This gave Rise to a Project, first
concerted in Lincolnshire, of procuring from the Council of Plymouth, a Grant
for settling a Colony in Massachusetts Bay, with a Resolution that the
principal Town thereof be called BOSTON, from a Seaport and Parliament Town of
that Name in Lincolnshire; being joined by some Adventurers of London and
Dorsetshire, they obtained from the Council of Plymouth Mar. 19, 1627, 8, a
Grant in the Name of six Associates and their Assigns, of all the Lands in
New England from three Miles South of Charles River, to three Miles North of
Merimack River, East and West from Sea to Sea: These six did associate Twenty
more Persons, and March 4. 1628, 9 obtained a Royal Grant with a Charter
countersigned Woolsely; it is commonly called the old Charter, whereof an
Abstract is as follows,

King James I. Anno Regni 18, Nov. 3, granted by Patent to a Council at
Plymouth in Devon, and their Associates and ^ssigns for ever, the Property and
Jurisdiction of the Lands in America ( called New England) from 40 d. N. Lat,
to 48 d. N. Lat. and East and West from Sea to Sea; if not possessed by any
Christian State, nor within the Limits of a Southern Colony lately granted; the
Quit-Rent to be the fifth Part of all their Gold and Silver Ore. This Company
by Deed granted and sold 19 March, 3 Regni Charles I. a Part of their Patent
Lands to six Gentlemen, Sir Henry Roswell, etc. their Heirs, Assigns, and
Associates for ever, viz. All Lands from three Miles Northward of any and every
Part of Merimack River, to three Miles Southward of any and every Part of
Charles River, and of Massachusetts Bay, E. and W. from Sea to Sea, with all
Islands on the Eastern or Western Coasts. This Grant was confirmed to those six
Gentlemen and their 20 Associates by Royal Charter March 4. 1628, 9. The said
26 Grantees with all such others as shall hereafter be admitted and made free
of the Company, shall for ever be one Body corporate and politic, by the Name
of the GOVERNOR AND COMPANY OF THE MASSACHUSETTS BAY IN NEW ENGLAND. The
Corporation to consist of one Governor, one Deputy Governor, and eighteen
Assistants, to be annually elected out of the Freemen of the Company; The King
did nominate for the first Year, Matthew Craddock Governor, Thomas Goff
Lieutenant Governor, with 18 Assistants. The Governor may call an Assembly at
Pleasure, the Governor and Assistants not under seven may once ^ Month meet to
do Business. Four great and General Courts or Assemblies of the Freemen
a^nually, on the last Wednesdays of Hillery, Easter, Trinity, and Michaelmas
Terms, whereof the Governor and six of the Assistants, at least to be seven,
This seems to imply, that they were to meet and vote together.
with the Represent^tives of the Townships, to admit Freemen, constitute
Officers, make Laws, but not repugnant to the Statutes of England: Annually
upon the last Wednesday in Easter-Term shall be an Election of General Assembly
then convened, of a Governor, Deputy Governor, 18 Assistants, and all other
Officers. Liberty to transport from England any People, Effects, and
Merchandise free of Customs both outward and inward, for the first seven Years,
and quit from all Taxes and Customs in New England; also for the first seven
Years, and for 14 Years more, excepting the 5 pr Ct. Duty in England, upon all
Merchandise imported. All born in this Country, or in Passages to and from the
Colony, be deemed natural-born Subjects of England; the General Court may make
Orders and Laws, constitute Officers; may impose Fines, Imprisonment or other
lawful Correction, according to the Course of other Corporations in England,
Here Capital Crimes seem not to be included.
establishing of the Christian Faith amongst the Natives is in this Charter
declared to be the principal End thereof; may encounter and resist by Force of
Arms by Sea or Land, any who shall in a hostile Manner invade said Plantation;
if any of said Colony shall injure any Subject of Princes in A^ity with us,
they shall, Proclamation made in England, be required to give Satisfaction, and
make Restitution; which if not complied with, said Persons shall be put out of
our Allegiance and Protection, and said Princes shall be allowed to prosecute
said Offenders with Hostility -- None of our Subjects to be debarred fishing
upon the Coast of New England, nor from setting up Stages and Workhouses on
Shore, and cutting requisite Timber and Wood.

The Colony Seal was an Indian erect, naked, an Arro^ in his right Hand, and a
Bow in his left Hand; these Words in a Scrowl from his Mouth, Come ^ver and
help us; and in a Round, Sigillum Gub. et Societatis de Mass^chusetts-Bay in
Nova Anglia.

To render this History clear and distinct, we shall here continue the Accounts
of the Incidents which happened, relating to this Charter, down to its being
vacated in Chancery 1684.

Anno 1635 several Complaints against the Colony of Massachusetts Bay being
lodged in the Court of King's Bench; a Quo Warrant^ was issued against the
Governor and Company of Massachusetts Bay; some of the Company appeared and
disclaimed their Charter, others did ^ot appear, and were outlawed.

In this Controversy with Mr. Mason, Anno 1637 in Trinity Term was obtained a
Judgment from the King'^ B^nch, against the Colony of Massachusetts Bay in
Favor of the King, viz That the King should seize said Province, and take
t^eir Governor Cradock's Body into Custody; but by Reason of the ensuing civil
War Confusions, the Charter was never taken up, and from that Time to the
Restoration, New England enjoyed a desirable Tranquillity; and at the Desire of
their impotent Neighbors, the Eastern Settlers were taken into their
Protection and Jurisdiction.

Upon the Restoration 1661 Gorge and Mason's Representatives, renewed their
Complaints against Massachusetts Bay Colony, upon Account of Encroachments; it
was chiefly in Compassion that these Eastern People were (as abandoned) taken
under their Protection and Jurisdiction, but moreover, Massachusetts Bay Colony
conceived, that it might keep up their Claim, to the most Northerly Part of
Merimack River with three Miles Advantage, and E. and W. from Sea to Sea,
including all the settled Part of Mason's Grant or New Hampshire, and of the
Province of Main to Black Point.

Anno 1675, 6 March 10, ordered by the King in Council, that Massachusetts Bay
Government, should answer the Complaints of Mason's and Gorge's Heirs,
concerning their being by said Government, unjustly kept out of their Right.

William Stoughton and Peter Bulkley, were sent over (...) Agents; they
disclaimed any Title to those Lands in the Petition.

The Lords of the Committee for Trade and Plantations, with the Lords chief
Justices Rainsford and North, reported to the King in Council, that the
Massachusetts Bay Colony by their Representatives disclaimed any Title to said
Lands in Controversy; this Report was confirmed by the King in Council.

After the Order of the King in Council July 20. 1677, the Assembly of
Massachusetts Bay passed an Act 1679* vacating all such Grants as they had
made, of Lands beyond the three Miles North of Merimack River. We must observe,
that about this Time, some of the Mass^chusetts People, upon Account of the
Indian Trade and Fishery, removed to New Hampshire and Province of Main, and
lived for some Time in a separate State; but from Divisions amongst themselves,
and from Fear of being insulted by the Indians, they put themselves under the
Protection and Jurisdiction of the Government of Massachusetts Bay. 1652 The
Inhabitants of New Hampshire, or Piscataqua, or Mason's Grant, put themselves
under the Protection and Government of Massachusetts Bay, until the Time of
Cranfield's being appointed Governor of New Hampshire. President Cutts ^^d
Council, Sept. 18. 1680 were commissioned by the King; before this, there had
been no Power of Government granted for that Territory of New Hampshire. We may
observe, that the old Townships of Portsmouth, Hampton and Dover, were Grants
of the Massachusetts Bay Assembly: Col. Waldron Representative for Dover, was
Speaker of Massachusetts House of Representatives.

Anno 1682 May 9. The King in Council further inhibits the Massachusetts Bay
Government, from any Jurisdiction in Mason's Property.

The further Account of the Disputes between the Corporation of
Massachusetts Bay, and the Heirs of Mr. Mason Proprietors of New Hampshire, we
refer to the Section of New Hampshire.

Anno 1682 when a despotick Monarchy was hatching, several Towns in England,
began to surrender their Charters, by the Persuasion of Lord chief Justice
Ieffries, a Person capable of any Wickedness to gratify the Court; particularly
in Cornwall, where are many poor Boroughs, for small Considerations always at
the Devotion of the Court; 25 Boroughs brought in their Charters.

Anno 1683 K. Charles II, by a Message to the General Assembly of
Massachusetts Bay, desired, that in Consideration of several A Disregard to the
Act^ of Trade, Persecution of their Fellow Christians, etc.
Complaints entered against them, they would surrender their Charter to the
King'sPleasure, which by a Vote of General Assembly was refused. Thereupon in
Consequence of a Quo Warranto, and scire facias 1684, in Chancery, in Trinity
Term, Judgment was entered against their Charter, and it was vacated, the
Colonies Agents or Attorneys not appearing.

Robert Humphrey, Esquire Agent for Massachusetts Bay Colony, in his Letter to the
Governor and Council, dated Inner Temple, May 2. 1685, and read in the General
Assembly July 8. following; Mr. Humphrey at that Time seems not to have been a
real Friend to New England.
writes, "The Breaches assigned against you, are as obvious as unanswerable, so
that all the Service your Council and Friends could have done you here, would
have only served to deplore not prevent that inevitable Loss; I sent you the
Lord Keeper's Order of June 15. 1684, requiring your appearing first Day of
Michaelmas Term, else Judgment entered against your Charter was to stand. When
this first Day came, your Letters of Attorney neither were, nor indeed could be
returned: Accordingly, I applied to the Chancery for further Time; where
Judgment passes by Default, there may be a Rehearing. Instead of sending
Letters of Attorney, the Colony sent only an Address to the King, without
Colony Seal, or any Subscription per Order; therefore it was not presented; I
herewith send you a Copy of the Judgment against your Charter. Col. Kirk was
fixed upon by Charles II. to be your Governor, and James II. is said to have
renewed his Patent for your Government."

Henry Cranfield Governor of the adjoining Province of New Hampshire is said to
have been appointed by Charles II, Governor of New England; it is certain his
Commission was never published, if there was any such Patent, it dropped by the
Death of Charles II; by Charles II's sudden Death, whether natural, or wickedly
procured we shall not determine; this Affair was neglected, and the New England
Colonies continued for about two Years more, in the Enjoyment of their Charter
Privileges. Plymouth Colony had the same Fate with Massachusetts Bay Colony in
the Affair of Charters; Connecticut and Rhode Island Colonies submitted by
Resolve of their Assemblies to the King's Pleasure, and for two Years and a
half were under the Government of Sir Edmund Andross, without being required to
surrender their Charter; upon the Revolution, as their Charter had never been
vacated by Law, nor surrendered, they were allowed by the Court of England, to
reassume their (...), and continue in the full Enjoyment thereof to this Day.


Joseph Dudley, Esquire was sent over to the Court of England as their Agent in the
Charter Affairs; but as being a Native of New England, and a cunning Man, it
was thought by the Court that he was the proper Person to ^acilitate and to
introduce a new Administration, or Form of Government; accordingly in April
1686 he was appointed President with a Council to govern New England; he
arrived at Boston in June following; there were no considerable Acts of
Government in his Time: In December of the same Year, arrives Sir Edmund Andros
Governor of New England, with Nicholson Lieut.-Governor, and two independent
Companies of Soldiers, and President Dudley was appointed chief Justice.

The New England Charters being laid aside; the Governor and Council (6 or 7
Persons, generally Strangers) had the legislative and executive Power of
Government: they acted many unjust and oppressive Things; for Instance, in
Property, they alleged, that the People's Conveyances were not according to
the Laws of England, and that upon their Charter ceasing, their former Titles
ceased; and obliged them to take out new Grants or Titles at high Rates and
extravagant Fees; particularly the King assumed the absolute Government, and
the Property of the unappropriated Lands, the granting of Lands, raising of
Taxes, making of Laws, with the executive Part likewise.

Upon the Arrival in April 1689 in Boston, of the News of a thorough Revolution
in England, there was a Kind of popular Insurrection in Boston against the
Governor Sir Edmund Andros and his Officers, who surrendered and were sent Home;
a Convention of the principal Gentlemen of the Colony was held in Boston, who
appointed a Council, Simon Bradstreet President, or Committee for the Safety of
the People, and Conservation of the Peace; and summoned a Convention of the
Representatives of the People; accordingly at first Meeting 66 Representatives
of 44 Towns and Districts were present, and May 24, there were Representatives
from 54 Places, they resolved that the Governor, Deputy Governor, Assistants,
and other Officers, as chosen May 12, 1686 should act in their respective
Stations, viz. Simon Bradstreet Governor, Thomas Sergeant Major General, Isaac
Adington Secretary, John Philips Treasurer, Thomas Danforth President of the
Province of Main, etc. Thomas Oaks was Speaker of the House of
Representatives; they resolved upon six Rates of Taxes, whereof one Rate was to
be in Provisions; all this was transacted with Submission to the King and
Queen's Pleas^^e when notified.

It was proposed by a Writ of Error to have a Rehearing concerning the
New England Charters, in Westminster Hall; but this was dropped. There was a Bill
brought into the Convention Parliament, for restoring the New England Charters;
it passed the lower House, but the Convention being dissolved soon after, it
dropped. Upon granting the new Charter, the King allowed the Agents for
Massachusetts Bay to nominate their first Governor; they nominated Sir William
Phipps.

The further provincial Proceedings we defer to the next Article.

The Boundary Lines of Old Massachusetts Bay Colony.
The Southern Line is, 1. With the late Plymouth Colony 41 Miles; being 15
Miles due W; 23 Miles W. 18 d. S, see P. 401, and W. 7 d. N. 3 Miles and half;
upon this Line lie the Townships of Hingham, Weymouth, Braintree, and
Stoughton. 2. Massachusetts South Line was set off according to the Letter of
the Charter, from 3 Miles South of the Head of Stop River in Wren^ham, being
the most Southerly Branch of Charles River; it falls into the main Body of
Charles River at M^dfield.
The Line with Rhode Island Colony, from the Intersection of the North and
South Line from Patuket Falls to Massachusetts Bay South Line, as settled by
Agreement of the two Colonies May 14. 1719, and afterward confirmed by the
King in Council, is W. 7 d. N. about 20 Miles to the N. W. Corner of
Rhode Island, being a Production of Connecticut and Rhode Island N. and S.
Line, as settled by Agreement of these two Colonies Anno 1738. N. B. Here the
Differences of Variation allowed per Agreement with Rhode Island of W. 7 d. N.
and with Connecticut of W. 9 d. N. occasions a Notch of 1 Mile and 40 Rod in
the Township of Douglass, from the Rhode Island N. W. Corner to the Connecticut
N. E. Corner; upon this Line lie the Townships of Wrentham, Bellingham,
Uxbridge, and Douglass. 3. The Line with In N. Lat. 42 d. 2 m. as observed by
the ingenious, learned and inquisitive Gentleman William Burnet, Esquire sometime
Governor of New York, and afterward Governor of the Province of
Massachusetts Bay; a worthy Son of the worthy pious and honest, though
political Bishop Bu^net.
Connecticut, run Anno 1713 from said N. E. Corner of Connecticut W. 9 d. N. to
the N. W. Corner of Connecticut 72 Miles; viz. From said N. E. Corner of
Connecticut to Connecticut River (90 Rod North of the N. E. Corner of Suffield)
38 Miles, and from thence to Connecticut N. W. Corner 34 Miles, in all 72 Miles
upon Connecticut; this Line was A late Petition to the General Court or General
Assembly for the indented Townships of Massachusetts Bay, to be s^t off to the
Jurisdiction of Connecticut is idle and vain, because the Jurisdiction has been
some Yea^ s^^c^ finally issu^d by the King in Council.
settled per Agreement, and afterward confirmed by the King in Council: Upon
this Line lie the Townships of Dudley; Woodstock indented, Sturbridge,
Brimfield, Summers and Enfield indented, Suffield indented, Westfield, Bedford,
Housatonicks No's 3 and 2, and Sheffield.

As an Equivalent, for some indented Lands properly belonging to the Colony of
Connecticut, but settled, and for some Time assumed under the Jurisdiction of
Massachusetts Bay; Anno 1713 the Province of Massachusetts Bay allowed the
Property, but not Jurisdiction of some of their vacant Province Lands,
containing 105,793 Acres in four separate Parcels; these equivalent Lands were
sold at public Vendue by the Colony of Connecticut April 25. 1716 for 683 L.
New England Currency in 16 Shares, viz. Gurdon Saltonstall Governor of
Connecticut, Mrs. Saltonstall, Paul Dudley, Addi^gton Davenport, Th^mas Fitch,
Anthony Stoddard, William Brattle Minister, Ebenezer Pemberton a Minister of
the Gospel, William and Joseph Dummer's each one half of a Share, Jonathan
Belcher, John White, William Clark near Boston common, John Wainwright, Henry
Newman and John Caswall, each one third of a Share, N^th. Gould, and Peter Burs
each one half of a Share, John Stoddard and Elisha Williams* each one half of
aShare, and to John Read oneShare: About 40,000 Acres of these Lands by the
late Settlement of a Line with New Hampshire fall into the Jurisdiction of
New Hampshire upon Connecticut River above Northfield.

The West Line of Massachusetts Bay hitherto is not settled; the People of
New York pretend that their East Line is Connecticut River Anno 1726 some of
the (...)-Bay People in settling Hous^tonick Tow^ships were (...) Count in an
A^^ion of Trespass against a ^ian^ to (...) from my Lo^^ (...) Governor of
N^w-Yo^k.
, because the Dutch Colony, their Predecessors extended their Pretensions so
far, and had a considerable Trade in Connecticut River: But we may observe,
that some Years since, Anno 1725 when New York and Connecticut settled their
Line, which was afterward confirmed by the King in Council; their fundamental
Agreement was, that this Boundary Line should be at 20 Miles East of Hudson's
River, and parallel with said River; therefore naturally this Line in the same
Circumstances must extend Northward, and bound Massachusetts Bay and
New Hampshire Provinces.

The It was designed to ref^r the ^i^t^ry of thi^ ^^ne to the Se^^ion ^f
N^w-Hamp^^ir^, but it seem^ (...) to f^ll in this Pla^e.
North and East Lines have been in continued Disputes in opposite Claims, of
Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire. Anno 1739 The King in Council, upon
Appeals from the Judgment of Commissioners (per Agreement of both Parties)
appointed under the Great Seal of Great Britain, finally determined the same.

As all disputable Claims are now extinguished, we may reckon them as obsolete;
but for the curious (Antiquaries perhaps may be an improper Term in a young
Colony) we shall give some succinct History of those Claims.

It is frequently very difficult, and almost impossible to reconcile the Letter
of the Boundaries of two old Grants; because generally more was granted, than
had been surveyed, or perhaps more than had been discovered; therefore the
Lines were ill expressed, in loose general Terms, and frequently interfering;
which cannot be adjusted but by amicable voluntary Conventions and Agreements
of the Parties concerned; to be explained and confirmed by the King in Council,
the original Granter.

Immediately upon the Royal Grant or Patent to the New England Company, called
the Council of Plymouth; that Council granted to Sir Ferdinando Gorge Governor
of the Fort of Plymouth, and sometime President of said Council, and to Mr.
Mason Merchant of London their Secretary, jointly; from Neumkeag or Salem River
to Q^enebec River along the Seashore, and sixty Miles inland: Soon after, they
had separate Grants of separate Parcels of Land; here, we are only to relate
the Disputes with Mr. Mason's Heirs and Assigns, and in the Section of
New Hampshire must be referred to.

Anno 1621 March 9. The Council of Plymouth granted to John Mason, Esquire of
London, their Secretary, his Heirs and Assigns, a Tract of Land from Neumkeag
to Merimack River. Anno 1629 they granted to Ditto a Tract Thi^ Patent is
posterior to that of Massachus^tts-Bay 1628, 9. and ^h^^efo^e vo^d* a^ to the
Lands between Neumkeag and Merimack River.
of Land, between Merimack River and Piscataqua River, 60 Miles up each River,
and these to be bounded by a Line across from River to River. Both these Grants
were joined in a new Grant 1635 April 22, from the Council of Plymouth to said
Mason, viz. 60 Miles up Neumkeag River, etc. and from the Entrance of Neumkeag
(a Creek between Salem and Beverley) round by the Seashore to the middle
Entrance of Piscataqua River, up Piscataqua River, and Newichawennock River to
the Head thereof, and thence North Westward till 60 Miles be accomplished; and
cross from the Termination of each of these 60 Miles; to be called New
Hampshire. Anno 1635 August 19 K. Charles by Patent confirms this Grant called
New Hampshire, with Power of Government and Jurisdiction (as in the Palatinate
or Bishopric of Durham) with Power of conferring Honors.

The Complaints from Time to Time of Mr. Mas^^'s Heirs to the King in Council,
and the Determinations thereupon, have been already related in p. 410; we shall
now mention some very large private Claims from Indian Grants, where both
Colonies of Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire were supposed to be concerned
in Property as well as in Jurisdiction.

Anno 1629 the Chiefs of the Indians of Merimack River sold to John Wheelwright
and others of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, all that Land beginning "at the End
of 20 Miles N. W. from Pantucket Falls, and thence running a N. E. Line to
intersect Merimack and Piscataqua Rivers, and these two Rivers to be the Bounds
of it, from that Line to the Sea." This, together with other Lands, included
all the late Province of New Hampshire; the Claim was revived by Mr. Cook, and
others about 30 Years since, when some Irish Presbyterians petitioned both
Assemblies of Massachusetts Bay and of New Hampshire, for a Settlement or
Township of Lands; these Emigrants are settled upon Part of those Lands by
Charter or Grant from the Governor and Council of New Hampshire; their Township
is called Londonderry (formerly Nutfield) and flourishes much; they are a noted
Pattern and Example of Industry and Frugality, particularly they excel in the
Fabric or Manufacture of Linen Cloth: May the other Townships of New England
copy from them! This Township lies a few Miles East of Pantuket Falls of
Merimack River.

Anno 1683, a large Tract of Land called the Million Purchase both Sides of
Merimack River above Souhage^ River, was granted by the Sachems of the Weymaset
or Lower River Indians, and the Penycook or upper River Indians, to Jonathan
Tyng of Dunstable for valuable Considerations. This Tract of Land extended upon
the West Side of Merimack River, from the Mouth of Soughagen River, where it
falls into Merimack River, six Miles and a half up said Souhagen or Souhegonack
River, t^ence N. 20 d. Westward, ten Miles, thence in a direct Li^e from
Northward as far as the most Southerly End or Part (meaning I suppose the
Production Westward of a Line from the Southerly End of said Pond) of the great
Pond or Lake commonly called Wenapesioche Lake; extended upon the East Side of
Merimack River from Brenton's Lands or Farm (in Litchfield) six Miles in
Breadth Eastward, and thence running in a direct Line Northward unto and as far
as the most Southerly End or Part of Wenepasioche Lake; neither of these West
or East Lines to come nearer to the River of Merimack than six Miles; an Indian
Plantation of three Miles square is reserved. These Lands were conveyed in
several Pa^cels, and at sundry Times to certain Persons by Transfers, Anno
1684, 1685 and 1686; of which Transfers some were acknowledged before the
Magistrates of the Administration of the old Colony of Massachusetts Bay, and
some before these of K. James II's Reign. After these Conveyances and Transfers
were confirmed by Robert Tufton Mason Proprietor of New Hampshire April 15.
1686, so far as falls within the Royal Grant of New Hampshire, at a Quitrent,
of 10 s. St. per An. when demanded; they were regulated into 20 equal Shares,
viz. Joseph Dudley Charles Lidget John Usher Edward Randolph John Hubbard
Robert Thompson Samuel Shrimpton William Stoughton Richard Wharton Thomas
Henchman Thaddeus Macarty Edward Tho^^son John Blackwell Peter Bulkeley William
Blathwayt Jonathan Tyng Daniel Cox
and three other Persons to be hereafter named and agreed upon; no Benefit of
Survivorship; to be divided as soon a^ may be, and each Share may take up 5000
Acres at Discretion for the present; these Grants and Regulations were also
confirmed July 12. 1686 (and entered November 9 followin^) by I^seph Dudley
President, and by the Council of his M^j^sty's Territory and Dominion of
New England in America; with an Addition of the Township of Concord,
Chelmsford, Groton, Lancaster, Stow, and Dunstable, and 12 Miles more of Land.
This Claim was in a Manner revived about 28 Years since, but soon dropped; it is
now again revived by an Advertisement in the Boston Gazette of June 21. 1748.
These Lands at present are in the Jurisdiction of New Hampshire, and must be
claimed in that Province.

Not many Years since Mrs. Rand from New England, Heiress or Representative of
Thomas Goffe, one of the 26 original Patentees or Proprietors of
Massachusetts Bay Grant, entered a Claim in Chancery accordingly, and gave some
Disturbance to the Massachusetts Bay Vessels in the River Thames in London, by
entering a ne exeat in Chancery; pretending they were the Produce of that
Colony, which the 26 original Proprietors had never jointly assigned to the
Settlers; but upon her Death, and none of the Heirs of the other original
Proprietors appearing, the Affair dropped; and the Settlers by their
Representatives in General Assembly, continue in quiet Possession by
Prescription.

For many Years there had been a Dispute concerning the North Boundary of
Massachusetts Bay Colony with New Hampshire; New Hampshire claimed, from three
Miles North of the middle Channel of the Mouth of Merrimack River due West,
until it meet with other British Governments; Massachusetts Bay claimed, from
three Miles North of the Black Rock where Merrimack River emptied it self into
the Ocean, when the Charter was granted; thence running at three Miles Distance
parallel with the River, to three Miles North of the Fork or Crotch where this
River first receives the Name Merimack, and from thence due West to the South
Sea or to any of his Majesty's other Territories.

I have ^e^n the more ^^^ticular i^ this Affair, that it may serve, by Way of
Instance, to illustrate the Length of Time required to bring Planta^ion A^^airs
to an I^sue at the Court of Gr^^t B^itain. The Affair of the Boundaries between
lord Baltimor^ of Maryland, (...) of (...) of a much longer stand^ng, and not
as (...).
Anno 1731, the General Assembly of New Hampshire appointed Mr. Rindge their
Agent, to solicit at Home, for settling their Boundaries with the Province of
Massachusetts Bay; 1733 the Petition was presented; 1734 Ian. 5. the Board of
Trade and Plantations, sent to the Attorney and Sollicitor-General, this
Question, "From what Part of Merimack River, the three Miles Limitation ought
to be taken?" March 19, the Report was, "From three Miles North of the Mouth of
Merrimack River." 1737 April 9. by the Consent of both Parties, a Commission
under the great Seal was issued to some Gentlemen of the Councils in the
neighboring Provinces to hear and judge in the Affair. The Commissioners met
at Hampton in New Hampshire August 1. and gave their Determination Sept. 2;
both Parties appealed to the King in Council, and the Commissioners adjourned
themselves to August 1, 1738, to receive the King's Pleasure. 1739 March 5, the
Appeals were heard before the proper Committee of Privy Council, and afterward
their Report was heard before the King in Council, where the Affair was finally
determined. Conform to this Determination the Lines were run by the Province of
New Hampshire ex part, the Massachusetts Bay Government refused to join in the
Survey; the Line between New Hampshire and the Province of Main by Mr. Bryant;
the Line parallel with, and at three Miles (on the North Side) Distance from
the River Merrimack by Mr. Mitchell, and the Line from Pantucket Falls Station
W. 10 d. N. to New York East Line by Mr. Hazen. These Lines or Surveys were in
May 1741 lodged with the Records of both Provinces.

We come now to delineate the Northerly Line of Massachusetts Bay Province. The
Commissioners for settling of it 1737 put it thus, "If the same Lands were
granted " by W. and M. Charter, as by that of Charles I; then this Line should
run 3 Miles North from the Black Rock at theMouth of the River Merimack, and
parallel with the River to three Miles North of the Crotch where the Rivers of
Winnepasiake and Pemegawasset meet, and thence due West: But if otherwise, then
the Line is to begin at three Miles North from the Mouth of said River, and run
from thence due West: Upon the Appeals the King in Council issued the Case in
neither of these Ways; but that after the Parallel was ^arried so far as the
Flexure of the River at Pantucket Falls, it should proceed no further; because
if the parallel Line were to be continued further, it would be East and not
North from the River; the Course of the River from this Flexure becoming North
and South; and from a Station three Miles North of the Flexure or Falls, the
Line to run W. 10 d. N. by Compass, to New York East Line.

Mr. Mitchell's Line parallel with Merrimack River begins at three Miles North
of a Black Rock, to Pantucket Station being W. 9 d. S. by Compass, 27 Miles.
This parallel Line passes through and cuts off Part of the following Townships
of Massachusetts Bay Government, viz. Salisbury, Amesbury, Haverhill, Methuen,
Dracut, and Nottingham; the Colony of Massachusetts Bay had extended these
Townships beyond the three Miles North of Merrimack, not so much upon Account
of their having assumed the Jurisdiction of that Country, at the Time of
granting these Townships, but chiefly because they were Indian Grants to
Massachusetts People.

Mr. Hazen's Line from Pantucket Station three Miles East of Merrimack River,
runs W. 10 d. N. by Compass to cut Connecticut River (1 Mile and 3 qrs. North
of Northfield Meeting House; and about 10 Miles South of Fort Dummer) 53 Miles
58 Rod; thence to New York Line (20 MilesEast from Hudson's River, 36 Miles 60
Rod, in all about 90 Miles. ThisLine continued falls in with Hudson's River 6
Miles above Albany Church, and a little below the Mouth of Mohawks River. This
Line passes through, and takes off from the Massachusetts Bay Jurisdiction,
some Parts of the following Townships and Lands, viz. Dunstable, Groton,
Townsend, A few Years since, the General Assembly of the Massachusetts Bay, was
in the Humor of distributing the Property of much vacant or Province Land;
perhaps in good Policy and Foresight, to secure to the Massachusetts People, by
Possession, the Property of Part of some controverted Land^; accordingly it
came to pass, that upon a royal Commission from the Court of Great Britain, to
determine this Controversy, the Jurisdiction but not the Property was allotted
to New Hampshire, or rather to the Crown. Some of these Grants called
Townships, were to the Inhabitants of the several old Townships v. g. to Boston
three Townships, to Ipswich one, etc; Nine Townships were voted, but only 7
granted, to the Descendents of the Naraganset or Pequod Indian War Soldiers
1637, called Naragans^t Townships; 9 Townships were granted to the Heirs of the
Militia or Soldiers who went against Canada Anno 1690, and are called Canada
Townships. A Parcel of these Townships the furthest up in the Country, run W. 5
and half d. S. across from Merimack River 35 Miles to C^nnecticut River, as a
Barrier against the Indians, they are called the double Line of Towns; whereof
No. 3, 8, and 9, are very mountainous, rocky a nd stony, not capable of
Settlement, No. 4 and 7, are the best Lands.

At present there remains in the Territory of Old Massachusetts Bay Colony,
vacant or provincial Lands, not exceeding the Value of six Townships of six
Miles squar^ each.


Ipswich new Township, Canada to Rowley, some Province vacant Lands, Canada to
Sylvester and others, Canada to Roxbury, Winchester, Northfield, Fall-fight
Township, Boston new Township No. 2, and Province vacant Lands to New York East
Line.

The Sea-Line of the old Colony of Massachusetts Bay does not exceed 80 Miles.

The superficial Land Contents of said Colony we may estimate in this Manner.
1. Its Northerly Line in a direct Course, North Side of Merrimack River W. 9 d.
S. to Pantucket Station is 27 Miles, thence W. 10 d. N. to New York East Line
are about 90 Miles, being in all about 117 Miles. 2. Its Southerly Line is from
Conohasset Rocks to the Notch in Bridgwater 15 Miles, thence W. 18 d. South to
the Station Tree 23 Miles, thence W. 7 d, N. to Rhode Island N. W. Corner,
which is nearly the same with Connecticut N. E. Corner 24 Miles, This Line by a
Production of about 20 Miles falls in with H^^son's River, about half a Mile
below the Mouth of Es^pus River.
thence W. 9 d. N. to Connecticut N. W. Corner 70 Miles, being in all about 132
Miles. 3. The Meridian Distance from the abovesaid Northerly and to the
Southerly Line is about 47 Miles. These 47 Miles multiplied into 125 which i^
nearly the Medium between the Northerly and Southerly Line, produces 5,875
square Miles which are 3,760,000 Acres. By a late Determination of the King in
Council, the Province of Massachusetts Bay; has lost of its claimed Lands,
about one half in Number of Acres; thus estimated; the Southerly Line of the
claimed Lands disunited from Massachusetts, is 117 Miles; the Northerly Line is
from E^dicot's Tree, three Miles North of the Fork of Merrimack River, 35 Miles
to Connecticut River, and thence to N^w-York East Line about 60 Miles, being in
all about 95 Miles, whereof a Medium Extent East and West is 106 Miles, this
multiplied into 55 Miles, the Meridian Distance between Pa^tucket Falls and
Endicot's Tree, gives 5,830 square Miles, which are 3,731,200 Acres.

There are some actual Surveys of Extents which ought not to be (...) in
Oblivion; as for Instance, from Merrimack River due West to Gr^t^^
Meeting House are 12 Miles; from Gr^ton Meeting House (as surveyed by Col.
St^ddard, Major F^lbam, and Mr. D^ight, by Order of the General Assembly) to
Northfield Meeting House W. 16 d. N. by Compass, are 41 Miles and half; from
Deerfiel^ Meeting House near Connecticut River, a little higher, to Albany
Church upon the West Side of Hudson's River, W. 12 and half d. N. are 57 Miles
20 Rod. From such actual Surveys the public Roads may be laid out to better
Advantage than at present: For Instance, the present Road from Bos^o^ to Alba^y
(this is the Road to Monreal in Canada) by Way of Springfield, the
Ho^sat^ni^ks, and Kinderbook is about 200 Miles* a new and better Road, but not
as yet well improved, is via Lan^ast^r and Nich^w^g to Sunderland upon
Connecticut River 84 Miles, and from Deerfield a little higher to Albany are 57
Miles, being in all only about 150 Miles.




As to the Situation of this American Province of Massachusetts Bay in
New England, upon the Surface of the terrestrial Globe; we shall observe that
BOSTON the chief Town or Metropolis of New England, from the Observations of
the late ingenious Mr. Thomas Robie Fellow of Harvard alias Cambridge College
of New England determined it to be in 42 d. 25 m. N. Lat. and By the same
Eclipse of the Moon March 15. 1717 observed by Cassini and De la Hire at Paris
(which is 9 m. 40 Seconds in Time Fast from London) and by Mr. Robi^ at
Cambridge of New England. Two Observations, do better ascertain the Difference
of Time betwe^n two remote Places, than an Observation in one Place, and a
Calculation only for the other.
West from London 4 h. 46 m, which is W. Long. 71 ^. 30 m.

The general History under the old Charter Adminis^ration continued.
This Charter was dated March 4. 16^8, 9; by Charter Mr. Cradock was nominated
their first Governor, but by Reason of his advanced Age he declined going over;
and Mr. Endicot Deputy Governor, but being of no Note, he was dropped; the
Company in London chose John Winthrop Governor, and Thomas Dudley
Deputy Governor.

Anno 1629, the Company sent over 350 People, 115 Neat Cattle, some Horses,
Sheep, and Goats (most of this Stock died in the Passage) 6 Pieces of Cannon
with Stores, they landed at Neumke^g, now Salem, June 24. 1629; Mr. Endicot
their Leader, gave it the Name Salem.

1630 In April Mr. Winthrop and Mr. Dudley with some of the Adventurers and
Assistants, many Settlers and Servants, Provisions and Stores, in all 17 Ship^
were sent over this Year: Of the Settlers about 100 died the first Year, and
the Survivors Deputy Governor Dudley March 28. 1631, wrote Home to his Friends
in England, "The 180 Servants which w^ had sent over, we could not avoid giving
them all their Liberty, though they cost us from 16 to 20 L. St. a Person, not
having Bread Kind for a Fortnight. If any comes to this Settlement to plant for
worldly Ends (but if for spiritual he may do well) that can live well at Home,
he commit^ an Error, of which he will soon repent him; we failed of our
Expectation to our great Damage. People of England, who are ^ndued with Grace,
and furnished with Means to find their Families for 18 Months, and to build and
plant, let them come. In the Beginning of our Settlements we had great Sickness
and Mortality, as well as the Settlers of New Plymouth, which seemed to proceed
from Want of warm Lodging and good Diet; they who landed in Summer died of
Fevers from the Heats; they who landed in Winter, as those of New-Plymouth,
died of the Scurvy.
suffered much for Want of Provisions. After a chargeable, long and tedious
Voyage, they landed at Salem; they disliked Salem, and chose to settle where
the Land was better; they proceeded to the Mouth of It was so called some Years
before this Settlement.
Charles River further up the Bay, here some settled and called it
Charlestown; some settled at Sagus River, now Lynn, some at Mystic River, now
Medford; these two Settlements are between Salem and Charlestown; some from
Charlestown crossed over and settled upon a Peninsula, now called BOSTON, the
Metropolis of Britis^ America; some settled from Charlestown Westward at
Newtown and Watertown: Some from Boston settled two Miles West Southward, and
called it Roxbury, because rocky Ground. Some settled four Miles South from
Boston and called it Dorchester, they were mostly West-Country-Men. Newbury
settled 1635. Here I could proce^d, and give the History of the first settling
and progressive Improvements of most Townships in the Province of
Massachusetts Bay; but this would be of too private and con^ined a Nature, to
be admitted into a general Summary, and could require the Atten^ion of but a
few Readers.


Being sickly, and fearing the Severity of the Winter, many were discouraged;
about 100 Persons returned with the Ships to England, some Libertines went to a
small Settlement which had been made at Pisca^aqua without this Jurisdiction.
From setting out April 30, to December following died upwards of 200 Persons.

Anno 1631 Freemen were first admitted, and here the old Charter Law-Book
begins; preceding May 1634, admitted about 390 Freemen; preceding 1641, about
4000 Settlers came from England; for the twenty followin^ Years, the
Independent Manner in Religion was fashionable at Home, and more People went
Home from New England then came abroad to New England. After the Restoration
the Episcopal Church of England again became rigid, and many Dissenters came
over with their Ministers; thus Mr. Allen was appointed Minister of Boston, Mr.
Lee of Bristol, Mr. Bailey of Waterto^^, etc.

The assiduous and well qualified Agent Dummer in his ingenious and politic
Piece published in London 1721, in Defense of the New England Charters, when
all Charte^ and Proprietary Governments* were in Danger of being annihilated,
by a Bill brought into the House of Commons of Great Britain; he writes, "That
the Expense of settling the Massachusetts Bay Colony for the first twelve
Years, was about 200,000 L. Sterling; that the Settlers were neither
necessitous nor Criminals."

The History of their successive Governors is as follows,
1630 The Company of Massachusetts Bay Adventurers in London, chose for their
Governor, JOHN WINTH^OP a Lawyer, Son of Adam Winthrop of Groton in Suffolk; he
brought over with him to New England the Proceeds of an Estate of 600 to 700 L.
St. per An. was almost annually elected Governor till his Death; he was very
charitable, particularly in distributing his medicinal Van Helmont Nostrums to
the Poor. His Son was very instrumental in procuring the Connecticut Charter,
and was annually chosen their Governor during his Life. His Grandson was some
Time Major General of the Colony, and Chief Justice or Judge, he died 1717. To
his Great Grandson John, was dedicated the XLth Vol. of the Philosophical
Transactions of the London Royal Society, he died lately in London.

1636, In Opposition to Mr. Winthrop, HENRY VANE Son of Sir Henry Vane was
chosen Governor; he came over an enthusiastic rigid Puritan; his Conduct was
disagreeable to the People, he was dropped the Year following and Mr. Winth^op
chosen as formerly. He was afterward Member of the Long Parliament in England,
and executed as a Traitor 1662 Aet. 50.

1645 THOMAS DUDLEY was elected Governor, Mr. Winthrop Deputy Governor: Mr.
Dudley was born at Northampton, he was a Puritan, and bred in the Army, he was
about 10 Years Steward to the Earl of Lincoln, he came over Deputy Governor
1630, and was at Times chosen Major General of the Colony; he died in Roxbury
July 31. 1652, Aet. 77. His Son Joseph Dudley sustained many great and arduous
Posts, Colony Agent, President of the Council, Chief Justice, Member of
Parliament in England, and Governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay, as
shall be in Course related more at large. His Grandson Paul Dudley Esquire is the
present Chief Justice of the Province of Massachusetts Bay, of long Experience
in the Laws and Customs of the Province; he is noted abroad in the World, by
some ingenious Pieces, relating to the natural History of New England published
in the Philosophical Transactions of the London Royal Society for the Years
1720 and 1721.

1653 JOHN ENDICOT was chosen Governor, he died 1665.

1665 RICHARD BELLINGHAM, a Lawyer, a very old Man, was elected, he had been an
Assistant or Magistrate 30 Years before; he was chosen Governor for seven Years
successively, he died 1671 Aet. 80. He had formerly been Treasurer of the
Province, he was very severe against Anabaptists and Quakers, his Memory is
perpetuated by the Township of Bellingham, being called after his Name.

1671 Was chosen JOHN LEVERETT, he was annually continued Governor till Death
1676 in the Autumn. His Father Thomas Leverett with his Family removed 1633
from Boston in Lincolnshire of Old England, to New England.

1676 SIMON BRADSTREET was elected Governor, he was annually rechosen till Anno
1686; the Charter being vacated, he was ^uperseded by President Dudley: Upon
the Revolution in New England April 1689, subsequent to and consequent of the
Revolution in England Nov. 1688; by the Advice and Direction of the principal
Inhabitants of the Colony, with the other Colony Officers, as elected 1686; he
reassumed the Government, till the Arrival of the new Charter May 1692 this was
approved of and confirmed by W. and M., He was born in Lincolnshire, had been a
Fellow of Emanuel College in Cambridge of Old England; succeeded Governor
Thomas Dudley as Steward to the Earl of Lincoln; he married a Sister of
Governor Joseph Dudley; he died March 27. 1697 Aet. 95; he was the longest
Liver of all the first Planters of New England.

Some short Time after the Succession of K. James II. the Charter being
vacated, JOSEPH DUDLEY, Esquire who had been sent over the Colonies Agent, arrived
in Boston June 1686, as President with a Council, he assumed the
Administration, he was superseded by

The Arrival of Sir EDMUND ANDRO^ Governor of New England, in Dec. 1686, he
continued Governor, until sent Home with his Officers by the Revolutioners in
the Spring 1689. He had been Governor of New York under the Duke The City of
New York was so called from his English T^tle, and the (...) from hi^ (...).
of York and Albany for seven Years preceding 1684, when he was superseded by
Col. Dongan a Roman Catholic; Anno 1692 in Virginia he had the chief Command,
having succeeded Francis Nicholson, who was Lieut.-Governor under Lord Howard
principal Governor, dismissed; Sir Edmund continued Governor until School, when
Col. Nicholson from M^ryland superseded him; Governor Nicholson returned to
England 1704, and was succeeded by the Earl of Orkney. Here we insensibly
anticipate Affairs belonging to the Section of Virginia.

The successive MAJOR-GENERALS under the old Charter were, Thomas Dudley, John
Endicot, Edward Gibbons, Robert Sedgwick, Humphrey A^herton, Daniel D^nnison,
John Leverett, Daniel Gooki^, and Thomas Sergeant.

The successive SECRETARIES, were, William Burgis, Simon Bradstreet, Increase
Newel, and Edward Rawson, between the old and new Charters in the intermediate
a^bitrary oppressive Administration in the Reign of James H, James Randolph was
Secretary.

Col. Usher at the Revolution was TREASURER for the Dominions of New England;
upon this Revolution he went off abruptly.

These Minutes and common Place from Records, and Observations of Self and
Friends, I hope, are exact, and all Matters material may be depended upon; but
the Business of my Profession and other Affairs, do not allow me Time
sufficient to reduce them into a strict ^^iff Method or Order; therefore they
appear Miscellaneous, but in ^ome loose Manner digested, for the Use of future
Writers.
Some singularly remarkable Laws and Customs in the Old Charter Administration.
Their enacting Style was; It is ordered by this Co^rt, and the Authority
thereof.

For many Years, from the Beginning, the Governor, Assistants or Council not
under seven, and Deputies or Representatives in a legislative Capacity I^
Scotland before the happy Union 1707, in their Parliament^^ the Peer^,
Commissioners for Shires or Counties, and Commissione^s for Burgh^ or Boroughs,
made only one House and voted together.
voted together; but from long Experience diverse Inconveniences were found to
arise, and it was enacted 1652, that the Magistrates (Governor and Council)
should sit and vote apart, ^onstituting The Colonies of Connecticut and
Rhode Island followed their Example, and their Legislature to this Day consist^
of two Negatives* the Governor has no third Negative, as in the Provinces
strictly belonging to the Crown; but in the Upper-House or Negative, in Case of
an Equivot^ he determines the Affair.
a separate Negative.

The Governor, Deputy Governor, and Assistants, or Council called Magistrates,
were the superior Court for Appeals in civil Cases; and were the Court of Oye^
and Terminer in Cases of Life, Member, Banishment, and Divorce. After they were
constituted two distinct Houses, if they happened to differ in any Cases of
Judicature Civil or Criminal; the Affair was to be determined by a Vote of the
whole Court met together. The General Court only, had Power to pardon condemned
Criminals. The Governor when present was President in all Courts. No General
Court to be continued above one Year. The Governor, Deputy Governor, or
Majority of the Assistants, may call a General Assembly, but this Assembly is
not to be adjourned or dissolved, but by a Vote of the same.

County Courts may admit Freem^n, being This was too narrow and confined,
perhaps more severe than ever was practiced by the Church of England in its
most bigoted and faulted Periods; the present Generation in New England are of
an extensive Charity to all Prote^^ants, though differing in some peculiar but
not essential Modes or Ways of Worship.
Church Members, that is, of the Independent or Congregational religious Mode;
only Freemen were capable of voting in civil Assemblies; 1662 upon the King's
Letter this Law was repealed.

Formerly some Townships had it in their Option, to send or not send Deputies
to the General Assembly. The Deputies of Dov^r and such other Towns as ar^ not
by Law bound to s^nd Deputies, may be excused.

The Officers annually elected by the Freemen in general (not by their
Representatives or Deputies in the General Court or Assembly) were the
Governor, the Deputy Governor, the Assistants or Council, the Treasurer, the
Major General, the Admiral at Sea, the Commission^rs for the united Colonies,
and the Secretary.

By an Act 1641, the Freemen of any Shire or Town, have Liberty to choose
Deputies for the General Court This Law was not re-enacted under the new
Charter Administration, but by a special Act, Residence was required; by the
Influence of a Party or Faction averse to a polite Assembly well versed in
commercial and other public general Affairs of the World.
, either in their own Shire or Town, or elsewhere as they judge fittest; so be
it, they be Freemen and inhabiting this Jurisdiction.

By a Law made 1654, no Person who is an usual or common Attorney in any At
this Time the General Assembly was called the Supreme or General Court.
inferior Court, shall be admitted to sit as a Deputy in the General Court or
Assembly.

Where the Country or Colony Laws are deficient, the Case shall be determined
by the Our Bible in these Time^ as their Body of Laws Civil a^ w^ll as
Ecclesiastical, especially in Criminal Cases.
Word of GOD.

Disfranchisement, and Banishment, were the usual Penalties for great Crimes.

Governor and Deputy Governor jointly agreeing, or any there Assistants
consenting, have Power out of Court, to reprieve a condemned Malefactor, till
the next Court of Assistants, or General Court; and that the General Court only
has Power to pardon a condemned Malefactor.

1652 Enacted, That a Mint-House be erected in Boston, to coin Silver of
Sterling Alloy into 12 d. 6 d. and 3 d. Pieces, in Value less than that of the
present English Coin by 2 d. in the Shilling; the Stamp to be, within a double
Ring, on the one Side MASSACHUSETTS, with a Tree in the Center; on the other
Side NEW ENGLAND with the Year All the N^w-England Coin is dated 1652, though
for many follo^^ng Years they continued coining.
1652, and the Figure XII, VI, and III, according to the Value of each Piece;
with a private Mark. Excepting English Coin, no other Money to be current in
this Commonwealth; 5 pr Ct. for In Gr^a^-Brit^in the Coinage Charge, is
defrayed by the Governmen^; for thi^ Use the Par^iament allow^ (...) L. per An.
Charges of coining to be allowed by the Owners of the Silver brought into the
Mint to be coined. Exportation of this Coin, except Twenty Shillings for
necessary Expenses, is prohibited on Pain of Confiscation of all visible
Estate. Coinage is a P^erogative of the Sovereignty not of a Colony. Scarce any
of this Coin ^ow appears, with all other Silver Coin, it is drove away by a
multiplied fallacious base Paper Currency.

Besides some small Duties of Impost upon strong Liquors imported; and a small
Excise of 2 s. 6 d. pr Hhd upon Cider, and Malt Liquors retail'd; and Tunnage,
6 d. per Tun, upon Shipping; the ordinary Revenue was a Poll Tax or Coputation
upon all Male Whites of 16 Aet. and upwards, and a Rate of -- d. in the Pound
of principal Estate at small Valuations: Thus for Instance, Anno 16^1, the Tax
was 20 d. per Poll, and a Rate of 1 d. in the Pound Estate.

Anno 1692, when the old Charter expired, a Tax of 10 s. Poll, and a Rate of 30
s. upon every 100 L. of principal Estate; was computed to raise 30,000 L. Value
equal to Proclamation Money.

Anno 1639 a Court Merchant is appointed. When a Stranger's Affairs do not
allow him to tarry the ordinary Terms of the Courts; the Governor or Deputy
with any two of the Assistants, or any three of the Assistants, may call a
special Court.

Several Acts for Fairs and Markets in several Towns; for Instance, in Boston
two yea^ly Fairs, and a weekly Market upon the 5th Day. It is not eas^^y to be
accounted for, that the C^urt Merchant, and weekly Markets were not re ena^^ed
under the new Charter-Admini^^ration.


Enacted a small Body of good maritime Laws in 27 Sections.

The Economy of their Militia was after this Manner. All white Men of 16 Aet.
and upwards, were inlisted, no Company of Foot to be under 64 private Men
(small Towns are to join) no Troop of Horse to exceed 70 Men. The Non
Commission Officers to be appointed by the Commission Officers of the Company.
The Commission Officers of a Company to be chosen by a Majority of the Men
inlisted in that Company, to be approved by the County-Cou^t o^ Sessions. All
the Companies of one County or R^giment by a Majority of the Men belonging to
that Regiment are to choose a Serjeant-Major of the County, the Command^r of
that Regiment. The Command of all the Militia of the Colony was in a
Major General, annually chosen by the General Assembly. All this is fully
expr^s^^d in a few Words in the Dorch^ster Burying-Place near B^ston, upon a
Gravestone of Mr. Atherton; he sustained all these Command^, a^ (...) the
Office of Assistant or Magistrate in the State, and Deacon in the Church or
Congregation; the Poetry is rude, being composed in the Infancy of the Country:
Here li^s our Captain, and M^^or of Suffolk was withal,
A g^dly Magistrate was h^, and Major General.


Anno 1655, Cromw^ll divided E^gland into eleven Districts, and constitutes a
military Commander in each, by the Name of Major-G^n^r^l, but this was soon
di^used. At present in Great Britain, the Militia of each County is under the
Direction of a Lord Lieutenant, or of a Lieutenancy of the Country.


Any seven Assistants whereof the Governor or Deputy Governor to be one, may
impress Soldiers.

To prevent Oppression, any Person taking excessive Wages for Work done, or
unreasonable Prices for necessary Merchandise; shall be fined at the Discretion
of the Court where the Offense is presented. The Select Men to regulate the
Wages of Porters.

The Forms of their Judicial Oaths were, By the Name of the Living, and
sometimes Ever living GOD -- By the great Name of the Ever-living Almighty GOD
-- By the great and dreadful Name of the Ever-living GOD. These were used
according to the Solemnity of the Occasion.

Any Person may view and have attested Copies of any Records, the Journals of
the Council excepted.

These were Indian Conjurers and Fortune-Tel^ers.
Powowoers to be fined five Pounds. Jesuits, or any Roman Catholic
Ecclesiastics, to be banished; if they return, to suffer Death: This Law was
afterward extended to the Quakers.

Anno 1656. None of that cursed Sect of Heretics, lately risen up in the
World, which are commonly called Quakers, are to be imported: Penalty upon the
Master 100 L. per Piece, and 40 s. per Hour for any other Person harboring or
entertaining them.

1658. A Quaker The Quakers by their Simplicity of Manners, fair Dealings,
Industry, Frugality, Humanity, and Charity; with good Propriety give themselves
the Denomination of FRIENDS: as such they are at present much in Favor with
the Civil Government of Great Britain; in these Colonies by an Order from the
Crown, they are exempted from paying toward the Parochial Ministers Dues. I
must not adduce this as an Instance (because a powerful Corpse are in the
Opposition) that a regular Clergy in Pay, under the confined (Confinement
occasions Desertion) Discipline of Cre^ds, Confessions, Cannons, Articles, etc.
are not of that Use in Society (from the long Experience of many Centuries) as
those not confined, but who act as Volunteers or Irrregulars not paid, but
merely, as from the Amor-Patriae ^t Proximi, they are directed. Forms in
Religion are generally of bad Influence, with the Vulgar, they pass for the ALL
of Religion, and are thereby diverted from ^he Essentials, viz. a good Life,
and Charity, which is Brotherly-Love to the Affluent, and Compassion toward our
Neighbors the Indigent.
convicted, shall be banished upon Pain of Death.

Penalty for playing at Cards or Dice 5 s.; for observing any such Day as
Christmas 5 s.; Profaners of the Sabbath Day for the first Offense to be
admonished, but for after Offenses to be fined. Drinking Healths aboard of
Vessels 20 s. every Health. Reviling Magistrates or Ministers 5 L. or Whipping.

1633. Constables are to present unprofitable Fowlers, and Tobacco-Takers, to
the next Magistrate.

No Motion of Marriage to be made to any Maid, without the Consent of her
Parents. Births, Marriages, and Deaths to be recorded in each Town: to be
returned yearly to the County Court or Sessions.

The General Assembly having received and perused, a Letter from the Privy
Council in England, with an Act of Parliament 12 Carol. II. for the encouraging
of Shipping and Navigation; they appointed Naval Officers in all their proper
Sea Ports, the Transactions to be transmitted to London once a Year by the
Secretary.

Women, Girls, and Boys, are enjoined to spin; the Select Men of each Town, are
to assess each Family, at one or more Spinners; when they have Avocations of
other Business, they are to be deemed half or quarter Spinners; a whole Spinner
shall spin every Year, for thirty Weeks, three Pound every Week of Linen,
Cotton, or Woollen.

Five Years quiet Possession to be deemed a good Title. In Commonages five
Sheep shall be reckoned equal to one Cow.

1667. No licensed Person to sell Beer, but of 4 Bushels Barley Malt at least,
to the Hogshead, and not to be sold above 2 d. the Ale Quart; not to be mixed
with Molasses, coarse Sugar, or other Materials. No Mackerel to be caught,
except for spending whilst fresh, before the first of July annually. Surveyors
appointed to view all Shipping in Building.

Wampumpeag to be a Tender in Payment of Debts not exceeding 40 s. at 8 White
or 4 Black a Penny; this was repealed Anno 1661.

After a Vote passed in any Assembly or Civil Court, a Member may enter his
Dissent, without entering his Reasons of Dissent, to be recorded.

In all Assemblies, Neuters, that is Silents, shall be accounted Votes for the
Negative. Any two Magistrate^ with the Clerk of the County, may take Probate of
Wills, or grant Administration.

In old Charter Times the Colony was at first divided into the three Counties
of Suffolk, Essex, and Middlesex; when they assumed the Jurisdiction of
New Hampshire and Province of Main, and settled compactly upon Connecticut
River, the Colony 1671 was divided into these six Counties of Counties.
Suffolk Norfolk Essex Pisc^taqua Middlesex Yorkshire Hampshire
Shire-Towns.
Boston Salisbury and Hampton Salem and Ipswich Dover and Portsmouth
Charlestown and Cambridge York Northampton and Springfield


Transactions relating to their Religious Affairs.
Some Account of the various Sectaries or Modes of religious Discipline and
Worship in the several British American Colonies, was designed for the Section
of Rhode Island Colony, that Plantation being productive or receptive of very
many Sectaries: but as the Persecutions (so called) of sundry Sectaries in the
old Colony of Massachusetts Bay, is too much and too impartially noted by many
Historians; I could not avoid in this Place, to give a few and Matter-of-fact
Account of these Things. I. Concerning the Congregational Way of Religious
Discipline and Worship as generally practiced in the Colonies of New England.
II. Some Narrative of the Severities used in the Massachusetts Bay, toward
various Sectaries or Communions of rigid Brownists, Antinomians, Muggletonians,
Anabaptists, Quakers, and Witches are Enthusiasts or Maniacs, and may with
Propriety of Words, be said, of the Devil's Communion.
Witches. By the many Controversies in revealed Religions, the several Sects
expose the Inconsistencies and Absurdities of one another's Op^nions, and
occasion the wise and thinking Part of Mankind to regulate themselves by
natural Religion only, and to conclude that all Religi^ns only are good, which
teach Men to be good.


I. See P. 224, 369.
Some conscientious Non-Conformists harrassed by the Bishops Courts, etc. in
the Reign of James I, obtained a loose Grant from the Council of Plymouth
called the New England Company, of some Lands in North America; they
transported themselves to New England, and at first were perhaps Nothing but a
religious Heat or Zeal, at that Time could have withstood the Severities of
their Winters; at present their Winters are less rigid from the Country being
more and more cleared of Woods, and exposed to the Sun which dissolves their
Snows sooner than before it was opened.
enthusiastically rigid and called Brownists Robert Brown first appeared 1580.
Sir Walter Raleigh writes, that in 1592, there were in England near 20,000
Brownists.
from the Name of their Apostle or Leader; afterward their indiscreet Zeal
began to subside, and were called This Mode of Religion seems to be laudable
and well ^dapted to prevent Imperium in Imperio, that is, a Church Government
from controuling the State or civil Government. Cromw^ll, a very great
Statesman, as well as General, was sensible of this, they were his Favorites
upon that Account.
Independents, because every Congregation was independent of the other
Churches, but not independent of the civil Government, as some invidiously
represent it. A Church consisted only of so many People as could conveniently
meet together in one Audience, and under Covenant amongst themselves; a Vote of
the Brotherhood, made and unmade their Minister, Elders and Deacons; a Minister
could not administer but to his own Congregation; they allowed of Communion
with other Churches in Word and Prayer, but not in Sacrament^ and Discipline,
they advised with neighboring Churches, but were under no Obligation to follow
their Advice.

After some Time, they still became more moderate and sociable, they converted
the Designation INDEPENDENT, to that of CONGREGATIONAL; although they retained
the Notion of an independent supreme ecclesiastic Power in each Congregation;
they allowed, that sometimes it may be expedient to have the (...) of Synods
and Co^ncils; thus insensibly and naturally, for Sake of good Order, they fall
into the Presbyterian Mode; and in Fact have had several Synods appointed by
the civil Legislature. 1. In August 30, 1637, in Newtow^ was called an
universal Synod to condemn the Errors of the Rigids and Antinomians; Mr.
Williams, Mr. V^ne, and Mrs. Hutchinson were their Leaders; t^is Synod
continued three Weeks: This occasioned an Emigration, and the settling of the
Colony of Rhode^Island. 2. Sept. 30, 1648, by Order of the Legislature, a Synod
was called at Cambridge, to establish Uniformity; they agree to the Westminster
Confession of 1646, in Matters of Faith and Doctrine, but compose a Platform of
their own for Discipline. 3. Anno 1662 in the Spring in Boston a Synod was
called by Direction of the General Assembly, concerning the Right that Grand
C^ildren of Church Members had to Baptism, concerni^g the Consociation of
Churches, and some other Affairs of Church Membership. 4. Anno 1679 another
Synod in Boston was appointed by the Legislature, to consult what was proper to
be done to remove the Evils which continued to afflict the People of
New England; 1678, many had died of the Smallpox; the Result was, that all the
Churches should renew their Covenant. They had a second Session May 12. 1680,
and agreed upon a Confession of Faith, nearly the same with that of the
Independents in England, Oct. 12. 1658, called the Savoy Confession of Faith,
and seemed to renounce the Models of Geneva and Scotland. 5. Anno 1687 the
Ministers of Massachusetts Bay Colony, jointly sent an Address of Thanks to K.
James II, for his By this general Indulgence Popery was craftily to be
introduced; the Colony of Plymouth unadvisedly sent an Addres^ of the same
Nature.
Indulgence or general Toleration of religious Opinions and Congregations; this
was sent over, and presented to K. James by M^. Increase Mather, he and his
Constituents were not Politicians, sufficient, to penetrate into the wicked and
pernicious Contrivance of that Toleration. 6. About 30 Years since, it was
proposed in the General Assembly to call a Synod of the Congregational Churches
of the Province of Massachusetts Bay; this was refused, or dropped, because by
the Act of Union of Scotland and England, it is provided that the Church of
England Government, in all the English Colonies was forever established. Here
the History of New England Church-Synods must terminate.

All Convocations, General Assemblies, Synods, etc. of Clergymen, by their
indiscreet Zeal or Heats, rather increase, than heal the Distempers of the
Church.

In other Articles, the New England Independents become less contracted, and of
more extensive Charity. Although a Church properly consisted of no more Persons
or Christians, then could conveniently meet together in one Place, cemented by
a holy Covenant, and admitted in^o Church Membership by personal public
Confession; at present they have relaxed of that Rigidity* and 1. In many of
their Churches, do not require that personal public confessional Appearance,
in Order to be admitted into Church Membership; but only a privat^ Application
to their Pastor or Minister to be communicated to the Church only, if required.
2. They admit occasionally Members of other Churches to the Lord's Supper, by
Letters of Recommendation. 3. A Minister may occasionally administer the
Sacraments to a neighboring vacant Church. 4. The Brethren of the Church at
the Ordination of a Minister do not lay on Hands; it is done by the laying on
of the Hands of the Ministers In a N^w-England Ordination, five distinct
Personages or Part^ are required, 1. A preparatory Prayer, 2. A suitable Sermon,
3. A Charge, 4. Another Prayer, 5. The right Hand of Fellowship* some others
join in the Imposition of Hands.
of some neighboring Churches invited for that Purpose; this is a considerable
Festival Day in the Township or Parish. 5. A lay Elder may teach and perform
all Offices, excepting the Administration of the Sacraments.

At present the Congregationalists of New England may be esteemed among the
most moderate and charitable of Christian Professions.

The Persecution of Sectaries in New England, particularly of Anabaptists and
Quakers, is not minutely ^elated here; as being only local and temporary from
the wrong pointed Zeal of the Times, without any political wicked Design.
Mankind in a natural unpolished State is an A^imal Supersti^^^m* This is the
natural Reason of the great Influence of the Clergy. A fiery hot religious
Z^al, or Frantickness with Variety of Symptoms or Tenets, like other bodily
Distempers, at Times becomes contagious and epidemick, principally amongst the
weak Constitutions of Mind; as bodily Ails^seize weak Constitutions of Body:
For Instance, in Great Britain the Lollards, Anabaptists, Independ^nts,
Quakers, Witches; this Zeal if lest to Nature, after some short Time,
deverves^es and subsides; but if used with harsh violent Admi^i^trations* that
is, with Persecution, the Distemper becomes more intense, more lasting, and
more contagious or spreading: In all religious Distemperatures, Lenitives by
long Experience are found to be the most efficac^ous Medicines; thus, of the
above^me^tioned, some have disappeared, the Lollards and Witches; the others
are become very moderate, tractable, and some of the best Members of the
Commonwealth or civil Society.

At present the Differences amongst the various Communions, Communities, or
Persuasions of Protestants in the British Dominions; are not doctrinal, or
essential; being only different Modes or Fashions, in Church Government,
Ceremonies of Worship and Vestments; the Quaker himself in his old fashioned
formal Dress, seems to some, to be as superstitious, as a Clergyman of the
Church of England in his Gown, Cassock, and other Pontificial Accoutrements.
For this Reason the civil Government of Great Britain tolerates, or connives at
all Protestant Denominations of Christians; th^re are only the three
Denominations of Presbyterians, Independ^nts (in New England they are called
Congregationalists) and Anabaptists who take out Tolera^^on Lic^nses.
Speculative private Opinions can never disturb a State.




If by Sectaries are meant Dissenters from the general Mode of the Re^igion of
the Country at that Time; the Church of England Wo^ship was formerly a
Dissension in New England; the first Church of England Congregation formed
there was in Boston 1679, it still subsists and flourishes; and besides a
Rector in the Election and at the Charge of the Congregation, there is an
annual royal Bounty for an Assistant Minister, sometimes called Lecturer;
hitherto, excepting in Boston, there is no Church of England, but Missionaries;
at this Time, Anno 1748 (including Mr. Price for Hopkinton, appointed but not
as yet arrived) in the new Charter Province of Massachusetts Bay, are seven
Missionary Congregations, and about 200 Independent Congregations, besides some
Congregations of Irish Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Quakers, and lately some
Mushrome Meetings of Separatists, Disciples of Mr. Whitefield, and as of short
Duration, scarce deserving Mention.

By the Articles of Union of the two Nations of Great Britain May 1707, the
Church of England is established in Perpetuity in all the Territories at that
Time to England belonging; but before this Period, in all Charters and
Governors Patents, a general Toleration for all Christian religious Communities
(Roman Catholics excepted) was the ecclesiastical Constitution of our American
Colonies, without any Preference. The Ministers of the congregational
Persuasion or Discipline in the Province of Massachusetts Bay, continue to meet
annually about the Time of the anniversary Provincial Election of Counselors
(being an annual Jubilee, or Festival, or Concourse from all Parts of the
Colony) not by assuming any ecclesiastical Authority, or Combination, but only
by Way of friendly or brotherly ^atercourse.


1. The rigid Brownists True sincere Enthusiasts may be of good civil Use, if
well pointed; I do not mean Freethinkers and Libertines, who for worldly End^,
may act the Hypocrite in any Shape; but such as make a Conscience of Religion
in general, and of their own Way of thinking in ^^^ticular, and are zealous for
making of Converts in Spite of all Peril^ and ^atigue; such may be useful
M^ssi^naries amongst the (...) and promote Religion and Trade with them. This
Enthusiasm (...) to be encouraged and promoted.
are almost extinct; nothing ^iolent, or out of the common Course of human
Reason, (...) hold long; we have already given some transient Hints concerning
them; in the Infancy of these Colonies there were many Degrees of Rigidity, Mr.
Lock, in a Letter to Mr. (...), dated, Oat^s May 16. 1699, says* "I design to
take my Religion from the Scripture, and then, whether it suits or suits not
any other Denomination, I am not much concerned; for I think at the last Day it
(...) not be enquired, whether I was of the Church of England or (...); but
whether I sought and embraced Truth in the Love of it."
whereof several were puritanick and fanatical, of very short Continuance. The
Rigids generally Some Devotees would sacrifice their King (or any other Form of
civil Government) and Country blindly to the enthusiastic superstitiou^
Injunctions of their Priests and Exhorters. The Laws of Nature and Nations
require the curbing of these.
seceeded from the more moderate The several Sects or Communions of Protestant^
seem to agree in the essential Doctrines of the Christi^n Religion, and differ
only in some fanciful Modes and external Fashion^ of Worship.
, and removed with their Teachers or Ministers without the Limits or
Jurisdiction of the Colony. Anno 1634 Roger Williams, Minister of Salem, was
banished because of his Antinomians hold that the Law of Mos^s is unprofitable
under the Gospel, that Justification is without good Works; that Morality and
good Works are no Help to Salvation, but rather a Hindrance: Such pernicious
Doctrines are inconsistent with civil Society, and with Goodness and Honesty,
or a private Life.
Antinomian and The various enthusiastical Modes at their first Appearance in
the World, were frantic with a violent indiscreet religious Zeal: They
generally agree in two pernicious Articles; 1. They disclaim a civil Magistracy
and temporal Punishments; and, 2. Their own wild Notions are by themselves
called Impulses from GOD.
fanatical Doctrines* after some Removes, with his Disciples, he settled on the
South Side of Patucket River, and called their Settlement Providence
Plantations, which Name it retains to this Day, they purchased it of the
Indians, or had Liberty from them to settle there: An Instance of his
Formality, is a Letter from him, dated, Nantiggansick the 24th of the first
Month, commonly called March, the second Year of our Plantation (by Way of
^p^^ha, or in Imitation of the V. C. of the Romans) or pl^nting at Moothisick
or Providence.

When the People get into the Distemperature or ^umour of differing and
dividing, especially in Religion; they proceed to Subdivisions, and Separations
upon Separations. Anno 1636 in the Summer, some discontented Rigids to the
Number of about One Hundred, went from the Townships of Newtown, Dorchester,
Watertown, and Roxbury, under their Leaders and Teachers Homes, Hopkins,
Ludlow, Hooker, etc. removed Westw^rd to a pleasant Country upon Connecticut
River, and gradually made the Settlements of Har^for^ Wethersfield, Windsor,
Springfield, etc; those of the^ w^o found their Settlements without the Limits
of the Massachusetts Bay Charter, entered into a voluntary Association or
Jurisdiction, which continued until they obtained an ample royal Charter in the
Beginning of the Reign of Charles II; as shall be more fully related in the
Section of Connecticut Colony; those are at present a moderate, industrious,
well-governed People.

Some of the Separatists were concerned in the Settlement of Rhode Island (it
was then called Aquatneck, and Anno 1644 it was called the Isle of Rhodes or
Rhode Island) 1637, 8 by a voluntary Incorporation of 18 Persons: This belongs
to the S^ction of Rhode Island.

2. The Anabaptists at their first Appearance in New England, were
ent^usiastically troublesome; they chose among themselves the meanest of the
People for their Ministers; they call themselves Baptists by Way of
Abb^eviation o^ the Name Anabaptists, after the The Lollards (so called from
Walter Lollard the Author of thi^ Sect in Germany in the 13th Century) were our
first Reformers, their Name is now lost, the first Reformation being subdivided
into many Denominations: They first appeared in England, under Wickliff, D.D.
of Oxford, about the Middle of the 14th Century; they clamoured against
Transu^stantiation, Aurical Conf^ssion, C^libacy of the Clergy, Hierarchy, and
several pecuniary Perquisites of the R^man Cath^lick Clergy* with some
enthusiastical Notions, viz. The Church consist^ only of the Predestined,
converting of Church-Effect^ to other Use^ is no Sacrilege, neither public nor
private Succession is indefeasible, etc.
Lollards who we^e the first in the Reformation, followed the Lutherans and
Anabaptists, The Anabaptist^, a particular Sort of Devotees, first appeared
about the Time of Luther's Reformation, and prevailed chiefly in the
Netherlands and Westphalia; their essential or distinguishing Doctrine was, not
baptizing of Infants, and re-baptizing by dipping such as had been baptized in
their Infancy, hence is the Denomination of An^baptists; they pretended that
Inf^nt B^ptism was not to be found in the Bible: At first they were moderate
and orderly, Luther requested the Duke of Saxony, that they might be favorably
dealt with, because, their notional Error excepted, they seemed to be otherwise
good Men. They soon run into many pernicious wild Doct^ines; they condemned all
civil Administration and Magistracy; co^poral Punis^ments (...) a divine
Prerogative, they reserved to GOD Almighty; they de^spised judicial Oaths;
disregarded the Scripture^, pretending to a personal peculiar Kind of
Illumination; a Community of Good^, etc. John Buckhold a Butcher, a Native of
L^^d^n, commonly called Io^n or Jack of Leyden, having embraced the
Anabaptistic^l seditious Notions, became very popular with a great following;
the Cry or Parole was, Repent and be reb^ptized; in his Itin^^ancies, at
M^nsler ^n Westphalia, he fell into open Sedition, and was Master of the City
for some Time; the Bishop by Blocade recovered it, and Buckhold suffered ^n
exemplary painful lingering Death 1534.
some of them vainly imagine, that they ought to be called by that Name in a
peculiar Manner, their Baptism being the only scriptural Baptism: They would
not communicate with Persons baptized in Infancy only; if occasionally in a
congregational Meeting, upon a Child's being presented for Baptism, they
withdrew to the great Disturbance of the Congregation: Fines were enacted;
Holmes, because he would not pay his Fine, was whipped 30 Lashes. Anno 1644 and
1646 Laws were made against Disturbers of the Peace in any Church in Time of
divine Service, and against Railery of Magistrates; that all who shall condemn
or oppose the Baptism of Infants, or that shall purposely depart the
Congregation at the Administration of that Ordinance, or that shall deny the
Order of Magistracy; every Person continuing obstinate in these, after the
proper Means of Conviction have been used, shall be sentenced to Banishment. In
the Beginning they generally kept the Sabbath with the congregational Churches;
their first Separation to form a peculiar Church was at Rehoboth 1651, and were
much persecuted all over New England: From their Church in Swanzey, proceeded a
Church in Boston, May 28. 1665, which to this Day continues a very o^derly
peaceable Christian Society: The young Vagrant Mr. Whitefield, by his
Pr^achings, or rather strong youthful Vociferations, did draw off some of the
Congregatio^alists, weak Minds, to an Antinomian or Antimorality Separation,
this occasioned a Separation amongst the Anabaptists, and their Separatists
have a distinct Congregation under Mr. Bounds the Leather-Breeches-Maker; and
two more Separatists Ministers from the Congregationalists; are shortly to be
ordained, viz. Mr. Crosswell and Mr. Clark in Boston.

3. The Mugleton was a Journeyman Tailor, he pretended to be a great Prophet,
and to an absolute Power of damning or saving whom he pleased.
Mugletonian Books, Anno 1654 by Act of Assembly, as being full of Blasphemies
(they go under the Names of John Reeves and Lowdowich Mugleton, who pretended
to be the two last Prophets and Witnesses of JESUS CHRIST) to be brought to the
next Magistrate to be burnt by the common Executioner in the Marketplace of
Boston upon a Market Day: Penalty ten Pound for every Book discovered not
brought in.

4. The Their first Appearance in England was Anno 1644, G^orge Fox a Shoemaker
was their grand Apostle, and were called Enthusiasts* Anno 1650 they first
obtained the Name of Quakers from their oscilla^o^y or vibrating bodi^y
devotional Action.
Quakers first Appearance in New England was 1654 from Old England and
Barbados; their Behavior was ludicrous and indecent; they copied from the
Anabaptists in their most Enthusiastic State; the first in Boston were Women
(some Women are qualif^ed with an Agality or Glibness of Tongue, especially in
railing against their Superiors and Neighbou^s) have of^iciated as Preachers,
further back than History reaches* the Sibyls and other Oracle Deliverers were
Women; the Oracle Church or Scheme (a modern Word (...) religious Sectarie^) of
Doctrine, the most (...) of Greece, was set (...) after the Model of the Oracle
of Iu^iter (...) at (...) in Egypt; the Oracle of Apollo at (...)* was the most
cel^brated in (...), and their Top Preacher wa^ Pythia or (...) a Woman: thus
we find that this Woman preaching Reli^ion is very ancient: what is lately
called by our (...) s^^king o^ the Lord, (...) the consulting of Oracles among
the A^cients.
Mary Fisher and Anne Austin from Barbados: they seemed to join with the
Antinomians and Anabaptists, they had many Converts in In Salem and its
Neighborhood, Enthusiasm and other N^rv^us Disorders seem to be Endem^al; it
was the Seat of the (...)-England Witchcraft Anno 1692; Hypocondrick,
Hysteri^k, and o^^er Maniack Disorders prevail there, and Ipsw^ch adjoining, to
thi^ Day.
Salem, and it was their Headquarters. They impiously declared, that they were
immediately sent from GOD; and blasphemously asserted they were infallibly
assisted by the HOLY SPIRIT, they despised and spoke evil of Dignities or civil
Magistrates to the great Disturbance of civil Ju^isdi^tion. By Reason of their
Enormities, some Laws were made against the Importation of Quakers, and their
Proceedings; as being obstinate Rogues, Vag^bonds, 1656, 1658, and 16^9; and as
Disturbers of the P^ace of the Commonwealth, they were subjected to Fines,
Imprisonment^, Whipping, Crop^ing of (...) (1658 thr^e Quakers had th^^r E^rs
cropped) and Banishment, and by Act of Assembly upon their Return from
B^nishment, 16^9 and 1660, three or four Quakers suffered Death: This in Course
occasioned a national Clamor, and the Pains of Death, were exchanged into
these of being whipped, only through three Towns at the Ca^ts Tail: But upon
furtherComplaints Home, K. Charles II, in Council, by Order, Sept. 9, 1661,
required the Accused to be s^nt Home for Trial, and all penal Laws relating to
Quakers to be suspended.

The People who are called by the ludicrous Name of Quakers are at present
noted for a laudable Parsimony or Frugality, moral Honesty and mutual
Friendship; they have attained a considerable Interest in the Commonwealth;
Peerage like, they are indulged with Affirmation, instead of a judicial Oath;
and in New England they are exempted from paying Rates to the Township
Ministers. As Quakers, they call themselves Friends in a peculiar Manner; their
rejecting that sacre^ Symbol of Christian Friendship, eating and drinking
together in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, is not to be accounted for.

5. As to the Witchcraft Sectary, Originally Veneficicum or Witchcraft did not
signify an explicit Covenant with the Devil, but the Study of the poisonous
Qualities of Herbs, and the^^ Herb-Women were called Veneficae or Witches. The
Witchcraft of our Times, is a pavid Superstition and Ignorance, therefore it
prevails in Lapland, and other obscure ignorant Parts of the World. Some adore
what they admire, this is the only true Religion; some adore what they fear:
Freethinking Politicians assert, that Devil Worship is better than none,
because the firm Belief of some invisible Superintendency good or bad, is the
only Check upon vulgar Minds, in civil Affairs which cannot allow of civil
Conviction.
we shall only mention, what happened Anno 1692, when a most horrid inhuman
Murder by Color of Law was perpetrated upon many ignorant Maniacks and other
Persons affected in their Nerves, It was an endemial Distemper of the Brain and
Nerves. 1. Convulsion Fits were a Preth^gnomick Sign in this Distemperature. 2.
A Bunch like a Pullet's Egg would rise in their ^hroat, a noted Hysteric
Symptom. 3. Much troubled with Incubus or Nightmare, commonly called being
H^g-ride, for Instance, Toothacer deposed, That being upon his Back, he had not
Power to move Hand or Foot, till he saw the Shape of the Witch pass from his
Breast. 4. Nervous Disorders, especially if attended with Hysteric
Convulsio^s, leave the Patient^ or afflicted Persons, very weak; Mr. C. Mather
describes it thus, "When their Tormentors had left them for good and all, they
left them extreme weak and faint, and overwhelmed* with Vapors, which would
not only cause some of them to swoon away, but also were now and then for a
while discomposed in the Reasonablenes^ of their Thought." This may be called a
subsequent Hectic of the Spirit, from nervous Weaknesses; 2. Mr. Edwards of
Northampton, mentions the same consequential Disorder, upon the going off of
the Pourings out of the Spirit endemial there. The Pourings out of the Spirit
which have at Times been epidemick in Northampton upon Connecticut River belong
to this Tribe of nervous Disorders, as we shall hereafter evince. The
Sugillations, that is the black and blue Spots in their Skin, were called the
Devil's Nip, Pinch, or Gripe; whereas they were only scorbutic Stains,
incident to aged Persons.
called Witches. Anno 1691, 2 in February it began in the Family of Mr. Paris,
Minister of Salem-Village; from somewhat Endemial to the Soil, three Persons
were effected with nervous Disorders, convulsed and acted as if demented; they
were said to be bewitched, and by Mr. Paris's indiscreet Interrogatories, they
fancied themselves bewitched by his Indian Woman, and some neighboring ugly
old Women, which from their dismal Aspect were called Witches; and by the End
of May 1692, about 100 Persons were imprisoned upon that Account: About this
Time Sir William Phipps arrived Governor, and June 2, for their Trial a special
Commission of Oyer and Terminer was issued to Lieut. Governor Stoughton, Major
Saltonstall, Major Richards, Major Gidney, Mr. Wait Winthrop, Capt. Samuel
Sewall, and Mr. Sergeant; thus 19 were hanged, one pressed to Death; some died in
Prison, in all 5 Men, 23 Women had been condemned; not any of the 50 who
confessed themselves Witches, suffered Death; Mr. George Buroughs Minister of
Falmouth, who had left ^is former Ministry in Salem, was one in this Sacrifice,
perhaps in Resentment; none of the executed, confessed Guilt, many of them were
pious Persons: After these twenty dismal Deaths, many of the very popular, but
very weak Ministers or Clergy, addressed Sir William Phipps, a very weak
Governor, with Thanks for what was already done, and exhorting to proceed.

The Accusers were some Persons said to have the Spectral Sight, and some
confessing Witches; but overacting their Parts, some of Gov. Phipps's, and of
the Rev. Mr. Mather's Relations and Friends being accused; as also some of the
accused good Christians, and of good Estates, arrested the Accusers in high
Actions for Defamation; this put a Stop to Accusations, and in the Superior
Court Jan. 1692, 3 of 56 Bills which were preferred against Witches, the Grand
Jury brought in 30 Ignoramus; and of the remaining 26 the Petty Jury convicted
only three, who were afterward pardoned; Accusations were disregarded, and
upon Sir William Phipps's going Home, at this Time about 150 were in Prison,
and 200 more accused, they were all discharged paying 30 s. each, to the
Attorney General.

Many of the confessing Witches signed a Paper, importing that most of their
Confessions were only assenting to, or repeating what they were directed to;
being weak in Mind, and under Terror, from the putting to Death all Persons
accused, who did not confess; In December 1696 a general Fast was appointed by
the Assembly; Praying that GOD would pardon all the Errors of his Servants and
People in a late Tragedy raised amongst us by Satan and his Instruments; at
this Fast Judge Sewall and several of the Jury, gave in Papers signed; heartily
asking Forgiveness of all, and declaring that they would not do such Things
again for the whole World. When this Persecution ceased, no more ^^tchcraft was
heard of.

May those over-zealous provincial Mistakes in the Warfare against the Devils
and Auxiliaries, be buried in Oblivion; especially considering an Act of
Parliament 1736, procured by the late good Lord Talbot, has effectually
liberated the Dominion^ of Great Britain from all Bugbears* of this Kind; by
this Act no Prosecution shall be commenced or carried on against any Person for
Witchcraft, Sorcery, Enchantment, or Conjuration, or for charging another ^^th
any such Offense: If any Person shall pretend to exercise or use any of the
above, or tell Fortunes, or from occult Arts pretend to discover stolen Goods;
Penalty one Years Imprisonment, and once in every Quarter of the said Year to
stand on some Market Day in the Pillory.

Perhaps I am already too tedious in the Paragraph^ concerning the various
religious Sectaries that have appeared in New England, therefore shall wave two
late religious Appearances to the Section of Rhode Island, tho^ falling within
the Period of the new Charter of the Province of Massachusetts Bay Province; I
mean the North-Hampton Conversions or pouring out of the Spirit, Anno 1735 this
Enthusiasm must have spread (they were in the Tribe of Enthusiasts
Convulsionaries Such were the Sevennes or Fren^h Prophets about 40 Years since,
and at present in France the Devotees of (...).
) if some Felo de se and other flagrant Disorders had not exposed them; 2. The
Followers of Mr. Whitefield, an Actor or personated Enthusiast, endued with a
proper Genius of low Action; he first appeared in New England, An. 1740; his
Followers hitherto 1748 are not all returned to their right Minds; very lately
in the Town of Boston was ordained a Country Shoemaker, and reinstall'd a
Renagado from a Country Parish, to encourage this Separation or Enthusiastic
Divisions.

I now proceed to some Geographical Account of the old Colony of
Massachusetts Bay; their Mountains or Hills, Rivers, and Seaports.

Mountainous Parts may be classed into Mountains or Hills, and continued high
springy Lands; these with Rivers, Bays, and Promontories are permanent:
therefore a proper. Basis in the Description of a Country called its Geography;
as this with Chronology are the Basis of History.

The great Blue Hill, 12 Miles S. S. W. from Boston, with a continued Ridge of
Hills running Eastward to Boston Bay; upon this Hill the Townships of Milton,
Braintree, and Stoughton meet; the Summit of this Hill is very proper for a
Beacon in Case of any sudden Invasion by an Enemy; from thence a Fire and great
Smoke may be Some Years since by Direction of Col. Byfi^ld of Bristol, from a
great Smoke made upon this great Blue Hill, Moun^-Hope in Bristol was found to
bear S. by W. and by Estimation 45 Miles direct.
visible to seven Eights of the Province; in a clear Day from it are distinctly
to be seen, Pigeon-Hill, N. E. Easterly about 40 Miles, a noted Landmark upon
Cape-Anne the Northern Promontory of Massachusetts Bay; the great Watchuset,
the great Menadnock, The Wateticks are partly in the Province of
Massachus^tts-Bay, partly in the Province of New Hampshire, and lie East of a
Township granted to Ipswi^^.
Wateticks, and other noted Mountains. The great Watchuset* Hill in Rutland
lies W. N. W. Northerly about 50 Miles. The grand Menadnock in waste Lands of
the Province of New Hampshire, lies about 20 Miles further N. than Watchusets.

From the high Lands at the Meeting House of old Rutland District near the
Watchuset Hills, are the following Bearings, Great Watchuset Hill N. E. half N.
East End of Wateticks N. N. E. Northerly. Great Menadnock N. half W. Mount Tom
in Northampton W. b. N. half W. Mount Tobit in Sunderland W. N. W. Middle of
Northfield Hills -- N. W.
These are only general Expressions of what I observed by a Pocket-Compass; and
as a Specimen, how with proper Compasses or Needles from several well concerted
Places of Observation, and with actual particular Surveys compared and
adjusted, an exact Plan of the Country (for Utility or Amusement) may be
obtained; I have employed some vacant, and sometimes borrowed, Time in this
Affair; which I design as a Present to the Province.

Upon or near the River Merimack, there are several Mountains or Hills on its
West Side; viz. Anahousick, Oncanouit, etc. but are not within the Jurisdiction
of this Province, and by a late Determination of the King in Council, they
belong to the Jurisdiction of New Hampshire.

Upon or near the great River of Connecticut in this Colony, are the following
Mountains. In Sunderland E. Side of Connecticut River, is Mount Tobit, a Groope
of Hills; and opposite on the West Side of the River, in the South Parts of
Deerfield, are the two Sugar-Loaves or Pikes of Deerfield -- About 12 Miles
lower upon the East Side of this River in Hadley, is Mount Holyh^ck, a Ridge of
Mountains running 8 or 9 Miles N. E. from the River; here I did take the
Bearings of all the Mountains and high Lands, so far as the naked Eye could
reach, which I do not insert, as Minuteness is not consistent with the
Character of a Summary: Opposite to this (leaving only a Passage or Channel for
the River) on the West Side in Northampton is Mount Tom, a short Ridge of
Mountains, running in the same Direction. The Hills and Mountains higher up the
River, belong to the Section of the Province of New Hampshire, as do the
Mountains noted in Hazen, W. 10 d. N. divisional Line between Massachusetts Bay
and New Hampshire Provinc^s.

At 15 to 20 Miles Distance West of Connecticut River is a long Ridge of Hills
called the Westfield Mountains. There is a considerable Range of Mountains 7
Miles East of Housatonick River, another Ridge 7 Miles West of Housatonick,
this last is in Province of New York. The Westfield and Housatonick Mountains
render the old Road from Boston to Albany not so commodious, as a late
projected Road, via Deerfield.

Such are, but in a much more extended Manner as to Courses and great Lengths.
I. In Europe, in Switzerland of the Alps* within a small Compass are the
Fountains of three great and very long Rivers. 1. The Danube, which running
Easterly through the Circles of Sw^bia, Bavaria, and Austria of Germany;
through Transylvania, and the Turkish Dominions in Europe, empties or
disembogues into the Black Sea in Bulgaria of Turkey. 2. The Rhine, which
running Northerly passes through the Lake of Constance, and many Principalities
of Germany, in some Places dividing the German Dominions from the French; falls
into the German or Northern Ocean in Holland, by several Mouths called the
Yssel, L^ch, and Wahaal; the old Rhine after passing Utrecht and Leyden is lost
in the Duynen or Downs (Sands accumulated by the stormy Ocean) and does not
reach the Sea. 3. The rapid Rhosn^, running through the Lake of Geneva, for a
considerable Space Westward to Lions; thence Southward to the Mediterranean
Sea, in Provence of France. II. In the Northern Continent of America 10 or 12
Miles West from Hudson's River, and about 80 or 90 Miles North from the City of
New York, are the Cat-kil Mountains, very lofty, giving Springs which
extensively runs. For, 1. A Branch falls into Hudson's River, thence to the
Ocean near New York. 2. A Branch falls into Lake Ontario, thence in the great
River of Canada, or St. L^^rence, which discharges into the Atlantic Ocean,
between (...) and (...), and N^wfoundland. 3. A Run falls into (...) or (...)*
which fall^ into the Misissippi* which empties by many Mouths into the Bay or
Gulf of Mexico. 4. A Stream, head^ Delaware River, and falls into the
Sesquahana River, which falls into Chesapeak Bay, and this enters the Atlantic
Ocean in Virginia. 5. A Run of Water falls into Delaware River, which falls
into the Bay and Ocean between P^nsylvania and Iersi^s.
Much elevated HIGH SPRINGY LANDS; I shall give two Instances in this Province
o^ Colony, where very diffused Runs of Water originate.

I. In the Lands where the Townships of Worcester, Leicester, and Rutland join,
about 50 Miles West from Boston; here springs 1. Quinepuxet River, which falls
into Nashway River, which falls into Merimack River in Dunstable of the
Province of New Hampshire, which empties it self into the Sea or Atlantic
Ocean at Newbury of the Province of Massachusetts Bay: Upon Quinepuxet and
Nashway River, are the Townships of Rutland, Holden, Lancaster, Bolton,
Harvard, Groton, and Dunstable. 2. Halfway River, which in its Progress is
called Blackstone and Patuxet River, which empties into Naraganset Bay of
Rhode Island Colony; upon these, are the Townships of Worcester, Grafton,
Sutton, Uxbridge, Mendon, Attleborough, and Rehoboth of Massachusetts Bay; and
Cumberland, Smithfield and Providence, of Rhode Island. 3. Stony or French
River which falls into Quenebang River in Thomson Parish of Killinsley which
falls into Satucket River in Norwich, and this a little further falls into
Thames River or Creek, which falls into Long Island Sound at New London; upon
these are the Townships of Leicester, Oxford, Dudley, of the Massachusetts Bay;
and Killingsley, Pomfret, Plainfield, Canterbury, Norwich, Groton, and
New London of Connecticut Colony. 4. Seven Mile River, which falls into Quebang
River in Brookfield, which falls into Chicabee River in Kingston (a granted but
not constituted or incorporated Township) called also the Elbows, which falls
into Connecticut River in Springfield, which empties at Seabrook into
Long Island Sound; upon these are the Townships of Rutland, Leicester,
Brookfield, Western, Kingston, and Springfield of the Massachusetts Bay; the
Townships which lie upon the great Rivers of Merimack and Connecticut shall be
related, when we give some separate distinct Account of these Rivers.

II. Lands not appropriated, called Province Lands, adjoining to, and N. W. of
Hatfield, West of Connecticut River; from thence are Branches or Runs of Water,
1. A Branch to Housick River, running West, has upon it Fort Massachusetts, a
Frontier against the French and their Indians, which falls into Hudson's River
at Scatcook a Village of Indians 20 Miles North of Albany. 2. A Branch to
Housatonick or Westenho^k River, which running South to Stratford in
Connecticut falls into the Long Island Sound; upon this River are the Townships
of Boston Grant No. 3. near New York Line, the Property of Jacob Wendell, Esquire
of his Majesty's Council of the Province of Massachusetts Bay, Stockbridge,
Upper Housatonick, Sheffield, of Massachusetts Bay; Salisbury, Canaan, Sharon,
Cornwall, Kent, New-Fairfield, New-Milford, Newtown, Woodbury, Derby,
Stratford, and Milford of Con^^cticut. 3. Farmington Rive^, running through
Housatonick No. 4. Housatonick Commonage, Part of Housatonick No. 3. and Part
of Bedford in Massachusetts Bay; through Colebrook, Winchester, Barkhamstead,
New-Hartford, Farmington, Simsbury, falls into Connecticut River in Simsbury.
4. Westfield River, with many Branchings passes through Naraganset No. 4,
Housatonick Commonage, Part of Blandford, Part of Westfield, and falls into
Connecticut River in Springfield by the Name of A^gawaam near Springfield lower
Ferry.

RIVERS. The two great Rivers of this Colony are,

Merimack River, which comes from the Crotch or Fork near Endicot's Tree, where
Pomagewasset River and the Discharge of the Pond or Lake Winipisinket meet and
acquire the Name of Merimack (signifying in the Indian Language a Sturgeon,
this River abounds in Sturgeon) from this Fork it runs Southerly about 50 Miles
to Pantucket Falls, the Elbow of the River in Dracut; and thence (...) runs
Easterly about 30 Miles (round Reckoning) to Newbury Bar. Upon this River
(these great Rivers though in different Provinces, are ^est understood and
comprehended, when delineated without Interruption) the Townships in a
descending Order lie thus, 1. Upon the East and North Side are Gilman-Town,
Canterbury, Part of Rumford, Part of Suncook, Harrys-Town, Litchfield,
Nottingham of New Hampshire; Part of Dunstable, Dracut, Methuen, Haverhill,
Amesbury, and Salisbury of Massachusetts Bay: Upon the West and South Side are
the Townships of Contacook, Part of Rumford, Part of Suncook, Canada to Gorham
and Company, Naraganset No. 5. Merimack, and Dunstable of New Hampshire;
Dunstable, Chelmsford, Tewksbury, Andover, Bradford, and Newbury of
Massachusetts Bay. The Bar at the Mouth of this River, has only about 10 Feet
of Water, and shifts; it is navigable only about ^8 Miles, to Mitchel's (the
first Falls) Falls in Haverhill; here they deal chiefly in Ship-building, the
adjacent Country abounding in Ship-Timber; the Tide flows to Mitchel's Falls;
from Mitchel's Falls, 7 Miles higher Bedels, 2 Miles Peter's, 6 Miles to
Pantucket Falls, etc.

The Falls in this River are many; excepting Dracut or Pantucket Falls about 30
Miles from the Bar, and Amuskeag Falls about 25 Miles higher; all the other
Falls are passable for Floats of Timber, and for Canoes or small Boats in
Freshes or Floods of the River. Many of those called Falls are only Riplings or
Veins of scattered great Rock Stones. There is at Times when the River is low,
a Fording Place a little above Swans Ferry 24 Miles up from the Bar, and a
little above Hunt's or Dracut Ferry is another Fording Place. The Ferries cross
this River are many, I shall not enumerate them. The Elbow or Flexure of the
River, called the Horse-Shoe, is about 2 Miles above* Pantucket Falls.

The Rivers and Rivulets (small Runs I shall not mention) which falls into this
great River of Merimack. 1. On its North and East Side, are Powow River in
Amesbury from Ponds in Kingston, about 8 Miles above Newbury F^rry; East River
and West River in Haverhill below Mitchel's Falls; Spigot River in Methuen, a
little below Bodel's Falls; Bever Brook from Bever Pond in Londonderry comes in
between the two Falls of Pantucket 6 Miles below the Horse-shoe; 11 Miles above
the Horse-shoe is Nasumkeag Brook in the South Parts of Litchfield* in the
Province of New Hampshire; 6 Miles higher is little Cohoes Brook; one Mile
further is great Cohoes Brook, the Outlet of Massabisick, a large Pond ^n
Chester Township; thence to Amusceag Falls are 4 Miles, and 4 Miles higher is
Lousy Brook in Harries Town; thence 6 Miles to Suncook River in the Township of
Suncook. 2. On the South and West Side of Merimack River, are, Falls River from
Boxford, comes into a Creek West Side of Plumb-Island, and thence to the Mouth
of Newbury or Merimack River; Hantichook River about 9 Miles* above Newbury
Ferry; Catetchuck Brook, from a Pond of the same Name in Andover; Shawskin
River enters in Andover, about one Mile below the Entrance of Spigot River, on
the other Side; Concord River about one Mile below Pantucket Falls, this
Concord River is of a considerable Course, and higher is called Sudbury and
Framingham River; it springs in Hopkinton, upon it lie Hopkinton, Framingham,
Sudbury, Concord, Bedford, Billerica, and Tewksbury; Stony Brook, which springs
in Harvard pas^^s through Littleton, Westford and Chelmsford to Merimack River;
Salmon Brook from a Pond in Groton, discharges into Merimack in Dunstable of
New Hampshire; a little higher falls in Nashway River already describe^ P. 455;
thence to N^ticook Brook 5 Miles; thence 2 Miles to Sohegen River, upon Sohegen
River lie Souhegan East alled Naraganset No. 5, Merimack Township, Souhegan
West, called Naraganset No. 3, Monson Township, some peculiar Grants, a
Township granted to Ipswich, Townsend, and some Part of Lunenburgh: A little
below Amusceag Falls is Piscataquaag Brook, which waters a Township granted to
Simpson and others, afterward purchased by Lane, and others of Boston, it
waters a Canada Township granted to Beverley, and a Canada Township to Salem,
and another to Ipswich: The Southern Branch of Contacook River, waters Rumford
or Pennycook, No. 5, of the double Line of Barrier Towns called Hopkinton
Grant, No. 6, of ditto, called Marlborough Grant, some unappropriated Lands, a
Grant to the Town of Concord, purchased by Mr. Peter Prescot and others, and
Canada to Rowley Town: Next above Contacook Grant is Naamcook Brook; and next
above that is the Fork or Beginning of the Denomination of Merimack River.

The Reader, in all such dry Accounts which are local, and do not fall under
the Cognizance of many: must excuse them, as designed for a local Benefit, and
may be superficially passed over by some, as being of no general Concern.
The other great River is CONNECTICUT, an Indian Word signifying a long River;
upon this River lie three of the New England Colonies; ^^nnecticut lies upon it
about 52 Miles; thence Massachusetts Bay by an Indent of 9 Miles which makes
the Township of Suffield West Side, and Enfield East Side of the River, to the
W. 9 d. N. imaginary divisional Line of Massachusetts Bay and Connecticut; from
this divisional Line, the Province of Massachusetts Bay lies about 47 Miles
direct, Northerly; and further North is New Hampshire indefinitely, or Crown
Lands annexed to the Jurisdiction of New Hampshire.

From the Bar at the Mouth of Connecticut River to the Boundary imaginary Line
of Massachusetts Bay and Connecticut are about 60 Miles; from this imaginary
Line, as per a Provincial Survey by Gardner and Kellock Anno 1737, to the great
Falls in No. 3, In many Articles, by some Readers I may be censured as too
prolix or minute; my Design, I hope is laudable to prevent a Loss; public
Records are at Times lost by Fire, etc. as happened not long since at
Williamsbourg in Virginia, and last Year at Boston in Massachusetts Bay
Province.
about 20 Miles direct above Fort Dummer, are in Meridian Distance 72 English
Statute Miles and 120 Rod, and these great Falls a re 18 Miles 140 Rod East of
the Massachusetts and Connecticut Boundary Line, where it intersects the River;
and above these Falls, for about 10 or 12 Miles, Townships are laid out and
appropriated; the Garrison in No. 4. on the East Side of the River, as a
Frontier against the French and their Indians, is well noted in the New England
History of the present War. The greatest Extent of New England, directly inland
is from Seabrook Bar at the Mouth of Connecticut River, to this No. 4. being
about 150 Miles.

This River of Connecticut from its long Course, is subject to sudden Floods or
Freshes, and v. g. at Hartford sometimes rises 20 Feet; the Tide (the Influence
of the Tide comes so high) or rather the Stoppage of the River from the Tides
bel^w, rises only a few Inches. The shoalest Water from Suffield first Falls to
the Mouth of the River, is about one Mile below Hartford Town, being about 4
Feet. This River, as the adjacent People observe, becomes in Process of Time In
new unimproved Countries, Damps and Foggs lodge and form small Runs of Water;
as the Land is cleared and laid open, those Damps vanish, and the small Runs
dry up, and some of our Water-Mills upon this Account, are become of no Use;
their Streams are bec^me quite dry or deficient.
more shallow. From the Mouth of this River to about 150 Miles up, to the Eye,
it does not alter much in its Width (though in that Space it receives many
considerable Streams) being generally from 80 to 100 Rod: For Instance, from
Hadley to Northampton, the Ferry is about 80 Rod, and at medium Times runs 2 or
3 Knots, scowed over in about 9 Minutes: ^he Width of Hartf^rd ^^rry is 100 Rod.
At the Mouth of the River, the Tide flows from 4 to 6 Feet, upon the Bar are
about 10 to 12 Feet Water; the general Course of the River is N. N. E. and S.
S. W.; a S. S. E. Wind will carry a Vessel up all the Reaches of this River, so
far as it is navigable, it is navigable for Sloops near 60 Miles; the Banks of
the River are generally steep and sandy; in different Places in Process of
Time, losing on one Side, and gaining Ground on the other Side. Salmon and
Shade come up this River to spawn, but in smaller Quantities and later, and
continue a shorter Time (about three Weeks in May) than in Merimack River. The
Rivulets and Brooks where they fall into the great River, are not passable in
Freshes and Floods, because of the back Water. Some Ferries where there are no
Habitations, are kept at the Charge of the Counties, consisting of a large Scow
or Flat, to carry Persons, Cattle, and Goods, with a Canoe, Tender; Travelers
ferry themselves over, always leaving the Flat on one Side, and the Canoe on
the other to fetch the Scow upon Occasion; an Instance of this is in Northfield
Ferry.

The first Falls of this River are about 60. Miles from its Mouth, at Devotion
Island in the South Parts of Suffield; the next are about the Middle of
Suffield, half a Mile long; both these are passable by Boats in Channels, next
are the Falls in the Southerly Parts of Northampton, about 15 Miles further up
the River, not passable by Boats; the other Falls higher, we shall not
enumerate.

The Townships upon this River are, 1. Upon its East Side; in Connecticut
Colony, Lime, East Hadham, Part of Midletown, Glassenbury, Part of H^rtfo^^,
and Part of Windsor; in the Province of Massachusetts Bay, Enfield,
Springfield, Hadley, Sunderland, Farms or Peculiars, and Part of Northfield; in
the Province of New-H^mpshire, Part of Northfield, Winchester, No. 1, 2, 3, and
4. 2. Upon its West Side; in Connecticut Colony, are, Seabrook, West-Hadham,
Part of Midletown, Wethersfield, Part of Hartford, and Part of Windsor; in the
Province of Massachusetts Bay, are, Suffield, Part of Springfield, Northampton;
Hatfield, Deerfield, Part of Northfield; in the Province of New Hampshire, are
Part of Northfi^^d, 40,000 Acres equivalent Land belonging to four Proprietors
(in its S. E. Corner upon the River on a plain and long Reach of the River,
stands For^ Dummer, which although in the District of New Hampshire, incapable
of defending its long Frontier Range, is maintained at the Charge of the
Massachusetts Bay) Numbers 1, and 2.

The considerable Runs of Water which falls into Connecticut River, 1. Upon its
East Side are Salmon River and Cove, in East-Hadham, Hocanum River in
East-Hartford, Pedant Brook and Scantick River in East Windsor; Fresh Water
Brook in Enfield; Long-Me^dow Brook, Mill River, and Chicabee River with its
Townships enumerated P. 455, in Springfield; Batchelor's Brook and Fort River
in Hadley (higher the great River is fordable from Hadley to Hatfield; and a
little above Northfield Meeting House or Church, ^arts in a dry Time ford the
great River) Mohawk's River, and Saw-mill Brook in Sunderland; in the
intermediate Farms is Miller's River very rapid, it is composed of many
Branches which water Canada to Dorchester, Canada to Ipswich, Ipswich Grant,
Canada to Rowley, Pequioag, Canada to Sylvester, and Canada to Roxbury; in
Northfield is Patchoa^g Brook, Ashuelot River, its Branches water some of the
double Range of Frontier Towns, Upper and Lower Ashuelot Townships, Canada to
Roxbury, and Winchester. 2. Upon its West Side are Roaring Brook, and Mill
Brook in West Hadham; ^idleton River, and Dividend Brook in West Midleton
Precinct; Goffs Brook and Robins Brook in Wethersfield; Hartford River in
Hartford; Allen's Brook and Heyden's Brook in Windsor with Farmington River
described P. 456; Stony Brook in Suffield; Agawaam alias Westfield River in
Springfield, described P. 456; Monhan River in Northampton; Hatfield Mill River
in Hatfield, Deerfield River, which by its Branches waters the Boston Grants,
No. 1, and 2, the Grant to Hunt and others; Falls River which after watering a
Township to Gallop and others, and Falls-fight Township, falls into the great
River in Deerfield; the next considerable Run of Water is West River, about 2
or 3^ Miles above Fort Dummer, considerably higher (Information from Capt.
Wells of Deerfield, formerly a Partizan or Ranger against the Indians in
Governor Dummer's War) Connecticut River Forks; one Branch comes from near the
White Hills Easterly in the Province of Main, the other comes from the
Northward toward Canada, an Indian traveling Branchto Canada.

We s^all only mention one River more (in the Style of a late Historian C -- M
-- D. D. the Subject is dry, though watery) CHARLES RIVER; it is not large and
considerable, otherwise than as being referred to, in settling the South Line
of the late Massachuset^s-Bay Colony, as is Merimack River in settling the
North Boundary Line: The Words in the old Charter are, "As also all and
singular those Lands and Hereditaments whatsoever, lying within the Space of
three English Miles on the South Part of said River called Charles River, or
any or every Part thereof." Stop River which rises in Wrentham was pitched upon
as the most Southerly Branch of Charles River, and at three Miles South of the
Head of this River, the South Line of Massachusetts Bay was delineated; Stop
River falls into the main Body of Charles River in Medfield. The furthest Head
of Charles River is in the N. E. Parts of Mendon, and upon it lie the Townships
of Bellingham, Medway, Wrentham, Medfield, Sherburn, Natick an Indian Reserve,
Dedham, Needham, (here are two considerable Falls in this River) Newtown,
Westown, Waltham, Watertown, Cambridge, and Brooklin: This River falls into the
Bottom of Massachusetts or Boston Bay, and serves to bring down to Boston,
Floats or Rafts of Ship-Timber by the Tide from Watertown Barcadier about 9
Miles: There is another Creek or River, a small Way Eas^ of this, called
Mystic River, of about 4 Miles rafting from the Barcadier of Medford Township;
from Mystic Barcadier are sent to Boston, Bricks, Tar, and Turpentine.

The PROMONTORIES remarkable are, only Point Alderton about 9 or 10 Miles below
Boston upon the South Side of the Bay, over against the Light-House: here is a
good Harbor ^alled Hull-Gut, and the safe Road of Nan^asket secured by
circumambient Islands, where the King's Ships, and Merchant Ships outward and
inward bound anchor for a Time; it lies about 6 or 7 Miles below Boston, and by
Act of Assembly is deemed belonging to the Harbor of Boston.

Cape-Anne the North Side Entrance or Promontory of Massachusetts Bay,
Thatcher's Island lies about two Leagues East of this Harbor, and a small
Matter without Thatcher's, are Rocks called the Salvages; from the Salvages are
two Leagues to Ipswich Bar, a dangerous Bay called Ipswich Bay, from a great
Sea and Indraught; Cape-Anne Harbor is about eleven Leagues N. N. E. Easterly
from Boston; the Southern Promontory of Massachusetts Bay called Cape-Cod in N.
Lat. 42 d. 10 m. lies about 18 Leagues E. by S. from Boston: The Width of the
Entrance of this Bay, is from Cape-Anne Harbor S. W. 14 Leagues, to the Hook,
or Harbor of Cape-Cod.

The Seaports and their principal Trade of Export and Import must be referred
to the following Article, of the several Jurisdictions of New England, united
by a new Charter; it is only since the new Charter took Place, that Seaport
Districts of preventive Custom-Houses and Branches have taken Place: Here we
shall only enumerate them; besides small Creeks and Inlets for Timber and
Firewood in coasting small Vessels, and for curing of Fish; there are Newbury a
Branch of the Collection of Portsmouth in New Hampshire; there a^e Ipswich,
Cape-Anne, Salem and Marblehead, belonging to the Collection of Salem;
Charlestown, Boston, and all the other Custom-House Branches of
Massachusetts Bay, belong to the Collection of Boston.

ARTICLE 6. Concerning the present Territories as united by the Name of the
Province of Massachusetts Bay.
AS we before hinted by a Charter October 7. 1691, sundry Territories, under
several Grants and Jurisdictions, for their better Accommodation and
Conveniences, were united by Charter into one Property and Jurisdiction, that
is, into one General Assembly.

The Bill for restoring the New England Charters being dropped by the Dissolution
of the Revolution-Convention-Parliament; the New England Agents were puzzled,
whether, to stand a Trial at Law, by a Writ of Error for reversing the
Judgments against the old Charters, or to accept of a Draught of a new Charter;
at length they acquiesced in the King's Pleasure, and the King directed a new
Charter.

The Nature of this Union of several Colonies into one Jurisdiction, the new
Charter with a subsequent explanatory Charter, and sundry other general
Affairs, have been by Way of Anticipation already narrated, see P. 374, etc.

In the general Account of British North America, we omitted the Post Office, a
very beneficial Institution; and as the present Province of Massachusetts Bay,
is its most considerable Branch, here it may naturally take Place.

The Post Office in England was settled by Act of Parliament 12 Carol. II. In
the Beginning of this present Century Mr. Hamilton of New-Iersies projected a
Post Office for British North-Am^rica, this he effected and obtained a Patent
for the Management and Profits of the same, this Patent he afterward sold to
the Crown, and a few Years after the Union, the Posts of England, Scotland,
Ireland and America were put under one Director by Act of Parliament 9 Anne;
constituting one Post-Master-General for all the British Dominions; to keep a
General-Post-Office in London, the Post-Master-General may keep one
Letter-Office in Edinburgh, another in Dublin, another at New York, and other
chief Offices at convenient Places in America and the Leeward Islands, and
appoint Deputies for managing the particular Rates for the Postage of Letters
in the Plantations; requires too much Room for a Summary, it is referred to
Stat. 9 Annae Cap. 10. We shall only relate; that all Letters from on board any
Ship, shall be delivered to the Deputy Postmaster of the Place, Penalty ^ L.
Sterling. for every Offense; the Post-Maste^ paying to the Deliverer One Penny
Sterling. per Letter. N. B. This Clause is not much attended to, because the Act
exempts Merchants Letters, and those of Masters of Ships, so as such Letters be
delivered to the Persons to whom they are directed without receiving any Profit
for them: And any Letters sent by private Friends, or by any Messenger about
private Affairs or Business.

From Piscataqua or Portsmouth, to Philadelphia is a regular Postage, from
thence to Williamsburg is uncertain, because the Post does not proceed until
Letters are lodged, sufficient to pay the Charge of the Post-Riders: From
Williamsburg in Virginia to Charlestown in South Carolina, the Post-Carriage
is still more uncertain.

There is a Deputy Post-Master-General for America appointed by the
Post-Master-General in London; New York is appointed for his Official
Residence, but by Connivance he resides any where, v. g. at present in Virginia
Elliot Benger, Esquire formerly Mr. Loydd in South Carolina.

Here it properly belongs to give an Account of the general and frequented
traveling Roads from Penobscot Bay N. Lat. 44 d. 30 m. (further North is Duke
of York's Property and Nova Scotia, no travellingRoads) Tossed. Iuan or St.
John's River in Florida, N. Lat. 31 d. this by an Agreement with Spain Anno
1738 is the Termination of our Property or Claim in Florida: This is 40 Miles
N. of St. Augustine belonging to the Spaniards, from St. Augustine there is a
Land Communication to Moville, and from thence to Missisippi; these belong to
the Spanish and French, which properly do not belong to our History.

We shall begin at St. Georges Fort and Block-House upon St. Georges River, a
few Miles S. W. of Penobscot Bay; from thence Miles. Called the Eastern Parts
of Massachusetts Bay. To Muscongus or Broad-Bay 12 Frederick's Fort at Pemaquid
7 Damarscotti Falls and Mills 10 The Settlement on Sheepscot River 5 Arrowsick,
or George Town in Sagadahoc Bay of Quenebec River, via Wiscasset 20 George Fort
in Brunswick 22 Royal's River in North-Yarmouth 14 Presumpscot Ferry in
Falmouth 9 Stroud-Water Ferry in Falmouth 4 Saco or Winter-Harbour Ferry in
Biddiford 20 Kennebunk Ferry in Arundel 10 Wells Meeting House 6 York Ferry 16
Kittery Ferry over Piscataqua R. to Portsmouth 8 143 New-Hampsh. Hampton
Meeting House 14 Boundary Line Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay Provinces 6 20
Of the Western Division of the Province of Massach.-Bay. Merrimack R.F.
dividing Salisbury from Newbury 3 Ipswich 12 Beverley Ferry dividing Beverly
from Salem 12 Winisimet or Chelsea Ferry (of 2M.) to Boston 17 Dedham 11
Naponset River in Walpole 9 Wrentham Meeting House 7 Attleborough Meeting House
9 Rehoboth, alias Seaconck Meeting House 7 Patucket River Ferry; Boundary of
Massachusetts Bay Province, and Rhode Island Colo. 2 89 Rhode Island Colony.
Providence Town 1 Through several small and distant Settlements to a little
West of Pakatuke Bridge, Pakatuke River divides the Colonies of Connecticut and
Rhode Island 57 58 Connecticut Colony. Mystic River dividing Stonington from
Groton 7 Thames River Ferry, dividing Groton from New London 8 A Rope Ferry
over Nahantick Gut 5 Saybrook River Ferry, dividing Lyme from Saybrook 10
Killingsworth 10 Guilford East Parish 5 Guilford West Parish 5 Brantford
(generally to be understood) Old Meeting House 12 East Haven Parish Ferry 8 New
Haven 2 Milford 12 Stratford River Ferry 4 Str^^field, a Parish 3 Fairfield 4
Norwalk 12 Stamford 10 Gr^enwich or Horse-Neck 7 Byram River dividing
Connecticut from N. York 2 126 Province of New York. Rye 3 New Rochel 5 East
Chaster 4 King's Bridge to the Islan^ of New York County 6 Halfway House
Tavern 9 City of New York 9 Ferry to Staten Island Point 15 By Land to
Elizabeth Point Ferry 6 57 New-Iersies. Woodbridge 12 Bruns^ick Ferry of
Raritan River 18 Prince Town 12 Trent Town F. over De laWare R. dividing the
Province of New-Iersies from Pensylvania 10 52 Pensylvania Government. Bristol,
opposite to Bridlington or Burlington 10 Philadelphia 20 Schuyhkill River Ferry
3 Derby 4 Chester 9 Brandewine 14 Newcastle 6 Boundary Line of Pensylvania and
Maryland 12 78 Maryland Government. Elk-River 5 North-East River 7 Sesquahana
River Ferry 9 Gunpowder River Ferry 25 Petapsco River Ferry 20 Annapolis the
Capital of Maryland 30 Upper Marlborough 16 Piscataway 16 Port Tobacco 16 144
Dominions of Virginia. Potomack F. dividing Maryland from Virginia 4 How Is
Ferry 20 Southern's Ferry 30 Arnold Ferry 36 Clayborn's Ferry 22 Freneaux
Ordinary 12 Williamsburg the Capital 16 Hog Island 7 Isle of Wight Courthouse
18 Nansemond Courthouse 20 Bennet's Creek (near this is the Boundary Line
between the Provinces of Virginia and N. Carolina) 30 215 Province of
North Carolina. Eden Town, formerly the Capital 30 Chowan Sound Ferry 10
Pemlico 44 Ferry to Bathtown 5 Newbern Ferry (the present Capital) where News
River and Trent River meet 32 Whittock River 20 New River Ferry 30 Newtown or
Wilmington on the Forks of Cape Fear River, 30 Miles above the Bar 45
Lockwood's Folly 15 Shallot River 8 Little River, Boundary Line between the two
Governments of North and South Carolina 8 247 Province of South Carolina and
Georgia. East End of Long-Bay 14 West End of Long-Bay 25 Winyaw Ferry 30 Santee
Ferry 12 Sewee Ferry 20 Charlestown, the Capital; here is a Ferry 30 Port Royal
60 Frederica in Georgia, on the South Branch of Altamacha River 90 St. Iuan or
St. John's River, yielded to Great Britain by Spain per Agreement Anno 1738 it
is 40 Miles N. of Spanish Fort St. Augustine 20 301

In the new Settlements they reckon by computed not measured Miles,
consequently there may be in several of the Distances, an unvoidable Error of a
Mile or two.

This is a Road of great Extent, well laid out and frequented, it shows the
vast Extent of the British Plantations along the East Shore of North America;
the several British Provinces and Colonies, (...) this great Road as follows,
East Division of Massachusetts Bay 143 Miles. New Hampshire 20 Miles. West
Division of Massachusetts Bay 89 Miles. Rhode Island 58 Miles. Connecticut 126
Miles. New York 57 Miles. New Iersies 54 Miles. Pensylvania 78 Miles. Maryland
144 Miles. Virginia 215 Miles. North Carolina 247 Miles. South Carolina and
Georgia 301 Miles. 1532 Miles.


The many Ferries, and some of them not well attended, are a considerable
Hindrance in traveling: but by these it appears that the Country is well
watered, a great Advantage in Produce and Manufactures; and as many of the
Rivers, Sounds and Bays are navigable, a considerable Distance inland; they are
of great Benefit in Navigation or Trade.

As the Constitutions of all the British Plantations are nearly the same, being
minute in this Article, may save Repetitions and shorten the following
Sections; therefore Perspicuity and Distinctness require this Article to be
divided into Subsections.

. I. Concerning the Civil Administration.
This Administration may be divided into the legislative supreme Court, called
the General Court or General Assembly of the Province; and the subordinate
executive Courts.

The Great and General Court or Provincial Assembly, consists of three
Negatives, viz. the Governor, the Council, and House of Representatives.

The Governor is by Patent or Commission from the King durante beneplacito,
with a Book of Instructions; which Instructions though binding to the Governor
(frequently broke in upon by some Governors) are not so to the House of
Representatives, as they have from Time to Time represented to the Governor;
for Instance, one of the Instructions requires a Sallary of One Thousand Pounds
Sterling. per Annum, to be settled upon the Governor; this is always obstinately
refused, but are willing to grant him a yearly Support, suitable to the Dignity
of his Excellency, and consistent with the Ability of the People their
Constituents, of which it may be supposed they only are the proper Judges.

The military Government by Sea and Land, is sole in the King's Governors; they
grant all Commissions in the Militia, which gives the Governors a vast
Influence; People in the Plantations are readily bribed by distinguishing
Titles. -- The Governors in the Plantations have that considerable Power of
negativing or suspending Counselors without assigning Reasons; Governor
Belcher at one Time negatived 13 Counselors in the pernicious Land-Bank
Interest; this Management of Mr. Belcher's was in a high Manner approved of by
the passing an Act of the British Parliament soon after; this Land-Bank is
designed in the Words of the Act "mischievous Undertakings in America, and
unlawful Undertakings;" but so it is, that this Act of Parliament is not fully
put in Ex^cution at this Day Christmas 1748. They nominate Duran^o beneplacito
all Judges, Justices and Sheriffs, which being, with the Militia Officers of
the several Townships, a great Majority in the lower House, gives the Governor
a very great Influence there: the Power of negativing the Members of the upper
House makes his Influence there so considerable, that he has in a great Measure
two Negatives in the Legislature; the King at Home cannot negative or suspend
any Member of the upper House called the House of Lords.

The Governor has the Opportunity of recommending to the House, Agents or
Provincial Attorneys, his Friends or Creatures; to manage their Affairs and his
own at the Court and Boards in Great Britain, and to procure for them handsome
Gratuities: For Instance, the Governor in a M^ssage to the Assembly, March 16.
1743, 4, recommends a generous Allowance to Mr. Kilby, he having served the
Province upon particular Orders of this Court, with great Industry,
Faithfulness and Success. A Governor by frequent and long. Speeches and
Messages to the House of Representatives (sometimes near one half of the
Journal or Votes of the House of Representatives consists of these Speeches and
Messages) seems to act as a Member of that House, or rather as the Speaker or
Orator (a French Expression) of the House; sometimes Governors proceed further,
for Instance, Anno 1744 the Governor desires of the House of Representatives;
that in the Recess of the General Assembly (which must be short Intervals,
because of late Years the General Assembly at a great Charge to the Province
have had very frequent and long Sittings) upon any sudden Emergency, the
Governor and his Council may be empowered to draw upon the Treasurer. The
Governor has a Negative not only in all Bills of Assembly, but also in all
their Elections, that of a Speaker not excepted.

Thus the Governor commissions all Militia, and other military Officers,
independently of the Council or Assembly; he nominates all Civil Officers,
excepting those concerned in the Finances or Money-Affairs, and with Consent of
the Council, they are accordingly appointed* He calls, dissolves, prorogues,
adjourns, removes, and otherways harrasses the General Assembly at Pleasure; he
frequently refuses his Assent to Bills, Resolves, and Orders of the General
Court; whereas our Sovereign in Great Britain, excepting upon very
extraordinary Occasions, does not exert this Prerogative; thus we see a
delegated Power assuming more than the sovereign constituent Authority chooses
to venture upon.

His just pecuniary Perquisites are considerable, an Allowance or Grant of 1000
L. Sterling. or nearly its Value per An.; has one Third of all Custom-House
Seizures, the Naval Office belongs to him, and many F^^s of various Natures. In
Time of War there are Fees for granting Letters of Mart or Mark to private Men
of War called Privateers, and many Emoluments arising from multiplied
Expeditions.

Notwithstanding of this great Authority, a Governor's Station is very
slippery; upon frivolous and sometimes false Complaints he is liable to be
called to Account, s^perceded by some Expectant at Court, and if the
Maladministration is notorious, he is also mulcted.

By Charter the Governor cannot impress Men into the military Service, to march
out of the Province, without an Act or Resolve of the General Cour^; the
Governor by his 11th Instruction, is not to give his Assent to any Act for
repealing any of the standing Laws of the Province, without a suspending
Clause, that is, until a Copy thereof, be transmitted and laid before the King.
By the 12th Instruction the Governor is restrained to 30,000 L. Sterling. per An.
Emissions of public Paper Credit; but upon Account of unforeseen Incidents in
the Time of the late War with Spain and France; he was in this Article left at
large, this gave a Handle for unlimited ruining Emissions, a Privilege, said to
be by his Majesty's Indulgence; the Governor in his Speech, July 2. says, I am
freed now from the chief Restraints I was under, whereby Depreciations ensued
to the great sinking of all the personal Estates in the Province, Specialties
excepted.

Some Account of the Governors, from the Arrival of the New Charter, in the
Province of Massachusetts Bay.
Sir William Phips This Account is mainly taken from Cotton Mather, D. D.
Son of a Blacksmith, born Anno 1650, at a despicable Plantation on the River
of Quen^ebeck; after keeping of Sheep some Years, he was bound Apprentice to a
Ship-Carpenter for four Years, afterward^ went to Boston, learned to read and
write, followed the Carpenter's Trade, and married the Widow of Mr. John Hull
Merchant; upon Advice of a Spanish Wreck about the Bahamas, he took a Voyage
thither, but without Success; Anno 1683 in a King's Frigate the Algier Rose, he
was fitted out, upon the Discovery of another Spanish Wreck near Port de la
Plata upon Hispaniola, but returned to England unsuccessful: Soon after 1687,
he prevailed with the Duke of Albemarle, at that Time Governor of Iamaica, and
some other Persons of Quality, to fit him out with a royal Patent or Commission
to fish upon the same Spanish Wreck which had been lost about 50 Years since;
by good Luck in about seven or eight Fathom Water he f^sht the Value of near
Three Hundred Thousand Pounds Sterling (the Bermudians found good ^leaning^
there after his D^p^^t^re) whereof he had (...) 16000 L. Sterling. for his Share,
and the Honor of (...), and obtained of King James II. by Purchase, to be
constituted High Sheriff of New England, but was never in the Execution of this
Patent, and returned to England 1688 ( N. B. he had not received Baptism until
March 1690 Aet. 40) and soon after came back to New England. Upon the breaking
out of the Indian War 1688, he solicited an Expedition against Nova Scotia May
1690, and had good Success against the French; but his subsequent Expedition in
Autumn, against Canada the same Year was disasterous, as has been already
narrated, and in the Words of Mr. Mather "though used to diving for Plate, this
was an Affair too deep for him to dive into," amongst other bad Consequences of
this ill-contrived and worse managed Canada Expedition, was the introducing of
a pernicious, fraudulent Paper-Currency, or Bills of public Credit, to pay the
Charges or Debt incurred; the Operation of this injurious Currency is such that
all personal Estates (Specialities excepted) are reduced to One for Eight,
reckoning by heavy Pieces of Eight (or seven Eights of an Ounce of Silver) at 6
s.; the Loss of Men was of very bad Consequence to an Infant Colony, which was
not by the Enemy, but by a Camp Fever, the Smallpox, and Disasters in
returning Home, notwithstanding, as Dr. Mather expresses it, "the Wheel of
Prayer for them in New England was kept constantly going round." Soon after his
Return to Boston he went for London to petition the Court of England
(notwithstanding of former Disasters, and his own Incapacity to manage the
Affair) to encourage another Expedition against Canada. Upon obtaining of a new
Charter dated Oct. 7. 1691, at the Desire of the New England Agents Sir William
Phips was appointed Governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay and
Territories thereto belonging; he arrived with the new Charter May 14. 1692;
and June 8, the Assembly under the new Charter met for the first Time. He was
ordered Home to answer some Complaints, and sailed from Boston, Nov. 17. 1694,
and died of a malignant Fever in London, Feb. 18. following. Mr. Mather his
Advocate, writes "nor indeed had the Hunger of a Sallary, any such Impression
upon him, as to make him decline doing all possible Service for the Public --
That he was not to be reckoned amongst those who were infamous for infinite
Avarice and Villa^ny. Magnalia Book II. -- He was not ashamed of his former low
Circumstances; once in sailing with a considerable Command in Sight of
Quennebeck; he said to those under his Command, Young Men it was upon that Hill
that I kept Sheep a few Years ago, you don't know what you may come to. -- Upon
his Death Dr. C. Mather wrote an Elegy, beginning thus, And to Mortality a
Sacrifice
F^l^s he, whose Deeds must him immortalize.
This is not very fluent, but meant well.


If he had been dismissed from his Government, he designed to have gone upon
another Spanish Wreck, which had Governor Broadille aboard.

William Stoughton, Esquire Lt. Governor, was Commander in chief from Governor
Phips's going Home in the Autumn 1694, until the Arrival of Governor Lord
Bellamont in June 1699, after a few Months Lord Bellomont returning to
New York, Mr. Stoughton was again in the Chair, and continued till his Death in
May 1702. In Honor to his Memory a Township is called by his Name.

In May 1702, upon the Absence of the Governor and Death of the
Lieut.-Governor; conform to Charter, the Majority of the Council assumed the
Government, until the Arrival of Governor Dudley June 11. 1702.

Earl of Bellomont in Ireland, being appointed Governor-General of New York,
Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire; in his Passage to America in the End of
the Year 1697, from this bad Winter Coast, he was obliged to bear away to
Barbados, he did not arrive in New York until May School. In the Summer 1699, he
met our Assembly in Boston, his being a new Governor, cunning, complaisant, and
of Quality, did ingratiate him very much with the People, he was allowed 1000
L. Salary, and 500 L. Gratuity: In the Autumn he returned to New York, and died
there in February 1700, 1.

Joseph Dudley, Esquire arrived Governor June 11. 1702. He was Son to Governor
Thomas Dudley, see P. 429; he was chosen Assistant (that is of the Council)
1682, upon the Charter being in Danger, he was sent Home jointly with Mr.
Richards as Colony-Agents: Being a Native of the Country, a good Politician,
and cunning Man, i. e. of Subtality, the Court of England deemed him a proper
Person, to introduce or facilitate a Change in the Administration of the
Colony; accordingly upon the Charter's being vacated, he was appointed
President or pro tempore Commander in chief April 1686, and arrived at Boston
the June following: In December of the same Year arrived Sir Edmund Andros as
Governor, Nicholson Lieut.-Governor, and two Independent Companies of Soldiers;
Mr. Dudley is appointed Chief Justice, but was outed in the New England
Revolution, April 1689.

Anno 1690, he was appointed chief Justice of New York. Upon going Home he was
chosen Anno 1701, Member of Parliament for Newtown of the Isle of Wight, which
introduced him to the Government of the Province of Massachusetts Bay his
native Country. King William died before he set out, but his Commission was
renewed by Queen Anne, he continued Governor until Nov. 1715, when Col. Tailer
was appointed Lieut-Governor under Col. Burgess appointed Governor; Col. Tailer
produced an Exemplification of Col. Burgess's Commission or Patent, and as
Lieut.-Governor under him assumed the Government Nov. 9. N. B. Queen Anne died
August 1. 1714, Mr. Dudley continued in Government according ^o the Act of
Parliament for continuing Officers for six Months after the Demise of a
Sovereign, that is, until Feb. 1; the six Months being expired, the Council in
Conformity to the Charter, took upon themselves the Administration; but Mr.
Dudley having March 21, via New York, received the King's Proclamation for
continuing all Officers till further Orders, he reassumed the Government, and
continued Governor to November, as above: He died at his House in Roxbury near
Boston, Anno 1720, Aet. 73; he left surviving Sons, Paul, at present chief
Justice of the Province, see P. 429, and William, who served in the successful
Expedition against Port Royal of L' Accadie, now Annapolis-Royal of
Nova Scotia; he was afterward appointed a Judge, and for many succeeding Years
elected one of the Council, as being the best acquainted with the Property of
Lands and other Provincial Affairs; he died a few Years since, a great Loss to
this Country.

William Tailer, Esquire who had served as Colonel of a New England Regiment in the
Reduction of the foresaid Port Royal; for this his good Service, he was
appointed Lieut.-Governor under Governor Dudley, and arrived in Boston from
England, October. 3. 1711: 1715 he assumed the Command in chief, as
Lieut.-Governor under Governor Burgess. Col. Burgess did not come over to his
Government, and was superceded by Col. Samuel Shute; upon Mr. Shute's Arrival
in Boston, October. 4. 1716, Mr. Tailer's Command in chief devolved upon Col.
Shute, and as Lieut.-Governor he was superseded by William Dummer, Esquire he
alternately superseded Mr. Dummer as Lieut.-Governor under Governor Belcher
1730; he died at his House in Dorchester near Boston 1732. He was a generous,
facetious, good-natured Gentleman.

Samuel Shute, a military Man, Brother to Lord B^rrington, was appointed
Governor March 14. 1715, 16, by the Solicitation of Jonathan Belcher, Esquire a
very noted Merchant of New England, and afterward Governor there: Col. Shute
arrived in Boston October. 4. 1716, Mr. Dummer (I cannot avoid heaping Encomiums
upon him) was his Lieut.-Governor; Mr. Dummer an honest Man, his Knowledge in
Politics did not biass him; he was a natural Patron of his Country, and his
good Management in the Indian War during his Administration, with small
Expense, will perpet^ate his Memory with all true Lovers of New England. Col.
Shute, being a good natured easy Governor, some ill-natured designing Men in
the House of Representatives, attempted, by Way of Precedent (if passed) to
encroach upon the Prerogative; Col. Shute instead of sending Home, was well
advised to carry Home Complaints, Governors and other Royal Officers when
Complaints are lodged, or to be lodged at the Boards in Great Britain, Pro or
Co^; these Officers appearing at Home in Person, always turns to their best
Accounts. Attorneys or Agents do not answer so well; many Instances may be
produced, but the Case is notorious.
and back them there. Which accordingly he did, Nov. 1722; being seven
Complaints against the House of Representatives encroaching upon the Royal
Prerogative, see P. 379; he obtained a Redress of all these Complaints; being
aged not fit to go abroad, for his good Services he obtained a Pension of 400
L. Sterling. per Annum for Life.

Upon Governor Shute's going Home, the chief Command in the Administration,
devolved upon Lieut.-Governor Dummer, whose good Administration is universally
celebrated, and requires no Encomium of mine: He is alive and in good Health at
this present Writing, he continued Commander in chief until the Arrival of
Governor Burnet in Boston, July 19. 1728; upon Governor Burnet's Death, Sept.
7. 1729, he was again in the Chair, until the Arrival of Governor Belcher, Apr.
8. 1730.

William Burnet, Esquire a Son of the ce^ebrated Bishop Burnet of Salisbury, a
noted Divine, Politician, Antiquary, and Historian; this Mr. Burnet was
Comptroller General of the Customs in Great Britain, with a Salary of 1200L
Ster. pr. An. he exchanged with Governor Hunter of New York, whose Health
required his going Home. -- Upon the Accession of our present King GEORGE II,
Col. Montgomery a Favorite was appointed Governor of New York, and Mr. Burnet
in Nov. 1727, was appointed Governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay, he
arrived in Boston, July 13. 1728, he died there Sept. 7. 1729, much lamented.
When in the Government of New York, he was useful in promoting natural History;
by a Quadrant of a large Radius, and well divided; by a good Telescope of 18
Feet; and by a second Pendulum of large Vibrations, he made several good
Astronomical Observations, toward ascertaining Latitudes, Longitudes, etc. in
that Province.

Lieut.-Governor Dummer, upon Mr. Burnet's Death, was chief in the
Administration for several Months, until the Arrival of Governor Belcher, Aug.
8. 1730. Jonathan Belcher, Esquire a Native of New England, of a good clear
paternal Estate, and consequently of a true natural Interest in the Country; in
his younger Days had a very liberal and polite Education* having visited many
Courts in Europe, and particularly was well received at the Court of Hanover.
During his Government he religiously adhered to his Instructions: If he had
been continued two or three Years longer in the Administration, our pernicious
fraudulent Paper-Currency, would have all been cancelled, whereas ever since
his Dismission it has pejorated. He was superseded by Governor Shirley's
Commission for Governor, which arrived August 14. 1741. There were by Artifice
several Complaints against Governor Belcher sent Home partly from New England,
and partly hatched in London; which have since been discovered to be false and
forged. I shall mention a few of them, 1. That he was a Friend to the
fraudulent Land-Bank Scheme; whereas it has since evidently appeared, that he
was offered by the Land Bank Managers, a retaining Fee of some Thousands of
Pounds (appropriated for himself, or a subsequent Governor) to conciliate his
Countenance in the Affair, and to promote the Managers to Offices of Honor,
Profit and Trust; with a Land-Bank Promise to promote the Governor's Interest
in the House of Representatives, (being a Land Bank or Debtor's House) as to
Salary and Perquisites. Mr. Belcher rejected this Proffer with Disdain, and at
one Time negatived Thirteen of their elected Counselors (here was a Projection
for Debtors in a legislative Capacity to defraud their Creditors, by
depreciating the Debt) and disqualified many Justices of the Peace, Promoters
of these unwarrantable Schemes, and mischievous unlawful Undertakings, as
expressed in the Act of Parliament, 1741. 2. A Letter signed by five forged
Hands, toSir CharlesWager first of the Admiralty-Board, intimating, that Mr.
Belcher countenanced the Timbermen, in cutting of Masting White Pine Trees, to
be converted into Logs for Deal-Boards. 3. A spurious Letter under a
suppositious Cover of Benjamin Colman, D. D. to Mr. Holden (a Dissenter) a
Director of the Bank of England, and of great Influence; this Letter says, that
the Concerned, are many of the principal Ministers of the Presbyterian and
Congregational Persuasion in New England. No Signers to this Letter, alleging,
that their Signing might be the Occasion of their utter Ruin by Mr. Belcher,
but promise upon Mr. Belcher's being superseded to publish all their Names.
This Letter intimates that Governor Belcher, by his Intimacy and frequent
Conferences with the Rev. Commissary P -- e and Dr. C -- r, Ministers of the
Church of England, was contriving the Ruin of the dissenting Interest in
New England -- These with some other villainous Complaints and Suggestions
occasioned the Removal of Mr. Belcher; upon his going Home, he evinced all
these Complaints to be forged, false or frivolous; and the Court, in the
Interim conferred upon him the Government of the New Iersies, where he is at
present, happy in the Affections of the People. A short Account of the
abandoned Contrivers and Managers of Mr. Belcher's Affair, is referred to the
Appendix.

William Shirley, Esquire a Gentleman of the Law, who had resided and practiced Law
in New England for some Years, succeeded Mr. Belcher, in August 1741, and
continues Governor at this Writing, December 1748. A Gentleman in the
Administration ( ante obitum nemo, that is, before his Political Death) is not
to be used with Freedom, it is a Trespass against the Subordination, requisite
in Society: Therefore I must defer the short Account of this Gentleman's
personal Character, and Administration to the Appendix; lest, if applauded, it
might be deemed Adulation and Flattery; or if censured, may be construed
Insult, Detraction, and Resentment; which are not consistent with the Character
of an impartial Historian -- Our present Lieut.-Governor, Successor of Col.
Tailer, is Spencer Phips, Esquire a Country-Gentleman, adopted Name and Heir by Act
of Assembly to Sir William Phips.

These are the Governors and Lieutenant or Deputy-Governors appointed at Home,
from the Date of the New Charter 1691, to December 1748; the other royal
Officers, reserved by Charter, to be appointed by the Court of Great Britain
are the Secretary, and Judge of Vice-Admiralty: It may not be improper here to
annex a short Account of their Succession.

SECRETARIES. Isaac Addington, Esquire the first Secretary was appointed by the
Charter, during Pleasure, he was a Person of great Integrity; he died 1715, and
was succeeded by Capt. Woodward, a military Man, and of good Learning; Mr.
Woodward resigned 1717, in Favor of Mr. Willard, an honest, upright and pious
Gentleman, he continues Secretary at this present Writing.

The Charter reserves to the Crown, the Exercise of any Admiral Court or
Jurisdiction, by Commissions to be issued under the great Seal of
Great Britain, or under the Seal of the High Admiral, or of the Commissioners
for executing the Office of High Admiral. This Court of Vice-Admiralty consists
of a Judge, a King's Advocate, a Register, and a Marshal. A sole Judge, without
a Jury, in Cases of high Consequence; and this Judge too frequently appointed
at Random, seems to be an Error in the Constitution: It is true, there may be
an Appeal to a Court of Delegates in Great Britain.

The Succession of Judges, was, viz.

Wait Winthrop, Esquire May 22, 1699, appointed Judge of Admiralty for New York,
Massachusetts Bay, Connecticut, Rhode Island, and New Hampshire.

Mr. Atwood, Judge of Admiralty for the Colonies of New Hampshire,
Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, and the Iersies; being
the Northern District of Custom-House Officers. He appointed Nov. 10. 1701, Mr.
Newton his Deputy.

Roger Mempesson, Esquire April 1. 1703, had a Commission as Judge for
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York and
Iersies.

Nathaniel Byfield, Esquire Dec. 13, 1703, had the like Commission.

John Menzies, Esquire of the Faculty of Advocates in Scotland, appointed Judge,
Aug. 26. 1715, for New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, and Rhode Island.

Upon the Death of Judge Menzies, 1728, Robert Auchmuty, Esquire was appointed by
Governor Burnet, Judge pro tempore.

Nathaniel Byfield (formerly the Judge of Admiralty) was appointed Judge by
Governor Burnet; and confirmed from Home, Nov. 5. 1728, as Judge for
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay and Rhode Island.

The abovesaid Robert Auchmuty, Esquire succeeded him Sept. 6, 1733.

Mr. Auchmuty was superseded by Chambers Russel, Esquire Sept. 1747.

All the Officers of this Court of Vice-Admiralty have a Power of substituting
or deputizing. The present Deputy Judge is George Cradock, Esquire of many Years
Experience in this Court.

Besides, this Court of Vice-Admiralty, in each of the Provinces and Colonies,
there is a Justiciary Court of Admiralty for Trial of Piracies and other Crimes
committed upon the High Seas, the Members of this Court are various in the
various Colonies; in the Province of Massachusetts Bay, the Judges are, the
Governor, the Council, the Secretary, the Judge of Vice-Admiralty, the Captain
of the King's Station Ships of War, the Surveyor-General of the Northern
District of Customs, and the Collector of the Customs for the Port of Boston.

The Survey of the royal Timber, especially of Masting Trees, extends over the
Northern Provinces and Colo^ies; the Officers are appointed from Home, and are
a Surveyor General, with four subordinate Surveyors; the whole Charge of this
Survey is 800 L. St. per Annum, with considerable riding Charges, paid by the
Navy-Office.

The Officers belonging to the Collections of Customs are from Home appointed
by the Treasury-Board, and warranted by the Commissioners of the Customs in
Great Britain. In this Province there are but two Collections Boston and Salem.

A Deputy-Auditor, is commissioned by the Auditor-General in Great Britain, to
audit the Treasurer's Provincial Accounts; but Anno 1721, this was declared by
the General Assembly of the Province, to be inconsistent with their Charter; it
never is put in Execution.

Some Account of the second Negative in the Legislature of the Province of
Massachusetts Bay; that is, of the King's or Governor's Council, called the
Honorable Board.
This Council consists of 28 Assistants or Counselors, to be advising and
assisting to the Governor, and to constitute one Negative in the Legislature,
analogous to the House of Lords in Great Britain. The first Set were appointed
in the Charter, and to continue until the last Wednesday in May 1693, and until
others shall be chosen in their Stead. I do here insert the Names of the 28
Counselors appointed by Charter, whereof there are none surviving at this
present Writing, as it is an Honor to their Families or Posterity. Simon
Broadstreet John Richards Nathaniel Saltonstall Wait Winthrop John Phillips
James Russel Samuel Sewall Samuel Appleton Bartholomew Gidney John Hathorn
Elisha Hutchinson Robert Pike Jonathan Curwin John Ioliffe Adam Winthrop
Richard Midlecot John Foster Peter Sergeant Joseph Lynde Samuel Heyman Stephen
Mason Thomas Hinkley William Bradford John Walley Barnabas Lothrop John Alcot
Samuel Daniel Sylvanus Davis, Esqrs.
"Yearly once in every Year hereafter, the aforesaid Number of 28 Counselors
shall be by the General Court or Assembly newly chosen, i. e. of the
Proprietors or Inhabitants in the Old Colony of Massachusetts Bay, 18; formerly
New Plymouth, 4; formerly the Province of Maine, 3; Duke of York's former
Property, lying between Sagadahock River and Nova Scotia, 1." Two Counselors
more to be chosen at large.

The Counselors are annually chosen last Wednesday of May, by a joint Vote of
the last Year's Counselors, and the new House of Representatives. This
Negative is called The Board.

There seems to be some Inconveniences in the Constitution of this Negative;
they may be INTIMIDATED by the first Negative the Governor, as he has a Power
of negativing any Councellor's Election without adducing Reasons; they stand in
AWE of the Members of the third Negative, as to their Election by the House of
Representatives; thus they appear not to be FREE Agents,

The Council are assisting to the Governor (Seven makes a Board) by their
Advice and Consent in appointing of all Civil Officers, excepting those of the
Finances.

The Governor and Council have the Probate of Wills, of granting
Administrations and of Divorces; they appoint a subordinate Judge of Probates
in each County.

The Governor with the Advice and Consent of the Council, nominates and
appoints Judges, Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, Sheriffs, Justices of the
Peace, and other Officers to our Council and Courts of Justice belonging;
provided that no such Appointment be made, without Summons issued out seven
Days before such Nomination or Appointment, unto such of the said Counselors,
as shall be at that Time residing within our said Province.

Formerly under the Old Charter the Counselors or Assistants were elected by
the Votes of the Freemen of the Colony, as is the present Practice of the
neighboring Colonies of Connecticut and Rhode Island; but under the New
Charter (as beforementioned) they are annually chosen by a joint Vote of the
Majority of the Old Board of Counselors, and of the New House of
Representatives. -- Although their Election is annual, the former Counselors
are generally continued; last Election 1748, they were all continued.

When the New Charter first took Place, the Allowance or Wages ^f a Councellor,
was 5 s. per Day Exchange with London, 133 L. New England for 100 L. Sterling;
at present their Wages are 30 s. per Day Exchange with London, Eleven Hundred
Pounds New England, for One Hundred Pounds Sterling, Christmas 1748; in this
Proportion a multiplied public Paper-Credit in Bills has depreciated the
New England Currency; a vast progressive Loss in all personal Estates,
Specialties excepted. We must not reckon Depreciations indifferently by public
Allowance advanced, because the Variation does not observe every where the same
Proportion, v. g. the first Allowance to Counselors was 5 s. Currency per Day,
at present it is 30 s. which is Six for One, Depreciation Allowance; the
Governor's Allowance was 500 L. common Currency per Ann. at present it is 9,
600 L. Old Tenor, or common Currency, which is about Nineteen for One; so much
the Governor i^ at present favored by the House of Representatives, while they
themselves accept of 20 s. presentCurrency Old Tenor, for the original 3 s. per
Day, which is only Six and two Thirds for one. This Difference in Proportions,
is easily accounted for, and if requisite shall be taken Notice of in the
Appendix.


Some Account of the third Negative in the Legislature of the Province of So
called, from the Name of the Tribe of Indians living thereabout^, when the
English first began Settlements there.
Massachusetts Bay; called the Honorable House of Representatives.
The Province of Massachusetts is represented in their Lower House, not by a
Deputation from Counties, Cities and Boroughs, as in Great Britain, and in some
of the British Colonies; but from certain Districts of Land or Country,
incorporated by the Names of Townships, very unequal in Extent, thus
Springfield contains upwards of 100,000 Acres, Medford does not exceed 2000
Acres; but generally they are the Value of six Miles square, being nearly
23,000 Acres: Their Number of Inhabitants is as various, and consist of one to
five Parishes.

The Charter declares "each of the said Towns and Places, being hereby
empowered to elect and depute two Persons and no more, to serve for and
represent them respectively in the said great General Court or Assembly. To
which great General Court or Assembly, to be held as aforesaid, we do hereby,
for us, our Heirs and Successors, give and grant full Power and Authority from
Time to Time, to direct, appoint, and declare what Number, each County, Town,
and Place, shall elect and depute, to serve for, and represent them
respectively, in the said great and General Court or Assembly.

This last Clause gives a very great Latitude to our General Assemblies to
regulate the Representation of the Country. 1. The Charter says, each Place is
empowered to depute two Persons and no more; Boston is allowed to send four; it
is true, that equitably, considering their Taxes and Number of Inhabitants in
Proportion to the whole Colony Representation; they might be allowed to send
Twenty, but such Proportions are not observed in Great Britain our
Mother Country, perhaps for Reasons of State. 2. By Acts of Assembly all
Townships under 120 qualified Voters are restricted to send one and no more,
whereas by Charter any Township may send two. 3. The Charter does not limit the
Number of qualified Voters in any Township or Place constituted, to enable them
to send Representatives; they seem to be limited by Acts of Assembly, but with
this reasonable Qualification, that no Township consisting of less than 80
legal Voters shall be obliged, that is fined for the not sending of a
Rep^^^entative. 4. Lately (by Instruction to the Governor, or otherways, I am
not certain) this Province have constituted Townships, with all Town or
Corporation Privileges, excepting that of deputing Representatives to the
General Assembly; though the Charter expressly says, that they all may send
Representatives: It is true, that the multiplying of Townships, especially by
subdividing old large well regulated Townships, into many small jangling
Townships, has been not many Years ago, practiced with particular Views; but
has occasioned an Massachusetts Bay Government though lately curtailed, at
present do summons about 150 Representatives, being more than all of the
following five Provinces, New York 27 East and West New-Ierseys 22 Pensylvania
Proper or Higher 30 The three Lower Counties 18 South Carolina 42 139



INCONVENIENT Number of Representatives; the small Townships, under 80 Voters,
being qualified to send, but not obliged to send Representatives; upon the
Emergency of a Governor's, or any designing Party Interest, they are prompted
to send a Deputy to forward some party Affair.

Incorporating of Townships with all other Town Privileges, excepting that of
sending Representatives; seems to be inconsistent with that Privilege essential
to the Constitution of Great Britain, viz. that all Freeholders of 40 s. per
Annum Income, and others legally qualified are to be represented in the
Legislature and Taxation; as in New England there are no County
Representations, and as they are not in the Humor of being represented by
Counties though agreeable to Charter; it seems consonant to the Constitution,
and will at the same Time obviate the above Inconveniences, that is, that two,
three, four, or more of these new or small Townships, be joined in sending one
or two Representatives, after the Model, settled by the Articles of Union in
Great Britain, for the small Parliament-Towns in Scotland or North-Britain. Our
Plantations in America, New England excepted, have been generally settled, 1.
By Malcontents with the Administrations from Time to Time; 2. By fraudulent
Debtors, as a Refuge from their Creditors; 3. And by Convicts or Criminals, who
chose Transportation rather than Death. These Circumstances make the just Civil
Administration in the Colonies a difficult Performance. An indebted, abandoned,
and avaricio^s Governor, in Collusion with such Miscreants or Villains, is
capable of doing great Iniquity and Damage in a Province; therefore the Court
of Great Britain ought to be very circumspect, and appoint Men of Probity and
Wisdom, for Governors the only Checks; the recommending Minister, may be
interrogated: Is this Candidate or his Wife, any Relation, particular Friend,
or Amica? But we must not insist upon Utopian Governments.

The incident Difficulties which may arise between a Governor in high Power,
and a licentious People, are Problems not easily solved: Liberty without
Obedience is Confusion, and Obedience without Liberty is Slavery; to support a
coercive Power over a giddy People, and to secure the People against the Abuse
of this Power are difficult Problems.

When the Generality of a Province are disgusted with their Governor, let the
Occasion of this Disgust be any how; perhaps it may be advisable to supersede
him by another of equal or more Virtue and Qualifications for Government,
especially where a Governor's Avarice and Villainy are notorious; we gave
Instances in Lowther and Douglass.

All numerous Combinations, Associations, or Partnerships in an absolute
Sovereignty, or depending Provinces, tend to the Subversion, Ruin, or at least,
Confusion of the Society; we have a notorious Instance of this in the Province
of Massachusetts Bay of New England. Anno 1740, a Combination of DESPERATE
DEBTORS, by the Bubble Name of Land Bank, had formed a prevailing Party, which
notwithstanding of their being timely stigmatized and damned by an Act of the
British Parliament, their Influence in the Assembly continues to prevail to
this Time 1749; in a lucid Interval Anno 1746, Journal P. 246, the House of
Representatives, say, "We have been the Means of effectually bringing Distress,
if not Ruin upon our selves. And in Summer 1748, at the Desire of the House of
Representatives a Fast is appointed, " Upon Account of the extreme Drought, a
Punishment for many public Sins we (...) guilty of." This seems borrowed from
the Account of a genera^ Fast appointed by the Assembly, praying God that he
would pardon all the Errors of his Servants and People in a late Tragedy
(meaning the Affair of Salem Witchcraft) raised amongst us by Satan and his
Instruments.

Here is an obvious Political Observation, That notwithstanding the Proceedings
of a Community may be much perverted or vitiated; there are certain Boundaries
which Humanity and the natural Affection which Mankind bear to their Proge^y
cannot exceed* I shall give some few late Instances of it in this Provincial
Government -- 1748 June 3. the Board of Council and House of Representatives in
in a joint Message to the Governor, say, "The great Loss of Inhabitants for
Husbandry and other Labor, and for the Defense of an inland Frontier of about
300 Miles; the vast Load of Debt already contracted, and the unparallelled
growing Charge: the annual Charge of Connecticut Government, at this Time is
about 4000 L. to 5000 L. Old Tenor, whereas Massachusetts Bay Government, only
about O^e Third larger, is at the annual Charge (meaning the present Year) of
400,000 Old Tenor. Moreover, Connecticut is almost out of Debt, and we are
almost two Millions in Debt* INSUPPORTABLE DIFFICULTIES! -- In the same
Journal, the House of Representatives complain, that many Thousands of
Inhabitants, have been carried off from us, by the Expedition against the
Spanish West Indies, by the Expedition against Loui^^ourg, by forming and
recruiting the two American Regiments at Louisbourg, the Protection of
Nova Scotia, the maintaining of Provincial Privateer Vessels, and the Defense
of our Frontiers.

Anno 1747, the Governor insisting upon a further Emission of these
depreciating Bills; the Representatives, though a Paper-Money making House,
could not avoid remonstrating, "if we emit more Bills, we apprehend it must be
followed by a great Impair, if not utter Loss of the public Credit, which
already has been greatly wounded.

June 16. The Board of Council remonstrate, "the neighboring Provinces have
been at little or no Expense of Money or Men; while this Province is reduced to
the utmost Distress, by bearing almost the whole Burden of the Wars.

With public Taxes, we are burdened almost to Ruin. -- The Province is at a
prodigious daily Charge, beyond their Strength Which has involved us in a
prodigious Load of Debt, and in a Manner exhausted our Substance. -- 1746, 7.
March 14. The House of Representatives resolve, "That not only from the immense
Debt the Province is loaded with from the Cape-Breton Expedition, but also from
the Decrease of the Inhabitants; they will make no Establishment the present
Year, for any Forces which shall not be posted within the Bounds of the
Province" -- "Should the whole Sum expended in the late Expedition against
Cape-Breton, be reimbursed u^, we have still a greater Debt remaining, than
ever lay upon any one of his Majesty's Governments in the Plantations.




By Custom all Elections, Provincial, County, or Town are determined not by the
major Vote, but by the Majority of Voters; because where there are more than
two Candidates, a Person may have a major Vote, though not a Majority of the
Voters.

The Votes or Journal of the House of Representatives is regularly printed at a
public Charge, one Copy for each Township, and one Copy for each Member.

The House of Representatives insist upon several Privileges, I shall mention a
few, 1. The Governor's Instructions from the Secretary of State, of the
Deportment, are recommendatory, but not obligatory upon the Representatives of
the People. New England was no military Acquisition orConquest of the Crown
(such Acquisitions, until formally annexed to the Dominions of Great Britain,
are by the Prerogative absolutely under Direction of the Crown) but originally
and essentially belonging to the Dominions of England; and therefore Acts of
Parliament only are obligatory; and no Instruction pecuniary, procured by the
Patron, the Friend, or the Money of a Governor, with an arbitrary (perhaps)
annexed Penalty, of incurring the Displeasure of the Crown, is strictly
observed. A noted and repeated Instance of this we have in the Instruction for
a settled Salary upon the Governor; moreover, they assert, "That they are at
Liberty to vary from any former Grants to Governors, etc; Governor Shute, a
good inoffensive Men was reduced from an Allowance of 1200 L. per Annum common
Currency to 1000 L. 2. That the Council may only concur or not concur, a Tax or
any other Money-Bill, but may make no Amendment; the Affair of supplying the
Treasury always originates in the House of Representatives. 3. Not long since
all Accounts of public Charges, some very trifling, were rendered, audited, and
pass^d by the House of Representatives; not only at a great unnecessary Charge
(our Assembly-Men are all in Pay) of upwards of 100L. per Day, at thatTime for
passing a controverted Account of a few Pounds; but contrary to Charter; the
Words of the Charter are, "the Assembly to impose and levy proportionable and
reasonable Assessments, Rates, and Taxes; upon the Estates and Persons of all
and every the Proprietors or Inhabitants of our said Province or Territory; to
be issued and disposed of, by Warrant under the Hand of the Governor of our
said Province for the Time being, with the Advice and Consent of the Council."
Some Years since, upon Complaint Home, the King in Council has explained this
Affair.

In this Article we shall have frequent Occasion to mention Money-Affairs, viz.
Emissions of public Provincial Bills of Credit, called Paper-Money; Supplies
of the Treasury; annual Taxes, Salaries, and other Government Charges; all
which at various Times have been expressed in various Tenors; viz. Old Tenor,
Middle Tenor, New Tenor first, New Tenor second which in the Face of the Bill
is about 12 per Cent worse than New Tenor first, but from the Inaccuracy of our
People, and an abandoned Neglect of a proper Credit, pass indifferently at the
same Value. But that I may be the more easily understood, I shall by Means of a
small Table (which is the most concise and distinct Manner of representing such
Things) reduce all Tenors to their Value in Old Tenor the Original, and to this
Time 1749 the Denomination of common Currency: And to prevent the Reader's
Trouble in reducing the Value of our Old Tenor from Time to Time (as it has
been generally in a progressive State of Depreciation or Pejoration) to a
proper Standard of Exchange with London, or Value per oz. Mexico Silver. The
Exchange with London is 100 L. Sterling. for -- I have added the Accessions of
Governors for the last half Century, to make it apparent how much our Paper
Currency has depreciated in their respective Administrations. Periods Exc. with
Land. 1 oz. Silv. Acces. ofGov. A.D. 1702 133 6 s. 10 d. h. p Dudley 1705 135 7
s. do. 1713 150 8 s. do. 1716 175 9 s. 3 d. Tailor and Shute 1717 225 12 s. do.
1722 270 14 s. Dummer 1728 340 18 s. Burnet 1730 380 20 s. Belcher 1737 500 26
s. do. 1741 550 28 s. Shirley 1749 1100 60 s. That we may the better estimate
the Differences of Massachusetts present Currency from the present Value of
Currencies in the other British Plantations, Colonies, and Provinces; we
exhibit their present (1748) Exchanges with London.

Currency For 100 L. Sterling. New England 1100 North Carolina 1000 New York 190
South Carolina 750 East-Iersies 190 Barbados 130 West-Iersies 180 Antegoa 170
to 180 Pensylvania 180 St. Christophers 160 Maryland 200 Iamaica 140 Virginia
120 to 125


do. Exchange continues to rise rather than fall, notwithstanding of the
generous Reimbursement granted by the British Parliament, toward paying off
our Provincial Debts incurred by a private Corporation Adventure, in the
Cape-Breton Expedition: Perhaps the Merchants and others are diffident, and
suspect that some subsequent General Assembly (with the Countenance of a
suitable Governor) Worshippers of that wicked Idol, the iniquitous, bubling
Paper Currency, may pervert the proper Application of this Bounty or Donation.
Something of this Kind has lately been a Remora at Home, and has prevented the
Province from receiving of it by their Agents hitherto.

June 15. At the Commencement of the New Charter Jurisdiction, 1692, enacted, a
Continuance of the local and municipal* Laws of the old Charter Jurisdiction,
if not repugnant to the Laws of England, until November 10 following. -- The
fundamental Law or general political Principle of the Colonies of New England,
is, that natural and salutary Maxim, Salus Populi est suprema Lex; they do not
countenance the slavish Doctrines of Non-Resistance, Passive Obedience,
Hereditary indefeasible Right, and the like.

The present enacting Style is, Be it enacted by the Governor, Council, and
House of Representatives.

Thanksgivings and Fasts, ever since Governor Shute's Complaints, have been
appointed by the Governor and Council, at the Desire of the House of
Representatives.

Because all Acts of Assembly, are required by the Charter to be sent Home for
Allowance or Disallowance, therefore many Things are done, by the Name of Order
or Resolve.

Late Years, the Governors are directed by their Instructions not to consent to
Bills of sundry Kinds, until they be sent Home for Approbation -- thus it is in
the Parliament of Ireland.

The General Assembly by their accepting of an explanatory Charter upwards of
Thirty Years since; have curtailed the House of Representatives, from the
Privilege of electing their own Speaker absolutely; that is, a Power is
reserved to the Governor, or any other Commander in chief, to negative or
disapprove any Speaker elected and presented; and that the Representatives so
assembled, shall forthwith elect any other Person to be Speaker, to be approved
or disapproved, in Manner as aforesaid: As also from adjourning of themselves
not exceeding two Days at a Time, without Leave from the Governor, or any other
Commander in chief of the Province.

When a joint Committee of both Houses is appointed, generally one Third is
from the Council, and two Thirds from the Representatives.

Although the Military, are the absolute Prerogative of the King and of his
Representative the Governor; the Assembly, especially the House of
Representatives, do upon extraordinary Occasions, in Faithfulness to their
Constituents complain, and in some Measure admonish the Governor: We shall
adduce a few late Instances. -- 1746, The House by Message to the Governor,
say, that they suspect the Governor's inlisting Men for his Louisbourg
Regiment, out of the impressed Frontier Forces: The Governor denies this, but
acknowledges that he had allowed the Frontier Soldiers to be inlisted in the
Canada Expedition, and to impress Men in their Place -- It does not appear to
us necessary or convenient, for this Government, any Ways to concern themselves
in building of a Fort at the great Carrying-Place from Hudson's River to Wood
Creek in the Government of New York. -- The Forces, particularly upon the
Eastern Frontiers, have been very negligent in scouting, and all other military
Services; there have been many Ineffectives, Inhabitants of several Townships;
to do Duty in their own Townships, have been inlisted, paid, and victualled,
though they only followed their own private Business, "this is very abusive to
the Government, as well as injurious to these exposed Parts." -- 1747, The
Assembly represent "the Husbandry, Manufactures, and Navigation of the
Province; have suffered much by multiplied Expeditions." -- "We have by our
past Actions proved our selves zealous for his Majesty's Service; but our
Unhappiness is, that although the same Disposition remains, yet we are in a
Manner incapacitated to promote it for the future.

The House of Representatives frequently complain of their being involved in
unnecessary and improper Charges. 1747 April 21. "We apprehend that we have
made considerable Grants for the Protection and Encouragement of the Six Indian
Nations of New York Government, beyond what has been done by New York it self,
in whose Borders these Indians are situated.

There are many Altercations amongst the three Negatives; when this happens in
the Parliament of Great Britain, as it is very seldom, it is as a Prodigy; such
Differences lessen the Respect due from the People to each Negative in the
Legislature. Each of those Negatives, moreover, at Times vary Our Go -- e -- r
for certain Political Reasons which we shall not now dive into, sees meet to
vary from Time to Time. -- Soon after his Accession June 1742, in a Message to
the House, gives wholesome paternal Advice, 1. That long Sessions are very
expensive to the Province. 2. He entreats them to keep the Province clear of
Debt, which instead of decreasing, will continually increase their Encumbrances
-- 3. 1741 August 17, in his first Speech, "A Creditor who has the Misfortune
of having an out standing Debt, of the Value of 1000 L. Sterling. contracted Anno
1730, can now receive no more in our Courts of Judicature (unless in a Case of
Specialty) than the Value of about 650 L. Sterling. the great Injustice and
Oppression of which, upon the Creditor, has a great Tendency to introduce a
Spirit of Dishonesty into this Community." -- 4. 1741 Oct. 14. " Restraints
upon Emissions, which his Majesty has been graciously pleased, out of his
Paternal Affection to his People to do, and has thereby saved this Province
from greater Ruin" -- "It is the Injustice of those Bills, which has plunged us
into those Difficulties -- in some subsequent Assemblies "the securing to every
Creditor, the just Value of his Debt, is a Piece of Justice, hitherto unknown
to your Laws or Courts of Judicature" -- 5. "The Province being so long
acc^stomed, to estimate Province Bills of public Credit, according to their
nominal Value, is grown quite insensible of their real Value," -- 1744 Nov. 29,
he well observes in his Speech with Regard to multiplying Paper Currency, "and
can such a Proceeding be thought beneficial to the Country? Can it possibly be
deemed either prudent with Respect to yourselves, or just with Regard to your
Posterity. -- 1747, 8, Feb. 3. "the general Distress of the Province, arising
from the extraordinary Emissions of Paper Money, whereby the Value thereof, for
all Occasions of Life, is sunk so low, and is still sinking; and thereby the
Estates of Orphans and Widows, and of many others who have no Remedy in their
Power, against this growing Evil, daily diminishing; which must in very little
Time bring many good Families to Ruin."

On the other Side of the Question; we may observe, that, 1. Of late Years, the
Sessions of Assembly, are longer and more frequent, than ever; for Instance,
the annual Assembly of 1746, did sit about 30 Weeks at the daily Charge (our
Assembly-Men are all in Pay) of near 150 L. 2. Our Provincial Debt 1741, when
Mr. Belcher was superseded, was about 130,000 L.; at present 1749, it is about
two Millions. -- 3. "The great and sudden Depreciations of Province-Bills, is
owing to the immoderate Price of Exchange and Silver -- 4. Ian. 15. 1741, 2, "
The Instruction, containing a restraining Clause in emitting Bills of Credit,
is remitted: As this is an Alteration, which I am persuaded (Speech to the
Assembly) will be very agreeable unto you, and has been occasioned through my
Accession to the Government; I mention it to you with no SMALL SATISFACTION. --
5. In a Speech to the Assembly, "from 1718 to 1743, in constant Practice all
Debts upon Book, Note, Bond, or Mortgage, were discharged in Province Bills
Penny for Penny, that is, in the nominal Sum; which he deems to be equitable,
because both Creditor and Debtor, tacitly run the Chance of the rising or
falling of those Bills." N. B. This was the common Cant of the Land Bank
Managers and other Debtors; the Forbearance and Indulgence of Creditors is
ridiculed, as much, as if a Person entrusted by another with Money or Goods,
should turn Bankrupt and laugh at his Friend for his Trust, alleging, that it
was in his Option, to trust or not trust him. How provoking is this, to an
honest Man, for his Good Nature and Compassion to have his Estate first by a
private, and afterward by a more open and daring Combination of the Debtors
reduced in a reverse Proportion of 12 s. to 30 s. the Price of Silver from Anno
1718 to 1743, and from 30 s. to 60 s. as it is Anno 1749; and afterward be
laughed at as a silly Fool.

And in Fact, how could a Person remedy himself with the strictest Sagacity in
the following Cases? A Man lets out Money upon Mortgage May 1745, Exchange with
London 650 L. Currency for 100 L. Sterling*; in the Space of three Years May 1748,
Exchange is 1100 L. Currency for 100 L. Sterling.: A Creditor all this Time cannot
recover his Money, because by the Laws of the Province, near one Year (by
Appeals and Reviews) is required to bring a Bond to final Judgment, and the
Equity of Redemption is three Years more: Moreover, the public Loans and the
private Bank Loans were conditioned at 10 to 15 Years Forbearance, which with
the abovesaid four Years additional; makes an unavoidable Forbearance of 14 to
19 Years: Further, some of the Loan 1716 (a great Damage to the Public) is not
sued out at this present Writing. How is it possible to provide against the
continued great Depreciations during so many Years?

As it does not belong to any Provincial Assembly, to explain Acts of
Parliament; because they may be deemed sufficient to execute themselves, under
the Agency of the Colony executive Courts; I do not pretend to be Statesman
sufficient, to account for a Bill brought into our Court of Legislature yearly,
for these eight Years last past; entitled, A Bill for the more speedy finishing
of the Land-Bank Scheme; as it is never brought to an Issue, perhaps some may
call it, rather a Bill of Grace.

Governor Shirley in his Speech October 14. 1741, "Nothing is more easy, than
to secure to every Creditor his just Due, let the Bills depreciate never so
much, by enabling the King's Judges to do Justice to every Creditor in that
Particular -- It is the Injustice of our Bills which has plunged us into these
Difficulties." But as this Advice has not been followed or repeated, the
Creditors have generally suffered in the reverse Proportion of 60 to 30 in a
few Years; such is the malignant Nature of this depascent Ulcer, that nothing
but the Extirpation or Excision of this, can save our Body Politic; delenda
est.

I desire Readers, not affected with Paper-Currencies, may excuse Prolixity;
when this vil^ Chimaera or Monster comes in my Way, I cannot contain my self.

This Scheme for fraudulent Debtors to cheat their Creditors, was first
projected Anno 1714, by I. C. The Maxim or Basis was by multiplied Emissions to
depreciate the nominal Value of our Currency; thus the Difference between the
nominal Value, at any Time when paid, and its real Value when lent or
contracted for; was a fraudulent Gain to the Debtor, and a very injurious Loss
to the honest Creditor; for Instance, Anno 1713, Exchange with London 150 L.
Currency for 100 L. Sterling.; at present 1749, by Depreciations we are at 1100 L.
Currency for 100 L. Sterling.; that is in successive Dealings, the Creditor has
lost six in seven of his Debts or Contracts, which is the Debtor's crafty Gain.
There were various Essays made from Time to Time, to arrive to this
Depreciation, the last was miraculously the most successful. 1. Emitting Bills
of p^blick Credit, not only for the ordinary and necessary Charges of
Government, but for public Loans to private Persons, viz. Anno 1714. ^0,000 L.
Anno 1716, 100,000 L. Anno 1721, 50,000 L. Anno 1727, 60,000 L. at long Credit,
this had a considerable Effect in Favor of Debtors, but some Inconveniences
and I^st^^^ions put a Stop to it. 2. Postponing the cancelling of Emissions;
thus Emissions yearly multiplied, and the cancelling of them delayed, increased
this Flood of a base Currency. 3. Notes of private Associations designed to be
upon a Par, current with public Bills of Credit, would have multiplied this
false Currency immensly, but from private Complaints sent Home, this was
crushed in Embrio, by Act of the British Parliament 1741. 4. At length by
multiplied expensive Expeditions, they compassed their Designs to the greatest
Extent, or to a ne plus Ultra, which it is to be hoped the Parliament of
Great Britain in their wonted Goodness, will rectify in their present Session.

I am sorry that upon any Occasion, or in any Respect; I should give Offense to
any particular Person, or to any Number of Men: It is not from Malice or
Resentment: It cannot be imagined, that in Course, writing unavoidable
historical Truths, I should designedly and maliciously reflect upon the Country
and its municipal Jurisdiction; this is my Altera Patria, from upwards of
thirty Years Residence.

However, the Creatures of any Ministry at Home, may from Time to Time find
Fault with the Liberty of the Fress, which they represent as licentious; the
Courts of Judicature, which by good Providence a^e independent of the Ministry,
vindicate the Press, if not too licentious, and find Fault with their despotick
Accus^rs.

While I write mere Facts with proper Vouchers and in a good Light; I use only
that Liberty (not Licentiousness) of the Press, which seems sacred and
essential to the British Constitution; as we have no general Intendants as in
the French Constitution, every Historical Writer with us, may be a So^ of
I^^endant or Check upon Provincial Administration; for Instance, as the House
of Representatives, are the grand Inquest of the Province, especially as to
^^isdemeanors in the Administration: May I not take Hint from ^^eir Journals,
v. g. Although as above the Colony of C^^^ecticut are to this Province as two
to three; Connecticut is almost out of Debt, and we are about two Millions
Currency in Debt; the annual public Charges of Connecticut are 4000 to 5000 L.
Currency, those of Massachusetts Bay are about 400,000 L.: Which vast
proportional Difference, is said to be owing to the Differences in the
Frugality and Integrity of their respective Administrations. 2. The
Representatives in their Journals seem to complain of universal infectious
Corruption, viz. That Officers from the highest to the lowest, were iniqui^^^^
in their Perquisites: The Field-Officers, Captain^, and others were ^omplained
against for extorting Money from the private Men, as a Commission of receiving
their Wages, and for certifying their (...) Service; for buying their Wages or
Pay at a great Discount; for (...) Money in the Discharge or Exchange of
impressed Men; and for false incomplete Muster-Rolls: These Things are all
wisely provided against by the General Assembly, but the executive Part of the
Administration seem to connive; for Instance, by a late Act "if any Person
authorized, shall exact or take any Reward, to discharge or spare any
(Soldiers) from said Service, he shall forfeit Ten Pounds for every Twenty
Shillings he shall so exact or take:" In this Case many Officers have been
notoriously guilty, but not called to Account.

The whole Legislature, for Reasons best known to themselves, do at Times
jointly vary from their former Notions of Affairs: A noted Instance of this was
Anno 1741, a Sum of 127.125 L. in public Bills of Credit to be cancelled by
Taxes, conform to the emitting Acts of Assembly; so high a Tax was judged
inconvenient, and it was divided amongst the three subsequent Years: Anno 1748
the Province poorer by Expedition Losses of working Men, and by Ship building,
and other Articles of Trade failing, the Province Tax for the Year is enacted,
at upwards of 400,000 L. The Reimbursements granted by Parliament was designed
to payoff the public Bills of Credit, that is the Provincial Debt contracted
by the Cape-Breton Expedition.


from themselves, by contradictory Speeches, Messages, and reconsidering of
their Votes, I write with the Liberty and Freedom which is essential to the
British Constitution.

Upon the Arrival of the new Charter of the Province of Massachusetts Bay;
their first General Assembly or Legis^^ture convened in June 1692; in the first
Place they continued the municipal Laws (not repugnant to the Laws of England)
of the old Charter Administration, for a few Months until a small Body of new
Laws could be formed.

By this new Charter, see P. 374 of this Summary, the House of Representatives
is constituted in this Manner, viz. Every Year and for ever upon the last
Wednesday of May, and at all other Times as the Governor shall think fit, shall
be held a General Court or Assembly* the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of
the respective Towns and Places are empowered to depute two Persons and no
more, to represent them in the General Assembly. The Qualification of an
Elector is 40 s. at least per An. Freehold, or other Estate to the Value of 50
L. Sterling.

The present Practice by Acts or Resolves of the General Assembly, and by
Custom. Boston sends four Deputies or Representatives; Salem, Ipswich, Newbury,
Marblehead, and Charlestown, generally send two each; from the otherTowns which
send Representatives, each send one; we have not got into the Method directed
by Charter for two or more small Townships joining, to send a Representation,
which would prevent the Inconveniency of multiplying Representatives, and would
restore to the constituted, incorporated Townships (by Charter qualified, and
by the British Constitution privileged to be represented) that Privilege of
which they are abridged by being refused to send a Representative, as we have
no general County-Elections.

By Act of Assembly, first Year of the Charter 1692, each Town consisting of 30
to 40 qualified Electors may (at their Option) send or not send one
Representative; each Town of 40 qualified are injoined to send one
Representative; each Town of 120 qualified may send two Representatives; no
Town, Boston excepted (which may send four) are at any Time to send more than
two Representatives. Writs for calling a General Assembly to issue from the
Secretary's Office Thirty Days before their Meeting, directed to the
Select-Men, as returning Officers, the Returns to be made into the Secretary's
Office one Day at the least before the Time prefixed for the meeting of the
General Assembly -- Forty Representatives to constitute a House -- Penalty for
Non-Attendance 5 s. per Day. All Representatives with one Son or Servant each,
to have personal Protection during their Sessions, excepting in Cases of
Treason or Felony.

By Act of Assembly 1693, the Qualification of a Voter, for a Representative,
is reduced from the Charter Qualification of 50 L. Sterling. principal Estate to
40 L. Sterling. -- Representatives must be Freeholders and Residents in the Town
for which they are chosen.

Anno 1726, No Town under the Number of 60 qualified Electors be obliged to
send a Representative -- 1730 No Town under the Number of 80 qualified Electors
be obliged to send a Representative -- About one Third of the Townships which
have Precepts sent them, send no Representatives.

Here we shall insert by Way of Table, the Number of Precepts issued out, and
the Number of Members returned to the House of Representatives from ten Years
to ten Years (to mention every Year would be tedious, and of no Use) in each
County.

A List of Precepts sent, and of Returns made 1708 to 1748.
1708 1718 1728 1738 1748 Precepts. Returns. Precepts. Returns. Precepts.
Returns. Precepts. Returns. Precepts. Returns. Suffolk 19 13 14 15 16 17 17 17
18 16 Essex 17 17 20 19 19 18 20 20 19 18 Midlesex 22 18 20 20 28 20 33 22 32
25 Hampsh. 8 6 7 7 11 7 12 7 17 9 Worcester 18 8 22 5 Plymouth 7 5 8 8 10 9 13
10 13 8 Barnsta. 6 4 5 5 8 6 9 6 6 6 Bristol 11 7 10 9 12 11 15 10 11 8 York 3
2 3 3 7 5 10 7 11 5 D. County 3 1 3 2 3 3 3 Nantuck. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Total
97 74 91 88 115 94 151 108 153 101

N. B. Anno 1731 Some Townships were taken from the Counties of Suffolk,
Middlesex, and Hampshire; and formed into a new County called the County of
Worcester.

As this History seems to swell too much for the Perusal of the People in our
Infant Colonies, who in general are not Bookish, and do not apply themselves to
read Books of any considerable Bulk; I must forbear inserting the long List of
the Townships in Massachusetts Bay Province.

We shall here only observe, that our Townships or Districts of Land, may be
distinguished into four Sorts. 1. Incorporated Townships which are served with
Precepts, and generally send Representatives, this Year they are in Number 95.
2. Incorporated Townships, which are served with Precepts, but generally do not
send Representatives, this present Year they are 58; their Number being so
large, is occasioned by their Poverty, which proceeds from their laboring
young Men being taken away, that is, depopulated by multiplied Expeditions, and
their being peculated by multiplied Taxes; formerly our Province Tax was from
Six Thousand to (in great Exigencies) Forty Thousand Pound per Ann; whereas
this present Year 1748 the Provincial Tax upon Polls and Estates is Three
Hundred seventy-seven Thousand nine Hundred ninety two Pounds, and Excises
doubled; thus they cannot well spare 30 s. a Day the present Wages of
aRepresentative. 3. Townships incorporated, but in express Words debarred from
sendingRepresentatives; these are but few inNumber, because lately introduced;
this seems Anti-Constitutional, that (as we have no County Representatives)
Persons of good Estates real and personal should in no manner be represented,
as if they were Aliens, Servants or Slaves. 4. Townships or Districts granted
to a Number of Proprietors, but as the Conditions of the Grant, particularly
the settling of a certain Number of Families in a limited Space of Time, are
not fully performed, they are not as yet qualified to be constituted, by Act of
Assembly, with all Town Privileges; of those there are many, especially in
those Lands which lately were taken from the Province of Massachusetts Bay, and
annexed to the Crown in Property, and to the Province of New Hampshire in
Jurisdiction. N. B. This late Boundary Line cut off from Massachusetts Bay
Province, the constituted, but not represented Townships of Rumford and
Litchfield upon Merimack River; of Winchester upon Connecticut River; with Part
of the constituted Townships of Nottingham and Dunstable upon Merimack River;
Part of Groton, and Townshe^d, Part of Northfield upon Connecticut River: the
other Districts or Grants not incorporated anne^ed to New Hampshire, were,
Herrys Town, Contacook, the nine Townships commonly called the Double Row of
Frontier Towns against the French and their Indian Auxiliaries, the Row of four
Townships upon the East Side of Connecticut River, the Row of two Townships
West Side of Connecticut River, About 20 Years since, and for some following
Years, the General Assembly of the Province were in the Humor of dividing and
appropriating most of the then reckoned Provincial or unoccupied Lands; that in
Case of future Claims by the Crown, etc. by Possession they might retain at
least the Property: This was provident and good Policy, and accordingly upon
settling the Line between the two Provinces, the Property of the abovesaid
Districts, was in the Commission reserved to these Possessors; but lately the
Heirs and Assigns of Mr. Mason, original Grantee of New Hampshire, have
intimidated the Massachusetts Proprietors, and brought sundry of them to
compound for a valuable Quit-Claim, whereas if by Contribution of the present
Proprietors (a mere Trifle to each of them) they by Petition had carried the
Affair before the King in Council, they would have been quieted in their
Property, and obviated any further Claims, such as the Claims of Col. Allen's
Heirs, Mr. Mason's general Assignee; and of the Claims of the Million Purchase
lately revived, which may likewise be converted into Bubbles.

Our General Assembly at that Time were in such a Hurry to appropriate the
vacant Lands, that several old Townships were encouraged to petition for an
additional new Township; and when they were satiated, the Assembly introduced
by Way of Bounty to the Descendents of the Soldiers in the Indian War of King
Philip (so called) 1675, and of the Soldiers in Sir William Phipps's Expedition
against Canada, Anno 1690; thus nine Townships were granted to each of these
Expeditions: Thus no Lands (excepting in the inland back Wilderness of the
Province of Main) were left to recompense the Descendents of the particular
Sufferers (the Province in general was an unaccountable Sufferer) in the
unforeseen and inconceivable (because rash) Expedition against Louisbourg, our
Administration perhaps did not understand the Doctrine of Chances; but by good
Providence, though the Chance was upwards of a Million to One against us, we
gained the Prize, not by playing away Men (as is the Phrase in Flanders) in
being killed, but by the Poltroonery of the French Garrison; this must not be
understood as detracting from the New England Militia Troops, who are noted for
their Courage as Bull-Dogs (excuse the Expression) where they fix, they never
quit hold, until they conquer, or are cut to Pieces.


Canada to Gallop and others, Canada to Sylvester and others, Lower Ashuelot,
Upper Ashuelot, Canada to Rowley, Canada to Ipswich, Canada to Salem, Canada to
Beverly, Naraganset No. 3. Naraganset No. 5, Lanes New-Boston, Township to
Ipswich, in all 29 Grants transferred to New Hampshire Jurisdiction: The other
granted, but not constituted Townships, which remain in the Province of
Massachusetts Bay, are, in the Province of Main, Township to Cape-Anne or
Gloucester, Township to Powers and others, Township to Marblehead, Naraganset,
No. 7, Naraganset, No. 1, and Philip's Town upon Salmon Falls River; between
Merimack River and Connecticut River are Canada to Dorchester, Canada to
Ipswich, Canada to Roxbury, Township to Wells and others, Township to Salem,
Nichawoag, Pequioug, Naraganset, No. 6, Naraganset, No. 2, Townshend: On the
West Side of Connecticut River, are the Grants of Fall-fight Township, of
Canada to Hunt, and others; Naraganset, No. 4, Townships to Boston, No. 1, 2,
3, Upper Housatonick, four more Housatonicks, and Bedford; making in all Grants
not incorporated, 28 in the Province of Massachusetts Bay not alienated; and 29
transferred as to Jurisdiction, to the Province of New Hampshire.

The Affair of the above Townships is variable, and of no permanent Use, but
this may serve a future curious Historian, as an accurate Account for the State
of the Year 1749.

There are a few Things, in which the House of Representatives of the Province
of Massachusetts Bay in New England (which in all Respects is the principal
British Colony) do vary from the Practice of the House of Commons in
Great Britain. I shall mention two, which must not be deemed constitutional, as
being only by sundry Acts of the General Assembly, and consequently if
inconvenient, may be repealed or altered by some subsequent Act.

1. That a Representative must be a It is said, that Anno 1693, there were some
Boston Gentlemen Representatives for some of the Out-Towns, but not agreeable
to the then Rev. I. M -- th -- r; Mr. B -- f -- d for Bristol is mentioned; Mr.
M -- of great Interest with the weak Governor Phipps, and with the devotionally
bigoted House, procured this Act.
Resident in the Township for which he is elected. As the Representative of a
District or Township so called, is not a peculiar Agent for that Township, but
is their Quota of Representation of the whole Province in the General Assembly;
a Gentleman of good natural Interest and Resident in the Province, a Man of
Reading, Observation, and daily conversant with Affairs of Policy and Commerce,
is certainly better qualified for a Legislator, than a Retailer of Rum and
small Beer called a Tavern-Keeper, in a poor obscure Country Town, remote from
all Business; thus this Countryman will not be diverted from the most necessary
and beneficial Labor of cultivating the Ground, his proper Qualification; to
attend State Affairs, of which he may be supposed grossly and invincibly
ignorant; thus the poor Township, by Gentlemen at large serving gratis or
generously as the Quota of the Township, will be freed from the growing (in one
Year from Anno 1747 to 1748 this Charge was advanced from 20 s. to 30 s. per
Day) Charge of subsisting an useless Representative: Therefore, if this Clause
of Residence in the Act of Assembly 1693, is not absolutely repealed, may it
not be qualified in this Manner? viz. The Representative if not a Resident in
the Township, being a Resident in the Province, shall have a Rent Roll of ****
per Annum in the Place, or shall be the Proprietor of **** Hundred Acres in the
Township for which he is elected.

2. That Counselors and Representatives do serve their Country upon Wages. The
Honor, and Pleasure of doing Good, are Recompense sufficient to a Patriot,
thus the Province will As Savings, that is Frugality in private Economy is a
considerable Lucretian, so it is in the public Charges of Government; for
Instance, the taking and maintaining the Fort of Louisbourg in the Island of
Cape-Br^ton cost Great Britain; considering other unavoidable vast Charges, not
conveniently able to afford such an extra Charge upon a Place which must in
Policy unavoidably be restored, to the great Disgust of the brave New England
Men, who in Loyalty, and Patriotism to the British Nations, ventured not only
their Lives to the Number upwards of 2000 of an Infant Colony, dead, but their
Fortunes, (that is their Count^y, notwithstanding of the generous Reimbursement
of the British Parl^ame^t, reduced to great Distress) I say it cost about
500,000 L. Sterling. a dead Loss to Great Britain, whereas a small additional
Charge in the better garrisoning of Annapolis, Placentia, and St. John's; with a
few additional Ships of War from Great Britain, under the Direction of an
active Commander, such as Sir Peter Warren or Mr. Knowles, would have not only
secured our Northern Colonies and their Trade against all French Armaments, the
French being in that Time notoriously weak at Sea; but also would have cut off
all Communication between Old France, and New France or Canada.
save a very considerable Part of their Taxation; for Instance, this present
Year 1748, the Province would have saved about 25,000 L.; the whole annual
Provincial Charge from the Commencement of the Charter, fell short of this Sum,
until Anno 1735; that Year, the Rates were 31,000 L. Old Tenor; thus in Time to
come two of the Negatives would be under no Temptation of having their Wages
augmented by Collusion with the third Negative; the Governor's Allowance being
by them immoderately advanced. By Act of Assembly, Governors are exempted from
Rates or Taxes; therefore some Governors easily consent to, and laugh at a high
Tax.


The Allowances or Pay of the three Negatives for their Services, are settled
by themselves from Time to Time, therefore they do not suffer by the
Depreciation of their own public Bills of Credit. I shall here annex a Table
(Tables contract Things into a more easy, less diffused, and therefore more
distinct View) of the Pay of the three Negatives in some successive Periods,
and of the Province Rate: the Province Polls in these respective Years, see
afterward, as taken from the Valuation Acts; in about seven Years Periods, a
Valuation or Census is made for quoating the Assessments of each Township or
District toward the Provincial Rate or Charge.

A. D. 1702 1720 1730 1740 1743 1745 1747 1748 Govrs. pr. An. Dudley Shute
Belcher ditto Shirley ditto ditto ditto 600 1200 2400 3600 5400 6000 7600 9600
Couns. pr. Day 5 s. 6 s. 10 s. 15 s. 18 s. 18 s. 30 s. 40 s. Repre. pr. Day 3
s. 4 s. 6 s. 10 s. 12 s. 12 s. 20 s. 30 s. Rates. 6000 6000 8000 39000 60000
120000 168324 381672

Any well-disposed Person without Doors may submissively offer Advice or
Proposals, even after a Bill is enacted, because Acts are frequently explained
or altered by subsequent Acts for the public Good: All Legislatures and their
Laws ought to be sacred and tenderly used, without cavelling or censuring: thus
in Great Britain it has been a Practice Time out of Mind for Writers not of the
Legislature, freely and decently to give their Advice and Schemes. As the
Affair I mean is only temporary, I shall subjoin it amongst the Annotations. It
is arrogant, in some Measure seditious, and a great Sin against the divine
Institution of Society; for any Person or Persons, to exclaim against the Acts
of Legislature: the following are only some private Speculations, concerning
the negotiating of the late Cape-Breton Expedition Reimbursement Money, and the
sudden Transition from an immense base Paper-Currency, to that good and
universal Medium of Silver Money.

1. The late Act for receiving and negotiating our Reimbursement Money granted
by the Parliament of Great Britain, impowers Sir Peter Warren, Mr. Bollan, and
Mr. Palmer, or two of them, the said Bollan to be one; perhaps the giving of a
Negative to Mr. Bollan, may disgust the other two Gentlemen, so as to prevent
their acting, and consequently occasion a further Delay of the Reimbursement;
did not, Mr. Bollan's being formerly appointed sole Agent in this Affair,
disgust his Fellow Provincial Agent Mr. Kilby, a Gentleman of Knowledge and
Spirit in transacting of Business; and occasion a Memorial of Merchants and
others, Sept. 21. 1748, to the Treasury of Great Britain, to delay the
Remittance of the Reimbursement Money, for Reasons therein specified? This
Delay is a Damage to the Country after the Rate (I mean the Interest of the
Money) of 11,000 L. Sterling: or 110,000 L. Old Tenor per Annum; as if some
Debtors Managers, studied Methods to delay the Melioration of the Denominations
of our Currencies, by clogging the Affair.

2. The Amount of our Provincial Debt (that is of our public Bills, or Paper
Currency) Anno 1748, was about 2,405,000 L. Old Tenor; by thi^ ^ct a Part of it
712,000 L. is to be sunk by very heavy Rates upon a reduced poor People, in the
Years 1748 and 1749; and the ^^maining 1,693,000 L. Old Tenor, to be redeemed
or exchanged by the Reimbursement Silver; Commissions, Freight, Insurance, and
some petty Charges being first deducted.

I use the Words, a poor reduced People, 1. In Conformity to sundry Expressions
used at several Times by the House of Representatives, in their Messages to the
Governor, "with public Taxes we are burdened almost to Ruin." -- "The Province
is at a prodigious daily Charge beyond their Strength, which has involved us in
a prodigious Load of Debt, and in a manner exhausted our Substance." --
"Although the same Disposition remains, yet we are in a manner incapable to
promote (the British Interest) it for the future." 2. The Loss of about 3000
robust, laboring young Men by Expeditions; Major Little lately Commander of
the Massachusetts Bay Reinforcements sent to Annapolis in Nova Scotia, in his
Book published in London 1748, concerning the Nature of the present Trade of
our Northern Colonies, writes, that by multiplied Expeditions they had lost
7000 Men, and many Thousands perverted to Idleness: here I may, by Way of
Amusement observe, that according to the Estimates of Political Arithmeticians,
in all well settled Countries the Numbers of Males and Females are nearly equal
(some are very particular, and suppose 18 Male Births, to 17 Female Births)
therefore as we have lately by Expeditions lost about Three Thousand young Men,
there remains with us a Balance of Three Thousand young Women, good Breeders,
but idle in that Respect; the Balance may be transferred to settle
Nova Scotia, under the Cover of some Regiments of Soldiers, that must be
disbanded, which in the Interim may be transported to Nova Scotia, cantoned,
and continued in Pay for two or three Years, with Portions of Land, at an easy
Quit-rent; thus the French Settlers, our perfidiousSubjects may be elbowed out.
3. The inconceivable Decay of our Trade and Business: Fishery and Ship building
are the most considerable Articles: Formerly from Marblehead our principal
Cod-Fishery-Port, there were about 160 Fishing Scooners, at present 1748 only
about 60 Scooners: Formerly there have been upon the Stocks in Boston 7000 Ton
of Top-sail Vessels, at present not much exceeding 2000 Tons. 4. Some of our
Townships, and consequently their Proportion of Taxes, have lately by the
Determination of the King in Council, been set off to the neighboring
Governments of New Hampshire and Rhode Island. 5. The late sudden and
considerably enhanced Pay of the three Negatives of the Legislature,
notwithstanding Exchange, Silver, and Necessaries of Life (Clothing growing
cheaper) being nearly at the same Price Anno 1747 and 1748.

3. Our Combination of Debtors who formerly were for postponing of Paper Money,
all of a sudden inconsistently with their proper Cha^acter, quicquid id est
tim^o, are for sinking all Paper-Currency in the Space of a Year or two; we may
without Breach of Charity suspect their hurrying the Province into a State of
Confusion, that they may (...) in troubled Waters; perhaps as Paper-Currency
arrived by Degrees, to a vast Sum, and great Depreciation; it would be more
natural to sink it gradually in the Space of half a Dozen, or half a Score of
Years; and by Act of Parliament (not by precarious Instructions) no more
Paper-Money to be emitted, a Governor consenting to any such Emissions to be
rendered incapable and mulcted. Notwithstanding that I always was a professed
Enemy to all Paper, as being a base fallacious, and fraudulent Contrivance of a
Currency, I cannot avoid thinking that this is the most salutary Method.

4. The honest and honorable Way of paying a Bill, is, according to the Face
of the Bill, that is, all Bills with us of 6 s. in the Face of the Bills,
should be paid in a Piece of Eight; whereas by the Act 1748, a Piece of Eight
shall be received in Payments for 11 s. 3 d. New Tenor; thus these Bills in
their own pernicious Nature, from Anno 1742 to 1748 have suffered a Discount of
about 10 s. in the Pound: Mr. S -- l -- y in a Speech or Message in Relation to
the first Emission of these New Tenor Bills insinuates, that he had contrived
Bills which could not depreciate: But notwithstanding, these Bills have greatly
depreciated in passing through several Hands, and as it is impossible to adjust
the Proportion of Depreciation in each of these Heads, it is unreasonable that
the last Possessor should have the Allowance of the successive Depreciations:
Therefore the Assembly in Equity have allowed the Possessor only the current
Value, but here the Assembly seem to allow themselves to be Bankrupts at the
Rate of 10 s. in the Pound, from 1742 to 1748. Perhaps if a Piece of Eight had
been in the new Projection enacted equal to 12 s. New Tenor, which is 48 s. Old
Tenor, the general Price amongst Merchants; it would have been no Injustice to
the Possessors, it would have prevented their being hoarded up, and the
Reimbursement Money would have paid off about 6 per Cent more of our Debts,
that is, cancelled so much more of our iniquitous Currency. N. B. Perhaps, the
stating of a Piece of Eight (seven Eights of an Ounce of Silver) at 6 s.
Currency, and one Ounce of Silver at 6 s. 8 d. is out of Proportion: the true
Proportion is 6 s. 10 d. two 7ths.

5. In Place of sending over the Reimbursement in foreign Silver-Coin, if the
Provincial Treasurer were empowered from Home and here, to draw partial Bills
for the same upon the British Treasury, or where else it may be lodged; this
would save Commissions, Insurance, Freight, and small Charges, to the Value of
about 12,000 L. Sterling. upon the 183,000 L. Reimbursement, sufficient to
discharge 120,000L. Old Tenor, of our Debts. I shall not say that private
pecuniary Views, but not Economy are in the Case.

Upon the Supposition of this Reimbursement Money being remitted by Bills of
Exchange, consulting the best Advantage of the Province; perhaps by
appropriating one half of the Reimbursement for that End, 910,000 L. O. T. of
our Debt or Bills would in the most expeditious Manner be instantly sunk; all
Merchants, Shopkeepers, and others would gladly purchase with our Paper such
good and punctual Bills preferable to any other private Bills of Exchange: The
other half of the Reimbursement to be by the like Bills of Exchange purchased
here by Silver to introduce a Silver Currency, the only proper commercial
Medium; providentially in Favor of this Purpose, we have lately had imported a
Capture from the Spaniards of 54 Chests of Silver, which the Owners would
gladly have exchanged for such Bills; all Merchants and others in New England
and the adjacent Provinces who send Pieces of Eight Home as Returns, or to
purchase fresh Goods, would be fond of bringing their Silver to purchase such
^ood Bills free from all the Charges of other Remittances: Thus (...) a Silver
Currency commencing, of 910,000 L. Old Tenor Value, we shall have a remaining
Paper-Currency of 1,495,000 to be cancelled gradually by Rites and other Taxes,
suppose in 10 Years, is about 150,000 L. Old Tenor, or 37,500 L. New Tenor per
Annum; thus the two Years 1748 and 1749, perhaps oppressively loaded, will be
much eased, and the infatuated Paper-Currency Men made easy by sinking of it
gradually; with the Proviso of an Act of Parliament prohibiting, for ever
hereafter, any more public Bills of Credit to be emitted.

This remaining 1,495,000 L. Paper Currency, abstracting from the 910,000 L.
Silver, Part of the Reimbursement, is more than a sufficient Medium for Trade
and Business, in a quick Circulation, in the Province of Massachusetts Bay. Let
us recollect, that in the latter Part of Governor Belcher's Administration
1741, immediately preceding Governor Shirley's Accession, this Province in its
full Vigor and Extent of Trade, seemed to be sufficiently supplied, by a Sum
not exceeding 160,000 L. a Fund for Taxes not assessed, for Taxes assessed but
not collected, and for Arrears of Loans; let us suppose a like Sum of 160,000
L. from the neighboring Governments, obtained a Credit of Circulation with us
(the four Colonies of New England hitherto as to Currencies have been as one
Province) makes 320,000 L.; at that Time Silver was at 29 s. per Ounce, at this
Time 1748 it is 58 s. per Ounce; therefore upon this Foundation we must suppose
640,000 L. Old Tenor Value, the Medium sufficient or requisite for our Trade
and Business, whereas we have allowed 1,495,000 L. Old Tenor Value, being more
than double that Sum, to remain for a Paper Currency.

A Stranger may think it unaccountable that in the Beginning of Governor
Shirley's Administration, Anno 1741, the projected speedy cancelling of about
130,000 Old Tenor Bills by the Taxes for 1741 should be judged too oppressive
for one Year, and was therefore divided amongst three subsequent Years; whereas
the 103,000 L. New Tenor, or 412,000 Old Tenor, Taxes of 1748 (although, we
have the Reimbursement Money, to alleviate this grievous Weight) toward the
End of his Administration, is not lightened.




In this Province there seems to be a standing Faction consisting of wrong
Heads and fraudulent Debtors; this Faction endeavors to persuade us, that one
of our invaluable Charter Privileges, is, A Liberty to make Paper-Money, or
public Bills of Credit, receivable in all Dealings, ( Specialties excepted) as
a legal Tender.

3. By Charter all vacant or not claimed Lands were vested in the collective
Body of the People or Inhabitants; and their Representatives in General Court
assembled, with Consent of the Governor and Council; make Grants of these
Provincial Lands, to a Number of private Persons, to be incorporated, upon
certain Conditions, into Townships; there are also some peculiar Grants, which
after some Years are by Acts of Assembly annexed to some neighboring Township.

If in granting of these Lands, they had been subjected to an easy Quit-rent to
the Province; these Lands would have settled compactly, and improved sooner;
whereas at present, some Proprietors of large Tracts of Lands do not settle or
sell, because being at no Charge of Quit-Rent, and not in the Valuation of
Rates or Taxes for the Provincial Charge of Government; they choose to let them
lie unimproved many Years, for a Market. That this might have been practicable,
appears by Lands in the Township of Hopkinton subjected to an annual Quit-rent
for the Benefit of our Provincial Seminary called Harvard-College; which
notwithstanding of Quit-rent is well settled and improved; the Rev. Mr.
Commissary Price is their present Missionary Minister, and is a considerable
Proprietor there under Quit-rent.

The Townships are generally granted in Value of six Miles square (some old
Grants of Townships are much larger) to be divided into Sixty-three equal Lots,
viz. One Lot for the first settled Minister as Inheritance, one Lot for the
Ministry as Glebe-Lands, one Lot for the Benefit of a School; the other sixty
Lots, to sixty Persons or Families, who shall within five Years from the Grant,
erect a Dwelling House of 7 Feet Stud, and 18 Feet square, with 7 Acres cleared
and improved, fit for Mowing or Ploughing; to erect a House for public Worship
in five Years, and maintain an Orthodox Minister. Every Township of fifty or
upwards Householders to be constantly provided with a Schoolmaster to teach
Children and Youth to read and write, Penalty forNeglect 20 L. per Annum; as
also if consisting of 100 or upwards Householders, they are to maintain a
Grammar School; Penalty 30 L. per Annum, if consisting of 150 Families; Penalty
40 L. if consisting of 200 Families; and higher Penalties pro rata.

In each Township by a general Act of Assembly there are constituted certain
Town Officers to be elected at a Town-Meeting annually in March. I shall
instance Boston, for the Year 1748 were chosen the following Officers:
Town Clerk 7 Select-Men Town-Treasurer 12 Overseers of the Poor 7 Assessors 10
Firewards 5 Sealers of Leather 6 Fence-Viewers A Surveyor of Hemp Informers of
Deer Hayward 10 Cullers of Staves 10 Viewers of Boards, Shingles, etc. 4
Hogreeves 12 Clerks of the Market 2 Assay-Masters 6 Collectors of Taxes 12
Constables
Any Man rateable for 20 L. Principal Estate to the Province-Tax, Pol not
included, is qualified to vote in Town-Meetings, excepting in the Choice of
Representatives, which requires a Qualification of 40 s. per Annum Freehold, or
40 L. Sterling. personal Estate.

Sometimes Portions of adjoining Townships, are by Act of Assembly incorporated
into a Parish or Precinct, for the better Convenience of attending divine
Service, but in all other Respects, excepting in Ministerial Rates, they belong
to their original Townships.

The Plantations and Farms in the Old Townships near Boston, are generally
become small, occasioned by a Provincial Act of Assembly, which divides the
real as well as the personal Estate of Intestates, amongst all the Children or
Collaterals; our People are much bigoted to this Province-Law, and choose to
die intestate. This Humor is not without its Advantages, v. g. where a Farm
thus becomes small, the Possessor cannot live by it, and is obliged to sell to
the Proprietor of some adjoining Farm, and remove further inland, where he can
purchase waste Land in Quantities at an easy Rate, to the enlarging of our
Country Improvements: Thus the former Townships which now compose the County of
Worcester, about 40 Years since, there were not exceeding 200 Families, whereas
in the last Valuation 1742, there were found in that County about 3200 taxable
white Male Persons; but our multiplied Expeditions since that Time, have
diminished them much.

The civil Officers annually chosen by a joint Vote of the Board or Council,
and House or Representatives, and with the Consent of the Governor are
appointed.

The Treasurer or Receiver-General.

The General Impost-Office.

The General Commissary for Soldiers, their Provisions and Stores, and for
Indian Trade.

The Attorney General.

Collectors of Excise, one for each County.

Public Notaries for the Ports of Boston Salem Marblehead Gloucester Newbury
Plymouth Barnstable Kittery Casco-B^y York-County Duke's-County Nantucket


N. B. The Attorney General is annually chosen; the Governor and Council
pretend to have the sole Privilege of appointing him; the House of
Representatives hitherto have not given up this Point, but the Person appointed
by the Governor and Council is the acting Officer.

Because all Acts of Assembly are required to be sent Home for Allowance or
Disallowance, therefore some Transactions formerly have passed by Way of Order
or Resolve only.

A Member of the House of Representatives is fined 20 s. Old Tenor, for every
Days Absence without Leave or good Excuse.

Every Session there is a Committee appointed to prepare a List of the Travel
(20 Miles Travel is the same with one Day's Attendance) and Attendance of the
Members of the House for the Sessions -- Their Wages are paid out of the
general Provincial Supply or Bills of public Credit emitted for the ordinary
and extraordinary Charges of the Province for the Year; the Bills of this
Article are drawn in again not by a general Provincial Rate or Tax, but by a
peculiar Rate imposed upon the several Towns who send Representatives.

The Townships that have Precepts sent to them, but make no Returns, are liable
to be fined at the Discretion of the House; but are generally excused, and
perhaps out of 50 Delinquents (some are excused by Law, as being under the
Number of eighty Families) very few are fined; this Article though very small,
is one of the Articles for calling in the public Bills of Credit from Year to
Year.

Perhaps an Assembly Grant, as is the present Practice, in the Beginning of
every Year's Administration of a Governor for his Services to be done during
the next subsequent Year, may be thus qualified; to be paid after 12 Months, if
the present Governor's Life or Administration continue so long, otherwise in
Proportion to the Time of Service: We have a remarkable Instance of this in the
worthy Governor Burnet; some short Time before his Death, there was a Vote of
6000 L. for the last Year and current Year's Service, which for Want of
Concurrence did not take Place; soon after the Commencement of the then current
Year, Governor Burnet died, and his Heirs received only 3000 L. Old Tenor, for
all his Services, being for about 13 Months, thus the Province honestly saved
about 3000 L.

The Executive Courts.
By Charter the General Assembly are allowed to erect Judicatories, to hear and
determine concerning Pleas, whether real, personal or mixed; and all manner of
Crimes capital or not capital.

In personal Actions, where the Matter in Difference, does exceed the Value of
300 L. Sterling. Appeals are allowed to the King in Privy Council, provided such
Appeal be made in fourteen Days, after Judgment given; and that before such
Appeal be allowed, Security be given by the Appealants in the Value of the
Matter in Difference, with Costs and Damages, but Execution not to be staid.

See the present Charter, P. 375.

Our Judicatories in civil Actions are thus constituted. 1. All Actions under
10 L. Old Tenor, which may at present be about 20 s. Sterling. are at first
Instance cognizable by a It has hitherto been too much a Practice to multiply
the Number of the Justices of the Peace (this amongst other Inconveniences, as
an old Country Justice well observed) Depreciates the former Credit of a
Justice, as the multiplying of our public Bills of Credit, depreciates our
Currency. May not Acts of Assembly be made from Time to Time, to limit the
Number of Justices in each County, and their Qualifications be under some
Regulation?
Justice of Peace: 2. From thence lies Appeal to an inferior Court, or County
Court of Common Pleas; this Court seems to be of no great The Smallness of
Court-Fees, multiply Lawsuits, and is a Snare for poor People to become
litigious.
Consequence, and generally serves, without much Pleadings, only to transmit it
to the Superior or Provincial Court, perhaps the most upright of any in our
national Plantations or Colonies; all Actions not exceeding the Value as above,
must originate in the Inferior Courts. 3. From the Inferior Court of Common
Pleas, there is Appeal to a Superior or Provincial Court in their Circuits;
this is also a Court of Oyer and Terminer in criminal Affairs: 4. From this
Court there is a Review to the same Court of Judges, but of another Jury. 5.
There lies a Privilege of petitioning the General Assembly, as a Court of
Error, upon proper Allegations, to order a Rehearing before the same Superior
Court: Perhaps a Court of Delegates would have sounded better.

The Courts of General Quarter Sessions, and Inferior Court of Common Pleas,
are held at the same Place and Time, and according to the last general
Appointment 1743, are as follows, per Counties, Suffolk At Boston. First
Tuesday of January, April, July, and October. Essex Salem. Second Tuesday of
July; last Tuesday in December. Newbury. Last Tuesday in September. Ipswich.
Last Tuesday in March. Middlesex Cambridge. Third Tuesday in May. Charlestown.
Second Tuesday in December and March. Concord. Last Tuesday in August.
Hampshire Springfield. Third Tuesday in May, last Tuesday in August.
Northampton. Second Tuesday in February and November. Worcester Worcester.
First Tuesday in November and February, Second Tuesday in May, Third Tuesday in
August. Plymouth Plymouth. First Tuesday in March, Third Tuesday in May,
September, and December. Barnstable Barnstable. Last Tuesday in June, Third
Tuesday in March, October, and January. Bristol Bristol. Second Tuesday in
March, June, September and December. York York. First Tuesday of April, July,
October and January. Falmouth. First Tuesday in October. Duke's-County
Edgartown. First Tuesday in March, last Tuesday in October. Nantucket
Sherburne. Last Tuesday in March, first Tuesday in October.
The Superior Courts of Judicature and Assizes.
Suffolk Boston. Third Tuesday in August and February. Essex Salem. Second
Tuesday in November. Ipswich. Second Tuesday in May. Middlesex Cambridge. First
Tuesday in August. Charlestown. Last Tuesday in January. Hampshire Springfield.
Fourth Tuesday in September. Worcester Worcester. Third Tuesday in September.
Plymouth Plymouth. Second Tuesday in July. Barnstable and Duke's County
Barnstable. Third Tuesday in July. Bristol Bristol. Fourth Wednesday in
October. York York. Third Wednesday in Ju^^.


By Act of Assembly, occasionally, but not statedly, the Times of the sitting
of these several Courts are varied. And in general as these Courts may from
Time to Time be varied by Acts of the Provincial General Assembly, the above is
only a temporary Account.

The Juries never were appointed by the Sheriffs of the Counties, every
Township of the County at a regularly called Town-Meeting, elected their Quota
for the County; but as some evil, designing Men, upon particular Occasions,
officiously attended these Township-Meetings, in Order to obtain a packt or
partial Jury; lately the Jurors are by Lot, being partly by Chance, partly by
Rotation. N. B. The Privilege of Juries, seems to give the People a Negative,
even in the executive Part of the civil Government.

In each County the Governor and Council appoint one High Sheriff with a Power
of deputizing, and any Number of Coroners.

The Judges of the several Courts, appoint the Clerks of their several Courts,
but generally conform to the Recommendation from the Governor. N. B. Judges
should be independent of, and in no Respect under the Direction of a King or of
his Governor.

The other Civil Courts, some are appointed immediately by Charter; a Court for
Probate of Wills, and granting of Administrations, which is vested in the
Governor and Council; they appoint a Substitute called the Judge of Probate,
with a Register or Clerk in each County, from which there lies an Appeal to the
Ordinary, the Governor and Council. 2. In Time of War, a Court Martial by
Commission from the Governor with Consent of the Council, to exercise the
Law-Martial upon any Inhabitants of the Province. -- Some are by Commission
from the Court and Boards in Great Britain; 1. A Court of Vice-Admiralty, see
P. 483. 2. A Justiciary Court of Admiralty for Trial of Pirates, etc. see P.
484. All these have occasionally been formerly mentioned.

Generally in all our Colonies, particularly in New England, People are much
addicted to Quirks in the Law; a very ordinary Country Man in New England is
almost qualified for a Country-Attorney in England.

In each County, besides the civil Officers appointed by Governor and Council,
and the Military or Militia Officers appointed by the Governor as
Captain General, there is a County-Treasurer and County-Register, or Recorder
of Deeds or real Conveyances, these are chosen by a joint written Vote of the
qualified Voters in each Township of the County, and sorted in the next
subsequent Quarter Sessions for the County. The County-Treasurers yearly render
and pass their Accounts with a Committee of the General Assembly.

Taxes and Valuations.
The Provincial Taxes of Massachusetts Bay, consist of three Articles, Excise,
Impost, and Rates.

1. Excise. By Act of Assembly, after June 29. 1748 for the Space of three
Years (the Excise B^st^n, with the rest of the County of Suff^lk's Excise, is
farmed for 10,000 L. Old Tenor. being about 1000 L. Sterling. pr. An.
is farmed for three Years) the following Duties, Old Tenor, shall be paid,
being double of the former Excise. Every Gallon of Brandy, Rum, and other
Spirits distilled, 2 s. Wine of all Sorts, 2 s. Every Hundred of Lemons or
Oranges, 20 s. Limes, 8 s.
the Vender or Retailer to swear to the Account by him rendered to the Farmer;
20 per Ct. for Leakage to be allowed Duty free. -- Penalty for retailing
without License 12 L. toties quoties; Retailers are deemed such as sell smaller
Quantities than a Quarter-Cask or 20 Gallons; the Taverners, Innholders, and
other Retailers, are not to plead their License for vending in any other House,
besides that wherein they dwell. Formerly the Collectors were chosen by the
General Assembly, at present the Farmers are the Collectors. -- Licenses are
from the Quarter Sessions of the County, by the Recommendation of the
Select-Men of the Township, where the Taverner or Retailer lives -- The Farmer
is accountable to the Treasurer once every Year.

The Excise for three successive Years from 1748, is doubled, this with the
Increase of our Rioting and Drunkenness, introduced partly by our idle military
Expeditions; has increased the Revenue of Impost upon Liquors imported, and
Excise upon Home Consu^^^^on, but much to the Damage of private Families, (...)
the Economy of the Country in general.

The Impost and Excise of 1710, 1711, 1712, did not exceed a Sum of 7000 L. Old
Tenor, 1715 Were estimated at 7000 L. Old Tenor, 1726 Impost 5,200 L. Excise
3,600 L. 1747 Excise, Impost, and Tunnage 17,616 L. 1748 33,480 L.


2. Impost and Tunnage by Act of Assembly June 1748 for one Year; Salt,
Cotton-Wool, Provisions, the Growth and Produce of New England, Prize Goods
condemned in any Part of the Province, and Goods from Great Britain, are
exempted from Impost.

The Impost payable, is, Wines from the Western Islands per Pipe 4 L. Old Tenor
Madera, and other Sorts 5 L. Rum per Hogshead of 100 Gallons 4 L. Sugar 2 s.
Molasses 16 d. Tobacco 2 L. Logwood per Tun 3 s.
all other Goods 4 d. for every 20 s. Value.

Foreign Goods imported from other Places, than that of their Growth and
Produce, to pay double Impost.

Upon reshipping for Exportation to be drawn back per Pipe of Western Islands
Wine 3 L. Madera and other Sorts 3 L. 12 s. per Hogshead of Rum 3 L.


For Liquors allowed 12 pr. Ct. for Leakage, and decayed Liquors, or where two
Thirds are leaked out, shall be accounted as Outs free of Duty -- Stores may be
allowed to the Master and Seamen, not exceeding 3 pr. Ct. of the Lading.

The general Impost Officer or Receiver may appoint Deputies in the Out-Ports;
the general Impost-Officer his Salary is 200 L. Old Tenor, and to each Deputy
in the Out-Ports not exceeding 40 L. Old Tenor per An. All Forfeitures are one
half to the Province, and half to the Informer, the Informer's Part to bear the
Charges of Suit -- The Fee to the Impost-Officer for every single Entry is 2 s.
-- Masters of Vessels to report their Vessels and Cargoes, within the Space of
24 Hours.

All Vessels not belonging to Great Britain, Pennsylvania, East and West
Iersies, New York, Connecticut, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island; or any Part of
a Vessel not belonging as above, shall pay every Voyage, a Po^^d of good Pistol
Powder per Tun, called Tunnage.

The naval Officer is not to give Letpasses, to any Vessel outward bound, 'till
Impost and Tunnage is certified as paid.

3. Rates are Taxes upon Polls and Estates; Polls are all white Men of 16 Aet.
and upwards; Estates are real, personal, and Faculty, or Income arising from
their Trade and Business.

At the Commencement of the new Charter, the Taxation was by -- Number of
Rates, a single Rate was 12 d. Pol, and 1 d. upon 20 s. Principal Estate, six
Years Income of Estate Real, Personal and Faculty, is deemed as the Principal.
Anno 1692, to pay off Sir William Phipp's unsuccessful Canada Expedition, a Tax
of 10 s. Poll, and one Quarter Value (is 5 s. in the Pound) of one Years Income
of Estate, Real, Personal and Faculty, was computed to raise 30,000 L. About
Twenty Years after the N^ w England Revolution, Anno 1710 toward the Charges
of the Expedition against Port Royal now Annapolis Royal, the Quotas of the
four New England Colonies for every 1000 L. was in this Proportion,
Massachusetts Bay L. 638 7 s. 9 d. Connecticut 194 14 3 halfp^nny Rhode Island
111 5 3 halfpenny New-H^mp^^ire 55 12 6 at present 1749 ^^n^^ticut much exceeds
that Proportion in Men, and Rhode Island much exceeds that Proportion in (...).


At this Time the Poll is generally 3 d. upon every 1000 L. Rate, and for every
12 d. Poll, 1 d. Rate.

Assessors are to estimate Houses and Lands at six Years Income, as they are or
may be let, Negro, Indian and Molatto Slaves, proportionably as other personal
Estate, an Ox of four Years old and upwards at 8 L. Old Tenor, a Cow of three
Years old and upwards at 6 L. a Horse or Mare of thee Years old and upwards at
8 L. a Swine of one Year old and upwards at 32 s. a Sheep or Goat of one Year
old and upward at 12 s.

As Townships, in like Manner as private Persons in Process of Time, do alter
their Circumstances; for the more equal Adjustment of their Quota's of Tax^^
there is after a Number of Years (generally once in seven Years) a Lustration
or Census, called a Valuation, made throughout the Province; there is Anno
1749, a Valuation on Foot, last Valuation was 1742, there were Valuations 1734,
1728, etc. we shall here insert the Valuations of each County, and of some of
the Townships the highest and the lowest valued, as a Sample of the whole;
being their Proportions in every 1000 L. Rate. Before 1728 Since 1742, Before
1728, Since 1742. An. 1734. Counties of Suffolk 287 268 Boston 185 173 180
Essex 198 196 Salem 27 28 30 Middles 171 138 Ipswich 26 28 27 Hampsh. 55 54
Newbury 22 23 26 Plymouth 77 79 Marbleh. 20 20 19 Bristol 95 96 Charl^st. 17 19
13 Burnst. 56 42 Dartm. 16 14 15 York 37 53 Hadley 5 5 and half 5 Duke's-County
11 6 Stow 3 3 2 half Nantucket 13 6 B^llingham 2 1 Worc^ster 60 Townshend half
Worchester, July 10. 1731, was taken out of the Counties of Suffolk, Middlesex,
and Hampshire.

The Assessors may abate or multiply upon particular Rates, so as to make up
the Sum set upon each Town or District.

The Exempted from Polls and Rates, are, The Governor, Lieut.-Governor, and
their Families; the President, Fellows, and Students of Harvard-College;
settled Ministers, and Grammar Schoolmasters; and Persons by Age, Infirmities,
and extreme Poverty, to be deemed as Invalids.

Taxes may be paid, not only in public Bills emitted, but in certain Species
In the first Years after the New England Revolution, at the first Emission of
the fraudulent public Bills of Credit, as a Currency; their Tenor was -- This
indented Bill of ***** due from the Massachusetts-Colony to the Pos^^ssor shall
be in Value equal to Money; and shall be accordingly accepted by the Treasurer,
and Receivers subordinate to him in all public Payments, and for any Stock at
any Time in the Treasury. Boston in New England, February the Third 1690; By
Order of the General Court. At that Time the Ways and Means to supply the
annual Charges of Government was by so many single Rates (as in Germany by
Roman Months, and in Scotland by Months cess) whereof a certain Proportion was
receivable at the Treasury in Money, and a certain Proportion in Produce and
Goods enumerated, and at a fixed Price, which were called Stock in the Treasury
to be sold for provincial Bills.
of Goods, formerly called Stock in the Treasury; but as these Goods are
receivable in the Treasury, at a Value not exceeding half their Market-Price,
it cannot be supposed, that these Goods will be brought into the Treasury:
These Goods are coined Silver and Gold, merchantable Hemp, merchantable Isle of
Sable Cod-Fish, Bar Iron, Bloomery Iron, Hollow Iron Ware, Indian Corn, Winter
Rye, Winter Wheat, Barley, Barrel Pork, Barrel Beef, Duck, Long Whale Bone,
Merchantable Cordage, Train Oil, Bees Wax, Bayberry Wax, tried Tallow, Pease,
Sheeps Wool, and tanned Sole-Leather.

The Ways and Means are apparently very easy, but in Consequence ruinous, being
only a Manufacture of public Bills of Credit, without Limitation of Quantity,
not encumbered with any Interest, and not to be redeemed till after many Years;
that Strangers may have a distinct View of our depreciating Economy, I shall
annex a Table of our present Currency in Bills, which is our only Fund, as they
stood Christmas 1748. The lateral left Hand Column, is the Times when they were
emitted, the Top Line is the Periods at which they are redeemable.

Emitted. To be drawn in by Rates, to be cancelled. L 1748 1749 1750 1751 1752
1753 1754 1755 1756 1757 1758 1759 1760 1745 Feb* 200000 82800 Part of this was
cancelled by the Taxes of 1747.
April 200000 100000 100000 Of t^is 9600 L. for Representatives, was cancelled
by the Representatives Tax in the Year 1746.
July 280000 135200 135200 August 280000 140000 140000 December 2000^^ 100000
100000 1746 Mar ^8000^ 40000 40000 The 8000 L. for Representatives, was
cancelled 1747.
June 328000 80000 80000 80000 80000 July 100000 25000 25000 25000 25000 August
80000 40000 40000 This was cancelled 1747 in Part.
Sept. 40000 20000 Nov. 80800 20200 20200 20200 20200 1747 This was cancelled
1747.
Feb 32800 This in Part was cancelled 1747.
April 80000 39000 June 32000 32000 Oct^ber 136000 136000 1748 Feb. 100000
100000 June 400000 400000 Total Here is some small Error.
409800 540000 140000 135200 135200 140000 140000 140000 140000 125200 125200
125200 125000

This Table is reduced to Old Tenor, because our current Way of computing is by
Old Tenor, the Denominations of Middle Tenor and New Tenor, are too whimsical
and captious to take Place. Thus the Debt of the Province, exeunte 1748 was
2,466,712 L. contracted in the Space of four Years, by projecting whimsical
Expeditions ( lucrative to the Projectors, but pernicious to the Province) from
certain Applications, not rejected at Home by the Ministry, because the
Populace are pleased and amused with Expeditions.

There must be a considerable Addition to the Taxes of every Year, subsequent
to 1748, for the annual Charges of Government.

The cancelling of Bills each Year is by four different Funds; thus the Sum of
L. 415,512 Bills Old Tenor, is brought in By Excise, Impost and Tunnage L.
33,480 Fines of Townships delinquent in Representatives 360 Polls and Rates
364,000 Townships Tax for Representatives of last Year 17,672 Total 415,512


The Town of Boston paid of that Year's Tax L. 65,520

Our annual Supplies or Appropriations are in sundry Articles; thus of the
400,000 L. Old Tenor Emission, Anno 1748.

For Garrisons, armed Vessels, Forces upon the Eastern and Western Frontiers L.
160000 Warlike Stores and Commissaries Disbursments 136000 Allowances and
Grants 72000 Expended where no Establishment 12000 Contingencies 2000
Representatives Wages 18000 Total L. 400


Not long since there were extra (immensly chargeable) Articles of Expeditions
to Cape-Breton, Canada, etc. To represent at one View the vast depreciated
promiscuous Paper Currency, or rather public Debt of the Colonies of
New England, as it is at present.


Emitted by Massachusetts Bay L 2,466,712 Connecticut about 281,000
Rhode Island about 550,000 New Hamps^ire about 450,000


Thus the present depreciated (10 for 1 St. in round Numbers) New England Paper
Currency is about L. 3* 748,000.

The Parliament Reimbursements on Account of the Reduction of Louisbourg, when
received will cancel to Massachusetts Bay about L. 1,836,490 Connecticut
280,000 Rhode Island 63,000 New Hampshire 163,000 L. 2,342,490
there will remain about L. 1,405,000 New England Currency* to this must be
added about 5 per Cent. deducted from the Reimbursement Money for Charges of
receiving and transmitting about L. 117,000 is nearly one million and a half
remaining Currency.

Connecticut (that Colony is managed by Men of Wisdom and Probity) has not much
more outstanding public Bills of Credit, than their Reimbursement Grant from
the Parliament may redeem.

New Hampshire has about L. 450000 old Tenor Value; their Reimbursement, may
sink in round Numbers, about L. 150,000* there will remain about L. 300,000.
About one third of the whole was lent to the Inhabitants upon Mortgages to the
Government at a long Period; the Remainder excepting some small Sums for
Charges of Government was issued toward (...) late abortive Canada Expedition,
and has no other Fund for drawing ^t in again, besides some Expectations of
being reimbursed the Canada Expedition Charges.

Rhode Island may have about L. 550,000 old Tenor, whereof L. 75,000 will be
sunk by Bills of Exchange drawn on their Agent* on Account of the Canada
Expedition; L. 60,000 will be sunk by the (...) Reimb^^s^ment; there will
remain about L. 415.000 lent upon (...) Periods, reaching so far as Anno 1763)
to the Gover^^ent.

In Gratitude, we ought not to forget the compassionate Goodness of the
Parliament of Great Britain, the Parent of all our Colonies. The Expenses of
the Province of Massachusetts Bay, in taking, repairing and securing of
Louisbourg on Cape-Breton, till May 1746, when his Majesty's regular Troops
arrived there to defend it, amounted to 261,700 L. New Tenor Paper New England
Currency, which according to the Exchange of that Time, amounted to 183,649 L.
Sterling.; but when the Accounts were sent Home, our Currency was so much
depreciated, that the 261,700 L. New Tenor, was in Value equal only to 104,680
L. Sterling.; making a difference of 78,969 L. Sterling. This produced a Question at
Court and in Parliament; whether the said Province, ought to be paid a Sterling
Sum, equal in Value, to the Sum in Bills of Credit, expended upon the
Expedition, according to the Value of these Bills at the Time the Expense was
contracted, or only a Sterling Sum, equal to the Value of these Bills in their
present depreciated State? In Goodness they determined according to the
favorable Side of the Question, and allowed us the full Sum of 183,649 L.
Sterling.

Number of Inhabitants, Produce, Manufactures, Trade and Miscellanies.
Instead of imaginary Estimates, I conceived it might be of better Credence to
adduce loose Records and public Accounts of Things.

Before I proceed, I must make this general Remark; that our Forwardness
toward Expeditions may have occasioned the Court of Great Britain to deem us
self-sufficient; from 1739 to 1749 in the Spanish and French War, Great Britain
sent us only the Success a sixth Rate Man of War for a few Months, whereas in
Time^ of the profoundest Peace we had a constant Station Man of War from
Great Britain. Our Provincial armed Vessels at a great Charge, besides their
serving as Tenders to the British Squadrons in the Affair of Cape-Breton, their
only Service seems to have been the easy Capture of a French Privateer Sloop
Capt. De la Brotz, no Man killed on either Side; the Fault was not in
New-Englan^ Men (they are always forward in Service) but in the Management
perhaps.

Anno 1656, we had three Regiments Militia, Suffolk, Middlesex, and Essex; Anno
1671, three more Regiments were formed, viz. Norfolk or Piscataqua, Yorkshire
or Province of Main, and Hampshire upon Connecticut River; Piscataqua Regiment
is now in the Province of New Hampshire, the other two continue undivided large
Regiments (perhaps Yorkshire Regiment has lately been divided) Anno 1748,
Hampshire Regiment Col. Stoddard was about 2600, York Regiment Sir William
Pepperrell 2755, these with Boston Regiment Col. Wendell of 2500 Men, are large
enough to be subdivided into Battallion^.

Anno 1706, the Militia of Massachusetts Bay in their Address to the Queen call
themselves 12 Regiments.

Anno 1711, Admiral Walker upon the Canada Expedition, demanded of the
Government of Massachusetts Bay, a Supply of Sailors; the Governor and Council
represented, that their ordinary Garrisons, Forces upon the inland Frontiers,
and Men detached for the Canada Expedition, were upwards of 2000 Men, which are
more than one fifth of the fencible Men of the Province.

In the Spring Anno 1722, the Small Pox being over, by Order of the Select-Men,
Mr. Salter made a Perlustration of the Town of Boston; he reported 10,670
Souls, this Smallpox Time 5980 Persons were seized with this Distemper,
whereof 844 died, and about the same Number fled from Boston; thus we may
estimate about 12,000 People in Boston at the Arrival of the Smallpox. After
twenty Years Anno 1742, by a new Valuation there were reported 16,382 Souls in
Boston, add to these some Men lately gone upon the Cuba Expedition, several
Sons and Apprentices designedly overlooked to ease the Quota of Boston's
Provincial Tax, we may reckon about 18000 Inhabitants at that Time; thus in the
Space of 20 Years from 1722 to 1742 Boston Inhabitants had increased one third
or 6000. Taking this in another View; An 1720 a Year of middling Health and
immediately preceding the Smallpox, the Burials in Boston year nearly 345; by
Philosophical and Political Arithmeticians it is estimated that in a healthful
Country (such is Boston) one From the Estimates of Drs. Halley and (...), of 35
(...) ^8 are Boys, 17 are Girl^.
in 35 dies per A^. is nearly 12000 Inhabitants; Anno 1742, a Year of middling
Health in Boston, were buried about 515 by 35, makes nearly 18000 Inhabitants.
In the Valuation of 1742, of those in Boston were 1200 Widows, 1000 of them
poor; in the Almshouse 111, in the Workhouse 36, Negroes 1514;
Dwelling-Houses 1719, Warehouses 166, Horses 418, Cows 141.

1722 Governor Shute returned to England, in his Report to the Board of Trade
and Plantations, he says, That in the Province of Massachusetts Bay, were
94,000 People, whereof 15000 were in the training List (the Alarm List Males
from 16 Aet. and upwards, is about one Third more than the Training List,
because many are excused from Impresses and Quarterly Trainings) disposed into
16 Regiments of Foot, and 15 Troops of Horse. About 25000 Tun of Shipping in
the two Collections of Boston and Sal^^ at that Time.

In the Valuation of Anno 1728, for Boston were about 3000 rateable Polls,
Males from 16 Aet. and upwards, which is nearly the same with the Alarm List:
For Instance, Anno 1735 the rateable Polls in Boston were 3637; Anno 1733 the
Alarm List was about 3500, which allowing for two Years increases is nearly the
same. N. B. About this Time, Capt. Watson, one of the Assessors in Curiosity,
examined the Books, he found the Church of England People charged not exceeding
one Tenth of the Rates or Taxes in the Town of Boston.

1735 The Provincial Valuation was 35,427 Polls (white Men of 16 Aetat. and
upwards) 2600 Negroes, 27,420 Horse Kind of 3 Years old and upwards, 52,000
Neat Cattle of 3 to 4 Years old and upwards, 130,001 Sheep of one Year old and
upwards.

1742, In the Valuation were 41,000 white Men's Polls.

1749, A Valuation is on Foot but not finished; here will be considerable
Deductions. 1. Trade much decayed, and Taxes insupportably high has obliged
many to leave the Province. 2. Men annexed to New Hampshire and Rhode Island.
3. Deaths occasioned by the Cape-Breton Expedition. 4. Lost in the Minas of
Nova Scotia French Massacre. 5. Killed and captivated upon our Frontiers by the
French and Indians.

1747, The House of Representatives in a Message to the Governor, say, that
3000 is about one Twelfth of our sencible Men.

As by Charter the General Assembly of the Province is empowered to create
Judicatories for trying all Cases civil or criminal, capital or not capital;
accordingly by Act of Assembly in the Beginning of the French War, August 1744;
the Commanders in chief, may at any Time call a Court Martial, which for Mutiny
or Desertion may inflict Death.

Although in Succession of Years, Things vary much; we shall for the
Information of the Curious of after Times, insert the present Economy of our
Officers civil, Land Military, and Sea Military. N. B. Exchange being 10 to 11,
New England Old Tenor Currency for One Sterling.

Allowances Old Tenor to Civil Officers for 1748.

To the Governor L. 9,600 Secretary with Extra's 800 5 Judges of Superior Court
4000 Treasurer with Extra's 1400 Commissary with Extra's 1600 President of
College 1400 Professor of Divinity 300 Clerk to Representatives 480 Doorkeeper
320 Two Chaplains 80
The Land Military Establishment for Cape-Breton, 1745.
L. s. To the Lieut.-General per Month 60 Colonel 48 Lieut.-Colonel 40 Major 34
Captain of 40 to 50 Men 18 Lieutenant 12 Second Lieutenant or Ensign 8 Adjutant
General 18 Adjutant to a Regiment 12 Sergeant 6 8 Corporal 5 12 Clerk 6 8
Quartermaster General 16 Surgeon-General 28 Surgeon of a Regiment 25 Surgeon's
Mate 18 Drum Major 6 8 Common Drum 5 12 Chaplain 24 Armourer of a Regiment 10
Commissary of ditto 12 Three Thousand Sentinels each 5

The Artillery Establishment for Cape-Breton.
To the First Captain per Month. L. 36 Engineer 34 Second Captain 20 First
Lieutenant 16 Three Lieutenants, each 8 First Bombardier 34 Three, Ditto, each
8 Four Assistants, each 8 Thirty Gunners, each 8
The Artificers for the Train were 12 House-Carpenters, and 4 Ship-Carpenters,
commanded by Capt. Barnard.

The General was allowed 2000 L. for extraordinary contingent Services, to be
accounted for.

The Encouragement to private Men for inlisting was 4 L. Bounty, one Month's
Advance Wages, a Blanket, 20 s. Subsistence which was afterward advanced to 30
s. pe^ Week their Firelocks to be deducted out of their Wages.

By Solicitation from hence, Orders came from Home to raise two Regiments of
1000 Men regular Troops each for Louisbourg Garrison; but by a good Providence
in Favor of the Country, they never could be rendered effective, and probably
upon Louisbourg's being evacuated, these Men may return to their Labor, for
the Benefit of this Country.

To the Sea Military Establishment, 1745.
L. s. To the Captain per Month 22 Lieutenant 14 8 Master 12 8 Surgeon 12 8
Chaplain 12 8 Gunner 10 Boatswain 10 Mate 10 Boatswain's Mate 9 Steward 9 Cook
9 Gunner's Mate 9 Pilot 11 4 Carpenter 11 Cooper 9 Armourer 9 Coxswain 9
Quartermaster 9 Midshipmen 10 10 Common Sailors 8

N. B. Anno 1745 in the Time of the Cape-Breton Expedition, Exchange with
London was 7 and half for one* afterward as our Currency depreciated, Sailors
could not be got at these nominal Wages, and a common Sailor's Wages was set at
10 L. per Month. -- In the Winter Months when our armed Vessels are laid up,
the Captain, Gunner, Boatswain, and three common Sailors only are kept. -- Our
inland Frontier Summer Forces (in Time of War) are reduced to one Third of
their Compliment in Winter.

Anno 1743 the Year preceding the French and Indian War, our Military Charges
were very small.

Castle William in Boston Bay 40 Men. Richmond Fort on Quenebec River 10 Men.
Brunswick Fort on Amarescogin River 6 Men. Pemaquid Fort East of Sagadahock 6
Men. St. George's Fort near Penob^cot 13 Men. Saco River Fort 13 Men. Fort
Dummer on Connecticut River 16 Men. Province Store-Sloop 10 Men. 114 Men.
The Parties in Massachusetts Bay at present, are not the Loyal and Iacobite,
the Governor and Country, Whig and Tory, or any religious Sectary
Denominations; but the Debtors and the Creditors. The Debtor Side has had the
Ascendent ever since Anno 1741, to the almost utter Ruin of the Country.

Our late bad Economy is very notorious; for Instance, Anno 1725, Castle
William in Boston Harbor was victualled at 7 s. per Man, per Week; Anno 1748,
Victualling was 38 s. per Week, because of Depreciations. By Expeditions, we
lost many of our laboring young Men; this made Labor so dear, that in Produce
or Manufacture any Country can undersell us at a Market.

For many Years, in the Land Service, the Allowance of Provisions to each Man
was; Garrison Allowance 1 l. Bread per Day, half Pint Pease per Day, 2 l. Pork
for three Days, 1 Gallon Molasses for 42 Days; Marching Allowances per Day, 1
l. Bread, 1 l. Pork, 1 Gill Rum. A Sentinel or private Soldier's Pay per Month
was Anno 1742, 30 s. Old Tenor, Anno 1744, at the breaking out of the French
and Indian War, it was advanced to 5 L. Anno 1747, 6 L. 5 s. Anno 1748, 8 L.: A
Captain's Wages were double, and the other Officers in Proportion.

The Encouragement for Privateers commissioned by the Governor, was 10 L. Old
Tenor per Head, for each Enemy killed or taken Prisoner; and Captures made by
the Provincial armed Vessels were to be distributed, to the Captain 2 Eighths,
to the Lieutenant and Master 1 Eighth, to the Warrant Officers 1 Eighth, to the
Petty Officers 1 Eighth, to the common Sailors 3 Eighths; aboard the Provincial
Privateers, the victualling Allowance was to each Man per Week, Bread 7 l. Beer
7 Gallons, Beef 3 l. Pork 4 l. Pease 1 Quart, Indian Corn 1 Pint.

The Captains are to make up their Muster Rolls, and the Commissaries their
Accounts before the Men are paid off.

The Alacrity of the New England Militia may be observed, by the Alarm from d'
Anville's Breast French Squadron, End of September 1746; in a very short time
6400 Men from the Country well armed, appeared in Boston Common, some of them (
v. g. from Brookfield) traveled 70 Miles in two Days, each with a Pack (in
which was Provision for 14 Days) of about a Bushel Corn Weight: Connecticut was
to have sent us 6000 Men, being one half of their training List; these Men were
paid by the Province for their Travel and Attendance.

This Section concerning the Province of Massachusetts Bay, is swelled so much,
that some Heads in common to all New England, shall be deferred to the
following New England Section, and at present only mention

Timber of many Sorts. Many Kinds of Pine Trees, whereof the principal are the
White Pine a beautiful Tree of the best Use for Masting, and Joi^ers Work; and
the Pitch Pine the Mother of Turpentine, Tar, Pitch, Oil of Turpentine and
Rozin. Various Kinds of Oaks, the Principal for Ship-Building and other
Constructions, are the White Oak the best, the Swamp Oak, and the Black Oak.

Our Continen^ Southern Colonies are peculiarly adapted for Grain, Tobacco (in
S^ut^ Carolina they are making Trials for Indig^, Cotton, and Silk) and
Deer-Ski^s. Our Northern Continent-Colonies, produce kindly Pasturage, Cider,
Fishery, Furs, Naval Stores and other Timber.
Grain of various Sorts, scarce any of them are Natives or spontaneous. Indian
Corn is the Principal, Rye thrives tolerably, as do likewise Phaseoli or Kidney
Beans of several Sorts, called Indian or French Beans; all the Varieties of
English Grain are sown, but do not grow kindly. Apples are very natural to the
Soil and Climate, Flax grows well, and lately the People from the North of
Ireland have improved the Fabric of Linen, and all other Spinning-Work. The
Soil seems not strong enough for Hemp, many Trials have been made.

Fishery, see P. 294; Whaling, I mean Fish-Oil and Whale-Bone have at present
Within these few Years, our Cod-Fishery, Whaling, and Ship-Building have failed
much; and by Peculation and Depopulation, we were like to have been carried
into Ruin; but it is to be hoped we may have better Times; at present our Trade
is not half so much, and our Taxes from 30 to 40 Times more, than they were a
few Years ago.
failed us much, and our Cod-Fishing; Fishing Scooners are not half so many as
a few Years since; Anno 1748 only (...) ^ishing Scooners at Marblehead
Cape-Anne 20 Salem 8 Ipswich 6
Those Scooners of about 50 Tun, fish in deep Water (the deeper the Water, the
larger and firmer are the Cod) seven Hands to each Scooner, Communibus Annis,
they make 600 Quintals per Scooner; generally five Fares a Year, two Fares are
to the Banks of the Island of Sable, the other three Fares are to Banquero, and
to the other Banks along the Cape-Sable Shore. The merchantable dry Cod are
carried to the Markets of Spain, Portugal, and Italy; the Refuse Cod are shipped
off for the West India Islands to feed the Negro Slaves. Concerning the small
Fish, see P. 303. A Sturgeon-Fishery in the several Branches of Sagad^^^^ some
Years since was encouraged by a Society of ^^shmongers in London, but from the
Mismanagement of the Undertakers, especially as to proper Vinegar, it turned to
no Account, and was neglected ever since Mr. Dummer's Indian War.

Our Provincial Stores in the Truck-Houses for Indian Trade has always been
very small; Anno 1746 when the Indian Trade ceased because of the War; the
Commissary for that Trade, reported that he was accountable to the Province for
a Balance 13,324 l. 6 s. 4 d. Old Tenor, in his Hands. In New England, Beaver,
other Furs, and Deer Skins, are become so inconsiderable, they are scarce to be
reckoned an Article in our Trade, see P. 176.

To give a general View of the Navigation of Massachusetts Bay, we may observe,
that in this Province are two Collections or Custom-Houses, Boston and Salem.
At Boston Custom-House, from their Quarterly Accounts, Christmas 1747 to
Christmas 1748, foreign Vessels cleared out 540 entered in 430; about 10 Years
ago nearly the same Number: From the Quarterly Accounts of Boston District
Naval-Office, on foreign Voyages Michaelm^s 1747 to Michaelmas 1748, cleared
out 491 Vessels, viz. Ships 51 Snows 44 Brigs 54 Sloops 249 Scooners 93 491
Exclusive of Fishing and Coasting Vessels of the Provinces and Colonies of
Massachusetts Bay, New Hampshire, Connecticut and Rhode Island. This
Custom-House returns Communibus Annis, 200 L. Sterling. for Greenwich Hospital.

Salem Collection includes the Ports of Salem, Marblehead, Cape-Anne, Ipswich,
and Newbury. N. B. By a Mistake P. 456, Newbury was said to be a Branch of the
Collection of New Hampshire. From the Custom House quarterly Accounts of Salem,
from Michaelmas 1747 to Michaelmas 1748, cleared out Vessels upon foreign
Voyages 131, entered in 96; viz. Cleared Out, Ships 4 Snows 12 Brigs 21 Sloops
31 Scooners 63 131
Entered In, Ships 1 Snows 11 Brigs 11 Sloops 18 Scooners 55 96
In which were shipped off to Europe 32,000 Quintals of dry Cod-Fish, to
West India Islands 3070 Hogsheads (at 6 to 7 Quintals Refuse Cod-Fish per
Hogshead) for Negro Provision. New England ships off no pickled Cod-Fish.

Mr. Blanchandin in Anno 1721 of the Custom-House District of Salem, says, That
in the Course of several Years preceding, Communibus Annis, he cleared out
about 80 Vessels upon foreign Voyages per An.

Ship-Building is one of the greatest Articles of our Trade and Manufacture; it
imploys and maintains above 30 several Denominations of Tradesmen and
Artificers; but as in all other Articles, so in this more particularly for a
few late Years this Country has the Symptoms of a galloping (a vulgar
Expression) Consumption, not so desperate but by the Administration of a
skilful Physician, it may recover an Athletick State of Health; sublata causa
tollitur effectus. I shall illustrate the gradual Decay of Ship-Building, by
the Ship-Building in Boston, meaning Top-sail Vessels.

Anno 1738 on the Stocks 41 Vessels of 6324 Tun^ 1743 30 1746 20 1749 15 2450

As to the Decay of our Cod-Fishery, I shall only mention that Anno 1716 upon
my first Arrival in New England, by the Books of the two Custom-House Districts
of Massachusetts Bay were exported 120,384 Quintals, Anno 1748 exported about
53000 Quintals.

Rum is a considerable Article in our Manufactures. It is distilled from
Molasses imported from the West India Islands; it has killed more Indians than
the Wars and their Sicknesses, it does not spare white People, especially when
made into Flip, which is Rum mixed with a foul small Beer, and the coursest of
Muscovado Sugars; it is vented to all our Continent Colonies to greatAdvantage.

Hatts manufactured and exported to all our Colonies, is a considerable Article.

Iron is a considerable Article in our Manufactures; it consists of these
general Branches. 1. 120 Bushels Charcoal is sufficient to smelt Rock-Ore into
one Tun Pigs; the Compliment of Men for a Furnace is 8 or 9, besides Cutters of
the Wood, Co^lers, Carter^, and other common Laborers.
Smelting Furnaces, reducing the Ore into Pigs; having Coal enough and
Appearances of Rock Ore, in Attleborough were erected at a great Charge three
Furnaces; but the Ore proving bad and scarce, this Projection miscarried as to
Pigs: They were of Use in casting of small Cannon for Ships of Letters of
Marque, and in casting Cannon-Balls and Bombs toward the Reduction of
Louisbourg. 2. Refineries, which manufacture Pigs imported from New York,
Pennsylvania and Maryland Furnaces, into Bar Iron. 3. Bloomeries, which from
Bog or Swamp Ore lies from half a Foot to two Feet deep; in about 20 Years from
digging, it grows or gathers fit for another Di^ging; if it lies longer it
turns rusty, and does not yield well: Three Tuns of Swamp Ore yields about one
Tun of hollow Ware.
Bog or Swamp Ore, without any Furnace, only by a Forge Hearth, reduce it into
a Bloom or semiliquidated Lump to be beat into Bars, but much inferior to those
from the Pigs or Refineries. 4. Swamp Col. Dunbar Anno 1731 informs the Board
of Trade and Pla^tations, that in New England were Six Furnaces, meaning hollow
Ware Furnaces, and 19 Forges* meaning Bloomeries, not Refineries; at that Time
we had no Pig Furnaces, nor Refineries of Pigs.
Ore Furnaces, from that Ore smelted, they cast hollow Ware, which we can
afford cheaper than from England or Holland.

Oil of Turpentine distilled from the New England Turpentine, which yields the
most and best Oil; and from Carolina Turpentine; as also Rosin or its Residuum,
we defer to a Digression concerning Naval Stores in the New Hampshire Section.

Miscellanies. The Light-House at the Entrance of Boston Harbor was erected
Anno 1715, cost 2385 L. 17 s. 8 d. Currency. Light-House Money was 1 d. in, and
1 d. out, per Tun. Anno 1742 it was enacted at 2 d. Old Tenor in, and as much
out per Tun, in foreign Voyages. Coasters from Canso in Nova Scotia to
North Carolina 4 s. per Voyage.

In Castle William of the Harbor of Boston are 104 Cannon besides Mortars;
whereof 20 Cannon of 42 lb. Ball, and 2 Mortars of 13 Inches Shell arrived Anno
1744, with all Stores excepting Gunpowder, at the Charge of the Ordnance.

1711 October. 2. In Boston the Provincial Courthouse, and senior Congregational
Meeting House, with many other good Houses were burnt down; 1747 Dec. 9. the
Provincial Courthouse was burnt, most of the Records in the Secretary's Office
were consumed; the County Records of Land Conveyances were saved.

There is a public Grainery in Boston, for supplying poor Families with small
Parcels of Grain and Meal, at 10 per Cent Advance, for Charg^s and Waste; this
Grainery is sufficient for 10 to 12,000 Bushels Grain at a Time.

In New England the People are generally Congregationalists. Many of the
Congregational Churches have laid aside public Relations of their converting
Experiences, which formerly was required previous to the Admission of their
Infant Progeny to Baptism, and of themselves to the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper; giving Satisfaction to the Minister, of their Faith and good Life is
deemed sufficient. In Massachusetts Bay are 250 Congregational Churches, in
Connecticut about 120, in New Hampshire about 30; in Rhode Island only 6 or 7,
being generally Anabaptists, Quakers, and of some other Sectaries.

The several religious Societies in the Town of Boston, Anno 1749, are Three
Churches of England, One North of Ireland Presbyterians, 9 Congregationalists,
One French Hugonots, who by Length of Time have incorporated into the several
English Congregations, and at present are no separate Body, and have lately
sold their Church-Building to a Congregation of Mr. Whitefield's Disciples; Two
Anabaptists, viz. One Original, and one Separatist, One Quaker Meeting very
small, Whitefield's Separatist, and a Separatist of Separatists.

The Ability and Numbers in the several religious Societies in Boston, may be
gathered from a Sunday's Contribution for Charity to the Poor of the Town much
distressed by Want of Firewood in the hard Winter Feb. 1740, 1, viz. l. s. d.
l. s. d. Dr. Cutler Church of Engl. 72 14 2 Mr. Welsteed 58 0 0 Mr. Price 134
10 0 Mr. Hooper 143 0 0 Mr. Davenport 133 3 3 Mr. Foxcroft 95 0 0 FrenchChurch
14 11 3 Dr. Colman 164 10 0 Anabaptist 14 2 0 Dr. Sewall 105 0 0 Irish Meeting
27 5 0 Mr. Webb 105 0 0 Mr. Checkley 72 12 0 Mr. Gee 71 10 5 Mr. Byles 40 2 0

Harvard-College In the Continent of North America, we have four Colleges;
whereof two are by Charters from Home, that of Virginia is dated Anno 1692,
that for New-Iersies is dated October 22. 1746; the other two are by Provincial
or Colony Charters, Harvard or Cambridge College of Massachusetts Bay, and Yale
College of Connecticut. They do not assume the Names of Universities or
Seminaries of universal Learning, perhaps the first Design of the College in
Massachusetts Bay, was as a Seminary for a Succession of able and learned
Gospel Ministry.
in Massachusetts Bay.
Anno 1636, Winthrop Governor, Dudley Deputy Governor, and Bellingham
Treasurer; the General Assembly granted 400 L. toward a Collegiate School, but
afterward called a College; this was not then applied, it received the
Addition of 779 l. 17 s. 2 d. a Donation bequeathed 1638 by Mr. Harvard,
Minister of Charlestown, the Name of the College perpetuates his Memory; it is
situated in a healthful Soil (not above one per Ct. of the Scholars die per
Annum) formerly a District of Newtown, and constituted a Township by the Name
of Cambridge. 1640 The Income of the Ferry between Boston and Charlestown was
granted to the College: it is now Let at 600 L. New England Currency, or 60 L.
Sterling. per Annum, this Ferry is about three Miles from Cambridge.

Anno 1642, The General Assembly appointed Overseers of this College, viz. The
Governor, Deputy^Governor, the Council called Magistrates, and the ordained
Ministers of the six adjoining Towns of Cambridge, Watertown, Charlestown,
Boston, Roxbury, and Dorchester.

Their Charter bears Date, May 31. 1650; the Corporation to consist of a
President, five Fellows, and a Treasurer or Burser, to elect for Vacancies, and
to make Bylaws; the Overseers have a Negative.

The College-Building consists of a Court built on three Sides, the Front being
open to the Fields; the Building on the first Side was by a Contribution, 1672,
through the whole Colony of 1895 l. 2 s. 9 d. whereof from Boston about 800 L.
it was called by the former Name Harvard College; the Building on the Bottom
Side was erected Anno 1699, at the Charge of Lieut.-Governor Stoughton, and is
called Stoughton-College, consisting of 16 Chambers, Garret Chambers included;
the third Side was built Anno 1720 at the Charge of the Province, and is called
Massachusetts Hall, consisting of 32 Chambers. Besides this Court there is a
^ouse for the President at some Distance from the Court, and at a small
Distance behind the Harvard Side of the Court is a neat Chapel the Gift of Mrs.
Holden of London, Widow of Mr. Holden a late Director of the Bank of England.

The Resident Instructors of Youth, are a President or Supervisor, four Tutors
or Philosophy Professors, the Hollisian Professor of Divinity, the Hollisian
Professor of natural and experimental Philosophy, and a Professor of Hebrew.
The Income or Revenue of the College is The College never had any remarkable
Misfortune, the Rev. Mr. Cotton Mather writes, that once providentially, short
public Prayers (I do not know, that hereby he intended to recommend short
Prayers) by dismissing the Students in good Time, discovered the Fire and
prevented a Conflagration of the College Buildings.
not sufficient to defray its Charge. Some of that Body have an additional
Province Allowance; the ingenious and reverend Mr. Holyoke President, besides
the Rents of the Building called Massachusetts Hall, was voted 1748 out of the
Province Treasury 1400 L. Old Tenor; the Rev. Edward Wigglesworth, D. D.
Hollisian Professor of Divinity, besides the 80 L. New England Currency the
Hollis Donation, lately to prevent Depreciations, the Bonds at Interest, which
are a Fund for these Hollis Salaries, are reduced to Specialties, and thereby
become more in the present nominal Currency; he has Anno 1748 an additional
Allowance of 300 L. Old Tenor. The Hollisian Professor of natural and
experimental Philosophy, is upon the same Foo^ing and Salary with the Hollisian
Professor of Divinity; though this Branch is the most useful of all Sciences;
the present Incumbent, the ingenious and industrious (Observations and
experimental Trials are Industry) Mr. Winthrop has no additional Provincial
Allowance or Encouragement. The Professor of the Hebrew Language is Judah
Mo^is, formerly a Jew, and publicly christianized, or baptized, in the
College-Hall, May 27. 1722: He has petitioned for a Provincial Allowance from
Time to Time, but without Effect. The four Tutors commonly called Professors of
Philosophy, have each from the Income of the College 300 to 400 L. Old Tenor
per Annum, with some small Perquisites; there are about ten Hollisian poor
Scholars at about 10 L. Old Tenor per Annum.

Several well-disposed Persons have from Time to Time forwarded the Affair of
the College; besides the Grants from the Provincial General Court, and the
Donations of Mr. Hollis and Hopkins.

This Seminary at first consisted of a Preceptor, two Ushers, and a Treasurer,
Mr. Eaton was the first Preceptor, he was a Man of Learning, too severe in his
Discipline; the General Assembly dismissed him, and Mr. Dunster The New England
Psalms in present Use, are a just strict Version, but not an elegant loose
Paraphrase; they were composed by Mr. Elliot of Roxbury, Mr. Mather of
Dorchester, and Mr. Weld, printed Anno 1640, and afterward corrected by Mr.
Dunster and Mr. Lions, Tutor to Mr. Mildmay.
was appointed President Anno 1640, being an Anabaptist (a Sect at that Time
hated in New England) he was advised to resign 1654. Mr. Chauncy, Minister of
Situate, formerly a Church of England Minister, succeeded him, and died 1671,
Aet. 82. He was succeeded by Hoar, a Doctor of Physic from the University of
Cambridge in Old England; in his Time the Scholars Anno 1672, There were no
Scholars to commence.
deserted the College, and he resigned 1675. He was succeeded by Urian Oaks, a
Man of good Accomplishments and Minister of Cambridge, he died 1681. Was
succeeded by Mr. Rogers of Ipswich, Physician, he died 1684. Was succeeded by
Mr. Increase Mather, he was President or Rector When Mr. Dudley was President
of New England, for Distinction the President of the College was called Rector.
for about 20 Years; Mr. Mather, upon the Arrival of Governor Andros, went a
Voluntier Agent to the Court of England, he left the College under the
Direction of two Tutors Leverett and Brat^le; he came over to New England 1692,
in Company with the new Charter, and for his good Services at Home, had the
Degree of a Doctor in Divinity conferred upon him, the first and sole Instance
of a Doctor's Degree conferred in Harvard-Coll^ge: He was There has been
Pastors in the North Church or Congregation of Boston, a regular Succession of
Father, Son, and Grandson; the Grandson upon some Party Differences in the old
Congregation, has formed a new distinct unanimous Church.
Teacher of a Congregation in Boston, his Acquaintance with Mr. Hollis in
London, followed by the Solicitations of Benjamin Colman, D. D. a Minister in
Boston, procured the generous Hollisi^n Donations. Dr. Mather was succeeded by
Mr. Willard a Minister in Boston. This was succeeded by Mr. Leverett a Judge in
the Superior Court, and afterward a worthy and most deserving President of
this College, his Salary from the Province was 150 L. per Annum, he died 1724.
Was succeeded by Mr. Wadsworth a Minister of Boston, his too easy Discipline
was faulted, he died 1737, and the Presidentship continued vacant some Time.
The present President is the learned and ingenious Mr. Holyoke, a Minister from
Marblehead.

Protestants of any Denomination may have their Children educated and graduated
here. At Admission, the Scholars subscribe the College Laws: The Manner of this
College, is, after 4 Year's Residence, they are admitted to a Batchelor's
Degree in these Words. Admitto te ad primum Gradum in Artibus, pro More
Academiarum in Anglia: After three Years more (Residence not required) they are
admitted to the Degree of Master of Arts, in these Words, Admitto te ad
secundum Gradum in Artibus, pro More Academiarum in Anglia. They generally
become Ministers; the Proverbial Saying amongst some Strangers, that all the
Men of Note in New England have been Preachers, is not just. The public Act of
Commencement is on the first Wednesday of July annually; they began to confer
Academical Degrees Anno 1642, that Year nine Scholars commenced Batchelors; the
greatest Commencement was Anno 1725 of forty-five Batchelors, in the
Administration of Mr. Dummer; the College lately is upon the Decline, as are
the servile Arts and Sciences, Anno 1746 only 12 Students commenced Batchelors.

Besides Provincial Grants and the Legacy of Mr. Harvard already mentioned,
there have been many liberal Contributions toward the Revenue of the College,
its Edifices, Library, experimental Philosophy Instruments, etc. which the
Nature of a Summary does not require to be minutely related; I shall only
mention the Donations of Hopkins, and Hollis and Holden; Samuel Sewall, John
Leverett, Thomas Fitch, and Daniel Oliver, Esqrs; a Committee of the Trustees
appointed in his Majesty's Court of Chancery, to purchase Houses or Lands to
perpetuate the Charity of Edward Hopkins, Esquire purchased Province Lands now
called Hopkinton Township of 22,-500 Acres, including a few peculiar Farms
formerly granted. At a Meeting April 19. 1716; these Trustees agreed, that
12,500 Acres of the Lands should be laid out in Lots and leased at 3 d.
New England Currency per An. Quitrent per Acre for 99 Years, the Leases to
commence March 25. 1723, and upon the Expiration of 99 Years, the Leases to be
renewed from Time to Time, so as never to exceed 9 d. per Acre, and the
Trustees to save the Termors or Tenants from paying any Provincial Tax, for
three Quarters of their Lands; but by continued Depreciations of that
pernicious Paper-Currency of New England, the Value of these Lands was in a
progressive sinking to the great Damage of the College, to check this the
General Assembly ascertained those Rents to a Sterling Value; 1741, by Act of
Assembly the Quitrents were converted into 1 d. Sterling. per Acre per Ann. until
Anno 1823, and 3 d. Sterling. after, the Termors paying all the Provincial Taxes
of these Lands; and to enable these Tenants to pay those Province Taxes, the
common Lands (being about 8000 Acres) to be divided amongst them clear of any
Quitrent.

Mr. Thomas Hollis of London Merchant, made a Donation of about 300 L. per An.
New England Currency, as Encouragement for a Professor of Divinity, for a
Professor of natural and experimental Philosophy, and Exhibitions for the
Education of poor Scholars, with some Allowance to the College-Treasurer for
managing this Charity; Anno 1721 he had the Thanks of the General Assembly, for
his Donations. He made an Addition of many valuable Books to the Library, gave
an Apparatus for philosophical Experiments to the Value of 115 L. St. he sent
Hebrew and Greek Types, he was a Benefactor to the Housatonick Indians.

Samuel Holden, Esquire late Director of the Bank of England, bestowed Charities in
New England to the Value of 4,847 L. New England Currency. His Widow and
Daughters built a Chapel in Harvard-College, with other Benefactions to the
Value of 5,585 L. New England Currency.

Some Account of the Wars, or rather of the Incursions and Depredations of the
Canada French and their Indians, against the Governments or People of
New England and Nova Scotia, from the Revolution, Anno 1688 to Anno 1749.
As no Writer of Observation and Leisure, has hitherto given us a distinct
Account of these Affairs; we offer this short History, referring the Reader to
some previous Accounts mentioned in this Summary. See P. 160. We shall begin
with some general Observations.

The Indians in their Transactions and Conferences, run much into Similitudes
and Allegories. Their Language is not copious, because their Knowledge of
Things is not extensive, they seem to avoid Labial Letters.


See P. 191.
The general Characters of our Indians, are to decline open Engagements; Bush
fighting, or skulking is their Discipline; they are brave when engaged; great
Fortitude in enduring Tortures and Death; Love of Liberty; Affection to their
Relations, implacably revengeful; The Indians are the most implacably
vindictive People upon Earth; they revenge the Death of a Relation or any great
Affront, when Occasion presents, let the Distance of Time or Place be never so
remote.
inhumanely cruel; in all their Festivals and other Dances, they relate what
Successes they have had, and what Damages they have received in their late Wars.

Every Nation or Tribe is an absolute Republic or strict Democracy; their
chief Families have a kind of Succession as to Property, but in no other
Respects; wise Conduct, Courage, and personal Strength, are the chief
Recommendations for War Captains, etc. The Delegates of the Indian Nations,
after agreeing upon Articles with neighboring Powers, are obliged to go Home
and persuade their young Men to concur.


When the Indians break out, they seldom make any Onset ^n large Bodies; but
after a general Rendezvous, they divide into small skulking Parties; the whole
Art of War amongst the Indians, is the managing of small Parties, and like
carnivorous Beasts of the Forest (the French with good Propriety term them Les
hommes des Bois) commit Rapines and most cruel Murders without Regard to Age or
Sex. The Barbarians ground all their Wars upon personal or national Enmity,
whereas the Ruptures in Europe depend more upon Interest, than upon pure
Revenge. To set the Indians at Variance one Nation against another Nation, is
of no Advantage to the Colonies from Europe, it prevents their Beaver-hunting,
and other Branches of the Indian Trade.


As Man is a gregarious Animal, the American Indians associate in Herds or
Hords, but not in a progressive wandering Manner as the Tartars at this Time,
and as the Israelites of Old in the Wildernesses of Arabia.
As formerly amongst the Israelites, so it is at present with our Indians, See
P. 157 and 184.
he is a mighty Prince or Sagamore who leads 100 or 200 fighting Men. The
Indians reckon it a bloody Battle where they lose 10 or 12 Men. Formerly their
Instruments of War were Arrows and Darts, at present our neighboring Indians
use Firearms, that is Muskets and Fuzils, a Hatchet, and long sharp-pointed
Knives. The far Indians use only Arrows and Clubs.
Lately in Winter, in War Times, they do not travel, lest the English Scouts
should trace them. All the Incursions and Rapines of the Indians are concerted,
encouraged, and conducted by our perfidious Neighbors the French of Canada.
The French with their Indians may plunder, but cannot keep Possession of any of
our North America Continent Colonies, our Colonies join and are well peopled:
The French Canada and Cape-Breton Colonies have not this Advantage.

Narrow Rivers are the best Canoe traveling, because in Lakes or wide Rivers,
any considerable Degree of Wind, obliges them to go ashore.




The most successful Manner of managing a War against the Canada French and
their Indians, is by scouting Mr. Dumm^r a wise Patriot, by continued Scouts
and Rangers to the Indian Head Quarters, their Clam Banks, Ponds which the
Indians frequented for Fishing, Fowling and Hunting, and their traveling
Carrying-Places, kept the Indians at a Distance, and by harrassing of them
brought them to a happy Peace. The House of Representatives have frequently
voted that our inland Frontiers, are best secured by scouting Parties in Time
of War: 1744 they voted that the Scouts on the Frontiers have not been employed
in ranging according to their Votes -- small scattering Garrisons, without
making Excursions into the Indian Country avail nothing; this War we had
upwards of 50 such at a Time.

The House of Representatives at Times find Fault with the Management in our
last War: 1747 Feb. 6. It being represented to the House of Representatives
that many of the Soldiers raised for the Canada Expedition, as well as those
raised for the immediate Service of the Province labor under diverse Grievances
proper for the Consideration of this House; therefore a Committee is appointed:
when the Levies for the Cape-Breton Expedition were daily coming to Boston, the
Representatives by Message desire that the Forces may be sent on board the
Transports, and other Forces prevented from coming in, lest they should be
infected with the Smallpox -- 1746 June 13, voted that a Committee be
appointed, to enquire into the Complaints of the Soldiers in the Eastern and
Western Frontiers, with Respect to the Supply of Provisions -- And a Committee
to prevent Children under 16 Aet. from inlisting -- 1746 July 16 The House in a
Message represent, that inducing of the Men impressed for the Frontiers into
other military Service, was a great Distress upon the People, as requiring
further Impresses; this may discourage future Houses from showing their Zeal in
like Manner a^ this House ha^ done.


and ranging Parties further than our Frontiers; thus they are kept at a
Distance from our Settlements, they are intimidated, and subjected to the
Inconveniences of Sickness, Hunger-starved, and Cold-starved by continued
harassing.

This last French and Indian War, we have practiced, the cantoning of our
Frontier Forces in many small Parcels, and very little Scouting: But luckily
the Indians were much reduced by former Wars, and by their Intemperance in the
Use of Rum; and of the small Remainder some were called off by the Canada
French to Crown-Point, and some to Nova Scotia: The only considerable
Appearance of the French and Indians upon our Frontiers tiers this War, was in
Summer 1746, June 19, a large Party appeared against No. 4, Phi^^as Stephens
and others, having made good Improvements in No. 4, a little above the gr^^t
Falls of C^^^ecticut River in the Province of New-H^^pshire; to maintai^ their
Settlements, built a Fort which was afterward^ garrisoned by the Province of
Massachusetts Bay.
upon Connecticut River, Capt. Stevens with 50 Men (doubtless private Property
conduced to animate them) made a gallant and successful Defense against a large
Party of the Enemy. August 19 a Party of the Enemy commanded by M. Riga^d de
V^udre^il, appeared before Fort Massachusetts, the Garrison surrendered
Prisoners to be relieved the first Opportunity; the Enemy plundered the Fort
and burnt it; this Fort was by the Assembly designed and allowed to be the best
supplied with Forces and Stores, because it flanks our Frontier, being in its
N. W. Corner, and the nearest to Crown-Point French Fort; in Massachusetts Fort
were only 3 Women, 5 Children, 22 Men, whereof only eight were in Health, a
Sergeant was the commanding Officer, they were short of Ammunition, had only
remaining three or four Pounds of Powder and as much Lead. The Design of a
Barrier against the Canada French and Indians, perhaps would have better been
answered by four strong Places well fitted, viz. One on Quenebec River, a
little above Richmond Fort, another high up Nawichawanock or Salmon Falls
River, a Third at the Here we suppose Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire
acting in Concert.
Crotch or Fork of Merrimack River, and the Fourth at No. 4, on Connecticut
River; these Forts to serve as Places of Arms for Rendezvous, and as Magazines
for Provisions and other Stores; 200 effective Men to be allowed to each of
them (may be reinforced upon Occasion) not Impressed Men cannot be long
detained from their Families and Business, consequently must be frequently
relieved by a Rotation of raw Men, not accustomed to this Duty.
impressed Men, excepting for occasional Reinforcements, but Volunteers in good
Pay, with generous Scalp and Captive Premiums; one half of the Men alternately
to be abroad in the Wilderness at a considerable advanced Distance from the
Barrier, ranging and scouting; the other half to remain in Garrison. In this
Situation offensive and defensive, no skulking Parties would venture to attempt
our Settlements, and our Out-Plantations or Farms would uninterruptedly
continue under Cultivation for the general Good of the Province, as well as for
the private Interest of the Proprietors.

Besides the ordinary Forts of Georges, Pemaquid, Richmond, Saco, and Fort
Dummer; there were additional new Forts or Block-Houses in the Western Parts,
Fort Massachusetts, Pelham, Shirley, Colerain, Fall Town, Dinsdale, Northfield,
Deerfield, Road Town, New Salem, Winchester, Lower Ashuelot, Upper Ashuelot,
No. 4, Pequioag, Nashawog, Naraganset No. 2, Browns, Leominster, Lunenburg,
Townshend, Groton, New Ipswich, Salem, Canada, Souhegan West, New-Hopkinton,
Great Meadows, Contacook, Rumford, Suncook; in the Eastern Parts were
Philips-Town, Berwick, Kittery, York, Wells, Arundel, Biddiford, Scarborough,
Falmouth, Sacarippee, Naraganset No. 7 or Gorham's, New Marbleh^ad, North
Yarmouth, Topsom, Wishcasset or Unksechuset, Rices of Charlemont, George-Town
or Arrowsick, Wiscasset, Sheepscot, Damarascotti, and East Georges; being in
all 56, generally insufficient Cantonments; whereof 15 are in another Province.

In the inland Frontiers many of the Out-Farm Houses have Jets in their
Corners, with loop Holes for small Arms, and may be called Cazernes.

For the several Tribes of the New England or Abnoqui Indians. P. 183.
In the late Wars with the English, by Cold and Hunger, by Sickness, and by
immoderate Use of Spirits, these Indians decrease fast. It is true, that in the
late Wars with the Indians, we lost more People than the Indians lost, because
we had more People to lose, and because the Indians know better where to find
us, than we know where to find them.

The Variety of Ensigns or Signatures of the Indians of North America, are the
Tortoise, Bear and Wolf.

We have given some Account P. 189, etc.
of the New England Indian Wars or Incursions down to the Revolution, and from
thence we now proceed. King William's Revolution in England was November 1688,
in New England the Revolution happened in April 1689; from that Time to Anno
1749 in Space of Sixty Years we have had 4 Indian Wars.

1. In the Administration of Governor Phipps and Lieutenant Governor Stoughton
from 1688 to January 7. School, 9.

2. Under Governor Dudley from August 10. 1703 to July 17. 1713.

3. Under Lieut.-Governor Dummer from July 25, 1722 to Dec. 15. 1725.

4. Under Governor Shirley from November 1744 to 1749.

We shall take no Notice of the Spanish War, which was proclaimed in London,
Oct. 1739, and in Boston of New England April 1740, because it did not in the
least affect our inland Frontier, nor our Seacoast; the Expedition against the
Spanish West India Settlements commonly called the Cuba Expedition, ordered
from Home, was a very great Disadvantage to our young Colonies of North
America; the American Regiment, divided into four Battalions, consisting of
about 3600 Men, whereof scarce any returned, depopulated our Plantations very
much; of the 500 Men sent from Massachusetts Bay, not exceeding 50 returned.
The New England Men composed the third Battalion, excepting the two
Rhode Island Companies that were incorporated into the first Battalion in Place
of two North Carolina Companies incorporated in the third Battalion. The
several Colonies were at the Charge of Levy-Money, of Provisions, and of
Transports for their respective Quotas; they were paid off or dismissed Oct.
24. 1742, and allowed to keep their Clothing and Firelocks) The 500 Men from
Massachusetts Bay for the Cuba Expedition cost us about 37,500 L. Old Tenor,
which at that Time was equal to 7000 L. St.

1. Phipps and Stoughton's Indian War. Anno 1688 ^ general War began to be
hatched in Europe; and the Eastern Abnaquie Indians by Instigation of the
Canada French, upon Pretense of the English encroaching upon their Lands and
cheating them in Trade, became uneasy, and began an open Rupture by
Depredations at North-Yarmouth and Sheepscot, when Governor Andros was in his
other Government of New York; Captives were made on both Sides; Andros upon his
Return from New York returned the Indian Prisoners, without receiving from the
Indians the English which they had captivated. In the Spring 1689 at Quochecho
in New Hampshire, ^ large Party of Indians killed Major Waldron and about 20
People more, they carried away about as many Captives; the preceding Winter
Governor Andros with 1000 Men marched to the Eastern Parts and built small
Forts at Pemaquid, Sheepscot and Pejepscot. Nov. 1689 our Army went into
Winter Quarters, and left Garrisons in Wells, York, Berwick, and Quochecho.

Anno 1690 Massachusetts Bay sent 160 Men to Albany in New York Government for
their Protection against the Canada French and Indians.

Anno 1692 Sir William Phipps with 450 Men marches to the Eastward, and built a
good Fort at Pemaquid East of Quenebec River; in August 1696 at Pemaquid the
French landed a few Men to join the Indians, Capt. Chub who had succeeded Capt.
Church in the Command of the Fort with 95 Men double armed, basely surrendered,
the French demolished the Fort; in this Fort were fourteen Cannon mounted,
whereof six were eighteen Pounders.

Anno 1693 June 12, arrived at Boston, Sir Francis Wheeler's Squadron, fitted
out to distress the French Colonie^ in America, he made some vain Attempts upon
Martinico and Guadaloupe. Pursuant to Instructions Sir Francis proposes to the
Governor and Council, the attempting of Quebec in Canada, to sail by the
beginning of July with a Recruit of 4000 Men, and four Months Provisions; this
could not be complied with upon so short Notice, the Squadron imported a
malignant, ill-conditioned Fever, which destroyed many of our People, and
sailed from Boston August 3, attempted Placentia of Newfoundland in vain;
arrived in England October 13, with Hands scarce sufficient to bring the Ships
Home. How inhumanly do Sovereignties play away their Men!

The Canada French not capa^le to supply the Indians, with Provisions and
Ammunition, occasioned a Submission of the Penobscot, Quenebec, Amarescogin,
and Saco Indians, by a Treaty at Pemaquid August 12. 1693; the Articles were,
1. To ab^ndon the French Interest. 2. To deliver all Captives. 3. A free Trade.
In some short Time Canada received from France considerable Supplie^ and the
Canada French persuaded the Indians to break out again July 18. 1694, by
killing and captivating many of our People upon the Frontiers; and afterward
many Scuffles of no Consequence.

Anno 1697 A Squadron from France wa^ designed to make a Descent upon
New England, but were dispersed in a Storm.

Soon after the French Peace of Reswick 1697, our Eastern Indians submitted
Ian. 7. School, 9.

2. Dudley 's Indian War. About seven Weeks afte^ an insiduous Congress at
Casco, with the Pen^bscot, N^ridgwoag, Amerasconti, Pigwocket and Pen^cook
Indians, August 10. 1703, M. Bobassier with about 500 Fr^nch and Indians in
several Divisions, by Surprise invaded a Frontier of about 40 Miles Extent from
Casco to Wells and York, and made a most barbarous Havoc (a French Missionary
Massacre) sparing neither Age nor Sex; about 200 Men, Women and Children were
murdered. (The Assembly voted 40 L. Premium for each Indian Scalp or Captive;
in the former War the Premium was 12 L.) This Massacre was soon after the
Congress with the Indian Delegates in June 20. 1703, the Indians then mad^
great Professions of Friendship, they received our Presents, Trading-Places and
Price^ of Commodities were agreed upon. All this War, the Five Nation^ called
New York Indians stand neuter, and by this Stratagem the Dutch of New York by
Means of these Indians carried on an advantageous Trade with the French of
Canada.

Anno 1703, 4, Feb. 29, the French and Indians about 250, commanded by M.
Arteil made a most barbarous inhumane Incursion upon Deerfield; they killed
about 60 Persons, captivated about 100 with Mr. Williams their Minister, of the
Captives they killed at Times about 21, when unfit for Travel.

Anno 1704 June. Caleb Ly^an at Cowassuck on Connecticut River with 1
Englishman and 5 Mohegan Indians killed 8 Enemy Indians out of 9; our Assembly
gave them a Reward of 31 L. Major Church with 550 Volunteers visits Penobscot,
Mount Desert, Pesamaquady and Minas of Nova Scotia, but made no Attempt upon
Port Royal; he brought away many Prisoners. M. Bo^c^re with 2 Missionaries, and
700 French and Indians designed an Incursion upon New England, but from
Differences amongst themselves they dispersed, some of them consorted and did
Damage at Lancaster, Groton, Amesbury, Haverhill, Exeter, Oyster River, Dover,
etc. In the Winter Col. Hilton with 270 Men visit^ Noridgwoag, but found no
Indian^. In the Winter Seasons the Indians do not so much Damage as formerly,
the English having got into the Use of Raquettes or Snow Shoes. A French
Privateer Shallop was cast away upon Plymouth Shore; a Store-Ship for Canada
was taken by an English Virginia Fleet. The French from Placentia do Damage
1704 and 1705 in several English Harbour^ in Newfoundland, See P. 290.
Capt. Crapoa in a French Privateer, carries 8 of our fishing Vessels to
Port Royal of Nova Scotia.

Anno 1706. The Indians do Damage at Oyster-River in April. In July 270 French
and Indians made Incursions at Dunstable, Amesbury, Kingston, Chelmsford,
Exeter, Groton, Reading, and Sudbury. Capt. Rous with a Flag of Truce was sent
to Port Royal of Nova Scotia to negotiate Prisoners; his Management was
faulted. See P. 307.
Mr. Shelden was sent to Canada twice to redeem Captives. Col. Hilton with 220
Men ranges the Eastern Frontiers, and killed many Indians. About this Time the
Premiums for Indian Scalps and Captives were advanced by Act of Assembly, viz.
per Piece to impressed Men 10 L. to Volunteers in Pay 20 L. to Volunteers
serving without Pay 50 L. with the Benefit of the Captives and Plunder.

Anno 1707, 8 March 13, from Boston sailed Col. Church with two New England
Regiments upon an Expedition against Port Royal, Subercasse Governor, he
returned re infecta. See P. 308.


Anno 1708 in the Spring a Body of 800 French and Indians was formed, with
Design to invade the inland Frontiers of New England, but differing amongst
themselves they separated, 150 of them concerted and made an Incursion upon
Haverhill, killed the Minister Mr. Rolf and many others. Col. Hilton with 170
Men visits Amarasconti and Pigwocket.

Anno 1709 In April and June, Deerfield was harrassed by 180 French and Indians
commanded by M. Revel, Son in Law to M. Arteil. Col. Nicholson and Capt. Vetch
at the Court of Great Britain propose a Conquest of Canada by Sea and
Landforces; See P. 308.
this in Appearance or Semblance was encouraged by the Court, and Instructions
were sent to the several Provinces to furnish certain Quotas, to be clothed,
armed, and paid at a British Charge, but by political Management at Court,
after a considerable Expense, this was dropped, and an Expedition against
Port Royal of Nova Scotia was directed for the following Year. See P. 308.


Anno 1711, near Exeter the Indians kill several People, Col. Hilton and others
were killed, and some captivated: In Chelmsford Major Tyng and some others were
killed; and Westward, some were killed at Marlborough, Brookfield, Simsbury,
and Waterbury. In Winter Col. Walton ranges the Clambank Shores Eastward. The
abortive Scheme for reducing Quebec and Placentia, consequently all Canada and
Newfoundland, by an Expedition under General Hill and Admiral Walker. See P.
311.
In April the Indians do Damage Eastward. We lost 20 fishing Vessels on the
Cape-Sable Shore by the Negligence of our Guarda la Costas. Capt. Carver takes
a French Privateer from Placentia of 45 Men. Upon the Frontiers of Virginia,
the French and their Indians murder many Inhabitants.

Upon Advice of a Suspension of Arms between Great Britain and France in
Europe, the Indians applied for an Accommodation by Submission; accordingly at
Portsmouth of New Hampshire, July 11, 1713, the Indian Delegates had a Congress
with the Commissioners of the New England Colonies; the Basis of the Submission
was the Treaty at Penobscot, August 11. 1693. And that any Difference between a
Briton and Indian, shall be issued in a British Court of Judicature; these
Indians were called of the Rivers of St. John's, Penobs^ot, Quenebec,
Amerescogin, Saco, and Merimack; Mauxis was their Chief.

3. Governor Shute and Lieut.-Governor Dummer's Indian War. See some
anticipating Accounts, P. 199 and 317.
The Canada Missionaries 1717 persuaded the Indians, with Threatenings to claim
some Lands settled by the English, this was compromised at Arrowsick in August.
Anno 1719 The Indians were moved by the Canada French to renew the same Claims,
but a small Scout of 60 Men, kept them in Awe. Anno 1720 The Indians were
advised by the French to be more insolent, by killing of Cattle, and threatening
the Lives of the Inhabitants; Col. Walton with 200 Men brought them to
Submission, and received four Indian Hostages for their future good Behavior.
The Canada French continuing uneasy because of our enlarged Settlements, Anno
1721 M. Croizer from Canada, M. St. Casteen from Penobscot, Roll and De la
chasse French Missionaries with about 300 Indians, make a general Appearance at
Arrowsick an Island of Sagadahock, threatening that if the English did not
remove from the claimed Indian Lands in three Weeks, they would kill the
People, burn the Houses, and destroy their Cattle; accordingly at Merry-meeting
Bay of Quenebec River June 13. 1722, the Indians made a beginning and
captivated Love, Hamilton, Hansard, Trescot and Edgar. July 5. 1722 in Boston
these Indians were proclaimed Enemies and Rebels. Capt. Herman with a Scout
killed several Indians upon Quenebec River. A Body of Indians at Arrowsick kill
some People, burnt 60 Dwelling-Houses, and destroyed 50 Head of Cattle; they in
vain attempted Richmond Fort upon Quenebec River, and St. Georges Fort near
Penobscot; they seized an English Sloop at Pesamaquady, See P. 317.
in vain attempted Annapolis of Nova Scotia, they surprised 16 of our fishing
Vessels near Cans^. See P. 317.
Lovel with his scouting Party of Volunteers was of great Service, but at last
unfortunate. The great Havoc of Indians by a large scouting Party made at
Noridgwoag. See P. 199.
At Noridgwoag a scouting Party some Time before this, seized some Letters from
the Governor General of Canada to Missionary Ralle, exhorting all the French
Missionaries, notwithstanding of the profound Peace between Great Britain and
France, to incite the Indians to act vigorously against the English. The
Indians at Times did some small Damages upon our Frontiers; they invested Fort
St. George near Penobscot, 30 Days without Success.

Anno 1723 August 21 arrived in Boston 63 Indians of the Six New York Nations,
with a sham Proposal of Alliance against our Eastern Indians; their real
Project wa^ only to receive Present^; they returned Home without stipulating
any Succors.

Anno 1723 Nov. 17 arrived in Boston a Message from the General of Canada, by
Capt. Le Ronde Deny, and Lieut. de Ramsay de Troops Marines. 1725 in January
Col. Thaxter and Dudley from Massachusetts Bay, and Mr. Atkinson from
New Hampshire set out with a Message to expostulate with the French Government
of Canada, concerning their inciting and assisting of our rebellious Indians.

The Indians much harrassed by our frequent Scouts to Penobscot, Noridgwoag,
White Hills, etc. and by our Rangers visiting their Carrying-Places,
Clam-Bank^, Fishing, Fowling, and Hunting Grounds; submitted to our own Term^,
S^e P. 200.
Boston, Dec. 25. 1725; which was afterward ratified at Casc^, Aug. 5. 1726.
By this Indian War these Indians were so much reduced, that in the late French
and Indian War from 1744 to 1749 we suffered very little upon our Frontiers.
All the Supplies from 1720 to 1725 inclusive, did not exceed 242,000 L. whereof
10,000 L. Old Tenor per An. defrayed the ordinar^ Charges of Government, a
notoriou^ Instance of Honesty, Frugality and good Management. The Forces were
allowed per Week, 10 s. Pay, and 6 s. Provisions.

4. Governor Shirley 's French and Indian War. The War against France was
proclaimed in Boston, June 2. 1744; and to guard against the French and Indian
Incursions, 500 Men were impressed; whereof 300 for the Eastern Frontier, viz.
50 from each of the Militia Regiment^ of Pepperrell, G^rrish, Berry, Plaisted,
Saltonstall and Phipps; and 200 Men for the Western Frontier, viz. 50 from each
of the Regiments of Chandler, Ward, Willard, and Stoddard; 25 Men from each
Regiment of Wendell at Boston, and G^uge, for reinforcing of the ordinary
standing Garrisons, viz. Ge^rges Fort to 40 Men, Pem^quid to 24, Richmond to
25, Brunswick to 12, Sato to 20 Men; no Detachments were made from the Militi^
of the Old Colony of Plymouth. 96 Barrels Gunpowder were sent to the several
Townships, to be sold to the Inhabitants, at prime Cost including Charges.

In Summer 1744, upon the breaking out of the French War, the President Col.
Mascarene, and Council of Nova Scotia, represent the weak State of the Garrison
of Annapolis, and ill Condition of its Fortifications; the Assembly of the
Province of Massachusetts Bay, generously sent them a Reinforcement of 200 Men
in four Companies, allowing 25 L. Levy-Money per Man (the Men to find their own
Arms) and 3 Months Provision, their Pa^ and further Victualling was from
Great Britain; they continued about 18 Months in Pay, and were of good Service
against M. Lutre and Duvivier's Attempts upon Annapolis. See P. 319.


The Cape Sable and St. John's Indians of Nova Scotia, having in Summer under M.
Lutre made an Attempt upon Annapolis, they were proclaimed Rebels and Enemies
at Boston, November 1744, from three Miles East of Pasamaquady River; and 400
L. Old Tenor granted a Premium for each scalpt or captivated Indian. When it
was found that the Penobscot and Noridgwoag Indians had joined them, the
Declaration of War was extended to these August 23. 1745; these Indians having
burnt a Fort at St. Georges, some Houses, and killed many Cattle.

This War so far as it relates to Nova Scotia, has a^ready been mentioned. See
P. 319.
1. M. Lutre with 300 Cap^-Sable and St. John's Indians, did attemp^ the Fort of
Annapolis in June 1744. 2. Duvivier with the some Indians and some regular
Troops from Louisbourg, in all about 800 Men, in September invested and
summoned the Fort, and after 3 Weeks retired to Min^s. 3. M. M^ri^ from Canada
with about 900 French and Indians i^ May 1745 made a short Appear^nce before
the Fort, and r^tired to Minas, thence to proceed toward the Relief of
Louisbourg; they were intercept^d. 4. M. de Ramsay with about 1600 Men French
and Indians from Canada arrives at Minas in Summe^ 1746, designed to join Duke
d' Anville's Armament at C^ebuct^* toward the End of September he came before
Annapolis, but made no Assault; being advised of the Return of the French Fleet
for Fr^nce, he retired to Minas and Chica^ict^, and from thence next Summer to
join a French Fleet and Land Forces toward (...) of Annapolis; in the Winter
1746, 7 about 500 to 600 of d^ Rams^y's Men from Chica^ict^, surprised the
New England Forces cantoned at Minas and did much Havoc. See P. 324.
The French return to Chicanict^ waiting the Arrival of la Ionquiere's Squadron
from France, but upon Advice of this Fleet being destroyed in Europe, de Ramsay
returns to Canada, and Nova Scotia suffered no further Disturbance.

Those 500 Men of the Canada Levies, were the second Reinforcement sent by
Massachusetts Bay to Nova Scotia, they were about 12 Months in Pay, and the
Remains of them returned to Boston in Autumn 1747.

October. 31. 1747 all the Canada Levies were dismissed, and next Day November 1.
about 270 of them in six Companies listed as a third Reinforcement for
NovaScotia, they were allowed British Pay, and a full Clothing, but soon wore
out; they were ordered Home in the Severity of Winter 1748, 9 and in Rags, but
by kind Providence they generally arrived safe, and were dismissed February 24.
1748, 9.

For the three Canada Expeditions that have been projected, but not effected
since the Revolution, see P. 309, etc. The Canada Levies of 1746 were under the
Direction of Sir Peter Warren and Mr. Shirley, with an Instruction to employ
them occasionally, as in Discretion they might think proper; accordingly late
in the Year when the River of St. Lawrence was become impracticable, they
cantoned 900 of them, Part of theCrown-Point Destination (2000 under Waldo and
Dwight were the whole) along the Frontiers in double Pay, National and
Provincial, and 500 were sent to Nova Scotia. In Autumn 1747 Knowles and
Shirley by Instructions from Home had the Direction of Nova Scotia.

For the Affair of Cape-Breton a miraculously successful Expedition, See P.
335, 345.
our Colony People love Frolicks, they continued in Pay about 18 Months.

For the North America Sea Campaigns of 1744, 1745, 1746 and 1747, See P. 338,
etc.
to these we may add, that in the Winter 1748, 9 all the Station Ships of
North America were called off, to form a Squadron against St. Iago de Cuba, but
in vain; the French and Spanish Privateers improved this Opportunity of a naked
Coast, took many of our Vessels, impune they sailed up Delaware River to within
a few Miles of Philadelphia, and many Leagues up Chesapeak Bay of Virginia, and
up Cape-Fear River of North Carolina.

Toward the Crown-Point Expedition 1746, we sent by Water to Albany four
Months Provisions for 1500 Men with Tents, a 13 Inch Mortar, and -- Barrels
Gunpowder; the Sicknesses at Albany, and the Alarm from d' Anville's Squadron
luckily put a Check.

In the Summer 1748, notwithstanding of a Cessation of Arms in Europe being
notified, some associated Banditti Indians in the French Influence, did Damage
at Saratogo at Fort Massachusetts, in our Eastern Country; and at St. John's
River of Nova Scotia, they killed some Men belonging to the Anson and Warren of
the Ordnance.

There are several miscellany Affairs belonging to this Article, to be related
in a short loose Manner; which may serve as common Place for future Historians.

The Six Indian Nations of New York, by the Dutch Trading Influence, did
amongst themselves resolve to stand neuter, the Oneides and Cayuges, French
Priest-rid, refused a Meeting of Delegates desired by Governor Clinton. In
August and September 1746* Massachusetts Bay sent Commissioners to confer with
these Indians at Albany; and 1748 Massachusetts sent their Governor and other
Commissioners there to concert War Affairs when the War was over.

1746, The French and their Indians from Crown-Point commit many barbarous
Murders and Depredations at Saratogo near Albany. 1747 The Militia Garrison of
Saratogo, carry off the Ordnance and Stores, and burn the Fort, without Orders
from the Governor or Government, as it is said.

In the Spring 1744 arrived in Boston* the King's Gift to Castle William of 20
Cannon of 42 Pound Ball, and 2 Mortars of 13 Inches, with all Stores excepting
Gunpowder.

Anno 1744 The Provincial Assembly voted a Range of Forts to be built between
C^nnecticut River and N^w-York Boundary Line, viz. F^ll fight, Col^rain,
Shirley, Pelham, and Massachusetts.

In the Spring 1745 the Province Frigate Massachusetts was launched, the Fund
was 6 d. per Tun each Voyage upon Vessels in foreign Voyages, and 6 d. per Tun
per Annum on fishing and coasting Vessels of the Province.

For the Years 1745, 1746, and 1747 the Premium for Indian Scalps and Captives
1000 L. Old Tenor per Head to Volunteers, and 400 L. to impressed Men, their
Wages and Subsistence Money to be deducted.

1747 August arrives in Boston, 21 Days Passage from Quebec in Canada, a French
Flag of Truce with 172 Prisoners and Captives British; 70 of the British died
in Quebec; their Allowance there per Day was 1 lb. and half Bread, half lb.
Beef, 1 Gill of Pease, with Spruce Beer.

1747 We sent a Flag of Truce August 1. from Boston with 63 French Prisoners
delivered at l' Isle de Basque 35 Leagues below Quebec, and received 16 British
Prisoners, returned to Boston October 3.

On our Eastern and Western Frontier, and in the intermediate Province of
New Hampshire, besides ordinary Garrisons, there were Anno 1745, about 747 Men
for Summer; 1746, about 1270 Men for Summer, and 315 for Winter; 1747, about
1676 Men (the Canada 900 Levies included) for the Summer, and 509 for Winter;
1748 (including 200 Men from Connecticut) 1410 Men for Summer, and 524 for
Winter, 50 from Connecticut included.

1749 Beginning of February the Peace which had been signed at Aix la Chapel^e
the 7th of October 1748, was proclaimed in London, and in Boston May 10th
following.

After the Conclusion of the Peace with France and Spain; by Order of the
General of Canada, a considerable Number of People, consisting of (as it is
said) some regular Troops, Canadeans and Indians, made a short Appearance near
Bay Verte of Nova Scotia, they pretended that their Business was to cut
Firewood for the expected French Troops to garrison Louisbourg, but the real
Design seems to have been, to keep up their Claim to some Part of Nova Scotia,
lest Great Britain in after Times should claim Prescription from an
uninterrupted Possession; some short Time after this the Governor-General of
Canada by a formal Letter to the Government of Nova Scotia, put in a French
Claim to the Northern Parts of Nova Scotia. The General of Martinico's French
Claim last Winter to the Island of Tobago, 40 Leagues South from Barbado^, and
comprehended in the Commission of the Governor of Barbados, was something of
this Nature.

It is probable, that Claims of this Kind will be brought before the
Commissaries or Commissioners usually appointed to settle some Concerns, which
otherwise would have protracted the Negotiations for a general P^^ce.




Peace being now fully settled, the Court of Great Britain seem to be in
earnest (since the Peace of Utrecht neglected) in settling of Nova Scotia, as
appears by the following Extract from the original P^^ce.

Whitehall, March 7. 1748, 9.

A Proposal having been presented unto his Majesty, for the establishing a
Civil Government in the Province of Nova Scotia ^n North America, as also for
the better peopling and settling the said Province, and ex^ending and imp^oving
the Fishery thereof, by granting Lan^s within the sa^e, and giving other
Encouragements to such of the Officers and private Men lately di^missed his
Majesty's L^nd and S^a-Service, as shall be willing to settle in the said
Provi^^e: And his Majesty ^aving signified his Royal Approbation of the Purport
of the said Proposals, the Right Hon. the Lords Commissioners for Tr^de and
Plant^tions do, by his Majesty'^ Comman^, give Notice, that proper
Encouragement will be given to such of the Officers and private Men l^tely
dismissed his Majesty's Land and Sea Service, and to A^tific^rs necessary in
Building or Husbandry, as are willing to accep^ of Grants of Land, and to
settle with or without Families in the Province of Nova Scotia.

To the Settl^rs qualified as above, 1. will be granted Passage and Subsistence
during their Pass^ge, as also for the Space of twelve Months after their
Arrival. 2. Arm^ and Ammunition, as far as will be judged necessary for their
Defense, with proper Utensils for Husband^y, Fishery, erecting Habitations, and
other necessary Purposes. 3. A civil Government to be established wi^h all the
Privileges of his Majesty's other Colonies or Governments in America, and
proper Measures will be taken for their Security and Protection.

The Lands granted shall be in Fee simple, free from the Payment of any
Quitrents, or Taxes, for the Term of ten Years; at the Expiration whereof no
Person to pay more than one Shilling Sterling per Annum, for every fifty Acres
so granted; the Lands are to be granted with the following Qualifications and
Proportio^^.

50 Acres to every private Soldier or Seaman, and 10 Acres over and above to
every Person (including Women and Children) of which his Family shall consist,
and further Grants to be made to them, as their Families shall increase.

80 Acres to every Offic^r under the Rank of an Ensign in the Land Service, and
that of a Lieutenant in the Sea Service, and 15 Acr^^ to every Person belonging
to the Family.

200 Acres to every Ensign, 300 to a Lieutenant, 400 to a Captain, 600 to any
Officer above the Rank of a Captain in the Land Service; in the Sea Service,
400 Acres to a Lieutenant, 600 Acres to a Captain; 30 Acres to every Person
belonging to such Families. Reputed Surgeons, whether they h^ve been in hi^
Majesty'^ Service, or not, shall be in the Capacity of Ensigns.

All Persons desirous to eng^ge are to enter their Names in the Month of April
1749, at the Trade and Plantations Office, or with the Commissioners of the
Navy residing at Portsmouth and Plymouth.

Omitted in the Article of Cape-Breton.
The French People transported from Louisbourg to France (including the
Vigilant's Men) preceding July 17, 1745, were 4130, whereof 1822 via Boston,
and 76 via New Hampshire. The French, while in Boston, were allowed in Old
Tenor per Week, viz. An Inhabitant from Cape-Breton 20 s. a Sailor 15 s.
Captain of the Vigilant 5 l. Second Captain 3 l. each Officer 40 s.

N. B. This Volume begins January 1746, 7, and ends May 1749.

End of the First Volume.

