THOUGHTS ON EDUCATION.

THOUGHTS ON EDUCATION, Tending chiefly To recommend to the Attention of the
Public, some Particulars relating to that Subject; which are not generally
considered with the Regard their Importance deserves.

By the Author of BRITAIN'S REMEMBRANCER.

BOSTON: Reprinted and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street. 1749.

THOUGHTS ON EDUCATION, etc.
AGAIN a second time, my dear Countrymen, a sincere well-wisher to you and all
your interests presumes, on your experienced patience and goodnature, to
address you. The hour of terror and distress was hardly over, and the cloud,
which had for some time hung black and gloomy over this Nation, threatening to
burst upon it in a tempest of general destruction, was but just beginning to
break, when a former weak but well meant Representation was laid before you.
The first edition of Britain's Remembrancer, the Piece here understood, was
published in the month of January, 1745-6, when the Rebel-army was flying
before the Duke of Cumberland, by whom they were totally defeated at the battle
of Culloden the 16th day of April following. The chief design of the Piece was
to point out the national vices and follies we were called upon by that
visitation to reform.
In a storm at sea it is common not only for professed mariners and pilots to
exert themselves for the safety of the ship, but likewise, in case of need,
every private passenger thinks himself obliged to lend what assistance he can
for the benefit of the whole. In the same manner, in a time of national danger,
whoever has the deliverance of his country sincerely and earnestly at heart,
will not so much consider his own Qualifications for doing any thing to avert
or mitigate the judgments of Heaven, as the Need there is that something be
done; and will accordingly contribute his mite, and exert his abilities, such
as they are. To slip an opportunity of acknowledging the candid reception given
by you to what was offered on that occasion, would be both uncivil and unjust:
though at the same time, To gain the Attention or even the most universal
Approbation of Readers, will by no means give full satisfaction to a writer,
whose aim is at something different from both, and who had rather see one
person follow his advice than a thousand approve and yet neglect it. However,
they, who give a friendly monitor a fair hearing, are more likely in time to
think of taking his counsel than they who will not so much as hear him. That
the face of affairs in this nation is altered very much for the better since
the abovementioned period, is certain. That in place of the immediate prospect
of a general confusion, likely to end in the subversion of our civil and
religious liberties, or in a lasting and bloody civil war, we now see Rebellion
mortally wounded, and breathing its last; the sword of justice drunk with its
blood, and her self tired and satiated with vengeance; the liberties of our
country and the protestant religion the more firmly established for their
having been shaken by the late commotions. And have we then no more to think of
or to fear, or do we imagine Heaven has but one Judgment to punish national
Wickedness or Indolence? Surely, if ever it be the duty or interest of a nation
to endeavor, by a suitable conduct, to gain or keep the favor and protection
of Omnipotence, it is more peculiarly so of a people favored by so many and so
signal interpositions as we have been. But alas! the happy effect, which might
have been expected from our deliverance, to wit, the correcting of our follies
and vices, has not yet appeared clearly enough, to show that the late
visitation has done its work, so as to render a more severe and effectual one
unnecessary.

But, to proceed to the Subject of the following pages: In the former Essay,
among other particulars, one is mentioned, as well worthy the attention of the
nation, and likely to contribute greatly to its advantage, both by its natural
consequences, and by the probability of its drawing down a Blessing upon us, to
wit, The virtuous and religious Education of the Youth. The subject could not
be there fully treated on, and therefore your serious attention is desired to
the following additional thoughts on a matter, which is not only in it self of
the utmost importance, but which likewise seems in a peculiar manner to want a
hearty recommendation to the regard of the present Age.

In the first place it seems hardly necessary that any Parent or Instructor of
youth, who believes the Christian religion, be told, That a strict account will
certainly be required, at the hands of all persons, of whatever the divine
providence has committed to them; and that, as no Trust, that can be committed
to any person, is of equal importance with that of immortal Souls, it is to be
supposed, no neglect whatever will be so severely punished in another world as
the neglect of the souls committed to the care of Parents and Instructors of
youth, especially considering, That the souls of Youth are more immediately
committed to the care of their Parents and Instructors than even those of a
People are to their Pastor; as persons arrived at years of discretion may be
supposed (if they have had a proper education) in a great measure capable of
conducting themselves; whereas the utter incapacity of Youth lays them almost
wholly at the mercy of their Parents or Instructors for a set of habits to
regulate their whole conduct through life, upon which their happiness through
eternity depends. And can those Parents or Instructors of youth, the number of
which, it is to be feared, is not small, be said to discharge faithfully and
thoroughly this awful trust, who are so far from endeavoring to form the minds
of the youth under their care, and to establish them on solid and rational
principles of Virtue and Religion, that many of them do not seem to think any
such thing necessary to be attempted, and that a youth educated either to an
employment by which he may gain a subsistence, or accomplished in the polite
arts and sciences (if his birth be suitable) has had full justice done him by
those to whom the charge of him was committed by providence. One would think no
parent or instructor of youth, who believes that a day of accounts will come at
last, should be able to think without trembling, of the terrors of it, lest the
Judge should then say to such as have been negligent of the souls committed to
their care, Thou wicked and slothful servant, Matthew. xxv. 26.
ought thou not to have improved to the utmost the opportunity put in thy
hands, of being useful to thy fellow creatures, especially to those immediately
entrusted to thy care? How have thou shamefully neglected what thou might
have faithfully and worthily performed? How have thou, instead of being of the
greatest service in thy station and a blessing to numbers, proved unworthy of
thy place in society, and the cause why numbers have come short of happiness.
Instead, therefore, of the reward, that might have crowned thy labors, receive
the doom due to thy wickedness and negligence. Nor will it be agreeable to any
parent or instructor of youth in that day, to hear any unhappy person, formerly
under his care, reproach him in the following manner. Had you faithfully and
strictly discharged your duty to me, I had not probably been miserable this
day. Had you warned me of the dangers of vice and irregularity, I might have
escaped them. Had you laid before me the rewards of virtue and religion, I
might perhaps have aspired at them. Why did you, in my days of youthful
weakness and inexperience, keep me in the dark, and suffer me to mistake my way
to happiness for want of a guide? How could you be so cruel to one incapable of
injuring you? How could you neglect a work so agreeable? How could you trifle
with what was of so much consequence to one you pretended to love? Had you no
ambition to lay the foundation of a structure, which might have risen higher
and higher through eternity? Had you no zeal to be found faithful in the trust
committed to you? Henceforth nothing remains but the cruel reflection on the
loss of all the inexpressible joy we might have given to one another, had you
seen me arrive at that happiness you had endeavored with success to lead me
to, and had I had reason to thank you for your care in pointing me the way;
instead of which -- But this is a subject too shocking to enlarge any farther
upon. Let it suffice to add, at present, That as, on the one hand, the forming
of a rational mind to virtue, religion, and happiness is the most glorious work
an angel, an archangel, or any created Being can be employed in, so, in all
probability, it will meet with the highest reward They that bring many to
righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever and ever." Dan, xii. 3.
"Whosoever shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so,
shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven, (that is, shall have no
part in the Christian salvation) but whosoever shall do and teach them, the
same shall be; called great in the kingdom of heaven.
; on the other, as the neglect of an immortal soul is a breach of the most
important trust that can be committed to any person, it is likely to meet with
the severest punishment.

Man being a creature designed not only for a short and uncertain duration in
the present state, but also for an everlasting one after this is at an end,
from the hour of his entrance into the world, an existence commences, which is
to go on through eternity, and therefore from that time a constant regard ought
to be had, first by those to whom the care of him during his minority is
committed, and afterward by himself, to each several Period of his existence,
and likewise to the unmeasurable and endless Whole. If the opinion of the most
judicious be true, viz. That the very milk an infant sucks may have such an
influence upon his passions and appetites as may affect his whole conduct
through life, upon which every one knows how much his happiness through
eternity depends; I say, if this opinion be just, it is plain, That nothing is
indifferent or of small consequence in the education of youth, even from the
earliest infancy: but that, on the contrary, things, which at first view may
seem trivial, may be followed by consequences of a nature very far from
trivial. I mention this particular only by the By, it being my design to insist
chiefly on the care of youth between the age of six and eighteen, before which
last period if the mind of a person be not formed to virtue and religion, it is
not to be expected it ever should afterward.

Previous to every other step, that is to be taken in the education of a young
person, is the forming and breaking his temper; by cherishing and encouraging
the good qualities of it, as Emulation, or a laudable desire of excelling,
Curiosity, or thirst after knowledge, Humility, Tractableness, Meekness,
Fearfulness of offending, and the rest; and by crushing and nipping in the bud
the luxuriant or pernicious ones, as Anger, Pride, Resentment, Obstinacy,
Sloth, Falsehood, and so forth. If this work be neglected by parents till the
age of Six be past, it need hardly be attempted at all: for the mind soon
acquires a sturdiness and obstinacy that is not to be conquered, and bad Habits
become quickly, as it were, a part of the very soul, and as hard to be
eradicated as it would be to separate the faculties of the soul from one
another. A particular that must make every wise and considerate person tremble
at the thought of the consequences of suffering any other than good and
virtuous Habits to take possession of his mind, and should make every Parent or
Guardian of youth to the last degree solicitous what Habits first take root in
the minds of those he has the charge of.

The whole of education seems to me to consist of two parts, or to come under
two general heads; the first is, The accomplishing a person in such parts of
knowledge as may be useful for qualifying him to pass decently and comfortably
through the present life; the second is, The right directing him how to prepare
himself for the everlasting duration after this life is at an end, teaching him
how to improve and ennoble his nature, and putting him in the way of attaining
the favor of his Maker, which is only another phrase for perfect happiness.
And by how much an everlasting duration exceeds the fleeting dream of the
present life, and by how much it is more fatal to be unprepared to enter upon
eternity than upon the stage of this world, by so much undoubtedly it is of
more consequence that Parents and Instructors of youth have a regard to the
Morals and Principles of those committed to their charge, than that their whole
care be confined to their accomplishments and seize in scholarship, and
by so much the more fatal a miscarriage in the former than in the latter. I
would not here be thought to insinuate, That human literature is of small
consequence in education; on the contrary, I do not know one branch of
knowledge, which any man (of a middling station, at least, and who is endued
with a tolerable measure of natural sense,) had better be wholly ignorant of:
for I am convinced, That giving the mind an early turn to Knowledge of any
innocent kind is doing it a very eminent service: because, being an active and
restless principle, it will, in its search after happiness, run out in pursuit
after either the objects of Sense, to wit, Pleasure, Power, or Riches; or after
those of the Mind, to wit, Knowledge, Virtue, or Religion: and every one knows,
how much it were to be desired, that mankind would cultivate their rational
rather than their sensual faculties, and place their happiness in the
acquisition of the objects of the former than the latter.

Were I to put together a sketch of what I think every youth ought to be
instructed in, before the time of life that is proper for going to business or
an university, it would be much in the following manner.

First, the knowledge of Grammar seems to be a thing of that universal
usefulness for leading people into a method of speaking or writing their
thoughts correctly and intelligibly, and of rightly apprehending those of
others, that I think no man (however low his station may be) ought to be
without it, and that children, whose parents either do not choose, or cannot
afford them a classical education, ought to be taught Grammar in their mother
tongue, the science being the same through all languages. Along with Grammar,
Orthography and Painting ought to be taught; as nothing more betrays a mean and
sordid education than false spelling, nor is there any thing more apt to
occasion misapprehensions of a person's meaning, which, in business, sometimes
prove fatal, than the want of proper points and stops in his letters or other
writings, and the running of one sentence into another.

The knowledge of Latin and Greek (especially the first) seems rather valuable
on account of their being the foundation of most modern languages, than for
their own sake. If it be true, which is commonly asserted, that there is scarce
a radical word in any of the modern tongues of above two syllables long, that
is not derived from one or other of them, it can hardly be supposed a person,
who is a perfect stranger to these languages, can thoroughly enter into the
sense and spirit of his own mother tongue. In instructing youth in the Latin
language, I should think it advisable to make them familiar with the
Historians, rather than the Poets, as the writings of the first are truly
useful and instructing, whereas those of the last generally tend to hurt the
morals of youth, or at least to fill their brains with false and romantic
ideas, and to lessen their value for truth. There are innumerable passages in
Ovid, Horace, and some others of the Heathen poets commonly in the hands of
young people, that ought not to be in print, or any way exposed to public view
in a Christian country. And indeed the perusal of the best of them is only
traveling through fairy-land, and treading on enchanted ground. It is at least
absolutely necessary, that youth be guarded from the bad effects of too great
an admiration for heathen poetry, by giving them early a just contempt for its
childish fables, and by showing them the advantages of our rational and sublime
religion when set in contrast with the absurd and wretched mythology of the
ancients, which has nothing in it really valuable, except that a little
knowledge of it serves to illustrate some obscure parts of history, as it has
greatly clouded and darkened many more. The knowledge of the Greek language is
worth the pains of any young person, who has leisure to attain it; for the sake
of reading the Septuagint translation of the Bible, the New Testament, and the
writings of the earliest Fathers of the Christian church, in the original.

The French language is so easily acquired, that, though not one person in an
hundred ever has any great occasion for it in life, I think it is worth while
for youth to employ some of their leisure hours in reading it.

The art of Writing, being a mechanical thing, may be acquired by a youth of
any sort of genius, bright or dull, through dint of practice and application.

Drawing is an art both elegant and useful; but ought by no means to be forced
upon every youth: for none but such as are born with a genius for it, will
succeed at it.

Music, as it is not to be acquired without a natural taste, so it ought to be
very sparingly indulged, where there is a genius for it. It is a bewitching
art, and one way or others is hurtful to most people, who delight in and
practice it. If Dancing is to be learned at all, it ought to be dispatched in
early youth, for various reasons.

The Knowledge of Numbers is wanted by almost every person, every day of his
life: nor can the time bestowed in studying the elements of Mathematics be
grudged by any one who knows their universal usefulness.

The art of Keeping accounts distinct and regular, after the Italian method, is
so beautiful, and at the same time useful, less or more, to people almost in
all stations in life, that I think no man ought to be without it, and the
rather because it is in itself so simple and easily acquired.

Geography is a science not less useful than simple; for a person can hardly
enter into any conversation, read any piece of history, or rightly understand
an article in a News-paper, without some knowledge of the situations of places:
nor does it require any acuteness of genius or intense application, being
almost wholly a work of Memory.

I do not think it difficult to give most young people, who have reached the
age of twelve, though they be not intended for an academical education, a
tolerable notion of theoretical Astronomy, so as to enable them to form some
idea of the vastness of the system of the universe, and the general laws, by
which its motions and revolutions are carried on. I think the same may be said
of the science of Anatomy, or the knowledge of the structure of animal bodies,
especially the human. By communicating a little of these two last mentioned
parts of knowledge to youth, they cannot miss being led to entertain high and
elevated notions of the Maker and Governor of the world, and must thereby be
engaged to fear and obey him from rational and worthy motives. There is indeed
no part of the works of nature, the contemplation of which will not delight and
improve a young and innocent mind, and also enlarge and raise it above every
thing that is mean or unworthy of its attention; and the advantage of giving
young people an early turn to Knowledge is not to be imagined, as it
pre-engages them, before the dangerous and mischievous objects of Sense get
hold of them, and serves for food to the mind, which otherwise must run after
gratifications of a far inferior and more unworthy kind. A set of microscopical
observations, a few experiments in natural philosophy, such as those of the
air-pump, etc. and a few of those books which are written on purpose for
introducing youth to a little knowledge of that kind, are all extremely proper
for employing their leisure hours from twelve years of age and upwards.

But there is no kind of reading that tends more to settle the judgment, than
that of History and Biography, or the lives of eminent persons; which leads to
the most useful of all sorts of knowledge, I mean that of human nature, and to
prudence in the conduct of life; without which all other kinds of learning are
rather an encumbrance than any advantage in a man's affairs.

Young people ought also from their earliest years to be established in a
rational set of political principles, and taught the love of liberty and their
country, and consequently the hatred of Popery, Tyranny, Persecution. Venality,
and whatever else is against the interest of a free people. They ought at the
same time to be taught the proper medium betwixt an abject and slavish
disposition in a people on the one side, and absolute licentiousness, and a
spirit of murmuring and complaining without reason against their governors, on
the other; and that the true spirit of liberty is always corrected and
restrained by a proper submission to government. They ought as soon as possible
to be prepossessed against Party-disputes and contentions, and taught to judge
of them from History, and should be informed, that whatever the furious zealots
on each side have pretended, experience has shown, That Self has been generally
at the bottom with both; that party is very justly said to be the madness of
many for the gain of a few; and that a Patriot is only a Courtier out of place,
and a Courtier a Patriot in place: That wherever a set of men are found to
stick obstinately together, to go through thick and thin, and to approve and
disapprove constantly the same measures and proceedings, it is almost an
infallible mark of party; because it is hardly conceivable, that a great number
of men should exactly agree in their sentiments upon a great number of
different points, without any variation, unless they contrive to agree together
for the sake of carrying on some particular scheme, distinct from the interest
of their country. They ought early to be accustomed to consider themselves as
every day drawing nearer and nearer to a state of maturity, when they must (if
an untimely death prevent not) think of acting a part on the stage of life, and
becoming members of society. They cannot therefore be too early forewarned of
the strange vicissitudes of human life, they may afterward have occasion to
pass through; nor too strongly guarded against the various arts of flatterers
or other crafty and designing men, nor too well instructed how to detect them.
They should be taught a series of rules for their prudent conduct in life, and
how to distinguish the faulty from the laudable, to which it bears the nearest
resemblance; the prudent from the suspicious and over-cautious, the generous
from the lavish, the frugal from the niggardly, the diligent from the covetous,
and so forth. There should be a variety of Cases proposed to them, taken from
what usually happens in men's commerce and intercourse with one another; and
they should be taught to judge and distinguish nicely what is proper and what
improper to be done in each of them, and the reasons.

Young people ought to be strongly and early prepossessed against the three
fatal Baits, which allure the bulk of mankind, and draw them into infinite
misery and misfortune in the present life, and often into utter destruction at
last, I mean, Ambition, Covetousness, and Love of Pleasure. They ought to be
taught, That the satisfaction (if it may be so called) which Ambition offers,
is altogether imaginary, consisting wholly in the applause of others, which
will never give any happiness to a wise man, as it is of no value unless where
it serves to confirm the judgment of his own Conscience. That no wise or good
man will ever do any action for the sake of applause, which his own conscience
will not warrant, nor will he abstain from or disapprove of any which his own
conscience attests to be good and virtuous, and proper to be done in his
circumstances, merely because he knows the superficial multitude will find
fault with it, who almost constantly approve and disapprove in the wrong place.

To create in young people a contempt of the erroneous and ill-judged applause
of men, such instances as the following should be often laid before them, and
the mistakes of common opinion exposed to their observation. That we see the
most laborious, industrious, and useful part of mankind generally treated with
neglect and contempt, and at the same time the idle, the inactive and most
useless part of the species, I mean, the rich, who feed and riot, and fatten on
the labors of their fellow creatures, adored as gods upon earth. That we see
mankind admire learning, wit and courage in men, and outside beauty in the
other sex, and all the while neglect the less ostentatious, but infinitely more
valuable virtues of humility, meekness, prudence, benevolence, patience, and
mortification. That the superficial multitude have disgraced the honest
husbandman, who employs himself in raising out of the earth what is the support
of the life of his fellow creatures, with the contemptuous name of Clown, and
have at the same time dignified those wild-beasts called warriors, who spend
their lives in butchering their fellow creatures, with the title of Heroes or
Great-men. That according to the common opinion of mankind, it is no shame to
get wealth by grinding the face of the poor, by craft, by scraping, and all the
mean arts that can be practiced with safety from the laws of the land; but it
is a great shame to be poor for want of impudence to elbow mankind, or through
too much narrowness of conscience, or too much largeness of heart. That,
according to the opinion of mankind, affliction is of all things the most to be
dreaded, and prosperity the most to be desired; whereas the truth is quite the
contrary way: for that prosperity generally hurts men's virtue, whereas
adversity for the most part strengthens the mind, and makes the heart better;
so that the bulk of mankind being by divine providence subjected in the present
state to various hardships and miseries, is a mark of the tenderness of the
Governor of the world to his creatures. That according to common opinion, it is
a greater happiness to get and hoard up, than to deal out liberally and
generously; whereas in truth, to bestow with prudence on the deserving and
indigent is like a God, and to scrape together riches, like an earth-worm. That
according to common opinion, it is a crime in a man of fortune not to live
extravagantly, that is, according to the vulgar notion, suitably to his
fortune. Whereas the truth is, that for a man of great wealth to spend his
whole income without bestowing a reasonable proportion of it upon the truly
indigent, is embezzling what was only intrusled to him, not given him; a great
estate being properly a stewardship committed to a particular person for trial
of his charity, and his abstinence, as powerty is a trial of another set of
virtues, and not the effect of any partiality of divine providence in his
favor to the prejudice of other men.

A youth, early and frequently led to observe in these and innumerable other
instances the false and erroneous ways the multitude have of judging of men and
things, must see the folly of placing one's happiness in their applause, and
will thereby learn to despise the allurement of Ambition. And indeed it is the
fault of his parents or instructors, if he be not made to understand, that he
who never knew to distribute unseen and unthanked, to steal opportunities of
doing worthy actions, never to be known publicly, till read out of the
records, by which we are to be judged at the last day; who never could
condescend to what the erroneous world calls Meanness, for the sake of doing
good; that who never could do these things, and do them without so much as a
wish for any other approbation than that of his conscience and his judge, and
who has no relish for this feast of the mind in his private retirement, knows
nothing of the disinterested love of God and of goodness for their own sakes.

And, to prevent a young person's being ensnared by degrees, as he advances in
life, into the love of money, and at length into covetousness, he ought to be
made to understand, that the only real value of riches is, their being capable
of being applied to the purchase of the necessaries and conveniences of life,
and to the relief of the indigent. That the contents of all the mines of Peru
are not in reality so valuable, as one acre of ground covered with wheat; and
that a fresh egg is of of more real worth than the diamond lately brought from
the Brazils, of much the same bulk, which was valued at four hundred Millions;
because the first will save the life of a human creature from famine; but the
latter is not capable of being applied to any sort of use, besides pleasing the
eye. That all above the conveniences of life is absolutely useless, and indeed
troublesome. That after a person has acquired such a competency as will keep
him and his family above dependence, and in easy circumstances according to his
station in the world, it is not worth his while to go a step out of his way for
the sake of gaining ten thousand pounds more, because he can but live
conveniently at last, and has no occasion to bring upon himself more cares and
embarassments. That a few years will put an end to the life of the youngest man
alive, and that it will give him no more satisfaction on his deathbed to
reflect, that he has fifty thousand pounds in the funds, than that there are
fifty thousand shells at the bottom of the sea. That, supposing every man
infallibly certain of gaining an estate, who will take the pains for (...)
which is very far from being the case, exorbitant wealth and happiness have
nothing to do with one another, since we commonly see discontented faces in
gilded chariots, and day laborers making merry in spite of toil and poverty.
That the possession of great wealth exposes men to a thousand inconveniences
and temptations, such as, The encumbrance of a crowd of servants and
attendants, The continual buz of slavish flatterers and hangers-on, The fatigue
of overseeing great affairs, or the vexation of losses by entrusting them to
others, and, which is worse than all the rest, The risque of one's virtue,
through the snares of the world, and the deceit of riches, which are so hard to
resist, that we find in fact the rich are, generally speaking, persons of the
least amiable or perfect characters. That the honors said to attend on riches
are a mere cheat; since the fulsome respect, that is paid to a rich man at his
levee, is only a public proof given by the person, who pays it, of his own want
of sense, in being struck with what is of no real worth in itself; and being
paid to the wealth, and not to the person, who possesses it, is by no means
worth envying.

And lastly, as to Pleasure, young people ought to be guarded as strongly as
possible against its allurements by being forewarned of its bewitching nature,
and dangerous consequences, of its unsatisfactoriness, and the natural and
constant tendency it has to raise unquiet and restless imaginations and desires
in the mind; but especially by being led into a taste of the innocent instead
of the criminal pleasures, and the mental, instead of those of the senses. A
taste for knowledge, and retirement, if young people can be drawn into it, and
of the conversation of the few old people who are cheerful, knowing,
communicative, and lovers of the conversation of youth, may do great service
toward preserving them from this most dangerous and fatal snare. They ought to
be told, That there are no true pleasures but what are lawful, and that those
sorts of enjoyments, which leave a sting behind them, ought not to be called
pleasures, but troubles, and torments. They ought to be frequently put in mind,
that it is only the good and virtuous who have any right to the pleasures of
life, or who indeed can truly enjoy them; for that it is a contradiction to
suppose, that a person, whose conscience is wounded by guilt, and whose mind
(if he is not past thinking, which is still a worse state) must be in continual
pain through remorse for what is past, and horror at the thought of what is to
come, should be capable of relishing any sort of joy or comfort: but that a
good man, whose mind is calm and undisturbed, has both the advantage of freedom
from pain or fear, and a proper disposition for relishing the natural and
innocent pleasures of life, and is like to receive infinitely more happiness
from them than a wicked man, because he may justly consider them as the gifts
of a tender and bountiful father, whose favor he has reason to hope for, which
must give them an additional relish, and because he expects nothing from them,
but what they will really afford, and has still in reserve a higher happiness,
after the gratifications of sense have done their part. Young people ought also
to be led to consider pleasure as naturally and necessarily opposite to every
thing that is manly or great, as it tends to soften and enervate the mind, and
to render it unfit for encountering any difficulty, or applying to any labor.
They ought to be told, That, whatever men may say, in the hours of mirth and
jollity, in defense of a voluptuous life, there needs no better confutation of
the falsehood of their reasoning, than what they themselves furnish: for, though
most people in the gay time of life are continually crying out, that they have
not had half their share of the pleasures of the world; in their old age, and
on their deathbeds they are generally found to lament, that they have enjoyed
and indulged them a great deal too much. A youth ought to be told, that there
is a great deal of danger, when he comes to die, of his having many neglects
and omissions to repent of; but that there is no fear of his repenting on his
deathbed, that he had omitted to see a particular, new play on the first
night, or slipped an opportunity of getting drunk, or of debauching a virgin; so
that at least a life of sobriety and abstinence is on the safe side. Young
people should also be prepared for opposing and confuting the frivolous and
fallacious arguments commonly advanced by their thoughtless companions of their
own age, in defense of a life of pleasure; of which the most formidable one I
can at present remember, is the following, viz. Since God has given us desires
and appetites, why should we not gratify them at all events? Which thundering
piece of artillery may at once be silenced by only retorting the following
question. Since God has so formed me, that when I am extremely heated with
exercise, I have a great desire to cool myself as quickly as possible, why
should I not throw off my clothes, and expose myself to the air, though it
should occasion my death? and since I have a great thirst, why should I not
drink a plentiful draught of cold water, though it should give me a surfeit?
and, in short, since God has given me a variety of appetites and inclinations,
why should I not satisfy them all at random, without the least thought of the
consequences? They should be taught, that there is no desire or appetite
natural to the human species, but what may be innocently gratified, and may
also be abused; and that the rule to be observed with regard to all the natural
inclinations and appetites, is, To gratify them only in such a manner, and
within such bounds of moderation, as will best serve to gain the ends for which
they were implanted in the human constitution, and that whoever breaks through
this rule is guilty of a crime. They should be forewarned, that taking a full
swing of lawless pleasure in youth is only treasuring up for all the following
years of life an inexhaustible fund of pain and torment, and this upon the most
favorable supposition, viz. That they afterward repent of the follies of
youth, which if it should not happen, the consequences are still infinitely
worse. They should likewise be shown the absurdity of resolving (as is too
commonly done) to indulge themselves in all the various madness of youth, and
to go on in a course of guilty pleasure, with hopes of repenting of it
afterward. That for a person to do so, is to hope that he shall be heartily
ashamed and confounded at what he has done; to hope that he shall a thousand
and a thousand times wish it undone; to hope that he shall hate and loath
himself for what he has been guilty of; to hope that he shall suffer ten
thousand times more pain from shame and remorse than ever he enjoyed pleasure
in the pursuit of criminal delights; to hope that he shall have the
satisfaction of knowing himself to have been a fool and a madman; to hope that
he shall have the happiness of knowing, that he has done what may justly expose
him to the divine vengeance; to hope, that he shall be obliged to undertake the
disagreeable and almost insuperable task of rooting out confirmed habits, and
planting opposite ones in their place, of parting with vices as dear to him as
a right hand or a right-eye Matt. xviii. 8, 9.
, and of wholly new modelling his mind; in short, it is to hope, that he shall
have the happiness of seeing himself in great danger of final destruction.
Blessed hopes! glorious prospects! worthy for which to give up one's innocence
and peace of mind in the present life, and the prospect of happiness in that
which is to come.

Pleasure being the most alluring and most dangerous of the three principal
baits that draw in mankind to the ways of perdition, and being more peculiarly
prevalent in the time of youth, I have been the more copious upon this head:
but after all, I must repeat, that I know of no method, that will have any
chance of being effectual for saving young people from its snares, without
giving their minds a turn another way, and leading them into a taste and love
for objects and entertainments of a different nature.

By treating young people in this manner as rational creatures, and teaching
them to exert their reason, and to judge rightly of men and things, as they are
in themselves, and as they were originally constituted by the Supreme Being,
and not according to outward appearance, they would come out into the world,
not as the most part of youth do from schools and colleges, with heads full of
unwieldy knowledge, the greatest part of which they can apply to no use in
life, but with judgments in some measure settled and matured for action, and
prepared for the difficulties of life by a sort of anticipated experience.

But to come at length to the main intention of this Essay, I must own, it is
to me very surprising that many truly learned and ingenious men have been at so
much pains in contriving plans for education, and have all the while missed or
overlooked the most excellent and most comprehensive one that ever was or will
be invented for forming and perfecting the mind, and raising it to the nature
almost of angels, and this state almost to that of Heaven, I mean the CHRISTIAN
RELIGION. One author on the subject proposes, that youth be taught principles
of strict honor, and a strong aversion at falsehood; another, that they be very
early taught to consider themselves as members of society, and to love their
country; and a third, that the examples of the great men of antiquity be set
before them, and that they be often put in mind of their conduct, and directed
to imitate it. All which schemes are so far extremely good. But, if it be
certain, that there are no Truths of equal importance to mankind, with those
that are discovered by the Christian revelation, that there are no such sublime
or such worthy notions of the supreme Being, no such just notions of the nature
of Man, no such clear views of his Duty and way to happiness, to be found any
where else as in the Christian revelation, nor such a perfect and sublime
system of Morality, nor such a set of illustrious Examples of true greatness
and heroism to copy after, nor such views of the direful Consequences of vice,
nor such full and well established Prospects of a final Reward to virtue
communicated to mankind by any other means; why should Parents or Instructors
of youth stop short, and not rather resolve at once to take the only effectual
and complete method of forming and establishing the minds of those under their
care by making them thoroughly acquainted with the Christian Religion?

That the implanting in the minds of youth a set of principles of virtue and
religion upon the Christian plan would be of the greatest advantage to mankind
considered either as individuals, or as members of society, one would think,
should not need much reasoning or argumentation to prove. And yet there are
some, who, to palliate or excuse their own neglect of their duty, affect to
represent it as either impossible to be done with any considerable success, or
as of inferior consequence; which only shows how men can blind or prostitute
their reason to serve indirect ends. Instead of going about to establish the
importance of a virtuous and religious education upon a long deduction of
arguments, or upon authorities from the writings of the greatest men of ancient
or modern times, I shall only take the liberty to leave with those gentlemen
the few following Queries, and then proceed without taking up a great deal of
the leisure of other readers, to whom the importance of the subject appears
evident and unquestionable.

Quer. 1. Whether that period of the life of man, in which the mind is most
tractable, most clear of all manner of prejudices and pre-engagements, most
free from the cares of the world, and temptations either from without or from
within, is not universally allowed to be the fittest for laying the foundation
of all useful knowledge; and if so, why the time of youth is not equally proper
for the study of Morality and Religion as of human literature?

2. Whether any one can pretend, That either the knowledge of the obligations
of Morality, or the doctrines of the Christian religion are harder to be
comprehended than those parts of human literature, which youth are usually
taught almost in their earliest years, as Grammar, Arithmetic, and the elements
of Mathematics, etc?

3. Why it is by no means thought proper to leave people to find out by
themselves, after they arrive at years of discretion, the knowledge of Grammar
or Numbers, the art of Writing, and the other parts of improvement, which
usually employ the first years of life, if it be proper (as some people seem to
think) to leave them to themselves to find out a set of moral and religious
Principles, and the art of governing their Passions, till they are past the
proper time of life for improvements of almost all sorts, and come to be
engaged amidst the cares and temptations of the world; or whether any one can
allege, That it is more dangerous for a person to be unfurnished in that sort
of knowledge, which is necessary only for the present life, than in that which
serves to prepare him for happiness in the life to come?

4. Whether there is any imaginable danger or any worse consequence, that can
follow from implanting as early as possible in the minds of youth the
principles and habits of virtue and religion, than that those prinples and
habits are likely to acquire the greater strength the earlier they are
implanted, as all sorts of principles or habits are constantly known to do
through length of time?

5. Whether the habits of Vice and Profaneness, which must of course take
possession of an uncultivated mind, as naturally as weeds do of uncultivated
ground, whether the various cares and avocations of life, which in riper years
are ever intruding and withdrawing one's attention from his duty and the
improvement of his mind, whether the innumerable temptations, which are
continually soliciting our senses, and the prevailing force of almost universal
example; whether all these together, I say, are not more than sufficient
effectually to prevent any person, who has not in early youth had his mind
tinctured with principles of Virtue and Religion, from ever acquiring them in
any after part of his life?

6. Whether the only reason, why people brought up from their earliest years in
the grossest errors and superstitions, as Heathenism and Popery, are so
strongly attached to those absurdities through their whole lives, is not the
mere force of the prejudice of education; and since this prejudice is so
powerful as to make men obstinately retain, without daring to examine them, a
set of irrational and contradictory notions, the absurdity of which would
appear still more and more glaring as the judgment improves, if it were not for
the prejudice of education; whether it is not well worth while to take the
advantage of this prevailing prejudice, by implanting early in the minds of
youth a set of rational principles, the justness and obligation of which their
reason will show them more and more clearly as it improves and enlarges, and
which they will consequently be through their whole lives doubly attached to,
both from Education and Conviction.

7. Whether, of two persons, one of which has had his mind in early youth
established upon virtuous and religious principles, and the other has been left
to himself the first has not a very great advantage of the second, in case of
their being both in the after part of their lives overpowered by temptation,
and hurried from the ways of virtue and sobriety into those of pleasure and
sensuality; since the first has that within him, which will probably awaken him
sooner or later, and force him like the Prodigal in the gospel, or Noah's dove,
to return to where he strayed from, and to seek happiness and peace where he
knows by his own experience they are certainly to be found, viz. in Virtue and
Religion; whereas the other having never been initiated in those principles,
and having no experience of the happiness they give, can hardly either be
supposed capable to judge how to attain that happiness, or be expected to have
any desire for it.

In recommending to Parents and Instructors of youth to make those committed to
their charge acquainted with the Christian Religion, I would be understood to
mean, The Religion of the NEW TESTAMENT. For that the end is by no means to be
gained by teaching them any of the erroneous and inconsistent systems, which
men of weak judgments or of crafty and designing tempers have spun out of their
own brains, and imposed upon mankind for true Christianity with the sanction of
anathemas and fire and sword. On the contrary, there is great danger in a young
person's being its an authoritative manner commanded to believe a set of (...),
which his reason, as soon as he comes to the use of (...) and begins to examine
for himself, as many people do in this age and country of liberty, will show
him to be irrational and absurd, lest he should conclude the Christian religion
to be irrational and absurd, since he finds that what be was taught for the
Christian religion is so; and that he presently grow entirely out of conceit of
revelation, and turn at once downright Deist.

The Christian religion may justly be called, according to the phrase of its
divine Author, Matthew. xi. 30.
An easy yoke and a light burden. For it delivers no doctrines, as necessary to
be understood and believed, but what are altogether as intelligible and
consistent with Reason, and the justest Nations of the nature of God and the
nature of man, as easily to be accounted for, and as much within our
comprehension, as thousands of facts we see actually take place in the natural
world, Methinks those long headed gentlemen the Deists, before they go to work
to pull the Christian religion to pieces on account of some particulars in it,
which they tell as they cannot comprehend, or reconcile to their notions,
should in the first place show us, that they can comprehend all the mysteries
in nature, and reconcile them to their notions. Before they tell us, that it is
inconsistent with the notion of infinite Goodness to suppose. That God should
choose to forgive his offending creatures through an explation and intercession
rather than without them, they should show us how it is consistent with the
notion of infinite goodness, that one half of the animal creation should be
made to be devoured by the other, and that some of the most beautiful and most
harmless of God's creatures should be exposed to continual fear through their
whole lives, and at last to a cruel death, for the sake of supporting some
other species of creatures, which to us seem to be the very blot of the
creation, and the burden of the earth. Before they begin to dispute the truth
of the Incarnation, because they cannot comprehend how One, who was before the
creation, should take upon him a human body, they ought first to show us that
they understand exactly how a human or any other spirit is first placed in the
body it animates, and wherein the absurdity lies, of supposing a spirit capable
of being placed in a body created a thousand years after it begun to exist,
more than in supposing that a spirit may animate a body created an hour after
it, or before it, or at the same time with it. And before they begin by long
deductions and subtle reasonings to invalidate the proofs of Christianity,
which is not founded in argumentation, but in simple facts incomparably better
attested than any facts in history, they should show us, that all the relations
in history, that are true, are incapable of being cavilled at.
and consequently must believe to be fit and right; nor does it establish any
laws, which it would not be much better for mankind, even in the present life,
and without regard to futurity, to observe and (...) their conduct by: and
since this is the character of our holy religion in itself, of what
condemnation shall they be thought worthy, who, for the sake of any indirect
ends whatever, have clogged it with a heap of Absurdities of their own
invention, which it knows nothing of, and thus have laid a set of
stumbling blocks in the way of the honest mind, that otherwise would have
readily and cheerfully embraced the truth.

I must also here beg leave to say, That I see no necessity, why the memories
of young people should be loaded, or their understandings puzzled with the more
abstruse parts of revelation, the comprehending or believing of which is no
where asserted in scripture to be necessary to salvation: For it is certain
there are many parts of scripture, which will never be rightly understood in
this life: but it is no where asserted, that the clear understanding of those
difficult passages is necessary to Salvation.

And far less would I advise, that youth be taught to place the whole of
religion in violent Zeal for any party or for any particular opinions. On the
contrary, they ought to be from their earliest years prepossessed against all
manner of narrowness or harshness in judging of others, since the Great, the
Wise, and the Pious have in all ages differed, and ever will differ, in
particulars; but have at the same time always allowed one another full liberty
of examining, and declaring their sentiments. And indeed the wrath of man will
never work the righteousness of God. Persecution or ill usage on account of
matters of opinion are not the ways to support Truth; but have been invented
and practiced merely to aggrandize and support Parties and worldly interests.
To say, that the truths of religion are not able to support themselves upon a
fair and candid examination, without assistance from secular power, is saying,
That they are not agreeable to reason, or that their evidence is not
sufficient, or that the author of our religion committed a mistake in
prohibiting his apostles and followers, as he every where does, ever to make
use of force, or to apply to the secular arm. Upon the whole, it is my
judgment, that young people ought to be taught, That there is no Heresy so bad,
nor so contrary to the spirit of Christianity, as, to believe it to be proper
or lawful to bate or persecute a fellow creature and a brother, for an Opinion,
which he declares, in the simplicity and sincerity of his heart, he had
impartially examined, and thinks he finds to be agreeable to the sense of
Scripture.

First then, taking it for granted, that the youth, to be instructed in the
Christian religion, has had his mind from the earliest dawnings of reason
formed to the love of Truth for its own sake, and to the gentle and tractable
temper, which is necessary for one, who would submit to the obedience of good
and salutary Laws; taking it for granted, I say, that this has been done before
the age of six, the first step to be taken, is, in my opinion, to make him
acquainted with the Christian Morality. The beauties of the Christian
dispositions of Humility, Meekness, Temperance, Benevolence, and the rest, are
obvious to the apprehension of a Child: for a sense of right and wrong, and of
the excellencies of virtue and the deformities of vice, is what appears in the
human mind with the very first openings of reason. For this purpose that most
perfect, and most sublime of all systems of Morality, our Savior's Discourse
on the Mount, Mat. v, vi, and vii, ought to be imprinted in indelible
characters upon his understanding and memory. Whatever, through the
disadvantage of the bare literal translation, and of a few antiquated words,
used by the translators, is not obvious to him, ought to be explained, and
himself over and over examined from time to time, to see that he retains the
clear and full sense of those divine precepts upon his mind. He ought to be
taught, that his everlasting happiness, and that of all men to whom
Christianity is known, depends upon his forming his mind and practice upon that
perfect model. He ought to be every day told, That, if he do not acquire the
Dispositions there recommended, and observe the Laws there established, he
cannot possibly arrive at happiness at last; as he neither can in himself be
qualified for it, nor will the great Judge of all confer it on any who are
disobedient. He ought to be informed, that every degree of Anger, Malice,
Pride, Obstinacy, Falsehood, and so forth, are breaches of this awful and
tremendous law, by which we are all to be judged at last: and he ought to be
taught to examine all the parts of his own conduct by it; and to know when he
is guilty of a violation of any of its precepts, and when he swerves from that
pattern of perfection.

A person had better be uninformed, or unsettled in his notions of any, or all
other matters of science, than of Morality: for we are properly moral agents,
and our everlasting state is to be determined according to the eternal rules of
moral Right and Wrong, as they stand in the Divine mind. And in all sciences,
except Morality, either our knowledge is scanty, or our opinions uncertain, our
reasonings fallacious, our enquities laborious, our disputes endless, in some
our positions unintelligible by the bulk of mankind, and in others our
discoveries useless. In Morality, our knowledge is perfect, our opinions are in
the main agreed, our reasonings clear, our enquiries easy, our disputes (if
there be any such) determinable from revelation, our positions intelligible to
all capacities, and the knowledge of the subject absolutely necessary to our
happiness both here and hereafter.

There is no young person, of a tolerable capacity, of the age of ten, or
upwards, but may be led on gradually through a scheme or view of natural and
revealed religion from the first principles of common sense in the following
manner. First, No youth of that age is ignorant that God made him and all the
world. Next, in order to give him some notion of the Supreme Being and his
perfections, he may be easily led to judge, that a Being who could make the
vast system of the universe, the earth, which is so great that there are many
regions of it yet unknown Here it is to be supposed natural for an Instructor
of youth to turn to a book of Geography, or put the youth in mind of what he
has taught him of the greatness of the terraqueous globe.
, and the sun, the planets, and fixed stars, so amazing distant from us and
from one another And here it would be proper to show him a general view of the
magnitudes and distances of the heavenly bodies in any of the most simple and
familiar Books of astronomy.
, and all from nothing, must be possessed of immense power. That he who has
created such an endless variety of animate and inanimate creatures, all so
nicely fitted for their several uses, that the more we examine, the more skill,
contrivance, and design we find Decham's Physice-theology, Nature displayed,
etc. will be proper to consult here.
, must be a Being of inconceivable wisdom. And that He, who has made such ample
provision of convenient and pleasant habitations, of suitable food, and even of
innumerable delicacies and varieties for his creatures See the same, and
various other authors on these subjects.
, must undoubtedly be endued with unbounded goodness and benevolence. Thus a
youth may be convinced of three of the divine attributes, viz. infinite power,
wisdom, and goodness, almost by his bodily senses. The others he may by degrees
be led to conceive of, as well as his years and capacity will admit. After
this, it is natural to ask him, whether he does not think, that he and all
reasonable creatures are obliged to some kind of service and duty to the
Creator and Governor of all things, upon whom all depend, and to whom all
creatures are indebted for whatever they enjoy or hope, and to whom they must
be accountable at last. Then he may be made to understand, that if he ought to
love, honor, and obey his earthly parents, he ought much more to love, honor,
and obey the great Father and Creator of both his parents and himself, and of
all mankind. That, if he ought to behave in the same manner to his instructors
and teachers, he is much more strongly bound to those duties toward the God of
wisdom, to whom his instructors owe their capacity to teach him, and to whom he
himself owes his capacity for improvement. That, if it is base and wicked to
the last degree to be forgetful of kindnesses done him by men, who have it not
in their power to do him any very great favors, it must be infinitely more so
to be unthankful to him, to whom he owes his very being and all he enjoys. And
lastly, that, if it be extremely foolish and absurd for any one to disobey or
treat in a contemptuous manner a person in a superior station, who has it in
his power to punish him, and who at the same time requires no obedience of him
but what is just and proper, and is more for his own than his superior's
advantage, it is beyond conception impious and ridiculous to refuse obedience
to the supreme Lord and Ruler of all things, who can crush or destroy a world
with a word, especially seeing the obedience he requires is in itself highly
reasonable, and tends to the advantage and improvement of his creatures, and is
not required of them from mere arbitrary will and tyrannical pleasure, but for
answering the ends of their creation, and to qualify them for happiness.

After this, it is proper to inform a youth, that God has communicated to us
his will by Jesus Christ, and sent him into the world to give us a more perfect
Rule and Directory for our obedience than was ever known to mankind before, as
well as to revive what moral knowledge through barbarity and vice was lost, and
that therefore higher degrees of strictness and purity of life and manners will
be required and expected of us, than of the rest of mankind.

To hear the Christian religion recommended, to see the beauty and propriety of
most of its laws, and to let it pass without opposing it, but at the same time
without being in a rational manner convinced of its being truly of divine
original, such a reception as this will never effectually engage any one to it,
nor secure him from explaining away many very important parts both of a sound
belief and of a strictly regular practice. But he, who receives and embraces
it, because he has upon a thorough examination found it to bear the marks and
characters of an appointment of God, will not venture to trifle with any of
either its doctrines or precepts, but will be steadfast and unmovable to the
last, in the belief of the one and the practice of the other, in spite of all
the trivial objections and cavils of Deists against its doctrines, or
Libertines against its precepts. And he, who on rational grounds receives and
embraces the Christian religion, and in the sincerity and honesty of his heart
desires to believe and understand it as it is in scripture, without partiality
for or against any particular doctrines or opinions pretended to be revealed in
it, and who earnestly strives to his utmost power to form his mind and regulate
his practice according to its laws; such a person, without doubt, is not far
from the kingdom of God. It is therefore my opinion, that neither ministers
from their pulpits, nor those who have the care of youth, can labor this point
too much, nor employ too much time and pains in establishing those committed to
their charge in the rational and well-grounded belief of Christianity,
especially in an age in which a set of vain and shallow pretenders to wit or
reasoning are on all occasions endeavoring (unluckily enough indeed for
themselves) to sap the foundations of it. We find in Scripture, that Faith or
Belief is generally put for the whole of religion; and very justly: for it is
the foundation upon which the whole must rest, and wherever it possesses the
mind of a person in its full strength and evidence, it will influence and
overruled his whole conduct, and affect his whole character. And that the firm
Belief of genuine Christianity is the most effectual means that can be imagined
for ennobling and perfecting the human nature, is undeniably plain from
comparing the character of the bulk of mankind in Heathenish countries, where
the light of Christianity has not shone, and in popish, where it has been
extinguished by error and superstition, with the character of the bulk of the
Christians of the first ages, who enjoyed it in its original purity, as they
all stand in history. And that the lives and characters of pretended Christians
in succeeding ages have come short of those of the primitive times, is owing
alone to the want of that strong and steady belief of it in its original
purity, which they had. For its natural effect and tendency has ever been and
ever will be the same, and wherever it is understood and embraced as it was at
first delivered by its divine Author, it will produce its effect. And wherever
it is fairly proposed, undisguised and uninjured by the inventions of men, with
all its evidences and all its excellencies set in a strong and proper light, it
will not fail to produce conviction in any teachable and unprejudiced mind.
Whoever therefore has it in his power to do justice to the Christian religion,
and has opportunities of promoting the reception of it among mankind, which I
am sure, Parents and Instructors of youth have, whoever has such opportunities,
and neglects them, must answer another day, for such neglect, as he best can.

I do not think there are many young people, of ten or twelve years of age, or
upwards, but what are capable of entering into such reasoning as the following,
and perceiving the force of the following evidences of Christianity.

In the first place, if it is plain from the passages here quoted from the New
Testament Mat. v. 17. vii. 21 -- 23. ix. 6. x. 32, 33. xi. 27. xii. 28. xiii.
37, 41. xvi. 16. -- 20, 27. xviii. 11. xix. 28. xx. 28. xxi. 16. xxiv. 30. xxv.
31. xxvi. 64. Luke ii. 49. iv. 21, 43. ix. 48. x. 16. xix. 10. xxii. 29, 69.70.
xxiv. 25 -- 27. John i. 49.50. ii. 16. iii. 13 -- 19. iv. 25, 26, 34. v. 17, 19
-- 47. vi. 27, 32 -- 70. vii. 16, 17, 33. viii. 12, 59. ix. 4, 5. x. 1 -- 42.
xi. 25, 27, 41, 42. xii. 23 -- 29, 34 -- 37, 44 -- 50. xiii. 31 -- 34. xiv, xv,
xvi, xvii, xviii. 36, 37. xx. 17, 21. It will be highly proper to turn to these
and the following passages, and expound them to the youth; and where there are
difficulties, to consult a good commentator.
, that Jesus Christ declares himself to be the Savior of the world and the
Messenger of God to mankind, and if it can be shown, that he has brought
irresistible proofs of his commission, it is certainly the indisputable duty of
all men, to whom these proofs are proposed, to believe him, and to obey his
laws.

Next, if it can be shown, That no person ever gave such rational, such great
and such amiable views of the Supreme Being, nor such consistent notions of
spiritual things, and of futurity Mat. iv. 4. v. 3 -- 12, 19, 20, 45, 48. vi. 6
-- 9.15, 18, 26, 32. vii. 11, 21 -- 28. viii. 11. x. 15, 28 -- 33. xi. 22. xii.
25, 30, 32, 36. xiii. 37 -- 51. xviii. 14, 35. xix. 14. xxii. 29 -- 32. xxxiv.
29 -- 36. xxv. 1 -- 46. Luke xi. 31, 32. xiii. 24 -- 30. xv. 3, -- 7. xvi. 19,
-- 32. xviii. 7. xix. 12 -- 27. xxii. 29, 30. John iii. 3 -- 13, 16 -- 22. iv.
10. v. 17, 30. vi. 35 -- 41, 44 -- 46. viii. 44.51. xi. 25, 26. xiv. 2, 20,
23.26. xvi. 13, 14, 23, 27, 32. xvii. 1 -- 26.
as he did, as will appear upon comparing the whole doctrines I say the whole
doctrines, because, though it must be owned, That many of the Heathen
Philosophers (who seem to have been raised by Providence for valuable purposes)
delivered many sublime and useful doctrines and lessens of morality* considered
separately from other parts of their works, it must be confessed at the same
time, that they mixed with them many trifling, and hurtful tenets and rules of
practice, which drew upon them the contempt of the people of those times, and
greatly lessened the benefit mankind might have otherwise received from them:
whereas our Savior's doctrines and precepts (as they stand in the New
Testament free from perversions and misrepresentations) are all excellent, and
all consistent, and take in whatever was valuable in the writings of the
Heathen Philosophers, and leave out all that was tristing or hurtful.
of the greatest of the Heathen philosophers with those contained in the
passages here quoted, it seems highly reasonable to conclude, that he had those
notions from above, and was not a person of this world.

And if it can be shown, That no lawgiver in the world ever proposed a body of
such wise and good laws for ennobling men's natures and conducting their lives
Mat. iv. 7, 10. v, vi, vii, x. 16, 28, 32, 33. xii. 12, 36, 50. xv. 3 -- 21.
xvi. 24 -- 28. xviii. 3 -- 5, 7 -- 9, 15 -- 18, 21 -- 35. xix. 3 -- 10, 14.17
-- 30. xx. 26 -- 28. xxiii. 3 -- 28. xxiv. 46 51. xxv. 1 -- 46. Luke viii. 15.
ix. 62. x. 30, 41, 42. xi. 28, 41. xii. 15 -- 21, 33, 34. xiii. 2 -- 5, 24 --
30. xiv. 11 -- 15, 25 -- 34. xv. 11, 32. xvi. 9 -- 31. xvii. 10 -- 15. xix. 12
-- 27. xx. 3, 4. xxi. 34. xxii. 38. John iv. 23, 24. v. 24. vi. 27, 29. viii.
34. xii. 25, 26, 44 -- 48. xiii. 14, 15, 34, 35. xiv. 15, 23. xv. 2, 10, 12.
, who can doubt, that his wisdom was more than human.

But farther, if it can be shown, That almost innumerable ancient prophecies of
the Old Testament were fulfilled in him, and in him only Genes. iii. 15. xii.
3. xviii. 18. xxi. 12. xxii. 18. xxvi. 5. xxviii. 14. xlix. 10. Numb. xxiv. 8,
17. Deuteronomy. xviii. 15. 2 Samuel xxii. Job xix. 25. Psalm. ii, viii, xvi. 8 -- 11.
xviii, xxii. 1, 6 -- 31. xl. 6, 7. xlv, lxii, lxviii. 18. lxix. 9, 21. lxxii.
17. lxxx. 17. xci, cx, cxviii. 22. Isa. iv. 2. vii. 14. ix. 2, 6, 7. xi. 1 --
5. xxviii. 16. xxxii. 1. xxxv. 5. xl. 3. xlii. 1 -- 4, 6 -- 8. xlix. 5. l. 4 --
10. liii. 2 -- 12. lv. 1 -- 5. lxi. 1, 4. lxiii. 1 -- 9. Jerem. xxiii. 5, 6.
xxxi. 22. xxxiii. 15 -- 26. Ezekiel. xxxiv. 23, 24. xxxviii. 24. Dan. ii. 44. vii.
13. ix. 26. Hos. xi. 1. Micah v. 2. Hagg. ii. 7. Zach. iii. 8. vi. 12. ix. 9.
xii. 10. xiii. 7. Mal, iii. 1 -- 4. iv. 5.
, is it not reasonable to conclude he really was the Savior of the world
intended in those prophecies?

And, if it be evident, that he was so far from gaining any temporal advantage
by setting up his religion in the world, that he exposed himself to all manner
of abuse, and to death itself Matt. xxvi. 1 5, 45 75. xxvii. 1^ 50 compared
with the two or three last chapters of Mark, Luke and John.
by it, and that it was so far from flattering the vices and wicked
inclinations of mankind, that it directly opposed and exclaimed against them
See note (*) in page 36.
; who can imagine he had any indirect views in it, or any design to impose on
the world.

And, if it be certain, from the history of his life, that he performed almost
innumerable miracles Matt. viii. 3, 13, 15, 16.26.28. ix 6.20.30.33 xi. 5. xii.
15, 22. xiv. 32, 30. xv. 28, 30. xvii. 18. xix. 2. xx. 34. Mark i. 34. iii. 5.
in a public manner, as healing all sorts of diseases, casting out evil
spirits, calming tempests, and even raising the dead, which never were denied
either by Jews or Heathens Grotius, Of the Truth of the Christ. relig.
, and were the completion of various predictions by the ancient prophets; that
his resurrection was attested by numbers, who gave their lives in witness of
the truth of it, in which it was impossible they should be deceived, it being a
mere matter of fact, and as plain from the persecution they exposed themselves
to by their adherence to this religion, that they had no design to deceive
others; that a great variety of miracles were performed by his followers in
attestation of their doctrine Acts ii. 4, 43. iii. 7. iv. 33. v. 5.10, 12,
15.16, 32. vi. 8. viii. 13.17. ix 17.34, 40. x. 46. xiii. 11. x.v. 10. xvi. 18.
x^x. 11, 12. xx. 12. xxviii. 5, 8, 9.
; which miracles they declared to be performed for that very purpose, and which
were performed before multitudes of enemies and unbelievers, in an age and in
countries remarkable for learning, under all manner of disadvantages from the
hatred of those in power, and were not like magic tricks, suddenly over, but of
a permanent nature, and might bear being re-examined; that public testimony was
given by Heaven itself in favor of the apostles by several amazing prodigies
at once, in the sight of a multitude, who, to the astonishment and conviction
of three thousand people in one day, heard them speak in a variety of languages
they had never learned Acts ii.
; that this religion, levelled directly against the favorite vices and
inclinations of men, stripped of all outward pomp or show for catching the
admiration of the multitude, was spread through the whole world by a few mean,
illiterate persons, that it was attested by thousands of martyrs, and that its
doctrines and laws produced a greater effect upon the lives and manners of
mankind, than the labors of all the heathen philosophers put together Acts ii.
41, 44.47. iv. 4, 34: v. 12...14. ix. 31. xvii. 10, 12, 34. xix. 18, 20, etc.
See what is said on this subject, page 34.
, and that it was established in spite of persecution, without assistance from
secular power Acts ibid etc.
; that Jesus Christ foretold his own death and resurrection Matt xvi. 21. xvii.
12. xx. 18. xxvi. 24, etc.
, the universal spreading of his religion Matt. xxiv. Mark xiii. 10. xiv. 9,
etc.
, the persecution of his followers Matt. v. 11. x 17..36. xvi. 24. xxiv. 9, etc.
, the destruction of Jerusalem, and the captivity and dispersion of the Jews
Matt. xxiii. 37, 38. xxiv. 2, 15...23, 28, 39.41, Luke xix. 41 xxi. 20, etc.
, all which came to pass accordingly; if these facts be all certain and
indisputable, what more convincing proof can be desired of Jesus Christ's being
truly, what he declares himself, the Savior of the world, and the only full
discoverer of the will of God to mankind.

It does not appear to me, that there is any thing in all this above the
capacity of most youths of ten or twelve years of age and upwards; or that a
youth of that age is not as capable of seeing the force of these arguments in
support of Christianity, when laid before him in a manner suitable to his age,
as a man of Forty. And the least smattering of any sort of knowledge received
in youthful years, while the mind is free and unprejudiced, the imagination
warm and lively, and the memory unburdened with a variety of subjects, is
hardly to be conceived. Therefore, if any thing be worth learning, or
understanding clearly and perfectly, it is of infinite advantage to begin the
study of it in the time of youth, rather than to put it off till riper years
come on, with all their various cares, avocations and distractions.

What is wanting in this short and imperfect sketch of a few of the evidences
of Christianity may abundantly be supplied by the judgment of the parent or
instructor with the assistance of a few of the best books on the subject, as
Grotius On the truth of the Christian religion, Locke' s Reasonableness of
Christianity, Dr. Clarke' s Evidences of revealed religion, in his book On the
Being and Attributes of God, etc. In which last mentioned masterly work there
is a brief view of prophecy and its completions, which I would recommend to
all, who have the care of youth, to give them some insight into, as it will
prove an extremely delightful and instructing entertainment to them, and will
confirm them most powerfully in the belief of revelation. For who can entertain
the least doubt of the truth of a revelation, which shows, by the exact
completion of its almost innumerable predictions, that it was given by One, who
soreknew what was to happen in the most distant ages to come, of which
completion every impartial enquirer may be satisfied, who will take the pains
to compare the predictions with the events as they stand recorded in history.

I will here add, for the use of Parents and Instructors of youth, the
following brief, but comprehensive view of the scheme of Christianity, the
ground work of which was formed (for private use) by a gentleman, whose
writings on Divine subjects have given great pleasure and improvement to many;
but whose primitive and exemplary piety and purity of life is his best and most
prevailing. Work in honor of religion.

The Christian religion is the publication of an Act of grace to a rebellious
world, and of the terms upon which God will mercifully receive it into favor.

The views it exhibits are these.

1. God, the original of all being, the Father and Governor of the world. See
Note () page 37.
2. His creature Man, who was originally obliged to a perfect obedience to all
the laws of God, and thereupon insured of a happy immortality, fallen from his
first state by disobedience. Romans iii. 10, 19 -- 31. v. 12, 14, 18, 19. x. 5. 1
Cor. xv. 21, 22. Gal. iii. 12, 22. Ephesians. ii. 1, etc.
3. The Son of God incarnate voluntarily giving up his life as a sacrifice of
expiation To attempt to settle the dispute concerning the true notion of the
expiation made by our Savior, or to determine in what sense he is said in
Scripture to have given his life a ransom, to have laid down his life for the
sheep, to be the propitiation, the Lamb, or victim, that takes away the sins
of the world; to attempt, I say, to settle that dispute in this little Tract,
would be entirely vain and from the purpose. But I think all sides must own,
that the expressions of this sort in Scripture being so many and so direct,
give sufficient authority to conclude, that whatever the sacrifices under the
Jewish economy were typically with regard to ceremonial pollution, that the
death of Christ was really with regard to moral. Whether either of these is
rightly and to their full extent understood at this day, or which is the right
notion, and which the wrong, must be left to the decision of the learned. The
comfort is, That all that part of the theory of the Christian religion that is
necessary to be comprehended clearly, is simple and intelligible, and comes to
us attended with super-abundant evidence. As for those doctrines of Revelation,
which will bear various explanations, and concerning which the best reasoners
differ, being no where in Scripture represented as necessary to salvation,
while ingenious and pious men exercise their wits, without entering into
controversy, in endeavoring to form just notions of them, and to get the
better of their difficulties, they employ themselves incomparably better, than
they could in the pursuit of either Riches, Power, or Pleasure, and the true
notions of them, and their various connexions with things to us at present
wholly unknown, perhaps with other systems and orders of Beings, and the
extensive and glorious views they may hereafter open to us, may probably
furnish entertainment for ages, and we may then both comprehend them clearly,
and see the propriety of their being laid before us, even in this life, though
not to be fully understood till the next.
for the sins of mankind, whereby at the same time God's displeasure at sin is
clearly set forth to the view of all his creatures, and likewise his
willingness to forgive offenders upon any terms consistent with the honor of
his laws, or in other words, hereby Almighty God discovers himself in the
character both of the wise and righteous Governor, and also the tender and
merciful Father of his creatures See Note () page 37.
. 4. The same glorious Person by being blameless in his life, and at last
obedient even to death, setting a perfect example before mankind both of
obedience to the laws of God, and of resignation to his will 2 Cor. viii. 9.
Philip. ii. 5. Heb. ii. 9, 17. iv. 15. v. 8. 1 Pet. ii. 21.
. 5. The same glorious Person manifesting to mankind, the perfections of God,
and declaring his will and our duty in a more sublime and perfect manner than
ever was done before, and in an authoritative manner, as one who brought
convincing proofs of his commission from heaven for that purpose, and upon the
same authority assuring mankind of the terms upon which guilt was to be
forgiven, and acceptance to be found See Note (*) page 37.
. 6. On account of the intercession Hob. ii. 17, 18. iii. 1. iv. 15. v. 1 --
11. vii. 22 -- 28. ix. 24. x. 21, 22.
of the Messiah, the want of that perfect obedience mankind are originally
obliged to, the defect of which made an expiation and intercession necessary,
is forgiven, and thorough repentance for all our offenses, and a candid
reception and firm belief of the Christian religion, when proposed, and sincere
endeavors to obey its laws and attain the perfection of its graces and
virtues, accepted, and made the condition of pardon and everlasting happiness
Acts ii. 38. iii. 10.26. Romans iii. 24 -- 29. iv. 5, 16, 24, 25. v. 1, 2, 10.
vi. 1 -- 23. Galat. iii. 6 -- 14. Ephesians. ii. 5 -- 10. (...). p. i^^. 9. Heb. x.
17 -- 21. 1 John i. 7. ii. 2.
. And the Christian graces and virtues are, Love, Reverence, Gratitude, and
Obedience to God, Benevolence to men, Humility, Meekness, Purity, Sincerity,
Mercy, Charity, Contempt of riches, honors, pleasures, and all earthly things,
Heavenly-mindedness, Trust in the Divine providence and resignation to it,
Chastity, Temperance, Submission to governors in all civil matters, Forgiving
of injuries, Loving our enemies, Courage to stand up for the truth in spite of
the applause or threatenings of men, Vigilance and attention to the concerns of
futurity, Watchfulness against temptations from within, against the weakness of
human nature, and the allurements of the world, Prudence without cunning, Zeal
without heat or rancor, Steddiness without obstinacy, and so forth See Note (*)
page 39.
: The practice of every one of which virtues, and the attainment of every one
of which graces or dispositions is in itself, naturally, and abstracting from
our Savior's injunction, absolutely necessary to qualify us for enjoying that
happiness, to which the Christian religion is intended to raise those who
embrace it. 7. Those, to whom Christianity is proposed, obliged, after a candid
and sincere examination of its proofs, to receive it, and submit themselves to
its laws Matt. viii. 21 -- 23. x. 14, 15, 32, 33. xi. 6. xii. 40, 42. xiii. 19
-- 23. xvi. 24 -- 23. xxi. 33 -- 44. xxii. 1 -- 14. etc.
8. Two very simple but significant observances appointed by the Author of our
religion, as outward tests of our profession, to wit, Baptism, and the Lord's
Supper. The first intended as a ceremony of initiation into his religion, and
the second as a Memorial of Him, and of what he has done for us, particularly
of his sufferings and death Matt. xxvi. 26. xxviii. 19. Luke xxii. 17. Acts ii.
38. viii. 37. x. 47. 1 Cor. xi. 23.
9. The assurance of heavenly assistance to support the faithful, penitent, and
obedient Christian in the performance of the duties of religion, and in the
difficulties of the present state Romans viii. 9 -- 16, 26. 1 Cor. iii. 7, 16.
vi. 19. xii. 8. These. v. 19.
. 10. The future resurrection of all mankind from the dead, ascertained by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ See Note (*) page 38. 1 Cor. vi. 14. xv. 12 -- 22,
35 -- 58. 2 Cor. iv. 14. v. 1. xiii. 4. Colos. i. 18. iii. 1 -- 4. These. iv.
13, 14, 16. v. 10. Jam. iii. 21, 22. iv. 13. 1 Pet. i. 3. Rev. xx. 4 -- 7. See
also Matt. xxii. 29.
. 11. The final retribution of everlasting happiness or unspeakable misery to
every person according as they have lived agreeably to the divine laws or
contrariwise See Note () page 38. and Romans ii. 5 -- 11, 16. 1 Cor. iv. 5. 2
Cor. v. 10. 2 Thessalonians. i. 6 -- 11. 1 Pet. v. 4. 2 Pet. iii. 10, 14. Jude 13. Rev.
ii. 7, 10, 11, 17, 23, 26 -- 28. iii. 5, 12, 21. vii. 15. xiv. 11. xx. 4, 12.
xxi. 6. xxii. 7, 12, 14.
. 12. The future appearance of Jesus Christ, as Judge of the whole human race,
to allot to every man his portion in the next life.
I am sensible this view of the Christian scheme is rather proper for young
people, who are arrived at some ripeness of judgment, than for such whose
tender years render them unfit for reasoming or judging of abstracted subjects.
But I am convinced any parent or instructor of youth, endued with a tolerable
gift of communicating, might, with a little explaining here and there, cause
any youth of about fifteen years of age to enter fully into all the parts of
it. The advantages arising from explaining and enlarging on the passages of
scripture above quoted, and from warmly recommending and insisting on the
duties and dispositions above mentioned, are not to be conceived. Such methods
frequently and diligently practiced can hardly fail (through the blessing of
God) to work the Christian graces and virtues into the very soul, and to mould
and form the young and tender mind to that model of perfection.

Blessed work! Delightful task! Heavenly employment! Who would not rather
desire to improve and ennoble a rational, immortal mind, which from the first
laying of a foundation of virtae and religion in it, will be ever growing more
and more perfect, advancing farther and farther in all that is truly great and
worthy, and approaching more and more near to a resemblance of its Creator,
than to build a tower or a city, which from the day it is finished, is every
hour hastening to decay, and must at last be involved and lost in the general
and universal ruin of this world and all things upon it? Who would not rather
desire to have the pleasure to reflect on his deathbed, That he had had a
considerable hand in directing one fellow creature to the way that leads to
happiness, and in prevailing on him to enter upon it, and keep steddily to it,
than, That he had for the sake of his own glory or that of his king, involved
thousands in misery, strewn the fields with carnage, and laid waste the fair
face of God's creation?

To finish what I intend to say upon a Method of instructing, youth in the
knowledge of revealed religion, I will subjoin the following general view of
the whole body of Revelation, which, if explained and enlarged upon properly,
may serve to lead young people, come to the years of fifteen or upwards, to
form worthy and sublime corceptions of it and of its divine Author, and excite
their curiosity to attain a perfect and particular understanding of it.

Holy Scripture contains a brief, but uniform and consistent view (given at
very distant ages of the world, by many different persons, inspired and
conducted by a Spirit who saw clearly through futurity) of all the transactions
of Almighty God, that were proper to be revealed to mankind, with regard to the
rational inhabitants of this world during the whole period of its being
inhabited (at least by our species) beginning with its first change from a
Chaos to an habitable world Genesis i. 1.
, and concluding with its being reduced again to a Chaos by fire Rev. xx. 14.
, giving some account either historically or prophetically of almost every
thing great or important that has been or is to be transacted upon the vast
theater of the world, and opening a view beyond death and time into eternity,
bringing to light the world of spirits, with clear, sublime, and rational
notions of the perfections of God and his will, and the duty of mankind, and
their means to gain happiness, and the only rational and consistent notions of
futurity, that are any where to be found, and innumerable interesting truths,
which no human sagacity could ever have found out, or so much as though of, not
only enlightening those countries on which its direct beams have shone with
their full splendour, but even in spite of the clouds of Heathenism and
superstition breaking through and affording a glimmering light to the most
barbarous nations, without which they had been buried in total darkness and
ignorance as to divine and spiritual things. The outlines of the immense and
various prospect it exhibits, are these.

1. The reducing of this world from a Chaos to an habitable state Genesis i. 2 --
11.
. 2. The creation of the first of mankind in a state of innocence and
immortality Ibid. 26. ii. 7.
. 3. His fall from that state to one obnoxious to death by an act of
disobedience. 4. A dark prophecy of the restoration of him and his posterity to
the favor of God and immortality (after death) by Jesus Christ Genesis iii. 6.
. 5. A flood sent to destroy all mankind for their excessive wickedness, except
one virtuous family Ibid. vi. 5, 21 -- 24.
: a standing example to all ages, of the different consequences of obedience,
and irregularity. 6. The term of man's life shortened on account of the bad use
the antediluvians had made of its great length Ibid. vi. 3. xi. 10 -- 27.
. 7. Mankind degenerating into idolatry, scattered over the face of the earth,
to prevent their setting up an universal idolatrous empire Ibid. xi. 1 -- 10.
. 8. A particular family chosen for the singular piety of Abraham its head, to
the one true God, amidst the universal idolatry and polytheism of all nations,
and the descendants of it declared by prediction to be God's peculiar people,
separated from the idolatrous nations to be a light to the rest of the world
and to preserve his worship from being lost, and promises given, that from
among them should arise the Restorer of Mankind. The descendants of Abraham by
a peculiar providence carried into Egypt, to communicate something of the
knowledge of the true God to the people of that country, and by the same means
to other countries, Egypt being esteemed the mother of learning and arts, and
having a great influence over the other nations. His numerous posterity after a
certain time brought out of Egypt again, and with many miraculous
interpositions of providence conducted through a vast wilderness, and at last
established in a country assigned them. The ancient Pagan inhabitants of that
country driven out before them, as a token of God's displeasure with their
idolatry and other crimes, as a warning to the Israelites to avoid what they
saw bring on their ruin, and as a proof to all nations, that the victorious God
of Israel was the true God, and the impotent gods of the nations only idols.
The same people appointed to be examples to all nations of God's goodness to
the obedient, and his severity against disobedience. If they continued attached
to the worship of the true God, they were to be a repository of the true
religion, and if they revolted from him, they were, as a punishment, to be
scattered abroad into all countries, and their dispersion was to prove the
spreading of the knowledge of the true God over the world. But, after all their
disobedience and their punishments, they were to be restored at last, and to be
raised to higher dignity than ever. All which peculiar honors bestowed on this
people (the posterity of Abraham) were intended for a standing proof, during a
period of near 4000 years already, and how much longer God knows, of how much
value in the sight of the supreme Being the singular piety and constancy of
Abraham was, and that he thought he could not (so to speak) do favors enough
even to the latest posterity of that eminently good man, who had greatly stood
up alone for the worship of the true God against an idolatrous world; in which
light also the saving of Noah and his family at the flood, and of Lot at the
destruction of Sodom, are to be considered. A body of civil laws given to the
Israelites by God himself, who places among them a visible glory, as a mark of
his peculiar presence, and declares himself their King and Governor. A body of
religious ceremonies, interwoven with their civil polity, appointed them for
many wise and useful reasons, such as, 1. To tipify the expiation that was
afterward to be made by Jesus Christ. 2, To be a yoke and punishment to the
Jews for their frequent deviations into idolatry. 3. To keep them always in
mind of their being under a theocracy, to which a set of religious observances
enjoined by law was suitable. 4. For the sake of many noble morals couched
under the outward ceremonies. 5. In compliance with those early and unimproved
ages of the world, and the genius of that people, for whose gross apprehensions
a religion perfectly internal and spiritual was not proper. 6. To keep them
separate from the nations around them, as it has always been the outward
ceremonials of religion that have made the distinctions; and for many other
reasons too tedious to mention Genesis xii. 1 -- 4. xiii. 14 -- 18. xv. 1 -- 19.
xvii. 1 -- 9. xxii. 15 -- 19. xxvi. 5. Exodus iii. 6, 8, 15. vi. 3. xiii. 21,
22. xiv. 19 -- 22. xvi. 32 -- 36. xix. 4, 5, 6. xxiii. 23, 24, 32, 33. xxiv.
16, 17. xxix. 45, 46 xxxii. 8 Numb. xiv. 14, 15. Deuteronomy. i. 8, 30. ii. 25.33.
iii. 22. iv. 6, 7, etc. vii. 2, etc. xi. 23. xii. 1 -- 4, etc. See also (for
there would be no end of quoting particular passages) several of the Psalms,
and the Prophets, St. Stephen's speech, Acts vii. the beginning of the Epist.
to the Romans and that of the Heb. and Lowman, of the Jewish Polity, Spencer, de
legib. Jud. Patr. on the O. Test. Hammond, Ainsworth, Jos. Mede, Prideaux,
Univers. Hit. Law's Theory of relig. Stilling fleet's Orig. sacrae, etc.
.
9. The history of that people, partly related and partly foretold, during a
period of above 3000 years, in which the various vicissitudes they underwent
are shown to be owing to the particular interposition of providence, and are
all along the immediate consequence of their obedience or disobedience See
Exodus Joth. Judge. 1 Samuel 2 Samuel 1 Kings, 2 Kings, 1 Chronicles. 2 Chronicles. Ezra,
Nehem. (...), and the Prophets.
; from which the greatest and most important Moral, that can be conceived may
be drawn, viz. That Obedience is the way to gain the favor of God, in which
the happiness of all created beings consists, and that Disobedience is the sure
way to provoke his displeasure, which implies in it the most perfect misery any
nation or person can be reduced under. 10. A succession of inspired men raised
up among them, to call them from time to time to their duty, and denounce
against them the judgments which were to be the consequence of disobedience The
Prophets Sam. Isa. Jerem. etc.
. 11. Predictions given by the same prophets, of the revolutions of most of the
great states and empires of the world Ibid. and Rev.
. 12. Dispersion of the Israelites, according to the threatenings of Heaven
denounced by the prophets, for disobedience to their God and King Jerem. xxxix.
. 13. The coming of the Messiah, and his kingdom, more and more clearly held
forth by predictions, from the first obscure one, "That the seed of the woman
should bruise the head of the serpent," given immediately after the fall, down
through a period of four thousand years to those plain ones given by Zacharias
the priest, Simeon, Anna, and by John the Baptist his immediate forerunner; and
thus the will of God and his important designs with regard to mankind opened by
degrees, every great prophecy carrying on the view to the last glorious ages,
till at length our Savior himself comes as a light into the world, and carries
his views and discoveries immensely beyond all the past lawgivers,
philosophers, and prophets, opening a prospect into eternity, and bringing life
and immortality to light See note (*) page 39.
. 14. The history of our Savior's birth, life, miracles, doctrines,
prophecies, death, resurrection and ascension The gospels of Matt. Mark, Luke,
and John.
. 15. Records of the establishment of his religion, and the firm adherence of
his followers in spite of persecution Acts.
. 16. Addresses from the first propagators of Christianity to their proselytes,
explaining more fully the doctrines of religion, and encouraging them to
constancy in it Romans to Rev.
. 17. The last charge of Jesus Christ, the head of the church, to the Overseers
of the first societies of Christians, viz. the seven churches of the Lesser
Asia, communicated in vision to John one of his Apostles Rev. ii, iii.
. 18. Predictions of the future slate of the church from the apostolic age
forward, particularly its degeneracy into popery, and a prospect of the
consummation of all things Ibid. iv. et seq. to the end.
.
It being obvious, that all young people ought to be taught to pray, there need
be the less said on that head. They ought to be made to consider addressing the
supreme Being as a duty necessarily incumbent on all finite rational ones,
seeing they all depend absolutely upon him. They ought to be taught to think of
prayer as the most awful and serious duty of religion, and as an address to the
greatest of Beings, in whose presence the very angels and archangels of heaven,
compared with whom the kings of the earth are but worms, are said in scripture
to veil their faces, and to prostrate themselves before him. They ought by no
means to be suffered to use any words in prayer, which they do not understand,
nor to say over constantly the same form by rote, which creates in them a
contempt of that important exercise of religion, and makes it tedious and
irksome to them; but should be furnished with variety of matter suitable to
their age and understandings. And the prayers they use ought by no means to be
of an immoderate length, a fault which the most pious people are apt to deviate
into; though one would wonder how they come to do so, since there are in
scripture so many express cautions against it, and since the pattern set by our
Savior himself is so remarkably short, and all the others in scripture are of
a very moderate length.

They ought also to be properly prepared for partaking of the sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, and taught to consider it in its just light, viz. As a Memorial
of the Author of our religion, especially of his death, as a public attestation
of our being his disciples and followers, and as an evidence of our perfect
love and benevolence for our Fellow Christians.

It may perhaps be expected that on this occasion something should be said on
the subject of the female Education. But being unwilling to swell this little
Tract a great deal beyond the size I originally intended it, I shall say the
less upon the head.

If the female part of our species are as truly rational and accountable
creatures as the male sex, one would think, their being taught to speak French,
to write, or rather to scrawl, to work with a needle, to come into a room
genteelly, to dress neatly, to sing or touch a spinnet skillfully, and to dance
gracefully, should hardly be looked upon as and education sufficient to qualify
them for usefulness in their proper sphere in this world, and for happiness in
the world to come. Nay, I should think it no difficult task to prove, That
every one of the above accomplishments (as they are called) except that of
writing, if it were done to the purpose, and handling their needle, may do them
incomparably more prejudice than real service, if they are not constantly kept
in mind, That they are all trifling and contemptible in themselves, serving
only as ornaments or trappings, which may a little (and but a little) set off
the less conspicuous but infinitely more valuable beauties of the mind, to wit,
Goodnature, Prudence, Virtue, and Religion: and that, where these internal
beauties are wanting, the outside ornaments of the person serve only to make
the defect of real inward worth the more conspicuous. That young Ladies may in
fact be with success instructed in principles of virtue and maxims of prudence,
and that they may be made to form very clear and rational conceptions of the
doctrines of the Christian religion, and to see the beauty of its precepts, is
what I know to be practicable, because I have seen the happy effects of such
pious and worthy labors of both parents and teachers: and I hope there are
many instances of parents and teachers of young Ladies, who see their success
in such methods, and resolve to continue them.

I have already observed, That it is of great consequence to the youth of both
sexes, that they be early led into a just and rational way of thinking of
things, and taught to be extremely cautious of judging according to outward
appearances, or the superficial opinion of the multitude. Thus, for example,
young ladies ought to be informed, That (contrary to the vulgar error) it is a
woman's conduct and behavior, not her shape and complexion, that determine her
character and value. That it is the part of a woman of prudence and discretion
to bestow but very little thought on the ornaments of her body, and rather to
endeavor after those accomplishments of the mind, which will hold out, and
preserve the esteem of her friends and the affection of her husband after the
fading charms of her person are gone. That the most exquisite beauty is odious,
where the person who is possessed of it shows by her affected behavior, that
she is conscious of her own charms. That when a handsome young woman views
herself in a glass, or hears her beauty commended, prudence should direct her,
instead of being puffed up with pride and self admiration, to reflect, that it
is her business to take care that her mind be as well adorned with the
Christian graces and virtues as her face is by the exquisite hand of Nature
with a just mixture of the lily and the rose; to consider the superficial
beauty she and others admire is every day drawing nearer to old age, wrinkles,
and corruption; but that the beauties of her mind will still be improving to
all eternity; to remember, that however amiable and delicate any human form may
appear to the eye, there is nothing more mortifying than the consideration of
the gross substances our bodies consist of, and the many nauseous and
disagreeable properties of them; and that if beauty is really in any degree
valuable, it ought to fill the person possessed of it with gratitude to Him,
who bestowed it, and inspire her with the ambition of improving her mind
suitably, and so become an object the most completely amiable that the eye of
man can behold, which I believe every one will own is, A woman whose person is
adorned with unaffected beauty, and her mind with Goodnature, Prudence,
Virtue, and Religion. That a nice taste in dress is a blemish instead of an
accomplishment, because it is a mark of superior sense to despise all trifling
matters, and to be anxious only about things of consequence. That a woman's
having beauty enough to strike as many coxcombs dead at a glance as could be
contained in both Vauxhall and Ranelagh, could be no real advantage to her: but
the having her mind endued with such amiable qualifications as will gain and
secure the affection and esteem of one man of sense for life, would be of the
utmost consequence; and that the desire of gaining a multitude of admirers, or
of making conquests, is the very madness of folly. That flattering a woman for
her beauty, and pretending to gain her favcur by that means, is more properly
an affront than a compliment because it supposes her so extremely weak, as to
be taken with flattery, which is the very food of fools, and with the praises
of what she does not owe to herself, but to nature, and with the praises too of
the very meanest accomplishment a valuable woman is endued with, which is not
worth commending in a person, who has any one other qualification to be taken
notice of for. That the temptations and dangers, beauty exposes a woman to, are
more than all the advantages accruing to her from it, can make up for; and that
it requires an uncommon measure of prudence and caution in the person possessed
of it, to prevent one bad effect or other from it.

Whenever a young lady arrives at the age of Twelve or Fourteen, it is high
time to begin to instruct her how to conduct herself with regard to the other
sex. I don't mean, To teach her how to set off her affected and artificial
charms to the best advantage, and to practice a thousand studied arts and apish
tricks to draw a set of superficial fops about her: it is both foolish and base
in a woman to put herself off for any thing else than what every woman, and
every man is, viz. A creature full of infirmity and weakness, and who must in
many cases be forgiven and borne with. It is on this account, and by this
means, that so many marriages are unfortunate, which had not been so, if the
parties had been wise enough or honest enough to behave to one another like
rational creatures before they came together.

It is therefore my opinion, that the youth of both sexes should be taught,
That every thing in love-matters, except a rational, modest and cool
inclination toward the most happy and perfect state known on earth, I mean, of
marriage, on account of its various advantages and, comforts beyond a single
life, is contrary to the design of Heaven in creating the species in two sexes,
and inconsistent with the nature and present state of mankind; and that all
those loose images, or romantic notions we have in plays, novels, and poems,
which serve either to inflame beastly desires, or at best to fill the
imagination with raptures and ecstasies, which are altogether inconsistent with
the calm dignity of a decent behavior in the marriage state, are to the last
degree pernicious and mischievous.

It is highly necessary that young women be early instructed both how to behave
with regard to the honorable lover and the crafty seducer. With the first
plainness and sincerity are all that is necessary, and with the latter distance
and severity of behavior; or, which is still the more sure way to be safe,
downright flight: for the truest courage in temptation is shown by running
away. They should be taught, That for a young woman to believe the flattering
protestations of designing men, is to venture her all against those, who have
nothing to lose. They ought above all things to be every day and every hour
cautioned against Flattery, which is always one principal art that is used in
the undoing of every young woman, that is undone. They ought to be forwarned,
that every man, who persists in a slavish attendance on a young woman, without
making honorable proposals to her, has certainly either a design upon her
virtue, or is a fool and incapable of any design at all. And they ought to be
led to consider every man, who pretends to love and admire them, and is all the
while endeavoring to seduce them, in the same light as a wolf, who (if he had
the gift of speech) should earnestly beg the favor of a lamb to come within
the reach of his claws: for that he greatly admired his beauty and plumpness,
and wished to have the pleasure of devouring him.

But there is no end of the useful and important lessons of prudence that might
be taught young ladies, nor of the advantages they might gain by them. They
should likewife, as a powerful preservative against the inordinate love of
gaiety and pleasure, be drawn, if possible, to a love of reading, I don't mean
plays, romances, or love poetry, which all tend to give their minds a wrong
cast, and which they should be taught to despise for the false, bombastic, and
unnatural conceits they are generally stuffed with: The reading that is most
proper for them (abstracting from books on moral and divine subjects) is
History, and Biography, or the Lives of eminent men. Nor should they be
suffered to be ignorant of Geography. What has been already said on instructing
the youth of the other sex in the Christian religion may, with a very little
variation be applicable on this head.

If, after what has been recommended to Parents and Instructors of youth for
establishing those under their care in Morality and Christianity, any thing
were to be added with a view of rendering the pains they have bestowed the more
effectual, I should think the following might be likely to answer very
important ends, and properly crown the whole work. That before a youth removes
from under the eye of his Parent or Instructor, a Paper by way of letter be
drawn up for his use by such parent or teacher, consisting of, 1. An abridgment
of the Maxims and lessons of Prudence and Virtue that have been taught him. 2.
A brief view of the Doctrines and Precepts of Christianity. 3. An abstract of
the most forcible and convincing Arguments for the truth of Christianity. 4.
Some warm and pathetic Exhortations to endeavor after a steady and universal
conformity to the laws of the Christian religion. 5. Cautions against the
dangers incident to youth from the prevalence of Deism The danger to be sure is
not great, lest those profound philosophers the modern Deifts should gain many
proselytes, except among people of their own pitch of understanding. But youth,
who have not had their belief of Christianity eftablished in a convincing
manner upon a thorough knowledge of its evidences, are liable to be drawn aside
by the most wretched sophistry. They ought therefore to be forewarned and
prepared for the cavils (poor and feeble as they are) of that unhappy set of
men, who reason as a person might be expected to do, who was born with the
wrong side of his brain upwards; and may be safely told, That the following are
two or three of their most formidable arguments against the Christian religion.
That it can never signify much, whether mankind believe or reject the Christian
faith, if their practice be right. Which is much about as good sense as to say,
It is no great matter, whether the most effectual method that can be imagined,
for compassing a design, be taken, so the design be compassed, or That it does
not much signify, in raising a structure, whether a good foundation be laid or
not, so the structure be raised. Again, That the light of Reason is "sufficient
for mankind, and that Revelation is of no manner of use, and therefore ought to
be rejected." Which, setting aside its being found by experience. That the
light of Reason and Revelation both are not too much, is to the same purpose as
to say, The naked eye is sufficient to show us, that there are planets in the
sky, and therefore Telescopes are of no manner of use in astronomy, though they
may show us many surprising phenomena in each of them, that never were thought
of before the invention of that noble instrument. That Morality is all, and
therefore the rejection of a particular revelation can never be displeasing in
the sight of God. As if it was not as much an Immorality and as criminal in the
sight of God to oppose, or even to neglect what comes with all the characters,
internal and external, of a revelation from Him, as to injure one's neighbor.
That Christianity cannot be a revelation from God, else it had been
communicated with equal advantage to all mankind. Which is as good left handed
arguing, as to say, That Reason cannot be the gift of God, else it had been
communicated with equal advantages to every Idiot as to Sir Isaac Newton.
, from the snares of pleasure, honor, or riches, and from the infection of bad
company. 6. Directions, in case of a fatal defection from virtue and religion,
how to recover and return again to the way of truth; and cautions against the
too common and destructive practice of putting off repentance till old age and
a deathbed; and what other particulars may seem to the discretion of every
Parent or Instructor of youth likely to be beneficial. This Letter, if I might
advise, should be written with the hand of the parent, or person, who has had
the care of the youth, and a promise desired of him, as a last and parting
favor, That he would constantly, while he lived, continue to give it a fair
reading a certain number of times every year; once a quarter or the like. I am
persuaded, that any thing written and given to a youth by a person, whom he
formerly knew intimately, and was used to think of with esteem and love, must
to the last day of his life have a more powerful effect in keeping him steady
to his duty, or in calling him back to it, in case of a defection from it, than
a much more elaborate composition of a person, who was a stranger to him, or
who had written such a piece not immediately for his particular use. And, as to
those parents, who may not have the proper leisure or abilities they can but
apply for assistance to any judicious person either of the clergy or laity, or
which it is to be hoped there are every where numbers, who would gladly be
employed in such work.


Thus have I (my dear Countrymen) in the sincerity and honesty of a heart that
desires no greater happiness than an opportunity of doing you service, laid
before you a few incorrect and unpolished, but, I hope, not improper or
unnecessary observations on a subject, which truly seems to me worthy, in this
present age, of a much more sufficient hand. If what is here published should
give the hint to such an one, to do complete justice to the subject, it will
give me a peculiar pleasure. And if any person disposed to set the public right
in any particular point I may have misled them in, will do it in the same
spirit of candor as the above was written in, he is sure beforehand at least
of my thanks.

Methinks to Parents there should be no great occasion for any pathetic
entreaties, to move them to diligence in endeavoring to promote the happiness
of their own offspring both here and hereafter; if the ties of natural
affection do not engage them to their own flesh and blood, it is not any thing
I can say, that will be of any influence with them. Nor indeed will any
arguments be of weight with those Instructors of youth, whom the terrors of a
day of account will not move to endeavor to acquit themselves faithfully. Some
Parents there are, who, either from want of leisure, of a faculty of expressing
themselves, and communicating what they know, or of a proper education, are not
in a capacity to be very useful to their children in the ways I have been
recommending; but (as is already said) we have reason to bless the Divine
providence that there are not many places in Britain where any parent, who is
desirous to have his children instructed in principles of Virtue and Religion,
can be wholly at a loss for proper assistance. And, as it is not to be
supposed, any person should take upon him the charge of instructing youth, who
is not himself in some measure a judge both of most of the branches of human
literature they ought to be instructed in, and likewise more especially of
moral and divine matters, or, if there are, little do they think what a charge
they undertake; if, I say, any such person neglects the instruction of those,
who are under his care, in principles of Morality and Christianity, or commits
it to any other who, for ought he knows, may neglect it too, he will, I am
afraid, be found one day without excuse.

And now, having said what I thought would be proper on this occasion, to give
me an opportunity of doing my best for your service and advantage; what
remains, I mean the success of this weak attempt, must be left to the grace of
God, and to your willingness to listen to well-meant advice.

FINIS.
Books Sold by Rogers and Foul.
Colman's Practical Discourses on the Parable of the Ten Virgins. Colman's Life
and Character. Remarkable Passages in the Life of Col. Gardener. Watts's
Sermons on various Subjects Divine and Moral. Watts's Discourses on the World
to come: Watts's Orthodoxy and Charity united, in several Essays. Watts's
Lyrick Poems, Sacred to Devotion, etc. Watts's Catechisms and Prayers: Or, some
Helps to Religion. Watts on Prayer. Baruard on the Imperfection of the
Creature. Mrs. Row's Life, and Letters from the Dead to the Living. A Present
for an Apprentice. By a late Lord Mayor of London. Present for a Servant Maid,
with Directions for dressing Victuals. Douglass's Summary Historical and
Political of North America. Mall's History of the Martyrs, or the Sufferers
Mirror. Bunyan's Grace abounding. The Englishman directed in the Choice of his
Religion. Shepard's Meditations and Experiences, Select Cases resolved, etc.
Dickinson's Second Vindication of Sovereign Free Grace. Beach's Reply to
Dickinson's Second Vindication of Free Grace. Remarks upon Mr. Mills's
Vindication of Gospel Truth, etc. Johnson's New System of Morality. Johnson Of
loving and delighting in the Public Worship of God. Hooper On the Truth and
Reasonableness of the Christian Religion. Chauncy On the various Gifts of
Ministers. Wetmore's Vindication of the Professors of the Church of England.
The Art of Preaching, in Imitation of Horace's Art of Poetry. Breck On the Duty
of Ministers to exhort to Good Works. Foster's Account of the Behavior of the
Earl of Kilmarnock. Account of the Apparition of the Earl of Kilmarnock to
Foster. Mather's Two Witnesses to produce a well established Assurance.
Willard's Peril of the Times displayed. Guthery's Trial of a saving Interest in
Christ. Fox on Time. The Dissenting Gentleman's Answer to White's Three
Letters. The authentic Narrative of the Success of Tar-Water. Bennett's
Christian Oratory in two Volumes. Dunlop's Sermons, in two Volumes. Hale's
Contemplations, in two Volumes. Bennet's Memorial of the Reformation. Henry on
Prayer. (...) Jacob's Wrestling. Flemming's Confirming State of Religion.
Crawford against Infidelity. Duke of Marlborough's Life. Moses unveiled. (...)
Thoughts on Education. Wright on Regeneration An Engquiry into the Nature,
Obligation, and Advantages of Religious Fellowship, etc.
Prepared for the Press, And upon suitable Encouragement will be published,
A calm and dispassionate Vindication of the Professors of the Church of
ENGLAND, against the abusive Misrepresentations and fallacious Argumentations
of Mr NOAH HOBART, in his late Address to them. Humbly offered to the
Consideration of the good People of NEW ENGLAND. With a Preface by Dr. JOHNSON;
and an Appendix containing Mr. WETMORE 's and Mr. CANER 's Vindication of their
own Cause and Characters from the Aspersions of the same Author. By JOHN BEACH,
Minister of the first Church of CHRIST in Reading.

SUBSCRIPTIONS are taken in by Rogers and Foul in Queen street BOSTON. The
Price to Subscribers will be about Ten Shillings Old Tener, per Book, and a
seventh gratis to those who subscribe for six.

Proposals for printing by Subscription, Defense of the Christian Revelation,
on Two very important Points, as contained in one Treatise, entitled,
Observations on the History and Evidences of the Resurrection of JESUS CHRIST.
By Gilbert West, Esquire Clerk Extraordinary of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council. And in another entitled, Observations on the Conversion and
Apostleship of St. PAUL. By the Hon. George Littleton, Esquire Member of
Parliament, and one of the Commissioners of the Treasury; In a Letter to
Gilbert West, Esquire

Subscriptions are taken in by Rogers and Foul in Queen Street, and by D.
Gookin in Marlborough-street, Boston.

The Price to Subscribers will be 40 s. Old Tenor, bound on Bands, and a
seventh Book gratis to those who subscribe for fix.

TO BE SOLD by ROGERS and FOUL,
The Friendly Instructor: or, a Companion for young Masters and young Misses.
In which their Duty to GOD, and their Parents, their Carringe to Superiors and
Inferiors, and several other very useful and instructive Lessons are
recommended, in plain and familiar Dialogues. With a recommendatory Preface, by
the Reverend Dr. DODDRIDGE. Dial. I. Against Lying. II. On reading the
Scripture. III. On reflecting on what is read. IV. On the Death of a Child. V.
On Prayer. VI. On keeping the Sabbath. VII. On a proud and haughty Carriage
toward Inferiors. VIII. On Sickness and Death. IX. Peace of Mind in the near
Views of Death and the Grave. X. On Recovery from Sickness. XI. On Diligence
and Obedience to Parents. XII. On a suitable Behavior in the Worship of God.
XIII. On remembering what we hear. XIV. Of the Use to be made of what is heard.
XV. Encouragement received in hearing. XVI. Between Eliza and Maria, two
Sisters.


