SEVEN SERMONS UPON THE Following Subjects; VIZ.

The Difference betwixt Truth and Falsehood, Right and Wrong. The natural
Abilit^^^of Men for discerning these Differences. The Right and Duty of private
Judgment. Objections considered. The Love of God. The Love of our Neighbor.
The first and great Commandment, and c.
Preached At a LECTURE in the West Meeting House In BOSTON, Begun the first
Thursday in June, and ended the last Thursday In August, 1748.

By JONATHAN MAYHEW, A. M. Pastor of the West Church in Boston.

BOSTON, N. E. Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street.

MDCCXLIX.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Society Usually worshipping in the West Meeting House in
Boston,
THESE SERMONS, at first preached, and now published, at their Request, are
humbly inscribed, in Acknowledgment of their Kindness and Generosity to

The AUTHOR.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Four first Sermons, on LUKE XII. 54 -- 57.
SERMON I. Concerning the difference betwixt truth and falsehood, right and
wrong 1 SERMON II. Concerning the natural abilities of men for discerning these
differences 22 SERMON III. Concerning the right and duty of private judgment in
religious matters 41 SERMON IV. Objections against the right and duty of
private judgment, considered 65
The three last Sermons, on MATTHEW XXII. 37 -- 41.
SERMON V. Concerning the love of God 89 SERMON VI. Concerning the love of our
neighbor 111
SERMON VII. Upon what account the love of God is termed the first and great
commandment 131 On these two commandments ( viz. the love of God and of our
Neighbor) hang all the law and the prophets 139 On these two commandments
hangs all the gospel of Jesus Christ. 143

The principal Errata of the Press, are as follows,
PAGE 16, line 1, for ^^e, read no. P. 26, l. 10, for in, read is. P. 47, l.
18, insert the particle a, before third. P. 98, l. 7, from the bottom, dele do
with, after to. P. 137, l. 8, for he, read they. P. 150, l. 17, from the
bottom, read natural and moral. P. 152, l. 19, read speculative belief. P. 155,
l. 10, read the fables. P. 157, l. 2, and l. 7, from the bottom, for wilds,
read winds.

THE Difference betwixt Truth and Falsehood, Right and Wrong. SERMON I.
LUKE XII. 54 -- 57. And he said also to the people, When ye see a cloud rise
out of the west, straightway ye say, There comes a shower; and so it is.
And when ye see the south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat; and it comes
to pass.
Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, and of the earth: but how
is it, that ye do not discern this time?
Yea, and why even of your selves judge ye not what is right?

THESE are the words of our Lord Jesus Christ: and the occasion of them seems
to have been as follows -- He had been preaching the gospel in Jerusalem, and
the neighboring cities of the Jews; and had, by the purity of his doctrine,
the holiness of his life, together with the nature and number of his miracles,
convinced many persons, that he was the Messiah that was to come, and that they
were not to look for another. However the chief of the Scribes and Pharisees
rejected him as an impostor, attributing his miraculous works to the power of
magic, or his supposed familiarity with evil spirits.

Now it is easy to see what an influence this conduct of the Scribes and
Pharisees in vilifying our blessed Savior, must unavoidably have upon the
generality of the people. For they were in the highest esteem amongst the Jews,
both because they were supposed to have the deepest insight into things of a
religious nature, and, at the same time, to be men of extraordinary piety. This
favorable opinion concerning them, was indeed ill-grounded. But they had the
talent of imposing upon the people, in great perfection; and, in fact, managed
matters with so much craft and subtilty, that they were thought almost the only
saints in the world, and the great oracles to be consulted upon all occasions.
The people placed an implicit faith in their dogma's and decisions. Nothing was
thought to bear the genuine stamp of truth, unless they had had the coining of
it: And their censure of any particular person, or doctrine, was sufficient to
make either of them odious to the multitude.

WHEN, therefore, these infalliable guides stigmatized our Lord as an ill man;
when they reproached him as one, who, without any reason or authority, was
attempting to discredit certain opinions which they had received to have and to
hold from their forefathers; when they accused him of making innovations in
the old established religion, to the great hazard of the souls of men; I say,
when they talked and railed in this pious strain, it gave a general alarm to
the people, especially to the superstitious vulgar; and exposed our Lord to
their contempt and hatred and insults. They gave themselves no farther trouble
to inquire into the grounds of his pretensions to the messiah-ship; concluding
that he must needs be a deceiver, who was condemned by such a learned and holy
body of men, as that of the Scribes and Pharisees.

FEW of them condescended so far as to come and hear him preach, (this being
represented to them as dangerous) that so they might know what he had to say
for himself: and those that did, came rather as spies, that they might find
occasion to cavil, and to accuse him to the Priests and Pharisees, than with
such an unprejudiced and candid disposition as became inquirers after the truth.

BUT although the generality of the Jews were such abject slaves to the
dictates of their spiritual instructors, never daring to hesitate concerning
the truth of what they asserted upon religious subjects, but receiving every
thing, how absurd soever, with all the humility of implicit faith; yet it
seems, that in their temporal and worldly concerns, they were cautious enough.
Here they were not fond of taking up satisfied with any man's word; but were
forward to think, inquire and judge for themselves.

THIS is a short character of the people to whom our Lord speaks in the text.
And this being kept in view, his address will appear very natural and
seasonable. -- And he said also to the people, When ye see a cloud rise out of
the west, straightway ye say, There comes a shower; and so it is. And when ye
see the south wind blow, ye say there will be heat; and it comes to pass. Ye
hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, and of the earth: but how is
it, that ye do not discern this time? Yea, and why even of your selves judge ye
not what is right?

THESE Words seem to be very plain of themselves: but the sense of them may be
expressed more at large in the following paraphrase. --

AND after these things, Jesus addressed himself to the Jews, who were
generally prejudiced against him, through their blind attachment to their
spiritual guides; and said -- Ye that suffer yourselves to be led blindfold by
others, with regard to me and my doctrine, and things of a religious concern in
general, are nevertheless sagacious enough in matters of equal difficulty, and
much less importance -- Ye are apt and skilful enough at distinguishing the
signs and tokens of things that are to come to pass in the natural world, in
which your present interest is concerned. See Dr. Clarke's paraphrase.
Ye can, (for example) by observing the color of the sky, and the blowing of
the wind, form a true judgment concerning the future change of the weather. How
comes it to pass, then, ye deluded hypocrites, that amidst all your sagacity in
things that relate to the present world, ye are still blind and undiscerning in
things of a religious nature? why do not ye that can presage various changes
from the appearance of the earth and heavens, discern also the periods and
revolutions of things; the various dispensations of providence in the moral
world? In particular, how comes it to pass that ye do not distinguish the
present season, in which God is erecting a new dispensation, to succeed that of
Moses? There are signs and tokens enough to convince you that such a revolution
is now taking place, if ye would but examine them attentively. Why, then, will
ye suffer yourselves to be blinded by the authority of the Priests and
Pharisees, when God has given you sufficient abilities to gain the knowledge of
the truth? Why will ye not exert your own faculties, and judge for yourselves
what is true and right in this matter, as ye do in things of a worldly nature?

THUS I have endeavored to give a true idea of the original scope and meaning
of the words which I have chosen for the subject of my present discourse. I
shall now wave every thing in them peculiar to the time and circumstances
wherein they were spoken; and observe from them several universal truths which
concern all times and persons and places alike.

As I. THAT there is a natural difference betwixt truth and falsehood, right and
wrong. II. THAT men are naturally endowed with faculties proper for the
discerning of these differences. III. and lastly, THAT men are under obligation
to exert these faculties; and to judge for themselves in things of a religious
concern.


I. THEN, there is a natural difference betwixt truth and falsehood, right and
wrong. -- Why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right?

BY what is right, it is probable that our Savior here more immediately
intends, what is true; for his discourse in this place turns upon examining,
judging, and inferring one thing from another. But whether by this term we
understand, what is true in theory, or what is right in practice, it will come
to much the same thing at last; for there is an inseparable connection betwixt
them. If certain things are true in speculation, there must be some
correspondent fitness of actions resulting therefrom. And, on the other hand,
if any thing be allowed fit in a practical sense, that fitness or rightness
must be founded in certain truths and relations before subsisting. I shall,
therefore, take it for granted, that the text supposes, That there is in nature
both a True, as distinguished from speculative Error; and a Right, as
distinguished from Wrong in Conduct. And the remainder of this discourse will
be taken up with these important distinctions.

INDEED the spending of time to prove that there are really such differences as
those mentioned, may appear to some to be rather childish impertinence, or
formal trifling, than a proper employment for reasonable Creatures, it being
such a plain and obvious truth. However it is to be remembered, that no notion
is too absurd to deserve to be refuted, while some are absurd enough to
propagate, and others to believe, it: especially if it be such an one as
strikes at the root of all religion, and every thing wherein the happiness of
mankind consists.

AND such is the notion of an absolute indifference in nature with relation to
truth and falsehood, right and wrong. For this being allowed, it follows that we
have no invariable rule of life and conduct. No man, upon this supposition is
under a possibility either of judging or acting amiss; or of the contrary. Each
man thinks as justly as another, how contrary soever his sentiments are: And so
also each one acts as rightly as any other, let him act how he will. This is to
make short work with all questions and debates concerning truth, religion, and
the rule of human conduct: it supersedes all inquiries about them, by
presupposing that they have no existence but in the idea of certain doting men
who have employed themselves in inventing arbitrary distinctions.

THERE seem to have been two species of Scepticks in the World: one of which
exploded the whole notion of truth and right, as opposed to falsehood and wrong
conduct: and another which seemingly allowed such differences to have an
existence in nature; but held it impossible for us to discern them. It is only
the first of these opinions that we are concerned with at present; the latter
will be considered in our next discourse.

To begin with truth -- Notwithstanding what some are pleased to pronounce with
their lips concerning the indifference of truth and falsehood, it is hardly
possible but that their hearts should be at variance with their mouths, and
give them the lie, even while they are denying there is any such thing as
falsehood. For if there be any thing existing, (which surely no body was ever so
absurd as to deny) there must necessarily be such a thing as truth; truth, as
abstracted from mind or intelligence, being nothing distinct from the real
nature and properties of things existing. Whatever exists, has a real
existence; and if so, it cannot be true that it has no existence. Whatever has
a being, must also exist in some certain, determinate manner; with such and
such properties, affections and attributes; with such and such proportions,
aspects and relations. And we can as little alter these by our opinions, as we
can cause the things themselves to exist and not exist, alternately, as our
thoughts vary concerning them. Thus truth is somewhat determinate in itself; it
exists indpendently of our notions concerning it: And the precise boundaries
betwixt that, and falsehood, are also determined by the real nature and
properties of things, whether they are perceptible to us, or not.

TRUTH, as it exists in the mind, is nothing but the perception or knowledge of
that independent truth now mentioned; or a knowledge of things as they really
exist. And as it relates to words and propositions, it is nothing but the right
use of certain arbitrary signs, having a meaning annexed to them by common
consent; i. e. the using them in such a manner that they shall be conformable
to, and expressive of, the real nature and properties of the thing treated of.

To return -- Can any man think it equally true that he does, and that he does
not, exist? I instance in this, because it is familiar; but the same question
may be asked concerning every thing else. This is an universal dilemma,
applicable to every thing that comes under consideration -- "It is, or it is
not." No middle way can be taken. This is indeed no new discovery: it is
self-evident, and a first principle.

THUS, that we either do, or do not, converse with sensible objects, so that
one may be truly affirmed, and the other denied, is as plain as it is, that we
either do, or do not exist. We may proceed in the same manner to consider
things, which, if they exist at all, lie beyond the reach of our animal senses.
It is as certain in itself, that there are, or that there are not, spiritual
and invisible agents, as it is that there are, or are not sensible objects. And
with relation to the being of a GOD, it is as plain, that there is, or that
there is not, such a Being, as that there are, or are not, invisible agents in
general.

WE may descend in the same way to all the particular questions that have
arisen concerning the particular nature of this Being, upon supposition he
exists -- concerning the nature of his government -- concerning the reality of
a revelation from him -- concerning the immortality of our souls, etc. There
must necessarily be a true and a false, with relation to every question that
can be proposed, or come into our minds. We cannot so much as doubt of the
truth of any particular proposition, without supposing that truth lies on one
side or the other.

IT will be observed that I have not attempted to determine any of the
abovementioned questions. This was beyond my present design. All I aim at, is
to show, that there is, and must be, a natural distinction betwixt truth and
error, in general; a distinction which does not depend upon the precarious
humors and opinions of men: Whatever judgment we may form in any particular
case, it no ways affects the truth of it. Truth still remains the same simple,
uniform, consistent thing, amidst all the various and contrary opinions of
mankind concerning it.

THE natural distinction betwixt truth and falsehood being exploded, such
paradoxes as these must follow -- That no man's opinions are either right or
wrong -- That however contrary the sentiments of different men are to one
another, they are both equally conformable to the nature and reality of the
things they judge upon -- That there are neither any knowing nor any foolish
men in the world -- That what we usually call wisdom and folly, are the same --
And, what is stranger than all, That these paradoxes are neither true nor false
--

IF there be any such thing as wisdom, as opposed to ignorance and folly, it
consists in knowing the truth; and a man is wise in the same degree that he
does so. There is no knowledge, but of some truth or fact: Or, in other words,
knowledge presupposes the being of truth, or something to be known. Now if
there be no such thing as truth, there is nothing to be known: and consequently
every man, yea, every being whatever, must be entirely ignorant and destitute
of knowledge; as destitute of it, not only as the horse and mule which have no
understanding, but as any part of senseless inanimate matter. So that
notwithstanding all the noise there has been in the world about wisdom and
folly; notwithstanding the universal applause that has been bestowed on some
persons, as gloriously distinguished from the rest of mankind by a happy genius
and peculiar sagacity; yet in reality all this is at bottom nothing but empty
words without any meaning at all. Socrates and Plato, Lock and Newton, were
not superior, in point of wisdom, to the most illiterate husbandman. Nay;
upon this supposition, even Pyrrho and Arcesilaus themselves, the great leaders
of the skeptic tribe, knew no more than those whom they upbraided with their
ignorance. This, indeed, is a consequence which the Pyrrhonists will hardly be
persuaded to own. For there are none more apt than they, to value themselves
upon their superior wisdom and penetration. And they please themselves in
particular with the thought of their being the discoverers of this mighty
arcanum, that there is no such thing as truth, as distinguished from error. But
if there be no such thing as truth, why will they please themselves for their
sagacity in making this discovery? Or why will they endeavor to bring others
over to their opinion, when by their first, and I might add, their only,
principle, those others are no more in an error than themselves. Such is the
perplexity, the endless labyrinth, that a man brings himself into, by asserting
for truth, that there is no such thing as truth.

WE are indeed left entirely in the dark with respect to many things; our
knowledge is, at best, but of small extent; and the opinions of men are
various. It is this that has given some men occasion to confound truth and
error, as though there were in nature no difference betwixt them. But I hope it
is needless to say any thing more in opposition to an opinion so directly
contrary to common sense.

I proceed now to the other distinction mentioned above; the distinction
betwixt right and wrong in conduct And, as it was before observed, such a
distinction must necessarily take place in consequence of the former. There
are, perhaps, some things so indifferent as no ways to affect practice, whether
they are true or false. But there are other principles which, being allowed
true, immediately induce upon us an obligation to act in a particular,
determinate manner; so that to act thus shall be right and reasonable; and to
do the contrary unfit and wrong.

THUS, for example, it being supposed, That there is some particular course or
method of acting, which tends to promote our happiness upon the whole; and that
a contrary conduct tends to our misery, (which by the way are not bare
suppositions, but plain facts) a fitness of the former course of action, in
opposition to the latter, necessarily follows. For happiness being in itself a
good, and misery an evil, it is in itself right and reasonable to pursue the
former, and to avoid the latter. If to this we add, (which experience shows to
be fact also) that the same course of action which tends to private happiness,
tends to public also, this lays us under a twofold obligation to take that
course. For it is in itself right to do good to others, as well as to
ourselves, happiness being as valuable to them as it is to us. From this
general principle our obligation to what is usually called moral and social
virtue; to fidelity, justice, charity; to humility and temperance, may be
easily inferred. For it is apparent, from experience, that by the steady,
uniform practice of these virtues, both the good of individuals, and of the
public, is promoted. Indeed it seems impossible but that such a practice as
tends to the good of one, should tend to the good of the other also. For
public happiness is nothing but the happiness of a number of individuals
united in society: So that if the individuals of which the society consists, be
happy, the community must necessarily be happy also. And on the other hand, the
community is rendered miserable in the same degree that individuals are so.
Virtue, then, is what we are under obligation to practice, without the
consideration of the being of a God, or of a future state, barely from its
apparent tendency to make mankind happy at present.

AGAIN, let us suppose, (what is at least supposeable) That there is a God; a
being who created, and who governs the world, in infinite wisdom and goodness:
i.e. in such a manner as to communicate the greatest possible happiness to his
creatures considered collectively. -- This being is plainly the object of
esteem, gratitude, love, reverence, trust, etc. to all his rational creatures.
His character is in itself amiable and perfect. To treat him with contempt, or
disregard, is to treat him as being what he is not; which certainly cannot be
right. Piety, therefore, is what we are under obligation to, upon supposition
there is any such being as this, existing.

BUT farther -- If there be such a being, he is perfect in all moral
excellence, and therefore we, and all other intelligent beings, are under
obligation to copy after, and imitate, him, according to the condition and
capacity of our natures, without the consideration of his enjoining it upon us
by any express and positive law. For so far as we fall short of him, we fall
short of perfection, according to the supposition, he being the rule and
standard of perfection. And so, on the other hand, we are perfect, in
proportion as we resemble him in the temper of our minds; and imitate him in
the conduct of our lives. And this brings us in another way, to the former
conclusion, viz. That we are under obligation to practice what is usually
called moral virtue; for by this we imitate God: and fall in with his
benevolent design in creating and governing the world.

AGAIN -- It follows upon the supposition of such a being, That his declared
will ought to be universally the rule of our actions, in whatever manner it is
made known to us, whether by natural reason, or supernatural revelation; and
whether we are able to see the reason and grounds of his injunctions, or not.
For, properly speaking, our obligation to obey the commands of such a being as
knows and wills always what is best, does not arise in any degree from the
particular manner in which we come to the knowledge of his commands; or from
our seeing the grounds of them: but solely from our knowing that they are in
fact his commands: Thus if this being has, commanded us, besides practicing
such moral virtues as those mentioned above, to do certain things not dictated
by the light of nature; if he has commanded us to submit ourselves to Jesus of
Nazareth as his Son and Delegate, and our Lord and Master; we ought to comply
immediately with his will, as soon as it is made known to us. For it is
apparently wrong and unreasonable to thwart the will and authority of him who
is infinitely wise and good, although he had no power to chastize us for it. It
will not so much as bear a dispute, whether it is wrong or not, to act counter
to the injunctions of that being in any case, who in every case injoins that,
and that only, which is reasonable for him to injoin. -- If he command with
wisdom and goodness, we cannot disobey without folly and wickedness.

BUT after all, there is really no necessity of going so far to find our
obligation to what is usually called moral virtue, as to consider its tendency
to happiness; its rendering us like to God, the standard of perfection; or to
inquire whether the practice of it be injoined upon us by the positive will and
command of God. We may find the grounds of this obligation nearer home, even in
our own breasts. There is such a law written in our hearts; such an internal
consciousness of the moral excellency of virtue, and of the odiousness of its
contrary, as really leaves us no room to doubt of our obligation to it; and so,
in a great measure supersedes all other arguments. For we cannot ordinarily
violate the rules of justice, etc. without violating our own minds at the same
time; and turning our own accusers.

THE principal objection that can be urged against the moral difference of
actions, is taken from the difficulty there is, in some cases, to determine the
boundaries betwixt right and wrong; the variety of opinions that have prevailed
in the world concerning questions of right, especially in political affairs;
and the different, yea, contrary laws, enacted by wise men in different ages
and countries, and all equally under the notion of their being right and
equitable. But (to use the words of a learned writer Dr. S. CLARKE.
) as in painting, two very different colors, by diluting each other very
slowly and gradually, may, from the highest intenseness in either extreme,
terminate in the midst insensibly; and so run one into the other, that it shall
not be possible even for a skilful eye to determine exactly where the one ends
and the other begins; and yet the colors differ as much as can be, not in
degree only, but entirely in kind, as red and blue, or white and black: So
though perhaps it may be very difficult in some nice and perplexed cases (which
yet are very far from occuring frequently) to define exactly the bounds of
right and wrong, just and unjust, and there may be some latitude in the
judgment of different Men, and the laws of diverse nations; yet right and wrong
are nevertheless totally and essentially different; even altogether as much as
white and black, light and darkness.

THE admirable writer whose words I have here quoted, seems very charitably to
attribute men's entirely confounding right and wrong, to the difficulty which
they find in some cases, to determine what is right and equitable, and what
wrong and injurious; or to discern the terminating line betwixt them. And this
difficulty is doubtless what gives men an opportunity to oppose the notion of
such a moral difference in actions, under some little color of argument.
However an internal perception of the moral difference of things in general, is
so interwoven with our very nature, that it is hardly credible that any man
should really think all actions to be indifferent in their own nature. Or if
any actually entertain such an opinion, it is not natural. It does not proceed
so much from men's originally wanting clear ideas of the difference in general
betwixt right and wrong, as from their having made these things indifferent, as
far as their own practice could effect it. Men have naturally as clear a
conception of the general difference betwixt moral good and evil, antecedent to
all consideration of human laws and compacts, yea, to the consideration of the
will of God himself, as they have of the difference betwixt light and darkness.
But as the organs of sight may be abused and weakened to such a degree that a
man shall at last perceive no difference betwixt the night and the day: and as
most of our other animal senses may be perverted and debauched, so as to be
incapable of answering their original design; so also men's natural conscience
of good and evil, may, by frequent violations, lose its quickness; and the mind
itself become blind, callous and insensible. Our natural sense of the moral
difference in actions and characters, may be rendered dull and useless. And
thus the law written in the hearts of men by the finger of God himself, may be
repealed, and erased by the powerful influence of vice: whereupon they deny
that there was ever any such law engraved on their minds. This is just as if
Moses, when his anger waxed hot, and he cast the two tables of the law out of
his hands, and brake them beneath the mount, should have immediately denied
that God had ever written them, or given them to him to preserve. It is natural
for men of corrupt minds and morals, to endeavor to get rid of all uneasy
reflections upon what is past, and terrible presages of what may be future, by
entirely throwing aside the distinction betwixt moral good and evil, as if
these were but empty names without any meaning, invented by civil and
ecclesiastical tyrants to keep the world in awe.

HOWEVER, although the vices of men may go far toward darkning their
understandings, it is not to be supposed that the most degenerate of them ever
arrive at such a state of blindness as to have no real sense of the difference
betwixt right and wrong, whatever they may pretend. For such a sense in some
degree of it, seems inseparable from a rational nature: and cannot be totally
extinguished, but with reason itself. And it is worth observing, That with how
good a conscience soever the great masters of skepticism pretend they commit
the most flagrant immoralities, under the notion of all things being
indifferent in their own nature; yet they cannot help betraying themselves, and
showing their natural sense of right and wrong, upon certain occasions. For who
are more averse than they, to take the character of knave to themselves, though
they generally take no care not to deserve it? They choose to be esteemed as men
of honesty and integrity. And when it comes to their own turn to be injured,
they are as ready as any of their neighbors to accuse the aggressor of wrong
and injustice. If their moral sense were before asleep, suffering injuries
awakens it in a moment. And if they are not right down atheists, they are ready
to think strange that God should let his thunder sleep while such villainies are
perpetrated. -- Thus hard is it for men to disguise the inward sentiments of
their hearts in this case: the mask will drop off, and nature peep out in some
unguarded hour --

IF men would go no farther than to assert, That there are some questions of
right, so intricate and complicated, that it is difficult, or even impossible,
to determine them, none would contradict them but such arrogant and conceited
persons as imagine their knowledge has no limits. But when, not content with
this, they boldly strike at the foundation of every thing that is good and
praise worthy, by denying the moral difference of actions in general; and yet
upon every turn, are complaining of injuries and abuses, done, or offered to
themselves; it is hard to say whether they are more proper objects of pity or
contempt; of indignation or ridicule: For they have doubtless a good title to
all.

THERE can be no danger of being too severe in censuring men of this stamp. For
what they say concerning the absolute indifference of actions is either false
or true. If it be false, nothing is too bad to be said of them for thus setting
aside the moral difference of actions; for putting the most excellent virtues
and the most odious vices upon the same footing; for making it as innocent for
a child to murder his aged parents, as to kill a viper; and to blaspheme his
Maker, as it is to deride a sot; and, in this way, dissolving all the ties and
obligations both of private and of social virtue. But, on the other hand, if
what they assert be true, there is not even a bare possibility of injuring
them; for there can be no such thing as wrong or injury, if all actions are
absolutely indifferent in their own nature.

I hope it in some measure appears from what has been said, That as truth has a
real existence in nature, so the distinction betwixt right and wrong
necessarily takes place in consequence thereof. And thus I have done with the
first thing proposed.

THE next thing proposed was to show, That men are naturally endowed with
faculties proper for the discerning of those differences of which we have been
speaking. But this must be left for the subject of another discourse.

I shall conclude for the present with an obvious inference from what has been
said; viz. That since truth and right have a real existence in nature,
independent on the sentiments and practices of men, they do not necessarily
follow the multitude, or major part: nor ought we to make number the criterion
of the true religion. Men are sickle and various and contradictory in their
opinions and practices: but truth and moral rectitude are things fixed, stable
and uniform, having their foundation in the nature of things. They will not
change their nature out of complaisance to the most numerous and powerful body
of men in the world. We may conform to them; but they will not condescend to
us. Were number the mark of truth and right, religion itself would be a perfect
Proteus, sometimes one thing, and sometimes another, according to the opinion
that happens to prevail in the world. But if one man may err, why not two? And
if two, why not two thousand? And then, why not all mankind? If truth and right
are somewhat fixed, and men sickle and various, men may err both with respect
to principle and practice. But upon the other hand, if truth and right have no
existence but in the opinions of men, then indeed they might depend upon number
and multitude. But then it may be reasonably asked how many votes are necessary
to change a great lie into a glorious truth? how many, to change a flagrant
crime into a meritorious virtue? and a sinner, into a saint? The church of Rome
has been trying a great while to bring about these wonderful changes and
revolutions: and has indeed effected it to the satisfaction of many. But
nevertheless these are but some of the lying wonders of him, whose coming is
after the working of satan, with all deceivableness of unrighteousness. It is
still false that bread is flesh; or wine, blood. Murder remains a vice still
nor is breach of faith and perjury any virtue at all.

THE multitude may do evil, and the many, judge falsely, Iniquity may be
established by a law; it may have all the power and wealth of the world engaged
on its side to support it, while truth and right may be left solitary and
friendless. Noah was left alone; singular indeed, but still a preacher of
righteousness. He was a perfect and upright man in his generation; and, for
that reason, was preserved in the ark, the multitude being first drowned in a
flood of vice, and then deluged in a flood of water. Thus also was Lot
singularly righteous, while the multitude in Sodom and Gomorrah first burned
with impure lusts, and were then devoured with flames from heaven, being set
forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. And how few were
there that adhered toour blessed Savior while he was in this world? He was
despised and rejected of Men, as well as a man of sorrows and acquainted with
grief. It was the body of the people that was against him. They did not discern
the time, nor judge what was right. Even to this day, how small is the number
of those who worship the Father in spirit and in truth, according to the
simplicity of the gospel, compared to those that are immersed in gross
ignorance, superstition, and all kinds of immorality. The whole collective body
of christians, makes but a small company, compared to the rest of mankind. The
Roman Catholics again are much more numerous than the Protestants: and they
have long ago voted Us, Heretics. However there is no man in his senses that
will allow himself to be in an error, because he cannot get so many hands held
up in favor of his tenets, as another. Infallibility cannot be the result of a
great number of fallibles: nor perfection be found in a large body of such as
are each of them, considered singly, imperfect. But nevertheless we daily see
that the principal argument with which some endeavor to propagate their
opinions is, that they are generally received, i. e. in that particular place
or country: and if they can but add, that they were the doctrines embraced by
their pious forefathers, this they reckon such demonstration as no man in his
senses can resist. Such idle, superficial cant may gull the thoughtless
multitude: but will be despised by all others.

IF we must needs be governed by number in the choice of our religion, it is
certainly reasonable to be governed by the greatest number. And if so, we must
be neither Calvinists nor Arminians; Trinitanians, nor Unitarians; Quakers, nor
Anabaptists; Churchmen, nor Presbyterians; Papists, nor Protestants; nor Jews,
not Mahometans; but we must even turn Heathens at once, Paganism being the most
universal Orthodoxy in the world.

IT will be observed, that I have said nothing for, on against, any of the
different parties here enumerated: All I propose, is to show the
unreasonableness of choosing our religion by vote. This, considering the
fickleness and capriciousness of mankind, amounts to much the same thing with
choosing it by lot. For whether the major or minor part shall have truth and
right of their side, is entirely precarious: To day it may be so; To morrow,
otherwise.

NOR is it needless for us to be upon our guard in this matter, considering how
natural it is to the generality of mankind, especially to such as are of an
indolent, incurious make, to follow the most numerous and powerful party, both
in principle and practice, without troubling themselves about the merits of the
cause. Many would almost shudder at the thought of an unfashionable vice, or an
unpopular doctrine, who would nevertheless readily embrace the same vice and
the same doctrine, when unattended with the disadvantage of being contrary to
the mode. What we abhor when out of date and fashion, we are apt to admire upon
a change of times, when it comes to be reputable. It is most agreeable to us to
herd with the multitude; to believe and act as they do, right or wrong. This
gratifies our innate propensity toward society: and many advantages naturally
attend him that has the majority on his side. He procures the good will of all
about him, by falling in with their favorite opinions and practices, while the
dissenter is either ridiculed or railed at, and labors under innumerable
inconveniences. Hence it often comes to pass, that we are insensibly attached
to such corrupt opinions and practices as we should have abhorred, had they not
been reputable and popular. For the sake of being with the many, we daily see
some not only renounce their reason and understanding; but break through all
the ties of honor, friendship, humanity, charity and piety, making entire
shipwreck of a good conscience. Afterward they imagine that number is the
principal criterion of truth; and flatter themselves that they are always
secure of being in the right, while they adhere to that side that can carry the
vote. This conforming humor is too prevalent in the world at present; and
always was. Particularly it was so amongst the Israelites in the time of Moses.
For which reason, that great Jewish Lawgiver gave them the prohibition with
which I shall close the present discourse -- Thou shall not follow a multitude
to do evil: neither shall thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest
judgment.

SERMON II. Men, endowed with Faculties proper for discerning the Difference
betwixt Truth and Falsehood, etc.
LUKE XII. 54 -- 57. And he said also to the people, When ye see a cloud rise
out of the west, straightway ye say, There comes a shower; and so it is.
And when ye see the south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat; and it comes
to pass.
Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, and of the earth: but how
is it, that ye do not discern this time?
Yea, and why even of your selves judge ye not what is right?

THE second thing proposed, was to show,

II. THAT as there is a natural difference betwixt truth and falsehood, right
and wrong; so men are naturally endowed with faculties proper for the
discerning of these differences.

THIS is evidently implied in my text -- How is it that ye do not discern this
time? Yea, and why even of your selves judge ye not what is right?

IT must be acknowledged that the Pyrrhonists, who demand great encomiums for
teaching men (not to know any thing, but) to doubt of every thing, have not
generally carried their Skepticism any farther than to deny all certainty in a
relative sense, or with respect to us. To the most of them it appears too gross
to affirm that there is no difference in things themselves; and so no such
thing as truth and right absolutely, in opposition to error and wrong conduct.
What they principally insist upon is, that all things are totally
incomprehensible by us; that there is no criterion of truth and right; by which
they may be distinguished from error and wrong action: So that although there
be, in nature, a difference betwixt them, yet we have no faculties for
discovering it.

Now upon this state of the case, it is evident that the questions in the text
would be altogether impertinent -- as impertinent as they would have been upon
the former supposition, That there is no real difference in things; but all
propositions, equally true; and all actions, equally right. When it was asked
-- How is it that ye do not discern this time? Yea, and why even of your selves
judge ye not what is right? it would have been easy and natural to answer --
Because we have no faculties to distinguish betwixt truth and error, right and
wrong. These things are left so uncertain and precarious with respect to us,
that after all our researches, we are as distant from them as ever. It is not
possible for the most critical inquirer to find the truth in any instance, this
being like a bird that constantly flies from us with a speed proportioned to
that with which we pursue it. All we can do, is first to fatigue our selves in
quest of truth, and then to delude our selves by fancying we have found her.

SUCH is the dark and unhappy condition in which the skeptical doctrine
supposes mankind! doomed to total ignorance, and wandering from the right path:
Or if, in any case, they think and act right, it is by mere chance; nor can
they have the pleasure of knowing it, if they happen to be in the right. But it
is to be hoped that the Author of our being has not been so sparing of his
favors to us, as to leave us at such uncertainties about every thing,
especially about what concerns our own welfare. However, were this really our
case, one would think that those who are sensible it is so, instead of deriding
the doctrine of a supernatural revelation, (as is the practice of modern
Scepticks) should accommodate the words of David to their own case and
circumstances -- Who will show us any good? Lord, lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us! The blinder we are naturally, the more need we have of
supernatural light and instruction.

THE doctrine of our total incapacity to distinguish betwixt truth and
falsehood, right and wrong, has much the same aspect upon common life, civil
society, philosophy and religion, with that of the absolute indifference of all
things in their own nature: And the like absurdities will follow from it. Thus
(for example) it follows that there is no difference at all in men with respect
to wisdom and knowledge. For in order to constitute such a difference, it is
not only necessary that there should be a natural distinction betwixt truth and
falsehood; but also, that some, at least, should have faculties for discovering
it. Knowledge, if there be any such thing, consists in seeing or perceiving
truth. But if no men have a capacity for this, all men must be entirely
destitute of knowledge; as destitute of it, as if there were in nature no
distinction betwixt truth and error.

THE doctrine of our inability to discover truth and right, has much the same
aspect upon common life, civil society, philosophy and religion, with that of
the absolute indifference of all things in their own nature. It as effectually
precludes all inquiries concerning truth and virtue, private and public good;
and every other subject. For what does it signify to us, that there is a true
and a right in nature, while it is supposed, we have no faculties for
discovering them. If they lie entirely beyond our reach, we have no more
concern with them, than if they had no existence at all: and it is folly for
any one to busy himself about them. Nor can any man consistently take
satisfaction in his own opinions and actions, as though the former were true,
and the latter, right; or blame another for error in principle or practice,
while he asserts that there is equal evidence for the truth of all opinions,
and for the regularity of all actions; i. e. no real evidence for the truth and
regularity of any. Upon this supposition, he that denies his own existence, and
commits murder, adultery and robbery, has as much to say in his own
vindication, as he that asserts a circle is not a square, and saves his country
from ruin. And from hence it appears, that those who carry their skepticism no
farther than to question the abilities of men to discover truth and right in
all cases, are guilty of the same inconsistency with those who explode the
whole notion of a real distinction betwixt truth and right, and their
contraries. For why will they attempt to investigate truth? Or why will they
plume themselves upon their supposed discovery of this notable truth, That men
are unable to discover truth? Why will they upbraid their antagonists with
ignorance? Why will they, in any case, attempt to vindicate their own conduct,
under the notion of its being right? Or why will they censure that of others,
and resent things under the notion of injury? This has ever been their
practice; which goes wholly upon the supposition, that truth and right are not
only somewhat real in nature; but also, that they be distinguished from their
contraries, at least by these sagacious men themselves. What Ariadne's clue can
be found to extricate them from this labyrinth of folly and contradiction? If
there be no criterion of truth, let them not pretend to have found one
themselves; and then deride others for supposing that truth may be discovered.
There are many dogmatists about the world, who allow themselves only to be the
proper judges of truth and right; which is arrogant enough. But no bigoted
dogmatist in half so absurd and insolent as the Skeptic. For he endeavors to
make a monopoly of truth, and to engross the whole of that sacred treasure, to
the beggaring of the rest of mankind, even while the first (and I might add,
the only) article of his creed is, That truth cannot be discovered by any. It
is hard to say, whether this conduct has in it more of stupidity or of
insolence. But thus much is certain, that a thorough-pac'd Skeptic is the most
silly, conceited and inconsistent bigot in the world.

HE that allows of no certainty in any case, cannot even be sure that he
imagines there is no such thing as certainty. Perhaps he may be mistaken in
thinking he believes what he says he believes. To say he is certain he believes
what he thinks he does, is to admit of certainty in general, which is to give
up the point in question. But supposing him certainly to know what his own
sentiments are, how comes he to know that any one contradicts them; or differs
from him in opinion? He need not make himself uneasy at the opposition of any
supposed adversaries: For, upon his own scheme, these adversaries and their
opposition, may not be real, but wholly imaginary. And if one should call him
hard names, persecute him for his opinion, and answer his arguments with a
brick bat instead of a syllogism, this may be imaginary also. At least, he has
nothing to complain of, upon his own principles; for such a conduct toward
him, may possibly be as right and reasonable, as it in to feed the hungry, and
clothe the naked. And indeed such treatment might possibly be the most
effectual way to bring him to his senses. Epictetus used to say, Were I a
servant to those Pyrrhonists, I should take a pleasure in tiezing them. If they
should bid me pour oil into the bathing tub, I would throw brine upon their
head. If they should ask me to give them ptisan, I would bring them vinegar.
And if they offered to complain, I would tell them they were mistaken; or
persuade them that the vinegar was ptisan; or else make them renounce their
notions. Bayle's Hist. and Crit. Dict. Art. Phrrho, Note K.


BUT to come more directly to the point -- Some things are in themselves so
evidently true, that no criterion is necessary in order to our knowing them
with certainty. Thus, for example, that we exist, is what we have an immediate
and intuitive certainty of. And the same may be said concerning the reality of
all our own ideas and perceptions. That we experience pleasure and pain; that
we converse with various objects which affect us in a different manner; that
color is one thing, and sound another; and that smelling is not tasting; these
things are self-evident, and no medium can make them plainer. But it will
perhaps be said, that all this is only phansy and imagination, there being no
archetypes existing without us, of which these perceptions are the images or
representations. Be it so: still the perceptions and ideas themselves are real:
this we are certain of, whether there be any thing external, of which they are
the antitypes, or not. So that certainty may be had in some respects at least.
And this is sufficient to our present purpose; for we are not speaking
concerning the extent, but the certainty, of human knowledge.

OF the truth of other things we may be certain in a different manner, viz. by
reason, deducing them from other truths of which we have an intuitive
knowledge. Thus it is that a thousand mathematical truths are demonstrated; and
that with a certainty little or nothing inferior to those first principles
from which they are deduced, the connection in every step through the whole
process being so apparent, that to suppose the contrary would be a plain
contradiction, and amount to the denying a thing to be what it is acknowledged
to be. And in the same way many moral and religious truths may be demonstrated
also -- As the being of a God; his power, wisdom, goodness and providence: and
our obligation to obey him.

For the truth of many other things we can, indeed, have no more than probable
evidence; but which is, in many cases, almost as satisfactory to the mind as
intuitive and demonstrative certainty. Thus who doubts but that the sun will
set in a few hours? -- that the sea will ebb and flow to morrow, as usual? --
that autumn will succeed to summer; winter, to autumn; and spring, to winter,
as in times pass? But of these things there is no certainty. For God has power
to put a stop to the usual course of nature; and we cannot be certain that he
will not do it the next moment. Thus also probable evidence is all we can have
for the truth of facts recorded in ancient history. Men may possibly deceive
us. But who has ever been in such a doubting humor, as to question whether
there have been such men as Alexander the Great, and Julius Caesar; whether
they fought, and triumphed, etc? Indeed we can have no more than probable
evidence that food and sleep will refresh us for the future, as heretofore. Our
whole institution of life, as it relates to the present world, is grounded upon
evidence of this sort, and not upon intuitive or demonstrative certainty. Such
evidence is easy to be had; and is sufficient to the purposes of life, as daily
experience shows us. We may, if we please, perplex ourselves about the nature
of time, place and motion: But men who are no philosphers, find the way home at
one o'clock without any difficulty. We may puzzle ourselves about the essences
of things, and the manner in which one operates upon another: But experience
teaches the husbandman how to manure his fields, so as to make them fruitful:
We all know that drink allays our thirst, and food, our hunger; nor do we ever
hesitate whether we shall make use of them, or of something else, to remove
those natural uneasinesses. But still there is no infallible and necessary
connection betwixt those causes and the effects that are usually produced by
them.

NOR is there more room for skepticism in relation to morals and religion, than
in common life; nor indeed so much, with regard to the principal branches of
our duty. But, however it comes to pass, men take more pains to doubt in one
case than in the other. We have stronger evidence for the proof of the chief
articles of religion, than we have for most other things, of which we are fully
satisfied. The being and perfections of God may be known without much
difficulty; and these being known, it is as easy to know how we ought to
conduct ourselves toward him in general, as it is for a servant to know how to
please a master whose temper and character he is acquainted with. And it is at
least as plain that the Sovereign of the world will make a distinction betwixt
the righteous and the wicked, as that a wise and good prince will make a
distinction betwixt dutiful subjects, and rebels.

THUS it appears, in general, that men are able to distinguish betwixt truth
and falsehood, right and wrong. But I shall now make several observations upon
this proposition, in order farther to explain the real intention of it, to
obviate some objections against it, and to guard it against those abuses to
which it may appear liable.

And

1. IT is not intended in this assertion, that all men have equal abilities for
judging what is true and right. The whole creation is diversified, and men in
particular. There is a great variety in their intellectual faculties. That
which principally distinguishes some men from the beasts of the field, is the
different formation of their bodies. Their bodies are human, but they are in a
manner brute all beside. Whether the difference that there is in the natural
powers of men, proceeds from the original make of their minds, or from some
difference in those bodily organs upon which the exercise of the rational
faculties may be supposed to depend; it is apparent that there is, in fact,
such a difference. And therefore when it is said that men are able to judge
what is true and right, it must be understood in such a sense as is consistent
with this fact. Those of the lower class can go but a little ways with their
inquiries into the natural and moral constitution of the world. But even these
may have the power of judging, in some degree. However, upon supposition that
some were wholly ignorant even of their own existence, it does not follow that
all must be so, any more than that all bodies must be round, because some are
of that particular figure. From the most dull and stupid of the human species,
there is a continual rise or gradation, there being as great a variety in the
intellectual powers of men, as in their bodily and active powers. And so it may
be true of some in an higher and more proper sense than of others, that they
may even of themselves judge what is right. Many things are obvious, and, in a
manner first principles to them, which to others are mysterious and
incomprehensible.

2. As a farther limitation of this assertion, I would observe, that it does
not imply, that the same persons are equally adequate judges of truth and
right, in all conditions and circumstances. There is a great difference in the
powers of different men: But no one differs more from another than he does from
himself, considered in childhood and mature life, before and after his mind is
cultivated by study and exercise. The man knows what the child was ignorant of.
We come into the world ignorant of every thing. But he that, in his natural,
rude and uncultivated state, is unqualified to judge what is true and right,
unless it be in a few obvious cases, is capable of considerable improvements by
study and experience. Our intellectual faculties were given us to improve: they
rust for want of use; but are brightened by exercise. Exercise strengthens and
invigorates our mental faculties as well as our bodily. And the more a man
habituates himself to intellectual employments, the greater will be his aptness
and facility in discovering truth, and detecting error. Without some previous
study and application, it is as impossible that men should be accurate judges
of truth and right, as it is that they should be complete artificers in any
mechanical business, without spending time to learn the trade. They may bungle
and cobble; but can do nothing that will bear the inspection of a
master-workman. It is the unhappiness of a great part of mankind that they do
not sufficiently consider this natural weakness, ineptitude and awkwardness of
human reason before cultivation; but sit down contented with their imaginary
sagacity and promptness of understanding, without using the proper means to
qualify them for judging of things that may come under their consideration.
Hence it is that we have so many quacks and ignorant pretenders in all arts and
sciences -- What need of study to come at an acquaintance with those subjects
which we may understand at any time only by opening our eyes? Who will descend
into the bowels of the earth to dig for gold, while it lies in plenty within
his reach upon the surface of the ground? Who will dive for pearls, while he
imagines they float upon the waves? Or what need has that field of tillage,
whose soil is so fertile, that, like that of Eden, it produces spontaneously
the richest fruits? When men imagine that the depths of science may be fathomed
by a single glance of thought, without any previous application to intellectual
exercises, it can not be expected that they should be able to determine justly
upon any points but some of the most familiar and obvious. In this case, he
that was born like the wild asses-colt, must needs continue to be so; or, at
best, come to maturity, and grow up into an ass himself.

THE alteration which time and study make in the abilities of men for judging
concerning truth and right, is sufficient to account for the diversity of
sentiments entertained by the same persons at different periods of their life,
without having recourse to skepticism, or supposing all our notions, from first
to last, to be mere phansy and illusion. A man may err once without erring
always. Nor can we argue from the reveries of youth, and the absurd conceits of
the illiterate, that all mankind are but a mighty nation of fools and
lunaticks, pleasing themselves with idle dreams and delusive appearances,
instead of realities.

3. THAT men are able even of themselves to judge what is right, does not
imply, that they can receive no assistance from books, and the conversation of
learned men; Or that they may judge as well without these helps as with them.
Although all men are capable of discerning truth and right in some degree, by
the bare exercise of their own natural faculties, it does not follow that they
can stand in no need of any foreign aid, in order to their judging in a more
perfect manner. The more knowing may be helpful to others in their pursuit of
knowledge. And the abilities of men for reasoning justly, and judging truly,
may depend, in a great measure, upon the method of their education, the books
they read, and the genius and abilities of the persons they converse with. Who
will pretend that the natives of Greenland, or the Cape of Good Hope, enjoy the
same, or equal, means of knowledge, with those that are born in the polite and
learned nations of Europe? Who imagines that one brought up at the plough is as
likely to form right notions of things, as if he had been educated at a
university? Or that a man who has conversed only with ordinary Mechanics, has
the same advantages with those who have enjoyed the familiarity of the greatest
proficients in literature? To suppose these things, is to contradict daily
experience. And, therefore, to decline all assistances from others in the
search of knowledge, under a notion, that we are able to judge even of
ourselves what is right, is pride and vanity, and not the part of an ingenuous
inquirer after truth. This may be allowed by the most strenuous asserter of
men's natural abilities, and natural right, to judge for themselves, without any
appearance of inconsistency or contradiction. For it amounts to no more than
this, that some men are superior to others, and may help them to the knowledge
of some things which they would not have known without their assistance.

4. IT is not implied in this doctrine, that men's intellectual powers have no
bounds at all; or that they are equally able to determine upon all points,
although they should improve all the helps to knowledge, and cultivate their
reason in the best manner possible. There are many cases wherein the wisest of
men are unable to form any judgment at all -- difficulties which they cannot
solve -- heights which they cannot climb -- depths which they cannot fathom --
Some may, perhaps, think this a reflection upon human understanding. And indeed
it is so, if it be any reflection upon it to say, that it is not infinite like
that of God; but not otherwise. To say that human reason is confined to a
certain sphere, beyond which it cannot penetrate, is, in reality, no more than
to assert that man is a finite, and not an infinite, being; a creature, and not
the Creator. There are probably created intelligences much superior to man
even in his best estate: But it is no derrogation from their real dignity, to
say they are not omniscient. Why then should man grasp at omniscience? imagine
he may know every thing because he may know some? and look upon it as a
reproach, when it is said that his reason, and all his other faculties are
circumscribed?

WE may know what is proper to be known by beings of our rank, so as to fill
our place, and answer the design of our creation, without being able to
comprehend all things. We may know that this earth is inhabited by creatures,
the law of whose nature is virtue, and its end happiness; although we cannot
certainly tell whether the planets are inhabited, or not; or, if they are, by
what kind of beings, and what their condition and circumstances. We may know,
in general, what tends to health and felicity in this world, although the real
essences of things should be beyond our reach. We may know that whatever came
into existence, (as it is demonstrable that every thing did which we behold)
must have some invisible cause adequate to it, although we were not able to
form a clear idea of creative power, or the manner of its exertion. We may know
that beauty, order, harmony and design, in the works of nature, presuppose a
designer, or, intelligent artificer; although we cannot comprehend the system
of the universe. We may know that a constitution of things, actually tending to
happiness, must be the product of goodness, although we are not able exactly to
define, beforehand, that system the correspondent parts of which shall be so
adjusted as to effect the greatest possible good. We may know in general that
the Author of the world must be a wise and good being, although the final
causes of some things which we see in it, are beyond our sight. In fine, we may
know that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him;
although we cannot by searching find out the almighty unto perfection; or
comprehend his nature; or see through the whole scheme of his works, government
and providence.

THE wisest of men was not ashamed to own this imperfection of human reason,
even under its greatest improvements, and carried to its most exalted pitch.
When I applied mine heart to know wisdom, says Solomon, then I beheld all the
work of God, that a man cannot find out all the work that is done under the
sun; because though a man seek it out, yet shall he not find it; yea farther,
though a wise man think to know it, yet shall he not be able to find it.
However Solomon was no Skeptic. In the same book we find him saying, that
wisdom excels folly, as much as light excels darkness: And with him the
conclusion of the whole matter is, -- Fear God, and keep his commandments; for
this is the whole of man. Whatever he might be in doubt about, he was satisfied
of this, That there was a God who governed the world, that his will and
commandments might be known, and that the business and happiness of man,
consists in obeying them.

Again,

5. WHEN it is said we are able even of ourselves to judge what is right, this
is not designed to suggest that our intellectual faculties are so capacious as
to render a supernatural revelation of no use or importance to us. Certainly we
cannot suppose this to be the intention of him that uttered the words of our
text, since one of the titles which he took upon himself, was that of a
Prophet, or a Teacher sent from God. And indeed it necessarily follows from the
supposition of our rational faculties being limited, that there is room for our
being instructed by revelation. If one man may instruct another, much more may
we suppose it possible for him that is perfect in knowledge to supply the
natural defects of human reason by a supernatural communication of light and
knowledge. When, and how far, it is expedient for him to do this, He only
knows. However upon supposition of such a revelation, we must be supposed to be
able to see the evidence of its being such. It is the proper office of reason
to determine whether what is proposed to us under the notion of a revelation
from God, be attended with suitable attestations and credentials, or not. So
that even in this case, we may of ourselves judge what is right. If there be no
rational evidence of its coming from God, no rational man can receive it as
such: And, on the other hand, if it be accompanied with rational evidence, no
reasonable man can reject it. Indeed what Jesus Christ, particularly blames the
Jews for in the text, is their not exercising their reason in this way. He had
sufficiently proved his divine mission; but they would not discern the time,
nor judge what was right, being under the influence of prejudice, and not of
reason.

MOREOVER, it is the proper office of reason to determine the meaning of the
particular parts of a revelation, after the divine authority of it in general
is established and allowed. And this men's natural faculties qualify them for,
much in the same manner that they qualify them for interpreting other writings.
If God gives men a revelation, he gives it to be understood by men: And if he
gives it to be understood by men, he must give it in human language, and
accommodate it to human capacity. For otherwise, a second revelation would be
necessary to explain the first: And then, why not a third to explain the
second; and so on in infinitum? And so nothing would be really revealed after
all.

I shall just add in the

6th, and last place, as a farther limitation of the proposition before us,
That it does not intend that we are able to determine, with an equal degree of
certainty, all points which we are capable, in some sense, of coming to a
conclusion about. Although truth does not admit of degrees, yet the evidence of
truth does. So that of various propositions equally true in themselves, some
may be known with greater certainty than others. Probable evidence is indeed
all that can be had in most cases, as was observed before. It is by virtue of
this, that the intercourse of man with man, and all the business and commerce
of the world, is carried on. Experience shows that such evidence is sufficient
in secular affairs: And it may be sufficient in religious affairs also, in
those cases where absolute certainty cannot be had.

I shall now conclude this head concerning the certainty and sufficiency of
human knowledge, with the words of Mr. Lock. If -- any one, says he, will be
so skeptical as to distrust his senses, and to affirm that all we see and hear,
feel and taste, think and do, during our whole being, is but the series and
deluding appearances of a long dream, whereof there is no reality; and
therefore will question the existence of all things, or our knowledge of any
thing: I must desire him to consider, that if all be a dream, then he does but
dream that he makes the question; and so it is not much matter, that a waking
man should answer him. But yet, if he pleases, he may dream that I make him
this answer, that the certainty of things existing in rerum natura, when we
have the testimony of our senses for it, is not only as great as our frame can
attain to, but as our condition needs. For our faculties being suited not to
the full extent of being, nor to a perfect, clear and comprehensive knowledge
of things, free from all doubt and scruple; but to the preservation of us in
whom they are; and accommodated to the use of life; they serve our purpose well
enough, if they will but give us certain notice of those things which are
convenient, or inconvenient to us. For he that sees a candle burning, and has
experimented the force of its flame, by putting his finger in it, will little
doubt that this is something existing, -- which does him harm, and puts him to
great pain: which is assurance enough, when no man requires greater certainty
to govern his actions by, than what is as certain as his actions themselves.
And if our dreamer pleases to try, whether the glowing heat of a glass furnace,
be barely a wandering imagination, in a drowsy man's fancy; by putting his hand
into it, he may perhaps be wakened into a certainty, that it is something more
than bare imagination. So that this evidence is as great as we can desire,
being as certain to us as our pleasure or pain, i. e. happiness or misery;
beyond which we have no concernment, either of knowing or being. Mr. Locke's
works, edit. 4th Vol. 1. p. 312.


THUS it appears that men are naturally endowed with faculties proper for
distinguishing betwixt truth and error, right and wrong. And hence it follows,
that the doctrine of a total ignorance, and incapacity to judge of moral and
religious truths, brought upon mankind by the apostasy of our First Parents, is
without foundation. How much brighter and more vigorous our intellectual
faculties were in Adam, six thousand years before we had any existence, I leave
others to determine. It is sufficient for my purpose to consider mankind as
they are at present, without inquiring what they were before they had any
being. And it appears that they have now a natural power to judge what is true
and right, with the restrictions mentioned above. But it is, nevertheless, the
manner of vain Enthusiasts, when the absurdity of their doctrines is laid open,
to fall a railing, telling their opposers that they are in a carnal state,
blind, and unable to judge: but that themselves are spiritually illuminated.
Thus they endeavor to palm the grossest absurdities upon their neighbors,
under the notion of their being divine truths and holy mysteries: So that these
enlightened Idiots make inspiration, and the Spirit of truth and wisdom, the
vehicle of nonsense and contradictions. Whatever is reasonable, is, with them,
carnal: and nothing is worthy of belief, but what is impossible and absurd in
the eye of human reason.

WE see that our Blessed Savior did not suppose that the minds of men had
suffered any such total eclipse, or were wholly overspread with darkness. He
addresses the unbelieving Jews as if they had proper faculties for judging of
religious truths; and blames them for not exerting them -- why even of
yourselves judge ye not what is right? -- The candle of the Lord which was
lighted up in man at first, when the inspiration of the almighty gave him
understanding, was not extinguished by the original apostasy, but has kept
burning ever since. The divine flame has caught from father to son; and has
been propagated quite down to the present generation: Nor will it be put out
'till the sun himself shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light.

LET us retain a suitable sense of the dignity of our nature in this respect.
It is by our reason that we are exalted above the beasts of the field. It is by
this, that we are allied to angels, and all the glorious intelligences of the
heavenly world: Yea, by this we resemble God himself. It is principally on
account of our reason, that we are said to have been created in the image of
God. So that how weak soever our intellectual faculties are, yet to speak
reproachfully of reason in general, is nothing less than blasphemy against God.
Let us, therefore, instead of contemning this inestimable gift, in which
consists the glory of our nature, employ it to the ends for which it was
designed, in the service of the great Father of our spirits.

BUT we have had occasion, in this discourse, to speak of the imperfection, as
well as of the strength, of human reason. He that is not sensible of this
imperfection, is so far from being the wisest of men, that he knows nothing
yet as he ought to know it. Professing himself to be wise, he becomes a fool;
the knowledge of ourselves being the first, last, point, the alpha and omega of
human wherein. The knowledge of our own ignorance, is the most important and
beneficial of all sciences. This will naturally lead us to humility; and excite
us to improve, with gratitude and diligence, all the means of knowledge which
we are favored with; especially that revelation which God has given us by his
Son, whom he has sent from heaven to be a light unto the Gentiles, as well as
the glory of his people Israel. A Sense of our ignorance would also teach us
modesty in criticizing the works of nature and providence. The scheme of God's
government is vast; our understandings are narrow, and not proportioned to it.
We are at present, as it were, but rational beings in embrio, unborn to light
and knowledge. At least we are mere babes in speculation; we speak as children;
we think as children; we understand as children: But perhaps we may e'erlong
become men, and put away childish things. 'Till we arrive at that maturity of
life and knowledge, toward which we are in progress during our abode in the
present world, we ought not to think strange that our understandings are
baffled; or that many things remain mysterious and unaccountable to us, both in
the natural and moral government of God. And instead of boldly censuring the
author of the universe, as taking wrong measures in any respect, it becomes us
to use that humble language, not only of a great man, but an inspired apostle
-- O! the depths of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments; and his ways past finding out! -- Now to the
King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory
forever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

SERMON III. The Right and Duty of private Judgment asserted.
LUKE XII. 54 -- 57. And he said also to the people, When ye see a cloud rise
out of the west, straightway ye say, There comes a shower; and so it is.
And when ye see the south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat; and it comes
to pass.
Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, and of the earth: but how
is it, that ye do not discern this time?
Yea, and why even of your selves judge ye not what is right?

HAVING attempted to show, in two former discourses up on these words, That
there is a natural difference betwixt truth and falsehood, right and wrong: And,
That men are naturally endowed with faculties proper for the discerning of
these differences: I proceed now to show in the

IIId. And last place, That men are under obligation to exert these faculties;
and to judge for themselves in things of a religious concern. It cannot be
doubted but that this is fairly implied in my text. For the words evidently
carry in them a severe censure and reproof of the persons to whom they were
originally addressed, on account of their neglecting to judge for themselves
concerning our blessed Savior, and his doctrine. He makes this neglect, an
argument of their hypocrisy, one of the basest vices -- Ye hypocrites, ye can
discern the face of the sky -- and why, even of yourselves judge ye not what is
right?

THE subject before us being the duty of private judgment, I shall briefly
explain what I intend by persons judging for themselves; or by freedom of
thought and inquiry in religious matters: And then show, that this is what we
are all obliged to.

Now what I intend by a man's judging for himself with freedom, and exerting
his own faculties in the search of truth and right, may be comprised under the
following particulars --

THAT he suspends his judgment entirely concerning the truth or falsehood of all
doctrines; and the fitness or unfitness of all actions; 'till such time as he
sees some reason to determine his judgment one way rather than the other. He
that desires to come to the knowledge of the truth, puts himself in a state of
indifferency with regard to the point to be judged of; that so his mind being
as it were, in aequilibrio, his judgment may be determined solely by reason and
argument. He does not bring his old prejudices and prepossessions to determine
the point; but comes prepared, by an unbiassed mind, to receive the impressions
of reason, and of reason only. All propositions are the proper subject of
inquiry and examination, except first principles, which are few in number, and
which do not extend to any doctrines either of natural or revealed religion,
how nearly soever they may be connected with some of both. And therefore, in
order to our judging with true freedom, we ought to consider all such doctrines
with an eye of indifferency, neither fancying them to be true or false; nor
even wishing them to be so, till we see they are connected with, or contrary
to, some of those first principles of human knowledge, which being self
evident, are not the subject of examination. Thus, for example, we ought not to
believe that there is, or that there is not a God; that the Christian religion
is from God, or an imposture; that any particular doctrine fathered upon it, is
really contained in it, or not; or that any particular sect of christians, is
in the right, or in the wrong; 'till we have impartially examined the matter,
and see evidence on one side or the other. For to determine any point without
reason or proof, cannot be to judge freely, unless it be in a bad sense of the
word. So that suspense or indifferency, is the first thing implied in free
inquiry: or, to speak more properly, it is a pre-requisite, and preparatory to
it.

AGAIN: The next step toward freedom of examination and judgment, is the
exerting of our own reason in weighing arguments and evidences that offer
themselves to us, or that are offered by others. He that inquires freely after
truth, is not content with barely suspending his judgment till such time as
evidence forces it self upon his mind. In this way, a man may perhaps avoid
error; but will not gain much knowledge; for truth is coy, and must be courted.
To gain any considerable degree of knowledge, it is necessary that we are
active and vigorous in the pursuit of it; that we make use of all the means and
helps to knowledge that are within our reach; that we inquire into facts; that
we view things in different lights, not taking up satisfied with first
appearances; that we weigh the arguments that are brought to support any
doctrine or practice; that we balance them with contrary arguments; and the
like.

ANOTHER thing implied in the freedom of judgment is, that a man honestly
embraces for truth, whatever there appears evidence for, without endeavoring
to evade it, to shift it off, or stifle the conviction of his own mind. To
inquire into evidence, is to no purpose, unless we follow it wherever it leads,
and cheerfully receive the truth wherever it is to be found; whatever notions
it may contradict; whatever censures it may expose us to. It is an idle and
inconsistent thing to examine, if we are determined before hand to retain our
former sentiments; to believe as our forefathers did, or as any particular
body of men does at present. A man does not really inquire after truth and
right at all, unless he determines from the very first, to have no
superstitious veneration for great names; but to yield himself up to evidence
wherever it appears; and how much soever it might have contributed to his
present interest and reputation to have embraced other tenets.

LASTLY: Judging with freedom and impartiality, implies, that in giving our
assent to any proposition, we give it in proportion to the degree of evidence
that appears to support it. All truths are not equally clear and incontestible:
Innumerable lie quite beyond our sight; some just down upon our minds; others
appear in a strong and convincing light, though not so strong as to exclude all
doubt; while others glare upon us with all the force of demonstration. Now as
there are innumerable degrees of evidence betwixt the lowest probability, and
that intuitive certainty which we have of first principles; so a man ought not
to give the same degree of assent to every thing he receives for truth; but to
proportion his assent to the nature and degree of the apparent evidence,
whether it be greater or less. Not to assent to what is, in the lowest degree,
probable upon the whole, discovers a backwardness to entertain the truth. And,
on the other hand, to give an assent to any truth, over and beyond what the
nature of its evidence naturally demands and calls forth, is much the same
thing with believing without any evidence at all. For all that redundancy of
assent, if I may so express it, is mere credulity and rashness: and this is as
unbecoming a reasonable creature as obstinacy and perverseness.

HAVING thus briefly explained what I intend by judging for ourselves, with
freedom, I proceed now to show, That this is what every man is under obligation
to do. This I propose to prove directly by reason and revelation; and then to
answer the principal objections that are urged against it.

EACH individual has an interest of his own depending. We find, by experience,
that we are all capable of being happy or miserable to a great degree. Pain and
pleasure, at least, are private and personal things. And even they that
arrogate to themselves the right of judging for us, do not pretend to feel for
us also. Now if it be of any importance to us to be happy for ourselves, it is
of importance to judge for ourselves also; for this is absolutely necessary in
order to our finding the path that leads to happiness. Indeed if others can
afford us any assistance in finding this path, it is reasonable to make use of
it; but not to give ourselves up entirely to their direction. It is the
greatest folly imaginable, to give ourselves no concern about our own welfare,
unless we were certain it is secured to us already, so that we cannot possibly
miss of it, which is a supposition contrary to daily experience. We find that
our happiness depends, at least in some degree, upon our conduct; and that we
often take some wrong step, through ignorance; which ought to be a warning to
us to look about us, and take heed to our ways. -- Without knowing which is the
right path, we can never take it, unless it be by chance; and though we should
be so fortunate as to get into it, we cannot have the satisfaction of knowing
it.

IN our present imperfect state, such inquiries as the following, become every
man that has not yet resolved them in his own mind -- What is my chief good?
Where is the road that will convey me to my happiness? Where shall I find this
inestimable jewel? this pearl of great price? In what mountain shall I dig for
it? In what ocean shall I dive? Amidst the various opinions, and contrary
pursuits of mankind, what road shall I myself travel? What course shall I
steer? Shall I find my felicity in retirement and solitude? Or in the noise and
bustle of the world? Is it to be found in the humble and quiet cottage? Or in
proud and envious courts? Is it to be found in peace at home? Or in war abroad?
Does it consist in indulging to my animal nature without control? Or in
improving my mind in what some men call wisdom and virtue? Shall I seek it in
my own country? Or explore some distant region in hopes to find it? Shall I
search it upon the seas, or upon the dry land? In the earth beneath, or in the
heavens above? In this world, or in some other? Is my spirit immortal? Am I to
survive the dissolution of my body, and to live forever in some other state? Or
shall this vital spark that thinks, perceives and wills, and is anxious about
futurity, be wholly extinguished in a few days, when my body falls to dust? Is
there any being who created, and who governs the world? Or is this beautiful
and stupendous fabric of the universe, the offspring of chance? And without
any guide, overseer or ruler? -- a fatherless World, which the next moment may
fall into ruins, or into nothing? If there be a God, what is his character? Is
he powerful, wife, righteous and good; or is he not? Does my happiness depend
upon pleasing and obeying him, and conforming myself to his will? If it does,
what is his will? What are his laws? What does he expect of me? What kind of
government is it I am under? What is the particular and certain way, in which I
may obtain the good will of this great Parent of the world, in whose favor is
life, and whose loving kindness is better than life?

THESE, methinks, are such inquiries as every man should endeavor to get some
satisfaction about in his own ^^nd -- satisfaction of quite another kind than
any that can be had barely from the decisions of others concerning them. The
questions are too interesting and important to be submitted to the
determination of a second person.

BUT were we disposed to leave matters of this consequence to reference, who
shall be the judges? There are almost as many opinions in the world, as there
are men. The Talapoins of Siam have one system of religion: the Mufti at
Constantinople, another: and Christians, a third; and so on. And almost all
allege divine revelation in their own favor. There are even some fools who
say in their heart, there is no God; and not only in their heart, but repeat it
with their lips also. Now shall we submit to the Theists, or to the Atheists?
How shall we know on which side the truth lies, without examination? But
suppose we embrace Theism, what sect of the Theists shall we fall in with? With
those who deny, or those who maintain, a revelation from God? Is it reasonable
to give in to either party, before we inquire which has the best of the
Argument? But suppose we fall in with the latter, there are several sects of
them, the principal of which are Jews, Mahometans and Christians. It cannot be
a reasonable part to fall in with one, in opposition to the other two, without
reason. But suppose we are convinced that the Christian religion is true, do
not Christians differ very widely in their sentiments? Do they not differ so
much in explaining the doctrines of their common revelation, as to agree in
hardly any thing besides the name of Christian? Are they not divided into many
sects, the most of which strenuously maintain, that not only truth, but
salvation also, is confined to themselves? Do they not deal out their curses
mutually with a liberal hand? Are they not continually throwing firebrarnds,
arrows and death, (not indeed in sport, like other fools, but) in sober earnest?

Now amidst these differences and altercations, what is the part of a
reasonable man, but to sit down, and exercise, as well as he can, his (...)
intellectual powers; and so to judge even of himself what is right? What system
of doctrine -- what mode of worship -- what form of church government and
discipline, is most agreeable to scripture and reason -- what sect of Christians
he shall unite with -- and whether with any one, in all its minute and
distinguishing tenets and usages --? A man must join himself to the true,
primitive and catholic church. What church is that? all churches lay claim to
that title: and the question to be decided is, which of them supports its claim
the best? which cannot be decided without previous inquiry. But there is a
living infallible guide upon earth, to whom it is easy to repair; and then we
may be sure of being in the right without any farther trouble. Where is he?
Many deny there is any such unerring guide, and infallible umpire, as
confidently as others affirm it. But even those who agree that there is such a
sovereign judge of religious controversy, are not yet fully agreed who he is;
or whether infallibility be to be found in one single person or more. The heads
of all sects usually decide disputable matters with full as much assurance and
lordliness as it would become infallibility itself to do it, although they do
not all, in so many words, pretend to be exempted from a possibility of erring.
Those who claim infallibility, often decide and order as if they were fallible:
And those who do not claim it, are often full as positive, and given to
dominineering as much, as if it unquestionably belonged to them.

WE know the King of Great Britain (or the Queen, in a female reign) is the
Supreme Head of the church of England, as by law established; which church
claims power to decree rites or ceremonies, and authority in controversies of
faith.

BUT his Holiness at Rome thinks this a bold infringement of his prerogative,
and universal jurisdiction in ecclesiastical matters. Whose word, then, is to
be taken? How shall we act a rational part without judging even of ourselves
which is in the right? Or whether either of them be so. Indeed there is no
doubt but his Holiness is really the Supreme Head of the church of Rome; and,
as such, has authority therein in matters of faith, worship and discipline.
Thus also the King or Queen of Great Britain, is doubtless the Supreme Head of
the truly primitive, apostolical church of England, as lately established by
human laws. But nevertheless, it may perhaps admit of some dispute whether
Jesus Christ is not the Supreme Head of his own church? and consequently,
whether these are not three different churches, they having each of them a
different Supreme Head? It is of some importance to us to be settled with
regard to these points; and they are such as cannot be well determined without
some examination, though perhaps a very little may suffice.

THUS it appears that a regard to our own interest ought to put us upon
examining and judging for ourselves in religious concerns. The same thing might
be argued from the faculty of reason itself, which is common to all. If we
suppose an intelligent author of our nature, who had some design in giving us
our present constitution, it is plain that his end in endowing us with
faculties proper for the investigating of truth and right, was, that we should
exercise them in this way. Each of our bodily organs, and animal faculties, has
an apparent final cause. Our eyes are for seeing; our ears, for hearing; our
hands, for handling; our feet, for walkinging; etc. Nor is it less apparent
that our understandings were given us to be employed in the search of truth,
and in embracing it. Truth is the natural object of reason, as much as any
thing else is the proper object of that particular faculty or passion, to which
God and nature have adapted it. Our obligation, therefore, to inquire after
truth, and to judge what is right, may be found within us, in our own frame and
constitution. This obligation is as universal as reason itself; for every one
that is endowed with this faculty, is, by the very nature of it, obliged to
exercise it in the pursuit of knowledge; especially of moral and religious
knowledge. All men are not obliged to study the mathematics, law and physic.
But all are obliged to acquaint themselves with their duty -- what they owe to
God, to their neighbor and themselves. If one man is to think and judge for
all the rest of the species, why was reason given to all? why was it not
confined to him alone who has a right to use it? In short, we may say with as
much propriety, that we are to see only with another's eyes, hear with
another's ears, speak with another's tongue, and walk with another's feet, and
neglect our own; as, that we are to think and judge and believe, with another's
understanding.

IT appears, then, that reason is no enemy to free inquiry, and private
judgment, in religious matters. And I shall now endeavor to show that the
Christian religion is no enemy to it; but, on the contrary, enjoins it upon us
as a duty.

OUR Lord Jesus Christ, the author and finisher of our faith, constantly
appealed to the senses, and to the reason of mankind, as the proper judges of
his miracles, divine mission and doctrine. He did not demand of men an implicit
and blind belief in himself, without offering matter of conviction to their
understandings; but put them upon examining in a sober rational way, whether he
was authorized from heaven, or were an impostor; and so, whether his doctrine
were of God, or whether he spoke of himself. He reasons with the Jews in my
text: he blames them for their blind attachment to the Scribes and Pharisees,
their spiritual guides; and for not judging for themselves in religious
matters. Our Lord, pretended (at least) to prove his divine mission to the
unprejudiced reason of mankind in a sober, argumentative way. In disputing with
the Jews, he appealed to their ancient writings whose divine authority they
acknowledged; and to the miracles which he wrought, in order to convince them
that he was the Messiah. This is evident from almost every page of the
evangelical history, notwithstanding what the disingenuous author of
Christianity not founded upon argument, has confidently asserted upon this
subject, taking advantage of what some weak Christians have advanced concerning
the nature and grounds of faith. Whether the arguments which our Lord used for
the conviction of the Jews, were conclusive or not, is a question which I am
not now concerned with. But it is plain that he considered them as being so,
requiring people to examine them, and to judge whether they were conclusive or
not. Barely proposing arguments to the consideration of another, is a
disclaiming of authority properly so called: for it implies, that the arguments
are to be judged of by the reason of him to whom they are proposed. I might
bring many passages from the Evangelists, to show that the method which our
Lord took to gain proselytes, was to reason them into faith. But I must content
myself with quoting one passage only to this purpose, for the present -- John
V. 31. and onward, If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true [i. e.
my testimony in my own favor -- my declaring myself to be the Messiah, ought
not to be depended upon as true, without farther evidence.] There is another
that bears witness of me -- Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness unto the
truth -- But I have greater witness than that of John; for the works that the
Father has given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me,
that the Father has sent me -- Search the scriptures, for in them ye think ye
have eternal life; and they are they which testify of me -- There is one that
accuses you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. For had ye believed Moses, ye would
have believed me. But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my
words? There cannot be a more explicit appeal than this, to the reason and
understandings of men, or a fairer invitation given them to examine and judge
for themselves. And this also shows that our Lord aimed at bringing men to
believe in him, only by dint of argument. And as our Lord performed his mighty
works with a design to beget in those that beheld them, a rational belief, a
belief resulting from proper evidence; so the Evangelists committed those facts
to writing, that they might have a like effect upon those that had not been
eyewitnesses of them -- These things are written that ye might believe that
Jesus is the Christ the Son of God; and that believing, ye might have life
through his name. John XX. 31.

THE apostles also constantly encouraged free inquiry, as it is natural for
honest undesigning men to do. It is for the interest of some to discourage it,
and to keep people muffled up in darkness and ignorance, that so they may
submit to their dictates with the more readiness and humility. Their craft is
in danger of being detected, and their doctrine, of being exploded, as soon as
people have so much presumption as to open their eyes. Free inquiry bodes ill
to the design which they are engaged in; for they are sensible it will not be
safe for themselves to be knaves any longer than others are fools. But he that
has nothing in view but the interest of truth and virtue, desires nothing more,
than that persons would give themselves the trouble of a free and impartial
examination. Now the apostles knowing the goodness of their cause, and
following the example of their divine Master, made it their practice to
encourage liberty and freedom of thought; never intimating, a most of their
pretended successors have done, that this is hazardous to men's souls.

IN the apostolic age there were many impostors and enthusiasts; false
pretenders to inspiration, as there are at present, and as there have been in
almost every age of the christian church. And for this reason the apostles
directed christians to examine the pretensions of all, that so they might
distinguish betwixt really inspired persons and deceivers -- Thus 1 John iv. 1.
Beloved, believe not every spirit; but try the spirits, whether they are of
God; for many false spirits are gone out into the world. No one, surely, will
be so absurd as to suppose this was a direction to try deceivers only; and not
true prophets and apostles. For this would suppose that they might be known one
from the other, without trying them at all: and then no examination of either
of them would be necessary. "Determine first; and then examine," is the
pleasant advice of some grave divines: But the apostles exhorts us to examine
all things, before we believe any thing. The Jews at Berea are celebrated, Acts
xvii. 10. and onwards for not believing the apostles themselves without
critically examining their doctrine, and comparing it with the writings of
Moses and the prophets: and in the same passage, an implicit censure at least,
is passed upon the Thessalonians, as being indolent, credulous, and too easy of
belief. The words of the historian are these, And the brethren -- sent away
Paul and Silas -- unto Berea; who coming there, went into the synagogue of the
Jews. These were more noble than those of Thessalonica; for they received the
word with all readiness of mind: and searched the scriptures daily whether
those things were so. By their receiving the word with all readiness of mind,
nothing more is here intended, than that they gave a ready and candid attention
to what Paul and Silas had to say: Afterward, like prudent and rational men,
they examined into the truth of it. And it follows immediately in the next
verse -- Therefore many of them believed -- A natural consequence of a free and
impartial inquiry into the grounds of the christian religion. I observed above,
that the Thessalonians are censured in this passage, for their credulity, and
not using suitable precaution in receiving christianity. And it is probable
that the apostle Paul had a view at this incurious and over credulous humor of
theirs, in his 1 Epistle to them, Chap. v. ver. 21. Prove (or examine) all
things, says he; hold fast that which is good. This advice was, indeed, proper
for all; but peculiarly so for those who were backward to examine, and forward
to believe, these being in the greatest danger of being seduced.

AGAIN, What besides free inquiry after truth and knowledge, does the apostle
intend, Phil. xix. 10? And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and
more in knowledge and in all judgment, that ye may approve things that are
excellent -- (Or as some understand these last words, that ye may try things
that differ, and are controverted.) To the same purpose are the Words of this
apostle, Ephesians. vi. 14, 15. That we be henceforth no more children, tossed to and
fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and
cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive: but speaking the truth
in love, etc. So. St. John cautions the elect lady and her children, against
seducers, and deceivers -- Many deceivers are entered into the world -- Look to
yourselves -- 9. John 7, 8. The apostle here alludes to those deceivers who
confessed not that Jesus Christ was come in the flesh. And in his first Epistle
he cautions those to whom he wrote, against another kind of deceivers, whose
doctrine is equally fatal, viz. those who taught that faith without works,
denominates a man righteous -- Little children, let no man deceive you: He that
does righteousness is righteous -- He that commits sin is of the devil -- 1
John iii. 7, 8. Thus also the apostle Paul, Ephesians. v. 5, 6. -- Ye know that no
whore monger, etc. has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of God.
Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of these things comes the
wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Do not all these exhortations
given to christians, to take care that no man deceive them, imply that they are
to examine and judge for themselves; and not to submit implicitly to the
dictates of any, even though they pretend to a commission from heaven? Unless
it be their right and duty to do thus, nothing can be more impertinent than
exhortations of this kind.

ALTHOUGH the apostle Paul were an inspired writer, yet he is far from putting
on those dogmatical airs which are now too common amongst those who do not
pretend to inspiration. He often condescends to make an appeal to the reason
and judgment of those to whom he writes, and invites them to examine what he
says. Thus 1 Cor. x. 15. I speak as to wise men; judge ye what I say. And so,
Chap. i. ver. 12. Judge in yourselves, is it comely, etc.

IN a controversy betwixt the jewish and gentile converts at Rome, the apostle
gave his own sense concerning the point in debate: he exhorted them to mutual
love and forbearance: and then, like a reasonable, catholic man, and a friend
to the rights of private judgment, he concludes -- Let every man be fully
persuaded in his own mind. Romans xvi. 5.

WHEN the jewish converts in Galatia (being still zealously attached to the law
of Moses) were for imposing certain opinions and practices upon the Gentiles,
this same apostle took the part of the latter; and even enjoined it upon them
to vindicate their religious and christian rights against all such
encroachments -- Stand fast, says he, in the liberty wherewith Christ has made
you free: (i. e. assert your freedom from the mosaic law, and all the old
jewish institutions) and be not again entangled with any yoke of bondage. Gal.
v. 1.
(i. e. stand up in defense of your christian liberty, not only against these
your judaizing brethren; but also against all others who shall attempt to
exercise any kind of spiritual tyranny over you.) So that it is not left to the
option of christians whether they will relinquish their natural liberty in
religious matters, or not; they are commanded to assert it. God has given us
abilities to judge even of ourselves what is right: and requires us to improve
them. He forbids us to call any man master upon earth. And as he has forbidden
us to submit implicitly to the dictates of any man; so he has also expressly
forbid all christians to assume or usurp any authority over their brethren. Ye
know, says our blessed Savior, that the princes of the Gentiles exercise
dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them: But
it shall not be so among you. But whosoever -- will be chief among you, let him
be your servant, even as the son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister. Matt. xx.
How does our Lord upbraid the Scribes and Pharisees, who sat in Moses's seat,
for assuming an unreasonable authority, and affecting more honor and
submission than was due to them? The Scribes and Pharisees -- love the
uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues, and greetings
in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi. But be not (...) called
Rabbi, for one is your master even Christ; and all ye are brethren. Matt. xxiii.
The first propagators of Christianity carefully observed this prohibition.
They were meek, humble and charitable. They claimed no dominion over the faith
of Christians, but were content with being helpers of their joy. 2 Cor. i. 24.
They preached not themselves to be the Lord or Lords; but Christ Jesus; and
themselves the servants of Christians for Jesus sake. 2. Cor. iv. 5. This was
the manner in which the holy apostles demeaned themselves in their office. But
since their day, Ecclesiastics have been for less humility and more power. The
style of servants is below their dignity: And they must be called of men Lords,
Reverend and Right Reverend Fathers in God, etc. Their fellow christians and
brethren must approach them upon the bended knee: Sovereign princes must think
themselves honored in having the liberty to kiss the toe of an old Monk, who
calls himself Christ's Vicar: And thus it is that the Pope imitates him who was
meek and lowly in heart; and who condescended to wash his disciples feet.

I hope it appears from what has been said, that both reason and scripture
oppose the claims of those arrogant men who love to lord it over God's
heritage; and had rather have dominion over our faith, than be helpers of our
joy: And that it is the duty of christians to assert their right of private
judgment in religious matters, in opposition to all that are for usurping
authority over them. I promised, in the next place, to consider the principal
objections against this doctrine. But I believe I need make no apology for
deferring this to another opportunity.

I shall, however, beg leave, from what has been said already, to look upon the
point as proved; and so to close with a few reflections suitable to the subject.

IT appears, then, that all who any ways discourage freedom of inquiry and
judgment in religious matters, are, so far forth as they are guilty of this,
encroachers upon the natural rights of mankind; that they set up their own
authority in opposition to that of almighty God; and that they are enemies to
truth, and the gospel of Jesus Christ. -- They are encroachers upon the natural
rights of mankind, because it is the natural right and privilege of every man
to make the best use he can of his own intellectual faculties -- They set up
their own authority in opposition to that of almighty God, because God has not
only given us liberty to examine and judge for ourselves; but expressly required
us to do it -- They are enemies to truth, and the gospel of Jesus Christ;
because free examination is the way to truth, and the gospel in particular,
gains ground the faster, the more its doctrines and evidences are examined. --
While other tyrants enslave the bodies of men, these throw their chains and
fetters upon the mind, which (as the Jews said of themselves) was born free;
and which ought not to be in bondage to any man: but only to the Father of
Spirits. If it be asked who these spiritual invaders are, it may be answered,
all in general who set themselves up to judge for their neighbors; All who are
for imposing their own opinions upon others: All who any ways distress and
afflict such as differ from them in their religious sentiments: All who make
use of any other weapons besides those of reason and argument, in order to
demolish error, and propagate truth. If a man has a right to judge for himself,
certainly no other has a right to judge for him: And to attempt it, is to
strike at the most valuable interest of a man considered as a reasonable
creature.

THOSE that are guilty of this crime in the highest degree, are such as inflict
capital punishments upon those that embrace opinions contrary to their own. The
heathens sometimes practiced this barbarity among themselves before
christianity made its appearance in the world. Afterward they united their
force against the doctrine of Christ, as the most dangerous heresy that had
ever been heard of: and butchered millions. Scarce had they laid down the
practice, when Christians filled with more than pagan cruelty, took it up, and
persecuted one another: Nor is it quite laid aside to this day in some parts of
Christendom. The mother of harlots, who has long made herself drunk with the
blood of the martyrs of Jesus, has still her inquisition; and is frequently
adding to the number of those whom St. John saw, in his vision, under the
altar, while they cried with a loud voice, saying -- How long, O Lord, holy and
true! do thou not judge, and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth!

IN a somewhat lower degree are they chargeable with the same crime, who punish
dissenters and non-subscribers, by fines and imprisonments, and by depriving
them of those civil privileges, emoluments and honors, which, as good subjects
and friends, to the state, they might justly expect. It is well known in what
church this inhuman practice has been carried to a prodigious length: and in
which it is not yet wholly laid aside. It is well that, not Jesus Christ, but
another Person, is said to be the supreme Head of this church. For it would be
absurd to suppose, that He who said his kingdom was not of this world, should
allow of any such practice among the members of that body of which He is the
Head.

AGAIN: Another practice akin to those mentioned above, and which has an
apparent tendency to hinder men from judging for themselves, is that of
Creed-making; setting up human tests of orthodoxy, instead of the infallible
word of God; and making other terms of christian communion than those
explicitly pointed out in the gospel. For any man, or any set of men whatever,
to do thus, is plainly to arrogate to themselves the right of judging for their
neighbors; and to deter people, as far as they are able, from seeing with
their own eyes, and judging even of themselves what is right. Indeed this
practice is not so criminal as that of persecuting and murdering men for their
religious sentiments: for any reasonable man had rather be the object of a
thousand anathema's than have his life, or even his temporal substance taken
from him. But still, if these faith-maker's I am speaking of are so
compassionate as only to give their brethren to the devil, for not submittting
to their doctrines and decrees, even this has some tendency to intimidate them;
especially such as are naturally of a weak and pusillanimous make. For when a
creed is begun, or eked out with several reverend, ecclesiastical curses; and
when it is confidently affirmed, that unless a man believe faithfully every
article contained in it, he shall without doubt perish everlastingly; it cannot
be supposed, that the generality of people should ever have the courage to
hesitate in the least concerning the truth of it, although it may be really an
affront to common sense, a medly of nonsense and contradiction. Nor are there
wanting innumerable instances of persons, who have, in this way, been first
frighted out of their senses, and then into the belief of the grossest
absurdities; and paying a sacred regard to them under the notion of their being
orthodox, soul-saving truths and divine mysteries -- such as are not to be
examined with reason, but to be believed and adored without it.

IT is indeed pretended that all these different methods of keeping men from
exercising their own rational faculties, are entered upon with a very pious and
godly design; and with an holy zeal to keep heresies out of the church; to
reclaim those that are unsound in the faith; and to preserve the christian
verity pure and undefiled. But the proud, domineering, unchristian spirit that
has been betrayed by these holy murderers, robbers, and faith-imposers, leaves
us but little room to think that they were actuated by a real concern for the
interests of christianity, and the salvation of men's souls. However, to let
alone their views and intentions which we have little or nothing to do with,
these practices themselves are unjustifiable: they are imperious and
tyrannical: and contrary to the spirit and doctrines of the gospel. They are an
infringement upon those rights of conscience, which ought to be sacred; they
have an apparent tendency to prevent all improvements in religious knowledge,
and to entail ignorance, error, and superstition upon future generations. What
improvements can we suppose would have been made in the several arts and
sciences comparable to the present, had the study of them been incumbered with
such restraints, and almost insuperable difficulties?

LET us suppose, for example, that some great Monarch a few centuries ago,
together with the Philosophers of that age, had interposed with their authority
in the sciences: Let us suppose that an oath of supremacy to the King, or
Queen, had been required; and devised in such terms as these -- That the King
or Queen for the time being, is the supreme Head of the society [or church] of
Philosophers -- Vested with all power to exercise all manner of philosophical
discipline: And other philosophical persons have no manner of jurisdiction
philosophical, but by and under the King's or Queen's most Excellent Majesty;
who has full power and authority to hear and determine all manner of causes
philosophical, and to reform and correct all philosophical errors, heresies,
enormities and abuses whatsoever, within his, or her realm. Let us suppose
farther that philosophical creeds and articles of faith had been composed, and
authoritatively issued out with certain minatory and damnatory clauses; and
that they had been registered among the other laws of the land. Let us suppose
farther, that philosophical courts had been erected, where heretics in
philosophy, and all non-subscribers to the philosophy by law established, were
to be arraigned, harassed, fined, whipped, hanged or burnt. I say, if such
measures as these had been entered upon a few centuries ago, must (...) not
suppose that they would have been very absurd and injurious? Must we not
suppose also, that they would have damped the greatest and most enterprizing
Genius's; and so have been a means of keeping the world in ignorance? Would not
this have prevented those valuable improvements in natural knowledge, which the
world is blessed with at present? Had such methods been taken seasonably, might
it not have been Heresy still, to think this earth a globe? to deny that the
sun revolves about us once every twenty-four hours? or to question the equality
of the sun and moon? And might not the orthodox philosophy at this day, have
possibly been that concerning the great cow and tortoise, etc? In short, we
cannot think of supporting and propagating the sciences, by dint of authority,
without smiling. And it is equally ridiculous to attempt to propagate religious
knowledge and the doctrines of the gospel, by authority. And every one that
pleases may easily see what attempts of this nature have usually issued in; and
what must necessarily be the effect of them, viz. ignorance and hypocrisy.
Error, as well as iniquity, may be established by a law. And when it is so, a
man must either subscribe to it, contrary to his sentiments; or seriously
embrace it for truth: A sad dilemma! when a man is thus forced to be a knave or
a fool! Mankind in general seem to be quite indolent enough, backward enough to
examine into moral and religious subjects, without those unnatural restraints
which are put upon them by the setting up of authority in matters of faith.
There are indeed some foolish and conceited men who take a pleasure in being
singular in their opinions; and who never suppose they think freely enough,
till they are run wild and mad; and have rejected every thing that others have
believed before. But these instances are not frequent. Men are generally too
prone to follow the multitude, to embrace implicitly the tenets of their
spiritual instructors, their forefathers, their good mothers and nurses; and
to fall in with the opinions of the rich and powerful, which is the road to
wealth and preferment. And there is really much more need of encouraging
freedom of thought, and an inquisitive turn of mind, by handsome gratuities;
than there is of keeping people in the old beaten track by the terror of penal
laws, gibbets, inquisitions, spiritual courts, and carnal curses. Whatever is
pretended, these compulsive methods were not those by which the truth as it is
in Jesus, was at first propagated and defended: neither can they be of any
service to the cause of truth and religion at present. A pecuniary mulct may
impoverish a man in this world; but it cannot make him rich in faith, and an
heir of the Kingdom -- The rack may torture his limbs; but it cannot draw out
the sting from a guilty conscience. -- A dark and filthy dungeon may throw us
into a mortal distemper; but it cannot bring light and health into our minds,
and make our souls prosper -- A burning faggot may set our bodies in a light
blaze; but it has no tendency to illuminate the understanding. To attempt to
dragoon men into sound orthodox Christians, is as unnatural and fruitless as to
attempt to dragoon them into good poets, physicians or mathematicians. A blow
with a club may fracture a man's skull; but I suppose he will not think and
reason the more clearly for that; though he may possibly believe the more
orthodoxly, according to the opinions of some. And upon this account it must be
confessed that those who make use of these methods to propagate their
sentiments, act very prudently: for their doctrines are generally such as are
much more readily embraced by a man after his brains are knocked out, than
while he continues in his senses, and of a sound mind.

I shall conclude with the words of the apostle Paul to Timothy, in which he
points out the method of defending and propagating the doctrines of the gospel
-- The servant of the Lord, says he, must not strive; but be gentle unto all
men; apt to teach; patient; in meekness, instructing those that oppose
themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging
of the truth.

SERMON IV. Objections considered.
LUKE XII. 54 -- 57. And he said also to the people, When ye see a cloud rise
out of the west, straightway ye say, There comes a shower; and so it is.
And when ye see the south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat; and it comes
to pass.
Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, and of the earth: but how
is it, that ye do not discern this time?
Yea, and why even of your selves judge ye not what is right?

HAVING, in the preceding discourse, proved the right and duty of free inquiry
and private judgment in matters of religion, by direct and plain arguments both
from reason and revelation, there was, perhaps, no occasion for my exercising
your patience any further, by entering upon a consideration of the objections
that have been raised against this Doctrine. For no objections can signify any
thing against a doctrine once proved true in fact: However, since some men may
think themselves ill used, unless their arguments are distinctly considered, I
shall devote the following hour to examine the principal objections against the
of the foregoing discourse, setting them in the strongest point of light I am
able. The spiritual tyrants and lordly bigots of the earth have indeed
triumphed gloriously, as though they had gained a mighty victory over freedom
of thought, their old and mortal enemy; and laid her bleeding and gasping at
their feet. But whether these are the triumphs of real heroes, or only the vain
gasconades and Te Deums of imaginary conquerors, will, perhaps, be easy to
determine, when we come to take a view of their weapons, and to see the manner
in which they have employed them.

I shall not have much regard to order and method in proposing the objections
now to be considered; but mention them just as they present themselves to my
mind. And, in the first place, it may be objected,

1. THAT God himself under the mosaic dispensation, required that idolaters,
and dissenters from the established church, should be punished with death. From
hence it may be argued, That uncontrouled liberty in religious matters ought
not to be allowed of; but the true church is obliged in duty to restrain and
correct infidels and schismatics; and all in general that she judges unfound
in the faith.

To this it may be answered,

1st. THAT we cannot argue from what was lawful under the jewish economy, to
what is lawful since that is abolished, and superseded by another so different
from it as the christian. There might be, and doubtless were, some peculiar
reasons for authorizing and enjoining such a discipline then, which do not take
place at present. This might be as peculiar to Judaism as circumcision, or the
sacrificing of beasts, etc. And in reality it does not any more follow from the
Jews being commanded to extirpate idolaters, that christians may destroy
heathens and heretics, than it does from Abraham's being commanded to
sacrifice his son, that all parents may and ought to sacrifice their children
now.

IT is to be remembered, that Judaism was at least as much a political as a
religious institution. The Jews had God for their immediate king and lawgiver,
both in church and state. Their civil and ecclesiastical polity were blended
together; and being derived from the same source, every violation of the law of
Moses might be considered and punished as an offense against the state, in a
greater or less degree: And idolatry being in these circumstances equivalent to
high treason, it is not strange that a capital punishment should be annexed to
it. But the case is much altered since the promulgation of the christian
religion. Christ's kingdom is not at all a kingdom of this world. It is wholly
a religious institution. The laws, the penalties, the rewards of it, are wholly
of a spiritual nature: And men are to be won over to it, and kept in it, only
by spiritual and moral means.

BUT 2dly, If the true church ought to punish such as she looks upon to be
erroneous, heretical or schismatical, then a war must immediately commence in
Christendom; and continue till all are destroyed, but one party: For each sect
thinks itself in the right; and that all the rest are tinctured with heresy:
This must certainly be the consequence of this maxim, that the right of using
violence and persecution is the prerogative of the true church; which one would
think sufficient to convince any reasonable man, that the maxim is false.
Besides, from whence comes this doctrine, that true orthodox christians have a
right to persecute heretics and unbelievers? (i. e. to be more wicked and
immoral than heretics and unbelievers?) The scripture, indeed, (and experience
very often) teaches us, that those who will live godly in Christ Jesus, must
suffer persecution; but not, that they must persecute others.

BUT perhaps it will be objected in the second place,

2. THAT our Lord himself required his apostles to use external force, in order
to bring men over to the true faith, if gentler methods failed of success. The
objection will be taken from the parable of the supper, Luke 14. When the
guests that were bidden, refused the invitation, the master of the feast is
represented as saying to his servant, ver. 23. Go out into the high ways and
hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled. Now as the
servant was commanded to compel the guests to come to the supper, so the
apostles were injoined to use external violence, if necessary, in order to
bring men over to a belief of the gospel; from whence it follows that men are
not left to their freedom in religious matters. The

1st THING I would observe with relation to this objection is, that great
caution is necessary in the application of parables and allegories, lest the
similitude should be carried farther than was originally intended. Nor is it by
any means safe to build such a doctrine, (or rather such a practice) as that of
compulsion in religious matters, but upon the most plain and express command.

2dly, THIS parable, at most, only authorizes the compelling of infidels to
embrace the gospel: And so it has nothing to do with the controversies amongst
the different sects of christians.

3dly, ALTHOUGH it should be allowed, that this parable injoined the inspired
apostles to compel men, by external violence, to embrace christianity, it will
not follow that uninspired men since, men who have no commission immediately
from heaven, have a right to do the same.

4thly, IT is to be observed, that according to the parable, the persons to be
compelled are (...) the same who had before obstinately rejected the kind
invitation given them; but such as had not yet been sent to. For when the
master sends out his servant a second time, to compel people to come in, it
follows -- For I say unto you that those men who were hidden, shall not taste
of my supper. So that even according to this parable, those who will not be
persuaded by gentle methods, are to be given over, and not to have any farther
means used with them. From whence it follows,

5thly, THAT none at all are to be compelled by external violence: for we
cannot suppose that force should be applied first of all; and before other
methods prove ineffectual, if at all.

6thly, EITHER the apostles did not understand this as a command to use
violence in propagating christianity, or they neglected to obey it; neither of
which can be supposed, had there really been such a command. They never
attempted to use force; but declared, on the contrary, that the weapons of
their warfare were not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of
strong holds, etc. 2 Cor. X. 4.

7thly, THAT this cannot be the sense of the parable, appears from hence, that
it is, in the nature of the thing, impossible to force men really to believe
the gospel, and become good christians, though one had more dragoons to employ
in this pious work, than Louis the XIVth sent to convert the Hugonots. Faith
and repentance are the work of reason and the spirit of God; and cannot be
wrought in a man by a cudgel, a sword, or a gallows.

8thly, WERE this in itself possible, how could twelve unarmed apostles, who
were allowed to carry only a staff with them in their journies, convert the
whole world by force of arms?

9thly, AND lastly; After all the flourish that has been made with this passage
by Roman Catholics, and popish Protestants, the word we render compel, as
often signifies a moral, as a physical compulsion. And the subject here spoken
of, necessarily determines it to such a signification in this place. It is as
if the master of the feast had said to his servant, Since the persons before
invited to my supper, [the Jews] refuse to come, go to others, [the Gentile
nations] and give them the same invitation: And use the greatest importunity
with them; reason with them, exhort and persuade them; use all rational methods
to convince them, and bring them in.

BUT I must proceed to another objection: And perhaps one may be urged in some
such manner as this --

3. IF every man is allowed to think and judge for himself, the consequence
will be that many will fall into erroneous and hurtful opinions. This doctrine
opens a door for heresies to enter into the church: it gives men a liberty to
trample upon all our creeds and confessions of faith; to depart from the
doctrines of their pious forefathers; and to despise their spiritual guides.
And what will this issue in, but the overthrow of all religion. To this
objection I would answer,

1st. THAT it does not follow from men's being at liberty to judge for
themselves, and to choose their own religion, that they are at liberty to judge
wrong, and to reject the true religion, let it be what it will. If they are
obliged to judge and choose, for themselves at all, they are obliged to judge
truly and justly, and to reject only what is wrong. The right of private
judgmen does not imply, that it is indifferent whether a man judges truly, or
not, any more than a man's right of disposing of his own property, implies that
he may as innocently squander it away in rioting and drunkenness, as pay his
debts with it, or appropriate it to charitable uses. As a man has not a right
to do what is wrong with his own substance, so neither has he any, to judge
wrong with his own understanding. He is under a moral obligation to reject
error, and to embrace truth, as far as he is able to detect the former, and to
discern the latter.

2dly, AS the right of private judgment, does not leave men at liberty to judge
wrong, and to embrace a false religion; so neither has the exercising that
right any tendency to mislead men, as the objection supposes. The tendency of
it is directly the contrary way. Free examination, weighing arguments for, and
against, with impartiality, is the way to find the truth. Who imagines that
free inquiry into philosophical subjects, has any tendency to lead men into a
wrong idea of the natural world? No one was ever so infatuated as to assert
this. And it is in all respects as improbable, that free enquiry into religious
subjects should lead us into wrong notions concerning the moral world. One
would think that a man who had received his religious principles upon mature
and deliberate consideration, and so had in his own mind rational arguments to
support them, could not have the least apprehension of their suffering any
thing by being thoroughly scanned and examined to the bottom. Error and
imposture fly from the light, like the owl and bat: But truth and honesty, like
the noble eagle, face to the sun. The cause of error and superstition may
suffer by a critical examination; its security is to lurk in the dark: But the
true religion flourishes the more, the more people exercise their right of
private judgment. This is apparent: And therefore it is no uncharitableness to
suppose, that all who are backward to have their doctrines called in question,
and to stand a fair trial at the bar of impartial reason, have at least some
secret suspicion in their own minds, that they will not stand the test, and
come forth as gold when it is tried, but be found no better than dross. We pay
but a bad compliment to our religion, when we cry out that it is in danger, if
men are left to the free exercise of their own rational faculties in judging of
it. A man that is conscious his cause at court is good, chooses it should be
tried by the most severe and critical eye. But he that either knows, or
suspects, he has a dirty one, had much rather that people would spare
themselves the trouble of examining into its merits, and take his own word for
the goodness of it. But

3dly, As to the lamentable havoc which the objection supposes will be made
amongst our creeds and formularies, if the doctrine of free inquiry should
prevail; this is, doubtless, a very natural consequence: for this would
probably prove fatal, at least to many articles contained in them. For it is
plain that many of them are stuffed with the most ridiculous jargon, and are as
contrary to scripture, as they are to common sense. But this, instead of being
an objection against free inquiry, is one of the strongest arguments for it. If
these creeds and formularies were true, agreeable to reason and revelation, the
more thoroughly they are examined the better; for then their truth would
appear: But if they are false, it is still best they should be examined, in
order to their being exploded. It is no matter how old, or how new they are.
Truth does not die with age, and then revive again, as is fabled of the
phaenix: it flourishes in immortal youth. Error may indeed become venerable and
gray headed with length of time: but a falsehood of a thousand years standing,
remains as much a falsehood as ever, although it may have been consecrated by
the church, and transmitted to posterity in a creed. Whatever truths it may
have had to keep it company; and however it may have been preserved amidst the
storms that have beat upon the church, it is only like one of Noah's unclean
beasts preserved in the ark, amongst those of a pure, and more useful nature.
There is nothing more foolish and superstitious than a veneration for ancient
creeds and doctrines, as such; and nothing more unworthy a reasonable creature,
than to value principles by their age, as some do their wines. But, indeed,
this is as common as it is ridiculous. With many people, "Antiquity! Antiquity!
Antiquity!" is the cry: And, Who will be so hardy as to dispute the truth of
what was believed a thousand years ago? Just as if what was false formerly,
were not so still; but might be ripened and refined by age into a doctrine of
grace. Most things are, indeed, changed by time. Time makes the child a man:
Time makes the ignorant wise: Time often turns a friend into a foe, and a foe
into a friend: The fashion of the world passes away by time: And time shall
change the whole face of nature. But truth, like the Father of lights, is
without variableness, or shadow of turning.

To proceed,

4thly, IT is supposed in the last mentioned objection, that freedom of inquiry
will naturally bring our spiritual guides into contempt, and weaken their
authority. To this I reply, That it cannot possibly be of any disadvantage to
the sober and rational part of the clergy; but has a tendency to make them more
esteemed. But as to the vain and proud; the ignorant and assuming; the
enthusiastic and superstitious; it has doubtless a natural tendency to bring
these into contempt: And the sooner the better, that so they may not have so
much power to do mischief. These are the persons that are generally the most
averse to people's seeing and judging for themselves: And the reason why they
are so, is too apparent to need mentioning. But

5thly, AND lastly, Upon supposition that the cause of truth and real religion,
might suffer in some respects, by persons exercising their right of private
judgment; yet this is no just reason for denying them such a liberty. This
right is given them by God and nature, and the gospel of Christ: And no man has
a right to deprive another of it, under a notion that he will make an ill use
of it, and fall into erroneous opinions. We may as well pick our neighbor's
pocket, for fear he should spend his money in debauchery, as take from him his
right of judging for himself, and choosing his religion, for fear he should
judge amiss and abuse his liberty.

BUT I must hasten to another objection, which is frequently urged with a great
deal of confidence, and very little reason. It is near akin to that last
mentioned; and may be put into some such form as this,

4. IF all are left at liberty to choose their own religion, and to enjoy it
unmolested, we shall have innumerable sects springing up amongst us; which
tends to confusion, and destroys the peace and unity of the church. It is
therefore expedient that the governors of the church should injoin upon all,
the belief of certain articles of faith, and the observation of certain modes
and rites of worship. Without some common rule of faith, worship and
discipline, beyond what the scriptures contain, there can be no sufficient bond
of union amongst christians. And so the church must inevitably be crumbled to
pieces; whereas there ought to be no schism in that spiritual body.

WITH relation to this objection I would observe,

1st. THAT if any rule of faith, worship and discipline, besides that which our
Savior and his apostles have left us, be necessary in order to the peace and
good government of the church, then the church had no peace and was not well
governed during the apostolic age. For christians had then no common rule of
faith, worship and discipline besides that which they received from our Lord
himself, or his apostles, who were under the extraordinary influence and
direction of his spirit. Which rule is transmitted to us in the writings of the
new testament; and is sufficient now, for the regulation of the church, if it
was then. That this was sufficient then, is not denied; and therefore it cannot
be deficient at present. But

2dly, IF any farther regulations had been necessary in order to preserve the
peace and unity of the church, it is strange that neither our blessed Savior,
who loved the church and gave himself for it, nor the apostles, who lived and
died in the service of the church, should have taken more care to provide for
its peace and prosperity. Can we suppose that they did their work to the
halves, and left others to finish and perfect it?

3dly, WHO gave the governors of the church, any authority in matters of faith,
worship and discipline? Do we find one word of it in scripture? No. The church
of Christ, as such, has no legislator besides Christ himself, whom the Father
has made head over all things to the church. And whatever church that be, whose
rulers have any power of legislation, so far forth it is not the church of
Christ. For Christ equally forbids all his disciples to assume authority over
their brethren; and to submit to any who shall arrogate to themselves any
authority in matters of a religious concern.

4thly, and lastly, As no order of men has any authority to enjoin the belief
of any articles of faith; or the use of any modes of worship, not expressly and
explicitly pointed out in the scriptures; so neither has the enjoining any
such, a tendency to preserve the peace and harmony of the church; but directly
the contrary. The confusion and disorder that have hitherto been in the church,
have not arisen from christians exercising their own judgment, and worshipping
God according to their consciences; (though in a manner somewhat different from
others) but from the pride and insolence of those who deny their christian
brethren this liberty; and who undertake to prescribe authoritatively to others
what they shall believe, and how they shall worship. Were it not for the
turbulent, domineering spirit of some Ecclesiastics, who desire more power
than Christ saw sit to entrust them with, there would be but little of that
wrangling and discord which have hitherto disturbed the peace of the church.
The divisions and contentions that have hitherto happened, and still subsist in
the christian church, are all, in a manner, owing to the unchristian temper and
conduct of those who could not content themselves with scripture orthodoxy,
with the simple and spiritual worship of the Father, enjoined by our Savior,
and with the platform of church discipline contained in the new testament; but
must go to coining new articles of faith, new modes and rites of worship,
making new canons, and prescribing new rules for the regulation of the church.
It is about these comparatively novel inventions, that the governors and
fathers of the church, (as some affect to call them) have generally been more
warm and zealous, than about an holy and godly life. They have ordinarily given
pretty good quarter to the most vicious and debauched of men, provided their
own authority was acknowledged; their own peculiar whimsies embraced; and their
decent (or rather ridiculous) forms and ceremonies were religiously observed.
But the most peaceable, sober and virtuous persons, who would not submit to
their tyrannical yoke, have all along been treated with contempt and
inhumanity, as being heretics, scismaticks, etc. And all this, perhaps only
for not practicing such rites, as have no more relation to christianity than
telling beeds, or cracking the fingers; and for not believing such doctrines as
have no more to do with the gospel of Jesus Christ, than the idle stories of
bell and the dragon, or Tobit and his dog. Here is the true source of religious
discord. Had Ecclesiastics, instead of lording it our God's heritage, and
setting up their own authority in the room of Christ's, put on the meekness and
gentleness of Christ; and set a better example to the flock; had they
endeavored to remove all stumbling blocks out of the way, instead of insisting
upon indifferent things as necessary terms of christian communion; had they
taught and practiced the weightier matters of law, instead of spending their
zeal upon trifles; had they taught mutual forbearance and charity, instead of
fomenting a furious party spirit, and exciting ignorant bigots to rail at sober
peaceable christians; had they done thus, the peace and harmony of the church
might have been very well preserved, without creeds and formularies, or an
exact uniformity in faith and worship. Our blessed Savior and his apostles, it
is plain, have left matters so that there may be a considerable latitude and
difference in the sentiments of good christians, and in the manner of their
worship. But His ambassadors, and their successors, it seems, have found out
that this is a great defect. Accordingly they undertake to supply it, under the
notion of preserving the peace of the church. And this is what has hitherto
been, and must continue to be, the cause of angry debates and endless
contentions; a means of dividing the church, in stead of uniting it; and of
inspiring christians with mutual rage, instead of mutual love and brotherly
affection.

IT may be objected, in the fifth place,

5. THAT the doctrine of private judgment is inconsistent with that of a
standing ministry in the christian church, appointed by Christ to instruct
people in religious matters. An order of men was divinely instituted to do the
office of instructors, or teachers in the church: Consequently there must be
others whose duty it is to learn of them, and not to pretend to a right of
judging for themselves. It is incumbent upon the Laiety to go to their
spiritual guides; and to receive their instructions with humility and
reverence, without pretending to dispute the truth of what they assert in the
name of the Lord. This, we know, is the manner in which many express themselves
upon this subject. And the positive, dogmatical air with which most of our
pulpit-discourses are delivered is a sufficient proof, that these sentiments
are adopted by the generality of those that style themselves the ambassadors of
Jesus Christ. But to this objection it may be answered in the first place,

1st. THAT, allowing there is somewhere in the christian church, a set of Men
whose office it is to teach authoritatively, and by divine right, still people
must judge for themselves who these men are. Almost all public teachers of
religion pretend a divine right to be so. But they do not all teach the same
doctrines. How then shall we know whom to choose for our spiritual instructor,
without examining into, and judging upon, the claims of those who demand our
attention, and the direction of our understandings and consciences? But

2ly. SUPPOSING we have found who these persons are, to whom this authority is
given, it does not follow that they are to be implicitly believed in every
thing they say, or even in any thing. No man is to be believed implicitly,
unless he is infallible: but infallibility is not necessarily connected with a
divine right to teach. Although it should be allowed, that kings reign by
divine right, in the highest sense pleaded for by the advocates for passive
obedience and non-resistence, still it is possible that they may make an ill
use of their power; command things expressly forbidden by God, and forbid what
God has injoined. In either of these cases, it will be allowed that they have
no title to the active obedience of their subjects. So also, he that has a
divine right to instruct others in religion, may possibly speak false, either
ignorantly or with design: And if he does so, no one will be so extravagant as
to say, that he ought to be believed. God has given him a right to teach; but
it is only to teach truth; if, therefore, he teaches for doctrines the
commandments of men, and lies, for the gospel of Christ, he exceeds his
commission; and has no more right to demand our assent, than any other liar, or
deceiver who is unconsecrated. So that let us carry our idea of the authority
of christian teachers ever so high, yet if we stop short of infallibity, we are
in reason obliged to examine all that they say, and either to receive or reject
it, as evidence of its truth does, or does not appear. Even the apostles
themselves (who were divinely authorized teachers in a much higher and more
proper sense than any set of men can pretend to be at this day) never pretended
to such a right of dictating to others what they should believe and do, as
interfered with the right of private judgment. Christian teachers in after ages
are (or at least ought to be) only commentators upon the scriptures: and we
cannot suppose their commentaries have greater weight and authority than the
text itself.

A man of superior knowledge and integrity may be of great advantage in a
christian society, by helping his brethren and neighbors to a right
understanding of the scriptures, although he be not infallible, and although
nothing he advances is to be received for truth without examination and proof.
We have authorized professors and teachers of law, physic, philosophy, etc. who
are doubtless helpful to such as devote themselves to the study of these
sciences. But who ever imagined that the end of their institution was
authoritatively to dictate what is true in their respective provinces, in such
a sense as to preclude examination; and to render it unnecessary for their
pupils and auditors to inquire into the foundation of what they assert? This is
so far from being the case, that it is confessed their chief business is to open
and enlarge the minds of their scholars; to propose reasons and arguments to
their understandings, and to endeavor to make them apprehend their force; and
in this way to bring them acquainted with the sciences to which they
respectively apply themselves. A mathematician would think his pupil had made
but a small proficiency, if he only believed upon authority, all the
propositions in Euclid, and other books of the same kind, without seeing what
principles they were grounded upon, or being able to demonstrate them himself.
And as the business of an instructor is not to enforce certain dogma's purely
by dint of authority; so the business of a learner is not to receive for truth
whatever his instructor in any science advances as such; but to exercise his
own intellectual powers, and to enter into the reasons and grounds of what is
taught, and to receive nothing without evidence. No one imagines that a
person's exercising his own understanding in this manner, is inconsistent with
the notion of his having somebody to lead and instruct him in any branch of
natural knowledge. And the case is much the same in morals and religion. A
man's being an authorized (if you please, a divinely authorized) instructor in
religious matters, is no ways inconsistent with the right of private judgment
in others. Indeed if they reject the truth when it is sufficiently proved, they
do it at their peril; and that, let it be offered by whom it will. But still
all are left at as much liberty to examine and judge for themselves, as if
there were no public teachers at all.

I proceed now to the sixth, and last objection I shall have time to consider.
The objection I intend may be put into some such form as this --

6. ALTHOUGH men may be at liberty to judge for themselves, and to choose their
own religion, when the civil magistrate does not interpose with his authority;
yet when articles of faith have once received a royal sanction; and a
particular religion is established by the laws of the land; then certainly we
are bound to dismiss all our former scruples of conscience, and to submit to
the religion of the state. For the apostle has told us expressly, That the
powers that be, are ordained of God, that he that resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God, and shall receive to himself damnation.

With respect to this objection, I would beg leave to query in the first place,
whether christians are bound in conscience to believe and conform to that
religion, whatever it be, which is established by law, in the countries where
they respectively live? This is a plain question: and they either are, or are
not so obliged. There is no medium. If they are not so obliged, but only in
case they apprehend the established religion is agreeable to the word and will
of God, this supposes a right of private judgment, and so gives up the whole
point in debate. But on the other hand, if they are bound in conscience to
conform in the manner before expressed, from hence it follows, that he that
lives in Scotland is bound in conscience to be a Presbyterian; he that lives in
England to be an Episcopalian; he that lives in Italy, France, Spain or
Portugal to be a Roman Catholic; he that lives in Constantinople must be a
Mohammedan; and he that lives in a Heathen country, must conscientiously comply
with all the idolatrous rites that are injoined by the civil authority; and so
be an Heathen in order to obey the gospel-precept concerning submission to
lawful authority. Moreover, upon this supposition, it follows that a traveller
who has occasion to pass through all those different countries, must change his
religion with his climate. He must be successively a Presbyterian,
Episcopalian, Papist, Mussulman, and a Heathen; and then be a good orthodox
believer when he comes into Christendom again. These consequences are
unavoidable upon supposition that the subject ought universally to embrace the
religion of the supreme magistrate. And some men will not be shocked at these
consequences; for nothing pleases them better than to change their religion as
often as they can with convenience and profit; oaths and subscriptions are,
with them, of no signification; if they swear to their own hurt, it is but to
change. They are governed by the fashion in their religion, as much as they are
in the cut of their clothes; they have none but a state conscience; and either
rail or smile at those who are so whimsical and superstitious as to pretend to
have any other. What they have to do in order to know the true religion, is not
to inquire into the nature of things, and the infallible oracles of God, but to
search the Codes and Registers and Law Books in the country where they live.
However it is to be hoped that some others do not trifle with their Maker in
this manner; but think it of some importance to know the will of God; and to
obey it conscientiously, whatever may be the religion by law established. Is it
not possible for the command of the civil magistrate to interfere and clash
with the laws of God? No man will pretend to deny this. Whose authority, then
is to be regarded, that of the King, or that of the Monarch of the universe,
the King of Kings and Lord of Lords? Will any man say it is not our business as
men, and especially as christians, to judge whether the injunctions of the
civil magistrate may be complied with consistently with our allegiance and
loyalty to the supreme Majesty of heaven and earth? And if they cannot, will
any one make it a serious question, whether it is better to obey God or man? But

2dly. I would humbly inquire how any civil majestrate came by any authority at
all in religious matters; and who gave him this authority? Has the supreme
magistrate of every nation, as such, a right to make a religion for his
subjects? No. For then a heathen magistrate, would have a right to enjoin
idolatry and paganism; and to punish all christians that came within his
territories, if they would not conform. Does the gospel of Christ give the
christian magistrate authority in matters of faith and worship? No. It says not
a word about any such thing. But

3dly. AND lastly here, It is evident beyond all dispute, that the apostle in
injoining obedience to the civil magistrate, had no thought of injoining
obedience to him in religious matters. For all the supreme magistrates then in
the world were Pagan; and idolatry was the religion by law established. And
certainly we cannot suppose that the apostles could injoin it as a christian
duty to embrace the established religion, when that was directly opposite to
Christianity. To have threatened damnation to those who disobeyed in this case,
would have been to threaten damnation to themselves, and to denounce an
anathema against all the christians in the world, and even against Jesus Christ
himself; for these were all dissenters from the established religion; and
thousands gloriously suffered martyrdom, for refusing to comply with the
religion of the state, and for asserting that right of private judgment which
we are now endeavoring to defend.

ACCORDING to St. Paul, the magistrate is ordained of God for a terror to evil
doers; and for a praise to them that do well. His office is to preserve the
liberties and natural rights of his subjects, one of the most important of
which rights is that of private judgment, and an unmolested enjoyment of a
man's own religion, let it be what it will, provided he is a peaceable subject,
and a good member of society. These and such like are the ends for which,
according to scripture, the magistrate is ordained of God, and not to make a
religion for his subjects. This would be to invade, and incroach upon, those
natural rights of his subjects, which it is his business to preserve
inviolable. As the Jews said occasionally to Pilate, We have no king but
Caesar; so christians, as such, may say, We have no king but Jesus Christ: And
they are traitors to him their lawful sovereign if they swear allegiance to any
other as the lord of their faith, and the director of their religious conduct.
And indeed the very mention of articles of faith established by law, is as
great a solecism as mathematics established by law; and deserves a worse name
than I choose to give in this place.

THUS I have endeavored with all possible brevity and plainness to answer the
most material objections against freedom of thought, and the rights of
conscience in religious concerns. I have aimed at provoking no sect of
christians whatever; nor at pleasing any; but have spoken my sentiments, such
as they are, with the honest simplicity that I think becomes a christian: And
with such freedom as I apprehend is agreeable to the cause I have been
attempting to defend; the cause of religious liberty; that liberty which God
and the gospel of his Son have granted to us; that liberty, for the sake of
which our pious forefathers forsook their native land, where they had a goodly
heritage, and sought a safe retreat in this western world, a wilderness
inhabited by savage beasts and more savage men; though both were less savage
than some of those episcopal blood-thirsty tyrants from whose rage they fled.
This is a cause of no less importance even to the present happiness of human
society, than that of civil liberty, in opposition to arbitrary power. And here
I beg leave to use the words of a truly catholic prelate of the church of
England -- To liberty and property, says he, I add the free exercise of
religion as necessary to the happiness of a governed society: because as there
is no tyranny so odious to God, as tyranny over the conscience; so is there no
slavery so uneasy and ignominious, as a forced religion, or a worship imposed
upon -- men by the fear or application of outward inconveniences: besides that
nothing promotes the flourishing condition of a nation more than the indulgence
of this freedom to all whose principles are not manifestly inconsistent with
the public safety. Thus the bishop of Winchester, the noted scourge of civil
and ecclesiastical tyranny.

I shall now close with a few words by way of application. And

1st LET us all stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free;
and not suffer ourselves to be entangled with any yoke of bondage. If we have
submitted to the yoke hitherto, and ingloriously subjected ourselves to any
human impositions in religious matters; it is better to throw off the yoke even
now, than to let it gall us all our lifetime: It is not yet too late to assert
our liberty, and free ourselves from an ignominous slavery to the dictates of
men.

LET us take pains to find out the truth, and after we are settled in our
judgment concerning any religious tenet or practice, adhere to it with
constancy of mind, till convinced of our error in a rational way. Let us
despise the frowns and censures of those vain conceited men who set themselves
up for the oracles of truth and the standard of orthodoxy; and then call their
neighbors hard names -- We have not only a right to think for ourselves in
matters of religion, but to act for ourselves also. Nor has any man whatever,
whether of a civil or sacred Character, any authority to control us, unless it
be by the gentle methods of argument and persuasion. To Christ alone, the
supreme and only head of the christian church, and the final judge of mankind;
to him alone we are accountable for not believing his doctrines, and obeying
his commandments, as such. And whosoever attempts to restrain or control us,
takes it upon him to rule another man's servant, forgetting that he also is a
man under authority; and must hereafter stand or fall by a sentence from the
same mouth with ourselves.

DID I say, we have a right to judge and act for ourselves? I now add -- it is
our indispensible duty to do it. This is a right which we cannot relinquish, or
neglect to exercise, if we would, without being highly culpable; for it is
absolutely unalienable in its own nature. We may dispose of our temporal
substance if we please; but God and nature and the gospel of Christ injoin it
upon us a duty to maintain the right of private judgment, and to worship God
according to our consciences, as much as they injoin us to give an alms to the
poor, to love God and our neighbor, and practice universal righteousness: and
we may as well talk of giving up our right to the latter, as the former. They
are all duties, and not rights simply; duties equally founded in the reason of
things; duties equally commanded by the same God; duties equally injoined by
the same Lord; duties equally required in the same gospel. And a neglect of the
duty of private judgment may possibly be attended with worse consequences to
ourselves and others than the neglect of almost any other. For he that does not
examine for himself what is true and right, acts entirely in the dark, and so
may run into the most irregular and destructive practices that can be conceived
of, just as his weak or wicked guides are pleased to prompt him. He is fit only
for a tool to the devil and his emissaries: and may flatter himself that he is
doing God good service, while he is imbrueing his hands in the blood of the
innocent, and persecuting the church of Christ.

But

2ly. AND to conclude, while we are asserting our own liberty and christian
rights, let us be consistent and uniform; and not attempt to incroach upon the
rights of others. They have the same right to judge for themselves and to choose
their own religion, with ourselves. And nothing is more incongruous than for an
advocate for liberty, to tyrannize over his neighbors. We have all liberty to
think and act for ourselves in things of a religious concern; and we ought to
be content with that, without desiring a liberty to oppress and grieve others.
However we have some ignorant railing zealots amongst us, fired with a furious
party spirit, who are not satisfied that they enjoy their own liberty, but
mourn that their neighbors enjoy the same, and that they have it not in their
power to afflict them for their religious sentiments. They groan under the
righteous act of toleration, as much as our fathers groaned under the
unrighteous one of uniformity. However, through mercy, we have but a few men of
this stamp amongst us; and those are such ignorant and despicable creatures,
that they are more proper objects of pity, than of anger. My brethren, God
forbid that we should discover any thing of this same unchristian temper; or
begrutch others the enjoyment of those rights which we ourselves esteem so
dear, sacred and valuable. Let us, as much as in us lies, live peaceably with
all men; but suffer none to lord it over our consciences. Let us avoid a
contracted, censorious spirit in ourselves, and pity and despise it in others.
Let us be courteous and friendly to all men of what denomination soever they
be; and how much soever their religious principles may differ from our own. If
we think them erroneous, let us not rail at them, but reason with them in the
spirit of meekness. Let us use no methods but those of sober argument and kind
persuasion, in order to bring men over to a belief and practice of the truth as
it is in Jesus: and let us scorn those who are for using any other methods with
us. God grant that how different soever our sentiments are, we may be united in
love and charity; and that christians of all persuasions, and all churches, may
live and behave in such a manner, as to meet at last above: and join the
general assembly and church of the firstborn which are written in heaven. Amen.

SERMON V. On the Love of God.
MATTHEW XXII. 37 -- 41. JESUS said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.
This is the first and great commandment.
And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.

THAT which renders it a matter of the highest importance to examine with
freedom into moral and religious subjects, is not so much the advantage simply
of knowing what is true and right, as the necessity of this in order to true
and right action. It is scarce of any importance to us to gain a speculative
knowledge of true religion, but as this has relation to practice; and may teach
us what temper of mind toward our Creator, and one another, we ought to
cultivate; and what an external conduct we ought to adorn our lives with, in
order to answer the end of our being; in order to our filling up our place in
the creation, and acting our part well in the great drama of the world. This is
the view which ought to accompany all our inquiries into religious subjects. If
we are sollicitous only about knowing what is true and right, and terminate our
desires in such knowledge, we pursue as an end what ought to be looked upon
only a means to somewhat farther and beyond, viz. such a conduct as may render
us acceptable to our creator, and lay the foundation for rational happiness
here and hereafter. Knowledge can hardly be said to be valuable for its own
sake, but only as it may be improved to good and excellent purposes: Nor is it
eventually advantageous to us, any farther than we conform ourselves to truth
and right in our behavior.

FOR what end does the mariner study the art of navigation? Not, surely, for
this only or chiefly, that he may please and amuse himself with the theory of
it: but rather, that he may be able to steer his course aright through the
ocean, and arrive safe at length at the port for which he is bound. Without
applying his knowledge in this way, all the advantage it will be to him, is
that of being shipwrecked with his eyes open, while others run upon ruin
blindfold, and purely through ignorance. -- We also are mariners; bound to
another country, to another world. We sail at present upon a boisterous stormy
ocean, in which we are in danger of suffering shipwreck. For the moral world,
as well as the natural, has its rocks and whirlpools; its scylla and carybdis,
and a thousand enchanting sirens. To know the middle and safe way, will not
secure us, unless we keep in it, and avoid the danger on either hand. And to be
castaways through our own negligence, while we know the course we should steer,
instead of diminishing, will augment our sorrow. Religious knowledge applied to
its true ends and purposes, is the only knowledge that can be finally
profitable and gainful; for, to use the words of St. James with a little
variation, as the body without the spirit is dead, so knowledge without
practice, is dead also: And it is the voice of reason as well as of revelation,
That the servant that knows his Lord's will, and does it not, shall be beaten
with many stripes. What, then, has our Lord declared to us to be his will? And
what does he require of us? One of the most comprehensive accounts of our duty
toward our Maker, and each other, is contained in the words which I have
chosen for the subject of the present discourse. They are the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ to a person whom the historian styles a lawyer, in answer to an
important question, but proposed by him, perhaps, with no very good intention.
The question to be resolved was this -- Which is the great commandment in the
law? And our Lord determines it in this manner -- Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is
the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self. On these two commandments hang all the law and
the prophets. In discoursing upon these words I shall inquire I. INTO the
nature and obligation of the two duties here mentioned -- The love of God, and
of our neighbor. II. IN what sense, and upon what account it is said, that to
love God, is the first and great commandment. III. WHAT our Lord intends by the
assertion, That on these two commandments, viz. the love of God and of our
neighbor, hang all the law and the prophets. IV. AND lastly, I shall endeavor
to show, that these two commandments have the same place and pre-eminence under
the gospel dispensation, which they had under the legal: Or, that all the
Gospel of Jesus Christ hangs on these two commandments, in the same sense in
which all the law and (...) ^^^phets did.


I. THEN, let us inquire distinctly into the nature and obligation of the two
duties here mentioned; the first of which is expressed thus, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind.

WE know that in scripture language and indeed in common discourse, it is usual
for one duty or virtue to stand for all the rest. A righteous, a godly, a
merciful a just, or an upright man, often signifies a good man in general. And
so, when we are commanded to love or fear God, or to work righteousness, the
meaning is not that we should practice only the particular duty mentioned, as
distinguished from others; but often, at least, that we should become good men
in general, and walk in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord
blameless. And this is the sense which is sometimes put upon the precept now
under consideration. However it seems plain, that this cannot be the true
intention of it. For were it to be understood in this latitude, as injoining
obedience to the commandments in general, it would include in it the love of
our neighbor, which is expressly distinguished, in this place, from the love of
God. Here is plainly a comparison made betwixt two commandments, one of which
is said to be the first and great commandment, and the other to be like unto
it. This, therefore, which is styled the first, must be altogether distinct
from that with which it is compared. Love is, indeed, the duty injoined in
both; but the object of the first, is our Creator only; of the latter, only our
fellow creatures. This precept, therefore, does not include any of the duties
of the second table of the moral law, as they are commonly called. The most it
injoins, is, all the duties of the first table, as distinguished from those of
the second. But, if I mistake not, this command still admits, and requires a
farther limitation. It injoins certain dispositions and affections of the
heart, toward God, as distinguished from all external acts of devotion and
religion; such as praying, offering sacrifices, fasting, observing sabbaths and
ordinances, etc. The manner in which the precept is expressed, seems to show,
that the duty it injoins is wholly internal -- Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart; i. e. sincerely and unfeignedly -- and with all thy soul --
in the exercise of thy understanding, and rational faculties -- and with all
thy mind -- freely, voluntarily, without reluctance or constraint. These
expressions seem to relate wholly to the mind. And that which determines this
to be the true intention of the command, is what we find in the parallel place
in another Evangelist. St. Mark relates the story of a person's coming to our
Savior with the same question which is here answered; and the answer to it is
in effect the same. Upon which the Scribe (as he is called in St. Mark) replied
thus -- Master, thou have said the truth; for there is one God; and to love him
with all the heart -- is more than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices --
From this reply of the Scribe, it appears, that in proposing his question just
before, he had a particular eye to the external services required under the
Law, compared with an inward regard to God, and sincere benevolence to mankind:
And that he accordingly understood our Lord in his answer, as making a
distinction and comparison, not only betwixt the duties of the first and second
table; but also, betwixt the several duties of the first table; and preferring
the internal love and reverence of God, to all burnt offerings and sacrifices;
and consequently, to all external acts of piety and devotion, as injoined in
the ceremonial law. This is plainly the sense of the Scribe; and it is equally
evident that our Lord approved his sense: For it follows immediately in the
next verse -- And when Jesus saw that he answered discretely, he said unto him,
Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. I shall, therefore, take it for
granted, or rather proved, That the precept which our Lord calls the first and
great commandment, is distinguished not only from all the duties of the second
table, but likewise from many of the first; particularly, from all external
acts of devotion; from all rites and ceremonies and legal institutions; and in
short from all duties whatever, besides those internal ones of the heart and
affections; and of which God is the only and the immediate object. The duty
here required, is wholly a spiritual sacrifice; and the heart is the only altar
upon which it is to be offered. Accordingly, in the following discourse, we
shall have no concern with any thing besides the inward sentiments of the
heart; the dispositions and sallies of the soul toward its Creator, the Father
of spirits. But let none think I am going to inculcate enthusiasm, because I
speak of the religion and devotion of the heart. I propose to speak of nothing
but what has its foundation in scripture, and the nature of things: Nor will
any enthusiasm be encouraged, besides that which sober reason requires.

WHAT then is it to love the Lord our God, in the sense of the text? Or wherein
does this duty consist? I answer in general, That it consists in exercising
those internal regards toward our Maker, which the perfections of his nature,
and our relation to him require. And here I shall not spend time to prove, but
take it for granted, That God is infinite in power, knowledge and goodness; --
That he is able to perform whatever he pleases; -- That he knows universally
what is wisest and best; -- And that the moral rectitude of his nature is such,
that his will and actions are always conformable to truth and right: -- That as
he created all things, so he constantly upholds them, and governs them with
perfect wisdom and equity, accommodating and attempering his laws to the common
good of his creatures -- That as he is the father of all, so his government is
paternal, free from all unnecessary rigor; -- uniform and steady, in opposition
to all capriciousness and arbitrary proceedings; And finally, in the words of
the Psalmist, That he is good to all, and his tender mercies, over all his
works.

IT is sufficient to our present purpose, just to have hinted in this general
way at the character and perfections of God: For it being supposed that he is
really such a Being, it will not, perhaps, be very difficult to point out the
principal of those movements of mind, and internal regards, which are due to
him: and so to ascertain the nature of the duty under consideration. And I
think the various things included in this important and comprehensive duty of
loving God, may not unfitly be reduced to the following heads -- Love, in a
strict restrained sense -- Gratitude -- Desire of the divine approbation, and
delight in the consciousness of it -- Trust in, and dependence upon God --
Absolute resignation of heart to his will -- And lastly, Joy in the
consideration of our filial relation to him.

WHAT I mentioned first, was the love of God in the strict restrained sense of
the word. By this I do not intend those flashy and rapturous sallies of the
heart toward God, which may proceed only from a fond conceit, that we are
singled out to be the peculiar favorites of heaven. We may easily fall into an
ecstasy, and run mad in religious contemplation, without having any thing of
that divine love which is due to the perfections of our Creator. The love of
God is a steady, sober, calm and rational thing, the result of thought, and
consideration -- It is indeed a passion, but a passion excited by reason
presenting the proper object of it to the mind. Nor ought we to be so
sollicitous about avoiding one extreme, as to fall into the contrary. We ought
not to run so far from enthusiasm, as to lose sight of real devotion; we ought
not to be so fond of a rational religion, as to suppose that religion consists
wholly in cold dry speculation, without having any concern with the affections.
Real piety necessarily supposes, that the heart is touched, affected, warmed,
inflamed: and not barely that we have right speculative notions concerning God.
A religion consisting in nothing but a knowledge of God's attributes, and an
external conduct agreeable to his laws, would be a lifeless insipid thing: It
would be neither a source of happiness to ourselves nor recommend us to the
approbation of him, who requires us to give him our heart.

INDEED St. John says, That this is the love of God, that we keep his
Commandments. But it is plain, both from the nature of the thing itself, and
from the design of the apostle in this place, that his meaning is no more than
this -- That the natural effect or consequence of love to God, is obedience to
his commandments: And not strictly speaking, that keeping the commandments, is
a proper definition of the love of God. These are evidently two distinct
things; as distinct as love and obedience to any other being or person; or as
any two things whatever. And how close a connection soever there may be betwixt
them, they ought not to be confounded. It is evident at first view, that this
command, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy mind, carries in it something altogether different from
an injunction of external obedience. The precept relates to the heart and
affections, as distinguished even from the understanding, whereby we discern
and contemplate the divine perfections; and much more distinct from all
external actions of what kind soever. Let any one see whether the following
passages in the writings of the royal poet and prophet, do not carry in them
the warmest expressions of inward esteem, approbation and love. Whom have I in
heaven but thee? and there is nothing upon earth that I desire besides thee. My
flesh and my heart fails me; but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever. Like as the heart pants after the waterbrooks, so longs
my soul after thee, O God. My soul is a thirst for God; yea even for the living
God. When shall I come and appear before him! -- It is plain that this is the
language not barely of reason; but of passion and fervor and emotion of
spirit. Nor can any tolerable account be given of these, and such like
expressions in the devotional parts of scripture, without supposing that the
affections of those who uttered them, were raised to a great degree of warmth;
and that they terminated in God himself, as their proper and ultimate object,
without regard to any farther or future advantage: they terminated in him as
their end, in much the same manner that our animal affections and appetites
center in their respective objects. Nor is there any thing that is absurd or
romantic in this supposition; any thing that will not approve itself to our
understandings upon the closest examination.

THERE is a natural distinction betwixt actions and characters, some being in
themselves morally good, and others evil. Mankind have faculties for discerning
these moral differences: and what is in itself right and good, is also in
itself amiable in the eye of every rational being: it is in itself right to
approve and love what is right, and wrong to approve and love what is wrong.
Our Creator, besides endowing us with reason to distinguish betwixt moral good
and evil, has moreover given us another faculty which is sometimes called a
moral sense; and which St. Paul speaks of under the titles of the law written
in the heart, and the law of the mind. By virtue of this faculty, moral good
and evil, when they are objects to our minds affect us in a very different
manner; the first affording us pleasure, the other pain and uneasiness: And
this, as unavoidably as the eye is differently affected with regular and
irregular figures in the body; or the ear, with the most grateful harmony, and
the most harsh and grating discord: I say as unavoidably; but neither of them
are absolutely unavoidable. There are some who have no ear for music, and
others who have no eye for architecture, painting or statuary. And so there are
some, perhaps, who have little or no taste in morals. However, as to the
latter, this is not the natural state of their minds; but proceeds from their
abusing and perverting nature. (And all our animal senses may be viciated
also.) But take a man who has not violated frequently the natural law of his
mind; and he can no more approve of what is commonly called malevolence,
cruelty and injustice, than a skilful architect can approve of the most
irregular and awkward pile of building: And on the other hand, he can no more
hate and nauseate what appears to be honest, generous and benevolent, than the
other can be displeased at the sight of an edifice, all the parts of which are
adjusted by the exactest rules of proportion, and the whole brought to the
greatest perfection of art. What man for example, who is not become depraved to
a great degree in his own moral character, can read the contrary characters of
Cataline and Socrates with the same complacency? Can he that has any remains of
virtue, help being fired with indignation at the baseness and perfidy of the
former; and with love, at the virtue and integrity of the latter? Does a man
that lives by plunder; that swells his stores by rapine, and fattens on the
blood of the innocent, appear as amiable as one, that as Job elegantly
expresses it, is eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame? One whose benevolence
is diffused to all about him? None can avoid looking upon the former as the
proper object of displeasure, and upon the latter as the proper object of love
and complacency, although his own interest is no ways affected by the conduct
of either.

BUT what relation, it may be asked, has all this discourse to do with the love
of God? I answer, a very near relation: For God, according to the supposition
mentioned above, is perfect in all those moral qualities and excellencies which
we esteem amiable in mankind: and which if any man does not esteem and admire
and love, he is looked upon as a monster, debased below humanity, and unworthy
to be reckoned among rational creatures. Now if it be reasonable to esteem and
love our fellow-men in proportion to their justice, integrity and benevolence,
must not he who is perfect in all moral excellence be in proportion the proper
object of those same affections? The goodness of God so far transcends that of
the best of his creatures, that our blessed Savior has told us, There is none
good but one, that is God. The most that any can pretend to without arrogating
too much to themselves, is a faint resemblance of the divine perfections. And
can it be reasonable to love and admire the mere portrait of moral excellence,
and to let the substance, the source and standard of it, remain unregarded. If
goodness in a limited degree be worthy the esteem of all rational beings, shall
not that goodness that is without bounds, and absolutely perfect, be thought
worthy to excite in all, a real inward esteem also? an hearty and sincere
complacency? an ardent, inextinguishable love? A love strong as death? A love
which many waters cannot quench, nor the floods drown? In this there is no
enthusiasm: in this there is nothing unreasonable and fanciful: For undoubtedly
those qualities which being found in a limited degree, are really amiable, do
not cease to be so, when they become infinite; but instead of this, become
infinitely amiable.

WERE it possible for us to contemplate the divine perfections without
considering our own relation to God; our own dependence upon him, and his
providential care of us; could we consider him only as exercising his moral
perfections toward other beings with whom we have no concern, still it would
be rational to love and esteem him. For these perfections are in themselves
amiable, and consequently they are so to all beings who are capable of
discerning them. And we find ourselves in a manner necessitated to love those
virtuous characters which we meet with in history; -- characters of men who
lived in remote ages, and the distant parts of the globe; although our own
interest neither has, nor can be, any ways affected by their virtue. And thus
also the moral perfections of God demand our love, separate from the
consideration of our own particular relation to him. But when we consider him
under the notion of being our Creator, our moral Governor, our Father, our
Friend, our Patron; this brings the matter home to ourselves, and tends still
farther to endear him to us.

AND this naturally brings us to another of those religious regards which we
owe immediately to God: I mean gratitude. This is nearly allied to the former;
but entirely distinct from it. The love of God, in the most proper sense of it,
is an inward esteem, and delightful admiration of the divine perfections,
without the consideration of any good we have either received or expect from
them. But gratitude has respect to something past; it is a thankful sense and
recognition of certain benefits which we have actually received. And it is
plain that if the moral attributes of God, are in themselves a proper object of
love, their being exerted in positive acts of goodness and beneficence to us,
calls for the returns of gratitude. Ingratitude is always looked upon as an
indication of a base, sordid and degenerate mind: It is what we cannot avoid
condemning in those to whom we have shown favor in any instance: we expect, at
least, that they should retain in their minds a sense of our munificence. All
the world are agreed that this is what every man owes to his neighbor who has
proved a benefactor to him. Why then should not the same temper of mind take
place in us with relation of God? If we think ourselves obliged to thank our
fellow men for those inconsiderable favors, which they are scarce more than
the instruments of conveying to us, what degree of gratitude can be sufficient
for us to exercise toward our constant and infinite Benefactor? toward that
Being to whom we are indebted for our existence; for all the faculties of our
minds and bodies? that Being who is the original, voluntary bestower of all
that is valuable and dear to us? that Being from whom descends every good and
every perfect gift? And as we are christians, I may add, that Being who so
loved the world as to give his only begotten son that whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life? -- What shall I render to the
Lord for all his benefits? Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me
praise his holy name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his
benefits. He has redeemed thy life from destruction: he has crowned thee with
loving kindness and tender mercies.

BUT to proceed -- Another branch of that religious temper of mind which is
implied in the love of God, is a desire of his approbation and delight in the
consciousness or the prospect of it. We desire to be thought favorably of, by
mankind; and to be thought so by the wise and good, yields no small
satisfaction to ingenuous and virtuous minds. But as God is the only perfect
judge of real merit, to gain his approbation ought to be the highest ambition
of every reasonable creature. We are apt to lay traps and snares to catch the
fluttering applauses of the multitude; and delight to be hosanna'd by them. But
are they the supreme judges of what is really worthy of applause? Is it
reasonable to be sollicitous about the sentiments of the world concerning us,
and to take no thought about the approbation of the great Inspector and Censor
of that world whose esteem we court? No man that has any just conceptions of
God's perfections can be regardless with what eye he views his conduct upon
that stage where his place of action is assigned him. God himself is a
spectator in this great theater of the universe. A desire of his applause,
therefore, and of the honor that comes from him, should in a manner exclude
all lower ambition from our breasts. And the prospect of it must afford the
highest satisfaction to every virtuous man, without the consideration of any
reward consequent thereupon. The approbation of a perfect judge, is itself a
reward. Nor is there really any pious regard to the sentence that God passes
upon our behavior, any farther than our hope and delight terminates in that
sentence itself. This is divine ambition. But to look forward to some
consequent advantage beside and beyond this, is religious selfishness. However,
even this is not to be condemned, although it does not strictly fall under the
notion of piety. Piety respects God himself, and him alone.

To proceed -- Trust in God and dependence upon him as our portion (...), is a
duty which his perfections, and our own weakness, requires we should live in
the constant exercise of. None of us need to be informed of the internal want
and poverty of our nature: we all feel it in a greater or less degree. It is
the sense of this insufficiency at home, that makes us rove abroad after some
foreign support. See the Bishop of Bristol's Sermon* on the love of God.
We have commonly recourse to diversions and amusements; to the company and
conversation of our Friends, to mammon, and animal pleasures. Upon things of
this nature we lean for support; upon these we depend for that sedate happiness
and satisfaction, which our penurious nature craves. But they are found to be
absolutely insufficient to answer this purpose. Our inborn thirst of happiness
is not to be allayed with such shallow draughts as these, Vanity of vanities,
said Solomon, all is vanity and vexation of spirit, after he had searched a
long time for substantial happiness in worldly possessions and enjoyments. The
most that these things have it in their power to do, is to intoxicate us for a
little while, and so to make us think ourselves great and happy. But as soon as
we grow sober, and come to ourselves again, the fool's paradise, and the airy
castles disappear: we find our wants remaining, and soliciting for something
else. The constant language of our hearts is -- who will show us any good? --
Who will do the friendly office to point us to our happiness? Now whither shall
we go to find something that may fill our minds, and afford us a sincere,
constant and uniform satisfaction? Is there no object that is adequate to our
wants and capacities? none that may be firmly relied and depended on, as a
certain source of quiet and happiness? Doubtless there is; and indeed that
Object is not far from every one of us: for in God we live, and move and have
our being. His power, wisdom and goodness, may be a prop to our tottering and
desponding spirits; and if we please we may enjoy present happiness in relying
upon the care of his providence. We may thus get rid of all our wants at once;
of all our anxiety and solicitude about what may be on the morrow. He, without
whom a sparrow cannot fall to the ground; He that opens his hand, and
satisfies the desire of every living thing; He that even hears the young
ravens when they cry; cannot fail to provide suitably for us who are his
offspring. The very hairs of our head are all numbered by him: And we may cast
all our cares upon him, as the apostle expresses it; for he cares for us. --
Behold the fowls of the air, says our blessed Savior; for they sow not,
neither do they reap; nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly father feeds
them. Are ye not much better than they? -- Consider the lilies of the field,
how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: And yet I say unto you that
even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these -- Therefore
take no thought for the morrow; for the morrow shall take thought for the
things of itself; sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. Obedience to
this command, understood with such limitations as common sense suggests, would
disburthen us of a thousand fruitless cares, and be a source of constant
serenity to our minds, in this various scene, this inconstant ocean we are
passing through. The consideration of an universal kind providence presiding
over the world, is, to them that will give themselves time to attend to it, a
ground of continual peace, and composure of soul. All we need concern ourselves
about is to do our own duty: the rest belongs to God; and he will doubtless do
his part well; and they that put their trust in him will have no cause to be
ashamed; but find their expectations answered to the full. He that is conscious
of the integrity of his own heart, may have confidence toward God; and exult
in the language of David, in hope of happiness both here and hereafter -- God
is my refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. Therefore will not I
fear, though the earth be removed, and though the mountains thereof be carried
into the midst of the sea; though the waters thereof roar and be troubled;
though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof -- There is a river, the
streams whereof shall make glad the city of God -- Because he is at my right
hand, I shall not be moved -- Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory
rejoiceth; my flesh also shall rest in hope --

NEAR akin to that trust and confidence in God now mentioned, is absolute
resignation to his will in all cases and circumstances. There are indeed some
things which, in one sense, will unavoidably give us uneasiness, such as
sickness, the loss of our deceased friends, and ill usage from our surviving
ones, and the like. It is in vain to attempt to throw off human nature so far
as not to be in any measure moved with things of this kind. But it is our
indispensable duty to discharge our minds of all murmurings at providence; and
to acquiesce patiently in the lot assigned us. Things could not, upon the
whole, have been better ordered than they are, if the world be really under the
government of a perfect Being. When we consider that known unto God are all his
works from the beginning; his whole scheme and plan of government; and that by
the goodness of his nature, he is disposed to order every event through the
boundless universe, and through all periods of time, so that all shall finally
concur, to promote the common happiness of his creatures? what reason have we
to be submissive in all circumstances; and to say with our blessed savior, not
my will, but thine, be done!

UPON this subject of resignation to the will of God, I shall beg leave to use
the words of an admirable writer -- The consideration, says he, that the course
of things is unalterable, has a tendency to quite the mind under it, to beget
a submission of temper to it. But when we can add, that this unalterable course
is appointed and continued by infinite wisdom and goodness; how absolute should
be our submission, how entire our trust and dependence?

THIS would reconcile us to our condition; prevent all the supernumerary
troubles arising from imagination, distant fears, impatience; all uneasiness
besides that which necessarily arises from the calamities themselves we may be
under. How many of our cares should we by this means be disburthened of? cares
not properly our own, how apt soever they may be to intrude upon us, and we to
admit them; the anxieties of expectation, solicitude about success and
disappointment, which in truth are none of our concern. How open to every
gratification would the mind be, which was clear of these encumbrances? Our
resignation to the will of God, may be said to be perfect, when our will is
lost, and resolved up into his; when we rest in his will as our end, as being
in itself most just and right and good. And where is the impossibility of such
an affection to what is just and right and good, such a loyalty of heart to the
governor of the universe, as shall prevail over all sinister indirect desires
of our own? Neither is this at bottom any thing more than faith and honesty and
fairness of mind; in a more enlarged sense indeed than those words are commonly
used. And as in common cases, fear and hope and other passions are raised in us
by their respective objects, so this submission of heart and soul and mind,
this religious resignation, would be as naturally produced, by our having just
conceptions of almighty God, and a real sense of his presence with us. In how
low a degree soever this temper usually prevails amongst men, yet it is a
temper right in itself; It is what we owe to our Creator: It is particularly
suitable to our mortal condition, and what we should endeavor after for our
own sakes in our passage through such a world as this; where is nothing upon
which we can rest or depend: nothing but what we are liable to be deceived or
disappointed in. Thus we might acquaint ourselves with God, and be at peace.
This is piety and religion in the strictest sense, considered as an habit in
the mind: An habitual sense of God's presence with us; being affected toward
him as present, in the manner his superior nature requires from such a
creature as man: This is to walk with God. Thus the Bishop "of Bristol.

BUT to submission to the divine will, we may fitly add even joy and triumph of
heart, in the consideration of our relation to God. The superintendency of
divine providence, if conceived of in a right manner, is one of the most
pleasurable and delightful considerations that can enter into the mind of a
reasonable creature, sensible of his own weakness and various imperfections.
Indeed, if instead of a wise and infinitely gracious Being, one whose kind
regards are extended to all his intellectual creatures; and one who governs the
world with a view at promoting the moral rectitude, and so of advancing the
happiness of his creatures and offspring; I say, if instead of such a Being as
this, we, in our imaginations, place at the head of the universe, a capricious,
humoursome and tyrannical Being; one who loves and hates at random, and has no
uniform, consistent, and benevolent design; we form a scheme of principles,
more destructive of rational happiness than that of Atheism itself. For any man
had rather be left to the mercy of atoms, and fate, and chance, or any other
chimerical Deity, than be subjected to the pleasure of such a monster, as an
all-knowing, infinitely powerful Being, destitute of a steady, uniform
principle of justice and goodness; delighting himself in the exercise of a
wanton, licentious omnipotence -- But whatever schemes of religion have been
propagated, in which the supreme ruler of the universe is represented in such a
gloomy and formidable dress as this, they are equally inconsistent with the
religion of nature, and the religion of Jesus Christ. These teach us to look
upon God as transcending all his creatures in mercy and goodness, no less than
in power and greatness. Nor shall we behave ourselves as becomes our relation
to him, unless we always think of him with inward joy and pleasure. What can be
more unreasonable than for those who in God have a Father and Friend and
Patron; one who is tenderly concerned for their welfare, and does what he can
consistently with the rules of wisdom, to promote their best interests; what is
more unreasonable than for such, to entertain gloomy and melancholy thoughts;
and indulge superstitious fears, and groundless suspicions? Were God a
malevolent Being; were he an unreasonable Tyrant; were he an hard Master; were
he an implacable and revengeful Being; instead of a merciful and faithful
Creator; a compassionate Parent; a gentle Master, a righteous Judge; we might
well think of him with horror and dread; and even wish a period put to his
existence. For whilst such a Being sways the scepter of the universe, no one
can be secure a moment; but had better, were it possible, vanish into nothing,
than have his future welfare depend upon the precarious pleasure of such a
Sovereign. Such a Being were unworthy of any love, trust, confidence or
reverence; and would be the proper object of dread and horror, and hatred to
every rational creature. But God forbid that we should conceive of him in this
manner. While God is our Father; while we are the objects of his love and care;
while he looks on all our involuntary failings with an eye of pity, remembering
we are dust, and even passes by our wilful sins upon our showing the tokens of
contrition; while his liberal hand supplies our wants in this world; and while
he offers us eternal happiness hereafter, upon the gracious terms of the
gospel; what is there in this idea of God to make us fearful and uneasy? Does
the idea of a Father carry any terror in it? Do we dread the thoughts of our
gracious benefactor? Do we look upon our Father, as our executioner, as Isaac
looked upon Abraham? Do we tremble at being in his presence? imagining that he
inspects our conduct with the sagacious malice of an Inquisitor; instead of the
bowels of a parent? While the Fool says in his heart, there is no God, do we
wish there was none? If so we are Fools also. The doctrine of God's Being and
providence is the most delightful and elevated subject of contemplation, that
can enter into the mind of man. See Mr. Foster's Sermon. on Providence.
Upon the truth or falsehood of these great principles of natural and revealed
religion, depends the just idea of the universe; and of our own situation,
business, end, and expectations in it. And the whole system of nature
immediately puts on a quite different face, if the notion of an overruling
benevolent mind be excluded. The world, in that case, appears like a forlorn
desolate wilderness; nor can we have any security; or safe dependence upon any
thing -- We know not to what infinite disorders and irregularities, the whole
world may run the next moment; and how soon all rational beings may be involved
in ruin and misery -- Thoughts that excite the most terrible apprehensions in
the mind of every considerate man -- Such is the world without a providence --
an helpless Orphan -- deprived of its vital animating principle -- the support
of the virtuous -- the hope of the distressed -- and a restraint upon unbridled
lust and violence -- But once establish the doctrine of a superintending
providence, and creation revives; it puts on its former cheerful countenance.
If the world be under the government of a perfect Being, from this
consideration naturally springs, peace, tranquillity, joy and satisfaction to
every considerate man -- The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice -- Let the
multitude of the isles be glad thereof. -- Righteousness and judgment are the
habitation of his throne -- This is a consideration, which instead of dejecting
our minds, and filling us with gloomy fears, ought to put us upon anticipating
that triumphant song of the blessed -- Rev. xix. -- And I heard a great voice
of much people in heaven, saying alleluia -- Salvation and glory, and honor
and power be unto the Lord our God; for true and righteous are his judgments --
Alleluia, for the Lord God omnipotent reigns. Let us be glad and rejoice and
give honor to him.

THUS I have endeavored to give some account of that religious temper of mind
which I take to be injoined in that precept which our Lord calls the first and
great commandment. The next thing to be considered, is the nature and
obligation of the duty commonly called the love of our neighbor. But this must
be left to another opportunity.

IF it be possible that any one should doubt of our obligation to love God in
the sense above explained, let us reverse the scene, and try whether we can
approve a temper of mind contrary to this. Let us suppose the divine attributes
and conduct to be the same with respect to mankind, as we have hitherto
supposed them, and made the ground of our obligation to the duty we have been
discoursing upon. But let us suppose that a people in some remote part of the
globe, instead of making those returns of love, gratitude, etc. to God, thought
it their duty to hate his infinite perfections, -- to blaspheme their Creator
for his goodness to them -- to dread his approbation -- to court his
displeasure -- to be continually suspicious of him -- to be discontented at the
methods of his providence, and to mourn when they considered their filial
relation (...) him, and his paternal government over them -- Co^^^ we approve
of such a scheme as this? Could we think that those who embraced it were in
their right minds? Or should we think that they were not barely destitute of
what is called reason and common sense, but had some principle directly
contrary to it. -- A sort of anti-rational faculty? -- Well then, there is no
medium between these two, unless we suppose that God is not to be regarded by
us in any manner at all; than which, nothing can be more absurd. -- If he be
the object of any affections in the human constitution, it must either be of
those of love, esteem, honor, reverence; or the contrary one's of hatred,
resentment, anger, contempt, and the like. But we at first sight see the
shocking absurdity of the latter supposition; the former therefore must be true
--

WHEREFORE to conclude, Let us consider of the relation which God stands in to
us, and of our obligations to him; and give him the glory that is due unto his
name -- Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty! Just and true
are all thy ways, O thou King of nations! Who shall not fear thee, and glorify
thy name! Who shall not admire thee, thou eternal, inexhaustible fountain of
all good! Who shall not love thee, thou sovereign beauty! Thou great original
of all perfection! Blessing and glory and wisdom and thanksgiving, and honor
and power and might, be unto our God forever and ever, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

SERMON VI. On the Love of our Neighbor.
MATTHEW XXII. 37 -- 41. JESUS said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.
This is the first and great commandment.
And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.

IN the preceding discourse we inquired into the nature and obligation of the
love of God. The love of our neighbor is to be the subject of the present. The
precept injoining this duty, is thus expressed in the text -- Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self. Now the general question, What is implied in this
precept, naturally resolves itself into these three particulars and subordinate
inquiries.

1st. WHO is here intended by our neighbor? 2ly. WHAT the love of our
neighbor implies in it?
AND, lastly, what is intended by our loving our neighbor as ourselves? A
resolution of these three particular inquiries will give us a full idea of the
nature and extent of the duty under consideration.

1st. THEN, who is intended by our neighbor? I answer, primarily and strictly,
those who dwell near us; with whom it is to be supposed we have a frequent
intercourse; -- and so have more opportunities either to serve or injure them,
than we have to serve or injure those that are far separated from us. But the
term also includes all those with whom we have any thing to do -- all who come
within the reach of our abilities, so that we can do them good either by
communicating positive happiness of any kind to them, or by removing the causes
of their misery. Any person with whom we have any kind of intercourse, whether
he be one of our kindred or not; whether he be an acquaintance or a stranger;
whether he be a friend or an enemy; whether he profess the same religion with
ourselves, or a different one; whether he be in a private or a public station;
whether he be our own countryman, or a foreigner; let him be who he will, he is
our neighbor in the sense of the text, when providence puts it in our power to
relieve his wants, and render him happy. That this is the sense in which our
Lord uses the word neighbor, appears by St. Luke's account of what passed
betwixt him and a certain lawyer upon this same subject. Our Lord had told him
that if he loved God with all his heart, and his neighbor as himself, he
should live. Upon this the lawyer asked the question which we are now
endeavoring to answer -- And who is my neighbor? Luke x. 29. Upon this our
Lord relates a story concerning a Jew who fell into the merciless hands of
robbers. He was found in the road by two travelers, a bigoted hard hearted
priest, and a levite of the same disposition. Neither of them afforded the
pitiable object any relief, although he were one of their own nation and
religion. But when a Samaritan, a man of another country, and a different
religion, a man who had less orthodoxy and more charity, than the other, found
this unhappy stranger, he had compassion on him, and relieved him. Which now,
says our Savior, of these three was neighbor unto him that fell among
thieves. And he said, he that showed mercy on him: Then said Jesus unto him, go
thou and do likewise. Go thou, and act the same neighbourly part: Look upon thy
self to be a neighbor to every man, and every man a neighbor to thee, who has
any wants and calamities to recommend him to thee. Think not that thou
dischargest the duty of loving thy neighbor, by returning the kind offices of
thy friends; by doing good to thy acquaintance; to thy countrymen; to those of
thine own sect in religion; but extend thy friendship to all whom thou art
capable of serving.

FROM this piece of history, or this moral fable, (call it which you please) it
appears, in general, that the charity which is injoined in revelation, is
infinitely more noble, generous and disinterested than the love of our country,
as such, so much extolled by some deistical writers: And than that friendship
which is recommended by writers of the same stamp -- A friendship confined to a
particular knot of men, whom humor or interest, or perhaps only a similitude
of vices, has tied and united together. To be a friend in the usual sense of
the word, is to act a kind part to some one, or more particular persons; but to
love our neighbor, in the sense of scripture, is to ^^ve the world; and to be
that to all with whom we have any concern, which friendship is to one or two.

LEST we should take up a notion that the proper objects of our love were our
friends, our kindred, those of our own party, or our country only, our blessed
savior took care particularly to enjoin upon his disciples the love of their
enemies, after his own example, who died for us while we were enemies in our
minds by wicked works; and after the example of his God and our God; his Father
and our Father, who makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and
sends rain on the just, and on the unjust Our enemies are included in the
general term neighbor; but it was highly proper and necessary that they should
be particularly, and expressly pointed out to the Jews, because they were
generally such blind, narrow-hearted bigots, that they looked upon all the
world besides their own nation, to be the proper objects of their contempt and
hatred. This national hardness and stinginess of soul, was continually
increased by the influence of the Scribes and Pharisees, who, like too many
modern teachers and doctors, instead of inculcating the great duty of universal
charity, expended their zeal upon frivolous matters; and labored more
abundantly to make the populace adore themselves; and to raise their
indignation against all such as dared to say any thing against their old
traditions, or new whims, by which they made void the law of God. And that
which made it necessary for our Savior particularly to recommend to his
hearers the love of their enemies, makes it proper for every other preacher to
do the same, where bigotry and a party spirit prevails; and would to God, that
there were not enough of this wretched spirit to be seen in our own land, at
the present day, to make the same thing necessary now!

HAVING thus considered the object and extent of the love recommended in the
text; we proceed to inquire,

2ly. INTO the nature of the thing itself. What then is implied in the love of
our neighbor? I answer, it is the same thing with benevolence, good will, or
charity; a disposition to do good and communicate happiness. The same word that
is used in the text to express that temper of mind which becomes us toward our
Maker, is used also to express the temper and disposition of heart which is
required toward our neighbor. Both are expressed by the word love -- Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart -- and thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. However, although the words are the same, the things
intended by them are very different; as different as the objects of this love.
When it is referred to God, no one imagines it means benevolence, or wishing
well, or doing good to our Creator; but esteem, complacency, admiration,
reverence, submission, and the like. The reason of the thing, considering God's
independency, power and wisdom and moral perfections, and our own relation to
him, plainly points out these to be the things intended, when we are commanded
to love him. And it is equally plain that when our neighbor is proposed to us
as the object of our love, it cannot intend that we should pay him that same
internal reverence, honor, resignation, etc. which we pay to our Maker. This
would be idolatry instead of charity. So far as our neighbors resemble God, so
far indeed they are proper objects of the same kind of internal regards which
we owe to him: And it is doubtless our duty to esteem, and reverence them in
proportion to their real greatness and merit. For God requires us to give
honor to whom honor is due. However, this is not what is primarily or
principally intended by the love of our neighbor. This is a duty which we owe
to all in common, with whom we have any concern; too many of whom have little
or nothing in them that renders them the proper objects of delight,
complacency, esteem and reverence. Nor can they be all in common the object of
any other passion besides that of benevolence or good will: This, therefore, is
what the precept in the text injoins upon us. And our blessed Savior plainly
leads us to this general idea of the duty, in his discourse with the lawyer
before referred to, Luke 10. When the lawyer asked, who was intended by his
neighbor whom he was to love as himself, our Lord told him the story of the
Jew who was neglected in his misery by the priest and levite; and kindly
relieved by the schismatical Samaritan -- and then added, Go thou, and do
likewise. This shows that the primary and most proper notion of the love of our
neighbor, which he had just before recommended, is a kind and charitable
disposition. It also shows farther, that the love of our neighbor, as the word
is used by our Savior, is not restrained to the heart and affections, in the
same manner with the love of God: but is used in such a large complex sense as
to include benevolent action as well as benevolence of mind. -- "Go thou, and
do likewise." As the natural, and perhaps unavoidable, consequence of God's
being good, is his doing to his creatures; so there is a close connection
betwixt these, in all other beings. We cannot conceive of a man's being truly
charitable in his heart toward his neighbor, without doing good to him also,
when it is in his power, and the proper occasions present for calling forth
this internal principle into action. What a man really wills and wishes in his
heart, he effects also, when it does not exceed his abilities. So that
benevolent action will always be in proportion to the strength of the
benevolent principle, allowing for the different powers, talents, and
opportunities for doing good, which take place in the world. This I take to be
the intention of St. John, in his 1 Epis. chap. 3d. ver. 7. Little children let
no man deceive you: be that does righteousness, is righteous, even as he is
righteous. He that acts well, is really good to the degree that he acts well;
and he does righteousness in proportion to the righteous principle in his
heart: these things keep pace, and the one is always the measure and standard
of the other.

LOVE is, in its own nature, an active and vigorous principle. This godlike
guest, does not lie dozing in that breast where it takes up its abode, and
conceal itself from the observation of mankind, like eastern monarchs in their
palaces. Its light shines before men, and they see its good works. It is
constantly exerting itself for the benefit of those we love: The charitable man
loves not in word and in tongue only, but indeed and in truth. Charity contents
not itself with good wishes; with kind speeches, and a courtly address; but
does substantial acts of beneficence, according to the exigences of our
neighbors, and our own abilities. It contents not itself, with saying to the
naked be ye clothed; and to the hungry, be ye filled; but administers to their
necessities. Love is infinite and the methods of its acting various, and
innumerable. It originates in the heart, and from thence points every way, like
various lines drawn from the center of a circle, or rays issuing from the sun.
It shines with its benign influence upon all that come in its way. It is eyes
to the blind; and feet to the lame; it draws upon it the blessing of him that
is ready to perish, and causes the widows heart to sing for Joy. It is
instruction to the ignorant; and consolation to the sorrowful; it is a timely
redress to the injured and oppressed; and liberty to the captive. Charity
suffers long and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself,
is not puffed up, does not behave itself unseemly; seeks not her own; is not
easily provoked, thinks no evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in
the truth: Bears all things, believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things.

THE apostle describes charity, or the love of our neighbor, as comprehending
all these virtues in it: And very naturally; for they are plainly but so many
different branches of the same tree. Charity suffers long -- We naturally
bear a great while with those whom we sincerely love -- It is kind -- It is
benign, courteous, obliging; and sweetens our manners, purging away all
roughness, moroseness and asperity -- It envieth not -- does not grieve and
fret at the prosperity of others, but rejoices in their happiness -- It
vaunteth not itself -- It is not insolent or assuming, but is meek and
condescending to others -- It is not puffed up -- It does not swell a man with
vain thoughts of his own goodness and importance, compared with others; but
leads him to think others better than himself -- It does not behave itself
unseemly -- It prevents men from all indecencies in behavior; such as may be
shocking and offensive to his neighbors; and leads him to such a deportment of
himself as may be agreeable to those with whom he converses -- It seeks not
its own -- It is not selfish, but excites a person to consult the benefit of
others -- Is not easily provoked -- or rather is not greatly provoked (as the
word signifies.) -- It is not angry to an excess upon any occasion, violently
imaged, and beyond measure; but observes a mean, where there is real ground for
resentment and anger. It thinks no evil -- It puts the most favorable
construction upon the conduct of others; and is not apt to impute to them ill
designs and intentions -- It rejoiceth not in iniquity -- It is not pleased and
delighted with the vices and misconduct of mankind; but pities and laments them
-- It rejoiceth in the truth -- It is pleased to see truth and righteousness
prevail in the world, they being the foundation of happiness -- It bears all
things -- or rather, it covers all things, -- agreably to 1 Pet. iv. 8.
Charity shall cover the multitude of sins. -- It believes all things -- It is
not suspicious that our neighbors design to deceive and impose upon us; but is
prone to believe what they say, presuming upon their honesty and integrity. --
It hops all things -- It will not suffer, us to despair of our neighbor
repentance and reformation, although he may have wandered far in the ways of
error and sin; but hopes he may still be reclaimed -- Once more -- Charity
endures all things -- It is patient and sedate; not fretful and tumultuous; it
bears calamities and injuries; it bears with the faults and follies that are to
be seen in the world, so far as is consistent with the love of truth and virtue
and piety: It is a calm and unruffled self-enjoyment; a composed temper of
soul, amidst all the tumults and disorders of the world. Thus comprehensive is
the duty of charity, or the love of our neighbor, in the scripture sense of
it; neither indeed, have we yet carried it to its full extent. Charity,
considered in its greatest latitude, comprehends in it all moral and social
virtues. He that is a real lover of mankind will, from this simple uniform
principle, practice all those virtues upon which the good order and happiness
of the world depends: Benevolence naturally and necessarily leads to this; i.
e. to the practice of every virtue without exception. For there is not any
particular one that can be omitted, nor any vice that can be indulged, without
detriment to the world. The connection betwixt the practice of all moral
virtues, and public happiness, is close and intimate: Nor are those more
private virtues that fall under the denomination of temperance, exceptions to
this general assertion. It would take us too long a time to show how all
particular virtues, (or if you please christian graces) that respect either
ourselves or our neighbor, may be derived from this one source of benevolence:
But St. Paul's authority will be sufficient to justify the assertion, without
any farther proof. He that loves another, says the apostle, has fulfilled
the law: For this, Thou shall not commit adultery; thou shall not steal; thou
shall not bear false witness; thou shall not covet; and if there be any other
commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thyself. Love works no ill to his neighbor; therefore love
is the fulfilling of the law. And for this reason the same apostle calls
charity by that emphatical name -- The bond of perfectness, Col. i 14 -- The
tie and nexus, the common source and fountain of all moral perfections and
excellencies: From that they all flow, and into that they may all be resolved
again: As benevolence in the supreme Father and Lord of all things comprises in
it all the moral perfections of God: And as that simple principle, under the
direction of infinite wisdom, exerting itself in a variety of ways, in order to
accomplish the greatest possible good in the whole, receives the various
denominations of goodness, grace, mercy, forbearance, justice etc. so all
particular social virtues, may be only the various modifications of charity,
exerted into action.

WHEN we are speaking of the virtue of charity in mankind, it should always be
remembered that we are not speaking of a blind impulse or instinct; a sort of
mad -- good nature, that diffuses itself abroad without prudence, fore thought
or discretion; but of the benevolence of rational beings toward their
fellow creatures; which supposes, that benevolence is always under the
direction of reason, pointing out to it the ways in which it is to exert
itself, and the channels in which it ought to flow. Simple benevolence, not
directed by knowledge, would be only a loving, kind sort of phrenzy or
distraction, which it is probable might do as much hurt as good. For a being
without reason to govern his actions by, would be as likely to do wrong as
right; to make the object of his kindness miserable, as happy. But he that is
wise as well as benevolent, will observe those methods of acting, which are the
most conducive to happiness; that is, he will use the most effectual means to
bring about his end.

THERE is no conceiveable goodness or evil in the actions of an intelligent
creature, but as they conduce to some good or bad end. And since happiness, in
a large sense of the word, is the only good end, the only thing that is
valuable for its own sake, it follows that an action is so far good, and no
farther, than it produces happiness: And this is the general rule which we
ought to govern ourselves by in our intercourse with the world. To do good is
what we should aim at. But then there are other particular, and subordinate
rules of conduct, flowing from this general one, which ought to be the more
immediate regulators of our actions, in order to our doing the greatest good we
are capable of; such as adhering to truth, justice; doing good to a benefactor
rather than to another; providing for our own families and kindred rather than
for others; and the like: For there are certain peculiar ties and relations,
which make it reasonable to give the preference to some in our kind offices,
rather than to others. And this is so far from being inconsistent with
universal charity, that it is upon the whole most advantageous to the world.
Our benevolence would be too vague, and diffuse; it would be in danger of
evaporating without doing much service to any, had not the wise author of our
nature by the constitution he has given us, and certain particular affections,
pointed it to some particular objects more especially. In general our kindred
demand our first concern; our other friends and benefactors the next; those of
our neighborhood the next -- and so on to our country, our nation; and from
our own nation, to all others. This seems to be the order which God and nature
have pointed out to us; and if so, then to observe it, and to arise in our
good will by those gradations, must certainly be the most conducive to the
general happiness of mankind; for the order established by God can never
thwart, or interfere with, the good of his creatures. To break in upon the
order of nature, or to act out of our proper sphere, can never issue in greater
happiness to ourselves or others, than keeping strictly to both. And the method
of being serviceable to mankind, whatever our station, and circumstances in
life are, is ordinarily plain enough to those who have any real inclination to
follow it. But I must hasten to the third and last inquiry under this head, viz.

3ly. WHAT is intended by our loving our neighbor as ourselves?

IT has been observed See the Bishop of Bristol's sermon on this subject.
by some, That this expression is capable of three different senses -- It may
intend that we should love our neighbor with as great a degree of intenseness
as we do ourselves: and be as sollicitous about his happiness as about our own.
This would indeed be a glorious temper of mind. But it may be reasonably
questioned whether it is possible for mankind in this world, or perhaps in any
other, to be so benevolent, as not to have a peculiar feeling for themselves.
And as the possibility of this may be questioned, it may, in the same degree,
be questioned whether this is the true intention of the precept. For all God's
commands are adapted to our state, circumstances and capacities. Again, the
precept may intend that we should have a love to our neighbor of the same kind
with that which we bear to ourselves: i. e. that as we are all naturally
concerned for our own welfare, so we should also have a real concern, in some
degree for the welfare of others. But this interpretation seems to be as much
too low and jejune, as that above mentioned was too sublime and elevated. For a
man may have a real love to mankind in this sense, and yet be a wicked, and
unjust man, by reason that his benevolence is not strong enough to be a balance
for his principle of self-love. All men have doubtless some degree of real
benevolence; but a regard to their own private good may be so strong as to
counter-act and defeat it; and so lead them habitually to the most cruel and
inhuman practices.

IT seems necessary, therefore, that we pitch upon some third way of
interpreting the precept before us. And perhaps the sense of it may be this --
That we should not barely love our neighbor; but that our love to him bear
some certain proportion to our self-love; that we love him to such a degree, as
shall prevent us from doing any injury to him for the sake of private interest;
that in all our intercourse with him, we should do to him, as we would that he
should do to us. More cannot be well intended in the precept; and it is certain
that less cannot. And such a love to our neighbor as this, does not only imply
that we abstain from all acts of injustice toward him; but also that we are
active in serving him when he stands in need of our assistance; for certainly
this is what we should expect of him. It is impossible exactly to determine how
far we ought to go in acts of beneficence to our neighbor; but certainly
something is justly expected of us, besides not injuring him. I shall beg leave
to use the words of the Bishop of Bristol upon this subject, who seems to
prefer the last mentioned sense of the words. Both our nature and condition,
says he, require that each particular man should make particular provision for
himself: And the inquiry what proportion benevolence should have to self-love,
when brought down to practice, will be, what is a competent care and provision
for ourselves. And how certain soever it be, that each man must determine this
for himself; and how ridiculous soever it would be for any to attempt to
determine it for another; yet it is to be observed that the proportion is real;
and that a competent provision has a bound; and that it cannot be all which we
can possibly get, and keep within our grasp, without legal injustice. Mankind
almost universally bring in vanity, supplies for what is called a life of
pleasure, covetousness, or imaginary notions of superiority over others, to
determine this question: But every one who desires to act a proper part in
society, would do well to determine how far any of them come in to determine it
in a way of moral consideration. All that can be said is, supposing, what as
the world goes is so much to be supposed that it is scarce to be mentioned, that
persons do not neglect what they really owe to themselves; the more of their
care and thought, and of their fortune they employ in doing good to their
fellow low creatures, the nearer they come up to the law of perfection, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

WE have now done with the three inquiries which we proposed to answer -- Who
is our neighbor? what is it to love our neighbor? what is it to love him as
ourselves? We shall conclude the present discourse with a few words concerning
our obligation to the duty, the nature of which we have been considering. And
if it be asked why we should live in the exercise of benevolence, I answer

1st. No man wants, that any one should point out the particular grounds of the
obligation that others are under to love and assist him. Every man naturally
and unavoidably expects, and thinks he has a right to expect, kind usage from
those about him. But will any man be so vain as to imagine that himself is the
only person in the world that has any title to such treatment? Can he, if he
tries, persuade himself, that all are obliged to love and do good to him,
according to their abilities, and his own wants; and yet that he is under
obligation to none? No man can seriously believe this, 'till the light that is
in him is become darkness. Let us deal fairly with ourselves: Let the same
reason, whatever it be, that satisfies us, that others ought not to injure us,
but to be beneficent and humane to us, satisfy us also, that we ought not to be
injurious to them, but studious of their happiness. Happiness is what each man
desires for himself as a real good; and he cannot be ignorant that others
desire it also, and have a right to expect it upon the same terms with himself.
Either no one had a right to expect kindness, candor and good will; or all men
have the same. And then mutual benevolence, and an intercourse of good offices,
ought to take place in the world universally. -- But

2ly. GOD has required us to be benevolent, and friendly to each other. He that
commands us to love himself with all our heart, commands us also to love our
neighbor as ourselves. And the will or law of a perfect Being, a Being who is
in all respects fit to be obeyed, is what constitutes obligation in the primary
and most formal notion of obligation. We cannot properly be said to be under
obligation, but to some Being, who has a right to give us law; and the more
perfect that right is, the stronger is our obligation. But

3ly. To inquire why we are obliged to be beneficent just and charitable, is to
inquire why we are obliged to be morally good; a question that seems to carry
its own answer with it -- To suppose there is such a thing as moral goodness
and excellence, is to suppose that all rational beings are under obligation to
conform to the rules of it. It is a contradiction to suppose that any
particular temper, or course of action is right, and yet that it may be right
for us to deviate from it. It is eternally right to conform to what is right:
Nor need we look out for any farther obligation after we are satisfied that a
thing is really right: This of itself supposes we are under obligation to do
it; and that we cannot do the contrary without acting a wrong and unreasonable
part.

4ly THE nearer we conform to the great law of benevolence, the nearer we
conform to the perfections of the Deity. God is infinite in goodness. In this
the moral perfection of the divine nature consists. And if this be what renders
God perfect, it must in proportion render us perfect also. And so far as we
fall short of it, so far we fall short of perfection.

5ly. THE order and the common good of the world evidently depend upon the
exercise of mutual benevolence. From what proceed the tumults and principal
calamities that are daily seen in the world, but from a neglect of this duty,
and from the indulgence of a narrow selfish spirit? Were men to put on, as the
elect of God, bowels of love and compassion; did they feel for others as well
as themselves; we should no more hear of strife and debate betwixt private
families; there would be no longer those contentions and animosities that
disturb the peace either of church or state: We should no longer hear of the
tyranny and oppression of princes; or the envy and rebellion of subjects; we
should hear no more of wars and rumors of wars; of fields drunk with human
gore, and garments rolled in blood; we should hear no more of cities stormed;
countries laid desolate; men devoured by their fellow-men; or carried into
inglorious captivity and slavery; but all the world would be hushed into peace,
every one sitting securely under his own vine, and under his own fig tree. It
is selfishness, prevailing over charity and humanity, that has spread
destruction and desolation through the world; that has depopulated the earth;
that has turned the whole ocean into a red sea; and the whole world into
Golgotha and Aceldema, the place of a skull, and a field of blood.

The constitution of the world is such, that plenty, peace and happiness can
prevail no farther than a foundation is laid for them in mutual benevolence,
and an exchange of good offices. Love is the spirit that cements mankind
together; and preserves that order and harmony amongst them, which is requisite
in order to the general safety and welfare; just as the regular motions and
harmony of the heavenly bodies depend upon their mutual gravitation toward
each other: Let this catholic and universal principle be once destroyed, and
confusion, discord, and the crush of worlds inevitably follow: And disorders
similar to these unavoidably succeed in the moral world, upon the neglect of
those social duties that have their foundation in love.

IT is this divine principle that makes a good king; a good subject; a good
master, and a good servant. This is such a temper of mind as would lead every
man to fill up his own particular station in life with honor to himself; and
so as to contribute to the general happiness of mankind; it would sweeten the
nauseous draught of life, and make us all pass the days of our pilgrimage in
this world with pleasure; it would spread joy through out the earth. How
glorious would it be if that time should come, that every man was sure, that he
saw his friend every time he saw his neighbor! Would men take as much pains to
do good, as they do to afflict and grieve and devour one another, the society
of men on earth would resemble that of angels in heaven: But as things
generally are, there is so much strife and envy, and malice, and revenge, that
a good man is sick of the world: And is ready to cry out with the prophet, Oh
that I had wings like a dove; for then would I fly away and be at rest. But

6ly. AN argument for charity may be taken from self-love. That which tends to
public good, tends to private good also. To suppose the contrary is a manifest
contradiction. For public happiness is increased no farther than the happiness
of individuals is so. The temper of love is in itself, the temper of happiness,
and serene, self-enjoyment: And if the world be under the government of a
righteous and wise providence, those must, in the final result of things, be
found best to have consulted their own interest, who have been the most
industrious to advance the happiness of others. Wherefore, let these
considerations laid together excite us to put on the divine temper of love.
That charity which reason dictates, is so far from being the love of any sect
or party of men, that it ought not to be confined even to the whole human
species. It ought to extend to every order of beings that is capable of
happiness. There are none so high and so much above us, as not to have a just
claim to it; none so low and despicable as not to deserve our kind regards. The
reason why we are not commanded to extend our love to the angels, and all the
glorious inhabitants of the other world, is not because they are a different
order of beings; but because they are out of the reach of our abilities;
because their happiness is not placed in our power, like that of our neighbor.
And as to the lower animal world, it is as truly a transgression of the laws of
benevolence and humanity to put them to misery out of mere wantonness, and when
no good end can be answered by it, as it is groundlesly to afflict our fellow
men. Nothing ought to be below our notice, that is not so low in the scale of
being, as to be exempted from pain, and incapable of happiness. The lower
animals are not; and Solomon makes it one part of the character of a righteous
man, that he regards the life of his beast. They are all, in a good sense,
the offspring of God: God is the common parent to us and them: And we may say*
without a metaphor, even to the worm, Thou art my sister. Although we may be
apt to think that our great superiority to the other inhabitants of this earth,
sets us above an obligation to regard their happiness; yet God had a particular
regard to them in the institution of the sabbath; he even hears the young
ravens when they cry; and not a sparrow falls to the ground without him. If
we would avoid a narrow, selfish disposition, we should consider the whole
universe as one magnificent building, with different apartments for different
inhabitants, all subjects of the same King, and children of the same Father,
whose general law is benevolence and kindness. Him we should consider as
sitting upon the circuit of heaven, and saying with a loud voice to all, what
St. John said only to a few -- My children! Love one another; for love is of
God.

THIS earth, where mankind have their residence, bears but a small proportion
to the universe. And this earth is again divided into different countries and
nations; these countries and nations, into different cities and towns; into
distinct societies and corporations and families. This is necessary and
convenient; and every one ought to be principally concerned for the welfare of
those to whom he is the most nearly allied. But he ought not to let any part
ingross the whole of his benevolence. As a man's belonging to a particular
family, does not destroy his relation to the whole commonwealth of which he is
a member; so his particular relation to one political or civil society, does
not destroy his relation to the greater society of mankind in general; not
this, his relation to the whole rational creation. He that seriously considers
himself in this light, as a member and part of one stupendous whole, will find
little need of any farther arguments to convince him of the folly of being
selfish, and contracted: He will be ashamed of any thing that looks like a
party spirit: A vicious self-love will naturally be weakened in him:
Benevolence will spring up in his heart; it will diffuse itself like light from
the sun; it will spread from kindred to a country; from a country to a kingdom;
and from one kingdom to another, till it reach not only all the inhabitants of
this little spot of ground called the earth, but till it grasp the universe;
and then a man bears the nearest resemblance to that one God and Father of all,
who is good to all, and whose tender mercies are over all his works.

SPECULATIONS of this kind may sometimes be of service to us, in order to open
and enlarge our hearts: But our proper business lies chiefly much nearer home.
It is our neighbor that we are more immediately concerned with; it is him that
we are commanded to love as we do ourselves; and if we comply with this
precept, according to its true intention, we cannot be deficient in our kind
regards to those that are more remote from us. Benevolence and charity will be
the general turn and bent of our mind; and will naturally be felt toward all
beings when they present themselves to our thoughts. What connection and
dependence there may be of the various parts of the universe upon each other,
we cannot tell; our goodness, perhaps, may not extend to all, so as to
influence their happiness. But this we are certain of, that the happiness of
mankind depends upon mutual kindness and charity. And this being the case, it
is a call from God and nature, to improve all the powers and capacities we are
endowed with, in doing good to those about us. -- God grant that we may all be
inspired with this divine principle of love, that so we may be the children of
our Father which is in heaven; and the faithful followers of Jesus Christ, who
has said, By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one
another.

SERMON VII. The Love of God, the first and great Commandment, etc.
MATTHEW XXII. 37 -- 41. JESUS said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.
This is the first and great commandment.
And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.

HAVING, in two former discourses, considered the nature and obligation of the
two duties here mentioned, viz. The love of God, and of our Neighbor, I
proceed now, in the second place, to inquire,

II. IN what sense, and upon what account, it is said, That to love God, is the
first and great commandment.

WE may observe, that this assertion of our Lord contains an express and
positive answer to the question proposed just before by the lawyer. It seems
that the Jews (as was observed in the first discourse upon this subject) were
not agreed amongst themselves which commandment in the law [of Moses] was the
greatest, or most important. Some pitched upon that relating to circumcision;
others that concerning the observation of the sabbath; and so on. Now it was a
resolution of this point, which the lawyer, in his query, desired of our Lord.
And consequently, the sense of our Lord's answer will be this -- In making a
comparison betwixt the various precepts of the mosaic institution, the
pre-eminence ought to be given to that which respects the love of God; this is
the principal, the most important and fundamental of all duties; and which,
therefore, demands your chief care and attention.

THIS is the purport of our Lord's answer. Now the inquiry which naturally
arises here, is, What is the reason and ground of this preference? Or, upon
what account does our Lord style this, the first and great commandment? The
reason is too obvious to need mentioning, why the pre-eminence or first place
should be given to this commandment, had the competition been only betwixt the
internal love and reverence of the one true God, and the rituals of religion
ordained in the ceremonial law. But it appears that the comparison is made
betwixt all the commandments in general, moral as well as ritual. And that
which may seem strange to some, is, That the love of God should be looked upon
as of more importance than the love of our neighbor. As God is not externally
worshipped of men's hands, as though he needed any thing; so neither can our
loving him with all our heart, be any advantage to him, he being absolutely
independent. But our righteousness and charity may profit men like ourselves:
our neighbor may be really benefited by our love and good offices. And as we
must suppose that the end of all God's commandments, must be the advancement of
the happiness of his creatures, and not his own, so one might possibly think
that those commandments should be esteemed the most important, and claim our
primary regard, in which the good of mankind is the most immediately concerned,
such as justice, charity, and, in short all those particular duties which are
comprehended in the general one of love toward our neighbor. It might,
therefore have been expected, that our Lord's answer should have run thus --
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; this is the first and great
commandment. But we find, on the contrary, that he has assigned only the second
place to this duty, and reserved the first for the love of God. Now if this
should appear a difficulty to any, as probably it does, the difficulty may,
possibly be removed by the following considerations, which I shall scarce have
more than time enough to mention.

1. IF it be our duty to love God at all, this is the duty which is plainly
first in the order of offices. Our obligation to our Creator is prior in the
order of nature to our obligation to our fellow-men. This appears particularly
from hence, That our obligation to love our neighbor arises principally from
the will and command of God: but we could not have been under any obligation to
comply with his will in this particular instance, had we not been under some
antecedent obligation to him in general. It is the perfections of God that
induce upon us an obligation to obey him at all. Our obligation, therefore, to
acknowledge the divine perfections, to cultivate a proper regard to our Maker,
or in the words of the text, to love the Lord our God with all our heart, is,
in the nature of things, prior to all others: And upon this account it may be
said, that this is the first and great commandment. If, in our imaginations, we
divest God of those perfections, which at present we suppose him to be
possessed of, our obligation to obey him in any instance vanishes of course.
But suppose him infinitely wise, good and powerful, and our obligation to love,
honor and obey him, takes place immediately. So that our obligation to God is
the first which we are under; it is, indeed, that into which all others may be
resolved. There is no duty which we owe to our neighbor, considered as a
religious duty, but what derives its obligatory force from the will and
authority of God. And as the divine perfections are the original and sole
ground of all religious obligations in general, so to have a suitable internal
love and esteem of, and regard toward, those perfections, is the primary and
principal of all duties and obligations. But I shall explain myself farther
upon this head, under a second observation, namely,

2. THAT the whole of religion, in the largest sense of the word, ought to be
considered as the service of God, the supreme Governor of the universe: and in
this light it is usually considered in scripture. Now it is apparent, that the
first thing, not only in point of order, but of importance also, is to form
just sentiments concerning the Being whom we serve; to be suitably affected
toward him; to cultivate those regards of esteem, love, reverence, etc. which
the perfections of his nature, and his relation to us, demand. Religion must
originate here; there can be really no religion, no service, that God can look
upon as done in obedience to him, but what proceeds from this principle of love
to him; and such a principle does, as it were, insure our obedience to him in
all other instances. Loyalty of heart to our earthly sovereign; a proper sense
of our duty to him, in general, is the foundation of obedience to him in all
particular instances. The more our hearts are attached to our prince, the
better prepared, and, the more likely, are we, to yield a thorough and
universal obedience to his laws. I speak now of a temporal prince; but this
holds equally with regard to God, the King of kings and Lord of lords. Piety,
or the love of God is the first and principal thing is religion, as much as
loyalty to our earthly sovereign, is the first and principal thing in the
character of a good subject. And this is, doubtless, the reason why the
decalogue, that summary of man's duty, begins with our immediate duty to our
Creator. When the law was given at mount Sinai, it was ushered in thus, I am
the Lord thy God, etc. Thou shall have no other gods before me. This injunction
of loyalty, to the one true God prepared the way to, and ushered in, all the
other commandments. Nor was this order in delivering the law, accidental, or
without any particular design. It would be preposterous for a legislator to
promulge any particular laws to his subjects, without first asserting his own
authority, and requiring his subjects to own, acknowledge and honor him as
their prince, or lawgiver. This is the purport of the first commandment in the
decalogue: it requires those to whom it was given, to own, acknowledge and
honor the only true God; or, in the words of my text, to love the Lord their
God with all their heart. And there is something analogous to the divine
conduct in this particular, in the conduct of earthly princes, who, in the
first place, require an oath of allegiance from their subjects, in order to
make way for their laws to be cordially received and obeyed. This is a custom
which has prevailed pretty generally in the world; and it is plain that it
answers good ends in government. Nor is it less proper in the divine
government, than in human, that we should be required in the first place, and
as the groundwork, the sum and substance of all, to have a suitable regard
toward him, whose subjects we are; i. e. to honor and respect him as our
prince. The general reason of this, is the same in both cases, viz. the
necessity of our acknowledging the legislator, in order to our obeying his
laws. And this brings me to observe, in the third place,

3. THAT the love of God is the only sure and steady principle of virtue and
righteousness in our conduct toward our fellow-men. The moral and social
virtues are, indeed, amiable in themselves; worthy to be practiced; and it
would (ordinarily at least) be the interest of mankind to practice them, even
although there were no God at all. But considering the weakness of human
reason, the strength of human passion, and the force and variety of temptation;
considering what men are in themselves, and what a world they live in; it
cannot well be supposed that they should uniformly act a virtuous part, from
those considerations alone. Virtue is amiable, and excellent in itself: But the
bulk of mankind are not formed to be so powerfully struck with the beauty and
amiableness of it, as to disarm temptation, and cause them to adhere to truth
and right at the expense of their present ease and pleasure. To the
consideration of the fitness of righteousness, and all other moral virtues; and
the usual tendency of them toward happiness, it is necessary that the
consideration of a righteous Governor of the world should be added; whose
positive will and command it is, that we should invariably practice those
virtues which are in themselves good* and who will finally render to every man
according as his work shall be -- To exclude a God, and a righteous providence
from the world, is (I will not say, wholly to break down the fence betwixt vice
and virtue, and to make it wholly indifferent whether we practice the former or
the latter; but it is) to deprive virtue of one of its greatest supports and
guards. And it is to be remembered, that not to love God, not to cultivate
those religious regards toward him, which the perfections of his nature
demand, is to exclude him to all intents and purposes, as to any influence
which the knowledge and belief of him, can have upon our behavior. The
acknowledging of a God can have no good effect upon our conduct any farther
than our hearts are suitably affected toward him. So that there can be little
or no real virtue without piety. If any thing puts men upon doing their duty
toward their neighbor, and deters them from vice, when the eye of the world
is not upon them, and when their temporal interest is forfeited thereby, it
must be a sense of the divine perfections upon their hearts; i. e. a principle
of love to God, in the large sense in which that duty was before explained.
Without this he will be continually in danger of relapsing into vice, whenever
a present advantage is to be gained thereby, notwithstanding the beauty and
amiableness of a contrary conduct. But let a man once have a suitable sense of
the Deity upon his mind; let him really love the Lord his God with all his
heart, and this will be a constant principle of virtuous conduct in all
conditions and circumstances of life. It amounts to little less than a
contradiction to suppose that a man should really love God, and yet indulge
himself in the practice of those sins which God has forbidden; and which he
knows are contrary to the divine perfections. The connection betwixt the love of
God, and obedience to his commandments, is so close and inseparable, that St.
John tells, That this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments: and
again, Hereby do we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments -- He
that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments is a liar, and the
truth is not in him -- The love of our neighbor (which includes all moral
virtues in it) necessarily flows from the love of God, according to the same
apostle -- If any man say, I love God, and bateth his brother, he is a liar. --
Nor is this less evident from reason than revelation. The love of God is the
love of the divine perfections; it is the love of truth, goodness, justice,
holiness, and all moral excellencies. And he that loves these perfections,
cannot indulge himself in those vices which are contrary to them: but will, of
course, practice all the moral virtues in his own life. It is a common
observation, that similitude begets love; and it is equally true, that love
begets similitude. What we love and admire in others, we imitate, as naturally
as we love in others those dispositions and humors that prevail in ourselves.
So that if a man love God, who is possessed of all moral perfections, he must,
of course be molded into the same image himself; he will naturally conform his
own temper and behavior to the moral character of God, and be perfect, even as
his Father which is in heaven is perfect.

FROM these considerations it follows, that although the ultimate design of all
the divine commandments, were to bring us to a suitable temper and behavior
toward each other, in order to our mutual happiness; yet still, to love the
Lord our God with all our heart, would be the first and great commandment; upon
account of the influence which the performance of this duty must necessarily
have upon our moral conduct toward our neighbor; and the impossibility of our
adhering steadfastly to the practice of virtue without such a principle of
divine love. Where the love of God takes place, the love of mankind and all the
virtues that are comprehended in it, must necessarily take place also: Nor can
the latter take place to any good purpose or degree, where the former is
wanting. The love of God is the fountain from whence the love of our neighbor
flows: and to expect to find the latter in the breast where the former is not,
is as vain as to expect to find a stream which has no source from whence it is
derived. All moral excellencies in mankind have their origin here, in a proper
regard and disposition of heart toward God: and this is sufficient, of itself,
to entitle this command to the place which our Lord has assigned it. But

4. AND lastly here, This may be said to be the first and great commandment,
because the happiness of good men in this world consists principally in
exercising those religious regards which are intended by the love of God. The
duty consists in delight and complacency in God; in contemplating his
perfections; in resignation of heart to his will; in trust and dependence upon
him; and hope and confidence in his goodness. And he that is formed to such a
divine and heavenly temper as this, has the temper of happiness. He has within
him a secret spring of peace and consolation, that not only forbids him to be
miserable, but also causes him to rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of
glory. Without this principle of divine love, and trust in God, there can be
but little happiness enjoyed in such a world of confusion and disorder as this,
where every thing is in a fluctuating condition; where nothing can be depended
upon. God is the adequate, the only adequate, object of our affections; and our
supreme felicity in this world, as well as in the next, consists in the
enjoyment of him. So that had God consulted only our present happiness, he
could not have commanded us to do any thing which has so great a tendency to
promote it, and is so closely connected with it, as loving him with all our
heart. This will, indeed, appear wild and fanciful to some men, who value
themselves much upon their reason, but have no parts or capacity for devotion.
However the happiness of those whose souls are formed to the love of God, the
supreme and everlasting good, is not the less, because some men have no taste
or relish, for the sublime and exalted pleasures of piety.

HAVING thus, briefly shown some of the grounds of that pre-eminence which our
Lord gives to this commandment, I proceed

III. To inquire what our Lord intends by the assertion, that on these two
commandments, viz. the love of God, and of our neighbor, hang all the law and
the prophets? Now the full sense of this assertion may possibly be comprehended
in the following particulars.

1. UNDER the Mosaic institution, and during the ministry of the Jewish
prophets, the love of God and man, were the principal and most important
duties; more excellent in themselves, more acceptable to God, and more
beneficial to mankind, than the most punctilious observation of the ceremonial
parts of the law. The love of God, comprehending a sincere regard to, and
hearty complacence in, all the divine perfections; and the love of our
neighbor, comprehending all moral, social and relative virtues, were the sum
and substance of religion under the legal dispensation. This is plainly implied
in the assertion, That on these two commandments hang all the law and the
prophets. Every thing was of little account when put in competition with these
great and excellent duties. And this is plainly the light in which the prophets
constantly taught the Jews to look upon the various precepts of the law. I
shall have time to quote only two or three passages, where such a pre-eminence
is evidently given to the unalterable duties of inward piety, and a life of
charity and holiness. To this effect are the words of the prophet Isaiah, chap.
i. To what purposes is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me, says the
Lord? -- Bring no more vain oblations -- your hands are full of blood. Wash ye,
make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to
do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, plead for the widow. So Micah vi. 5, and onwards -- Hear O my
people! remember now what Balak king of Moab consulted -- wherewith shall I
come before the Lord, and bow myself before the high God? shall I come before
him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased
with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my
first born for my transgression; the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord thy God
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God? These duties are the same with those in the text; and the same which
our blessed Savior styled the weightier matters of the law, Matt. xxiii. 23.
and with the omission of which, he upbraids the Pharisees, Luke xi. 42. But woe
unto you Pharisees; for ye tithe mint and rue and all manner of herbs; and pass
over judgment and the love of God; these ought ye to have done, and not to
leave the other undone.

2. THE assertion before us may carry something more in it, than that the love
of God and man, were the most important of any duties of the law -- On these
two commandments hang all the law and the prophets -- This may possibly intend,
that these two general precepts, do in effect, and in some sense, comprehend
all other duties in them, of what kind soever. -- Not strictly, indeed; for
then no comparison could properly be made betwixt them, and others -- But as he
that obeys them, he that has a real principle of love to God and man in his
heart, will naturally be led to do his duty in every other instance -- to
worship God in such manner as he requires, and to discharge all the duties
which he owes to himself, and to his neighbor, in his particular station.
These two virtues, as (...) were, comprehend all others in them. For he that
sincerely loves and honors God in his heart, cannot fail to perform all the
external acts of piety which God has injoined, all the duties of the first
table; and from the love of our neighbor naturally flow, all the duties of the
second, all the duties which we owe to one another. So that to love God and our
neighbor, is, in effect, to obey the whole law and the prophets; and to do all
that God requires of us. And thus do all the law and the prophets, hang on
these two commandments.

3. AND lastly; In this position it may be implied, That the end and design of
all positive institutions; of all precepts not strictly comprehended in these
natural and unalterable duties of piety and charity, was to bring men to the
practice of them. All the rituals of religion, as appointed under the law, had
some reference to these essential duties; they were not injoined under the
notion of having any natural and inherent excellence or goodness in them; but
as means to bring men to a proper temper of mind toward their Maker, and one
another; neither were they valuable or beneficial any farther than as they
promoted this end, even sincere piety, and a life of holiness and charity. In
these things consisted real religion; and every thing besides, had no other
relation to religion, but that of means to an end. The rituals of religion,
though observed with the greatest exactness, were rather an abomination, than a
pleasure, to the Lord, when they were not accompanied, or followed, by these
natural and essential duties. Thus much is plainly implied in those words of
the prophet, Isai. lxvi. 2 -- 5. -- To this man will I look, even to him that
is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word. He that kills an
ox, is as if be slew a man; he that sacrifices a lamb, as if he cut off a
dog's neck; he that offers an oblation, as if he offered swine's blood; he
that burns incense, as if he blessed an idol: yea, they have chosen their own
ways, and their soul delights in their abominations. I also will choose their
delusions, -- because when I called, none did answer; when I spoke they did not
hear; but they did evil before mine eyes, and chose that in which I delighted
not.

THUS do all the law and the prophets hang on these two commandments -- They
are the most important duties of the law and the prophets -- All duties and
virtues naturally flow from them -- And all the ceremonials of religion were
designed as a means for promoting the practice of them. They were the sum and
substance, the alpha and omega, the beginning and end, of the Jewish religion.

SUCH was the religion of the old testament; and such also is the religion of
the new. Which brings me to the fourth and last thing proposed, namely,

IV. To show, that these two commandments have the same place and pre-eminence,
under the gospel dispensation, which they had under the legal: Or, in other
words, That all the gospel of Jesus Christ hangs on these two commandments, in
the same sense that all the law and the prophets did.

NOW, that I may avoid obscurity, and obviate some objections which the
ignorant, or the cavilling, might, perhaps, raise against this assertion, I
shall briefly premise two or three things for the explanation of it, before I
proceed to prove it.

FIRST then, it may be observed, That this assertion relates only to duty, or
practical religion, as distinguished from faith or belief. When our Savior
said that all the law and the prophets hang on these two commandments, he spoke
of the preceptive part of the law, and the duty of Jews, who were supposed
already to believe the law and the prophets, and to be fully convinced of their
divine original. To such persons as these he says, that there were no commands
of so much importance, as those which related to the love of God, and of their
neighbor. In these things consisted the sum and substance of duty under the
Jewish economy. Our Lord was not speaking of what was the substance of natural
religion, but of the mosaic, which was of divine institution, and received as
such by the posterity of Abraham. And accordingly, when it is now said under
the gospel dispensation, that all the gospel of Jesus Christ hangs on these two
commandments, the love of God and man, it is presupposed that christianity is
believed; that Christ is received as a teacher sent from God; as the promised
Messiah; and that the doctrines of his incarnation, death, resurrection and
ascension into heaven; and, in short, all the doctrines delivered either by
himself, or his inspired apostles, are firmly believed. This being supposed, if
the question were asked, which is the great commandment in the gospel? the true
answer to it, (putting only the term gospel instead of law and prophets) would
be the same our Lord gives to the lawyer in the text -- Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.
This is the first and great commandment: And the second is like unto it, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self: on these two commandments hangs all the
Gospel.

SECONDLY, It is not implied in this, that it is of no importance, whether
christians obey the positive institutions of the gospel or not, provided they
practice the natural duties of piety and charity. As our Lord did not set aside
the rituals of religion under the law entirely by giving the preference to the
love of God, and of mankind; so neither are they set aside by those who apply
his assertion concerning the law and prophets, to the gospel. The contrary is
rather implied. And it is a truth obvious to common sense, that all God's
commandments, without exception, are to be obeyed; those of a ritual, as well
as those of a moral, nature. But still, as there were the weightier matters of
the law under the mosaic dispensation, when a comparison was made betwixt the
several commandments of it; so there are the weightier matters of the gospel
also; and these are exactly the same under both dispensations.

LASTLY here: When I speak of the substance of christian duty, and the
weightier matters of the gospel, as consisting in the natural duties of piety
and charity; or the love of God, and man; I would be supposed to intend, that
these duties should be performed upon evangelical principles. The duties in
themselves are really duties of natural religion; but being adopted into
christianity, they are to be performed upon christian principles, and from
gospel motives; with a proper regard to, and dependence upon, the Mediator of
this new covenant, who gave himself for us.

WITH these explanations, I hope none will think the assertion strange, That
these two commands contain the sum of christian duty; and that they ought to
have the same pre-eminence under the gospel, which they had under the law.

THE main design of the christian institution is evidently to bring men to that
moral purity of heart and life, which is comprised in the love of God and of
our neighbor. Neither the most exact compliance with the positive precepts of
the gospel, nor any kind or degree of faith, unaccompanied with a principle of
sincere piety and charity; nor, indeed, any thing else, where the love of God
and man are wanting, can entitle us to the divine acceptance hereafter; or make
us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light. If we
believe in Christ and his gospel, so far it is well: but this does but lay the
foundation for our doing that, upon which our salvation finally turns. A right
faith is an excellent and valuable thing; but it is advantageous no farther
than it purifies the heart, and works by love; no farther than it transforms
our minds into the divine likeness; and leads us to live an holy and godly
life. Thus the apostle Peter exhorts us, to give all diligence, and to add to
our faith, virtue; [constancy, resolution, fortitude] and to virtue, knowledge;
and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience,
godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness,
charity. For, says he, if these things be in you, and abound, they make you
that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ. But he that lacks these things is blind -- 2 Pet. i. 5 -- It is
practical religion, the love of God, and a life of righteousness and charity,
proceeding from faith in Christ and the gospel, that denominates us good men
and good christians -- Not wearing the form of godliness -- Not the belief of
any doctrines, however true, concerning the atonement of Christ -- Not a lazy
recumbency upon the righteousness of another -- Not any enthusiastic fervors of
spirit -- Not a firm persuasion that we are elected of God, and that our names
are written in the book of life -- Some of the worst men in the world, have as
much faith as any in it -- attend upon sermons and sacraments as often -- rely
as confidently -- have as warm frames and lively imaginations -- and are as
fully persuaded of their being chosen to salvation. But what does all this
avail, if that faith be without works? if that form of godliness be without the
power? if that reliance upon the righteousness of Christ, be thought to
supersede personal and inherent holiness? -- if those fervors of soul, are
unattended by divine love and charity? -- if those towering imaginations, are
but the vagaries of a wild fancy? -- and that persuasion of their election,
proceed from vanity only, and not from their having given diligence to make
their calling and election sure?

THE apostle Paul, in the iid chap. of his epistle to Titus, charges him to
inculcate various moral and relative duties in his preaching; and then inforces
this charge with an argument taken from the general design of the gospel. --
For the grace of God, says he, has appeared unto all men, teaching us that,
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly and righteously
and godly in this present world, looking for the blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity; and purify unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works. These words are plainly expressive of
the main scope and intention of Christ's mediation, viz. the bringing of
mankind to real holiness of heart and manners; or, in other words, to the love
of God and of our neighbor. In the next chapter this same apostle commands
Titus to teach the importance and necessity of christian obedience, and good
works. This is a faithful saying, says he, and these things I will that thou
affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God might he careful to
maintain gook works: these things are good and profitable unto men. In what
does St. James place the substance of religion? Pure religion and undefiled
before God, even the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in
their affliction, and to keep a man's self unspotted from the world. Does he
not tell us that the devils believe and tremble? that faith without works is
dead? that faith cannot save us? and that by works a man is justified, and not
by faith only? The love of our neighbor is so essential, that St. John makes
it a certain evidence of a man's being in a state of favor with God; and the
want of it as certain an evidence that our religion is of no value. We know,
says he, that we are passed from death to life, because we love the brethren --
But whosoever has this world's good, and sees his brother have need, and shuts
up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him. St.
Paul also makes the want of charity, a certain mark of a man's being nothing in
a religious estimation, whatever faith, whatever gifts, whatever
accomplishments, he may be endowed with. Though I speak with the tongues of men
and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass and a
tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all
mysteries, and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and
have not charity I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the
poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity it profits
me nothing -- Now abides faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest
of these is charity. It would be endless to quote all the passages to this
purpose in the writings of the apostles.

OUR Lord's preaching tended to the same point. What is his sermon upon the
mount, but a moral discourse wherein the excellency and necessity of internal
piety, and holiness of life, is declared in the strongest terms? Has he not
made charity the distinguishing character of his true disciples? -- Hereby
shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another. And
herein, says he, is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit. So shall ye
be my disciples. Has he not told us, that not every one that says unto him
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that does the will
of his Father which is in heaven? Has he not assured us, that many will say
unto him in the last day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name; and
in thy name have cast out devils; and in thy name have done many wonderful
works? to whom he will them profess, that he never knew them, because they
wrought iniquity? Has he not said, If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide
in my love, even as I have kept my Fathers commandments, and abide in his love
-- This is my commandment that ye love one another as I have loved you? If we
look to the account which our Lord has given of the proceedings at the final
judgment, when he shall sit upon the throne of his glory, all nations being
gathered before him to receive their doom; I say if we look to this account,
what shall we find represented as the ground and reason, of the righteous being
acquitted, but charity and good works? -- Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the kingdom prepared for your from the foundation of the world; for I was and
hungered and ye gave me meat; thirsty, and ye gave me drink, etc. And what on
the other hand, is represented as the ground and reason of the condemnation of
others, but the neglect of these same duties? -- Depart from me ye cursed; for
I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; thirsty, and ye gave me no drink,
etc. In short, the whole tenor of our Lord's preaching was moral: he seldom
inculcated any thing upon his hearers besides piety toward God, and
righteousness and charity toward man: and all his discourses were just as
contrary to the solifidian doctrines which too many have given in to since, as
light is to darkness, or Christ to Belial; nor can the former any more have
communion together, than the latter. Our Lord insisted so much upon moral
duties, that some of late, in order to vindicate their own unscriptural and
irrational manner of preaching, have even been compelled to deny that he
preached the gospel, or designed to do it; alleging that his doctrines and
manner of preaching were legal. The irresistible conviction which these men
have, that their own doctrines and discourses are of a very different cast and
tenor from those of our blessed Savior, has put them upon making this wretched
and impious evasion. They apologize for themselves by condemning their Lord and
master. And rather than acknowledge, as they ought, that they do not preach the
real gospel of Jesus Christ, they deny that Jesus Christ himself did. But
notwithstanding they assert our Lord's preaching was legal St. John the Baptist
was plainly of a different opinion: for St. John the Evangelist informs us
chap. i. that he bare witness of him -- saying -- The law was given by Moses,
but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. And our Lord himself, when the
Baptist sent to inquire of him who he was, told the messengers to tell John,
among other things, that the poor had the gospel preached to them; and this in
order to satisfy the Baptist, that he was the true Messiah, and that another
was not to be looked for. I must, therefore, beg leave still to think, that our
Lord really preached his own gospel, although this may possibly be looked upon
by some as an heterodox opinion; and a certain mark of my denying the doctrines
of grace.

I hope it appears from what has been said, that the love of God and of our
neighbor; that sincere piety of heart; and a righteous, holy and charitable
life; are the weightier matters of the gospel, as well as of the law. Indeed
these are more evidently the substance of christian duty, than of jewish. Under
the gospel, rituals are indeed of less account than they were under the law. It
is not on this mountain, or that, that God is to be worshipped; every place is
a christian temple; for the Father seeks such to worship him, as will worship
him in spirit and in truth. Rituals were but a yoke and a burden, weak and
beggarly elements even under the law. And they are much more so under the
Gospel, when compared to that spiritual sacrifice which christians are to offer
to God. And as to charity, this is more peculiarly an evangelical, than a legal
duty. For which reason it is that St. John styles this a new commandment, that
we love one another.

UPON the whole then, the case seems to stand thus -- Although the christian
revelation brings us acquainted with many truths besides those which the light
of nature suggests, or Judaism plainly taught; although it injoins us to do
several things which would not have been obligatory without an explicit
command; although it furnishes us with a great variety of new and excellent
motives to excite us to the practice of our duty in all its branches; and
although christianity cannot, for these reasons, with any sense or propriety,
be said to be the same with natural religion, or only a re-publication of the
law of nature; yet the principal, the most important and fundamental duties
required by christianity are, nevertheless, the same which were injoined as
such under the legal dispensation; and the same which are dictated by the light
of nature. They are natural moral duties, enforced with revealed and
supernatural motives; and to be performed from principles peculiar to the
gospel. And, indeed, it is plain beyond dispute, that the substance of true
religion must necessarily be the same, not only under the jewish and christian
dispensations, but also, in all countries, to all rational creatures, in all
parts of the universe, in all periods of time. Modes and ceremonies of religion
may, indeed, be various as the circumstances and condition of men; and God may
afford different degrees of light and knowledge in different times and places:
But the sum of our duty results from the nature of God, our relation to him,
and one another. And this must therefore be as immutable as God himself, with
whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. As God is the same in all
times and places; as mankind bear the same general relation to him in all times
and places; and as our relation to each other is always the same, except as to
some trivial and merely circumstantial difference; so the substance of human
duty must necessarily be the same also in all times and places. There cannot be
any other than circumstantial differences in the duty, obligation and religion,
of creatures who are the offspring of the same God; creatures endowed with the
same common nature; and creatures bearing the same general relation to each
other. Now that religion which must remain invariably the same, under every
change of circumstance, through all ages, in all places, and to all rational
beings, consists in the love and veneration of the supreme Father and Lord of
the universe, and in the practice of righteousness and charity. This is the
religion which is common to earth and heaven: It is the religion of angels and
archangels above, as well as of saints below: This was the religion of
paradise before the apostasy of mankind: This was the religion of Noah before
the flood: This was the religion of the Patriarchs afterward: This was the
religion of the Israelites in Egypt before the law: This was the religion which
was ratified by God at mount Sinai: This was the religion of the law and the
prophets to the day of the Messiah: This was the religion which He and his
apostles principally inculcated upon mankind, under the gospel dispensation:
And this will be the religion, the employment and the happiness of the spirits
of just men made perfect hereafter in the kingdom of heaven; for the love of
God, and charity shall never fail, although whether there be prophecies, they
shall fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; and although, whether
there be knowledge, it shall vanish away.

THUS do these two duties claim the same place and pre-eminence under the
evangelical dispensation which they had in the law and the prophets: On these
two commandments hangs all the gospel of Jesus Christ.

I have now done with the four particulars which I proposed to discuss when I
first entered upon this subject. There are various moral reflections and
inferences which naturally arise from what has been now discoursed; and so I
must beg your patience a few minutes longer.

1. THEN, if the love of God and of our neighbor be the weightier matters of
the gospel as well as of the law, we are naturally led to bewail the folly, and
unhappy condition of those who, in a manner, leave these out of their religion.
There are innumerable persons even in the christian world, who, neglecting that
substantial religion which consists in the practice of these sublime and
heavenly duties, employ all their zeal, care and diligence about things of
little or no importance. Christianity is principally an institution of life and
manners; designed to teach us how to be good men, and to show us the necessity
of becoming so. But there are multitudes who call themselves christians, who
content themselves with an idle, speculative belief of certain notions and
doctrines, without troubling themselves about that holiness, without which we
are told, that no man shall see the Lord. They know their duty so exactly, and
believe it so firmly, that they imagine they may well be excused from doing it.
If they have but a great deal of faith, and rely strongly upon the
righteousness of Christ, they think they cannot miss of salvation, although, by
their sins, they daily crucify the son of God afresh, and put him to an open
shame. Some are pleasing themselves with a round of empty formalities,
imagining that religion consists chiefly in frequent fastings, attending upon
sacraments, and worshipping God with a great deal of outward pomp and ceremony.
They forget that God is a spirit; and to be worshipped chiefly in spirit: and
love all kinds of ordinances much better than they love their neighbors. There
are many, were they asked, which was the first and great commandment, if they
gave an answer agreeable to their own practice, must say -- Thou shall tell
beads devoutly; visit the sepulchers of ancient saints; fall down before
relics; pay homage to painted canvas, to carved stones, and molded clay,
pray frequently to the mother of God; or the like: and if they thought at all
of the love of God, and our neighbor, would assign them only that low place
which our Lord gives to tything mint, anise and cummin. Others place religion
chiefly in having frequent raptures, and strange transports of mechanical
devotion; in which the less they exercise their reason, the better and more
glorious it is. For 'till they have lost all human understanding, they think it
impossible they should get a divine one. Thus they go on, raising themselves
from one degree of religious phrenzy to another, till they run quite divinely
mad; and then they imagine, that with St. Paul, they are caught up into the
third heaven; that they hear unspeakable words; that they see visions, and have
a multitude of revelations given to them. And the consequence of this is, that
they are lifted up above measure. They then look down with contempt upon all
moral duties, as being below such spiritual men. They are for a religion that
consists in something more refined and sublime than the love of God and their
neighbor; these are but barely rational and natural duties, and fit only for
carnal men, or, at best, babes in grace. Nothing can hit the refined taste of
these Goliah's in christianity, but what has some mysterious sublimity in it,
and is quite remote from reason. What is plain and obvious is too low and
vulgar for such great proficients in grace and spiritual knowledge. God forbid
that I should say any thing to discourage a lively and warm devotion. But such
enthusiastic flights as these, have no countenance from the gospel of Christ.
And the almost invariable consequence of indulging them, is the neglect of
solid, substantial religion; a rational love of God, of mankind, and the
practice of moral virtue. When persons once get to gasping thus eagerly after
immediate inspiration, they generally bewilder themselves, lose sight of common
sense, and neglect sober religion for the sake of having fermented spirits, and
superficial flashes of joy. They impute all their ravings and follies and wild
imaginations to the spirit of God; and usually think themselves converted, when
the poor, unhappy creatures are only out of their wits.

2. SINCE the substance of christian duty consists in the love of God and of
our neighbor, and in the practice of morality, this shows us what a
gospel-minister's preaching ought chiefly to turn upon. When he is concerned
with such as are already christians in belief and speculation; that which he
has to do still is to bring them to be christians in heart and behavior -- Not
to dwell upon speculative points -- upon trifling distinctions, and upon
metaphysical niceties, which can only perplex his hearers, without bettering
their minds and morals -- But to excite them to put on a temper of mind and an
outward conversation, which corresponds to their holy profession; and, in the
words of my text, to love the Lord their God with all their heart, and their
neighbor as themselves However, this is too plainly neglected by many. Their
constant cry is -- "Believe, believe" -- "Come to Christ" -- "Depend upon his
righteousness." As for holiness and good works, they very rarely mention them;
and when they do, it is rather with a design to undervalue them, and persuade
people that they are good for nothing, than to enforce them as the
indispensable condition of salvation. Nay, these things are not only spoken of
very often as being perfectly useless, but even hazardous to the fouls of men.
Good God! that the design of thy gospel should be thus frustrated by those
whose immediate office it is, to enforce the holy precepts of it upon mankind!
--

3. HENCE it follows, that those people who are offended with moral discourses,
under the notion that they are not evangelical, are grossly ignorant of the very
spirit and design of christianity -- They know not what they say, nor whereof
they affirm; and need to be taught what are the rudiments and first principles
of the oracles of God. Such ignorant, licentious perverters of the gospel, the
apostle speaks of in his second epistle to Timothy. The time will come, says
he, when they will not endure sound doctrine. But after their own lusts shall
they heap unto themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn
away their ears from the truth, and be turned unto fables. And, indeed, of all
fables that ever were devised, there was never one that, either for silliness
or impiety, equalled this, that faith without works, without the love of God
and man, and a life of holiness, is sufficient to bring us to heaven.

4. FROM what has been said, we may see what those doctrines of the gospel are,
which ought to be defended and propagated with the greatest zeal, viz. those
which more immediately relate to practice; to the love of God and man -- A zeal
for all such doctrines is a zeal according to knowledge. But it is apparent,
that these have been but little regarded by many christians, in comparison of
others which a man might disbelieve without hurting his morals, or endangering
his salvation. Those things which have kept the christian world in an eternal
ferment; which have sharpened the spirits of men; and set little angry bigots a
snarling and growling at one another, are nice metaphysical fooleries,
scholastic distinctions without any difference, and mere words without a
meaning. These are the things, (or rather the nothings) which have been
disputed about, to the neglect of the weightier matters of the gospel; and even
to the destruction of all piety and brotherly love; of every thing becoming a
man and a christian. So hot and furious have many professed christians been in
all ages, and so wrathful their contentions, about nothing, or mere trifles,
that one unacquainted with the genius of their religion, would be apt to think
it a very different thing from what it is. He might be apt to think that the
master of these furious, railing, and burning disputants, had left it in
express charge, as the distinguishing character of his disciples, -- not that
they should be wise as serpents, and harmless as doves -- not that they should
love one another; and practice mutual forbearance and condescension -- and do
unto all men as they would be done by -- but that they should be venomous and
malicious as serpents -- hate one another with all their hearts -- do to every
one as they would be willing to be done to by none -- go together by the ears
about words and sounds -- drag each other to goals and gibbets -- to dungeons,
and the flames -- and consign all over to hellfire at last, who could not
immediately pronounce their uncouth shibboleths -- But O blessed Jesus! thou
Savior of the world! is this for thy disciples to love one another as thou
have loved them? Or did thou mercifully make peace betwixt God and man by the
blood of thy cross, that men being at peace with God, might thus make war upon
one another, and inhumanly shed each others blood! But

5. AND to conclude: suffer me to beseech you all seriously to consider of the
nature, the great end and design of the gospel, and principally to regard what
is of the greatest importance. Content not yourselves with believing well --
with being zealous either for, or against, any particular doctrines -- with
practicing the rituals of religion -- with being sanguine in the vindication of
any particular sect or party, or in opposing any -- These things will not
secure your salvation. It Is then and then only, that you will be the real
disciples of Christ, such as he will own and reward at the last day, when your
faith has its genuine influence upon your hearts and lives; when it inspires
you with the love of God, and of your neighbor; when it causes you to break
off your sins by repentance, and your iniquities by turning to the Lord. This
moral purity of heart and life, is that religion which our blessed Savior has
taught; it is that religion which employed his lips; and which all his
behavior preached to the world, more eloquently and louder than a thousand
tongues. For God's sake, for your own sake, for the honor of the gospel, and
your profession; let no man deceive you with vain words. He that does
righteousness, and he only, is righteous. Let no man amuse you with idle,
impious stories, as if faith, and reliance upon Christ, were all that the
gospel made necessary in order to your salvation. As surely as the gospel is a
real revelation, so surely are these notions a mere dream -- a fable -- a fable
wherein folly and wickedness seem to strive for precedence -- As sure as there
is a God in heaven, no man will go thither to behold his glory, and to enjoy
the everlasting pleasures that are at his right hand, unless he forsakes his
sins, and becomes holy as God is holy. I conclude with those words with which
our blessed Savior concluded his sermon upon the mount, Mat. 7. 24 -- 28. --
whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will like him unto a
wise man which built his house upon a rock: And the rain descended, and the
floods came, and the wilds blew, and beat upon that house* and it fell not, for
it was founded upon a rock. And every one that hears these sayings of mine,
and does them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man which built his house
upon the sand: And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the wilds blew,
and beat upon that house; and it fell, and great was the fall of it.

FINIS.
Just Published, And sold by Rogers and Foul in Queen Street* Dr. Watts's
Orthodoxy and Charity united: In several Reconciling ESSAYS ON THE Law and
Gospel, Faith and Works; VIZ.

ESSAY I. The Substance or Matter of the Gospel. II. The Form of the Gospel.
III. The Use of the Law under the Gospel. IV. Mistaken Ways of coming to God
without Christ. V. A plain and easy Account of Saving Faith, or coming to God
by Jesus Christ. VI. A Reconciling Thought on various Controversies about Faith
and Salvation. VII. Against Uncharitableness. VIII. The Difficulties in
Scripture, and the different Opinions of Christians. IX. An Apology for
Christians of different Sentiments.
Speaking the Truth in Love. Ephesians. iv. 15. The Second Edition.


