AN Humble INQUIRY INTO The Rules of the WORD of GOD, CONCERNING The
QUALIFICATIONS Requisite to a Complete Standing and full Communion IN THE
Visible Christian CHURCH.

By Jonathan Edwards, A.M. Pastor of the first Church in Northampton. With an
Appendix by Mr. Foxcroft.

JOB xxxiii. 2, 3. Behold now I have opened my Mouth: -- My Words shall be of
the Uprightness of my Heart. Confitebatur [ Lutherus] dolorem suum, quod ab
ipsis reflorescentis Evangelii Primordiis, quosvis absque Discrimine ad Coenam
dominicam admisisset, quodque Disciplinam, Fratrum Disciplinae similem, apud
suos non constituisset. -- Quia objiciebatur, Fratres non habere Ecclesiam
apertam; -- Responsum fuit, Sancta dare non Sanctis prohibuisse Christum: --
Errorem [in Papatu] corrigi non posse aliter quam ut certa Probation^, nec illa
subitanea, Cordium Arcana revelunter, Novitiique diu and caute tum informentur,
tum explorentur. Ratio Discipl. Fratr. Bohem. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S.
KNEELAND in Queenstreet, 1749.

The Author's PREFACE.
MY appearing in this public Manner on that Side of the Question, which is
defended in the following Sheets, will probably be surprising to many; as it is
well known, that Mr STODDARD, so great and eminent a Divine, and my venerable
Predecessor in the pastoral Office over the Church in Northampton, as well as
my own Grandfather, publicly and strenuously appeared in Opposition to the
Doctrine here maintained.

However, I hope, it will not be taken amiss, that I think as do, merely
because I herein differ from him, though so much my Superior, and One whose Name
and Memory I am under distinguishing Obligations, on every Account, to treat
with great Respect and Honor. Especially may I justly expect, that it will not
be charged on me as a Crime, that I don't think in every Thing just as he did,
since none more than he himself asserted this Scriptural and Protestant Maxim,
that we ought to call^^ Man on Earth Master, or make the Authority of the
greatest and holiest of mere Men the Ground of our Belief of any Doctrine in
Religion. Certainly we are not obliged to think any Man infallible, who himself
utterly disclaims Infallibility. Very justly Mr. Stoddard observes in his
Appeal to the Learned, (Page 97.) All protestants agree, that there is no
Infallibility at Rome; and I know no Body else pretends to any, since the
Apostles Days. And he insists, in his Preface to his Sermon on the same
Subject, That it argues no Want of a due Respect in us to our Forefathers, for
us to examine their Opinions. Some of his Words in that Preface contain a good
Apology for me, and are worthy to be repeated on this Occasion. They are as
follows:

It may possibly be a Fault (says Mr. Stoddard) to depart from the Ways of our
Fathers: But it may also be a Virtue, and an eminent Act of Obedience, to
depart from them in some Things. Men are will not to make a great Noise, that we
are bringing in Innovations, and depart from the old Way: But it is beyond me,
to find out wherein the Iniquity does lie. We may see Cause to alter some
Practices of our Fathers, without despising of them, without priding our selves
in our Wisdom, without Apostasy, without abusing the Advantages God has given
us, without a Spirit of Compliance with corrupt Men, without Inclinations to
Superstition, without making Disturbance in the Church of God: And there is no
Reason, that it should be turned as a Reproach upon us. Surely it is Commendable
for us to examine the Practices of our Fathers, we have no sufficient Reason to
(...) upon Trust from them. Let them have as high a Character (...) belongs to
them; yet we may not look upon their Principles as O^^cles. NATHAN himself
missed it in his Conjecture about building the House of God. He that believes
Principles because they affirm them, makes Idols of them. And it would be no
Humility, but Baseness of Spirit, for us to judge our selves incapable to
examine the Principles that have been handed down to us. If we be by any Means
fit to open the Mysteries of the Gospel, we are capable to judge of these
Matters: And it would ill become us, so to indulge our selves in Ease, as to
neglect the Examination of received Principles. If the Practices of our Fathers
in any Particulars were mistaken, it is fit they should be rejected; if they be
not, they will bear Examination. If we be forbidden to examine their Practice,
that will cut off all Hopes of Reformation.

Thus, in these very seasonable and apposite Sayings, Mr. STODDARD, though dead,
yet speaks: And here (to apply them to my own Case,) he tells me, that I am
not at all blameable, for not taking his Principles on Trust; That
notwithstanding the high Character justly belonging to him, I ought not to look
on his Principles as Oracles, as though he could not miss it, as well as NATHAN
himself in his Conjecture about building the House of God; Nay, surely that I
am, even to be commended, for examining his Practice, and judging for myself;
That it would ill become me, to do otherwise; That this would be no
Manifestation of Humility, but rather show a Baseness of Spirit; That if I
ben't capable to judge for my self in these Matters, I am by no Means fit to
open the Mysteries of the Gospel; That if I should believe his Principles,
because he advanced them, I should be guilty of making him an Idol. -- Also he
tells his and my Flock, with all others, that it ill becomes them, so to
indulge their Ease, as to neglect examining of received Principles and
Practices; and that it is fit, Mistakes in any Particulars be rejected: That if
in some Things I differ in my Judgment from him, it would be very unreasonable,
on this Account to make a great Noise, as though I were bringing in Innovations,
and departing from the old Way; That I may see Cause to alter some Practices of
my Grandfather and Predecessor, without despising Him, without priding my self
in my Wisdom, without Apostasy, without despising the Advantages God has given
me, without Inclination to Superstition, and without making Disturbance in the
Church of God; In short, that it is beyond him, to find out wherein the Iniquity
of my so doing lies; and that there is no Reason why it should be turned as a
Reproach upon me. Thus, I think, he sufficiently vindicates my Conduct in the
present Case, and warns all with whom I am concerned, not to be at all
displeased with me, or to find the least Fault with me, merely because I
examine for my self, have a Judgment of my own, and am for practicing in some
Particulars different from him, how positive soever he was that his Judgment
and Practice were right. It Is reasonably hoped and expected, that they who have
a great Regard to his Judgment, will impartially regard his Judgment, and
hearken to his Admonition in these Things.

I can seriously declare, that an Affectation of making a Show as if I were
something wiser than that excellent Person, is exceeding distant from me, and
very far from having the least Influence in my appearing to oppose, in this Way
of the Press, an Opinion which he so earnestly maintained and promoted. Sure I
am, I have not affected to vary from his Judgment, nor in the least been
governed by a Spirit of Contradiction, neither indulged a cavilling Humor, in
remarking on any of his Arguments or Expressions.

I have formerly been of his Opinion, which I imbibed from his Books, even from
my Childhood, and have in my Proceedings conformed to his Practice; though never
without some Difficulties in my View, which I could not solve: Yet, however, a
Distrust of my own Understanding, and Deference to the Authority of so
venerable a Man, the seeming Strength of some of his Arguments, together with
the Success he had in his Ministry, and his great Reputation and Influence,
prevailed for a long Time to bear down my Scruples. -- But the Difficulties and
Uneasiness on my Mind increasing, as I became more studied in Divinity, and as
I improved in Experience; this bro't me to closer Diligence and Care to search
the Scriptures, and more impartially to examine and weigh the Arguments of my
Grandfather, and such other Authors as I could get on his Side of the Question.
By which Means, after long searching, pondering, viewing and reviewing, I
gained Satisfaction, became fully settled in the Opinion I now maintain, as in
the Discourse here offered to public View; and dared to proceed no further in
a Practice and Administration inconsistent there with: Which brought me into
peculiar Circumstances, laying me under an inevitable Necessity publicly to
declare and maintain the Opinion I was thus established in; as also to do it
from the Press, and to do it at this Time without Delay. It Is far from a
pleasing Circumstance of this Publication, that it is against what my honored
Grandfather strenuously maintained, both from the Pulpit and Press. I can truly
say, on Account of this and some other Considerations, it is what I engage in
with the greatest Reluctance, that ever I undertook any public Service in my
Life. But the State of Things with me is so ordered, by the Sovereign Disposal
of the great Governor of the World, that my doing this appeared to me very
necessary and altogether unavoidable. I am (...) the Interest of Religion
concerned in this Affair, but my (...) Reputation, future Usefulness, and my
very Subsistence, all seem to depend on my freely opening and defending my
self, as to my Principles, and agreeable Conduct in my Pastoral Charge; and on
my doing it from the Press: In which Way alone am I able to state and justify
my Opinion, to any Purpose, before the Country (which is full of Noise,
Misrepresentations, and many Censures concerning this Affair) or even before my
own People, as all would be fully sensible, if they knew the exact State of the
Case.

I have been brought to this Necessity in divine Providence, by such a
Situation of Affairs and Coincidence of Circumstances and Events, as I choose at
present to be silent about; and which it is not needful, nor perhaps expedient
for me to publish to the World.

One Thing among others that caused me to go about this Business with so much
Backwardness, was the Fear of a bad Improvement some ill-minded People might be
ready, at this Day, to make of the Doctrine here defended: particularly that
wild enthusiastical Sort of People, who have of late gone into unjustifiable
Separations, even renouncing the Ministers and Churches of the Land in general,
under Pretense of setting up a pure Church. It Is well known, that I have
heretofore publicly remonstrated, both from the Pulpit and Press, against very
many of the Notions and Practices of this Kind of People: and shall be very
sorry if what I now offer to the Public, should be any Occasion of their
encouraging or strengthening themselves in those Notions and Practices of
theirs. To prevent which, I would now take Occasion to declare, I am still of
the same Mind concerning them, that I have formerly manifested. I have the same
Opinion concerning the Religion and inward Experiences chiefly in Vogue among
them, as I had when I wrote my Treatise on religious Affections, and when I
wrote my Observations and Reflections on Mr. Brainerd's Life. I have no better
Opinion of their Notion of a pure Church by Means of a Spirit of discerning,
their censorious Outcries against the standing Ministers and Churches in
general, their Lay-Ordinations, their Lay-Preachings, and public Exhortings,
and administering Sacraments; their assuming, self-confident, contentious,
uncharitable separating Spirit; their going about the Country, as sent by the
Lord, to make Proselytes; with their many other extravagant and wicked Ways. My
holding the Doctrine that is defended in this Discourse, is no Argument of any
Change of my Opinion concerning them; for when I wrote those two Books before
mentioned, I was of the same Mind concerning the Qualifications of Communicants
at the Lord's Table, that I am of now.

However, it is not unlikely, that some will still exclaim against my
Principles, as being of the same pernicious Tendency with those of the
Separatists: To such I can only by a solemn Protestation aver the Sincerity of
my Aims, and the great Care I have exercised to avoid whatsoever is erroneous,
or might be in any Respect mischievous. But as to my Success in these my
upright Aims and Endeavors, I must leave it to every Reader to judge for
himself, after he has carefully perused, and impartially considered the
following Discourse: which, considering the Nature and Importance of the
Subject, I hope, all serious Readers will accompany with their earnest Prayers
to the Father of Lights, for his gracious Direction and Influence. And, to Him
be Glory in the Churches by Christ Jesus. AMEN.

J. E.

ERRATA.
Page 9. last l. but one r. distinct Sort -- p.10. l.6.r. recommends it --
p.11.l. 31. for p.72.r.p.73. -- p.13.l.26.r. to do in admitting -- p. 14.last
l.r. explicitly -- p. 15.l.1.r. implicitly -- p.16.l.23.r.some.They plead, --
p. 36.l.25.dele had after Means -- p 41.l.20.r. good Reason -- p. 44. l.21.dele
as -- p.57.l.9. r. Scriptures -- p.58.l.8.r. and that natural and graceless Men
were not admitted -- l.10.dele and was done unawares p.91.l.19. after from,
dele to -- l. 25. r. insist -- p.106. l. 18. r.ANSW.This -- p.107.l.17.r.come,
being -- p.109.l.39. r. Mysteries, -- p.117. l.12.r.should be -- p. 126.l. 34.
r. the Ground -- p. 128. l. 6. dele it -- p. 134. l. 1. r. become.

PREFACE.
THOUGH the Doctrine here maintained by our dear and Rev. Brother was bro't over
hither by the pious and judicious Fathers of this Country from the Puritans in
England, and held by them and their Successors in our Churches above Threescore
Years without Dissension; yet some good and learned Men have since gone into
another Way of thinking in this Matter. And as the WORD OF GOD is our only Rule
of judging, and this only can bind the Conscience in Religion; it must needs
concern every Man to search the Scriptures, that he may come to as satisfying a
Knowledge as may be, whether he has a Right to the Lord's Supper, and whether
it be his immediate Duty to partake of it, or admit of others. And for all that
we had hitherto read on this Subject, it seemed to us, there wanted further
Searchings and Discoveries.

And though we have not all had Opportunity to read the Composure following; yet
we apprehend the Reverend Author singularly qualified to manage this important
Argument, from his great Acquaintance with the Scriptures, and diligent
Application to the study of them with a special Aim to find the Mind of CHRIST
and settle his Judgment in this Particular; both to get more Light himself, and
communicate the same to others. And we have this peculiar Motive to excite
Attention to what he writes; that he is so far from arguing from the Prejudice
or Influence of Education, that being bro't up in the contrary Way of Thinking,
and more inclined thereto from a special Veneration of his Reverend
Grandfather; yet on careful searching the sacred Volumes he was obliged to
yield to these Convictions they produced in him, and change his Judgment.

The following Treatise contains the Substance of these Convictions, or the
particular Reasons of this Alteration. And if those who are now in his former
Way of Thinking, would with due Seriousness, Humility, Calmness, Diligence and
Impartiality, search the Scriptures, and consider his Arguments derived from
them, looking up to GOD through CHRIST, and subjecting their Minds entirely to
Him; they may either see and yield to the same Convictions, and find Cause to
change their Judgments also, or will at least continue their fraternal
Affection to the worthy Author and Others in the same Sentiments with him.

We heartily pray that the Rev. Author and his Flock may for a long Time be
happy together; that their cordial Love and ^^derness to each other may
continue and operate in mutual and all lawful Co ^escentions and Forbearances
under different Sentiments in these Particulars; that every One may be open to
Light, and guard against all Prejudice, Precipitance and Passion; that they may
be very watchful against the Devices of Satan to disunite or disaffect them;
that they may study the Things that make for Peace and Edification. -- And the
GOD of Light, Love and Peace will continue with them.

Boston, August 11th 1749. Thomas Prince John Webb Thomas Foxcroft M. Byles.


An Inquiry into the Qualifications for full Communion in the visible Church of
CHRIST.
PART I.
The Question stated and explained.
THE main Question I would consider, and for the Negative of which, I would
offer some Arguments in the following Discourse, is This; Whether, according to
the Rules of CHRIST, any ought to be admitted to the Communion and Privileges
of Members of the visible Church of CHRIST in complete Standing, but such as
are in Profession, and in the Eye of the Church's Christian Judgment, godly or
gracious Persons?

When I speak of Members of the visible Church of Christ, in complete Standing,
I would be understood of those who are received as the proper immediate
Subjects of all the external Privileges, Christ has appointed for the ordinary
Members of his Church. I say ordinary Members, in Distinction from any peculiar
Privileges and Honors of Church Officers and Rulers. All allow, there are some
that are in some Respect in the Church of God, who are not Members in complete
Standing, in the Sense that has been explained: All that acknowledge
Infant Baptism, allow Infants, who are the proper Subjects of Baptism, and are
baptized, to be in some Sort Members of the Christian Church; yet none suppose
them to be Members in such Standing as to be the proper immediate Subjects of
all ecclesiastical Ordinances and Privileges: But that some further
Qualifications are requisite in order to this, to be obtained, either in a
Course of Nature, or by Education, or by divine Grace. And some who were
baptized in Infancy, even after they come to be adult, may yet remain for a
Season short of such a Standing as has been spoken of; being destitute of
sufficient Knowledge, and perhaps some other Qualifications, through the
Neglect of Parents, or their own Negligence, or otherwise; or because they
carelessly neglect to qualify themselves for ecclesiastical Privileges by making
a public Profession of the Christian Faith, or owning the Christian Covenant,
or forbear to offer themselves as Candidates for these Privileges; and yet not
be cast out of the Church, or cease to be in any Respect its Members: This, I
suppose, will also be generally allowed.

One Thing mainly intended in the foregoing Question is, Whether any adult
Persons but such as are in Profession and Appearance endowed with Christian
Grace or Piety, ought to be admitted to the Christian Sacraments: Particularly
whether they ought to be admitted to the Lord's Supper; and, if they are such
as were not baptized in Infancy, ought to be admitted to Baptism. Adult Persons
having those Qualifications that oblige others to receive 'em as the proper
immediate Subjects of the Christian Sacraments, is a main Thing intended in the
Question, by being such as ought to be admitted to the Communion and Privileges
of Members of the visible Church, in complete Standing. There are many adult
Persons that by the Allowance of all are in some Respect within the Church of
God, who are not Members in good Standing, in this Respect. There are many, for
Instance, that have not at present the Qualifications proper to recommend 'em
to Admission to the Lord's Supper: There are many scandalous Persons, who are
under Suspension. The late venerable Mr. Stoddard and many other great Divines
suppose, that even excommunicated Persons are still Members of the Church of
God: and some suppose, the Worshippers of Baal in Israel, even those who were
bred up such from their Infancy, remained still Members of the Church of God:
And very many Protestant Divines suppose, that the Members of the Church of
Rome, though they are brought up and live continually in gross idolatry, and
innumerable Errors and Superstitions that tend utterly to make void the Gospel
of Christ, still are in the visible Church of Christ: yet, I suppose, no
orthodox Divines would hold these to be properly and regularly qualified for
the Lord's Supper. It was therefore requisite, in the Question before us, that
a Distinction should be made between Members of the visible Church in general,
and Members in complete Standing.

It was also requisite, that such a Distinction should be made in the Question,
to avoid a lengthning out this Discourse exceedingly with needless Questions
and Debates concerning the State of baptized Infants; that is, needless as to
my present Purpose. Though I have no Doubts about the Doctrine of Infant Baptism;
yet God's Manner of Dealing with such Infants as are regularly dedicated to Him
in Baptism, is a Matter liable to great Disputes and many Controversies, and
would require a large Dissertation by it self to clear it up; which, as it
would extend this Discourse beyond all Bounds, so it appears not necessary in
order to a clear Determination of the present Question. The Revelation of God's
Word is much plainer and more express concerning adult Persons, that act for
themselves in religious Matters, than concerning Infants. The Scriptures were
written for the Sake of adult Persons, or those that are capable of knowing
what is written: It Is to such the Apostles speak in their Epistles, and to such
only does God speak through out his Word: And the Scriptures especially speak for
the Sake of those, and about those to whom they speak. And therefore if the
Word of God affords us Light enough concerning those spoken of in the Question,
as I have stated it, clearly to determine the Matter with Respect to them, we
need not wait 'till we see all Doubts and Controversies about baptized Infants
cleared and settled, before we pass a Judgment with Respect to the Point in
Hand. The Denominations, Characters and Descriptions, which we find given in
Scripture to visible Christians, and to the visible Church, are principally
with an Eye to the Church of Christ in its adult State and proper Standing. If
any one was about to describe that Kind of Birds called Doves, it would be most
proper to describe grown Doves, and not young Ones in the Egg or Nest, without
Wings or Feathers: so if any one should describe a Palm Tree or Olive Tree by
their visible Form and Appearance, it would be presumed that they described
those of these Kinds of Trees in their mature and proper State; and not as just
peeping from the Ground, or as Thunderstruck or blown down. And therefore I
would here give Notice, once for all, that when in the ensuing Discourse I use
suchlike Phrases as visible Saints, Members of the visible Church etc. I, for
the most Part, mean Persons that are adult and in good Standing.

The Question is not, whether Christ has made converting Grace or Piety itself
the Condition or Rule of his People's admitting any to the Privileges of
Members in full Communion with them: There is no one Qualification of Mind,
whatsoever, that Christ has properly made the Term of this; not so much as a
common Belief that Jesus is the Messiah, or a Belief of the Being of a God.
It Is the credible Profession and Visibility of these Things, that is the
Church's Rule in this Case. Christian Piety or Godliness may be a Qualification
requisite to Communion in the Christian Sacraments, just in the same Manner as
a Belief that Jesus is the Messiah, and the Scriptures the Word of God, are
requisite Qualifications, and in the same Manner as some Kind of Repentance is
a Qualification requisite in one that has been suspended for being grossly
Scandalous, in order to his coming again to the Lord's Supper; and yet
Godliness itself not be properly the Rule of the Church's Proceeding, in like
Manner as such a Belief and Repentance, as I have mentioned, are not their
Rule. It Is a Visibility to the Eye of a Christian Judgment, that is the Rule of
the Church's Proceeding in each of these Cases.

There are two Distinctions must be here observed. As, I. We must distinguish
between such Qualifications as are requisite to give a Person a Right to
ecclesiastical Privileges in Foro Ecclesiae, or a Right to be, admitted by the
Church to those Privileges, and those Qualifications that are a proper and good
Foundation for a Man's own Conduct in coming and offering himself as a
Candidate for immediate Admission to these Privileges: There is a Difference
between these. Thus, for Instance, a Profession of the Belief of a future State
and of revealed Religion, and some other Things that are internal and out of
Sight, and a Visibility of these Things to the Eye of a Christian Judgment, is
all, relating to these Things, that is requisite to give a Man a Right in Foro
Ecclesiae, or before the Church; but it is the real Existence of these Things
that is what lays a proper and good Foundation for his making this Profession,
and so demanding these Privileges. None will suppose, that he has good and
proper Ground for such a Conduct, who don't believe another World, nor believe
the Bible to be the Word of God. And then,

2. We must distinguish between that which nextly brings an Obligation on a
Man's Conscience to seek Admission to a Christian Ordinance, and that which is
a good Foundation for the Dictate of an enlightened wellinformed Conscience, and
so is properly a solid Foundation of a Right in Him to act thus. Certainly this
Distinction does really take Place among Mankind in innumerable Cases. The
Dictates of Men's Consciences are what do bring them under a next or most
immediate Obligation to act: But it is that which is a good Foundation for such
a Dictate of an enlightened Conscience, that alone is a solid Foundation of a
Right in Him so to act. A believing the Doctrine of the Trinity with all the
Heart, in some Sense (let us suppose a moral Sense) is one Thing requisite in
order to a Person's having a solid Foundation of a Right in Him to go and
demand Baptism in the Name of the Trinity: But his best Judgment or Dictate of
his Conscience, concerning his believing this Doctrine with this Sincerity, or
with all his Heart, may be sufficient to bring an Obligation on his Conscience.
Again, when a Delinquent has been convicted of Scandal, it is Repentance in some
Respect sincere (suppose a moral Sincerity) that is the proper Foundation of a
Right in Him to offer Himself for Forgiveness and Restoration: But it is the
Dictate of his Conscience or his best Judgment concerning his Sincerity, that
is the Thing which immediately obliges him to offer himself. It Is Repentance
itself, that is the proper Qualification fundamental of his Right, and what he
cannot have a proper Right without; For though he may be deceived, and think he
has real Repentance when he has not, yet he has not properly a Right to be
deceived; and perhaps Deceit in such Cases is always owing to something
blameable, or the Influence of some corrupt Principle: But yet his best
Judgment brings him under Obligation. In the same Manner, and no otherwise, I
suppose that Christian Grace it self is a Qualification requisite in order to a
proper solid Ground of a Right in a Person to come to the Christian Sacraments.
But of this I may say something more when I come to answer Objections.

When I speak, in the Question, of a being godly or gracious in the Eye of a
Christian Judgment, by Christian Judgment I intend something further than a
Kind of mere negative Charity, implying that we forbear to censure and condemn
a Man, because we don't know but that he may be godly, and therefore forbear to
proceed on the Foot of such a Censure or Judgment in our Treatment of him: As
we would kindly entertain a Stranger, not knowing but in so doing we entertain
an Angel or precious Saint of God. But I mean a positive Judgment, founded on
some positive Appearance, or Visibility, some outward Manifestations that
ordinarily render the Thing probable. There is a Difference between suspending
our Judgment, or forbearing to condemn, or having some Hope that possibly the
Thing may be so, and so hoping the best; and a positive Judgment in Favor of a
Person. For an having some Hope, only implies that a Man is not in utter
despair of a Thing, though his prevailing Opinion may be otherwise, or he may
suspend his Opinion. Though we cannot know a Man believes that Jesus is the
Messiah, yet we expect some positive Manifestation or Visibility of it, to be a
Ground of our charitable Judgment: so I suppose the Case is here.

When I speak of CHRISTIAN Judgment, I mean a Judgment wherein Men do properly
exercise Reason, and have their Reason under the due Influence of Love and
other Christian Principles; which don't blind Reason, but regulate its
Exercises; being not contrary to Reason, though they be very contrary to
Censoriousness or unreasonable Niceness and Rigidness.

I say in the Eye of the CHURCH's Christian Judgment, because it is properly a
Visibility to the Eye of the public Charity, and not of a private Judgment,
that gives a Person a Right to be received as a visible Saint by the Public.
If any are known to be Persons of an honest Character, and appear to be of good
Understanding in the Doctrines of Christianity, and particularly those
Doctrines that teach the grand Condition of Salvation, and the Nature of true
saving Religion, and publicly and seriously profess the great and main Things
wherein the Essence of true Religion or Godliness consists, and their
Conversation is agreeable; this justly recommends 'em to the good Opinion of the
Public, whatever Suspicions and Fears any particular Person, either the
Minister, or some other, may entertain, from what he in particular has
observed, perhaps from the Manner of his expressing himself in giving an
Account of his Experiences, or an Obscurity in the Order and Method of his
Experiences etc. The Minister, in receiving him to the Communion of the Church
is to act as a public Officer, and in Behalf of the public Society, and not
merely for himself, and therefore is to be governed, in acting, by a proper
Visibility of Godliness in the Eye of the Public.

It Is not my Design, in holding the Negative of the foregoing Question, to
affirm, that all who are regularly admitted as Members of the visible Church in
complete Standing, ought to be believed to be godly or gracious Persons, when
taken collectively, or considered in the Gross, by the Judgment of any Person
or Society. This may not be, and yet each Person taken singly may visibly be a
gracious Person to the Eye of the Judgment of Christians in general. These two
are not the same Thing, but vastly diverse; and the latter may be, and yet not
the former. If we should know so much of a Thousand Persons one after another,
and from what we observed in them should have a prevailing Opinion concerning
each one of them, singly taken, that they were indeed pious, and think the
Judgment we passed, when we consider each Judgment apart, to be right; it will not
follow, when we consider the whole Company collectively, that we shall have so
high an Opinion of our own Judgment, as to think it probable, there was not one
erroneous Judgment in the whole Thousand. We all have innumerable Judgments
about one Thing or other, concerning religious, moral, secular, and
philosophical Affairs, concerning past, present and future Matters, Reports,
Facts, Persons, Things etc.etc. And concerning all the many thousand Dictates
of Judgment that we have, we think 'em every one right, taken singly; for if
there was any one that we thought wrong, it would not be our Judgment; and yet
there is no Man, unless he is stupidly foolish, who when he considers all in
the Gross, will say he thinks that every Opinion he is of, concerning all
Persons and Things whatsoever, important and ^rifling, is right, without the
least Error. But the more clearly to illustrate this Matter, as it relates to
Visibility, or probable Appearances of Holiness in Professors: Supposing it had
been found by Experience concerning precious Stones, that such and such
external Marks were probable Signs of a Diamond, and it is made evident, by
putting together a great Number of Experiments, that the Probability is as Ten
to one, and no more nor less* i. e. That, take one Time with another, there is
one in Ten of the Stones that have these Marks (and no visible Signs to the
contrary) proves a true Diamond, and no more; then it will follow, that when I
find a particular Stone with these Marks, and nothing to the contrary, there is
a Probability of ten to one, concerning that Stone, that it is a Diamond; and
so concerning each Stone that I find with these Marks: But if we take ten of
these together, it is as probable as not, that some one of the Ten is spurious;
because, if it were not as likely as not, that one in Ten is false, or if
taking one Ten with another, there were not one in Ten that was false, then the
Probability of those, that have these Marks, being true Diamonds, would be more
than ten to one, contrary to the Supposition; because that is what we mean by a
Probability of Ten to one, that they are not false, viz. that take one Ten with
another there will be one false Stone among them, and no more. Hence if we take
an Hundred such Stones together, the Probability will be just ten to one, that
there is one false among them; and as likely as not that there are ten false
ones in the whole Hundred: and the Probability of the Individuals must be much
greater than ten to one, even a Probability of more than a Hundred to one, in
order to its making it probable that every one is true. It Is an easy
Mathematical Demonstration. Hence the Negative of the foregoing Question by no
Means implies a Presence of any Scheme, that shall be effectual to keep all
Hypocrites out of the Church, and for the establishing in that Sense a pure
Church.

When it is said, those who are admitted etc. ought to be by Profession godly
or gracious Persons, it is not meant, they should merely profess or say that
they are converted or are gracious Persons, that they know so, or think so; but
that they profess the great Things wherein Christian Piety consists, viz. a
supreme Respect to God, Faith in Christ etc. Indeed it is necessary, as Men
would keep a good Conscience, that they should think that these Things are in
them, which they profess to be in them; otherwise they are guilty of the horrid
Wickedness of wilfully making a lying Profession. Hence it is supposed to be
necessary, in order to Men's regularly and with a good Conscience coming into
Communions with the Church of Christ in the Christian Sacraments, that they
themselves should suppose the essential Things, belonging to Christian Piety,
to be in them.

It don't belong to the present Question, to consider and determine what the
Nature of Christian Piety is, or wherein it consists: This Question may be
properly determined, and the Determination demonstrated, without entering into
any Con^roversies about the Nature of Conversion etc. Nor does an asserting the
Negative of the Question determine any Thing how particular the Profession of
Godliness ought to be, but only that the more essential Things, which belong to
it, ought to be professed. Nor is it determined, but that the public
Professions made on Occasion of Persons Admission to the Lord's Supper, in some
of our Churches, who yet go upon that Principle, that Persons need not esteem
themselves truly gracious in order to a coming conscienciously and properly to
the Lord's Supper; I say, it is not determined but that some of these
Professions are sufficient, if those that made them were taught to use the
Words, and others to understand them, in no other than their proper Meaning,
and Principle and Custom had not established a Meaning very diverse from it, or
perhaps an Use of the Words without any distinct and clear determinate Meaning.

PART II.
REASONS for the NEGATIVE of the foregoing Question.
HAVING thus explained what I mean, when I say, That none ought to be admitted
to the Communion and Privileges of Members of the visible Church of Christ in
complete Standing, but such as are in Profession and in the Eye of the Church's
Christian Judgment godly or gracious Persons: I now proceed to observe some
Things which may tend to evince the Truth of this Position. And here,

1. I begin with observing, I think it is both evident by the Word of God, and
also granted on all Hands, that none ought to be admitted as Members of the
visible Church of Christ but visible Saints and professing Saints, or visible
and professing Christians. -- We find the Word Saint, when applied to Men, used
two Ways in the New Testament: The Word in some Places is so used as to mean
those that are real Saints, who are converted, and are truly gracious Persons;
as I Cor. vi. 2. Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the World? Ephesians. i.
18. -- The Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints. Chap. iii. 17,
18. That Christ may dwell in your Hearts by Faith, that ye being rooted and
grounded in Love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
Breadth etc. 2 Thessalonians. i. 10. When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints,
and admired in all them that believe. So Rev v.8. Chap. viii.4. andxi. 18.
andxiii.10. andxiv.12. andxix.8. In other Places the Word is used so as to have
Respect not only to real Saints, but to such as were Saints in Visibility,
Appearance, and Profession; and so were outwardly, as to what concerns their
Acceptance among Men and their outward Treatment and Privileges, of the Company
of Saints: So the Word is used in very many Places, which it is needless to
mention, as every one acknowledges it.

In like Manner we find the Word Christian used two Ways: The Word is used to
express the same Thing as a Righteous Man that shall be saved, 1 Pet. iv. 16,
17, 18. Elsewhere it is so used as to take in all that were Christians by
Profession and outward Appearance; Act. xi. 26. So there is a twofold Use of
the Word Disciples in the New Testament. There were Disciples in Name,
Profession and Appearance; and there were those whom Christ calls Disciples
indeed, Joh. viii. 30, 31. The word is (...) truly. The Expression plainly
supposes this Distinction of true or real Disciples, and those who were the
same in Pretense and Appearance. See also Luke xiv. 25, 26, 27. and Joh. xv. 8.
The same Distinction is signified, in the New Testament, by those that live,
being alive from the Dead, and risen with Christ, (2 Cor, iv. 11. Romans vi. 11.
and elsewhere) and those who have a Name to live, having only a Pretense and
Appearance of Life. And the Distinction of the visible Church of Christ into
these two, is plainly signified of the Growth of the good Ground, and that in
the stony and thorny Ground, which had the same Appearance and Show with the
other, 'till it came to wither away; and also by the two Sorts of Virgins, Mat.
xxv. who both had a Show, Profession and Visibility of the same Thing. By these
Things and many others which might be observed, it appears that the Distinction
of real Saints and visible and professing Saints is scriptural, and that the
visible Church was made up of these two, and that none are according to
Scripture admitted into the visible Church of Christ, but those who are visible
and professing Saints or Christians. And it is the more needless to insist
longer upon it, because it is not a Thing in Controversy; so far as my small
Reading will inform me, it is owned by all Protestants. To be sure, the most
eminent Divine in New England who has appeared to maintain the Lord's Supper to
be properly a converting Ordinance, was very full in it: In his Appeal to the
Learned, in the Title Page, and through the Treatise, he supposes that all who
come to the Lord's Supper must be visible Saints, and sometimes speaks of them
as professing Saints. Pa. 85, 86. And supposes that it is requisite in order to
their being admitted to the Communion of the Lord's Table, that they make a
personal public Profession of their Faith and Repentance to the just
Satisfaction of the Church, Pa. 93, 94. In these Things the whole of the
Position that I would prove is in Effect granted. If it be allowed (as it is
allowed on all Sides) that none ought to be admitted to the Communion of the
Christian visible Church, but visible and professing Saints or Christians, if
these Words are used in any Propriety of Speech, or in any Agreement with
Scripture Representations, the whole of that which I have laid down is either
implied or will certainly follow.

As real Saints are the same with real Converts, or really gracious Persons, so
visible Saints are the same with visible Converts, or those that are visibly
converted and gracious Persons. Visibility is the same with Manifestation or
Appearance to our View and Apprehension. And therefore to be visibly a gracious
Person, is the same Thing as to be a truly gracious Person to our View,
Apprehension or Esteem. The Distinction of real and visible don't only take
Place with Regard to Saintship or Holiness, but with Regard to innumerable
other Things. There is visible and real Truth, visible and real Honesty,
visible and real Money, visible and real Gold, visible and real Diamonds
etc.etc. Visible and Real are Words that stand related one to another, as the
Words real and seeming, or true and apparent. Some seem to speak of Visibility
with Regard to Saintship or Holiness, as though it had no Reference to the
Reality, or as though it were a distinct Reality by itself, as though by visible
Saints were not meant those who to Appearance are real Saints or Disciples
indeed, but properly a distant Sort of Saints, which is an Absurdity. There is
a Distinction between real Money and visible Money, because all that is
esteemed Money and passes for Money is not real Money, but some is false and
counterfeit. But yet by visible Money, is not meant that which is taken and
passes for a different Sort of Money from true Money, but thereby is meant that
which is esteemed and taken as real Money, or which has that Appearance that
recommends to Men's Judgment and Acceptance as true Money; though Men may be
deceived, and some of it may finally prove not to be so.

There are not properly two Sorts of Saints spoken of in Scripture: though the
Word Saints may be said indeed to be used two Ways in Scripture, or used so as
to reach two Sorts of Persons; yet the Word has not properly two Significations
in the New Testament, any more than the Word Gold has two Significations among
us: The Word Gold among us is so used as to extend to several Sorts of
Substances; it is true, it extends to true Gold, and also to that which only
appears to be Gold, and is reputed Gold, and by that Appearance or Visibility
some Things that are not real Gold obtain the Name of Gold; but this is not
properly through a Diversity in the Signification of the Word, but by a Diversity
of the Application of it, through the Imperfection of our discerning. It don't
follow that there are properly two Sorts of Saints, because there are some who
are not real Saints, that yet being visible or seeming Saints do by the Show
and Appearance they make obtain the Name of Saints, and are reputed Saints, and
whom by the Rules of Scripture (which are accommodated to our imperfect State)
we are directed to receive and treat as Saints; any more than it follows that
there are two Sorts of honest Men, become some who are not truly honest Men,
yet being so seemingly or visibly, do obtain the Name of honest Men, and ought
to be treated by us as such. So there are not properly two distinct Churches of
Christ, one the real, and another the visible; though they that are visibly or
seemingly of the one only Church of Christ, are many more than they who are
really of his Church; and so the visible or seeming Church is of larger Extent
than the real.

Visibility is a relative Thing, and has Relation to an Eye that views or
beholds. Visibility is the same as Appearance or Exhibition to the Eye; and to
be a visible Saint is the same as to appear to be a real Saint in the Eye that
beholds; not the Eye of God, but the Eye of Man. Real Saints or Converts are
those that are so in the Eye of God; visible Saints or Converts are those who
are so in the Eye of Man; not his bodily Eye, for thus no Man is a Saint any
more in the Eye of a Man than he is in the Eye of a Beast; but the Eye of his
Mind, which is his Judgment or Esteem. There is no more Visibility of Holiness
in the brightest Professor to the Eye of our Bodies, without the Exercise of
the Reason and Judgment of our Minds, than may be in a Machine. But nothing
short of an apparent Probability, or a probable Exhibition, can amount to a
Visibility to the Eye of Man's Reason or Judgment. The Eye which God has given
to Man is the Eye of Reason; and the Eye of a Christian is Reason sanctified,
regulated and enlightened by a Principle of Christian Love. But it implies a
Contradiction to say, that That is visible to the Eye of Reason, which don't
appear probable to Reason. And if there be a Man that is in this Sense a
visible Saint, he is in the Eye of a rational Judgment a real Saint. To say a
Man is visibly a Saint, but not visibly a real Saint, but only visibly a
visible Saint, is a very absurd Way of speaking; it is as much as to say, He is
to Appearance an appearing Saint; which is in Effect to say nothing, and to use
Words without Signification. The Thing which must be visible and probable, in
order to visible Saintship, must be Saintship itself, or real Grace and true
Holiness; not Visibility of Saintship, not unregenerate Morality, not mere
moral Sincerity. To pretend to or in any Respect to exhibit moral Sincerity,
makes nothing visible beyond what is pretended to or exhibited: For a Man to
have that visibly, which if he had it really, and have nothing more, would not
make him a real Saint, is not to be visibly a Saint.

Mr. Stoddard, in his Appeal to the Learned, seems to express the very same
Notion of Visibility, and that Visibility of Saintship which is requisite to
Persons coming to the Lord's Supper, that I have here expressed. In Page 10. he
makes a Distinction between being visibly circumcised in Heart, and being
really so; evidently meaning by the latter saving Conversion; and he allows the
former viz. a Visibility of Heart-Circumcision, to be necessary to a coming to
the Lord's Supper. So that according to Him, it is not a Visibility of moral
Sincerity only, but a Visibility of Circumcision of Heart, or saving
Conversion, that is a necessary Requisite to a Person's coming to the Lord's
Table. And in what Manner this must be visible, he signifies elsewhere, when he
allows, that it must be so to a Judgment of Charity; a Judgment of rational
Charity. This he expressly allows over and over; as in Pa. 2, 3. Pa. 28. Pa. 33.
Pa. 72. and 95. And an having Reason to look upon them us such, Pa.28. And
toward the Close of his Book, he declares himself sted fastly of the Mind,
that it is requisite those be not admitted to the Lord's Supper, who don't make
a personal and public Profession of their Faith and Repentance, to the just
Satisfaction of the Church, Pa.93,94. But how he reconciled these Passages with
the rest of his Treatise, I would modestly say, I must confess myself at a
Loss. And particularly, I cannot see how they consist with what this venerable
andever honored Author says, Pa. 16. in these Words; Indeed by the Rule that
God has given for Admissions, if it be carefully attended, more Unconverted
Persons will be admitted than Converted. I would humbly inquire, how those
visible Qualifications can be the Ground of a rational Judgment, that a Person
is circumcised in Heart, which nevertheless at the same Time, we are sensible
are so far from being any probable Signs of it, that they are more frequently
without it, than with it. The Appearance of that Thing surely cannot imply an
appearing Probability of another Thing, which at the same Time we are sensible
is most frequently, and so most probably, without that other Thing.

Indeed I can easily see, how that may seem visible, and appear probable to
God's People by Reason of the imperfect and dark State they are in, and so may
oblige their Charity, which yet is not real, and which would not appear at all
probable to Angels, who stand in a clearer Light: And the different Degrees of
Light, that God's Church stands in in different Ages, may make a Difference in
this Respect: The Church under the New Testament being favored by God with a
vastly greater Light in divine Things, (...) the Church under the old
Testament, that might make some Difference, as to the Kind of Profession of
Religion that is requisite, under these different Dispensations, in order to a
Visibility of Holiness; also a proper Visibility may fail in the greater Number
in some extraordinary Case, and in exempt Circumstances: But how those Signs
can be a Ground of a rational Judgment that a Thing is, which, at that very
Time, and under that Degree of Light we then have, we are sensible do oftener
fail than not, and this ordinarily, I own my self much at a Loss. Surely
nothing but appearing Reason is the Ground of a rational Judgment. And indeed
it is impossible in the Nature of Things, to form a Judgment, which at that
very Time we think to be not only without but against Probability.

If it be said, that although Persons don't profess that wherein sanctifying
Grace consids, yet seeing they profess to believe the Doctrines of the Gospel,
which God is will not to make use of in order to Men's Sanctification, and are
called the Doctrine which is according to Godliness; and since we see nothing
in their Lives to make us determine, that they have not had a proper Effect on
their Hearts, we are obliged in Charity to hope that they are real Saints, or
gracious Persons, and to treat 'em accordingly, and so to receive 'em into the
Christian Church, and to its special Ordinances.

I answer, This Objection does in Effect suppose and grant the very Thing
mainly in Dispute: For it supposes, that a gracious Character is the Thing that
ought to be looked at and aimed at in admitting Persons into the Communion of
the Church; and so that it is needful to have this Charity for Persons, or such
a favorable Notion of them, in order to our receiving them as properly
qualified Members of the Society, and properly qualified Subjects of the
special Privileges they are admitted to. Whereas the Doctrine taught is, that
sanctifying Grace is not a necessary Qualification herefor, and that there is
no need that the Person himself, or any other, should have any Imagination,
that he is a Person so qualified; because we know, it is no Qualification
requisite in itself; we know the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper is as proper
for them that are not so qualified as for those that are; it being according to
the Design of the Institution a converting Ordinance, and so an Ordinance as
much intended for the Good of the Unconverted, as of the Converted; even as
it is with the Preaching of the Gospel. Now if the Case be so, why is there any
Talk about a charitable hoping they are converted, and so admitting them? What
need of any charitable Hope of such a Qualification, in order to admitting them
to an Ordinance that is as proper for those who are without this Qualification,
as for those that have it? We need not have any charitable Hope of any such
Qualification in order to admit a Person to hear the Word preached. What need
have we to aim at any Thing beyond the proper Qualifications? And what Manner
of Need of any charitable Opinion or Hope of any thing further? Some Sort of
Belief, that Jesus is the Messiah, is a Qualification properly requisite to a
coming to the Lord's Supper; and therefore it is necessary that we should have a
charitable Hope, that those have such a Belief whom we admit; though it be not
necessary that we should know it, it being what none can know of another. But
as to Grace or Christian Piety, it clearly follows, on the Principles which I
oppose, that if there be any Visibility of it, more or less, of any Sort, yet
no Kind of Visibility or Appearance, whether more direct or indirect, whether
to a greater or less Degree, no Charity or Hope of it, have any thing at all to
do in the Affair of Admission to the Lord's Supper; for, according to Them, it
is properly a converting Ordinance. What has any Visibility or Hope of a
Person's being already in Health to admitting him into an Hospital for the Use
of those Means that are the proper appointed Means for the healing of the Sick,
and bringing them to Health? And therefore it is needless here to dispute about
the Nature of Visibility; and all arguing concerning a Profession of Christian
Doctrines, and an orderly Life being a sufficient Ground of public Charity,
and an Obligation on the Church to treat 'em as Saints, are wholly impertinent
and nothing to the Purpose. For on the Principles which I oppose, there is no
Need of any Sort of Ground for treating them as Saints, in order to admitting
them to the Lord's Supper, the very Design of which is to make 'em Saints, any
more than there is Need of some Ground of treating a sick Man as being a Man in
Health, in order to admitting him into a Hospital. Persons, by the Doctrine
that I oppose, are not taught to offer themselves as Candidates for Church
Communion under any such Notion, or with any such Pretense, as their being
gracious Persons; and therefore surely when those that teach 'em, receive them
to the Ordinance, they don't receive them under any such Notion, nor has any
Notion, Appearance, Hope, or Thought of it, any Thing to do in the Case.

The Apostle speaks of the Members of the Christian Church, as those that made
a Profession of Godliness. 2 Cor. ix. 13. They glorified God for your professed
Subjection to the Gospel of Christ. 1 Timothy ii. 10. In like Manner also that
Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, -- not with costly Array; but, which
becomes Women professing Godliness, with good Works. The Apostle is speaking
of the Women that were Members of that great Church of Ephesus, which Timothy
for the present had the Care of; and he speaks of them as supposing that they
all professed Godliness. By the Allowance of all, Profession is one Thing
belonging to the Visibility of Christanity or Holiness, that there is in the
Members of the visible Church. Visible Holiness is an Appearance or Exhibition
of Holiness, by those Things which are external, and so fall under our Notice
and Observation. And these are two, viz. Profession, and an outward Behavior,
agreeable to that Profession. That Profession which belongs to visible
Saintship, must be a Profession of Godliness, or real Saintship; for a
Profession makes nothing visible, beyond what is professed. What is it, to be a
Saint by Profession, but to be by Profession a true Saint? For to be by
Profession a false Saint, is to be by Profession no Saint; and only to profess
that, which if never so true, is nothing peculiar to a Saint, is not to be a
professing Saint.

In order to a M^n's being properly a professing Christian, he must profess the
Religion of Jesus Christ: And he surely don't profess the Religion that was
taught by Jesus Christ, if he leaves out of his Profession the most essential
Things that belong to that Religion. That which is most essential in that
Religion itself, the Profession of that is essential in a Profession of that
Religion; for (as I have observed elsewhere) that which is most essential in a
Thing, in order to its being truly denominated that Thing, the same is
essentially necessary to be expressed or signified in any Exhibition or
Declaration of that Thing, in order to its being truly denominated a
Declaration or Exhibition of that Thing. If we take a more inconsiderable Part
of Christ's Religion, and leave out the main and most essential, surely what we
have cannot be properly called the Religion of Jesus Christ: so if we profess
only a less important Part, and are silent about the most important and
essential Part, it cannot be properly said that we profess the Religion of Jesus
Christ. And therefore we cannot in any Propriety be said to profess the
Christian or Christ's Religion, unless we profess those Things wherein consists
Piety of Heart, which is vastly the most important and essential Part of that
Religion that Christ came to teach and establish in the World, and is in Effect
all; being that without which all the Rest that belongs to it, is nothing, and
wholly in vain. But they who are admitted to the Lord's Supper, proceeding on
the Principles of those who hold it to be a converting Ordinance, do in no
Respect profess Christian Piety, neither in Whole nor in Part, neither
explicitedly nor implicitedly, directly nor indirectly; and therefore are not
professing Christians, or Saints by Profession. I mean, though they may be godly
Persons, yet as they come to the Ordinance without professing Godliness, they
cannot properly be called professing Saints.

Here it may be said, that although no explicit and formal Profession of those
Things which belong to true Piety, be required of them; yet there are many
Things they do, that are a virtual and implicit Profession of these Things:
Such as their owning the Christian Covenant, their owning God the Father Son
and Holy Ghost, to be their God; and by their visibly joining in the public
Prayers and singing God's Praises, there is a Show and implicit Profession of
supreme Respect to God and Love to him; by joining in the public Confessions,
they make a Show of Repentance; by keeping Sabbaths and hearing the Word, they
make a Show of a Spirit of Obedience; by offering to come to Sacraments, they
make a Show of Love to Christ and a Dependence on his Sacrifice.

To this I answer; It Is a great Mistake, if any one imagines, that all these
external Performances are of the Nature of a Profession of any thing at all
that belongs to saving Grace, as they are commonly used and understood: and to
be sure none of them are so, according to the Doctrines that are taught and
embraced, and the Customs that are established in such Churches as proceed on
the Foot of the Principles forementioned. For what is professing, but
exhibiting, uttering, or declaring, either by intelligible Words, or by other
established Signs that are equivalent? But in such Churches, neither their
publicly saying, that they avouch God the Father Son and Holy Ghost, to be
their God, and that they give themselves up to Him, and promise to obey all his
Commands, nor their coming to the Lord's Supper, or to any other Ordinances,
are taken for Expressions or Signs of any thing belonging to the Essence of
Christian Piety. But on the contrary, the public Doctrine, Principle and
Custom in such Churches establishes a diverse Use of these Words and Signs.
People are taught, that they may use 'em all, and not so much as make any
Pretense to the least Degree of sanctifying Grace; and this is the established
Custom: so they are used, and so they are understood. And therefore whatever
some of these Words and Signs may in themselves most properly and naturally
import or signify, they entirely cease to be Significations of any such Thing
among People accustomed to understand and use them otherwise; and so cease to
be of the Nature of a Profession of Christian Piety. There can be no such Thing
among such a People, as either an explicit or implicit Profession of Godliness
by any Thing which (by their established Doctrine and Custom) an unregenerate
Man may and ought to say and perform, knowing himself to be so. For let the
Words and Actions otherwise signify what they will, yet that People have in
Effect agreed among themselves, that Persons who use them, need not intend them
so, and that others need not understand them so. And hence they cease to be of
the Nature of any Pretension to Grace. And surely it is an Absurdity to say,
that Men openly and solemnly profess Grace, and yet don't so much as pretend to
it. If a certain People should agree, and it should be an established Principle
among them, that Men might and ought to use such and such Words to their
Neighbors, which according to their proper Signification were a Profession of
entire Love and devoted Friendship toward the Man they speak to, and yet not
think that he has any Love in his Heart to him, yea, and know at the same Time
that he had a reigning Enmity against him; and it was known that this was the
established Principle of the People; would not these Words, whatever their
proper Signification was, entirely cease to be any Profession or Testimony of
Friendship to his Neighbor? To be sure, there could be no Visibility of it to
the Eye of Reason.

Thus it is evident, that those who are admitted into the Church on the
Principles that I oppose, are not professing Saints, nor visible Saints;
because that Thing which alone is truly Saintship, is not what they profess, or
make any Pretense to, or have any Visibility of, to the Eye of a Christian
Judgment. Or if they in Fact be visible and professing Saints, yet, they are
not admitted as such; no Profession of true Saintship, nor any Manner of
Visibility of it, has any Thing to do in the Affair.

There is one Way to evade these Things, which has been taken by some, and that
they plead: Although it be true, that the Scripture represents the Members of the
visible Church of Christ as Professors of Godliness; and they are abundantly
called by the Name of Saints in Scripture, undoubtedly because they were Saints
by Profession, and in Visibility, and the Acceptance of others; yet this is not
with any Reference to saving Holiness, but to quite another Sort of Saintship,
viz. moral Sincerity; and that this is the real Saintship, Discipleship, and
Godliness, which is professed, and visible in them, and with Regard to which,
as having an Appearance of it to the Eye of Reason, they have the Name of
Saints, Disciples etc. in Scripture.

It must be noted, that in this Objection the Visibility is supposed to be of
real Saintship, Discipleship, and Godliness, but only another Sort of real
Godliness, than that which belongs to those who shall finally be owned by
Christ as his People, at the Day of Judgment.

To which I answer, This is a mere Evasion; the only one, that ever I saw or
heard of; and I think the only one possible. For it is certain, they are not
Professors of sanctifying Grace, or true Saintship: The Principle proceeded on,
being, that they need make no Pretense to that; nor has any Visibility of
saving Holiness any Thing to do in the Affair. If then they have any Holiness
at all, it must be of another Sort. And if this Evasion fails, and fails, and
the whole Matter in Debate must be given up. Therefore I desire that this
Matter may be impartially considered and examined to the very Bottom; and that
it may be thoroughly enquired, whether this Distinction of these two Sorts of
real Christianity, Godliness, and Holiness, is a Distinction, that Christ in
his Word is the Author of; or whether it be an human Invention of something
which the New Testament knows nothing of, devised to serve and maintain an
Hypothesis. And here I desire that the following Things may be observed.

1. According to this Hypothesis, the Words, Saints, Disciples, and Christians,
are used four Ways in the New Testament, as applied to four Sorts of Persons.
(1) To those that in Truth and Reality are the Heirs of eternal Life, and that
shall judge the World, or have indeed that Saintship which is saving. (2) To
those who profess this, and pretend to and make a fair Show of a supreme Regard
to Christ, and to renounce the World for his Sake, but have not real Ground for
these Pretenses and Appearances. (3) To those who, although they have not saving
Grace, yet have that other Sort of real Godliness or Saintship, viz. moral
Sincerity in Religion; and so are properly a Sort of real Saints, true
Christians, sincerely godly Persons and Disciples indeed, though they have no
saving Grace. And (4) To those who make a Profession and have a Visibility of
this latter Sort of sincere Christianity, and are nominally such Kind of
Saints, but are not so indeed. -- So that here are two Sorts of real
Christians, and two Sorts of visible Christians; two Sorts of invisible and
real Churches of Christ, and two Sorts of visible Churches. Now will any one
that is well acquainted with the New Testament, say, there is in that the least
Appearance or Shadow of such a fourfold Use of the Words, Saints, Disciples,
etc.? It Is manifest by what was observed before, that these Words are there
used but two Ways; and that those of Mankind to whom these Names are applied,
are there distinguished into but two Sorts, viz. Those who have really a saving
Interest in Christ, spiritual Conformity and Union to him, and those who have a
Name for it, as having a Profession and Appearance of it. And this is further
evident by various Representations, which we there find of the visible Church;
as in the Company of Virgins that went forth to meet the Bridegroom, we find a
Distinction of them into but two Sorts, viz. The Wise that had both Lamps and
Oil; and those who had Lamps indeed like the wise Virgins (therein having an
external Show of the same Thing, viz. Oil) but really had no Oil; signifying
that they had the same Profession and outward Show of the same Sort of
Religion, and entertained the same Hopes with the wise Virgins. So when the
visible Church is represented by the Husband-man's Floor, we find a Distinction
but of two Sorts, viz. The Wheat and the Chaff. So again, when the Church is
compared to the Husband-man's Field, we find a Distinction but of two Sorts,
the Wheat and the Tares, which (Naturalists observe) show or appear exactly
like the Wheat, 'till it comes to bring forth its Fruit; representing, that
those who are only visible Christians, have a Visibility or Appearance of the
Nature of that Wheat, which shall be gathered into Christ's Barn; and that
Nature is saving Grace.

2. It Is evident, that those who had the Name of Disciples in the Times of the
New Testament, bore that Name with Reference to a Visibility and Pretense of
the same Relation to Christ, which they had who should be finally ^^^ned as
his. This is manifest by Joh. viii. 30, 31. As he spoke these Words, many
believed on him. Then said Jesus to th^se Jews which believed on him, If ye
continue in my Word, then are ye my Disciples indeed. (Compare Luke xiv. 25,
26, 27. and Joh. 15. 8.) The Phrase, Disciples indeed, is relative; and has
Reference to a Visibility, Pretense, or Name, only, which it is set in
Opposition to, and has a Reference to that Name and Visibility that those, who
then bore the Name of Disciples, had; which makes it evident, that those who
then bore the Name of Disciples, had a Visibility and Pretense of the same
Discipleship Christ speaks of, which he calls true Discipleship, or
Discipleship indeed: for true Discipleship is not properly set in Opposition to
any Thing else but a Pretense to the same Thing, that is not true. The Phrase
Gold indeed is in Reference and Opposition to something that has the Appearance
of that same Metal, and not to an Appearance of Brass. If there were another
Sort of real Discipleship in those Days, besides saving Discipleship, Persons
might be Christ's Disciples indeed, or truly (as the Word in the Original is)
without continuing in his Word, and without selling all that they had, and
without hating Father and Mother and their own Lives, for his Sake. By this it
appears, that those who bore the Name of Disciples in those Times were
distinguished into but two Sorts, Disciples in Name or Visibility, and
Disciples indeed; and that the Visibility and Profession of the former was of
the Discipleship of the latter.

3. The same Thing is evident by 1 Johnii.19. They went out from us, because
they were not of use: If they had been of us, they would no doubt have
continued with us. The Words naturally suggest and imply, that those professing
Christians, who at (...) proved false, did, before they went out, seem to
belong to the Society of the true Saints, or those endowed with persevering
Grace and Holiness; They seemed to be of their Number, i.e. They were so in
Pretense and Visibility, and so were accepted in the Judgment of Charity.

4. The Name and Visibility, that nominal or visible Christians had in the Days
of the New Testament, was of saving Christianity, and not of moral Sincerity;
for they had a Name to live, though many of them were (...) Rev.iii. 1. Now it is
very plain what that is in Religion which is called by the Name of Life, all
over the New Testament, viz. saving Grace; and I don't know that any Thing
else, of a religious Nature, is ever so called.

5. The Visibility, that visible Christians had of Saintship in the Apostles
Days, was not of moral Sincerity, but gracious Sincerity, or saving Saintship:
For they are spoken of as being visibly of the Number of those Saint and who
shall judge the World and judge Angels. 1 Cor. vi. 1, 2, 3. Dare any of you,
having a Matter against another, go to Law before the Unjust, and not before
the Saints? Do ye not know, that the Saints shall judge the World? And if the
World shall be judged BY YOU, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest Matters?
Know ye not that WE shall judge Angels? These Things do manifestly imply, that
if the Christian Corinthians were what they supposed they were, and what they
professed to be, and what they were accepted to be, they were some of those
Saints who at the Day of Judgment should judge Angels and Men.

6. That the Visibility was not only of moral Sincerity, but saving Grace, is
manifest, because the Apostle speaks of visible Christians as visible Members
of Christ's Body, of his Flesh of his Bones, and one Spirit with him, and
Temples of the holy Ghost. Ephesians. v. 30, and 1 Cor. vi. 16, 19. And the Apostle
Peter speaks of visible Christians as those who were visibly such righteous
Persons as should be saved; and that are distinguished from the ungodly, and
them that obey not the Gospel, who shall perish. 1Pet. iv. 16, 17, 18. Yet if
any Man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God
on this Behalf. For the Time is come that Judgment must begin at the House of
God; and if it first begin at US ( us Christians, comprehending himself and
those to whom he wrote, and all of that Sort) what shall the End of them be
that obey not the Gospel of God? And if the Righteous Scarcely be saved, where
shall the Ungodly and Sinner appear?

7. That the Visibility was not merely of moral Sincerity, but of that Sort of
Saintship which the Saints in Heaven have, is manifest by this, that they are
often spoken of as visibly belonging to Heaven, and as of the Society of the
Saints in Heaven. So the Apostle in his Epistle to the Ephesians speaks of them
as visibly of the same Household or Family of God, a Part of which is in Heaven.
Chap. ii. 19. Now therefore ye are no more Strangers and Foreigners, but
Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God. Together with the
next Chapter, Ver.15. Of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named.
Where the Context and Continuation of Discourse demonstrates, that he is still
speaking of the same Family or Household he had spoken of in the latter Part of
the preceding Chapter. So all visible Christians are spoken of as visibly the
Children of the Church which is in Heaven. Gal. iv. 26. Jerusalem which is
above, is free, which is the Mother of us all. The same Apostle speaks of
visible Christians as being visibly come to the Heavenly City, and having
joined the glorious Company of Angels there, and as visibly belonging to the
general Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, that are written in Heaven, and
to the Spirits of just Men made perfect, Heb. xii. 22, 23. And elsewhere they
are spoken of as being visibly of the Number of those who have their Names
written in the Book of Life, Rev. iii. 5. and xxii. 19. They who truly have
their Names written in the Book of Life, are God's true Saints, that have
saving Grace: as is evident by Rev.xiii. 8. And all that dwell on the Earth,
shall worship Him, whose Names are not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb
slain from the Foundation of the World. And Chap.xx. 12. And another Book was
opened, which was the Book of Life. Ver.15. And whosoever was not found written
in the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of Fire. We are told, in the
Conclusion of this Chapter, how they were disposed of whose Names were not
written in the Book of Life; and then the Prophet proceeds in the next Chapter
to tell us how they were disposed whose Names were found there written, viz.
that they were admitted into the New-Jerusalem, Ver. ^7. And there shall in no
wise enter into it any Thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works
Abominati^^ (...) makes a Lie; but they which are written in the Lamb's Book
of (...). And yet in the next Chapter it is implied, that some who were not
truly gracious Persons, and some that should finally perish, were visibly of
the Number of those that had both a Part in the New-Jerusalem, and also their
Names written in the Book of Life. Ver. 19. And if any Man shall take away from
the Words of the Book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his Part out of the
Book of Life, and out of the holy City.

8. That Baptism, by which the primitive Converts were admitted into the
Church, was used as an Exhibition and Token of their being visibly regenerated,
dead to Sin, alive to God, having the old Man crucified, being delivered from
the reigning Power of Sin, being made free from Sin, and become the Servants of
Righteousness, those Servants of God that have their Fruit unto that Holiness
whose End is everlasting Life; as is evident by Romans vi. throughout. In the
former Part of the Chapter, he speaks of the Christian Romans, as dead to Sin,
being buried with Christ in Baptism having their old Man crucified with Christ
etc. He don't mean, only, that their Baptism laid 'em under special Obligations
to these Things, and was a Mark and Token of their Engagement to be thus
hereafter; but was designed as a Mark, Token and Exhibition of their being
visibly thus already. As is most manifest by the Apostle's Prosecution of his
Argument in the following Part of the Chapter. Ver. 14. For Sin shall not have
Dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law but under Grace. Ver. 17, 18.
God be thanked, ye were the Servants of Sin, but ye have obeyed from the Heart
that Form of Doctrine which was delivered you. Being then made free from Sin,
ye became the Servants of Righteousness. Ver. 22. But now being made free from
Sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your Fruit unto Holiness, and the End
everlasting Life.

9. It Is evident, that it is not only a Visibility of moral Sincerity in
Religion, which is the Scripture Qualification of Admission into the Christian
Church, but a Visibility of Regeneration and Renovation of Heart, because it
was foretold that God's People and the Ministers of his House in the Days of
the Messiah, should not admit into the Christian Church any that were not
visibly circumcised in Heart. Ezekiel. xliv. 6, -- 9. And thou shall say to the
Rebellious, even to the House of Israel, Thus faith the Lord God, O ye House of
Israel, let it suffice you of all your Abominations, in that ye have brought
into my Sanctuary Strangers uncircumcised in Heart, and uncircumcised in Flesh,
to be in my Sanctuary to pollute it, even my House, when ye offer my Bread, the
Fat and the Blood; and they have broken my Covenant, because of all your
Abominations: And ye have not kept the Charge of mine holy Things, but ye have
set keepers of my Charge in my Sanctuary for your selves. Thus faith the Lord,
no Stranger uncircumcised in Heart, nor uncircumcised in Flesh, shall enter
into my Sanctuary, of any Stranger that is among the Children of Israel.

The venerable Author of the Appeal to the Learned, says, Page 10. That this
Scripture has no particular Reference to the Lord's Supper. I answer, though I
don't suppose it has merely a Reference to that Ordinance, yet I think it
manifest, that it has a Reference to admitting Persons into the Christian
Church, and to external Church Priviledges. It might be easy to prove, that
these nine last Chapters of Ezekiel must be a Vision and Prophecy of the State
of Things in the Church of God in the Messiah's Days: But I suppose it will not
be denied, it being a Thing wherein Divines are so generally agreed. And I
suppose, none will dispute but that by the House of God and his Sanctuary,
which it is here foretold the uncircumcised in Heart should not be admitted
into in the Days of the Gospel, is meant the same House, Sanctuary, or Temple
of God, that the Prophet had just before been speaking of, in the foregoing
Part of the same Chapter, and been describing throughout the four preceding
Chapters. But we all know, that the New Testament House of God is his Church.
Heb. iii. 3. For this Man was counted worthy of more Glory than Moses, in as
much as he who builded the House, has more Honor than the House. Ver.6. But
Christ as a Son over his own House, whose House are we, etc. 2 Timothy ii. 20. In
a great House there are not only Vessels of Gold and Silver, but also of Wood
and of Earth, etc. I Tim. iii. 15. That thou may know how thou ought to
behave thy self in the House of God, which is the Church of the living God.
Ephesians. ii. 20,21. And are built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner Stone; in whom all the Building
fitly framed together, grows into an holy Temple in the Lord. 1 Cor. iii. 9.
Ye are God's Building. ver. 16. Know ye not, that ye are the Temple of God? 1
Pet. ii. 5. Ye also as lively Stones are built up a spiritual House. Chap. iv.
17. For the Time is come, that Judgment must begin at the House of God: And if
it begin at us, what shall the End be etc? Heb. x. 21. And having an high
Priest over the House of God. -- Ezekiel's Temple is doubtless the same that it
is foretold the Messiah should build Zech. vi. 12, 13. The Man whose Name is
the Branch -- He shall build the Temple of the Lord, even he shall build the
Temple of the Lord -- And what the Temple that Christ builds, is, the Apostle
tells us, Heb. iii. 3,6. The Temple that Ezekiel in his Vision was bid to
observe the Measures of, as it was measured with a Reed (Ezekiel.xl.3,4.) we have
Reason to think, was the same the Apostle John in his Vision was bid to measure
with a Reed, Rev.xi.1. And when it is here foretold, that the uncircumcised in
Heart should not enter into the Christian Sanctuary or Church, nor have
Communion in the Offerings of God's Bread, of the Fat and Blood, that were made
there, I think so much is at least implied, that they should not have Communion
in those Ordinances of the Christian Sanctuary, in which that Body and Blood of
Christ were symbolically represented, which used of old to be symbolically
represented by the Fat and the Blood. For the Admission into the Christian
Church here spoken of, is an Admission into the visible, and not the mystical
Church; For such an Admission is spoken of as is made by the Officers of the
Church. And I suppose, it will not be doubted, but that by Circumcision of
Heart is meant the spiritual renewing of the Heart; not any common Virtues,
which don't in the least change the Nature, and mortify the Corruption of the
Heart; as is held by all orthodox Divines, and as Mr. Stoddard in particular
abundantly insisted. However, if any Body disputes it, I desire that the
Scripture may be allowed to speak for it self; for it very often speaks of
Circumcision of Heart, and this every where, both in the old Testament and New,
manifestly signifies that great Change of Heart that was typified by the
Ceremony of Circumcision of the Flesh. The same which afterward was signified
by Baptism, viz. Regeneration, or else the Progress of that Work in
Sanctification; as we read of the washing of Regeneration, etc. The Apostle
tells us what was signified both by Circumcision and Baptism, Col. ii.11, 12;
In whom also ye are circumcised with the Circumcision made without Hands, in
putting off the Sins of the Flesh by the Circumcision of Christ, buried with
him in Baptism; wherein also you are risen with him, through the Faith of the
Operation of God. Where I would observe by the Way, he speaks of all the
Members of the Church of Colosse as visibly circumcised with this Circumcision;
agreeable to Ezekiel's Prophecy, that the Members of the Christian Church shall
visibly have this Circumcision. The Apostle speaks, in like Manner, of the
Members of the Church of Philippi as spiritually circumcised (i. e, in
Profession and Visibility) and tells wherein this Circumcision appeared. Phil.
iii. 3. For we are the Circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit, and
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no Confidence in the Flesh. And in Romans
ii.28, 29. the Apostle speaks of this Christian Circumcision and Jewish
Circumcision together, calling the former the Circumcision of the Heart. But he
is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision which is
outward in the FLESH; But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly, and Circumcision
is that of THE HEART, in the Spirit, not in the Letter; whose Praise is not of
Men, but of God. And whereas in this Prophecy of Ezekiel it is foretold, that
none should enter into the Christian Sanctuary or Church, but such as are
circumcised in Heart and circumcised in Flesh; thereby I suppose is intended,
that none should be admitted but such as were visibly regenerated, and also
baptized with outward Baptism.

By the Thing which have been observed, I think it abundantly evident, that the
Saintship, Godliness and Holiness, of which, according to Scripture, professing
Christians and visible Saints do make a Profession and have a Visibility, is
not any Religion and Virtue that is the Result of common Grace, or moral
Sincerity (as it is called) but saving Grace. -- Yet there are many other clear
Evidences of the same Thing, which may in some Measure appear in all the
following Part of this Discourse -- Wherefore,

II. I come now to another Reason, why I answer the Question at first proposed,
in the Negative, viz. That it is a Duty which in an ordinary State of Things is
required of all that are capable of it, to make an explicit open Profession of
the true Religion, by owning God's Covenant; or, in other Words, professedly
and verbally to unite themselves to God in his Covenant, by their own public
Act.

Here I would ( First) prove this Point; and then ( Secondly) draw the
Consequence, and show how this demonstrates the Thing in Debate.

First, I shall endeavor to establish this Point, viz. That it is the Duty of
God's People thus publicly to own the Covenant; and that it was not only a
Duty in Israel of old, but is so in the Christian Church, and to the End of the
World; and that it is a Duty required of adult Persons before they come to
Sacraments. And this being a Point of great Consequence in this Controversy,
but a Matter seldom handled (though it seems to be generally taken for granted) I
shall be the more particular in the Consideration of it.

This not only seems to be in it self most consonant to Reason, and is a Duty
generally allowed in New England, but is evidently a great Institution of the
Word of God, appointed as a very important Part of that public Religion by
which God's People should give Honor to his Name. This Institution we have in
Deuteronomy. vi. 13. Thou shall Fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall SWEAR
BY HIS NAME, It Is repeated Chap. x. 20. Thou shall Fear the Lord thy God, him
shall thou serve, and to him shall thou cleave, and SWEAR BY HIS NAME. In both
Places it might have been rendered; Thou shall swear in his Name, or into his
Name. In the original, Bishmo, with the Prefix Beth which signifies in or into,
as well as By. And whereas in the latter Place in our Translation it is said,
to him shall thou cleave, and Swear by his Name. The Words are thus in the
Hebrew, Ubho Thidhbak Ubhishmo Tisshabheang. The literal Translation of which
is, (...) shall thou cleave [ or unite] and into his Name shall thou Swear.
(...) the same Prefix, Beth, before him, when it is said, Thou shall cleave to
him, as before his Name, when it is said, Thou shall Swear by his Name.
Swearing into God's Name, is a very emphatical and significant Way of
expressing a Person's taking on himself, by his own solemn Profession, the Name
of God, as one of his People; or by swearing to or covenanting with God,
uniting himself by his own Act to the People that is called by his Name. The
Figure of Speech is something like that by which Christians in the
New Testament are said to be Baptized (...) INTO THE NAME of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost. So Christians are said to be baptized into Christ,
Gal. iii. 17. This Swearing by the Name, or into the Name of the Lord, is so
often, and in such a Manner spoken of by the Prophets as a great Duty of God's
solemn public Worship, as much as Praying or Sacrificing, that it would be
unreasonable to understand it only, or chiefly, of occasionally taking an Oath
before a Court of Judicature, which, it may be, one tenth Part of the People
never had Occasion to do once in their Lives. If we well consider the Matter,
we shall see abundant Reason to be satisfied, that the Thing intended in this
Institution was publicly covenanting with God. Covenanting in Scripture is
very often called by the Name of Swearing, and a Covenant is called an Oath. As
Genesis xxi. 23. to the End. xxvi. 28. to the End. xxxi.44,53. Josh. ii. 12, etc.
1 Samuel xx. 16. 17, 42. 2 Kin. xi. 4. Eccl. viii.2. Ezekiel. xvi.59. xvii. 16. and
many other Places.
And particularly God's Covenant is called his Oath. Deuteronomy. xxix. 12. That thou
Should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his Oath. Ver.14,
Neither with you only do I make this Covenant and this Oath. 1 Chronicles.xvi.15,
16. Be ye mindful always of his Covenant -- Even of the Covenant which he made
with Abraham, and his Oath unto Isaac -- 2 Chronicles. xv. 12. And they entered into
Covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers. -- ver. 14, 15. And they swore
unto the Lord with a loud Voice. And all Judah rejoiced at the Oath. Swearing
to the Lord, or Swearing in, or into the Name of the Lord, are equipollent
Expressions in the Bible: the Prefixes Beth and Lamed are evidently used
indifferently in this Case to signify the same Thing. Zeph. 1. 5. That swear by
the Lord, and that swear by Malcham. The Word translated, to the Lord, is
Laihovah, with the Prefix Lamed; but to Malcham is Bemalcham with the Prefix
Beth, into Malcham. In (...) King. xviii. 32. It Is said, Elijah built an Altar
in the Name of the Lord; Beshem. Here the Prefix Beth is manifestly of the same
Force with Lamed in 1 Kings viii.44. The House I have built for thy Name or to
thy Name, Leshem.

God's People in Swearing to his Name, or into his Name, according to the
Institution, solemnly professed two Things, viz. Their Faith and Obedience. The
former Part of this Profession of Religion was called saying, The Lord lives.
Jer. v. 2. And though they say, The Lord lives, yet surely they Swear falsely.
Ver. 7. They have sworn by them that are no Gods: That is, They had openly
professed Idol-Worship. Chap. iv. 2. Thou shall Swear, The Lord lives, in
Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness; and the Nations shall bless
themselves in him, and in him shall they glory. (Compare this with Isai. xlv.
23, 24, 25.) Jer. xliv, 26. Behold I have sworn by my great Name, says the
Lord, that my Name shall no more be named in the Mouth of any Man of Judah in
all the Land of Egypt, saying, the Lord lives. i. e. They shall never any more
make any Profession of the true God, and of the true Religion, but shall be
wholly given up to Heathenism. See also Jer. xii. 16. and xvi. 14, 15. and
xxiii. 7, 8. Hos. iv. 15. Amos viii. 14. and V. 5.

These Words CHAI JEHOVAH, Jehovah lives, summarily comprehended a Profession
of Faith in that Alsufficiency and Immutability of God, which is implied in the
Name JEHOVAH, and which Attributes are very often signified in Scripture by
God's being the LIVING GOD, as is very manifest from Josh. iii. 10. 1 Samuelxvii.26,36. 2 Kin.xix.4, 16. Dan. vi. 26. Psalm. xviii. 46. and innumerable
other Places.

The other Thing professed in Swearing into the Lord was Obedience, called
walking in the Name of the Lord. Mic. iv. 5. All People will walk every one in
the Name of his God, and we will walk in the Name of the Lord our God for ever
and ever. Still with the Prefix Beth. Beshem, as They were said to Swear
Beshem, in the Name, or into the Name of the Lord.

This Institution, in Deuteronomy, of Swearing into the Name of the Lord, or
visibly and explicitly uniting themselves to him in Covenant, was not
prescribed as an extraordinary Duty, or a Duty to be performed on a Return from
a general Apostasy, and some other extraordinary Occasions: But is evidently
mentioned in the Institution as a Part of the public Worship of God to be
performed by all God's people, properly belonging to the visible Worshippers of
Jehovah; and so it is very often mentioned by the Prophets, as I observed
before, and could largely demonstrate, if there were Occasion for it, and would
not too much lengthen out this Discourse.

And this was not only an Institution belonging to Israel under the old
Testament, but also to Gentile Converts, and Christians under the
New Testament. Thus God declares concerning the Gentile Nations, Jer. xii. 16.
If they will diligently learn the Ways of my People, to SWEAR BY MY NAME, THE
LORD LIVES, as they taught my People to Swear by Baal: Then shall they be
built in the midst of my People, i. e. They shall be added to my Church; or as
the Apostle Paul expresses it, Ephesians. iii. 19, -- 22. They shall be no more
Strangers and Foreigners, but Fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the
Household of God, and be built upon the Foundation of Christ; In whom all the
BUILDING, fitly framed together etc. -- In whom they also shall be BUILDED for
an Habitation of God through the Spirit. So it is foretold, that the Way of
public Covenanting should be the Way of the Gentiles joining themselves to the
Church in the Days of the Gospel, Isai. xliv. 3, 4, 5. I will pour Water upon
him that is thirsty, and Floods upon the dry Ground; I wid pour my Spirit upon
thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thine Offspring, and they shall spring up as
among the Cross, as Willows by the Watercourse; one shall say, I am the
Lord's, and another shall call himself by the Name of Jacob, and another shall
SUBSCRIBE WITH HIS HAND unto the Lord -- As subscribing an Instrument whereby
they bound themselves to the Lord. This was Subscribing and Covenanting
themselves into the Name of Israel, and Swearing into the Name of the Lord, in
the Language of those forementioned Texts in Deuteronomy. So taking hold of
God's Covenant, is foretold as the Way in which the Sons of the Stranger in the
Days of the Gospel should be joined to God's Church, and brought into God's
Sanctuary, and to have Communion in its Worship and Ordinances, in Isai. lvi.
3, 6, 7. So in Isai. xix. 18. The future Conversion of the Gentiles in the Days
of the Gospel, and their being brought to profess the true Religion is
expressed by That, that they should SWEAR TO THE LORD OF HOSTS. In that Day
shall five Cities in the Land of Egypt speak the Language of Canaan, and Swear
to the Lord of Hosts. So in Jer.xxiii. 5, -- 8. It seems to be plainly foretold
that after Christ is come and has wrought out his great Redemption, the same
Way of publicly professing Faith in the Alsufficient and immutable God by
Swearing, The Lord lives, should be continued, which was instituted of old;
but only with this Difference, that whereas formerly they Covenanted with God
us their Redeemer out of Egypt, now they shall as it were forget that Work, and
have a special Respect to a much greater Redemption. Behold, the Days come,
says the Lord, that I will raise up unto David a righteous Branch -- Therefore
they shall no more say, The Lord lives which brought up the children of Israel
out of the Land of Egypt; But, The Lord lives which brought up and which led
the Seed of the House of Israel out of the North Country etc. Another
remarkable Place wherein it is plainly foretold that the like Method of
professing Religion should be continued in the (...) of the Gospel, which was
instituted in Israel, by Swearing or (...) Covenanting, is that, Isai. xlv. 22,
-- 25. Look unto me, and be ye (...), all ye Ends of the Earth; for I am God,
and there is none else: I have sworn by my self, the Word is gone out of my
Mouth in Righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every Knee shall
bow, EVERY TONGUE SHALL SWEAR: truly shall one say, In the Lord have I
Righteousness and Strength: even to Him shall Men come: -- In the Lord shall
all the Seed of Israel be justified and shall glory. This Prophecy will have
its left Fulfillment at the Day of Judgment; but it is plain, that the Thing most
directly intended is the Conversion of the Gentile World to the Christian
Religion. What is here called Swearing, the Apostle in citing this Place once
and again calls Confessing; Romansxiv. 11. -- Every Tongue shall confess to God.
Phil. ii. 10. -- That every Tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord.
Which is the Word commonly used in the New Testament to signify making a
public Profession of Religion. So Romans x. 9, 10. If thou shall confess with
thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine Heart, that God has
raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved: For with the Heart Man believes
unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation. Where
a public Profession of Religion with the Mouth is evidently spoken of as a
great Duty of all Christ's People, as well as believing in him; and ordinarily
requisite to Salvation; not that it is necessary in the same Manner that Faith
is, but in like Manner as Baptism is. Faith and verbal profession are jointly
spoken of here as necessary to Salvation, in the same Manner as Faith and
Baptism are, in Mar. xvi. 16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved.
And I know no good Reason why we should not look on oral Profession and
Covenanting with Christ, in those who are capable of it, as much of a stated
Duty in the Christian Church, and an Institution universally pertaining to the
Followers of Christ, as Baptism.

And if it be so, that explicit open Covenanting with God be a great Duty
required of all, as has been represented; then it ought to be expected of
Persons before they are admitted to the Privileges of the Adult in the Church
of Christ. Surely it is proper, if this explicit Covenanting takes Place at
all, that it should take Place before Persons come to those Ordinances wherein
they by their own Act publicly confirm and seal this Covenant. This public
Transaction of Covenanting, which God has appointed, ought to be or have an
Existence before we publicly confirm and seal this Transaction. It was that by
which the Israelites of old were introduced into the Communion of God's nominal
or visible Church and holy City; as appears by Isai. xlviii. 1, 2. Hear ye
this, O House of Jacob, which ARE CALLED BY THE NAME OF ISRAEL, and are come
forth out of the Waters of Judah, WHICH SWEAR BY THE NAME OF THE LORD, and make
mention of the God of Israel, but not in Truth nor in Righteousness: FOR THEY
CALL THEMSELVES OF THE HOLY CITY, etc. When and after what Manner particularly
the Israelites ordinarily performed this explicit Covenanting, I don't know
that we can be certain; but as it was first done on Occasion of God's first
Promulgating his Law or Covenant at Mount Sinai, and was done again on Occasion
of a Repetition or renewed Promulgation of it on the Plains of Moob, and was
done on Occasion of the public reading of the Law in Josiah's Time (2 Kings
xxiii. 3.) and was done after the Return from the Captivity on Occasion of the
public Reading of it at the Feast of Tabernacles ( Neh. Chap. viii, ix and x.)
So it appears to me most likely, that it was done every seventh Year, when the
Law of Covenant of God was, by divine Appointment, read in the Audience of all
the People at the Feast of Tabernacles; at least done then by all who then
heard the Law read the first Time, and who never had heard nor publicly, owned
the Covenant of God before. There are good Evidences that they never had
Communion in those Ordinances which God had appointed as Seals of his Covenant,
wherein they themselves were to be active, such as their Sacrifices etc. 'till
they had done it: It Is plainly implied in Psalm. 1. that it was the Manner in
Israel vocally to own God's Covenant, or to take it into their Mouths, before
they sealed that Covenant in their Sacrifices See ver. 16 taken with the
preceding Part of the Psalm from ver. 5. And that they did it before they
partook of the Passover (which indeed was one of their Sacrifices) or entered
into the Sanctuary for Communion in the Temple Worship, is confirmed by the
Words of Hezekiah when he proclaimed a Passover, 2 Chronicles.xxx.8. Now be ye not
stiff-necked as your Fathers were; But yield your selvesunto the Lord (in the
Hebrew, give the Hand to the Lord) and enter into his Sanctuary which he has
sanctified for ever, and serve the Lord your God. To give the Hand, seems to be
Hebrew Phrase for entering into Covenant, or obliging themselves by Covenant.
Ezra x. 19. And they gave their Hands, that they would put away their Wives.
And, as has been already observed, it was foretold that Christians should in
this Way be admitted to Communion in the Privileges of the Church of Christ.

Having thus established the Premises of the Argument I intend, I now come,

Secondly, To that which I think must be the Consequence, viz. That none ought
to be admitted to the Privileges of adult Persons in the Church of Christ, but
such as make a Profession of real Piety. For the Covenant, to be owned or
professed, is God's Covenant, which he has revealed as the Method of our
spiritual Union with him, and our Acceptance as the Objects of his eternal
Favor; which is no other than the Covenant of Grace; at least it is so,
without Dispute, in these Days of the Gospel. To own this Covenant, is to
profess the Consent of our Hearts to it; and that is the Sum and Substance of
true Piety. It Is not only a professing the Assent of our Understandings, that
we understand there is Such a Covenant, or that we understand we are obliged to
comply with it; but it is to profess the Consent of our Wills, it is to manifest
that we do comply with it. There is mutual Profession in this Affair, a
Profession on Christ's Part, and a Profession on our Part; as it is in
Marriage. And it is the same Sort of Profession that is made on both Sides, in
this Respect, that each professes a Consent of Heart: Christ in his Word
declares an entire Consent of Heart as to what he offers; and the visible
Christian, in the Answer that he makes to it in his Christian Profession,
declares a Consent and Compliance of Heart to his Proposal. Owning the Covenant
is professing to make the Transaction of that Covenant our own. The Transaction
of that Covenant is that of Espousals to Christ; on our Part, it is giving our
Souls to Christ as his Spouse: There is no one Thing, that the Covenant of
Grace is so often compared to in Scripture, as the Marriage-Covenant; and the
visible Transaction, or mutual Profession there is between Christ and the
visible Church, is abundantly compared to the mutual Profession there is in
Marriage. In Marriage the Bride professes to yield to the Bridegroom's Suit,
and to take him for her Husband, renouncing all others, and to give up her self
to him to be entirely and forever possessed by him as his Wife. But he that
professes this toward Christ, professes saving Faith. They that openly
covenanted with God according to the Tenor of the Institution, Deuteronomy. x.20. they
visibly united themselves to God in the Union of that Covenant: They professed
on their Parts the Union of the Covenant of God, which was the Covenant of
Grace. It is said in the Institution, Thou shall cleave to the Lord and swear
by his Name; or as the Words more literally are, Thou shall unite into the
Lord, and swear into his Name. So in Isai. lvi. It Is called a joining
themselves to the Lord. But the union, cleaving, or joining of that Covenant is
saving Faith, the grand Condition of the Covenant of Christ, by which we are IN
CHRIST: This is what brings us into the Lord. For a Person explicitly or
professedly to enter into the Union or Relation of the Covenant of Grace with
Christ, is the same as professedly to do that which on our Part is the uniting
Act, and that is the Act of Faith. To profess the Covenant of Grace is to
profess the Covenant, not as a Spectator, but as one immediately concerned in
the Affair, as a Party in the Covenant professed; and this is to profess that
in the Covenant which belongs to us as a Party, or to profess our Part in the
Covenant; and that is the Soul's believing Acceptance of the Savior. Christ's
Part is Salvation, our Part is a saving Faith in him; not a feigned, but
unfeigned Faith; not a common, but special and saving Faith; no other Faith
than this is the Condition of the Covenant of Grace.

I know the Distinction that is made by some, between the internal and external
Covenant; but I hope, the Divines that make this Distinction, would not be
understood, that there are really and properly two Covenants of Grace; but only
that those who profess the one only Covenant of Grace, are of two Sorts; There
are those who comply with it internally and really, and others who do so only
externally, that is, in Profession and Visibility. But he that externally and
visibly complies with the Covenant of Grace, appears and professes to do so
really. -- There is also this Distinction takes Place concerning the Covenant
of Grace; the one only Covenant of Grace is exhibited two Ways, the one
externally by the Preaching of the Word, the other internally and spiritually
by enlightening the Mind rightly to understand the Word. But it is with the
Covenant, as it is with the call of the Gospel: He that really complies with the
external Call, has the internal Call; so he that truly complies with the
external Proposal of God's Covenant, as visible Christians profess to do, do
indeed perform the inward Condition of it. But the New Testament affords no
more Foundation for supposing two real and properly distinct Covenants of
Grace, than it does to suppose two Sorts of real Christians; the
Unscripturalness of which latter Hypothesis I observed before.

When those Persons who were baptized in Infancy do properly own their
baptismal Covenant, the meaning of it is, that they now being become capable to
act for themselves, do professedly and explicitly make their Parents Act, in
giving them up to God, their own, by expressly giving themselves up to God. But
this no Person can do, without either being deceived, or dissembling and
professing what he himself supposes to be a Falshoood, unless he supposes that
he in his Heart consents to be God's. A Child of Christian Parents never does
that for himself which his Parents did for him in Infancy, 'till he gives
himself wholly to God. But surely he don't do it, who not only keeps back a
Part, but the chief Part, his Heart and Soul. He that keeps back his Heart,
does in Effect keep back all; and therefore, if he be sensible of it, is guilty
of solemn wilful Mockery, if he at the same Time solemnly and publicly
professes that he gives himself up to God. If there are any Words used by such,
which in their proper Signification imply that they give themselves up to God;
and if these Words, as they intend them to be understood, and as they are
understood by those that hear them, according to their established Use and
Custom among that People, don't imply, that they do it really, but do truly
reserve or keep back the chief Part; it ceases to be a Profession of giving
themselves up to God, and so ceases to be a professed Covenanting with God, or
owning God's Covenant; for the Thing which they profess, belongs to no Covenant
of God, in being; for God has revealed no such Covenant, nor has any such
Covenant of God any Existence, in which our transacting of the Covenant is a
giving up our selves to him with Reserve, or holding back a Part, especially
holding back our Souls, our chief Part, and in Effect our All. There is no
Covenant of God at all, that has these for its Terms; to be sure, this is not
the Covenant of Grace. And therefore although such public and solemn professing
may be a very unwarrantable and great Abuse of Words and taking God's Name in
vain, it is no professed Covenanting with God.

One Thing, as has been observed, that belonged to Israel's Swearing into the
Name of the Lord, was saying, the Lord lives; whereby they professed their
Faith in God's Alsufficiency, Immutability and Faithfulness. But if they really
had such a Faith, it was a saving Grace. They who indeed trust in the
Alsufficiency of God, he will surely be their alsufficient Portion; and they
who trust in God's Immutability and Faithfulness, he surely will never leave
nor forsake them. There were two Ways of Swearing, Jehovah lives, that we read
of in Scripture; one we read of Jer. ii. 2. Thou shall Swear, The Lord lives,
in Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness: And the other Way is swearing
falsely, which we read of in the next Chap.ver. 2.3. And though they say, The
Lord lives, yet surely they Swear falsely. (And certainly none ought to do
this.) It follows, O Lord, are not thine Eyes upon the Truth? i. e. God desires
Sincerity of Heart in those that profess Religion. Here a gracious Sincerity is
opposed to a false Profession; for when it is said, O Lord, are not thine Eyes
upon the Truth? The Expression is parallel with those, Psalm. li. 6. Behold thou
desire the Truth in the inward Parts. 1 Samuel xvi. 7. Man looks on the
outward Appearance, but the Lord looks on the Heart. Psalm. xi. 7. His
Countenance does behold the Upright. But these Texts speak of a gracious
Sincerity. Those spoken of Jer. iv. 2. that swore, The Lord lives, in Truth,
in Judgment, and Righteousness, were gracious Persons, who had a thorough
Conversion to God, as appears by the preceding Verse, If thou will return, O
Israel, Says the Lord, return unto me. i. e. Don't do as you or Judah was
charged with doing in the foregoing Chapter, ver. 10. Judah has not turned
unto me with her whole Heart, but feignedly. Don't do thus, but if thou will
return, return unto me. And then it is added in the second Verse, And thou
shall swear, the Lord lives, in Truth etc, that is, Then your Profession of
Religion will be worth regarding, you will be indeed what you pretend to be,
you will be Israelites indeed, in whose Profession is no Guile. They who said,
The Lord lives, in Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness; They said, The
Lord lives, as David did, Psalm. xviii. 46. The Lord lives, and blessed be my
Rock. And did as the Apostle says he did, 1 Timothy ix. 10. We trust in the LIVING
GOD, who is the Savior of all Men, specially of those that believe. And as he
would have Timothy exhort rich Men to do, Chap.vi.17. That they trust not in
uncertain Riches, but in the LIVING GOD. When the Apostle speaks of a
Profession, of our Faith in Christ, as one Duty which all Christians ought to
perform as they seek Salvation, it is the Profession of a saving Faith that he
speaks of; His Words plainly imply it. If thou shall confess with thy Mouth the
Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine Heart that God has raised him from the
Dead, thou shall be saved. The Faith which was to be professed with the Mouth
was the same which the Apostle speaks of as in the Heart, but that is saving
Faith. The Latter is yet plaine^ in the following Words; For with the Heart Man
believes unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth Confession is made unto
Salvation. Believing unto Righteousness, is saving Faith; but it is evidently
the same Faith which is spoken of, as professed with the Mouth, in the next
Words in the same Sentence. And that the Gentiles, in professing the Christian
Religion or swearing to Christ, should profess saving Faith, is implied, Isai.
xlv. 23, 24. -- Every Tongue shall swear; surely shall one say, In the Lord
have I Righteousness and Strength. i. e. should profess entirely to depend on
Christ's Righteousness and Strength.

For Persons merely to promise, that they will believe in Christ, or that they
will hereafter comply with the Conditions and Duties of the Covenant of Grace,
is not to own that Covenant. Such Persons don't profess now to enter into the
Covenant of Grace with Christ, or into the Relation of that Covenant to Christ.
All that they do at present, is only a speaking fair; They say, they will do it
hereafter; they profess, that they 'will hereafter obey that Command of God, to
believe on the Name of his son Jesus Christ. But what is such a Profession good
for, an^ what Credit is to be given to such Promises of future Obedience; when
at the same Time they pretend no other at present than to live and continue in
Rebellion against those great Commands which give no Allowance or License for
Delay? They who do thus, instead of properly owning the Covenant, do rather for
the present visibly reject it. It Is not unusual, in some Churches, where the
Doctrine I oppose has been established, for Persons at the same Time that they
come into the Church, and pretend to own the Covenant, freely to declare to
their Neighbors, they have no Imagination that they have any true Faith in
Christ or Love to him. Such Persons instead of being professedly united to
Christ, in the Union of the Covenant of Grace, are rather visibly destitute of
the Love of Christ; and so, instead of being qualified for Admission to the
Lord's Supper, are rather exposed to that Denunciation of the Apostle, ^Cor.
xvi. 22. If any Man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maran
atha.

That outward Covenanting, which is agreeable to Scripture-Institution, is not
only a promissing what is future (though that is not excluded) but a professing
what is present, as it is in the Marriage-Covenant. (Though indeed it is true,
that it was chiefly on Account of the Promise or Vow (...) there is in the
Covenant, that it is called Swearing.) For a Woman to promise that she will
hereafter renounce all other Men for the Sake of him who makes Suit to her, and
will in some future Time accept of him for her Husband, is not for her now to
enter into the Marriage Covenant with him: She that does this with a Man,
professes now to accept of him, renouncing all others; though Promises of
hereafter behaving toward him as a Wise, are also included in the Transaction.
It seems as though the primitive Converts to Christianity, in the Profession they
made of Religion, in order to their Admission into the Christian Church, and in
their visibly entering into Covenant in order to the initiating Seal of the
Covenant in Baptism, did not explicitly make any Promises of any Thing future,
they only professed the present Sentiments and Habit of their Minds, they
professed that they believed in Christ, and so were admitted into the Church by
Baptism; and yet undoubtedly they were, according to forementioned Prophecies,
admitted in the Way of public Covenanting, and as the Vovenant People of God
they owned the Covenant, before the Seal of the Covenant was applied. Their
professing Faith in Christ was visibly owning the Covenant of Grace, because
Faith in Christ was the grand Condition of that Covenant. Indeed, if the Faith
which they professed in order to Baptism, was only a Historical or Doctrinal
Faith (as some suppose) or any common Faith, it would not have been any visible
entering into the Covenant of Grace; for a common Faith is not the Condition of
that Covenant; nor would there properly have been any Covenanting in the Case.
If we suppose, the Faith they professed was the Grace by which the Soul is
united to Christ, their Profession was a covenanting in this Respect also, that
it implied an Engagement of future Obedience; for true Faith in Christ includes
in it is Nature an Acceptance of him as our Lord and King, and devoting our
selves to his Service: but a Profession of Historical Faith implies no
Profession of accepting Christ as our King, nor Engagement to submit to him as
such.

When the Israelites publicly covenanted with God according to the Institution
in Deuteronomy, they did not only promise something future, but professed
something present; they avouched Jehovah to be their God, and also promised to
keep his Commands. Thus it was in that solemn Covenant-Transaction between God
and the People on the Plains of Moab; which is summarily described, Deuteronomy. xxvi.
17, 18. Thou have avouched the Lord this Day to be thy God, and to walk in his
Ways, and to keep his Statures, and his Commandments, and his Judgments, and to
hearken unto his Voice; and the Lord has avouched thee this Day to be his
peculiar People, as he has promised thee, and that thou should keep all his
Commandments. The People in avouching God for their God, professed a compliance
with the Terms of the Covenant of Grace; as the Covenant of Grace is summarily
expressed in those Words, I will be thy God, and thou shall be my People. They
that avouch the Lord to be their God, do profess to accept of Jehovah as their
God: and that is to accept him as the Object of their supreme Respect and
Trust. For that which we chuss as the Object of our highest Regard, that and
that only do we take as our God. None therefore that value and love the World
more than Jehovah, can without lying, or being deceived, avouch Jehovah to be
their God: And none that don't trust in Christ, but trust more in their own
Strength or Righteousness, can avouch Christ to be their Savior. To avouch God
to be our God, is to profess that he is our God by our own Act; i. e. that we
choose him to be our chief Good and last End, the supreme Object of our Esteem
and Regard, that we devote our selves to, and depend upon. And if we are
sensible that we don't do this sincerely, we cannot profess that we actually do
it; for he that don't do it sincerely, don't do it at all: There is no Room for
the Distinction of a moral Sincerity and gracious Sincerity in this Case: A
supreme Respect of Heart to God, or a supreme Love to him, which is Real, is
but of one Sort: It would be absurd, to talk of a morally sincere supreme Love
to God in those who really love Dirt and Dung more than him: Whoever does with
any reality at all make God the Object of the supreme Regard of his Heart, i.
e. certainly a gracious Person: And whoever don't make God the supreme Object
of his Respect with a gracious Sincerity, certainly don't do it with any
Sincerity. I fear, while leading People in many of our Congregations, who have
no Thought of their having the least Spark of true Love to God in their Hearts,
to say, publicly and solemnly, that They avouch God the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost to be their God, and that They give themselves up to him, we have led 'em
to say they know not what. To be sure, they are very obscure Expressions, if
they mean any Thing that a carnal Man does, under the reigning Power of Sin and
Enmity against God.

Here possibly it may be objected, that it is unreasonable to suppose any such
Thing should be intended, in the Profession of the Congregation in the
Wilderness, as a gracious Respect to GOD, that which is the Condition of God's
Covenant, when we have Reason to think that so few of them were truly gracious.
But I suppose, upon mature Consideration this will not appear at all
unreasonable. It Is no more unreasonable to suppose this People to make a
Profession of that Respect to God, which they had not in their Hearts now, than
at o^^er Times when we are informed they did so, as in Ezekiel. xxxiii. 31. They
come unto thee as the People comes, and they sit before thee as my People [i.
e. as though they were my Saints, as they profess to be] For with their Mouth
they show much Love, but their Heart g^^th after their Covetousness. So in the
Apostles Time, that People professed that to be in their Hearts toward God,
which was not there. The Apostle is speaking of them, when he says, Tit. i. 16,
They profess that they know God, but in Works they deny him. This was common
among that People; God declares 'em to be an hypocritical Nation, Isai. x. 6.
And it is certain, this was the Case with them in the Wilderness; they there
professed that Respect to God which they had not; as is evident by Psalm.
lxxviii. 36, 37. They did flatter him with their Mouth, and they lied unto him
with their Tongue; For their Heart was not with him, neither were they steadfast
in his Covenant. In owning the Covenant with God, they professed their Heart
was right with him; as appears, because it is mentioned as an Evidence of their
having lied or dealt falsely in their Profession, that their Heart was not
right with him, and so proved not steadfast in God's Covenant, which they had
owned. If their Heart had been right with God, they would have been truly pious
Persons; which is a Demonstration, that what they professed, was true Piety. It
also appears that if they had had such an Heart in them as they pretended to
have, they would have been truly pious Persons, from Deuteronomy. v. where we have a
Rehearsal of their Covenanting at Mount Sinai: Concerning this it is said, v.
28, 29. And the Lord heard the Voice of your Words, when ye spoke unto me; and
the Lord said unto me, They have well said all that they have spoken. O that
there were such an Heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my
Commandments always, that it might be well with them and with their Children
forever. The People were mistaken about their Disposition and Preparation of
Heart to go through the Business of God's Service, as the Man in the Parable,
that undertook to build a Tower without counting the Cost. Nor need it seem at
all incredible, that that Generation who covenanted at Mount Sinai, should, the
greater Part of them, be deceived, and think their Hearts thoroughly disposed
to give up themselves forever to God, if we consider how much they had strongly
to move their Affections; the Wonders wrought in Egypt and at the Red Sea,
where they were led through on dry Ground, and the Egyptians were so
miraculously destroyed; whereby their Affections were greatly raised, and they
sang God's Praises: And particularly what they now saw at Mount Sinai, of the
astonishing Manifestations of God's Majesty there. Probably the greater Part of
the Sinners among them were deceived with false Affections; and if there were
others that were less affected and who were not deceived, it is not incredible
that they, in those Circumstances, should wilfully dissemble in their
Profession, and so in a more gross Sense flatter God with their Lips, and lie
to him with their Tongues. And these Things are more credible concerning that
Generation, being a Generation peculiarly left to Hardness and Blindness of
Mind in divine Matters, and peculiarly noted in the Book of Psalm^ for
Hypocrisy. And as to the Generation of their Children that owned the Covenant
on the Plains of Moab, they not only in like Manner had very much to move their
Affections, the awful Judgments of God they had seen on their Fathers, God
having brought them through the Wilderness, and subdued Sihon King of the
Amorites, and Og the King of Bas^an before them, Moses's affecting Rehearsal of
the whole Series of God's wonderful Dealings with them, together with his most
pathetical Exhortations; but it was also a Time of great revival of Religion
and powerful Influence of the Spirit of God, and that Generation was probably
the most excellent Generation that ever was in Israel; to be sure, there is
more Good and less Hurt spoken of them, than of any other Generation that we
have any Account of in Scripture See Numb. xiv. 31. Deuteronomy. i. 39, and viii. 15,
16. Josh xxii. 2. and ver. 11, to the End. Chap. 23. 8. Deuteronomy. iv. 4. Josh xxiv.
31. Jud. ii. 17, 22. Psalm. lxviii. 14. Jer. ii. 2, 3, 21. Chap. xxxi. 2, 3.
Hos. ix 10.
A very great Part of them swore in Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness:
And no wonder, that others at such a Time fell in, either deceiving, or being
deceived, with common Affections; as is usual in Times of great Works of God
for his Church, and of the Flourishing of Religion. In succeeding Generations,
as the People grew more corrupt, I suppose, their Covenanting or Swearing into
the Name of the Lord degenerated into a Matter of mere Form and Ceremony; even
as subscribing religious Articles seems to have done with the Church of
England; and as, it is to be feared, owning the Covenant, as it is called, has
too much done in New England; it being visibly a prevailing Custom for Persons
to neglect this, 'till they come to be married, and then to do it for their
Credit's Sake, and that their Children may be baptized. And I suppose, there
was commonly a great Laxness in Israel among the Priests who had the Conduct of
this Affair: And there were many Things in the Nature of that comparatively
carnal Dispensation, which negatively gave Occasion for such Things; that is,
whereby it had by no Means had so great a Tendency to prevent suchlike
Irregularities, though very wrong in themselves, as the more excellent
Dispensation, introduced by Christ and his Apostles. And though these Things
were testified against by the Prophets, before the Babylonish Captivity; yet
God, who is only wise, did designedly in a great Measure wink at these, and
many other great Irregularities in the Church, 'till the Time of Reformation
should come, which the Messiah was to have the Honor of introducing. But of
these Things I may perhaps have Occasion to say something more, when I come to
answer the Objection concerning the Passover.

Now to return to the Argument from the Nature of covenanting with God, or
owning God's Covenant: As to the Promises, which are herein, either explicitly
or implicitly, made; the making these Promises implies a Profession of true
Piety. For in the Covenant of Grace universal Obedience is engaged, Obedience
to all the Commands of God; and the Performance of inward spiritual Duties is
as much engaged in the Covenant of Grace, as external Duties; and in some
Respects much more. Therefore he that visibly makes the Covenant of Grace his
own, promises to perform those internal Duties, and to perform all Duties with
a gracious Sincerity. We have no Warrant; in our Profession of God's Covenant,
to divide the Duties of it, to take some and leave out others: Especially have
we not Warrant to leave out those great Commands of believing with the Heart,
of loving the Lord our God with all our Heart and with all our Soul, and our
Neighbor as our selves: He that leaves out these, in Effect leaves out all;
for these are the Sum of our whole Duty, and of all God's Commands: If we leave
these out of our Profession, surely it is not the Covenant of Grace, which we
profess. The Israelites when they covenanted with God at Mount Sinai, and said,
when God had declared to 'em the ten Commandments, All that the Lord has
spoken will we do and be obedient; their Promise implied, that as they
professed to know God, they would in Works not deny, but own and honor him,
and would be careful to conform to those two great Commandments, which are the
Sum of all the ten, and concerning which God said, These Words which I command
thee this Day, shall be in thine Heart. Deuteronomy. vi. 7. -- So, when they
covenanted on the Plains of Moab, they promised to keep and do God's Commands
with all their Heart and with all their Soul, as is very evident by Deuteronomy. xxvi.
16, 17. So it was also when the People owned their Covenant in Asa's Time, 2 Chronicles. xv. 12. They entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their
Fathers with all their Heart and with all their Soul. We have also another
remarkable Instance, 2 Kings xxiii. 3. and 2 Chronicles xxxiv. 31.

Now he who is wholly under the Power of a carnal Mind, which is not subject to
the Law of God, nor indeed can be, cannot promise these Things without either
great Deceit, or the most manifest and palpable Absurdity. Promising supposes
the Person to be conscious to himself, or persuaded of himself, that he has
such an Heart in him; for his Lips pretend to declare his Heart. The Nature of
a Promise implies Intention or Design: And proper real Intention implies Will,
Disposition and Compliance of Heart. But no natural Man is properly willing to
do these Duties, nor does his Heart comply with them: and to make natural Men
believe otherwise, tends greatly to their Hurt. A natural Man may be willing,
from Self-love and from sinister Views, to use Means and take Pains that he may
obtain a Willingness or Disposition to these Duties: but that is a very
different Thing from actually being Willing, or truly having a Disposition to
them. So he may promise, that he will, from some Considerations or other, take
great Pains to obtain such a Heart: But if he does so, this is not the Promise
of the Covenant of Grace. Men may make many religious Promises to God, and many
Promises some Way relating to the Covenant of Grace, that are not themselves
the Promises of that Covenant; nor is there any Thing of the Nature of
Covenanting in the Case, because although they should actually fulfill their
Promises, God is not obliged by Promise to them. If a natural Man Promises to
do all that it is possible for a natural Man to do in Religion, and fulfills
his Promises, God is not obliged, by any Covenant that he has entered into with
Man, to perform any Thing at all for him, respecting his saving Benefits. And
therefore he that promises these Things only, enters into no Covenant with God;
because the very Notion of entering into Covenant with any Being, is entering
into a mutual Agreement, doing or engaging that which, if done, the other Party
becomes engaged on his Part. The New Testament informs us but of one Covenant,
God enters into with Mankind through Christ, and that is the Covenant of Grace;
in which God obliges himself to nothing in us that is exclusive of unfeigned
Faith, and the spiritual Duties that attend it: Therefore if a natural Man
makes never so many Vows, that he will perform all external Duties, and will
pray for Help to do spiritual Duties, and for an Ability and Will to comply
with the Covenant of Grace from such Principles as he has, he does not lay hold
of God's Covenant, nor properly enter into any Covenant with God: For we have
no Opportunity to covenant with God in any other Covenant, than that which he
has revealed; he becomes a Covenant-Party in no other Covenant. It Is true,
every natural Man that lives under the Gospel, is obliged to comply with the
Terms of the Covenant of Grace; and if he promises to do it, his Promise may
increase his Obligation, though he flattered God with his Mouth and lied to him
with his Tongue, as the Children of Israel did in promising. But it will not
thence follow, that they ought knowingly to make a lying Promise, or that
Ministers and Churches should countenance them in so doing.

Indeed there is no natural Man but what deceives himself, if he thinks he is
truly willing to perform external Obedience to God, universally and
perseveringly through the various Trials of Life that he may expect. And
therefore in promising it, he is either very deceitful, or is like the foolish
deceived Man that undertook to build when he had not wherewith to finish. And
if it be known by the Church, before whom the promises to build and finish,
that at the same Time he don't pretend to have an Heart to finish, his Promise
is worthy of no Credit or Regard from them, and can make nothing visible to 'em
but his Presumption.

A great Confirmation of what has been said under this Head of covenanting, is
that Text, Psalm. 1. 16. But unto the Wicked God says, What have thou to do, to
declare my Statutes, or that thou shou^^est take my Covenant in thy Mouth? This
Term, the Wicked, in the more general Use of it in Scripture, is applied in
that Extent as to include all ungodly or graceless Persons, all that are under
the reigning Power of Sin, and are the Objects of God's Anger, or exposed to
his eternal Vengance; as might easily be made to appear by a particular
Enumeration of Texts all over the Bible. All such are in Scripture called
Workers of Iniquity, The Children of the wicked one. Matthew. xiii. 38. All such
are said to be of the Devil, (...) Joh. iii. 8. And to be the Children of the
Devil, ver.10. The righteous and the wicked are in a multitude of Places in
Scripture put in Opposition; and they are evidently opposed one to the other,
and distinguished one from another in Scripture, as Saints and Sinners, holy
and unholy, those that Fear God and those that Fear him not, those that love
him and those that hate him. All Mankind are in Scripture divided by these
Distinctions, and the Bible knows of no Neuters or third Sort. Indeed those who
are really Wicked, may be visibly Righteous, Righteous in Profession and
outward Appearance: But a Sort of Men who have no saving Grace, that yet are
not really wicked Men, are a Sort of Men of human Invention, that the Scripture
is entirely Ignorant of. It Is reasonable, to suppose, that by wicked Men here
in this Psalm is meant all that hate Instruction, and reject God's Word (v.
17.) and not merely such wicked Men as are guilty of those particular Crimes
mentioned, ver.17, -- 20. Stealing, Adultery, Fraud and Backbiting. Though only
some particular Ways of Wickedness are mentioned, yet we are not to understand
that all others are excluded; yea the Words, in the Conclusion of the
Paragraph, are expressly applied to all that forget God in such a Manner as to
expose themselves to be torn in Pieces by God's Wrath in Hell, v. 22. Now
consider this, ye that forget God, left I tear you in Pieces, and there be none
to deliver. We can no more justly argue, that because some gross Sins are here
specified, that no Sinners are meant but such as live in those or other gross
Sins, than we can argue from Rev. xxii. 14, 15. That none shall be shut out of
Heaven but only those who have lived in the gross Sins there mentioned; Blessed
are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of
Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City: For without are Dogs,
and Sorcerers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a
lie. Nothing is more common in Scripture, than in the Descriptions is gives,
both of the godly and the ungodly, together with their general Character, to
insert into the Description some particular excellent Practices of the one
which Grace tends to, and some certain gross Sins of the other which there is a
Foundation for in the reigning Corruption in their Hearts. So, Lying is
mentioned as Part of the Character of all natural Men, Psalm. lviii. 3, 4. (Who
are there called wicked Men, as in Ps. 1.) The wicked are estranged, from the
Womb; they go astray as soon as they be born, speaking Lies; Their Poison is
like the Poison of a Serpent, etc. So it is said of the Wicked, Psalm. x. 2, 3,
4, 7. His Mouth is full of Cursing and Bitterness. This the Apostle, Rom iii.
cites as a Description of all natural Men. So it is said of the wicked, Psalm,
cxi. 3. They have (...) their Tongues as a Serpent, Adder's Poison is under
their Lips; which the same Apostle in the same Place also cites as what is said
of all natural Men. The very same gross Sins which are here mentioned in the
fiftieth Psalm, are from Time to Time inserted in Solomon's Descriptions of the
wicked Man, as opposed to the Righteous, in the Book of Proverbs: particularly
the Sins mentioned in the 19th ver.of that Psalm, Thou give thy Mouth to
Evil, and thy Tongue frames Deceit; are thus mentioned, as belonging to the
Character of the wicked Man, Prove. xii. The Thoughts of the Righteous are
right; but the Counsels of the Wicked are Deceit. The Words of the Wicked are
to lie in wait for Blood; but the Mouth of the Upright shall deliver them.
Nevertheless it is plain, that the wise Man in this Book, in his Distinction of
the Righteous and the Wicked, means the same as Godly and Ungodly. Only reading
the two foregoing Chapters will be enough to satisfy any of this. Observe Chap.
x. 3, 7, 16, 20, 21, 24, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Chap. xi. 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11,
18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 30, 31. Besides innumerable other like Texts all over the
Book. In Chap. i. 16. it is said of Sinners, Their Feet run to Evil, and make
haste to shed Blood. This the Apostle in Romans iii. 15. cites as belonging to
the Description of all natural Me^. So in the Description of the Wicked, Prove.
iv. 14 -- 19. It Is said, that they s^eep not unless they have done Mischief,
that they drink the Wine of Violence, etc. and yet by the wicked there is meant
the same with the graceless Man; as appears by the Antithesis, there made
between him and the just or righteous whose Path is as the shining Light which
shines more and more to the perfect Day.

As a further Evidence that by the Wicked in this Psalm. l. 16. is meant the
same as the Ungodly or Graceless, it is to be observed, here is a pretty
manifest Antithesis, or Opposition between the Wicked, and the Saints, that
shall be gathered to Christ at the Day of Judgment, spoken of ver. 5. There God
speaking of his coming to Judgment, says Gather my SAINTS together, those that
have made a COVENANT with me by Sacrifice: And then after showing the
Insufficiency of the Sacrifices of Beasts, implying that That is a greater
Sacrifice by which these Saints make a COVENANT with him, it is added, But to
the Wicked [that are not in the Number of my Saints] God does say, What have
thou to do, to take my COVENANT into thy Mouth? Approving of the Covenanting of
the former, but disapproving the Covenanting of the latter. As to the gathering
of God's Saints, there spoken, if we consider the foregoing and following
Verses, it is evidently the same with that gathering of his Elect, when Christ
comes in the Clouds of Heaven, which is spoken of, Matt. xxiv. 30. 31. And with
that gathering of the Righteous, as his Wheat, into his Barn, at the Day of
Judgment, spoken of Matt. xiii. And therefore there is as much Reason to
suppose, that by the Wicked, which are opposed to them, is meant all graceless
Persons, as there is so to understand the Do^rs of Iniquity, spoken of in that
Matthew. xiii. as those that are opposed to the Righteous, which shall then shine
forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, v. 43. -- And there is one
Thing more which still further confirms me in my Construction of Psalm l. 16.
Which is, That the plain Reason here given against wicked Men's taking God's
Covenant into their Mouths, holds good with Respect to all graceless Men, viz.
Because they don't comply with, but reject the very Covenant, which they with
their Mouths profess to own and consent to. ver.17. Seeing thou hate
Instruction, and castest my Words behind thee: As much as to say, Thou
rejectest and have a reigning Enmity against my Statutes, which thou declarest
and professeft a Compliance with. And this is the Spirit and Practice of all
who live in the Sin of Unbelief and Rejection of Christ; they live in a Way
that is altogether inconsistent with the Covenant of Grace; for the Sum and
substance of the Condition and Engagement of that Covenant is what every
natural Man is under the reigning Power of Enmity against, and lives in
Contradiction to. Therefore, I think, it follows, that they who know it is thus
with them, have nothing to do to take God's Covenant into their Mouths; or in
other Words, have no Warrant to do this, until it be otherwise with them.

III. The Nature of Things seems to afford no great Reason why the People of
Christ should not openly profess a proper Respect to him in their Hearts, as
well as a true Notion of him in their Heads, or a right Opinion of him in their
Judgments.

I can conceive of Nothing reasonably to be supposed the Design or End of a
public Profession of Religion, that don't as much require a Profession of
Honor, Esteem and Friendship of Heart toward Christ, as an orthodox Opinion
about him; or why the former should not be as much expected and required in
order to a being admitted into the Company of his Friends and Followers, as the
Latter: it cannot be because the former in it self is not as important, and as
much to be looked at, as the latter; seeing the very Essence of Religion itself
consists in the former, and without it the latter is wholly vain, and makes us
never the better; neither happier in our selves, nor more acceptable to God. --
One End of a public Profession of Religion is the giving public Honor to
God; But surely the Profession of inwrrd Esteem and a supreme Respect of Heart
toward God is as agreeable to this Design, and more directly tending to it,
that the declaring of right speculative Notions of him. We look upon it that
our Friends do the more especially and directly put Honor upon us, when upon
proper Occasions they stand ready not only to own the Truth of such and such
Facts concerning us, but also to testify their high Esteem and cordial and
entire Regard to us. When Persons only manifest their doctrinal Knowledge of
Things of Religion, and express the assent of their Judgments, but at the same
Time make no Pretense to any other than a being wholly destitute of all true
Love to God, and a being under the Dominion of Enmity against him, their
Profession is, in some Respects, very greatly to God's Dishonor: For they
leave Reason for the Public greatly to suspect that they hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness, and that they are some of those that have both soon and hated
Christ and his Father, Joh. xv. 24. Who of all Persons have the greatest Sin,
and are most to God's Dishonor.

I am at a Loss, how that Visibility of Saintship, which the honored Author of
the Appeal to the Learned, supposes to be all that is required in order to
Admission to the Lord's Supper, can be much to God's Honor, viz. Such a
Visibility as leaves Reason to believe, that the greater Part of those who have
it, are Enemies to God in their Hearts, and inwardly the Servants of Sin. Such
a Visibility of Religion as this, seems rather to increase a Visibility of
Wickedness in the World, and so of God's Dishonor, than any Thing else; i. e.
it makes more Wickedness visible to the Eye of an human Judgment, and gives Men
Reason to think, there is more Wickedness in the World, than otherwise would be
visible to them: Because we have Reason to think, that those who live in a
Rejection of Christ, under the Light of the Gospel, and the Knowledge and
common Belief of it is Doctrine, have vastly greater Sin and Guilt than other
Men. And that venerable Divine himself did abundantly teach this.

Christ came into the World to engage in a War with God's Enemies, Sin and
Satan; and a great War there is maintained between them; which War is
concerning us; and the Contest is, who shall have the Possession of OUR HEARTS.
Now it is reasonable, under these Circumstances, that we should declare on whose
Side we are, whether on Christ's Side, or on the Side of his Enemies. If we
would be admitted among Christ's Friends and Followers, it is reasonable, that
we should profess we are on the Lord's Side, and that we yield OUR HEARTS
(which the Contest is about) to him, and not to his Rivals. And this seems
plainly to be the Design and Nature of a public Profession of Christ. If this
Profession is not made, no Profession is made, that is worth regarding, or
worth the making, in such a Case as this is, and to any such Purpose as a being
admitted among his visible Friends. There is no other being on Christ's Side,
in this Case, but a being so with an undivided Heart, preferring him to all his
Rivals, and renouncing 'em all for his Sake. The Case admits of no Neutrality,
or Luke-warmness, or a middle Sort of Persons with a moral Sincerity, or such a
common Faith as is consistent with loving Sin and the World better than Christ.
He that is not with me (says Christ) is against me. And therefore none do
profess to be on Christ's Side, but they who profess to renounce his Rivals.
For those who would be called Christians, to profess no higher Regard to Christ
than what will admit of a superior Regard to the World, is more absurd than if
a Woman pretending to marry a Man, and take him for her Husband, should profess
to take him in some Sort, but yet not pretend to take him in such a Manner as
is inconsistent with her allowing other Men a fuller Possession of her, and
greater Intimacy with her, than she allows him. The Nature of the Case, as it
stands between us and Jesus Christ, is such that an open solemn Profession of
being entirely for him, and giving him the Possession of our Hearts, renouncing
all Competitors, is more requisite in this Case, than a like Profession in any
other Case. The Profession (...) intermediate Sort of State of our ^ind, is
very disagreeable to the (...) of Christ's Errand, Work, and Kingdom in the
World, and all that belongs to the Designs and Ends of h^^ ^^ministrations; and
for Minist^^^ and Churches openly to establish such a Kind of Profession of
Christ (...) Part of his public Service, which don't imply a Pretense of any
more than Luke-warmness, is (I fear) to make a mere Sham of a solemn public
Profession of Christianity, and seems to be wholly without Wa^^ant from the
Word of God, and greatly to God's Dishonor.

It cannot be justly here pretended, as a Reason why the Opinion concerning
Doctrines should be professed, and not Friendship or Respect of Heart, that the
former is more easily discerned and known by us, than the latter. For though it
be true, that Men may be at a Loss concerning the latter, yet it is as true they
may be so concerning the former too. They may be at a Loss in many Cases
concerning the Fullness of the Determination of their own Inclination and
Choice; and so they may concerning the Fullness of the Determination of their
Judgment. I know of nothing in human Nature that hinders the Acts of Men's
Wills being properly subject to their own Consciousness, any more than the
Acts, of their Judgment; nor of any Reason to suppose that Men may not discern
their own Consent, as well as their Assent. The Scripture plainly supposes
gracious Dispositions and Acts to be Things properly under the Eye of
Conscience. 2 Cor. xiii. 5. Know ye not your own selves? Joh. xxi. 15. Simon
Son of Jonas, love thou me? and many other Places. Nor is the Nature of
Godliness less made known, than the true Doctrines of Religion. Piety of Heart,
in the more essential Things belonging to it, is as clearly revealed, as the
Doctrines concerning the Nature of God, the Person of the Messiah, and the
Method of his Redemption.

IV. We find in Scripture, that all those of God's professing People or visible
Saints who are not truly pious, are represented as Counterfeits, as having
Guile, Disguise, and a false Appearance, as making false Pretenses, and as
being Deceitful and Hypocrites. -- Thus Christ says of Nathanael, Joh. 1.47.
Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no Guile; that is, a truly gracious
Person: implying, that those of God's professing People, who are not gracious,
are guileful, and deceitful in their Profession. So Sinners in Zion, or in
God's visible Church, are called Hypocrites, Isai. xxxiii. 14. The Sinners in
Zion are afraid, Fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites. Isai. xi. 17. Every
one is an Hypocrite and an Evil-Doer. So they are called lying Children, Isai.
xxx. 9. and Chap. lix. 13. and are represented as Lying in pretending to be of
the Temple or Church of God. Jer. vii. 2, 4. Hear the Word of the Lord, all ye
of Judah that enter in at these Gates to worship the Lord, -- Trust ye not in
lying Words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple
of the Lord are these. They are spoken of as falsely calling themselves of the
holy City, Isai. xlviii. 1, 2. They are called Silver-Dross, and ^^^obate or
refuse Silver (Ezekiel. xxii. 18. Jer. iv. 30.) which glisters (...) shows like
true Silver, but has not it is inward Worth. So they are compared to adulterated
Wine, Isai. i, 22. and to Trees full of Leaves, bidding fair for Fruitfulness,
Mat. xxi. 19. Clouds that look as if they were full of Rain, ye bring nothing
but Wind, Jud. 12. Wells without Water, that do but cheat the thirsty
Traveller, 2 Pet. ii. 13. A deceitful Bow, that appears good, but fails the
Archer, Psalm. lxxviii. 57. Hos. vii. 16. -- Mr. Stoddard, in his Appeal to the
learned, from Time to Time supposes all visible Saints who are not truly pious,
to be Hypocrites, as in Page 15, 17, and 18.

Now what Ground or Reason can there be thus to represent those as visible
Saints, or Members of God's visible Church, who are not truly pious, if the
Profession of such don't imply any Pretense to true Piety: and when they never
made a Pretense to any Thing more than common Grace, or moral sincerity, which
many of them truly have, and therefore are not at all Hypocritical or deceitful
in their Pretenses, and are as much without Guile in what they make a
Profession of, as Nathanal was? The Psalmist speaking of sincere Piety, calls
it the Truth in the inward Parts. Psalm. li. Behold, thou desire the Truth in
the inward Parts. It is called Truth with Reference to some Declaration or
Profession made by God's visible People: But on the Hypothesis which I oppose,
common Grace is as properly the Truth in the inward Parts, in this Respect, as
saving Grace. God says concerning Israel, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 5. Their Spot is not the
Spot of his Children. God here speaks of himself as it were disappointed: The
Words have Reference to some Profession they had made: For why should this
Remark be made after this Manner, that there were Spots appeared upon them,
shrewd Marks that they were not his Children, if they never pretended to be his
Children, and never were accepted under any such Notion to any of the
Privileges of his People?

God is pleased to represent himself in his Word as though he trusted the
Profession of his visible People, and as disappointed when they did not approve
themselves as his faithful, steadfast and thorough Friends. Isai. lxiii. 8, 9,
10. For he said, surely they are my People, Children that will not lie. So he
was their Savior: In all their (...) he was afflicted. But they rebelled and
vexed his holy Spirit; therefore he was turned to be their Enemy. The same is
represented in many other Places. I suppose that God speaks after this Manner,
because he in his present external Dealings with his visible People, don't act
in the Capacity of the Searcher of Hearts, but accommodates himself to their
Nature, and the present State and Circumstances of his Church, and speaks to
them and treats them after the Manner of Men, and deals with them in their own
Way. But supposing the Case to be even thus, there would be no Ground for such
Representations if there were no Profession of true Godliness. When God is
represented as trusting that Men will be his faithful Friends, we must
understand that he trusts to their Pretenses. But how improperly would the
Matter be so represented, if there were no Pretenses to trust to, no Pretenses
of any real thorough Friendship? However there may be a Profession of some
common Affection that is morally Sincere, yet there is no Pretense of loving
him more than, yea not so much as his Enemies. What Reason to trust that they
will be faithful to God as their Master, when the Religion they profess amounts
to no more than serving two Masters? What Reason to trust that they will be
stable in their Ways, when they don't pretend to be of a single Heart, and all
know that the double-minded Persons used to be unstable in all their Ways?
Those who only profess moral Sincerity or common Grace, don't pretend to love
God above the World. And such Grace is that God and Man know is liable to pass
away as the early Dew and the Morning Cloud. If what Men profess amounts to
nothing beyond Lukewarmness, it is not to be expected, that they will be
faithful to the Death. If Men don't pretend to have any Oil in their Vessels,
what Cause can there be to trust that their Lamps will not go out? If they
don't pretend to have any Root in them, what Cause is there for any
Disappointment when they wither away?

When God in the forementioned Place Isai. lxiii. represents himself as
trusting Isael's Profession, and saying, Surely they are my People, Children
that will not lie; It cannot be understood, as if he trusted that they were his
People in that Sense, in which the ten Tribes were called God's People after
they had given up themselves to Idolatry for two or three Hundred Years
together without once repenting: But surely they are my sincere Saints and
Children, as they profess to be, Israelites indeed, without Guile; for surely
they would not do so evil a Thing as to make a lying Profession. This seems to
be the plain Import of the Words: It therefore shows that the Profession they
made was of real vital Godliness.

V. The eight first Verses of the lvi. Chap. of Isaiah, I think, afford good
Evidence, that such Qualifications are requisite in order to a due coming to
the Privileges of a visible Church State, as I have insisted on. -- In the four
preceding Chapters we have a Prophecy of Gospel Times, the blessed State of
Things which the Messiah should introduce. The Prophecy of the same Times is
continued in the former Part of this Chapter. Here we have a Prophecy of the
abolishing of the ceremonial Law, which was a Wall of Separation, that kept two
Sorts of Persons, viz. Eunuchs and Gentiles, out from the Ordinances of the
Church or Congregation of the Lord (for the Words Congregation and Church are
the same) the Place of whose Meeting was in God's House, within God's Walls, (
Ver. 5.) and on God's holy Mountain, v. 7. That in the Ceremonial Law, which
especially kept out the Gentiles, was the Law of Circumcision; and the Law that
the Eunuch shall not enter into the Congregation or Church of the Lord, we have
in Deuteronomy. xxiii. 1. Now here it is foretold that in the Days when God's
Salvation shall be come, and his Righteousness revealed, by the coming of the
Messiah, this Wall of Separation should be broken down, this Ceremonial Law
removed out of the Way (But still taking Care to note, that the Law of the
Sabbath shall be continued, as not being one of those ceremonial Observances
which shall be abolished) and then it is declared what is the great
Qualification, which should be looked at in those blessed Days, when these
external ceremonial Qualifications of Circumcision and Soundness of Body should
no more be insisted on, viz. Piety of Heart and Practice, Joining themselves to
the Lord, loving the Name of the Lord, to be his Servants, choosing the Things
that please him, etc, ver.3. etc. Neither let the Son of the Stranger that has
joined himself to the Lord, speak, saying, The Lord has utterly separated me
from his People; neither let the Eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry Tree; For thus
faith the Lord unto the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, and choose the Things
that please me, and take hold of my Covenant, even unto them will I give in my
House, and within my Walls, a Place, and a Name better than of Sons and of
Daughters; I will give unto them an Everlasting Name, that shall not be cut
off. Also the Sons of the Stranger that join themselves to the Lord, to serve
him, and to love the Name of the Lord, to be his Servants, every one that
keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, and takes hold of my Covenant: Even
them will I bring to my holy Mountain, and make them joyful in my House of
Prayer; their Burnt-Offerings and their Sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine
Altar: For mine House shall be called an House of Prayer for all People. The
Lord God which gathered the Outcasts of Israel, faith, Yet will I gather others
to him besides those that are gathered unto him.

VI. The Representations which CHRIST makes of his visible Church, from Time to
Time, in his Discourses and Parables, make the Thing manifest which I have laid
down.

As particularly the Representation which Christ makes in the latter End of
Matthew. vii. of the final Issue of Things with Respect of the different Sorts of
Members of his visible Church: Those that only say, Lord, Lord, and those who
do the Will of his Father which is in Heaven; those who build their House upon
a Rock, and those who build upon the Sand. They are all (of both Kinds)
evidently such as have pretended to an high Honor and Regard to Christ, have
claimed an Interest in him, and accordingly hoped to be finally acknowledged
and received as some of his. Those visible Christians who are not true
Christians, for the present cry Lord, Lord; that is, are forward to profess
Respect, and claim Relation to him; and will be greatly disappointed hereafter
in not being owned by him. They shall then come and cry Lord, Lord. This
Compellation, Lord, is commonly given to Jesus Christ in the New Testament, as
signifying the special Relation which Christ stood in to his Disciples, rather
than his universal Dominion. They shall then come and earnestly claim Relation,
as it is represented of Israel of old, in the Day of their Distress and God's
awful Judgments upon them, Hos. viii. 2. Israel shall cry unto me, My God, we
know thee. To know don't here intend speculative Knowledge, but knowing as one
knows his own, has a peculiar Respect to, and owns and has an Interest in.
These false Disciples shall not only claim Interest in Christ, but shall plead
and bring Arguments to confirm their Claim; Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied
in thy Name, and in thy Name have cast out Devils, and in thy Name have done
many wonderful Works? It Is evidently the Language of those that are dreadfully
disappointed. Then (says Christ) I will profess unto them, I never knew you;
Depart from me, ye that work Iniquity. q. d. 'Tho they profess a Relation to
me, I will profess none to them; though they plead that they know me, and have an
Interest in me, I will declare to them that I never owned them as any of mine;
and will bid 'em depart from me as those that I will never own, nor have any
Thing to do with in such a Relation as they claim. Thus all the Hopes they had
lived in of being hereafter received and owned by Christ, as in the Number of
his Friends and Favorites, are dashed in Pieces. -- This is further
illustrated by what follows in the Comparison of the Wise Man who built his
House on a Rock; representing those professed Disciples who build their Hope of
an Interest in him on a sure Foundation, whose House shall stand in the trying
Day, and the Foolish Man who built his House on the Sand; representing those
professed Disciples or Hearers of his Word, who build their Opinion and Hope of
an Interest in him on a false Foundation, whose House in the great Time of
Trial shall have a dreadful Fall, their vain Hope shall issue in dismal
Disappointment and Confusion.

On the whole, it is manifest that all visible Christians or Saints, all
Christ's professing Disciples or Hearers that profess him to be their Lord,
according to the Scripture-Notion of professing Christ, are such profess a
saving Interest in him and Relation to him, and live in the Hope of being
hereafter owned as those that are so interested and related. -- By those that
hear Christ's Sayings, in this Place, are not meant merely Auditors of the Word
preached; for there are many such who make no Pretense to an Interest in
Christ, and have no such Hope or Opinion built on any Foundation at all: but
those who profess to hearken to, believe and yield Submission to the Word of
Christ. This is confirmed by the Manner in which the Matter is expressed in
Luke vi. Whosoever comes to me, and hears my sayings, and does them, I will
show you to whom he is like: i. e. Whosoever visibly comes to me, and is one of
my professed Disciples, etc.

This Matter is confirmed by that parallel Representation that Christ gives us
in Luke xiii. 25. -- 29. of his final Disposal of the two different Sorts of
Persons that are in the Kingdom or Church of God; viz. those who shall be
allowed in his Church or Kingdom when it comes to its State of Glory, and those
who, though they have visibly been in it, shall be thrust out of it. It Is
represented of the latter, that they shall then come and claim Relation and
Interest, and cry, Lord, Lord, open to us; and Christ shall answer, and say, I
know you not whence you are. As much as to say "Why do you claim Relation and
Acquaintance with me? You are Strangers to me, I don't own you." Then (it is
said) They shall begin to say, We have eaten and drank in thy Presence, and
thou have taught in our Streets. As much as to say, "This is a strange Thing,
that thou do not own us! We are exceedingly surprised, that thou should
account us as Strangers that have no Part in thee, when we have eaten and drank
in thy Presence, etc." -- And when he shall finally insist upon it, that he
don't own them and will have nothing to do with them as his, then there shall
be weeping and gnashing of Teeth; then they shall be filled with dismal
Disappointment, Confusion and Despair, when they shall see Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, with whom they expected to
dwell forever there, and they themselves thrust out. By this it is evident,
that those visible Members of the Kingdom of God, that hereafter shall be cast
out of it, are such as look upon themselves now interested in Christ and the
eternal Blessings of his Kingdom, and make that Profession.

The same is manifest by the Parable of the ten Virgins, Matthew. xxv. In the
first Verse it is said, The Kingdom of Heaven [i. e. the Church of Christ] is
liken'd unto Ten Virgins. The two Sorts of Virgins evidently represent the two
Sorts of Members of the visible Church of Christ; the Wise, those who are true
Christians; and the Foolish, those who are apparent, but not true Christians.
The foolish Virgins were to all Appearance the Children of the Bride-chamber;
they were such as to Appearance had accepted of the Invitation to the Wedding,
which represents the Invitations of the Gospel, wherein the Bridegroom and
Bride say, Come; they herein had testified the same Respect to the Bridegroom
and Bride, that the Wise had: the Parable naturally leads us to suppose, that
they were to Appearance every Way of the same Society with the Wise, pretended
to be the same Sort of Persons, in like Manner interested in the Bridegroom,
and that they were received by the Wise under such a Notion; they made a
Profession of the very same Kind of Honor and Regard to the Bridegroom in
going forth to meet him with their Lamps, as his Friends to show him Respect,
and had the same Hope of enjoying the Privileges and Entertainments of the
Wedding: There was a difference with Respect to Oil in their Vessels, but there
was no difference with Respect to their Lamps. One Thing intended by their
Lamps, as I suppose is agreed by all, is their Profession. This is the same in
both; and in both it is a Profession of Grace, as a Lamp (from its known End
and Use) is a Manifestation or show of Oil. Another Thing signified by the
Blaze of their Lamps seems to be the Light of Hope: Their Lamps signify in
general the Appearance of Grace or Godliness, including both the Appearance of
it to the View or Judgment of others, and also to their own View, and the
Judgment they entertain of themselves: Their Lamps shone, not only on the Eyes
of others, but also in their own Eyes. This is confirmed, because on the
hearing the Midnight-Cry, they find their Lamps are gone out; which seems most
naturally to represent this to us, that however Hypocrites may maintain their
Hopes while they live, and while their Judge is at a Distance, yet when they
come to be alarmed by the Sound of the last Trumpet, their Hopes will
immediately expire and vanish away, and very often fail them in the sensible
Approaches of Death. Where is the Hope of the Hypocrite, when God takes away
his Soul? But 'till the Midnight-Cry the foolish Virgins seem to entertain the
same Hopes with the Wise; when they first went forth with the wise Virgins,
their Lamps shone in their own Eyes and in the Eyes of others, in like Manner
with the Lamps of the wise Virgins. -- So that by this Parable it also appears,
that all visible Members of the Christian Church or Kingdom of Heaven are those
that profess to be gracious Persons, as looking on themselves, and seeming, or
at least pretending to be such.

And that true Piety is what Persons ought to look at in themselves as the
Qualification that is a proper Ground for them to proceed upon, in coming into
the visible Church of Christ and taking the Privileges of its Members, I think,
is evident also from the Parable of the Marriage, which the King made for his
Son, Matthew. xxii. Particularly the 11th and 12th Verses, And when the King came
in to see the Guests, he saw there a A^an which had not on a Wedding Garment:
And he faith unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a
Wedding Garment? And he was Steechless. -- Mr. Stoddard says ( Appeal, Page 4,
5.) Here is a Representation of the Day of Judgment; and such Persons as come
for Salvation without a Wedding Garment shall be rejected in that Day. So that
here being nothing sai^ about the Lord's Supper, all arguing from this
Scripture falls to the Ground. Upon which I take Leave to observe, that the
King's coming in to see the Guests, means Christ's visiting his professing
Church at the Day of Judgment, I make ^o Doubt: But that the Guests coming into
the King's House means Persons coming for Salvation at the Day of Judgment, I
am not convinced. If it may properly be represented, that any Reprobates will
come for Salvation at the Day of Judgment, they will not do so before the King
appears; But Christ will appear first, and then they will come and cry to him
for Salvation. Whereas, in this Parable, the Guests are represented as gathered
together in the King's House before the King appears, and the King as coming in
and finding 'em there; where they had entered while the Day of Grace lasted,
while the Door was kept open, and Invitations given forth; and not like those
who come for Salvation at the Day of Judgment, Luke xiii. 25. who came after
the Door is shut, and stand without, knocking at the Door. I think, it is
apparent beyond all Contradiction, that by the Guests coming into the King's
House at the Invitation of the Servants, is intended Jews and Gentiles coming
into the Christian Church, at the Preaching of Christ's Apostles and others,
making Profession of Godliness and expecting to partake of the eternal
Marriage-Supper. I showed before, that that which is called the House of God in
the New Testament, is his Church. Here in this Parable the King first sends
forth his Servants to call them that were bidden and they would not come; and
they having repeatedly rejected the Invitation and evil entreated the Servants,
the King sent forth his Armies and burnt up their City; representing the Jews
being first invited, and rejecting the Invitations of the Gospel, and
persecuting Christ's Ministers, and so provoking God to give up Jerusalem and
the Nation to Destruction. Then the King sends forth his Servants into the high
Ways, to call in all Sorts; upon which many flocked into the King's House;
hereby most plainly representing the Preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles, and
their flocking into the Christian Church. This gathering of the Gentiles into
the King's House, is BEFORE the Day of Judgment, and the Man without the
Wedding Garment among them. It fitly represents the Resorting that should be to
the Christian Church, during the Day of Grace, through all Ages; but by no
Means signifies Men's coming for Salvation after the Day of Grace is at an End,
at Christ's appearing in the Clouds of Heaven. Let this Parable be compared
with that parallel Place, Luke xiv. 16, -- 24. The Company gathered to the
Marriage in this Parable, plainly represents the same Thing with the Company of
Virgins gathered to the Marriage in the other Parable, Matthew. xxv. viz. the
Company of visible Saint,-or the Company belonging to the visible Kingdom of
Heaven; and therefore both Parables are introduced alike with these Words, The
Kingdom of Heaven is like unto etc. As to the Man's being cast out of the
King's House when the King comes in to see his Guests, it is agreeable to other
Representations made of false Christians being thrust out of God's Kingdom at
the Day of Judgment; the Servant's not abiding in the House for ever, though the
Son abides ever: God's taking away their Part out of the holy City, and
blotting their Names out of the Book of Life, etc.

Mr. Stoddard says, "This Person that had not a Wedding Garment, was a
Reprobate; but every one that partakes of the Lord's Supper without Grace is
not a Reprobate." I answer, all that will be found in the King's House without
Grace when the King comes in to see the Guests, are doubtless Reprobates.

If it be questioned, whether by the Wedding Garment be meant true Piety, or
whether hereby is not intended moral Sincerity, let the Scripture interpret it
self; which elsewhere tells us plainly what the WeddingGarment is at the
Marriage of the Son of God: Rev.xix. 7, 8. The Marriage of the Lamb is come,
and his Wife has made her self ready. And to her was granted that she should
be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white; for the fine Linen is the
Righteousness of Saints. None, I suppose, will say, this Righteousness that is
so pure, is the common Grace of lukewarm Professors, and those that go about to
serve God and Mammon. The same, Wedding Garment we have Account of in Psalm.
xlv. 13, 14. The King's Daughter is all glorious within, her Clothing is of
wrought Gold: she shall be brought in unto the King in Raiment of Neeale work.
But we need go no where else but to the Parable it self; that alone determines
the Matter. The Wedding Garment spoken of as that without which Professors win
be excluded from among God's People at the Day of Judgment, is not moral
Sincerity, or common Grace, but special saving Grace. If common Grace were the
Wedding Garment intended, not only would the King cast out those that he found
without a WeddingGarment, but also many with a Wedding Garment: for all such as
shall be found then with no better Garment than moral Sincerity, will be bound
Hand and Foot, and cast into outer Darkness; such a WeddingGarment as this will
not save 'em. So that true Piety, unfeigned Faith, or the Righteousness of
Christ which is upon every one that believes, is doubtless the Wedding Garment
intended. But if a Person has good and proper Ground to proceed on in coming
into the King's House, that knows he is without this Wedding Garment, why
should the King upbraid him, saying, How came thou in hither, not having a
Wedding Garment? And why should he be Speechless, when asked such a Question?
Would he not have had a good Answer to make? viz. "Thou thy self have given me
Leave to come in hither, without a Wedding Garment." Or this, "Thy own Word is
my Warrant; which invited such as had only common Grace or moral Sincerity, to
come in."

VII. If we consider what took Place, in Fact, in the Manner and Circumstances
of the Admission of Members into the primitive Christian Church, and the
Profession they made in order to their Admission, as we have these Things
recorded in the Acts of the Apostles, it will further confirm the Point I have
endeavored to prove.

We have an Account from Time to Time, concerning these, of their first being
awakened by the Preaching of the Apostles and other Ministers, and earnestly
enquiring what they should do to be saved; and of their being directed to
repent and believe on the Lord Jesus, as the Way to have their Sins blotted
out, and to be saved; and then, upon their professing that they did believe, of
their being baptized and admitted into the Christian Church. Now can any
reasonably imagine, that these primitive Converts, when they made that
Profession in order to their Admission, had any such Distinction in View as
that which some now make, of two Sorts of real Christianity, two Sorts of
sincere Faith and Repentance, one with a moral and another with a gracious
Sincerity? Or that the Apostles, who discipled 'em and baptized 'em, had
instructed 'em in any such Distinction? The History informs us of their
teaching them but one Faith and Repentance; Believing in Christ that they might
be saved, and Repentance for the Remission of Sins: and it would be
unreasonable, to suppose, that a Thought of any lower or other Kind entered
into the Heads of these Converts, when immediately upon their receiving such
Instructions they professed Faith and Repentance; or that those who admitted
them understood 'em as meaning any lower or other Kind in what they professed.

Let us particularly consider what we are informed concerning those Multitudes,
whose Admission we have an Account of in Acts (...). We are told concerning the
three Thousand first Converts, how that they were greatly awakened by the
Preaching of the Apostles, pricked in their Hearts, made sensible of their
Guilt and Misery; and said to Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, Men and
Brethren, what shall we do? i. e. What shall we do to be saved, and that our
Sins may be remitted? Upon which they directed them what they should do, viz.
Repent, and be baptized, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, for the Remission of
Sins. They are here directed into the Way of Salvation. viz. Faith and
Repentance, with a proper Profession of these. Then, we are told, that they
which gladly received the Word, were baptized: that is, They which appeared
gladly to receive the Word, or manifested and professed a cordial and cheerful
Compliance (...) the Calls of the Word, with the Directions which the Apostles
had given them. The Manifestation was doubtless by some Profession, and the
Profession was of that Repentance for the Remission of Sins, and that Faith in
Christ, which the Apostles had directed 'em to, in answer to their Enquiry,
What they should do to be saved: I can see no Ground to suppose they though it of
any lower or other Kind. And it is evident by what follows, that these (...)
now looked upon it that they had complied with these Directions, and so were at
Peace with God: Their Business now is to rejoice and prais^ God from Day to
Day; They continued steadfastly in the Apostle's Doctrine and Fellowship --
Continuing daily with one Accord in the Temple, and breaking Bread from House
to House, they did eat their Meat with Gladness and Singleness of Heart,
praising God. The Account of 'em now is not as (...) Persons under Awakenings,
weary and heavy laden Sinners, under (...) Sense of Guil^ and Wrath, pricked in
their Hearts, as before; (...) Persons whose Sorrow was turned into Joy,
looking on themselves as now in a good Estate. And in the last Verse it is
^said, "The (...) to the Church daily such as should be saved; in the original
it; (...), The saved, (...) was a common Appellation given to (...) Christians,
or to all Members of the visible Christian Church. It Is as much as to say, the
Converted, or the Regenerate. Being Converted is in cripture called a being
Saved, because it is so in Effect; They were passed from Death to Life, Joh. v.
24. Tit. 1. 4. According to his Mercy he SAVED us, by the washing of
REGENERATION, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Who has SAVED us,
and called us with an holy Calling. Not that all who were added to the visible
Church were indeed regenerated, but they were so in Profession and Repute, and
therefore were so in Name. 1 Cor. i. 18. The preaching of the Cross is to them
that perish, Foolishness; but unto us [i. e. us Christians] which are SAVED
[(...)] it is the Power of God. So those that from Time to Time were added to
the primitive Church, were all called (...) The saved. Before, while under
Awakenings, they used to inquire of their Teachers, what they should do to be
saved; and the Directions that used to be given them, were to Repent and
believe in Christ; and before they were admitted into the Church, they
professed that they did so: and thenceforward, having visibly complied with the
Terms proposed, they were called THE SAVED; it being supposed, that they now
had obtained what they enquired after when they asked what they should do to be
saved. Accordingly we find that after that, from Time to Time, Christ's
Minister's treated 'em no more as miserable perishing Sinners, but as true
Converts; not setting before them their Sin and Misery to awaken them, and to
convince them of the Necessity of a Savior, exhorting them to fly from the
Wrath to come, and seek Conversion to God; but exhorting them to hold fast the
Profession of their Faith, to continue in the Grace of God, and persevere in
Holiness; endeavoring by all Means to confirm, and strengthen them in Grace.
Thus when a great Number believed and turned to the Lord at Antioch, Barnabas
was sent to 'em; who when he came, and had seen the Grace of God, was glad, and
exhorted them all, that with Purpose of Heart they should cleave to the Lord.
Acts xi. 23. See also Act. xiii. 43. -- xiv. 22. -- xv. 32, 41. and xx. 32. And
when the Apostles heard of the Conversion of the Gentiles to the Christian
Faith, visible by their Profession when they joined themselves to the Christian
Church, they in Charity supposed and believed that God had given them saving
Repentance, and an Heart-purifying Faith. Acts xi. 18. When they heard these
Things, they held their Peace, and glorified God, saying, Then has God also
granted unto the Gentiles REPENTANCE unto LIFE. Chap. xv. 9. And put no
Difference between us and them, PURIFYING their HEARTS by FAITH.

If any should here object, that when such Multitudes were converted from
Judaism and Heathenisim, and received into the Christian Church in so short a
Season, it was impossible there should be Time for each one to say so much in
his public Profession, as to be any credible Exhibition of true Godliness to
the Church: I answer, This Objection will soon vanish, if we particularly
consider how the Case was with those primitive Converts, and how they were
dealt with by their Teachers. It was apparently the Manner of the first
Preachers of the Gospel, when their Hearers were awakened and brought in good
Earnest to enquire what they should do to be saved, then particularly to
instruct them in the Way of Salvation, and explain to them what Qualifications
must be in them, or what they must do in order to their being saved, agreeable
to Christ's Direction. Mar. xvi. 15. 16. This we find was the Method they took
with the Three Thousand in the second Chap. of Acts, ver.37, -- 40. And it
seems, they were particular and full in it: They said much more to 'em than the
Words recorded. It Is said ver.40. With many other Words did Peter testify and
exhort. And this we find to be the Course Paul and Silas took with the Tailor,
Chap. xvi. Who also gave more large and full Instructions than are rehearsed in
the History. And when they had thus instructed them, they doubtless saw to it,
either by themselves or some others who assisted them, that their Instructions
were understood by them, before they proceeded to baptize them (for I suppose,
none with whom I have to do in this Controversy, will maintain, from the
Apostle's Example, that we ought not to insist on a good Degree of doctrinal
Knowledge in the Way and Terms of Salvation, as requisite to the Admission of
Members into the Church) And after they were satisfied that they well
understood these Things, it took up no great Time to make a Profession of them,
or to declare that they did or found in themselves those Things they had been
told of as necessary to their Salvation. Be sure, after they had been well
informed what saving Faith and Repentance were, it took up no more Time to
profess that Faith and Repentance, than any other. In this Case not only the
Converts Words, but the Words of the Preacher, which they consented to, and in
Effect made their own, are to be taken into their Profession. For Persons that
are known to be of an honest Character, and manifestly qualified with good
doctrinal Knowledge of the Nature of true Godliness, in the more essential
Things which belong to it, solemnly to profess they have or do those Things, is
to make as credible a Profession of Godliness as I insist upon. And we may also
well suppose, that more Words were uttered by the Professors, and with other
Circumstances to render them credi^^^, than are Recorded in that very brief
summary History, which we have of the primitive Church in the Acts of the
Apostles; and also we may yet suppose one Thing further, viz. that in that
extraordinary State of Things so particular (...) Profession was not requisite
in order to the Church's Satisfaction, either of Doctrines assented to, or of
the Consent and Disposition of the Heart, as may be expedient in a more
ordinary State of Things; for various Reasons that might be given, would it not
too much lengthen out this Discourse.

One Thing which makes it very evident, that the inspired Ministers of the
primitive Christian Church looked upon saving Faith as the proper Matter of the
Profession requisite in Order to Admission into the Church, is the Story of
Philip and the Eunuch in Act. viii. For when the Eunuch desires to be baptized,
Philip makes answer, ver.37. If thou believe with all thine Heart, thou
may. Which Words, certainly imply, that believing with all his Heart was
requisite in Order to his coming to this Ordinance properly and in a due
Manner. I cannot conceive what should move Philip to utter these Words, or what
he should aim at in them, if he at the same Time supposed, that the Eunuch had
no manner of Need to look at any such Qualification in himself, or at all to
inquire whether he had such a Faith, or no, in Order to determine whether he
might present himself as the Subject of Baptism; many that are without it,
being as properly qualified for this, as they that have it.

It is said by some, that Philip intended nothing more by believing with all
his Heart, than that he believed that Doctrine, That Jesus Christ was the Son
of God, with a moral Sincerity of Persuasion. But here again I desire, the
Scripture may be allowed to be its own Interpreter. The Scripture very much
abounds with such Phrases as this, with all the Heart, or with the whole Heart,
in speaking of religious Matters. And the manifest Intent of them is to signify
a gracious Simplicity andgodly Sincerity. Thus (...) Sam. xii. 20. Turn not
aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with all your Hearts. So
ver.24. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in Truth, with all your Heart. (...)
Kings viii. 23. Who keep Covenant and Mercy with thy Servants, that walk
before thee with all their Heart. Chap. xiv. 8. My Servant David, who kept my
Commandments, and who followed me with all his Heart. Kings x. 31. But Jehu
took no Heed to walk in the Law of the Lord God of Israel with all his Heart. 2 Chronicles. xxii. 9. Jehoshaphat fought the Lord with all his Heart. Chap. xxxi. 20
21. Hezekiah wrought that which was good and right, and Truth before the Lord
his God; and in every Work that he began in the Service of the House of God,
and in the Law, and in the Commandments, to seek his God, he did it with all
his Heart. Psalm. ix. 1. I will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole Heart. Ps.
lxxxvi. 12. I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my Heart, and will
glorify thy Name. Ps. cxi. 1. I will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole Heart,
in the Assembly of the Upright. and cxix. 2. Blessed are they that keep his
Testimonies, and that seek him with the whole Heart. ver. 10. With my whole
Heart have I sought thee. ver. 34. Give me Understanding, and I shall keep thy
Law, yea, I shall observe it with my whole Heart. ver. 69. The proud have
forged a lie against me, but I will keep thy Precepts with my whole Heart.
Jer.xxiv. 7. And I will give them an Heart to know me -- for they shall return
unto me with their whole Heart. Joel ii. 12, 13. Turn ye even unto me with all
your Heart, -- and rent your Heart, and not your Garments. And we have the like
Phrases in innumerable other Places. And I suppose that not so much as one
Place can be produced, wherein there is the least Evidence or Appearence of
their being used to signify any Thing but a gracious Sincerity. And indeed it
must be a very improper Use of Language, to speak of those as performing Acts
of Religion with all their Hearts, whose Heart the Scriptures do abundantly
represent as under the reigning Power of Sin and Unbelief, and as those that
don't give God their Hearts, but give them to other Things; as those who go
about to serve two Masters, and as those who indeed draw near to God with their
Lips, but have at the same Time their Hearts far from him, and running more
after other Things; and who have not a single Eye, nor single Heart. The Word
Believe, in the New Testament answers to the Word Trust in the Old; and
therefore the Phrase used by Philip, of believing with all the Heart, is
parallel to that in Prove. iii "Trust in the Lord with all thine Heart." And
Believing with the Heart is (...) Phrase used in the New Testament to signify
saving Faith. Romans x. 9, 10. If thou shall believe in thine Heart, that God
has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved; for with the Heart Men
believes unto Righteousness. The same is signified by obeying the Form of
Doctrine from the Heart, Romans vi. 17, 18. But God be thanked, that ye were the
Servants of Sin,! but ye have obeyed from the Heart that Form of Doctrine which
was delivered you; being then made free from Sin, ye became the Servants of
Righteousness. Here it is manifest, that saving Faith is intended by obeying the
Form of Doctrine from the Heart. And the same is signified as if it had been
said, ye have believed with the Heart the Form of Doctrine. But Philip uses a
yet stronger Expression, he don't only say, if thou believe with the Heart,
or from the Heart, but with ALL thine Heart. And besides, for any to suppose,
that those same Persons which the Scriptures represent in some Places as under
the Power of an evil Heart of Unbelief; and as double-minded with Regard to
their Faith ( James i. 6, 7, 8.) and as those who though they believe for a
While, yet have their Hearts like a Rock, in which Faith has no Root, (Luke
viii.) And yet that this same Sort of Persons are in other Scripture, spoken of
as believing with all their Heart; I say, for any to suppose this, would be to
make the Sound or Voice of God's Word not very harmonious and consonant to it
self. -- And one Thing more I would observe on this Head, there is good Reason
to suppose, that Philip, while he sat in the Chariot with the Eunuch, and (as
we are told) preached unto him Jesus, had showed to him the Way of Salvation,
had opened to him the Way of getting an Interest in Christ, or obtaining
Salvation by him, viz. believing in him, agreeable to Christ's own Direction,
Mark 16. 15, 16. And agreeable to what we find to be the Manner of the first
Preachers of the Gospel: And therefore now when after this Discourse he puts it
to the Eunuch, whether he believed with all his Heart; it is natural to
suppose, that he meant whether he found his Heart acquiescing in the Gospel-Way
of Savation, or whether he sincerely exercised that Belief in Christ which he
had been inculcating; and it would be natural for the Eunuch so to understand
him.

Here if it be objected, th^^ the Eunuch's Answer and the Profession he
hereupon made (wherein he speaks nothing of his Heart, but barely says) I
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, shows that he understood no more
by the Enquiry, than whether he gave his Assent to that Doctrine: To this (...)
answer; we must take this Confession of the Eunuch's together with Philip's
Words, which they were a Reply to, and expound the one by the other. Nor is
there any Reason but to understand it in the same Sense in which we find the
Words of the like Confession elsewhere in the New Testament, and as the Words
of such a Confession were wont to be used in those Days; as particularly the
Words of Peter's Confession, (...) xvi. 16. And Simon Peter answered and said,
Thou art Christ the Son of the living God: Which was a Profession of saving
Faith, as appears by what Christ says upon it. And we read, I Cor. xii. 3. No
Man can say, that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost. Not but that a Man
might make a Profession in these Words without the Holy Ghost, but he could not
do it heartily, or WITH ALL HIS HEART. So (...) Job. iv. 15. Whosoever shall
confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and he in God. i. e.
Whoever makes this Christian Confession (this Profession which all Christians
were wont to make) cordially, or with his whole Heart, God dwells in him, etc.
But it was thus that the Ernuch was put upon making this Confession.

VIII. It Is apparent by the Epistles of the Apostles to the primitive Christian
Churches, their Manner of addressing and treating them throughout all those
Epistles, and what they say to 'em and of 'em, that all those Churches were
constituted of Members so qualified as has been represented, having such a
Visibility of Godliness as has been insisted on; those who were reputed to be
real Saints, were taken into the Church under a Notion of their being truly
pious Persons, made that Profession, and had this Hope of themselves; and no
natural or graceless Men were admitted designedly, but unawares, and beside the
Aim of the primitive Churches and Ministers, and was done unawares; and that
such as remained in good standing, and free from an offensive Behavior,
continued to have the Reputation and Esteem of real Saints, with the Apostles,
and one with another.

There were Numbers indeed in these Churches, who after their Admission fell
into an offensive Behavior; some of which the Apostles in their Epistles speak
doubtfully of; others that had behaved themselves very scandalously, they speak
of in Language that seems to suppose 'em to be wicked Men. The Apostle Paul, in
his Epistles to the Corinthians, oftentimes speaks of some among them that had
embraced heretical Opinions, and had behaved themselves in a very disorderly
and schismatical Manner, whom he represents as exposed to Censure, and to whom
he threatens Excommunication; and upon Occasion of so many Offenses of this
Kind appearing among them that for a while had been thought well of, he puts
'em all upon examining themselves, whether they were indeed in the Faith, and
whether Christ was truly in them, as they and others had supposed, 2 Cor. xiii.
-- And the same Apostle speaks of great Numbers among the Galatians, who had
made a high Profession, and were such as he had thought well of when they were
first admitted into the Church, but since had given him Cause to doubt of their
State, by giving Heed to Seducers that denied the great Gospel-Doctrine of
Justification by Faith alone: Yet notwithstanding, the Apostle speaks of them
in such Language as shows Surprise and Disappointment, and implies that he had
looked upon them as true Christians, and hoped that his Labors among them had
had a saving Effect upon them. Gal. i. 6. I marvel, that ye are so soon removed
from him that called you into the Grace of Christ, unto another Gospel. Chap.
iv. II. I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you Labor in vain. and
ver.20. I desire to be present with you now, and change my Voice; for I stand
in Doubt of you. As much as to say, I have heretofore addressed you with the
Voice of Love and Charity, as supposing you the dear Children of God; but now I
begin to think of speaking to you in other Language. In the same Chapter, to
show them what little Reason he had had to expect that they would come to this,
he puts 'em in Mind of the great Profession they had made, and the
extraordinary Appearances there had formerly been in them of servent Piety.
ver.15. Where is the Blessedness you spoke of? For I bear you Record, that if
it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your own Eyes, and have given
them unto me. -- The Apostle James, in his Epistle, speaks of scandalous
Persons among the twelve Tribes that were scattered abroad; some that were Men
of unbridled Tongues; some that seem to have been a Kind of Antinomians in
their Principles, and of a very bitter and violent Spirit, that reproached,
condemned, and cursed their Brethren, and raised Wars and Fightings among
professing Christians, and were also very unclean in their Practice, Adulterers
and Adulteresses, Chap. iv. 4. And in the fifth Chap. of his Epistle, he seems
to speak to the unbelieving Jews, who persecuted the Christians, ver.6. -- And
the Apostles are also often speaking of some that had once been admitted into
the Church, crept in unawares, who had apostatized from Christanity, and
finally proved notoriously wicked Men. -- But otherwise, and as to such Members
of the visible Church as continued in the same good Standing and Visibility of
Christianity, wherein they were admitted, it is evident by the Epistles of the
Apostles, they were all in the Eye of a Christian Judgment truly pious or
gracious Persons. And here I desire the following Things may be particularly
observed.

The Apostles continually in their Epistles speak to them and of them as
supposing and judging them to be gracious Persons. Thus the Apostle Paul in his
Epistle to the Church of the ROMANS, Chap. i. 7. speaks of the Members of that
Church as beloved of God. In Chap. vi. 17, 18, etc. He thanks God, that they
had obeyed from the Heart that Form of Doctrine which had been delivered them,
and were made free from Sin, and become the Servants of Righteousness, etc. The
Apostle in giving Thanks to God for this, must not only have a Kind of negative
Charity for them, as not knowing but that they were gracious Persons, and so
charitably hoping (as we say) that it was so; but he seems to have formed a
positive Judgment that they were such: his Thanksgiving must at least be
founded on rational Probability; since it would be but mocking of God, to give
him Thanks for bestowing a Mercy which at the same Time he did not see Reason
positively to believe was bestowed. In Chap. vii. 4, 5, 6. the Apostle speaks
of them as those that once were in the Flesh, and were under the Law, but now
delivered from the Law, and dead to it. In chap. viii. 15 and following Verses,
he tells them, they had received the Spirit of Adoption, and speaks of them as
having the Witness of the Spirit that they were the Children of God, Heirs of
God, and joint Heirs with Christ. And the whole of his Discourse to the End of
the Chapter implies, that he esteemed them truly gracious Persons. In Chap. ix.
23, 24. He speaks of the Christian Romans, together with all other Christians,
both Jews and Gentiles, as Vessels of Mercy. In Chap. xiv. 6, 7, 8. Speaking of
the Difference, that then was among professing Christians, in Point of Regard
to (...) ceremonial Institutions of the Law, he speaks of both Parties as
acting from a gracious Principle, and as those that lived to the Lord, and
should die unto the Lord, He that regards the Day, regards it unto the
Lord, etc. For none of Us lives to himself, and no Man [ i. e. none of us]
dies to himself; For whether we live, we live unto the Lord, or whether we
die, we die upto the Lord; Whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lord's.
In Chap. xv. 14. He says, I my self also am persuaded of you, my Brethren, that
ye are full of Goodness. His being thus persuaded implies a positive Judgment
of Charity. -- And the same Apostle in his first Epistle to the CORINTHIANS
directs it to the Church at Corinth, that are sanctified in Christ Jesus,
called to be Saints, with all that in every Place call on the Name of the Lord
Jesus; i. e. to all visible Christians through the World, or all the Members of
Christ's visible Church every where: And continuing his Speech of these, Chap.
i. 8. He speaks of them as those that God would confirm to the End, that they
may be Blameless in the Day of our Lord Jesus Christ; Plainly speaking of them
all as Persons, in Christian Esteem, savingly Converted. In the next Verse, he
speaks of the Faithfulness of God as engaged thus to preserve 'em to Salvation,
having called them to the Fellowship of his Son. And in the 30th Verse he
speaks of them as having a saving Interest in Christ; Of him are ye in Christ
Jesus; who of God is made unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption. In Chap. iii. 21, 22, 23. he says to the Members of the Church of
Corinth, All Things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the
World, or Life, or Death, or Things present or Things to come; all are yours,
and ye are Christ's. In Chap. iv. 15. He tells 'em, he had begotten 'em through
the Gospel. In Chap. vi. I, 2, 3. He speaks of them as those who shall judge
the World, and shall judge Angels. and in ver.II. he says to 'em Ye are washed,
ye are sanctified, ye are justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of God. And in Chap. xv. 49. to the End, he speaks of them as having an
Interest, with him and other Christians, in the Happiness and Glory of the
Resurrection of the Just. And in his second Epistle, Chap. i. 7. He says to 'em
Our Hope of you is steadfast; knowing that as you are Partakers of the
Sufferings, so shall ye be also of the Consolation. This steadfast Hope implies
a positive Judgment. We must here understand the Apostle to speak of such
Members of the Church of Corinth, as had not visibly backslidden, as they whom
he elsewhere speaks doubtfully of. Again, in the 14th and 15th Verses, he
speaks of a Confidence which he had, that they should be his Rejoicing in the
Day of the Lord Jesus In all Reason we must conclude, there was a Visibility of
Grace, carrying with it an apparent Probability in the Eyes of the Apostle,
which was the Ground of this his Confidence. Such an apparent Probability, and
his Confidence as built upon it, are both expressed in Chap. iii. 3, 4. Ye are
manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, ministered by us; written not
with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in Tables of Stone, but in
the fleshly Tables of the Heart; and such Trust have we through Christ to
God-word. And in ver.18. he Apostle speaks of them, with himself and other
Christians, as all with open Face beholding, as in a Glass, the Glory of the
Lord, and being changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory. -- And in the
Epistle to the Churches of GALATIA, Chap. iv. 26. the Apostle speaks of visible
Christians as visibly belonging to Heaven the Jerusalem which is above. And
ver.28, 29. represents them to be the Children of the Promise, as Isaac was;
and born after the Spirit. In the 6th ver.of the same Chapter he says to the
Christian Galatians, Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into your Hearts, crying, Abba, Father. And in Chap. vi. 1. he speaks of
those of them that had not fallen into Scandal, as spiritual Persons. -- In his
Epistle to that great Church of EPHESUS, at the Beginning, he blesses God on
Behalf of the Members of that Church, as being together with himself and all
the Faithful in Christ Jesus, Chosen in him before the Foundation of the World,
to be holy and without Blame before Him in Love, being Predestined to the
Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to Himself, according to the good Pleasure
of his Will, to the Praise of the Glory of his Grace, wherein God had made them
accepted in the Beloved; in whom they had Redemption through his Blood, the
Forgiveness of Sins. In Chap. i. 13, 14. he thus writes to them, In whom ye
also trusted -- In whom after ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit
of Promise, which is the Earnest of our Inheritance, until the Redemption of
the purchased Possession. And in Chap. ii. at the Beginning; You has he
quickened, who were dead in Trespasses and Sins. With much more, showing that
they were, in a charitable Esteem, regenerated Persons and Heirs of Salvation.
-- So in the Epistle to the Members of the Church of PHILIPPI, the Apostle
saluting them in the Beginning of it, tells them that he thanks God upon every
Remembrance of them, for their Fellowship in the Gospel; being CONFIDENT of
this very Thing, that he which had begun a good Work in them, would perform it
until the Day of Christ: Even ( says he) as it is meet for me to think this of
you all. If it was meet for him to think this of them, and to be confident of
it, he had at least some appearing rational Probability to found his Judgment
and Confidence upon; for surely it is not meet for reasonable Creatures to
think at Random, and be confident without Reason. In ver.25, 26. He speaks of
his Confidence that he should come to them for their Furtherance and Joy of
Faith, that their Rejoicing might be more abundant in Christ Jesus. Which Words
certainly suppose that they were Persons who had already received Christ and
Comfort in Him; had already obtained Faith and Joy in Christ, and only needed
to have it increased. -- In the Epistle to the Members of the Church of
Colosse, the Apostle saluting them in the Beginning of the Epistle, gives
Thanks for their Faith in Christ Jesus, and Love to all Saints, and the Hope
laid up for them in Heaven; and speaks of the Gospel's bringing forth Fruit in
them, since the Day they knew the Grace of God in Truth. i. e. since the Day of
their saving Conversion. In Chap. i. 8. he speaks of "their Love in the
Spirit." ver.12, 13, 14. He speaks of them as made meet to be Partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light; as being delivered from the Power of
Darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of God's dear Son; as having
Redemption through Christ's Blood, and the Forgiveness of Sins. In Chap. iii. at
the Beginning, he speaks of 'em as risen with Christ; as being dead [i. e. to
the Law, to Sin, and the World] as having their Life hid with Christ in God;
and being such as, when Christ their Life should appear, should appear with him
in Glory. In ver.7. he speaks of them as having once walked and lived in Lusts,
but having now put off the old Man with his Deeds, and put on the new Man,
which is renewed in Knowledge after the Image of Him that created him. -- In
the first Epistle to the Members of the Church of Thessalonica, in Words
annexed to his Salutation, Chap. i. He declares what Kind of Visibility there
was of their Election of God, in the Appearance there had been of true and
saving Conversion, and their consequent holy Life, ver. 3, -- 7. And in the
Beginning of the second Epistle he speaks of their Faith and Love greatly
increasing; and in ver. 7, expresses his Confidence of meeting them in eternal
Rest, when the Lord Jesus Christ should be revealed from Heaven with his mighty
Angels. And in Chap. ii. 13. He gives Thanks to God, that from the Beginning he
had chosen them to Salvation. -- In the (...) to the Christian Hebrews, though
the Apostle speaks of some that once belonged to their Churches, but had
apostatized and proved themselves Hypocrites; yet concerning the rest that
remained in good Standing, he says, Chap. vi. 9. I am persuaded better Things
of you, and Things that accompany Salvation. (Where we may again note, his
being thus persuaded evidently implies a positive Judgment.) And in Chap. xii.
22. etc. He speaks of them as visibly belonging to the glorious Society of
Heaven. And in Chap. xiii. 5, 6. He speaks of them as those who may boldly say,
The Lord is my Helper. -- The Apostle James, writing to the Christians of the
twelve Tribes which were scattered abroad, speaks of them as regenerated
Persons (meaning, as I observed before, those which were in good Standing)
Chap. l. 18. Of his own Will begat he us by the Word of Truth, that we should
be a Kind of first Fruits of his Creatures, -- The Apostle Peter writing to the
Jewish Christians, scattered throughout Pontus, Galetia, Cappadecia, Asia, and
Bithynia (large Countries, and therefore they must in the whole be supposed to
be a great Multitude of People) to all these the Apostle in the Inscription or
Direction of his first Epistle, gives the Title of Elect, according to the
Foreknowledge of God the Father, through Sanctification of the Spirit unto
Obedience, and Sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ. And in the Versee next
following, speaks of them as regenerated or begotten again to a lively Hope, to
an Inheritance incorruptible etc. And as kept by the Power of God through Faith
unto Salvation. And says to them in ver.8, 9. Whom ( namely Christ) having not
seen, ye love; in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with
Joy unspeakable and full of Glory; receiving the End of your Faith, even the
Salvation of your Souls. and in ver.18, to the End, the Apostle speaks of them
as redeemed from their vain Conversation, by the precious Blood of Christ, --
And as having purified their Souls in obeying the Truth through the Spirit, --
Being born again of incorruptible Seed, etc. And in the former Part of Chap.
ii. he speaks of 'em as living Stones, coming to Christ, and on him built up a
spiritual House, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices,
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ, -- And As those that believe, to whom
Christ is precious, -- As a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy
Nation, a peculiar People, called out of Darkness into mavelous Light. The
Church at Babylon occasionally mentioned in Chap. v. 13. is said to be elected
together with them. And in his second Epistle (which appears by Chap. iii. 1.
to be written to the same Persons.) the Inscription is, To them which have
obtained like precious Faith with us, i. e. with the Apostles and Servants of
Christ. And in the third Chapter, he tells 'em, both his Epistles were designed
to stir up their PURE Minds. In the 1st Epistle of John, written (for ought
appears) to professing Christians in general, Chap. ii. 12, etc. the Apostle
tells them, he writes to them because their Sins were forgiven, because they
had known him that was from the Beginning, -- Because they had overcome the
wicked One, etc. In ver.20, 21. He tells 'em, they have as Unction from the
holy One, and know all Things; and that he did not write to 'em because they
had not known the Truth, but because they had known it, etc. and in ver.27. He
says, The Anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you, and ye need
not that any Man should teach you; but as the same Anointing teaches you of
all Things, and is Truth, and is no Lie, and even as it has taught you, ye
shall abide in him. And in the Beginning of the iiid Chap. he addresses them as
those who were the Sons of God, who when he should appear should be like him,
because they should see him as he is, In Chap. iv. 4. He says, Ye are of God,
little Children, and have overcome etc. -- The Apostle Jude, in his general
Epistle, speaks much of Apostates and their Wickedness; but to other prosessing
Christians that had not fallen away, he says ve.r20, 21. But ye, Beloved,
building up your selves on your most holy Faith, praying in the holy Ghost,
keep your selves in the Love of God, looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ, unto eternal Life: Plainly supposing, that they had professed Faith
with Love to God our Savior, and were by the Apostle considered as his Friends
and Lovers. -- Many other Passages to the like Purpose might be observed in the
Epistles, but these may suffice.

Now how unaccountable would these Things be, if the Case was, that the Members
of the primitive Christian Churches were not admitted into them under any such
Notion as their being really godly Persons and Heirs of eternal Life, nor with
any Respect to such a Character appearing on them; and that they themselves
joined to these Churches without any such Pretense, as having no such Opinion
of themselves!

But it is particularly evident that they had such an Opinion of themselves, as
well as the Apostles of them, by many Things the Apostles say in their
Epistles. Thus, in Romans viii. 15, 16. the Apostle speaks of them as having
received the Spirit of Adoption, the Spirit of God bearing Witness with their
Spirits, that they were the Children of God. And Chap. v. 2. Of their rejoicing
in Hope of the Glory of God. -- In 1 Cor. i. 7. He speaks of them as waiting
for the coming of the Lord Jesus. In Chap. xv. 17. the Apostle says to the
Members of the Church of Corinth, If Christ be not raised, your Faith is vain,
ye are yet in your Sins: Plainly supposing, that they hoped their Sins were
forgiven. -- In Philip. i. 25, 26. The Apostle speaks of his coming to Philippi
to increase their Joy of Faith, and that their rejoicing in Christ might be
more abundant^: -- Implying (as was observed before) that they had received
Comfort already, in some Degree as supposing themselves to have a saving
Interest in Christ. -- In 1 Thessalonians. i. 10. Me speaks of the Members of the
Church of Thessalonica as waiting for Christ from Heaven, as one who had
delivered them from the Wrath to come. -- In Heb. vi. 9, 19. He speaks of the
Christian Hebrews as having that Hope which was an Anchor to their Souls. --
The Apostle Peter, 1. Epis. i. 3, -- 6, 8, 9, speaks of the visible Christians
he wrote to, as being begotten to a living Hope of an Inheritance
incorruptible, etc. -- Wherein they greatly rejoiced, etc. -- And even the
Members of the Church of Laodicea, the very worst of all the seven Churches of
Asia, yet looked upon themselves as truly gracious Persons, and made that
Profession; They said, they were rich, and increased in Goods, and know not
that they were wretched and miserable, etc. Rev.iii. 17.

It Is also evident, that the Members of these primitive Churches and this
Judgment one of another, and (...) the Members of the visible Church of Christ
in general. -- In 1. These. iv. 13 etc. the Apostle exhorts the Christian
Thessalonians, in Mourning for their deceased Friends who were visible
Christians, not to sorrow as the hopeless Heathen were wont to do for their
departed Friends; and that upon this Consideration, that they had Reason to
expect to meet them again in glorious Circumstances at the Day of Judgment,
never to part more. The Ground of Comfort concerning their dead Friends, which
the Apostle here speaks of, is evidently something more than such an Hope as it
may be supposed we ought to have of all that profess Christian Doctrines and
are not Scandalous in Life, whom we must forbear to censure, because we don't
know but they are true Saints. -- The Members of the Church of Sardis, next to
Laodicea, the worst of the seven Churches of Asia, yet had a Name that they
lived; though Christ, who speaks to these seven Churches from Heaven in the
Character of the Searcher of Hearts, (see Rev.ii. 23.) explicitly tells them,
that they were dead; perhaps all in a dead Frame, and the most in a dead State.

These Things evidently show, how all the Christian Churches through the World
were constituted in those Days; and what Sort of Holiness or Saintship it was,
that all visible Christians in good Standing had a Visibility and Profession
of, in that Apostolic Age; and also what Sort of Visibility of this they had,
viz. not only that which gave 'em Right to a Kind of Negative Charity, or
freedom from Censure, but that which might justly induce a positive Judgment in
their Favor. The Churches that these Epistles were written to, were all the
principal Churches in the World; some of them very large, as the Churches of
Corinth and Ephesus; some of the Epistles were directed to all the Churches
through large Countries where the Gospel had had great Success, as the Epistle
to the Galatians. The Epistle to the Hebrews was written to all the Jewish
Christians in the Land of Canaan, in Distinction from the Jews that lived in
other Countries, who were called Hellenists or Grecians, because they generally
spoke the Greek Tongue. The Epistles of Peter were written to all the Christian
Jews through many Countries, Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia;
where were great Numbers of Jews beyond any other Gentile Countries. The
Epistle of James was directed to all Christian Jews, scattered abroad through the
whole World. The Epistles of John and Jude, for ought appears in those
Epistles, were directed to all visible Christians through the whole World. And
the Apostle Paul directs the first Epistle to the Corinibians, not only to the
Members of that Church, but to all professing Christians through the Face of
the Earth. 1 Cor. i. 2. and Chap. 14. 33. Speaking of the Churches in general,
he calls them all Churches of the Saints. And by what Christ says to the
Churches of Sardis and Laodicea in the Apocalypse, of whom more Evil is said
than of any Christian Churches spoken of in the New Testament, It appears that
even the Members of those Churches looked on themselves as in a State of
Salvation, and had such a Name with others.

Here possibly some may object, and say, It will not follow from the Apostles
speaking to and of the Members of the primitive Church after the Manner which
has been observed, as though they supposed 'em to be gracious Persons, that
therefore a Profession and Appearance of this was looked upon in those Days as
a requisite Qualification for Admission into the visible Church; because
another Reason may be given for it, viz. Such was the extraordinary State of
Things at that Day, that it so came to pass, that the greater Part of those
converted from Heathenism and Judaism to Christianity, were hopefully gracious
Persons, by Reason of its being a Day of such large Communications of divine
Grace, and such great and unavoidable Sufferings of Professors, etc. And the
Apostles knowing those Facts, might properly speak to and of the Churches as if
they were Societies of truly gracious Persons, because there was just Ground,
on such Accounts, to think the greater Part of them to be so; although no
Profession or Visibility of this was requisite in their Members by the
Constitution of those Churches, and the Door of Admission was as open for
others as for such.

But it will appear, this cannot be a Satisfactory nor true Account of the
Matter, if we consider the following Things.

(1.) The Apostles in the very Superscription or Direction of their Letters to
these Churches, and in their Salutations at the Beginning of their Epistles,
Speak of them as gracious Persons. For Instance, The Apostle Peter in the
Direction of his first Letter to all professing Jewish Christians through many
Countries, says thus, To the strangers scattered through Pontus etc. Elect,
according to the Foreknowledge of God the Father, through Sanctification of the
Spirit unto Obedience, and sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ. And in
directing his 2d Epistle to the same Persons, he says thus, Simon Peter a
Servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that have obtained like
precious Faith with us, etc. And the Apostle 'Paul directs his Epistle to the
Romans thus, To them that be at Rome, beloved of God. So he directs his first
Epistle to the Corinthians thus, Unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, to
them that are Sanctified in Christ Jesus. In what Sense he means Sanctified,
his following Words show, ver. 4, 7, 8, 9. The same was before observed of
Words annexed to the Apostle's Salutations in the Beginning of several of the
Epistles. This shows, that the Apostles extend this Character as far as they do
the Epistles themselves. Which surely would be very improper, and not agreeable
to Truth, if the Apostles at the same Time knew very well that such a Character
did not belong to Members of Churches, as such, and that they were not received
into those Churches with any Regard to such Character, or upon the Account of
any Right they had to be esteemed such Manner of Persons. In the Superscription
of Letters to Societies of Men, we are wont to give 'em that Title or
Denomination which properly belongs to 'em as Members of such a Body. Thus, if
one should write to the Royal Society in London, or the Royal Academy of
Sciences at Paris, it would be proper and natural to give 'em the Title of
Learned; for whether every one of the Members truly deserve the Epithet, or
not, yet the Title is agreeable to their Profession, and what is known to be
aimed at and is professedly insisted on in the Admission of Members. But if one
should write to the House of Commons, or to the East-India-Company, and in his
Superscription give 'em the Title of Learned, this would be very improper and
ill judged; because that Character don't belong to their Profession as Members
of that Body, and Learning is not a Qualification looked at or insisted on in
their Admission of Members; Nor would it excuse the Impropriety, though the
Writer might from his special Acquaintance know it to be Fact, that the greater
Part of 'em were Men of Learning. If one Man should once happen thus to
inscribe a Letter to 'em, it would be something strange; but more strange, if
he should do it from Time to Time, or if it should appear by various Instanoes
to be a Custom so to direct Letters to such Societies; as it seems to be the
Manner of the Apostles, in their Epistles to Christian Churches, to address
them under Titles which imply a Profession and Visibility of true Holiness.

(2.) The Apostle John in his general Epistle does very plainly manifest, that
all whom he wrote to were supposed to have true Grace, in as much as he
declares this the Qualification he has Respect to in writing to them, and lets
them know he writes to 'em for that Reason, because they are supposed to be
Persons of the Character of such as have known God, over come the wicked One,
and have had their Sins forgiven them. I Joh. ii. 12, 13, 14, 21.

(3.) The Apostles, when speaking of such as they write to, viz. visible
Christians, as a Society, and representing what belongs to such a Kind or Sort
of Society as the visible Church is, they speak of it as visibly (i. e. in
Profession and Reputation) a Society of gracious Persons. So the Apostle Peter
speaks of 'em as a spiritual House, an holy and royal Priesthood, an holy
Nation, a peculiar People, a chosen or elect Generation, called out of Darkness
into mavelous Light. 1. Pet. ii. -- The Apostle Paul also speaks of them as
the Family of God. Ephesians. ii. 19. And in the next Chapter he explains himself to
mean that Family a Part of which is in Heaven. i. e. They were by Profession
and in Visibility a Part of that heavenly and divine Family.

(4.) The Apostle Paul speaks expressly, and from Time to Time, of the Members
of the Churches he wrote to, as all of them in Esteem and Visibility truly
gracious Persons. Philip I. 6. Being confident of this very Thing, that he
which has begun a good Work in you will perform it until the Day of the Lord
Jesus Christ: Even as it is meet for me to think this of YOU ALL (that is, all
singly taken, not collectively, according to the Distinction before observed)
So Gal. iv. 26. "Jerusalem which is above, which is the Mother of us ALL." Romans
vi. AS MANY OF US as have been baptized into Christ, have been baptized into
his Death. Here he speaks of all that have been baptized; and in the
Continuation of the Discourse, explaining what is here said, he speaks of their
being dead to Sin; no longer under the Law, but under Grace; having obeyed the
Form of Doctrine from the Heart, being made free from Sin and become the
Servants of Righteousness, etc. Romans xiv. 7, 8. NONE OF US lives to himself,
and NO MAN "dies to himself" (taken together with the Context) 2 Cor. iii. 18.
"We ALL with open Face beholding as in a Glass, etc." and Gal. iii. "Ye are ALL
the Children of God by Faith."

5. It Is evident, that even in those Churches where the greater Part of the
Members were not true Saints, as in those degenerate Churches of Sardis and
Laodicea, which we may suppose were become very lax in their Admissions and
Discipline; yet they looked upon themselves as truly gracious Persons, and had
with others the Reputation of such.

(6.) If we should suppose, that by Reason of the extraordinary State of Things
in that Day, the Apostles had Reason to think the bigger Part of the Members of
Churches to be true Christians, yet unless Profession and Appearance of true
Christianity was their proper Qualification and the Ground of their Admission,
and unless it was supposed that all of them esteemed themselves true
Christians, it is altogether unaccountable that the Apostles in their Epistles
to 'em never make any express particular Distinction between those different
Sorts of Members. If the Churches were made up of Persons who the Apostles knew
looked on themselves in so exceeding different a State, some the Children of
God, and others the Children of the Devil, some the high Favorites of Heaven
and Heirs of eternal Glory, others the Children of Wrath, being under
Condemnation to eternal Death, and every Moment in Danger of dropping into
Hell: I say, if this was the Case, why do the Apostles make no Distinction in
what they say to 'em or of 'em, in their Manner of addressing 'em, in the
Things they set before 'em, and in the Counsels, Reproofs and Warnings they
gave 'em? Why do the Apostles in their Epistles never apply themselves or
direct their Speech to the unconverted Members of the Churches, in particular,
in a Manner tending to awaken them and make them sensible of the miserable
Condition they were in, and press them to seek the converting Grace of God.
It Is to be considered, that the Apostle Paul was very particularly acquainted
with the Circumstances of most of those Churches be wrote to; for he had been
among them, was their spiritual Father, had been the Instrument of gathering
and founding those Churches, and they had received all their Instructions and
Directions relating to Christianity and their Soul-Concerns from him; nor can
it be questioned but that many of them had opened the Case of their Souls to
him. And if he was sensible, that there was a Number among them that made no
Pretensions to being in a regenerate State, and that he and others had no
Reason to judge them to be in such a State, he knew that the Sin of such who
lived in the Rejection of a Savior, even in the very House of God, in the
midst of Gospel Light, and in Violation of the most sacred Vows, was peculiarly
aggravated, and their Guilt and State peculiarly dreadful. Why should he
therefore never particularly and distinctly point his Addresses to such,
applying himself to them in much Compassion to their Souls, and putting them in
mind of their awful Circumstances? But instead of this, continually lumping all
together, and indifferently addressing the whole Body, as if they were all in
happy Circumstances, expressing his Charity for them all, and congratulating
them all in their glorious and eternal Privileges; and instead of speaking to
them in such a Manner as should have a Tendency to alarm them with a Sense of
Danger, on the contrary, calling on all without Distinction, from Time to Time,
to rejoice? Philip iii. I. Finally, my Brethren, rejoice in the Lord. So 2 Cor.
xiii. 11. Finally, Brethren, be of good Comfort. Philip, iv. 4. Rejoice in the
Lord always, and again I say, Rejoice. The Matter is insisted upon as though
Rejoicing were a Duty especially proper for them, and what they had the highest
Reason for. The Apostle not only did not preach Terror to those whom he wrote
to, but is careful to guard 'em against Fears of God's Wrath; as in I These. v.
at the Beginning, when the Apostle there observes how that Christ will come on
ungodly Men as a Thief in the Night, and when they shall say Peace and Safety,
then sudden Destruction shall come upon them, as Travail on a Woman with Child,
and they shall not escape; he immediately uses Caution, that the Members of the
Church of Thessalonica should not take this to themselves, and be terrified, as
though they were in Danger; and says in the next Words, But ye, Brethren, are not
in Darkness, that that Day should overtake you as a Thief; ye are ALL the
Children of Light, and the Children of the Day. And says in the 9, 10, and 11th
Verses, For God has not appointed us to Wrath, but to obtain Salvation by our
Lord Jesus Christ; who died for us that whether we wake or sleep, we should
live together with him. Wherefore Comfort yourselves together, and edify one
another; even as also ye do. And ver.16. he says, Rejoice evermore. How diverse
is this Way of treating Churches, from the Method in which faithful Ministers
are wont to deal with their Congregations, wherein are many that make no
Pretense to true Piety, and from the Way in which Mr. Stoddard was wont to deal
with his Congregation! And how would he have undoubtedly judged such a Way of
treating them the most direct Course in the World eternally to undo them? And
shall we determine that the Apostle Paul was one of those Prophets who dawted
with unter^pered Mortar, and sewed Pillows under all Arm-Holes, and heard the
Hurt of immortal Souls slightly, crying Peace, 'Peace, when there was no Peace.
-- These Things make it most evident, that the primitive Churches were not
constituted as those modern Church^^ where Persons knowing and owning
themselves unregenerate, are admitted, on Principle.

If it be here objected, that the Apostle sometimes exhorts those that he
writes to, to put off the Old Man, and put on the New-Man, and to be renewed in
the Spirit of their Minds, etc. as exhorting them to seek Conversion. I answer,
that the meaning is manifestly but this, That they should mortify the Remains
of Corruption or the Old Man, and turn more and more from Sin to God. Thus he
exhorts the Ephesians to be renewed, etc. Ephesians. iv. 22. 23. whom yet he had
before in the same Epistle abundantly represented as savingly renewed already;
as has been before observed. And the like might be shown of other Instances.

(7.) It is a clear Evidence, not only that it happened the greater Part of the
Members of the primitive Churches were to Appearance true Christians; but that
they were taken in under that Notion, and because there appeared in them
Grounds of such an Estimation of them; and when any happened to be admitted
that were otherwise, it was beside their Aim; In as much as when others were
admitted, they are represented as bro't or crept in unawares. Thus the Matter
is represented by the Apostles. Jude v. 4. There are certain Men crept in
unawares, -- ungodly Men, turning the Grace of God into Losciviousness. Gal.
ii. 4. False Brethren, unawares bre't in. If it be said, these here spoken of
were openly scandalous Persons and Heretics: I answer, they were not openly
scandalous when they were first brought in; nor is there any Reason to think
they were Heretics when admitted, though afterward they turned Apostates. Mr.
Stoddard says, it don't follow that all Hypocrites crept in unawares because
some did. (Appeal, P. 17.) To which I would humbly say, it must be certainly
true with Respect to all Hypocrites who were admitted, either that the Church
which admitted them was aware they were such, or else was not. If there were
some [of whom the ] Church was aware, that they were Hypocrites, at the Time
when they were taken in, then the Church in admitting them did not follow the
Rule that Mr. Stoddard often declares himself to suppose ought to be followed
in admitting Members, viz. to admit none but what in a Judgment of rational
Charity are true Christians. (Appeal P. 2, 3, 10, 28, 33, 67, 73, 93, 94,) But
that not only Heretics and designing Dissemblers crept in unawares, but that
all false Brethrew, all Church Members not truly gracious, did so, appears by
such being represented as Bastards in a Family, who are false Children and
false Heirs, brought into it unawares, and imposed upon the Disposers of those
Privileges by Stealth. Heb. xii. 8. If, ye are without Chastisement, whereof
all are Partakers, then are ye Bastards, and not Sons.

Thus it is abundantly manifest, from the Apostolical Writings, how the visible
Church of Christ through the whole (...) was at first constituted and ordered,
under the Direction of the Apostles themselves, who Regulated it according to
the Infallible Guidance of the Spirit of their great Lord and Master. And
doubtless, as the Christian Church was constituted then, so it ought to be
constituted now. What better Rule have we for our ecclesiastical Regulations in
other Respects, than what was done in the primitive Churches, under the
Apostles own Direction; as particularly the standing Officers of the Church,
Presbyters and Deacons, the Method of Introducing Ministers in their
Ordination, etc? In this Matter that I have insisted on, I think the Scripture
is abundantly more full, than in those other Things.

IX. Another Evidence, that such as are taken into the Church, ought to be in
the Eye of a Christian Judgment truly gracious or pious Persons, is his, that
the Scripture represents the visible Church of Christ, as a Society having it is
several Members united by the Bond of christian brotherly Love.

Besides that general Benevolence or Charity which the Saints have to Mankind,
and which they exercise toward both the Evil and the Good in common, there is
a peculiar and very distinguishing Kind of Affection, that every true Christian
experiences toward those whom he looks upon as truly gracious Persons; whereby
the Soul, at least at Times, is very sensibly and sweetly knit to such Persons,
and there is an ineffable Oneness of Heart with them; whereby, to use the
Scripture Phrase (Acts iv. 32.) They are of one Heart and one Soul: Which holy
Affection is exercised toward others on Account of the spiritual Image of God
in them, their supposed Relation to God as his Children, and to Christ as his
Members, and to them as their spiritual Brethren in Christ. This sacred
Affection is a very good and distinguishing Note of true Grace, much spoken of
as such, in Scripture, under the Name of (...), The love of the Brethren, or
brotherly Love; and is called by Christ, The receiving a righteous Man, in the
Name of a righteous Man, and receiving one of Christ's little Ones in the Name
of a Disciple, or because he belongs to Christ, (Matt.x.41, 42. Mark ix.41.)
And a loving one another as Christ has loved them (Joh. xiii. 34. and xv. 13,
14, 15.) having a peculiar Image of that Oneness which is between Christ
himself and his Saints. (Compare Joh. xvii. 20th to the End.)

This Love the Apostles are often directing Christians to exercise toward
Fellow Members of the visible Church; as in Romans xii. 10. Be kindly affectioned
one to another with brotherly Love. The Words are much more emphatical in the
Original, and ^o more livelily represent that peculiar Endearment that there is
between gracious Persons, or those that look on one another as such; (...) The
Expressions properly signifies, cleaving one to another with brotherly natural
strong Endearment^ With the like Emphasis and Energy does the Apostle Peter
express himself, Epist. i. 22. Seeing ye have purified your Souls in obeying
the Truth through the Spirit, unto unfeigned Love of the Brethren ((...)) See
that ye' (...) another with a pure Heart servently. Again, Chap. iii. 8.
Finally, be ye all of one Mind, having Compassion one of another; love as
Brethren; be pitiful, be courteous. The Words in the Greek are much more
significant, elegant, and forcible; (...) The same peculiar Endearment the
Apostle has doubtless Respect to in Chap. iv. Above all Things have servent
Charity among yourselves. The Apostle Paul in his Epistles, from Time to Time,
speaks of the visible Saints whom he writes to, as being united one to another
with this Affection, and considers it as a Note of their Piety. Col. 1. 4. We
heard of your Faith in Christ Jesus, and of the LOVE which ye have to all
Saints. I These. iv. 9. As touching BROTHERLY-LOVE, ye need not that I write
unto you; for ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another. So, Phil. 5.
Hearing of thy Love, and Faith which thou have toward the Lord Jesus Christ,
and toward all Saints. And this is what he exhorts to, Heb. xiii. 1. Let
BROTHERLY-LOVE Continue. I These. v. 26. Greet all the Brethren with an holy
Kiss. Compare 1 Cor. xvi. 20. 2 Cor. xiii. 12. and 1 Pet. v. 14.

This (...) or Love to the Brethren, is that Virtue which the Apostle John so
much insists on in his first Epistle, as one of the most distinguishing
Characteristicks of true Grace, and a peculiar Evidence that God dwells in us
and we in God. By which must needs be understood a Love to Saints as Saints, or
on Account of the spiritual Image of God supposed to be in them, and their
spiritual Relation to God; according as it has always been understood by
orthodox Divines. There is no reasonable Doubt can be made, but that the
Apostle John in this Epistle has Respect to the same Sort of Love, which Christ
prescribed to his Disciples, in that which he called by Way of Eminency HIS
COMMANDMENT, and HIS NEW COMMANDMENT, which he gave as a great Mark of their
being truly his Disciples, as this same Apostle gives an Account in his Gospel;
and to which he plainly refers, when speaking of the Love of the Brethren in
his Epistle, Chap. ii. 7, 8. and iii. 23. But that Love, which Christ speaks of
in his new Commandment, is spoken of as between those that CHRIST loves, or is
supposed to love; and which has his Love to 'em for its Ground and Pattern. And
if this (...) this Love of the Brethren, so much spoken by Christ, and by the
Apostles 'Paul and John, ben't that peculiar Affection which gracious Persons
or true Saints have one to another, which is so great a Part and so remarkable
an Exercise of true Grace, where is it spoken of, at all, in the New Testament?

We see how often the Apostles exhort visible Christians to exercise this
Affection to all other Members of the visible Church of Christ, and how often
they speak of the Members of the visible Church as actually thus united, in
Places already mentioned. In 2 Cor. ix. 14. the Apostle speaks of the Members
of other Churches loving the Members of the Church of Corinth, with this
peculiar Endearment and Oneness of Heart, for the Grace of God in them. And by
their Prayer for you, which long after you, for the exceeding Grace of God in
you. The Word, translated long after, is (...); which properly signifies to
love with an exceeding and dear Love. And this is represented as the Bond, that
unites all the Members of the visible Church; Act. iv. 32. And the Multitude of
them that believed were of one Heart and one Soul. This is the same Thing which
elsewhere is called being of one Mind: 1 Pet. iii. 8. Finally, be ye all of one
Mind. And being of the same Mind: 1 Cor. i. 10. "That ye be perfectly joined
together in the same Mind." And being of the same Mind, Phil. iv. 2. I beseech
Euodies, and beseech Syntiche, that they be OF THE SAME MIND in the Lord. And
being like-minded (the Word is the same in the Greek) Romans xv. 5, 6. Now the
God of Patience and Consolation grant you to be LIKE-MINDED one toward
another; that ye may with one Mind, and one Mouth glorify God, even the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ: There is Reason to think, that it is this Oneness of
Mind, or being of one Heart and Soul, is meant by that Charity which the
Apostle calls the Bond of Perfectness, Col. iii. 14. And represents as the Bond
of Union between all the Members of the Body, in Ephesians. iv. 15, 16. But speaking
the Truth in LOVE, may grow up into him in all Things, which is the Head, even
Christ; from whom the whole Body FITLY JOINED TOGETHER, AND COMPACTED by that
which every Joint supplieth, according to the effectual Working in the Measure
of every Part, makes Increase of the Body unto the edifying it self in LOVE.

Herein seems much to consist the Nature of Scandal in the Members of a Church,
viz. Such an Offense as is a Wound and Interruption to this kind of Affection,
being a Stumbling Block to a Christian Judgment, in Regard of it is Esteem of
the Offender as a real Christian, and what much lessens the visibility of his
Christian Character. And therefore when Scandal is removed by visible
Repentance, the Church is directed to confirm their Love to the Offender, 2
Cor. ii. 8.

Now this intimate Affection toward others as Brethren in Christ and
Fellow Members of him, must have some Apprehension of the Understanding, some
Judgment of the Mind, for it is Foundation. To say, that we must thus love
others as visible Members of Christ, if any Thing else be meant, than that we
must love them because they are visibly, or as they appear to our Judgment,
real Members of Christ, is in Effect to say, that we must thus love them
without any Foundation at all. In order to a real and servent Affection to
another, on Account of some Amiableness of Qualification or Relation, the Mind
must first judge there is that Amiableness in the Object. The Affections of the
Mind are not so at Command that we can make 'em strongly to go forth to an
Object as having such Loveliness, when at the same Time we don't positively
judge any such Thing concerning them, but only hope it may be so, because we
see no sufficient Reason to determine the contrary. There must be a positive
Dictate of the Understanding, and some Degree of Satisfaction of the Judgment,
to be a Ground of that Oneness of Heart and Soul, which is agreeable to
Scripture-Representations of (...) or brotherly Love. And a Supposition only of
that moral Sincerity and Virtue, or common Grace, which some insist upon, though
it may be a sufficient Ground of neighbourly and civil Affection, cannot be a
sufficient Ground of this intimate Affection to them as Brethren in the Family
of a heavenly Father, this servent Love to them in the Bowels of Jesus Christ;
that implying nothing in it inconsistent with being Gospel Sinners and
domestic Enemies in the House of God; which Christians know are the most
hateful Enemies to Christ, of all the Enemies that he has.

It is a Thing well agreeing with the Wisdom of Christ, and that peculiar
Favor he has manifested to his Saints, and with his Dealings with them in many
other Respects, to suppose, he has made Provision in his Institutions, that
they might have the Comfort of uniting, with such as their Hearts are united
with in that holy intimate Affection which has been spoken of, in some special
religious Exercises and Duties of Worship, and visible Intercourse with their
Redeemer, joining with those concerning whom they can have some Satisfaction of
Mind that they are cordially united with them in adoring and expressing their
Love to their common Lord and Savior, that they may with one Mind, with one
Heart, and one Soul, as well as with one Mouth, glorify him; as in the
forementioned Romans xv. 5, 6. compared with Acts. iv. 32. This seems to be what
this heavenly Affection naturally inclines to. And how eminently fit and proper
for this Purpose is the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the Christian Church's
great Feast of Love; wherein Christ's People fit together as Brethren in the
Family of God, at their Father's Table, to feast on the Love of their Redeemer,
commemorating his Sufferings for them, and his dying Love to them, and sealing
their Love to him and one another? -- It is hardly credible, that Christ has so
ordered Things at that there are no instituted social Acts of Worship, wherein
his Saints are to manifest their Respect to him, but such as wherein they
ordinarily are obliged ( if the Rule for Admissions be carefully attended) to
join with a Society of Fellow-Worshippers, concerning whom they have no Reason
to think but that the bigger Part of them are Unconverted (and are more
provoking Enemies to that Lord they love and adore, than most of the Very
Heathen) which Mr. Stod and supposes to be the Case with the Members of the
visible Church. Appeal. p. 16.

X. It is necessary, that those who partake of the Lord's Supper, should judge
themselves truly and cordially to accept of CHRIST, as their only Savior and
chief Good; for this is what the Actions, which Communicants perform at the
Lord's Table, are a solemn Profession of.

There is in the Lord's Supper a mutual solemn Profession of the two Parties
transacting the Covenant of Grace, and visibly united in that Covenant; the
Lord Christ by his Minister, on the one Hand, and the Communicants (who are
professing Believers) on the other. The Administrator of the Ordinance acts in
the Quality of Christ's Minister, acts in his Name, as representing him; and
stands in the Place where Christ himself stood at the first Administration of
this Sacrament, and in the original Institution of the Ordinance. Christ, by
the Speeches and Actions of the Minister, makes a solemn Profession of his Part
in the Covenant of Grace: He exhibits the Sacrifice of his Body broken and his
Blood shed; and in the Minister's offering the Sacramental Bread and Wine to
the Communicants, Christ presents himself to the believing Communicants, as
their Propitiation and Bread of Life; and by these outward Signs confirms and
seals his sincere Engagements to be their Savior and Food, and to impart to
them all the Benefits of his Propitiation and Salvavation. And they in
receiving what is offered, and eating and drinking the Symbols of Christ's Body
and Blood, also profess their Part in the Covenant of Grace: They profess to
embrace the Promises and lay hold of the Hope set before them, to receive the
Atonement, to receive Christ as their spiritual Food, and to feed upon him in
their Hearts by Faith. Indeed what is professed on both Sides is the Heart: For
Christ, in offering himself, professes the Willingness of his Heart to be
theirs who truly receive him; and the Communicants, on their Part, profess the
Willingness of their Hearts to receive him, which they declare by significant
Actions. They profess to take Christ as their spiritual Food, and Bread of
Life. To accept of Christ as our Bread of Life, is to accept of him as our
Savior and Portion; as Food is both the Means preserving Life, and is also the
Refreshment and Comfort of Life. The Signification of the word Manna, that
great Type of this Bread of Life, is a Portion. That which God offers to us as
our Food, he offers as our Portion; and that which we accept as our Food, we
accept as our Portions. Thus the Lord's Supper is plainly a mutual Renovation,
Confirmation, and Seal of the Covenant of Grace: Both the covenanting Parties
profess their Consent to their respective Parts in the Covenant, and each
affixes his Seal to his Profession. And there is in this Ordinance the very
same Thing acted over in Profession and sensible Signs, which is spiritually
transacted between Christ and his Spouse in the Covenant that unites them. Here
we have from Time to Time the glorious Bridegroom exhibiting himself with his
great Love that is stronger than Death, appearing clothed in Robes of Grace,
and engaging himself, with all his Glory and Love, and it is infinite Benefits,
to be theirs, who receive him: And here we have his Spouse accepting this
Bridegroom, choosing him for her Friend, her only Savior and Portion, and
relying on him for all his Benefits. And thus the Covenant-Transaction of this
spiritual Marriage is confirmed and sealed, from Time to Time. The Actions of
the Communicants at the Lord's Table have as expressive and significant a
Language, as the most solemn Words. When a Person in this Ordinance takes and
eats and drinks those Things which represent Christ, the plain Meaning and
implicit Profession of these his Actions, is this, I take this crucified Jesus
as my Savior, my sweetest Food, my chief Portion, and the Life of my Soul,
consenting to acquiesce in him as such, and to hunger and thirst after him
only, renouncing all other Saviors, and all other Portions, for his Sake. The
Actions, thus interpreted, are a proper Renovation and Ratification of the
Covenant of Grace; and no otherwise. And those that take, and eat and drink the
Sacramental Elements at the Lord's Table with any other Meaning, I fear, know
not what they do.

The Actions at the Lord's Supper thus implying in their Nature and
Signification, a renewing and confirming of the Covenant, there is a
declarative explicit Covenanting supposed to preceed it; which is the
Profession of Religion, before spoken of, that qualifies a Person for Admission
to the Lord's Supper. And there doubtless is, or ought to be, as much
explicitly professed in Words, as is implicitly professed in these Actions; for
by these significant Actions, the Comumnicant sets his Seal but to his
Profession. The established Signs in the Lord's Supper are fully equivalent to
Words; they are a renewing and reiterating the same Thing which was done
before; only with this Difference, that now it is done by speaking Signs,
whereas before it was by speaking Sounds. Our taking the Bread and Wine is as
much a professing to accept of Christ, at least as a Woman's taking a Ring of
the Bridegroom in her Marriage is a Profession and Seal of her taking him for
her Husband. The Sacramental Elements in the Lord's Supper do represent Christ
as a Party in Covenant, as truly as a Proxy represents a Prince to a foreign
Lady in her Marriage; and lour taking those Elements is as truly a professing
to accept of Christ, as in the other Case the Lady's taking the Proxy is her
professing to accept the Prince as her Husband. Or the Matter may more fitly be
represented by this Similitude: It is as if a Prince should send an Ambassador
to a Woman in a foreign Land, proposing Marriage, and by his Ambassador should
send her his Picture, and should desire her to manifest her Acceptance of his
Suit, not only by professing her Acceptance in Words to his Ambassador, but in
Token of her Sincerity openly to take or accept that Picture, and so Seal her
Profession, by thus representing the Matter over again by a symbolical Action.

To suppose, Persons ought thus solemnly to profess that which at the same Time
they don't at all imagine they experience in themselves, and don't really
pretend to, is a very great Absurdity. For a Man Sacramentally to make such a
Profession of Religion, proceeding avowedly on the Foot of such Doctrine, is to
profess that which he don't profess; his Actions being no established Signs of
the Thing supposed to be professed, nor carrying in them the least Pretension
to it. And therefore doing thus can be no Man's Duty; unless it be Men's Duty
to make a solemn Profession of that which in Truth they make no Profession of.
The Lord's Supper is most evidently a professing Ordinance; and the
communicants Profession must be such as is adjusted to the Nature and Design of
the Ordinance; which nothing short of Faith in the Blood of Christ will answer,
even Faith unfeigned, which works by Love. A Profession therefore exclusive
of this, is essentially defective, and quite unsuitable to the Character of a
Communicant.

XI. When the Apostle says, 1 Cor. xi. 28. Let a Man examine himself, and so
let him eat -- It seems to be much the most reasonable to understand it of
trying himself with regard to the Truth of his Christianity, or Reality of his
Grace; the same which the same Apostle directs the same Corinthians to, in his
other Epistle, 2 Cor.xiii. 5. where the same Word is used in the Original. The
Greek Word ((...)) will not allow of what some have supposed to be the
Apostle's Meaning, viz. that a Man should consider and enquire into his
Circumstances, and the Necessities of his Case, that he may know what are the
Wants he should go to the Lord's Table for a Supply of. The Word properly
signifies proving or trying a Thing with Respect to it is Quality and Goodness,
or in order to determine whether it be true and of the right Sort. And so the
Word is always used in the New Testament; unless that sometimes it is used as it
were metonymically, and in such Places is variously translated, either
discerning, or allowing, approving, liking, etc. these being the Effects of
Trial. Nor is the Word used more frequently in the New Testament for any Sort
of Trial whatever, than for the Trial of professors with Regard to their Grace
or Piety. The Word (as Dr. Ames, in his Catechaseos Sciagraphia, and Mr.
Willard in his Body of Divinity, observe) is borrowed from Goldsmiths, properly
signifying the Trial they make of their Silver and Gold, whether it be Genuine
or Counterfeit: And with a manifest Allusion to this original Application of
the Word, is often used in the New Testament for a trying the Piety of
Professors. It Is used with this View in all the following Texts. 1 Pet. i. 7.
That the TRIAL of your Faith, being much more precious than of Gold that
perishes, though it be TRIED by Fire, might be found unto praise, etc. 1 Cor.
iii. 13. The Fire shall TRY every Man's Work of what Sort it is. Jam. i. 3. The
TRYING of your Faith works Patience. 1 These. ii. 4. God who TRIES our
Hearts. The same Word is used in 2 Cor. viii. 8. To PROVE the Sincerity of your
Love. So, Gal. vi. 3, 4. If any Man thinks himself to be something, when he
is nothing, he deceives himself: But let every Man PROVE his own Work. -- In
all these Places there is the same Word in the Greek with that in the Text now
under Consideration.

When the Apostle directs professing Christians to try themselves, using this
Word indefinitely, as properly signifying the examining or proving a Thing
whether it be Genuine, or Counterfeit, the most natural Construction of his
Advice is, that they should try themselves with Respect to their spiritual
State and religious Profession, whether they are Disciples indeed, real and
genuine Christians, or whether they are not false and hypocritical Professors.
As if a Man should bring a Piece of Metal that had the Color of Gold, with the
Impress of the King's Coin, to a Goldsmith, and desire him to try that Money,
without adding any Words to limit his Meaning, would not the Goldsmith
naturally understand, that he was to try whether it was true Gold, or true
Money. yea or no?

But here it is said by some, that the Context of the Passage under Debate (1
Cor. xi. 28.) does plainly limit the meaning of the Word in that Place; the
Apostle there speaking of those Things that had appeared among the Communicants
at Corinth, which were of a scandalous Nature, so doubtless unfitting 'em for
the Lord's Supper; and therefore when the Apostle directs 'em to examine or
prove themselves, it is but just, to suppose his meaning to be, that they should
try whether they ben't disqualified by Scandal. -- To this I answer, though the
Apostle's putting the Corinthians upon trying themselves, was on Occasion of
the mentioning some scandalous Practices found among them, yet this is by no
Means any Argument of its being only his Meaning, that they should try
themselves whether they were scandalous Persons; and not, that they should try
whether they were true genuine Christians. The very Nature of Scandal (as was
observed before) is, that which tends to obscure the Visibility of the Piety of
Professors, and wound others Charity toward them, by bringing the Reality of
their Grace into Doubt; and therefore what could be more natural, than for the
Apostle, when mentioning such Scandals among the Corinthians, to put them upon
trying the State of their Souls, and proving their Sincerity! This is certainly
the Case in this Apostle's directing the same Persons to prove themselves, 2
Cor. xiii. 5. using the same Word there, [which he uses here, and giving his
Direction on the like Occasion. For in the 2d Epistle (as well as in the first)
his putting them on examining and proving themselves, was on Occasion of his
mentioning some Scandals found among them; as is plain from the foregoing
Context. And yet there it is expressly said, that the Thing concerning which he
directs them to prove themselves, is, whether they be in the Faith, and whether
Christ is in them. Nor is there any Thing more in the preceding Context of one
Place, than in that of the other, obliging or leading us to understand the
Apostle to intend only a trying whether they were Scandalous, and not whether
they were sincere Christians.

And as to the Words following in the next Verse; For he that eats and
arinketh unworthily, eats and drinks Judgment to himself, not discerning
the Lord's Body: These Words, by no Means, make it evident (as some hold) that
what the Apostle would have them examine themselves about, is, whether they
have doctrinal Knowledge, sufficient to understand, that the Bread and Wine in
the Sacrament signify the Body and Blood of Christ: But on the contrary, to
interpret the Apostle in this Sense only, is unreasonable, upon several
Accounts. (1) None can so much as go about such an Examination, without first
knowing, that the Lord's Body and Blood is signified by these Elements. For
merely a Man's putting this Question to himself, Do I understand that this
Bread and this Wine signify the Body and Blood of Christ? supposes him already
to know it from a previous Information; and therefore to exhort Persons to go
about such an Examination, would be absurd. And then (2) It Is incredible, that
there should be any such gross Ignorance appearing in a Number of the
Communicants in the Corinthian Church, if we consider what the Scripture
informs us concerning that Church: As particularly, if we consider what an able
and thorough Instructor and spiritual Father they had had, even the Apostle
Paul, who founded that Church, bro't them out of their heathenish Darkness, and
initiated them in the Christian Religion, and had instructed them in the Nature
and Ends of GospelOrdinances, and continued at Corinth, constantly laboring in
the Word and Doctrine for a long while together, no less than a Year and six
Months; and, as we may well suppose, administering the Lord's Supper among them
every Lord's Day; for the Apostle speaks of it as the Manner of that Church to
communicate at the Lord's Table with such Frequency, 1 Cor. xvi. 2. And the
Corinthian Church at that Day when the Apostle wrote this Epistle, was a Church
noted for excelling in doctrinal Knowledge; as is evident by Chap. i. 5, 6, 7.
and several other Passages in the Epistle. Besides, the Communicants were
expressly told at every Communion, every Week, when the Bread and Wine were
delivered to them in the Administration, that that Bread signified the Body,
and that Wine signified the Blood of Christ. And then besides, (3) The Apostle
by his Argument in Chap. x. 16. supposes the Corinthians doctrinally acquainted
with this Subject already. It therefore appears to me much more reasonable, to
apprehend the Case to be thus; The offensive Behavior of the Communicants at
Corinth gave the Apostle Reason to suspect, that some of them came to the
Lord's Table without a proper Impression and true Sense of the great and
glorious Things there signified; having no habitual Hunger or Relish for the
spiritual Food there represented, no inward vital and experimental Taste of
that Flesh of the Son of Man, which is Meat indeed. The Word translated
discerning, signifies to discriminate or distinguish. The Taste is the proper
Sense whereby to discern or distinguish Food. Job xxxiv. 3. And it is a
spiritual Sense or Taste which is that whereby we discern or distinguish
spiritual Food. Heb. v. 14. -- Those who by Reason of Use, have their Senses
exercised to discern both Good and Evil.(...)etc. A Word of the same Root with
that rendered discerning, in 1 Cor xi. 29. He that has no habitual Appetite to
and Relish of that spiritual Food, which is represented and offered at the
Lord's Table; he that has no spiritual Taste, where with to perceive any Thing
more at the Lord's Supper, than in common Food; or that has no higher View,
than with a little seeming Devotion to eat Bread, as it were in the Way of an
Ordinance, but with us regarding in his Heart the spiritual Meaning and End of
it, and without being at all suitably affected with the dying Love of Christ
therein commemorated; such a one may most truly and properly be said not to
discern the Lord's Body. When therefore the Apostle exhorts to Self-Examination
as a Preparative for the Sacramental Supper, he may well be understood to put
Professors upon inquiring whether they have such a Principle of Faith, by Means
where of they are habitually in a Capacity and Disposition of Mind to discern
the Lord's Body practically and spiritually (as well as speculatively and
notionally) in their communicating at the Lord's Table: Which is what none can
do who have but common Grace, or a Faith short of that which is justifying and
saving. It Is only a living Faith that capacitates Men to discern the Lord's
Body in the Sacrament with that spiritual Sensation or spiritual Gust, which is
suitable to the Nature and Design of the Ordinance, and which the Apostle seems
principally to intend.

PART III.
OBJECTIONS answered
OBJECT. 1. The Scripture calls the Members of the visible Church by the Name
of Disciples, Scholars, or Learners; and that suggests to us this Notion of the
visible Church, that it is the School of Christ, into which Persons are
admitted in order to their learning of Christ, and coming to spiritual
Seize, in the Use of the Means of Teaching, Discipline and Training up,
established in the School. Now if this be a right Notion of the visible Church,
then Reason shows that no other Qualifications are necessary in order to a
being Members of this School, than such a Faith and Disposition of Mind as are
requisite to Persons putting themselves under Christ as their Master and
Teacher, and subjecting themselves to the Orders of the school. But a common
Faith and moral Sincerity are sufficient for this. Therefore the Scripture
leads us to suppose the visible Church to be properly constituted of those who
have these Qualifications, though they have not saving Faith and true Piety.

ANSW. I own, the Scripture calls the Members of the visible Church by the Name
of Disciples. But I deny, it therefore follows that the Church which they are
Members of, is duly and properly constituted of those who have not true Piety.
Because, if this Consequence was good, then it would equally follow, that not
only the visible, but also the invisible or mystical Church is properly
constituted of those who have not unfeigned Faith and true Piety. For the
Members of the mystical Church, as such, and to denote the special Character of
such, are called Disciples; in Luke xiv. 26, 27, 33. and in Job. viii. 31.
Chap. xiii. 35. and Chap. xv. 8. This shows, that in the Argument I am
answering, there is no Connection between the Premises and the Conclusion. For
the Force of the Objection consists in this, that the Members of the visible
Church are called Disciples in Scripture: This is the Sum total of the
Premises: And if there be any Connection between the Premises and the
Conclusion, it must lie in the Truth of this Proposition; The Church whose
Members are called by the Name of Disciples, as signifying their State and
Quality as Members of that Society, that Church is properly and fitly
constituted, not only of Persons truly pious, but of others that have merely a
common Faith and Virtue. But this Proposition, we have seen, is not true; and
so there is no Connection between the former and latter Part of it, which are
the same with the Premises and Conclusion of this Argument.

2. Though I don't deny, that the visible Church of Christ may fitly be
represented as a School of Christ, where Persons are trained up in the Use of
Means, in order to some spiritual Seize: Yet it will not hence
necessarily follow, that this is in order to all good Seize; for it will
not follow but that certain good Seize may be pre-requisite, in order to
a Place in the School. The Church of Christ is a School appointed for the
training up Christ's little Children, to greater Degrees of Knowledge, higher
Privileges, and greater Serviceableness in this World, and more of a Meetness
for the Possession of their eternal Inheritance. But there is no Necessity of
supposing, that it is in order to fit them to become Christ's Children, or to
be introduced into his Family; any more than there is a Necessity of supposing,
because a Prince puts his Children under Tutors, that therefore it must be in
order to their attaining to be of the royal Family. If it be necessary, that
there should be a Church of Christ appointed as a School of Instruction and
Discipline, to bring Persons to all good Seize whatsoever, then it will
follow, that there must be a visible Church constituted of scandalous and
profane Persons and Heretics, and all in common that assume the Christian
Name, that so Means may be used with them in order to bring them to moral
Sincerity, and an Acknowledgement of the Christian Faith.

3. I grant, that no other Qualifications are necessary in order to being
Members of that School of Christ which is his visible Church, than such as are
requisite in order to their subjecting themselves to Christ as their Master and
Teacher, and subjecting themselves to the Laws and Orders of his School:
Nevertheless I deny, that a common Faith and moral Sincerity are sufficient for
this; Because none do truly subject themselves to Christ as their Master, but
such as having their Hearts purified by Faith, are delivered from the reigning
Power of Sin: for we cannot subject our selves to obey two contrary Masters at
the same Time. None do submit to Christ as their Teacher, but those who truly
receive him as their Prophet, to teach them by his Word and Spirit; giving up
themselves to his Teachings, sitting with Mary, as little Children, at Jesus
Feet to bear his Word; and harkening more to his Dictates, than those of their
blind and deceitful Lusts, and relying on his Wisdom more than their own. The
Scripture knows nothing of an ecclesiastical School constituted of Enemies of
the Cross of Christ, and appointed to bring such to be reconciled to him and
submit to him as their Master. Neither have they who are not truly pious
Persons, any true Disposition of Heart to submit to the Laws and Orders of
Christ's School, the Rules which his Word prescribes to all his Scholars; such
as, to love their Master supremely; to love one another as Brethren; and to
love their Book, i. e. their Bible, more than vain Trifles and Amusements, yea,
above Gold and Silver; to be faithful to the Interest of the Master and of the
School; to depend on his Teachings; to cry to him for Knowledge; above all
their Gettings, to get Understanding, etc.

4. Whatever Ways of constituting the Church may to us seem fit, proper and
reasonable, the Question is, not what Constitution of Christ's Church seems
convenient to human Wisdom but what Constitution is actually established by
CHRIST'S infinite Wisdom. Doubtless, if Men should set their Wits to Work, and
proceed according to what seems good in their Sight, they would greatly alter
Christ's Constitution of his Church, to make it more convenient and beautiful,
and would adorn it with a vast Variety of ingenious Inventions; as the Church
of Rome has done. The Question is, whether this School of Christ which they
talk of, made up very much of those who pretend to no Experiences or
Seize but what consist with their being Enemies of Christ in their
Hearts, and who in Reality love the vilest Lust better than him, be that Church
of Christ which in the New Testament is denominated his City, his Temple, his
Family, his Body, etc. by which Names the visible Church of Christ is there
frequently called.

I acknowledge, that Means, of Christ's appointment, are to be used with those
who are Christ's Enemies, and don't profess themselves any other, to change
their Hearts, and bring them to be Christ's Friends and Disciples. Such Means
are to be used with all Sorts of Persons, with Jews, Mahometans, Heathens,
'with nominal Christians that are Heretical or Vicious, the Profane, the
Intemperate, the Unclean, and all other Enemies of Christ; and these Means to
be used constantly, and laboriously. Scandalous Persons need to go to School,
to learn to be Christians, as much as other Men. And there are many Persons
that are not morally Sincere, who from selfish and sinister Views do consent
ordinarily to go to Church, and so be in the Way of the Use of Means. And none
ought to forbid 'em thus going to Christ's School, that they may be taught by
him, in the Ministry of the Gospel. But yet it will not follow, that such a
School is the Church of CHRIST. Human Laws can put Persons, even those who are
very Vicious, into the School of Christ, in that Sense; they can oblige 'em
constantly to be present at public Teaching, and attend on the Means of Grace
appointed by Christ, and dispensed in his Name: But human Laws cannot join Men
to the Church of Christ, and make them Membere of his Body.

OBJECT. II. Visible Saintship in the Scripture-Sense cannot be the same with
that which has been supposed and insisted on, viz. a being in the Eye of a
rational Charity truly pious; because Israel of old were from Time to Time
called God's People, when it is certain the greater Part of them were far from
having any such visible Holiness as this, Thus the ten Tribes were called God's
People, Hos. iv. 6. after they had revolted from the true Worship of God, and
had obstinately continued in their idolatrous Worship at Bethel and Dan for
about two Hundred and fifty Years, and were at that Time, a little before their
Captivity especially, in the Height of their Wickedness. So the Jews are called
God's, People in Ezekiel. xxxvi. 20. and other Places, at the Time of their
Captivity in Babylon; a Time when most of them were abandoned to all Kinds of
the most horrid and open Impieties, as the Prophets frequently represent. Now
it is certain, that the People at that Time were not called God's People because
of any Visibility of true Piety to the Eve of Reason or of a rational Charity,
because most of them were grossly Wicked, and declared their Sin as Sodom. And
in the same Manner wherein the Jews of old were God's People, are the Members
of the visible Christian Gentile Church God's People; for they are spoken (...)
as graffed into the same Olive Tree, from whence the former were broken off by
Unbelief.

ANSW. The Argument proves too much, and therefore nothing at all. If those
whom I oppose in this Controversy, bring this Objection, they will in Effect as
much oppose Themselves in it, as me. The Objection, if it has any Force,
equally militates against their and my Notion of visible Saintship. For those
Jews, which it is alleged (...) God's People, and yet were so notoriously
openly and (...) Wicked, had neither any Visibility of true Piety, nor yet of
that moral Sincerity in the Profession and Duties of the true Religion, which
the Opponents themselves suppose to be requisite in order to a proper visible
Holiness, and a due Admission to the Privileges and Ordinances of the Church of
God. None will pretend, that these obstinate Idolaters and impious Wretches had
those Qualifications which are now requisite in order to an Admission to the
Christian Sacraments. And therefore to what Purpose can they bring this
Objection? Which, if it proves any Thing, overthrows my Scheme and their own
both together, and both in an equally effectual Manner; and not only so, but
will thoroughly destroy the Schemes of all Pretestants through the World,
concerning the Qualifications of the Subjects of Christian Ordinances. And
therefore the Support of what I have laid down against those whom I oppose in
this Controversy, requires no further Answer to this Objection. Nevertheless,
for the greater Satisfaction, I would here observe further: --

That such Appellations as God's People, God's Israel, and some other like
Phrases, are used and applied in Scripture with considerable Diversity of
Intention. Thus, we have a plain Distinction between the House of Israel, and
the House of Israel, in Ezekiel. xx. 38, 39, 40. By the House of Israel in the
39th Verse is meant literally the Nation or Family of Israel: But by the House
of Israel in the 40th Verse seems to be intended the spiritual House, the Body
of God's visible Saints, that should attend the Ordinances of his public
Worship in Gospel Times. So likewise there is a Distinction made between the
House of Israel, and God's Disciples who should profess and visibly adhere to
his Law and Testimony, in Isai. viii. 14, -- 17. And though the whole Nation of
the Jews are often called God's People in those degenerate Times where in the
Prophets were sent to reprove them, yet at the same Time they are charged as
^salsly calling themselves of the holy City. Isai. xlviii. 2. And God often
tells them, they are rather to be reckoned among Aliens, and to be looked upon
as Children of the Ethiopians, or Posterity of the ancient Canaanites, on
Account of their grossly wicked and scandalous Behavior. See Amos ix. 7, 8,
etc. Ezekiel. xvi. 2, 3, etc. ver.45, 46, etc. Isai. i. 10.

It Is evident that God sometimes, according to the Methods of his mavelous
Mercy and Long-suffering toward Mankind, has a merciful Respect to a
degenerate Church, that is become exceeding corrupt in Regard that it is
constituted of Members who have not those Qualifications which ought to be
insisted on: God continues still to have Respect to 'em so far as not utterly
to forsake 'em, or wholly to deny his Confirmation of and Blessing on their
Administrations. And not being utterly renounced of God, their Administrations
are to be looked upon as in some Respect valid, and the Society as in some Sort
a People or Church of God. Which was the Case with the Church of Rome, at least
'till the Reformation and Council of Trent; for 'till then we must own their
Baptisms and Ordinations to be valid. -- The Church that the Pope sits in, is
called The Temple of God. 2 These. ii. 4.

And with Regard to the People of Israel, it is very manifest, that something
diverse is oftentimes intended by that Nation's being God's People, from their
being visible Saints, or visibly Holy, 'or having those Qualifications which
are requisite in order to a due Admission to the ecclesiastical Privileges of
such. That Nation, that Family of Israel according to the Flesh, and with
Regard to that external and carnal Qualification, were in some Sense adopted by
God to be his peculiar People, and his CovenantPeople. This is not only evident
by what has been already observed, but also indisputably manifest from Romans ix.
3, 4, 5. I have great Heaviness and continual Sorrow of Heart; for I could wish
that my self were accursed from Christ for my Brethren, my Kinsmen ACCORDING TO
THE FLESH, who are Israelites, to whom pertains the ADOPTION, and the Glory,
and the COVENANTS, and the giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and the
PROMISES; whose are the Fathers; and of whom, concerning the Flesh, Christ
came. It Is to be noted, that the Privileges here mentioned are spoken of as
belonging to the Jews, not now as visible Saints, not as Professors of the true
Religion, not as Members of the visible Church of Christ; but only as People of
such a Nation, such a Blood, such an external and carnal Relation to the
Patriarchs their Ancestors, Isralites ACCORDING TO THE FLESH. For the Apostle
is speaking here of the unbelieving Jews, professed Unbelievers, that were out
of the Christian Church, and open visible Enemies to it, and such as had no
Right to the external Privileges of Christ's People. So in Romans xi. 28, 29.
this Apostle speaks of the same unbelieving Jews, as in some Respect an elect
People, and interested in the Calling, Promises and Covenants God formerly gave
to their Forefathers, and as still beloved for their sakes. As concerning the
Gospel, they are Enemies for your Sake; but as touching the Election, they are
beloved for the Fathers sakes: For the Gifts and Calling of God are without
Repentance. These Things are in these Places spoken of, not as Privileges
belonging to the Jews now as a People of the right Religion, or in the true
Church of visible Worshippers of God; but as a People of such a Pedigree or
Blood; and that even after the ceasing of the Mosaic Administration. But these
were Privileges more especially belonging to them under the Old Testament: They
were a Family that God had chosen in Distinction from all others, to show
special Favor to above all other Nations. 'Twas manifestly agreeable to God's
Design to constitute Things so under the Old Testament, that the Means of Grace
and spiritual Privileges and Blessings should be, though not wholly, yet in a
great Measure confined to a particular Family, much more than those Privileges
and Blessings are confined to any Posterity or Blood now under the Gospel. God
did purposely so order Things that that Nation should by these Favors be
distinguished, not only from those who were not Professors of the Worship of
the true God, but also in a great Measure from other Nations, by a Wall of
Separation that he made. This was not merely a Wall of Separation between
Professors and Non-Professors (such a Wall of Separation as this remains still
in the Days of the Gospel) but between NATION and NATIONS. God, if he pleases,
may by his Sovereignty annex his Blessing, and in some Measure fix it, for his
own Reasons, to a particular Blood, as well as to a particular Place or Spot of
Ground, to a certain Building, to a particular Heap of Stones, or Altar of
Brass, to particular Garments, and other external Things. And it is evident,
that he actually did affix his Blessing to that particular external Family of
Jacob, very much as he did to the City Jerusalem, that he chose to place his
Name there, and to Mount Zion where he commanded the Blessing. God did not so
affix his Blessing to Jerusalem or Mount Zion, as to limit himself, either by
confining the Blessing wholly to that Place, never to bestow it elsewhere: nor
by obliging himself always to bestow it on those that sought him there; nor yet
obliging himself never to withdraw his Blessing from thence, by forsaking his
dwelling Place there, and leaving it to be a common or profane Place: But he
was pleased so to annex his Blessing to that Place, as to make it the Seat of
his Blessing in a peculiar Manner, in great Distinction from other Places. In
like Manner did he fix his Blessing to that Blood or Progeny of Jacob. It was a
Family which he delighted in, and which he blessed in a peculiar Manner, and to
which he in a great Measure confined the Blessing; but not so as to limit
himself, or so as to oblige himself to bestow it on all of that Blood, or not
to bestow it on others that were not of that Blood. He affixed his Blessing to
both these, both to the Place and Nation, by sovereign Election. Psalm. cxxxii.
13, 14, 15. He annexed and fixed his Blessing to both by Covenant. To that
Nation he fixed his Blessing by his Covenant with the Patriarchs. Indeed the
main Thing, the Substance and Marrow of that Covenant which God made with
Abraham and the other Patriarchs, was the Covenant of Grace, which is continued
in these Days of the Gospel, and extends to all his spiritual Seed, of the
Gentiles as well as Jews: But yet that Covenant with the Patriarchs contained
other Things that were as it were Appendages to that great everlasting Covenant
of Grace, Promises of lesser Matters, subservient to the grand Promise of the
future Seed, and typical of Things appertaining to him. Such were those
promises, that annexed the Blessing to a particular Country, viz. the Land of
Canaan, and a particular Blood, viz. the Progeny of Isaac and Jacob. Just so it
was also as to the Covenant God made with David that we have an Account of, 2 Samuel vii. and Psalm cxxxii. If we consider that Covenant with Regard to what the
Soul and Marrow of it was, it was the Covenant of Grace: But there were other
Promises which were as it were Appendages of Things subservient to the grand
Covenant, and typical of it is Benefits; such were Promises of the Blessing to
the Nation of the literal Israel, and of continuing the temporal Crown of
Israel to Davia's Posterity, and of fixing the Blessing to Jerusalem or Mount
Zion, as the Place that he chose to set his Name there. And in this Sense it
was that the very Family of Jacob were God's People by Covenant, or his
Vovenant People, and his chosen People; yea and this even when they were no
visible Saints, when they were educated and lived in Idolatry, and made no
Profession of the true Religion.

On the whole, it is evident that the very Nation of Israel, not as visible
Saints, but as the Progeny of Jacob according to the Flesh, were in some
Respect a chosen People, a People of God, a Covenant People, an holy Nation;
even as Jerusalem was a chosen City, the City of God, a holy City, and a City
that God had engaged by Covenant to dwell in.

Thus a sovereign and alwise God was pleased to ordain Things with Respect to
the Nation of Israel. Perhaps we may not be able to give all the Reasons of
such a Constitution; but some of them seem to be pretty manifest; as

1. The great and main End of separating one particular Nation from all others,
as God did the Nation of Israel, was to prepare the Way for the coming of the
Messiah, who was to proceed of that Blood, God's Covenant with Abraham and the
other Patriarchs implied that the Messiah should be of their (...) their Seed
according to the Flesh. And therefore it was requisite that their Progeny
according to the Flesh should be fenced in by a Wall of Separation, and made
God's People. If the Messiah had been born of some of the Professors of
Abraham's Religion, but of some other Nation, that Religion being propagated
from Nation to Nation, as it is now under the Gospel, it would not have answered
the Covenant with Abraham, for the Messiah to have been born of Abraham's Seed
only in this Sense. The Messiah being by Covenant so related to Jacob's Progeny
according to the Flesh, God was pleased, agreeable to the Nature of such a
Covenant, to show great Respect to that People on Account of that extenal
carnal Relation. Therefore the Apostle mentions it as one great Privilege, that
of them according to the Flesh Christ came, Romans ix. 5. As the introducing the
Messiah and his Salvation and Kingdom was the special Design of all God's
Dealings and peculiar Dispensations toward that People, the natural Result of
this was, that great Account should be made of their being of that Nation, in
God's Covenant Dealings withthem.

2. That Nation was a typical Nation. There was then literally a Land, that was
the dwelling Place of God; which was a type of Heaven the true dewlling place
of God, and an external City of God, which was a type of the spiritual City of
God; an external Temple of God, which was a type of the spiritual City of God;
an external Temple of God, which was a Type of his spiritual Temple: So there
was an external People and Family of God, by carnal Generation, which was a
type of his spiritual Progeny: And the Covenant by which they were made a
People of God, was a type of the Covenant of Grace; and so is sometimes
represented as a Marriage-Covenant. God, agreeable to the Nature of that
Dispensation, Showed a great Regard to external and carnal Things in those
Days, as types of spiritual Things. What a great Regard God did show then to
external carnal Qualifications for Privileges and Services, appears in this,
that there is ten times so much said in the Books of Moses about such
Qualifications in the Institutions of the Passover and Tabernacle-Services, as
about any moral Qualifications whatsoever. And so much were such typical
Qualifications insisted on, that even by the Law of Moses the Congregation of
the Lord, or public Congregation or Church (for the Word is the same) of
visible Worshippers of God, and the Number of public Professors of the true
Religion, who were visible Saints, were not the same: For some were of the
latter, that were not of the former; as particularly the Eunuchs, who were
excluded the Congregation, though never so externally religious, yea truly pious;
and so also Bastards, etc.

3. It was the sovereign Pleasure of God to choose that Family, the Posterity of
Jacob according to the Flesh, to reserve 'em for special Favors to the End of
Time. And therefore they are still kept a distinct Nation, being still reserved
for distinguishing Mercy in the latter Day, when they shall be restored to the
Church of God. God is pleased in this Way to testify his Regard to their holy
Ancestors, and his Regard to their external Relation to Christ. Therefore the
Apostle still speaks of 'em as an elect Nation, and beloved for the Fathers
sakes, even after they were broken off from the good Olive by Unbelief. God's
Covenant with Abraham is in some Sense in Force with Respect to that People,
and reaches them even to this Day; and yet surely they are not God's
CovenantPeople, in the Sense that visible Christians are. See Lev. xxvi. 42.

If it be here said, It was often foretold by the Prophets, that in the Days of
the Gospel other Nations should be the People of God, as well as the Nation of
the Jews: And when Christ sent forth his Apostles, he bid 'em go and disciple
all Nations.

I answer; By a common Figure of Speech the prevailing Part of a Nation are
called the Nation, and what is done to them is said to be done to the Nation,
and what is done by them is said to be done by that Nation: And it is to be
hoped, that the Time is coming when the prevailing Part of many Nations, yea of
every Nation under Heaven, will be regularly brought into the visible Church of
Christ. And if we by Nations in these Prophecies understand any other than the
prevailing Part, and it be insisted on that we must understand it of all the
People belonging to those Nations; there never yet has been any Nation in this
Sense regularly brought into the visible Church of Christ, even according to
the Scheme of those whom I oppose: For there never yet has been an whole Nation
that were outwardly moral. And besides, what Mr. Blake says in his Treatise of
the Covenant (page 238.) may be applied here, and serve as an Answer to this
Objection. The Prophecies of the old Testament (says he) of the Glory of the
NewTestament-Times, are in Old Testament Phrases, by Way of Allusion to the
Worship of those Times, set forth to us. In Rev.xxi. 24. Nations are spoken of,
as having an Interest in the New-Jerusalem, which yet is represented as
perfectly pure, without the least Degree of Pollution and Defilement. ver. 27.
And as for the Command to the Apostles, to disciple all Nations, it was a
Direction to them as to what they should attempt, or do as much toward as they
could; not a Prediction of what they should bring to pass in their Day: for
they never brought one half of any one Nation into the visible Christian
Church, nor any at all in one half of the Nations in the World, it is very
probable.

If it should here be further objected, that it is an Evidence that Gentile
Christians are visible Saints, according to the New-Testament-Nation of visible
Saintship, in the very same Manner as the whole Jewish Nation were 'till they
were broken off by their obstinate Rejection of the Messiah; and the Gentile
Christians represented as being grafted into the same Olive, from whence the
Jews were broken off by Unbelief, Romans xi. 17. etc.

I would inquire, What any one can intend by this Objection? Whether it be
this, viz. That we ought to insist on no higher or better Qualifications, in
admitting Persons as Members of the Christian Church, and to all its
Privileges, than the whole Nation of the Jews, of that Generation which lived
in Christ's Time, were possessed of, 'till they had obstinately persisted in
their Rejection of him? If this is not intended, the Objection is nothing to
the Purpose: Or, if this be intended, neither then is it to the Purpose of
those with whom I have especially to do in this Controversy, who hold
Orthodoxy, Knowledge of the Fundamental Doctrines of Religion, moral Sincerity,
and a a good Conversation, to be Qualifications, which ought to be insisted on,
in order to a visible Church State: For a very great Part of those Jews were
destitute of these Qualifications; Many of them were Sadducees, who denied a
future State; others of them Herod^ans, who were occasional Conformists with
the Romans in their Idolatries; the prevailing Sect among them were Pharisees,
who openly professed the false Doctrine of Justification by the Works of the
Law and external Privileges, that Leaven of the Pharisees, which Christ warns
his Disciples to beware of: Many of them were scandalously ignorant, for their
Teachers had taken away the Key of Knowledge: Multitudes were grossly vicious,
for it was a Generation in which all Manner of Sin and Wickedness prevailed.

I think, that Text in Romans xi. can be understood no otherwise, in any
Consistence with plain Fact, than that the Gentile Christians succeeded the
Jews, who had been, either in themselves or Ancestors, the Children of Abraham,
with Respect to a visible Interest in the Covenant of Grace (which, as has been
observed, was the Substance and Marrow of the Covenant made with Abraham) until
they were broken off from the Church, and ceased any longer to be visible
Saints, by their open and obstinate Unbelief; (as indeed either they or their
Ancestors had all been thus broken off from the Church of visible Saints; for
every Branch or Family of the Stock of Jacob had been in the Church of visible
Saints, and each Branch withered and sailed through Unbelief.) This was the
highest and most important Sense, in which any of the Jews were externally the
Children of Abraham, and implied the greatest Privileges. But there was another
Sense, in which the whole Nation, including even those of 'em who were no
visible Saints, were his Children, which (as has been shown) implied great
Privileges, wherein Christian Gentiles do not succeed them, though they have
additional ecclesiastical Privileges, vastly beyond the Jews.

Whether I have succeeded, in rightly explaining these Matters, or no, yet my
failing in it is of no great Importance with Regard to the Strength of the
Objection, that occasioned my attempting it; which was, that scandalously
wicked Men among the Jews are called God's People, etc. The Objection, as I
observed, is as much against the Scheme of those whom I oppose, as against my
Scheme; and therefore it as much concerns them, to find out some Explanation of
the Matter, that shall show something else is intended by it, than their having
the Qualifications of visible Saints, as it does me; and a failing in such an
Attempt as much affects and hurts their Cause, as it does mine.

OBJECT. III. Those in Israel, who made no Profession of Piety of Heart, did
according to divine Institution partake of the Passover; a Jewish Sacrament,
representing the same Things, and a Seal of the very same Covenant of Grace
with the Lord's Supper; and particularly, it would be unreasonable to suppose,
that all made a Profession of Godliness whom God commanded to keep that first
Passover in Egypt, which the whole Congregation were required to keep, and
there is no Shadow of any such Thing as their all first making a solemn public
Profession of those Things wherein true Piety consists: and so the People in
general partook of the Passover, from to Generation to Generation; but it would
be hard to suppose, that they all professed a supreme Regard to God in their
Hearts.

ANSW. 1. The Affair of the Israelites Participation of the Passover, and
particularly that first Passover in Egypt, is attended with altogether as much
Difficulty in Regard to the Qualifications which the Objectors themselves
suppose requisite in Communicants at the Lord's Table, as with Regard to those
which I insist upon; and if there be any Argument in the Case, it is fully as
strong an Argument against their Scheme, as mine. One Thing they insist upon as
a requisite Qualification for the Lord's Supper, is a public Profession of
Religion as to the essential Doctrines of it: But there is no more Shadow of a
public Profession of this Kind, preceding that Passover in Egypt, than of a
Profession of Godliness. Here not to insist on the great Doctrines of the Fall
of Man, of our undone State by Nature, of the Trinity, of our Dependence in the
free Grace of God for Justification etc. let us take only those two Doctrines
of a future State of Rewards and Punishments, and the Doctrine of the Messiah
to come, that Messiah who was represented in the Passover: Is there any more
Appearance, in sacred Story, of the People's making a public Profession in
Egypt of these Doctrines before they partook of the Passover, than of their
making Profession of the Love of God? And is there any more Probability of the
former, than of the latter? Another Thing which they on the other Side suppose
necessary to a due Attendance on the Lord's Supper, is, that when any have
openly been guilty of gross Sins, they should before they come to this
Sacrament, openly confess and bumble themselves for their Faults. Now it is
evident by many Scriptures, that a great Part of the Children of Israel in
Egypt had been guilty of joining with the Egyptians in worshipping their false
gods, and had lived in Idolatry: But the History in Exodus gives us no Account
of any public solemn Confession of, or Humiliation for this great Sin, before
they came to the Passover. Mr. Stoddard observes ( Appeal p. 58, 59) that there
was in the Church of Israel a Way appointed by God for the removal of Scandals;
Men being required in that Case to offer up their Sacrifices, attended with
Confession and visible Signs of Repentance. But where do we read of the
People's offering up Sacrifices in Egypt, attended with Confession, for
removing the Scandal of that most heinous Sin of Idolatry they had lived in? Or
is there any more Probability of their publicly professing their Repentance
and Humiliation for their Sin, before their celebrating the Passover, than of
their publicly professing to love God above all? Another Thing which they
suppose to be requisite in order to Admission to the Lord's Table, and about
which they would have a particular Care be taken, is, that every Person
admitted give Evidence of a competent Knowledge in the Doctrines of Religion,
and none be allowed to partake who are grossly ignorant. Now there is no more
Appearance of this with Regard to the Congregation in Egypt, than of a
Profession of Godliness; and it is as difficult to suppose it. There is abundant
Reason to suppose, that vast Numbers in that Nation, consisting of more than a
Million of adult Persons, had been brought up in a great Degree of Ignorance,
amidst their Slavery in Egypt, where the People seem to have almost forgotten
the true God and the true Religion: And though Pains had been take by Moses, now
for a short Season, to instruct the People better; yet, it must be considered,
it is a very great Work, to take a whole Nation under such Degrees of Ignorance
and Prejudice, and bring every one of them to a competent Degree of Knowledge
in Religion; and a greater Work still for Moses both thus to instruct them, and
also by Examination or otherwise, to come to a just Satisfaction, that all had
indeed attained to such Knowledge.

Mr. Stoddard insists, that if Grace be requisite in the Lord's Supper, it
would have been as much so in the Passover, in as much as the chief Thing the
Passover (as well as the Lord's Supper) has Respect to and represents, is
Christ's Sufferings. But if on this Account the same Qualifications are
requisite in both Ordinances, then it would be as requisite that the Partakers
should have Knowledge to discern the Lord's Body (in Mr. Stoddard's Sense of 1
Cor. xi. 29.) in the Passover, as in the Lord's Supper. But this certainly is
as difficult to suppose, as that they professed Godliness: For how does it
appear, that the People in general who partook of the Passover, knew that it
signified the Death of the Messiah, and the Way in which he should make
Atonement for Sin by his Blood? Does it look very likely that they should know
this, when Christ's own Disciples had not Knowledge thus to discern the Lord's
Body in the Passover, of which they partook from Year to Year with their
Master? Can it be supposed, they actually knew Christ's Death and the Design of
it to be thereby signified, when they did not so much as realise the Fact it
self, that Christ was to die, at least not 'till the Year before the last
Passover? And besides how unreasonable would it be, to suppose, that the Jews
understood what was signified, pertaining to Christ and Salvation by him, in
all those many Kinds of Sacrifices, which they attended and partook of, and all
the vast variety of Ceremonies belonging to them; all which Sacrifices were
Sacramental Representations of Christ's Death, as well as the Sacrifice of the
Passover? The Apostle tells us, that all these Things had a Shadow of Good
Things to come, the Things concerning Christ; and yet there are many of them,
which the Church of Christ to this Day don't understand; though we are under a
thousand Times greater Advantage to understand them, than they were; having the
New Testament, wherein God uses great plainness of Speech, to guide us, and
living in Days wherein the Vail which Moses put over his Face is taken away in
Christ, and the Vail of the Temple rent, and have the Substance and Antitype
plainly exhibited, and so have Opportunity to compare these with those Shadows.

If it be objected, as a Difficulty that lies against our supposing a
Profession of Godliness requisite to a Participation of the Passover, that they
who were uncircumcised, were expressly forbidden to partake, and if Conversion
was as important and a more important Qualification than Circumcision, why were
not the unregenerate as expressly forbidden? I answer, why were not scandalous
Sinners as expressly forbidden? And why was not moral Sincerity as expressly
required as Circumcision?

If it be objected, that they were all expressly and strictly required to keep
the Passover; but if Grace was requisite, and God knew that many of the
Partakers would have no Grace, why would he give such universal Orders?

I answer; When God gave those Commands, he knew that the Commands, in all
their Strictness, would reach many Persons who in the Time of the Passover
would be without so much as moral Sincerity in Religion. Every Man in the
Nation, of every Generation, and which should be in Being each Year, from the
first Institution 'till the Death of Christ, were all (excepting such as were
ceremonially unclean, or in a Journey) strictly required to keep the Feast of
Passover; and yet God knew that Multitudes would be without the Qualification
of moral Seriousness in Religion. It would be very unreasonable, to suppose,
that every single Person in the Nation was morally serious, even in the very
best Time that ever passed over the Nation; or that ever there was such a happy
Day with that Nation, or any other Nation under Heaven, wherein all were
morally sincere in Religion. How much then was it otherwise many Times with
that Nation, which was so prone to Corruption, and so often generally involved
in gross Wickedness? But the strict Command of God to keep the Passover reached
the morally insincere, as well as others; they are no where excepted, any more
than the unconverted. And as to any general Commands of God's Word, these no
more required Men to turn from a State of moral Insincerity before they came to
the Passover, than they required 'em to turn from a graceless State.

But further, I reply, that God required them all to keep the Passover, no more
strictly than he required them all to love the Lord their God with their whole
Heart: And if God might strictly command this, He might also strictly command
them to keep that Ordinance wherein they were especially to profess it, and
seal their Profession of it. That evil Generation were not expressly forbidden
to keep the Passover in suceeding Years, for the whole forty Years during which
they went on provoking God, very often by gross sinning and open rebelling; but
still the express and strict Commands for the whole Congregation to keep the
Passover reached them, nor were they released from their Obligation.

If it be said, that we must suppose Multitudes in Israel attended the
Passover, from Age to Age, without such a Visibility of Piety as I have
insisted on; and yet we don't find their attending this Ordinance charged on
them as a Sin, in Scripture: I answer, We must also suppose that Multitudes in
Israel from Age to Age attended the Passover, who lived in moral Insincerity,
yea and scandalous Wickedness. For the People in general very often notoriously
corrupted themselves, and declined to Ways of open and great Transgression; and
yet there is Reason to think, that in these Times of Corruption, for the most
Part, they upheld Circumcision and the Passover; and we don't find their
attending on these Ordinances under such Circumstances, any more expressly
charged on them as a Sin, than their coming without Piety of Heart. The Ten
Tribes continued constantly in Idolatry for about 250 Years; and there is
Ground to suppose, that in the mean Time they ordinarily kept up Circumcision
and the Passover: For though they worshipped God by Images, yet they maintained
most of the ceremonial Observances of the Law of Moses, called the Manner of
the God of the Land, which their Priests taught the Samaritans, who were
settled in their Stead, 2 Kings xvii. 26, 27. Nevertheless we don't find
Elijah, Elisha, or other Prophets that were sent among them, reproving them for
attending these Ordinances without the required moral Qualifications. Indeed
there are some Things in the Writings of the Prophets, which may be interpreted
as a Reproof of this; but no more as a Reproof of this, than of attending God's
Ordinances, without a gracious Sincerity and true Piety of Heart and Life.

How many Seasons were there, wherein the People in general fell into and lived
in Idolatry, that Scandal of Scandals, in the Times of the Judges, and in the
Times of the Kings both in Judah and Israel? But still amidst all this
Wickedness, they continued to attend the Sacrament of Circumcision: We have
every whit as much Evidence of it, as that they attended the Passover without a
Profession of Godliness: We have no Account of their ever leaving it off at
such Seasons, nor any Hint of it is being renewed (as a Thing which had ceased)
when they came to reform. Though we have so full an Account of the Particulars of
Josiah' Reformation, after that long scandalous Reign of Manosseh, there is no
Hint of any reviving of Circumcision, or returning to it after a Cessation. And
where have we an Account of the People's being once reproved for attending this
holy Sacrament while thus involved in scandalous Sin, in all the Old Testament?
And where is this once charged on them as a Sin, any more than in the Case of
unconverted Persons attending the Sacrament of the Passover. Let the Reader
here take Notice of what is observed in the Conclusion of my Answer to the
Objection from the Instance of Judas.


ANSW. 2. Whatever was the Case with Respect to the Qualifications for the
Sacraments of the Old Testament Dispensation, I humbly conceive it is nothing to
the Purpose in the present Argument, nor needful to determine us with Respect
to the Qualifications for the Sacraments of the Christian Dispensation, which
is a Matter of such plain Fact in the New Testament. Far am I from thinking the
Old Testament to be like an old Almanac out of Use; nay, I think it is evident
from the New Testament, that some Things which had their first Institution
under the OldTestament, are continued under the New; for Instance,
particularly, the Acceptance of the Infant Seed of Believers as Children of the
Covenant with their Parents; and probably some Things belonging to the Order
and Discipline of Christian, Churches, had their first Beginning in the Jewish
Synagogue. But yet all allow that the Old Testament Dispensation is out of
Date, with it is Ordinances: And I think, in a Matter pertaining to the
Constitution and Order of the New-Testament-Church, that is a Matter of Fact
wherein the New Testament it self is express, full and abundant, in such a Case
to have Recourse to the Mosaic Dispensation for Rules or Presidents to
determine our Judgment, is quite needless, and out of Reason. There is perhaps
no Part of Divinity attended with so much Intricacy, and wherein orthodox
Divines do so much differ, as the stating the precise Agreement and Difference
between the two Dispensations of Moses and of Christ. And probably the Reason
why God has left it so intricate, is, because our understanding the ancient
Dispensation and God's Design in it is not of so great Importance, nor does so
nearly concern us. Since God uses great Plainness of Speech in the
New Testament, which is as it were the Charter and municipal Law of the
Christian Church, what Need we run back to the ceremonial and typical
Institutions of an antiquated Dispensation, wherein God's declared Design was,
to deliver divine Things in comparative Obscurity, hid under a Vail, and
involved in Clouds?

We have no more Occasion for going to search among the Types, dark
Revelations, and carnal Ordinances of the Old Testament, to find out whether
this Matter of Fact concerning the Constitution and Order of the
New-Testament-Church be true, than we have Occasion for going there to find out
whether any other Matter of Fact, we have an Account of in the New Testament,
be true; as particularly whether there were such Officers in the primitive
Church as Bishops and Deacons, whether miraculous Gifts of the Spirit were
common in the Apostles Days, whether the believing Gentiles were received into
the primitive Christian Church, and the like.

ANSW. 3. I think, nothing can be alleged from the holy Scripture, that is
sufficient to prove a Profession of Godliness to be not a Qualification
requisite in order to a due and regular Participation of the Passover.

Although none of the requisite moral Qualifications for this Jewish Sacrament,
either of one Kind or other, are near so clearly made known in the Old
Testament, as the Qualifications for the Christian Sacraments are in the New;
and although the supposing a Visibility, either of moral Sincerity, or
sanctifying Grace to be requisite, is (both respecting the one Case and the
other) involved in some Obscurity and Difficulty; yet I would humbly offer what
appears to me to be the Truth concerning that Matter, in the Things that follow.

(1.) Although the People in Egypt, before the first Passover, probably made no
explicit public Profession at all, either of their Humiliation for their
former Idolatry, or of present Devotedness of Heart to God; it being before any
particular Institution of an express public Profession, either of Godliness,
or Repentance in Case of Scandal: Yet I think, there was some Sort of public
Manifestation, or implicit Profession of both. Probably in Egypt they
implicitly professed the same Things, which they afterward professed more
expressly and solemnly in the Wilderness. The Israelites in Egypt had very much
to affect their Hearts, before the last Plague, in the great Things that God
had done for them; especially in some of the latter Plagues, wherein they were
so remarkably distinguished from the Egyptians: They seem now to be brought to
a tender Frame, and a Disposition to show much Respect to God (see Exodus
xii.27.) and were probably now very forward to profess themselves devoted to
him, and true Penitents.

(2) After the Institution of an explicit public Profession of Devotedness to
God, or (which is the same Thing) of true Piety of Heart, this was wont to be
required in order to a partaking of the Passover and other Sacrifices and
Sacraments that adult Persons were admitted to Accordingly all the adult
Persons that were circumcised at Gilgal, had made this Profession a little
before on the Plains of Moab; as has been already observed. Not that all of
them were truly Gracious; but seeing they all had a Profession and Visibility,
Christ in his Dealings with his Church as to external Things, acted not as the
Searcher of Hearts, but as the Head of the visible Church, accommodating
himself to the present State of Mankind; and therefore he represents himself in
Scripture as trusting his People's Profession; as I formerly observed.

(3.) In degenerate Times in Israel, both Priests and People were very lax with
Respect to Covenanting with God, and professing Devotedness to him; and these
Professions were used, as public Professsions commonly are still in corrupt
Times, merely as Matters of Form and Ceremony, at least by great Multitudes.

(4.) Such was the Nature of the Levitical Dispensation, that it had in no
Measure so great Tendency to preclude and prevent hypocritical Professions, as
the New-Testament-Dispensation; particularly, on Account of the vastly greater
Darkness of it. For the Covenant of Grace was not then so fully revealed, and
consequently the Nature of the Conditions of that Covenant not then so well
known: There was then a far more obscure Revelation of those great Duties of
Repentance toward God and Faith in the Mediator, and of those Things wherein
true Holiness consists, and wherein it is distinguished from other Things:
Persons then had not equal Advantage to know their own Hearts, while viewing
themselves in this comparatively dim Light of Moses's Law, as now they have in
the clear Sunshine of the Gospel. In that State of the Minority of the Church,
the Nature of true Piety, as consisting in the Spirit of Adoption, or ingenuous
filial Love to God, and as distinguished from a Spirit of Bondage, servile
Fear, and Self-Love, was not so clearly made known. The Israelites were
therefore the more ready to mistake, for true Piety, that moral Seriousness and
those warm Affections and Resolutions that resulted from that Spirit of
Bondage, which showed it self in Israel remarkably at Mount Sinai; and which
throughout all the Old-Testament-Times, they were especially incident to.

(5.) God was pleased in a great Measure to wink at and suffer (though he did not
properly allow) that Laxness there was among the People, with Regard to the
Visibility of Holiness, and the moral Qualifications requisite to an Attendance
on their Sacraments: as also he did in many other Cases of great Irregularity,
under that dark, imperfect, and comparatively carnal Dispensation; such as
Polygamy, putting away their Wives at Pleasure, the Revenger of Blood killing
the Manslayer, etc. and as he winked at the worshipping in High Places in
Solomon's Time (1 Kings iii. 4, 5.) and at the Neglect of keeping the Feast of
Tabernacles according to the Law, from Joshua's Time 'till after the Captivity
( Neh viii. 17.) and as he winked at the Neglect of the SynagogueWorship, or
the public Service of God in particular Congregations, 'till after the
Captivity PRIDE. Connect. Part 1. page 354, -- 536. and 555, 556. 9th Edition.
The Word translated Synagogues Psalm. lxxiv. 8. signifies Assemblies; and is
supposed by the generality of learned Men to relate to another Sort of
Assemblies.
, though the Light of Nature, together with the general Rules of the Law of
Moses, did sufficiently teach and require it.

(6.) It seems to be from Time to Time foretold in the Prophecies of the old
Testament, that there would be a great Alteration in this Respect, in the Days
of the Gospel, that under the new Dispensation there should be far greater
Purity in the Church. Thus, in the fore mentioned Place in Ezekiel it is
foretold, that those who are [visibly] uncircumcised in Heart, should NO MORE
enter into God's Sanctuary. Again Ezekiel. xx. 37, 38. And I will cause you to
pass under the Rod, and will bring you into the Bond of the Covenant; and I
will purge out from among you the Rebels, and them that transgress against me.
It seems to be a Prophecy of the greater Purity of those who are visibly in
Covenant with God. Isai, iv. 3. And it shall come to pass that he that is left
in Zion, and he that remains in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every
one that is written among the living [i. e. has a Name to live, or is enrolled
among the Saints] in Jerusalem. Isai, lii. 1. Put on thy beautiful Garments, O
Jerusalem, the holy City; from henceforth there shall NO MORE come to thee the
Uncircumcised and the Unclean. Zech, xiv. 21. And in that Day, there shall be
NO MORE the Canaanite in the House of the Lord.

(7.) This is just such an Alteration as might reasonably be expected from what
we are taught of the whole Nature of the two Dispensations. As, the one had
carnal Ordinances (so they are called Heb. ix. 10) the other a spiritual
Service ( Joh. iv. 24.) The one an earthly Canaan, the other an heavenly; the
one an external Jerusalem, the other a spiritual; the one an earthly
High Priest, the other an heavenly; the one a Worldly Sanctuary, the other a
spiritual; the one a bodily and temporal Redemption (which is all that they
generally discerned or understood in the Passover) the other a spiritual and
eternal. And, agreably to these Things, it was so ordered in Providence, that
Israel, the Congregation that should enter this worldly Sanctuary, and attend
these carnal Ordinances, should be much more a worldly, carnal Congregation,
than the New-Testament-Congregation. One Reason why it was ordered in
Providence that there should be such a Difference, seems to be this, viz. That
the Messiah might have the Honor of introducing a State of greater Purity and
spiritual Glory. Hence God is said to find Fault with that ancient Dispensation
of the Covenant, Heb. viii. 7, 8. And the Time of introducing the new
Dispensation is called the Time of Reformation, Heb. ix. 10. And one Thing,
wherein the Amendment of what God found Fault with in the former Dispensation
should consist, the Apostle intimates, is the greater Purity and Spirituality
of the Church. Heb. viii. 7, 8, 11.

OBJECT. IV. It Is not reasonable, to suppose, that the Multitudes which John
the Baptist baptized, made a Profession of saving Grace, or had any such
Visibility of true Piety, as has been insisted on.

ANSW. Those whom John baptized, came to him confessing their Sins, making a
Profession of some Kind of Repentance; and it is not reasonable to suppose, the
Repentance they professed, was specifically or in Kind diverse from that which
he had instructed 'em in and called them to, which is called Repentance for the
Remission of Sins; and that is saving Repentance. John's Baptism is called the
Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of sins: I know not how such a Phrase
can be reasonably understood any otherwise, than so as to imply, that his
Baptism was some Exhibition of that Repentance, and a Seal of the Profession of
it. Baptism is a Seal of some Sort of religious Profession, in adult Persons:
But the very Name of John's Baptism shows, that it was a Seal of a Profession
of Repentance for the Remission of Sins. It Is said, Luke iii. 3. John PREACHED
the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of sins. What can be understood by
this, but his preaching that Men should now speedily turn to God, by true
Repentance and Faith in the promised Savior, and come and confess their Sins,
and openly declare this Repentance toward God, and Faith in the Lamb of God,
and that they should confirm and Seal this their Profession by Baptism, as well
as therein receive the Seal of God's Willingness to remit the Sins of such as
had this Faith and Repentance. Accordingly, we are told, the People came and
were baptized of him, confessing their Sins, manifesting and professing that
Sort of Repentance and Faith which he preached. They had no Notion of any other
Sort of Repentance put into their Heads, that they could suppose John called
them to profess in Baptism, but this accompanied with Faith in the Lamb whom he
called them to behold; for he preached no other to'em. The People that John
baptized, professed both Repentance for the Remission of Sins, and also Faith
in the Messiah; as is evident by Acts. xix. 4, 5. John verily baptized with the
Baptism of Repentance, saying unto the People, that they should believe on him
that should come after him, that is, on CHRIST JESUS: When they heard this
[John's Preaching] they were baptized in the Name of the Lord JESUS.

If it be objected here, that we are told Matthew. iii. 5, 6. There went cut to
him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Region round about Jordan, and were
baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their Sins; and that it is not to be
imagined, all these made any credible Profession of saving Repentanc^ and
Faith! I answer, No more is to be understood by these Expressions, according to
the Phraseology of the Scripture, than that there was a very general Resort of
People from these Places to John. Nor is any more to be understood by the like
Term of Universality in Joh. iii. 26. They came to John, and said unto him,
Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou bear Witness,
behold, the same baptizeth, and ALL MEN come to him. That is, there was a great
Resort to him from all Quarters. It Is in no wise unreasonable, to suppose,
there was indeed a very great Number of People that came to John from the
Places mentioned, who being exceedingly moved by his Preaching, in that Time of
extraordinary Out pouring of the Spirit, made Profession of the Faith and
Repentance which John preached. Doubtless there were many more Professors, than
real Converts: But still in the great Resort to John, there were many of the
latter Character; as we may infer from the Prophecy: as appears by Luke i. 16,
17. And many of the Children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. And
he shall go before him in the Spirit and Power of Elias, to turn the Hearts of
the Fathers to the Children, and of the Disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just,
to make ready a People prepared for the Lord. And from that Account of Fact in
Matthew. xi. 12. From the Days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom, of
Heaven suffers Violence, and the Violent take it by Force. And in Luke xvi.
16. The Law and the Prophets were until John: Since that Time the Kingdom of
God is preached, and EVERY MAN presses into it. Here the Expression is no less
universal, than that which is objected in Matthew. iii. 5, 6. As to those wicked
Pharisees, that so much opposed Christ, some of them I suppose had been
baptized by John, and then had a great Show of Repentance and Faith; but they
afterward apostatized, and were much worse than ever before: Therefore Christ
speaks of 'em as being like a House from which the unclean Spirit is visibly
turned out for a while, and is left empty, swept and garnished, but afterward
is repossessed, and has many Devils instead of one. Luke xi. 24, etc. Yet as to
the greater Part of these Pharisees, they were not baptized by John, as appears
by Luke vii.29, 30.

If it be further objected, that John in baptizing such Multitudes could not
have Time to be sufficiently informed of those he baptized, whether their
Profession of Godliness was credible, or no. I answer, That we are not
particularly informed of the Circumstances of his teaching, and of the
Assistance he was favored with, and the Means he had of Information concerning
those whom he baptized: But we may be sure of one Thing, viz. He had as much
Opportunity to inquire into the Credibility of their Profession, as he had to
inquire into their doctrinal Knowledge and moral Character; which my Opponents
suppose to be necessary, as well as I: And this is enough to silence the
present Objection.

OBJECT. V. Christ says, Matthew. xx. 16. and again Chap. xxii. 14. that many are
called, but few are chosen. By which it is evident, that there are many, who
belong to the visible Church, and yet but few real and true Saints; and that it
is ordinarily thus, even under the NewTestament, and in Days of Gospel Light:
and therefore that Visibility of Saintship, whereby Persons are visible Saints
in a Scripture-Sense, cannot imply an apparent Probability of their being real
Saints, or truly gracious Persons.

ANSW. In these Texts, by those that are called, are not meant those who are
visible Saints, and have the requisite Qualifications for Christian Sacraments;
but all such as have the external Call of the Word of God, and have it is Offers
and Invitations made to them. And it is undoubtedly true, and has been Matter
of Fact, for the most Part, that of those called in this Sense, many have been
but only called, and never truly obedient to the Call, few have been true
Saints. So it was in the jewish Nation, which the Parable in the xxth of Matthew.
has a special Respect to; they in general had the external Call of God's Word,
and in general attended many religious Duties, in Hopes of God's Favor and
Reward, which is called laboring in God's Vineyard; and yet but few of them
eventually obtained Salvation; nay, great Multitudes of those who were called
in the Sense, were scandalous Persons, and gross Hypocrites. The Pharisees and
Sadducees were called, and they labored in the Vineyard, in the Sense of the
Parable; for which they expected great Rewards, above the Gentile Converts or
Proselytes; wherefore their Eye was evil toward them, and they could not bear
that they should be made equal to them: But still these Pharisees and Sadducees
had not generally the intellectual and moral Qualifications, that my Opponents
suppose requisite for Christians Sacraments; being generally scandalous
Persons, denying some fundamental Principles of Religion, and explaining away
some of it is most important Precepts. Thus, many in Christendom are called, by
the outward Call of God's Word, and yet few of them are in a State of
Salvation: But not all these that sit under the Sound of the Gospel, and hear
its Invitations, are sit to come to Sacraments.

That by those who are called, in this Saying of our Savior, is meant those
that have the Gospel offer, and not those who belong to the Society of visible
Saints, is evident beyond all Dispute, in Matthew. xxii. 14. By the many that are
called, are plainly intended the many that are invited to the Wedding. In the
foregoing Parable, we have an Account of those that from Time to Time were
bidden, or CALLED (for the Word is the same in the original ver. 3. And sent
^e^th his Servants to CALL them that were CALLED [(...)] and they would not
come. This has Respect to the Jews, who refused not only savingly to come to
Christ, but refused so much as to come into the visible Church of Christ. ver.
4. Again he sent forth other Servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden [or
CALLED] Behold, I have prepared my Dinner, etc. Ver. 8 They which were bidden
[or CALLED] were not worthy, Ver. 9. Go ye therefore to the high Ways, and as
many as ye shall find, (...) [or CALL, (...)] to the Marriage, or nuptial
Banquet; representing the preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles; who upon it
came into the King's House. i. e. the visible Church, and among 'em one that
had not a Wedding Garment, who was bound Hand and Foot, and cast out, when the
King came: And then, at the Conclusion, Christ adds this Remark, Ver 14. For
many are CALLED or bidden [(...)] but few are chosen; which must have
Reference, not only to the M^n last mentioned, who came into the Wedding-House,
the Christian visible Church, without a Wedding Garment, but to those also
mentioned before, who were called, but would not so much as come into the
King's House, or join to the visible Christian Church. To suppose this Saying
to have Reference only to that one Man who came without a Wedding Garment
(representing one that comes into the visible Church, but is not a true Saint)
would be to make the Introduction of this Aphorism, and it is Connection with
what went before, very strange and unintelligible; because then it would be as
much as to say thus, Multitudes came into the King's House, who were called,
and the House was full of Guests; but among them was found one Man who was not
chosen; for many are called, but few are chosen.

OBJECT. VI. When the Servants of the Householder, in the Parable of the Wheat
and Tares ( Matthew. xiii.) unexpectedly found Tares among the (...) they said to
their Master, Will thou that we go and gather them up? But he said, Now, last
while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up also the Wheat wish them; (...) grow
together until the Harvest. Which shows the Mind of Christ that we ought not to
go about to make a Distinction between true Saints and apparent in this World,
or aim at any such Thing as admitting true Saints only into the visible Church,
but ought to let both be together in the Church 'till the Day of Judgment.

ANSW. 1. These Things in this Parable have no manner of Reference to
Introduction into the Field, or Admission into the visible Church, as though no
Care nor Measures should be taken to prevent Tares being sours; or as though the
Servants who had the Charge of the Field, would have done well to have taken
Tares, appearing to be such, and planted them in the Field amongst the Wheat:
No, instead of this, the Parable plainly implies the Contrary. But the Words
cited have wholly Respect to a CASTING OUT and purging the Field, after the
Tares had been introduced unawares, and contrary to Design, through Men's
Infirmity and Satan's Procurement. Concerning purging Tares out of the Field,
or casting Men out of the Church, there is no Difference between me and those
whom I oppose in the present Controversy: And therefore it is impossible, there
should be any Objection from that which Christ says here concerning this
Master, against Me, but what is as much of an Objection against Them; for we
both hold the same Thing. It is agreed on all Hands, that adult Persons,
actually admitted to Communion of the visible Church, however they may behave
themselves so as to bring their spiritual State into Suspicion, yet ought not
to be cast out, unless they are obstinate in Heresy or Scandal; lest, while we
go about to root out the Tares, we should root out the Wheat also. And it is
also agreed on all Hands, that when those represented under the Name of Tares
bring forth such evil Fruit, such scandalous and obstinate Wickedness, as is
plainly and visibly inconsistent with the Being of true Grace, they ought to be
cast out. And therefore it is impossible, that this Objection should be any
Thing to the Purpose.

ANSW. 2. I think, This parable, instead of being a just Objection against the
Doctrine I maintain, is on the contrary a clear Evidence for it.

For (1.) The Parable sh^ws plainly, that if any are introduced into the Field
of the Householder, or Church of Christ, who prove to be not Wheat (i.e. not
true Saints) they are bro't in unawares, or contrary to Design; and that they
are what don't properly belong there. If Tares are as properly to be sown in
the Field, as is the Wheat, which must be the Case if the Lord's Supper be a
converting Ordinance; then surely no Care ought to be taken to introduce Wheat
only, and no Respect ought to be had more to the Qualities of Wheat in sowing
the Field, than the Qualities of Tarer; nor is there any more Impropriety in
the Tares having a Place there, than the Wheat: But this surely in altogether
inconsistent with the Scope of the Parable.

(2.) This Parable plainly shows, that those who are in the visible Church,
have all of them at first a Visibility, or Appearance to humane Sight, of true
Grace, or of the Nature of true Saints. For it is observed, Tares have this
Property, that when they first appear, and 'till the Products of the Field
arrive to some Maturity, they have such a Resemblance of Wheat, that it is
(...) to impossible to distinguish them.

OBJECT. VII. CHRIST Himself administered the Lord's Supper to Judas, whom he
know at the same Time to be (...); which is a full Evidence, that Grace is not
in itself a requisite qualification in order to coming to the Lord's Supper
(...) and if is (...) requisite in itself, a Profession of it cannot be
requisite.

ANSW. 1. It Is to me apparent, that Judas was not present at the Administration
of the Lord's Supper. It Is true, he was present at the Passover, and dipped
with Christ in the Paschal Dish. The three former Evangelists do differ in the
Order of the Account they give of this dipping in the Dish. Luke gives an
Account of it after his Account of the Lord's Supper, Luke xxii. 21. But
Matthew and Mark both give an Account of it before. (Matt. xxvi. 23. Mark xiv.
20.) And the like might be shown in abundance of Instances of these three
Evangelists differing one from another in the Order of their Narratives; one
places those Things in his History after others, which another places first;
these sacred Historians not undertaking to declare precisely the Date of every
Incident, but regarding more the Truth of Facts, than the Order of Time.
However, in the present Case, the Nature of the Thing speaks for it self, and
shows, that Judas's dipping with Christ in the Dish, or his Hand being with
Christ on the Table, or receiving a Sop dipped in the Dish, must be in that
Order wherein Matthew and Mark place it in their History, viz. at the Passover,
antecedent to the Lord's Supper: For there is no such Thing in the Lord's
Supper as dipping of Sops and dipping together in the Dish; but there was such
a Thing in the Passover, where all had their Hand together in the Dish, and
dipped their Sops in the bitter Sauce. None of these three Evangelists give us
any Account of the Time when Judas went out: But John, who is vastly more
particular as to what passed that Night, and is every where more exact as to
the Order of Time than the other Evangelists, gives us an Account, and is very
precise as to the Time, viz. that Jesus when he gave him the Sop, at the same
Time sent him away, bidding him do quickly what he intended to do; and
accordingly when he had received the Sop, he went immediately out. Joh. xiii.
27, -- 30. Now this Sop being at the Passover, it is evident he was not present
at the Lord's Supper which followed. Many of the best Expositors are of this
Opinion, such as Van Mastricht, Dr. Doddridge, and others.

ANSW. 2. If Judas was there, I deny the Consequence. -- As I have observed
once and again concerning the Lord's Dealings with his People under the old
Testament, so under the New the same Observation takes Place: Christ did not
come to judge the Secrets of Man, nor did ordinarily act, in his external
Dealings with his Disciples, and in Administration of Ordinances, as the
Searcher of Hearts; but rather as the Head of the visible Church, proceeding
according to what was exhibitted in Profession and Visibility; herein setting
an Example to his Ministers, who should stand in his Place when he was gone,
and act in his Name in the Administration of Ordinances. Judas had made the
same Profession of Regard to his Master, and of forsaking all for him, as the
other Disciples: And therefore Christ did not openly renounce him 'till he
himself had destroyed his Profession and Visibility of Saintship, by public
scandalous Apostasy. Supposing then the Presence of Judas at the Lord's Supper,
this affords no Consequence in Favor of what I oppose.

ANSW. 3. If they with whom I have to do in the Controversy, are not contented
with the Answers already given, and think there is a remaining Difficulty in
this Matter lying against my Scheme, I will venture to tell them, that the
Difficulty lies full as hard against their own Scheme; and if there be any
Strength at all in the Argument, it is to all Intents of the same Strength
against the Need of those Qualifications which they themselves suppose to be
necessary in order to an Approach to the Lord's Table, as against those which I
think so. For although they don't think renewing saving Grace necessary, yet they
suppose moral Seriousness or (as they variously speak) moral Sincerity in
Religion to be necessary: They suppose it to be requisite, that Persons should
have some Kind of serious Principle and View in coming to the Lord's Table;
some Sort of Intention of subjecting themselves to Christ, and of seeking and
serving him, in general; and in particular some religious End in coming to the
Sacramental Supper, some religious Respect to Christ in it. But now did not
Christ at that Time perfectly know, that Judas had none of these Things? He
knew he had nothing of Sincerity in the Christian Religion, or of Regard to
Christ in that Ordinance, of any Sort whatsoever; he knew, that Satan had
entered into him and filled his Heart, and that he was then cherishing in
himself a malignant malicious Spirit against his Master, excited by the Reproof
Christ had lately given him. (Compare Joh. xii 8. with Matthew. xxvi. 8, -- 16.
and Mark xiv. 4, -- 11.) and that he had already formed a traitorous murderous
Design against him, and was now in the Prosecution of that bloody Design,
having actually just before been to the chief Priests, and agreed with them to
betray him for thirty Pieces of Silver. (See Matthew xxvi. 14, 15, 16. Mark xiv.
10, 11. Luke xxii. 3, -- 6. and Joh. xiii. 2.) Christ knew these Things, and
knew that Judas was utterly unqualified for the holy Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper; though it had not yet been made known to the Church, or the Disciples. --
Therefore it concerns those on the contrary Part in this Controversy, to find
out some Solution of this Difficulty, as much as it does me; and they will find
they have as much Need to take Refuge in the Solution already given, in one or
other of the two preceding Answers to this Objection.

By the Way I would observe, that Christ's not excluding Judas from the
Passover, under these Circumstances, knowing him to be thus unqualified.
without so much as moral Sincerity, etc. is another Thing that effectually
enervates all the Strength of the Objection against me, from the Passover: For
Judas did not only in common with others fall under God's strict Command, in
the Law of Moses, to keep this Feast, without any Exception of his Case there
to be found; but Christ himself with his own Hand gave him the Sop, a Part of
the Paschal Feast; even although at the same Instant he had in View the Man's
secret Wickedness and Hypocrisy, the traitorous Design which was then in his
Heart, and the horrid Conspiracy with the chief Priests, which he had already
entered into, and was now in Prosecution of: this was then in Christ's Mind,
and he intimated it to him, at the same Moment when he gave him the Sop,
saying, What thou do, do quickly. This demonstrates, that the Objection from
the Passover is no stronger Argument against my Scheme, than the Scheme of
those whom I oppose; because it is no stronger against the Necessity of
sanctifying Grace, the Qualification for Christian Sacraments, which I insist
upon, than it is against the Necessity of moral Seriousness or Sincerity, the
Qualification which they insist upon.

OBJECT. VIII. If sanctifying Grace be an requisite Qualification in order to
Persons due Access to Christian Sacraments, God would have given some certain
Rule, whereby those who are to admit them, might know whether they have such
Grace, or not.

This Objection was obviated in my starting the Question. However, I will say
something further to it in this Place; and would here observe, that if there be
any Strength in this Objection, it lies in the Truth of this Proposition, viz.
That whatever Qualifications are requisite in order to Persons due Access to
Christian Sacraments, God has given some certain Rule, whereby those who admit
them, may know whether they have those Qualifications, or not. If this
Proposition is not true, then there is no Force at all in the Argument. But I
dare say, there is not a Divine, nor Christian of common Sense, on the Face of
the Earth, that will assert and stand to it, that this Proposition is true: For
there is none will deny, that some Sort of Belief of the Being of a God, some
Sort of Belief that the Scriptures are the Word of God, that there is a future
State of Rewards and Punishments, and that Jesus is the Messiah, are
Qualifications requisite in order to Persons due Access to Christian
Sacraments; and yet God has given those who are to admit Persons no certain
Rule, whereby they may know whether they believe any one of these Things.
Neither has be given his Ministers or Churches any certain Rule, whereby they
may know whether any Person that offers himself for Admission to the Sacrament,
was any Degree of moral Sincerity, moral Seriousness of Spirit, or any inward
moral Qualification whatsoever. These Things have all their Existence in the
Soul, which is out of our Neighbor's View. Not therefore a Certainty, but a
Profession and Visibility of these Things, must be the Rule of the Church's
Proceeding; and it is as good and as reasonable a Rule of Judgment concerning
saving Grace, as it is concerning any other internal invisible Qualifications,
which cannot be certainly known by any but the Subject himself.

OBJECT. IX. If sanctifying Grace be requisite to a due Approach to the Lord's
Table, then no Man may come but he that knows he has such Grace. A Man must not
only think he has a Right to the Lord's Supper, in order to his lawful
partaking of it; but he must know he has a Right. If nothing but Sanctification
gives him a real Right to the Lord's Supper, then nothing short of the
Knowledge of Sanctification gives him a known Right to it: Only an Opinion and
probable Hopes of a Right will not warrant his coming.

ANSW. 1. I desire those who insist on this as an invincible Argument, to
consider calmly whether they themselves ever did, or ever will stand to it. For
here these two Things are to be observed,

(1) If no Man may warrantably come to the Lord's Supper but such as know they
have a Right, then no unconverted Persons may come unless they not only think,
but know it is the Mind of God, that unconverted Persons should come, and know
that he don't require Grace in order to their coming. For unless they know that
Men may come without Grace, they cannot know that they themselves have a Right
to come being without Grace. And will any one assert and stand to it, that of
Necessity all adult Persons, of every Age, Rank and Condition of Life, must be
so versed in this Controversy, as to have a Certainty in this Matter, in order
to their coming to the Lord's Supper? It would be most absurd for any to assert
it a Point of easy Proof, the Evidence of which is so clear and obvious to
every one of every Capacity, as to supersede all Occasion for their being
studied in Divinity, in Order to a Certainty of it is Truth, That Persons may
come to the sacred Table of the Lord, notwithstanding they know themselves to
be unconverted! Especially considering, it seems a Matter of plain Fact, that
the Contrary to this Opinion has been in general the Judgment of Protestant
Divines and Churches, from the Reformation to this Day; and that the bigger
Part of the greatest Divines that have ever appeared in the World, who have
spent their Lives in the diligent prayerful study of Divinity, have been fixed
in the Reverse of that Opinion. This is sufficient at least to show, that this
Opinion is not so plain as not to be a disputable Point; and that the Evidence
of it is not so obvious to Persons of the lowest Capacity and little Inquiry,
as that all may come to a Certainty in the Matter, without Difficulty and
without Study. -- I would humbly ask here. What has been the Case in Fact in
our Churches, who have practiced for so many Years on this Principle? Can it be
pretended, or was it ever supposed, that the Communicants in general, even
Persons of mean Intellectuals and low Education, not excepting the very Boys
and Girls of sixteen Years old, that have been taken into the Church, had so
studied Divinity, as not only to think, but know, that our pious Forefathers,
and almost all the Protestant and Christian Divines in the World have been in
an Error in this Matter? And have People ever been taught the Necessity of this
previous Knowledge? Has it ever been insisted upon, that before Persons come to
the Lord's Supper they must look so far into the Case of a Right to the Lord's
Supper, as to come not only to a full settled Opinion, but even Certainty in
this Point? And has any one Minister or Church in their Admissions ever
proceeded on the Supposition, that all whom they took into Communion were so
versed in this Controversy, as this comes to? Has it ever been the Manner in
examining them as to the Sufficiency of their Knowledge, to examine them as to
their thoro' Acquaintance with this particular Controversy? Has it been the
Manner to put by those who had only an Opinion and not a Certainty; even as the
Priests who could not find their Register, were put by, 'till the Matter could
be determined by Urim and Thummim? And I dare appeal to every Minister, and
every Member of a Church that has been concerned in admitting Communicants,
whether they ever imagined, or it ever entered into their Thought, concerning
each One whose Admission they have consented to, that they had looked so much
into this Matter, as not only to have settled their Opinion, but to be arrived
to a proper Certainty?

(2) I desire it may be remembered, the venerable Author of the Appeal to the
Learned, did in his Ministry ever teach such Doctrine from whence it will
unavoidably follow, that no one unconverted Man in the World can know he has
Warrant to come to the Lord's Supper. For if any unconverted Man has Warrant to
worship his Maker in this Way, it must be because God has given him Warrant by
the Revelation of his Mind in the holy Scriptures. And therefore if any
unconverted Man, not only think, but knows, he has Warrant from God, he must of
Consequence, not only think, but know, that the Scriptures are the Word of God.
But I believe all that survive of the stated Hearers of that eminent Divine,
and all who were acquainted with him, well remember it to be a Doctrine which
he often taught and much insisted on, that no natural Man knows the Scripture
to be the Word of God; that although such may think so, yet they don't know it;
and that at best they have but a doubtful Opinion: And he often would express
himself thus; N^ natural Man is thoroughly, convinced, that the Scriptures are
the Word of God; if they were convinced, they would be gained. Now, if so, it is
impossible any natural (...) in the World should ever know, it is his Right, in
his present Condition, to come to the Lord's Supper. True, he may think it is
his Right, he may have that Opinion: but he cannot know it; and so must not
come, according to this Argument. For it is only the Word of God in the holy
Scriptures, that gives a Man a Right to worship the supreme Being in this
Sacramental Manner, and to come to him in this Way, or any other, as one in
Covenant with him. The Lord's Supper being no Branch of natural Worship, Reason
without Institution is no Ground of Duty or Right in this Affair. And hence
it is plainly impossible for those that don't so much as know the Scriptures are
the Word of God, to know they have any good Ground of Duty or Right in this
Matter. Therefore, supposing unconverted Men have a real Right, yet since they
have no known Right, they have no Warrant (according to the Argument before us)
to take and use their Right; and what Good then can their Right do them? Or how
can they excuse themselves from Presumption, in claiming a Right, which they
don't know belongs to them? -- It Is said, A probable Hope that Persons are
regenerate, wont warrant them to come; if they come, they take a Liberty to do
that which they don't know God gives them Leave to do, which is horrible
Presumption in them. But if this be good arguing, I may as well say, a probable
Opinion that unregenerate Men may communicate, wont warrant such to do it. They
must have certain Knowledge of this: else, their Right being uncertain, they
run a dreadful Venture in coming.

ANSW. 2. Men are liable to doubt concerning their moral Sincerity, as well as
saving Grace. If an unconverted Man, sensible of his being under the reigning
Power of Sin, was about to appear solemnly to own the Covenant (as it is
commonly called) and to profess to give up himself to the Service of God in an
universal and persevering Obedience; and at the same time knew, that if he did
this, and sealed this Profession at the Lord's Supper, without moral Sincerity
(supposing him to understand the meaning of that Phrase) he should eat and
drink Judgment to himself; and if accordingly, his Conscience being awakened,
he was afraid of God's Judgment; in this Case, I believe, the Man would be
every whit as liable to Doubts about his moral Sincerity, as godly Men are
about their gracious Sincerity. And if it ben't Matter of Fact, that natural
Men are so often exercised and troubled with Doubts about their moral
Sincerity, as godly Men are about their Regeneration, I suppose it to be owing
only to this Cause, viz. that godly Men being of more tender Consciences than
those under the Dominion of Sin, are more afraid of God's Judgments, and more
ready to tremble at his Word. The Divines on the other Side of the Question,
suppose it to be requisite, that Communicants should believe the Fundamental
Doctrines of Religion with all their Heart (in the Sense of Act. viii. 37.) the
Doctrine of three Persons and one God, in particular: But I think, there can be
no reasonable Doubt, that natural Men, who have so weak and poor a Kind of
Faith in these Mysteries, if they were indeed as much afraid of terrible
Consequences of their being deceived in this Matter, or being not morally
sincere in their Profession of the Truth, as truly gracious Men are wont to be
of Delusion concerning their Experience of a Work of Grace, or whether they are
evangelically sincere in choosing God for their Portion; the former would be as
frequently exercised with Doubts in the one Case, as the latter in the other.
And I very much question, whether any Divine on the other Side of the
Controversy would think it necessary, that natural Men in professing those
Things should mean that they know they are morally sincere, or intend any more
than that they trust they have that Sincerity, so far as they know their own
Hearts. If a Man should come to 'em, proposing to join with the Church, and
tell 'em, though indeed he was something afraid whether he believed the Doctrine
of the Trinity with all his Heart, (meaning in a moral Sense) yet that he had
often examined himself as to that Matter with the utmost Impartiality and
Strictness he was capable of, and on the whole he found Reasons of probable
Hope, and his preponderating Thought of himself was, that he was sincere in it;
would they think such an One ought to be rejected, or would they advise him not
to come to the Sacrament, because he did not certainly know he had this
Sincerity, but only thought he had it!

ANSW. 3. If we suppose sanctifying Grace to be requisite in order to a being
properly qualified, according to God's Word, for an Attendance on the Lord's
Supper; yet it will not follow, that a Man must know he has this Qualification,
in order to his being capable of conscienciously attending it. If he judges,
that he has it, according to the best Light he can obtain, on the most careful
Examination, with the Improvement of such Helps as he can get, the Advice of
his Pastor, and c. he may be bound in Conscience to attend. And the Reason in
this; Christians partaking of the Lord's Supper is not a Matter of mere Claim,
or Right and Privilege, but a Matter of Duty and Obligation; being an Affair
wherein another (even God) has a Claim and Demand on us. And as we ought to be
careful, on the one Hand, that we proceed on good Grounds in taking to our
selves a Privilege, le^t we take what we have no good Claim to; so we should be
equally careful, on the other Hand, to proceed on good Grounds in what we
withold from another, lest we don't with hold that from him which is his Due,
and which he justly challenges from us. Therefore in a Case of this complex
Nature, where a Thing is both a Matter of Right or Privilege to us, and also a
Matter of Obligation to another, or a Right of his from us, the Danger of
proceeding without Right and Truth is equal both Ways; and consequently, if we
cannot be absolutely sure either Way, here the best Judgment we can form, after
all proper Endeavors to know the Truth, must govern and determine us;
otherwise we shall designedly do that whereby, according to our own Judgment,
we run the greatest Risque; which is certainly contrary to Reason. If the
Question were only what a Man has a Right to, he might forbear 'till he were
sure: But the Question is, not only whether he has Right to attend the Supper,
but whether God also has not a Right to his Attendance there? Supposing it were
merely a Privilege, which I am allowed in a certain specified Case, and there
were no Command to take the Lord's Supper even in that Case, but yet at the
same Time there was a Command not to take unless that be the Case in Fact,
then, supposing I am uncertain whether that be the Case with me or no, it will
be safest to abstain: But supposing I am not only forbidden to take it, unless
that be the Case with me, but positively commanded and required to take it, if
that be the Case in Fact, then it is equally dangerous to neglect on
Uncertainties, as to take on Uncertainties. In such a critical Situation, a Man
must act according to the best of his Judgment on his Case; otherwise he
wilfully runs into that which he thinks the greatest Danger of the two.

Thus it is in innumerable Cases in human Life. I shall give one plain
Instance: A Man ought not to take upon him the Work of the Ministry, unless
called to it in the Providence of God; For a Man has no Right to take this
Honor to himself, unless called of God. Now let us suppose a young Man, of a
liberal Education and well accomplished, to be at a Loss whether it is the Will
of God that he should follow the Work of the Ministry; and he examines himself,
and examines his Circumstances, with great Seriousness and solemn Prayer, and
well considers and weighs the Appearances in divine Providence: And yet when
has done all, he is not come to a proper Certainty, that God calls him to this
Work; but however, it looks so to him, according to the best Light he can
obtain and the most careful Judgment he can form: now such a one appears
obliged in Conscience to give himself to this Work. He must by no Means neglect
it under a Notion that he must not take this Honor to himself, 'till he knows
he has a Right to it; because, though it be indeed a Privilege, yet it is not a
Matter of mere Privilege, but a Matter of Duty too; and if he neglects it under
these Circumstances, he neglects what according to his own best Judgment, he
thinks God requires of him, and calls him to; which is to sin against his
Conscience.

As to the Case of the Priests, that could not find their Register (Ezra ii.)
alleged in the Appeal to the Learned (page 64.) it appears to me of no Force
in this Argument; for if those Priests had had never so great Assurance in
themselves of their Pedigree being good, or of their being descended from
Priests, and should have professed such Assurance; yet it would not have
availed, nor did they abstain from the Priesthood, because they wanted
Satisfaction themselves, but they were subject to the Judgment of the
Sanhedrim; whose Rule to judge of the Qualification spoken of, God had never
made any Profession of the Parties themselves, but the Visibility of the Thing
and Evidence of the Fact to their own Eyes: this Matter of Pedigree being an
external Object, ordinarily within the View of Man; and not any Qualification
of Heart. But this is not the Case with Regard to requisite Qualifications for
the Lord's Supper, which being many of them internal invisible Things, seated
in the Mind and Heart, such as the Belief of a supreme Being, and c. God has
made a credible Profession of these Things the Rule to direct in Admission of
Persons to the Ordinance: Who in making this Profession are determined and
governed by their own Judgment of themselves, and not by any Thing within the
View of the Church.

OBJECT. X. The natural Consequence of the Doctrine which has been maintained,
is the bringing Multitudes of Persons of a tender Conscience and true Piety
into great Perplexities; who being at a Loss about the State of their Souls,
must needs be as much in Suspense about their Duty: And it is not reasonable, to
suppose, that God would order Things so in the Revelations of his Will, as to
bring his own People into such Perplexities.

ANSW. 1. It is for Want of the like Tenderness of Conscience which the Godly
have, that the other Doctrine which insists on moral Sincerity, don't naturally
bring those who are received to Communion on those Principles, into the same
Perplexities, through their doubting of their moral Sincerity, of their
believing Mysteries with all their Heart, etc. as has been already observed.
And a being free from Perplexity, only through Stupidity and Hardness of Heart,
is worse than being in the greatest Perplexity through Tenderness of Conscience.

ANSW. 2. Supposing the Doctrine which I have maintained, be indeed the
Doctrine of God's Word, yet it will not follow, that the Perplexities true
Saints are in through doubting of their State, are Effects owing to the
Revelations of God's Word. Perplexity and Distress of Mind, not only on
Occasion of the Lord's Supper, but innumerable other Occasions, is the natural
and unavoidable Consequence of true Christians doubting of their State. But
shall we therefore say, that all these Perplexities are owing to the Word of
God? No, it is not owing to God, nor to any of his Revelations, that true Saints
ever doubt of their State; his Revelations are plain and clear, and his Rules
sufficient for Men to determine their own Condition by: But, for the most Part,
it is owing to their own Sloth, and giving Way to their sinful Dispositions.
Must God's Institutions and Revelations be answerable for all the Perplexities
Men bring on themselves, through their own Negligence and Unwatchfulness? It Is
wisely ordered it should be so, that the Saints should escape Perplexity in no
other Way than that of great Strictness, Diligence, and maintaining the lively,
laborious and self-denying Exercises of Religion.

It might as well be said, that it is unreasonable to suppose, God should order
Things so as to bring his own People into such Perplexities, as doubting Saints
are wont to be exercised with in the sensible Approaches of Death; when their
Doubts tend to vastly greater Perplexity, than in their Approaches to the
Lord's Table. If Christians would more thoroughly exercise themselves unto
Godliness, laboring always to keep a Conscience void of Offense both toward
God and toward Man, it would be the Way to have the Comfort and cast the
Sweetness of Religion. If they would so run, not as uncertainly; so fight, not
as they that beat the Air; it would be the Way for them to escape Perplexity,
both in Ordinances and Providence, and to rejoice and enjoy God in both. --
Not but that doubting of their State sometimes arises from other Causes,
besides want of Watchfulness; it may arise from Melancholy, and some other
peculiar Disadvantages. But however, it is not owing to God's Revelations nor
Institutions; which, whatsoever we may suppose 'em to be, will not prevent the
Perplexities of such Persons.

ANSW. 3. It appears to me reasonable, to suppose, that the Doctrine I
maintain, if universally embraced by God's People, however it might be an
accidental Occasion of Perplexity in many Instances, through their own
Infirmity and Sin; yet, on the whole, would be a happy Occasion of much more
Comfort to the Saints, than Trouble, as it would have a Tendency on every
Return of the Lord's Supper, to put them on the strictest Examination and Trial
of the State of their Souls, agreeable to that Rule of the Apostle 1 Cor. xi.
28. The Neglect of which great Duty of frequent and thorough Self-Examination,
seems to be one main Cause of the Darkness and Perplexity of the Saints, and
the Reason why they have so little Comfort in Ordinances, and so little Comfort
in general. -- Mr. Stoddard often taught his People, that Assurance is
attainable, and that those who are true Saints might know it, if they would;
i.e. if they would use proper Means and Endeavors in order to it. -- And if
so, then certainly it is not just, to charge those Perplexities on God's
Institutions, which arise through Men's Negligence; nor would it be just on the
Supposition of God's Institutions being such as I suppose them to be.

OBJECT. XI. You may as well say, that unsanctified Persons may not attend any
Duty of divine Worship whatsoever, as that they may not attend the Lord's
Supper; for all Duties of Worship are holy, and require Holiness in order to an
acceptable Performance of 'em, as well as that.

ANSW. If this Argument has any Foundation at all, it has it is Foundation in
the supposed Truth of the following Propositions, viz. Whosoever is qualified
for Admission to one Duty of divine Worship, it qualified for Admission to all;
and he that is unqualified for one, and may be forbidden one, is unqualified
for all, and ought to be allowed to attend none. But certainly these
Propositions are not true. There are many who are qualified for some Duties of
Worship, and may be allowed, and are by no Means to be forbidden to attend 'em,
who yet are not qualified for some others, nor by any Means to be admitted to
'em. As every Body grants, the Unbaptised, the Excommunicated, Heretics,
scandalous Livers, and c. may be admitted to hear the Word preached;
nevertheless they are not to be allowed to come to the Lord's Supper. Even
excommunicated Persons remain still under the Law of the Sabbath, and are not
to be forbidden to observe the Lord's Day. Ignorant Persons, such as have not
Knowledge sufficient for an Approach to the Lord's Table, yet are not excused
from the Duty of Prayer: They may pray to God to instruct them, and assist 'em
in obtaining Knowledge. They who have been educated in Arianism and Socinianism,
and are not yet brought off from these fundamental Errors, and so are by no
Means to be admitted to the Lord's Supper, yet may pray to God to assist 'em in
their Studies, and guide them into the Truth, and for all other Mercies which
they need. Socrates, that great Gentile Philosopher, who worshipped the true
God, as he was led by the Light of Nature, might pray to God, and he attended
his Duty when he did so; although he knew not the Revelation, which God had made
of himself in his Word. That great Philosopher that was contemporary with the
Apostle Paul, I mean Seneca, who held one supreme Being, and had in many
Respects right Notions of the divine Perfections and Providence, though he did
not embrace the Gospel, which at that Day was preached in the World; yet might
pray to that supreme Being whom he acknowleged. And if his Brother Gallio at
Corinth, when Paul preached there, had prayed to this supreme Being to guide
him into the Truth, that he might know whether the Doctrine Paul preached was
true, he therein would have acted very becoming a reasonable Creature, and any
one would have acted unreasonably in forbidding him: but yet surely neither of
these Men was qualified for the Christian Sacraments. So that it is apparent,
there is and ought to be a Distinction made between Duties of Worship, with
Respect to Qualifications for them: and that which is a sufficient
Qualification for Admission to one Duty, is not so for all. And therefore the
Position is not true, which is the Foundation whereon the whole Weight of this
Argument rests. To say, that although it be true there ought to be Distinction
made, in Admission to Duties of Worship, with Regard to some Qualifications,
yet sanctifying Grace is not one of those Qualifications that make the
Difference; would be but a giving up the Argument, and a perfect begging the
Question.

It Is said, There can be no Reason assigned, why unsanctified Persons may
attend other Duties of Worship, and not the Lord's Supper. But I humbly
conceive, this must be an Inadvertence. For there is a Reason very obvious from
that necessary and very notable Distinction among Duties of Worship, which
follows:

1. There are some Duties of Worship, that imply a Profession of God's
Covenant: whose very Nature and Design is an Exhibition of those vital active
Principles and inward Exercises, wherein consists the Condition of the Covenant
of Grace, or that Union of Soul to God, which is the Union between Christ and
his Spouse, entered into by an inward hearty consenting to that Covenant. Such
are the Christian Sacraments, whose very Design is to make and confirm a
Profession of Compliance with that Covenant, and whose very Nature is to
exhibit or express the uniting Acts of the Soul: those Sacramental Duties
therefore cannot, by any whose Hearts do not really consent to that Covenant,
and whose Souls do not truly close with Christ, be attended, without either
their being self-deceived, or else wilfully making a false Profession, and
lying in a very aggravated Manner.

2. There are other Duties, which are not in their own Nature an Exhibition of
a Covenant-Union with God, or of any Compliance with the Condition of the
Covenant of Grace; but are the Expression of general Virtues, or Virtues in
their largest Extent, including both special and common. Thus Prayer, or asking
Mercy of God, is in it is own Nature no Profession of a Compliance with the
Covenant of Grace: It Is an Expression of some Belief of the Being of a God, an
Expression of some Sense of our Wants, some Sense of our need of Help, and some
Sense of a need of God's Help, some Sense of our Dependence, and c. but not
only such a Sense of these Things as is spiritual and saving. Indeed there are
some Prayers proper to be made by Saints, and many Things proper to be
expressed by them In Prayer, which imply the Profession of a spiritual Union of
Heart to God through Christ, but such as no Heaven, no Heretic, nor natural
Man whatever, can or ought to make. Prayer in general, and asking Mercy and
Help from God, is no more a Profession of Consent to the Covenant of Grace,
than Reading the Scriptures, or Meditation; or performing any Duty of Morality
and natural Religion. A Mohammedan may as well ask Mercy, as hear Instruction:
And any natural Man may as well express his Desires to God, as hear when God
declares his Will to him. It Is true, when an unconverted Man prays, the Manner
of his doing it is sinful. But when a natural Man, knowing himself to be so,
comes to the Lord's Supper, the very Matter of what he does, in respect of the
Profession he there makes, and his Pretension to lay Hold of God's Covenant, is
a Lie, and a Lie told in the most solemn Manner.

In a Word, the venerable Mr. Stoddard himself, in his Doctrine of instituted
Churches, has taught us to distinguish between Instituted and natural Acts of
Religion. The Word and Prayer he places under the Head of moral Duty, and
considers as common to all; but the Sacraments, according to what he says
there, being instituted, are of special Administration, and must be limited
agreeable to the Institution.

OBJECT. XII.(...) Supper has a proper Tendency to promote Men's Conversion
(...) an affecting Representation of the greatest and most important Things of
God's Word: It has a proper Tendency to awaken and humble Sinners; here being a
Discovery of the terrible Anger of God for Sin, by the Infliction of the Curse
upon Christ, when Sin was imputed to him; and the Representation here made of
the dying Love of Christ has a Tendency to draw the Hearts of Sinners from Sin
to God, and c.

ANSW. Unless it be an evident Truth, that what the Lord's Supper may have
Tendency to promote, the same it was appointed to promote, nothing follows from
this Argument. If the Argument affords any Consequence, the Consequence is
built on the Tendency of the Lord's Supper. And if the Consequence be good and
strong on this Foundation, as drawn from such Premises, then wherever the
Premises hold, the Consequence holds; otherwise it must appear, that the
Premises and Consequence ben't connected. And now let us see how it is in
Fact. Don't scandalous Persons need to have these very Effects wro't in their
Hearts, which have been mentioned? Yes surely, They need them in a special
Manner: They need to be awakened; they need to have an affecting Discovery of
that terrible Wrath of God against Sin, which was manifested in a peculiar
Manner by the terrible Effects of God's Wrath in the Sufferings of his own
incarnate Son: Gross Sinners need this in some Respect more than others: They
need to have their Hearts broken by an affecting View of the great and
important Things of God's Word: They need especially to fly to Christ for
Refuge, and therefore need to have their Hearts drawn. And seeing the Lord's
Supper has so great a Tendency to promote these Things, if the Consequence from
the Tendency of the Lord's Supper as inferring the End of its Appointment, be
good, then it must be a Consequence also well inferred, that the Lord's Supper
was appointed for the reclaiming and bringing to Repentance scandalous Persons.

Here, for any to go to turn this off by saying, Scandalous Persons are
expressly forbid, is but a giving up the Argument, and a begging the Question.
It Is a giving up the Argument; since it allows the Consequence not to be good.
For it allows, that not withstanding the proper Tendency of the Lord's Supper
to promote a Design, yet it may be so that the Lord's Supper was not appointed
with a View to promote that End. -- And it is a begging the Question; since it
supposes, that unconverted Men are not evidently forbidden, as well as
scandalous Persons; which is the Thing in Controverly. If they be evidently
forbid, that is as much to reasonable Creatures. (who need nothing but good
Evidence) as if they were expressly forbidden. -- To say here, that the Lord's
Supper is a converting Ordinance only to orderly Members, and that there is
another Ordinance appointed for bringing scandalous Persons to Repentance, this
is no Solution of the Difficulty; but is only another Instance of yielding up
the Argument and begging the Question: For it plainly concedes, that the
Tendency of an Ordinance don't prove it appointed to all the Ends, which it
seems to have a Tendency to promote; and also supposes, that there is not any
other Ordinance, appointed for the Converting of Sinners that are moral and
orderly in their Lives, exclusive of this, which is the Thing in Question.

It Is at best but very precarious arguing, from the seeming Tendency of Things,
to the divine Appointment, or God's Will and Disposition with Respect to the
Use of those Things. It looks as though it would have had a great Tendency to
convince the Scribes and Pharisees, and to promote their Conversion, if they
had been admitted into the Mount when Christ was transfigured: But yet it was
not the Will of Christ, that they should admitted there, or any other but
Peter, James and John. It seems as though it would have had a very great Tendency
to convince and bring to Repentance the unbelieving Jews, if they had been
allowed to see and converse freely with Christ after his Resurrection, and see
him ascend into Heaven; But yet it was the Will of God, that none but Disciples
should be admitted to these Privileges. So it seems as though it might have had a
good Tendency, if all that were sincere Followers of Christ, Women as well as
Men, had been allowed to be present at the Institution of the Lord's Supper:
But yet it is commonly thought, none were admitted beside the Apostles.

Indeed the ever honored Author of the Appeal to the Learned has supplied me
with the true and proper Answer to this Objection, in the following Words, page
27, 28. The Efficacy of the Lord's Supper does depend upon the Blessing of God.
Whatever TENDENCY Ordinances have in their OWN NATURE to be serviceable to Men,
yet they will not prevail any further than God does bless them. The Weapons of
our Warfare are mighty through God, 2 Cor. x. 4. It is God that teaches Men to
profit, and makes them profitable and serviceable to Men's Souls. There is
Reason to hope for a divine Blessing on the Lord's Supper, when it is
administered to those that it ought to be administered to; God's Blessing is to
be expected in God's Way. If Men act according to their own Humors and
Fancies, and don't keep in the Way of Obedience, it is Presumption to expect
God's Blessing. Matt. xv. 9 In vain do they Worship me, teaching for Doctrines
the Commandments of Men. But when they are admitted to the Lord's Supper that
God would have to be admitted, there is Ground to hope that he will make it
profitable.

OBJECT. XIII. All that are Members of the visible Church and in the external
Covenant, and neither ignorant nor scandalous, are commanded to perform all
external Covenant-Duties; and particularly they commanded to attend the Lord's
Supper, in those Words of Christ, This do in Remembrance of me

ANSW. This Argument is of no Force, without first taking for granted the very
Thing in Question. For this is plainly supposed in it, that however these
Commands are given to such as are in the external Covenant, yet they are not
given indefinitely, but with Exceptions and Reserves, and don't immediately
reach all such; they don't reach those who are unqualified, though they be in the
external Covenant. Now the Question is, who are these that are unqualified? The
Objection supposes, that only ignorant and scandalous Persons are so. But why
are they only supposed unqualified; and not unconverted Persons too? Because
it is taken for granted, that these are not unqualified. And thus the grand
Point in Question is supposed, instead of being proved. Why are these
Limitations only singled out, neither Ignorant nor Scandalous; and not others
as well? The Answer must be, because these are all the Limitations which the
Scripture makes: But this now is the very Thing in Question. Whereas, the
Business of an Argument is to prove, and not to suppose, or take for granted,
the very Thing which is to be proved.

If it be here said, It is with good Reason that those who are Ignorant or
Scandalous alone are supposed to be excepted in God's Command, and Obligations
of the Covenant; for the Covenant spoken of in the Objection, is the external
Covenant, and this requires only external Duties; which alone are what lie
within the Reach of Man's natural Power, and so in the Reach of his legal
Power: God don't command or require what Men have no natural Power to perform,
and which cannot be performed before something else, some antecedent Duty, is
performed, which antecedent Duty is not in their natural Power.

I reply, Still Things are but supposed, which should be proved, and which want
Confirmation.

(1.) It is supposed, that those who have externally (i e. by oral Profession
and Promise) entered into God's Covenant, are thereby obliged to no more than
the external Duties of that Covenant: which is not proved, and, I humbly
conceive, is certainly not the true State of the Case. They who have externally
entered into God's Covenant, are by external Profession and Engagements entered
into that one only Covenant of Grace, which the Scripture informs us of; and
therefore are obliged to fulfill the Duties of that Covenant, which are chiefly
internal. The Children of Israel, when they externally entered into Covenant
with God at Mount Sinai, promised to perform all the Duties of the Covenant, to
obey all the ten Commandments spoken by God in their Hearing, and written in
Tables of Stone, which were therefore called the Tables of the Covenant; the
Sum of which ten Commands was, to LOVE the Lord their God with all their HEART,
and with all their SOUL, and to LOVE their Neighbor as themselves; which
principally at least are internal Duties. In particular, they promised not to
Covet; which is an internal Duty. They promised to have no other God before the
Lord; which implied, that they would in their Hearts regard no other Being or
Object whatever above God, or in Equality with him, but would give Him their
supreme Respect.

(2) It Is supposed, that God does not require Impossibilities of Men, in this
Sense, that he does not require those Things of them which are out of their
natural Power, and particularly that he don't require 'em to be converted. But
this is not proved; nor can I reconcile it with the Tenor of the
Scripture-Revelation: And the chief Advocates for the Doctrine I oppose, have
themselves abundantly asserted the contrary. The venerable Author
forementioned, as every Body knows, that knew him, always taught, that God
justly requires Men to be converted, to repent of their Sins, and turn to the
Lord, to close with Christ, and savingly to believe in him; and that in
refusing to accept of Christ and turn to God, they disobeyed the divine
Commands, and were guilty of the most heinous Sin; and that their moral
Inability was no Excuse.

(3.) It Is supposed, that God don't command Men to do those Things which are
not to be done 'till something else is done, that is not within the Reach of
Men's natural Ability. This also is not proved; nor do I see how it can be
true, even according to the Principles of those who insist on this Objection.
The forementioned memorable Divine ever taught, that God commands natural
Men without Delay to believe in Christ; and yet he always held, that is was
impossible for them to believe 'till they had by a preceding Act submitted to
the Sovereignty of God; which yet, he held, Men never could do of Themselves,
nor 'till humbled and bowed by powerful Convictions of God's Spirit. Again, He
taught, that God commands natural Men to love Him with all their Heart: and
yet he held, that this could not be 'till Men had first believed in Christ; the
Exercise of Love being a Fruit of Faith: and believing in Christ, he supposed
not to be within the Reach of Man's natural Ability. Further, he held, that God
requires of all Men holy spiritual and acceptable Obedience; and yet that such
Obedience is not within the Reach of their natural Ability; and not only so,
but that there must first be Love to God, before there could be new Obedience,
and that this Love to God is not within the Reach of Men's natural Ability: nor
yet only so, but that before this Love there must be Faith, which Faith is not
within the Reach of Man's natural Power: and still not only so, but that before
Faith there must be the Knowledge of God, which Knowledge is not in natural Men's
Reach: and once more, not only so, but that even before the Knowledge of God
there must be a thoro' Humiliation, which Humiliation Men could not work in
themselves by any natural Power of their own. Now, must it needs be thought,
notwithstanding all these Things, unreasonable to suppose, that God should
command those whom he has nourished and brought up, to honor him by giving an
open Testimony of Love to Him; only because wicked Men cannot testify Love 'till
they have Love, and Love is nor in their natural Power! And is it any good
Excuse in the Sight of God, for one who is under the highest Obligations to
Him, and yet refuses Him suitable Honor by openly testifying his Love of Him,
to plead that He has no Love to testify; but on the contrary, has an infinitely
unreasonable Hatred? God may most reasonably require a proper Testimony and
Profession of Love to Him; and yet it may also be reasonable to suppose, at the
same Time, He forbids Men to lie; or to declare that they have Love, when they
have none: Because, though it be supposed, that God requires Men to testify Love
to Him, yet he requires 'em to do it in a right Way, and in the true Order,
viz. first loving Him, and then testifying their Love.

(4) I don't see how it can be true, that a Man, as he is naturally, has not a
legal Power to be converted, accept of Christ, love God and c. By a legal Power
to do a Thing, is plainly meant such Power as brings a Person properly within
the Reach of a legal Obligation, or the Obligation of a Law or Command to do
that Thing: But he that has such natural Faculties, as render him a proper
Subject of moral Government, and as speak it a fit and proper Thing for him to
love God and c. and as given him a natural Capacity herefor; such a one may
properly be commande^ (...) put under the Obligation of a Law to do Things so
reasonable; notwithstanding any native Aversion and moral Inability in him to
do his Duty, arising from the Power of Sin. This also, I must observe, was a
known Doctrine of Mr. Stoddard's, and what he ever taught.

OBJECT. XIV. Either unsanctified Persons may lawfully come to the Lord's
Supper, or it is unlawful for them to carry themselves as Saints; but it is not
unlawful for them to carry themselves as Saints.

ANSW. It Is the Duty of unconverted Men both to become Saints, and to behave as
Saints. The Scripture Rule is, Make the Tres good, that the Fruit may be good.
Mr. Stoddard himself never supposed, that the Fruit of Saints was to be
expected from Men, or could possibly be brought forth by them in Truth, 'till
they were Saints.

And I see not how it is true, that unconverted Men ought, in every Respect, to
do those external Things, which it is the Duty of a godly Man to do. It Is the
Duty of a godly Man, conscious of his having given his Heart unto the Lord, to
profess his Love to God and his Esteem of him above all, his unseigned Faith in
Christ etc. and in his Closet-Devotions to thank God for these Graces as the
Fruit of the Spiit in him: But it is not the Duty of another that really has no
Faith, nor Love to God, to do thus. Neither any more is it a natural Man's Duty
to profess these Things in the Lord's Supper. -- Mr. Stoddard taught it to be
the Duty of Converts, on many Occasions, to profess their Faith and Love and
other Graces before Men, by relating their Experiences in Conversation: But it
would be great Wickedness, for such as know themselves to be not Saints, thus
to do because they would speak falsely, and utter Lies in so doing. Now, for
the like Reason, it would be very sinful, for Men to profess and seal their
Consent to the Covenant of Grace in the Lord's Supper, when they know at the
same Time that they do not consent to it, nor have their Hearts at all in the
Affair.

OBJECT. XV. This Scheme will keep out of the Church some true Saints; for
there are some such who determine against themselves, and their prevailing
Judgment is, that they are not Saints: and we had better let in several
Hypocrites, than exclude one true Child of God.

ANSW. I think, it is much better to insist on some Visibility to Reason, of
true Saintship, in admitting Members, even although this through Men's Infirmity
and Darkness, and Satan's Temptations, be an Occasion of some true Saints
abstaining; than by express Liberty given, to open the Door to as many as
please, of those who have no Visibility of real Saintship, and make no
Profession of it, nor Pretension to it; and that because this Method tends to
the Ruin and great Reproach of the Christian Church, and also to the Ruin of
the Persons admitted.

1. It tends to the Reproach and Ruin of the Christian Church. For by the Rule
which God has given for Admissions, if it be carefully attended ('it is said)
MORE Unconverted, than Converted Persons, will be admitted. It is then
confessedly the Way to have the greater Part of the Members of the Christian
Church ungodly Men; yea, so much greater, that the godly shall be but few in
Comparison of the Ungodly; agreeable to their Interpretation of that Saying of
Christ, Many are called, but few are chosen. Now, if this be an exact State of
the Case, it will demonstrably follow, on Scripture Principles, that the
opening the Door so wide has a direct Tendency to bring Things to that Pass,
that the jar bigger Part of the Members of Christian Churches shall not be
Persons of so much as a serious conscientious Character, but such as are
without even moral Sincerity, and don't make Religion at all their Business,
neglecting and casting off secret Prayer and other Duties, and living a Life of
Carnality and Vanity, so far as they can, consistently with avoiding
Church Censures; which possibly may be sometimes to a great Degree. Ungodly Men
may be morally sober, serious and conscientious, and may have what is called
moral Sincerity, for a while; may have these Things in a considerable Measure,
when they first come into the Church: But if their Hearts are not changed,
there is no Probability at all of these Things continuing long. The Scripture
has told us, that this their Goodness is apt to vanish like the Morning Cloud
and Early Dew. How can it be expected but that the Religion should in a little
Time wither away, which has no Root? How can it be expected, that the Lamp
should burn long, without Oil in the Vessel to seed it? If Lust be unmortify'd,
and left in reigning Power in the Heart, it will sooner or later prevail; and
at Length sweep away common Grace and moral Sincerity, however excited and
maintained for a while by Conviction and temporary Affections. It will happen
to them according to the true Proverb, The Dog it returned to his Vomit; and
the Swine that was wished, to his wallowing in the Mire It Is said of the
Hypocrite, Will be delight himself in the Almighty? Will be always call upon
God? -- And thus our Churches will be likely to be such Congregations as the
Psalmist said he hated, and would not sit with. Psalm. xxvi. 4, 5. I have not
sat with vain Persons, nor will I go in with Dissemblers; I have hated the
Congregation of Evil Doers, nor will I sit with the Wicked. This will be the
Way to have the Lord's Table ordinarily furnished with such Guests as allow
themselves to live in known Sin, and so such as meet together from Time to Time
only to crucify Christ afresh, instead of commemorating his Crucifixion with
the Repentance, Faith, Gratitude and Love of Friends. And this is the Way to
have the governing Part of the Church such as are not even conscientious Men,
and are careless about the Honor and Interest of Religion. And the direct
Tendency of that is, in process of Time, to introduce a prevailing Negligence
in Discipline, and carelessness in seeking Ministers of a pious and worthy
Character. And the next Step will be the Churches being filled with Persons
openly vicious in Manners, or else scandalously erroneous in Opinions: It Is
well if this be not already the Case in Fact with some Churches that have long
professed and practiced on the Principles I oppose. And if these Principles
should be professed and proceeded on by Christian Churches every where, the
natural Tendency of it would be, to have the bigger Part of what is called the
Church of Christ, through the World, made up of vicious and erroneous Persons.
And how greatly would this be to the Reproach of the Christian Church, and of
the holy Name and Religion of Jesus Christ in the Sight of all Nations? And
this by the Way answers another Objection, which some have made, viz. That the
Way I plead for, tends to keep the Church of Christ small, and hinder the
Growth of it. Whereas, I think, the contrary tends to keep it small, as it is
the Wickedness of its Members, that above all Things in the World prejudices
Mankind against it; and is the chief Stumbling Block, that hinders the
Propagation of Christianity, and so the Growth of the Christian Church. But
Holiness would cause the Light of the Church to shine so as to induce others to
resort to it.


And now is it not better, to have a few real living Christians kept back through
Darkness and Scruples, than to open a Door for the letting in such universal
Ruin as this? To illustrate it by a familiar Comparison; Is it not better, when
England is at War with France, to keep out of the British Realm a few loyal
Englishmen, than to give Leave for as many treacherous Frenchmen to come in as
please?

2. This Way tends to the eternal Ruin of the Parties admitted: For it lets in
such yea it persuades such to come in, as know themselves to be impenitent and
unbelieving, in a dreadful Manner to to take God's Name in vain; in vain to
worship him, and abuse sacred Things, by solemnly performing those external
Acts and Rites in the Name of God, which are instituted for declarative Signs
and Professions of Repentance toward God, Faith in Christ, and Love to Him, at
the same Time that they know themselves destitute of those Things which they
profess to have. And is it not better, that some true Saints, through their own
Weakness and Misunderstanding, should be kept away from the Lord's Table, which
will not keep such out of Heaven; than voluntarily to bring in Multitudes of
false Professors to partake unworthily, and in Effect to seal their own
Condemnation?

OBJECT. XVI. You cannot keep out Hypocrites, when all is said and done; but as
many graceless Persons will be likely to get into the Church in the Way of a
Profession of Godliness, as if nothing were insisted on but a Freedom from
public Scandal.

ANSW. It may possibly be so in some Places, through the Misconduct of Ministers
and People, by Remissness in their Inquiries, Carelessness as to the proper
Matter of a Profession, or setting up some mistaken Rules of Judgment;
neglecting those Things which the Scripture insists upon as the most essential
Articles in the Character of a real Saint; and substituting others in the Room
of them; such as Impressions on the Imagination, instead of renewing Influences
on the Heart; Pangs of Affection, instead of the habitual Temper of the Mind; a
certain Method and Order of Impressions and Suggestions, instead of the Nature
of Things experienced and c. But to say, that in Churches where the Nature, the
Notes and Evidences of true Christianity, as described in the Scriptures, are
well understood, taught and observed, there as many Hypocrites are likely to
get in; or to suppose, that there as many of those Persons of an honest
Character, who are well instructed in these Rules, and well conducted by them,
and judging of themselves by these Rules, do think themselves true Saints, and
accordingly make Profession of Godliness, and are admitted as Saints in a
Judgment of rational Charity; (to suppose, I say) as many of these are likely
to be carnal unconverted Men, as of those who make no such Pretense and have no
such Hope, not exhibit any such Evidences to the Eye of a judicious Charity, is
not so much an Objection against the Doctrine I am defending, as a Reflection
upon the Scripture itself, with Regard to the Rules it gives, either for
Persons to judge of their own State, or for others to form a charitable
Judgment by, as if they were of little or no Service at all. We are in
miserable Circumstances indeed, if the Rules of God's holy Word in Things of
such infinite Importance, are so ambiguous and uncertain, like the heathen
Oracles. And it would be very strange, if in these Days of the Gospel, when
God's Mind is revealed with such great Plainness of Speech, and the Canon of
Scripture is completed, it should ordinarily be the Case in Fact, that those
who having a right doctrinal understanding of the Scripture, and judging
themselves by it is Rules, do probably conclude or seriously hope of themselves,
that they are real Saints, are as many of them in a State of Sin and
Condemnation, as others who have no such rational Hope concerning their good
Estate, nor pretend to any special Experiences in Religion.

OBJECT. XVII. If a Profession of Godliness be a Thing required in order to
Admission into the Church, there being some true Saints who doubt of their
State, and from a tender Conscience will not dare to make such a Profession;
and there being Others, that have no Grace, nor much Tenderness of Conscience,
but great Presumption and Forwardness, who will boldly make the highest
Profession of Religion, and so will get Admittance: it will hence come to pass,
that the very Thing, which will in Effect procure for the latter an Admission,
rather than the former, will be their Presumption and Wickedness.

ANSW. 1. It Is no sufficient Objection against the Wholesomeness of a Rule
established for the regulating the civil State of Mankind, that in some
Instances Men's Wickedness may take Advantage by that Rule, so that even their
Wickedness shall be the very Thing, which, by an Abuse of that Rule, procures
them temporal Honors and Privileges. For such is the present State of Man in
this evil World, that good Rules, in many Instances, are liable to be thus
abused and perverted. As for Instance, there are many humane Laws or Rules,
accounted wholesome and necessary, by which an accused or suspected Person's
own solemn Profession of Innocence, his asserting it upon Oath, shall be the
Condition of Acquit^^nce and Impunity; and the Want of such a Protestation or
Profession shall expose him to the Punishment: And yet by an Abuse of these
Rules, in some Instances, nothing but the horrid Sin of Perjury, or that most
presumptuous Wickedness of false Swearing, shall be the very Thing that acquits
a Man: while another of a more tender Conscience, who fears an Oath, must
suffer the Penalty of the Law.

2. Those Rules, by all wise Lawgivers, are accounted wholesome, which prove of
general good Tendency, notwithstanding any bad Consequences arising in some
particular Instances. And as to the ecclesiastical Rule now in Question, of
Admission to Sacraments on a Profession of Godliness, when attended with
requisite Circumstances; although this Rule in particular Instances may be an
Occasion of some tenderhearted Christians abstaining, and some presumptuous
Sinners being admitted, yet that don't hinder but that a proper Visibility of
Holiness to the Eve of Reason, or a Probability of it in a Judgment of rational
Christian Charity, may this Way be maintained, as the proper Qualification of
Candidates for Admission: nor does it hinder but that it may be reasonable and
wholesome for Mankind, in their outward Conduct, to regulate themselves by such
Probability; and that this should be a reasonable and good Rule for the Church
to regulate themselves by in their Admissions; notwithstanding it is so
happening in particular Instances, that Things are really diverse from, yea the
very Reverse of, what they are visibly, Such a Profession as has been insisted
on, when attended with requisite Circumstances, carries in it a rational
Credibility in the Judgment of Christian Charity: For it ought to be attended
with an honest and sober Character, and with Evidences of good doctrinal
Knowledge, and with all proper, careful and diligent Instructions of a prudent
Pastor: And though the Pastor is not to act as a Searcher of the Heart, or a Lord
of Conscience in this Affair, yet that hinders not but that he may and ought to
enquire particularly into the Experiences of the Souls committed to his Care
and Charge, that he may be under the best Advantages to instruct and advise
them, to apply the Teachings and Rules of God's Word unto them, for their
Self-Examination, to be Helpers of their Joy, and Promoters of their Salvation.
However, finally, not any pretended extraordinary Skill of his in discerning
the Heart, but the Persons own serious Profession concerning what he finds in
his own Soul, after he has been well instructed, must regulate the public
Conduct with Respect to him, where there is no other external visible Thing to
contradict and overruled it: And a serious Profession of Godliness, under these
Circumstances, carries in it a Visibility to the Eye of the Church's rational
and Christian Judgment.

3. If it be still insisted on, that a Rule of Admission into the Church cannot
be good, which is liab'e to such a Kind of Abuse as that forementioned, I must
observe, This will overthrow the Rules that the Objectons themselves go by in
their Admissions. For they insist upon it, that a Man must not only have
Knowledge and be free of Scandal, but must appear orthodox and profess the
common Faith. Now presumptuous Lying, for the Sake of the Honor of being in
the Church, having Children baptized, and voting in ecclesiastical Affairs, may
possibly be the very Thing that brings some Men into Church by this Rule; while
greater Tenderness of Conscience may be the very Thing that keeps others out.
For Instance, a Man who secretly in his Mind gives no Credit to the commonly
received Doctrine of the Trinity, yet may, by pretending an assent to it, and
in Hypocrisy making a public Profession of it, get into the Church; when at
the same Time another that equally disbelieves it, but has a more tender
Conscience than to allow himself in solemnly telling a Lie, may by that very
Means be kept off from the Communion, and lie out of the Church.

OBJECT. XVIII. It seems hardly reasonable to suppose, that the only wise God
has made Men's Opinion of themselves, and a Profession of it, the Term of their
Admission to Church Privileges; when we know, that very often the worst Men
have the highest Opinion of themselves.

ANSW. 1. It must be granted me, that in Fact this is the Case, if any proper
Profession at all is expected and required, whether it be of sanctifying Grace,
or of moral Sincerity, or any Thing else that is good: And to be sure, nothing
is required to be professed, or is worthy to be professed, any further than it
is good.

ANSW. 2. If some Things, by the Confession of all, must be professed for that
very Reason, because they are good, and of great Importance; then certainly it
must be owned very unreasonable, to say, that those Things wherein true
Holiness consists are not to be professed, or that a Profession of them should
not be required, for that same Reason, because they are good, even in the
highest Degree, and infinitely the most important and most necessary Things of
any in the World: And it is unreasonable to say, that it is the less to be
expected we should profess sincere Friendship to Christ, because Friendship to
Christ is the most excellent Qualification of any whatsoever, and the Contrary
the most odious. How absurd is it to say this, merely under a Notion that for a
Man to profess what is so good and so reasonable, is to profess a high Opinion
of himself!

ANSW. 3. Though some of the worst Men are apt to entertain the highest Opinion
of themselves, yet their Self Conceit is no Rule to the Church: But the
apparent Credibility of Men's Profession is to be Ground of ecclesiastical
Proceedings.

OBJECT. XIX. If it be necessary that adult Persons should make a Profession of
Godliness, in order to their own Admission to Baptism, then undoubtedly it is
necessary in order to their Children's being baptized on their Account. For
Parents cannot convey to their Children a Right to this Sacrament, by virtue of
any Qualifications lower than those requisite in order to their own Right:
Children being admitted to Baptism, only as being as it were Parts and Members
of their Parents. And besides, the Act of Parents in offering up their Children
in a Sacrament, which is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, is in them a solemn
attending that Sacrament as Persons interested in the Covenant, and a public
Manifestation of their approving and consenting to it, as truly as if they then
offered up themselves to God in that Ordinance. Indeed it implies a renewed
offering up themselves with their Children, and devoting both jointly to God in
Covenant; Themselves, with their Children, as Parts of Themselves. But now what
fearful Work will such Doctrine make amongst us! We shall have Multitudes
unbaptized, who will go about without the external Badge of Christianity, and
so in that Respect will be like Heathen. And this is the Way to have the Land
full of Persons who are destitute of that which is spoken of in Scripture as
ordinarily requisite to Men's Salvation; and it will bring a Reproach on vast
Multitudes, with the Families they belong to: And not only so, but will tend to
make them profane and heathenish; for by thus treating our Children, as though
they had no Part in the Lord, we shall cause'em to cease from fearing the Lord;
agreeable to Josh xxii. 24, 25.

ANSW. 1. As to Children's being destitute of that which is spoken of in
Scripture as one Thing ordinarily requisite to Salvation; I would observe, that
Baptism can do their Souls no Good any otherwise than through God's Blessing
attending it: But we have no Reason to expect his Blessing with Baptism, if
administered to those that it does not belong to by his Institution.

ANSW. 2. As to the Reproach, which will be brought on Parents and Children, by
Children's going without Baptism, through the Parents neglecting a Profession of
Godliness, and so visibly remaining among the Unconverted; if any insist on
this Objection, I think it will favor of much Unreasonableness and even
Stupidity.

It will favor of an unreasonable Spirit. Is it not enough, if God freely
offers Men to own their Children and to give them the Honor of Baptism, in
Case the Parents will turn from Sin and relinquish their Enmity against him,
heartily give up themselves and their Children to him, and take upon them the
Profession of Godliness? -- If Men are truly excusable, in not turning to God
through Christ, in not believing with the Heart, and in not confessing with the
Mouth, why don't we openly plead that they are so? And why don't we teach
Sinners, that they are not to blame for continuing among the Enemies of Christ,
and neglecting and despising his great Salvation? If they are not at all
excusable in this, and it be wholly owing to their own indulged Lusts, that
they refuse sincerely to give up themselves and their Children to God, then how
unreasonable is it for them to complain that their Children are denied the
Honor of having God's Mark set upon them as some of his? If Parents are angry
at this, such a Temper shows 'em to be very senseless of their own vile
Treatment of the blessed God. Should a Prince send to a Traitor in Prison, and
upon opening the Prison-Doors, make him the Offer, that if he would come forth
and submit himself to him, he should not only be pardoned himself, but both he
and his Children should have such and such Badges of Honor conferred upon
them: yet if the Rebel's Enmity and Stoutness of Spirit against his Prince is
such, that he could not find it in his Heart to comply with the gracious Offer,
will he have any Cause to be angry, that his Children have not those Badges of
Honor given them? And besides it is very much owing to Parents, that there are
so many young People who can make no Profession of Godliness: they have
themselves therefore to blame, if the Case be so, that proceeding on the
Principles which have been maintained, there is like to rise a Generation of
unbaptized Persons. If Ancestors had thoroughly done their Duty to their
Posterity in instructing, praying for, and governing their Children, and
setting them good Examples, there is Reason to think, the Case would have been
far otherwise.

The insisting on this Objection would savor of much Stupidity. For the
Objection seems to suppose the Country to be full of those that are
Unconverted, and so exposed every Moment to eternal Damnation; yet it seems we
don't hear such great and general Complaints and lamentable Outcries concerning
this. Now why is it looked upon so dreadful, to have great Numbers going
without the Name and honorable Badge of Christianity, that there should be
loud and general Exclamations concerning such a Calamity; when at the same Time
it is no more resented and laid to Heart, that such Multitudes go without the
Thing, which is infinitely more dreadful? Why are we so silent about this? What
is the Name good for, without the Thing? Can Parents bear to have their
Children go about the World in the most odious and dangerous State of Soul, in
Reality the Children of the Devil, and condemned to eternal Burnings; when at
the same Time they cannot bear to have 'em disgraced by going without the Honor
of being baptized! An high Honor and Privilege this is; yet how can Parents be
contented with the Sign, exclusive of the Thing signified! Why should they
covet the external Honor for their Children, while they are so careless about
the spiritual Blessing! Don't this argue a Senselesness of their own Misery, as
well as of their Children's, in being in a Christless State? If a Man and his
Child were both together bitten by a Viper, dreadfully swollen, and like to
die, would it not argue Stupidity in the Parent, to be anxiously concerned only
about his Child's having on a dirty Garment in such Circumstances, and angry at
others for not putting some outward Ornament upon it? But the Difference in
this present Case is infinitely greater and more important. Let Parents pity
their poor Children, because they are without Baptism; and pity themselves, who
are in Danger of everlasting Misery, while they have no Interest in the
Covenant of Grace, and so have no Right to Covenant-Favours or Honors, for
themselves nor Children. No religious Honors, to be obtained in any other Way
than by real Religion, are much worth contending for. And in Truth, it is no
Honor at all to a Man, to have merely the outward Badges of a Christian,
without being a Christian indeed; any more than it would be an Honor to a Man
that has no Learning, but is a mere Dunce, to have a Degree at College; or than
it is for a Man who has no Valor, but is a grand Coward, to have an honorable
Commission in an Army; which only serves, by the listing him up, to expose him
to the deeper Reproach, and sets him forth as the more notable Object of
Contempt.

ANSW. 3. Concerning the Tendency of this Way of confining Baptism to
Professors of Godliness and their Children, to promote Irreligion and
Profaneness; I would observe, First, That CHRIST is best able to judge of the
Tendency of his own Institutions. Secondly, I am bold to say, that the
supposing this Principle and Practice to have such a Tendency, is a great
Mistake, contrary to Scripture and plain Reason and Experience. Indeed such a
Tendency it would have, to shut Men out from having any Part in the Lord (in
the Sense of the two Tribes and Half, Josh. xxii. 25.) or to fence them out by
such a Partition Wall as formerly was between Jews and Gentiles; and so to shut
them out as to tell 'em, if they were never so much disposed to serve God, He
was not ready to accept 'em; according to that Notion the Jews seem to have had
of the uncircumcised Gentiles. -- But only to forbear giving Men Honors they
have no Title to, and not to Compliment them with the Name and Badge of God's
People and Children, while they pretend to nothing but what is consistent with
their being his Enemies, this has no such Tendency: But rather the contrary has
very much this Tendency. For is it not found by constant Experience through all
Ages, that blind corrupt Mankind, in Matters of Religion, are strongly disposed
to rest in a Name, instead of the Thing; in the Shadow, instead of the
Substance; and to make themselves easy with the former, in the Neglect of the
latter? This over-valuing of common Grace, and moral Sincerity, as it is
called; this building so much upon them, making them the Conditions of enjoying
the (...) or God's Covenant, and the appointed Privileges, and honorable and
sacred Badges of God's Children; this, I cannot but think, naturally tends to
sooth and flatter the Pride of vain Man, while it tends to aggrandize those
Things in Men's Eyes, which they, of themselves, are strongly disposed to
magnify and trust in, without such Encouragements, to prompt 'em to it, yea,
against all Discouragements and Disswasives that can possibly be used with them.

This Way of Proceeding greatly tends to establish the Negligence of Parents,
and to confirm the Stupidity and Security of wicked Children. -- If Baptism
were denied to all Children, whose Parents did not profess Godliness, and in a
Judgment of rational Charity appear real Saints, it would tend to excite pious
Heads of Families to more thoro' Care and Pains in the religious Education of
their Children, and to more servent Prayer for them, that they might be
converted in Youth, before they enter into a married State; and so if they have
Children, the Entail of the Covenant be secured. -- And it would tend to awaken
young People themselves, as yet unconverted, especially when about to settle in
the World. Their having no Right to Christian Privileges for their Children, in
Case they should become Parents, would tend to lead 'em at such a Time
seriously to reflect on their own awful State; which, if they don't get out of
it, must lay a Foundation for so much Calamity and Reproach to their Families.
And if after their becoming Parents, they still remain unconverted, the
melancholy Thought of their Children's going about without so much as the
external Mark of Christians, would have a continual Tendency to put 'em in Mind
of, and affect 'em with their own Sin and Folly in neglecting to turn to God,
by which they bring such visible Calamity and Disgrace on themselves and
Families; They would have this additional Motive continually to stir 'em up to
seek Grace for themselves and their Children: Whereas, the contrary Practice
has a natural Tendency to quiet the Minds of Persons, both in their own and
their Children's Unregeneracy. Yea, may it not be suspected, that the Way of
baptizing the Children of such as never make any proper Profession of
Godliness, is an Expedient originally invented for that very End, to give Ease
to Ancestors with Respect to their Posterity, in Times of general Declension
and Degeneracy?

This Way of Proceeding greatly tends to establish the Stupidity and Irreligion
of Children, as well as Negligence of Parents. It Is certain, that unconverted
Parents do never truly give up their Children to God; since they don't truly
give up themselves to him. And if neither of the Parents appear truly pious, in
the Judgment of rational Charity, there is not in this Case any Ground to
expect that the Children will be brought up in the Nurture and Admonition of
the Lord, or that they will have any Thing worthy the Name of a Christian
Education, how solemnly soever the Parents may promise it. The Faithfulness of
Abraham was such as might be trusted in this Matter. See Genesis xviii.19. But Men
that are not so much as visibly godly, upon what Grounds are they to be
trusted? How can it be reasonably expected, that they should faithfully bring
up their Children for GOD, who were never sincerely willing that their Children
or Themselves should be his? And it will be but Presumption, to expect that
those Children who are never given up to God, nor brought up for him, should
prove religious, and be God's Children. There is no Manner of Reason to expect
any other than that such Children ordinarily will grow up in Irreligion,
whether they are baptized or not. And for Persons to go about with the Name and
visible Seal of God, and the sacred Badge of Christianity upon them, having had
their Bodies, by a holy Ordinance, consecrated to God as his Temples, yet
living in Irreligion and Ways of Wickedness, this serves to tend exceedingly to
harden them, and establish in them an habitual Contempt of sacred Things. Such
Persons, above all Men, are like to be the most hardened and abandoned, and
most difficulty reclaimed: As it was with the wicked Jews, who were much more
confirmed in their Wickedness, than those heathen Cities of Tire and Sidon. To
give that which is holy to those who are profane, or that we have no Manner of
Reason from the Circumstances of Parentage and Education, to expect will be
otherwise, is not the Way to make 'em better, but worse: It Is the Way to have
them habitually trample holy Things under their Feet, and increase in Contempt
of them, yea, even to turn again and rent us, and be more mischievous and
hurtful Enemies of that which is Good, than otherwise they would be.

OBJECT. XX. Some Ministers have been greatly blessed in the other Way of
Proceeding, and some Men have been converted at the Lord's Supper.

ANSW. Though we are to eye the Providence of God, and not disregard his Works,
yet to interpret them to a Sense or apply them to a Use inconsistent with the
Scope of the Word of God, is a Misconstruction and Misapplication of them. God
has not given us his Providence, but his Word to be our governing Rule. God is
sovereign in his Dispensations of Providence; he bestowed the Blessing on
Jacob, even when he had a Lie in his Mouth; he was pleased to meet with
Solomon, and make known himself to him, and bless him in an extraordinary
Manner, while he was worshipping in an high Place; he met with Saul, when in a
Course of violent Opposition to him, and out of the Way of his Duty to the
highest Degree, going to Damascus to persecute Christ; and even then bestowed
the greatest Blessing upon him, that perhaps ever was bestowed on a mere Man.
The Conduct of divine Providence, with it is Reasons, is too little understood
by us, to be improved as our Rule. God has his Way in the Sea, his Path in the
mighty Waters, and his Footsteps are not known: And he gives none Account of
any of his Matters. But God has given us his Word to this very End that it
might be our Rule; and therefore has fitted it to be so; has so ordered it that
it may be understood by us. And strictly speaking, this is our only Rule. If we
join any Thing else to it, as making it our Rule, we do that which we have no
Warrant for, yea, that which God himself has forbidden. See Deuteronomy. iv. 2. Prove.
xxx.6. And with Regard to God's blessing and succeeding of Ministers, have not
some had remarkable Experience of it in the Way which I plead for, as well as
some who have been for the Way I oppose? However, we cannot conclude, that God
sees nothing at all amiss in Ministers, because he blesses them. In general, he
may see those Things in them which are very right and excellent; these he
approves and regards, while he over looks and pardons their Mistakes in Opinion
or Practice, and notwithstanding these is pleased to cro^n their Labors with
his Blessing.

As to the two last Arguments in the Appeal to the Learned, concerning the
Subjects of the Christian Sacraments, their being Members of the visible
Church, and not the invisible; the Force of those Arguments depends entirely on
the Resolution of that Question, Who are visible Saints? or what adult Persons
are regularly admitted to the Privileges of Members of the visible Church?
which Question has already been largely considered: and I think, it has been
demonstrated that they are those who exhibit a credible Profession and
Visibility of Gospel-Holiness or vital Pretty, and not merely of moral
Sincerity. So that there is no Need of further debating the Point in this Place.

I might here mention many Things not yet taken Notice of, which some object as
Inconveniences attending the Scheme I have maintained: And if Men should set
up their own Wit and Wisdom in Opposition to God's revealed Will, there is no
End of the Objections of this Kind, which might be raised against any of God's
Institutions. Some have found great Fault even with the Creation of the World,
as being very inconveniently done, and have imagined that they could tell how
it might be mended in a great many Respects. But however God's Altar may appear
homely to us, yet if we lift up our Tool upon it to mend it, we shall pollute
it. Laws and Institutions are given for the general Good, and not to avoid
every particular Inconvenience. And however it may so happen, that sometimes
Inconveniences (real to imaginary) may attend the Scheme I have maintained;
yet I think, they are in no Measure equal to the manifest Conveniences and
happy Tendencies of it, or to the palpable Inconveniences and pernicious
Consequences of the other. -- I have already mentioned some Things of this
Aspect, and would here briefly observe some other.

Thus, the Way of making such a Difference between outward Duties of Morality
and Worship, and those great inward Duties of the Love of God and Acceptance of
Christ, that the former must be visible, but that there need to be no
Exhibition nor Pretense of the latter, in order to Persons being admitted into
the visible Family of God; and that under a Notion of the latter being
Impossibilities, but the other being within Men's Power; this, I think, has a
direct Tendency to confirm in Men an Insensibility of the Heinousness of those
Heart-Sins of Unbelief and Enmity against God our Savior, which are the Source
and Sum of all Wickedness; and tends to prevent their coming under a humbling
Conviction of the Greatness and utter Inexcusableness of these Sins, which Men
must be brought to if ever they obtain Salvation. Indeed it is a Way that not
only has this Tendency, but has actually and apparently this Effect, and that
to a great Degree.

The Effect of this Method of Proceeding in the Churches in New England, which
have fallen into it, is actually this. There are some that are received into
these Churches under the Notion of their being in the Judgment of
rational-Charity visible Saints or professing Saints, who yet at the same Time
are actually open Professors of heinous Wickedness; I mean, he Wickedness of
living in known Impenitence and Unbelief, the Wickedness of living in Enmity
against God, and in the Rejection of Christ under the Gospel: Or, which is the
same Thing, they are such as freely and frequently acknowledge, that they don't
profess to be as yet born again, but look on themselves as really unconverted,
as having never unfeignedly accepted of Christ; and they do either explicitly
or implicitly number themselves among those that love not the Lord Jesus
Christ; of whom the Apostle says, let such be Anathema, Maran-atha! And
accordingly it is known, all over the Town where they live, that they make no
Pretensions to any sanctifying Grace already obtained; nor of Consequence are
they commonly looked upon at any other than unconverted Persons. Now, can this
be judged the comely Order of the Gospel! or shall God be supposed the Author
of such Confusion!

In this Way of Church proceeding, God's own Children and the true Disciples of
Christ are obliged to receive those as their Brethren, admit them to the
Communion of Saints, and embrace them in the highest Acts of Christian Society,
even in their great Feast of Love, where they seed together on the Body and
Blood of Christ, whom yet they have no Reason to look upon otherwise than as
Enemies of the Crass of Christ, and Haters of their heavenly Father and dear
Redeemer, they making no Pretension to any Thing at all inconsistent with those
Characters; yet, in many Places, as I said before, freely professing this to be
actually the Case with them.

Christ often forbids visible Christians, judging one another: But in this Way
of ecclesiastical Proceeding, it is done continually, and looked upon as no
Hurt; a great Part of those admitted into the Church are by others of the same
Communion judged unconverted graceless Persons; and it is impossible to avoid
it, while we stretch not beyond the Bounds of a rational Charity.

This Method of Proceeding must inevitably have one of these two Consequences:
Either there must be no public Notice at all given of it when so signal a Work
of Grace is wro't, as a Sinner's being bro't to repent and turn to God, and
hopefully becomes the Subject of saving Conversion; or else this Notice must be
given in the Way of Conversation, by the Persons themselves, frequently,
freely, and in all Companies, declaring their own Experiences. But surely,
either of these Consequences must be very unhappy. -- The former is so, viz.
the forbidding and preventing any public Notice being given on Earth of the
Repentance of a Sinner, an Event so much to the Honor of God, and so much
taken Notice of in Heaven, causing Joy in the Presence of the Angels of God,
and tending so much to the Advancement of Religion in the World. For it is found
by Experience, that scarce any one Thing has so great an Influence to awaken
Sinners, and engage them to seek Salvation, and to quicken and animate Saints,
as the Tidings of a Sinner's Repentance, or hopeful Conversion: God evidently
makes use of it as an eminent Means of advancing Religion in a Time of
remarkable Revival of Religion. And to take a Course effectually to prevent
such an Event's being notify'd on Earth, appears to me a counter-acting of God,
in that which he ever makes use of as a chief Means of the Propagation of true
Piety and which we have Reason to think he will make use of as one principal
Means of the Conversion of the World in the glorious latter Day. -- But now as
to the other Way, the Way of giving Notice to the Public of this Event, by
particular Persons themselves publishing their own Experiences from Time to
Time and from Place to Place, on all Occasions and before all Companies, I must
confess, this is a Practice that appears to me attended with many
Inconveniences, yea, big with Mischiefs. The abundant Trial of this Method
lately made, and the large Experience we have had of the evil Consequences of
it, is enough to put all sober and judicious People for ever out of Conceit of
it. I shall not pretend to enumerate all the Mischiefs attending it, which
would be very tedious; but shall now only mention two Things. One is, the bad
Effect it has upon the Persons themselves that practice it, in the great
Tendency it has to spiritual Pride; insensibly begetting and establishing an
evil Habit of Mind in that Respect, by the frequent Return of the Temptation,
and this many Times when they are not guarded against it, and have no Time, by
Consideration and Prayer to fortify their Minds. And then it has a very bad
Effect on the Minds of others that hear their Communication, and so on the
State of Religion in general, in this Way: It being thus the Custom for Persons
of all Sorts, Young and Old, Wise and Unwise, Superiors and inferiors, freely
to tell their own Experiences before all Companies, it is commonly done very
injudiciously, often very rashly and foolishly, out of Season, and in
Circumstances tending to defeat any good End. Even sincere Christians too
frequently in their Conversation insist mainly on those Things that are no Part
of (their true spiritual Experience; such as Impressions on their Fancy or
Imagination, Suggestions of Facts by Passages of Scripture etc. in which Case
Children and weak Persons that hear, are apt to form their Notions of Religion
and true Piety by such experimental Communications, and much more than they do
by the most solid and judicious Instructions out of the Word, they hear from
the Pulpit: which is found to be one of the Devices whereby Satan has an
inexpressible Advantage to ruin the Souls of Men, and utterly to confound the
Interest Of Religion. -- This Matter of making a public Profession of
Godliness or Piety of Heart, is certainly a very important Affair, and ought to
be under some public Regulation, and under the Direction of skilful Guides,
and not left to the Management of every Man, Woman and Child, according to
their Humor or Fancy: And when it is done, it should be done with great
Seriousness, Preparation and Prayer, as a solemn Act of public Respect and
Honor to God, in his House and in the Presence of his People, Not that I
condemn but greatly approve of Persons speaking sometimes of their religious
Experiences in private Conversation, to proper Persons and on proper Occasions,
with Modesty and Discretion, when the Glory of God and the Benefit or just
Satisfaction of others require it of them.

In a Word, the Practice of promiscuous Admission, or that Way of taking all
into the Church indifferently, as visible Saints, who are not either ignorant
or scandalous, and at the same Time that Custom's taking Place of Persons
publishing their own Conversion in common Conversation; where these two Things
meet together, they unavoidably make two distinct Kinds of visible Churches, or
different Bodies of professing Saints, one within another, openly distinguished
one from another, as it were by a visible dividing Line. One Company consisting
of those who are visibly gracious Christians, and open Professors of Godliness;
another consisting of those who are visibly moral Livers, and only profess
common Virtues, without pretending to any special and spiritual Experiences in
their Hearts, and who therefore are not reputed to be Converts. I may appeal to
those acquainted with the State of the Churches, whether this be not actually
the Case in some, where this Method of Proceeding has been long established.
But I leave the judicious Reader to make his own Remarks on this Case, and to
determine, whether there be a just Foundation in Scripture or Reason for any
such State of Things; which to me, I confess, carries the Face of glaring
Absurdity.

And now I commit this whole Discourse (under God's Blessing) to the Reader's
candid Reflection and impartial Judgment. I am sensible, it will be very
difficult for many to be truly impartial in this Affair; their prejudices being
very great against the Doctrine which I have maintained. And I believe, I my
self am the Person, who, above all other upon the Face of the Earth, have had
most in my Circumstances to prejudice me against this Doctrine, and to make me
unwilling to receive Conviction of the Truth of it. However, the clear Evidence
of God's Mind in his Word, as Things appear to me, has constrained me to think
and act as I have now done. I dare not go contrary to such Texts as those.
Levit. x. 10. Jer. xv. 19. Ezekiel. xxii. 26. and Chap. xliv. 6, 7, 8. And having
been fully persuaded in my own Mind, what is the Scripture Rule in this Matter,
after a most careful, painful, and long Search, I am willing, in the faithful
Prosecution of what appears to me of such Importance and so plainly the Mind
and Will of God, to resign to his Providence, and leave the Event in his Hand.

It may not be improper to add here, as I have often had suggested to me the
Probability of my being answered from the Press: If any one shall see Cause to
undertake this, I have these reasonable Requests to make to him, viz. That he
would avoid the ungenerous and unmanly Artifices used by too many Polemick
Writers, while they turn aside to vain Jangling in carping at incidental
Passages, and displaying their Wit upon some minute Particulars, or less
material Things in the Author they oppose, with much Exclamation, if possible,
to excite the ignorant and unwary Reader's Disrelish of the Author, and to make
him appear contemptible, and so to get the Victory that Way; perhaps dwelling
upon and glorying in some pretended Inconsistencies in some Parts of the
Discourse, without ever entering thoro'ly into the Merits of the Cause, or
closely encountering any of the main Arguments. If any one opposes me from the
Press, I desire he would attend to the true State of the Question, and
endeavor fairly to take off the Force of each Argument, by answering the same
directly, and distinctly, with calm and close Reasoning: avoiding (as much as
may be) both dogmatical Assertion and passionate Reflection. Sure I am, I shall
not envy him the Applause of a Victory over me, however signal and complete, if
only gained by superior Light and convincing Evidence. -- I would also request
him to set his Name to his Performance, that I may in that Respect stand on
even Ground with him before the World, in a Debate wherein the Public is to
judge between us. This will be the more reasonable, in Case he should mingle
any Thing of Accusation with his Arguing: 'Twas the Manner even of the heathen
Romans, and reputed by them but just and equal, to have Accusers Face to Face.

May the GOD of all Grace and Peace unite us more in Judgment, Affection and
Practice, that with one Heart and one Mouth we may glorify his Name through JESUS
CHRIST. AMEN.

An APPENDIX.
BEING A LETTER to the Author, in Answer to his Request of Information
concerning the Opinion of Protestant Divines and Churches in general, of the
Presbyterians in Scotland and Dissenters in England in particular, respecting
five QUESTIONS that relate to this Controversy.

Rev. and dear Sir,
IF you look into Mr. BAXTER's Controversial Writings against Mr. BLAKE, you
will meet with such Accounts of Principles and Facts, as I think, may
reasonably give an Inquirer much Satisfaction as to the common Judgment of
Protestant Churches and Divines in the Points you mention. I particularly refer
you to his Five DISTUTATIONS of Right to Sacraments, and the true Nature of
visible Christianity. Where all or the most of your Queries are considered and
answered, with a Multitude of Testimonies produced in favor of Sentiments
contrary to those of your excellent Predecessor, the late Mr. STODDARD. -- I
have not said this from any Disposition to excuse my self from the Labor of
making some further Inquiry, if it be thought needful. And as it may show my
Willingness to gratify your Desire, I will now say something on your Questions
distinctly, but with as much Brevity as I can.

QUEST. 1. What is the general Opinion respecting that SELF-EXAMINATION
required in 1 Cor. xi. 28. Whether Communicants are not here directed to
examine themselves concerning the Truth of Grace, or their real Godliness?

ANSW. This Construction of the Text, as far as I have had Opportunity to
inquire, appears to me very generally received: if I may judge by what many
celebrated Expositors have said, on the Place, and by what many famous Divines
have written in Treatises of Preparation for the Lord's Supper, besides what is
contained in public Confessions, Catechisms, Directories, etc, -- I think, Dr.
REYNOLDS, in his Meditations on the Lord's Supper, has summarily expressed the
common Judgment of Calvinists in these strong Lines of his. "The Sacrament is
but a Seal of the Covenant; and the Covenant essentially includes Conditions;
and the Condition on our Part is Faith. No Faith, no Covenant; no Covenant no
Seal; no Seal, no Sacrament. -- The Matter the of this Trial (says he) must be
that Vital Qualification, which predisposeth a Man for receiving of these holy
Mysteries; and that is Faith."

However, I may venture to be confident, that Mr. STODDARD's Gloss on the Text,
who tells us in his controverted Sermon, "The Meaning is, that a Man must come
solemnly to that Ordinance, examining what NEED he has of it," is quite foreign
from the current Sense of Calvinist Writers. And though he makes a different
Comment in his Appeal to the Learned, saying, "The Examination called for is,
whether they understood the Nature of the Ordinance, that so they may solemnly
consider what they have to do when they wait upon God in it", neither can I
find any Appearance of a general Consent of the Learned and Orthodox to this
new Gloss, at least as exhibiting the full Meaning of the Text. I might easily
confront it with numerous Authorities. But the Palatine Catechism, and that of
the Westminster-Assembly, with the common Explanations and Catechizings upon
them, may be appealed to as Instar Omnium. And I shall only add here, if it be
allowed a just Expectation that the Candidate for the Communion examine himself
about the same Things at least as the Pastor, to whom he applies for Admission,
ought to make the Subject of his Examination, then it is worth while to hear the
Opinion of those un-named Ministers in NEW ENGLAND (among whom the late Dr.
COLMAN, I have Reason to think, was the principal Hand) that answered Dr.
MATHER's Order of the Gospel (Anno 1700) who in the Postscript to their REVIEW
thus express themselves: "We highly approve -- that the Proponant for the
Lord's Table be examined of his baptismal Vow; his Sense of spiritual Wants,
Sinfulness and Wretchedness; his Hope, Faith, Experiences, Resolutions through
the Grace of God." This, I think, is something beyond Mr. STODDARD.

QUEST. 11. Whether it be the general Opinion of those aforesaid, that some who
know themselves to be unregenerate and under the reigning Power of Sin, ought
notwithstanding, in such a State, to come to the Lord's Table?

ANSW. I am aware, Sir, though you have seen fit to take no Notice of it to me,
that Mr. STODDARD (in his Doctrine of Instituted Churches) is peremptory in the
Affirmative: but I have met with no Author among Calvinists, at home or abroad,
consenting with him, unless it be Mr. Blake, and some that were for a
promiscuous Admission, with little or no Limitation. If Divines in general, of
the Calvinist Character, were for such a Latitude as Mr. Stoddard's, what can
we suppose to be the Reason, that in treating on the Lord's Supper they so
constantly consider it as one of the Rights of the Church, belonging to the
truly Faithful alone, exclusively of all others? Why do we hear them declaring,
It is certain that the Right of external Fellowship resides in the Faithful
only: and as to the rest, they are in that Communion only by Accident, and it is
also only by Accident that they are suffered there; but being what they are,
they have not any Part in the Rights of that Society properly belonging to
them? If they though it the Sacrament instituted for Conversion, why do we never
find them recommending it as a converting Ordinance, and urging Persons to come
to it with that View, who kn^w themselves to be in an unconverted State? If
they though it that any such have a Right before God, and may come to it with a
good Conscience, why do we find them so solemnly warning all that are truly
convinced of their remaining yet in a natural State, to refrain coming to the
Lord's Table in their Unbelief and Impenitence; as if they judged it a sinful
and dangerous Thing for them to come under such Circumstances? I know, Mr.
STODDARD in his Appeal disputes the Fact: but it has occurred to me in Abundance
of Instances, while reviewing my Authors on this Occasion.

Among the foreign Protestants, in Germany, France, etc I shall name but two
out many Instances before me. The Heidelbergh or Palatine CATECHISM, which had
the solemn Approbation of the Synod of Dort, and was especially praised by the
Divines of Great Britain; which has been in a Manner universally received and
taught, formerly in Scotland and still all over Holland, and by Reason of it is
Excellency has been translated into no less than thirteen several Languages;
this is most express in claiming the Lord's Supper for a special Privilege of
such as have true Faith and Repentance; and forbidding it to Hypocrites, as
well as scandalous Persons, declaring that none such ought to come. See the
eighty first and other Questions and Answers, with URSIN'S Latin Explications
and DE WITTE's English Catechizings thereon. Here, Sir, indeed you have the
Judgment of a Multitude in One. -- Another celebrated Book is CLAUDE'S
Historical Defense of the Reformation; in which I meet with repeated
Declarations of the same Sentiments, perfectly on the Negative Side of the
Question in Hand; but I think, too many and too long, to be here transcribed.
The Language of some of 'em I have just now had Occasion to make use of.

As for the Church of SCOTLAND, I find, they have adopted the
Westminster-Confession, Catechisms and Directory, which debar all ignorant and
ungodly Persons from the Lord's Table, and require every one to examine
himself, not only as to his Knowledge, but also his Faith, Repentance, Love new
Obedience etc, -- In their Books of Discipline, I observe sundry Passages that
appropriate the Sacrament to the truly Penitent and Faithful, as the only
proper Subjects. Their National Covenant, renewed from Time to Time, has this
Clause; To the which [true Reformed Kirk] we join our selves willingly, in
Doctrine, Faith, Religion, Discipline, and Use of the holy Sacraments, as
lively Members of the same in Christ our Head, etc. And among the Divines of
SCOTLAND, I find many in their Sermons, Sacramental Speeches, and other
Discourses, declaring themselves strongly on the Negative Part in the Question
before us, advising to Strictness in Admissions to the Lord's Supper,
renouncing the Opinion of it is being a converting Ordinance, inviting only the
sincere Friends of Christ to it, and frequently warning Professors conscious of
reigning Sin and Hypocrisy to forbear approaching the Lord's Table. I might
bring much to this Purpose from Mr. ANDREW GRAY's Book of Sermons published
Anno 1716. and his Sermons printed Anno 1746. with a Preface by Mr. WILLISON.
-- So from Mr. EBENEZER ERSKINE's Synodical Sermon, Anno 1732. -- And from Mr.
RALPH ERSKINE's Sermon on Isai. xlii. 6. and his Discourse at Fencing the
Tables, annexed to his Sermon on Job. xvi. 15. -- So from Mr. WILLISON's
Synodical Sermon Anno 1733. where he sets down a Variety of searching Questions
(no less than 27) which he advises to be put to Proponants, and their Answers
to be waited for, before they are admitted. -- The anonymous Author of a
Defense of National Churches against the Independents (who is reputed to be Mr.
WILLISON) asserts it as a Presbyterian Principle, that none have Right before
God to the complete Communion of the Church, but such as have Grace; and that
none are to be admitted but those who are Saints, at least in Profession; such
as profess to accept of the Offers of Christ's Grace etc. And confess
themselves to be sincere. -- Mr. AYTONE, in his Review against Mr. GLASS, owns
that the Lord's Supper is not a formal Mean of Conversion, but of further
Growth andNourishment to those already converted. -- In the same Strain is Mr.
NASMITH's Treatise of the Entail of the Covenant. -- And Mr. WARDEN's Essay on
Baptism. -- In a Word, I find Mr. CURRIE (in his Synodical Sermon, Anno 1732.)
testifying of the Ministers in Scotland, that they are tender (i.e. circumspect
and cautious) in admitting People to the holy Table of the Lord; knowing, the
Design of the Ordinance is not Conversion, but Confirmation: and he observes,
that all who approve themselves to God here, will a thousand times rather choose
to have, was it but one Table or half a Table of honest Communicants, true
Believers and real Saints, than have a hundred Tables, by admitting any that
are unworthy (or Christless Souls, as he anon characterises them) of whom there
are not moral Evidences of their Fitness for this holy Ordinance. And for the
commendable Practice of the Church of Scotland in being pointed and particular
in debarring the Unworthy from this ordinance (says he) God forbid ever it turn
into Desuetude. -- I think, I may here not unfitly subjoin those remarkable
Passages in Mr. ANDERSON's excellent Defense of the Presbyterians, against Mr.
Rhind: where he informs us, They look upon this holy Ordinance as the common
Privilege of the Faithful; and therefore they usually fence the Lord's Table,
in the Words of Scripture, 1 Cor. vi. 9. or some such like -- To excluded the
Impenitent from the Privilege of Gospel-Mysteries; to debar those from the
Lord's Table, whom the Lord has, by the express Sentence of his Word, debarred
out of the Kingdom of Heaven, is what every one, who is not quite lost in
Impiety, must own to be not only lawful, but a Duty. -- Upon which I beg Leave
to observe, according to this Principle I do not see but that a Man who with
apparent Signs of Credibility confesses himself habitually impenitent, ought to
be debarred from the Lord's Table: And surely, by Parity of Reason, he that
knows himself to be unregenerate, ought to refrain coming, since there can be
no true Repentance without Regeneration. I think, we have no just Grounds to
suppose, Mr. STODDARD's Principle in this Matter has hitherto any general
Prevalence in the Church of Scotland.

And now to pass over to England, neither do I find Reason to think the
Dissenters there in general are for Mr. STODDARD's Latitude. The Assembly of
Divines pronounce all the Ungodly, as well as Ignorant, unworthy of the Lord's
Table: direct to Preparation for it, by examining our selves of our being in
Christ etc. And though they declare this Sacrament appointed for the Relief even
of the weak and doubting Christian, who unfeignedly desires to be found in
Christ; and having directed such a one to be wail his Unbelief and labor to
have his Doubts resolved, they assert that so doing he may and ought to come to
the Lord's Supper, to be further strengthened: yet I don't find any Appearance
of a Hint, as if others who know themselves to be in a natural State, or are
conscious of their being certainly graceless, may and ought to come to this
Ordinance, that they may be converted. Nay, they expressly declare of ALL
ungodly Persons, that while they remain such, they cannot without great Sin
against Christ partake of those holy Mysteries. -- As to particular Divines, I
find Multitudes of 'em among the Dissenters, in later as well as former Times,
expressing the same Sentiments: distinguishing between natural and instituted
Duties, between initial and confirming Means, between special Ordinances and
common: and declaring the Lord's Supper a Disciple-Privilege, peculiar to such
as have Disciple-Properties, and admonishing as well the close Hypocrite, as
the more gross, of the Sin and Danger of coming to it in his unregenerate
State, impenitent and unbelieving. Thus, Mr. BOLTON, in his Discourse on the
Wedding-Supper and the Wedding Garment, warns the graceless not to come to the
Lord's Supper; affirming, that an unsanctify'd Presence will be found as bad as
a profane Absence. -- Mr. BAXTER, in his five Disputations, has much that runs
in the same Strain; so in his Reformed Liturgy, and in his Christian Concord,
where we have his Brethren joining their Testimony with his. -- Likewise Mr.
CHARNOCK, in his Discourse of the Subjects of the Lord's Supper. -- Mr. PALMER,
in his Scripture-Rail to the Lord's Table -- Mr. SAUNDERS, in his Anti
Diatribe. -- Mr. LANGLEY, in his Suspension reviewed. -- Mr. DOOLITTLE, Mr.
HENRY, Dr. EARL, and others, in their Books on the Lord's Supper. -- Mr.
SHOWER, in his Sacramental Discourses. -- Mr. FLAVEL, in his Sermon on
Gospel-Unity, and other Pieces. -- Mr. PHILIP HENRY, and Mr. TROSSE, in the
Accounts of their Lives. -- Dr. CALAMY in his Discourse on V^ws, and his
Defense of Nonconformity. -- Mr. SIMON BROWN, in the Continuation of Henry's
Expos. on 1 Cor. xi. 28. -- Dr. HARRIS, in his Discourse on Self-Examination.
-- Dr. JENNINGS, in his Sermons to young People. -- I could, from all these
Authors, cite Passages much to the Purpose: But it would be too tedious. Yet I
will give you a few Hints from some others -- Dr. WILLIAMS, in his Gospel Truth
stated, says, Though a Man had it revealed to him that he is one of the Elect,
yet so long as he remains unregenerate, he has no Right to partake of the
Lord's Supper. -- Dr. GUYSE, in his late Sermon at Mr. Gibbons's Ordination
observes, that Men's being Church Members supposes them already to have a good
Work begun in them, and to be Partakers of Christian Love, even such as
proceeds from Faith, in a prevailing Degree; and Persons (says he) that have
nothing of this, ought not to be Church Members. -- Mr. HALL, in his
Exhortation on the same Occasion, remarks, that the Seals of the Covenant are
to be used as discriminating Signs of the real Separation of true Believers
from the World; and urges to have the Fence kept up, which Christ has set about
his Church, that it may appear to be a Body wholly distinct from the World:
God's House being erected for the Entertainment, not of Hypocrites and dead
Sinners, but of the Living in Jerusalem. -- But, says Dr. WATTS, in his Humble
Attempt, it is true, this cannot be practiced universally and perfectly here on
Earth, so as to prevent some secret Sinners making their Way into our separate
Congregations, and joining with us in the most solemn Ordinances; yet he
declares such not really worthy of any Room or Place in the House of God. --
And in his Holiness of Times, Places, and People, the Dr. observes, The visible
Christian Church is founded on a Supposition, that the Members of it are, or
should appear to be, Members of the invisible: And none (says he) are to be
admitted into this visible Church or esteemed complete Members of it, but those
who make such a Declaration and Profession of their Faith in Christ and their
avowed Subjection to him, as may be supposed in a Judgment of Charity to
manifest them to be real Believers; true Subjects of his spiritual Kingdom, and
Members of the invisible Church. -- I find Dr. DODDRIDGE in the same
Sentiments, by what he says in his Family-Expositor. Thus, on the Case of
Ananias and Sapphire, he has this Note, The Church is never happier, than when
the Sons of Falsehood are deterred from intruding into it: If it is Members are
less numerous, it is a sufficient Balance, that it is more pure. And on Simon's
Case, he pronounces it to be in vain for Men to profess themselves Christians,
in vain to submit to Baptism, etc. if their Heart be not right with God. And
such Persons being admitted to distinguishing Ordinances, he calls an EVIL, in
the present State of Things unavoidable: wishing for the happy Medium, between
prostituting divine Ordinances by a foolish Credulity, and defrauding the
Children of (...) Household of their Bread, by a rigorous Severity and mistaken
Caution^ (...) every where represents the Lord's Supper as the Sacrament of
(...) a reviving and nourishing Ordinance; but never that I can find (...)
regenerating or converting one. Upon the Case of Judas, the Dr. observed that
if he had truly stated the Order of the Story, then Judas certainly went out
before the Eucharist was instituted: And indeed one (...) reasonably suppose,
Christ would have commanded him to (...) of this Cup as the Blood shed for him
for the Remission of Sins, when he had just before been declaring, in Effect,
that his Sins should never be forgiven. -- By which Observation, I think, Dr.
DODDRIDGE has quite demolished one of the most plausible Pleas in Favor of the
secret and conscious Hypocrites Claim to the Lord's Supper.

In fine, even those who appear Advocates for a Latitude in Admissions to the
Communion, I observe, generally in the Course of the Argument offer such
Distinctions or make such Concessions, as seem by fair Consequence a giving up
the Point, at least as stated in the present Question. For they usually
distinguish between a Right in foro Dei and in foro Ecclesiae; accordingly
treat these as two different Questions, Who ought to come? and Who ought to be
admitted? considering the latter as an Ecclesiastical Case, and here they
assert a Latitude; but the former, as a Case of Conscience, of private
Reference only, and here they grant a Limitation. How large soever their
Principles, while taking the Case in it is Ecclesiastical View, yet I have met
with very few Divines, that taking it as a private Case of Conscience, have
gone Mr. STODDARD's Length, in asserting, that some unsanctified Men have Right
before God to the Lord's Supper, and may come with a good Conscience, yea,
ought to come, notwithstanding they know themselves at the same Time to be in a
natural Condition. This he declare in his Doctrine of instituted Churches, and
confirms in his Sermon and Appeal. But then he has made some Concessions, which
seem to be subversive of his Opinion. For he expressly allows, that the
Sacrament by Institution supposes Communicants to be visible Saints; and this
Title of visible Saints he assigns to such as have a visible Union to Christ,
such as are in the Judgment of rational Charity Believerss, such as carry
themselves so that there is Reason to look upon them to be Saints. Now, taking
the Case as a private Case of Conscience (in which Light only Mr. STODDARD
professes to have disign'd to consider it in his Sermon, and not at all as an
Ecclesiastical Case) I think, this Visibility of Saintship immediately respects
the Proponant for the Lord's Table, and must be referred to his own private
Judgment of himself. But then, how can there be a Visibility of Saintship in
the Eye of the Man's own Conscience, when at the same Time he knows himself to
be in a natural Condition! Or how can a Man come to the Lord's Table with a
good Conscience, as having Right before God, while he cannot form so much as a
Judgment of rational Charity for himself; seeing he carry's so, in the View of
his own Conscience, that he has no Reason to look on himself to be a Saint,
nay, even knows he is still a natural State, and therefore in the Eye of his
own impartial Judgment is not such a one as the Sacrament by Institution
supposes the Communicant to be! -- Moreover, Mr. STODDARD in describing visible
Saints, inserts into their Character a serious Profession of the true Religion,
which he sometimes calls a Profesion of Faith and Repentance, morally sincere:
and in his Doctrine of Instituted Churches (page 19) he lays down a remarkable
Position in these Words, SUCH A PROFESSION AS BEING SINCERE MAKES A MAN A REAL
SAINT, BEING MORALLY SINCERE MAKES A MAN A VISIBLE SAINT. Now according to
this, it seems to me, the Profession it self, whether evangelically or morally
sincere, is always of a uniform Tenor; having one and the same Thing for the
Matter of it; and not respecting, in the different Cases, a Religion
specifically different, or a Faith and Repentance of a higher and a lower Kind.
-- But then it is quite beyond me to comprehend, how a Man who knows himself to
be in a natural Condition, can be so much as morally sincere in his Profession,
while it is in it is Matter and Tenor such a profession as being (evangelically)
sincere makes a Man a Real Saint. For if he knows himself to be in a natural
Condition, he then as certainly knows he has not (in the Principle or
Exercise) that Faith and Repentance, which is the just Matter of such a
Profession: And how therefore can he be reasonably supposed, with any Degree of
moral Sincerity to make such a Profession, when for the Matter of it it is the
very same Profession he would make, if he knew himself to be a real Saint! Can
a Person in any sound Gospel-Sense profess himself a Saint or believing
Penitent, and herein speak the Truth with a common moral Honesty, while yet he
knows himself to be destitute of all such Characters in the Sight of God and
Conscience, being still in a natural Condition and under the Dominion of
Unbelief and Impenitence! For my own Part, I must confess this a Difficulty in
Mr. STODDARD's Scheme, that I am not capable of solving. His
Favourite-Hypothesis, I think, must fall, if his Position stands, and his
Concessions be abode by; which serve clearly to determine the present Question
in the Negative, agreeable to the general Sense of Protestant Churches and
Divines.

QUEST. III. Whether it be not the general Opinion, that persons admitted to
the Lord's Table ought to PROFESS saving Faith and Repentance; meaning that
Faith and Repentance, which are the Terms of the Covenant of Grace!

ANSW. I believe, after what has been already offered, we need be at no Loss to
know the Mind of the Generality respecting the Subject of this Inquiry. Were
there Occasion for it, I could easily produce a Cloud of Witnesses, to evidence
that the general Opinion is on the Affirmative Side, in this Question. Repeated
Searches have been made by diligent and impartial Inquirers, who though of
varying Judgment and Practice in Church Discipline, yet agree in their Reports:
And from them I will give you the following Attestations.

Mr. LOB (in his True Dissenter) tell us, It is the Judgment of all the
Nonconformists, that nothing less than the Profession of saving Faith credibly
significant of the Thing professed, gives Right to Church Communion. And this
he declares to be the Rule of all Protestants in general. He brings even Mr.
HUMPHREY (though opposite in Judgment) for his Voucher: Who acknowleges, That the
visible Church is defined by a Profession of true regenerate Faith, and of no
less than that, according to the most general Opinion of Protestant Divines. He
speaks of it as the common Opinion, that a Profession of no less than true
Grace or justifying Faith is the Rule of Admission to the Church-Sacraments.
And though Mr. Humphrey went off from the received Opinion, yet could he not come
into Mr. Blake's Notions in this Matter, who also had gone off from it, nor
hope for their Vindication: Hence he makes that Challenge, What Man is there,
that dares revive Mr. Blake's Cause, and defend it against Mr. Baxter's RIGHT
to Sacraments!

Mr. BAXTER in this his Book very copiously argues for a Profession of saving
Faith, as the Rule of Admission to Sacraments, and much insists on it is being
so by the unanimous Consent of judicious Divines. He tells us, Mr. GATAKER in
his Books has largely proved this by a Multitude of Quotations from Protestant
Writers. And he adds his own Testimony, repeatedly saying, It is indeed their
most common Doctrine -- It is the common Protestant Doctrine -- And again,
Certain I am, this is the common Doctrine of Reformed Divines -- He subjoins, I
must profess, that I don't know of any one Protestant Divine, reputed Orthodox,
of the contrary Judgment, before Dr. Ward and Mr. Blake, though some Papists and
Arminians I knew of that Mind. -- And again (beside Sir Henry Vane) he says,
All that I know of, since Dr. Ward, is Mr. Blake, Mr. Humphrey, and one John
Timson; and John Timson, Mr. Humphrey, and Mr. Blake. -- He alleges Mr. VINES,
as thus Witnessing in the Case on his Side. To this Purpose all our learned
Divines have given their Suffrage; I need not number Authors or Churches. It is
so plain a Case, that I wonder, those [of the contrary Opinion] have not taken
Notice of it, there is an Army to a Man against them.

Mr. LANGLEY, in his Suspension reviewed, observes; The concurrent Judgment of
Divines, English and Foreign, Episcopal and Presbyterian, that Man of vast and
digested Reading, the Learned Mr. BAXTER has demonstrated at large in SIXTY
Testimonies; sundry of which have many in them, being the Judgment of many
Churches and many learned Men therein; and more might easily be bro't. -- In
short, He calls it the old Protestant Doctrine asserted against the Papists;
and wonders at the Confidence of the Men, who tell us, against our own Eyes,
that it is a Novelism.

To these Attestations I subjoin that of our Mr. MITCHEL (in his Introduction
before the Defense of the Synod, 1662) who while asserting a different Latitude
of the two Sacraments, yet pleads for Strictness in Admissions to the Lord's
Table; and testify's, It is most evident, that godly reforming Divines have in
their Doctrine unanimously taught, and in their Practice (many of them)
endeavored, a strict Selection of those who should be admitted to the Lord's
Supper. -- I think, it may be not improperly observed here, that in a
Manuscript, drawn up by this eminent Person for his own Satisfaction, and
inserted in the Account of his Life, he has left his solemn Testimony against a
lax Mode of Profession (exclusive of all Examinations and Confessions, of a
practical and experimental Nature) as having been found by plentiful Experience
a Nurse of Formality and lrreligion. At the same Time declaring his Judgment,
with a particular Eye to the Churches of New England, That the Power of
Godliness will be lost, if only doctrinal Knowledge and outward Behavior come
to be accounted sufficient for a Title to all Church-Privileges; and the use of
practical Confessions and Examinations of Men's spiritual Estate be laid aside.
For (says he) that which People see to be publicly required and held in
Reputation, That will they look after, and usually no more. -- In another Place
he observes, This will not only lose the Power of Godliness, but in a little
Time bring in Profaneness, and ruin the Churches, these two Ways. (1) Election
of Ministers will soon be carried by a formal looser Sort. (2) The Exercise of
Discipline will, by this Means, be impossible. And Discipline falling,
Profaneness rises like a Flood. -- Agreably he says elsewhere; Certain it is,
that we stand for the Purity of the Churches, when we stand for such
Qualifications as we do, in those whom we would admit to full Communion; and do
withstand those Notions and Reasonings that would infer a Laxness therein,
which has apparent Peril in it. -- In Sum (says he) we make Account, that we
shall be near about the Middle-Way of Church-Reformation, if we keep Baptism
within the Compass of the Non-excommunicable, and the Lord's Supper within the
Compass of those that have (unto Charity) somewhat of the Power of Godliness,
or Grace in Exercise. -- For, Mr. MITCHEL as he thought Faith in the special
and lively EXERCISE thereof necessary to a safe and comfortable Participation
of the Lord's Supper, so he judged an Appearance of this unto rational Charity,
judging by positive sensible Signs and Evidences, justly required in order to
Admission into full Communion. Whereas, he thought Baptism annexed to initial
Faith, or Faith in the Being of it; the charitable Judgment whereof (says he)
runs upon a great Latitude; and he conceived the same Strictness, as to outward
Signs, not necessary unto a charitable probable Judgment or Hope of the Being
of Faith, which intitles to Baptism, as of that Growth and special Exercise of
Faith, which is requisite to the Lord's Supper. These are the main
Distinctions, on which he grounded his Opinion of a different Latitude of the
two Sacraments. -- For, I must observe, as strenuously as he pleads for a
various Extent, as to the Subjects of them, he never supposes any Adult
regularly admittable to either Sacrament, but such as in Ecclesiastical
Reputation sustain the Character of Believers; such as in the Account of a
rational Charity (judging by probable Signs) have the Being of Regeneration; or
as he variously expreses it, have true Faith, in the Judgment of Charity; and
do in some Measure perform the Duties of Faith and Obedience, as to
Church-Visibility and charitable Hope; and therefore are such as the Church
ought to receive and hold as Heirs of the Grace of Life, according to the Rules
of Christian Charity. -- Though it seems, as Mr. SHEPARD before him speaks of his
Church Charity and Experimental Charity; so Mr. MITCHEL had his Positive
Charity and his Negative, and conducted his Judgment and Administrations
accordingly, in admitting Persons to the one Sacrament or the other. -- I
should not have been so prolix and particular here, but that I though it it might
serve to prepare the Way for a more easy, short, and intelligible Answer to
your remaining Queries.

QUEST. IV. Whether it be the general Opinion of Protestant Churches and
Divines, in the Case of adult Persons, that the Terms of Admission to both
Sacraments are the same?

ANSW. I presume, Sir, the Question does not respect a Sameness in the Degree
of Qualifications, Experiences, and Evidences; but only a Sameness in Kind, or
for the Substance and general Nature of Things. I suppose, you had no View here
to any such critical Distinction as that beforementioned, between an initial
Faith and a grown Faith; or between the simple Being of Faith, which intitleth
to Baptism, and the special Exercise of Faith, which fits for the Lord's
Supper; nor aim at a nice Adjustment of the several Characters of Visibility,
or Motives of Credibility, in the one Case and the other: but only intend in
general to inquire, whether Persons admittable to one or other Sacrament, ought
to profess true justifying Faith, and not be admitted on the Profession of any
Faith of a Kind inferior and specifically different. Now, taking this to be the
Scope of your Question, I have good Reason to apprehend, that the Generality of
Protestant Churches and Divines, of the Calvinistic Persuasion especially, have
declared themselves for the Affirmative.

I think, all that hold, the visible Christian Church ought to consist of such
as make a vissible and credible Profession of Faith and Holiness, and appear to
rational Charity real Members of the Church invisible (which is the common
Language of Protestants) are to be understood as in Principle exploding the
Conceit of a conscious Unbeliever's Right before God to special Church.
Ordinances, and as denying the apparent Unbeliever's Right before the Church to
Admission, whether to one Sacrament or the other. I observe, Eadem est Ratio
utriusque Sacramenti, is a Maxim (in it is general Notion) espoused by the
several contending Parties in this Controversy about a Right to Sacraments.

That a credible Profession of saving Faith and Repentance is necessary to
Baptism, in the Case of the Adult, I can show, by the Authority of CLAUDE's
approved Defense of the Reformation, to be the general Opinion of French
Protestants; and by the PALATINE Catechism, by the LEYDEN Professors Synopsis,
etc. to be the prevailing Judgment of the Reformed in Germany, Holland, and
foreign Parts.

And for the Dissenters in England, that they are in general of the same
Judgment, I might prove from the Assembly of Divines Confession, Catechisms,
and Directory; and from the Heads of Agreement assented to by the United
Ministers, formerly distinguished by the Names of Presbyterian and
Congregational; as also by a large Induction of particular Instances among
Divines of every Denomination, would it not carry me to too great a Length. I
find Mr. LOB. (in his True Dissenter) assuring us in general, "It is held by
the Dissenters, that nothing less than the Profession of a saving Faith gives a
Right to Baptism." Nor do I see, by their Writings of a later Date and most in
Vogue, any just Grounds to suppose a general Change of Sentiments among them. I
will mention two or three Moderns of distinguished Name. Dr. HARRIS (in his
SelfDedication) tells us, The Nature of the Lord's Supper plainly supposes
Faith; and that none but real Christians have Right in the Sight of God; though a
credible Profession intitles to it in the Sight of the Church, who cannot know
the Heart. And he declares it the same Faith, which qualifies the Adult, both
for Baptism and for the Lord's Supper; there being the same common Nature to
both Sacraments, and the latter only a recognizing the former. -- The late Dr.
WATTS (in his Holiness of Times, Places, and People) says, The Christian Church
receives none but upon Profession of true Faith in Christ, and sincere
Repentance; none but those who profess to be Members of the invisible Church,
and in a Judgment of Charity are to be so esteemed. Our Entrance into it is
appointed to be by a visible Profession of our being born of God, of real Faith
in Christ, of true Repentance, and inward Holiness. -In fine, to name no more,
Dr. DODDRIDGE (in his Family-Expositor, on Act. viii. 37.) supposes a credible
Profession of their Faith in Christ required of the Adult in Apostolic Times,
in Order to their being admitted to Baptism; even such (sayshe) as implied
their cordially subjecting their Souls to the Gospel, and their being come to a
Point, so as to give up themselves to Christ with all their Heart.

And for the Church of Scotland, Mr. ANDERSON, who well understood their
Principles and Practice, assures us (in his Defense of them) that Presbyterians
will not baptize without a previous Profession or Sponsion. To the Adult (says
he) it is not only necessary (as it is also in Infants) that they be internally
sanctified, but also that they make an outward Profession, of which Baptism is
the Badge and Token. To justify this, he observes concerning the Catechumens in
primitive Times, that during all that State they were Probationers, not only as
to their Knowledge, but Piety; and were obliged, before they could be admitted
to Baptism, to give moral Evidences of the Grace of God in their Hearts. And he
advances it as a Presbyterian Principle, that Faith and Repentance are pre
required to Baptism, in adult Persons at least. By this he points out the true
Matter of baptismal Profession: And then in Opposition to such as pretend
Baptism to be a converting Ordinance, he observes, If they can have Faith and
Repentance without the Spirit and spiritual Regeneration, which they say is not
obtained but in and by Baptism, I don't see why they may not go to Heaven
without the Spirit and spiritual Regeneration: For I am sure, Repentance toward
God and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, is the Sum of the Gospel. -- Mr.
WARDEN, another of their noted Writers (in his Essay on Baptism) says in the
Name of Presbyterians, We think that Baptism supposes Men Christians; else
they have no Right to Baptism, the Seal of Christianity; all Seals, in their
Nature, supposing the Thing that is sealed. He that is of Adult Age, is to
profess his Faith in Christ and his Compliance with the whole Device of
Salvation, before he can have the Seal of the Covenant administered to him. --
The Author of the Defense of National Churches (though it to be Mr. WILLISON) says,
I know nothing more, requisite to Admission to the Lord's Supper in foro
Ecclesiastice, than unto Baptism in an adult Person; they being both Seals of
the same Covenant. And he thinks the Objects of Church Fellowship are "all who
profess to accept the Offers of Christ's Grace, with Subjection to his
Ordinances, and a suitable Walk, and who confess themselves sincere.

I have reserved Mr. BAXTER for my last Witness, because his Attestation is
comprehensive and of a general Aspect. In his Disputations of Right to
Sacraments, and other his Writings, he repeatedly declares, "It has been the
constant Principle and Practice of the universal Church of Christ, to require a
Profession of SAVING Faith and Repentance, as necessary before they would
baptize; and not to baptize any upon the Profession of any lower Kind of Faith.
He must shut his Eyes against the fullest Evidence of History and
Church-Practice, who will deny this. I desire those otherwise-minded to help me
to an Instance of any one approved Baptism, since Christ's Time or his
Apostles, upon the Account of a Faith that was short of justifying, and not
upon the Profession of a justifying Faith. Hitherto this is not done by them:
but the contrary is fully done by others, and yet they confidently except
against my Opinion as a Novelty Mr. GATAKER'S Books have Multitudes of
Sentences recited out of our Protestant Divines, that affirm this which they
call new. It is indeed the common Protestant Doctrine, that the Sacraments do
presuppose Remission of Sins, and our Faith; that they are instituted to
signify these as in Being; and do solemnise and publicly own and confirm the
mutual Covenant already entered in Heart. The Jesuits themselves do witness
this to be the ordinary Protestant Doctrine. -- It seems not necessary to
mention the Judgment of our reformed Divines, as expressed in any of their
particular Sayings, when their public Confessions and Practices are so
satisfactory herein." -- Mr. Baxter, however, recites a Multitude of their
Testimonies; producing the Judgment of Luther, Calvin, Beza, Pet. Martyr,
Piscator, Melanchton, Altingius, Junius, Polanus, Zanchius, U^sinus, Par^us,
Bucanus, Musculus, Professores Leyd.andSalm, Wollebius, Vossius, Wendeline,
Keckerman, Bullinger, Alsted, Deodate, Dr. Ame^, Dr. Moulin, the Catechism of
the Church of England, and English Divines, Bp Usher, Dr. Willet, Dr. Fulk, Dr.
Prideaux, Dr. Whitaker, Mr. Yates, Perkins, Cartwright etc. the Scottish Church
in their Heads of Church Policy, and Divines of Scotland, Mr. Gillespy, Mr.
Rutherford, and Mr. Wood; the Westminster-Assembly of Divines, their
Confession, Catechisms, and Directory, the Annot. of some of those Divines etc.
"And for the Reformed Churches in general (Mr. Baxter observes) it is past all
Question, by their constant Practice, that they require the Profession of a
saving Christian Faith, and take not up with any lower. -- And respecting the
then-practice in England, he says, This is manifest by our daily Administration
of Baptism. I never heard (says he) any Man baptize an Infant but upon the
Parent's or Susceptor's or Offerer's Profession of a Justifying Faith.

This leads to your last Inquiry.

QUEST. V. Whether it be the general Opinion, that the same Qualifications are
required in a Parent bringing his Child to Baptism, as in an adult Person for
his own Admission to this Ordinance?

ANSW. Here, Sir, I suppose you intend only the same Qualifications in Kind: or
a Profession and Visibility, in some Degree, of the same Sort of Faith and
Repentance; meaning that which is truly evangelical and saving. And
understanding you in this Sense, I Am persuaded, by all I can observe, that the
Generality of Protestants are in the Affirmative; not assenting to a specific
and essential Difference, whatever circumstantial and gradual Disparity they
may allow, between the two Cases you mention.

Mr. BAXTER speaking of the Judgment and Practice of the Christian Fathers,
tells us, that Faith (justifying Faith, and not another Kind of Faith) was
supposed to be in the Parent, for himself and his Seed: because the Condition
or Qualification of the Infant is but this, that he be the Seed of a Believer.
-- And he thinks the Generality of the Reformed are in these Sentiments. He
declares his own Judgment in full Concurrence herewith, and backs the same with
a Variety of Arguments, in his Five Disputations and other Writings. He
observes, it seems strange (...) that any should imagine, a lower Belief in the
Parent will help his Child to a Title to Baptism, than that which is necessary
to his own, if he were unbaptised; because mutual Con^ent is necessary to
mutual Covenant, and the Covenant must be mutual: No Man has Right to God's
Part, that refuses his own: They that have no Right to Remission of Sins, have
no Right given them by God to Baptism. -- If God be not at all actually obliged
in Covenant to any ungodly Man, then he is not obliged to give him Baptism: but
God is not obliged so to him. Most of our Divines make the contrary Doctrine
Pelagianism, that God should be obliged to (...) in a State of Nature in such a
Covenant. -- If the Parent's Title be questionable (says he) the Infant's is so
too; because the Ground is the same: and it is from the Parent, that the Child
must derive it; nor can any Man give that which he has not. -- We ought not
(says he) to baptize those Persons, or their Children, as theirs, who are
visible Members of the Kingdom of the Devil, or that do not so much as profess
their forsaking the Devil's Kingdom; But such are all that profess not a saving
Faith. If such are not visibly in the Kingdom of the Devil, at least they are
not visibly out of it. -- All that are duly baptized, are baptized into CHRIST;
therefore they are supposed to possess that Faith, by which Men are united or
ingraffed into Christ: But that is only justifying Faith. Tell me (says he)
where any Man was ever said in Scripture to be united to Christ, without saving
Faith or Profession of it. -- In a Word, Mr. Baxter takes Occasion to declare
himself in this Manner. If Mr. BLAKE exacts not a Profession of saving Faith
and Repentance, I say he makes soul Work in the Church. And when such soul Work
shall be voluntarily maintained, and the Word of God abused for the Defilement
of the Church and Ordinances of God, it is a greater Scandal to the Weak, and
to the Schismatics, and a greater Reproach to the Church, and a sadder Case to
considerate Men, than the too common Pollutions of others, which are merely
through Negligence, but not justified and defended.

We are told by other impartial Inquirers, that all the Reformed do in their
Directories and Practices require Professions, as well as Promises, of Parents
bringing their Children to Baptism; even Professions of present Faith and
Repentance, as well as Promises of future Obedience; and these not merely of
the Moral, but the Evangelical Kind. -- The Judgment of the Church of Scotland
may be known by their adopting the Confession, Catechisms, and Directory of the
Assembly of Divines: who, when they require a parental Profession, (as in their
Catechisms etc.) intend it not of any lower Kind, than a true Gospel-Faith and
Obedience. -- The Mind of the Dissenters may be very much judged of by the
Reformed Liturgy, presented in their Name upon King Charles's Restoration;
where Parents credible Profession of their Faith, Repentance and Obedience is
required in order to the Baptism of their Children. -- I might bring further
Evidence from the Writings of particular Divines among them, ancient and
modern: But I must for Brevity omit this. Only I will give you a Specimen in
two or three Hints. Mr. CHARNOCK, that great Divine, observes, "Baptism
supposes Faith in the Adult, and the Profession of Faith, in the Parent for his
Child." -- The late eminent Dr. WATTS, in his Holiness of Times, places and
People, thus declares himself, with respect to the Infants of true Believers:
"In my Opinion, so far as they are any Way Members of the visible Christian
Church, it is upon Supposition of their being (with their Parents) Members of
the invisible Church of God."

On the whole, as to our Fathers here in New England, it is true, they asserted
a Baptism-Right in Parents for themselves and Children, whom yet they excluded
from full Communion; the Ground of which Difference was hinted before: and they
denied a Parity of Reason between the two Cases now in View, on some Accounts.
Their chief Ground was, that Adult-Baptism requires a Measure of visible moral
Fitness or inherent Holiness in the Recipient: whereas, Infant Baptism requires
nothing visible in it is Subject, but a relative Fitness or federal Holiness,
the formalis Ratio of Infant-Membership, accruing from God's Charter of Grace
to his Church, taking in the Infant Seed with the believing Parents Baptism
they supposed to run parallel with regular Membership; and the Child of such a
Parent entitled to this Covenant-Seal in it is own Right, on the Foot of a
distinct personal Membership, derivative in Point of Being; but independent for
it is Duration, and for the Privileges annexed to it by divine Institution
However, they certainly owned Parental Profession, as belonging to the due
Order and just Manner of Administration, both most and needful. -- Accordingly
they provided, that Parents claiming Covenant-Privileges for their Children,
should own their Covenant-State, have a Measure of Covenant-Qualifications, and
do Covenant-Duties, in some Degree, to the Satisfaction of a rational Charity.
-- And it ought to be remembered, they have left it as their solemn Judgment,
that even taking Baptism-Right for a Right of FITNESS in Fore ecclesiastics,
still the Parents whose Children they claimed Baptism for, were such as must be
allowed to have a Title to it for themselves, in Case they had remained
unbaptised: looking upon them, although not duly fitted for the Sacrament of
Communion and Confirmation, yet sufficiently so for the Sacrament of Union and
Initiation; Professors in their intancy Parentally, and now Personally in an
initial Way; appearing Abraham^ Children, in some Measure of Truth, to a
judicious Charity; Justly therefore baptisable, in their Persons and Offspring,
by all the Rules of the Gospel. -- I am not here to argue upon the Justness of
this Scheme of Thought on the Case; but only to represent the Fact in a genuine
Light.

I have no Room (Sir) for any further Remarks, But must conclude, with
Christian Salutes, and the Tender of every brotherly Office, from

Boston, June 26, 1749. Your very affectionate Friend and humble Servant,
THOMAS FOXCROFT.


