Dr. Chauncy's SERMON On the Death of Mrs. Foxcroft.

The BLESSEDNESS of the DEAD who die in the LORD.

A SERMON Preached the LORD's Day after the Funeral of Mrs. ANNA FOXCROFT, The
amiable and pious Consort of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Foxcroft, Who died October
9th 1749, in the 53d Year of her Age.

By Charles Chauncy, D. D. One of the Pastors of the First Church in BOSTON.

Philip 1. 21. For me to live is CHRIST, and to die is Gain. BOSTON, Printed by
ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street. MDCCXLIX.

The Blessedness of the Dead who die in LORD.
REV. XIV. 13. AND I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying to me, write, Blessed
are the Dead which die in the LORD from henceforth: Yea, says the SPIRIT, that
they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them.
THE Manner in which these Words are introduced bespeaks a more than ordinary
Attention. I heard a Voice from Heaven. i. e. from GOD out of Heaven: And it
was a Voice distinctly articulated in its Sound, like the Voice at our
Savior's Baptism and Transfiguration; a Voice that spoke to the Apostle John
in plain and intelligible Words, commanding him, not merely to pronounce, but
to write, the Dead in CHRIST blessed. For so it follows, Saying unto me, Write,
Blessed are the Dead which die in the LORD from henceforth. Like Words of
Support and Consolation to the Saints of the most High, both living and dying,
are scarce to be met with any where in the Bible. The Dead in CHRIST, it is
true, are frequently spoken of as blessed; but, perhaps, never with so much
Particularity, with such special Marks of Honor and Distinction. And yet, this
is not all: For the Divine SPIRIT is himself introduced, expressly and solemnly
testifying that they are thus blessed, and particularly specifying the
Instances wherein they are so; Yea, says the SPIRIT, that they may rest from
their Labors, and their Works do follow them.

In the Words, the three following Things are observable, not improper to
employ our present Meditations.

I. A Description of the Persons here pronounced blessed; the Dead who die in
the LORD. II. A special Notification of the Time when they enter upon this
Blessedness; signified in those Words, from henceforth. III. A Recital of the
particular Instances wherein they are blessed; that they may rest from their
Labors, and their Works do follow them.
Accordingly, these are the Heads we shall distinctly illustrate, and then
apply what may be offered in some suitable Reflections.

I. The first Thing observable in the Text is, A Description of the Persons
pronounced blessed. And these are the Dead: Not the Dead without
Discrimination, but the Dead who die in the LORD.

But, you will ask, Who are these? Who are the Persons meant by the Dead who
die in the LORD, concerning whom it is here declared, that they are blessed. In
answer whereto,

Some say, that the holy Martyrs, those who have suffered Death for the Name
and Sake of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, are the Persons more especially intended.
Who die in the LORD, i. e. for the LORD, for his Sake, in Defense of his Cause,
and to bear Testimony to the Truth of his Gospel. So some expound the Phrase:
In which Sense, it must be owned, it is sometimes taken in Scripture; as in
Ephesians. iv. 1. 1 Pet. i. 14. (according to the Original) and in several other
Places; which it is needless to turn you to. And, to be sure, those who suffer
for Righteousness Sake, who die in the Cause of CHRIST, 'not counting their
Lives dear to them', so that they may honor their Savior, and the Truths
pertaining to his Kingdom, are not to be excluded a Share in the Blessedness
the Text speaks of: Though there does not appear sufficient Reason to
determine, that these are the only Persons here intended.

Others therefore interpret the Words more generally, as including not only
Confessors and Martyrs, but all good Christians. Who die in the LORD, i. e. in
the Faith of the LORD JESUS, united to him, and interested in the Mercy of GOD
through him. In this Sense they understand the Phrase: And with good Reason;
for it seems to be of the same Import with those Phrases, the Dead in CHRIST,
those that are fallen asleep in JESUS, which are undoubtedly made use of as
descriptive of sincere Christians in common.

And we shall the more easily conceive of the Propriety of this Mode of Speech
to point out good Men, if we call to mind, that they are not infrequently, in
the Writings of the New Testament, characterised from their being in CHRIST.
Agreeable whereto is that Language, 2 Cor. iv. 17. 'If any Man be in CHRIST, he
is a new Creature'. And again, Chap. xii. Ver. 2. 'I knew a Man in CHRIST'. And
yet again, Philip. iii. 8, 9. -- 'I count all Things but Loss, -- that I may
win CHRIST, and be found in him.'

There is indeed a being in CHRIST that is common to all that are Members of
that visible Kingdom, of which he is Head and Lord, whether they are Christians
in Truth, or in Pretense only. Hence the Apostle Paul, when mentioning the
Churches of Judea (in which there were doubtless a Number of mere nominal
Christians) uses that Style 'which were in CHRIST' Gal. i. 22.
. And our blessed Savior expressly speaks of 'Branches in him which bear no
Fruit' John xv. 2.
. And makes that Supposition, Ibid. Ver. 6.
'If a Man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a Branch, and is withered: And
Men gather them, and cast them into the Fire; and they are burned'.

But this notwithstanding, there is a being in CHRIST that is peculiar to good
Men, and certainly descriptive of their Character as such. And this indeed is
that being in CHRIST, or Union to him, that is so much celebrated in Scripture,
and set forth under such a Variety of strong and lively Resemblances. It is
compared to the Union between Husband and Wife, which is so near and intimate
that they are no longer twain, but one Flesh Matthew. xix. 5.
. -- It is compared to the Union of a Building, in which the several Parts,
being fitly framed, are so joined together as to constitute one House; of which
House, CHRIST, in the Similitude, is the Foundation, or chief Cornerstone 1
Pet. ii. 4, 5, 6.
. -- It is compared to the Union of the Body with the Head, in Consequence
whereof it 'maketh Increase, and grows up into him, in all Things, which is
the Head, even CHRIST' Ephesians. iv. 15, 16.
. -- It is compared to the Union of a Vine and its Branches; and the Analogy is
so exact, that 'as the Branch cannot bear Fruit of it self, except it abide in
the Vine; so neither can they, except they abide in him' Joh. xv. 4, 5.
. -- It is compared to the Union between GOD and CHRIST; and they, in the
Comparison, are said to be in him, and he in them, in some Sense analogous to
that in which he is in the Father, and the Father in him Joh. xvii. 21, 22, 23.
. -- In a Word, They are, according to the Scriptures, united to him, and so in
him, as to be transformed into the same Image, and to partake of the same
spiritual Nature 1 Cor. vi. 17.
. -- They are so in him as to derive from him those Supplies of Grace, whereby
they are made 'compleat in him, who is the Head of all Principality and Power'
Col. ii. 10.
. -- Yea, they are so in him as to become interested in what he has done, and
suffered, and is now doing in Heaven, at the Right Hand of GOD, on the Behalf
of Sinners Ephesians. i. 3.
.

And wherein could good Christians be better distinguished? Their being thus
spoken of as in CHRIST is an infallible Mark, discriminating them from all
others.

And these now are the Persons intended by the Dead that die in the LORD. They
are those, and only those, who, while alive, were so united to CHRIST as that
they 'abode in him, and his Words in them'? They are those who were so in
CHRIST, as that they derived such Influences from him whereby they were enabled
to bring forth the Fruits of Righteousness, in a Conversation becoming the
Gospel of CHRIST. Of all such, and of such only, it may be said, while they
live, that they live in CHRIST; and when they die, that they die in CHRIST. And
blessed, says the Voice from Heaven, in my Text, are the Dead that thus die in
the LORD. And this leads

II. To the second Thing observable in the Words, which is, A special
Notification of the Time, when the Dead in CHRIST shall enter upon this
Blessedness; signified by that Phrase, from henceforth. In the Original, it is
aparti; which is an Expression that will admit of several Senses. Among others,
it may well be construed in this, Vid. Lowman's Paraphrase in Loc. Note e.
which specifies the Time when the Dead in CHRIST commence blessed. 'Blessed
are the Dead, that die in the LORD, from henceforth'. As if it had been said, '
from that Time they are blessed. They are no sooner Dead than they are blessed.
They enter upon a State of Blessedness instantly upon their Death'. The Words
are certainly capable of being thus understood; and this, probably is the very
Sense in which they ought to be interpreted: To be sure, it is a Sense that
falls in with the Truth of Fact, in respect of all the Dead that die in the
LORD.

Their Bodies, it is true, 'return to the Dust from whence they were taken';
but not so their Spirits. These 'ascend up to GOD who gave them': And this
immediately upon their Death. From henceforth, we may say, they are blessed.

Their Spirits do not go to a Place of Purgation, in order to their being
fitted for the paradisaick State; as is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome:
Neither do they sleep with their Bodies, till the general Resurrection; as is
the Opinion of others, who, though they profess a Regard to the Scriptures, yet
explain them so as to consist with their own private Notions: Much less still
do they perish at Death, sinking into a State of Nonexistence; as is the
Pretense of those, who are styled, in the sacred Language, 'wise Men after the
Flesh'.

If we may give Credit to the Revelations of Scripture, there is no Room for
Doubt, whether the Soul survives the Funeral of the Body: Nor can it reasonably
remain a Question, Whether those, who die in the LORD, do immediately pass into
Glory? The Apostle Paul certainly thought, that good Men were happy instantly
upon their Death. For with him, is respect of all sincere Christians, 'to die
is Gain'; 'to be absent from the Body, is to be present with the LORD'; and 'to
depart hence, is to be with CHRIST, which is by far better than to abide in the
Flesh'. And our blessed SAVIOR himself, in the Parable of the Rich Man and
Lazarus, represents Lazarus, upon his dying, as immediately 'carried by the
Angels into Abraham's Bosom'; by which he means a Place of ineffable Happiness.
And it is observable, what he here says of Lazarus is exhibited as an Example
of what will be the Case of all who die in CHRIST: The holy Angels of GOD will
take into Custody their departing Spirits, and convoy them safe to some Place
of Blessedness, in the future World.

And this Scripture-Representation of the Matter is far more agreeable to true
Philosophy, than that which makes Death, either a total Destruction of our
Being, or the bringing us into a State of Insensibility.

Death, considered as the Destruction of our rational and moral Powers, is an
incredible Thing, if viewed in the Light of Reason. We have in Nature no
Example of such Destruction. What we call the Destruction of material Beings
is, properly speaking, nothing more than a Change of their Form. And if, in
respect of unperceiving Beings, there is no Destruction; but only a Change in
the Mode of their Existence: Why should it be thought, that a total End is put
to perceiving Beings, much less to intelligent moral ones, upon such an
Appearance as Death? This cannot be argued from Analogy: For there is nothing
similar to it, that we know of, in all the Revolutions of Nature. -- It
certainty looks more rational to conclude, that, in respect of such thinking
moral Beings as Men are, a Change only is introduced by Death, as to the Manner
of their Communication with this sensible and material World. -- Besides, it
does not reflect Honor on the infinitely benevolent Creator and Ruler of the
World, to suppose him putting a Period, at Death, to the Existence of rational
moral Beings; especially, those among them, who, by a wise Improvement of their
Powers, have enlarged their Capacities for Happiness. We can easily conceive
GOD to be good, and as exercising Goodness, and the greatest Goodness upon the
whole, when the Constitution of Things is such, as that, according to certain
stated Laws, there shall be a Change in moral Beings, as to the Manner of their
Existence, and the Exertment of their several Powers: But the Consistency
between Goodness, in an infinitely benevolent Creator and Governor, and the
total perishing of moral Beings; especially such as have behaved well, does not
so readily appear to the humane Mind. To be sure, it gives us, at best, but a
low diminished Idea of the Benevolence of GOD, to view him as destroying moral
Agents, capable of Happiness, and growing in their Capacity and Meetness for
it, after so short and momentany an Existence as our's must be, if there is an
End of it at Death. --

In like Manner, Death, considered as sinking Men into a Stupor, and thereby
rendering their thinking Powers useless and inactive, though it be only till the
Resurrection, is a Notion that can no more be justified by Reason. What may
have led to this Apprehension, and is indeed the only Thing that can, with any
Color, give Credit to it, is the ceasing of that stated Order, at Death,
according to which the humane Mind has Communication, by Means of a wisely
organized Body, with external Objects. But this is a Consideration more
plausible than weighty, unless it could be made to appear, that the Mind, upon
Failure of that bodily Organization, by Means of which it is now affected and
moved, must be, if not destroyed, yet, at least, reduced to an inactive State;
becoming incapable of receiving other Ideas, or exercising it self in
Contemplation on those it has already received: Which perhaps can never be
done. It is allowed by all Inquirers into Nature, that the present Method,
according to which the Mind receives Ideas, is an arbitrary Constitution: To be
sure, it is not the only possible one; for if it was, then no Mind, or thinking
Being, could be impressed with Ideas, but in Conformity to this Law of Nature:
Which, without all Doubt, is contrary to the Truth of Fact. And if the Mind may
receive Ideas, and exert it self in making the proper Use of them, without
being confined to the present established Order of Nature, it can never be
proved, that, when this ceases to take place, as it will at Death, the Mind
becomes stupid, senseless and inactive. It should seem far more reasonable to
suppose, that Death only puts an End to that constituted Method, according to
which the Mind, at present, receives Sensations from this material World;
introducing some unknown Change as to the Manner of its Communication with that
it then goes into.

And thus the Existence of the Soul, after Death, as a living, active, thinking
Being, is a Supposition perfectly agreeable to the Principles of Reason, as
well as the Doctrine of Revelation.

As to the Place where unimbodied Spirits exist, Reason, it must be owned, is
wholly at a Loss; and Revelation speaks only in general Terms. Reason also is
unable to declare the Condition of humane Souls in their separate State: -- But
we are relieved, under this Difficulty, by Revelation; which expressly affirms,
in respect of all who die in the LORD, that they are blessed. The Apostle John,
in my Text, heard a Voice from Heaven, declaring them blessed, and bidding him
write them blessed from henceforth, i. e. from the very Moment of their Death.
Yea, they are solemnly pronounced blessed by the SPIRIT of Truth; who also
particularly says wherein they are so. And this brings me

III. To the third Thing observable in the Text, viz. A Recital of the
particular Instances, wherein the Dead who die in the LORD are blessed. And
these are two. 1. They rest from their Labors. 2. Their Works do follow them.

1. They rest from their Labors. i. e. from the Sorrows and Afflictions, the
Crosses, Difficulties and Vexations, they were exposed to, and might be called
to conflict with, while in this Vale of Tears.

Even good Christians, those who are in CHRIST, as being spiritually united to
him, are liable, while in this World of Trial and Discipline, to all those
various Troubles to which Mankind are born, and which as naturally come upon
them, 'as the Sparks fly upwards'. There is, in this Respect, 'one Event both
to the Righteous and the Wicked: All Things come alike to all: And no Man
knows either Love or Hatred by all that is before him'.

There are, in general, two Sorts of Troubles, which those, who are in CHRIST,
are exposed to, and often conflict with, in the present World, which they shall
be set at Rest from the Moment they die, on Account whereof they are blessed;
the one common to all Men, the other peculiar to good Christians.

In common with other Men, they are exposed to numberless Diseases and
Disasters, and all the Pain and Sorrow naturally consequent thereupon. -- They
may meet with Losses, and Crosses, and Disappointments; and are capable of very
uneasy Sensations herefrom. -- They may suffer Hunger and Thirst, Nakedness and
Distress; and even the Want of all outward good Things. -- They may be defamed,
oppressed, and injuriously treated, both by Enemies and Friends. -- They may be
called to put on Mourning for the Death (...) ^earest Friends and Relations:
'The Desire of their Eyes may be taken from them with a Stroke;' their
'Children may be removed into Darkness:' or, in many other Ways, their dearest
Comforts may be imbittered to them. -- In a Word, there is no Evil that can
befall other Men, but it may befall them also; and so as to impress their Minds
with Grief and Pain, and endanger their indulging to Impatience and Discontent.
But this is their Blessedness, that they shall not always labor under the
Trial of such Evils as these. For at Death they rest from their Labors; are
instantly and eternally set free from all these Sorrows of a sinful and
calamitous World. They shall no more meet with any cross Events; they shall no
more be disappointed; they shall no more be afflicted and grieved: For being in
the State of the Dead, they are in that State, concerning which we read, Rev.
xxi. 4. 'And GOD shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes; and there shall be
no more Death, neither Sorrow, nor crying; neither shall there be any more
Pain: for the former Things are passed away.'

But besides these Afflictions common to all Men, there are Labors and
Distresses peculiar to good Christians, in respect whereof, those who are in
CHRIST JESUS often suffer great Uneasiness, and go mourning all the Day long;
all which they shall rest from at Death.

It is no unusual Thing, even for very good Christians to call in Question the
Safety of their spiritual State; yea, many Times, they who 'fear the LORD, and
obey the Voice of his Servant, walk in Darkness, and see no Light'; by Means
whereof, they are 'subject to Bondage through Fear of Death,' and what may be
the Consequences of it beyond the Grave. But they are blessed, in that they
shall rest from (...) Conflicts and spiritual Labors, if not before, yet
certainly at Death. For they shall then know, to their entire Satisfaction, by
being received to the Place assigned for the Spirits of just Men make perfect,
that they are indeed the (...) GOD, interested in the Purchases of the
REDEEMER's Blood, and Heirs to the Kingdom of Heaven. They shall now see that
all their former Suspicions, which gave them so much Anxiety, were groundless;
and shall never more entertain the least Fear whether GOD is their FATHER, and
CHRIST their SAVIOR; but shall live in the assured Expectation of complete
Blessedness, when the 'LORD JESUS shall appear a second Time without Sin unto
Salvation.'

O what a glorious Rest is this! What Heart can conceive the Pleasure, with
which the separate Spirits of good Men shall be filled, when they come to know,
beyond the Possibility of Mistake, that they are in Favor with the GOD of
Heaven, and that they shall, in the Day of the Revelation of JESUS CHRIST, be
owned as his Disciples, and bid, as such, to enter upon Possession of an
everlasting Kingdom in Heaven! -- They will now exult with Joy unspeakable, and
full of Glory. --

But the greatest Trouble of good Men arises from the Burden of Sin, they at
present groan under. Notwithstanding all that has been wrought in them, and
done for them, by the SPIRIT of GOD and Holiness, they have still a car^^^
Part, which opposes that in them which is holy and spiritual. And it occasions
a great deal of Labor and Conflict. 'The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and
the Spirit against the Flesh': And so great is the Struggle between these two
Principles, that they have often Reason to cry out with the holy Apostle Paul,
'O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death'?
But it shall not be always thus with those who are in CHRIST JESUS. Now they
may complain of 'Sin that dwells in them': And after all their Endeavors,
they will have Reason to lament their Frailties and Imperfections, their too
frequent Inadvertencies, if not more heinous Offenses. But Death will forever
set them at Rest from all their Labors and Sorrows, occasioned by Sin. No
sooner shall their Souls leave their Bodies than they shall become sinless.
They shall no more, after Death, have Reason to lament, that 'the good they
would, they do not; and the Evil they would not, that they do.' They shall no
more have Occasion to bewail their having displeased GOD, or dishonored
CHRIST, or grieved the good SPIRIT of Grace. They shall no more reflect Blame
on themselves for any Thing they have done that is amiss: For they are now in
the Paradise of GOD without Spot or Wrinkle, perfectly conformed to the
REDEEMER's Image.

O what a blessed Ingredient is this in the Rest of those Dead who die in the
LORD! How should the believing Prospect of such a Rest from Sin, even at
present, ravish their Hearts with Joy! and dispose them to long for their
Dissolution, that they might no more displease their heavenly FATHER, that they
might no more offend their compassionate REDEEMER! Thanks be to GOD for JESUS
CHRIST, through whom we have the Hope of putting off that Body of Sin and Death
we are now clothed with, when we shall stand faultless before the Throne of
his Glory with exceeding Joy.

And thus we see that the Dead who die in the LORD are blessed, as they rest
from their Labors, i. e. their Troubles, Conflicts and Trials, whether of an
outward or spiritual Nature. But this Rest, you observe, is a negative
Blessing: which though necessary to Happiness, yet is not all that is
necessary: Nay, it is the smallest Ingredient in the Blessedness of the Dead in
CHRIST. They not only rest from their Labors,

2. But, Secondly, Their Works do follow them: Not that they do so, according
to the Strictness of the Letter; for being transient Acts, no sooner done than
gone, this is plainly impossible: But, by an easy Figure of Speech, they may be
said to follow, or, as the Words may be rendered, go along with them. They do
so in such Senses as these, which the Time will allow me but just to mention.

Their Works do follow them. i. e. The conscious Remembrance that they once
performed them. They do not, at Death, lose their Power of Reflection, but
carry it with them into the Place of separate Spirits, where they are able to
look back upon those Labors of Love, and Works of Faith, Humility, Patience,
Submission, and other Virtues, they were enabled to exercise, while in this
World of Trial. And this Power of making themselves conscious to the having
done these good Works, will be a never-failing Spring of Joy to them. Scarce
any Thing will afford good Men, either in their separate State, or after the
Reunion of their Souls to their Bodies, greater Pleasure than that which will
result from the Reflection on those virtuous Acts, in their various Kinds,
which they were disposed and enabled, by Divine Grace, to perform, in this
World, to the Glory of CHRIST, and the Credit of his Religion.

Their Works do follow them. i. e. The good Dispositions which were confirmed
and improved by the frequent Performance of them. The Habits of Virtue are
capable of Improvement by virtuous Acts. The Repetition of these has a natural
Aptitude, and, under the Influence of the SPIRIT of GOD, a powerful Tendency,
both to invigorate their corresponding Dispositions, and give them a Facility
in their Exertions. And good Men have accordingly improved their virtuous
Habits, in a less or greater Degree, in Proportion to the Acts of Virtue, or
those good Works, they have performed, in Obedience to the Will of GOD. And
these Dispositions, with all their Improvements, they carry with them into the
other World: And they are another Source of the Happiness they will there
enjoy. At present, they reap no such Satisfaction as that which is the Fruit of
their virtuous Dispositions sutably exercised: And the Connection between
Happiness and virtuous Exercises will much more take place, in the future
State. The Dead in CHRIST will never cease, either in their unimbodied State,
or afterward, employing themselves in Acts of Homage 'to him that sits upon
the Throne, and to the Lamb,' or in Works of Love and Service to those they
will then be associated with: And in these and such like Exercises, they will
be eternally happy. --

Their Works do follow them. i. e, in fine, the Reward of them, freely bestowed
for the Sake of JESUS CHRIST. Agreeable to which Interpretation of the Words is
that of the Prophet, Isai. iii. 10. 'Say ye to the Righteous, it shall go well
with him; for they shall eat of the Fruit of their Doings.' And that of holy
David, Psalm lviii. 11. -- 'Verily, there is a Reward for the Righteous.'

This Reward they will enter upon, in part, at Death, and enjoy through the
whole Time of the intermediate State. But it will not be complete, till the Day
of the great and last Judgment. Then shall their Souls be again united to their
Bodies, not as they were put into the Grave, but 'as fashioned like to the
glorious Body of JESUS CHRIST': Then shall they be acquitted, upon a full
Hearing of their Case, before the General Assembly of Angels and Men: And then
shall they be pronounced blessed, and have 'Entrance ministered to them
abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom prepared for them, from before the
Foundation of the World'; in which Kingdom, they shall have placed on their
Heads 'an immortal incorruptible Crown of Glory', and be treated as 'Kings and
Priests to GOD and the FATHER for ever and ever.' -- But the Blessedness of
this Reward cannot be described. It surpasses all Language; yea, all
Conception. We have not, at present, fit Organs to let into the Mind adequate
Ideas of it. For, 'as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither
have entered in the Heart of Man, the Things which GOD has prepared for them
that love him.' 1 Cor. ii. 9.

I shall only add, as the Dead who die in the LORD are blessed, in that their
Works do follow them, it is obvious to remark, that their Blessedness will be
various, in Degree, both in their separate State, and after they are received
to Heaven, according to the Variety there has been in their Works. Not that
there is any Merit in the Works, even of those who are in CHRIST. Such a
Supposition would carry with it a gross Absurdity, and basely reflect upon the
Mercy of GOD, and the Mediation of JESUS CHRIST. But though there is no Merit
in the best Works of the Saints, and the Reward promised to them is wholly a
Matter of Grace, communicable only through the Hands of a Mediator, and on
Account of his Performances and Sufferings, in this Capacity; yet, it seems a
Thing congruous in it self, that it should be a Reward proportioned to the
Difference there is in the Works of good Christians. As more and better Works
are done by some than others, it should seem fit that the Reward of some should
be greater than that of others; that GOD should distinguish those, whom he has
enabled, by his Grace, to distinguish themselves, by their Zeal for his Honor,
and their active Diligence in working the Works, which he sent them into the
World to do: And there is no Reason to think, but that he will thus bestow the
Rewards of the future World.

The Application is as follows.

1. As the Dead who die in the LORD are the Persons pronounced blessed, in my
Text, we should all be concerned that we may thus die. Die we must, sooner or
later. 'It is appointed to all Men once to die.' And 'what Man is he that
lives, and shall not see Death'? -- And shall we be unconcerned how it goes
with us, when we come to die? That we may be ranked among the blessed, at the
Day of our Death, is a Matter of the nearest and greatest Importance to us: And
as those only, among the Dead who die in the LORD, are blessed, it should be
our principal Concern and main Business, on the present Stage of Time, that we
may thus die: In order whereto, we should make it our earnest and constant Care
to get into CHRIST, while we live; for then, and then only, shall we be in him
when we come to die. -- There is such a Thing as a spiritual Union to CHRIST, a
being in him, so as the Rest of the World are not; yea, so as to be interested
in his Righteousness and Merits, and the Mercy of GOD to eternal Life on that
Account. An Union to CHRIST by external Profession, and mere visible
Membership, in that Kingdom of which he is the Head, is not sufficient for
this. We may, notwithstanding such a being in CHRIST, be severed from him at
Death, as withered Branches fit for burning; and at the final Judgment be
doomed to a Departure from him, unto the Fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. We must therefore take Care, that we be in CHRIST in an higher and more
spiritual Sense. It is by Faith, not an empty notional Faith, but a Faith that
is an inward living powerful Principle of Action, that we become one with
CHRIST, dwell in him, and live to him, to the Purposes of another World. Let us
in this Way, get into CHRIST: And if we are thus in him while we live, we may
depend we shall be in him when we come to die: And blessed, for ever blessed
shall we be, if we die in the LORD.

2. The Consideration, that those who die in the LORD, do rest from their
Labors, affords strong Ground of Support and Consolation to good Christians
under the Sorrows and Troubles of Life. These may be many, and great. -- In
this Way, it may seem good to the Wisdom of GOD to give Opportunity for the
Trial of your Graces, and to let 'Patience have its perfect Work.' But be not
discouraged: The Time of your Redemption draws near. It will not be long
before you will arrive at the Place of the Dead in CHRIST, where you shall
eternally rest from all your Labors and Sorrows. Your 'Tears may endure for a
Night; but Joy comes in the Morning.' The Time hastens, it hastens with a
quick Pace, when all 'Cryings shall flee away.' O look forward, in the lively
Exercise of Faith, to the Apartment assigned, in the Place of separate Spirits,
for the Dead who die in the LORD, and 'faint not in your Minds,' neither repine
at Providence. -- What though you may be called to endure Hardships, and pass
through a Variety of afflictive Trials, so long as the Time is at Hand, when
you shall be taken by the holy Angels of GOD, and carried to a World of eternal
Rest from all your Griefs and Labors. Is not this enough to support your
Spirits, and soften your Difficulties and Toils? -- 'Be ye patient therefore,'
ye who are in CHRIST, and live to him, 'stablish your Hearts; for the coming of
the LORD draws nigh': His coming to call you by Death; and then 'shall all
Tears be wiped away from your Eyes: neither shall you know Sorrow any more.'

3. What has been discoursed may be improved to reconcile good Christians to
the Thought of dying, and render it comfortable to them. Your Bodies, it is
true, will at Death, become senseless and inactive; they will be laid in the
dark and silent Grave, and there they will dissolve, and gradually return to
their original Dust: which are Considerations abhorrent to Nature, and apt to
startle even the most sanctified in JESUS CHRIST. But to guard against undue
Impressions from these natural Horrors of the Grave, you should, in the
Exercise of Faith, turn your Thoughts to those Spirits within you, which will
survive the Funeral of your Bodies; ascending up, when they die, 'to GOD who
gave them,' to be made by him immediately blessed, in some Place, he has
prepared, in the other World, for the 'Spirits of just Men.' A most comforting
Reflection this! and should make the Thought of Death set easy on the Minds of
good Men; yea, it should render it pleasant and joyful to them: Especially,
while they are in the further Exercise of Faith in a living REDEEMER, who will
again 'stand upon this Earth,' and by his almighty Voice speak Life even into
their dead Bodies, however long they may have laid dead, and into whatever
small Particles of Dust they may have been resolved. For this is that which we
are certified of in the Revelations of GOD, that 'this Corruptible shall put on
Incorruption, and this Mortal, Immortality; when shall be brought to pass that
Saying which is written, Death is swallowed up in Victory.'

4. Rich Consolation may be fetched, from the preceding Discourse, for those
who may be mourning the Decease of near and dear Relatives, whom they have
Reason to believe died in the LORD. Such indeed, in a Sense, cannot be said to
be dead: They are alive in respect of their Spirits; and what is more, their
Spirits are alive in a State of Happiness: for, as the Apostle John was
ordered, by a Voice from GOD out of Heaven, to declare, and write, Blessed are
the Dead that die in the LORD: To which, the Divine SPIRIT is brought in
subjoining his Testimony; Yea, says the SPIRIT, that they may rest from their
Labors, and their Works do follow them.

A most comforting and supporting Consideration this! There is enough in it,
duly realised, to compose your Minds to Silence and Submission, upon the Death
of the nearest and dearest Relative.

I doubt not, your afflicted Pastor, and my Companion and Fellow Laborer in
the Kingdom and Patience of JESUS CHRIST, has often, since the holy GOD took
from him the Desire of his Eyes, quieted his Heart, by looking beyond the
Grave, to the Paradise of GOD, and meditating on her, in his believing Hopes,
as enjoying there perfect Rest from all her Labors and Conflicts, and reaping
the blessed Reward of her Works of Righteousness, in Joys unspeakable, which
shall increase and endure forever. It cannot be supposed, that, in this View of
her, he so much as wishes her back again into this World of Sin and Sorrow. And
though he may grieve, it is not for her; but for himself, and his dear
Children. And in this Respect, he is not to be blamed, if 'his Heart is
troubled.' Nature leads to this, and Religion does not forbid it. Abraham, that
Pattern of Faith and Submission, upon the Death of Sarah, 'went to mourn and
weep for her.' And a greater than Abraham, even the blessed JESUS, did himself
weep upon Occasion of the Death of Lazarus. And there is, in the present Case,
just Cause of Grief: -- The Excitements to the Sensations of Sorrow are strong
and powerful.

It may renew the Grief of my Fellow-Worker unto the Kingdom of GOD, if I
mention, in his Presence, those Things which adorned his deceased Consort, and
made her amiable in the Sight of those who were acquainted with her: Yet, he
will 'forgive me this Wrong,' if, out of Regard to GOD, whose she was, and whom
she served, I endeavor some brief Delineation of her Character.

She was a Person endowed with desirable Qualities; a good Understanding, a
solid Judgment, and a well-turned Mind: Sober and grave, yet pleasant and
cheerful: cautious and reserved, yet, upon suitable Occasions, wisely free and
open: meek and gentle, yet capable of Resentment, when proper and necessary;
though not hasty to be angry, not given to Wrath, never bitter, never
revengeful, never clamorous and noisy: Candid, and ever inclined to speak well
of others: Compassionate to the poor and afflicted, and not envying them who
prosper in the World: Generous, yet frugal in her Expenses: Humble in her
Deportment, and adorning herself in modest Apparel: A Keeper at home, yet a
Friend to all the good Offices of Neighborhood and Acquaintance: Singularly
prudent; not prone to be rash in Conduct, not acting without Thought, and at
Random; but apt to forecast her Affairs, and guide them with Discretion. -- And
as she was formed to behave well in the several Relations of Life, few better
filled them with the Duties proper to them. As a Wife, how engaging in her
Carriage! how faithful! how dutiful! As a Mother, how tender and affectionate!
how vigilant! 'having her Children in Subjection with all Gravity.' As Mistress
in the Family, how prudent in her Economy! how provident! how diligent! The
Wise Man's Description of the virtuous Woman is very much here is, 'She opens
her Mouth with Wisdom, and in her Tongue is the Law of Kindness. She looks
well to the Ways of her Household, and eats not the Bread of Idleness. Her
Children arise up, and call her blessed; her Husband also, and he praises
her.' Prove. xxxi. 26, 27, 28.

But her greatest Glory was her being a Woman in CHRIST, a real good Christian;
as we cannot but charitably believe and judge. Those acquainted with her, when
young, speak of her as having then a serious Bent of Mind; noted for her
Sobriety, Modesty, and decent Christian Behavior. And she, all along in Life,
discovered an Abhorrence of Vice, in all its various Shapes and Kinds; and
expressed a becoming Regard to the Things of GOD and Religion. She was a daily
diligent Reader of her Bible, and constant in her Retirements for Devotion: A
Lover of the House, and public Worship of GOD; taking Care to sanctify his Day,
and devoutly attend on all his Institutions. -- But CHRIST, above all, was the
lovely Object of her Desire, and Faith, and Hope. Into his Hands she committed
the great Affair of her Soul's Salvation: On his Righteousness and Merits she
depended for Acceptance with GOD to eternal Life: His Image she was adorned
with: And the Graces of his Spirit she lived in the daily Exercise of;
endeavoring in all Things to please and serve him. --

It was on Account of these, and such like Strokes, in her Character, that she
lived so generally beloved, and died so generally lamented; leaving behind her
a 'Name better than precious Ointment.' I doubt not I have a Witness in the
Hearts of many of you, to the Truth of all that I have said concerning her.
You, the Worshippers of GOD in this House, justly entertained an high Opinion
of her: And I cannot but mention to your Honor, and the Imitation of the
Churches, the Respect you so readily showed to her, as well as Sympathy with
your bereaved Pastor, in the handsome Provision you made, by your generous
Subscription, for her decent Funeral. -- But she is now gone, not out of Being,
blessed be GOD, though out of our World. In her last Sickness, she was silent
and submissive; as, at other Times before, she had set a bright Example of
Patience and Firmness of Mind under great Afflictions. On her Deathbed, she
expressed her Desire to depart and be with CHRIST; and her Hope, that for her
to die, would be Gain. And we doubt not, she is gone to be with CHRIST, (to
whom she lived) in the Place GOD has appointed for the Reception of unimbodied
Spirits.

And what a Spring of Joy is this to the surviving Relatives! How thankful
should they be, that they are not called to 'mourn as those who have no Hope'?
And how should they temper their Sorrow with the Thought, that their departed
Friend, though 'absent from the Body, is present with the LORD'!

We heartily wish for them all the Supports of Divine Grace, the Comforts of
the HOLY GHOST, and those Influences from above, under this 'Tryal of their
Faith,' whereby they may be enabled to behave so as that CHRIST may be
glorified, their own Holiness promoted, and their future Crown of Glory made
more bright and weighty.

We unite in our Supplications to the Throne of GOD particularly for the
mourning Husband, that he may be helped to exhibit such a Temper and Conduct,
upon this Occasion, as that there may be no Reason to apply to him the Words of
Eliphaz to Job, 'Behold, thou have instructed many, and thou have strengthened
the weak Hands. Thy Words have upholden him that was falling, and thou have
strengthened the feeble Knees. But now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest;
it touches thee, and thou art troubled': But, on the contrary, that it may be
said of him, he sets before his Flock a bright Pattern of Meekness and
Humility, of Faith, Patience, Submission, and a steady Trust in GOD, and firm
Reliance on his Perfections and Promises. And may he be quickened to go on in
his LORD's Work, with greater Zeal, Vigor, Fidelity, and active Diligence. And
in fine, may he, from his own Experience of the Divine Consolations, under this
trying Providence, have Reason to exult with the holy Apostle Paul, and say,
'Blessed be GOD, even the Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, the Father of
Mercies, and the GOD of all Comfort, who comfort us in all our Tribulation,
that we may be able to comfort them which are in any Trouble, by the Comfort
wherewith we our selves are comforted of GOD.'

We wish also, for the bereaved Children, the Grace of GOD whereby they may be
disposed and enabled to be Followers of their departed Mother, wherein she
followed CHRIST. And may you her Sons appear as 'beautiful Plants grown up in
your Youth': And you her Daughters, shine as 'Corner-Stones polished after the
Similitude of a Palace.'

Our Prayer likewise for the mourning Sisters is, that the LORD JESUS CHRIST
would say to them, for their Support and Comfort, as he did in the Days of his
Flesh to the Sisters of dead Lazarus, 'I am the Resurrection and the Life: He
that believes on me, though he were dead, yet shall he live.'

And may it please a good and gracious GOD to sanctify this repeated Stroke of
his Hand upon this Church of JESUS CHRIST. We have Reason to lament, and pray,
with David, 'Help LORD, for the Godly cease, and the faithful fail from among
us.' -- Let us not be insensible of our great Loss, in the Removal of so many
of our Brethren and Sisters in CHRIST, by Death, from Time to Time, and
especially of late. 'O LORD our GOD, by whom shall Jacob arise? for he is
small'! -- Let us make GOD our Hope; and direct our Prayer to his holy
Dewlling Place, begging that he would mercifully look from thence, and be 'the
Repairer of our Breaches': And instead of the Parents, may the Children rise
up, and do worthily for GOD in their Day and Generation.

And may we all get spiritual Good by the Providence we are now lamenting.

And may the Daughters in Zion, in special, hear the Voice of GOD, speaking as
it were particularly to them; and be quickened therefrom to live as those who
must shortly die. Let your 'Behaviour be as becomes Godliness'. -- 'Be sober,
discreet, chaste, exemplary for all good Works.' And 'your Adorning, let it be
the hidden Man of the Heart; even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit:
which is, in the Sight of GOD, of great Price.'

5. In the last Place, As the Works of good Christians do follow them into the
other World, let us all labor to abound therein. Our good Deeds, done in Faith
and Love, from a Regard to CHRIST, and for the Glory of GOD, are the only
Things we can carry with us into the coming State: And these, we may depend,
will go along with us, and of the infinite Mercy of GOD, through the infinite
Worthiness of his dear Son JESUS CHRIST, be rewarded beyond, not only our
Deserts, but even our Imaginations. And the more and better our Works have
been, the greater and more glorious will our Reward be.

Be encouraged therefore to do all the good you can in the World. Serve GOD,
and your Generation, with all your Might. -- Faithfully employ your Time, and
wisely improve the Talents you have been entrusted with. -- 'And besides this,
giving all Diligence, add to your Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge; and
to Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance, Patience; and to Patience,
Godliness? and to Godliness, Brotherly-kindness; and to Brotherly-kindness,
Charity.' And look to it, that 'these Things be in you and abound': For in
Proportion to your Improvements in them here, will be your Reward in Heaven
hereafter. 'Wherefore, my beloved Brethren, Be ye steadfast and immovable,
always abounding in the Work of the LORD; for as much as ye know, that your
Labor shall not be in vain in the LORD.'

FINIS.

