LOVE to our NEIGHBOR RECOMMENDED; AND The DUTIES thereof IMPORTUNATELY URGED:
A SERMON SHOWING What is Required, and what is not Required in Loving our
Neighbors as Ourselves, and why we must do it, etc.

Preached at Freehold in the Jersies.

By Joseph Morgan, A. M. Pastor of a Church there.

Now Published at the Desire and Expense of One that lately perused, and very
much approves of it.

NEW LONDON, Printed in the Year 1727. BOSTON: N. E. Re Printed by JOHN GREEN,
1749.

LOVE to our Neighbors.
MATTHEW XXII. 39. And the Second is like unto it, Thou shall Love thy
NEIGHBOR as thy self.


AS Love is the ground of Happiness; so a Spirit of Love is necessary to the
Happiness of the Creature. We can have no Pleasure in that which we Love not;
whether it be good or evil. And the better the thing Loved is, and the stronger
the Love, the greater is the Happiness of enjoying it. So it has been GOD's
unspeakable kindness to us, to make us such as are capable of Loving him, who
is Infinitely more Excellent than all the whole Creation. And hence our Soul is
ever empty of its proper and sufficient Happiness, while it does not enjoy GOD;
and cannot be truly Happy, except it Love him strongly with all its Power and
Strength: which cannot be without knowing his excellent Goodness. Joh. 17.3.

And Hence, as GOD is Love, and Loves to make us Happy: So he has made this the
Sum and Substance of all our Duty. To Love the Lord with all our Heart and
Soul, etc. Mat. 22.37. So the substance of all our Duty and Happiness (which
are inseparably joined in one) is Love. And if we Love dutifully and happily,
we shall proportion our Love to every Thing according to its worth. And hence
shall Love GOD for his own sake, and his Creatures for his sake, and modify our
Love to his Creatures according to their use and worth. He that had this Love
is happy: he that wants it is miserable; though at present he perceive it not.

Hence the whole Law is comprised in these two Commands, To Love the Lord our
GOD with our whole Heart, Soul, Mind and Strength, and to Love our Neighbor as
our self.

Hence when Men and Devils had by Sin forfeited their Happiness, they became
Angry, Malicious, Proud, Deceitful, etc. And therefore the Gospel of Christ is
bro't in (since the everlasting Law) to restore some of the Children of Men to
the Spirit of Love again, that they may be happy, since Christ has satisfied
Justice for them. Here our LORD first shows which is the first and great
Command: And then says of the other, that it is like the first. That is, we
cannot be happy without it. The Spirit of not loving our Neighbor, that evil
and disquieted Spirit, would render us in it self unhappy, and incapable of
Communion with GOD, who is Love.

So I Observe, The Loving our Neighbors as we love ourselves, is necessary
unto our Duty and Happiness.

I shall here in the first Place enquire, What it is, to love our Neighbor as
ourselves.

In order unto which, I lay down this Position, viz. An Unregenerate Person,
while in that State, is incapable of keeping this Command, according to the
Intention of it.

To Explain this, I add, It is a very great Wickedness for an Unregenerate
Person to love his Neighbor as he does love himself. It is his great Duty to
love his Neighbor as he ought to love himself: But not as he does love
himself. I show it in these Instances.

1. He loves himself for his own sake. He loves himself, not under GOD, but
above GOD, and his love to GOD is only for himself and for his own sake. He
cares not for GOD's Glory otherwise than for his own Interest. He Spiritually
feeds on the forbidden Fruit continually; in setting up for himself a Happiness
separate from GOD's Glory. His Religion is only to make himself easy. He serves
his own Conscience, and not GOD.

Among many Instances, I name one. If he think he is not Elected to Salvation,
he will not seek to serve GOD: It appears he cares not for Him, nor for his
Glory. But if he think he is Elected, then he cares as little; for he thinks he
is safe enough, and desires not to Glorify GOD in his Life, but to take his own
Comfort and live to himself.

Therefore, If an Unsanctifyed Person love his Neighbor as he loves himself,
he is an Idolater in doing it: He sets his Neighbor in God's Stead, to be
loved for his own Sake, and not for the Sake of God's Glory by him.

2. An Unregenerate Person loves himself very Treacherously. Because he loves
not GOD truly, therefore he loves not himself truly; for these Interests are
joined in one by GOD in our Creation, and therefore they cannot be separated.
He that is True to GOD is True to himself: And he that is False to GOD is False
to himself. So are the Wicked Snared in the Work of their own Hands, Psalm.
9.16. He Labors after Humiliation, Faith and Repentance very Unfaithfully; and
hence is never made Partaker of either in Truth, but is deceived with a false
Hope. He Labors to keep off Convictions, because he is afraid to trust his
Soul with Christ, loathe to loose his easy Mind, and his good Opinion of
himself. When he examines himself, Whether he be in Christ; he does it very
Partially, takes every Argument to think all well, and takes off all that
Condemns him: And if he yet cannot find himself in Christ, yet he is easy with
false Purposes of what he will do hereafter. So that if an Unregenerate Person
love his Neighbor as he loves himself, he must be as Treacherous to him as the
Devil is, and seek to lead him to Hell. Alas how many do so!

3. An Unregenerate Person's love to himself makes him love to please himself
in his Sinful Lusts (to GOD's Dishonor.) Some in one thing, some in another,
according to their Constitution and Temptations: And it is Wickedness against
GOD and his Neighbors Soul, to love his Neighbor so; yet how many do it, Romans
1. last.

Therefore if an Unsanctifyed Person love his Neighbor as he does love
himself, it is not an Obedience to this Command of Love, but the very Reverse
of it.

Yet Observe. Some Unsanctifyed Men go beyond the Command, and yet keep it
never the better: For they love their Neighbors better than they love
themselves; especially such as they have least love for. For they will be angry
at their Sins, and seek to cross them in their Sinful Lusts, and to have them
Punished, or Convinced of the Evil of their way. A good thing when done in
Obedience to this Command.

Having showed what is not required but forbidden in loving our Neighbors as
ourselves. I Proceed to show in the Affirmative, what is required.

(1.) We are to love our Neighbor from the same Motive for which we should
love ourselves That is because of GOD's Image which we see in them, and that
GOD may be Glorified by them: And the more we see of this in them, (in the way
wherein it is our Duty to Glorify Him) the better we are to love them. And
therefore (since the Fall) almost the only Motive to love them must be the
possible Hope that Peradventure the Glory of GOD in the Gospel of Jesus Christ
may be Magnified in their Salvation. For this reason the Angels of God love us
and rejoice in our Welfare, Luke 2.14.

And hence, Those we hope are brought over to Christ, and those we hope are of
GOD made Instruments of bringing others to Christ, are to be Proportionally
abundantly the more beloved. If you love your self Truly, you will not love
your self Idolatriously: And therefore this will be the reason why you can have
any Pleasure in your self. Thus you are to Love your Neighbor as your self.

(2) We are to love our Neighbors as Truly, as Sincerely, and as Honestly and
Uprightly, as we love our selves. We are to do by them as we desire (in the way
of GOD's Glory) they should do by us. Luke 6.31. We are to be as loath to hurt
ourselves. We are to cover his Frailties (if it may consist with the good of
his Soul) as carefully as we would have our own covered. We are to be as
willing to help him in any need, as we would desire that he should help us in
like need. We are to take no Advantage of his Ignorance or Necessity in dealing
with him, more than we would be willing he should take of us in like Case. My
Hearers, I demand of your Conscience that it do it is Office, and tell whether
you do so or not. If you love your own Soul, Observe upon all such Occasions;
that you may find out, whether you perform this Part of loving your Neighbor
as yourself.

If we love our Neighbor as ourselves, we are to be as truly pleased with his
Prosperity as with our own. We are to seek no Revenge upon him for Injuries
done, more than we would desire of him upon us in like Cases: Yea no more than
we would have that God should take Vengeance upon us for our Sins, Luke 11.4.
Ephesians. 4 last. etc.

But to show the Truth on both sides, least we give it a wrong Luster. God had
given each Man a peculiar Charge of himself, we are to Eat to preserve our own
Lives, we must Believe and Repent for ourselves, in this sense, another cannot
do it for us, each one must be Saved for himself, or Damned for himself, feel
Comfort for himself, and Trouble for himself, and give an account to God of
himself. So we are not to exercise love in the same degree for our Neighbor as
for ourselves, but in the same Sincerity and Truth.

(3) If we love our Neighbors as we ought to love ourselves, we must above
all, seek in our Capacity, to be helpful to their Souls good: for this is the
greatest kindness we can (in Truth) desire from our Neighbor. To help his Body
is a needful Kindness, but to help his Soul, is unspeakably more needful; to
Save him from Hell.

Let the same Mind be in us which was in Christ Jesus, Phi. 2.4, 5. We are
bound to Exhort one another Daily, Heb. 2.17. Each one in his Capacity, some in
more Public Teaching, some in more Private Discourses, all in Praying for
GOD's Blessing upon Endeavors, and all, according to their Ability, in
upholding such as make it their Work to Teach the Way of Salvation, and in
upholding them to Teach such as know not the need of it themselves.

This last is a very manifest Act of loving our Neighbors as ourselves. If we
do not expend to help their Perishing Souls, when God has given us to see it;
How do we love them as we love ourselves? Or at least as we ought to love
ourselves? I must think they love not themselves truly, who have so little love
to their Neighbors, as to think it enough to be Saved themselves, with their
own Friends, and do not with their Prayers and Endeavors, all that in them
lies, to Promote the saving of all they can beside.

In the Second place I Enquire, Why we must love our Neighbor as ourselves?

[1] Because there is the same Reason for it. He is GOD's Creature so well as
we, and of the same Kind. GOD may as well be Glorified in him as in us. It is
as much for GOD's Honor that my Neighbor be Saved, as it is that I be: And
the Misery of Hell would be as bitter to him. And if the Glory of GOD be our
Reward and Treasure, then we shall as truly Rejoice to see another Glorify Him,
as to do it ourselves.

If I only seek to have my self and Friends Happy, and Saved, it is a Sign I
love my self Separate from GOD, which is Idolatry.

[2.] If we can be happy in GOD, we have His Image, and if we have His Image,
then it will appear in our Practice, in Reason and Equity; and if we have not
this part of His Image, then we can never enjoy Communion with him. Now their
is as much Reason that my Neighbor should desire to enjoy Health and
Prosperity, as that I should: And as much Reason that I should wish his Good,
as that he should wish mine.

If we Profess to be GOD's Children, and do not show His Image, by Equity and
Love, we Scandalize His Glorious Name. Mat. 5.16. Let your Light so shine
before Men, that they may see your good Works and Glorify your Father which is
in Heaven.

[3.] The Rejoicing in the Glorious Excellencies of GOD is the Joy of Heaven.
Every redeemed Soul (even the least of all) is an Instance of GOD's Glorious
Redeeming Grace, and thereby an Addition to the Joy of all the rest, and even
of the Angels, Luke 15.10. Thus as our own Salvation (if we have it) will be
matter of Everlasting Joy in the Glory of GOD; so will that of our Neighbor.
And hence; if we have the Grace of GOD in our Soul, we have the same Motive to
desire our Neighbors Good and Salvation, which we have to desire our own.

From these things we may be Informed,

1. The Reason why Love to the Brethren is a Mark of one Passed from Death to
Life, 1 John 3.14. Because the Foundation of the Glory, Excellence and
Happiness of a Rational Creature consists in Love, Love to GOD, and hence, Love
to his Image, and Love to all that Glorifies Him. But Observe,

We are not to love those that Glorify GOD against their will, such as the
Devils and Damned. We are to Rejoice that GOD is Glorified upon them: But we
owe them no good will for it. But while we have any hope that they will yet
Obey the Gospel of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, we are to Love them with this hope
and desire as Sincerely as we Love ourselves.

But when a Person appears to have Obeyed the Gospel, we are to rejoice in him,
and to love him with a pure Heart Fervently in a more peculiar manner.

But as every Mark of Grace may be Counterfeited, so this of Love to the
Brethren. For Devils and wicked Men are forced to honor the Image of GOD; it
carries a Majesty with it and a Beauty of Holiness. They are Obliged to bow
before it, while they hate it. Their Conscience declares the good estate of
such a Man. This sometimes Torments them that they are not so themselves. Rev.
11.10. But instead of yielding Subdued, they seek Evasions, and strive to make
themselves believe it is Hypocrisy, and are glad to find Evil to speak of them.
A Poor way to cure their own Wound! Thus they strive and take pains to go
quietly to Hell, and delude their own Conscience. They love themselves most
Treacherously. So this sort of Love to the Brethren is no Evidence of a Child
of Grace, but of the very contrary.

2. Here appears, The person who has not this Love to GOD and his Neighbor, is
a Miserable unhappy Creature. He has not the Root of Happiness, but of Torment.
Heaven can be no Heaven to him were he there. GOD's Glory can be no Joy to him,
but a Terror. He has the Seed of Hell Fire in him. If he have all Knowledge, and
do all the great Works in the World, and die a Martyr, and have not this Love;
it all avails him nothing, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. Heaven and Hell are as Contrary
in their Inhabitants as in their Natures.

3. Hence. The Person who seeks to make his own Gain by his Neighbors Loss,
walks not according to Love. And how shall we know the Tree but by it is Fruit?
Mat. 7.18.

GOD's Infinite Wisdom has made our way of Living so agreeable to Love (when
rightly used) that what a Man gains honestly is some way for the Public Good,
or such as deal with him are the better for it, so well as himself. What the
Farmer raises on his Land makes so much the more Provision in the Country. The
Tradesman serves his Customers so well as himself, and supplies what is needed
in the Land. The Merchant brings into the Country what it needs, and disposes
of their Superfluities for them. The Teacher promotes Knowledge, for the Public
Good. Thus Men need a Communion for the good of each Party, to show by
Similitude the Heavenly Communion.

What is ours lawfully Gained, may lawfully be Possessed: But what is gained by
another Loss, in bargaining or otherwise, brings no good to the Public, and
is contrary to the Law of Loving our Neighbor as ourselves; and therefore a
breach of one necessary Rule unto Salvation.

Where there is Profit on both sides, Men may divide it as they can agree; but
not to that degree, that shall turn all the Profit to one side. But what is
gained by Wagers, is a sinfully Lost as Gained: For Men are not Lords, but only
Stewards of all which GOD has lent them, and must as well give an account how
they dispose of it, as how they get it.

4. Hence Such as love to speak evil of their Neighbors more than good, have
the mark of Hell upon them. They love not their Neighbors as themselves. We
see that Men naturally take the part of their nearest Friends when they are
spoken against, because they have a natural love for them. But we see that in
many Places, an evil Report (true or false) of any Person, will spread much
faster then a good Report: Whereby it appears that the most part love not their
Neighbors as themselves, but bear them an inward Hatred, or else (which is as
bad) that they have an inward hatred to Holiness it self (though they think they
have it) and are glad to tell of evil Committed. My Hearers, I beg of you,
Examine yourselves. It is a Point of Life and Death. Well might our LORD tell
us, There be few that find the strait and narrow Way to Life, Mat. 7.14.

5. Hence we see the Reason why the Devils are of such a Malicious Angry Evil
Temper. It is because no Happiness belongs to them, for they have Sinned it
away, and so their Temper is become Miserable. For Love is the Temper of
Happiness, and Anger or Hatred, the Temper of Misery.

And here we see that an Angry Contentious Wilful Temper in Men, carries the
mark of Misery and Condemnation. What shall an Angry Creature do in Heaven?
Where it is all Love.

Some vent their Anger in Religious things; and thereby not only quiet their
Conscience, but also build a great hope of their Grace unto Salvation: But let
them read, James 3.15, 16, 17. This Wisdom descends not from above, but is
Earthly, Sensual, Devilish. For where Envying and Stife is, there is Confusion
and every evil Work. But the Wisdom that is from above is first Pure, then
Peaceable, Gentle and easy to be Entreated, etc.

I can excuse a passionate Man, who breaks out into Raptures of Anger, and
cannot help it, but upon second Thot's, is grieved for it. But I know not how
to excuse a Wilful Contentious Person, who upon Mature Tho'ts, will rather Rend
the Church or Town or Neighborhood than loose his will or be though it to have
been in a wrong cause. These often think they stand for the Honor of GOD, when
their own will at the Bottom blinds 'em to think so: And their want of love to
their Neighbor makes 'em think worse of him then he is. Luke 9.55. That Love,
without which all great things are nothing, is thus Described, 1 Cor, 13. ver.
4, 5, 6, 7. (Translated in our Bibles, Charity) Suffers long, and is kind;
Envieth not, Vaunteth not it self, is not Puffed up, does not Behave it self
unseemly, Seeks not her own, is not easily Provoked, thinks no Evil, etc.
We ought to stand firm for the Truth of Christ: But if it break out into Anger
and Hatred, it is Sinfully Managed. 2 Timothy 2.25. In meekness Instructing them
that oppose themselves, if GOD Peradventer will give them Repentance to the
acknowledging of the Truth. We ought to be diligent to keep the Church clean
from Scandalous Persons: But if a Secret Grudge at the Person be at last found
to be the cause of your Zeal; it will be found but a Service of the Devil. Men
need know well by what Motive they are set on Work. The way is Narrow!

Nor do I know how to excuse those who in Families or in Neighbourhoods, are
ever and anon in Anger, and giving angry Language (whether to Equals or
Inferiors.) They are much easier Reformed by Convincing Loving Reasons: And if
Inferiors must have Correction, it will take much the better Convincing
Impression, when few or no angry Words (which always seem to show Revenge) are
mixed with it; as Experience shows where it is used. But an angry murmering
Temper looks so little like Heaven, and so much like Hell; that I must beg of
such as use it to consider on what Ground they stand.

6. Here see what we are to aim at, in all our Religion, viz. to be Transformed
into Love, that Glorious Virtue, and a resemblance of GOD! We lost it by the
Fall when Man set up for himself in Separation from GOD. We became Hateful and
Hating one another. CHRIST came to Redeem us, and to Sanctify us and to Purify
us, and turn us again into Love. Come to CHRIST to bring you to it, by his
Mediation and holy Spirit. Know what Progress you have made of Faith in Him, by
the Fruit of it in Love, Gal. 5.6. Know that if you make no Progress in that,
then all you have done yet has bro't nothing to Effect; you are yet in your
Sins and bear the Image of the Devil. I do not mean an Affectionate Passion of
Love (which yet is very good in it is time and place) but I mean that Love by
which Faith works in a due care for GOD's Glory and your Neighbors Good and
Peace and Comfort: Which among many greater Effects makes you bear with many
considerable Faults in others, without being angry at them, knowing how much
you need the same from GOD.

FINIS.

