PROPOSALS RELATING TO THE EDUCATION OF YOUTH IN PENSILVANIA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed in the Year, M.DCC.XLIX.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
IT has long been regretted as a Misfortune to the Youth of this Province, that
we have no ACADEMY, in which they might receive the Accomplishments of a
regular Education.

The following Paper of Hints toward forming a Plan for that Purpose, is so
far approved by some publick-spirited Gentlemen, to whom it has been privately
communicated, that they have directed a Number of Copies to be made by the
Press, and properly distributed, in order to obtain the Sentiments and Advice
of Men of Learning, Understanding, and Experience in these Matters; and have
determined to use their Interest and best Endeavors, to have the Scheme, when
completed, carried gradually into Execution; in which they have Reason to
believe they shall have the hearty Concurrence and Assistance of many who are
Wellwishers to their Country.

Those who incline to favor the Design with their Advice, either as to the
Parts of Learning to be taught, the Order of Study, the Meth^d of Teaching, the
Economy of the School, or any other Matter of Importance to the Success of the
Undertaking, are desired to communicate their Sentiments as soon as may be, by
Letter directed to B. Franklin, Printer, in Philadelphia.

AUTHORS quoted in this PAPER.
1. THE famous Milton, (...) Learning and Abilities are well known, and who had
practiced some Time the Education of Youth, so could speak from Experience. 2.
The great Mr. Lock, who wrote a Treatise on Education, well known, and much
esteemed, being translated into most of the modern Languages of Europe. 3.
Dialogues on Education, 2 Vols. Octavo, that are much esteemed, having had two
Editions in 3 Years. Supposed to be wrote by the ingenious Mr. Hutcheson
(Author of A Treatise on the Passions, and another on the Ideas of Beauty and
Virtue) who has had much Experience in Educating of Youth, being a Professor in
the College at Glasgow, etc. 4. The learned Mr. Obadiah Walker, who had been
many Years a Tutor to young Noblemen, and wrote a Treatise on the Education of
a young Gentleman; of which the Fifth Edition was printed 1687. 5. The much
admired Mons. Rollin, whose whole Life was spent in a College; and wrote 4
Vols. on Education, under the Title of, The Method of Teaching and Studying the
Belles Lettres; which are translated into English, Italian, and most of the
modern Languages. 6. The learned and ingenious Dr. George Turnbull, Chaplain to
the present Prince of Wales; who has had much Experience in the Educating of
Youth, and published a Book, Octavo, entitled, Observations on Liberal
Education, in all its Branches, 1742.
With some others.

PROPOSALS, etc.
THE good Education of Youth has been esteemed by wise Men in all Ages, as the
surest Foundation of the Happiness both of private Families and of
Commonwealths. Almost all Governments have therefore made it a principal
Object of their Attention, to establish and endow with proper Revenues, such
Seminaries of Learning, as might supply the succeeding Age with Men qualified
to serve the Public with Honor to themselves, and to their Country. As some
Things here proposed may be found to differ a little from the Forms of
Education in common Use, the following Quotations are to show the Opinions of
several learned Men, who have carefully considered and wrote expressly on the
Subject; such as Milton, Lock, Rollin, Turnbull, and others. They generally
complain, that the old Method is in many Respects wrong; but long settled Forms
are not easily changed. For us, who are now to make a Beginning, it is, at
least, as easy to set out right as wrong; and therefore their Sentiments are on
this Occasion well worth our Consideration.

Mr. Rollin says (Belles Let. p. 249. speaking of the Manner of Educating
Youth) "Though it be generally a very wise and judicious Rule to avoid all
Singularity, and to follow the received Customs, yet I question whether, in the
Point we now treat of, this Principle does not admit of some Exception, and
whether we ought not to apprehend the Dangers and Inconveniences of blindly
following the Footsteps of those who have gone before us, so as to consult
Custom more than Reason, and the governing our Actions rather by what others
do, than by what they should do; from whence it often happens, that an Error
once established is handed down from Age to Age, and becomes almost a certain
Law, from a Notion, that we ought to act like the rest of Mankind, and follow
the Example of the greatest Number. But human Nature is not so happy as to have
the greatest Number always make the best Choice, and we too frequently observe
the contrary."




Many of the first Settlers of these Provinces, were Men who had received a
good Education in Europe, and to their Wisdom and good Management we owe much
of our present Prosperity. But their Hands were full, and they could not do all
Things. The present Race are not thought to be generally of equal Ability: For
though the American Youth are allowed not to want Capacity; yet the best
Capacities require Cultivation, it being truly with them, as with the best
Ground, which unless well tilled and sowed with profitable Seed, produces only
ranker Weeds.

That we may obtain the Advantages arising from an Increase of Knowledge, and
prevent as much as may be the mischievous Consequences that would attend a
general Ignorance among us, the following Hints are offered toward forming a
Plan for the Education of the Youth of Pennsylvania, viz.

It is proposed,

THAT some Persons of Leisure and public Spirit, apply for a CHARTER, by which
they may be incorporated, with Power to erect an ACADEMY for the Education on
of Youth, to govern the same, provide Masters, make Rules, receive Donations,
purchase Lands, etc. and to add to their Number, from Time to Time such other
Persons as they shall judge suitable.

That the Members of the Corporation make it their Pleasure, and in some Degree
their Business, to visit the Academy often, encourage and Rollin, Vol. 2. p.
371. mentions a French Gentleman, Mons. Hersan, who, "at his own Expense, built
a School for the Use of poor Children, one of the finest in the Kingdom; and
left a Stipend for the Master. That he himself taught them very often, and
generally had some of them at his Table. He clothed several of them; and
distributed Rewards among them from Time to Time, in order to encourage then to
study."
countenance the Youth, countenance and assist the Masters, and by all Means in
their Power advance the Usefulness and Reputation of the Design; that they look
on the Students as in some Sort their Children, treat them with Familiarity and
Affection, and when they have behaved well, and gone through their Studies, and
are to enter the World, zealously unite, and make all the Interest that can be
made to establish them Something seems wanting in America to incite and
stimulate Youth to Study. In Europe the Encouragements to Learning are of
themselves much greater than can be given here. Whoever distinguishes himself
there, in either of the three learned Professions, gains Fame, and often Wealth
and Power: A poor Man's Son has a Chance, if he studies hard, to rise, either
in the Law or the Church, to gainful Offices or Benefices; to an extraordinary
Pitch of Grandeur; to have a Voice in Parliament, a Seat among the Peers; as a
Statesman or first Minister to govern Nations, and even to mix his Blood with
Princes.
, whether in Business, Offices, Marriages, or any other Thing for their
Advantage, preferably to all other Persons whatsoever even of equal Merit.

And if Men may, and frequently do, catch such a Taste for cultivating Flowers,
for Planting, Grafting, Inoculating, and the like, as to despise all other
Amusements for their Sake, why may not we expect they should acquire a Relish
for that more useful Culture of young Minds. Thompson says, It Is Joy to see the
human Blossoms blow,
When infant Reason grows apace, and calls
For the kind Hand of an assiduous Care;
Delightful Task! to rear the tender Thought,
To teach the young Idea how to shoot,
To pour the fresh Instruction over the Mind,
To breathe the enlivening Spirit, and to fix
The generous Purpose in the glowing Breast.


That a House be provided for the ACADEMY, if not in the Town, not many Miles
from it; the Situation high and dry, and if it may be, not far from a River,
having a Garden, Orchard, Meadow, and a Field or two.

That the House be furnished with a Library (if in the Country, if in the Town,
the Town Besides the English Library begun and carried on by Subscription in
Philadelphia, we may expect the Benefit of another much more valuable in the
Learned Languages, which has been many Years collecting with the greatest Care,
by a Gentleman distinguished for his universal Knowledge, no less than for his
Judgment in Books. It contains many hundred Volumes of the best Authors in the
best Editions, among which are the Polyglot Bible, and Castel's Lexicon on it,
in 8 large Vols. Aldus's Septuagint, Apocrypha and New Testament, in Greek, and
some other Editions of the same; most of the Fathers; almost all the Greek
Authors from Homer himself, in diverse Editions (and one of them in that of
Rome, with Eustathius's Commentaries, in 4 Vols.) to near the End of the 4th
Century, with diverse later, as Photius, Suidas, diverse of the Byzantine
Historians; all the old Mathematicians, as Archimedes, Apollonius, Euclid,
Ptolomy's Geography and Almagest, with Theon's Commentaries and Diophantus, in
the whole above 100 Vols. in Greek Folio's. All the old Roman Classics without
Exception, and some of them in several Editions (as all Tully's Works in four
Editions) All Graevius, Gronovius, Salengre's and Pol^ni's Collections of Roman
and Greek Antiquities, containing above Five Hundred distinct Discourses in 33
Tomes, with some Hundreds of late Authors in Latin, as Vossius, Lipsius,
Grotius, etc. A good Collection of Mathematical Pieces, as Newton in all the
three Editions, Wallis, Huygens, Tacquet, Dechales, etc. in near 100 Vols. in
all Sizes, with some Orientals, French and Italian Authors, and many more
English, etc. A handsome Building above 60 Feet in front, is now erected in
this City, at the private Expense of that Gentleman, for the Reception of this
Library, where it is soon to be deposited, and remain for the public Use, with
a valuable yearly Income duly to enlarge it; and I have his Permission to
mention it as an Encouragement to the proposed Academy; to which this noble
Benefaction will doubtless be of the greatest Advantage, as not only the
Students, but even the Masters themselves, may very much improve by it.
Libraries may serve) with Maps of all Countries, Globes, some mathematical
Instruments, an Apparatus for Experiments in Natural Philosophy, and for
Mechanics; Prints, of all Kinds, Prospects, Buildings, Machines, etc. See in
Turnbull, p. 415. the Description of the Furniture of the School called the
Instituto at Bologna, procured by the Care and Direction of Count Marsigli, and
originally at his private Expense.


That the RECTOR be a Man of good Understanding, good Morals, diligent and
patient, learned in the Languages and Sciences, and a correct pure Speaker and
Writer of the English Tongue; to have such Tutors under him as shall be
necessary.

That the boarding Scholars diet Perhaps it would be best if none of the
Scholars were to diet abroad. Milton is of that Opinion (Tractate of Education)
for that much Time would else be lost, and many ill Habits got.
together, plainly, temperately, and frugally.

That to keep them in Health, and to strengthen and render active their Bodies,
they be frequently Milton proposes, that an Hour and Half before Dinner should
be allowed for Exercise, and recommends among other Exercises, the handling of
Arms, but perhaps this may not be thought necessary here. Turnbull, p. 318.
says, "Corporal Exercise invigorates the Soul as well as the Body; let one be
kept closely to Reading, without allowing him any Respite from Thinking, or any
Exercise to his Body, and were it possible to preserve long, by such a Method,
his Liking to Study and Knowledge, yet we should soon find such an one become
no less soft in his Mind than in his outward Man. Both Mind and Body would thus
become gradually too relaxed, too much unbraced for the Fatigues and Duties of
active Life. Such is the Union between Soul and Body, that the same Exercises
which are conducive, when rightly managed, to consolidate or strengthen the
former, are likewise equally necessary and fit to produce Courage, Firmness,
and manly Vigor, in the latter. For this, and other Reasons, certain hardy
Exercises were reckoned by the Ancients an essential Part in the Formation of a
liberal Character; and ought to have their Place in Schools where Youth are
taught the Languages and Sciences." See p. 318 to 323.
exercised in Running, Leaping, Wrestling, and Swimming It Is supposed that
every Parent would be glad to have their Children stilled in Swimming, if it
might be learnt in a Place chosen for its Safety, and under the Eye of a
careful Person. Mr. Lock says, p. 9. in his Treatise of Education; "'It Is that
saves many a Man's Life; and the Romans thought it so necessary, that they
ranked it with Letters; and it was the common Phrase to mark one ill educated,
and good for nothing, that he had neither learnt to read nor to swim; Nec
Literas didicit nec Nature. But besides the gaining a Skill which may serve him
at Need, the Advantages to Health by often Bathing in cold Water during the
Heat of the Summer, are so many, that I think nothing need be said to encourage
it."

It Is some Advantage besides, to be free from the slavish Terrors many of those
feel who cannot swim, when they are obliged to be on the Water even in crossing
a Ferry.

Mr Hutchinson, in his Dialogues concerning Education, 2 Vols. Octavo, lately
published, says, Vol. 2. p. 297. "I would have the Youth accustomed to such
Exercises as will harden their Constitution, as Riding, Running, Swimming,
Shooting, and the like."

Charlemagne, Founder of the German Empire, brought up his Sons hardily, and
even his Daughters were inured to Industry. Henry the Great of France, says
Mons. Rhodez, "was not permitted by his Grandfather to be brought up with
Delicacy, who well knew that seldom lodges other than a mean and feeble Spirit
in an effeminate and tender Body. He commanded that the Boy should be
accustomed to run, to leap, to climb the Rocks and Mountains; that by such
Means he might be inured to Labor, etc. His ordinary Food also was of coarse
Bread, Beef, Cheese and Garlic; his Clothing plain and course, and often he
went barefoot and bareheaded." Walker of Education, p, 17, 18.


, etc.

That they have peculiar Habits to distinguish them from other Youth, if the
Academy be in or near the Town; for this, among other Reasons, that their
Behaviou^ may be the better observed.

As to their STUDIES, it would be well if they could be taught every Thing that
is useful, and every Thing that is ornamental: But Art is long, and their Time
is short. It is therefore proposed that they learn those Things that are likely
to be most useful and most ornamental. Regard being had to the several
Professions for which they are intended.

All should be taught to write a fair Hand* and swift, as that is useful to
All. And with it may be learnt something of Drawing is a kind of Universal
Language, understood by all Nations. A Man may often express his Ideas, even to
his own Countrymen, more clearly with a Lead Pencil, or Bit of Chalk, than with
his Tongue. And many can understand a Figure, that do not comprehend a
Description in Words, though ever so properly chosen. All Boys have an early
Inclination to this Improvement, and begin to make Figures of Animals, Ships,
Machines, etc. as soon as they can use a Pen: But for want of a little
Instruction at that Time, generally are discouraged, and quit the Pursuit.

Mr. Lock says, p. 234. "When your Son can write well and quick, I think it
may be convenient not only to continue the Exercise of his Hand in Writing, but
also to improve the Use of it further in Drawing; a Thing very useful to a
Gentleman on several Occasions; but especially if he travel; as that which
helps a Man often to express in a few Lines well put together, what a whole
Sheet of Paper in Writing would not be able to represent and make intelligible.
How many Buildings may a Man see, how many Machines and Habits meet with, the
Ideas whereof would be easily retained, and communicated by a little Skill in
Drawing; which being committed to Words, are in Danger to be lost, or at best
but ill retained in the most exact Descriptions? I do not mean that I would
have him a perfect Painter; to be that to any tolerable Degree, will require
more Time than he can spare from his other Improvements of greater Moment. But
so much Insight into Perspective and Skill in Drawing, as will enable him to
represent tolerably on Paper any Thing he sees, except Faces, may, I think, be
got in a little Time."

Drawing is no less useful to a Mechanic than to a Gentleman. Several
Handicrafts seem to require it; as the Carpenter's, Shipwright's, Engraver's,
Painter's, Carver's, Cabinet-maker's, Gardiner's, and other Businesses. By a
little Skill of this kind, the Workman may perfect his own Idea of the Thing to
be done, before he begins to work; and show a Draft for the Encouragement and
Satisfaction of his Employer.


Drawing, by Imitation of Prints, and some of the first Principles of
Perspective.

Mr. Lock is of Opinion, p. 269. that a Child should be early entered in
Arithmetic, Geography, Chronology, History and Geometry. "Merchants Accounts,
he says, if it is not necessary to help a Gentleman to get an Estate, yet there
is nothing of more Use and Efficacy to make him preserve the Estate he has.
It Is seldom observed that he who keeps an Account of his Income and Expenses,
and thereby has constantly under View the Course of his Domestic Affairs, lets
them run to Ruin: And I doubt not but many a Man gets behind-hand before he is
aware, or runs farther on when he is once in, for want of this Care, or the
Skill to do it. I would therefore advise all Gentlemen to learn perfectly
Merchants Accounts; and not to think it is a Skill that belongs not to them,
because it has received its Name, and has been chiefly practiced by Men of
Traffic." p. 316.

Not only the Skill, but the Habit of keeping Accounts, should be acquired by
all, as being necessary to all.


Arithmetic, Accounts, and some of the first Principles of Geometry and
Astronomy.

The Mr. Lock, speaking of Grammar, p. 252. says, "That to those the greatest
Part of whose Business in this World is to be done with their Tongues, and with
their Pens, it is convenient, if not necessary, that they should speak properly
and correctly, whereby they may let their Thoughts into other Men's Minds the
more easily, and with the greater Impression. Upon this Account it is, that any
sort of Speaking, so as will make him be understood, is not thought enough for
a Gentleman. He ought to study Grammar, among the other Helps of Speaking well,
but it must be THE GRAMMAR OF HIS OWN TONGUE, of the Language he uses, that he
may understand his own Country Speech nicely, and speak it properly, without
shocking the Ears of those it is addressed to with Solecisms and offensive
Irregularities. And to this Purpose Grammar is necessary; but it is the Grammar
only of their own proper Tongues, and to those who would take Pains in
cultivating their Language, and perfecting their Styles. Whether all Gentlemen
should not do this, I leave to be considered, since the Want of Propriety and
Grammatical Exactness is thought very misbecoming one of that Rank, and usually
draws on one guilty of such Faults, the Imputation of having had a lower
Breeding and worse Company than suits with his Quality. If this be so (as I
suppose it is) it will be Matter of Wonder, why young Gentlemen are forced to
learn the Grammars of foreign and dead Languages, and are never once told of
the Grammar of their own Tongues. They do not so much as know there is any such
Thing, much less is it made their Business to be instructed in it. Nor is their
own Language ever proposed to them as worthy their Care and Cultivating, though
they have daily Use of it, and are not seldom, in the future Course of their
Lives, judged of by their handsome or awkward Way of expressing themselves in
it. Whereas the Languages whose Grammars they have been so much employed in,
are such as probably they shall scarce ever speak or write; or if upon Occasion
this should happen, they should be excused for the Mistakes and Faults they
make in it. Would not a Chinese, who took Notice of this Way of Breeding, be
apt to imagine, that all our young Gentlemen were designed to be Teachers and
Professors of the dead Languages of foreign Countries, and not to be Men of
Business in their own." Page 255. the same Author adds, That if Grammar ought
to be taught at any Time, it must be to one that can speak the Language
already; how else can he be taught the Grammar of it? This at least is evident
from the Practice of the wise and learned Nations among the Ancients. They made
it a Part of Education to cultivate their own, not foreign Tongues. The Greeks
counted all other Nations barbarous, and had a Contempt for their Languages.
And though the Greek Learning grew in Credit amongst the Romans toward the End
of their Commonwealth, yet it was the Roman Tongue that was made the Study of
their Youth: Their own Language they were to make Use of, and therefore it was
their own Language they were instructed and exercised in." And p. 281. "There
can scarce be a greater Defect (says he) in a Gentleman, than not to express
himself well either in Writing or Speaking. But yet I think I may ask the
Reader, whether he does not know a great many, who live upon their Estates, and
(...), with the Name, should have the Qualities of Gentlemen, who cannot so
much as tell a Story as they should, much less speak clearly and persuasively
in any Business. This I think not to be so much their Fault as the Fault of
their Education." Thus far Lock.

Mons. Rollin, reckons the Neglect of Teaching their own Tongue a great Fault
in the French Universities. He spends great Part of his first Vol. of Belles
Lettres, on that Subject; and lays down some excellent Rules or Methods of
Teaching French to Frenchmen grammatically, and making them Masters therein,
which are very applicable to our Language, but too long to be inserted here. He
practiced them on the Youth under his Care with great Success.

Mr. Hutchinson, Dial. p. 297. says, "To perfect them in the Knowledge of their
Mother Tongue, they should learn it in the Grammatical Way, that they may not
only speak it purely, but be able both to correct their own Idiom, and
afterward enrich the Language on the same Foundation."

Dr. Turnbull, in his Observations on a liberal Education, says, p. 262. "The
Greeks, perhaps, made more early Advances in the most useful Sciences than any
Youth have done since, chiefly on this Account, that they studied no other
Language but their own. This no Doubt saved them very much Time; but they
applied themselves carefully to the Study of their own Language, and were early
able to speak and write it in the greatest Perfection. The Roman Youth, though
they learned the Greek, did not neglect their own Tongue, but studied it more
carefully than we now do Greek and Latin, without giving ourselves any Trouble
about our own Tongue."

Mons. Simon, in an elegant Discourse of his among the Memoirs of the Academy
of Belles Lettres at Paris, speaking of the Stress the Romans laid on Purity of
Language and graceful Pronunciation, adds, "May I here make a Reflection on the
Education we commonly give our Children? It is very remote from the Precepts I
have mentioned. Has the Child arrived to six or seven Years of Age, he mixes
with a Herd of ill-bred Boys at School, where under the Pretext of Teaching him
Latin, no Regard is had to his Mother Tongue. And what happens? What we see
every Day. A young Gentleman of eighteen, who has had this Education, CANNOT
READ. For to articulate the Words and join them together, I do not call
Reading, unless one can pronounce well, observe all the proper Stops, vary the
Voice, express the Sentiments, and read with a delicate Intelligence. Nor can
he speak a Jot better. A Proof of this is, that he cannot write ten Lines
without committing gross Faults; and because he did not learn his own Language
well in his early Years, he will never know it well. I except a few, who being
afterward engaged by their Profession, or their natural Taste, cultivate their
Minds by Study. And yet even they, if they attempt to write, will find by the
Labor Composition costs them, what a Loss it is, not to have learned their
Language in the proper Season. Education among the Romans was upon a quite
different Footing. Masters of Rhetoric taught them early the Principles, the
Difficulties, the Beauties, the Subtleties, the Depths, the Riches of their own
Language. When they went from these Schools, they were perfect Masters of it,
they were never at a Loss for proper Expressions; and I am much deceived if it
was not owing to this, that they produced such excellent Works with so
mavelous F^tility."

Pliny, in his Letter to a Lady on choosing a Tutor for her Son, speaks of it as
the most material Thing in his Education, that he should have a good Latin
Master of Rhetoric, and recommends Julius Genitor for his eloquent, open and
plain Faculty of Speaking. He does not advise her to a Greek Master of
Rhetoric, though the Greeks were famous for that Science; but to a Latin Master,
because Latin was the Boy's Mother Tongue. In the above Quotation from Mons.
Simon, we see what was the Office and Duty of the Master of Rhetoric.


English Language might be taught by Grammar; in which some of our best
Writers, as Tillotson, Addison, Pope, Algernoon Sidney, Cato's Letters, etc.
should be Classicks: The Styles principally to be cultivated, being the clear
and the concise. Reading should also be taught, and pronouncing, properly,
distinctly, emphatically; not with an even T^^e, which under-does, nor a
theatrical, which over-does Nature.

To form their Style, they should be put on Writing This Mr. Lock recommends,
Educ. p. 284. and says, "The Writing of Letters has so much to do in all the
Occurrences of human Life, that no Gentleman can avoid showing himself in this
Kind of Writing. Occasions will daily force him to make this Use of his Pen,
which, besides the Consequences that, in his Affairs, the well or ill managing
it often draws after it, always lays him open to a severer Examination of his
Breeding, Sense and Abilities, than oral Discourses, whose transient Faults
dying for the most Part with the Sound that gives them Life, and so not subject
to a strict Review, more easily escape Observation and Censure." He adds,

"Had the Methods of Education been directed to their right End, one would have
thought this so necessary a Part could not have been neglected, whilst Themes
and Verses in Latin, of no Use at all, were so constantly every where pressed,
to the Racking of Childrens Inventions beyond their Strength, and hindering
their cheerful Progress by unnatural Difficulties. But Custom has so ordained
it, and who dares disobey? And would it not be very unreasonable to require of
a learned Country Schoolmaster (who has all the Tropes and Figures in Farnaby's
Rhetoric at his Finger's Ends) to teach his Scholar to express himself
handsomely in English, when it appears to be so little his Business or Thought,
that the Boy's Mother (despised, it is like, as illiterate for not having read a
System of Logic or Rhetoric) outdoes him in it?

"To speak and write correctly, gives a Grace, and gains a favorable Attention
to what one has to say: And since it is English that an Englishman will have
constant Use of, that is the Language he should chiefly cultivate, and wherein
most Care should be taken to polish and perfect his Style. To speak or write
better Latin than English, may make a Man be talked of, but he will find it
more to his Purpose to express himself well in his own Tongue, that he uses
every Moment, than to have the vain Commendation of others for a very
insignificant Quality. This I find universally neglected, nor no Care taken any
where to improve young Men in their own Language, that they may thoroughly
understand and be Masters of it. If any one among us have a Facility or Purity
more than ordinary in his Mother Tongue, it is owing to Chance, or his Genius,
or any Thing, rather than to his Education, or any Care of his Teacher. To mind
what English his Pupil speaks or writes, is below the Dignity of one bred up
among Greek and Latin, though he have but little of them himself. These are the
Learned Languages, fit only for Learned Men to meddle with and teach: English
is the Language of the illiterate Vulgar. Though the Great Men among the Romans
were daily exercising themselves in their own Language; and we find yet upon
Record the Names of Orators who taught some of their Emperors Latin, though it
were their Mother Tongue. It Is plain the Greeks were yet more nice in theirs.
All other Speech was barbarous to them but their own, and no foreign Language
appears to have been studied or valued amongst that learned and acute People;
though it be past Doubt, that they borrowed their Learning and Philosophy from
abroad.

I am not here speaking against Greek and Latin. I think Latin at least ought
to be well understood by every Gentleman. But whatever foreign Languages a
young Man meddles with, that which he should critically study, and labor to
get a Facility, Clearness and Elegancy to express himself in, should be his
own; and to this Purpose he should daily be EXERCISED in it."

To the same Purpose writes a Person of eminent Learning in a Letter to Dr.
Turnbull: "Nothing certainly (says he) can be of more Service to Mankind than a
right Method of Educating the Youth, and I should be glad to hear -- -- to give
an Example of the great Advantage it would be to the rising Age, and to our
Nation. When our public Schools were first established, the Knowledge of Latin
was thought Learning; and he that had a tolerable Skill in two or three
Languages, though his Mind was not enlightened by any real Knowledge, was a
profound Scholar. But it is not so at present; and People confess, that Men may
have obtained a Perfection in these, and yet continue deeply ignorant. The
Greek Education was of another Kind [which he describes in several Particulars,
and adds] They studied to write their own Tongue more accurately than we do
Latin and Greek. But where is English taught at present? Who thinks it of Use
to study correctly that Language which he is to use every Day in his Life, be
his Station ever so high, or ever so insignificant. It is in this the Nobility
and Gentry defend their Country, and serve their Prince in Parliament; in this
the Lawyers plead, the Divines instruct, and all Ranks of People write their
Letters, and transact all their Affairs; and yet who thinks it worth his
learning to write this even accurately, not to say politely? Every one is
suffered to form his Style by Chance; to imitate the first wretched Model which
falls in his Way, before he knows what is faulty, or can relish the Beauties of
a just Simplicity. Few think their Children qualified for a Trade till they
have been whipped at a Latin School for five or six Years, to learn a little of
that which they are obliged to forget; when in those Years right Education
would have improved their Minds, and taught them to acquire Habits of Writing
their own Language easily under right Direction; and this would have been
useful to them as long as they lived," Introd. p. 3, 4, 5.

Since Mr. Locke's Time, several good Grammars have been wrote and published
for the Use of Schools; as Brightland's, Greenwood's. etc.


Letters to each other, making Abstracts of what they read; or writing the same
Things in their own Words; telling or writing Stories lately read, in their own
Expressions. All to be revised and corrected by the Tutor, who should give his
Reasons, explain the Force and Import of Words, etc.

To form their By Pronunciation is here meant, the proper Modulation of the
Voice, to suit the Subject with due Emphasis, Action, etc. In delivering a
Discourse in Public, designed to persuade, the Manner, perhaps, contributes
more to Success, than either the Matter or Method. Yet the two latter seem to
engross the Attention of most Preachers and other Public Speakers, and the
former to be almost totally neglected.
Pronunciation, ^^ey may be put on making Declamations, repeating Speeches,
delivering Orations, etc. The Tutor assisting at the Rehearsals, teaching,
advising, correcting their Accent, etc.

But if As nothing teaches (says Mr. Lock) so nothing delights more than
HISTORY. The first of these recommends it to the Study of grown Men, the latter
makes me think it the fittest for a young Lad, who as soon as he is instructed
in Chronology, and acquainted with the several Epochas in Use in this Part of
the World, and can reduce them to the Julian Period, should then have some
History put into his Hand. Educ. p. 276.

Mons. Rollin complains, that the College Education in France is defective in
Teaching History, which he thinks may be made of great Advantage to Youth. This
he demonstrates largely in his Belles Lettres, to the Satisfaction of all that
read the Book. He lays down the following Rules for Studying History, viz. 1.
To reduce the Study to Order and Method. 2. To observe what relates to Usages
and Custom. 3. To enquire particularly, and above all Things, after the Truth.
4. To endeavor to find out the Causes of the Rise and Fall of States, of the
Gaining or Losing of Battles, and other Events of Importance. 5. To study the
Character of the Nations and great Men mentioned in History. 6. To be attentive
to such Instructions as concern MORAL EXCELLENCY and the CONDUCT OF LIFE. 7.
Carefully to note every Thing that relates to RELIGION. Vol. 3. p. 146.


HISTORY be made a constant Part of their Reading, such as the Translations of
the Greek and Roman Historians, and the modern Histories of ancient Greece and
Rome, etc. may not almost all Kinds of useful Knowledge be that Way introduced
to Advantage, and with Pleasure to the Student? As

GEOGRAPHY, by reading with Maps, and being required to point out the Places
where the greatest Actions were done, to give their old and new Names, with the
Bounds, Situation, Extent of the Countries concerned, etc.

CHRONOLOGY, by the Help of Helvicus or some other Writer of the Kind, who will
enable them to tell when those Events happened; what Princes were
Cotemporaries, what States or famous Men flourished about that Time, etc. The
several principal Epochas to be first well fixed in their Memories.

ANCIENT CUSTOMS, religious and civil, being frequently mentioned in History,
will give Occasion for explaining them; in which the Plenty of these are to be
met with in Montfaucon; and other Books of Antiquities.
Prints of Medals, Basso Relievo's, and ancient Monuments will greatly assist.

MORALITY, For the Importance and Necessity of moral Instructions to Youth, see
the latter Notes.
by descanting and making continual Observations on the Causes of the Rise or
Fall of any Man's Character, Fortune, Power, etc. mentioned in History; the
Advantages of Temperance, Order, Frugality, Industry, Perseverance, etc. etc.
Dr. Turnbull, Liberal Education, p. 371, says, "That the useful Lessons which
ought to be inculcated upon Youth, are much better taught and enforced from
Characters, Actions, and Events, developing the inward Springs of human
Conduct, and the different Consequences of Actions, whether with Respect to
private or public Good, than by abstract Philosophical Lectures. History
points out in Examples, as in a Glass, all the Passions of the human Heart, and
all their various Workings in different Circumstances, all the Virtues and all
the Vices human Nature is capable of; all the Snares, all the Temptations, all
the Vicissitudes and Incidents of human Life; and gives Occasion for Explaining
all the Rules of Prudence, Decency, Justice and Integrity, in private Economy,
and in short all the Laws of natural Reason."
Indeed the general natural Tendency of Reading good History, must be, to fix
in the Minds of Youth deep Impressions of the Beauty and Usefulness of Virtue
of all Kinds, Public Spirit, Fortitude, etc.

History will show the wonderful Effects of ORATORY, in governing, turning and
leading great Bodies of Mankind, Armies, Cities, Nations. When the Minds of
Youth are struck with Admiration at this, Rules are best understood, when
Examples that confirm them, and point out their Fitness or Necessity, naturally
lead one, as it were by the Hand, to take Notice of them. One who is persuaded
and moved by a Speech, and heartily admires its Force and Beauty, will with
Pleasure enter into a critical Examination of its Excellencies; and willingly
lay up in his Mind the Rules of Rhetoric such an Example of Eloquence plainly
suggests. But to teach Rules abstractly, or without Examples, and before the
agreeable Effects the Observance of them tends to produce (which are in Reality
their Reason or Foundation) have been felt, is exceedingly propostorous."
Turnbull, p. 410.

"I have seldom or never observed any one to get the Skill of Speaking
handsomely, by Studying the Rules which pretend to teach Rhetoric. Lock, p.
279.


then is the Time to give them the Principles of that Art, which they will
study with Taste and Application. Then they may be made acquainted with the
best Models among the Ancients, their Beauties being particularly pointed out
to them. Modern Political Oratory being chiefly performed by the Pen and Press,
its Advantages over the Ancient in some Respects are to be shown; as that its
Effects are more extensive, more lasting, etc.

History will also afford frequent Opportunities of showing the Necessity of a
Public Religion, from its Usefulness to the Public; the Advantage of a
Religious Character among private Persons; the Mischiefs of Superstition, etc.
and the Excellency of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION above all others ancient or modern
See Turnbull on this Head, from p. 386 to 390. very much to the Purpose, but
too long to be transcribed here.
.

History will also give Occasion to expatiate on the Advantage of Civil Orders
and Constitutions, how Men and their Properties are protected by joining in
Societies and establishing Government; their Industry encouraged and rewarded,
Arts invented,, and Life made more comfortable: The Advantages of Liberty,
Mischiefs of Licentiousness, Benefits arising from good Laws and a due
Execution of Justice, etc. Thus may the first Principles of sound Thus, as
Milton says, Educ. p. 381. should they be instructed in the Beginning, End and
Reasons of political Societies: that they may not, in a dangerous Fit of the
Commonwealth, be such poor, shaken, uncertain Reeds, of such a tottering
Conscience, as many of our great Counselors have lately shown themselves, but
steadfast Pillars of the State.
Politics be fixed in the Minds of Youth.

On Historical Occasions, Questions of Right and Wrong, Justice and Injustice,
will naturally arise, and may be put to Youth, which they may debate in
Conversation and in Writing After this, they are to dive into the Grounds of
Law and legal Justice; delivered first and with best Warrant by Moses; and as
far as human Prudence can be trusted, in those celebrated Remains of the
ancient Grecian and Roman Lawgivers, etc. p. 382.

"When he has pretty well digested Tully's Offices, says Mr. Lock, p. 277. and
added to it Puffendorff de Officio Hominis and Civis, it may be seasonable to
set him upon Grotius, de Jure, Belli and Pacis, or which perhaps is the better
of the two, Puffendorff de Jure naturali and Gentium; wherein he will be
instructed in the natural Rights of Men, and the Original and Foundations of
Society, and the Duties resulting from thence. This general Part of Civil Law
and History are Studies which a Gentleman should not barely touch at, but
constantly dwell upon, and never have done with. A virtuous and well-behaved
young Man, that is well versed in the general Part of the Civil Law (which
concerns not the Chicane of private Cases, but the Affairs and Intercourse of
civilized Nations in general, grounded upon Principles of Reason) understands
Latin well, and can write a good Hand, one may turn loose into the World, with
great Assurance that he will find Employment and Esteem every where."


. When they ardently desire Victory, for the Sake of the Praise attending it,
they will begin to feel the Want, and be sensible of the Use of Logic, or the
Art of Reasoning to discover Truth, and of Arguing to defend it, and convince
Adversaries. This would be the Time to acquaint them with the Principles of
that Art. Grotius, Puffendorff, and some other Wrirers of the same Kind, may be
used on these Occasions to decide their Disputes. Mr. Walker, in his excellent
Treatise of the Education of young Gentlemen, speaking of Public and open
Argumentation pro and con, says p. 124, 125. This is it which brings a Question
to a Point, and discovers the very Center and Knot of the Difficulty. This
warms and activates the Spirit in the Search of Truth, excites Notions, and by
replying and frequent Beating upon it, cleanses it from the Ashes, and make it
shine and flame out the clearer. Besides, it puts them upon a continual Stretch
of their Wits to defend their Cause, it makes them quick in Replies, intentive
upon their Subject; where the Opponent uses all Means to drive his Adversary
from his Hold; and the Answerer defends himself sometimes with the Force of
Truth, sometimes with the Subtilty of his Wit; and sometimes also he escapes in
a Mist of Words, and the Doubles of a Distinction, whilst he seeks all Holes
and Recesses to shelter his persecuted Opinion and Reputation. This properly
belongs to the Disputations which are Exercises of young Students, who are by
these Velitations and in this Palaestra brought up to a more serious Search of
Truth. And in them I think it not a Fault to dispute for Victory, and to
endeavor to save their Reputation; nor that their Questions and Subjects are
concerning Things of small Moment and little Reality; yea, I have known some
Governors that have absolutely forbidden such Questions, where the Truth was of
Concernment, on purpose that the Youth might have the Liberty of exerting their
Parts to the ^^termost, and that there might be no Stint to their Emulation."
Public Disputes warm the Imagination, whet the Industry, and strengthen the
natural Abilities.

When Youth are told, that the Great Men whose Lives and Actions they read in
History, spoke two of the best Languages that ever were, the most expressive,
copious, beautiful; and that the finest Writings, the most correct
Compositions, the most perfect Productions of human Wit and Wisdom, are in
those Languages, which have endured Ages, and will endure while there are Men;
that no Translation can do them Justice, or give the Pleasure found in Reading
the Originals; that those Languages contain all Science; that one of them is
become almost universal, being the Language of Learned Men in all Countries;
that to understand them is a distinguishing Ornament, etc. they may be thereby
made desirous of learning those Languages, and their Industry sharpened in the
Acquisition of them. All intended for Divinity should be taught the Latin and
Greek; for Physic, the Latin, Greek and French; for Law, the Latin and French;
Merchants, the French, German, and Spanish: And though all should not be
compelled to learn Latin, Greek, or the modern foreign Languages; yet none that
have an ardent Desire to learn them should be refused; their English,
Arithmetic, and other Studies absolutely necessary, being at the same Time not
neglected.

If the new Universal History were also read, it would give a connected Idea of
human Affairs, so far as it goes, which should be followed by the best modern
Histories, particularly of our Mother Country; then of these Colonies; which
should be accompanied with Observations on their Rise, Increase, Use to
Great Britain, Encouragements, Discouragements, etc. the Means to make them
flourish, secure their Liberties, etc.

With the History of Men, Times and Nations, should be read at proper Hours or
Days, some of the best Histories of Nature Rollin, Vol. 4. p. 211. speaking of
Natural Philosophy, says, "That much of it falls within the Capacity of all
Sorts of Persons, even of Children: It consists in attending to the Objects
with which Nature presents us, in considering them with Care, and admiring
their different Beauties, etc. Searching out their secret Causes indeed more
properly belongs to the Learned,

"I say that even Children are capable of Studying Nature, for they have Eyes,
and don't want Curiosity; they ask Questions, and love to be informed; and here
we need only awaken and keep up in them the Desire of Learning and Knowing,
which is natural to all Mankind. Besides this Study, if it is to be called a
Study, instead of being painful and tedious, is pleasant and agreeable; it may
be used as a Recreation, and should usually be made a Diversion. It is
inconceivable, how many Things Children are capable of, if all the
Opportunities of Instructing them were laid hold of, with which they themselves
supply us.

"A Garden, a Country, a Plantation, are all so many Books which lie open to
them; but they must have been taught and accustomed to read in them. Nothing is
more common amongst us than the Use of Bread and Linen. How seldom do Children
know how either of them are prepared, through how many Operations and Hands the
Corn and Flax must pass, before they are turned into Bread and Linen? The same
may be said of Cloth, which bears no Resemblance to the Wool whereof it is
formed, any more than Paper to the Rags which are picked up in the Streets: And
why should not Children be instructed in these wonderful Works of Nature and
Art which they every Day make Use of without reflecting upon them?

"He adds, that a careful Master may in this Way enrich the Mind of his
Disciple with a great Number of useful and agreeable Ideas, and by a proper
Mixture of short Reflections, will at the same Time take Care to form his
Heart, and lead him by Nature to Religion."

Milton also recommends the Study of Natural Philosophy to Youth, Educ. p. 380.
"In this, says he, they may proceed leisurely from the History of Meteors,
Minerals, Plants and living Creatures, as far as Anatomy; Then also in Course
might be read to them out of some not tedious Writer, the Institution of
Physic; that they may know the Tempers, the Humors, the Seasons, and how to
manage a Crudity; which he who can wisely and timely do, is not only a great
Physician to himself, and to his Friends, but also may at some Time or other
save an Army by this frugal and expenseless Means only; and not let the healthy
and stout Bodies of young Men rot away under him for want of this Discipline,
which is a great Pity, and no less a Shame to the Commander."

Proper Books may be, Ray's Wisdom of God in the Creation, Derham's
Physico-Theology, Spectacle de la Nature, etc.


, which would not only be delightful to Youth, and furnish them with Matter for
their Letters, etc. as well as other History; but afterward of great Use to
them, whether they are Merchants, Handicrafts, or Divines; enabling the first
the better to understand many Commodities, Drugs, etc. the second to improve
his Trade or Handicraft by new Mixtures, Materials, etc. and the last to adorn
his Discourses by beautiful Comparisons, and strengthen them by new Proofs of
Divine Providence. The Conversation of all will be improved by it, as Occasions
frequently occur of making Natural Observations, which are instructive,
agreeable, and entertaining in almost all Companies. Natural History will also
afford Opportunities of introducing many Observations, relating to the
Preservation of Health, which may be afterward of great Use. Arbuthnot on Air
and Aliment, Sanctorius on Perspiration, Lemery on Foods, and some others, may
now be read, and a very little Explanation will make them sufficiently
intelligible to Youth.

While they are reading Natural History, might not a little Gardening,
Planting, Grafting, Inoculating, etc. be taught and practiced; and now and then
Excursions made to the neighboring Plantations of the best Farmers, their
Methods observed and reasoned upon for the Information of Youth. The
Improvement of Agriculture being useful to all Milton would have the Latin
Authors on Agriculture taught at School, as Cato, Varro and Columella; "for the
Matter, says he, is most easy, and if the Language be difficult, yet it may be
mastered. And here will be an Occasion of inciting and enabling them hereafter
to improve the Tillage of their Country, to recover the bad Soil, and to remedy
the Waste that is made of Good; for this was one of Hercules' Praises." Educ.
p. 379.

Hutcheson (Dialogues on Educ. 303, 2d Vol.) says, "Nor should I think it below
the Dignity or Regard of an University, to descend even to the general Precepts
of Agriculture and Gardening. Virgil, Varro, and others eminent in Learning,
though it it not below their Pen -- and why should we think meanly of that Art,
which was the Mother of Heroes, and of the Masters of the World."

Lock also recommends the Study of Husbandry and Gardening, as well as gaining
an Insight in several of the manual Arts; Educ. p. 309, 314, 315. It would be a
Pleasure and Diversion to Boys to be led now and then to the Shops of
Artificers, and suffered to spend some Time there in observing their Manner of
Working. For the Usefulness of Mechanic Skill, even to Gentlemen, see the Pages
above cited, to which much might be added.


, and Skill in it no Disparagement to any.

The History of Commerce, of the Invention of Arts, Rise of Manufactures,
Progress of Trade, Change of its Seats, with the Reasons, Causes, etc. may also
be made entertaining to Youth, and will be useful to all. And this, with the
Accounts in other History of the prodigious Force and Effect of Engines and
Machines used in War, will naturally introduce a Desire to be instructed in How
many Mills are built and Machines constructed, at great and fruitless Expense,
which a little Knowledge in the Principles of Mechanics would have prevented?
Mechanics, and to be informed of the Principles of that Art by which weak Men
perform such Wonders, Labor is saved, Manufactures expedited, etc. etc. This
will be the Time to show them Prints of ancient and modern Machines, to explain
them, to let them be We are often told in the Journals of Travelers, that such
and such Things are done in foreign Countries, by which Labor is saved, and
Manufactures expedited, etc. but their Description of the Machines or
Instruments used, are quite unintelligible for want of good Drafts. Copying
Prints of Machines is of Use to fix the Attention on the several Parts, their
Proportions, Reasons, Effects, etc. A Man that has been used to this Practice,
is not only better able to make a Draft when the Machine is before him, but
takes so much better Notice of its Appearance, that he can carry it off by
Memory when he has not the Opportunity of Drawing it on the Spot. Thus may a
Traveller bring home Things of great Use to his Country.
copied, and to give Lectures in Mechanical Philosophy.

With the whole should be constantly inculcated and cultivated, that Benignity
of Mind "Upon this excellent Disposition (says Turnbull, p. 326.) it will be
easy to build that amiable Quality commonly called GOOD BREEDING, and upon no
other Foundation can it be raised. For whence else can it spring, but from a
general Good Will and Regard for all People, deeply rooted in the Heart, which
makes any one that has it, careful not to show in his Carriage, any Contempt,
Disrespect, or Neglect of them, but to express a Value and Respect for them
according to their Rank and Condition, suitable to the Fashion and Way of their
Country? It Is a Disposition to make all we converse with easy and well pleased."
, which shows itself in searching for and seizing every Opportunity to serve
and to oblige; and is the Foundation of what is called GOOD BREEDING; highly
useful to the Possessor, and most agreeable to all It is this lovely Quality
which gives true Beauty to all other Accomplishments, or renders them useful to
their Possessor, in procuring him the Esteem and Good Will of all that he comes
near. Without it, his other Qualities, however good in themselves, make him but
pass for proud, conceited, vain or foolish. Courage, says an excellent Writer,
in an ill-bred Man has the Air, and escapes not the Opinion of Brutality;
Learning becomes Pedantry; Wit, Buffoonery; Plainness, Rusticity; and there
cannot be a good Quality in him which Ill-breeding will not warp and disfigure
to his Disadvantage." Turnbull, p. 327.
.

The Idea of what is true Merit, should also be often presented to Youth,
explained and impressed on their Minds, as consisting in an Inclination joined
with an Ability to serve Mankind, one's Country, Friends and Family; which
Ability is (with the Blessing of God) to be acquired or greatly increased by
true Learning; and should indeed be the great Aim and To have in View the Glory
and Service of God, as some express themselves, is only the same Thing in other
Words. For Doing Good to Men is the only Service of God in our Power; and to
imitate his Beneficence is to glorify him. Hence Milton says, "The End of
Learning is to repair the Ruins of our first Parents, by regaining to know God
aright, and out of that Knowledge to love him, to imitate him, to be like him,
as we may the nearest by possessing our Souls of true Virtue." Educ. p. 373.
Mr. Hutcheson says, Dial. v. 2. p. 97. "The principal End of Education is, to
form us wise and good Creatures, useful to others, and happy ourselves. The
whole Art of Education lies within a narrow Compass, and is reducible to a very
simple Practice; namely, To assist in unfolding those Natural and Moral Powers
with which Man is endowed, by presenting proper Objects and Occasions; to watch
their Growth that they be not diverted from their End, or disturbed in their
Operation by any foreign Violence; and gently to conduct and apply them to all
the Purposes of private and of public Life." And Mr. Lock (p. 84. Educ.) says,
"'It Is VIRTUE, the^, direct VIRTUE, which is to be aimed at in Education. All
other Considerations and Accomplishments are nothing in Comparison to this.
This is the solid and substantial Good, which Tutors should not only read
Lectures and talk of, but the Labor and Art of Education should furnish the
Mind with, and fasten there, and never cease till the young Man had a true
Relish of it, and placed his Strength, his Glory, and his Pleasure, in it." And
Mons. Rollin, Belles Lettres, Vol. 4. p. 249. to the same Purpose, "If we
consult our Reason ever so little, it is easy to discern that the END which
Masters should have in View, is not barely to teach their Scholars Greek and
Latin, to learn them to make Exercises and Verses, to charge their Memory with
Facts and historical Dates, to draw up Syllogisms in Form, or to trace Lines
and Figures upon Paper. These Branches of Learning I own are useful and
valuable, but as Means, and not as the End; when they conduct us to other
Things, and not when we stop at them; when they serve us as Preparatives and
Instruments for better Knowledge, without which the rest would be useless.
Youth would have Cause to complain, if they were condemned to spend eight or
ten of the best Years of their Life in learning, at a great Expense, and with
incredible Pains, one or two Languages, and some other Matters of a like
Nature, which perhaps they would seldom have Occasion to use. The End of
Masters, in the long Course of their Studies, is to habituate their Scholars to
serious Application of Mind, to make them love and value the Sciences, and to
cultivate in them such a Taste, as shall make them thirst after them when they
are gone from School; to point out the Method of attaining them; and make them
thoroughly sensible of their Use and Value; and by that Means dispose them for
the different Employments to which it shall please God to call them. Besides
this, the End of Masters should be, to improve their Hearts and Understandings,
to protect their Innocence, to inspire them with Principles of Honor and
Probity, to train them up to good Habits; to correct and subdue in them by
gentle Means, the ill Inclinations they shall be observed to have, such as
Pride, Insolence, an high Opinion of themselves, and a saucy Vanity continually
employed in lessening others; a blind Self-love solely attentive to its own
Advantage; a Spirit of Raillery which is pleased with offending and insulting
others; an Indolence and Sloth, which renders all the good Qualities of the
Mind useless."

Dr. Turnbull has the same Sentiments, with which we shall conclude this Note.
If, says he, there be any such Thing as DUTY, or any such Thing as HAPPINESS;
if there be any Difference between right and wrong Conduct; any Distinction
between Virtue and Vice, or Wisdom and Folly; in fine, if there be any such
Thing as Perfection or Imperfection belonging to the rational Powers which
constitute moral Agents; or if Enjoyments and Pursuits admit of Comparison;
Good Education must of Necessity be acknowledged to mean, proper Care to
instruct early in the Science of Happiness and Duty, or in the Art of Judging
and Acting aright in Life. Whatever else one may have learned, if he comes into
the World from his Schooling and Ma^ters, (...) ^^^cquainted with the Nature,
Rank and Condition, of Mankind, and the Duties of human Life (in its more
ordinary Circumstances at least) he has lost his Time; he is not educated; he
is not prepared for the World; he is not qualified for Society; he is not
fitted for discharging the proper Business of Man. The Way therefore to judge
whether Education be on a right Footing or not, is to compare it with the END;
or to consider what it does in order to accomplish Youth for choosing and
behaving well in the various Conditions, Relations and Incidents, of Life. If
Education be calculated and adapted to furnish young Minds betimes with proper
Knowledge for their Guidance and Direction in the chief Affairs of the World,
and in the principal Vicissitudes to which human Concerns are subject, then is
it indeed proper or right Education. But if such Instruction be not the
principal Scope to which all other Lessons are rendered subservient in what is
called the Institution of Youth, either the Art of Living and Acting well is
not Man's most important Business, or what ought to be the CHIEF END of
Education is neglected, and sacrificed to something of far inferior Moment.
Observations on Liberal Education, p. 175, 176.


End of all Learning.

END.

