A COLLECTION OF THE WORKS OF THOMAS CHALKLEY. In TWO PARTS.

Blessed is the Man that walks not in the Counsel of the Ungodly, nor
stands in the Way of Sinners, nor sits in the Seat of the Scornful: But
his Delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate both Day
and Night.

PSALM i, 1, 2. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL, MDCCXLIX.

THE TESTIMONY OF THE Monthly Meeting of Friends IN PHILADELPHIA, Concerning
our Ancient, Worthy FRIEND, THOMAS CHALKLEY, Deceased.
THE Christian Experiences of the Faithful being useful to direct such as are
desirous of following them in the Paths of true Religion and Virtue, and their
good Examples shining with the greatest Clearness, when they have, with the
Flesh, put off all human Infirmities; Justice to their Memory, and a Concern
for the Benefit of their Survivors, demand our grateful Remembrance of them,
and the contributing our Endeavors to render their Labors useful to Posterity.

These Considerations engage us to preface the Writings of this our esteemed
Friend and Elder in the Truth, with this Testimony concerning him.

He was a Member of our Monthly Meeting above Forty Years, so that some of us
had Opportunities of being intimately acquainted with him; and of knowing his
Fidelity and Diligence in promoting the Cause of Truth, and the Edification of
the Church of Christ; this having been the principal Engagement and Concern of
his Mind, and which he preferred to any other Consideration; as will evidently
appear to those, who, with an honest and unprejudiced Intention, peruse his
Journal of his Life and Travels.

By this it will appear, that He was, in the early Part of his Life, sensibly
affected with the Visitation of Divine Life and Grace, and, by adhering
thereunto, was preserved from the Vanities and Follies, which often divert and
alienate the Minds of Youth from the due Remembrance and awful Regard of their
Creator; so that he was enabled to bear a Testimony of Christian Patience and
Self-Denial in his youthful Days, and, by keeping under that Exercise, as he
advanced in Years, attained to further Knowledge and Experience in the Work of
Religion, in which he had a Sight of the Necessity of keeping in a State of
Humility, and of bearing the Cross of Christ, which mortified him to the World;
so that the Loss many sustain by the anxious Pursuit of the lawful Things
thereof appearing to him, He was concerned to avoid it, and in Obedience to the
Precept of Christ, to seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness,
having Faith in his Promise, that all these Things (necessary for him) should
be added.

Thus the Love of God influencing his Mind, and opening his Understanding, he
became concerned for the general Good of Mankind, and received a Gift of the
Ministry of the Gospel of Christ, before he had attained the Age of Twenty-one
Years; in the public Exercise of which, He soon after traveled through many
Parts of England, and into Scotland, and the next Year, being 1697, He came to
visit Friends in this and the adjacent Provinces of America, where his Ministry
and Conversation were to the Comfort and Edification of the Faithful (as some
of us can with Satisfaction declare, from our Knowledge and Remembrance of him
at that Time) and the near Fellowship and Union he then had with Friends here
(we believe) contributed to his more speedy Determination of settling among us,
which He afterward thought it his Duty to do, though the leaving his Parents and
Relations (as He afterward expressed) was no small Cross to him, being of a
dutiful and affectionate Disposition.

After fixing his Residence among us, He persever'd in his Concern and Labor
for the Edification of the Churches, and gathering People to Faith and
Dependence on the inward Teachings of Christ, and for that Purpose only He
traveled many long Journies and Voyages through the several English Colonies
on this Continent, and most of the Islands in the West Indies, and in Europe,
through England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland, Holland, Frizeland, and several
Parts of Germany, and the adjacent Northern Kingdoms; and in many of these
Places his Ministry and religious Labors were blessed with the desired
Success, of which there are yet some Witnesses living, and others, who were
convinced of the Principles of Truth by his Means, became serviceable Members
of the Church, and continued therein to the End of their Lives.

But as the wise King Solomon formerly observed, that One Event comes to the
Righteous, and to the Wicked, so it happened to this good Man, who met with
various Losses and Disappointments in his temporal Estate; after which, the
Circumstances of his Affairs engaged him to undertake some Business, in the
Management of which He was obliged to cross the Seas frequently: This, however,
did not abate his Zeal and religious Care to make use of all Opportunities of
visiting the Meetings of Friends when among them, and of calling, at other
times, to such who might be accounted as the Outcast of Israel, and the
Dispersed of Judah, or as Sheep not yet of the Fold of Christ; and his Services
of that Kind are worthy to be commemorated, having been often productive of
good Effects.

His Patience was remarkable in Disappointments and Afflictions, of which He
had a large Share; and his Meekness, Humility and Circumspection, in the
general Course of his Life and Conversation, were conspicuous and exemplary;
and as He frequently exhorted and admonished others to the Observation and
Practice of the many excellent Precepts and Rules of Christ, our Lord and
Lawgiver, and more especially those expressed in his Sermon on the Mount
(which contains the Sum of our moral and religious Duties) so He manifested
himself to be one of that Number, whom Christ compared to the wise Builder, who
laid a sure Foundation; so that his Building stood unshaken by the various
Floods and Winds of Tribulations and Temptations he met with, both from within
and without.

He was a Lover of Unity amongst Brethren, and careful to promote and maintain
it, showing the Example of a meek, courteous, and loving Deportment, not only
to Friends, but to all others, with whom he had Conversation or Dealings; so
that it may be truly said, That few have lived so universally beloved and
respected among us: And it was manifest this did not proceed from a Desire of
being popular, or to be seen of Man: For his Love and Regard to Peace did not
divert him from the Discharge of his Duty in a faithful Testimony to those that
professed the Truth, that they ought to be careful to maintain good Works; and
He was often concerned zealously to incite and press Friends to the Exercise of
the good Order and Discipline established in the Wisdom of Truth, by
admonishing, warning, and timely treating with such as fell short of their Duty
therein, and by testifying against those who, after loving and brotherly Care
and Endeavors, could not be brought to the Sense and Practice of their Duty;
and thereby He sometimes shared the Ill Will and Resentment of such Persons.

The several Essays He wrote on religious Subjects at Sea, are further Proofs
that his Mind was principally engaged in the great Business and Concern of
Religion; and as He continued under the same Engagement to the End, we are
fully persuaded the Words with which He concluded his last public Testimony on
the Island of Tortola, may be truly and properly applied to him, That he had
fought a good Fight, and had kept the Faith, and, we doubt not, he now enjoys a
Crown of Righteousness.

Much more might be truly said of his Integrity, Faithfulness and Worth, but we
do not think it necessary; our chief Intention being to express our respectful
Remembrance of him, and our Unity with his Labors and Services, and in order
to assure those, to whom he was not personally known, of the Truth of what He
has himself wrote of his Life and Travels; for we believe, as He was a Man
signally influenced with the Spirit of universal Love and Good Will to Mankind,
this was his chief Motive for writing; and we are sincerely desirous that his
good Design may be answered, and that the Glory of every good and perfect Work
may be attributed to that Divine Power alone, which can qualify others to
supply the Places of those faithful Ministers and Servants of Christ, who have
been of late Years removed from among us, and are of that Number, of whom it is
written, Blessed are the Dead, which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea,
says the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do
follow them.

Signed on Behalf, and by Appointment of the Monthly Meeting of Friends in
Philadelphia, the Twenty-eighth Day of the Second Month, 1749, by ISRAEL
PEMBERTON.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Journal, Page 1, to 326 God's great Love to Mankind through Jesus Christ,
Page 327, to 348 Fruits of Divine Meditation at Sea, Page 349, to 355 An
Exhortation to Youth, Page 356, to 361 A loving Invitation to young and old,
Page 362, to 376 Forcing a Maintenance not warrantable from the Holy
Scriptures, for a Minister of the Gospel, Page 377, to 410 Observations on
Christ's Sermon on the Mount, Page 411, to 465 Some truly tender Scruples of
Conscience about the Common Prayer, Page 466, to 477 A Letter to a Friend in
Ireland, Page 478, to 491 A Letter to Aquila Paca, etc. Page 492, to 495
Christ's Kingdom Exalted, Page 496, to 523 Considerations on the Call, Work,
and Wages, of the Ministers of Christ, Page 524, to 537 Concerning Personal
Election and Reprobation, Page 538, to 547 A Letter to Cotton Mather, Page 548,
to 554 Youth persuaded to Obedience, Gratitude, and Honor, to God, and their
Parents, Page 555, to 575 Free Thoughts communicated to Free-Thinkers, Page
576, to 509
JOURNAL, OR, HISTORICAL ACCOUNT, OF THE Life, Travels, and Christian
Experiences, OF THAT Ancient, Faithful Servant of JESUS CHRIST, THOMAS
CHALKLEY; Who departed this Life in the ISLAND of TORTOLA, the fourth Day of
the Ninth Month, 1741.

I will send those that escape of them unto the Nations, to Tarshish, Pull, and
Lud, that draw the Bow, to Tubal and Javan, to the Isles afar off, that have
not heard my Fame, neither have seen my Glory; and they shall declare my Glory
among the Gentiles,

ISAIAH lxvi. 19. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL, MDCCXLIX.

A JOURNAL OF THE LIFE, LABORS, TRAVELS, etc. OF THOMAS CHALKLEY.
HAVING great Cause to acknowledge the Regard and Protection of Divine
Providence in the several Stages of my Life, I think it may be of Service to
others to leave behind me the following Account of my Life and Travels.

I WAS born on the Third Day of the Third Month 1675, in Southwark, 1675.
and descended of honest and religious Parents, who were very careful of me,
and brought me up in the Fear of the Lord; and oftentimes counseled me to
Sobriety, and reproved me for Wantonness; and that light Spirit, which is
incident to Youth, they were careful to nip it in the Bud: So that I have Cause
to bless God, through Christ, on the Behalf of my tender Parents.

And I may not forget the Dealings of God with me in my very tender Years. 1684.
When between eight and ten Years of Age, my Father and Mother sent me near two
Miles to School, to Richard Scoryer in the Suburbs of London. I went mostly by
my self to the School; and many and various were the Exercises I went through,
by Beatings and Stonings along the Streets, being distinguished to the People
(by the Badge of Plainness which my Parents put upon me) of what Profession I
was; diverse telling me, 'Twas no more Sin to kill me, than it was to kill a Dog.

Rotherhith Parish, in Southwark.
About this Time the Lord began to work strongly on my Mind by his Grace,
insomuch that I could not forbear from reproving those Lads who would take the
Name of the Lord God in their Mouths in vain, reminding them of the third
Commandment, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the
Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain; and of Christ's
Saying, Every idle Word that Men shall speak, they shall give Account thereof
in the Day of Judgment; for which I was mocked and derided by some, and others
would sometimes refrain from such bad Words when I reproved them.

One Time I remember I was amongst some Men, one of whom I had reproved, and he
told the rest of it, and turned to me, and said, That I was no Christian, and
asked me when I said the Lord's Prayer. I asked him if he said it? He said.
Yes. I then asked him how he could call God Father, and be so wicked as to
swear and take God's Name in vain? which I had heard him often do; and I told
him what Christ said to the Jews, 1685.
You are of your Father the Devil, because his Works ye do; and that those that
did the Devil's Work could not truly call God Father, according to Christ's
Doctrine. So being convicted in their Consciences that what I said was true,
they were all silent, and wondered that I, being so young, should speak in such
a Manner; in which I remember I had great Peace and good Satisfaction: And from
thenceforth these Men let me alone.

Notwithstanding I hated to hear wicked Words, I loved Play exceedingly, being
persuaded that there was no Harm in that, if we used no bad Words. One Time I
was at Play at a Neighbor's House with the Children, and in the midst of my
Sport I was reached to with strong Convictions, insomuch that I could not
forbear Weeping. The Childrens Mother observing that I wept, said, Why do you
weep, Tommy? I told her I could not tell, except it was because I was a naughty
Boy. Oh! said she, don't believe him, for that is the Devil tells you so, for
you are the best Boy in all our Street. But I knew I was told the Truth by
Conviction, and that she was mistaken: For I plainly understood by clear
Conviction, and by the Holy Scriptures (which I had been trained up in the
Reading of) that I was too vain and wanton; for I loved Music, Dancing, and
Playing at Cards, and too much delighted therein betimes, and was followed with
the Judgments of God therefore i^ ^e Secret of my Soul.

What I did in those Sports and Games, I always took care to do out of the
Sight, and without the Knowledge of my tender Parents; for I was afraid of
their Reproofs and Correction, the which I was sure to have, if they had any
Intelligence of it.

I remember that, unknown to my Parents, I had bought a Pack of Cards, with
Intent to make use of them when I went to see my Relations in the Country,
where there was Liberty in the Family so to do, at a Place called Woodford,
Woodford, in Essex.
about seven Miles from London, where I got Leave sometimes to go; and at the
Time called Christmas, I went to see them, and five Miles on my Way went to a
Meeting, at a Town called Wanstead; at which Meeting, Wanstead.
a Minister of Christ declared against the Evil of Gaming, and particularly of
Cards; and that the Time which People pretend to keep Holy, for Christ's Sake,
many of them spend mostly in Wickedness, Sports, and Games; even some
pretending to be Religious: And, generally speaking, more Sin and Evil is
committed in this Time, than in the like Space of Time in all the Year besides;
so that the Devil is served instead of honoring Christ. From this Meeting at
Wanstead, I went to the House of my Relations, where the Parson of the next
Parish lodged that Night, who used to play at Cards with them sometimes; and
the Time drawing near that we were to go to our Games, my Uncle called to the
Doctor (as he called him) to me, and to my Cousin, to come and take a Game at
Cards; at which Motion I had strong Convictions upon me not to do it, as being
Evil, and I secretly cried to the Lord to keep me faithful to him; and lifting
up my Eyes, I saw a Bible lie in the Window, at the Sight of which I was glad.
I took it, and sat down, and read to my self, greatly rejoicing that I was
preserved out of the Share. Then my Uncle called again, and said, Come, Doctor,
you and I, and my Wife and Daughter, will have a Game at Cards, for I see my
Cousins, better disposed. Then he looked upon me, and said, "He was better
disposed also." So their Sport for that Time was spoiled, and mine in that
Practice for ever; for I never (as I remember) played with them more, but as
soon as I came Home, offered my new and untouched Pack of Cards to the Fire.
And of this I am certain, the Use of them is of evil Consequence, and draws
away the Mind from Heaven and heavenly Things; for which Reason all Christians
ought to shun them as Engines of Satan: And Music, and Dancing, having
generally the same Tendency, ought therefore to be refrained from. The
Sentiments of the Waldenses, a People in great Esteem among Protestants, are
worthy the Consideration of all true Protestants and Christians; which were
That as many Paces, or Steps, as the Man or Woman takes in the Dance, so many
Paces or Steps they take toward Hell.

I very well remember the Work of God upon my Soul, when I was about ten Years
of Age; and particularly at a certain Time when I had been rebelling against
God and my Parents, in Vanity and Lightness: And as I had offended both, so I
was corrected by both. For I had not only the Anger of my Parents, but the Lord
frowned upon me, insomuch that I trembled exceedingly, and was as though I heard
a vocal Voice say to me, What will become of thee this Night, if I should take
thy Life from thee? At which I was amazed, and in great Fear. Then I covenanted
with God, that if he would be pleased to spare my Life (for I thought God would
have taken my Life from me that very Moment) I would be more sober, and mind
his Fear more than I had done before.

Nevertheless I broke Covenant with God my Maker, my Adversary tempting me so
to do, telling me I was but a Child, and that it was natural for Children to be
brisk and to play, and that God would wink at my Childhood and Youth, and it
was time enough for me, when a Man, to become Religious. But still God followed
me with his chastising Rod, and often put me in Mind of my Covenant that I made
with him in my Distress; and that he had granted my Request which I then made
to him; and unless I would take up a Cross to my own corrupt Will and
Inclinations, he should take me out of the World. Then, Oh then! I cried, Lord
help, or I die! Save me, or I perish for ever! I cannot keep thy Covenant, nor
do thy Will, without thy Help and Assistance! And indeed if the Lord had not
helped, I had been undone for ever.

So I continued bowed down in my Mind, calling on the Lord; thinking and
meditating on Heaven and heavenly Things: But, as I am sensible, I had an
inward Enemy that always sought my Hurt and Overthrow, I have Cause to bless
God, who by his Grace (as mine Eye was turned to it) helped me to do his Will,
as he was pleased to manifest it to me; so that thereby some Change was wrought
on me, both inwardly and outwardly.

And I then began to delight in Reading and Sobriety, which before were irksome
to me: And when I read the Holy Scriptures, I desired that God would open them
to my Understanding, which he did to my Edification many Times. I also begged
earnestly of the Lord, that he would be pleased to be with me, and make me like
to those his Children and Servants, of whom I read in the Holy Scriptures, who
faithfully served Him all their Days. And when I read of the Crucifixion of our
Blessed Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, it would break my Soul into Tenderness.
I thought it was enough to awaken and humble any Soul that was well-meaning,
and had any Sense of the Power, Love, and Grace, of Christ. Thus I went on for
several Years, feeling that Peace which passes natural Understanding, which
many Times accompanied my poor and needy Soul. And being advanced to about 14
or 15 Years of Age, 1690. Shad-Thames, Southwark.
I remember that I used to shun the Cross of speaking in the plain Language
(which I always read in the Holy Scriptures) to those whom I conversed with,
except my Father and Mother, who would not allow me to speak otherwise: I was
convicted in my Conscience that it was not right to play the Hypocrite after
that Manner; and on a certain Time I had Occasion to speak with an Officer, a
great Man in our Neighborhood, and my Heart moved within me for fear I should
shun the Cross of Christ: For it was Christ's Language to all, as we may read
in the New Testament; and the Scriptures, from Genesis to the Revelations,
speak Thee and Thou, to a single Person, in a general Way.

So I took up the Cross, and said Thee to him; and he was much affronted, and
said, Thee! what do thou Thee me for? I soberly asked him if he did not say
Thee to his Maker in his Prayers? and whether he was too good, or too great, to
be spoke to in the same Language in which he addressed the Almighty? Unto which
he made no Reply, but seemed to fall from his Passion into Admiration, as one
smitten in himself. And he ^^re me Respect ever after; and I greatly rejoiced
that I was preserved faithful. Though it may look like a little Thing to some,
yet I found it good as the Scripture says not to despise the Day of small
Things.

About the twentieth Year of my Age, 1694.
I was pressed and carried aboard a Vessel belonging to a Man of War. I was put
down into the Ho^d in the Dark, not having any Thing to lie upon but Casks; and
what made it worse to me, I was among wicked, debauched Men; and as we were
shut up in Darkness, so was their Conversation dark and hellish. In the Morning
(for which I longed more than the Watchmen) the Lieutenant called us up on
Deck, and examined us whether we were willing to serve the King. He called me
to him, and asked me, If I were willing to serve his Majesty? I answered, that
I was willing to serve him in my Business, and according to my Conscience, but
as for War or Fighting, CHRIST had forbid it, in his excellent Sermon on the
Mount; and for that Reason I could not bear Arms, nor be instrumental to
destroy or kill Men. Then the Lieutenant looked on me, and on the People, and
said, "Gentlemen, what shall we do with this Fellow? he swears he will not
Fight." The Commander of the Vessel made Answer, "No, no! "he will neither
Swear nor Fight." Upon which they turned me on Shore. I was thankful that I was
delivered out of their Hands; and my tender Parents were glad to see me again.

Now as I grew in Years, the World began to take too much Root in me; and my
unwearied Enemy would tell me that it was lawful enough and indeed I see that
he hurts many with lawful Things, with whom he knows that unlawful Things
will not take, and here I had been lost, if God had not been gracious to me.
But he in whose Presence I delighted, withdrew, and deprived me of that
Enjoyment which was graceful and comfortable above all Things to my Soul. Then
did I pray, with Tears, O that it might be with me as it was at other Times
before! and I was willing to let the World go, rather than Grace and God's
Glory. The Psalmist says, No good Thing will he withold from them that walk
uprightly, Psalm. lxxxiv. Verse 11.

1695.
About this Time there was a great Concern on my Mind, rightly to distinguish
between the Voice of Christ, and the Whisperings of Satan, and thus it opened
to me: That Christ, the Truth, always speaks Good, and for a good End, and
that there is divine Life to the Soul in this Speaking; but the Devil never
speaks Good, unless sometimes for a bad End, and then not Good in Reality, only
colored with a good, or fair Show.

And keeping under this Exercise, the Lord appeared to me again, and many Times
refreshed my Heart with his Goodness. And when I was in my Business amongst
Men, I did Witness the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, to be near me; which was more
to me than all the World, or the Riches, Glory, and Beauty of it; the Love of
God being so sweet to my Soul and Spirit, my Breathings, Prayers, and
Supplications, were to the Lord, that my Neighbors, Acquaintance, and
Relations, might also partake of the like precious Faitn and Love which I
enjoyed; and that the Children of Men might answer that great and good End for
which the Lord did create them; which is, that Glory, Honor, and Praise, might
ascend and be given to him.

I had such a Sense and Fear of Dishonouring God, that I often, with Tears,
cried, Never let me live to dishonor Thee. Oh! it had been better for me, than
I had never been born, or my Mother's Womb had been my Grave, than that I
should live to dishonor Thee, or wilfully reproach the Name of Christ, who,
with the Father, is only worthy of Divine Honor.

In this Concern I felt the Gospel Power of our Lord Jesus Christ to work upon
my Soul, and the Word of God was as a Seed in my Heart, growing and opening in
me, speaking to me, and making my Understanding fruitful in the Things of his
Kingdom; and in that Ability which was given me of God, through his Grace and
Holy Spirit, I exhorted People to Repentance and Amendment of Life; and I
always humbly desired the Help and Divine Influence of God's eternal Word
therein. Oh! I did fervently pray, that I might minister the Gospel in the
Power of Jesus; for I clearly discerned in the Light of the Son of God, that
all Ministering out of Christ's Power, was neither edifying nor efficacious unto
Souls: Therefore I did earnestly beseech God for the Continuance of the Gift of
His Spirit, that I might be enabled to preach the Gospel in the Power of Christ
Jesus. The Concern that was upon me on this Account at that Time, is hard to be
expressed in Words.

The latter End of the Year 1695, my Father sent me into Essex, on some
Business, which, when I had accomplished, I visited some Meetings of Friends
there, and my Mind being much affected with the Apprehensions of an impending
Storm, (the Nation being about this Time threatened with an Invasion from
France, in favor of the late King James, so that there was Expectation of much
Bloodshed and Confusion in the Land) I wrote a Letter to my Parents, and
another to Friends of the Evening Meeting (kept Weekly at my Father's House)
expressing my great Thankfulness to the Almighty, in Remembrance of the many
precious Visitations of Divine Love and Favor we had been made Partakers of,
to the uniting our Hearts to Him, and to one another; and my earnest Prayers
and Supplications, that we might be preserved in true Love, and the Unity of
the Spirit, which is the Bond of everlasting Peace, and that the World might be
made sensible of this true Peace, which abounds in those who Love and fear the
Lord, and truly believe in the Name of Jesus. Oh! surely they would then depart
from Sin, and abandon Iniquity, by which the incur the Wrath of the Lord, and
provoke the Just One to Ang^^; so that the Line of Confusion seems to be
stretched over the City and Nation, and the Eye of the Faithful sees it to the
Grief of their Souls. Yet the Mercy of the Lord, even of the Just God (who will
render a just Reward to every one according to his Deeds done in the Body) is
still handed forth to the Land. Oh that the Inhabitants thereof would consider
their Ways, and be Wise, and turn to the Lord with unfeigned Repentance, while
the Day of Mercy lasts, before it be said, Now it is hid from thine Eyes, for
the Lord, even the God and Father of Spirits, has said, My Spirit shall not
always strive with Man, for that he also is Flesh, Gen vi. 3.

1696.
On the Expiration of my Apprenticeship, having served my Father faithfully
seven Years, I entered more strongly into Covenant with my heavenly Father and
Master, to serve him all my Days, through His Assistance; and was soon after
drawn forth, in the Spirit and Love of Christ, to visit the Meetings of Friends
Westward from London, viz. through Surrey, Sussex, Hampshire, Wiltshire,
Devonshire, and Cornwall, to the Land's End; in which Journey I was accompanied
by William Hornould. At one of our Meetings at Falmouth, in Cornwall, two Men
(called Gentlemen) came from the Inn to hear the Strangers; and after Meeting,
they said they could take their Oaths that I was a Jesuit, and that they had
heard me preach in a Romish Chapel in France; which was utterly false: For I
never was in France in my Life. Besides had I been a Papist, 1697.
or popishly inclined (which I was not) I was too young to be a Jesuit.

Indeed I thought I was mean for the Work of the Ministry, but the good
Remembrancer brought those Truths to my Remembrance, which strengthened me in
the Work and Service of God. The Spirit breath^ where it lists; Out of the
Mouths of Babes and S^cklings thou have perfected Praise, etc. We having great
Peace in our Labors in this Journey, and being edified therewith, returned to
London, after about four Months Absence from Home.

And after I had been two Weeks at Home, my dear Mother departed this Life, in
a sweet Frame of Spirit, Praising the Lord. London.
She was one who lived the Life of the Righteous, and whose latter End was like
theirs, and left a good Report behind her, being well beloved (I think I may
safely say by all our Neighbors; not only by those of our own Society, but
others also, to whom she was often very helpful.

So I (...) to my Calling, and got a little Money, (a little being enough)
which I was made willing to spend freely, in the Work and Service of my Great
Master Christ Jesus. And about this Time I was concerned to travel into the
North of England, and Part of Scotland, which I did in that Ability God gave
me; and that Dispensation which I had freely received, I freely handed forth to
the People, devoting my Strength and Time to serve him (that had done so much
for me) and I had the Satisfaction to find diverse confessing the Truth, as it
is in Jesus. In this Journey I was from Home about four Months, being mostly
alone as to any Yoke Fellow in that Work, traveling many Hundreds of Miles,
being as far as Edinburgh, in Scotland, Edinburgh.
where our Meeting was in the Street, we being locked out of our Meeting House
by the then Power, and great Numbers of People were there. This News being
carried to the Provost of the City, he said, The Quakers would do more Hurt out
of Doors, than within, and he ordered Friends their Key. Since which I have
understood that Friends in that City have enjoyed their Meetings in the
Meeting House; and sometimes when the Rabble have disturbed Friends, the
Magistrates have sent Officers to disperse them.

Now after I had visited the Churches of Christ in diverse Parts of England, and
had many sweet Seasons of God's Love, and good Opportunities with my Friends,
and others in this Nation; (the Word of Life being declared in the Simplicity
of the Gospel, in several Places People were very open-hearted, and received
the Testimony of it with Gladness. London.
) And after I had been at my Father's, and at my Calling, a little after this
North-country Journey, I found my self engaged in the Love of the Gospel to
visit Friends in America; and having acquainted my Friends and Relations of my
Mind (they being willing to give me up) in order for the Voyage, Friends of the
Monthly Meeting gave me a Certificate, and I had another from the Meeting of
Ministers in London.

My Father, and several other Friends with me, took Boat from London, and
accompanied me to Gravesend, on the 21st of 10th Month 1697, and I went on
Board the Ship Josiah, Deel.
Thomas Lurting, Master, and sailed that Day from Gravesend, and got to the
Downs the next Day, where we tarried some Days for a fair Wind; in which Time
several others that were concerned in the same Gospel-labour, came on Board,
viz. Thomas Turner, William Ellis, and Aaron Atkinson. In about four Days Time
the Wind was fair for us, and we set Sail, At Sea.
and in a little Time we got out of Sight of the Land; soon after which the
Wind was contrary, and we proceeded but a small Distance for several Weeks; the
Weather was rough and the Sea boisterous, so that with the Motion thereof, most
of the Passengers were Sick. In this Time we lost a Lad, that fell into the Sea
(as he was drawing a Bucket of Water) and was drowned; the Ship running
swiftly, he could not be saved, although it was speedily endeavored. Several
others died before we got over; but for the most Part we were Healthful. The
Lord be praised, he was, is, and will be, with those that faithfully serve him
to the End.

We were three Ships in Company, but by Distress of Weather, soon after we came
out, we parted. After we had been at Sea about eight Weeks (on the 15th of 12th
Month) we saw two Vessels astern of us. One of them came up with, and the
People hailed us, and told us they came from Bristol, and had been out ten
Weeks. The other came up with us next Day. The People informed us they had been
at Sea seven Weeks, and that they had had a dreadful Time of it. She had lost
Part of her Topmast, and her Spritsail Topmast was gone. She was a new Ship,
and never at Sea before, belonging to London, and bound for Virginia, as near
as we could understand: Our Ship lost none of her Tackling, through the great
Mercy of God to us, though the Wind and Sea was wonderful high at Times; the Mate
told me I might go to Sea all my Life, and not see the like; he said he had
been at, or used the Sea, twenty Years, and never saw it so rough and high
before. We had Meetings twice a Week, several of which were comfortable and
refreshing Meetings, to which most of the Passengers, being in all about Sixty
in Number, sometimes came; and several of them were affected with the Sense of
Truth, and the Lord strengthened our Faith and Hope in Him.

Oh for ever blessed be the Living and Eternal God, who kept my Soul above the
Fear of Death, Hell, and the Grave; for my Trust was in Him, and He did bear up
my Spirit above the Waves of the Sea; and in the Time of Tossing with Tempests,
I was comforted and cheerful, Praising the Lord in my Heart, both in the Day
Time, and in the Night Season.

I was much concerned in my Mind, for many of the Passengers, who with the
second Mate, and several of the Seamen were very Sick (by some it was thought
near unto Death) I cried to the Lord to heal them, in the Name of his dear Son,
and that it might be a Means to convince them of the Efficacy of Love to, and
Faith in Christ Jesus, the Physician of Value; and the Lord was pleased to heal
them. The Mate of the Ship desired that I would come and pray by him. I went to
him, and prayed in the Power and Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Lord
helped him; that he said he was fine and easy, and thanked me for my Love; and
in a little Time he recovered. Several others of the Seamen and Passengers I
was Instrumental to help in their Sickness. The Lord blessed my Endeavors in
supplicating Him, on their Behalf, and administering what I had to them. One of
the Seamen said, He was bound to pray for me as long as he lived; and that the
Lord would bless me. Another of the Passengers said, That I was the blessed
Doctor (for there was a Surgeon, or Doctor, in the Ship.) I was very free to
communicate of what I had to any sick Person in the Ship, and several blessed
the Lord on my Behalf. Indeed I thought I could scarce do enough for any that
were in Distress. I write not thus, that I might seem popular, but with my Mind
bowed before the Lord. Many Times in this Voyage there was Consultations in my
Mind, whether I had best write a Memorandum hereof; but at last conceiving in
my Spirit that it might strengthen and excite Love to God, and Faith in his
beloved Son, in true Believers, I wrote as aforesaid; and then I was satisfied,
and gave the Glory to God.

Before we came to the Land, we saw a Ketch which had saved the Lives of some
that belonged to a Ship that was a little before foundered in the Sea: Who said
also, that a Fleet of New England Ships who had been upon that Coast, by stormy
Weather, were forced to Barbados; and within a few Days after we saw the Land
of Virginia, and also a New England Ship, who sailed or came from England three
Weeks before us. School.
We arrived within the Capes of Virginia the 31st of 1st Month School, Capes of
Virginiae.
and overtook the John and Margaret, a Ship that came out of the English
Channel with us (the Master, Thomas Salmon, being dead) and the next Day we
anchored our Ship at the Mouth of Patuxent River in Maryland, where our Boats
were hoisted out, and we were rowed up Patuxent River twelve Miles, to Arthur
Young's House, where we lodged that Night; and for our Preservation and safe
Arrival, we blessed the Lord our God, and my Spirit praised Him who lives for
ever and ever. Our Voyage was above twelve Weeks, it being then Winter Time,
and for the most Part the Winds so high, that the Ships could carry but little
Sail, which made our Voyage the longer.

About four Days after we landed, Patuxent River, in Maryland.
we had a Meeting near Patuxent River: And a blessed one it was! When it was
ended, we went (that Night) to Daniel Rawlings, and from thence to the Clifts,
to Richard John's a Friend that came with us from England, at whose House we
had a Meeting, wherein God's Presence was powerfully felt. We had several
Meetings on that Side the Bay called the Western Shore, and then we sailed over
to the E^st Side of Chesapeak Bay, with Thomas Everden, in his Sloop. Went to
his House, and had a Meeting, where many People came. Here we met with our
Friends, Jonathan Tyler, Henry Payton, and Henry Payton's Sister. While I was
at this Friend's House, there was one Robert Cathing, who being very ill, sent
for Thomas Everden, and he (not being very well) desired me to visit the sick
Person: So I went, and the Man was near to Death. Howbeit he said he was
comforted much with the Visit, and that he had never received so much Benefit
by the Parish Priest in his Life: Although, said he, it cost me dear for what I
had; and if ever I live to get over it, by the Assistance of God I shall have
nothing to do with them more. But, he said, he should not live three Days. And
before the End of three Days he expired. He desired (if I were not gone) I
would be at his Funeral. On Notice hereof, about ten Friends went; and there
were a great many People, among whom we had a good Opportunity, and many
weighty Truths were opened to them in the Love of God; and some of them were
tender and wept; and the most, if not all (I think I may say) were solid and
weighty.

From Thomas Everden's House we went to George Truit's, at whose House we had a
Meeting. This Friend and I went to an Indian Town not far from his House,
because I had a Desire to see these People, having never seen any of them
before. When we came to the Town they were kind to us, spoke well of Friends,
and said they would not cheat them (as some others did.)

Virginia.
From George Truit's, in Maryland, we went down to Virginia; and in Accomack and
Northampton Counties we had large Meetings, and I hope they were effectual to
many; I think my Hope is not without Ground. In those Parts we had several
Meetings, where we were informed Friends had not had any before. And really I
cannot but bless the Lord for the Opportunities we had with the People; for the
Goodness of God, through Christ our Lord, was great, both to us and them, and
with Tears they did acknowledge to the Truth. Now Thomas Turner, who had
hitherto accompanied me, went by the Sea Side the nearest Way to Philadelphia;
Maryland.
and afterward I had a Meeting at George Truit's Brother's, and on the first
Day, another near the Courthouse, and went to Thomas Everden's, and so to
Levin Denwood's, and thence to Nanticoke River, and visited Friends up the Bay
until I came to the River Choptank, about which there is a pretty many Friends.
Pennsylvania.
So I went on, and took the Meetings till I came to Philadelphia, in and about
which Place, and in other Parts of the Province of Pennsylvania, I had many
large and precious Meetings, the Power of the eternal Son of God being
wonderful, in which Power we many Times blessed his Name together. It was in my
Heart much to exhort Friends to Love to God, and to Unity one with another,
without which there is no fulfilling the Law or Gospel. There are many Friends
in that Province, and many sober young People, which greatly rejoiced my
Spirit; so that for their Encouragement, the Lord opened my Mouth in a
prophetic Manner to declare unto them the Blessings which he had in Store for
them, on Condition of their Walking in the Truth. Glory to God on high! Untruth
decays, and the Branches of it mightily wither; the Darkness is much past, and
the true Light shines gloriously in many Souls. O powerful Praises be given to
God, who is Light for ever!

From Philadelphia I went to Burlington, East and West Jerseys
and so to Croswicks, where we had a large Meeting under the Trees, where some
were convinced of the Truth. From hence I went to Shrewsbury, and had Meetings
there: From Shrewsbury we went mostly by Water) to Woodbridge and
Staten-Island, Staten-Island, Long Island.
from thence to Long Island, being accompanied by several Friends. On
Long Island we had several large and good Meetings, wherein Christ was preached
freely* and after we had been two Weeks there, we went on Board a Sloop bound
for Rhode Island, and by the Way we touched at Fisher's and Block Islands,
Fisher 's and B^ Island Rhode Island.
and on the first Day Morning we set sail from Block-Island to Rhode Island,
the yearly Meeting being just over when we got there. That Evening we sailed
over to Conn^nicut-Island. Connecticut Island.
On the third Day of the Week had a Meeting there, and from thence we went over
to Narraganset, Narraganset.
and had a Meeting, and so over to Rhode Island again (where Ruth Fry, a sober
young Woman, was convinced, and remained a Friend till her Death.) Here I met
with several traveling Friends. From this Island we went over to the Main, and
had a large Meeting on first Day, at a Place called Greenwich. It was thought
there were about five Hundred People, and many of them were tender. We went
over the same Night to the Island; and after several open Times with Friends
and others on Rhode Island, about twelve Friends of that Island went with me to
Warwick and Providence yearly Meetings, Warwick and Providence.
in our Friend Borden's Boat. We set Sail about Neon, and having but little
Wind, it was late in the Night before we got there, and very dark, insomuch
that we could neither see nor know one another, but only by our Speech, and the
Darkness occasioned us to run our Vessel against the Rocks; but at last we got
on Shore (with our Horses) and after going over a very dirty Slough, we entered
a dismal Wilderness; so that these Difficulties occasioned our not getting to
the Friend's House till the next Day, which, being the last of the Week, we had
a Meeting; and on first Day we had a very large and satisfactory Meeting. Many
of us were so united in the Love of God, that it was hard for us to part one
from another.

Boston, (...), Hampton.
From Providence I went to Boston and Salem, where I had Meetings, and from
thence to Hampton. In those Parts God Almighty has shortened the Power of
Persecutors, and has brought his righteous Judgments upon them for their
Unrighteousness. Oh that New-England's Professors might live in the Sense of
the same, and repent. I being a Stranger and Traveller could not but observe
the barbarous and unchristian-like Welcome I had into Boston, the Metropolis of
New England. Oh! what pity (said one) it was that all of your Society were not
hanged with the other Four! M^rm^duke Stevenson, William Robinson, Mary Dyer,
and William L^ra, who were put to Death in 1659 and 1660.
In the Eastern Parts of New England God has a Seed left of his People.

From thence I returned in order to get a Passage to the Isle of Nantucket; and
from a Place called Cus^net, we sailed over to the said Island in about ten
Hours, where we tarried several Days, and had Five Meetings. The People did
generally acknowledge to the Truth, and many of them were tenderhearted. Some
of the ancient People said, Nantucket.
That it was never known that so many People were together on the Island at
once. After the first Meeting was over, one asked the Minister (so called)
Whether we might have a Meeting at his House. He said with a good Will, "We
might." This Minister had some Discourse with me, and asked, What induced me to
come hither, being such a young Man. I told him that I had no other View in
coming there, than the Good of Souls, and that I could say with the Apostle,
that a Necessity was laid upon me, and Woe would be to me if I did not preach
the Gospel. Then said he, I wish you would preach at my House in GOD's Name. So
next Day we had a Meeting at his House; and on the first Day we had the largest
Meeting that we had or the Island. It was thought there were above two Hundred
People. The Lord in his Power did make his Truth known to the Praise of his
Name. Oh! how was my Soul concerned for that People! The Lord Jesus did open my
Heart to them, and theirs to Him: They were also loving and kind to us. The
chief Magistrate of the Island desired that I would have a Meeting at his
House, there being no settled Meeting of Friends before I came; and after
Meeting he disputed about Religion with me. I thought we were both but poor
Disputants; and I cannot remember all that passed between us, but that in the
Close of our Dispute, he said, I disputed with your Friends in Barbados, and
they told me, That we must eat the spiritual Flesh, and drink the spiritual
Blood of Christ: And said the Governor, Did ever any one hear of such Flesh and
Blood; for is it not a Contradiction in Nature, that Flesh and Blood should be
Spiritual? O surely, said I, the Governor has forgot himself; for what Flesh
and Blood was that which Christ said, Except ye eat my Flesh, and drink my
Blood, ye have no Life in you. Why, said he, I don't think they were to gnaw it
from his Arms and Shoulders. Then I told him, he had answered himself. Thus our
Dispute ended. [And from that Time forward they have continued a Meeting, and
there is now a Meeting House, and a yearly Meeting for Worship, it is a growing
Meeting to this Day, and several public Friends are raised up amongst them,
who preach the Gospel of Christ freely.]

At this Time a Friend was convinced, whose Name was Starbuck, who became very
serviceable, and lived and died an eminent Minister of Christ on that Island.
Several Scores of them came and accompanied us to the Water Side; and when we
embarked on Board our Sloop, they desired that I would come and visit them
again. So I recommended them to the Grace of our Lord Jesus, and we parted in
great Love and Tenderness. In the Evening of the next Day we got to the Main
Land, where we were gladly received. Now it was in my Heart again to visit the
Eastern Parts of New England before I l^ft America; Boston. Lynn. Salem.
therefore I went to Boston yearly Meeting, thence to Lynn and Salem, where we
had a sweet comfortable Time; likewise to the yearly Meeting at Dover, and so
to Piscataway, where we had several Meetings, which were profitable
Opportunities to many. From Piscataway James Goodbridge and I went over to the
Isle of Shoals; Isle of Shoals.
we had with us a Churchmember of the Presbyterians, whose Brother invited her
over with us to the said Island, to the Meeting which was at his House; and
while he was talking with her in the Yard or Garden, I saw a Bible, and took
it, and read therein. When she came into the House she asked me, What I did
with that Book? I told her, If she was offended I would lay it down. No, No,
said she, don't think to come off^se, for you disown or deny that Book. I told
her, She was mistaken; and asked, Who told her so? Why, said she, our Minister
in his Pulpit. I replied, That it was a great Abuse upon us, for I had been
trained up from my Childhood in the Reading and Belief of the Scriptures, and
my Father and Mother were Friends that is, Quakers. She willing to try me
further, said, Did your Father and Mother suffer you to read the Bible when you
were a little Boy? Yes, said I, and gave me Correction when I was not so
willing to read therein as they would have me. Then, said she, Our Minister has
belied you; and since you say so, if it please God, I will go and hear you. She
went with us to Meeting; and after it was over (going Home) one asked her, How
she would answer it to their Minister, for going to Meeting. She replied, It
was Truth she had heard, and she would stand by it through the Grace of Christ,
and need not be ashamed of it (through we are of our selves but poor weak
Creatures.) This Woman was sober and religious, and one of good Report. By the
foregoing we may see how Slanders flow from some Pulpits; the more is the Shame
and Pity! We went on, and preached the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ in that
Ability he gave us, with which the People were affected, and would have had us
tarried longer, but we could not (although they much importuned us) because we
had appointed a Meeting at Oyster River. After we had had several Meetings
about Piscataway and Dover, Dover. Hampton
we went to Hampton, where we had Meetings; and at Salisbury we had a large
open Meeting, as it was supposed, of about three Hundred People (which was at
this Time accounted a great Concourse of People thereabouts;) also at Jamaica
and Haverill we had Meetings, and from thence went to Salem and Lynn again,
where we had good Service for Truth, and then to Boston, and had a Meeting at
the Meeting House, Boston.
and another at a Friend's House in the Evening, at which there were many
People. From Boston I went to visit Friends about Cape-Cod, till I came again
to Rhode Island. By the Way I met with Aaron Atkinson, who was on a Visit to
Friends in New England. I had several good Opportunities, and powerful
Meetings, in those Parts, and Truth wrought a Tenderness in diverse at
Rhode Island. The Presence of Him, who said, Where two or three are met in my
Name, there am I in the midst of them, being sensibly witnessed by many; for he
was with us of a Truth. From thence I went round the Narraganset Country,
Narraganset.
and had Meetings at several Places, and was accompanied by John Rodman and
William Beackly, through Connecticut to Long Island, which is accounted two
Hundred Miles. We had one Meeting by the Way, in which Christ was preached to
them, Connecticut.
as He is the Light of the World, at a Place where we were told there never was
a Friend's Meeting before. I came to Long Island about two Weeks before the
General Meeting, and visited Friends in several Places on this Island, Long
Island.
as at Hampstead, Jerusalem, Jericho, and Bethpage, where there were large
Meetings, and much Openness among the People, and some were convinced. We had a
Meeting at a Place called Matinicok, where I met with some of the People called
Ranters, who disturbed our Meeting. I may say as the Apostle Paul (only
altering Ephesus to Matinicok) that I fought with Beasts there; and thence I
traveled to New York, New York. Jerseys.
where we had two Meetings, from thence we went to the Jerseys, and there we
had several serviceable Meetings that were large; and so to Pennsylvania, where
there are many very large Meetings of Friends, and the Lord is with his People
there, and prospers them spiritually and temporally. Here I met with my dear
Friend, Pennsylvania.
William Ellis. From Philadelphia Richard Gove (of that City) and I traveled
to Maryland, and visited Friends on the Western Shore, and from thence to
Virginia. In Virginia, near James's River, Virginia.
I met with an aged Friend whose Name was William Porter. He was ninety-two
Years of Age, and had then a Daughter two Years old Some Years after I saw him,
and he was weeding Indian Corn with a Hoe. He was then about 106 Years of Age,
and had upwards of seventy Children, Grandchildren, and Great Grandchildren.
We were diverse Friends of us to see him, and he preached to us a short, but
very affecting Sermon, which was (as near as I remember) Verbatim thus;
Friends, you are come to see me in the Love of God. God is Love, and those that
dwell in God, dwell in Love. I thank God, I feel his Divine Life every Day and
every Night. He lived to see his above mentioned daughter married, and died,
aged 107 Years.
. We had several Meetings there amongst Friends, and others, many being well
satisfied concerning the Truth, and spoke well of it.

And after we had had several good and open Meetings in Virginia, we found our
selves clear of America, and in order for our Passage, we agreed with our
Friend F. Johnson, on Board the Elizabeth and Mary, to carry us for England.

On the 11th of First Month School-9, School-9.
we were accompanied on Board by several Friends, who abode with us all Night;
and the next Day, being the first Day of the Week, we had a little comfortable
Meeting, and then parted in much Love, having the Evidence of the Power of the
Almighty with us. We waited for a fair Wind until the 2Oath of the aforesaid
Month, and left the Capes of Virginia that Day, and at Night we got our Ship
into a sailing Posture; and I was glad in my Spirit, that I was setting my Face
toward my native Land; and more glad that I was returning with Peace in my
Bosom. Oh! At Sea.
the Power and Presence of Him who said, Go teach all Nations, was sweet to my
Soul at that Time, and now in some Measure I enjoyed the Fruits of my having
labored in that Ability God had given to me. Glory to God, through Christ, who
is worthy for ever! The Presence of God was with us on the great Ocean, and we
were strengthened through his Goodness wonderfully. We had several good
Meetings on board our Ship, 1699.
and were opened (in the Love of God) to the poor Seamen very largely. At Sea.


When we launched forth into the Deep, we were several Ships in Company; but we
had been but a little Time at Sea, before we lost Sight of them all. Several
Ships passed by us about a Week after we sailed; and about this Time we saw a
very large Whale, who lifted himself Part out of the Water with his Mouth open,
which looked like the Entrance of a large Cave. We likewise saw several other
large Sea Fish, such as Grampusses, Sharks, etc. all which show forth the
wondrous Works of the Great Creator of all Things, Elizabeth Webb and Elizabeth
Lloyd went over with us in this Vessel, both virtuous Women. About two Weeks
the Winds were mostly fair for us, in which Time we got finely on our Way; but
for above a Week afterward the Winds were mostly contrary, and the Ship had a
great Motion, which caused some of us to be Sea-sick, especially Elizabeth
Lloyd She was the Daughter of Thomas Lloyd, late Deputy Governor of
Pennsylvania. She lived and died a virtuous Woman; and, I think, generally
beloved by all who were acquainted with her. When she died she was the Wife of
Daniel Za^hary, a Merchant at B^n, New England, well known, and much beloved
the^e, for his Piety and Virtue.
(who was but weakly.) One Night our Sailors thought that an Enemy or Pyrate
was near us, who fired two Guns, and so passed by us; but it being Night, we
could not certainly know what she was. I rather judged it might be some Ship in
Distress, for we saw one of the Ships that Evening that came out with us, and
the next Morning we could see none at all, and there was hardly any Wind that
Night, so I feared that our Companion had sprung a Leak and foundered; and when
I told our Master my Opinion, he said, he feared the same likewise. Now for two
Weeks Time, or thereabouts, we beat about the Sea, and made little Progress.
Howbeit we had several good Meetings, At Sea.
wherein we gave Glory to God our Savior; and for ever let it ascend, says my
Soul, to him over all! After contrary Winds, about two Weeks, the Wind sprung
up Westerly, and was fair for several Days; in which Time we got finely on our
Way again, and left the Western Islands about two Days Sail behind us; and then
the Wind was contrary again. Contrary Winds are commonly tedious at Sea (but
especially to those that know not where to stay their Minds) but we being
several Friends of us on Board that were Passengers, had oftentimes good
Meetings several Times a Week; and if any of our Ship's Company came to
Meeting, they always were sober, and sometimes tender; and truly, God's Love
was extended toward them. And when it was not our Meeting Days, we spent not
our Time idly, but for the most Part in Reading the Holy Scriptures, and
Writing, etc. in which we were at sundry Seasons greatly refreshed,
strengthened, and comforted. O my Soul! glorify God thy Maker, and Christ thy
Savior for ever, in the Sense of His Goodness and Mercy, both by Sea and Land,
by Night and by Day! After we had been almost seven Weeks at Sea, we thought
that we were near the Land, but we founded several Days, and found no Bottom,
although we let out Abundance of Line, I think above 300 Yards.

About this Time our Doctor dreamed a Dream, which was to this Effect, himself
relating it to me: He said, He dreamed that he went on Shore at a great and
spacious Town, the Buildings whereof were high, and the Streets broad; and as
he went up the Street he saw a large Sign, on which was written in great golden
Letters SHAME. At the Door of the House (to which the Sign belonged) stood a
Woman with a Can in her Hand, who said unto him. Doctor, will you drink? He
replied, with all my Heart, for I have not drank any Thing but Water a great
while (our Wine and Cider being all spent, having had a long Passage) and he
drank a hearty Draught, which he said, made him merry; so went up the Street
reeling to and fro, when a grim Fellow coming behind him, clapped him on the
Shoulder, and told him, that he arrested him in the Name of the Governor of the
Place. He asked him for what, and said, What have I done? He answered, for
stealing the Woman's Can; the Can he had indeed, and so he was had before the
Governor, which was a mighty black Dog, the biggest and grimest that ever he
saw in his Life; and Witness was brought in against him by an old Companion of
his, and he was found guilty, and his Sentence was to go to Prison, and there
to lay for ever.

He told me this Dream so punctually, and with such an Emphasis, that it
affected me with serious Sadness, and caused my Heart to move within me (for to
me the Dream seemed true, and the Interpretation sure) I then told him he was
an ingenious Man, and might clearly see the Interpretation of that Dream, which
exactly answered to his State and Condition, which I thus interpreted to him:
This great and spacious Place, wherein the Buildings were high, and the Streets
broad, is thy great and high Profession: The Sign, on which was wrote Shame,
which thou saw, and the Woman at the Door, with the Can in her Hand, truly
represents that great, crying and shameful Sin of Drunkenness, which thou knows
to be thy great Weakness, which the Woman with the Can did truly represent to
thee: The grim Fellow which arrested thee in the Devil's Territories is Death,
who will assuredly arrest all Mortals: The Governor which thou saw,
representing a great black Dog, is certainly the Devil, who after his Servants
have served him to the full, will torment them eternally in Hell. So he g^t up,
as it were in have, and said, God forbid! It is nothing but a Dream. But I told
him it was a very significant One, and a Warning to him from the Almighty, who
sometimes speaks to Men by Dreams.

In seven Weeks after we left Sight of the Land of America, we saw the Scilly
Islands, Engl^ Channel.
and next Day we saw the Land of England, which was a comfortable Sight to us;
in that God Almighty had preserved us hitherto, and that we were so far got on
our Way. We drove about the Channel's Mouth for several Days for Want of Wind;
after which, for two Days the Wind came up, and we got as far up the Channel as
Limebay, and then an Easterly Wind blew fresh for several Days, and we turned
to Windward, but rather lost than got on our Way, which was tiresome and
tedious to some of us.

Now about this Time (being some Days after the Doctor's Dream) a grievous
Accident happened to us. We meeting with a Dutch Vessel in Limebay a little
above the Start, hailed her, and she us. They said they came from Lisbon, and
were bound for Holland. She was loaded with Wine, Brandy, Fruit, and such like
Commodities; and we having little but Water to drink (by reason our Passage was
longer than we expected) therefore we sent our Boat on Board, in order to buy
us a little Wine to drink with our Water. Our Doctor, and a Merchant that was a
Passenger, and one Sailor, went on Board, where they staid so long until some
of them were overcome with Wine, although they were desired to beware thereof; so
that when they came back, a Rope being handed to them, they (being fi^led with
Wine unto Excess) were not capable of using it dexterously, insomuch that they
overset the Boat, and she turned Bottom upwards, having the Doctor under her.
The Merchant caught hold of a Rope called the Main Sheet, whereby his Life was
saved. The Sailor not getting so much drink, as the other two, got nimbly on
the Bottom of the Boat, and floated on the Water till such Time as our other
Boat was hoisted out, which was done with great Speed, and we took him in; but
the Doctor was drowned before the Boat came. The Seaman that sat upon the Boat
saw him sink, but could not help him. This was the greatest Exercise that we
met with in all our Voyage; and much the more so, as the Doctor was of an evil
Life and Conversation, and much given to Excess in Drinking. When he got on
Board the aforesaid Ship, the Master sent for a Can of Wine, and said, Doctor,
will you drink. He replied, Yes, with all my Heart, for I Have drank no Wine a
great while. Upon which he drank a hearty Draught, that made him merry (as he
said in his Dream; N. B. This Relation about the Doctor's Dream, when I was at
Barbados, I had Occasion to write about it to a Friend in Ireland, which he got
printed there, which is the same with this in Substance, only this is somewhat
fuller and larger.
) and notwithstanding the Admonition which was so clearly manifested to him but
three Days before, and the many Promises he had made to Almighty God, some of
which I was a Witness of, when strong Convictions were upon him, yet now he was
unhappily overcome, and in Drink when he was drowned. This is, I think, a
lively Representation of the tender Mercy, and just Judgment of the Almighty to
poor Mortals; and I thought it was worthy to be recorded to Posterity, as a
Warning to all great Lovers of Wine and strong Liquors. This Exercise was so
great to me, that I could not for several Days get over it; and one Day while I
was musing in my Mind on those Things relating to the Doctor, it was opened to
me, that God and his Servants were clear, and his Blood was on his own Head;
for he had been faithfully warned of his evil Ways.

Plymouth.
We were obliged by contrary Winds to put into Plymouth Harbor, and from
Plymouth I went by Coach to London, where I was gladly received by my Relations
and Friends. In this Journey I traveled about 2000 Miles by Land, and 6000 by
Water.. I got to the yearly Meeting of Friends in London, in the Year 1699
(which was large) and was at diverse public Meetings for the Worship of
Almighty God. London.
I may truly say, the Holy Ghost was among us, blessed be God our Savior for
evermore.

In this Year I thought it my Place to enter into a married State, and I
acquainted my Father of my Design, and that I inclined to make Choice of Martha
Betterton, a religious young Woman, whom I entirely loved for that Piety,
Virtue, and Modesty, which I beheld in her; (I was in the twenty-fourth Year of
my Age, and she in her twenty-first.) I likewise acquainted her Father and
Mother with my Intentions, to which both our Parents consented; her Father
saying (when I spoke him) Go together, and the Lord bless you together. And my
Father said, If I was worth my Weight in Gold, she deserved me. The Heartiness
of both our Fathers in this Matter, was more to me than a Portion of Silver or
Gold, of which we had but very little; but our Love to each other was very
great, and being well and honorably grounded, it was not easily shaken. So
after Consent of Parents, we proposed our Intentions of Marriage to the monthly
Meetings unto which we belonged; and because I had been traveling in America,
I had Certificates from my Brethren there (not only) of my Industry and Labor
in the Ministry, with the good Effects thereof, but also of my Clearness in
Relation to Marriage; and after having twice published our Intentions, we had
Liberty of said Meeting to proceed to the Solemnization of our Marriage, which
was accomplished at Devonshire-House, in London (at a Meeting appointed for
that End) on the 28th Day of the seventh Month, in the aforesaid Year, in the
Presence of many hundreds of People, and many worthy Brethren and Elders. A Day
of Days it was to my Soul! wherein I was made sensible of the Love and Goodness
of God in a particular Manner, which to me was an earnest of our future
well-doing. My dear Wife was one who truly loved and feared God, and had an
excellent Gift of the Ministry given unto her, and was serviceable therein. [A
Paper coming to my Hands of her own Handwriting and composing, I transcribe it
here. She calls it An Account of the Exercise of Martha Betterton, viz. As I
was walking in the City of London, with a Concern on my Mind, in beholding the
abominable Pride of the People; it opened upon my Mind in this wise: Woe, Woe! to
the Crown of Pride! And then I was deeply bowed in my Spirit before the Lord,
and it was said to me, I will yet spare a little longer; I have Sheep which I
will gather Home to me, and there shall be one Shepherd, and one Sheepfold.
Then I said in my Heart, Oh Lord! shall I be one of thy Sheep belonging to thy
Sheepfold of eternal Rest. And again it was answered me, My Sheep hear my
Voice, and they follow me. Then a Cry was raised in me, Cause me to hear thy
Voice; and not only so, but enable me to obey the same. And then this Charge
was returned to me, Be thou faithful!]

Surrey, Sussex, and Kent.
Soon after I was married, I had a Concern to visit Friends in the Counties of
Surrey, Sussex, and Kent, which I performed in about two Weeks Time, and came
Home and followed my Calling, and was industrious therein; and when I had
gotten something to bear my Expenses, and settled my Wife in some little
Business, I found an Exercise on my Spirit to go over to Ireland, Ireland.
to visit our Friends and Brethren on that Island, in which William Townsend
accompanied me, and Friends in that Nation were generally satisfied with our
Service among them. When we had been from Home about ten Weeks, and had visited
most Parts of that Nation, having had many Meetings among Friends, and others,
we found Freedom in our Minds to return Home, which we did, being comforted in
our Service, and blessed the Name of the Lord.

After some few Months I acquainted my Wife and my Father, with her Father and
Mother, that I thought it my Duty to go over and live in America. To which
Proposal, my Father consented, though with Tenderness of Heart, considering that
I must be so far separated from him. I also laid it before the monthly Meeting
of Friends at Horsly-Down, in Southwark (of which Meeting I was a Member) who
consented to it (though somewhat unwilling to part with us) and gave us their
Certificate, to let our Brethren know that we were in Love and Unity with them,
and walked according to our Profession. And when we were ready, and in order
for going, we agreed for the Freight of our Goods and Servants, with John
Snowdon, and shipped them on Board the Josiah, bound for Maryland. When the
Ship was at Gravesend, and ready to sail, Gravesend.
several of our dear Relations and Friends accompanied us to the Ship, on board
of which we had a good Meeting, and took our solemn Leave of one another, as
never expecting to see each other any more in this World. It was a solemn Time
indeed! We prayed for one another, and so parted, our Ship sailing that
Evening, and we got to Margate-Road, where we anchored, A great Storm in
Margate-Road.
and the Wind sprung up very fresh, and blew tempestuously, so that we broke
our Cable, and lost our best Bower-Anchor, and drove violently toward the
Goodwin Sands. We let go our Sheet-Anchor, and three more, which were all we
had, but they did not stop her; upon which the Master ordered the Carpenters to
stand by the Mainmast, with their Axes upon their Shoulders, and when he gave
the Word, then they were to cut the Mast. The People in the Ship (there being
diverse Passengers) were in a great Consternation, expecting nothing but Death:
But for my Part, being exceedingly Sea-sick, and having been in many Storms, I
was not so much surprised with this, the Sailors sometimes making a great Noise
when there is but little Danger; but there was more Danger than I was aware of,
as appeared afterward. One of the Passengers came weeping, and said, "Our Case
was very bad," The Doctor also came in the same Manner, and cried, "Oh! Mr.
Chalkley, we are all dead Men!" Then I thought with my self, I would go out on
Deck, and see what the Matter was; and when on Deck, I went to the Pilot, who
had the Lead in his Hand, and he founded, and cried out, Lord have Mercy upon
us! she is gone, she is gone, she is gone! by which I perceived that we were
very near the Goodwin Sands, on which many Ships have been lost with all their
Crews. In this Sense of Danger I se^ for the Passengers into the Cabin, and
told them that I thought it would be well for us to sit still together, and
look unto, and wait upon God, to see what he would please to do for us; that,
if Death came, we might meet him in as good a Frame of Mind as we could, and
that we might not be surpised beyond Measure: And as we were thus composed in
our Minds, a Concern came upon my dear Wife, and she prayed to God, the Father,
in the living Power and Sense of his Son; and he heard from his holy
Habitation, and answered the Prayer: For, immediately after, the Wind abated,
and our Anchors held us. This was a great Deliverance, which is not to be
forgotten. When we saw the longed-for Morning, we were very near the Sands, and
the Sea ran prodigiously high, and broke upon them mightily, so that we were
forced to le^ (...) C^^les and Anchors, and make the best of our Way to Deal,
as well as we could. One of the Owners being on Shore, and seeing us in
Distress, sent off a Cable and Anchor to us; and we anchored before Deal with
our new Cable and Anchor, Deal.
and sent a Boat for our other Anchors and Cables, when it was Calm, which
brought them to us. And after we had supplied our selves with what we wanted,
we put to Sea again, and had fair Winds till we got as far as the Western
Islands, Western Islands.
where Captain Cant being in Company with us, he spoke with our Captain in the
Evening, 1700.
and the two Captains concluded it would be stormy that Night, which happened
accordingly. They took in their Sails, and we all but our Mainsail;
notwithstanding which, the Storm was such, that we lost our Mainmast, sprung
the Head of our Foremast, and broke our Cross-jackyard, and thus lay rolling
upon the Sea for about two Week: The Ship Bristol Merchant coming by in that
Time, lent us a spare Topmast, of which we made a Mainmast, and a Topmast of
our Top-gallant-mast, and so refitted out as well as we could, and had a pretty
good Passage afterward. Capes of Virginia.
We were about eight Weeks from the Lands-End to the Capes of Virginia; had
Meetings twice a Week on Board, and they helped to stay our Minds on our Maker,
though our Bodies were tossed to and again on the mighty Waters. We went on Shore
at Patuxent River, Maryland.
and went by Land to Herring-Bay, where I, my Wife, and Family, tarried that
Winter; and I, with my three Servants, followed my Calling. In the Spring we
transported our selves, our Goods, and Servants, 1701.
from Maryland to Pennsylvania, where we intended to settle when we came from
our native Country. Philadelphia.
At Philadelphia I bought a Lot of Ground upon the River Delaware, and there I
followed my Calling that Summer; and in the Fall I had an inward Call to visit
Friends in Barbados, which I proposed to our monthly Meeting, and they
certified on my Behalf that they had Unity with me in my Proposal,
Conversation, and Ministry: So I took Ship at Philadelphia (about the 20th of
7th Month, 1701) on Board the Abraham, -- Street, Commander, and was about a
Month on our Voyage; ( Josiah Langdale was with me.) We had several good
Meetings in the Ship to our Satisfaction; Barbados,
and were well received, and had many Meetings at Barbados, which were often
very large and open, and some of the People loving and tender. We had several
Meetings at Bridge-Town, Speight's-Town, the Spring, and the Thickets, and at
Pumpkin-Hill; and after being there about six Weeks, we went in a Sloop to
Bermudas, where we found but very few Friends, Bermudas.
yet had Meetings in several Places, and at the Houses of some People who were
not of our Profession; and the longer we tarried, the larger our Meetings were;
and many began to be affected, and spoke well of us and our Devotion, but some
were disturbed, and spoke to the Governor to break up our Meetings (which at
the Desire of one of the Inhabitants we had appointed at his House) upon which
he sent Orders by one of his Colonels to break up our Meeting, which troubled
diverse sober People. After this I met with the Governor at the House of one
Judge Stafford; and he being a moderate Man, we had the following Discourse,
viz.

Gov. How do you like our Country? We are but a little Spot in the Sea.


T. C. I like it well for its moderate Climate. If the People were moderate
also, it would be well.


Gov. Does it answer your End in coming?


T. C. My End in coming, was to visit the People in Christian Love.


Gov. Do you think the People will be brought over?


T. C. If they are brought to Truth and Righteousness, it will be well for
them. That is the End of our coming.


Gov. If you had acquainted me with your Design, when first you came, you had
done well. It was your Duty.


T. C. If we had known the Governor's Will herein, or that thou would have
spoken with us, we should have readily answered it: But knowing nothing of it,
we could not tell but that it might be taken for Rudeness in us, considering
our homely Way and Manner of addressing such Men.


Gov. Then your Design in coming here was to preach. Had you no other End?


T. C. Yes. As we found a Concern upon us to preach, and a Desire in the People
to hear.


Gov. Why don't you tarry with them? That looks strange. Here the People are
affected with you, and you go away and leave them: Upon my Word I blame you for
that.


T. C. We don't direct them to Man, but to the Lord Jesus Christ, their
Teacher, and Bishop of their Souls. And why should our leaving them look
strange to the Governor? For it was the Practice of the Apostles of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and his own Practice and Command to his Followers. And further,
the Apostles (which Word signifies Ambassadors or Messengers) say, Follow us,
as we are Followers of Christ. And they traveled up and down the World
preaching the Gospel; and our great Lord himself had not whereon to lay his
Head.


Gov. The Apostles were inspired Men: Inspired by the Holy Spirit to preach the
Gospel. I suppose you don't pretend to be inspired.


T. C. Every true Christian ought to pray for the Pouring out of the Holy
Spirit, or Holy Ghost upon him. The Church of England Of which Church the
Governor was a Member.
also prays for it, the Receiving of which is Inspiration.


Gov. Your Reasons being grounded on Scripture, you are well grounded; for no
Man can deny the Scriptures. Then you say you are inspired?


T. C. I hope I am. I pray for it with great Earnestness.


Gov. Then it is but ask, and have, you think.


T. C. If we ask in Faith, without wavering, we shall receive according to the
Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles in the New Testament.


Gov. Well, If any have a Desire to hear you, you may preach and welcome.


After I had this Discourse with the Governor, it was reported on the Island
that the Governor had given us a License to preach (which Report was not true,
further than the aforesaid Discourse) and then we had larger Meetings than
before. We had a Meeting at Judge Stafford's House, and one at a House not far
from his.

It is observable that this Island has formerly been a very healthy and
fruitful Place. Red Cedar, or Sweet Wood, is all the Timber they have in the
Island, with which they build their Houses, make their Household Goods, build
their Ships and Sloops, and make their Fires; so that there is continually a
fragrant and pleasant Smell, which we could smell at Sea sometime before we saw
the Land; and it is yet a pretty healthy and fruitful Island, but not so
healthy and fruitful as formerly. In one of the Meetings I was concerned to let
them know, that it was the Evil of their Ways and Doings that had caused the
Almighty to withold from them the Fruits of the Earth, and to make their
Island more unhealthful than formerly it was. After Meeting the Judge told me I
had said truly, for that was the Cause; and if I had spoke more to that Matter,
or on that Subject, I had done well. Several were convinced at this Time on
this Island.

Soon after an Opportunity offered, in a Sloop belonging to this Island, that
was bound for Philadelphia, in which we (being clear) embarked, and on our
Voyage had indifferent good Weather, At Sea.
only one hard Gale of Wind, which caused us to hand our Jib. A Molatto Man
named Stavo (being the Master's Servant) went out upon the Bowsprit to hand the
Sail, and there came a Sea and washed him off; and the Vessel ran over him;
and, in all probability, he had certainly been drowned, had he not been a good
Swimmer; for he swam, as we judged, three Quarters of a Mile, before he got to
the Sloop, it not coming into any one's Mind to lower the Sails, until I
sharply ordered it to be done, which they then did readily; and the Course of
the Vessel being ^^op'd, he soon got on Board, having stripped him self of his
Clothes in the Sea, and brought them in his Mouth. I was very thankful for the
poor Fellow's Life, and praised the Lord in the Secret of my Soul, for his
Preservation. In about two Weeks Time we arrived at Philadelphia, Philadelphia.
and I had gre^ Peace in my Labors in this Visit, in which I was from Home
about five Months. The Friends of Barbados were so well satisfied with this
Labor of Love, that they certified the same by Way of Certificate, more than
is proper for me to mention. But though they thought so well of me, yet I had
occasion to think very meanly of my self, 1702.
for I was emptied to exceeding great spiritual Poverty at Times.

After I came Home from Barbados and Bermudas, I followed my Calling; and kept
to Meetings diligently; for I was not easy to be idle; either in my spiritual
or temporal Callings; and at Times traveled in the Work of the Ministry in our
own Province (in which there are many large Meetings of Friends, and they
increase and multiply from time to time.) Since my settling in this Province,
which is now about a Year, some Hundreds of People are come here to settle, and
diverse Meeting Houses are built; and I do certainly know from above, that this
Province of Pennsylvania, and City of Philadelphia, will flourish both
spiritually and temporally, if the Inhabitants will love (and live in)
Righteousness, and in the Fear of God; otherwise the Hand that planted them can
soon pluck them up. After some time I was drawn forth to visit Friends in
Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina, and went with the Unity of Friends,
having their Certificate (according to the good Order established among us;) so
about the 26th of 1st Month, 1703, 1703.
I went through Maryland, and visited Friends in Virginia and North Carolina, to
the River Pamphlico, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina.
where no traveling public Friends (that ever I heard of) were before, and we
had several Meetings there on each Side of the River. One Day going out of our
Canoe through a Marsh, I trod on a Rattle-snake (which is accounted one of the
most poisonous Snakes) but it only hissed at me, and did no Harm. This was one
Deliverance, among many, the Lord by his Providence wrought for me; and I bless
his Holy Name for all his Mercies. In going to, and coming from the (...) we
lay two Nights in the Woods, and I think I never slept better in all my Life.
It was the eighth Hour in the Evening when I laid down on the Ground one Night
(my Saddle being my Pillow) at the Root of a Tree, and it was four a Clock in
the Morning when they called me. When I awoke I thought of good Jacob's Lodging
he had on his Way to Padanaram, when he saw the holy Vision of Angels, with the
Ladder, whose Top reached to Heaven. Very sweet was the Love of God to my Soul
that Morning, and the Dew of the everlasting Hills refreshed me; and I went on
my Way Praising the Lord, and magnifying the God of my Salvation. In this
Journey I met with another remarkable Deliverance, going over a River eight
Miles broad, we put our Horses [we being eight Men, and seven Horses] into two
Canoes tied together, and our Horses stood with their Fore-feet in one, and
their Hind-feet in the other. It was calm when we set out, but when we were
about the Middle of the River the Wind rose, and the Seas ran high, and split
one of our Canoes, so that with our Hats we were obliged to cast out the Water;
and with much Difficulty (at last) all of us, with our Horses, got safe on
Shore, through the good Providence of God. And o^ (...) Return through
North Carolina, we had several large Meetings, and an open Time it was; as also
at Nansimund and Chuckatuc, and several other Places in Virginia, and when my
Service was over in those two Provinces I went back to Maryland, and visited
Meetings there, and then went Home. Philadelphia.
As near as I can compute it I rode about a thousand Miles in this Journey.
After which I staid at Home, following my Business, in order to the Maintenance
of my Family, 1704.
being blessed with Wife, Children, and Servants, and with other Things; for
which I am truly thankful.

While I was at Home I visited the neighboring Meetings as I found a Concern
on my Mind; and on the 6th Day of the 3d Month, 1704, I laid before our
Quarterly Meeting of Ministers and Elders, an Exercise that was upon my Mind,
to visit our Friends Meetings on Long Island, Rhode Island, and in New England,
and the Places adjacent; from which Quarterly Meeting I had a good Certificate
(which I thought it my Duty to endeavor to live up unto; Jerseys.
) and being accompanied with several Friends to Burlington and Croswicks,
Joseph Glaster being my Fellow Laborer in the Work of the Gospel; at the two
aforesaid Places, we had Meetings, and then we traveled to New York and
Long Island, Long Island.
where we had diverse Meetings; as at Flushing, Westbury, Jerusalem, Jericho,
Bethpage, Matinicock, and also at West-Chester, on the Main, Rhode Island.
and from thence we traveled to Rhode Island yearly Meeting, which was large
and serviceable to many. From hence Joseph Glaster went toward Boston, the
inland Way, and I went by the Sea Side; and we met together, after I had been
at Meetings at diverse Places, viz. Dartmouth and Nantucket Island, Dartmouth.
at which Island there are large Meetings, People there being mostly Friends,
and a sober growing People in the best Things; though not of our Society when
they first received the Truth, yet they received it with Gladness; and although
diverse of the People called Presbyterians were very cruel in their Expressions,
and bitter in their Spirits against us, yet there were some who went ^^der that
Name, who were more open and charitable toward us, and received us gladly with
Tenderness; and at some Places we had Meetings at their Houses to our mutual
Satisfaction. We likewise had Meetings at Suc^annset, Situate, and Sandwich.
Sandwich.
About this Time the Indians were very barbarous in the Destruction of the
English Inhabitants scalping some, and knocking out the Brains of others (Men,
Women, and Children) by which the Country was greatly alarmed, both Night and
Day; but the Great Lord of all was pleased wonderfully to preserve our Friends,
especially those who kept faithful to their peaceable Principle, according to
the Doctrine of Christ in the Holy Scriptures, as recorded in his excellent
Sermon which he preached on the Mount, in the vth, vith and viith Chapters of
Matthew, which is quite opposite to Killing, Revenge, and Destruction, even of
our Enemies: And because our Friends could not join with those of fighting
Principles and Practices, some of them were put into Prison; diverse People
railing and speaking very bitterly against their peaceable Neighbors, and
wishing the Quakers might be cut off. Some of the New England Priests and
Professors were so bitter against Friends, that instead of being humbled, under
the mighty Hand of God upon them, in suffering the Indians to destroy them,
they expressed their Enmity against the poor Quakers, on a Day appointed for
Humiliation and a Fast; and particularly in a Sermon preached by one of their
Priests, which he divided into three Heads, viz. First, That the Judgments of
God were upon them, in letting loose the Savage Indians to destroy them.
Secondly, In that he withheld the Fruits of the Earth from them (for there was
great Scarcity.) Thirdly, That the Quakers prevailed, and were suffered to
increase so much among them; which he said, was worse than the Indians
destroying of them, and gave this absurd Reason for it, The Indians destroy our
Bodies, but the Quakers destroy the Soul. This Priest was soon after killed by
the Indians, as I was told by a Minister.
This is an abominable Falsehood; for it is Sin that destroys the Soul: And such
as those that preach to the People that there is no Freedom from it in this
World, contradict Christ's Doctrine, Be ye perfect, etc. And that of the
Apostles, He that is born of God cannot Sin. And thus their blind Guides
mistake Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light. Among the many Hundreds
that were slain, I heard but of three of our Friends being killed, whose
Destruction was very remarkable, as I was informed (the one was a Woman, the
other two were Men.) The Men used to go to their Labor without any Weapons,
and trusted to the Almighty, and depended on his Providence to protect them (it
being their Principle not to use Weapons of War, to offend others, or defend
themselves) but a Spirit of Distrust taking Place in their Minds, they took
Weapons of War to defend themselves; and the Indians, who had seen them several
Times without them, and let them alone, saying, They were peaceable Men, and
hurt nobody, therefore they would not hurt them, now seeing them have Guns, and
supposing they designed to kill the Indians, they therefore shot the Men dead.
The Woman had remained in her Habitation, and could not be free to go to a
fortified Place for Preservation, neither she, her Son, nor Daughter, nor to
take thither the little Ones; but the poor Woman after some Time began to let
in a slavish Fear, and did advise her Children to go with her to a Port not far
from their Dwelling. Her Daughter being one that trusted in the Name of the
Lord, the mighty Tower, to which the Righteous flee and find Safety, could not
consent to go with her; and having left a particular Account in a Letter to her
Children of her and their Preservation, I think it worthy to be inserted here
in her own Words. When the cruel Indians were suffered to kill and destroy, it
was showed me, That I must stand in a Testimony for Truth, and trust in the
Name of the Lord, that was a strong Tower, and we should wait upon him. And I
often desired my Mother and Husband to sit down, and wait upon the Lord, and he
would show us what we should do: But I could not prevail with him, but he would
say it was too late now, and was in great have to be gone; but I could not go
with him, because I was afraid of offending the Lord: But still he would say I
was deluded by the Devil, so that my Mother would often say, A House divided
could not stand; and she could not tell what to do, although she had most Peace
in staying, yet she had Thoughts of moving, and said to me Child, Can thee
certainly say it is revealed to thee that we should stay; if it be, I would
willingly stay, if I was sure it was the Mind of God. But I being young, was
afraid to speak so high, said, Mother, I can say that it is so with me, that
when I think of staying and trusting in the Name of the Lord, I find great
Peace and Comfort, more than I can utter, with a Belief we shall be preserved;
but when I think of going, O the Trouble and Heaviness I feel, with a Fear some
of us should fall by them! And my dear Mother sighed, and said, "She could not
tell what to do." But I said to them, If they would go, I would be willing to
stay alone; if they found Freedom, I was very willing, for I was afraid of
offending the Lord. But still my poor Husband would say, "I took a wrong Spirit
for the right." And he would say how I should know, For if I was right, I would
be willing to condescend to him. And then I said, In Condescension to him I
would move; but I hoped the Lord would not lay it to my Charge, for was it not
to condescend to him, I would not move for the World, and after I had given
away my Strength, in a little Time there came Men from the Garrison, with their
Guns, and told us, "They came for us," and told us, "The Indians, they thought,
might be near;" and then away we went; and my Mother went in with my
Brother-in-law, although I persuaded her not to do it. But she said, Why, my
Child is there; And why may not I be with her as well as thee? And so we went
along to Hampton, to my Husband's Brother's. But O the Fear and Trouble that I
felt! And told my Husband it seemed as if we were going into the Mouths of the
Indians. And the next Day was the first Day of the Week; and our dear Friend,
Lydia Norton, came with my dear Mother; and in her Testimony, she said there
was there that was very near to her Life, that was very near Death. O then I
was ready to think it would be I, because I believed we had done amiss in
moving, and great Trouble was I in, and told dear Lydia of it; but she
comforted me as much as she could, and said, "She did not think it would be I."
And my dear Mother went to my Sister's again, to the Garrison, where she found
herself not easy; but, as she often said to many, that she felt herself in a
beclouded Condition, and more shut from Counsel than ever she had been since
she knew the Truth; and being uneasy, went to move to a Friend's House that
lived in the Neighborhood; and as she was moving, the bloody cruel Indians lay
by the Way, and killed her. O then how did I lament moving! And promised if the
Lord would be pleased to spare my Life, and Husband, and Children, and carry us
Home again, I would never do so more. But O the Fear, and Trouble, and
Darkness, that fell upon me, and many more at that Time! And three or four of
us kept our Meeting: But although we sat and waited as well as we could, yet we
sat under a poor beclouded Condition, till we returned Home again, then did the
Lord please to lift up the Light of his Love upon our poor Souls. O then I told
my Husband, although he had built a little House by the Garrison, I could not
move again. So he was willing to stay while the Winter Season lasted, but told
me he could not stay when Summer came, for then the Indians would be about; and
so told me, That if I could not go to the Garrison, I might go to a Friend's
House that was near it. And I was willing to please him, if the Lord was
willing; and then applied my Heart to know the Mind of Truth, and it was showed
me, that if I moved again, I should loose the Sense of Truth, and I should
never hold up my Head again. O then I told my Husband he must never ask me to
move again, for I durst not do it. Still he would say it was a Notion, till our
dear Friend Thomas Story came, and told him, He did not see that I could have a
greater Revelation than I had. And satisfied my Husband so well that he never
asked me more to go, but was very well contented to stay all the Wars; and then
Things were made more easy, and we saw Abundance of the wonderful Works, and of
the mighty Power of the Lord, in keeping and preserving of us, when the Indians
were at our Doors, and Windows, and other Times; and how the Lord put Courage,
in you, my dear Children, don't you forget it, and don't think that you was
young, and because you knew little, so you feared nothing, but often consider
how you staid at Home alone, when we went to Meetings, and how the Lord
preserved you, and kept you, so that no Hurt came upon you: And I leave this
Charge upon you, Live in the Fear of the Lord, and see you set him always
before your Eyes, lest you sin against him: For if I had not feared the Lord,
and felt the Comforts of his Holy Spirit, I never could have stood so great a
Trial, when so many judged, and said I was deluded, and that all the Blood of
my Husband and Children, would be required at my Hands; but the Lord was near
to me, and gave me Strength and Courage, and Faith to trust in him, for I know
his Name to be a strong Tower, yea, and stronger than any in the World; for I
have oftentimes fled there for Safety. O Blessing, and Honor, and everlasting
high Praises, be given to the Lord, and to his dear Son, our Savior and
Mediator, Christ Jesus, Amen. MARY DO.

A Neighbor of the aforesaid People told me, That as he was at Work in his
Field, the Indians saw, and called him, and he went to them. They told him,
That they had no Quarrel with the Quakers, for they were a quiet, peaceable
People, and hurt nobody, and that therefore none should hurt them. But they
said, That the Presbyterians in these Parts had taken away their Lands, and
some of their Lives, and would now, if they could, destroy all the Indians.

Those Indians began about this Time to shoot People down as they rode along
the Road, and to knock them in the Head in their Beds, and very barbarously
murdered many: But we traveled the Country, and had large Meetings, and the
good Presence of God was with us abundantly, and we had great inward Joy in the
Holy Ghost in our outward Jeopardy and Travels. The People generally rode and
went to their Worship armed, but Friends went to their Meetings without either
Sword or Gun, having their Trust and Confidence in God.

After having had diverse good Meetings in those Eastern Parts of New England, I
returned to Salem, Boston, etc.
Lynn, Boston, and so on toward Rhode Island, and at diverse adjacent Places;
Narraganset. Dartmouth.
as in the Narraganset Country, we had diverse Meetings, also at Dartmouth,
Sandwich, and Situate. As I was entering into the Town of Boston in Company
with many others, a Man rode up to me, and asked in a scoffing Manner, Whether
I saw or met with any Quakers on the Road? I pleasantly told him, we should not
tell the Presbyterians, lest they should hang them. He not thinking of such an
Answer went sneakingly away.

Now having thoroughly visited Friends in those Parts, in Company with my
Friend Thomas Story, Connecticut, Long Island.
I traveled through Connecticut Government, and had several Meetings in that
Colony; and came to Long Island, where we had diverse Meetings to the
Satisfaction of our selves and Friends. From Long Island, after we were clear
of the Service and Exercise of the Work of the Ministry, and had visited
Friends Meetings as we traveled; and in diverse Places found Openness among the
People who were not of our Profession (which sometimes came in great Numbers to
our Meetings, and several were convinced in some good Degree, and many
comforted, strengthened, and edified, in Christ our Lord) we came to
Philadelphia, Philadelphia.
the Place of our Habitation. Let (says my Soul) his Name have the Praise of
all his Works for ever.

After being at Home some Time I visited Friends Meetings in our own County,
and several Parts of New Jersey, New Jersey. Lower Counties. Maryland.
Maryland, and the Lower Counties, on Delaware. At Jones's I appointed a
Meeting at a public House near the Courthouse (general Notice being given
thereof) there came one -- Crawford, a Priest, with many of his Hearers, and in
the Beginning of the Meeting he read a Sermon (as they called it) which was a
Transcript of the Works of some of our Adversaries, which we desired to have
from them to answer. They said, If I would answer it myself I should have it.
The which I told them I should, if they would let me; but though they promised
it, they did not perform, but were worse than their Word. We heard them read it
over patiently; and after they had done, we had our Meeting. The Auditory was
large, and most of the Magistrates were at it. The Priest's Reading, and my
Testimony occasioned this Meeting to hold long; after which, as we were getting
on Horseback, the Priest cried out among the People, That he did not think we
would go away so sneakingly. We having twenty Miles to ride that Night, and he
near his Home, he having the Advantage in that Respect, some thought it made
him the bolder, for he let me get on Horseback before he uttered that sneaking
Expression. I told him to challenge was enough to set a Coward to work, and we
were no Cowards; for he knew we could venture our Lives for our Religion, which
I questioned whether he would do for his; so I dismounted, and he having the
Bible open in his Hand, I being near him, chanced, against my Will and
Knowledge, to touch it with my Foot. Look you, Gentlemen, says he, he tramples
the Word of God under his Feet. 1705.
For which gross Abuse his own Hearers openly rebuked him, and put him to
Shame. Then he said, He would prove us no Ministers of Christ. I bid him prove
himself one, and he would do the Business. Well, says he, how shall we know who
are Christ's Ministers? Why, said I in answer to him, art thou willing to be
tried by Christ's Rule, for he has given us a plain Rule to know them by.
"What is that Rule? let us hear it," says he. It Is short, but full, namely, By
their Fruits you shall know them: For Men don't gather Grapes of Thorns, nor
Figs of Thistles; wherefore by their Fruits they are known. "I deny it, says
Priest Crawford (for that was the Name he went by here, he going under another
elsewhere) that they are known by their Fruits." I answered, Then thou denies
the plain and naked Truth of Christ. So I called aloud to the People to take
notice what a blind Guide they had; and indeed he was wicked, as well as blind,
and his Fruits not good; which may make one suppose, that he was not willing to
be tried by his Fruits: For soon after News came that he had a Wife in England,
and as he had another here, his Fruits were wicked with a Witness; and
according to Christ's Doctrine, no Good could spring from his Ministry,
therefore he proved himself by his evil Deeds to be no Minister of Jesus Christ
Near the aforesaid Place we got a Meeting settled, which is called Little-Creek
Meeting; and about the same Time a Meeting was established, and a Meeting House
built at Duck-Creek. The People in those Parts about this Time began mightily
to see through the formal Preaching of such as preach for Money or Hire, who
love the Hire, though they don't love to be called Hirelings.

In the Year 1706, Nottingham, etc. Maryland.
having some Concerns in the Province of Maryland, I had diverse Meetings as I
traveled on the Road, as at Nottingham, Elk River, Northeast, Susouehannah,
Bush, and Gunpowder Rivers; at some of which Places I don't know that there had
been any Meetings before. 1706.
At one of these Meetings were one Edwards a Priest, and a Lawyer the
Attorney General, and several of the Justices of the Peace. The Priest was
angry, and said, It was an unlawful Assembly, the House not being licensed by
Law. The Justices told him, That he and his People being there to hear, if any
unwarrantable or false Doctrines was preached, he had a fair Opportunity to lay
it open before all the People. So they desired him to hear patiently and
quietly. He seemed to like the Proposition, and sat down by me. We had not sat
down long before I stood up, and spoke to the People some considerable Time;
and the Lawyer sat opposite to me, and took what I said in Shorthand, for
about Half an Hour; but growing weary, he laid down his Pen, and took out of
his Pocket a Bottle of Liquor, or Spirits, and said, Come, Friend, here is to
thee (or you) you have spoke a great While, you need something to refresh you.
So I made a Stop, and said to the People, Here is your Minister, and here is
some of the Fruits of his Ministry, of which he and all sober People may be
ashamed. And then I went on again without any Opposition till I had done; but
afterward they were in a Rage, and threatened what they would do to me, if
ever I came to have a Meeting any more there. But I told 'em if they had Power
to take our Lives from us, they were not dear to us for the sake of Christ and
his Gospel; and that we did not matter their Threatenings, I desired the Lawyer
to give me a Copy of what he had written: He went about it, but did not do it;
neither was he candid in penning my Words; for several of the People then
present did bear Witness he had not wrote it Verbatim, nor truly taken the
Sense of what I spoke, wherefore I charged him to be Just, otherwise he had
many Witnesses against him; at which the Priest bent his Fist, and held it up
to me, but did not strike me, and away they went in a Fret. Soon after we had
another Meeting at the same Place, which was large and quiet. The Man of the
House being an Attorney at Law, had got his House licensed, and though the Priest
and Lawyer threatened hard, they came not.

Aquila Paca, High Sheriff of the County, living at the Head of Bush River,
near the main Road, built a Meeting House at his own Charge, and had it
licens^d, at which we had many good Meetings. About this Time also was built a
Meeting House at a Place called Nottingham, which is a large Meeting, and
greatly increases.

When I was traveling in those Parts I had a Concern on my Mind to visit the
Indians living near Su^cannage, at C^nest^goe, C^st^goe.
and I laid it before the Elders of Nottingham Meeting, with which they
expressed their Unity, and promoted my visiting them. We got an Interpreter,
and thirteen or fourteen of us traveled through the Woods about fifty Miles,
carrying our Provisions with us, and on the Journey sat down by a River, and
spread our Food on the Grass, and refreshed our selves and Horses, and then
went on cheerfully, and with good Will, and much Love to the poor Indians; and
when we came, they received us kindly, treating us civilly in their Way. We
treated about having a Meeting with them in a religious Way, upon which they
called a Council, in which they were very grave, and spoke one after another
without any Heat or Ja^ring; and some of the most esteemed of their Women do
sometimes speak in their Councils. I asked our Interpreter, Why they suffered
or permitted the Women to speak in their Councils? His Answer was, That some
Wom^n were wiser than some Men. Our Interpreter told me, That they had not done
any Thing for many Years without the Counsel of an ancient grave Woman; who, I
observed, spoke much in their Council; for I was permitted to be present at it;
and I asked, What it was the Woman said? He told me she was an Empress; (...)
they gave much heed to what she said amongst them; and that she then said to
them, She looked upon our coming to be more than natural, because we did not
come to buy, or sell, or get Gain, but came in Love and Respect to them, and
desired their Well-doing both here and hereafter; and further continued, That
our Meetings among them might be very beneficial to their young People, and
related a Dream which she had three Days before, and interpreted it, viz. That
she was in London, and that London was the finest Place she ever saw (it was
like to Philadelphia, but much bigger) and she went across six Streets, and in
the seventh she saw William Penn preaching to the People, which was a great
Multitude, and both she and William Penn rejoiced to see one another; and after
Meeting she went to him, and he told her, That in a little Time he would come
over and preach to them also, of which she was very glad. And now she said her
Dream was fulfilled, for one of his Friends was come to preach to them. And she
advised them to hear us, and entertain us kindly; and accordingly they did.
Here were two Nations of them, the Seneca's and the Shawnese. We had first a
Meeting with the Seneca's, with which they were much affected; and they called
the other Nation ( viz. the Shawnese) and interpreted to them what we had spoke
in their Meeting, and the poor Indians (particularly some of the young Men and
Women) were under a solid Exercise, and Concern. We had also a Meeting with the
other Nation, and they were all very kind to us, and desired more such
Opportunities; the which, I hope Divine Providence will order them, if they are
worthy thereof. The Gospel of Jesus Christ was preached freely to them, and
Faith in Christ, who was put to Death at Jerusalem, by the unbelieving Jews;
and that this same Jesus came to save People from their Sins, and by his Grace
and Light in the Soul, shows to Man his Sins, and convinces him thereof,
delivering him out of them, and gives inward Peace and Comfort to the Soul for
Well-doing, and Sorrow and Trouble for Evil-doing; to all which, as their
Manner is, they gave public Assents; and to that of the Light in the Soul,
they gave a double Assent, and se^ (...) much affected with the Doctrine of
Truth; also (...) ^enefit of the Holy Scriptures was largely opened to them
It Is worthy of Notice, that at the first Settling of Pennsylvania, William Penn
took great Care to do Justice to the Indians, and bought his Land of them to
their Satisfaction, and settled a Trade with them; so that whereas the Indians
were destructive to other Colonies, they were helpful to Pennsylvania; and to
this Day they love to hear the Name of WILLIAM PENN.
. Philadelphia.


After this we returned to our respective Habitations, thankful in our Hearts
to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Several of the Friends that
went with me expressed their Satisfaction in this Visit, and offered themselves
freely to go again on the like Service.

I also was concerned soon after to visit the People about Egg-Harbour and
Cape-May, Egg-Harbour.
and had diverse Meetings amongst them, and several Meetings were settled in
those Parts, and the People somewhat reformed from what they had been before
they were visited by Friends, as themselves told me (after a Meeting we had
with them) that they used to spend the Sabbath Days in Sporting and Vanity
until Friends came among them, and now they met together to worship God, and
his Son Jesus Christ. At our coming amongst them some Backsliders and Apostates
were displeased. One (in a very bitter Spirit) called us, Cursed and cruel
Devils. Another wrote against us. To him I sent an Answer, for which he
scandalized me in one of his Almanacks, and publicly belied me in Print; which
Lies I swept away with a Small Broom, printed in this Year 1706, to which I
never understood that he returned any Answer, nor that he wrote against Friends
afterward, though he had made it his Practice before for several Years.

At Little Egg-Harbour lived a Friend whose Name was Edward Andrews, who, as
himself told me, had been a Leader of the People into Vanity and Folly, as
Music, Dancing, etc. but the good Hand of the Lord being upon him, wrought a
wonderful Reformation in him, a^ ^ade him an Instrument to lead People into
Truth (...) Righteousness, and gave him an excellent Gift of the Ministry of
the Gospel of Christ; so that he was made instrumental in the Gathering of a
large and growing Meeting, most of the People thereabouts being convinced, and
a great Reformation and Change wrought in their Conversations. This Friend told
me, That when he was very rude and wild, he was mightily reached unto at the
Meeting we had under the Trees at Croswicks See Page 17.
, so that he could not go on with his Vanity as before, after which he had
strong Convictions on him, which wrought Conversion in the Lord's Time, after
he had gone through many and deep inward Exercises.

Philadelphia.
After these several Journeys were over, and I had cleared myself, I was some
Time at Home, and followed my Business with Diligence and Industry, and throve
in the Things of the World, the Lord adding a Blessing to my Labor. Some
People would tell me that I got Money for Preaching, and grew Rich by it;
which, being a common Calumny cast upon our public Friends that are
Travelers, I shall take a little Notice of it, and leave it to Posterity. That
it is against our Principle, and contrary to our known Practice and Rule to
take Money for our Preaching the Gospel of Christ, and the Publishing of
Salvation through his Name unto the People; for according to Christ's Command,
We, Receiving it freely, are to give it forth freely: And I can say without
Vanity or Boasting, I have spent many Pounds in that Service, besides my Time,
which was, and is, as precious to me, as to other People: And rising early, and
laying down late; many Days riding 40, 50 and 60 Miles a Day, 1707.
which was very laborious and hard for my Flesh to endure (being corpulent and
heavy from the 27th Year of my Age;) and I can truly say, that I never received
any Money or Consideration on Account of these Services, either directly or
indirectly; and yet if any of our Ministers are Necessitous or Poor, we relieve
them freely, not because they are Preachers, but because they are Needy; and
when we have done those Things, we have done but our Duty: And well will it be
for those that have discharged themselves faithfully therein! Such will
(besides the Earnest of Peace in their own Souls in this World) have a blessed
Reward in the glorious Kingdom of the Lord and his Christ in that World which
is to come. It is well known that I have spent much of my Time (since I have
been free from my Apprenticeship) in Traveling and Preaching the Gospel, being
out often many Months, and sometimes a whole Year, and more; and at Intervals I
have been apt to think the Time long, till I got to my Business and Family; and
so have diverse Times made more Have than I should have done, which has brought
Trouble on my Mind, and is a Trouble to me unto this Day; which may be a
Caution to those who travel in the Work of the Ministry hereafter, not to make
too much Have from the Work of Christ; and yet there ought to be Discretion
used; for a Minister may stay too long, as well as return too soon, which may
be perceived as we keep the Eye of our Mind to our Divine Guide.

After I had staid at and about Home for some considerable Time, Prepares to
visit Friends in West Indies and Europe.
a weighty Concern came upon me to visit Friends in the West Indies, and some
Parts of Europe, as it might please the Almighty to open my Way; and as it was
to be a long Travel, both by Sea and Land, and hazardous, by Reason it was War
Time, and many Privateers out at Sea, I settled my Affairs by Will, and
otherwise, that if I should not live to come Home again, Things relating to my
outward Affairs might be done honorably and well: For at this Time, as at many
others, I can truly say I gave up my Life freely for my Holy Master's Sake, and
in his Cause, who said, Go teach all Nations, etc.

On the 29th of the Sixth Month, 1707, I had a Certificate from the
Monthly Meeting of Friends at Philadelphia, signifying their Unity with my
Undertaking, and Desires for my Welfare; and a tender Concern was on my Mind
that I might live according to what my Brethren had certified concerning me. I
likewise laid my Exercise before the General Meeting of Ministers and Elders
held for the Provinces of Pennsylvania and New Jersey, on the 22d of Seventh
Month, who also signified their Fellowship with my intended Travels and
Journey, and recommended me to the Grace of God, and in much Love and
Tenderness I parted with my dear and loving Wife, and my near and affectionate
Friends and Brethren.

I had for my Companion and Fellow Laborer in the Work of the Gospel, my dear
Friend, Richard Gove, who also had the Approbation and Unity of Friends in this
Journey and Undertaking.

We went on Board a Sloop at Philadelphia, bound for Barbados, John Knight,
Master, about the 27th of the Eighth Month, in the aforesaid Year.

After a few Days Sailing down the River Delaware, we put to Sea, and in about
a Month's Time we came within Sight of Barbados, At Sea. Chaced by a Privateer.
where we met with a Privateer, which chased, and had like to have taken us;
but the good Providence of God preserved us out of the Hands of those Enemies:
For ever blessed be his Great Name! In this Chase the Seamen were uneasy, and
belched out wicked Oaths, and cursed the Quakers, wishing all their Vessels
might be taken by the Enemy, because they did not carry Guns in them: At which
[Evil] I was grieved, and began thus to expostulate with them: Do you know the
Worth of a Man's Life? (Guns being made on Purpose to destroy Men's Lives;) were
this Ship and Cargoe mine, so far as I know mine Heart, I do ingenuously
declare, I had rather lose it all, than that one of you should lose his Life
(for I certainly knew they were unfit to die.) Lives! say they, we had rather
lose our Lives than go to France. But, said I, that is not the Matter: Had you
rather go to Hell, than go to France? They being guilty of great Sins and
Wickedness, and convicted in their own Consciences, held their Peace, and said
no more about the poor Quakers; and when we got within Gunshot of a Fort on
Barbados, the Enemy left chasing us.

Next Morning early we safely arrived at Bridge-Town, in Barbados, Barbados.
where our Friends gladly received us; amongst whom we labored in the Work of
the Gospel for about two Months; and from thence, after having had diverse good
and edifying Meetings, for the Worship of God, we sailed for Antigua, Antigua.
and stayed some Days there, having Meetings, and visiting our Brethren. From
Antigua we sailed for Nevis, but the Wind being contrary, Montserrat.
we put in at Montserrat (an Isle that has a great Mountain in it, on the Top
of which is a Hot Spring of Water, which boils up, and the Mud of it is clear
Brimstone; some of which we carried on Board our Vessel; the which is
admirable, and shows the wonderful Works of God. They say that the Spring is
hot enough to boil an Egg.) From this Island we sailed to Nevis, Nevis.
and had Meetings with those few Friends that were there, with whom we parted
at the Sea Shore in great Love and Tenderness: After which we sailed to an
Island called Anguilla, Anguilla.
and were civilly treated there by the Generality of the People; as also by the
Governor, George Leonard, at whose House we had Meetings. I remember that after
one Meeting the Governor went into his Porch, and took the Bible, and opened
it, and said, By this Book, if People believe the Holy Scriptures, I am able to
convince the World, and prove that the People called Quakers, are the People of
God, and that they follow the Example and Doctrine of Christ, and the Practices
of the Apostles and primitive Christians, nearer than my People in the World; (
i. e. generally speaking) At this Island several People were heartily
convinced, and did confess to the Truth, among whom a Meeting was settled. Here
was never any Friend before, as the Inhabitants said. I entreat the Lord
Jehovah to preserve the sincere-hearted among them in his holy Fear whilst they
remain in this World; and not them only, but all that love and fear him, in all
Kindreds and Nations, and amongst People of all Professions whatsoever. This,
in the universal Spirit of God's Divine Love, is the Desire of my Soul. Back
from Anguilla we went to Nevis, and from Nevis to Antigua; Nevis.
and notwithstanding our Sloop was a dull Sailer, Antigua.
yet we were preserved from the Enemy, to the Admiration of our selves,
Friends, and others, our Course being in the very Road of the Privateers. Just
as we got into the Harbor and were landed, a Privateer came by with a Prize
along with her, as we supposed, which excited our Thankfulness to the Lord for
our Preservation. Here we met with the Packet-Boat bound for Jamaica, and
thence for England. We staid a little at the Island called Saint Christophers.
St. Christophers.
In our Way to Jamaica we saw a small Privateer, that gave us Chase, and it
being calm, she rowed up toward us. The Master prepared the Vessel to fight,
hoisting up his Mainsail, and putting out our Colors. In the Interim some were
bold, and some sorrowful. One came to me, Chaced by a Privateer.
and asked, What I thought of it? And what I thought of the Quakers Principles
now? I told him I thought I was as willing to go to Heaven, as himself was; to
which he said nothing, but turned away from me. Another asked me, What I would
do now? I told him, I would pray that they might be made better, and that they
might be made fit to die. Then in the midst of their Nose and Hurry, in Secret
I begged of the Almighty, in the Name, and for the Sake of his dear Son, that
he would be pleased to cause a fresh Gale of Wind to spring up, that we might
be delivered from the Enemy without shedding Blood (well knowing that few of
them were fit to die) and even whilst I was thus concerned, the Lord answered
my Desire and Prayer, for in a few Minutes the Wind sprung up, and we soon left
them out of Sight, our Vessel sailing extraordinary well, and the next Day we
got to Jamaica, and had diverse Meetings, viz. at Port Royal, Kingston, and
Spanish-Town, Jamaica.
etc. At a Meeting at Spanish-Town, there were diverse Jews, to whom my Heart
was very open, and I felt great Love to them, for the Sake of their Fathers
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and they were so affected with the Meeting, that
they sent us some unleavened Cakes, made with fine Flour and sweet Oil, it
being a Festival Time with them. We had a Meeting at Port Royal, in a Place
where the Earthquake had destroyed a large Building, in which Meeting I had
occasion to remind them of the righteous Judgments of God, which had been
justly inflicted on them for their Sins and Wickedness. Some wept, and some
were rude. The People here, as I was informed, were generally very wicked.
After having had diverse Meetings, the Packet in which we had taken our Passage,
being obliged to stay but ten Days, we went off sooner than we otherwise should
have done, and solemnly taking Leave of those Friends that were there, Sails
for England.
we went on Board our Vessel, in order for England, by God's Permission. We got
readily through the Windward Passage, which is between the Islands of Cuba and
Hispaniola; and diverse Times after we left Jamaica, we were chased by several
Ships, but they could not come up with us. One Ship of twenty-eight Guns gave
us Chase after a great Storm, and was almost up with us before we could well
make Sail; they being eager of their Prey, sent their Hands aloft to let their
Reefs out of the Topsails, in order to make more Speed, and came running
mightily toward us, and gained much upon us; we fearing to make Sail by Reason
of the Storm, and the Sea running very high, and our Masts being therefore in
Danger, we were some Time in Doubt whether we should escape or not: But whilst
we were in this Consternation, down came the French Ship's three Topmasts at
once, so we escaped, and left her, and went rejoicing on our Way, that we were
thus delivered. This was one of the great and remarkable Deliverances among the
many I met with, by the good Hand and Providence of the Lord, my great and good
Master, whom I hope to serve all my Days.

After having been at Sea about six Weeks, we began to look out for Land, and
in two or three Days we founded, and found Ground, at about ninety Fathoms;
after which we saw two French Privateers, that gave us Chase about four a Clock
in the Morning, and pursued us vigorously; but sailing better than they, we run
them out of Sight by eight a Clock the same Morning, and in about two Hours
after we saw the Land of Ireland; On the Coast of Ireland in eminent Danger.
it being misty Weather, with Rain and Wind, our Master thought it best to lay
by and forbear Sa^ling, that Coast being rocky and dangerous, by which Means
the two Ships (that gave us Chase) came up with us, and found us not in sailing
Order, and were in Gunshot of us before we were aware of it. What to do now we
could not tell, until they began to fire at us; but in this Emergency and
Strait our Master resolved he would rather run the Vessel on Shore than they
should have her, she being richly laden with Indigo, Silver, and Gold, reckoned
to the Value of Fifty Thousand Pounds. In this Strait, we must either fall into
the Hands of the French, who were our Enemies, or run amongst the Rocks; and we
thought it best to fall into the Hands of the Almighty, and trust to his
Providence; so toward the Rocks we went, which looked with a terrible Aspect.
The native Irish seeing as they came down in great Numbers, and ran on the
Rocks, and called to us, saying, That if we came any nearer we should be dashed
in Pieces. Then our Master ordered the Anchor to be let go, Got safe on the
^rish Shore.
which brought her up before she struck; and, with much ado, he put his Boat
out into the Sea, and put in all the Passengers, in order to set them on Shore,
the Waves r^ning very high, so that it looked as if every Wave would have
swallowed us up; and it was a great Favor of Providence that we got to Land in
Safety. The Privateers not daring to come so near the Shore as we did, after
firing at us, went away, and our Master carried the Ship into the Harbor of
Kinsale, in Ireland. Thus through 'many Perils and Dangers we were preserved, and
g^t safe on the Irish Shore, for which, and all other the Mercies and Favors
of the most High, my Soul and Spirit did give God Glory and Praise! In this
Voyage we were about seven Weeks at Sea.

When I came from my Home at Philadelphia, I did intend (the Lord permitting)
to visit Friends in Ireland, and being accidentally cast on Shore there, I
thought it my Place first to go through that Nation. I had been in Ireland about
nine Years before, and then being but young, and now being more grown in Body,
my old Acquaintance and Friends did not at first know me; but we were kindly
and lovingly received by our Friends and Brethren in that Nation, where there
is a great and numerous People, that Serve and Worship the Father in Spirit and
in Truth, and who have diverse good and wholesome Orders established amongst
them, in the Unity and Fellowship of the Gospel. In this Nation we had many and
large Meetings after our Landing, visiting Friends Meetings along to the North,
many, not of our Society, coming to them, among whom we often had good Service,
to our and their Satisfaction, as they often declared, Richard Gove being still
with me. Friends from their National Meeting, certified to our Brethren in
America, of our Service, and Labor of Love among them, after we had traveled
several Hundred Miles, and visited Friends Meetings generally, and some other
Places where it was not usual. While I was in Ireland, under a Concern for the
Prosperity of Truth and Religion, I wrote an Exhortation to the Youth, and
others, which was afterward printed there.

Scotland.
We took Ship in the North of Ireland, at a Town called Donaghadet, being
accompanied with diverse Brethren, who brought us on our Way after a godly Sort.
We got to Port-Patrick, in Scotland, after about five Hours Sail, in order to
visit those few Friends that were scattered about in that Part of the Nation.
People in those Parts looked very shy on us, and did not care to discourse with
us on Matters Civil or Religious, Glasgow.
which I thought unreasonable. The first Town or City we came to in which we
had a Meeting, was Glasgow (accounted the second City in North-Britain) where,
in our Meeting for the Worship of the Almighty, we were shamefully treated by
the People, throwing Di^t, Stones, Coal, etc. amongst us, and by diverse other
Actions unbecoming Men (though Heathens or Infidels) much more People professing
Christianity; so that I was constrained to tell them, that though I had preached
the Gospel to many Heathens, and to diverse Jews, as also to Indians and
Negroes, and had traveled in many Countries and Nations in the World, in
several Quarters thereof, and many Thousands of Miles, yet I must needs say,
that I never met with the like Incivilities, and such scurrillous Treatment, no
not in all my Travels. I also told them, that I had preached the Gospel of
Christ among their Brethren in New England, and in Boston, where they formerly
hanged the Quakers, and cruelly persecuted them for their Religion, and yet
they did not treat us so brutishly even there. And further I told them, that I
lived in those Parts of America, and what Account I should have to carry Home
to their aforesaid Brethren, of our Treatment in Glasgow, the second City in
Scotland. I desired them to consider of it, and be ashamed, if they had any
Shame. This a little abashed them for the present, but afterward they were as
bad as ever. There were at this Meeting diverse Collegians, who were very rude.
I asked if that was their Way of treating Strangers? And that I believed their
Teachers in the University did not allow of such ill Manners, by which they
scandalized themselves, their City, and Country. Hamilton and Gershore.
From this City we went to Hamilton and Gershore, where they were more civil.
At Gershore a Man of Letters, and sober Conversation, begged that I would pray
to the Almighty, that he would establish him in the Doctrine which he had heard
that Day. This being rare in those Parts, therefore I thus minute it here. We
went on toward the North of Scotland, to Aberdeen, and thereabouts, 1708.
where there is a tenderhearted People, among whom we had several ^ge
Gatherings, Aberdeen.
and some that were not of us, expressed their Satisfaction. In the North I met
with a Gentleman, who coming from a Nobleman's House, joined me, and asked me,
"If I knew Robert Barclay?" I said not personally, but by his Writings I knew
him well. He told me, That he (Barclay) had not left his Fellow in Scotland. We
afterward traveled Southward, where there were but few Friends, and small
Meetings; yet we may say, that the Goodness, Love, and Presence, of Him, who
said, Where two or three are gathered in my Name, there am I in the midst of
them, was oftentimes witnessed to be with us, blessed be his Holy Name. Oh!
that the Children of Men would praise him in Thought, Word, and Deed, for he is
worthy. So in great Reverence and holy Fear, we traveled along toward
South-Britain, had several Meetings at Edinburgh, and diverse other Places;
Edinburgh. Berwick.
also at Berwick upon Tweed, where there were many Soldiers who were very rude.
The Devil has had many Battles with us, ever since we were a People, in order
to hinder us in our Worship, but we generally came off with Victory, as we did
here also, through Faith in His Name, Who has loved us, and manifested himself
to us. Those rude Soldiers throwed their Hats into the Congregation, in order
to disturb us, and hinder us in our Service, but were at last ashamed and
disappointed. At this Place my dear Friend and Fellow-traveller, Richard Gove,
and I parted: I was for going by the East Sea Coast up for London, and he
inclined toward Cumberland, after we had traveled about a Year in the Work of
the Ministry, in great Love and true Friendship, in which Work we were true
Helpers one of another; and as we had labored together in the Work of Christ,
so we parted in His Love. Now from Berwick I traveled along to Newcastle;
Newcastle. Sunderland.
had one Meeting by the Way, and several good Meetings at Newcastle,
Sunderland, Shoten, and Durham, and several other Places in the Bishopric of
Durham. The Winter coming on apace, it began to be bad traveling; and I being
already much spent by it, designed to go speedily up to London; and taking some
Meetings in my Way, as at Stockton, Whitby, Scarborough, Burlington, Hull, and
Brigg, and so on through Lincolnshire, Lincolnshire.
where I went to visit a Friend that was Prisoner in the Castle of Lincoln,
because for Conscience Sake he could not pay an ungodly Priest the Tithes of
his Labor. From Lincoln I proceeded to Huntington, about which Place we had
several large Meetings, so on to Baldock, where I met with my Father and John
Gopsil, who came from London to meet me, which was a joyful Meeting, for I had
not seen my Father for about nine Years. The Love and Tenderness between us,
and the Gladness in seeing each other again, cannot well be expressed (but I
believe it was somewhat like Jacob and Joseph's Meeting in Egypt;) it was
affecting and melting: Blessed be the Almighty that gave me once more to see my
tender and aged Parent! So from Baldock we went to Hitching, and had a Meeting
there, as also at Hertford, from whence, with several Friends, I went to
Enfield, where I met with my dear and only Brother George, and there were with
us several of my Relations, and diverse others of our Friends: We were heartily
glad to see one another. From Enfield we went forward for London, and by the
Way we met with several Friends (of the Meeting of Horslydown, to which I did
belong from my Childhood) who came to meet me, and accompanied us to London.
London.


I stayed in and about the City most of the Winter, visiting Meetings when I
was well and in Health; for through often changing the Climates, I got a severe
Cold, and was ill for several Weeks, so that I was not at any Meeting, which
Time was very tedious to me; not so much because of my Illness, as that I was
deprived of diverse Opportunities and Meetings (which are in that City every Day
of the Week except the last.) When I was a little got over this Illness, I went
into Hertfordshire, and some Parts adjacent, Hertfordshire. Uxbridge, etc.
and had Meetings at Stains, Langford, Uxbridge, Walford, Hempstead, Bendish,
Albans, Market-Street, Hitching, Hertford, Hodgdon, and then returned again to
London.

After I had been at London a while, I visited several other Country Meetings,
as Winchmore-Hill, About London.
Tottenham, Wansworth, Plaistow, Deptford, and Epping, and then staid about
London some Weeks waiting for a Passage for Holland, which I intended to visit
before I left my own Habitation.

And on the 14th of First Month, 1708-9, I, with my Companion, John Bell, after
having acquainted our Friends and Relations (having their Consent) and taking
our solemn Leave of them, we went down to Gravesend, and staid there two or
three Days for a fair Wind. We went on Board the Ship Ann, John Duck, Master,
bound for Rotterdam, in Company with a Fleet of Vessels waiting for Wind, etc.
When the Wind was fair we sailed for the Coast of Holland, and when we arrived
on that Coast the Wind was contrary; 1709.
and blew very hard, so that some of the Ships in Company lost their Anchors,
but in a Day or two we all arrived safe at Rotterdam in Holland, Arrives safe
at Roterdam.
(we were but two Days in this Passage.) On the First Day Morning we went to
Meeting at Rotterdam, where Friends have a Meeting House; and we staid at this
City seven or eight Days, and had six or seven Meetings, and were comforted
with our Brethren and Sisters, and greatly refreshed in the Lord Almighty. At
this City we spoke without an Interpreter, because the most in the Meeting
understood English. From Rotterdam we traveled by the Trackscoot, (or Boat,
being drawn by Horses, which is a pleasant easy Way of traveling) to a large
Town called Harlem, Harlem.
where we had a Meeting, and spoke by an Interpreter; to which Meeting came
diverse of those People called Menonists: They were very sober and attentive,
and stayed all the Time of the Meeting, and spoke well of it. From Harlem we
went to Amsterdam, Amsterdam.
the Metropolis of Holland, where Friends have a Meeting House. Here we had
several Meetings, and stayed about a Week. On the first Day we had a large
Meeting, to which came many People of diverse Persuasions and Religions, as
Jews, Papists, and others; and we had a good Opportunity among them, and
several were tender, A Jew came next Day to speak with us, and did acknowledge,
That Christ was the Minister of that Sanctuary and Tabernacle that God had
pitched, and not Man; and that he was sensible of the Ministry of Christ in his
Soul; and, said he, my Heart was broken while that Subject was spoken of in the
Meeting. I was glad to see the Man tender and reached; but too generally
speaking, the poor Jews (the Seed of good Jacob) are very dark and unbelieving.
I have met with but very few in my Travels of them, that have been tender; but
I do love them for Abraham, Isaac; and Jacob's Sake. At this Meeting William
Sewe^ (the Author of the History of the Rise and Progress of the (...) called
Quakers) a tender-spirited upright Man i^ (...). (...) Holland.
From Amsterdam we went to N^ (...) Peter Re^a^d went with us t^ interpret for
us; so by Boat, or S^^^t, we travell^d to a Town called (...), (...).
^re we had two Meetings, Friends having a Meeting House there; from (...) we
went (...) to (...), and had two ^^ge Meetings there on the first Day, and in
order to cross the South Sea to H^^tingam, H^^tingam.
at which Place we had two Meetings, and we and Friends were glad to see one
another: And indeed, we being as one Family all the World over, are generally
glad to see each other. From this Place we traveled Eastward through
East-Friesland, and went through several great Towns and Cities until we came
to Embden, Embden,
the chief City in East-Friesland, where we had a comfortable Meeting by the
Bedside of one of our Friends that lay sick; and several of her Neighbors
came in and stayed till the Meeting ended; some of them were very tender and
loving, and wished us well, and were well satisfied. After Meeting we set
forward for Hamburgh, it being four Days Journey by Wagon, and passed along
through diverse Towns and Cities: We also traveled through the City of
Oldenburgh, Oldenburg and Bremen.
and a Place of great Commerce called Bremen. A Magistrate of this City took
Notice of us, joined himself to us, and went with us to the Inn, and then very
lovingly took leave of us, and desired God to bless us. The People at our Inns
were generally very loving and kind to us, and some would admire at my coming
so far only to visit my Friends, without any Views of Advantage of Profit
outwardly. Hamburgh.
When we got to Hamburgh we had a Meeting at Jacob ^gen's, and those that were
there, were well satisfied with the Doctrine of Truth, blessed be God, who, I
may say, was with us at that Time and Place! At Hamburgh there was at Meeting
one who had preached before the King of Denmark; who, as I understood by our
Interpreter, was turned out of his Place, for preaching the same Truths that we
had preached there that Day; at which Meeting, were Papists, Lutherans,
Calvinists, Menonists, Jews, etc. All of them were sober, and generally
expressed their Satisfaction. I had so much Comfort in that Meeting, that I
thought it was worth my Labor (...) coming from my Habitation, the Answer of
Peace was such to my Soul, that I greatly rejoiced in my Labor in the Work of
Christ. From hence I traveled to Frederickstadt, Frederickstadt.
it being two Days Journey (where Friends have a Meeting House) We stayed about
ten Days, and had nine Meetings in this City. Some of the Meetings were very
large, and the longer we stayed, the larger they were. This Frederickstadt is a
City in the Dominions of the Duke of Holstein, and was the farthest Place we
traveled to Eastward; and from hence I wrote a small Piece, called, A loving
Invitation unto Young and Old in Holland and elsewhere; which was translated
into the German and Low Dutch Languages; and diverse Impressions of them were
also printed in England.

We traveled in this Journey through some Parts of the Emperor of Germany's
Dominions, as also of the Kings of Denmark and Swedeland, and of the Duke of
Oldenburgh's and Prince of East-Friesland's Territories, besides some Parts of
the Seven Provinces of the united States. We parted with our Friends of this
City of Frederickstadt, in much Love and Tenderness, and with our Hearts full
of good Will, one toward another, Embden.
and so went back to the City of Embden a nearer Way, by two Days Journey, than
to go by Hamburgh. We crossed the Rivers Eyder, Elfe, and Weiser; over which
last we were rowed by three Women. The Women in those Parts of the World are
strong and robust, and used to hard Labor. I have seen them do not only the
Work of Men, but of Horses; it being common with them to do the most laborious,
and the Men the lightest and easiest Work. I remember that I once saw near
Hamburgh a fair well-dressed Woman, who, by her Dress, or Appearance, was a
Woman of some Note, and a Man (which I took to be her Husband) walking by her,
and she was very great with Child, and the Way difficult, being up a very steep
Hill, and he did not so much as offer his Hand, or Assistance to her; which,
however it might look to a Man of that Country, it seemed very strange to me,
being a Briton. For my Part, I thought it unmanly, as well as unmannerly: O^
which I observe, that I never in any Part of the World, saw Women so tenderly
dealt by as our English, or British Women, which they ought to value and prize
highly, and therefore, to be the more loving and obedient to their Husbands,
the indulgent Englishmen; which Indulgence I blame not, but commend, so far as
it is a Motive to stir them up to Love and Faithfulness.

In this Journey between Frederickstadt and Embden, we had four Days hard
traveling, and were twice overturned out of our Wagons, but we got no Harm,
which was admirable to us; for once we fell Wagon and all over a great Bank,
just by the Side of a large Ditch, and did but just save ourselves out of the
Ditch. The next Time we overset upon Stones: We wondered that none of us were
hurt, particularly myself, I being much heavier than any of the rest; but through
the Mercy of God, we got well to Embden the second Time, and had a Meeting upon
a First Day, and immediately after Meeting, Delfzeel.
we took Ship for Delfzeel (which was from Embden about nine or ten English
Miles, by Water) and with a fair Gale of Wind, got there in less than two Hours
Time. We spoke by Interpreters all along, and were divinely helped to preach
the Gospel to the Satisfaction of others, and our own Comfort; and the Friend
who interpreted for us, was sensible of the same Divine Assistance, to his
Admiration, for which we were all truly thankful. But notwithstanding we were
so opened, to the Satisfaction of ourselves, our Friends, and the People, yet
we were sometimes emptied to exerting great spiritual Poverty, and in the Sense
of our Want and Need, we did many Times pour out our So^ and Spirits in humble
Pray^ ^d Sup^tion to the most High, for his Help (...) Strength, that it might
be made manifest to us in (...) Weak^* and we found Him a God man at Hand,
(...) Help in the needful Time, and had a (...) Answer to our Prayers. O^ that
my Soul, with (...), may dwell near to him, in whom alone is (...) Help, and
Strength, of all his Faithful Servants and Ministers! Amen.

(...), etc.
From Delfzeel we went to Groeningen, the chief City in Groeningland, and so on
to a River called the W^der, and to a Town named Goradick, where we had a
Meeting with a few Friends there, and some of their Neighbors came to the
Meeting. It was to us a comfortable Meeting, and they were glad of it, they
being but seldom visited by Friends. From this Place we traveled by Wagon to
Hervine, Hervine
where we lodged that Night, and next Day went by Wagon to Leuwarden.
Leuwarden.
It happened that we had generally very fine Weather while in those open
Wagons, in which we traveled several Hundred Miles, so that Jacob Claus, our
Companion and Interpreter, though he had traveled much, said he never had
observed the like before; which Observation I thought good to make, with Thanks
to the Almighty.

From the City of Leuwarden, we came by Water to Herlingen, Herlingen.
where Friends were glad to see us, and we them. We had a Meeting in Friends
Meeting House, and a good comfortable One it was, blessed be the Lord for it!
From hence we crossed the South Sea, and had a contrary Wind, which made our
Passage long and tedious. We were two Days and two Nights on this Water before
we got to Amsterdam, in all which, and the next Day, I tasted no food, being
three Days fasting I was willing to keep my Body (...), and ^d it for my
Health; neither had I any Desire of Food in these three Days, in which Time we
had two Meetings. Amsterdam.
We arrived at Amsterdam about the sixth Hour, on the First Day Morning, and
had two Meetings at Amsterdam that Day, which were quiet, and many People came
to one of them: But we could not be clear without going again to North-Holland;
so from Amsterdam we went to Hern, Hern.
where we had a Meeting in the Coll^gian's Meeting House, and it was to
Satisfaction: The People were very loving, and diverse very tender, even more
than we have usually seen. They desired another Meeting, but our Time would not
admit of it, we having appointed a Meeting at Twisk the next Day, Twisk.
which we had in the Meeting Place, as also another at a Friend's House. The
next Day we returned to Amsterdam, Amsterdam.
and had a Meeting, which began about the Fifth Hour, which was the last
Meeting we had in this City, and I hope it will not easily be forgotten by
some. After it we solemnly took our Leave of Friends, Harlem.
and departed for Harlem, where we were well refreshed in the Love and Life of
Christ Jesus, our dear Lord, and good Master. From Harlem we went with several
Friends to Rotterdam, where we had two Meetings, Rotterdam.
and in the Evening we went to visit a Friend that was not well, with whom we
had a Meeting, and affecting Time, and the sick Friend was comforted and
refreshed, and said, she was much better than before; and we were edified, and
the Lord our God praised and magnified over all, who is blessed for ever.

In those Parts, viz. Holland, Fries^d, Germany, etc. we traveled 972 English
Miles, all in Wagons and Vessels. We came not on a Horse's Back all the Time.
It was about nine Weeks that we stayed in those Countries, traveling therein,
and getting Meetings where we could, which were to the Number of Forty-five,
thus accounted: At Rotterdam 10 At Horn 1 Harlem 3 Hamburgh 1 Amsterdam 10
Embden 1 Twisk 4 Frederickstadt 10 Herlingen 3 Goradick 1

All these are large Cities, except Twisk and Goradick.

From Rotterdam we took Ship for London, and on the 30th of the Third Month,
1709, we sailed down the River Meuse to the Briel, in the Ship Anne, John Duck,
Master, but he missing the Convoy, we took our Passage in the Packet; and so
from Helvoets^uys we sailed over to Harwich, Harwich.
and thus safely arrived in our native Land, blessing Almighty God for his many
Preservations and Deliverances by Sea and Land.

About this Time (after a long Continuance of War) there was great talking of
Peace; but the old Enemy to Peace, Truth, and Righteousness, broke it off by
his evil Working in Man: Neither can there be any lasting Peace, until the
Nations come to the Witnessing of the peaceable Government and Spirit of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to be set up and established in themselves. The Lord bring
it to pass, if it be his blessed Will, with Speed, for his holy Name's Sake!
Amen.

As I have had great Peace and Satisfaction in my Travels in Holland and
Germany, so, for exciting others under the like Exercise, I may truly say, that
there is Encouragement for faithful Ministers to labor in the Work of the
Gospel: For I know not that I ever met with more Tenderness and Openness in
People, than in those Parts of the World. There is a great People which they
call Menonists, who are very near to Truth, and the Fields are white unto
Harvest among diverse of that People, spiritually speaking. Oh! that faithful
Laborers, not a few, might be sent of God Almighty into the great Vineyard of
the World, is what my Soul and Spirit breathes to him for!

After lodging one Night at Harwich, we came to Ipswich, and from thence to
Colchester, Ipswich. Colchester, etc.
and stayed there the First Day, and had two Meetings; and had a Meeting at
Birch and Coggshall, and then back to Colchester, where we took Coach for
London, London Yearly Meeting.
to the Yearly Meeting of Friends, which was very large. I gave some short
Account of my Travels to the said Meeting, with which Friends were satisfied,
and made a Minute thereof. I had been about twenty Months from my Habitation,
and from my dear and affectionate Wife, and from any Manner of Trade and
Business, either directly or indirectly, being all that Time wholly given up in
my Mind to preach the glorious Gospel of God our Savior, without any outward
Consideration whatever, taking my great Master's Counsel, As I had freely
received from him, so I freely gave; and had that solid Peace in my Labors
that is of more Value than Gold, yea, than all the World.

From the Yearly Meeting I traveled through some Parts of most of the Counties
in England, Visits the Meetings of Friends in England and Wales.
and also in Wales: In which Service, I labored fervently, and often traveled
hard, in Body and Mind, until the next Yearly Meeting, 1710, having traveled
that Year about Two Thousand Five Hundred Miles, and had near Three Hundred
public Meetings, in many of which there were much People, and oftentimes great
Openness. I being at so many Friends Houses, and at so many Meetings, if I was
to be particular in the same, it would be too voluminous, for which, and some
Reasons besides, I only give a general Account thereof here.

In this Year ( viz. 1710.
1710) my dear Friend and Fellow-traveller, Richard Gove, departed this Life,
at Uxbridge, about fifteen Miles from London, at our Friend Richard
Richardson's House. He died of a Consumption. We traveled together in great
Love and Unity, and the Lord blessed his Work in our Hands. We were in Company
in the West India Islands, Ireland, and North-Britain, till we came to Berwick
on Tweed. We met together again at London, and he visited some other Parts of
Britain, in the Time I was in Holland and Germany. He was an inoffensive,
loving Friend, and had a sound Testimony, which was serviceable and convincing,
and was well-beloved in Philadelphia, where he lived. He left a good Savor and
Report behind him (I think) wherever he traveled in the World.

London Yearly Meeting
Now at this General Meeting in London, I had a good Opportunity to take my
Leave of my dear Friends and Brethren in my native Land, not expecting to see
it, or them any more, in this World. Oh! I may truly say, it was a solemn
Parting! It was a solemn Time to me indeed. After the Yearly Meeting was over,
I took my Passage in the Mary-Hope, John Annis, Master, bound for Philadelphia;
and on the 29th of Fourth Month, Gravesend.
1710, at Gravesend, after having taken my solemn Leave of our Relations, and
several of my dear Friends, we set Sail, and overtook the Russia Fleet, at
Harwich, and so joined them, and sailed with them as far as Shetland, which is
to the Northward of the Isles of Orkney. We were with the Fleet about two
Weeks, At Sea.
and then left them, and sailed to the Westward for America* In this Time we
had rough Seas, which made diverse of us Sea-sick. After we left Shetland we
were seven Weeks and four Days at Sea before we saw the Land of America, and
glad we were when we got Sight thereof. In this Time we had diverse sweet and
solemn Meetings, viz. on First Days and Fifth Days, wherein we worshipped and
praised the Great JEHOVAH, and many Things were opened in the Spirit of Love
and Truth, to our Comfort and Edification. We had one Meeting with the Germans
or Palatines, on the Ship's Deck, and one that understood both Languages
interpreted for me. The People were tender and wrought upon, behaved sober, and
were well satisfied: And I can truly say, I was well satisfied also.

In this Voyage we had our Health to Admiration; and I shall o^ve one Thing
worthy of my Notice. Some of my loving and good Friends in London, fearing a
Sickness ^n the Ship, as she was but small, considering there were so many
Souls on Board her, being ninety-four in Number, they, for that and other
Reasons, advised me not to go in her; for they loved me well, and I took it
kindly of them: But I could not be easy to take their Advice, because I had
been long from my Habitation and Business, and which was yet more, from my dear
and loving Wife: And notwithstanding the Vessel was so full and crowded, and
also several of the People taken into the Ship sick in the River of Thames, yet
they mended on board the Vessel apace, and were soon all brave and hearty,
being perfectly recovered at Sea, and the Ship, through the Providence of the
Almighty, brought them all well to Philadelphia, in the Seventh Month, 1710:
Philadelphia.
(I think I never was in a more healthy Vessel in all my Time, and I thought
this peculiar Favor worthy to be recorded by me.) We had a very pleasant
Passage up the River Delaware, to our great Satisfaction, the Palatines being
wonderfully pleased with the Country, mightily admiring the Pleasantness and
the Fertility of it. Diverse of our People went on Shore, and brought Fruit on
Board, which was the largest and finest they had ever seen, as they said, viz.
Apples, Peaches, etc.

I was from my Family and Habitation in this Journey and Travel for the Space
of three Years, within a few Weeks; in which Time, and in my Return, I had
sweet Peace to my Soul, Glory to God for evermore! I had Meetings every Day
when on Land, except Second and Seventh Days (when in Health, and nothing
extraordinary hind'red) and traveled by Sea and Land Fourteen Thousand Three
Hundred Miles, according to our English Account. I was kindly and tenderly
received by my Friends, who longed to see me, as I did them, and our Meeting
was comfortable and pleasant.

After this long Travel and Voyage I stayed at Home, and looked after the
little Family which God had given me, and kept duly to Meetings, except
something extraordinary hindered. Diverse People when I came Home raised a false
Report of me, and said, I had brought Home a great deal of Money and Goods,
that I had got by Prea^* which was utterly false and base; for I br^ ^r Money
or Goods, so much as to the Va^ ^ve Pounds, except my wearing Apparel; so much
the Reverse, that I borrowed Money at London to pay for my Accommodations Home,
the which I faithfully remitted back again to my Friend that lent it to me, to
whom I was much obliged for the same: And if I might have gained a Hundred
Pounds per Annum, it would not have tempted me to undertake that, or such
another Journey. Soon after my Return Home again, I visited a few neighboring
Meetings, which were large and edifying, Friends being glad to see me again
returned Home from that long Journey. And I did (as I had Reason to do) bless
the Holy Name of the Lord, for his many Preservations and Deliverances by Sea
and Land.

After some Stay at Philadelphia, I went down with my Wife and Family into
Maryland, Maryland.
to a Corn-Mill and Saw-Mill, which I had there, in order to live some Time,
and settle my Affairs: And after being there some Time, my dear Wife was taken
ill of a sore Disease, which some thought to be an Ulcer in the Bladder, and I
had her up to Philadelphia, she being carried as far as Chester in a
Horse-litter, where she continued for some Months, in much Misery, and extreme
Pain, at the House of our very kind Friends, David and Grace Lloyd, 1711.
whose Kindness to us in that sore, trying, and exercising Time, was great, and
is not to be forgotten by me, while I live in this World. From Chester we
removed her again in a Litter, being accompanied by our Friends, to
Philadelphia, Philadelphia.
where she continued very ill all that Winter, often thinking that Death
tarried long, and crying mightily to the Lord, "Oh! Come away, come away!" This
was her Cry Day and Night, 'till at last she could speak no more. As we lived
together in great Love and Unity, being very affectionate one to another; so
being now left alone I was very solitary, and sometimes sorrowful, and broken
into many Tears, in the Sense of my Loss and Lonesomness. This my dear Wife,
was a virtuous young Woman, and one that truly feared God, and loved his dear
Son; from whom she had received a good Gift of the Ministry, and was
serviceable to many therein. I had five Children by her, four Sons and one
Daughter, all which I buried before her, under three Years old. At the Yearly
Meeting before she died, she was so wonderfully carried forth in her Ministry,
by the Divine Grace, that diverse of her Friends believed she was near her End,
she signifying something to that Effect in her Testimony, and that she should
not live to see another Yearly Meeting: And so it came to pass; for she died
before another Yearly Meeting, being aged about thirty-five Years, and a
married Woman about thirteen Years. Her Body was carried to Friends
Meeting House in Philadelphia, and buried in Friends burying Ground, being
accompanied by many Hundreds of our Friends, in a solemn Manner: And my Heart
was greatly broken in Consideration of my great Loss; and being left alone, as
to Wife and Children, I many Times deeply mourned, though I well knew my Loss was
hers and their Gain!

Here I shall end the first Part of the Journal of some Part of my Life and
Travels, omitting many Meetings, and lesser Journeys, which I performed: And
the Accounts here given, have been mostly general not descending into many
Particulars; though the adding some Things might have been instructive and
agreeable: The whole being intended as a Motive to stir up others to serve,
love, and faithfully follow, and believe in Christ.

The End of the First PART.
A JOURNAL OF THE LIFE, LABORS, TRAVELS, etc. OF THOMAS CHALKLEY. PART II.
I NOW gave up my Time mostly to traveling, 1712.
for about the Space of two Years, 1713.
in which I visited the Meetings of Friends in the Provinces of Pennsylvania,
East and West-Jersey, Pennsylvania, Jersey, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina,
Philadelphia, Long Island, Rhode Island, etc.
Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina, and back again to Philadelphia, and
then to New Jersey again: Also to Long Island, Rhode Island, Conanicut-Island,
Nantucket-Island, and New England, and through those Parts on my Return to
Philadelphia. In these Provinces, etc. I traveled some Thousands of Miles, and
had many large Meetings (some in Places where there had not been any before)
and some were convinced, and many would acknowledge to the Testimony of Truth,
which was declared by the Help and Grace of Christ; and many Times, my Heart
was, by the Assistance of that Grace, wonderfully opened to the People. If I
should be particular in the Account of these Journies, it would enlarge this
Part of my Journal more than I am willing.

In Virginia I had a Meeting at James' River, where a Priest of the Church of
England, with some of his Hearers, made some Opposition (after our Meeting was
over) and were for disputing about Religion; and he openly declared, The Spirit
was not his Guide, nor Rule; and he hoped, never should be. But, he said, the
Scriptures were his Rule, and that there was no Need of any other; and that
they were as plain as Gunter's Line, or as 1, 2, 3. I told him, The Scriptures
were a good secondary Rule, and that it were well if Men would square their
Lives according to their Directions; which we, as a People* exhorted all to:
But that the Holy Spirit, from which the Holy Scriptures came, must needs be
preferable to the Letter, that came from it; and without which Holy Spirit, The
Letter kills, as says the Apostle. I also asked him, How he, or any else,
without the Light, or Influence of the Holy Spirit, could understand the
Scriptures, which were parabolically and allegorically expressed, in many
Places? And further to use his own Expression, How could any understand
Gunter's Line, without Gunter 's Knowledge? Or without they were taught by
Gunter, or some other? Neither can we be the Sons of God, without the Spirit of
God. Which he answered not, but went away.

In New England, one Joseph Metcalf, a Presbyterian Teacher, at Falmouth, wrote
a Book, entitled, Legal Forcing a Maintenance for a Minister of the Gospel,
warrantable from Scripture, etc. Which Book, a Friend of Sandwich gave me, and
desired I would answer it; which, after finding some Exercise on my Mind, for
the Cause of Truth, I was willing to undertake; and accordingly, wrote an
Answer thereto which I called, Forcing a Maintenance, not warrantable from the
Holy Scriptures, for a Minister of the Gospel. In which I endeavored to set
the Texts of Scripture in a true Light, which he had darkened and
misrepresented by his chimerical Doctrines.

In this Year, 1713, I went from Philadelphia, in the Hope Galley, John
Richmond, Master, to South Carolina. We were about a Month at Sea; and when it
pleased God that we arrived at Charlestown, South Carolina.
in South Carolina, we had a Meeting there, and diverse others afterward. There
are but few Friends in this Province; yet I had several Meetings in the
Country. The People were generally loving, and received me kindly. What I had
to declare to them, I always desired to speak to the Witness of God in the
Soul, and according to the pure Doctrine of Truth in the Holy Scriptures; and
there was Openess in the People in several Places. I was several Times to visit
the Governor, who was courteous and civil to me. He said, "I deserved
Encouragement;" and spoke to several to be generous, and contribute to my
Assistance. He meant an outward Maintenance; for he would have me encouraged to
stay among them. But I told him, that though it might be a Practice with them, to
maintain their Ministers, and pay them Money for preaching, it was contrary to
our Principle to be paid for preaching; agreeable to the Command of our great
Master, Christ Jesus, who said to his Ministers, Freely you have received,
freely give: So that we are limited by his Words, whatever others are: And
those who take a Liberty, contrary to his Doctrine and Command, I think, must
be Antichrist's, according to Holy Scripture. The longer I staid there, the
larger our Meetings were; and when I found my self free and clear of those
Parts, I took my Passage for Virginia, in a Sloop, Henry Tucker, Master. I had
a comfortable and quick Passage to James' River, Virginia.
it being about two Hundred Leagues. The Master of the Vessel told me, That he
believed he was b^ for my Sake. I wished him to live so as that he might be
blessed for Christ's Sake. And some R^* was begun on him in our Voyage; when
was the Goodness of God, though Christ, to him, and not to be attributed to me,
any f^ther t^ (...) the Divine Hand* for of ourselves we cannot do any Thing
that is Good, it being by Grace, though Faith, that we are saved, which is God's
Gift to the Soul.

After I had been some Time in Virginia, I got a Passage up the Bay of
Ches^o^k, and had several Meetings in Maryland, Maryland.
Friends being glad to see me; and we were comforted in Christ our Lord. I made
some little Stay at a Place I had in that Province, called Longbridge,
Philadelphia.
and then returned to Philadelphia, where I lodged at the House of my very kind
Friends Richard and Hannah Hall; and was oftentimes at diverse neighboring
Meetings; and sometimes had good Service therein.

About this Time I had an Inclination to alter my Condition of being a Widower,
to a married State; and the most suitable Person that I (with some of my good
Friends could think upon, was Martha, the Widow of Joseph Brown: And on the
15th of the Second Month, 1714.
1714, we were joined together in Marriage, with the Unity of Friends in
general. We had a large Meeting at our Marriage, the Solemnization thereof
being attended with the Grace and Goodness of God; and, for Example-sake, we
made but little Provision for our Guests: For great Entertainments at Marriages
and Funerals, began to be a growing Thing among us, which was attended with
diverse Inconveniences.

My Wife was a sober and religious young Woman, and of a quiet natural Temper
and Disposition; which is an excellent Ornament to the fair Sex: And indeed it
is so both to Male and Female; for according to the Holy Scriptures, A meek and
quiet Spirit is with the Lord of great Price.

The first Child we had I called Abigail (or the Father's Joy, as the Word
signifies) and while she lived, I had Joy and Comfort in her, even more than I
could expect, her Age considered; for she lived but about eighteen Months, yet
in that Time gave frequent Proofs of an uncommon Capacity, and dropped such
extraordinary Expressions, that I have said to her Mother, This Child is too
ripe for Heaven to live long on Earth, therefore let us not set our Hearts upon
it. And I have thought that in this Child the Saying of Christ was fulfilled,
even in the Letter of it, Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings, thou have
perfected Praise, Mat. xxi. 16.

I was at diverse Yearly Meetings in 1715, 1715.
viz. at Choptank in Maryland; Maryland. Shrewsbury. Salem.
at Shrewsbury and Salem in New Jersey; all which Meetings were very large and
comfortable; many Things being opened therein tending to the Convincing and
Establishing the People in the Truth and Doctrine of Christ. I was likewise at
diverse other Meetings in those Provinces; which were large and satisfactory.

At Salem Yearly Meeting I was sent for to the Prison, where there was a young
Woman that was to be tried for her Life. She desired that I would pray for her,
and charged me to warn the young People to be careful not to keep bad Company:
For, said she, it has been my Ruin, and brought me to this Shame and Reproach.
She had been tenderly brought up and educated. I knew her when she wore a
Necklace of Gold Chains, though now she wore Iron ones: Upon which Subject I had
afterward a large Opportunity to speak to the People in a very moving Manner;
which seemed to very much affect the Youth, and others in the Meeting, which
consisted of many Hundreds of People. I saw this young Woman afterward, the
Jury acquitting her; and I told her, that her Life was given her for a Prey;
and reminded her, how it was with her when she was in Prison in Chains; and I
advised her to walk more circumspectly for the future; which she said, she
hoped she should do.

1716.
In the Year 1716, I had some Concerns which drew me to the Island of Bermudas
(to which Island I went twice that Summer.) My Family increasing, I traded a
little to Sea for their Support and Maintenance: And I can truly say, I carried
on my Affairs and Business in the Fear of God, having an Eye, or Regard
therein, more to his Glory, than to my own Interest. We had a rough Passage to
this Island (in the first Voyage) and were forced, by Distress of Weather, to
cast some of our Goods into the Sea; and the Storm being very violent, some of
the Seamen thought we should be devoured by the Waves; and as for me, they had
shut me up in the Cabin alone, all in Darkness, and the Water came in so that
they were forced to take it out in Buckets. At Sea.
When the Storm was a little over, the Master came to me, and asked, How I did
all alone in the Dark? I told him, Pretty well; and said to him, I was very
willing to die, if it so pleased God: And indeed I did expect no other at that
Time. After this great Storm was over we arrived at Bermudas in a few Days;
Bermudas.
but going into the Harbor the Bottom of the Vessel struck the Rocks, but we
got well in; for which I was thankful to the Almighty. I stayed on the Island
about a Month, and had several Meetings, to some of which, many came who were
not called Friends. They were all sober, and some well satisfied; and the
People of the Island generally received me lovingly, and were very kind to me.
(Our Ancients, who bore he Burden and Heat of the Day, met with (...)
Treatment. I tenderly desire that we who come up after them, may be truly
humble and thankful to the Almighty for all his Mercies!)

By Reason of my outward Affairs, I had Opportunities with some Persons of
great Note and Business on this Island; and sometimes opened the Principles of
Friends to their Satisfaction; some of them cold me, They never understood so
much concerning our Friends before; and if what I said was true, they had been
misinformed. Diverse such Opportunities I had with several on this Island, there
being but very few of our Society.

These are called the Summer Islands, or Bermudas, there being many little
Islands in the midst of the Main Island, in Form like a Horse-shoe, and are
about two Hundred Leagues Distance from the Capes of Delaware. It is rare to
see Hail, Snow, or Ice there.

After I had done my Business, Philadelphia.
and had been for some Time on the Island, I had a ready and comfortable
Passage Home, where I was joyfully received.

After some little Stay at Home, Bermudas.
I went the second Time (that Summer) to Bermudas, and then also I had some
Meetings, and did some Business on the Island. It was my constant Care, that my
worldly Affairs should not hinder me in my religious Concern for the Good of
Souls. It happened at this Time there was a mighty Hurricane of Wind, so that
it blew many Houses to the Ground, and very many Trees up by the Roots, and
rent diverse Rocks asunder, which I was an Eyewitness of: Though it is to be
observed, that those Rocks in the Summer Islands, are not so hard as in some
other Parts of the World, particularly to the Northward; for here they saw them
with Saws, and cut them with Axes like Wood. I was told there were sixty Sail
of Vessels then at these Islands, and all drove on Shore but three, and ours
was one of the three that rode out the Storm; for which I was truly thankful.
In this great Storm, or Hurricane, several Sloops (there being no Ships) were
driven upon dry Land, so that after the Storm was over, one might go round them
at High Water, and several blown off the dry Land into the Water. One that was
ready to be launched, though fastened on the Stocks with two Cables and Anchors
put deep in the Ground, yet the Violence of the Wind blew her into the Water,
and dashed her all to Pieces.

About this Time the Bermudas People had got a vast Treasure of Silver and
Gold, out of the Spanish Wrecks; and at a Meeting which I had with a pretty
many People on the First Day of the Week before the Hurricane, or Storm of
Wind, it came weightily on my Mind to exhort them Not to be lifted up
therewith, nor exalted in Pride: For I declared to them, that the same Hand
that took it from the Spaniards, could take it from those who had now got it
out of the Sea; and if he pleased, by the same Way; which was a Storm that cast
away the Ships going from Spain. And indeed so it happened the same Week; for
it was reckoned by Men of Experience and Judgment, that they had last more by
the Storm, than they had gained by the Wrecks of the Spaniards. A sober old Man
(not of our Profession) told me the next Day after the Hurricane was over, that
what I spoke in the Meeting was soon come to pass: And he added, I was a true
Prophet to them. Many Houses that were not blown down, were uncovered. My
Landlord's House being old, several thought it would be down; but by the good
Providence of God, it was one of them which stood. I was in my Store, which
stood also; though I expected every Minute when it would have been blown down. It
was by the Mercy of God we were preserved, and not for any Merit of ours. I
entreated the Lord in the midst of this great Wind, that he would please to
spare the Lives of the People; for many of them being Seafaring Men, were very
unfit to die; at which Time I thought I was sensible of the Answer of my
Prayer, and he was pleased to be entreated for them: For, notwithstanding the
Violence of the Storm, and the great Destruction it made, yet not one Man,
Woman, or Child, nor Creature was lost, that I heard of in all the Island,
which was to me very admirable. The Friend of the House came to me after the
Storm abated, and said, The Lord had heard my Prayers for them. Although they
could not by any outward Knowledge, know that I had prayed for them, yet they
had a Sense given them, that I was concerned for them before the Almighty;
which indeed was true. Oh! that we may never forget the merciful Visitations of
that High and Lofty One, who inhabits Eternity!

While I was on the Island I was invited to, and kindly entertained at the
Houses of several of the Gentry, and at the Governor's, who invited me several
Times to his House: And once I was with him, and some of his chief Officers at
Dinner, with diverse of the first Rank, where I was treated very kindly; and
after Dinner the Governor's Practice was to drink the King's Health, and he
hoped I would drink it along with them. Yes, said the rest at the Table, Mr.
Chalkley (as they called me) will surely drink the King's Health with us. So
they passed the Glass, with the King's Health, till it came to me; and when it
came to me, they all looked steadfastly at me, to see what I would do (and I
looked as steadfastly to the Almighty) and I said to them, I love King George,
and wish him as well as any Subject he has; and it is known to Thousands that
we pray for him in our Meetings and Assemblies for the Worship of Almighty GOD:
But as to drinking Healths, either the King's, or any Man's else, it is against
my professed Principle, I looking on it to be a vain, idle Custom. They
replied, That they wished the King had more such Subjects as I was; for I had
professed a hearty Respect for him: And the Governor and they were all very
kind and friendly to me all the Time I was on the Island.

After I had finished my Concerns I embarked in the Sloop Dove for Philadelphia
(she being consigned to me in the former and this Voyage.) It being often calm
and small Winds, our Provision grew very scanty. We were about twelve Persons
in the Vessel, small and great, and but one Piece of Beef left in the Barrel;
and for several Days, the Wind being contrary, the People began to murmur, and
told dismal Stories about People eating one another for Want of Provisions; and
the Wind being still against us, and, for ought we could see, like to continue,
they murmured more and more, and at last, against me in particular (because the
Vessel and Cargo was consigned to me, and was under my Care) so that my inward
Exercise was great about it; for neither myself, nor any in the Vessel, did
imagine that we should be half so long as we were on the Voyage: But since it
was so, I seriously considered the Matter* and to stop their Murmuring, I told
them they should not need to cast Lots (which was usual in such Cases) which of
us should die first, for I would freely offer up my Life to do them Good. One
said, "God bless you, I will not eat any of you." Another said, "He would die
before he would eat any of me;" and so said several. I can truly say, on that
Occasion, at that Time, my Life was not dear to me, and that I was serious and
ingenuous in my Proposition: And as I was leaning over the Side of the Vessel,
thoughtfully considering my Proposal to the Company, and looking in my Mind to
him that made me, a very large Dolphin came up toward the Top or Surface of
the Water, and looked me in the Face; and I called the People to put a Hook
into the Sea, and take him, for here is one come to redeem me (said I to them;)
and they put a Hook into the Sea, and the Fish readily took it, and they caught
him. He was longer than myself: I think he was about six Foot long, and the
largest that ever I saw. This plainly showed us that we ought not to distrust
the Providence of the Almighty. The People were quieted by this Act of
Providence, and murmured no more. We caught enough to eat plentifully till we
got into the C^pe^ of Delaware. Thus I saw it was good to depend upon tho
Almighty, and rely upon his eternal Arm; which, in a particular Manner, did
preserve us safe to our desired Port, blessed be his great and glorious Name,
through Christ for ever!

I now stayed at, and about Home, for some Time; Philadelphia, Maryland, New
Jersey.
after which I was concerned to visit Friends in several Places, and in the
adjacent Provinces, as Maryland, New Jersey, etc. and was at many Marriages and
Funerals, at which, many Times, we had good Opportunities to open the Way, and
also the Necessity to be married to Christ Jesus, the great Bridegroom of the
Soul; and also to exhort the People to consider and prepare for their latter
End and final Change; which many Times was sanctified to diverse Souls, and the
Lord's Name was glorified, who is worthy thereof.

In the Year 1717 I went into Maryland, to look after my Affairs in that
Province; and as I traveled I had diverse Meetings at Nottingham, and at
Bush-River, Nottingham. Bush and Gurpawder Rivers, Maryland.
about which Time, at Bush-River, several were convinced. The Meeting I found
in a growing Condition in that which is Good, several Persons meeting together
in Silence to worship God, according to Christ's Institution, which was, and
is, and ever will be, in Spirit and in Truth: And for the Encouragement of all
such, Christ has said, That such the Father seeks to worship him: And again,
Where two or three are met together in my Name, there am I in the midst of
them. And if Christ be in the midst, there is no absolute Need of vocal
Teaching, except it be the Will of the Lord to call any to it. Let the
spiritual Christian read and judge.

After my Return I had several Meetings in the Country, near Philadelphia;
Philadelphia, etc.
and about the latter End of the Eighth Month I was at diverse Marriages, one of
which was on the Third Day of the Week, about fifteen Miles above Philadelphia,
over Delaware River: The next was over the River again, about twenty Miles
below the City: The third was about twenty Miles further down the River, 1717.
and on the opposite Side at Salem (on the following Days;) so that I crossed
Delaware River three Times in three Days, and rode about one Hundred Miles. The
Meetings were all large, and Matter suitable to the Occasion freely opened to
the People. These Remarks are not intended to set up Man, or exalt Flesh, but
to stir up others to come up to the Work of Christ in their Generation: All the
Glory and Godliness of Man is but at the Grass, which soon withers, without we
dwell in the Root of true Religion, and holy Life of Christ; and that God may
have the Glory of all his Works, is the End of all the Labors and Travels of
the Servants and faithful Ministers of Christ.

In the Tenth Month, 1717, diverse Considerations moving me thereto, Takes a
Voyage to Barbados.
I took a Voyage to Barbados, in the Snow Hope, J. Curtis, Master, and from
thence to Great Britain and London; partly on account of Business, and hoping
once more, if it pleased God, to see my aged Father, my Brother, Relations, and
Friends; which Voyage I undertook in the solid Fear of God. I desired the
Concurrence of my Wife, and my Friends and Brethren of the Meeting to which I
did belong, in this Undertaking, the which I had in a general Way, and the good
Wishes and Prayers of many Particulars, with a Certificate from our Monthly
Meeting, signifying their Unity with my Conversation and Ministry, and present
Undertaking: And I felt the Love and Goodness of God therein, but in many
Respects it was a great Cross to me, as the leaving my beloved Wife and
Children, and many of my dear Friends, whom I loved well in Christ: And the
Crossing of the Seas always was troublesome to me, being sickly at Sea,
especially in windy or stormy Weather; and the Confinement was worse to me for
the Time than a Prison; for it would be much easier to me to be in Prison on
Land, upon a good Account, than in Prison at Sea, I always looking on a Ship to
be a perilous Prison, though my Lot was to be much therein: And as for my natural
Life, I always gave it up when ever I went to Sea; and I thought that was the
least Part of the Hardship, never putting much Value thereon; and I think I had
rather die at any Time, than go to Sea, it being so contrary to my Nature and
Disposition, as well as Inclination: But to Sea I went, for the Reasons
mentioned, and got from Philadelphia to Newcastle the first Night in said
Vessel, and to Elsinburgh next Day, where we lay for a fair Wind about two
Days; and when the Wind was fair, we sailed to Bombay-Hook, where we met with
two other Vessels bound out to Sea, who waited also for the Wind. We lay there
two Nights, and then on a First Day Morning set Sail, the Weather being bitter
cold, and the Ice very thick on the Sides of our Vessel, and on our Ropes. The
same Day that we left Bombay-Hook we got out to Sea, took in our Boat, and went
on our Way; At Sea.
and in four or five Days we got into warmer Weather.

In this Voyage I wrote something of the Common Prayer, used by some of the
Church of England, whose Conversations were very loose and corrupt, which I
entitled, One truly tender Scruple of Conscience, about that Form of Prayer
called the Common Prayer, as used by the Church of England and her Members, etc.

In this our Voyage we saw several Ships, but spoke with none; and in
twenty-seven Days from our Capes we arrived at Barbados, and came to an Anchor
in Carlisle-Bay. Barbados.


I had been twice in Barbados before, but this was the quickest Passage by one
Day. Here I was lovingly and tenderly received by my Friends. I took my good
Friend, Joseph Gamble's House, for my Quarters, most of the Time whilst I
stayed on the Island; and I visited Friends Meetings several Times over, there
being five of Friends Meeting Houses in the Island, and our Meetings were
sometimes large and open.

Our Stay was longer here than we at first expected, by Reason of a great
Drought, they having no Rain for more than a Quarter of a Year, which was a
great Hindrance to Trade on the Island. While I was this Time in Barbados our
ancient Friend George Gray died. I was at his Funeral, at which there were many
People; and on this Occasion we had a large Meeting in our Meeting House at
Speights-Town, where I had a seasonable Opportunity with the People, opening to
them the Necessity of preparing for, and thinking of their latter End; and
pressed them earnestly thereto. They were generally attentive and sober, and
some were broken into Tenderness. While we were burying the Friend there
appeared a dismal Cloud hanging over the Island, such an one as I never saw
before: It was to my thinking, of the Color of the Flame of Brimstone, and I
expected there would have been a great Storm, or some mighty Gust, and much
Rain, they having had very little for many Weeks, or some Months: but it went
over, and there was no Rain, nor Wind, as I remember. Soon after some People
came in from Sea, and they said, that from that Cloud it rained Ashes; and they
brought some of the same to the Island, some of which Ashes I have now before
me: The taste of them seems to me to be a little sulphurous, and have some
glittering Particles in them, in Color and Smell I think they differed little
from common Ashes. Herein the Almighty and Infinite Being signally showed his
Mercy and Favor to poor Mortals; for had not his Mercy prevented, he could as
easily have rained down the Fire as the Ashes, who rained down Fire and
Brimstone on the Cities and Inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah, for their Pride
and Idleness, much of which abounds among the Inhabitants of Barbados, the
People being very luxurious. Oh! may the luxurious Inhabitants of that Isle, as
also all others, consider their Ways and Doings, and not provoke the Great
Lord, the Sovereign of Heaven and Earth, as many of them do by their evil
Lives, and voluptuous Conversations; and that they would kiss his Son, though not
with a Judas' Kiss, of Profession, or speaking well or fair of him only, but
with divine Love manifested through Obedience, while his Wrath is but a little
kindled against them before it break out into a Flame.

After this Funeral I was sent for to Bridge-Town, to the Burial of a Master of
a Ship, a young Man, who was very fresh and well a few Days before. There was a
great Appearance of People, and I was pretty largely opened in the Meeting, on
the Words of the Prophet, where he says, All Flesh is Grass, and all the
Goodliness thereof, is as the Flower of the Field. The Grass withers, the
Flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord blows upon it: Surely the
People is Grass. The Grass withers, the Flower fades; but the Word of our
God shall stand for ever, Isaiah lx. 6, 7, 8. And I treated of this Word, its
Wonderfulness, its Duration, and its Work in Man: As also of the fading
Constitution of mortal Man, though young and strong, as that young Man was a few
Days before, whose Corpse was then before us.

I was at diverse other Burials on this Island, which indeed does prove a Grave
to many New-comers, it being a hot Climate, makes those who are not accustomed
to it, very thirsty, and by Reason of the extreme Heat, it is not easy to
quench their Thirst; so that what is called moderate Drinking, throws many
Strangers into a violent Fever, and oftentimes is the Cause of their Death. I
note this as a Caution to any who may transport themselves there (that may see
this) that they may shun that Danger, which might be avoided by drinking cool
Drinks, of which they have many Sorts very pleasant, viz. Cane, Sugar-reed, and
White Sorrel, Pine, Orange, and diverse others: And I advise such, as they love
their Health, to refrain from drinking much hot Drinks or Spirits.

I saw several Curiosities in Nature in this Island, which among the great
Numbers of the Works of God, do show forth his Praise and Glory. One to the
Leeward Part of the Island, which is called the Spout, sends up a vast Body of
Water into the Air, occasioned by a great Cavity in the Rocks under the Water,
which may be seen in calm Weather, when the Sea is low; but when the Wind blows
(a great Body of Water being pent in a large hollow Place) it forces it up into
the Air, sometimes ten, fifteen, and twenty Yards high, according as the
Strength of the Wind is more or less, and makes a Report like a Cannon, or
Thunder a great Way off. I believe I have seen it ten or twelve Miles out at
Sea. I was also at a Place called Oliver's Cave, which we got to with some
Difficulty, in going down the steep and craggy Rocks. There is on the outward
Part next the Sea, a very large, vaulted Place in the Form of a Half-circle,
about one hundred Foot high, as near as I could guess. In this large Vault,
behind a Rock, is the Mouth of the Cave, not the Height of a Man at the first
Entrance; after one is in, a few Yards, one may walk upright comfortably, the
Bottom being pretty plain and smooth for about a hundred Yards, and then we
come into a large Cave which is formed archwise, and about ten or fifteen Yards
high, as we thought, being much higher in the Middle than the Sides, but almost
as regular as if it had been done by Art, which we beheld with Admiration, by
the Help of Wax-Candles, and other Lights, that we made and carried for that
Purpose.

When I had done my Business in Barbados, having been about thirteen Weeks
there, our Vessel being loaded, we sailed from thence the 10th of Second Month,
1718, for London.

We had a good Passage, 1718.
being five Weeks and two Days from Barbados to Great Britain, in which we saw
diverse Vessels at Sea, but spoke with none; At Sea.
and after Sight of the Land, we got in two Days to Beachy-Head, which is about
fifteen Leagues from the Downs or Deal. We sailed along Shore by Folkstone,
where we took in a Pilot, and had a comfortable Passage through the Downs,
London.
and up the River of Thames to London, where I met with my dear and aged
Father, and loving Brother, Sister, and Cousins, and many other of my near and
dear Relations and Friends.

In this Voyage I wrote some Things which opened in my Mind at Sea, upon that
excellent Sermon of Christ's upon the Mount, as it is recorded in the Holy
Scriptures of the New Testament, in the vth, vith, and viith Chapters of the
Evangelist Matthew, but have since heard that the same is much better done by
an abler Hand; and therefore it may suffice here to give the Advice, which in
the Course of my Travels I have often had occasion to do, that the Professors
of Christianity should frequently read this Sermon, and be careful to practice
the same; that they may not only be Christians in Name, but in Deed, and in
Truth.

After visiting my Relations, and some Meetings of our Friends in, and about
London, and having finished my Business, being ready to return homeward, diverse
Friends accompanied us from London to Gravesend; and the Wind not being fair,
we went to Rochester, and had a Meeting there; and then back to Gravesend, and
there took a solemn Farewell of our Friends, recommending one another to the
Grace of Christ; having this Time made but little Stay in Britain.

In the Fifth Month, 1718, we sailed from the Downs in the aforesaid Snow Hope,
diverse Friends, At Sea.
viz. John Danson, Isaac Hadwin, John Oxley, Lydia Lancaster, Elizabeth
Rawlinson and Rebecca Turner, being in Company with us: After about nine Weeks
Passage from Land to Land, having had Meetings First Days and Fifth Days on
board all the Voyage, we came all safe and well to Philadelphia, Philadelphia.
through the Blessing of God, where I stayed with my Family a few Months, and
then took another Voyage for Barbados and Britain. I was under some Concern
more than ordinary, as to the Support and Well-being, or Accommodation of my
Family, the Circumstances thereof being a little changed by the Increase of
Children, remembering the Words of the Apostle, That those who had not that Care
and Concern, were worse than Infidels; my Lord Jesus (whose Servant I profess
myself to be) also saying, It is better to give than receive; wherefore an
Opportunity offering of the Consignment of a Vessel and Cargo (the Snow Hope,
Warner Holt, Master) to Barbados, and from thence to London, and so to make
Returns Home again, for Philadelphia, I embraced it; though with Reluctance, to
leave my very loving Wife, Children, and Friends, all whom I tenderly loved and
respected. I also had in my Eye an Hope, through the Blessing of God, to obtain
wherewith to accommodate my Friends, who were Strangers and Pilgrims in this
World for Jesus Sake, as I also had been myself; and that they might find a
Place or Home, and Refreshment under my Roof; not to Excess, but to Comfort and
Edification; which in Sincerity, is all the Grandeur I covet or desire in this
World: So after due Consideration, on the second Day of the Eleventh Month,
1718, we set Sail from Philadelphia, many Friends taking their Leaves and
Farewell of us for that Voyage. Thus with Hearts full of Love and Good Will, we
parted with our Friends, and went down the River about five Miles, where we ran
aground, but got off next Tide, and next Day came to an Anchor at Chester. On
the 4th Day of the Month we set Sail, and got to Newcastle about the 11th Hour;
it being Meeting-Day, we went to Meeting, where our great Lord was pleased in
some good Measure to own us with his living Presence, and comfort us with his
Love; blessed be his Holy Name! In the Morning we sailed to Reedy Island, where
we stayed for the Tide, and in the Night our Cable parted, which we knew not
till the Morning, and then we had gone from the Place where we anchored, above
a League: But though the Vessel drove about the River, yet she did not go on
Ground. We dropped our other Anchor, and sent the Boat to seek for that which
was parted from us, but could not find it until the next Tide, and then could
not get it up, and were unwilling to go to Sea without it; which occasioned us
to stay several Tides before we could get it: At last with much Difficulty we
weighed it, our Men's Clothes being much frozen; for it was very cold, and
froze extremely hard. After this we went down to Bombay-Hook, where was also
another Vessel going out to Sea. Next Day the Wind was against us, and it
snowed much, and froze hard; and that Night the River and Bay was filled with
Ice as far as we could see, and it drove very hard against our Vessel, so that
we wished for Day; for we thought sometimes it would have torn her Bows into
Pieces; but our Anchor and Cable held us, we thought, to a Miracle (for which
we were thankful to the great Keeper of all those who put their Trust in him.)
When the Tide turned for us we got up the Anchor, and so let her drive with the
Ice down the Bay: The other Vessel did the same. It was now dangerous moving,
go which we would. The Vessel in Company with us attempted to go back again,
but seeing that we did not, as we supposed, came to Anchor again, and we both
went down the Bay together; and the Wind springing up fair, we got clear of the
Ice in some few Hours Time; but by this Hindrance we could not get to Sea that
Day, but were obliged to come to Anchor near the Middle of the great Bay of
Delaware, and the Night being fair and calm, we rode it out safely, which if it
had been windy Weather, would have been dangerous. Early in the Morning (of the
9th Day of the Month) we got to Sea, and soon left Sight of the Land. At Sea.
Next Day the Wind was high, and the Weather proved stormy for several Days,
insomuch that our Main-deck was under Water most of the Time, so that we were
forced to go before it for several Days together. We also shut up our Cabin
Windows, and were tossed exceedingly, and I was very Sea-sick; and we began in
this Storm to fear falling on the Rocks of Bermudas, which we were near, as we
imagined, and the Wind set right on the Island. But when we had passed the
Latitude of Bermudas, we met with fair Weather and Winds (all the remaining
Part of our Passage being pleasant and comfortable) by which I was led to
consider the Vicissitude which Mortals may expect while on this unstable
terraqueous Globe, which is full of Changes; and I strongly desired to be
rightly prepared for that World which is eternal, and its Joy and Felicity
permanent; at which blessed Port, I hope in God's Time, through his Grace, safely
to arrive. Thus through Storms, Tempests, Ice, and Snow, we left those frozen
Climes, and crossed the Tropic of Cancer (between which, and that of
Capricorn, there is neither Frost nor Snow at Sea, at any Time of the Year) and
the Wind always within a small Matter one Way, viz. Easterly (except in
Hurricanes and violent Storms, which sometimes they have in those Parts of the
World.) We arrived at Bridge-Town, in Barbados, Barbados.
in one-and-twenty Days, which was the quickest Passage that I ever had, this
being the fourth Time of my coming hither, where I was always kindly received
by my Friends.

About this Time War was declared against Spain by the King of Great Britain,
by Proclamation, in Bridge-Town, which put such a damp on Trade, that there was
little Business, and the Markets low and dull, which made my Stay longer than I
would have chose; but my Friends, among whom I had many Opportunities, seemed
rather pleased than otherwise; telling me, 1719.
That they did not care if I was to stay there always if it were my Place: And
when I left Barbados Friends gave me better Credentials than I thought I
deserved --. A Friend of mine giving me Intelligence that the Market was better
at Antigua than at Barbados, I dispatched my Affairs, and took Part of our
Cargo there, and was kindly received by our Friends. We were about three Days
in our Passage, and had fine Weather therein. Antigua.
At Antigua I had diverse Meetings, my Business at no Time hindered me in my
more weighty Service; for I always, through Divine Help, made that give Way to
my religious Duty, in which I ever found Peace and inward Satisfaction. In
about five Weeks I finished my Business in this Island, having no small
Satisfaction in coming to it; and our Vessel being now laden, we took our
solemn Leave, and with the good Wishes of many, departed for England.

Our Friends there signified to their Brethren, that they were glad of my
Company, and that I was serviceable to them, though I came upon Business. My
Hand, when Need required, was to my Business, but my Heart was, and I hope is,
and ever shall be, freely given up to serve the Lord, in that Work whereunto I
believe he has called me. We have Liberty from God, and his dear Son, lawfully,
and for Accommodation's Sake, to work or seek for Food or Raiment; though that
ought to be a Work of Indifferency, compared to the great Work of Salvation.
Our Savior says, Labor not for the Meat which perishes, but for that which
endures for ever, or to eternal Life: By which we do not understand, that
Christians must neglect their necessary Occasions, and their outward Trades and
Callings; but that their chief Labor, and greatest Concern ought to be for
their future Well-being in his glorious Kingdom; else why did our Lord say to
his Disciples, Children, have you any Meat? They answered, No; and he bid them
cast their Nets into the Sea, and they drew to Land a Net full of great Fishes;
and Fishing being their Trade, no doubt but they sold them, for it was not
likely they could eat 'em all themselves. Also the Apostle of Christ says, He
that does not take care of his Family, is worse than an Infidel: And the
Apostle Paul (the great Apostle of the Gentiles) wrought with his Hands, even
while he was in his Travels, and in the Work of the Gospel; and others tasted
of the Benefit of his Labor naturally, as well as spiritually. It is also
written, That he that will not work, shall not eat. By all this, and much more,
which might be noted, it appears that we not only have liberty to labor in
Moderation, but we are given to understand, that it is our Duty so to do. The
Farmer, the Tradesman, and the Merchant, do not understand by our Lord's
Doctrine, that they must neglect their Calling, or grow idle in their Business,
but must certainly work, and be industrious in their Callings. We all ought to
understand, that our Hearts and Minds ought to be out of the World, or above
the Nature and Spirit of it. It Is good and profitable for both Soul and Body,
rightly to distinguish between earthly and heavenly Things, and to be careful
how they mix the one with the other; for it is an eternal Truth, that God and
Mammon cannot dwell together, or join together in the Heart. If our Love is
more to God, than the Creature, or to Heaven than Earth, then will he dwell in
us, and with us: But if our Love is more to the Creature than to Christ, or to
Earth than Heaven, then will he not dwell with us, but will leave us to
ourselves; for the Lord Omnipotent will not admit of any Rival.

At Sea.
On the 11th of the Fourth Month, 1719, we left Antigua, stood close to the Wind
till we again crossed the Tropic, and got into those Latitudes where the Winds
are variable. Sailing in the great Deeps we saw the Wonders of the Lord,
particularly in diverse Kinds of Fish, they living upon one another in the Sea,
the great Fishes on the small Ones; and Mankind too much resembles them in that
Respect. About the Latitude of 33 North, our Master, Warner Holt, seeing a
Scool of Porpoises about the Ship, though he was not very well, and had not been
for most of the Voyage, he took his Harping-Iron, and struck one of them, and
we took him into the Vessel, out of which we got eleven Quart Bottles of Oil;
and we most of us eat heartily of this Fish, which agreed with our People very
well. They fried his Liver for our Mess, of which I eat a large Meal, which was
well-tasted, and eat more like fresh Beef than Fish. I make this Memorandum of
it, that if any should take them when their Provisions are scarce, they may eat
freely without Danger, according to our Experience. When we had been at Sea
about three Weeks, being near the Latitude of 40 North, and about the Longitude
of 42, though it was in the midst of Summer, we saw an Island of Ice, at which we
all marvelled, and judged that there had been a severe cold Winter in those
Latitudes on the Land of America. When we saw this Island of Ice we judged
ourselves not far from the Banks of Newfoundland. Hitherto we had easy Gales of
Wind, and many Calms, which made our Passage seem long to us. We saw two Sail
of Ships about those Latitudes, but spoke with neither, being willing to shun
them as it was War-time.

We had in this Voyage Weekly Meetings for worshipping the Almighty, in which
the Great Lord both of Sea and Land, was pleased greatly to manifest his Name
and Truth amongst us, for which my Soul often secretly and openly blessed and
praised his Divine and Glorious Name and Truth; for he bore up my drooping
Spirit, so that I could truly say with the Royal Psalmist (not because he spoke
it only, but also being an experimental Witness thereof) The Floods have lifted
up, O Lord, the Floods have lifted up their Voice: The Floods lift up their
Waves. The Lord on High is mightier than the Noise of many Waters, yea, than
the mighty Waves of the Sea, Psalm xciii. 3, 4. This the King wrote of his own
Experience in a spiritual Sense; but I may say without boasting, I have
witnessed the Rage and Noise of mighty Waves and Waters, both natural and
spiritual; the one, as though it would swallow up my Reputation among Men, and
the other, as though it would swallow up my Person, in this my watery
Peregrination: But blessed be the Name of him that is Holy and Eternal, who
indeed is stronger than the Noise of many Waters, or than the mighty Waves of
the Sea, either inwardly or outwardly, I will through his Strength, magnify his
Name, because he is worthy: And may I do it for ever!

About the 11th Day of the Fifth Month, we saw great Flocks of Birds, which we
judged came from the Azores, or Western Islands, near which we reckoned
ourselves to be. The 21st Day we saw, and came up with, a French Ship, which
had been fishing on the Banks of Newfoundland, and was bound for Havre de
Grace, in France, the Master of which came on board us, and our Captain went on
board them. We exchanged some Rum and Sugars (of our Sea-Stores) for their
French Wine and Cider, and some of our Provisions for some of their Fish. The
Captain was a Protestant, and very courteous to us: The Regent of France at
this Time being kind to the Protestants, so that they increased much in that
Kingdom. The Frenchman seeming desirous to know what Religion I was of, I told
him, by an Interpreter, that I was one called a Quaker, or Trembler, and that
our Principle was to do Good to all Men, and not to hurt any Man, according to
Christ's Doctrine, Not to render Evil for Evil, but to overcome Evil with Good.
When they went away and took Leave of us, they desired me to pray for them, the
which I remembered with Tenderness of Spirit, and having but little Wind, we
kept Company for several Days; but the Wind springing fair, we wished them
well, and went on our Way, our Vessel outsailing most that we met with; and a
few Days after we met with a New England Ship, who came out six Days before us
from Antigua. We were then in the Latitude of about 50 North, and 29 Degrees of
Longitude from the Lands-End of Great Britain. The 30th Day of the Fifth Month,
we sounded, and found Ground at 28 Fathom, and on the 1st of the Sixth Month,
we saw the Lands-End of England, all our Company being in Health, and well; For
which my Heart was truly thankful, to that great and infinite Being, whose
Providence is over us poor Mortals in all Parts of the World, and who reigns
over Sea and Land, and is worthy of Adoration, Worship, Service, and living
Praise for ever!

In a few Days we came into the English Channel, English Channel.
and going up the Channel there came one of the King's Yacht's, and they
pressed most of our Men; the best Hands we had they took from us, and carried
them on board a Man of War, after which we came to Anchor at Folkstone, where I
left the Vessel, and got a Horse to Dover, and from Dover took Coach to London.
Dover.
In the Coach were diverse Persons who began to talk about the Quakers, and
spoke against their plain Way of Living and Clothing, and said, That they did
not understand their unfashionable Way of Conversation; neither was it the Way
to gain Proselytes. Upon which I asked them, Whether they understood Paul, the
great Apostle of the Gentiles? who said, Be ye not conformable to the World (i.
e. the Fashions of it) for this great Reason, The World, and the Fashions
thereof, passes away; which is a great Truth, and it is plainly seen how
fickle and changeable the World is in its vain Fashions and Customs, which, to
follow, in all its foolish Cuts and Turns, or Changes, must, of Consequence,
make a Man or Woman very foppish and apish. I told them, That our Religion was
agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, which, if they did not understand, neither
could they understand us; for the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, was
generally therein very plain; and the Doctrine in Christ's excellent Sermon on
the Mount, is clear and plain to very low or mean Capacities: So they
discoursed no more of Religion till we came to London, London.
where once more I met with my loving and aged Father, a Man fearing God, and
having a Gift of the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ, and well-beloved of his
Friends and Neighbors, who, with others of my near and dear Relations and
Friends, received me gladly.

After some Months Stay among my Relations and Friends in London, we sold our
Vessel, the Snow Hope, and bought another Ship which we called the Trine-Hope
(Warner Holt, Master) and when I had done my Business I sailed in the said Ship
for Pennsylvania. At Sea.
We had Meetings on board the Vessel twice a Week, in which the Almighty was
pleased to favor us with his good Presence. Sobriety, and the Fear of God, and
Faith in his beloved Son, Christ, was often recommended to the Youth then on
board the Vessel with us, of whom there were diverse, who transported themselves
to America, in order to settle there. At one Meeting on board I was tenderly
concerned to remind them of Jacob, who in his Youth, left his Country and
Relations, to sojourn in a strange Land, and how in that Undertaking, he sought
the Lord, and his Blessing, more than any outward Thing; and that he was
greatly blessed with many Favors from Heaven above, and also from the Earth
beneath, and they were advised to take him for their Example: And many other
Things were tenderly opened to them in the Love of God, and in his Fear and
Counsel they were exhorted from time to time.

It being Wintertime we sailed to the Southward, and got into warm Weather,
and were on our Passage seven Weeks and some odd Days from Land to Land, in
which Time we saw several Vessels, and spoke with one, whose People said, they
were chaced by a Turk, but got from him, at which they greatly rejoiced. We
apprehended it was our Ship that they saw over Night, for we saw a Sail that
crowded from us as fast as she could, and it being near Night, we shortened
Sail, and so she left us; but in the Morning came up with her, and being pretty
near, both they and we put out our Colors, and being both Englishmen, we spoke
to each other, and were glad to meet with some of our own Nation upon the great
Ocean; but our Vessel sailing best, we took our Leave of them, wishing them a
good Voyage. We met with rough Seas and high Winds in the latter Part of our
Passage, till we came to the Capes of Delaware, which we all rejoiced to see,
and we had a pleasant Passage up the Bay and River to Philadelphia, where I had
once more a comfortable Meeting with my dear Wife and Family, which I
gratefully acknowledged as a high Favor from the Hand of the Almighty.

We arrived at Philadelphia the 1st of the Second Month, 1720; after which, I
stayed at, 1720.
and about Home, for some Time (and was not idle, Philadelphia.
but kept to my Business, and to Meetings) and having a Desire to see my
Friends in the Province of Maryland, at their General Meeting at West River, I
was accompanied by Isaac Norris and Thomas Masters (both sober young Men.) It
had been a Time of pretty much Rain, and the Waters thereby being out and high,
going over a Ford of Brandywine, my Mare got among the Rocks (it being a very
rocky Creek) she fell down, and the Stream being very strong, she rolled upon
me, and being entangled with the Stirrup, I could not easily clear myself, but
I gave a Spring from her, and swam to clear myself from her; and when I was
clear, I got to her again, and laid hold of her Mane, and through the good
Providence of God, got well out with the Mare on dry Land, which was a
remarkable Deliverance. In three Days we got to West River, Maryland.
to the Yearly Meeting, which was large, and Friends were glad to see me, I
having not been there for several Years. I was out on this Journey about two
Weeks, and rode about 300 Miles; and after my coming Home, I traveled pretty
much in and about the Provinces of Pennsylvania and New Jersey.

1721.
In the Year 1721, Thomas Lightfoot and I, with William Brown, went to a
Meeting at Bush-River, and going over Susquehannah-Ferry, the People were
fiddling and dancing. When their Dance was over I asked them (believing them to
be Protestants) If they thought Luther to be a good Man? They replied, Yes,
there was no doubt of it. Well, said I, and so do I; and I will tell you what
he says concerning Dancing, That as many Paces as the Man takes in his Dance,
so many Steps he takes toward Hell; which spoiled their Sport, and they went
away, and we went on ours toward the Meeting; and a good Meeting it was! and
we after it returned by Way of Nottingham, and had a Meeting there, and one at
New-Garden, and so on to Philadelphia. I was from Home about a Week, and
traveled in this Journey about 150 Miles, and was well satisfied therein.

In the Years 1721 and 1722, I went several Journeys, and had many large
Meetings, traveling many Hundreds of Miles, of which I neglected to keep a
particular Account, hardly thinking what I did worth recording; but diverse of
my Friends in many Parts of the World, put me upon something of this Nature, to
which, at length, I gave up, and found some Benefit and Satisfaction therein,
in looking back and considering the Dealings of God with me in my Youth and
upwards.

From Philadelphia I went to the General Meeting at Shrewsbury, Shrewsbury.
in East-Jersey, where I heard of J. G's being wounded by a young Man, with a
Sword, of which he died, lamenting that he did not take the Counsel of his
Friends; as young Men, who slight the Counsel of them that wish them well, 1722.
commonly do, either sooner or later, if the Day of their Visitation be not
over. Some few Days after this Meeting at Shrewsbury, I visited Friends on
Long Island, and returned Home again, having traveled about 300 Miles. In my
Stay at, and about Home, I wrote something concerning Perfection, in answer to
a nameless Author; as also something concerning Predestination, or Election and
Reprobation.

In the Year 1722, Pennsylvania.
I went back in the Woods to Buckingham, the Great Swamp, Perkiomy,
Manahatowny, and Oley, where I had Meetings, traveling over great Mountains,
from which we could see many Miles. I traveled in this Journey about 150
Miles, and returned Home in about two Weeks; and after staying some Time at
Home, and visiting neighboring Meetings, I went to the Yearly Meeting of
Friends on Long Island, which Meeting was very large, many People (not of our
Persuasion) being there, and were very sober. Many Things were opened in the
Love of Christ, and his great Love was largely declared to that great
Congregation. The Parable concerning the Prodigal Son, came before me to speak
of to the People in a very moving Manner, and strongly to invite the Youth to
lay hold of the Love of the Father in his Son, to poor Souls: And indeed it is
a wonderful Parable, setting forth the infinite Love of the great Lord of all
to his poor Creatures. Many were affected and reached to at this Meeting, and
the Almighty was praised and glorified, who alone is worthy.

From thence I went and had a Meeting at New York, and then set forward to
Woodbridge, where we had a comfortable Meeting; Naaman, the Assyrian, being
much the Subject of that Days Work: And that one Thing loved and esteemed more
than Christ, whatever it be, is to be avoided, and the People warned to be
careful to cleave close to the God of Israel (spiritual Israel) and to give up
all which is contrary to his Nature, and to take up Christ's Cross, and follow
him: For it is those who follow him in the Regeneration, that are to be Heirs
of his Kingdom.

In this Year also I was at the Burial of our Friend Jonathan Dickenson, at
which we had a very large Meeting, he was a Man generally well-beloved by his
Friends and Neighbors. In this Meeting a Passage (he had often told me in his
Health) was brought to my Remembrance, I think, worthy to be recorded to the
End of Time, which is as follows: It happenned at Port Royal, in Jamaica,
that two young Men were at Dinner with Jonathan, and diverse other People of
Account in the World, and they were speaking about Earthquakes (there having
been one in that Place formerly, which was very dreadful, having destroyed many
Houses and Families.) These two young Men argued that Earthquakes, and all
other Things, came by Nature, and denied a supernatural Power, or Deity;
insomuch that diverse surprised at such wicked Discourse, and being ashamed of
their Company, left it; and at the same Time the Earth shook, and trembled
exceedingly, as though astonished at such Treason against its Sovereign and
Creator, whose Footstool it is: And when the Earth thus moved, the Company
which remained were so astonished, that some run one Way, and some another, but
these two atheistical young Men stayed in the Room, and Jonathan with them, he
believing that the Providence of Almighty God could preserve him there, if he
pleased, and if not, that it was in vain to fly; but the Hand of God smote
these two young Men, so that they fell down; and, as Jonathan told me, he laid
one on a Bed, and the other on a Couch, and they never spoke more, but died
soon after. This was the amazing End of these young Men: A dreadful Example to
all Atheists, and dissolute and wicked Livers. Oh! that young People might be
warned, that the Hand of God might be upon them for Good, and that they would
tenderly be concerned for their Salvation!

On the 30th of the Fourth Month, 1723, 1723.
my tenth Child, named Thomas, died about Midnight (having before buried nine.)
It was some Exercise to me thus to bury my Children one after another; but this
did a little mitigate my Sorrow, that I knew that could I have all Things
relating to them according to my Desire; could I see them grow up to be sober
Men and Women, well married, have a Competency in the World, etc. yet it was
safer and better for them, and they more out of Danger, being taken away in
their Infancy and Innocence; and I fervently begged of the Almighty, that he
would be pleased to take them away while Innocent, rather than that they should
live to be vicious or unrighteous Men and Women, and to bring Scandal on the
holy Name of Christ, and upon our Christian Profession; which Considerations
did mightily tend to settle and quiet my Mind in my sorrowful Exercise. The
Great Lord of all sanctify the Sorrows and Afflictions of his People and
Children, and grant them the Fulfilling of that blessed Portion of Holy
Scripture, that all Things shall work together for the Good of them that love
and fear God: Even so be it, says my Soul!

In the Sixth Month of this Year I removed from the City into the Country,
Removes to Frankfort.
to a small Plantation I had at Frankfort, in order to be more retired, and for
Health's Sake, etc. finding some declining in my bodily Strength, which I take
to be very much owing to the severe Colds and Hardships I have sustained in my
long and hard Travels, more especially in the Wilderness of America; for
without Vanity I may say, that I always loved Temperance, and have been
sometimes zealously concerned to preach against Intemperance; and though I cannot
now take so long Journeys as I have formerly, my Spirit earnestly travels for
the Welfare of Sion, and the Peace and Prosperity of all those who love, fear,
and serve, God, and believe in his Son.

On the Sixth Day of the Eighth Month, it pleased God to give me another Son,
whom I named George, after my Father, Brother, Nephew, and King; and though this
Name is now a great Name among Men, I considered that no Name can preserve
Life, so I gave him up to the Will of him who gave him to me, and desire, if I
have no Name through Children to Posterity, I may have a Name in the Lamb's Book
of Life, which I have ever esteemed far above a Name amongst Men.

After my Removal to this Place I was not idle, but visited neighboring
Meetings, and in the Eighth Month I went to Shrewsbury General Meeting,
Shrewsbury.
where there were many Hundreds of People, and the Truth declared had good
Impression upon the Minds of many; some after Meeting, who were not of our
Society, acknowledged to the Truth, and that they were glad they were there. In
this Meeting I was concerned for the Welfare of Mankind, and the Exaltation of
the Holy Name of the Almighty, to declare the universal Love of God to Man,
from several Texts of Holy Scripture, as that Passage concerning Jacob and
Esau, and Peter and Cornelius, and something concerning the Objection made
against us, the People called Quakers, that we do not acknowledge the Holy
Scriptures to be the Word of God; for though we believe that the Scriptures came
by Divine Inspiration, yet we are clearly convinced by their Testimony, and by
the Spirit of Truth in our Hearts, that Christ is the eternal Word of God, by
whom all Things were made and created, and do still exist.

From Shrewsbury, with diverse other Friends, I rode to Croswicks, Croswicks.
where, on the Fifth Day, we had a very comfortable Meeting, in which the
ancient Love and Goodness of our heavenly Father was with us to the tendering
our Hearts into Tears of Joy, some of us being likewise affected in Remembrance
of the Goodness of the Almighty to us, in the Meeting we had in this Place
under the Trees about twenty-five Years since. The great Subject of Faith and
Works was spoken to; as, that the Romans seemed to lay too much Stress on
Works, and the Lutherans, Calvinists, and others, too little: But our Principle
led us to join both together; the Almighty having joined them together, none
ought to separate them. This Subject of Faith and Works having been much in
Debate amongst professed Christians, it is on my Mind here to mention a few
Things deduced from the best Authority:

The First is, Without Faith, it is impossible to please God, Heb. xi. 6.

Second, Faith is the Gift of God.

Third, Faith works by Love.

Fourth, Faith is the Evidence of Things not seen, and the Substance of Things
hoped for.

Fifth, Faith without Works is dead.

Sixth, The Just live by Faith.

Seventh, You believe (or have Faith) in God, believe also in me, John xiv. 1.

And the Author to the Hebrews speaks excellently concerning the Power of
Faith, and the mighty Wonders wrought by it. Note, this living, saving, true,
and Divine Faith, must be in the Heart, through, and in Christ Jesus the Son of
the Living God, who is, and always will be, the Author and Finisher of it in
every true Believer.

After I came from Shrewsbury, I visited diverse neighboring Meetings, and some
in Chester County, Chester County.
where I had Meetings for nine Days successively, some of which were very large
(particularly at Providence and Goshen) in which I was opened to exhort them to
keep to that plain, honest Way of Life and Conversation, which our Fathers and
Elders were found in, and to remind them of the Sufferings they endured for
their Testimony to the blessed Truth, in the first breaking forth thereof in
the last Age; and I was concerned to show them, that the Almighty, who had
blessed us with plenty of temporal Blessings, would continue the same to us, if
we were careful to live in his Fear; but that otherwise, we might expect his
Judgments for Disobedience.

And after my Return, I continued about Home for some Time, it being Winter
Season, and bad Traveling, and I not so capable of traveling as formerly: But
I had great Peace and Tranquillity of Mind, in that I had freely given up my
youthful Days to serve my Creator, and the same Love and Zeal was yet fresh and
warm in my Heart, for the Glory of his Great Name; and I still have a full
Resolution through his Strength and Grace to serve him, the great Lord of all,
all my Days, according to the Light and Strength given to me.

Our Yearly Meeting at Philadelphia this Year was large, in which our Friend
Benjamin Kid, from England, being with us, had great Service. I cannot forget a
Concern which was upon me at this Meeting, that the universal Love of God,
through Christ, might prevail amongst Mankind, and to press Friends to manifest
to all People the Influence thereof, by their exemplary Lives and Conversations.

1724.
In the Second Month, 1724, I went into New Jersey as far as Shrewsbury,
Shrewsbury.
where, on a First Day, we had a large Meeting, to general Satisfaction; and
the next Day we had another, wherein the Love and Goodwill of God, through Christ
was opened freely to the People, and our Duty to forgive one another was
largely treated of; and it was plainly shown, that without forgiving others, we
could not be forgiven of God, as Christ says, If ye forgive Men their
Trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: But if ye forgive not
Men their Trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive your
Trespasses, Matthew. vi. 14, 15, etc. and much more to the same Effect on that
Subject; as also Christ's Answer to Peter, who asked, How often a Man should
forgive his Brother if he trespassed against him? Peter says, till seven Times?
Our Lord Jesus answers, I say not unto thee, until seven Times, but until
seventy Times seven, Matthew. xviii. 22. And again Christ says, If thy Brother
trespass against thee seven Times in a Day, and seven Times in a Day turn again
unto thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him, Luke xvii. 4. Which
hard-hearted People think a great Hardship, but Christ's Cross must be taken
up, and born daily, if we will be his Disciples and Followers in Deed, and in
Truth, as well as in Profession.

After we had reconciled some Differences at Shrewsbury, we went to a Place
called Menesquan, Menesquan.
and had a good, open Meeting, and most of the People of that Place were there.
It was a good Time, and I hope the Opportunity will not soon be forgotten by
diverse that were there. From this Place we traveled to Croswicks, and had a
good Meeting. Croswicks.
After Meeting a Friend told me that some would say, I spoke by information,
because I had opened some Matters which were exactly to the State and Condition
of some there: But I knew nothing of their State and Condition, otherwise than
as it was then immediately opened in my Mind; neither had I been told any Thing
concerning them directly or indirectly: And from thence we traveled to
Burlington, Burlington.
where the Monthly Meeting of our Friends had desired that I would be assistant
to help to end a Difference which had happened through Mistake, and continued
for about seven Years (since the first Occasion was given) and through Divine
Assistance, our Hearts being filled with the Love of Christ, we so prevailed
upon the differing Persons, that they gave each other Satisfaction, with Hopes
that they should live in Love for the future; and Friends of the Place greatly
rejoiced at the End of that Difference. As I went along this Town, some Friends
told me of a religious People some few Miles distant, whom they desired I would
have a Meeting with. I desired them to see if it would be granted, and let me
know; which was done, and we had a Meeting, and were kindly received, and the
Divine Nature of the Gospel of Christ was freely opened to them, and in great
Love we parted from one another. I traveled in this Journey about two Hundred
Miles; and when I came Home, my dear Wife and Family gladly received me with
Hearts full of Love: And this Testimony I think proper, for several solid
Reasons, to leave behind me of my virtuous and loving Wife, that since we were
married, she never hindered me in that Service my great Master called me unto,
in all the Time of our living together: We always parted, for the Sake of the
Gospel of Christ, in pure Love, and in the same Love we always met again.

Soon after this Time I met with several great Losses by Sea and Land, and
myself and my little Daughter were dangerously sick, so that our Recovery
seemed doubtful; yet through the Mercy of God, we both recovered, for which I
praise his Name.

After some Stay at Home, I was again moved in the Love of Christ, to visit the
General Meetings of Duck-Creek and Salem. Duck-Creek.
At Duck-Creek we had a large and satisfactory Meeting. From Duck-Creek I
appointed a Meeting at George's-Creek, George's-Creek.
which was a good Meeting. The next Morning we went over to Elsinburgh,
Cohansie.
and so on to Cohansie, where I met with two of my Fellow Laborers in the Work
of Christ, Thomas Lightfoot and Benjamin Kid. We had a Meeting together at
Cohansie, in which the People were exhorted to Sobriety and just Dealing. The
contrary of both is too obvious at such Times as Fairs; there being diverse of
the Fair People there as well as others, and the Nature of Christ's Work in the
Heart, was somewhat spoke to, but not so open a Meeting as some others, the
People thereaway being too slack and dull as to Religion. Next Day we had a
Meeting at Alloways-Creek, Alloways-Creek.
where we all three had some pretty close Work; and from thence we went to the
General Meeting at Salem, which was larger than common, on account of said
Friend ( Benjamin Kid's) being there; who, Salem.
in the Love of Christ, came from England, to visit the Churches in this Part
of the World. There were so many Friends and others here at this Time, that
some Houses were so filled, that there was not Room for all that came to lodge
there. Frankfort.
After this Meeting I returned Home and in a few Days, went into
Chester-County, and traveled above 100 Miles; and when I came Home I
understood, that some for Want of a true Sense of the Work of Christ, had been
censuring me for my much Traveling and hard Labor in the Work of the Ministry
of the Gospel of Christ; though, by the same Rule of judging, the Apostles of
Christ, and our ancient Friends, who traveled much, cannot escape their
Censure; for in all my Travels, I have had an especial Regard to the Unity of
the Brethren, and never knowingly went abroad without it: But let this Caution
be recorded for the Instruction of all such forward Judges; let them be careful
of judging Christ's Servants, lest their Words become their Burden: Judge not,
that ye be not judged ( says our great Lord) for with what Judgment ye Judge,
ye shall be judged.

Soon after my Return from Chester-County, Abington.
I was at a Marriage at Abington, which was one of the most solemn I have been
at; and on the 15th of the Third Month, at the Youth's Meeting at Germantown,
Germantown.
to my great Satisfaction; and on the 23d of the same Month, I went to the
General-meeting of Ministers and Elders at Burlington; at which Meeting,
Burlington.
several Things relating to the Gospel Ministry, were declared; as its being a
free, a clear, and a powerful Ministry, reaching to the Conscience, and
Convincing of the Danger of continuing in Sin: And divine Charity was much
recommended, without which, All Ministry is but as sounding Brass, etc. From
this Meeting I went with Walter Herbert, into Bucks-County, Neshaminy.
and at Neshaminy we had an open, tender Meeting. From thence I went to
Buckingham, and was at a Marriage of a Son and Daughter-in-law of Thomas
Canby's. The Meeting was large, Buckingham.
and Friends well satisfied; and it was observable, though I was very hoarse,
through a Cold I had taken, and could hardly speak in common Conversation, yet it
was much taken away in my Ministry, so that I was carried through the Service to
our Admiration, for which I was truly thankful. After this Meeting I returned
Home with true Satisfaction, such as is much more valuable than Silver and
Gold, two mighty Idols in the World.

Frankfort. North Wales.
After a little Stay at Home I went on a First Day to North Wales or Gwinnedd,
where was a pretty large Meeting, many young People being there, to whom I was
concerned to show, that Christ is the Way by which we must come into the true
Church, through Regeneration, and that all who invent other Ways are Thieves and
Robbers. I rode twenty-five Miles that Day, and next Day came to Frankfort, and
was at the Burial of an ancient Friend, Joan Orpwood, at which our Friend, John
Salkeld was, with whom I was the next Day at Philadelphia, at our Third-Day
Meeting, which was a good Meeting.

On the 4th Day of the Fourth Month, intending soon to take a Journey to
Long Island, I thought it a proper Time to alter my Will, as I had kept one by
me for diverse Years before, considering the Uncertainty of Life. On the 5th of
the Fourth Month I went to Merion to visit an ancient Friend, Merion.
John Roberts, who was sick near unto Death, where I again met with John
Salkeld. The Friend expressed his Satisfaction in this Visit, and we had a
Reward of Peace in the Exercise of that Christian Duty of Visiting the Sick,
which is recommended by the Apostle to the primitive Churches of Christ. After
we had been some Time with our said sick Friend, we went to the Meeting which
had been appointed for us several Days before, and was large and satisfactory;
for which favorable Visitation we blessed the great Name of the Almighty, and
parted tenderly in Christian Love and Good Will. The Friend we went to visit
died the next Day. He was a Helper of the Poor, and a Maker of Peace in the
Neighborhood: Of such, Christ said, Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they
shall be called the Children of God.

On the 10th of the Fourth Month, 1724, I had a Concern to write the following
Epistle to Friends in the Island of Barbados.

Frankfort, 10. 4 th Mon. 1724. Dear Friends,
IN the tender Love of God, our heavenly Father, An Epistle to Friends in
Barbados.
and of our Savior Jesus Christ, do I, your Brother, at this Time greet you,
and wish you Health and Salvation. Understanding by a concerned Friend, that of
late several of our Friends are taken away from you by Death, a Concern came on
my Mind to put you in Remembrance of your latter End, and of the Cause of
Christ; and also, of the Prosperity of his blessed Light and Truth in your (in
that Respect, poor, though in some others, rich and luxurious) Island: The
Posterity of many that have been taken away there, as well as in diverse other
Places, having gone astray; and that it may not be so with these who are left
behind, let a weighty Concern come upon you. O dear Friends! let your Practices
and Expressions, manifest to the rising Generation, that the Welfare of their
Souls, more than of their Bodies, is at Heart with you; and do not indulge them
in that which you in yourselves were convinced to be of an evil Tendency, when
your Hearts were first reached by the Power of Truth. How many Youths have been
lost, through the Looseness of the Example of their Elders, and through an undue
Indulgence of them in Vanity, Folly, Pride, and Idleness! Woeful Experience does
but too much declare that they are many: O they are many indeed, who have been
lost by so doing! Wherefore, dear Friends, clear yourselves of your Children;
and, if they will obstinately go astray, faithfully bear your Testimony against
them, in Life, Doctrine, or Expressions and Conversation, which will Witness
for you when you are dead and gone, and your Heads laid in the silent Grave.
Thus will your Youth, through the Blessing of God, and your Endeavors, come up
in your Places, or at least you will be clear, and their Blood will be upon
their own Heads. A pure, strict Watch is required of you in Conversation, in
all those Relations: First, That God may be glorified. Secondly, That your
Children may be exampled. Thirdly, That your Neighbors may be edified, or
built up in pure Religion: And Fourthly, That you may die in Peace with him
that created you, and died for you; remembering the blessed Doctrine of Christ
Jesus, Let your Light so shine before Men, that others, seeing your good Works,
may glorify your Father which is in Heaven. And again; You are as a City set on
a Hill, which cannot be hid. And as you thus train up your Children in the Way
which they should go, when they are young, you may have Reason to hope they
will not depart from it when they are old; for many have been convinced of the
Truth, as it is in Jesus Christ, through the good Conversation of his Followers.
And how can we expect to die well, if we do not live well? Or can we expect the
Answer of, Well done, if we are not in the Practice of doing well?

And I do desire and earnestly exhort Friends to read the Holy Scriptures, and
wait to feel the Power from which they sprung, through the holy Writers; and also
to teach them to their Children. And, dear Friends, let me prevail with you in
the Love of God and his dear Son, to keep close to your Meetings for the
Worship of Almighty God, and for the well ordering of your Society; and do it
in the meek Spirit, for that is of great Price with the Lord; and when in your
Meetings, get into a religious Exercise, and lively Concern for God's Glory,
and your Souls Peace and Prosperity. I pray the holy Lord of Sabbath, to open
your Hearts to him in the Reading of this little Epistle, as mine is open to
you, my beloved Friends, that you and I may be edified (though outwardly
separated) as we were when together; and if we should never meet more in this
World, that we may meet in the Kingdom of God, where we may never part more.
Amen. Hallelujah, says my Soul!

I desire this may be copied and read at the Close of one of each of your
particular Meetings, and, if it could be readily, in every Family of Friends;
to all whom is my very dear Love in Jesus Christ, whose Servant I am, and hope
to be to the End, and I am an entire Lover of Souls, and a Well-wisher of
Sion's Prosperity

T. CHALKLEY.


On the 11th of Fourth Month I left Home on a Journey to Long Island, in order
to visit Friends Meetings, and also to negotiate some Business I had there; the
first Meeting I had was at Burlington, Burlington.
where I had occasion to advise them to keep in Remembrance of that ancient
Love which first united our Society together, and in which, in Times of cruel
Persecution, some freely offered to suffer the Imprisonment of their Bodies to
obtain the Liberty of their Friends in Confinement. From thence we traveled to
Amboy, Amboy.
and so over to Staten-Island. The Day being very hot, and the Evening Cold, I
got a severe Cold, which I did not get clear of for about two Weeks,
notwithstanding which, I went to Meetings, though ill in Body. The first Meeting
I had on Long Island, was at Flushing, Flushing.
on a first Day: A comfortable Meeting it was! in which was closely pressed,
the Taking up the Cross of Christ, by all who desire to be his Disciples, and
that without it we could not be true Christians. From Flushing we went to
Muskette-Cove, Muskette-Cove.
and had a Meeting there on Third Day, which was large, and to general
Satisfaction, and some were there that were newly convinced. I seeing the
Openness of the Meeting, advised Friends to build a Meeting House there, which
they approved of. Westbury. Cowneck.
On Fourth Day we had a Meeting at Westbury, and Fifth Day at Cowneck. From
Cowneck I went to the South Side of the Island, and had a Meeting at Captain
Hicks's. Rockway.
The Neighbors, who were not of our Society, came generally to this Meeting,
and they were pressingly exhorted to come to Christ, and the Way opened unto
them. It was a good Time, and I thought a Time of Love to us all; though before
the Meeting I was exceedingly shut up in myself, so that the Meeting was very
beneficial to me, among the rest, to see how the Lord could work by his Power,
and unlock the Soul, as in a Moment, as he did for my poor Soul at Times. O may
I, with Christ's Followers and Ministers, ever depend upon him, is my Petition!
From Rockway (for so is the Place called) we went to Westbury, and had a very
large Meeting on a First Day; and, as I was informed, some were convinced there
that Day. From hence I went to a Place called Forster's Meadows, Forster's
Meadows.
where we had a large Meeting in one Di^es^ry's Barn. After this I went over to
the Main Land, and had a Meeting at a Place called Westchester. Westchester.
Flushing.
From thence we went to Flushing, and had a large Meeting on a Fifth Day of the
Week, in which the right Training up of Children, and careful Education of
Youth, was zealously recommended. From Flushing I went to Huntington,
Huntington.
where some were lately convinced of the Principle of Truth as it is in Christ
Jesus, some of whom were excommunicated by the Presbyterians, with whom they
had formerly joined. We had a pretty large Meeting in a Friend's Barn, where
one Priest Prime opposed me, as he also had my Friend Benjamin Kid some Time
before, of which, by Letter, I gave an Account to my dear Friends Thomas
Lightfoot and Benjamin Kid, desiring them (in their Return from New England) to
have an Evening Meeting there. The Grounds of this Priest's Cavilling, or
Dispute, was that I had declared, That it is the Light of Christ, or his
Spirit, which convinces the World of Sin, and not a natural Light, or the
Light of a Natural Conscience; from whence he took Occasion to charge me with
denying a natural Conscience, the Falsehood of which I charged upon him before
the Auditory, and desired him, if he had any Thing on his Mind, to write it to
me, to which I promised to return him an Answer.

From Huntington I went to the General Meeting of Friends held at Newtown,
Newtown.
which was so large that the Meeting House could not contain the People, and
the Weather being extreme hot, the People without Doors were some of them
uneasy, and went to and fro; but those that were in the House, and so near as
they could hear, were very attentive, and as far as I could learn, generally
satisfied. New York.
Our next Meeting was at New York, which was the quietest Meeting I ever had
there; and those few Friends at New York, and some that were there from
Long Island, parted with us in the Love of Christ, and in the Fellowship of his
blessed Gospel; and so I traveled homewards, having good Satisfaction in
visiting my Friends; and when I came Home, I found my dear Wife and Children in
Health, Frankfort.
for which I bless God.

After this Journey I kept to Meetings at and about Home as usual, and was at
the Fifth-Day-Meeting in Philadelphia, Philadelphia.
when Samuel Preston was married to Margaret Langdale (the Widow of my dear
Friend and Fellow-traveller, Josiah Langdale:) The Meeting was large, and the
Parable of the Virgins, and the Bridegroom's coming at Midnight, was opened,
with an Exhortation to People to be ready against that Hour, and that they
should take Care to have the Holy Oil of Divine Grace in their Hearts.

After this Meeting I had some Affairs which called me into Chester-County,
Chester-County.
and on the Road my Horse gave a sudden and violent Start out of the Path, and
threw me down, and before I could get up again, he struck my Face, and on my
right Eye with his Foot, being newly shod, which stunned me for the present;
but as soon as I opened that Eye which was unhurt, I perceived that I lay on my
Back, under my Horse's Belly, with my Head between his fore Feet. He stood
still, and I got on my Hands and Knees, the Blood streaming out of my Nose and
right Eye, and while I was bleeding, a Man and Woman came by, and stayed till I
had done Bleeding, and saw me mounted on my Horse again. I went forward, being
about two Miles from the House I intended to go to, and after riding about a
Mile, I met with a Friend that knew me, and was surprised to see me so bloody,
and went with me to Randal Maylin's, (a faithful, honest Friend, who was
upwards of eighty Years of Age, and had suffered much for his Profession of the
Truth in his younger Years) where several tenderhearted, motherly Women
dressed my wounded Eye. I was truly thankful to the Lord for his Providence
toward me in this Deliverance, among many others, which he in his Goodness
has vouchsafed to me. I stayed at this Friend's House, three Nights and mended
apace, and the Friend accompanied me to my House at Frankfort, where my loving
Wife, with some Surprise, received me very affectionately; and through her Care
and continual Application, I recovered, that I could see pretty well with
Spectacles, which I was obliged to use for some Months. Such Accidents plainly
show us the Necessity of preparing for sudden Death, as we know not when, or
how, we may go off the Stage of this Life.

On the 25th of Fifth Month, I received a Letter from a Person in the County of
Burlington, relating to Water Baptism, to which I made Answer as follows:

THY Lines I received last Night, in the Perusing of which, there was a
Christian Love in my Heart toward thee, though unknown by Face, and I have much
Freedom of Mind to answer thine, according to thy Request, and my small
Ability. First then, We are near in Sentiments to each other in the grand
Christian Principle of saving Religion, which is the Work of the Holy Spirit of
Christ upon the Soul, for that is the Baptism which is Christ's, and is truly
saving, and absolutely necessary to Salvation; Christ's Baptism being but one,
which is with the Holy Ghost, and with spiritual Fire or Water; John's being
the Element, or Figure; and CHRIST's being the Spirit, Power, and Divine
Substance, and is to be with the Church of Christ, and with his true Ministers
to the End of the World. Secondly, In Answer to thy Query, Was Water Baptism
(that is, the Element) not commanded by Christ himself, in Matthew. xxviii. 19? I
answer, I believe not. My Reason is this, because the Holy Ghost, or Spirit, is
mentioned in the Text, or that Command, in express Words, and Water is not; and
therefore we omit going into outward Water, and for other Reasons as follows.
Thirdly, That Water Baptism, which was John's, was practiced by the Apostles,
is true; but it was not practiced by Christ, who, no doubt, would have done it
if it had been absolutely necessary; for he disdained not to wash his Disciples
Feet, a much more despicable Office than that of the Baptismal Ceremony: So
because Christ did not himself practice it, nor, as we conceive, commanded us
to go into material Water, we therefore forbear it. Fourthly, That the Apostles
did baptize with Water, we deny not; and that they were circumcised, and did
circumcise, is also undeniable. Now, must we circumcise because the Apostles
did, and were themselves circumcised? Consider that carefully, and I hope that
will give thee some Sight or Light into, or concerning the Dispensation of
Water Baptism, which was John's Baptism, and was gloririous in its Day and
Dispensation, in pointing at Christ's Baptism, until it came, which was the
Substance, and was with spiritual Fire, and spiritual Water, and will continue
for ever. To Christ, and his Baptism, I heartily direct thee for further
Instruction, in whom is Light, and that Light is the Life of Men, or Life, and
that Life the Light of Men.

And further, I would write a little of my own Thoughts concerning
Water Baptism, and on some Texts of Scripture, being Christ's own Words, viz.
He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, and he that believes not,
shall be damned, or condemned, Mark xvi. 16. Now this must needs be understood
of the Spirit's Baptism; for it would be absurd to say, or believe, that all
who are baptized with the Element Water, are saved, or all who are not baptized
with Water, are damned; therefore it is the Spirit's Baptism, that all
professing Christianity ought to come unto to Witness Salvation. Again, Christ
says, Except a Man be born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God, or of Heaven, Mat. iii. 5. This diverse will have to be a
Mixture of the Element Water, and of the Spirit; but Christ says, It is the
Spirit that quickens, the Flesh profits nothing: The Words that I speak
unto you, they are Spirit, and they are Life, John vi. 63. And that which is
born of the Flesh, is Flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit,
John iii. 6. According to which Doctrine, I have Faith to believe, that
outward, fleshly, or elementary Water Baptism, profits little or nothing to the
Soul. Again, Why should the Water in that Place be understood of the Element,
any more than the Fire in the other, viz. To be baptized with the Holy Ghost,
and with Fire? Since Christ said, My Words they are Spirit and Life. Remember
the Well of Water that springs up to eternal Life in the Believers: Remember
the Water that Christ gave, whosoever drank of it was never to thirst more.
This is all Spiritual, which the carnal Mind cannot comprehend or enjoy, but is
witnessed by the spiritual Man. And further, if we consider what Confusion
there is in the World about this Water Baptism, it may well put a
tender-seeking Soul upon further Search into the Nature of holy, saving
Baptism. The Papists have one Way; the Lutherans and Calvinists another; the
Baptists, they have another; and all differ so widely, that, generally
speaking, they will not worship together; neither are they ever like to be
reconciled, except they come to the Holy Spirit and Divine Power of Jesus, the
good Savior and precious Guide of Souls. That Saying of his has often been a
Comfort to me in deep Exercises and Distresses of Mind, when he said to his
Disciples, It is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the
Comforter will not come; but if I go away, I will pray to the Father, and he
will send the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, in my Name, and when he is come,
he shall lead you, and guide you into all Truth; he shall take of mine, and
give it unto you, and shall bring all Things to your Remembrance, that I have
spoken unto you. And that he was to convince the World of Sin; and that he
shall abide with you for ever. May the precious Gift of the Spirit be given to
thee, and to all true Seekers of God, his Christ and Kingdom, is my real
Desire, and humble Prayer to the most High. [ See the Four Evangelists for this
Promise, they not wording it alike.]

Having answered the most of thy Letter, I would add a few Lines more, viz. I
have known some who could not be satisfied with Words about this Point of
Baptism with Water, until Christ had by his Spirit given them Satisfaction in
themselves; and as thou comes more and more into close Communion with his Grace
and Spirit in thy own Soul, I hope thou also wilt have better Satisfaction than
that of Words only. I have known some of the People called Baptists, who have
been convinced of the Truth, according to our Way and Principle, to whom all
the Writing, and Disputing, and Reading, and Preaching, about this Point, could
never give ample Satisfaction, until they had it inwardly and immediately from
Christ, manifested to them by his Holy Spirit in their Hearts, as aforesaid.
Though I would not be understood to be against satisfying one another as much as
lies in our Power, and as we find Openness in the Love of God and Christ. And
further, I never understood that any of our Society were absolutely against
such practicing of it,
who could see no further, or did really think in their Conscience it was their
Duty so to do: But we believe, that we see beyond the Figure or Shadow, and are
come to the Substance, for the Reasons mentioned, and many more which mi^ (...)
given. Several Treatises have been written upon this Subject, one of which is
very full (before we were a People) by William Dell, a wise and learned Man,
and one who had a large Sense of the Power of God: And among us Barclay's
Apology, and a Treatise by John Gratton, who was a Baptist Preacher, and one by
Joseph Pike: And also here is a little Book of Thomas Upsher's (a Baptist
Preacher before he came to join with us) which I send thee, with whom I was
well acquainted, as also with those Men who subscribed it. If thou applies
thyself to Richard Smith, of Burlington, he is as likely as any I know to help
thee to those Books, all which are larger on the Subject, and have given
Satisfaction to Thousands about it; tho some, as I have said, could never be
satisfied with Words. In reading the latter Part of thy Letter, I was tenderly
affected, and my Prayers to the Almighty were that he would please to direct
thee by his Power and Spirit, and the Grace of his dear Son, who has said, He
that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast off. Now, tender Friend, Christ is
the true Light, that lights every Man that comes into the World, by which
Light thou must walk to the Kingdom and City of God. He is the Door into the
true Sheepfold: He is the Truth, in whom thou must believe: He is the Divine
Life and Light of the Soul: He is the true Christian's All in all: And, as the
Kingdom is within (as said Christ) so the King is also within, and without
also. He is God Omnipotent, Omniscient, Omnipresent, the immortal Jehovah, and
is God over all, blessed for ever. And as a Servant of his, I recommend thee,
with my own Soul, unto him for Preservation and Divine Direction; for it is the
great Work of Christ's true Ministers and Servants, to direct the seeking,
traveling Souls to him; to whom, with the Father, and the eternal Spirit, be
Glory, now, and evermore. Amen. -- From thy assured Friend in Christ.

T. C.


The Person to whom I wrote this Letter, some Time after informed me, it gave
him great Satisfaction.

After I had stayed at Home some Time, and pretty well recovered of the Hurt I
had by my Fall, Philadelphia, etc.
I visited some Meetings about Home, as Philadelphia, Abington, and Germantown.
In several of those Meetings I was concerned to exhort Friends, as our Meetings
and Worship was, in this Province of Pennsylvania, a Kind of national Worship,
to beware that they did not indulge themselves in the Sins of the Nations, but
to be careful to keep to the holy, self-denying Life of Jesus.

On the 5th of the Sixth Month, between the Hours of nine and ten in the Night,
there was an Earthquake, which diverse People were very sensible of; and about
this Time diverse People were taken off with a violent Fever; and I was
concerned in several Meetings to put the People in Mind of their Mortality, and
Shortness of Time here; and also of the Uncertainty of it, and the Necessity of
speedy Preparation for their final Change and future Well-being. In the
aforesaid Month I was at our Youths Meeting in Philadelphia, where I was
concerned to advise Parents to do justly to their Children, in the diverse
Relations of a Child's State; to be just in Correction, and to be sure to give
them Learning, and train them up in Reading of the Holy Scriptures, they being
able, through Faith in Christ, to make us wise to Salvation. I also was earnest
in Exhortation to the Youth, to obey and Honor their Parents, and to have a
Care not to be disobedient to their Fathers and Mothers. I had a Concern also
to remind that large Congregation, that the Almighty had stretched out his Arm
of Power, with his Rod, and had given the People of this Land three Strokes
therewith, as a gentle Admonition toward Heart-preparation, to meet him, and
to prepare for their latter End, or final Dissolution: Which was First, A
Sickness, or pestilential Fever, which carried off many of the People.
Secondly, An Earthquake, of which diverse in Town and Country were very
sensible. Thirdly, A terrible Whirlwind, such as we never before heard of in
this Land, that I remember. They were admonished to take particular and special
Notice of those gentle Strokes of the Divine Hand, for if he pleased he could
as soon take away many by Sickness, as a few, and if he pleased he could have
made us a Desolation, as well as the Country about Mount Aetna, or Port Royal
in Jamaica, not very far from us; and he could also blow us away with a
Whirlwind of his Wrath, and could as easily have blown down all our City, as
those few Houses in the Country.

Next Day after this Meeting I went with John Rodman to the Quarterly
General-meeting of Worship in the County of Chester, which was large and
satisfactory. Chester County.


The 25th of the Sixth Month I was at the Burial of the Wife of Richard Waln, a
virtuous and good Woman. Some of her last Words were, Some Men's Sins go
beforehand to Judgment, Fair Hill.
and some follow after them; and that her Sins were gone before, which was a
great Comfort to her, now she was going to leave the World. It was a large
Meeting, and a seasonable Opportunity that we had at the Funeral. The People
were called upon to work, Frankfort.
while it was called Today, Because, as our Savior said, the Night comes,
wherein no Man can Work.

In this and the foregoing Year I met with various Trials and Exercises: As
First, Great inward Poverty and Want. Secondly, Great Losses in outward
Affairs. And Thirdly, The evil Spirits of diverse stirred up against me, to
report Falsehoods concerning me, with many other sore Exercises both inward and
outward. As to the First, I had often been tried that Way, and found by
Experience, that I must wait upon God my Savior, for fresh and renewed
Visitations from above; in which Exercise, I had always in the Lord's Time,
Comfort from him, as by the same Exercise I had now the same Comfort also; but
I thought it very long, and the Enemy did greatly endeavor to break in upon my
Patience now more than usual: But my Heart still depended in Faith and Hope
upon the Lord my Redeemer and Savior, and in his Time he was pleased to help
me, blessed be his holy Arm and Power for ever! Many blessed Saints and
Servants of Jesus were brought to my Mind, who were in the like Condition, so
that I had a secret Joy in their Company (who met with the like in their
Travels to the holy City.) Secondly, As to my outward Losses, I thought with
myself, peradventure it might be best for me: And I remembered that many,
through the Increase of outward Riches, were exceedingly hurt as to their
inward State; and though I (or any good Man) might be concerned for our Children,
to get and leave something for them, yet I plainly saw, that generally
speaking, much Riches does much Hurt to Youth. This was a melancholy
Observation that I had made in my Life and Travels, and I see at this Day that
it is an universal Distemper (a very few excepted) wherefore I cried mightily
to God that he would give to me and mine, the Gift of his Grace and Holy
Spirit, whatever our Circumstances might be in the World. In this also I saw
that Patience was an excellent Virtue, and that the Meek had the best
Inheritance of the Earth, if they had ever so little of it; and that true
Happiness did not consist in earthly Things, which my Experience had largely
taught me. And Thirdly, As to the base and evil Treatment I met with (which was
more than I had ever met with in all my Life before) great Endeavors were used
to lessen my Reputation, as a Man and a Christian; all which proved false and
fruitless, and in due Time my Innocence was made manifest; and I considered
that they could not use me worse than they had done my Lord and Master, and
that the Devil was angry with any who endeavored to dethrone him, and pull
down his Kingdom, at the Foundation of which, through the Help of my Master, I
had many a Stroke or Blow, with such Weapons as he was pleased to furnish me
withal.

The last of the Sixth Month, and the 1st of the Seventh Month, was the
Quarterly and Youths Meeting at Burlington, at both which I was. At the
Quarterly Meeting I was concerned to open to that Meeting, how all along tne
Church of God was governed by his Spirit, in the Time of the Law, and Moses was
an Instrument therein; and that when it was too hard, and too much Work for
Moses, he was advised to get the Help and Assistance of the Elders; and that
the same Power and Spirit of God that was with and upon Moses, was upon the
Elders who assisted him in the Affairs of the Church, and Congregation of the
Lord's People; so that it was governed by God's Spirit, and is to be governed
by the same still, and not by the Will of Man, nor according to the Will of Man
in his corrupt Nature. And when Israel went from God's Power and Spirit, the
Lord left them, but at last sent to them his only begotten Son, our dear Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ; and he was, and ever is, to be Governor of his
Church, through his Holy Spirit, which, he told his Disciples, he would pray the
Father, and he should send unto them, the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, or Spirit,
the Spirit of Truth, and he should abide with them for ever, and should lead
and guide them into all Truth; which sweet and precious Promises that he made
to them, the true Believers do witness to be fulfilled at this Day. Glory to
his Name for ever, he is the wonderful Councellor, mighty Savior, and Prince
of Peace! of whose Peace and Government there shall never be an End, and upon
whose Shoulder the Government is to be for ever, for whose Power and holy
Spirit Friends were exhorted to pray and wait, and to be sensible of it in the
Discipline and Government of the Church now in this Gospel Day, in which is a
brighter Manifestation of God's Love, through his Son, than in the Time of the
Law. The Youth's Meeting was also large, and diverse Testimonies were born, by
Way of Exhortation and Counsel to the Youth. They were with much Tenderness
advised to take Counsel of their Elders, and were shown how it fared with some
young Men, who slighted the Advice and Counsel of the Elders; and that one,
when on a Dying-bed, cried out in the Bitterness and Agonies of his Spirit, Oh!
that I had taken the Counsel and Advice of my Friends, for then I had not been
here, nor in this Condition. Youth were advised to beware of keeping bad
Company, and spending their precious Time in Taverns, which has undone many
fair and promising Youths: And it was shown, how a young Man might cleanse his
Ways, by taking heed thereto, according to the Word of God, which lives and
abides for ever, and which the Holy Scriptures proceeded from; and they were
earnestly exhorted to read and practice what was written therein: And a very
tender Time we had in Prayer to God, through his dear Son, to preserve us all in
his Fear, both Youth and aged; and so our Meeting broke up, and we parted in
the sweet Love of God, and his Christ our holy Savior.

Frankfort.
My Troubles in the World, and in the Things of it, being many, and my outward
Losses being great; as also was my inward Poverty of Mind and Spirit, I took my
Pen, and wrote one Day as follows: Oh! if it be right in the Sight of God,
how do I long to be unclothed of this frail and mortal Body, that my Soul and
Spirit might mount up into the ae^herial Plains, and repose itsetf in the vast
expanding Arms of its Maker, and most sweet Savior for ever!

Philadelphia, etc.
Being at and near Home some Time after I came from Burlington, I visited the
Meetings of Germantown and Philadelphia, which were large, and some good Sense
of Truth was on the Hearts of diverse. I was concerned at that Meeting at
Philadelphia to let the People know, that as God had blessed the People of that
City, and the Province, with spiritual and temporal Blessings, and made the
Land naturally fruitful, to the Enriching many of the Inhabitants, he now
expected Fruits from them of Piety and Virtue; and that if there was not a
stricter Walking with God in Christ Jesus, they might expect his Divine Hand
which had visited them with Favors from Heaven above, and from the Earth
beneath, would visit them with a Rod in it, and that he had already given them
some gentle Strokes therewith.

Yearly Meeting.
Our Yearly Meeting was this Year at Burlington, for the Provinces of New Jersey
and Pennsylvania, the Service of which our Quarterly Meeting appointed me, with
diverse others, to attend. It was a large and comfortable Meeting, and many went
Home thankful to the Holy Name of God and Christ, that they were there.

I shall End the second Part of the Journal of my Life and Travels, when I have
transcribed Part of a Letter which my dear Father wrote me, when eighty odd
Years of Age, he having been a Minister of Christ above forty Years, which
follows:

Loving Son, Thomas Chalkley,
THINE dated the 11th of Tenth Month, A Letter from my Father.
1723, I received, and was very glad to hear of your Welfare, and that the Lord
has given you Children: And I pray the Almighty God that he may preserve them
with you, that they may be a Comfort to you in your latter Days; and that if
the Lord may be pleased to continue them with you, that they may, as they grow
in Days, grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; and that the Lord may be pleased to preserve us all to the End of those
few Days we may have in this World, that then we may lay down our Heads in
Peace and in full Assurance of everlasting Blessedness for ever and evermore.

I bless the Lord that he has preserved me sensible of his blessed and Holy
Spirit, whereby my Understanding is indifferent clear and well, considering my
Age; and the Lord in his great Loving Kindness I do feel to help me to my great
Satisfaction, in my little Service for him.

Having this Opportunity by a Friend of your Town, was willing to let you hear
of our Welfare and Health. I am in as good Health at present as I have been for
many Years, and can make a Shift to go over London Bridge, and to the Meeting
at Aldersgate, and to the Peel-Meeting, from my House in Shad-Thames. -- And
the Lord has been pleased to be with me now in my poor, aged Condition.

So, Dear Son, my dear Love is to thee and thine, and to Friends that may
enquire (...) us. Diverse Friends give their Love to thee, whose Names I cannot
remember.

With repeated Love to you all, I rest thy aged, and (thereby through Pain)
afflicted Father,

GEORGE CHALKLEY.
Southwark, London, 5. 6 th Mon. 1724. P. S. Thy Brother George, his Love is to
you all; and I desire thee to let us hear of you as Opportunity may serve.




To see my dear Father's Handwriting, now he was above four-score Years of
Age, was very affecting to me; and the more, because I expected it might be his
last; (which it was.) -- The Answer I sent to my dear Father's Letter is as
follows:

Frankfort, 22. of 8 th Mon. 1724. My dear Father,
An Answer to my Father's Letter
THINE, per James Wilkins, I received with Joy, and was greatly comforted to
hear that thou wast yet alive, and especially that thou art favored, (...) in
thy old Age, with a Sense of the Gift of God, through the Holy Spirit of his dear
Son, our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

The Reading of thine did mightily refresh and tender my Heart and Spirit, not
expecting many more such Epistles from thee, by Reason of thy great Age. But my
very dear and truly honored Father, if we should never hear from, nor see one
another more in Mutability, yet are we, while here on Earth, as living
Epistles, in one another Hearts, wrote by the Finger, or Hand of God. I have
Hope also, that we shall meet where we shall never part more, in the glorious
Kingdom of God and his Christ.

We are all in good Health, I humbly thank the Lord, and if it be his Will,
should rejoice to hear that these find thee (my tender and loving Father, with
my dear Brother and Sister, and all my loving Cousins, and our Friends in
general) in like Health. -- I desire to know exactly, thy Age in thy next, if
thou art able to write to me, and if thou lives where thou did formerly, or
with Brother or Cousin, which will be very acceptable to me.

Thus, with unspeakable Love from self and Wife, to thee my dear and aged
Father, and all Relations and Friends, I remain thy loving and dutiful Son,

THOMAS CHALKLEY.


The End of the SECOND PART.
A JOURNAL OF THE LIFE, LABORS, TRAVELS, etc. OF THOMAS CHALKLEY. PART III.
IN this Year, 1724, I met with various Trials, 1724.
Afflictions, and Tribulations; and had not the secret Hand of the Lord, which
I felt underneath, bore up my Spirit from sinking (I think) I could never have
waded through them.

I was now removed (as already related) into the Country, for Retirement, which
I greatly loved and delighted in; but as soon as I was a little settled there,
the Enemy of all Good endeavored to disquiet my Repose, by stirring up some
bad People against me, who lived near, and in Time past had sawn'd upon me:
And, to add to my Afflictions, I lost a Vessel, in which, I suppose, I had
upwards of Five Hundred Pounds; and another Vessel came in almost a Wreck, in
which I suffered in my Interest several Hundreds more, and a third I heard of,
in which I had the like Loss; and about the same Time I had also a good new
Barn burnt to the Ground in a few Minutes, so that I was exceedingly stripped
that Way: And to add yet more to my Exercise, I was sorely afflicted with
Sickness, having a Swelling in my Jaws, Mouth, and Throat, to that Degree that
I could neither speak nor swallow for some Time, nor eat nor sleep for about
seven Days (as I remember) without great Difficulty. What the Distemper was, we
could not be certain. Some supposed it to be the Quinsey, others an Imposthume;
also my little and only Daughter at the same Time was likely to die; and as for
my own Part, I was very willing to go, if it so pleased God; for I saw through
the Deceit of the World, and that the Friendship of it was not permanent; and
in my sore Afflictions in ^dy, Mind, and Interest, it fared with me as with
Job, for diverse of my pretended Friends added to my Afflictions by undue
Reflections; whom I pray the Lord to forgive for his Son's Sake! At th^se Times
the Remembrance of that Saying of Christ, That the very Hairs of your Head are
numbered, Matthew. x. 30. at Times supported me in Hopes, that all would work
together for Good.

When I got a little well, so that I could go to Meetings, I went to
Germantown, Abington, Philadelphia, and Darby. Philadelphia.
My first going abroad was to Philadelphia, where, on a First Day, we had a
large Meeting, and diverse Things were opened in my Mind. I told them they had
Moses and the Prophets, and JESUS CHRIST, who was arisen from the Dead; for
neither Death, Hell, nor the Grave, could detain the Lord of Life and Glory.
And I was opened to declare to them, that they had a great Advantage of the
Coming of Christ, not only in his Appearance at Jerusalem, but as he came to,
and spoke to the Heart, by his inward and spiritual Appearance; and that this
Gospel Dispensation was by his Coming, made more conspicuous, bright, and
glorious, than that which went before. Friends were very glad to see me abroad
again (they having expected daily to hear I was dead) and there was Tenderness
over the Meeting, and God over all, through his dear Son our Lord Jesus Christ,
was praised and glorified, who is worthy for ever.

In this Year two sober young Women, Elizabeth Levis and Jane Fenn, were
concerned to visit Friends in the Island of Barbados, and they meeting with
some Discouragement, in christian Love I wrote them the following Letter, to
encourage them in the Work of Christ.

Frankfort, 1. 12 th Mon. 1724-5. My dear Friends, Elizabeth Levis and Jane
Fenn,
UNDERSTANDING by our Friend, Grace Lloyd, that you have proposed your
Intention of visiting those few Friends in the Island of Barbados, and that you
meet with some Discouragement inwardly and outwardly, therefore it is in my
Mind to comfort and strengthen you in so great and good an Undertaking and
honorable Work, as is that of the Cause of Christ, who, for our Sakes crossed
himself abundantly beyond Expression, more than is possible for us to do for
his Sake, or the Sake of his People, whom we may so entirely love, as to lay
down our Lives for his and their Sakes. But what is our Lives, to the Life of
the only-begotten Son of God? And truly, we must give them up often, if we have
the Cause of Souls at Heart; and then he often gives them to us again, Glory to
his holy Name for ever! As Christ said, He that will save his Life, shall lose
it, and he that will lay down his Life for my Sake and the Gospel, shall find
it; which reaches your Case in this Undertaking. And indeed, some of our
Lives, in our own Sense, is hardly worth mentioning, considering the Cause of
Christ.

And, dear Children of our heavenly Father, I may, through some good Experience,
truly inform you, that there is much Openness in many People on that Island,
and good Encouragement I have had, from above, in my Visiting the People there;
though, true it is, the Inhabitants, too generally, are Luxurious, and much given
to Vanity: Yet I have this Seal in my Heart, that the Lord has a Seed in that
Place who desires to serve him, and that Seed will surely join with you in your
Exercise, and you will be comforted one in another, and in the Lord. And that
there are Differences among them, is also true; but they have the more Need of
being visited by such, who are, through their wise Conduct and healing
Disposition, likely to heal those Breaches which are, or may be among them.
Some, indeed, have gone among them, and have done Hurt, by a rash and turbulent
Way of Management, and by so doing, have rather made the Breaches wider, than
by a meek and loving, as well as lowly Disposition, lessened their Differences,
and healed them.

And, tender Friends, though it may seem hard for you in several Considerations,
to give up to go to Sea, and also to diverse who love you, and are nearly
related to you, know ye, and such so concerned, That the Lord is stronger than
the Noise of many Waters, and than the mighty Waves of the Sea. And I really
believe that you, as well as my Soul (with the Servants of Christ) have, and
will experience it to be so, as David did, whose Words they are.

I remember the Words of our great Lord and Master Jesus, when he sent forth
his Servants to preach his Word and Gospel; I send you forth as Lambs among
Wolves. No question but you, like innocent Lambs, before your Return (if it
please God to give you to us again) may meet with the Wolves Spirit, or the
Spirit of the Beast, in some or others among whom you may Travel; then will the
Counsel of Christ, added to his Commission, be good for you to keep close to;
Be ye wise as Serpents, but innocent or harmless as Doves.

And, dear Maidens, I look upon it as your Cross is great, you being two
innocent, chaste, young Women, to give up your Names to cross the Sea, which I
know is a great Cross to a chaste Woman, or Man either, the Seamen, too
generally, being rude, dissolute People; so your Crown will be great also. I
have known that by keeping near to Christ, and his Truth and Power, there has
been a wonderful Reformation diverse Times in several of those rude Seamen; and
some have been so far convinced, as to be exceedingly Kind, and to speak well
of Friends and their Conversation, when it has been coupled with the Fear and
Wisdom of God. When I have gone to Sea I always found a religious and christian
Concern upon me, for the poor Sailors, the good Effects of which, have been
much more than I may speak of; but give this little Hint for your Encouragement
and Information.

Well, dear Souls, if you go, I believe the Lord will go with you; and sure I
am, that my Spirit will go along with you, which will not hurt you, if it do
you no Good And although my Exercises and Tribulations of late have been very
great, both Spiritual and Natural, yet my very Heart within me affects the
Cause of Christ, according to the best of my Understanding; and I heartily wish
well to all my Fellow Laborers, who are faithful, painful Servants of Christ,
and disinterested, except as to the Interest which they desire in Christ and
his Kingdom, for the Sake of which, they love not their Lives unto Death.

I must now take Leave, after putting you in Mind of remembering me, your poor
Friend and Brother, when before the Throne you are supplicating the Father of
Mercies in Secret, even as my Heart is tenderly bowed and broken into Tears on
your Behalf at this Time. The Lord be with you, and sanctify the present
Exercise and Concern that is upon you, and you to himself, with all the
faithful Lovers and Followers of the Lamb, through his Word, whose Word is Truth.
I am your Friend and Brother, in the Fellowship of the Gospel of Christ Jesus,
our great Lord and good Master; and blessed are all those, who by their Fearing
to offend him, manifest him to be their Master, and by their honoring him,
manifest him to be their Lord

T. C.


Chester County.
In the Twelfth Month I went to the Quarterly Meeting of Friends, held at
Providence, for Chester County, for Discipline and Worship; which Meeting was
large, and a Concern came upon Friends at that Meeting to suppress Excess in
Eating and Drinking, and great Entertainments at Marriages and Funerals, and
spending Time idly in tippling Houses; as also in several other Things for the
well-ordering our Society, in which appeared great Love and Unanimity. The
People were reminded of God's Love to them in this Land, and many Favors were
recounted to them, which he had favored the Inhabitants of the Land with,
which were very singular, and that he expected they should bring forth Fruits
that might be answerable to the Labors of Love, which the Lord had bestowed
upon them.

About this Time I had it in my Mind to write to one who was conscientiously
concerned to preach the Gospel of Christ, but was under great Exercise on that
Occasion.

Frankfort, 24. 12 th Mon. 1724-5. My Friend,
SINCE I last saw thee and conversed with thee, thou have often been in my
Mind, and thy Exercise has come before me; and not having an Opportunity to
converse with thee personally, I take this Way of communicating my Mind, hoping
in Christ thou will reap some Satisfaction and Advantage thereby. I think I
know thou art concerned for Christ's Cause, as also was that eminent Minister
Apollos, Yet was instructed more perfectly by good Aquila and Priscilla. The
Subject on which I have it in my Mind to write to thee, is the Ministry of the
Gospel of Christ Jesus, which I believe to be very different from that which it
is generally taken for, in most Parts of the World, by many professing
Christianity. First, The greatest Part of Christendom, so called, calls and
elects their Ministers themselves, and will not call them unless they have
School-learning, although Christ called and chose unlearned Men, as to that Sort
of Learning, and the Apostles were called, Not according to the Will of Man,
but by the Revelation of Christ Jesus. And Christ thanked his Father that He
had revealed the Mysteries of his Kingdom to Babe^ and Sucklings. And the wise
Jews (the Scribes and Pharisees) admired at the Apostles, who so wonderfully
preached Christ, and were so wonderfully carried forth in their Ministry, and
yet few of them were Men of Learning; so that the Call, Election, and Wages of
Christ's Ministers, is Spiritual, and not Carnal, and therefore their Ministry
is with Divine Life and Power, by which they are qualified for this Service
without either Study or Premeditation: Though it is not denied, that Christ may
show a Minister beforehand, what he shall, or is to speak, at such a Time or
Place, as he may see meet; but that studying or writing Sermons, and afterward
Preaching, or rather Reading them to the People, was, or is, the Practice of
the true Ministers of Jesus, our great Lord and Master, is denied; of which, I
do believe, thou have a real Sense.

I shall impart to thee something of my own Experience for thy Edification in
this great Work, viz. As in the Work of Conversion, or Regeneration, there is a
Growth and Increase from the State of a Child to that of a Man in Christ, so in
the Work of the Ministry, or Preaching the Gospel, there is also a Growth from
a Babe to an able Minister, in all which the Power and Grace of the Holy Spirit
must be our Guide, our Help, and Support, keeping close to which, we shall
increase in Divine Wisdom and ^ound Judgment, and our Hearts and Understandings
will be more and more opened and enlarged. The Apostle Paul said, When I was a
Child, I spoke as a Child, understood as a Child, and thought as a Child; and
yet he was an excellent Child of God, and Minister of Christ, and as he grew in
his Gift, and Christ's Grace, he became a wonderful, serviceable Instrument in
the Hand of God. Now a Child's State in the Ministry is too much overlooked by
many, some thinking to be Men, as soon as they are brought forth into the
Ministry; and, according to my Observation, diverse have been at a Loss, and
some quite lost, for Want of a patient Continuing in Well-doing, and not
waiting to feel a Growth and Increase from above, have gone on in their own
Strength and Will, perhaps against the Advice and Instruction of a sound and
honest Aquila and Priscilla, and have been hurt; and some, who had received a
Gift, have had that same Gift taken from them, even by the Lord, who gave it
them.

As I take it, a true Minister of Christ, is to take no Thought what to say,
but it will be given him in the same Hour that which he should speak to the
People (that is, in a general Way) and if it is not given from above, I believe
he or she ought to be silent; for they receive freely, if they do receive any
Thing from Christ, and so they ought freely to administer; and where little is
given, little is required, all which is plain from Christ's own Words in the
New Testament; and Christ's Cross is to be taken up by his Ministers in their
Preaching, as well as in their Conversation.

It is a Practice which the Holy Scriptures have not acquainted us with, that
the Ministers of Christ should take a Verse, or a Line, out of the Holy
Scriptures, and Write, or Study, beforehand, a Discourse on it, and Preach it,
or rather Read it, to the People. The holy Men of Old (as we read both in the
Old and New Testament) spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and by it
they were gifted for the Convincing, Converting, and Reforming the World, and
for Comforting and Edifying of the Saints, quite contrary to the latter
Practice of modern-reading Divines, who Dispute, Write, and Preach, against the
immediate and Divine Revelation of the Spirit of Christ, and therefore cannot
be of his Ministers, but must be the Ministers of Antichrist, and Ministers of
the Letter, and not of the Spirit of Christ, or of his Gospel. And where the
Apostle says, When I was a Child, I spoke as a Child, I take him to point at
the being brought forth newly into the Work of the Ministry, as well as the
Work of Conversion, and that he uses them Expressions by Way of Comparison,
and therefore I compare it thus: A Child when it first begins or ventures to
speak, he speaks but a few Words, and those stammering sometimes, and its
Judgment is weak, and must be put upon Speaking by his Father over and over, if
he be a backward Child, otherwise if he be forward, and speaks too much, he is
curbed by a wise Father: And thus, according to my Observation, it has pleased
our heavenly Father to instruct his Children in the Ministry, and as a Child in
Christ, I would speak a little of my Experience unto the Child, or Children of
God. When I first felt a Necessity on me to preach the Gospel, I had but a few
Sentences to deliver, in great Fear and Tenderness, with some Trembling, with
which my Brethren were generally satisfied and edified; and after some Time I
felt a Concern to preach the Gospel in other Countries, and to other Nations
(than that in which I was born) which to me was a very great Cross; but feeling
the Woe of the Lord to follow me ^n not giving up to it, I in some Time took
that Cross up, for Christ's Sake and the Gospel's: And in Taking it up, I
experienced the Truth of the Apostle's Doctrine, That the Gospel of Christ is
the Power of God unto Salvation, to every one that believes, Romans i. 16. Thus,
through a continual Labor and spiritual Travel, I witnessed a Growth in
Experience, and an Enlargement in Expressions and heavenly Doctrine; and my
Heart was mightily enlarged to run the Ways of God's Commandments, and diverse
were convinced, and some, I hope, thoroughly converted, and many comforted, and
God, through the Ministry of his dear Son, glorified, who is thereof only worthy
for ever.

In all which I have nothing to boast of nor glory in, saving in the Cross of
Christ; for what is Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, but Instruments? (I would not
be understood to compare with those Apostles, but to endeavor to follow them
as they followed Christ.) Christ is All in all: He is the great Teacher of
Teachers, and the highest Schoolmaster of all: And he says, He that will be my
Disciple, must first deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me.

We do not find any where in the New Testament, that Christ's Ministers or
Messengers were only to speak or preach to one Meeting of People, or that they
were called or hired by Man; for then it would have been necessary Man should
pay them; but Christ says, Freely you have received, freely give; and go forth,
etc. Matthew. xxviii. 19, 20.

And, my Friend, I find to this Day, that it is safe for me when I am
Ministering to the People; when the Spring of Divine Life and Power, (from which
sound Truths and edifying Matter springs and flows into the Heart or
Understanding) abates or stops, to stop with it, and sit down, and not to
arise, or speak publicly to the People, without some spiritual Impulse or
Moving, and Openings.

I would have this taken no otherwise, but as one Friend and Brother opening
their States and Condition to another for Edification, and the Strengthening
each other in Christ. And as I fear lest I should exceed the Bounds of a
Letter, therefore shall conclude thy real Friend in Jesus Christ,

T. C.


The 25th of Twelfth Month I was at the Burial of the Wife of Randal Spikeman.
It being our Fifth-Day-Meeting, diverse sober People were there not of our
Persuasion, and I was drawn forth to speak to the People of the Death of Christ
and his Merits, and to show them that there is no Merit in the Works of Man, as
he is Man, or in a formal Righteousness or Holiness.

In our Yearly Meeting at Burlington it was agreed that the Families of Friends
should be visited, and soon after our Monthly Meeting appointed me, with other
Friends, to visit the Families of Friends of our Meeting; in which Visitation,
many were comforted and edified, both Youth and Aged; and we could truly say,
that the Power and Grace of God, and the sweet Love of Christ accompanied us
from House to House, to our mutual Comfort; and we were so extraordinarily
opened and guided to speak to the States of the People in their Families (that
were unknown and Strangers to us) that sometimes some of them were ready to
think that we spoke by Information, when in Truth we were clear of any such
Thing, and only spoke from what was immediately given to us, without any
Information from Man or Woman; which to us was sometimes very wonderful, and
caused us to praise the great Name of the Lord.

In the First Month, the General-Meeting at Philadelphia, was a solid, good
Meeting, and ended in a Sense of Grace and Truth, which comes by Jesus Christ.
Next Day, being our Week-Day-Meeting, our dear Friends, Elizabeth Levis, and
Jane Fenn, took Leave of us, they intending for the Island of Barbados; and it
was such a Parting-Meeting that will not soon be forgotten by some of us then
present.

Burlington.
After this Meeting I went to Burlington, to visit one that was sick, and under
some Trouble of Mind for going astray, and greatly desired to come into the
right Way, with whom I had a good, seasonable Meeting, to her Comfort, and my
own Satisfaction. Upon this Visit I would remark, that it is a great Pity, that
Youth, when in Health and Strength, should put off the Work of their Salvation,
and forget the most High, till either Sickness or Death overtake them. And
then, Oh! the bitter piercing Cries and Groans, and terrible Agonies the Soul
is in, which, by timely Repentance, and Amendment of Life, might be avoided.

1725.
I was afterward at Meetings at Philadelphia, Merion, Germantown, etc. and had
some Service and Satisfaction therein. -- And on the 2d of Second Month, the
Friend whom I visited as above, was buried, and the Relations of the Deceased
sent for me to the Burial. The Person being well-beloved, there was a large
Appearance of People of diverse Persuasions, and we had an Opportunity at this
Funeral to exhort the People to live so as that they might die well; and that
the Way to die in the Favor of God, was to live in his Fear; and Charity to
those who dissent from one another, was pressingly recommended from the
Apostle's Words, that If we had Faith to remove Mountains, and to give all our
Goods to the Poor, and our Bodies to be burned, yet if we wanted Charity, we
were but like sounding Brass, and a tinkling Cymbal, 1 Cor. xiii. 1, 2, 3. And
also our Belief of the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Dead was asserted,
in Contradiction to that gross Calumny cast on our Society of denying it.

The latter End of the Second Month, I was at a Marriage at Horsham (at which
was present William Keith, Horsham.
our Governor) and I was concerned to speak of the End of that great Ordinance,
and of the Happiness of those married Persons who fulfill the Covenants they
make in Marriage, and what Strength and Comfort the Man is to the Woman, and
the Woman to the Man, when they keep their Covenants, and that they are the
contrary when they break them: And I also opened the Methods prescribed by our
Discipline, to be observed in Marriages, and our Care to prevent any
clandestine Marriages amongst us. After Meeting I returned Home without going
to the Marriage-Dinner, as I generally avoided such Entertainments as much as I
could, having no Life in, or Liking to them, being sensible that great
Companies and Preparations at Weddings, were growing Inconveniences among us,
the which I was conscientiously concerned to discourage. And a few Days after
my Return Home, at our Meeting at Frankfort, I was concerned particularly to
exhort Friends to keep to Plainness in Language, Dress, etc. according to the
Examples given us in the Holy Scriptures, particularly that of Daniel and his
Companions; and to caution against vain and indecent Fashions, which, with
Concern, I have observed to prevail too much among some who make Profession
with us.

In this Second Month I went to the Yearly Meeting of Friends at Salem, Salem.
and by the Way had two Meetings at Woodberry-Creek. At Salem we had a large
Meeting, and our gracious Lord was with us, to the bowing many Hearts before
him, and many Testimonies were given of the Goodness, Love, Mercy, and Grace of
God, and his dear Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. From Salem we traveled to
Alloways-Creek and Cohansie, and from thence to Elsinburgh, Cohansie, etc.
and ferried over the River Delaware, with our Horses, to George's- Creek, and
had Meetings at all those Places. At George's Creek, one, not a Friend, came to
me after Meeting, and said, George's-Creek.
He thanked me for my Advice and Counsel; and seemed heartily affected with the
Doctrine of Christ. From George's- Creek we traveled to Nottingham, Nottingham.
and had a large Meeting on a First Day, and another (very large) on the
Second-Day, where were many People of diverse Persuasions. The House could not
contain us, so that we met in an Orchard. A solid Meeting it was! wherein the
mighty Power of the Creator was declared of, as also the Divinity of Christ,
and his Manhood, and People were exhorted to be careful of forming any personal
Ideas of the Almighty; for the Holy Scriptures do plainly manifest, that God is
a wonderful, infinite, eternal Spirit, and therefore is to be worshipped in
Spirit and in Truth, and outward Representations of the Lord Jehovah, borders
too much on Idolatry. Pretty much was deliveed on that Head; and I was told
after Meeting that diverse Papists were there, though I knew nothing of it. From
Nottingham I went to Newcastle, Newcastle.
had a Meeting there, and then visited a sick Friend, with which he expressed
much Satisfaction; and then went on to the Center, Center, Kennet, etc.
Kennet, and Marlborough, and so to the Monthly Meeting at New-Garden, where we
had a large, open Meeting, wherein was shown, that those who meddled with our
Discipline, in the Will, Nature, Spirit, and Wisdom of Man only, could do but
little Service, and that our Discipline, as also our Worship and Ministry,
ought to be performed in the Wisdom and Power of God, through the Grace and
Spirit of Christ. -- From New-Garden we went to Birmingham, had a large
Meeting, and I was much drawn forth to the Youth, of whom many were there: From
Birmingham we went to the Quarterly Meeting for Discipline and Worship at
Concord, Concord.
in Chester-County, which was larger than I had ever seen there before. In the
Quarterly Meeting of Discipline, Friends were exhorted to keep to the Cross of
Christ, and to speak to Matters in the Fear of God, and to avoid and shun as
much as in them lay, Self-Will, Humor, Pride, and Passion; showing that the
rough, crooked, unhewn, unpolished Nature of Man, could never work the
Righteousness of God, and is contrary to the meek, Self-denying, Life of Jesus.
John Salkeld, and Jacob Howell, then signifying that they were going to visit
Friends in Long Island and Rhode Island, the Sense of the Call, Labor, and
Work of the Ministry of the Gospel, and of the Love of Christ (in the Freeness
of it) to Mankind, took some good Hold on diverse in that Meeting, and the great
Name of God, and his dear Son, through the Holy Spirit, was glorified.

From this Meeting I came Home (having been out on this Journey near three
Weeks, at 20 Meetings, and traveled more than 200 Miles) and found my Wife and
Children in Health, and we rejoiced to see each other; but my Rejoicing was in
Fear, even almost to Trembling, lest I should be too much lifted up when Things
were agreeable to me.

After my Return Home I went to several neighboring Meetings, and on a
Fifth-Day was at Philadelphia, at the Marriage of Richard Smith and Elizabeth
Powell. The Meeting was large, and the Marriage solemnly celebrated, and the
People were earnestly entreated to love Christ above all, and to manifest that
Love by keeping his Commandments, and that not in Show or Words only, but in
the Heart and Affections.

About the latter End of the Third Month, I went to the Quarterly Meeting of
Ministers and Elders for the County of Burlington; Burlington. Stony-Brook.
and from thence to Stony-Brook; where, on the First Day, we had a large
Meeting (in Joseph Worth's Barn) which was crowded with People, and was a
solid, good Meeting. From Stony-Brook I went to Croswicks, Croswicks
and was at their Youth's Meeting, which was the largest I had ever seen in
that Place; I told them they might say as the Sons of the Prophets did, That
the Place was too straight for them, and advised them to enlarge it. I was glad
to see such a large Appearance of sober People, and so great an Increase of
Youth (in this Wilderness of America) and exhorted them to live in the Fear of
God, that his Blessings might still be continued to them; and an Exercise was
on my Mind for the Welfare of the young People, to show them the Danger of Sin
and Vanity, and of keeping ill Company, and following bad Counsel; and that the
young King Rehoboam ( Solomon's Son) lost the greatest Part of his Father's
Kingdom, by following the Company and Counsel of vain, young Men; and that many
young Men in this Age had lost and spent the Estates their Fathers had left
them by the like Conduct, and brought themselves to Ruin, and their Families to
Poverty and Want. Diverse lively Testimonies were delivered in this Meeting, and
it ended with Adoration and Praise of Almighty God; and though the Meeting held
more than four Hours, the People did not seem willing to go away when it was
over; for indeed it was a solid, good Meeting. The Business of the
Quarterly Meeting was carried on in Peace and Love (that being the Mark the
Disciples of Jesus were to be known by) and Friends were exhorted with a great
deal of Tenderness to keep that Mark.

In this Journey I traveled about ninety Miles, and was at four Meetings,
being from Home four Days, and was much satisfied in my Journey; but met with
some Exercise when I came Home, hearing of some Losses and Damage to my Estate;
so that I found after I had (according to my best Endeavors) done the Will of
God, I had need of Patience, that I might receive the Promise. I was sensible
of the Messenger of Satan, the Thorn in the Flesh, which the Apostle speaks of.

About this Time a loving Friend of mine informed me, that one whom I very well
knew in Barbados, a Minister of our Society, had gone into an open Separation,
so as to keep Meetings separate from his Brethren, and contrary to their
Advice: I was concerned in Love to write a few Lines to him, to remind him of
the unhappy State and End of such, who, notwithstanding the brotherly Love and
kind Treatment of Friends, had separated from us, and losing the Sense of
Truth, which had made them serviceable in the Church, were acted by a rending,
dividing Spirit, by which the Enemy of our Happiness had so far obtained his
End, as to make some Disturbance for a Time; but few, if any, of these
Separatists, have had further Power than to promote and maintain their separate
Meetings during their own Lives; such Meetings having, in every Instance I have
known (except one, and that lasted not long) dropped on the Death of the
Founders. And though we think it our Duty to testify against, and disown all
such; yet this Disowning is only until the Persons offending, from a real Sense
of, and Sorrows for their Faults, acknowledge and condemn the same; then the
Arms of Christ, and of his Church, are open to receive and embrace them: I
therefore earnestly besought him to consider the Danger of offending any who
love and believe in Christ (though never so little in their own or other Men's
Esteem) for we cannot have true Peace in departing from the pure Love of God,
his Truth, and People; to which I added the following Sentences out of the
New Testament:

1. By this shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have Love one to
another, John xiii. 35. -- Don't lose this Mark.

2. We know that we have passed from Death unto Life, because we love the
Brethren. He that loves not his Brother, abides in Death, 1 John iii. 14.

3. He that loves not, knows not God; for God is Love, -- iv. 8.

4. He that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him, --. 16.

About the latter End of the Fourth Month I was at a Meeting at Abington,
occasioned by a Burial; and in the Beginning of the Fifth Month, Abington.
Philadelphia. Germantown.
I was at a Marriage in Philadelphia; and was soon after on the First Day at
two Meetings at Germantown, where I went to visit a Friend who had not for some
Months been at Meeting, being in a disconsolate Condition; I invited her to
Meeting, where the Love and Goodness of Christ to the Poor in Spirit was
largely manifested, and the Friend after Meeting said, she was better, and
afterward recovered, and kept to Meetings. I was frequently at the Weekday
Meetings at Philadelphia; for I thought that Week not well spent, in which I
could not get to Weekday Meetings, if I was in Health.

In this Month I was at the Burial of George Calvert, who was one of sober
Life, and just Conversation, and being well-beloved by his Neighbors, he left
a good Report behind him. Soon after which I was at Merion Meeting, Merion.
which was large and solid: The People were tenderly exhorted, That neither
outward Favors, nor spiritual Blessings, might make them grow forgetful of
God; but that in the Sense of the Increase and Enjoyment thereof, they might be
the more humble; and forasmuch as the Christian Church in former Ages was
corrupted by temporal Riches and Power, it was intimated, that as we had Favor
shown us from the Government, and Increase of outward Things, we should be very
careful not to abuse those Privileges, by growing proud, and wanton, or
envious, and quarrelsome; but To do justly, love Mercy, and walk humbly with
God.

In this Month I was at Middletown in Bucks County, at the Burial of my dear
and intimate Friend John Rutledge (who died very suddenly) at which Burial
there were above 1000 People: He was well-beloved among his Neighbors, and was
a serviceable Man where he lived: Neshaminy.
I admired to see such a Number of People upon so short Notice, he dying one
Day in the Afternoon, and being buried the Day following: Diverse Testimonies
were born concerning the wonderful Works and Ways of God. It was a solid bowing
Time, wherein many Hearts were broken, and melted into Tenderness. After
Meeting a young Man came to me trembling, and begged that I would pray for him,
for he had spent too much of his Time in Vanity, and had strong Convictions on
him for it, and had been greatly affected and wrought upon that Day: I exhorted
him to deny himself, and to take up his Cross, and to follow Christ, who has
said, He would in no wise cast off those who came to him [in true Faith.] He
went from me very tender and loving, being broken in his Spirit.

From thence I went to Gwynnedd (or North Wales) where on the first Day of the
Week we had a very large Meeting; in the Morning of the Day, North Wales.
a Voice awoke me, which cried aloud, saying, REWARDS AND PUNISHMENTS FOR WELL
AND EVIL DOINGS ARE SEALED AS AN ETERNAL DECREE IN HEAVEN, which confirmed me
that Mankind were happy or unhappy in that World which is to come, according to
their Deeds in this Life, if their Deeds be Good (as Christ said) their
Sentence will be, Come ye Blessed; if their Deeds be Evil, Depart from me all
ye that work Iniquity, and go ye Cursed, etc. And, if thou do well, shall
thou not be accepted? And if thou do not well, Sin lies at the Door. And
again, I have no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn
from his Way, and live. These, with many more Texts of the same Nature,
contained in the holy Scripture, are contrary to the Doctrine of personal
Election and Reprobation, as some hold it. We had a Meeting also in the
Afternoon of the same Day, which was satisfactory to many; our Hearts being
filled with the Love of God, for which we thankfully praised him. The next Day
we had a Meeting of Ministers, in which they were exhorted to wait for the Gift
of the Holy Ghost, without which there can be no true Minister not Ministry. I
was concerned to put them in Mind to keep close to Christ, their holy, sure
Guide, and Bishop, to be cautious of going before, lest they should miss their
Way, and of staying too far behind, for fear we should lose our Guide; and to
be careful to keep a Conscience void of Offense toward God, and also toward
Man; that we might say to the People truly, Follow us, as we follow Christ;
that our Conversation might confirm and not contradict our Doctrine, for our
Savior says, By their Fruits ye shall know them; Men do not gather Grapes of
Thorns, etc. and of such as say and do not, he charged his Followers not to be
like them, Matthew. xxiii. 3. The next Day we had another very large Meeting
there, in which many Things were opened and declared, tending to establish and
build us up in our Faith in Christ. After this Meeting parting with my Friend
John Cadwallader, who had accompanied me, I came homeward, lodging that Night
at Morris Morris's (whose Wife was very weakly) with whom we had a tender Time.

The 29th of the Fifth Month I was at the General Meeting at Germantown,
Germantown.
which was a large and good Meeting; going Home I went to see Richard Buzby,
who was not well; he said the Company of his Friends revived him. Next Day I
went to visit Jane Breintnall, who was seized with the Dead-Palsy on one Side,
and the Lord was pleased to comfort us together, as she expressed, to our
mutual Satisfaction.

On the 30th of the said Month was our Quarterly Meeting of Ministers at
Philadelphia, Philadelphia.
where humble Walking with God was recommended and prayed for, and it was
desired that Ministers might be exemplary therein, having Christ for their
Pattern.

On the 1st of the Sixth Month, I was at our Meeting at Frankfort, which was a
dull Meeting to me and diverse others, a lively Exercise of Spirit being too
much wanting among many, and close walking with God in Conversation: If we
would really enjoy the Love and Presence of Christ in our religious Meetings,
we ought to keep near to him in our daily Conversation, which that we might do,
was humbly desired in Supplication and Prayer to God.

The young Man who came to me under great Concern of Mind after the Funeral of
John Rutledge, wrote to me, that he was followed with the Judgments of God for
his manifold Transgressions, desiring that I would pray for him. In Answer to
his Letter, I wrote him to the following Effect:

Frankfort, 7 th 6 th Month, 1725.
THINE from Burlington of the 26 th, 5 th Mon. I received, by which I perceive
the Hand of the Almighty has been upon thee for thy Vanity and Folly; and I
desire that thou may be very careful to keep close to that Hand, and do not go
from under it, but mind the Light of Christ that has discovered God to be
great and good, and his dear Son to be thy Savior, and Sin and Satan to be
Evil, which Evil (if thou follows it) will certainly bring thee to Destruction
and eternal Woe; but if thou follows Christ, and walks according to that Light
by which he has manifested Sin to be exceeding sinful, in his Time; as thou
waits in Patience, he will bring thee through his righteous Judgments unto
Victory.

Wait, O Wait in Patience upon God, if it be all thy Days! I will bear the
Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, said the Prophet
Micah. Again, All the Days of my appointed Time will I wait till my Change
comes, says Job.

Thou art young in Years, and young in Experience in the Work of Grace,
wherefore advise with solid, good Men, if thou meets with inward or outward
Straits and Difficulties, for the Enemy will not easily let go his Hold which
he has had of thee; therefore walk circumspectly, and shun evil Company. As to
praying in a Form of Words (without the Spirit helps, in order to open them
according to thy State and Condition) that will not avail: A Sigh or a Groan,
through the Help of the Spirit, is much more acceptable to God, than any Forms
without it.

That in the Lord's Time thou may enjoy the Reward of Peace, is the Desire
of thy Friend

T. C.


The young Man took this Counsel well, and kept to Meetings, and behaved
soberly for a Time, but afterward ran out, kept bad Company, took to Drinking
to Excess, ran himself in Debt, and at length into a Goal, which has been the
unhappy Case of many unstable Youths, who, when they knew God, they glorified
him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their Imaginations,
and their foolish Hearts became darkened.

Bybury.
In this Month I was at Bybury and Abington Meetings, in which we were favored
with the immediate Power and Presence of Christ, to our great Comfort and
Edification, the Visitation of divine Love to the Youth having a good Effect on
some of them, and the latter Meeting ended with Praise to the Almighty, after
Supplications for all Men, from our King on the Throne, to the meanest of his
Subjects.

In my Travels I met with a Person who query'd of me, how he should know which
Society had most of the Holy Spirit, since most of the Professors of Christ do
believe in the Holy Ghost (or Spirit?)

To whom I made the following Answer, viz.

Let the Rule of Christ determine this Question; he says, By their Fruits ye
shall know them; Do Men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figgs of Thistles? Matt.
vii. 16. The Fruits then of the Spirit of Christ are, Love, Faith, Hope,
Patience, Humility, Temperance, Godliness, brotherly Kindness and Charity, with
all Manner of Virtues. Therefore the Society of Christians, who brings forth
most of the Fruits of the Holy Spirit, consequently have most of Christ's Grace
and Spirit. But some object and say, we will not believe that any Society have
the Holy Ghost now, or the immediate Revelation or Inspiration of the Spirit,
unless they work Miracles. To which it is answered, That right Reformation from
Sin, and true Faith in Christ, cannot be wrought without a Miracle, neither can
we bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit without the miraculous Power of Christ.
-- Men by Nature bring forth the Works of Nature, and that which is contrary to
Nature is miraculous. Sin is natural, but divine Holiness, or the Righteousness
of Christ, wrought in Man, is spiritual, supernatural, and miraculous. And as
to natural Men (that are in a state of Nature) seeing outward Miracles, if they
will not, nor do not believe what is written in the holy Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament, neither will they believe, although one were to rise from the
Dead. Notwithstanding Christ wrought outward Miracles, and did the Works which
none other could do; though he cured all Manner of Diseases, and fed many
Thousands with a few Loaves, and a few small Fishes (and what remained, when
all had eaten, was more than there was at first) though he raised the Dead, and
himself arose from the Dead, yet few, but very few, believed in him, so as
truly to follow him. His Birth, his Life, his Doctrines, his Death, his
Resurrection, are all miraculous; and since all this was done in the Person of
Christ, and at the first Publication of his Religion to Men, there is now no
absolute Necessity of outward Miracles, though his Power is the same now as ever;
but he said to his Disciples, He that believes on me, the Work that I do,
shall he do also, and greater Works than these shall he do, John xiv. 12. Upon
which W. Dell says, This must be understood in Relation to Sin; for Christ had
no Sin in himself to overcome, but we all have sinned, and to overcome Sin is
the greatest of Miracles. -- This will try the notional or nominal Christian,
who says, we can never overcome Sin in this World. -- Where then is our Faith
in the Son of God, who for this Purpose was manifested, that he might destroy
the Works of the Devil, John iii. 8. Heb. ii. 14.

Therefore let not Christians be slow of Heart to believe in the glorious
Gospel of Christ; and if we truly believe therein, and live in the Practice of
his Doctrine, we shall see Miracles enough to satisfy us forever.

The 16th of Sixth Month, I was at the Weekly-meeting at Franckfort, Franckfort.
which, though a small Meeting, was sweet, reviving, and comfortable, to some of
us; so that we had a sufficient Reward for leaving our Business (at being the
Time of our Hay Harvest) -- Week-day-meetings are much neglected by many, more
is the Pity. -- The Apostle's Advice is necessary for many in our Age, even of
professed Christians, viz. Let us consider one another to provoke unto Love and
Good-works, not forsaking the assembling yourselves together, as the Manner of
some is, -- Heb. x. 24.25.

The 23d of Sixth Month, my Cart-wheel, being Iron bound, ran over me, and my
Horse kicked me on the Head; the Wheel put my Shoulder out, and the Horse
wounded my Head so that the Scull was bare, and my Leg was sorely bruised; the
same Day Dr. Owen, and Dr. Graham, with the Help of two of our Neighbors, set
my Shoulder, and dressed my Wounds; and the Lord was so merciful to me, that
the next Day I was enabled to write this Memorandum of this wonderful
Deliverance and speedy Cure, for which, added to the many I have received from
his gracious Hand, I have Occasion to be truly thankful: I was obliged to keep
at home some Time, and thought it long, because I could not go to Meetings as
usual; but many Friends came to see me, which was a Comfort to me. One Day
upwards of thirty Persons came from several Parts of the Country to see how I
did, and were glad I was like to recover. The Day before I was so hurt (being
the first of the Week) I was at Meeting at Philadelphia, and was concerned to
speak of the Uncertainty of Life, and the many Accidents we are incident to in
those frail Bodies, and exhorted Friends to live so, that they might have a
Conscience serene, and clear of Offense toward God and Man, and then they
might expect the Comforts of the Holy Ghost, which in such Season of Difficulty
would be a great Help and Benefit to them, of which I had the sweet Experience
the next Day, under great Extremity of Pain; and though the Pain of my Body was
such that I could not for several Nights take my natural Rest, yet I had
Comfort, through the sweet Influence of the Holy Spirit, which Christ promised
his Followers, John xiv. 26.

On the 18th of the Seventh Month began our Yearly Meeting at Philadelphia,
which was large, and our Friends, Philadelphia.
John Wanton, and William Anthony, from Rhode Island, and Abigail Bowls, from
Ireland, had good Service therein. From this Meeting an Address was sent to
King George for his royal Favor to us as a Society of People, in giving his
Assent to a Law made in this Province for presenting the Forms of Declaration,
Affirmation, etc. instead of the Terms heretofore used.

The Beginning of the Eighth Month, being a little recovered from my Hurt, I
had a Desire once more to see my Friends on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, at
their General-meeting at Choptank. The first Day I set out, I traveled about
thirty Miles, and at Night was very weary, being but weak in Body, and I was
almost ready to faint in my Mind about proceeding any further; but next Day
George Robinson (at whose House I lodged) offering to accompany me, we
traveled about forty Miles to Sassafras River, and both of us, though much
tired, were comforted in each other's Company and Conversation. On the next Day
we traveled near twenty Miles to the General-meeting in Caecil County, in
Maryland; where we met with two Friends from Rhode Island, Maryland.
and two from Pennsylvania, who were there on the like Occasion. The Meeting
was large and quiet, many People being there not of our Society, and were very
sober: The Meeting held several Days, wherein the Gospel Dispensation was set
forth, and the Love of God in Christ was exalted. From Caecil we went to
Chester River, and had a Meeting there, at which the People were exhorted to
come to Christ, the eternal Rock, and true Foundation, and to build their
Religion on him, against whom the Gates of Hell can never prevail; and they
were so much affected, that they did not seem forward to leave the House after
the Meeting was over. From Chester River we went to Tred-Haven, to the
General-meeting of Friends for Maryland, which was very large; some Friends
from Pennsylvania and Virginia being also there, and many People of other
Societies: Many Testimonies were born to the Operation of Christ by his Spirit
in the Soul, and Friends were earnestly desired to be diligent in reading the
Holy Scriptures, and to keep up the Practice of our wholesome Discipline; by the
Neglect of which, a Door would be opened to loose living, and undue Liberties.
The Great-Forest.
From Tred-Haven we traveled into the Great Forest, between the Bays of
Chesapeak and Delaware, and had a satisfactory Meeting; as yet there was no
public Meeting House in this Place, wherefore I told the People of the House,
I was obliged to them for the Use of it; but they tenderly answered, they were
more obliged to me for my kind visiting of them; and truly we had a solid, good
Meeting there: The People being generally poor, they had but little Notice
taken of them by the Money-loving Teachers, who preach for Hire. From the
Forest I went to Little-Creek, Little-Creek.
in the Territories of Pennsylvania; where was a General-meeting for the
Counties of Newcastle, Kent, and Sussex. The Meeting was large, and Friends
parted in great Love and Tenderness. And I went forward to Duck-Creek,
Duck-Creek, etc:
where we had a Meeting; diverse Persons of Note being there, and all were
quiet, and heard with Attention. From Duck-Creek I went to George's- Creek, and
had a Meeting; where a Man of a sober Conversation, said, That he never heard
Things so spoken to before; but that he could witness to the Truth of all that
was said. It was a good Meeting before the Conclusion; but I was very low and
poor in my Spirit in the Beginning of it. From this Place we set forward to
Newcastle, where we had a Meeting; Newcastle.
it was the Time of the Sitting of the General Assembly, and several Members of
the House were at Meeting: The Governor (who has from our first Acquaintance
been very respectful to me) hearing that I was in Town, sent to desire me to
tarry all Night in Newcastle; but being engaged to a Meeting over the Rivers
Christine and Brandywine, and it being near Night, I could not stay, but went
away that Evening, and sent my Love to him, desiring to be excused. That Night
I lodged at John Richardson's, and next Day went to George Robinson's, at
Newark, where we had a Meeting on the First Day, and on Second-day another at
Providence; Providence. Darby.
and went from thence to Darby to visit our worthy aged Friend Thomas
Lightfoot, who lay very weak in Body, none expecting his Recovery; I called as
I went from Home, and then he was very ill, and told me, "He thought that
Illness would conclude his Time in this World, but said that all was well, and
likewise that he had a great Concern upon his Mind for the Growth and
Prosperity of Truth in the Earth, and desired with Tenderness of Spirit, that I
would give his dear Love to all Friends;" and he now said, "I never thought to
see thee more, but am glad to see thee." I stayed there all Night, and in the
Morning we had a comfortable Heart-melting Time together, in which was revived
the Remembrance of the many favorable Seasons of God's Love we had enjoyed in
our Travels in the Work of the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ, and we
tenderly prayed, if we never met more in this World, we might meet in that
which is to come, where we might never part more, but might forever live to
sing with all the Saints and holy Angels, Hallelujah to God and the Lamb. From
Darby I went to Philadelphia Third-day Meeting, and from thence to my House,
where my dear Wife and Children with open Hearts and Arms received me, and I
them with Joy; at which Time I had a gracious Reward of Peace for my Labor of
Love, which far exceeded Silver or Gold. In this Journey I traveled above
three hundred Miles, had nineteen Meetings, and was from Home above three
Weeks, in which Time I recovered of my Lameness to Admiration; so that I had
with Satisfaction to remember the Apostle's Saying, that All Things work
together for Good to them that love God, Romans viii. 28.

After my Return Home, I was at the General-meeting at Franckfort; and in the
Beginning of the Ninth Month, I was at Meetings, at Abington, Germantown,
Philadelphia.
and diverse Times at Philadelphia, particularly at the Youths-meeting, wherein
several Testimonies were born, and the Youth exhorted to Piety and Humility.

On the Fifth Day of this Month in the Morning, being under a Consideration of
the many sore Exercises and Trials I had met with from my Childhood, I was much
affected; but the following Portions of Scripture being brought to my
Remembrance, afforded me some Relief, viz. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth
-- And if ye be without Chastisement, ye are Bastards, and not Sons -- And in
this World ye shall have Trouble, but in me Peace. -- So that I patiently bore
my Affliction, and praised God under it.

In this Month, I was at the Funeral of our worthy, ancient Friend, Thomas
Lightfoot. Thomas Lightfoot 's Burial at Darby.
He was buried at Darby; the Meeting was the largest that I had ever seen at
that Place. Our dear Friend was greatly beloved for his Piety and Virtue, his
sweet Disposition, and lively Ministry: The Lord was with him in his Life and
Death, and with us at his Burial.

After this Burial, I was at one at Abington; the Meeting was large, and, on
that Occasion, several Things suitable to the States of the People were treated
on.

I was also about this Time at Germantown, Germantown.
and at a General-meeting at Plymouth, to my great Satisfaction, being
accompanied by my ancient Friend Rowland Ellis; and at the Third-day Meeting in
Philadelphia, at the Time of our Fall Fair, there were fervent Desires, and
Prayers, in several of us, That the Youth might be preserved from the Evils too
prevalent at such Times of Liberty and Profaneness.

About the 20th of the Month I went for Long Island, being drawn in true Love
to make a general Visit to Friends there; and likewise having some Business to
transact there. On the Fifth Day of the Week, Thomas Masters and I set out from
Franckfort, and in the Evening we got to a Friend's House near the Falls of
Delaware; where we were kindly entertained, and our Horses taken good Care of:
To take due Care of Travelers Horses, is a commendable Thing; and more
grateful to some Travelers, than to take Care of themselves. From the Falls of
Delaware, we traveled next Day to Piscattaway, and lodged at an Inn; and on
the next Day we went to Woodbridge, Woodbridge.
to John Kinsey's, and on First Day we had a satisfactory Meeting there with
Friends and others; and the next Day John Kinsey went with us to Long Island,
and that Night got to John Rodman's, and next Day we rested, Flushing.
being weary with traveling so far in the Cold. Our dear Friends in that
Island very lovingly, and kindly, received my Visit to them; so that I had
Occasion to remember that Saying of the Holy Scripture, As Iron sharpeneth
Iron, so does the Countenance of a Man his Friend!

The Fifth Day of the Week we had a large Meeting at Flushing, and another in
the Evening at Obadiah Lawrence's, which was an open, tender Time. From
Flushing we went to Cow-Neck, Cow-neck. Westbury.
to Joseph Latham's, who went with me to Westbury Meeting, which (considering
the Co.) was much larger than I expected. From Westbury, Nathaniel Simmons,
Samuel Underhill, Bethpage.
and Phebe Willet, went with us to Bethpage; where we had a comfortable
Evening-meeting at the House of Thomas Powell, who went with us next Morning to
a Town called Setawket; Setawket.
it was as cold a Day's Travel as ever I went through in all my Life; the Wind
was in our Faces, and Northerly; I do not remember (though I had been a
Traveller above thirty Years) that ever I endured so much Hardness by Cold in
one Day; my Chin and Jaws were much affected with the Frost for several Days;
but we had a good Meeting that made up for all. After which we went ten Miles
to Amos Willet's House, where we had a serviceable Meeting: He invited his
Neighbors, who came and received us with Hearts full of Goodwill; and those
not of our Society, were well satisfied with the Meeting; so that we went on
our Way rejoicing, that we were favored with the good Presence of God in our
Journey. Amos Willet and his Wife went with us to Huntington, Huntington:
where we had a quiet, peaceable Meeting, and the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ was with and among us, as many can witness that were there. From hence
we went to Samuel Underhill's, and visited his weak Brother; in which Visit the
Lord mightily refreshed us together, and we blessed his holy Name, for he is
good to all them who put their Trust in him. Next Day we had a large Meeting at
Matinicock. Matinicock.
After the Meeting we went to Thomas Pearsall's, and had an Evening-meeting at
his House. The next Day, being a snowy, stormy Day, and one of the shortest in
the Year, we went, being 18 in Company, to Cow-Neck, Cow-neck.
where we had a good Meeting, and much larger than could be expected. After
Meeting we went to Joseph Latham's, and had a tender, open Evening-meeting
there, in which we were edified, and refreshed, in Christ Jesus. From Cow-Neck
I went to Flushing, Flushing.
had a large Meeting there on the First Day of the Week, and on Second-day we
went over the Sound (which divides Long Island from the main Continent) to
Horse-Neck, Horse-Neck.
and had a Meeting, where I understood there never had been one before; the
People were sober and attentive, and some expressed their Satisfaction. That
Evening we had a Meeting at an Inn near Byram River, Connecticutt.
where diverse People came, and were attentive; the Innkeeper, his Father,
Brother, Wife, and several others, took our Visit very kindly; though there was
one restless Man, who seemed to be out of Order with Drink before he came into
the House, and when we were sitting in Silence, waiting for the Gift of Christ,
and worshipping in Spirit, as Christ instituted, he sitting by me, jogged me,
and said, It was Time to begin, for there is as many come as would come to
Night; though he was mistaken in that; but he not having Patience to watch and
pray, went away; after which we had a good Meeting -- These two Meetings were
in the Government of Connecticutt, where they formerly made a Law imposing a
Fine of five Pounds on those who should entertain any of our Society, which
Law, I was informed, was repealed in Great Britain. From thence we traveled
into New York Government, and had a Meeting at Rye, Rye. Marrineck.
and another at Marrineck; from whence we traveled to West-Chester, and had a
Meeting there on a Sixth-day of the Week, intending over the Ferry next Day to
Long Island; but the Wind being high and boisterous, that we could not get
over, we tarried three Nights at the House of John Stevenson, where we were
lovingly and generously entertained: And on First Day we were again at West
Chester Meeting, West-Chester.
which ended comfortably, though I was in a low State, both of Body and Mind, in
the Beginning of it. On Second-day we got well over the Ferry to Long Island,
parting with our Friends at the Ferry in much Love and Good Will. Joseph Latham
having been my Fellow-Traveller on the Main, I went to his House, and from
thence to Westbury, Westbury, etc.
to a large Meeting, and next to Bethpage, and had a Meeting there, and in the
Evening, accompanied by Samuel Bowne and Joseph Latham, I went to Jerusalem,
and had a large and satisfactory Meeting: Many of the People of the Town, who
were there, came the next Day to our Meeting at Hempstead, Hempstead.
which was large; the great Lord of all was good to us that Day, which, I hope,
many that were there, will not forget; and some Convincement was wrought on
some that were of Account in the World at these last-mentioned Meetings,
particularly one who lived at Jerusalem, with Tenderness of Spirit, desired my
Remembrance, whom I pray God to preserve (with all those who love and fear him,
and believe in his Son) to the End.

Matinicock.
From Hempstead I went to Matinicock, where, on a First Day of the Week, we had
a large Meeting, and a solid, good Opportunity it was; and from hence to Thomas
Townsend's on the Plains, at whose House we had an Evening-meeting; next
Morning a pretty many Friends from the Plains, went with us to the South Side
of the Island, to a Place called Rockway, Rockway.
where we had a Meeting at Hicks's, the Neighbors coming to it pretty
generally; there was great Openness to receive the Doctrine of Truth in those
not of our Society, and they were very kind to us in those Parts: This was the
second Meeting I had been at in this Place, Benjamin Holmes having the first
there, since which they had not been visited by any Friend of the Ministry
except myself. From Rockway we went to Foster's Meadow, Foster' Meadows.
where was a large Gathering of People, and Christ filled our Hearts with
Divine Love. From thence I went to Peter Titus's, and had a Meeting at his
House, to which came the Neighbors, and were well-affected; and next Day we
had a Meeting in the Meeting House at Westbury, which was very large, Westbury.
and to our Satisfaction. From Westbury, in the Evening, we went to visit a
young Woman, who had been in a despairing Condition for several Years. The
Family came together, and we put up our Prayers to the Almighty, in the Name of
his dear Son, it was a good Time to us all; and the young Woman, and some
others, expressed their Satisfaction.

This Evening we went to see another young Woman who was in a deep Consumption,
but in a very comfortable State of Mind; having a great Desire to see me before
she died, she sent to me to come to her, and her desire was answered, her
Spirit being revived with a fresh Visitation of the Love of Jesus Christ, the
holy Physician of Value, and our Supplications were, that the Lord would be
pleased to be with her, and support her to the End, and grant her an easy
Passage from this Life to his glorious Kingdom, when it should please him to
remove her, which Prayer we have Cause to hope was answered.

Though the Days were short we rode about fifteen Miles, and made these two
Visits, after that great Meeting at Westbury, and the Season was exceeding
cold; but our great and good Master supported us, and was with us in our
Exercises and Service for his Name and Truth's Sake. I lodged this Night at
Joseph Rodman's, and was next Day at Flushing Weekday Meeting, Flushing.
which was very large and satisfactory, and had a Meetting the same Evening at
Samuel Bowne's, and the next Day, went to New York, and had a quiet, New York
good Meeting in the Evening at Samuel Harrison's, and on the Morrow had an
Evening Meeting at a Place called the Kills, Kills.
at the House of Richard Hallet, and the next Day being First Day, had a large
Meeting at Newtown, Newtown.
to the Edification of Friends and other sober People.

It being now generally known that I was on the Island, the People flocked to
Meetings, though the Weather was extreme cold, for the Lord manifested himself in
the Riches of his Love unto us in our Meetings, for the Worship of his holy
Name. The next Meeting was at James Jackson's, Rocky-Hill.
at Rocky-Hill, where was Judge Hicks, the High Sheriff, and a Justice of
Peace, with several other Persons of Note, with whom and our Friends, we had a
good Time to set forth the Work of Grace and Reformation (as I think) to
general Satisfaction, for which we blessed the Holy Name of God, and humble
Prayer was put up to him for all Men, and particularly for our King George, as
also for all in Authority under him, and that they might be a Terror to
Evildoers, and the Praise of them that do well. Jamaica.
The next Meeting we had, was at Jamaica, which was also large, and several in
Authority were there, and were very loving and respectful after Meeting. The
next First Day we had a large Meeting at the Meeting House at Cow-Neck,
Cow-Neck.
which was somewhat crowded. I was right glad (though my Exercises were very
great) that there was such Openness and Room in Peoples Hearts to receive the
Doctrine which I had to declare unto them, in the Name and Power of Christ;
afterward we had an Evening-meeting with the Widow Titus, to which diverse
Dutch People came, and were very attentive and sober. Hell-gate.
On the third of the Week we had a Meeting near the Place called Hell-Gate (a
narrow Passage in the great Sound or Bay, between Long Island and the Main
Land) several Justices and their Wives were at this Meeting, one of which had
disowned his Son, and turned him out of Doors for coming among us; but
beholding his Son's sober Conversation, grew more moderate, and after Meeting
he and his Wife invited us to dine with them, but we were engaged to visit the
Widow Stevens, that Evening, at whose House we had a Meeting. Going thither, it
being very cold and stormy my Hands were touched with the Frost, and perceiving
it when I came to the Fire, I called for a Basin of cold Water, which soon
cured them: I note this that others may reap Benefit thereby Next Day we went
to the Week-day-meeting at Newtown, Newtown. Flushing.
and on the Fifth-day at Flushing Meeting, which was large, and to Edification,
(...) in the Evening had a Meeting at our ancient Friend Hugh Copperthwait's,
which was acceptable to him as benefit expressed when it was ended and to us
also. Next Day we had a very large Evening-meeting at Thomas (...)'s, and
likewise a large, good Meeting, the Day after being First Day) at Matinicock,
Matinicock.
(...) the Kingdom of Christ was exalted, and the de^ormed State of Sin and
Iniquity represented, and the Example and Doctrine of Christ, closely
recommended, in order to the overcoming Sin, this being not only possible, but
the Duty of Christians through the Power of Christ, and true Faith in his holy
Name; and the Danger of believing that it is impossible to overcome Sin was
opened to them, and that such a Belief is contrary to, and against Christ and
his Doctrine, and darkens and blinds the Hearts of Men; but the Love of Christ
enlightens the Soul, and strengthens it to believe that all Things are possible
with God, for this great Work cannot be done in the Will, Wit, and Power of
Man, but through the Power and Grace of Christ, which he promised to true
Believers in him. I was fainty after this Meeting, but resting a little I soon
grew better, so that we had an Evening Meeting at James Cock's, where one came
and told us, we must not eat any Flesh, and produced Thomas Tryon's Works for
his Proof; but I took the Bible, and showed him a Proof to the contrary, and
told him, we were resolved to believe our Book before his, and showed him from
the Apostle, that the Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, nor diverse
Washings, but Righteousness, Peace and Joy, in the Holy Ghost, Romans xiv. 17.
Though at the same Time, according to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, I
was for Temperance in Meats and Drinks, as well as Moderation in Apparel. The
next Day we had a very large Meeting at Oyster-Bay, Oyster-Bay.
many being there, who were not of our Society, who steadily gave Attention to
what was declared: Here being many young People, they were persuaded to give up
their blooming Years to do the Will of God, and to Remember him their Creator,
in their youthful Days: Friends said there had not been such a Meeting there a
great while, for which Opportunity I was humbly thankful to the Lord. After
Meeting we went to Samuel Underhill's, and had an Evening-meeting with his
Brother, who, through Sickness and Lameness, could not get out for a long Time.
"Next" Day, Samuel Bowne, being with me, we went to visit a young Woman that
was weak in Body, but lay in a comfortable Frame of Mind; she was thankful for
our Visit, and said the Visits of her Friends were comfortable to her. Next
Day, being the Fourth-day of the Week, we had a Meeting at the Widow Taylor's,
who desired it on Account of her Father, who was in the 88th Year of his Age,
and so infirm, that he could not get to Meetings; he was very clear in his
Understanding and Memory, and was much refreshed with this Meeting, as were
diverse of us also. Next Day we had a Meeting at Flushing, Flushing.
which was large and open, and the Grace and Power of Christ was with us in the
Ministration of the Gospel. After this Meeting, we had an Evening-meeting with
our ancient Friend Joseph Thorn, who by Reason of his Age and Infirmity could
not go abroad as far as to the Meeting: The House was crowded with his
Neighbors and Friends, and we had a solid, good Time together. While at
Flushing I went to visit a young Woman who was a most dismal Spectacle to
behold, an Object of great Pity: Her Face, Hand and Foot, being much eaten away
by the King's Evil; our Prayers were, that now in her great Misery, the
Almighty would be pleased to support her Soul by his Grace and Spirit, and
sanctify her Afflictions to her, that it might work for her a more exceeding
Weight of Glory in that World which is to come. The next First Day we had a
large Meeting at Flushing, wherein many weighty Truths were opened to the
Satisfaction and Edification of the Auditory, and in the Evening we had a
Meeting with the Wife of Matthew Farrington, who was too weakly to go abroad;
the Neighbors came in, and we had a seasonable Opportunity. The next Third-day
was the Youths-meeting at Flushing, in which we were concerned to exhort to
Obedience to God and their Parents, and to follow their Parents as they follow
Christ; for where any leave Christ, there we are to leave their Example, though
they were our Fathers or Mothers; and the right Honoring of our Parents was
set forth, and they exhorted not to despise the Day of small Things, and the
happy State of the Obedient, and the unhappy State of the Disobedient, and many
weighty Truths were delivered to them in that Meeting by several experienced
Friends. From Flushing, I went to the Week-day-meeting at Newtown, Newtown.
and in the Evening we had a Meeting at the Widow Way's; the Neighbors coming
in, we had a good Time with them: The Parable of the ten Virgins, was treated
of, and the great Disadvantage of wanting the divine Oil of Grace in our
Vessels, was shown to them.

The next Day, being the 5th of the Week, we had a very large, satisfactory
Meeting, at the Widow Allsup's at the Kills, and from thence with several
Friends went to New York, New York.
where we had three Meetings to our Edification, the Weather still remaining
extremely cold, but we felt the Love of Christ to warm our Hearts, and though I
think I never felt it colder, I never had my Health better. Several Friends
accompanied us to the Boat at New York, New York.
the Water being open on that Side, we took our Leave of each other, and put
out for the other Shore; but before we got there, we were blocked up in the Ice
and it was a considerable Time before we could work our Way through, but at
last got well on Long Island, where I waited some Hours for Company, who
through some Difficulty got on Shore; after which we went to the Narrows through
a Storm of Wind and Snow, but the Wind being high we could not get over that
Night, nor the next Day, the Ice having come down, and filled the Bay: When the
Tide had drove away the Ice, we put out, and got well over, and lodged at the
Ferry-House on Staten-Island. Next Morning we went to the Ferry at the
Blazing-Star, over against Woodbridge, but it was all fastened with Ice, and we
not daring to venture over it, went to the Ferry at Amboy, Amboy.
and got comfortably over, stayed there that Night, and next Day went to
Trenton, Trenton.
and lodged at Capt. Gould's, who treated me very kindly, I being much tired
with Traveling. Next Morning I went over Delaware River on the Ice (as we had
also the Day before at Rariton) and that Day, being the 5th of Twelfth Month,
Frankfort.
I got safe Home to my loving Spouse and tender Children, where I found all
well, and a hearty Reception, having traveled 600 Miles, and attended above 60
Meetings.

After having been at Home, and at our own Meeting at Franckfort, I went to the
Quarterly Meeting at Philadelphia, where Friends were glad to see me.

On the next Fifth Day I was at the Marriage of Thomas Masters, and Hannah
Dickinson, where were many sober People, not of our Society.

Having been lately among Friends at Long Island, and been comforted in the
many Opportunities we had together, it came into my Mind to visit them with an
Epistle at their Quarterly Meeting at Flushing, which was as follows.

Franckfort, 12 th Month, 1725-6. My dear and well beloved Friends,
BELIEVING it might be acceptable to you to hear that I was got well to my
Habitation in such a difficult Time of the Year as I set out from you in; An
Epistle to Friends in Long Island.
and also feeling the sweet Influence of the divine Love of the heavenly
Father, and his dear Son our Lord Jesus Christ, to arise and spring in my
Heart, and flowing toward you:

It came into my Mind to write a few Lines to the Quarterly Meeting of Friends
at Flushing, by way of Epistle, well knowing also that many of us are as
Epistles writ in one another Hearts by the heavenly Finger of the most High;
and those Characters of divine Love so written will not easily be erased. I
could willingly have been at your Quarterly Meeting, but that I had been so
long from my Family, that I was much wanted therein, and my coming Home was
seasonable and acceptable, both to them and my Friends; and I humbly thank the
Lord, I found all well. Now that which is on my Mind to your Quarterly Meeting,
is after this Manner, concerning the Government of the Church of Christ, of
which Church He is the holy Head and Lawgiver: Wherefore we are to seek and
wait for Counsel and Wisdom from him, in all our Monthly and
Quarterly-meetings, for the well-ordering of our little Society, which is
growing and increasing in the Earth, and also in your Island (notwithstanding
the invidious Attempts of some Men of corrupt Minds) and it will grow and
increase more and more, as we keep our Places, our heavenly Places in Christ
Jesus.

Dear Friends, the good Order of Truth, and Government of Christ in his Church,
is a great Help to us and our Children, when carried on in Christ's Spirit
[pray observe or mind that] for if our Order, and Church Government, be carried
on in the Spirit of Man (as he is mere Man) though he is never so crafty, or
cunning, it will do more Hurt than Good in the Church of Christ. Christ's
Spirit must govern Christ's Church; and when, and where, that is over all,
then, and there, Christ's Church, and Kingdom, is exalted, of whose Kingdom and
Peace there will be no End; and happy will all those be, whose End is in it.
Moses, that Man of God, governed in the Jewish Church in the Spirit of God, and
when he found the Work too heavy for him, the Lord put his Spirit on Seventy
more, who were Help-meets in the Government; so that it was God's Spirit that
governed; and while that ruled them, all was well; but when they went from
that, they fell into Error and Disobedience; and, at length, the Messiah came,
and he governed his own little Flock himself; and when he ascended up on high,
he promised his Spirit should be with, and in his Church, forever, and be their
holy Guide into all Truth, in which he would also comfort them: And Christ
fulfilled this his Promise; for when his Disciples waited at Jerusalem to be
endued with Power from on high, according to the Advice of their Lord, they
were filled with the Gift and Grace of the Holy Spirit: And when the Brethren
and Elders met together about the Affairs and Government of the Church, they
gave forth Rules and Orders from that General-meeting to the particular Ones;
and the Holy Ghost presided amongst them, which they signified to the other
Meetings, saying, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to put you in
Mind of such and such Things. And while this Holy Ghost, or Spirit, governed in
the primitive Christian Church, all was well; God and Christ was glorified, and
his Church and People edified; but by going from that, the Apostasy came in.

Wherefore, dear Friends, keep close to the Spirit, Power, Light, and Divine
Life, of Christ Jesus, in your Monthly and Quarterly Meetings for the
Government of the Church, as well as in your Meetings for the Worship of the
Almighty; for if we go from that, he will go from us.

And, dear Friends, the Testimony of Jesus, in the Spirit of Prophecy, opens in
me after this Manner, that if our Society keep and live up to the Spirit and
Truth of Christ, which has been manifested to our Forefathers, and to us also
in this Age, the great Lord of all will prosper his Work in our Hands, and
bless both us and our Children, as we and they keep therein.

And as we have kept close to this our heavenly Guide, how has the Lord
sweetly manifested his Love and Power to us in our Meetings for the
well-ordering of our Society? Which many Times has filled our Hearts with pure
Praises, and holy Thanksgiving, to the high and lofty One, who inhabits
Eternity, and dwells in the highest Heavens, and is Light forever: To whom,
with the Lamb of God, who takes away the Sins of the World, I recommend you, my
dear and well beloved Friends, Brethren, and Sisters, in Christ, with my own
Soul.

T. C.
P. S. Since my Return, I have been thankful to God for the many favorable
Visitations and good Opportunities he was pleased to grant me with you, and
diverse sober People on your Island, in which there is an open Door among many
to receive the Testimony of Truth. I commend your Nobility in building good
Houses, and making Room for your sober Neighbors to sit with you in your
Meetings; this is of good Report concerning you, both far and near, and, if I
apprehend right, there is more Work of that Kind for you to do. I thought
often, when among you, and now also, That there would be a large Gathering, if
there were a House built at the Upper-end of the great Plains, not far from
Foster's Meadow; but every one may not think or see alike; tho I know some
solid Friends among you, thought the same with me, about the Prospect of a
large Gathering there-away, if a House were built; to which Friends, and
well-inclined People, might come from Hempstead, Rockyhill, Rockway, Foster's
Meadow, etc.

T. C.




After my Service on Long Island, I had great Sweetness upon my Spirit for some
Time, which sometimes caused my Heart to sing for Joy; and yet I rejoiced in a
trembling Frame of Spirit, and had the true Sense of what is written in the
Holy Scriptures, where it is said, Serve the Lord with Fear (I take it, Filial
Fear) and (...) with Trembling, for fear of losing that previous (...) of the
Love of God, which is in Christ.

On the 20th of the Twelfth Month (the First Day of the Week I was at Abington
Meeting, Abington.
in which the Love of Christ was manifested to us, in the Opening of his
Saying, If I be lifted up, I will draw all Men unto me, John xii. 32. The next
Day I was at Germantown, Germantown.
at the Burial of a Son of Dennis Cunrad, at which also was our Friend Abigail
Bowls. On the Sixth day following, I went to the General-meeting of Ministers
and Elders at Burlington, Burlington.
where I again met with our said Friend and diverse others: The First Day
Meeting was large; and on Second-day was the Quarterly Meeting for the County;
and Third-day was their Youths meeting, which was large, and many weighty
Truths were delivered in that Meeting. On Fourth-day we were at a Meeting at
Springfield; Springfield.
the House was pretty much thronged, and Friends were exhorted, thankfully to
commemorate the Mercies and Favors of the Almighty to them, and desired to
enlarge their Meeting Houses as their Number increased; for in those Parts
there was such an Openness in the Hearts of the People, and Increase of their
Number, that Friends had already agreed on building two Meeting Houses between
Croswicks and Burlington; their Zeal and Unanimity therein, was worthy of
Commendation. Fifth-day being the Weekday Meeting at Burlington, Friends of
the Town desired I would stay at it; I thought we had just before had diverse
good Opportunities, and my own Inclinations seemed to lead to my Family; but
Friends being desirous of my staying, I did so, and we had a good, solid
Meeting. After Meeting a solid good Friend said, "He thought we had the best
Wine at last;" and indeed the Love of God through Christ, is so sweet to his
People, that the last often seems the best, when it is only a renewed
Visitation of the same Love to his Children. So I went home rejoicing that I
was in some good Measure accounted worthy to serve so good, and so gracious, a
Master.

On the 6th Day of the First Month (being the First of the Week) I was at the
Morning and Afternoon Meetings in Philadelphia, wherein those who call
themselves Free-thinkers were exhorted, to be careful of drinking too freely,
lest they might justly be called Free-drinkers; for many times such, when they
drink too freely of strong Liquor, think and speak too freely their own corrupt
Notions, to the Dishonor of God, and to the Scandal of Religion in general.

Soon after I was at the First Day Meetings at Philadelphia; and in this Month
I went into the Jerseys, Jerseys.
and was at three large Meetings in Company with Abigail Bowls, in which our
said Friend had good Service, to the Comfort of Friends, convincing of
Gainsayers, and confirming the Weak, and the People were glad of our Visit.

The 15th Day of this Month I was at Burlington at the Burial of my good Friend
and old Acquaintance Abraham Bickley, at whose Funeral were great Numbers of
People, he being well-beloved of his Neighbors: Christ's raising Lazarus out
of the Grave, and his Tenderness and Weeping there, was spoken of, in order to
stir People up to a tender, religious Exercise of Mind, which is too much
wanting among many of the Professors of his holy Name, who have too little
Sense of that which should bring true Tenderness over their Minds, being more
in Earth than Heaven; so that they are dry and barren; as to the Things of God.
The Meeting ended (to Satisfaction) with Supplications to the Almighty.

A few Days after, I was at our General Spring-meeting in Philadelphia, which
was large; where our Friends Robert Jordan and Abigail Bowls had good Service.

This Week I was at four very large Meetings, at Philadelphia, Franckfort, and
Abington, much to my Satisfaction, though I had no vocal Service therein; yet my
Heart was broken into Tenderness and Tears, under the Ministry of several
weighty, solid Testimonies, that were born by good and living Ministers,
qualified to preach the Gospel in the Demonstration of the Spirit, and with
Power.

1726.
The 26th of the First Month, 1726, I went to Germantown Meeting, which was
large, and I was opened therein to speak of the Vision of the Prophet Ezekiel,
of the holy Waters, which proceeded from under the Threshold of the Sanctuary,
which the Angel measuring, they grew deeper and deeper, until they became a
River to swim in, Ezekiel. xlvii. 5. Which mystically shows the Work of Grace,
Conversion, and Regeneration; and that these holy Waters the Soul must drink
of, and be washed, and baptized in, are spiritual and supernatural, and
therefore not to be measured by the Spirit and Will of Man, in his natural
State, according to the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. xxxiii. V. 21. Man, before he can
swim therein, must be stripped of all his Self-righteousness and artificial
Religion, though as splendid and beautiful as a gallant Ship, or Galley with
Oars, which, in this Respect, is agreeable to the State of Men swimming in
elementary Water, where the most skilful have sometimes lost their lives, for
want of being naked or unclothed; and those who had not yet attained much
Experience, were advised not to go out of their Depth, but to wait in Patience
and Humility, to enjoy the medicinal Virtue of the Trees growing by the Side of
this River, whose Fruit is for Meat, and Leaves for Medicine, Ezekiel. xlvii. 12.
The People of this Meeting were generally Germans, several of whom stayed in
the House after the Meeting was over, and were broken into Tenderness, in a
Sense of the Presence and Love of God unto us, for which I was also humbly
thankful and bowed in Spirit.

I was at the Third-day Weekly-meeting in Philadelphia, which was but small,
considering the large Number of those professing to be of our Society in this
City; those present were closely and tenderly exhorted to be zealous for good
Works, and against bad Works; not respecting the Person of any Man; the
Abominations committed by some under our Profession, in this City and Province,
calling for Humiliation; and as the Promise of God's Favor was to those who
mourned with Sighs and Cries for the Abominations among his People formerly,
Ezekiel. ix. 4.6. so now, as many as are under the same Concern, may hope for
Preservation and Salvation, if he should in like Manner visit us, as at this
Time he does some of our Neighbors; there being a great Sickness and Mortality
in some of the adjacent Places.

In the Second Month, I visited the Meetings of Friends at Haverford, Newtown,
Radnor, Haverford, Newtown, etc.
and Merion; which Meetings consist chiefly of ancient Britons, who are a
religious, industrious, and increasing People; among whom my Service was (as
they expressed) to our mutual Satisfaction. Bucks County.
After my Return Home, I went to visit Friends at the Falls of Delaware, and
was at a large Meeting in their new Meeting House. After a satisfactory Meeting
at Franckfort, on the Fifth-day of the same Week, I went with Ennion Williams
to his Son's Marriage; and the next Day he, and several other Friends,
Woodberry-Creek.
accompanied me to Woodberry-Creek, and had a good, open Meeting, and that
Night went to James Lord's, and next Morning went toward Salem, and lodged at
Isaac Sharp's; where I was informed of a great Mortality at Cohansy. The 24th
of Second Month was the General-meeting at Salem, Salem.
which was a large Gathering of People of different Persuasions, from many
Parts of the Country, where the Doctrine of the Gospel was preached in great
Love to the People, which they heard with solid Attention. From Salem I went to
Alloway's- Creek and Cohansy, Cohansy.
and had Meetings there: I was informed that more than Seventy Persons had
lately died here of a malignant Distemper, though it seemed to abate, none dying
while we were there. At Cohansy the Meeting was large and solid, though but few
of our Society there; and they were earnestly admonished to a proper
Disposition of Mind, to fit them either for Life or Death, and reminded of the
Regard of the Almighty to such as live in his Fear, who will have Peace in
their Death, and their Exchange will be glorious, when they are taken out of
this Life; but with the Wicked it is not so.

From Cohansy I went through the Wilderness over Maurice's River, Maurice 's
River.
accompanied by James Daniel, through a miry, boggy Way, in which we saw no House
for about forty Miles, except at the Ferry, and that Night we got to Richard
Townsend's, of Cape-May, where we were kindly received; next Day we had a
Meeting at Rebecca Garrison's, and the Day after a pretty large one at Richard
Townsend's, and then went down to the Cape, and had a Meeting at John Page's,
and next Day another at Aaron Leaming's; several expressed their Satisfaction
with those Meetings. I lodged two Nights at Jacob Spicer's (my Wife's Brother).

From Cape-May we traveled along the Seacoast to Great-Egg-Harbour, had
another Meeting, much larger than the first, at Rebecca Garrison's, and here I
was much concerned to promote the settling a Monthly Meeting, for the
well-ordering the Affairs of our Society.

We swam our Creatures over Egg-Harbour River, and went over ourselves in
Cannoes, and afterward we had a Meeting at Richard Summers's, which was as
large as could be expected, considering the People's living at a Distance from
each other.

The next Meeting we had at John Scull's; and on First Day we had a large one
at Peter White's, and on Second-day at Japhet Leeds's, and then we went five
Miles through a Marsh to Little-Egg-Harbour River, and had a Meeting in their
Meeting House on the Fourth Day of the Week, and 11th Day of the Month, which
was the larger by the Addition of the Owners, Masters, and Mariners, of two
Sloops from New York, who, hearing of the Meeting, came to it. And the next Day
we had another Meeting at the same Place, and lodged at Jervis Farc's. After
these two Meetings, I left Egg-Harbour, accompanied by several Friends from
thence, and traveled about forty Miles, before we came to any House. In the
Evening we reached a Friend's House, where we were kindly entertained, and next
Morning we got to Burlington, Burlington.
and so home, where I found all well, and was therefore thankful to the
Almighty. -- In this Journey I traveled about three hundred Miles, had 21
Meetings, and was from home about three Weeks.

In the Third Month I stayed at and about Home, Philadelphia, etc.
visiting the Meetings at Philadelphia, Germantown, Abington, and Franckfort.

In the Fourth Month I left my Family, and went back in the Woods as far as
Oley. I was from Home nine Days, traveled about one hundred and fifty Miles,
and had six Meetings at Oley, Perkiomen, and diverse other Places, chiefly in
Barns and open Places, there being large Companies of People, and few
Meeting Houses yet built in those Parts of the Country. In this Journey I
suffered pretty much through the Heat -- The first Meeting was at the Iron-works
settled a little beyond a Place called Mount Misery; I was concerned for those
People, having heard of their rude Doings before I left my Habitation; and
although some were rude, others behaved themselves soberly, and expressed their
Thankfulness for that Visitation, as I do for the Opportunity I had of clearing
myself to them. On my Return homewards I crossed Schuylkill, and went to Samuel
Nutt's Iron-works, where I had a large, quiet, solid Meeting: And the next Day
I called to see my old Friend David Meredith, who being about 89 Years of Age,
I thought it probable I might not have another Opportunity of seeing him. He
met me with Gladness, and told me, "It was their Meeting-day;" so that I
stayed, and was much comforted and tendered by the Power of Christ; after which
I came home that Night.

O (...) first day, after my Return, I went to Philadelphia, Philadelphia.
Goshen.
and, after the Afternoon Meeting, to Darby, and from thence to a
Yearly Meeting in Chester County, held at Goshen; though the Season was wet, this
was a large, good Meeting; at which there were three young Men, who were lately
called to the Work of the Ministry, whom I was glad to hear declare the Truth
in the Power and Simplicity of the Gospel of Christ, being of the Mind of
Moses, when he said, in Answer to Joshua, Would God that all the Lord's People
were Prophets, and that the Lord would put of his Spirit upon them, Number. xi.
29. After this Meeting I went to Springfield, and the next Day returned home.

On the 22d of the Fourth Month, I went to the Marriage of John Lee's Daughter
at Springfield, in Chester County: The Meeting was large, and I was concerned
to speak mostly to the young People, advising them to seek the Lord in that
great Affair of Marriage, that they be careful how and on whom they set their
Affections, and not to draw out one another's Minds, if they did not intend an
honorable Marriage; and reminding them of the ill Tendency of courting several
at a Time, or suffering several to court at once, and that they be chaste and
true in their Proceedings, duly regarding the Advice of the Apostle, Be not
unequally yoked; for to be sure all such Marriages are unequal, when those who
marry are of different Principles in Religion. The Meeting ended with tender
Supplication for Preservation through whatever Exercises, further Troubles or
Trials, Temptations or Afflictions, we might meet with in the World, that we
might end well at last, and live forever to praise and glorify God and the
Lamb, who, through the holy, eternal Spirit, is worthy forever.

On the Receipt of the last Letter from my dear Father, which I some Time since
mentioned, I was apprehensive it might be his last, which it proved to be; for
the next Letter from my dear Brother gave me Intelligence of his Death, An
Account of my Father's Death, etc.
which I received the 25th of the Fourth Month this Year. The News of my dear
Father's Decease took such Hold of my Mind (though I daily expected it) that for
some Time I was hardly sociable -- Oh how have I been sometimes comforted in
his loving and tender Epistles! At the Receipt of which I have cried to the
Lord, that, if it pleased Him, I might have a double Portion of the Spirit
which he gave to my Father: But Oh! Now I must never hear more from him in this
World; yet in this I have some inward Comfort, that I hope we shall meet where
we shall never part more. -- Here follows a Part of my affectionate Brother's
Account of my Father's Death and Burial.

Edmonton, 25 th of 1 st Month, 1726. Dear Brother,
THIS comes with the sorrowful Account of our dear Father's Decease, who
departed this Life the 7th Inst. after having been indisposed about a
Fortnight. -- I have herewith sent a particular Account of some remarkable
Passages, and his last Expressions in his Sickness; that Part relating to his
Convincement, he desired should be committed to Writing, which I have done, and
sent it to thee.

I was with him several times in his last Illness, and most of the two last
Days of his Life, as thou may perceive by the Contents. -- Our worthy Father
was honorably buried on the 11th Inst. being carried from his own House to the
Meeting House at Horsley-down, accompained with his Relations, where was a
large Meeting of many People, as many as the Meeting House could well contain,
and many Testimonies were there born to the innocent, exemplary Life, Integrity
and honest Zeal of our dear Father, so concurrent and unanimous, that I have
hardly known any such Occasion more remarkable: He was accompanied from thence
to the Grave very solemnly, and there in like Manner interred, where a further
Testimony was given to his honest Life and Conversation, and lively Zeal for
the holy Truth, whereof he made Profession.

Dear Brother, though it be a sorrowful Occasion of Writing, yet herein we may be
comforted, in Consideration that our Father went to his Grave in Peace in a
good old Age: He had his Understanding and Memory to the last in a wonderful
Manner. I believe (as I have sometimes said) that he embraced Death as joyfully
as ever he did any happy Accident of his Life: I remember one Passage of his
cheerful Resignation, finding him fine and cheary when I came to see him, a
Week before his Decease, and he showing me how well he could walk about the
Room, and would have went out of it, though he was very bad the Day before, so
that I said, Father, I hope thou will get over this Illness; but he answered me
pretty quick and loud, No, but I don't though: It Is not long since he was at my
House, and was cheerful and well, but spoke as if he thought it would be the
last Time. -- My Wife said, Father, thou may live some Years; but he replied,
Is it not better for me to die, and go to Christ? So, dear Brother, with dear
Love to thee, my Sister, and thy dear Children, and our Relations, I conclude
with earnest Desires for thy Health and Welfare,

Thy affectionate Brother, GEO. CHALKLEY.


My Brother's Account of my Father's Convincement, and of his last Sickness and
dying Words.

My Father was born of religious Parents at Kempton, near Hitching, in
Hertfordshire, An Account of my Father's Convincement, etc.
the 1st of Ninth Month, 1642; his Father's Name was Thomas Chalkley, by Trade
a Dealer in Meal, by Profession of the Church of England, and zealous in his
Way, as was also his Wife.

They had four Sons and three Daughters, Thomas, John, George and Robert;
Elizabeth, Sarah and Mary. My Father (being the third Son) was convinced very
young at a Meeting by Enfield Chaceside, near Winchmore-Hill, through the
powerful Ministry of William Brend, who was an eminent Minister in the Lord's
Hand in that Day, and had been a great Sufferer for his Testimony in
New England. He was preaching, as I heard my Father several times say, upon the
Words of the Preacher, Eccles. xi. 9. Rejoice, O young Man, in thy Youth, and
let thy Heart cheer thee in the Days of thy Youth, and walk in the Ways of thy
Heart, and in the Sight of thine Eyes; but knew thou, that for all these Things
God will bring thee into Judgment. Upon which Subject he spoke so home to my
Father's State and Condition, that he was convinced, and two others of his
Companions were reached and affected with the Testimony of Christ's Truth and
Gospel; my Father and two young Men had been walking in the Fields, having
religious Conversation together, and were providentially directed to the
Meeting, by observing some Friends going to it, whom they followed thither: One
of his Companions was Samuel Hodges, who lived and died a faithful Friend, at
whose House in succeeding Times a Meeting was settled, and is there continued,
and a Meeting House built at this Day at Mims, in Hertfordshire.

My Father was the first of the Family who received the Testimony of Truth as
it is in Jesus, after which his Father and Mother were convinced, and all his
Brothers and Sisters, who lived and died honest Friends, except one who died
young, continuing in the Church of England Persuasion. Soon after the
Convincement of my Father and his two Companions aforesaid, they met with a
Trial of their Faith and Patience; for being taken at a religious Meeting of
Friends, they were all three committed to the New-Prison in White-Chappel,
where having continued Prisoners for some Time, the Magistrates observing their
Christian Courage, Boldness and Innocence, and being touched with Tenderness
toward them, considering their Youth, they discharged them.

My Father, about the 25th Year of his Age, married my Mother (a virtuous young
Woman) who was the Widow of Nathaniel Harding, a Friend, who died under the
Sentence of Banishment for his Profession of Christ; the above Account I had
from my Father's own Mouth; what follows fell within my own Observation.

My dear Father met with great Exercises and Disapointments in his early Days;
he, dealing in his Father's Business, sold Meal to some who broke in his Debt,
which brought him low in the World, in which low Estate he was an eminent
Example of Patience, Resignation and Industry, laboring with his Hands for the
Support of his Family, and conscientiously answered all his Engagements; so
that it may be justly said of him, he was careful that he might owe nothing to
any Man but Love; and farther, he was very constant in keeping to Meetings,
being a good Example therein, though in very hot Times of Persecution, for when
Friends were sorely and severely persecuted on account of keeping their
religious Meetings, and the Prisons filled with them through the Nation, and
their Goods taken away, and much Spoil and Havoc made about the Years 1680 to
1684, my Father constantly attended Meetings, and never missed, as I remember,
when well; and though he was sometimes concerned to speak by way of Exhortation
to Friends in their public Meetings, when they were kept out of their
Meeting Houses (by the then Powers) to stand faithful to the Truth and
testifying of the solid Comfort and Satisfaction those had who truly waited on
the Lord, which the Faithful enjoyed, notwithstanding their deep and many
Sufferings for Christ's sake, and his Gospel, it pleased the Lord to preserve
him by his divine Providence, that he did not suffer Imprisonment, though the
wicked Informers were very busy in that Time of severe Persecution. I may
farther add, that when Father was about 60 Years of Age, he had a Concern to
visit Friends Meetings in the North of England, and some other Parts of the
Nation; and in the 75th Year of his Age, he traveled to Chester, and from
thence (in Company with James Bates, a public Friend, of Virginia) went over
for Ireland; in all which Services he had good Satisfaction, and was well
received of Friends: Diverse other Journeys and Travels he performed not here
noted; but this Journey into mother Nation at 75 Years of Age, shows his Age
had not quenched his Love and Zeal for his Lord's Work and Service.

In our Father's Old Age he was attended with very great Exercises: About the
77th Year of his Age, as he was assisting his Men in the Dusk of the Evening,
he missed his Footing, and fell down, and broke his Leg; and soon after his Leg
was well, he met with another Accident by a Fall, which disabled him, and made
him lame to his Death, never recovering the Hurt he had by that Fall, which was
after this Manner; he was sitting in a Chair by his Door on a Plank, which not
being set fast, it fell, and he, to save himself from the Stroke of the Plank,
fell with his Hip on the Stones, and got hurt exceedingly, notwithstanding he
was remarkable for his Activity; he would walk (though so aged, and also lame) as
far as the Workhouse, Devonshire-house, and Bull and Mouth Meetings [two or
three Miles from Home.] The last bad Accident that befell him was about three
Weeks before his Death, when, being walking in the Timber-yard, a single Plank,
which stood against a Pile, fell down, and striking him on the Side, threw him
down; he complained not much of the Blow till about a Week after, when he was
taken with a violent Pain in his Side, on the very Place where he received the
Stroke, and, when his Cough took him (with which he was often troubled) the
Pain was very great; howbeit, through Means of a Sear-cloth he received some
Ease, and the Pain of his Side abated, and the Cough went off; but a violent
Flux followed, and it brought him very low, and extreme weak; so that it was
thought he could not continue long; upon which Notice was sent to me, and I
went to see him, and found him very low; but he revived, and changed often in
this last Illness; I having been to see him five or six Days before, having an
Account he was ill, I then found him cheerful, and thought he might recover. He
continued all the Time of his Illness in a patient and resigned Frame of Mind;
on a first Day, in the Afternoon, he took his Bed, being the 6th of the First
Month, and in the Evening, after the Afternoon-meeting (which was the Day
before his Death) several Friends came to visit him, who, finding him very
weak, after a little Stay, went to take their Leave of him, whom he desired to
sit down, and after some Time of Silence, he broke forth in Declaration in an
intelligible and lively Manner, to this Effect, saying; We have no continuing
City here, but seek one to come, which has Foundations, whose Builder and
Maker is God: Friends, that we may all labor to be prepared for our last and
great Change, that when this earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved, we may have
a Habitation with the Lord, a Building not made with Hands, eternal in the
Heavens, and that it might be thus, the Lord has showed thee, O Man, what is
good, viz. To do justly, love Mercy, and walk humbly with thy God. I do not
expect but this will be the last Night I shall have in this World, and I desire
it may be remembered, as the Words of a dying Man (which came to pass, for he
died the next Day) O that we may labor to be clothed upon with our House that
is from Heaven, so that when the finishing Hour comes, we may have nothing to
do, but to die. About one or two a Clock, the next Morning, he began to change,
and desired to see me; I came to him, and found him very sensible, but expected
his End quickly to approach; he saying, he was waiting for his Change. My
Son-in-law, Samuel Thornton, being with me, and we sitting by the Bedside,
with his Nurse, his Housekeeper, and his Men, about the 4th Hour in the Morning
he prayed fervently after this Manner: Lord, now let thou thy Servant
depart in Peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation, which thou best
prepared before the Fa^e of all People (thou have given thy Son) a Light to
enlighten the Gentiles, and to be the Glory of thy People Israel; and now, Lord
be with thy People and Servants, and preserve my near and dear Relations, and
keep them from the Snares and Temptations of the Enemy, that in thy Truth they
may fear thy great Name.

After a little Time of Silence, he desired me to remember his dear Love, in
the Life of Christ Jesus, to my dear Brother, Thomas Chalkley, in Pennsylvania,
and to all my old Friends and Acquaintance.

About the 11th Hour in the Morning he enquired how the Tide was, which no Body
present could exactly tell; some Time after he asked again; his Man then went
out to see, returning, he told him, it would be High Water about 3 a Clock in
the Afternoon; he then lay still a while, and after some Pause spoke cheerfully
out aloud, so that all in the Room might hear him, I shall go off about Five;
his Man said, Master, how do know? To which he answered, Know, I do not
know, but I believe it. After this the Apothecary, one of his Neighbors (among
whom he was well beloved) about Noon came to see him, and asked him how he was?
Father answered, that for three or four Hours in the Night he thought he should
have gone. Why, said he, Sir, it will be no Surprise to you, I hope. No, no,
said my Father, very cheerfully. He taking Leave of Father, said, The Lord be
with you. To whom Father answered, And with thee also: The Doctor having
ordered him a comfortable Cordial to drink, he drank it willingly, and then
said, I don't think to drink any more in this World; but I hope I shall drink
plentifully of the River of Life: Then drawing near his End, finding his
Strength fail, there, being a Cord by his Order at the Bed's Feet, he raised
himself up thereby as long as he had any Strength left in his Hands, and when
his Hands and Shoulders failed, and his Head, when last lifted up, he spoke
very low and faultering, yet so as I could understand, and said, Now I am a
going, and about an Hour after, laying all the While without Sigh or Groan,
departed this Life as in a Slumber in sweet Peace, according as he had
foretold, just as the Clock struck Five in a perfect Enjoyment of that Legacy
our Savior left his Followers; My Peace I leave with you, etc. leaving us, of
the succeeding Generation, a good Example to follow; who, as he lived, so he
died, like a Lamb, in the eighty-fourth Year of his Age, the seventh Day of the
First Month, 1725-6.

GEO. CHALKLEY.


To which Account I shall add the following short Testimony concerning my dear
and greatly beloved Father, George Chalkley, viz.

I have a great Deal in my Heart, more than I can write concerning my dear
Father's Life, it having been a wonderful Life to me from my Youth up; his
early Care of me, and Counsel to me, when I was too thoughtless and wild, melts
me into Tears now in the Remembrance of it; and my tender Mother was a Partner
with him in the same Exercise, and she died in like Peace: The last Words I
heard her speak, were, I long to be dissolved. And as to my tender Father, I
would record a little briefly in Memory of him, that he was,

1st, A true and faithful Servant of Christ.

2d, A tender and affectionate Husband: I lived at Home with my Parents about
twenty Years, and I never heard (that I remember) an angry Expression between
them, only once something had troubled them, and they both wept, my Father
saying, I have been an indulgent Husband unto thee, and my Mother answered, I
have not been one of the worst of Wives to thee; which were the harshest Words,
and the greatest Difference that I observed between them; for their Life was a
Life of Peace and Love, and they were an excellent Example to us their
Children. Oh! May we follow them therein to the End!

3d, He had a fatherly Care for his Children, in tender Prayers for us, and in
good Advice to us, and in giving us Learning according to his Ability, and
teaching us (by his Example, as well as Precept) Industry, Humility, and the
true Religion of our blessed Savior, endeavoring to plant it in us betimes,
and to destroy the evil Root of Sin in us, while young.

4th, I was his Servant, as well as his Son, and I can truly say, his Service
was delightful, and his Company pleasing and profitable to me; and he was also
beloved much by his other Servants.

5th, He was universally beloved by his Neighbors, and I do not remember any
Difference between him and them, in the many Years I lived with him; but all
was Peace and Love.

6th, He was very loving to his Relations, and true to his Friends, and a
hearty Well-wisher and Lover of his King and Country.

T. C.


Our General-meeting at Franckfort, the 30th of Fourth-month, was large, our
Friend William Piggot, from London, being there (in the Course of his Visit to
Friends in America) and had close Work and good Service in this Meeting.

In the Fifth Month, 1726, I visited the Meetings of Friends at Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Germantown, etc.
Germantown, and Bybury, in some of which Meetings, as also at our own at
Franckfort, I had very comfortable Satisfaction: My Testimony was pretty sharp
sometimes to Transgressors, and therefore some of them hate me, as the Jews did
my great Master: Because I was concerned to testify, that their Deeds were
Evil, and to excite my Friends to manifest a Christian Zeal, by openly denying
ungodly Men, while they continue in their ungodly Works; but when they become
truly penitent, and reform their Lives, the Arms of Christ, and his Church,
will be open to receive them.

Being under some melancholy Thoughts, because some Persons, for whom I wished
well, and to whom I had been of Service, were so envious and malicious as to
tell false Stories of me, tending to defame me; as I was riding to our Meeting,
it opened with Satisfaction to my Mind, The more my Enemies hate me, The more
I Will love, if that can be; and I had hearty Desires to come up in the Practice
of this Resolution: And I then thought I should come up with them all, for if a
Man loves and prays for his Enemies, if they are gained, he is instrumental to
their Good, and so has Cause of Rejoicing; and if they are not gained, he
heaps Coals of Fire on their Heads; so that every true Christian, by keeping
under the Cross of Christ, and in the Practice of his Doctrine, gets the better
of his Enemies.

In the Beginning of the Sixth Month, I was at the Burial of Robert Fletcher, a
worthy Man, and one universally beloved by all Sorts of People (as far as ever
I heard) There was a large Meeting at his Funeral, wherein several Testimonies,
suitable to the Occasion, were born: Some of his last Words were mentioned,
which were, That he had lived according to the Measure of Grace given him. And
the Doctrine of the Resurrection was maintained according to the Scripture, and
the People were exhorted to prepare for their final Change. The Death of this
Friend was a Loss to the Country, to our Society, and to his Neighbors, as
well as to his Family and Friends.

After Meeting I traveled toward Uwchland, Uwchland.
had a Meeting there on First Day, and on Second-day another Meeting at Lewis
Walke^'s, and on Third-day was at the General-meeting at Haverford: Haverford.
Friends were exhorted to dwell in the Love of God, one toward another; for if
they lost their Love, they would lose their Religion, their Peace, and their
God; for God is Love, and those that dwell in God, dwell in Love.

My Neighbor, Daniel Worthington, accompanied me in this rough Travel, some
Part of the Way being hilly, and very stony and bushy, and the Weather wet. We
had four Meetings, and rode about four-score Miles; and though I had traveled
much in this Province, I had never been at some of those Places before: But a
few Nights before I set out, I had a plain Prospect of them in a Dream, or
Night Vision, as I saw them afterward, which I thought somewhat remarkable.

The People inhabiting this Province, are now become numerous, and make many
Settlements in the Woods, more than I have observed in my Travels in any of the
British Plantations; and there has long been a Desire in my Mind that they
might prosper in the Work of true and thorough Reformation; and a godly Fear
and Concern being upon me, I have sometimes put them in Mind of the State of
this Land, when their Fathers first came and settled in it; and to caution
them, of growing careless, and forgetting the Lord, lest he should forsake
them, and turn their now fruitful Fields into a barren Wilderness, as this was
so lately; which it is easy with him to do, if he pleases, for the Sins of the
People.

After my Return Home, I visited many Meetings, as, Abington. Philadelphia.
Abington (Youths-meeting) Philadelphia, and Chester. At Chester I was
concerned to direct the People to that Power in themselves, which is the Life
of Religion, and to be careful not to rest in the best Forms without it; for if
we had only the Form of Godliness, and had not the Life and Power of it, it
might be as reasonable for People to turn away from us, as it was for our
Forefathers to turn away from other Societies.

In the Seventh Month, I was at our Yearly Meeting held at Burlington, for the
Provinces of New Jersey and Pennsylvania, which was a very large Meeting, there
being Friends from New England, Rhode Island, and Europe.

First Day Morning I went to Evesham to the Burial of our serviceable Friend
Jervis Stockdale; Evesham
he being in good Esteem, there was much People: The Meeting was in a good
tender Frame, and continued several Hours so, in which diverse Testimonies were
delivered, in order to stir up People to Truth and Righteousness, and godly
living, that they might die well. I lodged the Night before at Peter Fearon's,
and in the Morning I was awaked out of my Sleep, as it were by a Voice,
expressing these Words; HE THAT LIVES AND BELIEVES IN ME SHALL NEVER DIE.
This I took to be the Voice of Christ, I do not know that it was vocal, but it
was as plain as one. From these Expressions I had to observe to the People, the
happy State and Privilege of those who live and believe in Christ, and that
such must not live in Sin.

During the Time of our Yearly Meeting, some rude People came up the River in a
small Sloop, provided by them for that Purpose, and spent their Time in
drinking, carowsing, and firing of Guns, to the Grief and Concern of Friends,
who were religiously discharging their Duty, in serving and worshipping the
Almighty; and, it is observable, that one of these disorderly Persons had his
Hand shot off at that Time, and that the chief Promoters and Actors in this
riotous Company, were soon after cut off by Death, in the Prime of their Days.

After the General-meeting was over, which ended well, Friends in the Love of
God departed in Peace for their several Habitations, praising and glorifying
God.

In the Beginning of the Eighth Month, having some Business at Cape-May, I
ferried over to Gloucester, and went the first Night to James Lord's, lodged
there, got up before Day, it being First Day Morning, and rode near thirty
Miles to Salem, Salem.
where we had a good Meeting, Cohansy.
and so went to Alloway's Creek, Cohansy, and through a barren Wilderness to
Cape-May, where we had one Meeting, and returned by Way of Egg-Harbour home; in
which Journey I traveled upwards of two hundred Miles. At Cape-May I was
concerned to write a few Lines concerning Swearing, as follows, viz.

Against Swearing.
Christians ought not to swear in any Case, for these Reasons -- 1st, Because
Christ, their Lord, forbad it; unto whom the Angels in Heaven must be subject,
and, doubtless, so must mortal Man, to whom he gave the Precept. We must and
ought to be subject to Christ, who is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and the
Judge of the Quick and the Dead: To him all Mortals must be accountable for
their Disobedience. He says, in his Sermon on the Mount, Mat. v. 34. John xv.
14.
thus, I say, Swear not at all: Wherefore, how can Christians (or such who are
his Friends) swear, since he says also, Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever
I command you. So consequently those who disobey his Commands, must be his
Enemies. To this Command it is objected, that Christ only spoke against common
or profane Swearing: But this must needs be a great Mistake because Christ
says, Mat. v. 33.
It was said in old Time, Thou shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths
(alluding to the Law of Moses) which Oaths were solemn and religious; therefore
Christ did not only prohibit vain and profane Swearing, but all Swearing: If
we understand the Word, All, and what all signifies, then all and any Swearing
whatsoever, is not lawful for a Christian, according to Christ's Law and
Command, which is positive to his Followers.

2dly, James (the holy Apostle of Christ, our Lawgiver, and our King) says,
Above all Things, James v. 12.
my Brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by
any other Oath. Christ says, Swear not at all; and James, his Disciple and
Apostle, says, Swear not by any Oath; wherefore, if swearing on the Bible be
any Oath, or is swearing at all, it is contrary to the express Doctrine of
Christ, and his Apostle James, as is plain from the above cited Texts.

3dly. The Primitive Christians did not swear at all, in the first Ages of
Christianity. Query, Whether our Modern swearing Christians are better than the
Primitive Ones, who for Christ, and Conscience sake, could not swear at all,
even before a Magistrate, though legally called?

4thly, Many Christians have suffered Death, because they for Conscience sake
could not swear, and so break the Command of Christ their Lord; and do not our
Modern Christians trample upon their Testimony and Sufferings? Some of whom
suffered Death for not swearing before the Heathen Magistrates, and some were
martyred by the Papists; judge then whether the Persecuted or Persecutors were
in the right.

5thly, Many of our worthy Friends and Forefathers (since the former) have
suffered to Death in Goals for not swearing, when required by persecuting
Protestants, because for Christ's sake and Sayings, as above, they could not
swear at all: And this has been a Testimony which our Society has constantly
born ever since we have been a People, for the Reasons above, and more also, if
there were Occasion, which might be given.

The 23d of Eighth Month, I was at the Morning Meeting at Philadelphia, on a
First Day of the Week, Philadelphia.
which was large, and I was concerned therein to exhort Friends to labor to
purge and cleanse our Society of such under our Profession who live in open
Profaneness, and are riotous in their Conversations. I was at the Bank-meeting
in the Afternoon, where we had a comfortable Time: And the next Sixth-day of
the Week I was at our Monthly Meeting, where it was unanimously agreed, in
Consideration of some late indecent Conduct of some Persons pretending to be of
our Profession, that a Testimony from that Meeting should go forth against such
disorderly Doings, and unchristian Practices; and that all such Persons, who
were irregular in their Conversations, be disowned to be of our Community,
until they by Repentance, manifest their Reformation; which was accordingly
soon after published, and read in our First Day Morning Meeting, and in our
Youths-meeting. And about this Time our Governor issued a seasonable
Proclamation against Drinking to Excess, Gaming, Swearing profanely,
Revelling, Night-walking, and Disturbing the Peace, and other Immoralities;
which afforded some Satisfaction to sober and well-inclined Friends, and
others: Yet there remained a great Exercise and Concern upon my Mind, that some
young People, whose Parents had been careful in training them up, were grown so
wicked, that by their extravagant Conduct, they not only disturbed our
religious Meetings, but likewise became obnoxious to the peaceable Government
we live under.

In the Ninth Month I was at diverse Meetings, at Merion, Merion. Germantown,
etc.
Germantown, Fairhill, Abington, and Philadelphia; in which were several
Marriages solemnized in a religious Manner. And in the Tenth Month, I went into
the County of Salem, about my Affairs: It happened to be at the Time of the
Quarterly Meeting for Salem and Gloucester Counties; but I did not know of it,
Salem.
until I came to Salem, where Friends were glad to see me, as also I was to see
them; there were some of us whose Hearts were knit and united together as
Jonathan's and David's, the divine Love of God being much shed abroad in our
Hearts at that Meeting* When it was over, and I had finished my Business, I
could not be clear in my Mind, without having some Meetings in the said
Counties of Salem and Gloucester; and though it was a sickly Time, and People
died pretty much in those Parts where we were going, James Lord and I, in the
Love of Christ, visited the Meetings at Alloway's Creek, Cohansy, Pile's-
Grove, Woodberry, Cohansy, etc.
Newton, and Haddonfield, having Meetings every Day in the Week, except the
last, and sometimes riding near twenty Miles after Meeting, the Days being at
the shortest, and the Weather very cold; but the Lord was with us, which made
sufficient Amends for all the bodily Hardships we met with.

I got home well, but weary; and was well and joyfully received by my loving
Spouse, Children, and Servants; and I was truly thankful to the Most High, for
his Presence and Goodness continued to me; so that, though I perceived my bodily
Strength to decline apace, my Sight, Hearing, and Voice, failing much, I have
Occasion to believe, at times I was helped even beyond Nature in the Work of
Christ, my dear Lord and Master.

The 27th of the Tenth Month, I heard the News of the Death of my dear Friend
John Lee (by one sent to Desire my Company at his Burial) It affected me with
Sorrow, he being an old Acquaintance, and inward Friend of mine, with whom I
had traveled many Miles: He was a living, serviceable Minister of the Gospel
of Christ, and instrumental to convince diverse of that Principle of Divine
Light and Truth, which we profess. I could not be at his Burial, because of my
Indisposition, and the Unseasonableness of the Weather; yet I think it my Duty,
to say this concerning him; That our Love and Friendship was constant and
entire unto the End, having been acquainted about thirty-five Years, as near as
I can remember.

In the Eleventh Month, as I was meditating in my Closet, on the Duty and
Beauty of that great Virtue of Temperance, it appeared very bright to the View
of my Mind, and the great Benefit of it to those who loved and lived in it:
1st, As to Religion, it tends to keep the Mind in an even Temper, which is a
Help to Devotion, and the Practice of religious Duties. 2dly, It is a great
Preservative to Health and a good Constitution. 3dly, It is a Blessing to
Posterity, in many Considerations. Whereas Intemperance destroys the Health,
stains the Reputation, hurts Posterity (in respect to a healthy Constitution of
Body, and Estate) ruins many Families, brings to Poverty and Disgrace, and,
what is yet worst of all, is a great Let to Religion and the true Fear of God,
and is a great Scandal to any who make Profession of the Christian Religion.

In this Month I accompanied William Piggot (who lately arrived from London, on
a religious Visit to the Meetings of Friends in America.) From Philadelphia we
went to my House at Franckfort, and from thence to North Wales, North Wales.
Abington. Franckfort. Germantown.
and had two large satisfactory Meetings on the First Day; next Day we were at
the Monthly Meeting at Abington, the Third-day at Franckfort, and Fourth-day at
Germantown. Fifth-day I went to Philadelphia Weekday Meeting, and the said
Friend to Abington General-meeting, and a few Days after we met again at the
Quarterly Meeting of Ministers and Elders at Philadelphia.

The 8th of the Twelfth Month was our Youths-meeting at Franckfort; many dying
about this Time, I was concerned in the Meeting to put Friends in mind of their
Mortality; and that I had told Friends lately, at their Meetings at Abington
and Philadelphia, "That as I was riding from my House to Philadelphia, about a
Mile from the City, I saw (in the Vision of Life) the Hand of the Lord
stretched over the City and Province, with a Rod in it, in order to correct the
Inhabitants for their Sins and Iniquities; which Sight affected my Mind
greatly, and although I did not hear any vocal Voice, nor see any visible Hand,
yet it was as plainly revealed to me as though I had:" And that notwithstanding I
understood some slighted that Testimony, yet I observed to them, that since
that Time, more People were taken away than common, as they now might see; and
indeed that inward Sight and Sense I had of the Displeasure of God for the Sins
of the Times, made great Impression on my Mind; and that no Flesh might glory,
the Lord took, from the Evil to come, several sober, well-inclined young
People, as well as diverse whose Lives and Conversations were evil and vicious;
so that all had need to be warned to be watchful, and turn to the Lord, lest he
come at unawares, and call us suddenly out of the World unprepared. In the
Twelfth and First Months many died, of all Ages and Professions; and now some,
who would hardly give Credit to what I had delivered in several Meetings, began
to see the Fulfilling of it, and great Talk there was about it: And many solid
and large Meetings we had with the People at diverse Funerals about this Time,
exhorting the People not to slight the present Visitation of the Almighty, and
to prepare for Eternity, to meet the Judge of the Quick and the Dead, who
stands at the Door. And among many that were taken away by Death, were some few
of my particular Friends; and first, dear Hannah Hill, who was a bright Example
of Piety and Charity, she was like a nursing Mother to me in my Affliction, as
was her Husband more like a Brother, than one not related, whose generous
Entertainment I may never forget at times. Thomas Griffith, and Elizabeth his
Wife, died also about this Time: Thomas was a serviceable Man, and well
esteemed in our Society; and his Wife a noted Woman for being helpful to, and
visiting the Sick: She chose the House of Mourning, rather than the House of
Mirth. These were worthy Ancients, who made peaceable and good Ends, and to
whom may be properly applied that remarkable Text of Scripture; Mark the
Upright, and behold the Just, for the End of that Man is Peace.

1727.
In the Second Month, 1727, I proceeded on a Voyage to Barbados on Account of
Business, for the Support of my Family, A Voyage to Barbados on Account of
Trade.
and in order to discharge my just Debts, which were occasioned by great Losses
by Sea and Land. Many of my Friends were kind to me, and sent a Cargo of Goods,
in the Sloop John, Anthony Peel Master, consigned to me for Sales and Returns.
When the Vessel was loaded, she proceeded down the River, and I went by Land to
Salem, and was at Meeting there on First Day, and on Third-day went aboard the
Sloop at Elsenborough: On the 8th of the Second Month, we took in our Boat and
Anchors, and proceeded to Sea. From Elsenborough and the Capes I wrote to my
Wife, giving her an Account how it was with me, and encouraged her to bear my
Absence with Patience: It was indeed very hard for us to part.

I may not omit taking Notice of an Exercise which I felt one Night as I lay on
my Bed in Philadelphia (on the 21st of the 1st Month, my Sleep being taken from
me) which I recollected and wrote down on board the aforesaid Vessel, and was
in this Manner, viz.

That the Lord was angry with the People of Philadelphia and Pennsylvania,
because of the great Sins and Wickedness which was committed by the
Inhabitants, in Public Houses, and elsewhere: And that the Lord was angry with
the Magistrates also, because they use not their Power as they might do, in
order to suppress Wickedness; and do not, so much as they ought, put the Laws
already made in Execution against Profaneness and Immorality: And the Lord is
angry with the Representatives of the People of the Land, because they take not
so much Care to suppress Vice and Wickedness, and wicked Houses, in which our
Youth are grossly corrupted, as they ought to do: And also the Lord is angry
with many of the better Sort of the People, because they seek after and love
the Things of this World, more than the Things of his Kingdom: And it was
showed me, that the Anger of the Most High would still be against us, until
there was a greater Reformation in these Things. [ It is worthy of
Commendation, that our Governor, Thomas Lloyd, sometimes in the Evening, before
he went to rest, used to go in Person to Public Houses, and order the People
he found there to their own Houses, till, at length, he was instrumental to
promote better Order, and did, in a great Measure, suppress Vice and Immorality
in the City.]

For some Days after we were at Sea, the Weather was pleasant, and we had our
Health, for which my Heart was truly thankful. I exhorted the Sailors against
Swearing; and though they had been much used to it, they left it off, so that it
was rare to hear any of them swear; for which Reformation, so far, I was glad.
I lent and gave them several good Books, which they read, and showed much
Respect to me: But soon after the Wind was contrary (for some Days) and some in
the Vessel were quarrelsome. I asked them what they thought of the Saying of
Christ, viz. If a Man smite thee on one Cheek, turn to him the other also? At
which they were silent, and better conditioned to one another afterward, and
we had some Reformation both from Fighting and Swearing. This Voyage I was not
so Sea-sick as I formerly had been (though I had, before I left Home, some uneasy
Thoughts about my usually being Sea-sick) which I took as a peculiar Favor
from Heaven. About the Latitude of 20 Degrees North, we met with Calms and
contrary Winds, which was very hard for some in the Vessel to bear, they
putting themselves much out of Temper about it; as for my own Part, I had been
used to Disappointments, and therefore did not so much mind it. I spent pretty
much of my Time in reading and writing, and God being gracious, it was, in the
main, a comfortable Time to me; and I enjoyed my Health as well as ever I did
at Sea in my Life, for which I often breathed forth inward Thanks to the
Almighty. On the 5th of the Third Month we arrived at Barbados, Barbados.
and I was lovingly received by our Friends, but came to a very low Market for
my Goods.

I visited Friends Meetings on the Island, and had several open Meetings at
Bridge-Town, Bridge-Town, Spight's-Town, etc.
and Spight's- Town, and likewise at Pumpkin-Hill, and the Spring. On the Day
of Pentecost (so called) we had a Meeting at Bridge-Town, in which was shown,
the Work and Operation of God's Spirit on the Old World, and under the Law; and
the everlasting Duration and Operation of the same Holy Spirit under the Gospel
Dispensation, which, Christ said, should abide forever. At the
Quarterly Meeting at Spight's- Town, was Judge Allen, and the Captain of the
Man of War stationed there, with several others, not of our Society. I was much
drawn forth in this Meeting to speak of the Power of the Father, Son, and the
Spirit, opening to the People how we had been misrepresented, in respect to our
Belief in the Trinity, or the Holy Three which bear Record in Heaven, the
Father, Word, and Spirit, which Three are One; for that it was clear and plain
that we are more orthodox in our Belief in the Deity, than those who do not
believe in the Operation of the Holy Ghost; as also that none could be true
Christians without it. It was queried, How could they be clear in their Belief
in the Holy Trinity, or the Three that bear Record in Heaven, who believe the
Holy Spirit is ceased in his Operations, Gifts, or immediate Revelations, and,
if ceased, when, and where, to whom, and how? The People were very sober and
attentive, and staid all the Time, and after the Meeting was done some Time,
diverse expressed their Satisfaction with what was said. My good Friend Peter
Sharp, of Maryland, was with me at this Meeting, (...) ^ose Account some of the
People came. He had (...) Service in the Meeting, and I was glad of his ^pany
in this Island, where we joyfully met and parted in the Love of Christ. At this
Meeting we had each of us a Certificate from Friends, signifying their Unity
with our Conversations and Services. The last Meeting I had at Barbados, was at
Spight's- Town, on a First Day; it was a solid, good Meeting, in which I took
my Leave of Friends there, and exhorted them to believe in and hear Christ, he
being a Teacher that could not be removed from them, as Men often were; and,
though they were but few, they were desired to meet in Christ's Name; and I had
to show them the Difference between us and other Christian Professors, who hold
no public Worship, if there be no outward Teacher: Whereas, if but Two or
Three meet in the Name of Christ, he has promised to be in the midst of them;
and he is the best Teacher we can have.

On the 14th of Fourth Month we set Sail from this Island, and, for the most
Part, At Sea.
had fair Weather and fair Winds, and saw several Ships, but spoke with none.

I was one Evening leaning over the Side of the Vessel, as being very lonesome
(having little Conversation with any in the Vessel, for diverse Reasons) I
turned from all outward Things to the Lord, and was glad to feel his Presence
and Goodness, which was a Comfort to me in my lonesome State; and as my Travels
and Concerns had called and caused me to be much on the Seas, it also pleased
my good and gracious God, to support me thereon many Times, in diverse Trials,
Temptations, and Exercises; for all which, I bow in awful Reverence before him,
and return Thanksgiving and Praise to his great Name.

The 1st of the Fifth Month, about Noon, we came to the Capes of Delaware, and
sailed up the Bay; but, in a little Time, we touched the Ground with our Vessel
several Times; there being little Wind, we get no Harm; but two Hours after, or
thereabouts, a Gust, or Storm of Wind, took us, which, if it had met with us on
the Shoals where we struck, in all Likelihood we must have perished; which I
took to be a remarkable Deliverance. Next Tide we got to Newcastle, and, it
being First Day, I had a Meeting with Friends there, with which we were greatly
refreshed in the Lord, and in one another. After Meeting I went on board the
Sloop, and, having a fair Wind, we sailed for Philadelphia, where we arrived
about the eleventh Hour, lodged that Night at Paul Preston's, and next Day went
home to my Family at Franckfort, where my Wife, Children, and Servants,
received me with much rejoicing.

When I was in Barbados, P. M. who accompanied me from Bridge-Town to Windward
to Counselor Weeks's, told me, "That when I was in the Island before, he and I
had some Discourse concerning the Use of the Sword, he then (not being of our
Society) wore a Sword, but now had left it off, and his Business also, which
was worth some Hundreds a Year." I had reminded him of Christ's Words, that,
Those who take the Sword, should perish with the Sword, Mat. xxvi. 52. and,
Resist not Evil, and if a Man smite thee on one Cheek, turn the other also:
Love Enemies, do Good to them that hate you, pray for them who despitefully use
you, and persecute you. After I had used these Arguments, he asked me, If one
came to kill me, would I not kill rather than be killed? I told him, No; so far
as I know my own Heart, I had rather be killed than kill. He said, That was
strange, and desired to know what Reason I could give for it. I told him, That
I being innocent, if I were killed in my Body, my Soul might be happy; but if I
killed him, he dying in his Wickedness, would, consequently, be unhappy; and if
I were killed, he might live to repent; but if I killed him, he would have no
Time to repent; so that, if he killed me, I should have much the better, both
in respect to myself and to him. This Discourse had made so much Impression,
and so affected him, that he said, he could not but often remember it. And when
we parted at Bridge-Town, we embraced each other, in open Arms of Christian
Love, far from that which would hurt or destroy.

After I had been at home some Time, I visited the Meetings at Philadelphia,
Burlington and Germantown, in which Places I had Service of diverse Kinds, and
was lovingly received by Friends and others.

In the Fifth Month, Joshua Fielding and John Oxley had a large and
satisfactory Meeting at Franckfort. Joshua came from London on a religious
Visit to America, and having been on diverse Islands, he landed on the Main at
South Carolina, and from thence traveled through the Wilderness 400 Miles, or
more, where no Public Friend had ever traveled before: The Journey was
perilous, but the Lord was with him; who may, in his own Time, make Way for his
Servants in those desert Places. John Oxley came on the same Account from
Barbados, and had good Service among Friends in his public Ministry.

In this Month we thinking it convenient to send our little Children to School,
and not having a Schoolmaster of our Society near us, concluded to put our Son
and Daughter under the Care of Nathaniel Walton, to whom I thought it my Duty
to write a few Lines about the Salutation and Language I would have them
trained up in, which were on this wise, viz.

Franckfort, 30. 5 th Mon. 1727. Loving Friend Nathaniel Walton,
I HOPE thou will excuse this Freedom which I take with thee, in writing this
on Account of my Children, in these Particulars, viz. Respecting the Complement
of the Hat, and Courtesying, the Practice thereof being against my professed
Principle; 1st, Because I find nothing like it in the Bible; but, as I think,
the contrary. Thou knows the Passage of the Three Children of God, who stood
covered before a mighty Monarch; and Mordecai, who could not bow to great
Haman: And, 2dly, I believe those Practices derived from vain, proud Man. And
as to Language, I desire my Children may not be permitted to use the plural
Language to a single Person; but I pray thee to learn them to say, Thee, and
Thou, and Thy, and to speak it properly (diverse using it improperly) and the
rather I desire it, because it is all along used in the Divine Inspired Holy
Writings. I suppose thou art not a Stranger of its Rise being from the Grandeur
and Apostasy of the Romish Church; and, also, that You to a single Person, is
not consonant to the Book of God, nor the true Rules of Grammar -- I know it is
generally objected, That the End of Speech is to be understood -- But it is
understood better in and according to the Language of God, Christ, and the Holy
Ghost, in the Bible, and the Language of Kings, and all People, as we read it
in the Holy Scriptures; why then should we be ashamed of it, or shun it, and
bring in and uphold a Custom contrary to it? The same Care I would have thee
take, about the Names of the Days and Months, which are derived from the Names
of the Gods of the Heathen, and are not found in the Bible. I suppose I have
the Mind of all those of our Society in the above, it being consonant to our
Principle and Profession, and I write in a Motion of divine Love to all.

As to the School-learning of my Children, I leave to thy Management, not
questioning thy Ability therein; and if they want Correction, spare not the Rod.

I hope thou will observe this Direction in Teaching my Children, in which thou will oblige thy assured Friend,

T. C.


The latter End of the Fifth, and the Beginning of the Sixth Months, the
Weather was exceeding hot, so that diverse People died suddenly of the Heat (as
it was supposed.)

The Beginning of the Sixth Month I was at the Youths-meeting at Abington,
which was large, Abington.
and open to many; and I not having been there since I came from Sea, diverse
expressed their Gladness to see me; and we were that Day favored with some
Showers, both celestial and elementary, to our Comfort.

In the same Month I was also at the Youths-meeting in Philadelphia: It had
been a sickly Time, Philadelphia.
but many had recovered. That Passage opened on my Mind, to speak of in the
Meeting, concerning the Lepers which Christ cleansed and healed, being ten in
Number, and that but one came to return Thanks to God, for being healed, and
restored to Health, Luke xvii. 12. Friends were exhorted to prize their Health,
and to show their Thankfulness to God, the Giver of it, by fearing and serving
him, and taking Heed to Christ, the Word, in their Hearts. The Meeting was in a
good, solid Frame, and we praised the Lord together, and gave him Thanks for
his merciful Visitation.

About this Time I heard of the Death of our King (GEORGE the First) a Prince
whom I loved and honored; which News was very sorrowful to me on diverse
Accounts: His Love and Kindness to our Society, was well worthy our grateful
Remembrance.

On a Third-day, being our Week-day-meeting at Franckfort, Elizabeth Whartnaby
and Mary Smith were there: It was a comfortable Opportunity. They were two
Nights at my House. Elizabeth was preparing to leave this Land for Barbados and
Europe, intending a religious Visit to Friends.

The 20th of the Sixth Month, going into my Closet, I there met with a Paper of
my Son-in-Law Isaac Brown's, and finding the Contents were religious, as I had
done of several of his late Writings, I found it on my Mind to write to him
after this Manner:

Dear Son Isaac,
A Letter to Isaac Brown.
BY several Writings of thine (of late) I perceive that a good Thing is at work
in thy Mind, the which I pray the All-wise and Infinite Being to promote in thy
Heart, to thy eternal Salvation, and his Glory. I now begin to be in some Hopes
that my Prayers and Tears for thee, in the Lord's Time, may be answered: And I
do believe, if thou keeps low in thy Mind, that God will more and more visit
thee. The Advice of David to his Son Solomon, when he also gave him the
Kingdom, comes before my Mind to give thee -- My Son, know thou the God of thy
Father, and serve him with a perfect Heart, and with a willing Mind; For the
Lord searches all Hearts, and understands all the Imaginations of the
Thoughts; if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him,
he will cast thee off forever, 1 Chronicles. xxviii. 9. Dear Isaac, this was Counsel
from one of the greatest and best of Kings, to a wise young Prince, who
petitioned the Almighty for divine Wisdom, before Riches, or Honor, or long
Life; which Petition so pleased God, that he answered his Request, and, over
and above, blessed him in an extraordinary Manner.

I perceive thou art inclined to read pretty much: I pray thee, that thy chief
Study in Books may be the holy Scriptures. Let all other Books (though of Use,
and good, in their Places) be subservient to them; for their Authority, of all
other Writings (to the true Believers in Christ) are most divine; they having a
supernatural Spring and divine Evidence in them to the virtuous and pious
Readers. Thou, my Son, wilt much comfort the Heart of thy tender Mother, and of
me thy loving and careful Father, if thou follows and perseveres in the Ways of
Virtue and Truth; which, that thou may, is the Prayer of thy affectionate
Father-in-Law,

T. C.


The latter End of the Sixth Month, I went to the General-meeting of Ministers
and Elders for the East Part of New Jersey, and to the Quarterly and
Youths-Meetings at Burlington, Burlington. Stony-Brook. Bucks County.
and to a General-meeting at Stony-Brook, and to the Quarterly Meeting of the
County of Bucks -- John Oxley, of Barbados, and Joshua Fielding, of London,
were at diverse of those Meetings; wherein we had open, seasonable
Opportunities; and I had a large, affecting Account from Joshua, of his long
and difficult Travels in the Service of Truth to the West India Isles, and
thence to South Carolina, from whence he came through the Wilderness, by Land,
through North Carolina, Virginia, etc. to this Province.

The 16th of the Seventh Month began our Yearly Meeting at Philadelphia,
Yearly Meeting at Philadelphia,
which was attended with the gracious Presence of God, to the Comfort and great
Satisfaction of many Souls. In this Meeting diverse young Men and young Women
appeared, who were lately come forth in the Ministry, and, as I believe, had
received a Measure of the Gift of Christ's Gospel; which was Cause of Rejoicing
to the Faithful among us, and excited our Thanksgiving and Praises to the
Almighty Lord of Heaven and Earth.

At this Meeting we had the Company of four Ministers from Great Britain, and
one from Barbados, and many from diverse other Parts, it being a very large
Gathering of some Thousands of People (as was believed) in which many were
strengthened in their Faith in Christ, and comforted through the Power of the
Holy Ghost, that blessed Comforter, which Christ promised to his Church, who
should be with them forever, and guide them into all Truth.

Next First Day after the Yearly Meeting, I, with several of my Neighbors,
went over Delaware to a Meeting up Pens^wken Creek; Pens^wken.
in which the wonderful Love of God was declared, in ^en^ng his Son upon Earth,
who, as he was Man, died for Man, and is now by his Spirit present with all
those that truly believe in him; he bring the Messenger of the Covenant of God
to Mankind. -- And on Second-day, being the 25th of the Seventh Month, I had
the sorrowful Tidings of the Death of my beloved Friend James Lord; who, on his
Deathbed, desired that I might be sent for to his Burial. In the Consideration
of that Christian Love which was between us, I think I may truly note, That we
were always glad to meet each other; therefore the Thoughts of this so sudden
Change, and final Parting, brought, for the present, a Sadness and Heaviness
over my Mind; considering his Station in that Neighborhood, and Service in
that Congregation to which he did belong; for therein he was well-beloved, and
very serviceable.

And Oh! The Loss that his dear Wife and tender Children will have of him,
really affects me with Sorrow in penning these Notes; but the Sorrow, in these
Things, is all on our Side; for he, without Doubt, is at Rest with his great
Master in Heaven. We had a larger Meeting at his Funeral, than ever was known
to be there before (as an ancient Friend told me) which was solemn and
serviceable to many.

Some Time after, having been at diverse Meetings about home, John Oxley and I,
in Company, visited Friends on Long Island. Long Island.
At Flushing we were at the Burial of Jonathan Dickenson: Many People, of
diverse Persuasions, were at the Meeting on that Occasion, and were very sober
and attentive. -- I was at the Yearly Meeting for the South Side of the Island,
at a Place called Seccataug, which Meeting was large, many Friends and others
coming to it over the Plains. I was afterward at the Yearly Meeting at
Shrewsbury, Shrewsbury.
in East-Jersey, which held three Days, and was very large, and the last Day
the People were very still -- Joshua Fielding was at this Meeting, and was
therein concerned to preach the Gospel of Christ with good Authority, and
Matter suitable to a true Gospel-minister; John Oxley was ill of a Fever, so
that he could not be there; but there were Brethren from diverse Parts, and the
Power and Presence of the Most High was with and among us; blessed be his Name.

I was also at Rahaway River, where was a solid, Rahaway.
good Meeting. From thence I returned home, having been abroad about a Month,
and at above 20 Meetings, and traveled above 350 Miles.

In the Eighth Month, at Franckfort, Franckfort.
we had three Burials out of one House, at one Time; the Mother, Daughter, and
Granddaughter (of which I had never known the like Instance before) On this
Occasion we had the Company of many Neighbors, and a very solemn Meeting at
our Meeting House at Franckfort.

About this Time I was at diverse Meetings at Philadelphia, Abington, and
Burlington: Philadelphia. Burlington.
We had an Evening-meeting at Burlington with Richard Smith, junior; who had
been so ill that he could not get out to Meetings for some Months: It was such
a satisfactory Meeting, that he, and I, and others that were there, will not
easily forget, our Hearts being broken together.

The World still continued to frown upon me; but, though my Case was such in this
World, yet, at Times, I had great Consolation in Christ; and, in the Midst of
my Troubles, when I looked back, I could truly say, That I had not been
extravagant, but frugal; not covetous, but charitable; not idle, but
industrious; not willing to be such an Infidel as not to take Care for my
Family; it was some solid Comfort to my Mind; and I bless the Almighty, that I
always preferred his Work and Service to my own, and therein had great Peace.
This I can also say, if it were the last I should say, That I never wilfully,
or knowingly, wronged any Man, Woman, or Child, since I came to Years of
Discretion; and yet I have nothing to boast of; it is the Lord's Grace and
Mercy which saves us.

Having Occasion to make another Voyage to Barbados, I wrote to the Teacher of
my Children as follows:

Franckfort, 10 th of 10 th Mon. 1727. Loving Friend,
I BEING going to Barbados, leave the Charge of my little Children to thy Care,
not doubting thy Management of them, by their growing in their Learning, please
to instruct them to Sobriety, and the Fear of God, and Faith in Christ; and, if
I never should see them nor thee any more (our Lives being uncertain in this
World) pray let them know that it was their Father's Will and Desire, That they
should mind their Learning, and, above all Things, mind the Fear of the Most
High. When my little Daughter has read her Testament through, I would have her
go to Writing; and George the same, on the same Terms. Please to learn them the
Use of Chapter and Verse, that if any ask them where they are learning, they
may tell. And, kind Friend, Inasmuch as I perceive thou have followed my former
Directions, I look on myself obliged to thee; therefore am so much the more
free to impart my Mind to thee, now on my Departure; which, with real Love, is
from thy loving Friend,

T. C.
P. S. Although my Care is great for my Childrens learning their Books, yet it
is much more so as to their learning true Piety and Virtue.




On the 25th of Tenth Month we set sail from Philadelphia, in the Sloop Dove,
Oswald Peel Master; having taken a solemn Farewell of my dear W^^, Children,
and Friends, in order for the Support of my Family, and answering my just
Debts, which I had contracted. On the 27th Day of the Month, in the Evening, we
took in our Boat, and put to Sea; At Sea.
had some rough Weather in our Passage, but lived comfortably; we being all
loving and obliging one to another. On the 15th Eleventh Month we safely
arrived at Spight's- Town, in Barbados; and the 18th, Barbados.
between the Hours of five and six in the Morning, we felt the greatest
Earthquake that I had ever felt; An Earthquake.
having been sensible of Three, one at London, one at Jamaica, and one at
Franckfort, in Pennsylvania. I was thankful in my Heart to the Lord for my safe
Arrival, and that we were all preserved safe in our stormy Passage, and deep
loaded Vessel; one Vessel being lost that came out a little Time before us; and
another, which came from our Port to this Island a few Days sooner than we,
lost three Men by the Violence of the Storm, and received much Damage
otherwise; one of them being a Neighbor of mine, with whom I was well
acquainted, it affected my Mind very much. I visited Friends Meetings in
Barbados, and some diverse times over; and had Occasion in some Meetings to
mention the Earthquake, which I told them I did believe was a Visitation from
the Almighty, in order to put People in Mind of Mortality, and to reform them
from the Evil of their Ways, and call them to Repentance.

While I was in Barbados, Francis Gamble died, whom I went to visit several
times in his Sickness: At his Funeral was a large Gathering of his Neighbors,
and others; and diverse, not of our Society, expressed their Satisfaction with
the Meeting. The People in and about Spight's- Town, in Barbados, were very
loving and kind to me, more than I ever had observed before; even some vile,
profane Men, whom I could not forbear to reprove for their Swearing, and
taking the sacred Name in vain, yet they showed Respect, notwithstanding I
reproved them sharply. Who can take the sacred Name of God into their Mouths in
vain, and be guiltless? Or, who can hear it, and forbear reproving it, without
being remiss in their Duty? This great Evil is too frequently practiced in this
rich (poor) Island of Barbados (rich in Earthly, but poor in Heavenly Treasure)
which caused me many times to mourn in secret before the Almighty, praying him
for the Reformation of the People, for Christ's sake, and for the Glory of his
own eternal Name.

1728.
The 27th of the First Month, 1728, having done my Business in Barbados, and
seen Friends generally, an Opportunity offered for my Return home, in the
Brigantine Sarah and Mary, Samuel Gallop Master, bound for Burlington, At Sea.
in Company with William Dury and William Callender, both of Barbados. Our
Master was exceeding kind to us in the Voyage. The Wind hanging Northerly, we
could not go to Windward of Martineco, but drove to Leeward, and sailed by the
Isles of Lucia, Martineco, Dominico, Guardaloupe, Antigua, Montserrat, Rodondo,
Nevis, Christopher's, Statia, Saba, Martin's, Anguilla, Bartholomew's,
S^mbrero, and four other small Islands, which are called The Saints. It was
very pleasant sailing by these Islands, only some of them were so exceeding
high, that in some Places we were becalmed, and the Clouds appeared below the
Tops of diverse of the Mountains. At Christopher's (which is counted the highest
of them) there being a small River of good fresh Water, we sent our Boat on
shore for some, having none very good on board: We lay off and on about two
Hours, but did not come to. I was thankful for this Water, it being my constant
Drink; it was also very serviceable to the People on board. After we left the
Isle of Sombrero, we saw a Sail, which we thought stood after us, 1728.
and hearing at Christopher's that several Spanish Privateers were on that
Coast, our Master, and some others on board, were a little surprised; but we
soon left her out of Sight, and we afterward went pleasantly on our Way, till
we came to the Latitude of Bermudas, where the Winds blew fresh, and much
against us; and this Winter having been very hard, we felt the sharp Blasts of
the latter End of it. We had a Passage of about thirty Days, and came very
pleasantly up the Bay and River; and it pleased God that I got home once more
to my beloved Wife and Children, and was joyfully received by all my Family,
whom I found in a good Degree of Health; for which I did (as I had Occasion to
do) bless and praise the great Name of the Most High, Franckfort.
who is worthy forever.

After I came home, I was at many Meetings in Pennsylvania and Jersey, viz. at
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and Jersey.
Burlington, Bristol, Biberry, Franckfort, Germantown, New-Hanover, Croswicks,
etc. in all which Meetings, I had some Service to Friends Satisfaction, and was
comforted with the Goodness of God in the Midst of my Afflictions. -- My
Business lying much at Burlington, Burlington.
I spent pretty much of my Time there for several Weeks; where my Friends
manifested a tender and hearty Respect toward me, and sympathized with me in
my Troubles and Travels; and there I prepared for another Voyage; for I was
fully resolved, through Divine Assistance, to pay all my just Debts (which I
contracted, and lay on me, through many Losses) or else to die in the Pursuit
of it; in which Resolve I had inward Peace and Satisfaction; though such
Labor, Travel, and Separation from my Family, was a great Cross to Nature.

On the 14th of Fifth Month we went on board the Brigantine Sarah and Mary,
Samuel Gallop Master, for Barbados; and on the 16th we sailed down the Bay, and
put to Sea, and I wrote a loving, At Sea.
tender Letter, to my Wife and Family, and another to my Friends at Burlington.
We had fair Winds for about two Weeks, after which they were contrary for
several Days, during which two of our Men had a Fever, and our Vessel proved
leaky (though tight in smooth Water) which was some Concern to us, and obliged us
to pump every Half Hour; but the Leak being much the same, while at Sea, we
were the more easy about it: I took Care of those two People that were sick,
who soon recovered. The 3d and 4th Days of the Sixth Month, it was very windy,
with Lightning, Thunder, and Rain; in which rough Weather one of our best
Sailors put his Shoulder out of Joint, and they brought him to me to see if I
could do him any Service; I was not forward to meddle; but the Man and the
People believing, if I would undertake for him, I might help him; I told them,
that though I did not understand Bone-setting, I would instruct them the best I
could; then I ordered him to set down upon the Deck, and to be stripped to the
Waist, and got a round Piece of Wood as thick as his Arm, and wrapped a Piece of
Cloth about it, that it might not bruise his Flesh, and put it under his Arm,
and ordered two Men, one at each End of it, to lift up strongly, and a third
Man to stretch his Arm out, and keep it down withal; which being done, the Bone
went into its Place; for which I was thankful in my Heart to the Almighty. --
About the 10th of the Sixth Month we safely arrived at Spight's- Town in
Barbados, Barbados.
being the First Day of the Week. From whence I had an Opportunity, by
Alexander Seaton, Master of a Vessel bound to Pennsylvania, to send an Account
of our safe Arrival.

I had many Meetings in the Island, and made several Visits to diverse sick
Persons, one of which was particularly to the Satisfaction of the Person
visited and his Relations: He died, and was buried at Hethcott's- Bay, where we
had a large Meeting at our Meeting House, where was many People, and it was a
good, seasonable Opportunity; in which I had Occasion to remind them of their
Mortality, and press them to a holy Life, the Way to a happy Immortality. I had
diverse Meetings at Bridge-Town Spight's- Town, and the Spring; where the
Testimony of Christ's Gospel was well received. And after a Stay of three
Weeks, I left Barbados on the 1st of Seventh Month, and took my Passage in the
Amity, Charles H^rgrave Master, who was very friendly to me in my Passage, At
Sea.
as were all on board. We arrived at our Port without casting Anchor in all our
Voyage, and laid the Vessel to the Wharff at Philadelphia; Philadelphia.
and on my landing I immediately went into the Meeting of Ministers and Elders
(it being just Meeting Time) where we were much comforted together in Christ;
after which I went home, being lovingly received by my Wife and Family, having
been from home about ten Weeks.

After I came home from this Voyage, I visited the Meetings of Friends at
Philadelphia, Franckfort, Germantown, the Falls of Delaware, Burlington,
New-Hanover, Mount-Holly, Fair-Hill, etc.

The 2d of Ninth Month I was at the Quarterly Meeting of Ministers and Elders
at Philadelphia, Philadelphia.
where I met with Joseph Tailor, a Friend, who had visited our Meetings pretty
generally on the Continent of America, in the Ministry of the Gospel, and was
now on his Return homewards, with whose Visit Friends had good Unity, and
certified the same to our Brethren of the Meeting where he lived in
Great Britain.

After this I was at diverse Meetings in Pennsylvania and Jersey; and the latter
End of the Ninth Month, Sarah, the Wife of Jeremiah Elfreth, died very
suddenly, having been the Day before walking in her Garden; she was a sober,
young Woman, and her Death much lamented; her Burial occasioned my Stay at
Philadelphia, which I had diverse Times shunned, because a Concern had been on
me for some Time, to declare to the People of that City, "That the Lord was
angry with the Legislators of Pennsylvania, because they were not so much
concerned to promote Religion and Piety as they ought, and to make such Laws as
might prevent the excessive Increase of Public Houses, which often prove
Seminaries of Satan; but strove to promote Parties more than Religion: And that
the Lord was angry with the Magistrates, because they did not so much as they
might, and ought to do, put those good and wholesome Laws in Execution, which
were already made, against Vice and Immorality: And that the Lord was angry
with some of the better Sort of People, because they seek and mind the Things
of this World, more than the Things of God and his Kingdom." But I was helped
to clear myself in the Morning-meeting, to the Satisfaction of many of the
Honest-hearted, and unburden my Mind of a great Exercise that I had long lain
under.

In the Afternoon we had a large Meeting at the Bank-meeting-house, occasioned
by the aforesaid Burial; the Resurrection of the Dead was declared in that
Meeting, according to the Doctrine of our Savior Jesus Christ, the great
Author of the Christian Religion, and also of that eminent Apostle Paul; and
that old and false Calumny, that our Society denied the Resurrection of the
Dead, was publicly denied and refuted. The People were exhorted to live well,
that they might die well; and then they need not doubt but that they would rise
well at the Resurrection in the last Day: The Meeting concluded with Praise to
the Almighty for all his Mercies, and Prayer to him, that he would sanctify
that Day's Service to the People.

In the Tenth Month, I prepared for another Voyage to the Island of Barbados,
and had the Ship Bristol Hope, consigned to me, but the Winter setting in
sooner than common, caused our Stay much longer than we expected, whereby I had
the Opportunity to visit diverse Meetings, as Burlington, the Falls of Delaware,
Neshaminy, and Wright's- Town, and Philadelphia. Burlington. Bucks County.
Philadelphia.
In this City a Concern was on my Mind to declare to the People, that the
Almighty had showed me, that he had often visited them in Philadelphia and
Pennsylvania, with his own Hand, and with his own Rod; but if that did not work
the designed End, for which he visited them (of which they were told also
before it came to pass) he then would chastise them with the Rod of Man, and
this was as plainly spoken to me in my own Habitation, as though it had been the
Voice of a Man, though it was not vocal.

The 12th of the Eleventh Month, being First Day, I was at Horsham Meeting, and
had a tender bowing Time therein; and in my Way home visited some Friends who
were sick, it being a Time of general Visitation in those Parts, and the next
Seventh Day I was at the Meeting of Ministers and Elders at Philadelphia, where
we had a good Meeting; here I was earnestly desired to be at the Funeral of
Edmond Orpwood, the eldest Friend belonging to Franckfort Meeting; Franckfort.
but was in a Strait, this Friend, being my Neighbor, and I had before engaged
to be at the Burial of one with whom I had been acquainted near 40 Years,
therefore I did my Endeavor to be at both, being each of them buried in the
Afternoon, and five Miles distant; the Days being short also, diverse told me it
was impracticable; I told them they might be mistaken, as they were, for though
we had a large Meeting, and the Company of Rowland Wilson, from Britain, who
had large and good Service therein, yet after Meeting we mounted, and got to
Philadelphia, about a Quarter of an Hour after the Corpse was brought into the
Meeting House, as I was informed; we had a large, and, as I thought, a good
Meeting, after which I went home, being weary in my Body, but thankful in my
Heart, that the Almighty had been with us, and helped us to perform that Day's
Service.

On the 20th of the Eleventh Month, and Second-day of the Week, I went into a
Piece of Ground (which I was clearing for Meadow) in order to give Directions
to the Workmen, and one of the Trees fell contrary to the Kerf, and also to the
Wind, which was then at North West, and when I saw it falling toward me, I ran
from it, but before I could get out of the Way, it fell upon me, across my
Book, from my Shoulder to my Hips, and struck me down to the Earth, where for
some Time I lay speechless and in all Likelihood I should have been immediately
killed, if I had not been providentially preserved by the Body of the falling
Tree lying on a Stump, which prevented its crushing me, as I lay on the Ground.
A Friend that was near me with a Horse, desired the Wood-cutters (when they
were recovered from the Surprise, and I to the use of my Speech) to help me on
his Horse, and I rode home, but in extreme Misery, and I was under great
Concern, lest I should surprise my Wife and Children suddenly. We sent to
Philadelphia for Dr. Griffith Owen, who came in about two Hours, and let me
Blood, and ordered several Things to be applied and taken, which through Divine
Favor proved very serviceable to me; notwithstanding which I was in great Pain
many Days, and long and tedious Nights, not being able either to feed myself,
nor turn in my Bed, for a great while. -- In this Confinement I was at times
favored with a very comfortable Sense of the Presence of God, whose Providence
is over all his Works; and as his Love to me was great, so the Love of his
People was also, many of whom, and of my Neighbors, came to see me,
sympathising with me in my Distress; but among them I had one of Job's
Comforters, who wickedly abused me in this Low State. I can scarce forbear
mentioning his Name, having Example for it in holy Writ, but through the Lord's
help I Will put on Charity.

The 9th of the Twelfth Month, I got abroad the first time to our Meeting at
Franckfort, with which diverse expressed their Gladness to see me there again.
In this Meeting I exhorted them to think on Eternity, and to prepare for it, by
living to Day, as though they were to die Tomorrow; for I found it by Experience
to be needful, and then if sudden Death comes, it will not surprise us.

As I now found it continue my Business to go to Sea for a Livelihood, I
undertook the Charge of the Ship New Bristol Hope, as Master, though it was a Way
of Living to which I did not incline; I took care in our Vessel that there
should be no Swearing in my Hearing, nor Drunkenness, to my Knowledge, without
Reproof, and if I could not be instrumental that Way to break them from
Swearing, and Drinking to Excess, my Manner was, to put them away, so that we
generally had a pretty quiet Ship. We left Philadelphia the 13th of the Twelfth
Month, but Storms and contrary Winds detained us in the River and Bay, so that
we did not get out to Sea till the 21st of said Month, when the Pilot left us,
At Sea.
by whom I wrote to my Wife and Family; and now I thought I felt the Benefit of
the good Wishes of my beloved and dear Friends I left behind, which did me a
great Deal of Good, as it often has done on the like Occasion; for faithful
Friends, and good Christians, are as Epistles written in one another Hearts.
-- In our Passage we took several Dolphins, which were very welcome to us, we
having a long Passage, and our fresh Provisions near spent. The 19th of the
First Month we saw the Island of Barbados, Barbados.
having had several Meetings on board the Ship in this Voyage, the good Effects
I could see but little of, only for that Day they would be a little more sober,
and some of them addicted to Swearing, did not swear so often as they did
before. The Day following we safely arrived at Speight's Town, Speight 's Town.
where we had the next Day a very comfortable Meeting for the divine Worship of
God. 1729.
The Fifth Day following I was at Bridgetown, Bridge-Town.
at their Week-day-meeting; and next First Day (being the 30th of the Month) I
was at a Meeting at Pumpkin Hill, where I was enlarged in the Doctrine of Faith.

After this I went to the Bridge with a Friend from New England; we had two
good Meetings, it being the General-meeting for the Friends of the Island, and
afterward I with several Friends went again to Speight's Town, and on the 12th
of the Second Month, I was at the Thicket's- meeting, Thicket 's-meeting.
at which was Counselor Weeks, Colonel Charnock, and Justice Sims; I dined
with them at Judge Weeks's, and they discoursed of what was said in the Meeting
about Dancing, I quoting Luther's Words, That as many Paces as the Person takes
in the Dance, so many Paces or Steps they take toward Hell: And I told them,
that I had heard several had used that vain Exercise in our Meeting House,
which was appointed for the Worship of God, and I said, I hoped for the future
it would be so no more; two of those Persons who danced in our Meetting-house,
were then in the Meeting, though I did not know it. This Testimony so wrought on
the Colonel, that he said, he could scarcely feel his Legs since I spoke it;
and the Justice said, if these Words be true, he had taken many Steps toward
Hell, and the Counselor and Judge said, It was home Doctrine to some that were
there: Diverse of them seemed to be touched with the Testimony of Truth, though
not so solidly as I desired. Soon after I went with Joshua Byrch, to visit the
Governor of the Island, Colonel Worsley, who treated us with much Freedom and
Civility; he desired me to sit down by him, and then called for a Decanter of
Wine, of which he kindly offered me a Glass, but I told him I chiefly drank
Water; he said Water is certainly the best Drink in the World, and told me I
was a Credit to my Drink, as I looked as well or better than most who drank
Wine.

In the Second Month, I was at Meeting on a First Day at Bridge-Town, which was
somewhat larger than usual; it was a good open Time in the Morning, Bridge-Town.
but more so in the Afternoon. At this Meeting, there was a Merchant of the
Town, who sent to know if our Friends (he not being of our Profession) would
make a Contribution for me, in Consideration of my Losses. He said he would
contribute as much as any, although he had heard me only that one time; but he
was informed that we received no Money nor Pay for our Preaching; yet his
Good Will I aknowledged.

The 4th of the Third Month, I was at Meeting at the Spring, where I met with
Joseph Gamble, Spring.
and John Oxley, and his Wife, and several others, not belonging to this
particular Meeting, and we were edified together in the Love and Life of
Christ. I was concerned to speak of the diverse Visitations and Speakings of God
to the People since the World began; quoting the Words of holy Writ, That, God
who spoke to the Fathers by the Prophets, speaks now in those last Days by his
Son, whom he has appointed Heir of all Things: And that this Dispensation is
the last and brightest Dispensation of all, and is the greatest and most
glorious Manifestation of God's Love to Mankind; and that besides this vocal
Speaking of Christ, when in the Body on Earth, he now speaks spiritually, which
spiritual Speaking of Christ, in and to the true Church, and true Believers,
will out-last Time, and endure to all Eternity; the great Lord of all for his
unspeakable Benefit therein, was praised and glorified, as being alone worthy.

I had diverse other Meetings on the Island, which I pass by, not being willing
to be prolix. After a Stay of about nine Weeks we proposed failing. Judge Gray
a very noted Man, and much esteemed among the People, took Passage with us;
also Joshua Byrch, of Bridge-Town, for his Health, and William Callender, and
several others, as Merchants. -- Though I came on Account of Trade, 1720.
our Friends gave me a Certificate that I had good Service among them, Speight
's-Town.
and in my outward Affairs had gained Esteem among the People, as well as in my
Service in preaching Christ; all which I acknowledge to be the Effects of
divine Grace; diverse Friends and Acquaintance came to the Seashore at
Speight's Town, and in a great deal of tender Christian Love, and good Desires,
we took leave, and committed one another to the Protection of the Almighty. We
had a comfortable Passage, and arrived at Philadelphia, Philadelphia.
where I was lovingly received by my Wife and Friends,

In this Voyage a great and weighty Concern came on my Mind, on Account of the
young and rising Generation, desiring they might be happy in this World, and in
that which is to come. And first, as to this World, I have taken Notice, that
diverse of the Youth are too apt to waste their outward Substance, which often
is given to them (for when they get it themselves, they are for the most part
more saving of it) and this Wasting ard Spending those Sparks call Generosity,
Liberality, Goodnature, Gentility, fine Breeding, and Abundance of other fine
Names, not considering the Labor and Industry, Frugality, Care and Watchings,
of their Parents or Ancestors, to get what they have. May Parents note this
well, and not be anxiously concerned to get much Wealth, which may be a Means
to ruin their Posterity! And truly most of these spending, drinking,
Company-keeping, gaming, chatting, tippling Youngsters, take a great Deal more
Care, how they may get Money from others, that they may spend it, than how to
earn it, or faithfully labor for it themselves; they will beg or borrow, and
run in Debt, but take little or no solid Thoughts to pay; by which Means diverse
of those topping, beggarly Beaus, and Spenders, have brought both themselves
and Relations, Parents and Friends, to Shame and Disgrace, and sometimes to
Poverty, 1729.
where the^r Relations and Parents have been too liberal. Let all indulgent
Parents note this also.

And if any concerned Person should advise those inconsiderate Youths of their
Evils, it is much if they gain not their lasting Ill Will, and the Epithets of
Niggards and Covetous, ill-natured, censorious, sour, morose, etc. However I
shall venture to stand the Shock of their Displeasure, and in as moving Terms
as I can, consistent with the Matter on my Mind, entreat them to consider the
End of their spending, slothful, idle Life (which if continued in) must needs
end in their Ruin, and they may repent when it is too late, crying out, "Oh!
that I had hearkened to the Advice of my Father, and my indulgent Mother! Oh!
that I had taken the Counsel of my good Friends in Time, then I had not beer in
this Condition, nor in those Straits I am now in." This, or worse, must at last
inevitably be the Condition of those unthinking Time-wasting and
Money-spending, evil Company-keeping young People, of both Sexes. Some of whom,
if they can get it, will spend more in a few Hours, than their Parents can get
in so many Days, which is very unreasonable, as well as unthinking; for if the
indulgent Parents do not hold their Hands, truly they must all sink together;
and where the Parents have been what these sorts of Youths call liberal, whole
Families have by such Liberality been undone, which is a Case to be lamented by
all sober People.

I pray our spending Youths to consider, how many brave, fine young Men and
Women, whose Parents have left them Estates and handsome Incomes, have by such
Extravagancies, soon spent all, and sometimes more than all, and Disgrace and a
Goal have been their Portion; and how many, by living too fast, have died too
soon, much sooner than might be expected, according to the Course of Nature.

Wherefore I would advise them to regard what the wise King Solomon said, Go to
the Aunt, thou Sluggard, consider her Ways, and be wise; she gathers her Food
in the Summer (i. e. she prepares against the Winter) Though this may be
despicable in the Eyes of our fine Gentlemen and learned spending Wits, yet
there appears more Wisdom in these little industrious Animals, than in those
great Spenders, who, in the Spring and Summer of their Years, take so little
Thought of saving what has been with so much Care gotten for them, or of
getting more against their Winter or Old Age; which, if they live, will
certainly overtake them, when their Youth or Summer is gone.

But many Youths object against this Advice, crying out, as I have often heard,
"The aged give this Advice when they are old, but did as we do when they were
young, as we are;" although this may be true in some, yet it will not hold good
in the general, and if it do in some, is not that Maxim Good? "Let others Harms
learn us to beware, before it be too late, that we fall not into the same
Snare, which has entangled or caught Thousands, to their great Shame and
reproach." Again, Those who have been so overtaken in their Youth, and are
escaped out of the Snare, are more fit to caution or advise how to escape it,
or to show those Paths which led them into that Labyrinth of Woe and Misery.

The Author of all Evil uses his utmost Skill and Power to promote the
Practices of excessive Drinking, etc. among Mankind, it being a mighty Support
to his Kingdom; for when the Nobility of the Understanding is clouded thereby,
then Oh! how many wicked Oaths, Oh! what corrupt Language, what unhandsome,
unbecoming Words and Actions, are brought forth! How is good Manners corrupted!
How is the sober, chaste Soul offended, and, above all other Considerations,
how is God dishonored, and the End of our Creation frustrated, and Man
condemned!

When People are in those Excesses, how do they take the sacred Name in vain,
and so bring themselves in guilty before God, and Man; for he has positively
said, He will not bold them guiltless, who take his Name in vain; so that let
him plead never so many Excuses, he is pronounced guilty by the Judge of Heaven
and Earth: Therefore let me persuade the Youth to remember what the Lord by his
Servants said concerning drinking to Excess, Woe to the Drunkards; and that no
Drunkard shall inherit the Kingdom. Again, Woe to them that are mighty to drink
Wine, and Men of Strength to mingle strong Drink, etc. If it be objected, as it
often is, when such poor Souls are reproved, and their Sins set in Order before
them; We trust in the Mercy of God and the Merits of Christ; I say this is a
good Trust and Hope, if upon a good Foundation; but the Wicked must forsake
their Ways, and the Unrighteous their evil Thoughts; but what Forsaking is
that, when strong Conviction is upon the Soul, to make Covenants, Vows and
Promises, and break them from Time to Time? And though Christ has satisfied the
Justice of the Almighty for Sinners, it is for those who forsake their Sins,
not those who plead for the Practice of them, and endeavor, by many vain
Excuses, to justify themselves in them.

Since then the Salvation of the Soul is precious, and has cost the precious
Blood of the Lamb of God, and is much more precious than Health or Wealth, why
should any be so cruel and hard-hearted to themselves, as, for a little Vanity,
Froth and Mirth, Toys and Trifles, vain Sports, and evil Pastime, to plunge and
sink themselves into the eternal Gulf of Woe and Misery; pray, O pray consider
it, dear Youths!

After my Return from Barbados, Burlington, Philadelphia, etc.
in the Fourth Month, I visited Friends Meetings at Burlington, at the Falls of
Delaware, Abington, Germantown, and was diverse Times at Philadelphia and
Franckfort Meetings; which Meetings were much to my Satisfaction; the Lord
being pleased to manifest his Goodness to many, as also to my poor exercised
Soul; for which I was truly thankful unto him.

In the Sixth Month I was at the General-meeting of Friends at Darby, Darby.
in Chester County, which was a large, good Meeting, diverse Friends appearing
there in a lively Ministry. About this Time some Thousands of People came from
Ireland, and also many Palatines from Holland; among whom, it is reported, were
Romans, or Papists, several of whom, it was said, gave out threatening Speeches,
which caused some Consternation among the People.

At this la^ge General-meeting, I exhorted them, To trust in the Lord, and not
to distrust that Hand which had hitherto preserved us by his Providence without
outward Force; and that though the People who came among us were many in Number,
yet we, having the Lord on our Side, were more than they, in a mystical Sense;
putting them in Remembrance of the Prophet, who, when his Servant was afraid,
prayed to the Almighty, To open the Eyes of his Servant, and when they were
mystically opened, he saw the Mountain full of Chariots of Fire, and Horses of
Fire, and that they were more than their Enemies: I was also concerned to
exhort Friends to be good Examples to those Strangers, who came among us in
such great Numbers; and that our Lights, in our Conversations, might so shine,
that those People, seeing our good Works, might glorify our Father which is in
Heaven, according to the Doctrine of Christ; and then we should do them Good,
and they would do us no Hurt, but Good also: But, on the other Hand, if we keep
not our Places, and do not live in the Fear of God, nor according to our holy
Principles and Profession, that then it might be just with the Lord God, to
make them a Scourge to us. -- Many were comforted in this Meeting, and God was
praised, who is worthy.

On the 15th of Sixth Month, having loaded the Ship New Bristol Hope, a second
Time, I sailed in her from Philadelphia, and having a Concern to visit the
Meeting of Friends at Salem, I left the Ship at Gloucester, under the Care of
the Pilot, Philadelphia. Salem.
and went by Land to the First Day Meeting at Salem, and from thence to
Elsenborough, and staid till the Ship came down; and on the 20th of the Month
we got to Sea, At Sea.
and had a fair Wind for several Days, and lived very lovingly on board, being
respectfully treated by my Sailors.

In this Voyage we had several Meetings on board, the first of which was at the
Request of my second Mate, to call the Sailors together in the Cabin; I not
being forward to propose it to them, lest they should suspect me of some
Vanity, in desiring to preach to them; they not knowing the Cross of Christ in
that Exercise.

On the 24th Day of the Seventh Month, at Noon, our Ship, by Observation, being
exactly in the Latitude of Barbados, we steered away West for the Island, and
on the 26th we saw it, after five Weeks and one Day leaving Sight of Cape
Henlopen; we having, after the first few Days, light Winds, Calms, and Head
Winds, which made our Passage long, and our Sea Stores almost spent; but now
the Sight of Land made the People forget all Uneasiness, and, for this Favor,
my Heart was thankful to the great Preserver of Men.

This Time we came to a tolerable Market with our Provisions, which made our
stay but short; Barbados.
yet I was diverse times at the Bridge Meeting of Friends, as also at Spight's-
Town (where my Concerns chiefly lay) and once at Pumkin-Hill Meeting, in which
Meeting it was observed to the People, That the Salvation of the Soul is
precious, and that true Religion is a solid Thing, a Thing of the greatest
Moment to both Body and Soul, and that People ought to be very serious and
solidly concerned about it, taking special Care to lay, or build, their
Religion on a sure Foundation; it was showed them, that Christ Jesus was the
sure Rock and Foundation of all the Righteous, in all Ages; he was the Rock
that followed Israel, which they drank of; any other Foundation than him, no
Man can lay; who is, in the truly religious, and the true Believers, the Hope
of their Glory. -- Many other precious Truths were manifested to us, in that
Meeting, for which we praised the Lord.

Bridge-Town.
Soon after, I went to Bridge-Town to clear out the Vessel, and was at their
Weekday Meeting: The Subject Matter I had to treat of in that Meeting, was,
"That the Lord brings low, and he raises up again; and that, in diverse
Respect, as to Kingdoms, Families, and particular Persons; and as to Health,
Wealth, Honor, etc. diverse in that Meeting were appealed to, as Witnesses of
it." -- After this Meeting, I went to visit the Governor, who was courteous to
me, and took my Visit kindly, and desired to be remembered to our Governor, and
several others, and wished me a prosperous Voyage, and well back again, which
he hoped would be in about three Months -- He said, "Whoever lived to see it,
Pennsylvania would be the Metropolis of America, in some hundreds of Years." --
He said, "He loved downright, honest Men; but he hated Deceit and Hypocrisy,"
A great Man, and a great Expression!

The ^st of (...) Eig^h Month, 1729, we, having done our Business, weighed
Anchor, and went to Sea: At Sea.
And on the 26th, we had a good Meeting with the Ship's Company, for the
Service and Worship of God; in which the Gospel of Christ was declared without
Partiality, and the reigning Sins of Sailors openly exposed, according to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Most High Lord entreated to carry on in the
Earth the great Work of Reformation. -- Hitherto we had fine, pleasant Weather.

The Beginning of the Ninth Month, we had a very blustering, stormy Time, for
many Days, so that we could not carry Sail, but sometimes lay by, and sometimes
went with a reeff'd Main-sail and Fore-sail; the Ship had such a violent
Motion, that it broke our Glasses, and about a Dozen Bottles of Wine, and our
Earthenware, and strained our Hogsheads and Casks, so that we pumped out
Melasses into the Sea, and beat us back many Leagues, and blew our Sails out of
the Bolt-ropes.

After those Storms, we had a Calm, and the Wind sprung up westerly; our Course
being North-west, or thereabouts, we could barely lay our Course; yet, it being
moderate, we had Cause to be thankful.

The 12th of the Ninth Month, we found ourselves in the Latitude of 36 Degrees. 17
Min. North; but the Wind was ahead, and our fresh Stock of Provisions almost
expended, and Winter coming on a-pace, the Nights dark and long, made it seem
tedious to our People; the which I was helped to bear with Patience.

The 14th Day, about eight of Clock, at Night, John Plasket, one of the best of
our Sailors, through the violent Pitching of the Ship, fell into the Sea from off
the Bowsprit; one of the Sailors, seeing him fall, nimbly threw a Rope to him,
which he caught hold of, and the People helped him into the Ship; though, in
all Probability, he had perished in the Sea, if he had missed taking hold of
the Rope. I was thankful to the Almighty for this young Man's Life, and took it
as a great Favor from Heaven, The next Day it was dreadful stormy, the Wind
blew violently at South-west, with Lightening, Thunder, and much Rain; the Seas
ran so high, and the Ship had such a great Motion, that the Goods, or Casks,
shifted in the Hold, and we lay by till next Day; our Sails also were much
torn, and, in many Places, blown out of the Bolt-ropes, so that we were Half a
Day mending them, and then proceeded on our Voyage home, where we arrived the
latter End of the Month.

Philadelphia. Franckfort. Germantown.
After I came home from this Voyage, in the small Stay I was on Shore, I was
diverse times at Meetings at Philadelphia and Franckfort, and was also at
Germantown, at the Burial of our ancient Friend Dennis Cunrad, who was one of
the first Settlers of this Town (as I understood the first Meeting of Friends,
for Worship, in it, was kept at his House) He was a Man of an inoffensive Life,
much given to Hospitality, and left a good Report behind him: The Meeting was
large, and many of the first Settlers of the Country were there. I was also at
the Burial of Catherine, the Daughter of Thomas Lightfoot, the Wife of James
Miller, a worthy Woman, who died soon after their Arrival from Ireland, and was
buried from our Great-meeting-house in Philadelphia, in a decent and exemplary
Manner.

The latter End of the Tenth Month, Samuel Harrison, Franckfort.
of New York, and Obadiah Lawrence, on Long Island, favored me with their
Company all Night at our House, where we called the Family together, and had a
seasonable Time to take Leave, they of me, and I of them, and my Family also;
and the next Day diverse very dear Friends came with me to the Boat, to the
River Side, to take Leave, and we parted with Hearts full of Love and Good Will
to each other.

So I went on board at Wiccacoe, and had a cold Passage down the River and Bay,
and left the Capes the 1st of 11th Month (being the third Voyage as Master) and
the 17th we passed the Tropic of Cancer. Hitherto we had a comfortable
Passage, and though we had a crowded Ship, At Sea.
yet we had Peace and Quietness to a greater Degree than I expected; for Men
that use the Seas, are, too generally, inconstant as the Wind and Waters they
wade through. We had several Meetings on board the Vessel, in this Voyage, and
were at Sea about four Weeks, before we arrived at Barbados, and when we
arrived, the Markets were dull, which occasioned our stay so long at about
twelve Weeks. During which Time, Barbados.
I had diverse religious and good Opportunities with those of our own, and other
Societies, I believe to general Satisfaction; having the good Wishes of People
of all Ranks, from the Governor to the poor Negroes; all of whom I profess Love
to for Christ's sake.

This Voyage, in our Return home, we had a full Ship, and upwards of thirty
Passengers, Philadelphia.
and was on our Passage home about a Month, and had good comfortable Weather
therein.

Soon after I came home from Barbados, in the Third Month, 1730, 1730.
I went to a Meeting at Burlington, at which was married Thomas Evans; Margaret
Preston was also there: It was a good Meeting. Burlington.
I crossed the River Delaware twice, visited a sick Person, and rode thirty
Miles that Day. I also went to the Falls Meeting, and, after said Meeting,
Falls* Neshaminy.
appointed another at Neshaminy the same Day; after which, I went with Joseph
Kirkbride to William Paxton's, and lodged: Next Morning Joseph Kirkbride rode
with me home, and thence to Philadelphia. I was diverse times at Philadelphia,
Franckfort, and Germantown, Philadelphia.
and at the General-meeting at Franckfort, where our Friend John Cadwallader
was married; Isaac Norris, Samuel Preston, and Margaret his Wife, and John
Oxley, were at this Meeting, with many other Friends, a good Share of whose
Company I got home with me, of which I was glad, ever loving and coveting the
Company of good Men and Women.

I was now preparing for the fourth Voyage, Fourth Voyage.
as Master of the New Bristol Hope, for Barbados; but it grew harder and harder
for me to leave my Family, which, for many Consideration, was very exercising;
yet I was obliged to continue going to Sea, upon an honorable Account; i. e.
That no Person might suffer by me, if I could help it; and having got our
Vessel loaded, we sailed from Philadelphia the 9th of the Fifth Month. Next Day
came to an Anchor at Chester, Chester.
and visited my old Friend David Lloyd, who, with his good Spouse Grace,
treated me with tender, Christian Love: the Judge and I, being old
Acquaintance, and both of us in Years, and he not well, we took Leave, as if we
were not to see one another any more (which happened accordingly, for he died
before I returned.)

We weighed Anchor at Chester, and got down to Elsenborough, Salem.
and went to Salem Meeting (it being First Day of the Week, and 12th of the
Month) with some of our Passengers and Sailors. The Meeting was pretty large,
and I was earnestly concerned for their Welfare (as I had often been when I was
absent) and was glad I was with them that Day.

After this Meeting we proceeded on our Voyage, and left the Capes the 15th of
the aforesaid Month; had small and contrary Winds, and sometimes Calms, until
the 2d of the Sixth Month, and First Day of the Week, when the Wind was at
South, and a hard Gale, the Sea high, and the Ship having a great Motion,
therefore we had not a Meeting as usual: Many of the Passengers were very
Sea-sick; as for my Part, I thought, if the Almighty was but with me, that
would make up for all Difficulties; for in him was, and is, my Life and
chiefest Joy: And, as an Answer of Peace in my tossed Condition, I sometimes
had comfortable Times; being inwardly refreshed with the Love and Presence of
God; not only in the Day, but also in the Night, in my Sleep; out of which I
was awakened one Morning (in the Morning Watch) with these comfortable Words,
He took me to his banqueting House, and his Banner over me was Love. These
Expressions were so fresh in my Mind, for some Days, that I could not forbear
but bless the holy Name of the living Lord secretly in my Soul.

The 16th of the Sixth Month, we saw the Island of Barbados. The 17th, there
arose, about Midnight, a hard Gale of Wind, which the Barbadians call a
Hurricane, or Tornado, and blew more than ten Vessels ashore, great and small,
which were wholly (...); and our Ship was very near the Rocks, People looking
every Minute when she would come on Shore; but, through divine Favor, we
escaped, with only the Boat stove against the Rocks: I would have got on board,
but that was impracticable; but I got on the highest Place I could, from which
I could see them in the Ship, and they me on Shore; for we could not, for the
Violence of the Wind, hear one another; yet they were so near the Fort, where I
stood, that I could discern them one from another, and they me from the
Multitude of People (many being in the Fort with me) I seeing the Chief Mate
look toward me, I waved my Hat to him, and he, in answer, his to me; then I
made a Signal to him to go to Sea, which they immediately did, letting slip
their Cables, and went to Sea without either Boat, Anchor, or Cables, and came
in the next Day, and got their Cables and Anchors again, to the great Joy of
many of the Inhabitants, whose hearty Prayers were for our Safety, as many of
them told me. This, among many others, I put in my Calender of Deliverances,
and Preservations from imminent Dangers, by the Hand of divine Providence.

We staid this Time in Barbados about five Weeks, leaving the Island the 27th
of the Seventh Month; and there I met with Robert Jordan, my Friend and Brother
in the Work and Fellowship of the Gospel of Christ, who took his Passage with
us for Philadelphia, whose Company was pleasant and comfortable. One Evening he
was repeating some Verses of the excellent Addison's, which I willingly
transcribed, as well in Memory of that great Author, as also that they answered
my State and Condition in my watery Travels, and in the Extremes of Heat and
Cold, and some poisonous Airs, I have often breathed in.

They are as follows:

I.
How are thy Servants blessed, O Lord!
How sure is their Defense!
Eternal Wisdom is their Guide,
Their Help Omnipotence.
II.
In foreign Realms, and Lands remote,
Supported by thy Care;
Through burning Climes I passed unhurt,
And breathed in tainted Air.
III.
Thy Mercy sweet'ned every Soil,
Made every Region please,
The hoary Alpine Hills it warmed,
And smoothed the Tyrrhene Seas.
IV.
Think, O my Soul! devoutly think,
How, with affrighted Eyes,
Thou saw the wide, extended Deep,
In all its Horrors, rise.
V.
Confusion dwelt in every Face,
And Fear in every Heart,
When Waves on Waves, and Gulphs on Gulphs,
O'ercame the Pilot's Art.
VI.
Yet, then, from all my Griefs, O Lord!
Thy Mercy set me free,
Whilst, in the Confidence of Prayer,
My Soul took hold on thee.
VII.
For though in dreadful Whirls we hung,
High on the broken Wave,
I knew thou were not slow to hear,
Nor impotent to save.
VIII.
The Storm was laid, the Wind retired,
Obedient to thy Will;
The Sea, that roared at thy Command,
At thy Command was still.
IX.
In Midst of Dangers, Fears, and Death,
Thy Goodness I Will adore;
And praise thee for thy Mercies past,
And humbly hope for more.
X.
My Life, if thou preserv'st my Life,
Thy Sacrifice shall be;
And Death, if Death must be my Doom,
Shall join my Soul to thee.
The 4th of the Eighth Month, we met with a hard Gale of Wind, which broke the
Tiller of our Rudder, and split our Bowsprit and Main-sail, and overset many of
our Chests; Robert Jordan narrowly missed his Chest falling on him from one
Side of the Ship to the other, which welooked on as a merciful Providence, and
spoke of it to one another, remembering Addison's Verses, which the Night before
were repeated.

In this Passage we saw three Vessels only; it was a blustering Time, but the
shortest from Land to Land that ever I had, being but 14 Days and 14 Hours from
the Sight of Barbados to the Sight of the Main-land: We arrived at
Philadelphia, Arrives at Philadelphia.

A fifth Voyage as Master. Chester.


the 16th of the Eighth Month.

In the Ninth Month, I proceeded on a fifth Voyage (as Master) to Barbados, and
went down the River De^^ware on a Seventh-day, and on First Day, was at Chester
Meeting, at which Time there was a Burial of a Child, and a large Meeting: Our
Friends at Chester were glad to see me, and I them, and after Meeting we set
(...), and went down the River to Elsenbourgh, where came to and landed Robert
Worthington, whose Son Ezra, was on board, and went to Barbados for his Health,
being in a deep Consumption.

This Voyage we were on our Passage about 33 Days before we arrived at
Barbados, Barbados:
when after doing my Business, and visiting our Friends Meetings in about five
Weeks, we put to Sea the 10th of the Twelfth Month, and sailed along to Leeward
of diverse Islands, till we came to Anguilla, Anguilla.
where we landed in Expectation to get Salt, but at this Time was not any to be
had there. We came to an Anchor here in the Night, hoping to get to an Harbor
before it was dark; but it soon being very dark, and coming into shoal Water,
we saw a large Rock, and came to by the Side of it, in about five or six Fathom
Water, Narrowly escapes Shipwreck.
taking it to be a Ship, and when it was Day we saw our Mistake, and that
instead of a Vessel, we were too nigh a Rock, and the Wind coming about, tail'd
our Ship toward it so near, that we were sensible of touching twice; I ordered
the Men to heave a little farther ahead, and so we lay clear till Morning.
When Morning came, of which we were glad, several Boats, with a Cable, came to
us, and the People advised us to put a Spring on our Cable, and cut it, that
she might cast the right Way; which accordingly we did, and it had the desired
Effect; so that we soon got into a very fine Harbor, it being about a Mile
off. Many thanks were given by many of the People for this Deliverance to the
Almighty. George Leonard, the Governor of this Island, heard in the Morning,
that a Vessel was on the Rocks, and the People were running with Saws and Axes,
in order to break her up, if she should not be got off: The Governor seeing
them, sent a Lieutenant with Orders, that let her belong to what Nation soever,
they should help to get her off, if it could be, and if she was likely to be
made a Wreck, he charged them at their Peril not to meddle with her, nor any
Thing belonging to her, until they had first come to Terms with the Master,
which is worthy to be Recorded.

We stayed several Days before we could get our Anchor; for after we were in
the Harbor, it blew very hard for four or five Days; so that with four Oars we
could not row our Boat ahead, but watching for a Calm one Night, our People
went and got it, and then we went into the principal Road and Harbor in the
Island called Croaker's- Bay; the Name of that we came from was Rendezvous-Bay,
where lived a very kind Friend of ours, named John Rumney, who, with his Wife
and Family, treated us with great Love, and courteously received us in their
House, and he went with me to the Governor's, who was my old Acquaintance and
Friend, who, with much Love and Tenderness (when he knew me) took me in his
Arms, and embraced me, and lovingly saluted me with a Kiss of Charity, and
thanked God for our Deliverance, and that he had lived to see me once more (I
having been there some Years before) he was seventy odd Years of Age, as I
remember, and had eighty odd who called him Father: They living much on Roots
and Pulse, are very healthy in this Island. I was here nine Days, and had seven
Meetings with the People; the longer I staid the larger the Meetings were; so
that I had some Difficulty to leave them. Through the Grace and Gift of God I
was helped to preach the Gospel of Christ freely, and they received it both
freely and thankfully, diverse, if not all; for theirs and my Heart was very
open one to another, the holy Lord's Name be praised forever

The 3d of the First Month, Ezra Worthington died, and the 4th in the
Afternoon, he was buried on the Plantation of John Rumney, near his House; the
Governor and his Son in Law were at the Burial, where I told them, that he was
an inoffensive, innocent, sober young Man, and that Death was to be the End of
us here, putting them in mind to remember their latter End. After I had done
speaking, the Governor said, That Death was a Debt due to Nature, and that we
must all pay it, and blessed is the Man that in Time truly prepares for it.
This was a good Expression for a Man in his Post, and worthy of my Notice* as I
thought.

I was at one Meeting, where was the Governor and his Daughter, with diverse of
the best and soberest People of this Island; it was a satisfactory Meeting,
which ended in Prayer; and when I arose from my Knees I found the Governor on
one Side, and his Daughter on the other Side of me, both on their Knees; a
Posture in which People are too seldom found in this degenerate Age of the
World.

On the 10th of the First Month, we departed from the Island of Anguilla, Sails
from Anguilla.
with a pleasant Gale, and had fair Weather and Winds for several Days; I spent
some Time of this Voyage in Reading, and met with a Passage of or concerning
Friendship; the Comfort and Beauty of it therein was notably set forth, yet
most who treat upon that noble Subject, place (too generally) the Felicity
thereof in Humanity: Whereas true and lasting Friendshipis of a Divine Nature,
and can never be firmly settled without Divine Grace: Christ Jesus is the prime
Friend of Mankind, and from whom all true and lasting Friendship springs and
flows, as from a living Fountain, himself being the head Spring thereof; out of
which holy Fountain has sprung as follows, Henceforth I call you Not
Servants, and ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. And again,
By this shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another. O
Holy Expressions! much to be admired, and worthy every true and good Man's and
Woman's Imitation and Practice. Observe, that when they had done whatsoever
Christ had commanded them, then they were to be his Friends, and they were not
only to be his Friends, but one another Friends, as he was theirs, and if
Occasion were, as he died, so they would die for one another: By this Mark and
truest Seal of the truest Friendship, all the World should know they belonged
to Christ, that they were united to him, and in him united to one another:
Nothing but Disobedience and Sin can ever separate this Friendship.

Against this Friendship, which is in Christ, 1731.
and grounded and founded upon him, the Gates of Hell can never prevail; all
Friendship, upon any Consideration, merely human, is brittle and uncertain, and
subject to Change or Mutability, as Experience has taught in all Ages.

If any Person has a Desire to have a particular Friend, At Sea.
let that Person be sure to make Choice of Christ, and such as choose him, have
a Friend in whom all lasting Peace, Comfort and Delight, Joy and Pleasure, is,
and in him alone it is to be enjoyed forever.

The 20th of the First Month, being the first of the Week, we had a comfortable
Meeting for Divine Worship, in which the Goodness of God was extended to us as
we were rolling on the mighty Waters of the great Deep, after which we had
pleasant Weather, and a fair Wind, for several Days.

On the 26th the Wind sprung up at East North-East, a hard Gale, which lasted
several Days; and having but little Sea-room for about thirty Hours, it blew so
hard, that we could dress no Victuals: I then thought on the Words of Job, when
he spoke to his impatient Wife, saying 'Shall we receive Good at the Hand of
God, and shall we not receive Evil also? (or that which is accounted or looks
like Evil in the Eye of Man) In this time of Exercise the Love and heavenly
Life of God, in his beloved Son, filled my Heart, and caused an Overflowing of
Praises to his holy, glorious, and blessed Name. Oh! it was exceeding precious
to my Soul at that time!

The 1st of the Second Month, we saw Land, being driven to the Southward near
250 Miles in this last hard Weather; but we soon after arrived at our desired
Port.

After which I visited the Meetings of Friends at Philadelphia, Burlington, the
Falls, Abington, Philadelphia. Burlington, etc.
German town, Bristol and Franckfort, and found the People had been under a
general Visitation of the Smallpox, insomuch that many Hundreds, especially of
Children, were taken off the Stage of this Life in the City of Philadelphia,
and I was concerned to exhort Friends in that City to bring their Children to
Meetings, and educate them, when young, in the Way they should go, that they
might not depart from it when old; and that he who had taken many away, could,
if he pleased, take many more; or though he might have laid down his Rod at
present (the Distemper in the City being much abated) he could soon take it up
again. It is my Belief that the Lord Almighty will still continue to visit the
City and People (if there is not a Reformation) with further, if not sorer,
Visitations, because he has known them to do them Good, and make them a
Blessing to many Islands and People; giving them the Fatness of the Earth, and
that which is far more, the Dew of Heaven; so that he may justly say to us, as
to Israel of old, You have I known of all the Families of the Earth; therefore
I will visit upon you for all your Iniquities.

In the Beginning of the Fourth Month, Robert Jordan was married to Mary, the
Widow of Richard Hill (all three worthy Friends) The Meeting on this Occasion
was large, and the Marriage solemnized in the Fear of God. Diverse Friends were
concerned to speak to the People, and it was greatly desired that those present
(who were then spoke to) might be married to Christ, the great Lover of Souls,
who laid down his Life (the most precious Life that ever was on Earth) and shed
his precious Blood for our Salvation.

A sixth Voyage as Master.
A few Days after which I again took Shipping for the Island of Barbados (being
the sixth Voyage) in the New Bristol Hope, and left the Capes of Delaware the
eighth Day of the Month. The 22d of the said Month, I being weary, At Sea.
laid me down to rest, and fell asleep, and was awakened out of my Sleep with
the Words, 'Oh Heart in Heaven! It Is an excellent thing to have an Heart in
Heaven!' Which Words were comfortable to me, and left a Sweetness on my Mind
all the Day after, for which I was thankful, and greatly desired that my Heart
and Mind might be set and fixed more and more on Heaven and heavenly Things,
and that my Treasure might be in Heaven, that my Heart might be be there also,
according to the Doctrine of my Savior, Matt. vi. 6.20.21. Lay up for
yourselves Treasure in Heaven, for where your Treasure is, there will your
Heart be also.

The 27th Day (being the First Day of the Week) we had a comfortable Meeting,
the Weather being moderate; and on the 7th of the Fifth Month, Barbados.
we arrived at Bridge-Town in Barbados, where we unloaded part of our Cargo,
and from thence we went to Speight's- Town; where, after a Stay of about five
Weeks, we accomplished our Affairs. I also visited all our Friends Meetings,
and some several Times, in which we were edified and comforted, Hurricane.
and diverse of us had Occasion to bless the holy Name of God for his Mercy to
us: Before we left the Island, there happened a great Storm or Hurricane, which
did much Damage to the Ships, and to the Island, blowing down many Houses, and
spoiling much Provisions, destroying almost all the Plantain Trees on the
Island, which is a very wholesome and pleasant Fruit, and much used by many
instead of Bread.

I was clearing out our Vessel when this Storm happened, and being twelve Miles
off, could not hear of or concerning her, but thought it altogether unlikely
that she should ride out so great a Storm, in so bad a Harbor or Road, it
being open to the Sea, and such a Storm as had not been known for many Years,
and some said, never but one (to their Knowledge) though much more Damage has
at some other Times been done to the Shipping, by reason that the hardest of of
the Wind was not that Way, which was most dangerous to them in Carlisle-Bay,
where they mostly lay; for they all got out to Sea, except two or three that
were lost by the violence of the Weather. It was indeed a very dismal Time, the
Vessels which rode it out were much damnified, and one being loaded, ready to
sail, sunk right down, and was lost in the Bay. When I had cleared our Ship, I
set forward in order to see what was become of her; but the Floods were so out,
and the Ways were so bad, I could not without some Danger get to her that
Night; but next Morning I set out from Joseph Gamble's, and, to my Admiration,
from the Top of a Hill (on which a House in the Storm was blown flat to the
Ground) I saw our Ship at an Anchor, having rode out the Storm, with one Sloop
by her, for which cause my Soul was humbly thankful.

On the 17th of said Month, with some more than ordinary Fatigue, we got up our
Anchor, and took in our Boat, and got our Passengers and Provisions on board,
Sails from Barbados.
the Sea breaking high on the Shore, so that several of our People and our Boat
were in Jeopardy of being lost; but at length being all on board, we set Sail,
and having sailed slowly about six or seven Miles, we met with a Sloop who had
lost her Mast in the Storm, and next Morning we met with two large London
Ships, who had put out to Sea, not venturing to ride it out.

We had fine pleasant Weather for several Days after we left the Island, and on
the 22d of the Sixth Month (being the first Day of the Week) we had a Meeting
for the Worship of God, which was comfortable and satisfactory to us. The 4th
and 5th of the Seventh Month, we had very fresh Gales from the North-East to
the North, and was near a Water Spout (about a Stone's throw off) which
surprised some on board, on which I came out of my Cabin, and saw the Water
run up out of the Sea into the Cloud, as plain as ever I saw tne Water run into
the River, till it filled the Cloud with Blackness, and then it would break in
great Quantities into the Sea, which is dangerous, when falling on Vessels. The
5th of the Month, being the first Day of the Week, we had a good religious
Meeting, for divine Worship, wherein our People were earnestly exhorted to a
holy Life, and to be earnestly concerned for the true Faith, which is in
Christ; that Faith which works by Love, and is the Evidence of Things not
visibly seen, being manifest by Works of Piety and Virtue. In this Voyage we
were twenty two Days from the Island of Barbados to the Sight of Cape Henry, in
Virginia, and had a pleasant Passage in the main to Philadelphia, where,
Philadelphia.
in the Seventh Month, was held our Yearly Meeting, at which I had a desire to
be, my watery Employment having hindered my being at a yearly Meeting for
several Years: At this Meeting I met with my old Acquaintance, and dear
Friends, John Richardson, of Yorkshire, and Paul Johnson, of Dublin, both on a
Gospel Visit to the Brethren and Friends in America: The Meeting was large, and
attended with Divine Grace and Goodness, and ended with Thanksgiving and Praise
to God and the Lamb.

While our Ship was loading I was at several Meetings in the Country, as at
Abington, Germantown, Fair-Hill, and Franckfort, in Philadelphia County: and at
the Falls of Delaware, Buckingham, Neshaminy, and Bristol, in Bucks County. I
was also at Burlington, at the Marriage of William Callender, junior, of
Barbados, with Katherine Smith, Daughter of Daniel and Mary Smith, of
Burlington.

On the 16th of the Ninth Month, A seventh Voyage to Barbados as Master.
I proceeded on the seventh Voyage to Barbados, in the Ship New Bristol Hope,
as Master, having on board several Passengers, one of whom (Elizabeth
Martindale) was on the Passage convinced of the Principles of Truth, and
afterward suffered, in diverse Respects, for her making Profession with us.

We had a long Passage down the River, the Wind being high and boisterous. On
the 22d of the Ninth Month we left the Capes of Delaware, and saw the Island of
Barbados the 21st of the Tenth Month, Arrives at Barbados.
before it was Day, and in the Afternoon came to an Anchor in the Bay of
Speight's- Town. In this Voyage I met with an Accident that was paintul and
troublesome to me, which happened in a hard Gale of Wind, I being to the
Windward, and the Ship having a large Motion, and missing my Hold, was canted
from my Place to the other Side of the Vessel, against the Edge of a Chest, and
so bruised my Leg that I could not do my Business as I usually did, which was a
great Hindrance and Disappointment to me: But in about a Month's Time, with the
Assistance of some of my Friends there, I got indifferently through it, and
also rode to Bridge-Town, and had several Meetings there. I was also at several
good and comfortable Meetings at Speight's-Town, where we had one the Day we
sailed, being the 21st of the Eleventh Month; and on the Seashore parted with
our Friends in great Love, Sails from Barbados.
and set Sail, the Wind being about North-East, so that we could not weather
the Island of Martineco; we therefore sailed along by the Islands of Dominico
and Guardaloupe, and had Calms under the Islands, and sometimes the eddy Winds
from off the Mountains, or High Lands, would take the Sails, and carry the Ship
clear round, which made it sometimes tedious. The 23d and 24th, we passed by
the Islands of Mont serrat, Antigua, Rodondo, Christopher's, Nevis,
Bartholomew, Statia, Saba, Barbuda, Martin's, and Anguilla, the Winds and
Weather being fair and pleasant. The 25th, in the Evening, it began to be hazy;
and, in the Night, we split our Main-top-sail, which cost us a great deal of
Labor, and Loss of Time, before we could get it mended and set again. We had
pretty fair Weather about 20 Days, until we came on our Coast, and into
Soundings; when a hard Gale of Wind springing up easterly, which setting on the
Shore, was dangerous, and we had a long Night coming on; but, through the
Favor of the Almighty, we got off from the Land. In the Midst of the Danger of
this Storm, my Soul sang Praises to the Lord.

The 12th of the Twelfth Month, we met with another Easterly Storm, being in
about thirty Fathom Water, it blew, and rained very hard, and was also
exceeding cold, and our coming from a hot Climate made it more hard to bear. In
this Storm we saw diverse Lights, which the Sailors call Corpusants, one of them
was exceeding bright, and sat, as near as I can compute it, about Half an Hour
on our Main-topmast Head, plain to the View of all the Ship's Company, diverse
of whom said they never saw the like, and I think I never heard of, or saw the
like before.

The Storm continued all Night till Day, when it abated, and, it being the
First of the Week, we had a comfortable Meeting, in which the People on board
were advised to get divine and heavenly Learning, and not to be Fools in
Religion, or in the Things of God, nor to hate his true Knowledge; for if they
had all the natural Knowledge, and brightest natural Parts in the World, they
would be but Fools without the true Fear of God, which the wise King Solomon
says, Is the Beginning of Wisdom.

The 27th of the Month we saw Cape Henlopen, having been 27Days from the Island
of Barbados: This was a close, foggy Day, we could see but very little before
us, and had like to have been a-ground on the Shoals, which they call the Hen
and Chickens, but went between them and the Cape, in three Fathom Water; the
Wind blowing hard at South, we went up the Bay by the Lead; for we could not
see Land; and the Gale being so fresh, we got to Bombay-Hook, from our Capes,
in about six Hours, which is accounted twenty Leagues; where we came to an
Anchor, and there met with abundance of Ice. Merciful was the Deliverance and
Preservation we met with, from the Hand of the Almighty, this Voyage; may we
ever gratefully remember it! About a League above Bombay-Hook, when the Fog
broke up, we found ourselves close on the Jersey Shore; and the Wind sprung up
at North-west, and obliged us to come to an Anchor; where the Ice came down
upon us, which surprised some of us much. The sudden coming out of so hot a
Climate, into one so severely cold, had a bad Effect on most of our Ship's
Company; and, for my own Part, I had a sore Fit of the Phthysick, and was, at
times, almost breathless, and thought I must die, for I could hardly breath, or
speak; but yet I resolved, as long as I was capable of Thoughts, I would think
of God, and my beloved Jesus; in which Thoughts and Meditations I found some
Comfort and Consolation. I sat up for diverse Nights, not being able to lie down
for want of Breath; and I could not drink any strong Drink, as Rum, Wine, Ale,
or Punch, such as the Sailors drank; but, instead thereof, I drank Sage Tea,
which was very helpful to me.

The next Day, the Ice came down more and more upon us, and we feared to put
back, because, if we had gone a-ground in the Bay, the Ice might have
demolished us; so we took the most convenient Time we could, and got up our
Anchor, with some Difficulty, and stood for Reedy-Island, one of the best
Harbors upon Delaware; but, the Wind and Tide sailing us, we could not get in;
and the Ebb brought down the Ice mightily on us, so that it took away the Head
of our Vessel, and cut her Sides very much. The next Tide we got into the
Harbor, and lay close to Reedy-Island, making the Ship fast on Shore. While we
lay here, several Vessels came to us, and fastened on Shore as we did. The Ice
drove one Vessel on us, and broke our Spritsail Yard. Here I went on Shore,
where the People were very kind to us, particularly the Sheriff of the County,
John Gooding, and his Wife and Family. I went also to the House of John M'
Coel, who, with his Wife, were very tender in their Care and Love toward me;
bathing my swelled and benumbed Limbs until the Frost was pretty well out of
them. The Good Will, and tender Love and Care, I here met with, affects my Mind
in the noting of it: I pray the Most High, whom I love and serve, to be their
Rewarder.

I had two Meetings at our Meeting House at George's-Creek, where was People of
diverse Persuasions, who gave good Attention. For these Meetings I was truly
thankful; for though, through the extreme Cold, I could hardly speak when on
board, I now spoke freely, much to my Admiration, and I believe to the People's
Satisfaction, more than is proper for me to mention, wherefore I praise God.
When the Weather was a little more open, and the Ice gone, we sailed up the
River to Philadelphia, Philadelphia.
where I was joyfully received by my Friends; and while the Vessel was
repairing and fitting for another Voyage, I was not idle, but visited Friends
Meetings at Philadelphia, Burlington. Abington, etc.
Burlington, Abington, Germantown, Biberry, Fair-Hill, and Franckfort; being
sometimes at four or five Meetings a Week. I was also at Haddonfield and
Evesham Meetings, in West-Jersey; both good and comfortable Meetings, and will
not easily be forgotten; for therein God was graciously pleased to visit us
with his Word, blessed be his Name.

The 4th of the Third Month we again set sail for Speight's-Town, in Barbados;
An eighth Voyaye as Master, etc.
and the 6th of the Month, about six in the Morning, left the Capes of
Delaware. From the Time we left the Sight of the Capes of Delaware, to the
Sight of Barbados, was Twenty-five Days (which was the quickest Voyage that
ever I had in this Ship) in which Time we had three Meetings for the public
Worship of Almighty God, and to me they were beneficial; and for God's
Goodness, I could do no less than return Praise to Him, who alone is worthy
forever.

After I had done my Business at Barbados, Barbados.
and visited Friends Meetings on the 5th of the Fifth Month, I sailed for South
Carolina, touched at the Island of Christophers, and landed some Passengers
there. St. Christophers.
From thence we went to Sea, and the same Night we had a Storm, 1732.
but suffered little, the Wind being for us, that we went before it, and after
it was over, we had a pleasant Passage of about fourteen Days to the Coast of
Carolina; and when we saw the Land, the Wind came against us, which made some
of our Passengers very uneasy; but in meditating on the Infinite Being, I was
favored with inward Comfort and strong Consolation, so that I was humbly
thankful, and praised God.

We were prevented by contrary Winds, and a strong Current, from getting into
Charlestown, and while we were beating about the Coast, we met with a Vessel,
which came from thence, who gave us Intelligence that many People died
suddenly, and that they buried ten or twelve in a Day. Hearing such News, and
the Wind being still against us, our Passengers, who intended for Carolina,
concluded to go for Philadelphia; so we tacked about, and stood for
Delaware-Bay, and then we had a fresh Gale ahead again for several Days, and
spending so much Time on the Coast, our Water was far expended, and we agreed
to come to an Allowance of Water, a Quart a Man for Twenty-four Hours, for
several Days before we got in. We were about five Weeks in our Passage from
Barbados to Delaware River.

Philadelphia.
Soon after our Arrival at Philadelphia we got our Ship on the Ways, in order to
refit and sheath her, in which Time I traveled into several Counties, and had
many religious Meetings in diverse Places, in which I had good Satisfaction; and
my old Acquaintance and Friends said, they rejoiced to see me again after my
Sea Voyages. I was thankful in my Heart for the Goodwill of my Good Master, and
of my Friends, in those Journeys, which was, and, I hope, ever will be better
to me than choice Silver, and fine Gold.

The Winter setting in about a Month sooner than usual, many Vessels were
detained from going to Sea, being frozen up; also many Vessels could not come
from Sea up the River, so that a great Damp was put on Trade, and the Frost
coming so suddenly, many People were taken with Colds, and many died in both
the Provinces of New Jersey and Pennsylvania. My dear Friend and kind Landlord
Paul Preston, died about this Time, who, on his dying Bed, said, 'He had no
Desire to live, but to do Good, and that it had been his Care to keep a
Conscience void of Offense toward God, and to all Men, which now was his
Comfort.' The hard Weather continuing, I found an Exercise and Concern on my
Mind to visit Friends Meetings in the County of Bucks, in Pennsylvania, and the
County of Burlington, in West Jersey; in both which I was at above twenty
Meetings in about twenty Days. In this Journey I was favored with the Grace
and Goodness of the Divine Hand to a greater Degree than I was worthy of,
though I was sometimes exceeding poor in my Spirit, and, in my own Judgment,
very weak for Service and Labor, both in Body and Mind; our Meetings,
considering the severe Season, were large, and, I hope, they were to general
Edification.

On the 25th of the Tenth Month, being the reputed Birth Day of our Lord Jesus
Christ, at a little Town, near the Falls, called Bordentown, Bordentown.
we had a Meeting (where never any had been before of our Friends) in one of
the Houses newly built by Joseph Borden, the Proprietor of the Place: He
entertained us lovingly at his House, when he was so generous as to offer
Ground for a Grave-Yard, and to build a Meeting House on, and a handsome Sum of
Money toward building it, though he did not make Profession to be of our
Society. Some that were at this Meeting, who did not profess with us, came over
the Creek on the Ice to Isaac Horner's, in the Evening, where we had a
satisfactory Meeting, in which God, through Christ was glorified. Daniel
Stanton (my Wife's Sister's Son) accompanied me in this Journey, whose Company
and Ministry was acceptable, both to me and Friends, and we had Meetings at the
Falls, Bristol, Middletown, Wright's-Town, Bordentown. Croswicks, Mansfield,
Upper and Lower Springfield, Mount Holly, Rancocas, Evesham, and Chester, and
diverse Evening Meetings at several Friends Houses. It now being a sickly Time I
was often sent for to visit the Sick, in which Visits we were comforted, and
God's holy Name was praised.

On the 18th of the Eleventh Month, I was sent for to Bristol to visit Ennion
Williams, Bristol.
who was dangerously ill, and to Burlington, to the Burial of Elizabeth, the
Wife of Jonathan Wright, Burlington.
who was buried from the great Meeting House at Burlington. The Meeting was
very large, she being well beloved by her Neighbors and Acquaintance, being a
Woman much given to Hospitality (and indeed many of the Friends of Burlington
have exceeded in that Respect the most that ever I have observed in my Travels)
She was a Pattern of Piety, a loving, obliging Wife, and tender and careful
Mother, a kind Neighbor, a loving and faithful Friend, and so continued to the
End; for some of her dying Words were, That she desired her Love might be
remembered to all her Friends, which was done openly in the said Meeting, and
tenderly affected many.

After I came home, I was at the Marriage of William Parker, and Elizabeth
Gilbert, at which Marriage was our worthy, ancient Friend, John Richardson,
with diverse other European Friends. The Meeting was large and edifying.

The River still continuing frozen up, I had a Desire to visit my Friends and
Brethren in Chester County, whom I had not seen for some Years; and in order
thereto, in the Beginning of the Twelfth Month, I, with my Kinsman, Daniel
Stanton, set out from Philadelphia, and went to Newtown, where we had a Meeting
next Day (being the first of the Week) and afterward an Evening Meeting at
Evan Lewis's; from thence we went to the Monthly Meeting at Providence, on
Third-day to Middletown, Fourth-day to Concord, Fifth-day to Birmingham,
Sixth-day to London-Grove; after which we had an Evening-meeting at a Widow's
House: From thence we traveil'd on Seventh-day to Nottingham, and were at a
large Meeting there on First Day, and had an Evening-meeting at a Friend's
House, where some Persons came, who had never been at a Meeting of Friends
before; on Second-day we had a Meeting at Susquebannah Ferry, to which diverse
People came over the Ice, and it was a good Opportunity to many of them.
Third-day we had a large Meeting at West-Nottingham, and in the Evening at
William Brown's, and next we had a large Meeting at New-Garden, and at Michael
Lightfoot's House we met with two Friends from Ireland, Mungo Bewley, and
Samuel Stephens, who were now proceeding on the Course of their religious Visit
to Friends in Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina. -- From thence I went to
visit my old Friend and Acquaintance Ellis Lexis, who had a Desire to see me:
We had an Evening-meeting in his Chamber, to our mutual Comfort and
Refreshment; and next Day had a very large Meeting in the Meeting House at
Kennet; after which we went to Concord to the Quarterly Meeting for the County
of Chester, and were at three Meetings there, and likewise had three
Evening-meetings at Friends Houses; at which Meetings we had the Company of my
Kinswoman Alice Alderson, and her Companion, Margaret Coupland, who were lately
come from the North of England, to visit Friends in this and the adjacent
Provinces.

We went on Third-day to the General-meeting at Providence, which was very
large; Joshua Fielding and Ebenezer Large were there; and we had an Evening
Meeting at Rebecca Minshall's; and next went to Chichester, where we had a
larger Meeting than I expected, considering the Season; we lodged at John
Salkeld's; and on Fifth-day we had a good, open Meeting at Chester, and, in the
Evening, another at Grace Loyd's; next Day had a Meeting at Springfield, which
I believe will be remembered by some that were there, when we don't see one
another; afterward we traveled to Philadelphia.

In this Year, 1732, arrived Thomas Penn, one of the Proprietors of
Pennsylvania, and Son of the truly honorable William Penn, Governor and
Proprietor of this Province, a wise Man, a good Christian, and a mild Governor,
a great Promoter of Piety and Virtue, and of good Men. May this his Son walk in
his Steps!

In the First Month was our General Spring-meeting, at which were several
Public Friends from England, viz. John Richardson, Alice Alderson, and
Margaret Coupland. The Meeting was large and edifying, the said Friends having
Service therein to general Satisfaction.

1733.
The 2d of the Second Month, I proceeded on a Voyage to Barbades (it being the
first in the Snow Barbados-Packet, a Vessel built on Purpose for me) We got to
the Capes the 20th of the Second Month, in the Evening, where we were obliged
to come to an Anchor; and the 21st we put out to Sea, but the Wind being
against us, and looking like windy Weather, I concluded to come to under our
Cape, and wait for a fair Wind: As soon as our Snow came to, we got our Boat
out, Lewis-Town.
and went to Lewis-Town; and next Day, being First Day, we had a Meeting in the
Courthouse. In this Town is an Episcopal, and a Presbyterian Meeting House;
but neither of their Teachers were that Day in Town, and diverse of the People
were glad of a Meeting, and I had a good Opportunity with them. After Meeting I
went or board, and weighed Anchor, At Sea.
and had a fair Wind for above a Week after: In which Time we overtook the Ship
Amity, -- Bowling, Master, near the Latitude of Bermudas; where we had smart
Gales of Wind, which (...) us to carry our Topsails double-reeff'd: And, (...)
having been at Sea 27 Days and one Night, in which Time we had several
Meetings, we saw the Island of Barbados; though, for the most Part, Barbados.
we had contrary Winds; but all was well, and God blessed, who is forever
worthy.

The 20th of the Fourth Month, Sails from Barbados.
having done my Business, and also visited Friends Meetings, we sailed for
Philadelphia; and on the 25th of the Fourth Month, being First Day, we had a
seasonable and serviceable Meeting, wherein the Almighty was worshipped and
praised, and the People exhorted to Sobriety and Temperance. We were about 20
Days from Barbados to Philadelphia. Philadelphia.


After having staid at home about six Weeks, and visited the Meetings of
Friends in diverse Places, to mine and their Satisfaction, on the 28th of the
Sixth Month, I proceeded on another Voyage for the Island of Barbados. We left
Sight of our Capes on the 31st of the said Month. The Winds were, for the most
Part, contrary, and, before we got into the Trade Wind, we met with two hard
Gales; the last of which was a Kind of a Hurricane, in which we could carry no
Sail at all, but let the Vessel lie to the Mercy of the Seas, or rather to the
Mercy of him that made the Seas, and all that is therein, and in the Earth
also. In this Storm we lost a spare Topmast, and diverse other Utensils
belonging to the Vessel; but all our People were well and safe. This Voyage we
had several comfortable religious Meetings on board, in which we were exhorted
to prepare for another and better World, this being so very uncertain and
momentary, and full of various Exercises, Temptations, and Afflictions.

I had on board three Whitehaven Sailors, William Towerson, William Trimble,
and William Atkinson, and I do not remember that I heard either of them swear
an Oath during the whole Voyage, which I thought worthy to stand on Record,
1731.
because it is so rare in seafaring Men. About the Beginning of the Eighth
Month (being in the Latitude of Barbados) the Thoughts of my leaving my Family
and Habitation, and many of my loving Relations, and near and dear Friends (as
at diverse other times also) made me pensive and sorrowful; but it being on a
Principle of Justice, and sometimes meeting with the Presence and Goodness of
God, I was enabled to do my Affairs and Business, and forbore to appear
sorrowful as much as possibly I could, or to be of a sad Countenance in the
Sight of Men; but to him, who knew all Things, and sees in secret, I poured out
my Soul in all my Afflictions, for he only is able to help me. I met with some
who untruly censured me, as covetous of the Things of this World, or to be
rich; and that for the sake of these outward Things, I might venture my Life,
until I might lose it: Really, as to my Life, it has long been my Desire to be
ready to resign it, and is so still: And, as to those outward Things, so far as
I know, my Heart is clear; Food and Raiment, and to be clear and even with the
World, having rather to give than receive, is all the Grandeur I desire; and if
that be not granted, I hope to be contented without it, and to be thankful. I
look upon Crowns and Sceptres, and all the fine Things of this World, that are
of the Nature of it, but as Trifles, and diminutive Things, in Comparison of a
House and Kingdom eternal in the Heavens. In this Voyage, as usual, At Sea.
I read in the Holy Scriptures, and met with strong Consolation therein,
especially in the New Testament; I also read much in the Works of that eminent
Judge and good Christian, Matthew Hale.

Arrives at Barbados.
The 7th of Eighth Month, we arrived at Barbados, staid three Weeks and one Day,
and had diverse religious Meetings. I hastened to accomplish my Affairs before
Winter, it coming on, and the Time of the Year dangerous for sailing on our
Coasts. On the 30th of the Eighth Month we left the Island of Barbados, bound
for Philadelphia; 1733.
and on the 11th of the Ninth Month it pleased God to favor us with a gracious
Opportunity to worship him; At Sea.
wherein was declared to the Ship's Company, The Nature and Advantage of Good,
and the Fountain from whence it flows, or springs; as also the Nature and
Disadvantage of Evil; the one being or springing from God, and the other
proceeding from Satan, or the Devil, who is the Root of all Evil; and, that Men
might be left without Excuse, God has sent the Divine and Supernatural Light
of his Holy Spirit, to show to Mortals what is Good, and what is Evil; in order
that they might embrace the Good, and refuse the Evil.

The 21st of the Ninth Month, we had a very hard Gale of Wind at North-west,
which blew so hard, that it put us by from sailing, so that we were obliged to
lay her to the Wind; for, by the Violence thereof, we could not carry any Sail;
and it was so dark, that we could neither see Stars, nor one another; nor hear
one another, without we were very near, the Seas rising very high: Indeed the
long, stormy and dark Nights were very dismal; and some of our Goods got loose
in the Hold. In the Beginning of the Night, about the seventh Hour, Philip
Kearney, my Apprentice, fell into the Sea, and was lost; which was a deep
Affliction to us in diverse Considerations.

The 25th we saw the Land, and next Day we came to an Anchor in Delaware Bay.
Philadelphia.
The Loss of this Lad, was a Cause that we were not so joyful, as is usual for
People to be when come to the Shore.

The latter End of the Tenth Month I went the 3d Voyage (Commander of the
Barbados-Packet) from Philadelphia, bound to Barbados: We were towed through
the Ice by two Boats from Thomas Masters's Wharff, and in two Days got to
Reedy-Island; from whence we sailed down Delaware Bay; where we lay two Nights,
the Wind being contrary, blowing hard; the Nights being long, the Days very
short, and Weather sharp; we left our Capes in the Night, it being dangerous
lying in the Bay; and after being out several Days, At Sea.
we had favorable Winds, and pleasant Weather; but when we got into the
Trade-wind, it blew hard, and mostly against us; so that the first Land we saw
was the Island of Christopher's, Arrives at Christopher's
where we arrived in 20 Days from our Capes; and the Market for Provisions
being at that Time better than at any other of those Islands, and the Property
of the Vessel mostly belonging to me, and the Cargo generally consigned to me,
I disposed of Part of it. Here being no Meeting of our Society on this Island,
I had Meetings on board the Vessel in the Harbor, and diverse from the Shore,
and several Masters of Vessels came to our Meetings, the Snow having large
Accommodations for such an Occasion; and, so far as I could understand, the
People were generally satisfied, and spoke well of our Meetings.

Of late times, and also in this Voyage, meeting with many Losses and Crosses,
and much Afflictions, and various Exercises, I was ready to say in my Heart,
Lord, why am I thus afflicted, now in my declining Years, since, thou knows, I
love thee above all Things, and that I would not willingly or knowingly offend
thee, my great and dear Lord? It was answered (as though vocally spoken) My
only begotten and beloved Son, who never offended me, suffered much more. This
Word being such an evident Truth, I begged Patience to go through all my
Sufferings and Afflictions, so that at last I might live with Christ in the
glorious Kingdom of God forever, where I might always bless and praise his holy
Name.

Five or six Days after our Arrival at this Island, a Vessel, that came out
five or six Days before us, arrived, she meeting with the same boisterous
Weather as we did, yet we made our Passage ten or eleven Days sooner: Diverse
other Vessels, bound to Barbados, put in here, through these contrary Winds;
and when I saw others in the like Circumstances with us, I was the more
thankful for being preserved safe, and so soon to this Place; yet it was a
considerable Loss and sore Trial not to get to Barbados, the Island I was bound
to, and a great Disappointment to me, and many more.

At this Island a Person, whose Name was -- Galloway, a Man of a great Estate,
hearing that I kept Meetings on board the Vessel, kindly invited me to have a
Meeting at his House, and said he would give Notice of it to diverse of the
Gentlemen (as he called them) of the Island, telling me, that I should be
welcome to his House, which was much more convenient than the Vessel; but I was
not very forward to accept of my Friend Gall^way's kind Offer, being sensible
of my own Weakness and inward Poverty, so that I made several Excuses to evade
it; but he obviated them all. 1st, I asked him, "If he could bear the Reproach
of having a Quaker's Meeting at his House?" He answered, "Yes, there is Good
and Bad of all Societies." 2dly, I asked, "If his Wife would like it, or be
willing that a Meeting should be in the House?" He said, "She desired it, and
would be very willing." 3dly, I asked, "If he thought he could sit in Silence?
He told me, "He believed he could." I then told him, "I was obliged to him for
his kind and friendly Offer, and, God willing, I intended to come, and tell my
People of the Ship's Company to come also, and desired him to give Notice of
it:" The which he did; and there was a large, satisfactory Meeting: Oh may the
Almighty sanctify it to some Souls, is my Desire!

He and his Wife were both very courteous to me, and invited many of his rich
Friends and Relations: His Wife's Father was a Judge in this Island of good
Repute. Diverse People, of several Professions, were at this Meeting, and many
expressed their being glad of it. An Attorney at Law said, "He was thankful for
the Words he heard that Day, and, if I would stay with them, he would always
come to our Meetings." One Judge Mills was at this Meeting, and very kindly
invited me to his House. Some meeting me next Day, said, They were sorry they
were not there. The Mistress of the House told diverse of the People, who were
Persons of Note, "That they should remember what they had heard;" and spoke it
with a religious Concern, as it seemed to me. When I went to this Meeting, I
was very poor, and in much Fear, speaking with a great Concern on my Mind for
the People's Salvation, and that God, through Christ, might be glorified.

After this Meeting, it was (as though a Voice) said unto me, How do thou know
but for this Cause, and for this Meeting, thou art brought here to this Island,
though against thy Will? The People told me that they did not remember that there
ever was a Meeting of our Friends before on the Island. The Meeting had this
Effect, that the People had a better Opinion of our Society than they had
before. The Subject in this Meeting was, The Excellency of the Gospel
Dispensation above that of the Law, in that it brought us to the Law, went
through the Law, and was above the Law, and far from destroying the Law, but
fulfilled it; for Proof of which, they were referred to Christ's most excellent
Sermon which he preached on the Mount, Mat. v.

From the Island of Christopher's I purposed, God willing, for Barbados; the
which I apprehended would be a troublesome Voyage, it being about 100 Leagues
to Windward, and a strong Current against us. On the 19th of the Twelfth Month,
we sailed toward Barbados; and the Wind being ahead, and blowing hard, Lucea.
we tarried two Nights at the Island of Lucea, where we took in Wood and Water:
The People here were mostly French, and were very civil to us.

The 21st we put out again to Sea; but the Wind and Current being against us,
obliged us to go into the Harbor from whence we came, and tarry for an
Opportunity more favorable. While we were in this Harbor, which is a very
good one, several Vessels came in on the like Occasion; and a Vessel that came
from Christopher's about three Hours after us, came here three Days since we
did.

We went out again, in order to proceed to Barbados; but, as before, the
Current was so strong against us, and the Wind also, that we could not get
forward on our Way; wherefore we put back again to Christopher's, and, by the
Way, called at Antigua, Antigua.
where I had an open, satisfactory Meeting, for which I was truly thankful, and
so were some, not of our Society, of whom there were diverse, and some who had
not been at our Meetings before.

The next Day we arrived again at Christopher's, Christopher's
and there unloaded the Remainder of our Cargo, though much against my Mind.
After having sold the most of our Cargo at Basseterre, we went to Sandy-Point,
and there sold the Remainder, and took in our Loading for Philadelphia.

In loading our Vessel, Judge Brown was my very good Friend, and helpful to me
therein, for which I think my self much obliged to him.

While we lay here, I had a Meeting on board our Vessel, to which came five
Masters of Vessels. It was a good Meeting, though I spoke to them in much Misery
and Pain, having very angry painful Sores on my Legs, occasioned by a Fall in
getting out of the Boat, the Seas running high, and through the Violence of the
Waves, I fell across the Boat, and broke both my Shins very grievously.

The 31st of the First Month, 1734, 1734.
we had another Meeting on board our Vessel, to which came several from other
Vessels, and some from the Shore, among whom was a young Baronet, and his Host
(a Tavernkeeper) with him, who at first behaved airily, but, after some Time,
he was more sober, and seemed respectful at parting.

I was invited to have a Meeting next First Day on board the Ship King George,
a large Vessel; the Master told me his Cabin was large, and would accommodate
many more than mine; but we did not stay so long as till the First Day.

After this Meeting was over, the Master of the large Ship came on board, and
said, "He was sorry he had not come sooner, so as to have had the Opportunity
to have been at the Meeting."

Anguilla.
From Christopher's we set sail for the Island of Anguilla, and had a Meeting at
the Governor's House on a First Day. We staid at Anguilla three Days, and there
took on board some Bags of Cotton on Freight, and sailed from thence the 10th
of the Second Month. The Governor of this Island, whose Name is George Leonard,
told me, "That he should live and die in our Principles, saving that he must
defend his People." But he did not consider, that his Defense might destroy
both him and them, and that such Defense was directly contrary to Christ's
Doctrine and Practice. A remarkable and dismal Passage he related to me, that,
some Days before, a Vessel came from the Island of Saltitudas (which went there
to take in Salt) the People going on Shore, the Master told him, that there lay
at the Landing the Heads of above twenty Men on one Side the Path, and the
Quarters of them on the other; which so surprised them, that they made the best
of their Way to Anguilla, where they related this dismal Story, and supposed
the Slain to be Britons by their Appearances, and that they were destroyed by
the Spaniards, who are known to be cruel to them: This Action being far from
the Spirit of Christianity, is a Reproach to the Actors thereof.

Not far from Anguilla is an Island they call St. John's, the Inhabitants of
which are Dutch: The Negroes there lately rose and took the Island, killed the
People, spoiled their Plantations, and burnt their Houses: I lodged at the
House of a Person, Anguilla.
who went to subdue those Negroes, who were too strong for him and his Company,
and the Negroes killed diverse of them, and among them, killed this Man's two
Sons, for which their Mother and Sisters were in bitter Mourning, when I was at
their House. The Thoughts of the Bloodshed, and vast Destraction, which War
makes in the World, caused me to cry in my Heart; How long, O Lord, th^^ holy,
just, and true God, will it be till Nation lift up the Sword no more against
Nation, nor the People learn War any more

When I came home from this Voyage, Arrives at Philadelphia.
which was the 30th of the Second Month, I met with the sorrowful News of the
Death of my only Son George, a beloved, dear Youth, Account of the Death of his
Son George.
who was taken sick the fifth of the Eighth Month, 1733, and departed this Life
at my House in Franckfort, the 13th of said Month, about the ninth Hour, in the
Evening of the sixth Day of the Week, and was carried to the Bank Meeting House
of Friends in Philadelphia, and buried from thence on the first Day following,
being accompanied by many Friends, and others; he was ten years and seven Days
old, when he died, and, as he was much beloved for the Sweetness of his Nature
and Disposition, so he was greatly lamented by many who were acquainted with
him. I have this Account to leave concerning him, not so much that he was my
Son, as to excite other Youths to serve and fear the Lord, and to love him
above all, and that they might remember their Creator in their youthtul Days,
that it might be well with them in this World, and when Time here to them shall
be no more.

He was a Lad much inclined to read the Holy Scriptures, and other good Books,
especially religious Ones; and was always obliging, obedient and and loving, to
his Parents, and ready and willing to do any Service he could to his Friends;
any little Services in his Power he cheerfully performed, and took delight in;
he was very diligent, and ready to go to religious Meetings, and an entire
Lover of religious People. In his Sickness he behaved himself more like a wise
Man, than a Youth of that Age, bearing his Pain and Sickness with a great deal
of Patience. I being in another Part of the World, he would gladly have seen
me, but said, he should never see me any more, and therefore desired his Mother
to remember his dear Love to his Father, and tell him, that he was gone to his
Heavenly Father. He was very fervent in Prayer in the Time of his Sickness, and
prayed that God would preserve his People all the World over. One time, when in
great Misery and Pain, he prayed to Christ, saying, Sweet Jesus! Blessed Jesus!
give me Patience to bear my Misery and Pain, for my Misery is greater than I
can well bear! O come, sweet Jesus, why art thou so long a coming? I had rather
be with thee than in the finest Place in all the World. Many religious
Expressions he spoke on his dying Bed, greatly to the Satisfaction and Melting
of his Friends and Relations who came to see him in his Illness; one Day he
said, My misery and Pain is very great, but what would it be if the Wrath of
God was in my Soul? He believing in the Love of God in Christ, made him
desirous of being with him, and seeing the Joy that was set before him, thought
the Time long to be with Jesus, as knowing that then he would be out of all
Misery and Pain. His Heart was full of Love to his Relations, Acquaintance and
Friends, who came to see him in his Illness; and full of tender Sweetness and
Divine Love, he took his last Leave of them, which greatly affected many. This
was one of the most pinching Excercises I ever met with in all my Days; but as
he said in his Illness, so I now write. The Wisdom of the Lord is wonderful.
One time in this dear Child's Sickness he said, Oh! the good Hand of Thee the
Lord help me, give me Ease, and conduct me safe (i. e.) to God's Kingdom,
uttering this Verse: Sweet Jesus, give me Ease, for Mercy I do crave;
And if thou'll give me Ease, then Mercy I shall have.


Although this was a great and sore Exercise, and deep Affliction to me, in
losing this promising Youth, and my only Son; yet, considering that he went off
the Stage of Life like a solid, good Christian, it was made tolerable easy to
me; for he departed this Life in much Brightness and Sweetness, and more like
an old Christian, than a Youth of ten Years of Age.

It was usual for me to advise his Mother not to set her Affections too much
upon him, thinking he was too good to live long in this World, and too ripe for
Heaven, to stay long here on Earth, or in this World of Sorrow and Misery. This
dear and tender Youth, when reading (to which he was much inclined) if he met
with any Thing that affected him, either in the sacred Writings, or other good
Authors, he would write it down, and get it by Heart; he was, more than common,
affectionately concerned for his Mother, doing whatever he could freely and
cheerfully to serve her, and told her not to do diverse Things which he thought
too much for her, saying, Mother, let me do it, if I were a Man, thou should
not do any Thing at all (meaning as to Labor,) My dear Wife, being very
industrious, and apt to overdo her self at times: And she being affected with
his filial Love and Care for and toward her in his Father's Absence, it caused
her sometimes to turn about and weep, in Consideration of his great Care for
and Love to her. I thought a little Memorandum of the Life and Death of this
religious Lad was worthy recording, in order to stir up other Youths to
Obedience and Love to their Parents, who begat them, and carefully and tenderly
nourished and brought them up; and also to love and obey God, from whom they
have their Life, Breath and Being, and to believe in Christ, who died for them;
who is the glorious Light of all the Nations of them that are saved, and walk
therein, according to sacred Writ.

As noted above, he got several Pieces by Heart out of the Bible, and other
Religious Writings, first writing them with his Pen. Two short Ones I may
Recite, of which nature were diverse others, which peradventure may be edifying
to some, who may cast their Eye thereon.

One Place which much affected my Mind that he wrote down, and got by Heart,
was the 15th Verse of the 57th Chapter of that evangelical Prophet Isaiah: For
thus says the high and lofty One, that inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is
holy, I dwell in the high and holy Place, with him also that is of a contrite
and humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the Humble, and to revive the Heart
of the contrite Ones.

Another little Piece was five Verses, which among others he wrote, and got by
Heart, viz.

As one Day goes another comes,
And sometimes shows us dismal Dooms,
As time rowls on, new things we see,
Which seldom to us do agree:
Though now and then is a pleasant Day,
It Is long a coming, soon away;
Wherefore the everlasting Truth
Is good for aged and for Youth,
For them to set their Hearts upon;
For that will last till Time is done.
I have now but one only Daughter, Rebecca, left me out of twelve Children
(except my Wife's Son and Daughter.)

After this long and tedious Voyage, which ended in the second Month, I stayed
but a few Weeks at home, and loaded with Wheat and Flour for Dublin, in
Ireland; had Alice Alderson, my Kinswoman, and Margaret Copeland, Passengers,
We had a very comfortable, pleasant Passage, fair Winds and Weather, and good
religious Meetings. I think it was the most pleasant Time that ever I crossed
the Seas; Sails for Ireland.
about Nantucket we saw several Sloops a Whaling, and spoke with one, by which
Opportunity we enquired of the Welfare of our Friends on that Island, and sent
our Loves to them. Not many Miles from the Sloops we saw a shoal of Whales; I
counted eight in a Row lying Side by Side (...) the Water.

We were four Weeks and six Days from our Capes to Cape Clear in Ireland;
coming near the Land we met with Fishing-Boats, and got Plenty of choice fresh
Fish; in the Evening we got into Kinsale, Kinsale.
took in a Pilot for Dublin, and sailed next Day from Kinsale, and was out one
Night at Sea, got next Day to Dublin-Bay, where we went ashore, Dublin.
and were kindly entertained by our Friends; we were at diverse large Meetings
in that great City, which some of us, while we live, at times I believe shall
remember. My Stay in Ireland was about seven Weeks, in which Time I visited
several Meetings in the Country, and at Edenderry, the Moate of Greenogh,
Carlow, Ballytore, etc.

We set sail from Dublin with a fair Wind, Sails for Philadelphia.
in Company with the Ship Neptune, and our Friends sent many Prayers and good
Wishes after us. We were about forty Persons, Sailors, Passengers and Servants,
on board, and had a good Passage, all Things considered. We had diverse
religious Meetings on board, and were on our Passage, from the Sight of
Ireland, to the Sight of our Land, five Weeks and six Days; Arrives safe.
it was the quickest Voyage I ever made to Europe and back again to
Philadelphia.

When I came home, finding all well, I was thankful to God, in the Name of
Christ, for all his Mercies, and the many Preservations wherewithal he had
favored me.

After being a little at home, and at several Meetings, and not being clear of
the World, in order to it, I undertook another Voyage to Barbados, and from
thence intending for London, in order to settle my Affairs there, which I
intended some Years before, but Losses and Disappointments hindered me:
Wherefore, the ^th of the Tenth Month, Proceeds again to Barbados.
I proceeded on a fifth Voyage in the Barbados Pa^ke^* and left Philadelphia,
and was at a Meeting the next Day at Chester (being First Day) and in the
Evening we had a large Meeting at Grace Loyd's, where I met with my dear Friend
Joseph Gill, who had good Service in said Meeting; we rejoiced in Christ to see
each other: We left Chester the 9th, and got that Tide down the River to
Newcastle, and, after visiting those few Friends there, we set sail the 12th in
the Morning; the Wind being high, and the Weather very sharp, freezing hard,
our Sails were so froze, that we had hard Work to get the Vessel under sail.
The 13th Day, weighed Anchor, and sailed down the Bay, and the 14th we were
clear of the Capes. The First Day following, we had a good, seasons (...)
Meeting, for the Worship and Service of God; and, in said Meeting, as I was
treating of Disobedience to Parents, and Disobedience to Almighty God, our
great Parent and heavenly Father, a Youth, who was a Passenger in the Vessel,
At Sea.
went out hastily and abruptly, as I was showing the Ungratefulness of the
first, much more of the last: When I asked the Reason of his going out, he
said, "It was because he could not forbear crying;" and thinking I spoke so
because of him, he said, "He could not hear me any more." Afterward I
understood that he was a Youth who was very ungrateful and disobedient to his
Parents; the which I knew not of, for his Mother told me, and himself also,
that he went to Sea on Account of his Health. I thought his going out so
hastily, was occasioned by some Indisposition of Body; but it was, as he gave
us to understand, through resenting ill what was spoken, and by his taking of it
to himself. I have, in like Manner, sometimes observed, that diverse People have
shown a Restlessness and Uneasiness in public Assemblies of Worship and
Devotion, and sometimes going out, etc. so that they have thereby exposed
themselves to the Notice of the People, as Persons guilty of the Matter
publicly reprehended, or spoken against; just as though they were the only
Persons in the Assembly, who were guilty of the Evil then taken Notice of: Such
public Restlessness, is a great Folly and Weakness, besides so openly and
publicly exposing themselves.

After we left our Capes, we had diverse hard Gales of Wind, which lasted
several Days. The 28th, being a First Day, we had a Meeting for divine Worship,
in which God was praised, and his holy Name exalted, for his unspeakable Grace,
in sending his only begotten Son, a Divine Light to enlighten the Inhabitants
of the World: After which we had stormy Weather and contrary Winds for some
Weeks, so that our Passage was tedious; and of 15 Times going to Barbados, I
found this the most difficult; and the Prospect was very discouraging of making
a losing Voyage, by the great Expense I expected for repairing and resisting
the Vessel, etc. so that I began to despair of accomplishing my Design of
discharging my Debts in Great Britain, and the Thoughts and Consideration of
losing so much of the Company and Conversation of my Wife, Relations, and
Friends, and spending so much precious Time (which cannot be recalled) to so
little Purpose, lay heavy on my Mind; yet, by the Grace of God, my Mind was
supported, and my Resolutions confirmed to praise the Almighty, for every
Dispensation of his Providence.

The 23d of the Eleventh Month, Barbados.
we saw the Island of Barbados (at the breaking of the Day) having been from
the Capes of Delaware forty Days, and one Night; and was truly thankful, that,
at last, we, through Divine Favor, got well to our desired Port; where we were
lovingly received by our Friends at Speight's- Town, who were joyful at our
Arrival. From thence I went to Bridge-Town, and so on to the Governor's, in
order to enter our Vessel; but, staying a little too late, the Governor, who
was the Lord How, was come from his House on his Way to Bridge-Town, with his
Coach and Six, and his Attendants; but he (seeing me) courteously stopped his
Coach, and did my Business as he sat therein; and though I made an Essay
toward an Excuse, he would not admit of it, saying, "There was no Need of any
Excuse." He was indeed an extraordinary courteous Man: He died soon after, much
lamented, as he was much beloved.

Barbados.
My Stay at Barbados this time was the longest I ever stayed, believing it to be
the last time I should go there, and that I should see them no more. My so
saying troubled some of them; but growing in Years (being then turned of
Threescore) I thought it would be too hard for me to undertake such another
Voyage; therefore I was at all the Meetings of our Friends on the Island.

Here I met with Moses Aldridge, a Friend from New England, who came on a
religious Visit to Friends of this Island, with whom we had diverse good
Meetings, his Service in Preaching the Gospel being edifying and acceptable; we
were together at the Marriage of Andrew Dury and Mary Lewis, after which
Meetting and Marriage, I was ill of a Fever several Days, which Distemper was
very much among the People, of which near twenty Masters of Vessels, and some
Hundreds of People died; and though I had been at Barbados many times, I never
had so much Illness there before; Moses Aldridge, and several Friends of us,
had a large Meeting at John Gibson's, where were many People, not of our
Persuasion, who generally were sober; but as I was recommending Charity to the
People, according to the Doctrine of the Apostle Paul, as the most excellent
Gift, I advised them to show it forth to all People of all Professions, and
also to their Negroes, telling them, 1735.
that some of the Gentry of this Island had observed to me, that the more kind
they were to their Slaves, they had their Business the better done for it;
though I observed also, that I had been at some Places, where I had watched to
hear some Expressions that might look like Charity; but in diverse Houses, and
some of Note, Barbados.
I could not hear any Christian-like Expressions to their Slaves or Negroes,
and that with Sorrow I had seen a great deal of Tyranny and Cruelty, the which
I dissuaded them from: This Doctrine so exasperated some that were there, that
they made a Disturbance in the Meeting; one of which Persons meeting me on the
King's Highway, shot off his Fowling Piece at me, being loaded with
Small-shot, ten of which made Marks on me, and several drew Blood; by which
unfriendly Action, the Man got a great deal of Disgrace, it being highly
resented by all who were acquainted with me; the President of the Island looked
on it as a very base Action, as did also diverse of the Justices and the Gentry,
also the Vestry, and several Clergymen and Lawyers; one of the Lawyers told me,
"I should not be just to the Country, myself, nor the Man, if I did not
prosecute him;" another, professing the Law, said, "He ought to be abandoned by
all Mankind, if he shot at me with Design;" many were for prosecuting him, for
the People generally took Notice of it with Abhorrence; but he sending for me,
and signifying, he would not do so again, I forgave him; and I pray it may not
he laid to his Charge in the great Day, and that he may be forgiven, he being
ignorant of the Love I had and have for him and all Men, even them whom I know
to be mine Enemies. It would be too great a Scandal and Reproach, to expose his
Name and Station in the World. Some thought I did well in forgiving him, and
some thought I did ill in it; but I spoke my Mind to him alone freely, in which
I had Satisfaction and Peace.

Intending my Vessel for London, I made my Chiefmate, Barbados.
Ralph Loftus, Master of her, not knowing whether I might proceed the Voyage,
it being a very sickly Time; afterward my Mate had the Distemper also, but I
bless God we both recovered a good State of Health.

It was this Voyage that my Friends in Barbados published a little Piece I
wrote at Sea, which I called, Free Thoughts communicated to Free-Thinkers; done
in order to promote Thinking on the Name and Works of God; which had, as far as
I understand, a good Acceptance among the People; the principal Clergyman on
the Island, thanked me for it, and said, "There was need enough of it:" But I
could be glad another, or a better Hand, had done some Thing of that Nature,
and more large. If this may be of any Service, I shall be thankful.

I had also a Meeting at John Lewis's, in Joseph's Parish, at which were diverse
not of our Profession, and some who were never at any of our religious Meetings
before; who said, They were glad they were there that Day; it being a
satisfactory, open Meeting.

After I had visited my Friends, and settled my Affairs as well as I could, and
loaded our Vessel with Sugars, for London, being willing, once more, to see my
native Land, and to settle my Affairs there, and see my Relations and Friends;
on the 6th of the Third Month, we set sail from Barbados for London, and had
pleasant Weather. At Sea.
The 16th, being the First Day of the Week, we had a religious Meeting for the
Worship of God, in which I was concerned to speak on the Government of the
Tongue (having on board several Hands, which did not sail with us before that
Voyage, that were much used to Swearing.) After that Meeting, we had not so
many bad Words and Oaths as before. I was thankful in my Soul to the Lord, and
blessed his holy Name, for his Goodness to us that Day; and, in the Night, my
Sleep was very sweet and comfortable, At Sea.
being sensible of the Love of God in the Visions of the Night; so that I
witnessed the Fulfilling of the Prophecy of Joel, Chap. ii. 28.

The 23d, being the First Day of the Week, we had a Meeting, in which the Grace
of God, that comes by Jesus Christ, was magnified, and a Blessing begged for
all who love and serve God, throughout the World, by Sea and Land; also a
render Petition was put up to Almighty God, that, as he was gracously pleased
to look down or those eight Persons in Noah's Ark, so he would please to look
upon us in our Vessel; and, that, as, by his divine Providence, they safely
landed on the Earth, so we, if it were his Will, might safely land at our
desired Port; yet not that our Wills, but his Will might be done: Which
Supplication was put up with great Submission. Both Day and Night I often
sought the Lord, and was much alone in this Voyage. I read the Old and New
Testament almost through, and much of it diverse Times over; my Time being
mostly taken up in Reading, Writing, and Meditating, in which, at times, my
Heart would be broken into Tenderness; and I was humbly thankful to God, that
my Heart was not hard; he having promised to visit the contrite Ones; the which
he sometimes fulfilled, to my unspeakable Satisfaction Glory to his holy Name
forever. My Heart was also thankful that God was pleased to visit me in my
watery Travels and Troubles, and in my Separation from my Family and Friends,
which are much nearer, and more valuable to me, than all Riches, and a great
Cross to my natural Inclination to part with.

The 8th of the Fourth Month, being the First Day of the Week, we had a
Meeting, in which Acquaintance with God was exhorted to, showing the Benefit of
it, and of loving him above all Things, and delighting in his Law, and
meditating therein Day and Night. The 19th, in the Morning, a strong northerly
Wind came up, and blew so hard, that we could not carry Sail, but lay to the
Wind, under our Mizzen, which was split or torn with the Violence of the Wind,
and the Sea rose high, so that it came into the Windows of our great Cabin: It
was very rugged for the Time, and, though it was Mid-summer, it was so cold,
that we were obliged to cloth ourselves, as in Winter. The 22d, being
First Day, we had a comfortable Meeting after the Storm, wherein the great
Benefit of true Religion was a little opened to our small Company, and the
Lord, Most High, was praised for our Deliverance and Preservation. The 26th, we
sounded, and found about 70 Fathom Depth of Water. The 29th, we were abreast
of the Isle of Wight. English Channel.
From the Time we left the Island of Barbados, to the Time we found Ground, was
seven Weeks. Thus, through many Perils and Dangers, we came to Great Britain;
for all which Mercies and Providence, let my Soul bless and praise the holy
Name and mighty Power of the Most High. It was now a Time of very great
Pressing for Seamen, and several Men of Wars Boats came on board to press our
Sailors; but they had prepared a Place in the Vessel to hide themselves, and
the Men of Wars People could not find them: One Lieutenant, with his Men, came
on board, and seeing us weakly handed (the best of our Hands being hid) he
asked me if I had any more Hands on board? I made him very little Answer; he
then said, He was sure I could not bring the Ship from Barbados without Hands:
I told him, Sailors were hard to be got in Barbados, either for Love or Money,
to go for London, for fear of being pressed, and I was obliged to take any I
could get: He said, It was in vain to talk much, but if I would say, I had no
more Hands on board, he would be satisfied; he having a Belief that I would
speak the Truth, though he never saw me before; and he said, If I would say,
there were no more Men on board, he would go away: for then he had no more
Business there: But I made him no Answer, not daring to tell a Lie: Now I know
that there is Men on board, said he; so he commanded his Men to search the Ship
to her Keel; so they stripped, and made a narrow Search, and sweated and
fretted, but could not find them. He being civil, I made him, when he went
away, a small Present; he wished me well; and so I carried my People safe up to
London.

In the Beginning of the Fifth Month, London.
I came to London, and lodged at the House of Simeon Warner, in Southwark, and
at diverse kind Friends and Relations in and about London; the tender and
brotherly Respect which I received from diverse, in some of those Families, in
my Sickness, will not, I believe, ever be forgotten, while I am in this World,
at times, by me; and, I hope, that He, whom I serve with my Might and Strength,
will be their Reward. When in the Country about London, my Residence was mostly
at Edmonton, at my dear Brother George Chalkley's, who, with my Sister and
Cousins, were a Comfort to me, both in Health and Sickness; for I was often in
London sorely afflicted with the Phthysick and Asthma, which sometimes made me
very uneasy; and, though my Affairs required me to be often at the City, yet I
was obliged to return into the Country for Air, and, both in Health and
Sickness, was kindly and very affectionately received and tended by my dear
Brother, Sister, and all my loving Cousins; the Memory thereof is Cordial to me
in penning these Lines: It may be truly said, We were very joyful in meeting
one another; and our Sorrow in parting not easy to be expressed.

In London I sold my Vessel, the Barbados Packet, and settled all my Affairs to
general Satisfaction, so far as I knew, on which Account I had labored for
several Years, and was joyful that Providence had favored me so far as to see
it accomplished; so that I now wholly intended to leave trading by Sea, the
which I never inclined to, only on a Principle of Justice; for I was fully
resolved in my Mind that my Creditors should be paid their just Debts, though I
might lose my Life in the Pursuit of it, about which I had no anxious Guilt,
because I never was extravagant nor indolent, but met with diverse Casualties by
Fire and Water; by the latter I lost many Hundreds of Pounds for several Years
together; and I would persuade all in their Undertaking for a Livelihood in
this World, to be sure to have an Eye to Divine Providence, who will not suffer
us (if we do well) nor so much as a Sparrow to fall to the Ground, without he
think it best for us, he knowing what is for our Good better than we know
ourselves. Thus when I had paid my Debts, and in a good Degree settled my
Affairs, I visited several of my Relations, as at Kingsworth, Stains, Guilford,
etc. had a Meeting at Market-Street, and one at Guilford, another at Stains,
and one at Longford; in all which I had some Service, and my Relations were
joyful to see me once more, having never expected to see me again; and when I
had visited Meetings in and about London, I went toward the North, in order to
visit some Places where I had never been, and some that I had been at. The
Number of Meetings, and the Names of the Places where I had Meetings (while I
was this time in England) are as follows: While I was in and about London, I
was at eighteen Meetings in that great City, at two of which I was with May
Drummond, a virtuous young Woman, who has a good Gift in the Ministry, and had
a gracious Opportunity of declaring her Convincement to our noble Queen
Caroline (our great King George's royal Consort.) The kind Treatment, and good
Reception, she had with the Queen, spread so in City and Country, that many
Thousands flocked to hear her, and more of the Gentry and Nobility, than ever
was known before, to our Meetings. I had some private Conversation with her,
which put me in mind of the Apostle's Exhortation, where he advises the
primitive Christians, that their Words be few and savoury, and that they should
be seasoned with Grace for this great Reason, that they might administer Grace
to the Hearers; and truly I thought there was the Influence of Grace in her
Conduct and Conversation, whom I pray God to preserve in Christ to the End.

I had a Meeting at the House of my Brother with his Scholars at Edmonton,
Edmonton*
and also with his Family and diverse of our Relations, which some of us may
have Occasion to remember. We had seven Meetings at Tottenham, at sundry times,
and four at Hartford; Tottenham. Hartford. Hitching. Baldock, etc. In
Hartfordshire. To Ives. Huntington and Ramsey, in Huntingtonshire.
Wellingborough. Northampton. Braybrooke. Okeham. Long-Clackson. Nottingham.
Fairnsfield. Mansfield. Chesterfield. Stockport.
I traveled to Hitching, from thence to Baldock, and then to Stadtfold, and
Ashwell. The 7th of the Eighth Month (being the third Day of the Week) to
Reyston, 4th to Ives, 5th to Huntington, 6th to Ramsey. First Day, being the
12th of the Month, we had a Meeting at a small Town named Finding, and the same
Day, in the Evening, had a large Meeting at Wellingborough, in
Northamptonshire. The 14th, being 3d Day of the Week, we had a Meeting at
Northampton, 4th Day at Braybrook, 5th Day at Okeham, in the County Town of
Rutland, 6th Day at Long-Clackson; and first Day, being 19th of the Month, I
was at a large and open Meeting at Nottingham, where were many People, not of
our Society, who were very sober; 3d Day had a Meeting at Fairnsfield, 4th Day
at Mansfield, 5th at Chesterfield, in Derbyshire; from whence we went over the
Moors and Mountains, Benjamin Bangs, the younger, accompanying me, who came on
purpose from Stockport to be my Companion and Guide thither: His Company was
both pleasant and profitable to me in that Hill Country, through which we
traveled to Stockport, where we had three Meetings, and where I met with my
dear, worthy old Friend, Benjamin Bangs; when we met, we embraced each other in
Arms of Christian Love, having not seen one another for many Years, with whom I
stayed four Days. This worthy Friend, though upwards of Fourscore Years of Age,
went with me to Manchester, where we had two Meetings, and then I went back
with him to his House. He was a Man of extraordinary Character, and well
beloved, he being a Pillar in the Church of Christ.

Manchester.
When at Manchester, I went to visit a Friend newly cut for the Stone, who had a
Stone taken out of him, the measure of which I saw, and had the Stone in my
Hand; it was nine Inches about, and three Inches over. Before I went out of
those Parts, he was well enough to ride home, which was near an hundred Miles;
he was cheerful as well as thankful.

Macclesfield.
From Stockport I went to Macclesfield, to Joseph Hobson's, where I met with
Joshua Toft, and his Brother, two choice Ministers of Jesus Christ, of whose
Company I was glad, though at that time I was very low and poor in my Spirit.
We had two Meetings here; on the 2d of the Ninth Month, being first Day, I was
at a large Meeting at Morley, Morley.
and, in the Evening, at the Meeting at John Leigh's, at both which Meetings
there were many People, not of our Society, who were very still, and some were
broken into Tenderness. Penketh.
From Morley I went to Penketh, where we had a large, solid Meeting, and had an
Evening Meeting at Warrington, Warrington.
where I met with many Brethren and Sisters, who sincerely love our Lord Jesus
Christ, with whom I was refreshed, particularly at Gilbert Thompson's, and
Lawrence Calen's. From Warrington I went to Langtree, Langtree. Preston and
Clifton. Lancaster.
Preston and Clifton, where I had Meetings, and so went on to Lancaster. I went
to Wray, in order to visit my old Ship-mate Elizabeth Rawlinson (whose Son
Hutton Rawlinson went with me) When I came to Wray, Wray.
they desired me to have a Meeting with them; and though there was little
Notice, yet we had a large Meeting, diverse Neighbors coming in, and Christ was
preached to them freely; this was the 10th, in the Evening, and second Day of
the Week. Third-day I went to Kendal, and, Kendal.
in the Evening, with very little Notice, we met with several Hundreds of
People, Friends and others; it was a Surprise to me, I expecting but a Few,
because of the Shortness of Time; but I acknowledge it was a pleasant Surprise,
to see the Willingness and Readiness of the People to hear the Gospel preached.
Friends here are a great People, and well beloved and esteemed by their
Neighbors, and live in much Love and Unity. The 4th Day many Friends came to
see me from diverse Parts, I giving them some Notice that I designed no farther
Northward, and haft'ning to get ready to go to America, betimes in the Spring;
having been from home near two Years; wherefore diverse of my Friends, some of
whom who had been at Sea with me, met me here. We rejoiced to see one another,
and, after a large and good Meeting, we took a solemn Farewell, diverse of us
never expecting to see each other any more.

In this Journey and Travel I endeavored to be (as much as I well could) at
such Meetings as I had never been at before, and because I was short in this
Visit to my Friends, some were not so well pleased; but my Call was most to the
American Shore, where I thought my Service mostly lay, and in order to return I
set my Face toward London, and expected to meet with my Friend and Brother in
Christ, Isaac Pickerell, in Cheshire, who designed to accompany me toward the
South; wherefore I went from Kendal to Lancaster, Lancaster* Penketh.
and was at Penketh on a first Day, being the 16th of the Ninth Month, which
Meeting was large and solid; after this Meeting we went to Sutton, Sutton.
where I met with Isaac Pickerell; also with our ancient Friend James
Dickinson, and Christopher Wilson, a choice young Man, his Fellow Laborer. We
had Meetings at Sutton, Newtown, Chester and Shrewsbury: James Dickinson,
Newton and Chester. Shrewsbury.
was about four-score Years of Age, and yet held out in Travels to Admiration,
and was lively in preaching the Gospel; He is a worthy Elder, of whose Company
I was joyful; at Shrewsbury we parted, and Isaac and I went to Colebrook,
Colebrook Sturbridge. Broomsgrove.
where, on a first Day, we had a solid, good Meeting; from thence we went to
Sturbridge, and after having a Meeting there, we had another at Broomsgrove,
and so went on to Worcester, where we had diverse large and solemn Meetings; we
lodged at John Corbin's, who was very kind to us, as also were his hopeful
Children, Worcester. Evesham.
and in great Love and Unity we both met and parted. From Worcester, we went to
Evesham, where we had two Meetings, Oddington.
and from thence to Oddington, and had a large Evening Meeting; the People (who
were mostly of other Societies) were very sober, and gave good Attention; this
was the Fourth-day of the Week; Chalbury. Wallingford.
Fifth-day we had a Meeting at Chalbury, and a tender Time with a Friend very
weak at Wallingford, who expressed his Satisfaction and Thankfulness for the
Visit; his Children were very tenderly affected also. The good Lord, the great
Physician of Value, was with us, and his balsamic Grace was at that Time shed
abroad in our Hearts. From Wallingford, we went to Reading, Reading.
where my good Companion and Fellow Traveller Isaac Pickerell dwelt; we were
lovingly received by our Friends; I stayed here and rested several Days, and
had several satisfactory Meetings with Friends, they being a large People,
living much in Love and Good Will; here Samuel Thornton, of Edmonton, my
Kinsman, and Isaac Brown, my Wife's Son, came to see me from London. From
Reading, Isaac Pickerell accompanied me to Maidenhead, Maidenhead. Jordan's
and to Jordan's, at both which Places we had Meetings.

House and Burying-ground at Jordan's, are kept in the neatest Order I ever
saw, in which Ground lies the Bones of diverse worthy Friends, Isaac Penington,
William Penn, Thomas Elwood, George Bowls, and their Wives, as I remember;
this Meeting is often if not mostly kept in silence, yet several have been
convinced there though the Grace of God, and the Power of the Holy Ghost, which
Christ said he would send to the true Believers, and that should abide with the
Church forever; here my beloved Friend Isaac and I parted in much Love, having
good Desires for each other's Welfare. From Jordan's I went with my Kinsman to
my Brother's at Edmonton, Edmonton
where I stayed and rested a few Days from Traveling.

Then a Concern came upon me to visit Friends Meetings in the County of Essex,
and I went from my Brother's to Hartford, and had several Meetings there;
Hartford. Ware. Hartford.
and one I had also at Ware, which was very large; after which I went to
Hartford again, I having diverse Relations there; from thence I went to
Bishopstafford, Bishopstafford. Stebbing. Braintree. Coggeshall. Cone.
where I had a Meeting, and so on to Stebbing, where I had a large Meeting; and
had a Meeting at Braintree, Coggeshall, and a large Meeting on a First Day at
Halstead, and there was Abundance of People at Cone, at an Evening Meeting we
had there, where I met with our worthy Friend Joshua Toft, and his
Fellow-traveller Joseph Hobson, we rejoicing to see each other. From Cone, I
went to Cockfield, Cockfield. Colchester.
which was a very small Meeting; from thence I went to Colchester, where I
staid several Days, and went to several Meetings, as at Rockstead and
Manningtree, and then back again to Colchester, where (on the First Day) I had
a large Meeting in the Afternoon, and after Meeting, diverse of the Friends came
to see me, and were for appointing Meetings for me to be at, in the ensuing
Week, and desired to know my Mind therein; after a little Pause I told them, I
found a full Stop in my Mind from going to any more Meetings at present, and
that I would wait some Days with them in the City, till I saw further; while we
were sitting together, a Letter came to me from London, that a Friend, Stephen
Payton, had set up my Name on the Exchange in London, as Master of the Barbados
Packet, which was the Vessel bought of me by John Agar, who sold her to said
Stephen Payton, who intended her for Philadelphia, and next Morning a Messenger
was sent for me from London: Thus having such a favorable Opportunity of
returning home, I embraced it, and went on Second-day to Witham, Witham.
where I again met with Joshua Toft, and Joseph Hobson at Meeting; from thence
we went to Plaistow, Plaistow. Bromley.
where we had a Meeting, and then went to Bromley, near Bow, and was at Joseph
Oliv^'s, had a Meeting with his People and Servants, which were many; I thought
it was a good Meeting, a Divine Hand of Love was reached out to the young
People, and they were advised to give up their Hearts to their Creator in their
youthful Days; several Scores of People belong to his Family; after this
Meeting I went to London, London.
and prepared for the Voyage. When our Vessel was loaded, which was chiefly by
Israel Pemberton the Younger, who went with us, as did our Owner Stephen
Payton, and Isaac Brown, and four of my Kinsfolks, whose Names are Freeman,
with diverse other Passengers: In the latter End of the Twelfth Month, my
Brother and his eldest Daughter Rebecca, with her Husband Samuel Thornton,
Gravesend. Downs.
accompanied me to Gravesend, where our parting with them was, as at Edmonton,
very solemn and sorrowful, we never expecting to see one another more. From
Gravesend we sailed the 3d of the First Month to the Downs, and from thence
down the British Channel to the Sea, At Sea.
and was at Sea above nine Weeks, which we thought long, having many contrary
Winds; but, after we came on Shore, we understood, that there were diverse
Vessels that were much longer. At Sea we had diverse Meetings, which were some
of them to my Satisfaction. I came very unwell on board; but, when at Sea, I
mended; for which Favor I am truly thankful. We landed all well and in Health
at Philadelphia, Philadelphia.
in the Third Month, 1736, where we were received with Joy by our Relations,
1736.
Friends, and Acquaintance; it was much the more so, because they had heard I
was like to die; I having, at London, had a sore Fit of the Asthma or
Phthysick, three Persons sitting up with me for three Nights, who I thought
would see my End; but the Time was not yet come that I must die, though indeed
Death was no Terror to me, hoping my Change would be much for the better; for
then, I hoped, I should be forever with Him whom I love better than life.

After I had been at home some Time, I went to Salem, and from thence to
Cobansy, and, Salem. Cobansy, Bristol. Burlington. Trenton etc.
in my Return, was at Woodberry-Creek, and had Meetings at each Place: And,
soon after, I visited the Meetings of Friends at Bristol, Burlington, Trenton,
and Borden's- Town, and, in my Return home, at Middleton; by the Way, calling
to see my ancient Friend Joseph Kirkbride, and the Widow Warder; she was 92
Years of Age, and perfect in her Understanding; she said, "She did not know for
what End the Almighty should prolong her Days to that Age; but she was
satisfied in his Will.

In the Fifth Month, Haddonfield. Newton. Hartford, etc. Plymouth. Philadelphia.
I visited the Meetings of Friends at Haddonfield, in West-Jersey, and at
Newton, Hartford, Germantown, Abington, North Wales, and Plymouth, and was
diverse times at Philadelphia and Franckfort.

After my many Exercises, and large Travels by Sea and Land, my Brethren, and
diverse others, not of our Society, expressed their Gladness to see me,
rejoicing that I was like to spend my Time more on the Land, hoping that I
would go no more to Sea; the which (God willing) I determined, having so
settled my Affairs, that I could stay on Shore; and am truly and humbly
thankful to the Almighty, that He, by his good Hand of Providence, in his due
Time, had favored and helped me so to do.

In the Sixth and Seventh Months, I again visited the Meetings of Friends at
Bristol, Burlington, Byberry, Bristol, etc.
Abington, Horsham, Germantown, Fairhill, and diverse times at Franckfort and
Philadelphia.

In the Eighth Month, I went to Cohansy and Salem, and was at two Meetings at
Cobansy, and one at Alloway's- Creek, Cobansy* Salem* Alloway 's-Creek.
where I met with Edward Tyley, a Friend on a religious Visit from Europe, and
John ^ykes, a Friend living near Croswicks, in the Jerseys; her^ we had an
open, satisfactory Meeting: From whence I went to Salem; Salem.
it being their Week-day-meeting, which was large, and to Edification of many.
I was also at Piles-Grove Fifth-day, Piles-Grove. Woodberry-Creek.
and at Woodberry-Creek Sixth-day; in which last Meeting the obedient Son was
encouraged, and the disobedient earnestly called home to his heavenly Father's
House. In this Journey I had John Bringburst, the younger, for my
Fellow-traveller; his Father being unwilling that I should go the Journey alone.

Shrewsbury.
After I had been at home some Time, I, with some others; went to the
Yearly Meeting at Shrewsbury, in East-Jersey, which was on the 23d of the
Eighth Month: It was exceeding large, and the quietest and most settled Meeting
that ever I was at there; and many divine Truths were delivered therein. From
thence I went to Manesquan, Manesquan. Middletown.
and had a Meeting, and then back to Shrewsbury, and so to Middletown, where we
had a Meeting in the Baptist Meeting House, diverse of whom were there, and glad
of the Meeting: thence came back to Shrewsbury, and had a Meeting on the
First Day, being the 30th of the Month: From whence, on my Return home, had
Meetings at Moses Robin's, Allen 's-Town. Croswicks. Bordentown, etc.
Burlington, Franckfort. Chester. Providence. Springfield.
Allen's- Town, at Croswicks (where I met with diverse of my old Friends)
Borden-Town, and Mansfield; some of which were large, open and satisfactory
Meetings. After the last Meeting, we went to Burlington, and next Day came
home, accompanied by Richard Smith, jun. After being a few Days at home, I was
sent for to Chester, to the Marriage of John L^^ (who had sailed several
Voyages with me) Next Day I went to the Week-day-meeting at Providence, and on
First Day was at Springfield; from whence I returned home.

The 23d of the Ninth Month, I left home again, and went to Philadelphia, and
from thence with Daniel Stanton, John Easton, and John Proud, jun.
Philadelphia. Radnor. Goshen.
(the two latter of Rhode Island) to Radnor Meeting, and from thence to Goshen
Meeting, and by the Coldness of the Weather, and crossing several Creeks, I got
a Cold, which settled on my Lungs, so the in Conversation, I was hoarse; but I
was helped in Meetings to Admiration; for which I was truly thankful to the
Almighty, the great Helper of his Servants and Children. We had an Evening
Meeting with an ancient Friend, who said she had above 200 who called her
Mother, being her Children by Blood and Marriage to the fourth Generation: We
took our Leave of her, as never expecting to see each other more, and parted in
Tenderness of Heart. One of this Friend's Grandsons went with us to Concord,
where, on a First Day, Concord.
we had a very large Meeting, and an Evening-meeting at Moses Mendenhall's; and
the Remainder of the Week we had Meeting at Birmingham, Kennet, New-Garden,
Birmingham, etc.
Marlborough, and the Monthly Meeting at Center on the Seventh-day following,
at which were many young People; for whose sakes I was drawn and moved, in my
Exercise of the Ministry, to show the Rise and Design of our Meetings of
Discipline.

" First, That the same Power that gathered us to be a People, inclined our
Elders to establish those Meetings, and settle them in most Parts where we were
gathered, and had Meetings for the Worship of God.

Secondly, They were advised to do their Business, and speak to their Affairs,
in the Sense of the same Power, Spirit and Wisdom, of Christ, which, as it had
raised us, would, as we kept to it, preserve us to be a People to the Praise of
God's holy Name.

Thirdly, They were advised, in doing their Business, not to run out into many
unnecessary Words, which might lead to Contention, and spending much Time to
little Purpose; religious Affairs being done best if a meek and quiet Spirit,
that being of great Price with the Lord; great Evils having been known in many
Ages, through hot and long Contentions about Religion. It is also good to avoid,
in Matters of Difference, Respect of Persons, on account of being acquainted or
related, so as to be swayed thereby from Justice.

Fourthly, They were advised to be very careful of giving any just Occasion of
Offense to any, to Jew or Gentile, to Indian or Negroe; for, Woe to them, says
our Savior, by whom Offenses come; and if any will take Offense when none
justly is given, it is the best Way to be patient, and take our Savior for our
Example, who got the Victory through Suffering; a safe Way, and glorious in the
End. And, as to few Words, the Apostle says, Let your Words be few and savoury,
seasoned with Grace, that they may administer Grace to the Hearers.

Fifthly, I was engaged, for the Sakes of the Youth of both Sexes, to show
them, that a material Part of the Service of these Meetings, is, that Care be
taken therein to see that Persons are clear of prior Engagements or
Entanglements, in relation to Marriage, and that they had the Consent of
Parents, or Parties concerned as Guardians, etc. and, also, that they, and all
that belong to our Society, walk orderly in Conversation; otherwise they could
not be in Unity with us, or owned by us, as a Society of religious People: We
don't own scandalous Persons, nor admit them to be married amongst us, without
acknowledging their Faults, and promising Amendment for the future, through
Divine Grace and Assistance; Also, in those Meetings, the Widows and Fatherless
are taken Care of, that they may be supported and visited, and Youths put out
Apprentices to learn Trades, etc."

This Meeting concluded with Supplication for the rising Generation, and for
the King, and all his Subjects, and with Thanksgiving and Praises to the sacred
Name of Him who lives forever.

After the abovesaid Meeting, we went to Wilmington, a new-settled Town on
Christians Creek, which I believe will be a flourishing Place, Wilmington.
if the Inhabitants take Care to live in the Fear of God, and seek his Glory,
and the Riches of his Kingdom, preferring it to any Thing or Things of this
World. We had a pretty large Meeting here, considering the Season (for it was
very cold) which was held in a large House of William Shipley's; but they are
making Provision for a Meeting House. From this Town we went to Newark, Newark.
and had a comfortable Meeting at George Robinson's in the Evening,
Philadelphia.
and next Morning set out for Philadelphia.

As it was now the Winter Season, and having been diverse times at this Season
of the Year in the warm Climates, the Cold was become harder for me to bear
than usual, so that I staid at and about home pretty much, being diverse times
at Philadelphia, Franckfort, Germantown, and Abington Meetings.

The latter End of the Tenth Month, on a First Day of the Week, I was at a
large, open Meeting, at Darby, in Chester County. Darby.
After Meeting I rode home about 14 Miles; but it was so cold, that my Limbs
were much benumbed, and were not fully recovered in more than a Week. Coming
home between Schuylkill River and Philadelphia, we saw the largest Meteor that
I ever saw, though I had seen many by Sea and Land, this was in Sight almost a
Minute, as near as I could guess; it was a mighty Stream, like a Flame of Fire,
leaving, as it were, Sparks of Fire behind it, as ^ went along, and then
settled like a Star, and disappeared. A few Days after this Meteor, there
appeared in the Sky an uncommon Redness, with Streams like Fire.

About this Time, was buried at Franckfort, Franckfort.
John Hurford, who was about ninety Years of Age; whose Burial, the Coldness of
the Season considered, were a pretty many Friends, Neighbors, and Relations,
of the Deceased; as also, diverse from Philadelphia. I was concerned to advise
those present. To prepare for their final Change; Franckfort.
that being certain, though the Time is uncertain; which, generally, none know
but the Almighty; therefore we ought always to be preparing for our
Dissolution, and always watching and praying, lest we enter into Temptation; as
said our dear Lord, If the good Man of the House had known in what Hour the
Thief would come, he would have watched, Luke xii. 39. And, we not knowing
whether Death will come in our Youth, our middle, or old Age, therefore, were
earnestly desired to prepare our Hearts to meet Death, so that we might dwell
with God and Christ in his Kingdom forever. It was also observed, that though
this Friend had lived to a great Age, yet that few lived so long, no, not one
in a Thousand, and many die very young; therefore they were earnestly
entreated, in the Love of God, through Christ, to prepare for their latter End,
and not to set their Hearts and Affections on Things below; for, by how much
they set their Hearts and Affections on natural or outward Things and Objects,
by so much the harder it would be to part with them, when Death should come.
This Meeting ended with Prayer for Reformation and Preservation to the End of
Life; and Praises, yea, high Praises, were given to Him, who had given to all
present our Life, our Breath, and our being.

It being exceeding severe Weather, with much Rain, Wind, and Snow, there were
great Floods, so that we could not get over Franckfort Creek to Meeting;
wherefore the Friends on the West Side met together at my House, and we had a
satisfactory, good Meeting, in which we were exhorted, to build our Religion on
the sure Foundation; that Storms, Rain, nor Winds, might not be able to shake
us from this Foundation, which is, Christ, the Rock of Ages.

This Winter we were visited at Franckfort with the Smallpox, of which many
died at Philadelphia, Franckfort
and several in our Neighborhood.

The latter Part of this Winter, staying much at home, I spent my Time much in
Reading and Writing, often being sensible of the Love and Goodness of God, my
exceeding great Reward; He, by the Spirit of his Son, comforting me, and
sometimes melting my Heart into Tenderness, in Consideration of his many
Mercies, which caused me to praise his holy Name, who is thereof worthy, beyond
Expression, forever.

In the First Month, I went with my Friend John Oxle^, of Barbados, to Bristol,
Bristol.
where we had a large Meeting; thence went over the River Delaware to
Burlington Quarterly Meeting; Burlington.
we were obliged to get to the Jersey Shore on the Ice, laying Boards thereon
for about 100 Yards together, and being long on the Ice, and poorly, as to
Health, I took such a Cold that I could not get to Meeting next Day; but was at
the Youths-meeting Third-day following -- Fourth-day I went to Ancocas Meeting,
Ancocas.
thence to a large Meeting at Mount-Holly, where was a Marriage; afterward to
Evesham and Upper-Springfield, Ev^sham. Springfield. Burlington.
or Hanover, and then returned to Burlington, and next Day was at the
Monthly Meeting there, which, to me, was a good, open Meeting, wherein
Church Discipline was somewhat treated of, and Friends advised to wait for that
Spirit which leads into all Truth, to guide them in their Discipline.

In the Second Month, 1737, I went to Cohansy, 1737.
in order to negotiate some Affairs there, and, while there, had three Meetings
at Greenwich, Cohansy.
and one at Alloway's-Creek; and on the 9th of said Month, being First Day, was
at Salem Meeting, which was large and open; Salem.
and, in the Evening, we had a heavenly Meeting at Bartholomew Wyat's.

After my Return from Salem, on the 1st of the Third Month, I took a Journey to
the Eastward, having a Desire to see Friends in those Parts, whom I had diverse
times visited, in the Service of the Gospel, in my young Years; and though now
upwards of Threescore Years of Age, was willing to visit them once more before
I died, who, in some Places, where I had formerly traveled, were now grown
very numerous. I set out with Joseph Gilbert, and several other Friends, and we
traveled together to Long Island, Long Island.
where we parted, and I went to Newtown, where I met with John Fothergill and
Samuel Bowne; at which Place we had a Meeting, which was appointed on John's
Account, and his Service therein was to the Satisfaction and Edification of
Friends. From thence John went to West-Chester, Flushing.
on the Main, and I went to Flushing, where we had a large, open Meeting; it
was a solid, good Time, and the sacred Name of Him who lives forever, was
praised.

From Flushing I went with my old Friend and School-fellow, Joseph Latham, to
his House; our Conversation was pleasant and comfortable to each other, wherein
we remembered our Walking to and from School, in the Suburbs of that great and
populous City, London; when we were beaten, stoned, and abused, only for being
the Children of those called Quakers: The Priests, who had Money for Preaching,
had preached and printed so many Lies against our Friends, that the common
People were almost ready to make a Sacrifice of us; they telling us (when we
pleaded our Innocence, by telling them, we went quietly along the Streets to
School) that It was no more Sin to kill us, than to kill a Dog: But now,
through the Grace and Favor of the Almighty, we enjoy the Exercise of our
Religion, according to our Consciences, free from Goals and Prisons, in which
our primitive Friends suffered much; for which we ought to be truly thankful to
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Westbury. Matinicock.
From Joseph Latham's we went to Westbury and Matinicock (after a Meeting at
Cowneck) and afterward, to New York; where I had also religious Service, and a
Meeting; and from New York I took my Passage in Robert Bowne's Sloop for
Newport, New-Y^
on Rhode Island, was two Days and Nights on the Water, and on my Arrival at
Rhode Island, Newpor^ in Rhod^Island.
the Brethren lovingly received me, and we were joyful to see each other.

After having had diverse good Meetings on Rhode Island, I went to Dartmouth,
where we had a large, Dartmouth. Ponyganset.
serviceable Meeting, at a Place called Ponyganset; many Hundreds being added
to the Church since I first visited those Parts. From this Place I went to
Holder Slocum's, and he lent us his Shallop to go over to Nantucket; but the
Wind not favoring, we had a satisfactory Meeting at a large Farm of his on an
Island bearing his own Name, and after Meeting set sail for Nantucket, had
several large Meetings there, and I rejoiced to see the Growth and Increase of
Friends on this Island; where God has greatly multiplied his People, and made
them honorable; Glory to His Name forever.

The Priests, who have Money for Preaching; the Lawyers, who have it for
Pleading, and the Physicians, who have Money for giving Receipts for Health,
are poor Trades here on this Island.

At Nantucket I had been about 39 Years before, at which Time there were only
two Men and one Woman who joined with our Friends in Profession, and now it was
computed there were about 1000 who went to our Meetings, they being a sober,
religious People; and there is a great Increase of Friends in diverse other
Places in New England: And whereas formerly we were greatly persecuted for our
Religion, now we are treated with more Civility and Respect in those Parts.

From Nantucket, Nathaniel Starbuck and Elijah Collins, went with me, with
several other Friends, to the Yearly Meeting at Rhode Island; Rhode Island.
which was so very large, that it was difficult to speak so as to be heard all
over the Meeting; but the last Day of the Meeting, our Friend John Fothergill,
who had a High Voice, being attended with the Divine Power, gave good
Satisfaction to the Meeting, and it ended well. After this Meeting was over, I
went with Benjamin Bagnal to Boston, Boston. Lynn. Salem.
and from thence to Lynn and Salem, had several satisfactory Meetings, which
tended to the uniting our Hearts together in the Love of Christ, and the
Fellowship of his Gospel. From Salem I went with Zaccheus Collins and his Wife
to their House, and lodged there three Nights, and was lovingly entertained, as
I was also at many other Friends Houses. From Lynn, Zaccheus Collins
accompanied me to Boston, Boston.
where we had a Meeting on a Fourth-day of the Week, and the next Day there was
a very large Meeting (the greatest Gathering of People which had been seen
there at Friends Meeting House for a long Time) occasioned by the Marriage of
John Mifflin, of Philadelphia, to Benjamin Bagnal's eldest Daughter.

Rhode Island
From Boston I returned to Rhode Island, and had diverse Meetings at Newport and
Portsmouth, wherein our Hearts were made glad in Christ, and we were
strengthened in our Faith in him; blessed be his holy Name forever.

Conanicut, Kingston.
From Rhode Island, I went to Conanicut, and from thence over to Kingston in the
Narraganset Country, and had Meetings, and then back to Rhode Island again, and
thence by Water in Company with diverse Friends to Greenwich, Greenwich.
where I was at two large Meetings: At this Place they showed me the Trees
under which about forty Years since I had a Meeting; but now they have a
pleasant Meeting House.

The next Frst-day, I was at a large, solid, edifying Meeting in a new
Meeting House at Tiverton. Tiverton.
From thence I went to visit Joseph Wanton's Wife, who had been long sick; and
in her Chamber (with several of her Friends and Relations) I had diverse
religious Seasons, with which she expressed much Satisfaction: She died of this
Sickness, and I was at her Burial, which was large, she being well known and
well beloved; the next Day was at an appointed Meeting at Portsmouth,
Portsmouth.
which was large, and to Satisfaction, for which we blessed the holy Name of
God. I had diverse good Opportunities at Rhode Island in private Families, and
was at several Meetings over the Beach at John Easton's, who was about ninety
Years of Age; he had formerly traveled with me, when I was a young Man; we
took Leave of each other, never expecting to meet more in this World.

Now (after diverse Meetings on Rhode Island) I took my Passage for Long Island,
in my Return homeward; Long Island.
and after a boisterous Passage, and being four Nights on the Water, I got well
again to my loving Friend Joseph Latham's, where I had left my Horse, and on
Fifth-day had a Meeting at Cowneck, Cowneck.
where I met with Elijah Collins, Rose Tibbets, and Patience Barker, we
rejoicing to see each other, after their long Journey by Land, and mine by
Water, they being likewise going for Pennsylvania. These Friends went to
Flushing First Day Meeting, and I went to Westbury, Westbury.
where was a large Meeting, in which there was a drunken Schoolmaster who
disturbed the Meeting, though at last it ended quietly, and I hope well also.
The (...) Fourth-day was at the Monthly Meeting at Westbury where many Friends
met from diverse Quarters, and it was a solid good Time. We had a Meeting at
Thomas Rodman's, who was unwell and had not been at a Meeting for some Months;
he took our Visit kindly, expressing his Love to us; we had also a Meeting at
Jeremiah Williams's to good Satisfaction. Matinicock.
Fifth-day we had a large Gathering at Matinicock, and in the Evening a tender
broken Meeting at Samuel Underhill's, and Sixth-day a good Meeting at Newton,
Newton:
wherein primitive Christianity was opened, and experimentally declared to the
People, and in the Evening we had a good Opportunity to declare the Truth of
Christ at the House of Richard Hallet, among several of his sober Neighbors;
next Morning, being the Seventh of the Week, West-Chester.
we went to West-Chester, to a yearly Meeting, which was much crowded, and the
People very unsettled, so that it was not so satisfactory as could have been
desired; New York.
after Meeting we went over again to Long Island, and then to New York, where
we had a large quiet Meeting in the Evening. At New York, Third-day in the
Morning diverse dear and loving Friends accompanied us to the Waterside, where
we solemnly took Leave of one another in the Love of Christ, and in the
Fellowship of his Gospel, some of us not expecting to see each other any more,
and from thence passing over Long and Staten-Islands, to Elizabeth-Town, we
traveled to Raway, Raway.
and had a Meeting at Friend -- Shotwell's, on a Fourth-day in the Evening,
where many Neighbors came in, and after Meeting a certain Person was
dissatisfied about Women's public Speaking in religious Meetings ( Rose
Tibbits, having publicly exhorted them in this Meeting to be religious, and to
fear God, and having prayed to God for us all, and praised his holy Name) which
said Person desired we would endeavor to satisfy him about it, inasmuch as the
Apostle Paul forbad it, as he apprehended. To which it was answered, that the
Apostle Paul, only forbad, or did not permit forward or overbusy Women, to
speak or ask Questions in the Church; but advised them to ask their Husbands at
home, and that doubtless he never intended to debar such godly Women, who had a
real Necessity laid on them, and were concerned, by the Almighty, to speak
unto, or pray for the People, else he would not have showed them, how they
ought to behave themselves in their Speaking unto, or Praying for the People or
Church; for if he had any Design to hinder such, whom the Almighty should
concern, then he must have contradicted himself (where he shows how they must
behave themselves in their Duty of Speaking or Praying) and he would likewise
thereby have opposed the Apostle Peter, who said, "Now is fulfilled the
Prophesy of the Prophet Joel, that in the latter Days Sons and Daughters should
Prophecy." So that is is clear and plain, they who would limit or silence
those, who have a Gift from God to preach or pray in public, from the Words of
the Apostle Paul, they oppose him to himself, and to the Apostle Peter's, and
also to the Prophet Joel.

From Raway, we went to Woodbridge, Woodbridge.
where we had a Meeting, and there I parted with my Fellowtravellers having a
Concern (though much in the Cross to my own Will) to go back in the Woods,
Raway.
to a Meeting about eight or nine Miles off; which Meeting was much to mine and
their Satisfaction, Stony-Brook.
as diverse of them expressed. From this Place I went to Stonybrook, had a
pretty large Meeting, considering it was rainy, in the Time of the Meeting's
gathering. At this Place my Son in Law Isaac Brown, with several Friends, came
to meet me, whom I was glad to see, and went after Meeting with them to
Trenton, Trenton. Bristol. Franckfort.
and next Day to Bristol, it being their Third-day Meeting, which was large,
and after Meeting went home to Franckfort, and there was lovingly received by
my Wife and Family. In this Journey I was from home three Months and nine Days,
had fifty five Meetings, and traveled by Land and Water above a thousand
Miles; and I may truly say, that therein I was favored with the Divine
Presence and Grace of God by Christ in a good Degree, and also with the
Fellowship of many sincere Believers in him, which in my Return caused my Soul
to bless his holy Name, who lives forever.

In the 6th Month, after having had diverse Meetings at and about home, I went
to Darby, Darby-Newcastle.
Chester and Newcastle, having Meetings at each Place, which was to the
tendering of some mournful Souls, and to the Comforting and strengthening them.
From Newcastle I ferried over Delaware River to Pennsneck, Pennsneck.
where I had a Meeting, at which were several that had never been at any of our
Meetings before, who went away well satisfied. Salem. Cohansy.
From thence I went to Salem Monthlymeeting, which was very large, and thence
to Cohansy to Third-day Meeting, and staid till next First Day Meeting, which
(though small, by Reason of rainy, stormy Weather) was a very precious Meeting.
After I negociated some Affairs at Cohansy, I returned to Salem, Salem.
where I met with my Fellow-traveller Elijah Collins, of Boston, with whom I
went on to Philadelphia, Philadelphia. Franckfort.
and from thence home, having much Satisfaction in this Journey, in which I had
nine Meetings, and traveled about 150 Miles. I cannot be clear in my Mind
without saying, that I did not, nor do not study what I preach to the People,
nor did I, or do I receive any Pay or natural Consideration for Preaching, it
being, as I really believe, contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, and his
Apostles and Disciples.

This Fall I visited several of the Meetings of Friends in Bucks County,
Pennsylvania.
and the Meetings at and about home, as at Franckfort, Philadelphia, Abington,
Byberry and Germantown. In the Ninth Month I was appointed, with several other
Friends, by our Monthly Meeting, to visit the Families of Friends in
Philadelphia, my Lot was to visit the upper Part of the City, in Company with
Ph^be Morris, Hannah Parrock, and Daniel Stanton; in which Service we were of
one Heart and Mind, and we performed said Service in pure Selfdenial, and in
the Cross of our holy Lord Jesus Christ; and wonderful it was, how the Presence
and Goodness of God went with us from House to House, and opened the States and
Conditions of the Families to us, to the tendering of many Hearts, both of
Parents, and of their Children. We visited about forty Families of our Friends,
and the Winter setting in, and I being but weakly, having had a sharp Spell of
the Fever, we, by Consent, were willing to defer the Conclusion of this Work,
until longer Days, and warmer Weather.

In this Month I was sent to, in order to be at the Burial of the Wife of
Richard Smith, junior: Burlington.
She was a virtuous Woman, and well beloved, at whose Funeral were many of her
Neighbors and Friends: It was a very solemn Time, in which Meeting, it was
desired that those who had lost their Parents would live so, that they might
not be a Dishonor to them; for it was observed of some Children, after their
Parents were dead, they grew worse than when they were alive, taking undue
Liberties, which their Fathers and Mothers could not have allowed of, which was
a sore Grief, and Trouble to their Friends, and such as wished them well;
therefore they were exhorted not to do that now, when their Parents were Dead,
which they would not have done, if they were living, which would be heavy on
them, and tend to bring a Blast on them in this World; and they were desired to
consider, how they would answer it in the World to come.

It was also observed, that sometimes the Death of Parents had a good Effect on
diverse sober young People, they being thereby led more seriously to think on
their own Mortality, and to consider the great Loss of their careful and
religous Fathers and Mothers, and the good Example and Counsel they gave them.
This Meeting concluded with a solid weighty frame of Mind in many. From
Burlington I went to Mount Holly, had a large M^^ingat the Meeting House, and
another in the Evening at Mount Holly Town, Mount-Holly.
at the House of Thomas Shinn; both which were open Meetings, and diverse
People, not of our Profession, were there, who were well satisfied therewith.
From Mount Holly I went to Evesham and Chester, as also to Haddonfield,
Evesham, etc. Haddonfield. Burlington.
at all which Places I had large Meetings, and then I went back again to
Burlington, and was at their Fifth-day Meeting. From Burlington I went with
Richard Smith, Caleb R^per, and Jonathan Wright, to visit a Friend who was
sick, Franckfort.
after which the said Friends acompanied me to the Ferry; after I was over the
Ferry I rode home, where I found my Family well, for which I was thankful. In
the fore Part of the Tenth Month our worthy Friend, John Fothergill sailed in
the ^rigantine Joseph, Ralph Loftus, Master, for Barbados, he having made a
third Visit to America from Europe on a religious Account. His visit was
acceptable and serviceable, and we parted in great Love and Tenderness; the
Night before, about the eleventh Hour, was an Earthquake, which was the
greatest known in this Province, the whole City of Philadelphia being shaken,
and most Part of the Adjacent Provinces, though little or no Damage done
thereby, which shows the abundant Mercy of a merciful God; as also, if it were
the Pleasure of his Will, how soon he can lay Cities and Countries waste and
desolate, and bury Thousands in a Moment; but notwithstanding the mighty Power
of the Eternal Jehovah, Oh how hard are the People's Hearts, and how they hate
to be reformed, and how unconcerned are the Inhabitants of the Land about their
Eternal Peace and Well-being! This is really lamentable: Oh! how do earthly
mindedness, Pride, Covetousness, and Drunkenness, abound, with many other
Evils, which were scarcely known amongst the first Settlers of this Peaceful,
and now plentiful. Land of Pennsylvania.

The 26th of the Twelfth Month (being the first Day of the Week) was buried at
Merion, Merion.
Edward Jones, aged about Ninety-two Years, he was one of the first Settlers of
Pennsylvania, and was a Man much given to Hospitality, a Lover of good and
virtuous People, and was likewise beloved by them. There were many Hundreds of
People at his Funeral. I had a Concern to be at this Meeting before I left my
Place at Franckfort, and before I heard of this Friend's Decease.

The beginning of the First Month (being the fifth of the Week) I was sent to,
in order to be at the Burial of Hannah, the Wife of John Mickle, at Newtown, in
West-Jersey: My Kinsman, Daniel Stanton, was with me at this Burial: It was a
solid, Heart-melting Time, my Heart was broken into Tenderness with many
others. This deceased Friend was much beloved by her Friends and Neighbors,
and there was much mourning among her Relations at her Grave, among whom she
will be greatly missed. The People were desired earnestly to prepare for their
latter End, and final Change, and that, as we had all Reason to hope it was
well with our deceased Friend, we might likewise have a well grounded Hope that
it would be well with ourselves, when we came to put off our Mortality, and put
on Immortality. The Meeting ended with servent Supplication for our furture
Well-doing and Well-being both here and hereafter, and Praise to the most high,
who is alone worthy forevermore.

As soon as I returned to Philadelphia, Philadelphia.
on the Sixth-day of the Week I heard of the Death of Joseph Kirkbride, at
Israel Pemberton's, who told me, I was desired to be at his Burial. He, his
Son, and William Logan, accompanied me as far as Samuel Bunting's that
Afternoon, with which Journey I was exceedingly tired, so that I could hardly
stand or go when I alighted off my Horse, but being refreshed with a good
Night's Rest, I went in the Morning to the House of my deceased Friend. There
was a Multitude of People at the Burial, among whom we had a good Opportunity
to invite them to lay hold of Truth and Righteousness, and prepare for another
World. They were reminded, that neither natural Wisdom, nor Riches, Youth nor
Strength, Crowns nor Scepters, would, nor could secure them from the Stroke of
Death. Robert Jordan was at this Meeting, and had good Service therein; it
concluded in Supplication for the Widow and Fatherless, and for Mankind
universally. First Day being fourth of the First Month, I was at Middleton
Meeting, Middleton.
in Company with Thomas Brown, wherein the Divinity of Christ, and his being
made Flesh, born of a Virgin, crucified, dead and buried, and his being raised
from the Dead by the Divine Power, was largely opened to the People, and that
the same Power must be witnessed to reform our Lives, and give us the true
saving Faith and Knowledge of God the Father, and Christ the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.

This Month, at our General Spring-meeting, I acquainted Friends, that I had a
Desire once more to see my Friends in Virginia, Maryland, and North Carolina,
if Health and Strength did permit, and Divine Providence favored, I not having
yet fully recovered my former Health and Strength, to which the Meeting
consented.

1738.
The latter End of the First Month I was at the Burial of Robert Evan,
North Wales.
of North Wales; he was upwards of fourscore Years of Age, and one of the first
Settlers there. A Man who lived and died in the Love of God and his Neighbors,
of whom, I believe it might be truly said, as our Savior said of Nathaniel;
'Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no Guile.' He was a Minister of
Christ, full of Divine and religious Matter. In this Month I was at Fairhill,
at a Meeting appointed for Ruth Courtney, and Susannah Hudson, who were on a
religious Visit from Ireland, to Friends in this and the adjacent Provinces; it
was a good Meeting, the Friends speaking to the State thereof.

The Beginning of the Second Month, I went over Delaware, Cohansy.
and so to Cohansy, intending home before I set out for my Journey to the
Southward; but my Affairs not answering to come home, and afterward to reach
the Yearly Meeting of Friends at West-River, the which I proposed to our
General-meeting; I now wrote to my Wife and Family, that I intended to proceed
to West-River Meeting, it saving me much Time and Riding, and after having been
at several Meetings at Cohansy, Salem, etc.
and at the Yearly Meeting at Salem, and at a Meeting at Piles-Grove; being
accompanied by a Friend of Salem, I proceeded, and went over Delaware River,
and first had a Meeting at George's Creek, and from thence to the Head of
Sassafras. River, Sassafras.
where we had a Meeting, but by Reason of the wet Weather it was but small;
thence we traveled to Cecil Meeting, Cecil.
and so on to Chester, where we had a Meeting on First Day, then to Queen Ann's
County, and back from thence to Newtown, on Chester River, Newtown.
at which Town we had a large satisfactory Meeting; in which it was shown that
no good Christian might or could break the moral Part of the Law, for it (says
the Apostle) is a Schoolmaster to bring to Christ, and that those who come to
the Gospel of Christ, can in no wise break the least Commandment of God. As for
Example, the Law says, thou shall not forswear thy self, but if a Man
(according to Christ's Gospel) swears not at all, then that Man cannot forswear
himself. Again, the Law says. Thou shall Love thy Neighbor and hate thine
Enemy; but Christ says, Love your Enemies; the which if we do, there is no
doubt but we shall Love our Neighbors. Again, the Law says, Thou shall not
commit Adultery; but if according to the Doctrine and Gospel of Christ, a Man
does not look on a Woman with a lustful Eye, there is no Danger of committing
Adultery with her, etc. Those Things were largely spoke to and opened in the
Meeting, and the People (there being many not of our Society) were very
attentive and sober, and the good Hand of the Almighty was amongst us in this
Meeting. From Chester River, we crossed Chesapeak Bay, to the Yearly Meeting at
West-River, with Chester Friends, West-River.
in William Thomas's Boat, and sent our Horses over by Kent-Island to
West-River, where we met with our Friends Michael Lightfoot, Elizabeth Wyat,
and Grace M^son, with diverse others, ( Elizabeth and Grace, being on their
Return from a religious Visit to North Carolina and Virginia:) We all being far
from home, and well acquainted, were glad to see one another, being thankful to
the Almighty, who had been pleased to preserve us so far on our Way. After the
Meeting was ended at West-River, taking Leave in the Love of Christ of diverse
Friends, with Hearts full of Love, and Eyes full of Tears, as never expecting
to see one another again. I with my Companion and Armiger Trotter (who came up
with the Friends from Virginia, to West-River) set out for Virginia, Patuxent.
River. Potomack.
and having passed over Patuxent River, had a Meeting among the Family of the
Plummers, one of whom, with another Friend, ^ompanied us to the River Potomack;
we rode as (...) as we could compute it sixty Miles that Day, I being heavy and
aged, and the Weather hot, was very much tired, and laid down in my Clothes all
Night, and the next Morning ferried over the River Potomack, computed about
three Miles over, and parted with our Guides. When over this River, we
traveled about fifteen Miles to William Duff's, had a Meeting there, and from
thence to a Meeting of Friends at John Cheagle's, Black-Creek.
and so on to Black-Creek, had a Meeting there, and then went to the
Monthly Meeting of Friends on the West Side of James-River, and so to William
Lad's, after which we went to the Monthly Meeting of Friends at
Nansemond-River, Nansemond. North Carolina.
and from thence to Carolina, and on a First Day had a large Meeting at a new
Meeting House built to accommodate the Yearly Meeting; it was a good, solid
Meeting; and there the Friends appointed for us the Meetings following.
Third-day of the Week, being the 13th of the Fourth Month, at Joseph Barrow's,
Fourth-Day at Jacob Butler's, Fifth-day at Samuel Newby's, Sixth-day and
First Day at the Upper-meeting-house at Little-River, and Third-day at the
Lower-meeting-house on said River, Pospotanck-River.
and Fourth-day at Pospotanck, and Fifth-day at Amos Trueblood's up
Pospotanck-River, and then we went to the Quarterly Meeting for Friends in
North Carolina, which was very large; the People were exhorted to overcome Sin
as Christ overcame, that they might sit with him in his Kingdom, as he
overcame, and is set down in the Kingdom of God his Father; that Subject was
largely spoken to that Day, and we had a good Opportunity with the People, 1738.
and the great Name of God was exalted over all. After this Quarterly Meeting,
we had a Meeting at James Wilson's, in the Barrens, which was a large, good and
open Meeting; in the Conclusion thereof, I told them, That I came among them in
great Love (though in a Cross to my own Will, with respect to my Age, and the
Heat of the Weather) being willing to see them, in that Province, once more
before I left the World; and, as I came in Love, so I parted with them;
desiring them, to dwell in Love and Peace, and then the God of Love would be
with them.

From Carolina we traveled into Virginia (Zachariah Nickson accompanying us)
and had a Meeting at the Widow Newby's, and from thence had a Meeting at
Nansimund, and so to the Branch, Nansimund.
where we had a very large Meeting; many People were there not of our Society,
and were very attentive and sober; and next Day, being the Second-day of the
Week, we had a satisfactory Meeting at Bennet's- Creek, Bennet 's Creek.
Chuckatuck, etc. Pagan-Creek, etc. Virginia.
and thence to Chuckatuck, and so on to Rasper-Neck, and then to Pagan-Creek,
thence into Surrey County to Samuel Sebrell's, and thence to Robert Honicut's,
had a Meeting there, then to Curl's, up James-River, to Thomas and John
Pleasant's, had a Meeting there on a First Day, and then to the Swamp and
Cedar-Creek, and so on to John Cheagle's. We came to John Cheagle's the 20th of
the Fifth Month, being the Fifth of the Week, and being unwilling to be idle on
Sixth and Seventh Days (intending to have a Meeting at his House on First Day)
I asked John if he could tell where we could have a Meeting Sixth and
Seventh-day? And he said, Yes, he could. And he appointed one about three Miles
off his House, and another six Miles off; at which Places we had good Service;
and then had a very large Meeting at his House, on First Day, which was, I
hope, to pretty general Satisfaction, to the religious Part of the People. From
thence we traveled to William Duff's ( John, and another Friend, going with
us) and had a Meeting at their Meeting House, and afterward William went with
us over Potomack River, Potomack-River. Piscattaway.
as far as Piscataway, in Maryland; this River is computed to be near four
Miles over, and, when about the Middle, there was a large Swell in the River,
so that our Horses could not stand, and the Motion of the Boat made them fall
down, and the Boat having much Water in it, being very leaky, she was near
oversetting; they in the Boat were in some Concern and Consternation, saying,
when we came to the Shore, that they did not remember they were ever before in
the like Danger; and I apprehended we were in Danger, and if the Boat had
overset, in all Likelihood, we might all have been drowned; and I then thought
I was in the Service of Christ, my great Master; and I also knew, I must die,
and I thought I might as well die in his Service as my own; so I gave up my
Life for Christ's Sake, and he gave it to me again. Oh! may I, with all those
who sincerely love Him, serve Him truly all our Days, is my Desire!

Patuxent-River.
From Piscataway we traveled to Patuxent, to the Family of the Plummers, who
were ten Sons of one Father and Mother, who were convinced about the Time I
first had Meetings in those Parts, and, so far as I know, they are all sober
Men. After this Meeting we went to Gerard Hopkins's, Patapsco.
and from thence to Patapsco, had a large Meeting, the House being full before
the Friends came, so that they were hard set to get in; Gunpowder River.
to me it was a good, seasonable Opportunity, as was our next in the Forest of
Gunpowder River; where Friends have built a new Meeting House, which, at this
Time, could not contain the People: From Gunpowder River we went to Bush River,
Bush River. Deer-Creek.
had a good, open Meeting, and one at Deer Creek, and so over Susquehannah to
Elibu Hall's.

At West-Nottingham, I parted with my Companion, he having about a Day's Travel
home. West-Nottingham.
I had two Meetings First Day at the great Meeting House at West-Nottingham,
which were very large, and Friends glad to see me once more: And after having
Meetings at Christine-Bridge, Wilmington, Center, and Kennet,
Christine-Wilmington, Center, Kennet, etc.
went to the Quarterly Meeting of Ministers at Concord, and was there First and
Second-day, and Third-day at Darby, all which were very large Meetings, and
Friends were satisfied and comforted, and I was encouraged in the Work and
Service of the Gospel of Christ. From Darby I went home, Darby* Franckfort.
having been abroad about four Months, and rode, by Computation, above eleven
hundred Miles, and at about seventy Meetings.

While I was on this Journey, I had an Account of the Death of my dear and only
Brother, George Chalkley, a religious, prudent Man; he died the 24th of the
Ninth Month, 1737, near the seventieth Year of his Age, and left behind him a
mournful Widow and four Daughters, all virtuous Women.

When in Virginia, I wrote to those of our Society at Opeckon, Shannadore, etc.
many of whom went out of our Province to settle in the Government of Virginia,
to the following Effect, viz.

Virginia, at John Cheagle's, 21st 5th Mon. 1738. To Friends of the
Monthly Meeting at Opeckon.
Dear Friends, who inhabit Shennadore and Opeckon,
HAVING a Concern for your Welfare and Prosperity, both now and hereafter, and
also the Prosperity of your Children, I had a Desire to see you; but being in
Years, and heavy, and much spent and fatigued with my long Journeys in Virginia
and Carolina, makes it seem too hard for me to perform a Visit in Person to
you; wherefore I take this Way of Writing to discharge my Mind of what lies
weightily thereon: And,

First, I desire that you be very careful (being far and back Inhabitants) to
keep a friendly Correspondence with the native Indians, giving them no Occasion
of Offense; they being a cruel and merciless Enemy, where they think they are
wronged or defrauded of their Right, as woeful Experience has taught, in
Carolina, Virginia and Maryland, and, especially, in New England, etc. And,

Secondly, As Nature has given them, and their Forefathers, the Possession of
this Continent of America (or this Wilderness) they have a natural Right
thereto in Justice and Equity; and no People, according to the Law of Nature
and Justice, and our own Principle, which is according to the glorious Gospel
of our dear and holy Lord Jesus Christ, ought to take away, or settle, on other
Men's Lands or Rights, without Consent, or purchasing the same, by Agreement of
the Parties concerned; which, I suppose, in your Case, is not yet done.

Thirdly, Therefore my Counsel and Christian Advice to you, is (my dear
Friends) That the most reputable among you, do, with Speed, endeavor to agree
with and purchase your Lands of the native Indians or Inhabitants: Take Example
of our worthy and honorable late Proprietor, William Penn; who, by his wise
and religious Care, in that Relation, has settled a lasting Peace and Commerce
with the Natives, and, through his prudent Management therein, has been
instrumental to plant in Peace, one of the most flourishing Provinces in the
World.

Fourthly, And who would run the Risque of the Lives of their Wives and
Children, for the sparing a little Cost and Pains? I am concerned to lay those
Things before you, under an uncommon Exercise of Mind, that your new and
flourishing, little Settlement, might not be laid waste, and (if the Providence
of the Almighty does not intervene) some of the Blood of yourselves, Wives or
Children, be shed and spilt on the Ground.

Fifthly, Consider you are in the Province of Virginia, holding what Rights you
have under that Government; and the Virginians have made an Agreement with the
Natives, to go as far as the Mountains, but no farther; and you are over and
beyond the Mountains, therefore out of that Agreement; by which you lie open to
the Insults and Incursions of the Southern Indians, who have destroyed many of
the Inhabitants of Carolina and Virginia, and even now have destroyed more on
the like Occasion [ The English, going beyond the Bounds of their Agreement,
were 11 of them killed by the Indians while we were traveling in Virginia.]

Sixthly, If you believe yourselves to be within the Bounds of William Penn's
Patent from King Charles the Second, which will be hard for you to prove, you
being far to the southward of his Line; yet, if done, that is of no
Consideration with the Indians, without a Purchase of them; except you will go
about to convince them by Fire and Sword, contrary to our Principles; and, if
that were done, they would ever be implacable Enemies, and the Land would never
be enjoyed in Peace.

Seventhly, Please to note, that in Pennsylvania no new Settlements are made,
without an Agreement with the Natives; as Witness, Lancaster County, lately
settled; though that is far within the Grant of William Penn's Patent from King
Charles the Second; wherefore you lie open to Insurrections of the Northern as
well as Southern Indians.

And, Lastly, Thus having shown my Goodwill to you, and to your new little
Settlement, that you might sit every one under your own shady Tree, where none
might make you afraid, and that you might prosper naturally and spiritually,
you and your Children; and having a little eased my Mind of that Weight and
Concern (in some Measure) that lay upon me, I, at present, desist, and
subscribe, in the Love of our holy Lord Jesus Christ,

Your real Friend, T. C.


After my Return from this Journey, I stayed much at home that Winter,
traveling now being hard for me, so that I could not perform long Journeys as
formerly, being more broken in the long and hard Traveling in this Journey,
than in diverse Years before.

1739.
In the Year 1739, I took several short or lesser Journeys, Franckfort, etc.
and had many Meetings in diverse Places, as in Salem and Burlington Counties,
in West-Jersey, and Philadelphia, Chester and Bucks Counties, in Pennsylvania;
having many large and comfortable Meetings, and some satisfactory Service in
diverse of them.

This Year the War broke out between Great Britain and Spain; the Spaniards
giving great Occasion of Offense to the British Nation; notwithstanding which,
King George the Second sought to accommodate Matters peaceably; but the Crown
of Spain not complying with the Terms agreed on for an Accommodation, therefore
War was proclaimed; which occasioned much Disturbance and Distraction in our
little peaceable Province and Government; War being destructive to Life, Health
and Trade, the Peace and Prosperity of the People, and absolutely against the
Doctrine and Practice of the Prince of Life and Peace, our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; a great Concern came on my Mind to promote his Doctrine; in order
to which I was largely concerned to treat thereof in or at the General
Spring-meeting at Philadelphia; with which Service diverse wise and pious People
were well satisfied, though some were offended.

When the Meeting was over, 1740.
I having a Desire and Concern once more to visit Friends in the three lower
Counties, Newcastle, Kent and Sussex, among whom I had not traveled for near
twenty Years, and being now a little better in Health than I had been, I set
out from my Home, and went to Chester, and from thence to Wilmington, and had a
Meeting there; Wilmington. Newcastle. George 's-Creek. Duck-Creek.
Little-Creek. Mother-Kills.
and then to Newcastle, where we had another; William Hammond being with me, he
and I went from Newcastle to George's- Creek, had a Meeting there; and then
went to Duck-Creek; after having two Meetings at Duck Creek, I went to Little
Creek Meeting, and so proceeded to the Mother-Kills, where I had a large, open
Time in Preaching the Gospel to the People, which diverse of them received with
Gladness; and there were many, not of our Society, who were very sober and
attentive, a Door being open among them; yet, notwithstanding there may be much
Openness both in Speakers and Hearers, I have observed with Sorrow, that there
are but few who retain the Truth so as to be really converted; many are
convinced, but few converted and come to be regenerated or born again, as our
Savior taught.

From Mother-Kills I went back to Little-Creek to Timothy Hanson's, he
accompanying me, Little-Creek.
and from Timothy's I went to Duck-Creek, Duck-Creek. Appoquinamy.
and from thence to Appequinamy to the Burial of a Friend's Son, who died of
the Smallpox; on which Occasion we had a solid Meeting, the mournful Relations
being thankful for our Company. Newcastle.
From Appequinamy I went to John M' Cooll's, and from thence to Newcastle;
where we had a large, open Meeting, to the Satisfaction of diverse; though I was
very weakly and poorly, as to my Health, so that it was hard for me to stoop to
take any thing from the Ground, and with Difficulty I walked from the Friend's
House to the Meeting; but being helped by Grace, and carried through the
Service of the Meeting beyond my Expectation, was, with diverse others truly
thankful to God the Father, and Christ, my Lord and Savior.

Wilmington. Newark.
From New^astle I went to Wilmington, had a Meeting there, and from thence to
Newark to the Marriage of Alexander Seaton; the Meeting was uncommonly large,
and to general Satisfaction.

From Newark I went back to Wilmington, and from thence to the Center
Monthly Meeting, Center. Kennet.
and so on to Kennet, where was a very large Meeting: Here diverse, who had
professed among us, refrained coming to the Public Meetings for divine
Worship; with whom, next Day, we had a Meeting, wherein the evil Consequence of
forsaking the assembling ourselves together was spoke to, and that it would be
a great Hurt to the young and rising Generation, and themselves also; being a
bad Example to them, and contrary to the Advice and Counsel of the holy
Apostle, Not to forsake the assembling of ourselves together, as the Manner of
some is.

Concord.
From Kennet I went to Concord to the Burial of Benjamin Mendinhall, where we
had a large and solid Meeting, several lively Testimonies being borne therein:
This Friend was a worthy Elder, and a serviceable Man in our Society, and one
of the first or early Settlers in Pennsylvania; A Man given to Hospitality, and
a good Example to his Family, and has left diverse hopeful Children surviving
him.

The Night before this Meeting I lodged at the Widow Gilpin's, whose Husband,
Joseph Gilpin, was lately deceased; there was true Christian Love and
Friendship between us for above fifty Years. When first I saw Joseph in
Pennsylvania, he lived in a Cave in the Earth, where we enjoyed each others
Company in the Love and Fear of God. This Friend had fifteen Children, whom he
lived to see brought up to the States of Men and Women, and all but two married
well, and to his Mind.

From Concord I went to Wilmington, and from thence after Meeting to Newcastle,
where I, Wilmington. Newcastle. Penn's-Neck. Salem. Greenwich. Woodberry-Creek.
Philadelphia. Franckfort.
with George Hogg, went over the River Delaware into Penn's-Neck, and had a
Meeting at James Wilson's; from Penn's-Neck we went to Salem, and thence to
Cohansy, where I had several Meetings at Greenwich, and at the Head of
Alloway's Creek, also at David Davis's, where the People kindly lent us the
Benches of their Meeting House, and many of them came themselves, and were very
attentive; after which I went to Pilesgrove and had a Meeting there, and from
thence to Woodberry-Creek, and so to Gloucester, where I ferried over Delaware
to Philadelphia, and from thence came home, having traveled about 500 Miles in
this Journey; After which I stayed at and about home for some Time.

I was at the Yearly Meeting at Burlington in the Seventh Month; Burlington.
going to this Meeting my Horse started, and threw me, which hurt my Shoulder
and Hip badly, of which Hurt I did not recover for above Half a Year.

This Meeting was very large, and though I was outwardly in Misery and Pain,
yet in the Sense of the Love and Goodness of God, and Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, I was, with many others, much comforted in Spirit.

From Burlington I traveled to Shrewsbury, Shrewsbury, etc.
having several Meetings by the Way; as, at Bordenton, Crosswycks, Trenton,
etc. This Journey I rode in much Pain; but the Satisfaction I had in Meetings
through the Spirit and Power of the most High, made Amends for all the Labor
and Pain I underwent. I bless the sacred Name of God, and may I do it forever!
Franckfort.
I made what Haste I could home, being in Pain with my Fall, and tarried at
home most of the Winter, which was one of the longest and hardest known in
these Parts by some of the oldest Livers here; diverse People being frozen to
Death in several Places, and many Sheep and Cattle perishing, and much of the
Winter Grain killed with the Frost, so that there was some Apprehension of a
Want of Bread; all which I took to he Warnings of the just and righteous
Judgments of God for the Ingratitude, Pride, and other Sins and Iniquities of
the People, the which I was diverse Times, and at diverse Places, concerned to
put them in Mind of. How well would it be if the People would lay the Judgments
of the Most High to Heart; and when his Judgments are abroad in the Earth, that
the Inhabitants would learn Righteousness!

1741.
After this Winter I was at a General-meeting at Germantown, and at Meetings at
North Wales, Horsham, Visits the Meetings of Friends in diverse Places.
and Byberry, and from thence, with Joseph Gilbert, went to Burlington, and was
at a Marriage there, and then returned home.

In the Second Month I was under an inward and religious Engagement in my Mind
to visit the Meetings of Friends in Gloucester and Salem Counties, in
West-Jersey, and the 19th of said Month I went over Delaware River, and was at
Haddonfield on a First Day, and Third Day at Chester, Fourth Day had a Meeting
at the House of Josiah Foster, and Fifth Day at Evesham; from which Meeting I
went to John Estaugh's, Ebenezer Large and Samuel Jordan being with me. In the
Morning we went to Woodberry-Creek Meeting, and next Day down to Salem, in
order for the Yearly Meeting, which began on the 26th of the Second Month, and
was an extraordinary solid Meeting, the Divine Presence and Glory being richly
manifested amongst us.

Salem.
From Salem I went, in Company with John Evans and Elizabeth Stevens, to
Alloway's-Creek and Cohansy, where we had Meetings, I believe, to the
Satisfaction of many; here I parted with said Friends, and not being well, I
staid at Greenwich, and they went to David Davis's, in order for Pilesgrove
Meeting.

The 3d of Third Month, being First of the Week, I was at Cohansy Meeting,
Cohansy.
which was solid and weighty; in which the mighty Works of God, and his
wonderful Power, was set forth to the People in diverse Respects.

First, As to the Work of the Creation of the Heavens and the Earth, and of Man
to govern in the Earth, reserving to himself the Government of Man; to whom he
gave a Law, for the Breach of which he was turned out of Paradise, and brought
Death into the World.

Secondly, Nothwithstanding Man's Fall, God had Love, Mercy and Compassion
toward him, and promised the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Head of the
Serpent, who led them astray, which Seed was Christ, whom all are commanded to
hear, believe and follow, in the Practice of his holy Doctrine, which is
contained in his Words spoken to his immediate Disciples and Apostles, and
likewise made known and revealed in our Hearts.

Thirdly, That now in our Day his righteous Judgments are abroad in the Earth,
as the Sword, and a Threatening of Famine, or want of Bread; all which was
spoken in the tender Love and Fear of God, and Faith of Christ, and all were
entreated to lay these Things to Heart, and Turn to the Lord, and he will have
Mercy, and to our God, and he will abundantly pardon. In this Meeting God was
glorified, and his Name magnified, through the Assistance of the Spirit of his
dear Son, our Lord.

From Cohansy I went to Salem, and thence to David Davis's, where we had a
Meeting, at which were several People of diverse Professions, who were satisfied
and edified therein; and thence we went to Pilesgrove Meeting, afterward into
Penn's-Neck, and had a good open Meeting at the Widow Hughs's, and so to
Woodbery-Creek Meeting, which, I hope, was serviceable; after which I went home
with my Friend James Lord's Widow; who, with her Sister Ann Cooper, and Joseph
Clews, went with me to Gloucester Goal, Gloucester
where we visited one under Sentence of Death for Stealing; I asked him, if he
truly repented of that Sin of Stealing, of which he had been so often guilty?
He told me, he hoped he had, and was willing to die. He was recommended to the
Grace of God, and to keep in an humble Frame of Mind, and beg Mercy of the
Almighty, for the Sake of Christ, for all his Sins. While a Friend was praying
by him, he was broken into Tenderness.

Here the aforesaid Friends parted from me; I crossing the River Delaware to
Philadelphia, and so home to Franckfort. I was at ten Meetings in this Journey
besides the Yearly Meeting at Salem) and traveled about 150 Miles; but
traveling was painful to my Body* for I now more and more felt the Effects of
many old Falls and Bruises, which much disabled and hurt me in Riding.

In the Fourth Month I was at diverse Meetings about or near home, as at
Fair-Hill, Germantown, and at a Meeting at Thomas Roberts's; Philadelphia.
Darby. Merion. Haverford.
also was at Philadelphia Meeting. In the Beginning of the Fifth Month, I
visited Friends Meetings at Darby, Merion, and Haverford; at the last Place the
Meeting was large, and very open; wherein the mighty Power of God was exalted
over all, and it was plainly manifested, that if there was any Virtue, or any
good Gift or Genius in the Creature, it derived its Excellency from the
Creator; and that Man, in his best Capacity, in either natural or spiritual
Seize, has no Cause to boast or Glory in any Thing or Things, which he,
as an Instrument in the divine Hand, might help to do or perform; wherefore we
ought to humble ourselves under the mighty Hand of God, attributing no Glory to
Self, or the Creature; but all Glory and Praise to the Creator, who is in and
over all blessed forever.

The 20th of the Fifth Month, I set forward on a Journey, in order to visit
Friends at and near Burlington, and was next Day at a Meeting at Bristol,
Bristol.
which was large, considering the Heat of the Weather, and the Shortness of the
Notice; next Day, being the Fourth-day of the Week, and the 22d of the Month, I
was at Mount-Holly, Mount-Holly.
at the Burial of our ancient Friend, Restored Lippincoat: He was, as I
understood, near an hundred Years of Age, and had upwards of 200 Children,
Grand Children, and Great Grand Children, many of whom were at his Funeral; the
Meeting was large, and thought to be a serviceable Meeting by diverse. After
this Meeting, I went with a few choice Friends to visit Susannah Fearon, who
had been long ill; in which Visit we were favored with the divine Presence and
Goodness of the Most High; for which we returned Him Thanks and Praise. After
which we went to Burlington, Burlington.
and next Day had a Meeting, which was an acceptable Opportunity to many.

Next First Day, being the 27th of the Month, we had a good, solid Meeting at
Trenton; from thence I went, with diverse Friends, to Bristol, and so home to
Franckfort; and was thankful to the Almighty for the Grace which he was pleased
to bestow upon me, a poor Worm; and that, considering the extreme Heat, I had
my Health better than usual. After coming home, I visited diverse Meetings, at
Philadelphia, Haddonfield, Franckfort, etc.

In the Sixth Month there was a great Mortality in Philadelphia, and many were
taken away; on a Fifth-day, I was concerned to put the People in Mind of it,
and of their own Mortality, and exhorted them to prepare for it, they not
knowing whose Turn it might be next, nor the Hour when Death might come to
their own Habitations; and was concerned, in the same Nature, at several large
Burials; in the Meeting at Philadelphia, they were told, It was better to fall
into the Hands of the Lord, than into the Hands of Men; and that since we had
been settled in this Province of Pennsylvania, we were preserved from the Hands
of Men; there having never been an Enemy in it, in a warlike Way; our
Dependence being on Providence, and our Principle against War, and against
spilling of human Blood by Wars and Fighting, according to the Doctrine of
Christ, the peaceable Savior; wherefore I believe the Hand of God was
manifested in preserving us in Peace: Yet I would not be understood to be
against the Magistrates exercising the Power committed to them, according to
just Law; but national Wars, woeful Experience teaches, are destructive to the
peaceable Religion of Jesus, to Trade, Wealth, Health and Happiness. Our dear
Lord preached Peace to the People, and against Wars; telling his Followers,
"That they must love and pray for their Enemies, and rather take a Stroke or a
Blow, than give one; and that they should not resist Evil;" which peaceable
Doctrine of Christ, the Jews could not away with; no, no, by no Means; O, say
they, If we let this Man alone, the Romans will come and take away our Place
and Nation: Just as the People now say in this Province, among and to those
peaceable Men, who, for the Sake of Christ and his Doctrine, cannot use the
Sword; "The Romans will come and take our Country, if we don't build Forts and
Castles, and have military Preparations:" And I wish it were not true, that
some, who profess this peaceable Principle; too much endeavor to smother,
stifle and keep under, this peaceable Doctrine, through a slavish Fear, and too
much distrusting of the Divine Providence, which may cause the Divine Hand to
deliver us to the Romans indeed; at which I should not wonder, since we
distrust that Divine Hand, that has hitherto preserved us, without our
preparing for War, above these fifty Years. To which I know that it is
objected; "But now there are Abundance of People who are not of that
Principle." I answer. Then why did they come among us, if they could not trust
themselves with our Principles, which they knew, or might have known, if they
would? The King gave the Province, and the Government of it, to our worthy
Proprietor, WILLIAM PENN; who was a Man of this peaceable Principle; for which
the Heathens loved him, and honor his Name and Memory to this Day, and those
of his Society and Principles; whereof I am a living Witness. The Sense of the
Sweetness and social Life that the first Settlers of the Province of
Pennsylvania and the City of Philadelphia lived in, makes me express myself in
this Manner. Oh! that the Inhabitants of the City and Country, did but live and
dwell in that first Love, and hold it fast; and then I believe that the
Almighty would not suffer any to take our Crown; which Crown is Righteousness,
Peace and Love, through true Faith; which true Faith works by Love, in Christ
Jesus.

On the last Day of the Fifth Month, Prepares for a Visit to Tortola, etc.
I acquainted my Friends of the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia, with a Concern
I had been some Time under, to visit the People in the Virgin Islands, and more
particularly in Anguilla and Tortola; in order to preach the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ freely, to those who might have a Desire to hear, as the Lord
should be pleased to open my Way: And my Friends having Unity with me therein,
at their next Meeting, gave me a Certificate of their Concurrence: Soon after
which, having settled my Affairs, and taken Leave of my dear Wife and Daughter,
and the rest of my Family and Friends, on the 19th Day of the Seventh Month, I
embarked at Philadelphia, in the Sloop John, Peter Blunder Master, bound for
the Island of Tortola.

We sailed down the River, and came to an Anchor near Christine Creek that
Night, in which there was a violent Storm, which drove several Vessels on the
Marshes; so that when the Tide ebbed, one might walk round them. Next Day we
sailed to Reedy-Island, where we waited for a fair Wind: We sailed down the Bay
(in Company with two Sloops, one bound for Bermudas, At Sea.
the other for the Island of Christopher's) and left the Capes on the 23d Day
of the Month, and in 18 Days, from that Time, fell in with the Island of
Thomas, and in one Day more turned up to Tortola.

In this Voyage we saw nine Sail of Vessels; but spoke with none of them: Had a
rough Passage, the Wind being high and contrary above a Week, and much Rain;
yet, through the Mercy and Grace of God, I was preserved above all Fear, except
the holy Fear of the Living Lord, in which I blessed his holy Name.

Tortola.
On the 12th Day of the Eighth Month, John Pickering, the Owner of the Sloop
(who was likewise Governor of the Island) with his Spouse, met me at the
Waterside, and lovingly embraced me, and led me up to their House, and, the
same Evening, had a Meeting at his House; and on the 15th of the Month, being
the Fifth-day of the Week, we had a large, satisfactory Meeting, at which were
many People, diverse of them not of our Profession, and, I think, the good Hand
of the Lord was with us. I was concerned in this Meeting to show. That the last
Dispensation of God to Mankind, in and through his dear Son, was a spiritual
Dispensation; a Dispensation of pure, divine Love, which is to last and be with
the true Believers in Christ forever, according to his own Doctrine in the
New Testament.

On the First Day of the Week, and the 18th of the Month, we had another
Meeting, larger than the former (and the Governor told me, He had never seen so
large a Gathering on the Island, on any Occasion) My Spirit was much set at
Liberty in this Meeting, and great Openness and Brokenness was among the
People, so that the Gospel was freely and largely declared to them. The Case of
Cornelius, and of the Apostle Peter going to his House, was treated of, with
diverse other Matters, tending to Edification. I was so affected with the Power,
Spirit and Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, when the Meeting was over,
Tortola.
I withdrew, and, in private, poured out my Soul before the Lord, and begged
that He would be pleased to manifest His Power and glorious Gospel more and
more. At this Meeting there was a Woman who had suffered much for her going to
Meetings; her Husband being a proud, haughty Man, had beat her to the drawing
of Blood; he also drew his Sword, and presented his Pistol, with Threat'nings
to kill her; but she thanked God, that she was resigned to lose her Life for
Christ's Sake: This Woman expressed some Words in Supplication in this Meeting,
in a broken Manner. There was also another (a beautiful young Woman) whose
Father had turned her out of Doors for coming to Friends Meetings.

I went, with the Governor and his Wife, to visit a few Families up in the
Mountains, and had a Meeting, in which was great Brokenness and Tenderness in
the Time of Prayer.

On Second-day we visited several Families in the Division caled the Road, to
which we went by Water in a Coble (somewhat like our Canoes) there were four
of these in Company, five Persons in two of them, and seven in the other two.
In this visiting of Families, the People came and filled the Rooms, and we had
seasonable Meetings, in which the People were so loving, and well-affected,
that we could seldom go in a friendly Way to visit our Friends, but they would
presently fill their little Rooms, and we scarcely could depart, without having
a Time of Worship.

Next Day we went to visit a young Man's Habitation (who had not yet finished
his House) and the Neighbors coming in, as usual, we had a good Meeting.

I cannot but note, That the Hand of the Lord God was with us, and I felt his
Visitation as fresh and lively as ever; (...).
for which I was truly thankful, and though it if I never saw my Habitation again,
I was satisfied in this Gospel Call, and religious Visit; though, being in
Years, it was sometimes a little troublesome to the Flesh; being in the 66th
Year of my Age, and stiff in my Limbs from Hurts with many Falls and Bruises;
but, as to my Health, I had it better now, than for several Years past; for
which I am humbly thankful to Him, in whom we live and have our Being; Glory to
his Name, through his dear Son.

Third-day and Fourth-day, visited several Families, and had diverse good
Opportunities: In one of those Meetings, a young Man, named Jeremiah Martin,
spoke a few Words in Prayer; in which Season, we were, I think, all broken into
Tenderness; so that in Truth we might say, That the Power and Spirit of Christ
was with and among us, and his great Name was praised.

Fifth-day, being the Week-day-meeting, it was larger than was ever known of a
Weekday at that Place; there being diverse Friends who came from an Island
called Jos. Vandike's, and many Neighbors and sober People, who were very
attentive.

Sixth-day, was at several Peoples Houses, and had religious Meetings; which we
could not well avoid, the People were so loving and desirous to hear what might
be spoken to them; they being many of them like thirsty Ground, wanting Rain,
and our good and gracious Lord gave us celestial Showers, which were refreshing
to us, and thankfully received.

Seventh-day, I went, with several Friends, to the House of One who, with his
Wife, had been at our Meeting on Fifth, day; he kindly invited me to his House;
his Name Black; he and his Wife were loving; though he had formerly wrote
against Friends, he was now better informed. From his House I went to Townsend
Bishop's, Tortola.
and being many Friends there from another Island, we had a most comfortable,
tender Evening-meeting, in which we offered up an Evening Sacrifice of high
Praises and Thanksgiving to the holy Name of the Living Eternal God, and his
dear Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, through the Influence of the Holy
Spirit, ONE GOD over all, blessed forever. And,

On the First Day of the Week, being the 25th of the Month, we had a larger
Meeting than ordinary; and, in Expectation of larger Meetings than usual, the
Governor, John Pickering, had made several new Forms to accommodate the People
at his own House, which he sent six Miles on Men's Heads, the Roads not being
passable for Carriage by Carts, etc. This I think worth noting, that their Zeal
may be had in Remembrance, and that others may be stirred up to a more
religious Concern, who will scarce go six Steps to a religious Meeting, or will
not go at all. In this Meeting I was concerned to speak of and set forth the
Doctrine of Christ, which he preached on the Mount, contained in the 5th, 6th
and 7th Chapters of Matthew; and to press the People to come to the Practice of
what is there commanded by the great Author of the Christian Religion; and to
show that the despised Quakers had learned out of that excellent Sermon much of
their Religion, which displeases many People, and diverse of the great Men of
the World* and to urge them to regard the Grace of God, which brings
Salvation, and has appeared to all Men. In this Meeting Dorcas (the Wife of
John Pickering) spoke to the People in public Testimony, to which they gave
good Attention.

After Meeting we returned by Water from the Road Harbor, to Fat-Hogg-Bay
(where John Pickering lives) being upwards of 20 of us in Company, in three
Cobles.

Tortola.
These two Weeks I spent in the Island of Tortola, to my great Satisfaction.

The Journal of this worthy Friend ending here, the following Supplement is
collected from some Notes sent by a Friend of that Island, giving an Account of
his further Services, Sickness and Death.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE JOURNAL OF THOMAS CHALKLEY.
ON the 2d Day of the Third Week of his being among us, he visited some Friends
in the Neighborhood, and likewise the Man who had treated his Wife so cruelly
for coming to Friends Meetings.

On Third-day, he was employed chiefly in Writing to his Family and Friends in
Philadelphia.

On Fourth-day, some Friends from the Road came to see him, which prevented his
going out to visit the Neighbors, as usual.

On Fifth-day Morning, being 29th of the Eighth Month, he found himself much
indisposed* yet he went to our Week-day-meeting, about a Quarter of a Mile.
When the Meeting broke up, he had a hot Fever on him: Doctor Turnbull (the
chief Physician in our Island) thought it proper to take some Blood from him,
and he being very willing, it was done that Afternoon, Tortola.
and the Fever abated sometime that Night; and the next Day he walked about,
and made no Complaint until about Eight of Clock in the Evening; about which
Time the Fever returned, and continued very severe till First Day Morning; when
the Doctor advised him to take a Vomit, which he declined that Day, being
desirous of attending the Meeting; which was held at my House, and was a large,
sweet and tender Meeting; in which he spoke to us first concerning Temptations,
and how Christ was tempted, and how to withstand them; and afterward on the
Parable of the great Supper, and other Subjects; ending his Testimony with the
Words of the Apostle Paul, I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my
Course, I have kept the Faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness: Which Words, and most Part of this last Sermon, was delivered in
great Brokenness; from whence I judged that he was sensible that he had not
long to live, though, I believe, he was not afraid to die.

On Second-day Morning, the Fever abated a little, and he complied with the
Doctor's Prescription of taking a Vomit, which seemed to have its proper
Effect; but that Night the Fever returned, and continued on him until he died;
which was between two and three of Clock on Fourth-day, Morning, the fourth Day
of the Ninth Month, being speechless about seven Hours before.

A general Invitation was given to Friends and others to his Funeral; where
three Testimonies were borne, all in great Brokenness, under a just Sense of
our great Loss. After which he was decently interred on the Evening of the same
Day, in a Piece of Ground which is since given to Friends for a Burial Place,
and on which a Meeting House is built by John Pickering, the Governor of the
Island at that Time. Tortola.


It is said in the Scriptures, That the Righteous are taken away, and no Man
lays it to Heart; but, I hope, it may be truly said, this was not the Case at
this Time; for Friends, in general, much lamented their great Loss, in being so
soon deprived of so instructive a Friend and Elder, whose Care over us was very
great; and who, by his loving and exemplary Life, and Tenderness to People of
all Ranks and Professions, engaged the Love and Respect of most of the People
in the Island. We are fully assured, that his Labor among us was not in Vain,
and that many have felt the good Effects of it; so that we believe some of the
last Words he expressed in Public, may justly be applied to him, and that he
now enjoys a Crown of Righteousness.

FINIS.
THE WORKS OF THOMAS CHALKLEY. PART II. CONTAINING His EPISTLES, and other
WRITINGS.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL. MDCCXLIX.

GOD's GREAT LOVE UNTO MANKIND, THROUGH JESUS CHRIST, Our Lord.
And there came a Voice out of the Cloud, saying, This (i. e. Christ) is my
beloved Son, hear ye him,

LUKE ix. 35. If ye love me, keep my Commandments,

JOHN xiv. 15. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believed in him, might not perish, but have everlasting Life,

JOHN iii. 16.
PREFACE to the READER.
IN Sincerity, and unfeigned Love, both to God and Man, were these Lines
penned: I desire thee to peruse them in the same Love, and then, peradventure,
thou may find some Sweetness in them. Expect not learned Phrases, or florid
Expressions; for many Times, heavenly Matter is bid in mean Sentences, or
wrapped up in plain Expressions. It sometimes pleases God to reveal the
Mysteries of his Kingdom (through the Grace of his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ)
to Babes and Sucklings; and he oftentimes ordains Praises out of their Mouths;
one of which, Reader, I desire thou may be.

MY Intent in Writing these Sheets, is, that they, through the Help of God's
Grace, and the good Spirit of Christ, may stir up true Love in thee; first, to
God and Christ, and then, to Man: Then thou will be fit to be espoused to him,
who is altogether lovely (that is, Christ) which is the Desire of him, that is
thy Friend, more in Heart, than Word.

T. C.

GOD's Great Love to MANKIND, etc.
HAVING been concerned for the Good and Welfare of the Children of Men, 1697.
in my youthful Days, and tasted of the infinite Love of God, in, and through
his dear Son, the holy Lamb Jesus, who laid down his Life for the Sins of the
World; and, in my tender Years, reaped great Benefit, through Faith in, and
Obedience unto, him: For, truly, I have found, by sufficient Experience, that
one without the other (to wit) Faith without Works, will not answer the End of
the great Love of Christ Jesus, our Lord, in that he offered himself a
Sacrifice for all Mankind; not for People to live in Sin, but to take away the
Sin of the World: In a Word, Faith, without Works, is dead, James ii. 20. For
my Part, I found it so, and so must all true Believers in the Son of God.

Christ he first loved us, and paid that Debt for us, that, of ourselves, we
were not able to do. Oh his infinite Love! it has oftentimes melted my Soul
into Tenderness. Methinks it is Abundance of Pity, that ever the Sons of Men
should requite Evil for Good, or Disobedience, for such gracious Obedience: I
would to God, that all Believers in Christ, would live in that Fear of God, and
that Love to Christ, that keeps the Heart clean; because nothing unclean can
enter the Kingdom of Heaven. I don't mean a slavish Fear; but Fear, that is
wrought by Love: For them that love the Lord, the Great, Everlasting God, will
fear to offend Him.

This is the Matter that chiefly bears Stress on my Mind, at this Time, The
Necessity of Love to God, and Christ, and one another: Eye has not seen, nor
Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive, the
Things that God (...) prepared for them that love Him, 1 Cor. ii. 9. For thy
Part, I cannot pretend to tell thee, O Man! to the Full; but only a little to
hint at it: It is, Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory: But then we must love
Him, so as to keep His Commandments. This is the Work that I am very earnest in
pressing People to; whether Youth, or Aged: It is not too soon for the Young,
neither too late for the Aged, to begin this Work of Obedience, through Faith,
and Love to God and Christ, if His Spirit is reproving or striving in them. But
it is more honorable and acceptable, for a Man to give up the Strength of his
Days to serve the Lord, and to remember his Creator in the Days of his Youth,
before Sin is too much rooted and grown in Man; for then it will be much more
Labor, to get the Root of Unrighteousness plucked up.

So that in that Ability, which God has given me, I would endeavor to stir up
all to serve Him, and to be in good Earnest, and not to put the Day of God,
even the Mighty Jehovah, a-far off; but to love the Lord unfeignedly, and with
true Obedience; since it is that Sacrifice, that is only acceptable to God;
that is to say, To love Him in Deed, and in Truth, more than in Word, and with
Tongue: For against such a People, the Lord, by his Servant, complained, in old
Time; They, says the Lord, draw nigh to me with their Mouths, and with their
Lips do honor me: But, Oh! their great Misery was, their Hearts were far from
Him; they did not love Him with their whole Hearts; that was their great Fault:
This Thing is also a great Evil in the Sight of the Great God, in this our Age;
and it is too frequent in England, the Land of my Nativity, as also in other
Islands, and Places, beyond the Sea. What Lamentation shall be taken up, for
such as do so mock the Lord, the Great God of Love? Surely he will render
Vengeance, as in Flames of Fire, upon all the Wicked, and Ungodly, and those
that forget Him. It Is not by Saying, but by Doing, that we are justified,
through Faith in Christ: Not he that ^aith, Lord, Lord, only; but he that does
his Will also, shall enter the Kingdom.

Now the Will of God, and Christ his Son, is, That we should love Him above
all; and in loving Him, we shall love one another; for Christ saw the great
Need there was of loving God above all, and also of loving one another;
therefore he answered thus to him that asked him, Which was the greatest
Commandment -- Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with
all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind, Mat. xxii. 37.

This (says Christ) is the first and great Commandment; and the Second is like
unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thyself: On these two Commandments
hang all the Law and the Prophets, Verses 38, 39, and 40.

Now if these two great Commandments were obeyed, it would answer God's great
Love to us, in sending his Son to bless us, O! the Glory of God, how it would
shine! it would make the young Men, as Valiants of Israel, and the old Men, as
Captains of Thousands; then Christ would reign gloriously indeed, in the Hearts
of the Children of Men; here the Lamb and his Followers (that walk in the
Light, and that Commandment, that burns as a Lamp) would get the Victory over
the Devil, and his Followers: But, on the contrary, this is the great Error of
Mankind, they talk of God, and Christ, in Words; but deny Him in Works: Nay,
some will not stick to say, It is impossible to keep the Commands of Christ. It
is too commonly spoken, and also believed, That there is no Perfection on this
Side the Grave, contrary to the Saying of Christ, Be ye perfect, even as your
Father* which is i^ Heaven, (...) perfect, Mat. ^ 48. Yet, say they, it is
impossible; which is as much as to say, Christ is a hard Master, in commanding
what cannot be done, consequently, out of their own Mouths they will be
condemned: for Christ is not a hard Master. I testify against all such unholy
and imperfect Believers, in solid Fear before the Lord; but according to such
People's Faith, and Belief, he mu^ needs be hard. O that People would but so
love (...), and his dear Son, as to strive to do his Commands; for it is
impossible they should obey, if they do neither believe, nor endeavor: But let
such know, That many shall strive, and shall not enter; much less, enter, if
they do not strive: But we must, of Necessity, strive, in Obedience to his
Will, and by his Assistance (not in our own natural Will) to enter in at the
strait Gate: Man would enter in with all his pleasant Things, and in all his
Bravery, and Gallantry; but God's Will is, That he should be brought low, that
he might exalt him. O! this Self, it is a great Enemy to Mankind.

My intention is, to awaken People out of the Sleep of Sin, which is Death; and
to stir them up to Righteousness, and Love to the Lord, and their Neighbor,
even with their whole Heart: This is what my Heart breathes to, and
supplicates, the Lord of Heaven for; Then would the End of my Labor, in his
Love, be answered; for great is the Love of God, in sending his Son, and, also,
in sending his Servants, and stirring them up, to rouse People out of the Sleep
of Security, that they might see the Danger they are in, and how near they lie
to the Brink of the Pit of Burning. O! that People would but seriously consider
that which is showed and told them in the Love of the Lord. O that it might be
laid to Heart. However, whether they will hear, or forbear, God will be clear,
and his Servants also will be clear. But if we not only hear, but also obey,
that Peace, which passes the Understanding of Men (that our Lord gives to his
Followers) will be our Portion, and the Lot of our Inheritance forever. But
this is on Condition of our Obedience, and keeping the Commands of God: If ye
love me, keep my Commandments (John xiv. 15.) says the Lord. So, if People
live in Saying, and not in Doing, in Professing, and Confessing, yet still
living in Pride, and High-mindedness, and in Sin, it is apparent, they do not
love Christ Jesus (according to his own Words) neither does he justify them;
it is only the Doers that he will justify. The Apostle John says, If a Man says,
he loves God, and yet hates his Brother, he is a Liar, 1 John iv. 20. and, by
plain Scripture Testimony, such are not of God: Moreover, if he says, He loves
Christ, yet does not his Sayings, he is also a Liar, and the Truth is not in
him, or, Christ is not in him; who said, I am the Truth; and thus Man becomes
reprobated; for Paul, writing to the Brethren, says, Examine yourselves,
whether you be in the Faith, prove your ownselves; know ye not, your ownselves,
how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates, 2 Cor. xiii. 5. Which
Indwelling of Christ, is a great Mystery to many; although Christ within (which
the Apostles preached) was the Hope of the Saints Glory, Col. i. 27. And, Oh!
how earnest was Christ in Prayer to his Father, That his Followers may be one
in Him, and that they might be united together in one, John xvii. Such was the
Love of Christ to his Church; now, what remains on the Church's Part, since
Christ has done his Part, surely it is, that we love him again; for, says
John, He that loves not, knows not God; for God is Love, 1 John iv. 8. They
that dwell in Enmity, are not the Children of God; but the Children of Satan;
who always hated the Appearance of Christ, the Light of the World; and yet
stirs up those that are led by his dark Spirit, to war against Him, and his
Seed, in his Children; who said, I am the Light of the World.

But indeed it is as Christ has said, Men love Darkness rather than Light; and
how strange is it, seeing the one is so glorious, and the other so miserable?
But the Reason is, as Christ has showed, because their Deeds are evil, John
iii. 19. That is indeed the very Cause; for if their Deeds were good, they
would love the Light which is Christ Jesus, the Lord of Life and Glory; and
bring their Deeds to him, that he might judge them; who will give righteous
Judgment to every Man according to his Works, John v. 29. The Righteous will
have their Portion in the Resurrection of Life, Joy and Peace, in the Holy
Ghost; but the Wicked in the Resurrection of Damnation. Oh! that I might be
instrumental in the Hand of the Lord, to open the Eyes of some that are
spiritually blind, that they might see the Splendour, the Beauty, and the great
Glory, of the dear Son of God, that most excellent Light which God has
prepared, according to good old Simeon's Testimony of him, Thou have (says he)
prepared him a Light to enlighten the Gentiles, and to be the Glory of thy
People Israel, Luke iii. 32. A glorious Light indeed! Truly, methinks every
Body should be in Love with him: For my Part, he is my chiefest Joy: I would
not part with him for all the Pomp, and Vainglory, of the World; neither would
I have the shining Beams, and glorious Rays (which comfort me for Well-doing,
and reprove me for, and discover, the contrary) clouded from my Sight and
Understanding, for the finest Gold, or choicest Rubies; such is my Love to
Christ, the Bridegroom of Souls: But, by the Way, it has cost me many a Tear,
and many Groanings in my Spirit, before I came thus to enjoy Christ; who is the
Beloved of all the Redeemed. Oh! may I never give him Cause to withdraw himself
from dwelling in me. Oh! the universal Love of Christ; it is everlasting to them
that are open-hearted unto him, and to all that will hear his Voice, so as to
obey it; for, says he, I stand at the Door and knock (that is, the Door of the
Heart of Man) if any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in to
him, and will sup with him, and he with me, Rev. iii. 20. And John says, And we
have known and believed the Love that God has to us: God is Love, and he that
dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John iv. 16. A heavenly
Habitation, and glorious Dwelling Place! Who would but endeavor to dwell in
Love, and forsake Enmity, that they might attain unto such eternal Happiness,
as to have their Abode with the Lord.

This fulfils the Words of Christ. For he dwells with you, and shall be in
you, John xiv. 17. How was he to be in him? A Comforter for Well-doing, that
they might have the Hope of Glory, and a Reprover for Sin, Self-righteousness
and wrong Judgment. Indeed it was the great Love of God in thus sending his
beloved Son a Light into this dark World, to show People their evil Deeds, and
to condemn Sin in the Flesh; for he is the sinful World's Condemnation, as well
as a Savior and Justifier of the Righteous and holy Believer. The Jews of Old
hated him, and many of them did intend to darken his bright and shining Light,
but some of the Jews believed on him, and after they came truly to believe on
his Name, spread his Gospel of Truth and Gladtidings amongst the Children of
Men, and also suffered for his Name's Sake. It is also said, He came unto his
own, and his own received him not, but as many as received him, to them gave he
Power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Nam^, John i.
11, 12. But what say such to him as account themselves spiritual Jews (seeing
the Apostle tells us, He is not a Jew that is one outwardly, Romans ii. 28.) I
mean those that call themselves by his Name; why many of them trample upon his
Light and Appearance, and despise the Spirit of his Grace, which is a swift
Witness against Evil, and ^ets Men see what is Good, and what is Bad, Comforts
for the one, and brings Judgment and Condemnation for the other. I can truly
say, I would with my whole Heart, that God did dwell a Comforter in all (or
Christ, or the Holy Ghost, or Holy Spirit, which are all one) But this can
never be, while Sin remains and has an evil Root in Mankind, An evil Tree
cannot bring forth good Fruit. By this we may know Christians from
Anti-christians, and Lovers of Christ, from them that love him not; if we love
him, we become Subjects to him, subject to do his Will. O! it is a brave
Station to be the Subjects of the King of Heaven, and if we love him
unfeignedly with all our Might and Mind, and our Neighbors (or them that are
already his Subjects) as ourselves, and with the Sword of the Spirit valiantly
encounter with the Devil and Satan; O then shall we be his Subjects, and he
will receive us into his Warfare, and through him we shall be victorious, for
the Lamb and his Followers will have the Victory. I would press People in Love
into this Warfare, having Commission from my Master and Lord (I mean Spiritual)
by showing them what Anxiety of Soul, and Distress of Mind, they will procure
to themselves, by living in Enmity to the Lord, and his Saints. O my Soul, I
charge thee, with all those that have any Regard to the Holy Jesus, obey the
Commands of the Lord, and love his Followers, or thy Neighbor as thyself. Let
his universal Spirit of Love to all dwell in thee, O my Soul!

I would have all to cast down that which they glory in (that is not right in
his Sight) at his Footstool, and do like the poor penitent Woman, that lay and
wept at his Feet, Luke vii. 38. She thought all little enough to get into his
Favor. Christ himself also was meek and lowly, Learn of me, said he, Matt. xi.
29. All Power in Heaven and Earth was given unto him; Take me, (said he) for an
Example, when he washed his Servants Feet. O he was meek and lowly indeed* and
seeing his Love was so great to them, and is also to us, let us love him again,
not with feigned Love, but with Love that may manifest us to be his Followers;
and in this Love let us love one another; for this Intent our Lord issued forth
his royal Command, which is this, A new Commandment give I unto you, that ye
love one another, as I have loved you, that ye also love one another: By this
shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have Love one to another,
John xiii. 34, 35. Christ's Love was unfeigned to his Disciples, nay, to all
the World in general; for what greater Love can there be, than for a Man to lay
down his Life for his Friend; and he not only laid down his Life for his
Friends, but for his Enemies also, Romans v. 10. So that his Love was great and
unfeigned: We ought with the same Love to love him again, since that he loved
us first; and this cannot be without Obedience to his Commands. Thus
undoubtedly we should with true Love love him, and one another: This Love is
exceeding precious, it thinks no Evil, and we may be sure, will not do any
willingly or knowingly. If a Man sees his Neighbor or Brother in that which
is not Right, he prays to the Lord to help him, and tenderly admonishes him;
yea, if having this Love he wounds, his Wounds are faithful, for faithful are
the Wounds of a Friend, Prove. xxv. 6. He that is thus endued with Love, is not
hindered from reproving his Brother, but if there be a Cause, it rather stirs
him up to be faithful therein, without respect of Persons. O the Love that is
raised in them that love the Lord above all, it is great to the Sons and
Daughters of Men; it does wonderful Things; it is valiant for God; it overcomes
its Enemies: It is not overcome with Evil, but it often overcomes Evil with
Good: It smites Sin in the Gate (that is, in its first Appearance) before it
be entered into Man, so as to subject him thereunto; it gets Victory over the
Devil* for he cannot stand before God's Love. I would to God that People did
but know the Virtue of Love to Christ, and one another in him, it would cause
them, for the Enjoyment thereof, to forsake all Manner of Enmity one against
another, and all Things else, how near or dear soever; yea, though they were as
a right Hand or a right Eye, they would be forsaken for its Sake, and for the
Sake of him that first loved us: And then we should strive, through the Ability
of his Grace, (even the Grace or Spirit which he told Paul was sufficient for
him) to love him again, and our Neighbor as ourself; but this cursed Self is
loved too much, and our Neighbor too little.

Paul, the Apostle of Christ, did not after his Conversion hate his Neighbor,
nor was he in Enmity with them; indeed when he was Saul, he did oppress and
injure his nearest Neighbors and chiefest Friends, for that blind Zeal was
part of that Body of Sin and Death that was upon him, and from which, by the
Help of Christ's Grace, he was delivered, and came to love his Enemies; and for
their Good hazarded his Life: And for his Love to Christ laid it down, as many
holy Martyrs have done since his Time. Surely they had not much Regard for Self
then! Though it is a common Expression now a Days, Every one for himself* and God
for us all; But if every one were for his Neighbor or his Brother as much as
for himself, God would be the more for us all. But this Self Love is in the
Sight of the Lord an Abomination, and the Great, Eternal God, abhors it:
Therefore were the first and second Commandments given forth.

If all People would obey these two Commandments, the whole Law and the
Prophets, yea, and the Gospel too, would be all obeyed.

But this Self is a great Enemy unto Mankind, and does very much hinder his
eternal Happiness; it shuts the Ear from hearing the Cause of the Widow and
Fatherless, or of the Needy, and drowns the Cry of the Oppressed; to which we
ought not only to lend an Ear, but also to administer Relief, according to
their Necessity, and our Ability. But Mankind is too apt to despise the base or
low Things of the World, and to join with that which is pleasant to the Eye,
and agreeable to the Lust of the Heart; (like Dives the rich Glu^ of Old, who
loved Self better than poor Lazarus) but do not consider that which is lasting,
and would do them Good for ever. How shall I express the excellent Glory and
eternal Sweetness of this Love to the Lord and our Neighbor? Oh! how is my
Soul grieved, and how does my Spirit mourn before the Lord, when I see any walk
contrary to the Commands of Christ, or that are in Enmity to the Truth, and in
Hatred one to another* even from my tender Years, ever since God Almighty
opened my Understanding, and made known to me him that i^ true: And my Cry has
been many Times to him, to keep and preserve me in his true Love and Fear to
the End of my Days; in Love both to him and the Brethren: But more especially
to those that do his Will (although there is universal Love in my Heart to all.)
Christ said, For whosoever shall do the Will of my Father which is in Heaven,
the same is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother, Matt, xii. 50. Therefore my
Love is more singly unto those. The Apostle also thus writes concerning Love to
the Brethren; We, (says he) know that we have passed from Death unto Life. (How
did they know it?) because we love the Brethren: He that loves not his
Brother, abides in Death, 1 John iii. 14. Are they then in Death that are in
Enmity with the Brethren? Assuredly they are, For this Enmity is Sin; And the
Wages of Sin is Death, Romans vi. 23. and those that are therein, are dead while
they live. I wish, and heartily pray to the God, and Father of Spirits, that
from the Snares or Death his People may for ever be preserved.

Now I would show People some of the many Snares of Death and Satan.

First, Some People are too apt to judge one another, and to speak Evil of
Things they know not, except by Report and Supposition, which too often lets in
Enmity, and is not according to the Mind of Christ, but is a Snare of the Enemy
of Man's Salvation. Surely if People were sensible thereof, they would not so
hardly censure one another: For indeed we ought to be well satisfied before we
give Judgment, and then it ought to be in Love, and not in Enmity. It is better
to suffer, than to censure, or to be judged, than to Judge. -- Judge not, that
ye be not judged, Matt. vii. 1. -- said the Judge of Heaven and Earth. But
People are too much possessed with Uncharitableness and Revenge one toward
another, and are not so ready to forgive one another their Trespasses, as the
Almighty is to forgive them: Though to forgive one another their Trespasses, be
every Christian's Duty, and without which, we cannot justly expect God to
forgive us our Trespasses, as Christ Taught, Matt. vi. 14, 15.

Secondly, Persecution for Righteousness Sake, also is another great Branch of
that corrupt Tree, which never did, and never will bring forth good Fruit, but
must be cut down by the Ax of God's Power, which is laid to the Root of every
corrupt Tree, in order to cut it down; and the Lord will burn it with
unquenchable Fire. It is the true Church's Lot to be persecuted, but she never
persecutes any; for he that is her High Priest for ever, commanded quite the
contrary, viz. Love to Enemies, and to do Good to them that hated them, and to
pray for them that despitefully used and persecuted them, Matt. v. 44. They
were also to rejoice, and to be exceeding glad when all manner of Evil was
spoken falsely against them for Christ's Sake; because great should be their
Reward in Heaven; and Christ observes, that so they persecuted the Prophets,
Matt. v. 11, 12.

Thirdly, Many are rebelling against God, and doing Despite to the Spirit of
Grace in their own Hearts, and trespassing one against another, not living in
Love, but in Enmity against God and one another. The Judgment of Man is
terrible to the Rebellious, how much more if Men rebel against God, our
Savior, will his Judgment be just and dreadful, as he has not only Power to
kill the Body, but can afterward cast the Soul into Hell? O! that the Son^ and
Daughters of Men, would but fear to offend him, the King of eternal Glory.
Israel of old, his own peculiar People, did fear and tremble before him; even
all their Host, his presence was so dreadful, Exodus xix. 18. And a noble King
made a Decree, that Men should fear and tremble before the living God, Daniel
vi. 26.

Oh! that all would work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling, according
to Scripture Testimony, Phil. ii. 12. I desire all People might thus love the
Lord, then should we fear exceedingly to offend him: Also if one Man did truly
love another very well, were the Case thy own, thou would very unwillingly
offend him whom thou love dearly. So if we love Christ in Deed, and in Truth,
then we should fear to offend him, and must of Necessity love one another also:
So shall we fulfill the great Commands, that the whole Law and the Prophets hang
on.

Fourthly, I have also many times been grieved, when I have heard Cursing and
Swearing, and the Lord's Name taken in vain, which many too much abound in (by
Sea and Land) and too little consider that God will not hold them guiltless,
Exodus xx. 7. I am sure this is far from obeying him. Oh! the deep Sense of this
great Sin, it has been, and is of great Moment, and is a great Concern on my
Mind: Vengeance from Heaven is, and will be the Portion of all such, that thus
violate the Mind and Will of God. Judgment, Judgment is the Lot and Inheritance
of all the Wicked, who remain and live in Wickedness. Although the Lord is slow
to Anger, and of Great Loving Kindness, and his Mercy endures for ever, to
them that truly repent of Evil, and do that which is Good: Yet he has also
prepared Weeping, Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth, for them that continually
live in Sin. There is a Possibility of S^i^ng, until there is no Mercy nor
Grace for Man: Witness the Words of God; My Spirit shall not always strive with
Man, for that he also is Flesh, Genesis vi. 3. But those that are willing to put
the Day of God afar off, are ready to say, Christ is our Advocate with the
Father; He makes Intercession for our Sins; (very well) but it is
conditionally: It is if thou will repent, and sin no more. (Mark that well!)
Repentance without Sinning no more, will not do. John viii. 11. Confession is
very Good, but forsaking is abundance better: Confession without forsaking will
stand in little Stead in the Day of Account.

Fifthly, Also being drunk with Wine, or with strong Drink; Drunkenness is a
great Sin: First, against God, and secondly, the Abuse of God's Mercies, and
good Creatures. And by this Frame of Drunkenness, Men are often fitted for any
Business that their Master the Devil may call them to: So that this great Sin
ought to be strictly watched against. Surely if Men had any good Desires in
their Hearts, or any Love to God, they would refrain from such great
Wickedness. I admire how People can expect Mercy from God, or the Intercession
of Christ, when they are piercing his Sides, and putting of him to open Shame:
For those that are sinning against him, are piercing of him. How can such
expect He will interceed for them, when they have dealt so shamefully with him,
and grieved him, and from Time to Time disobeyed his Voice? Now suppose a Man
stood condemned before a Judge, and that at the Judge's right Hand there sat
one who had Power in his Hand, and this poor condemned Person, hopes he will
interceed for him; and yet this poor Wretch has come to him as before
mentioned. What Grounds can he have, to hope for Intercession, Clemency or
Lenity, while he believes he can do no otherwise than sin against him all his
Days? For my part, I think his Faith, Hope and Belief, is but vain; without any
Reason or Ground. But he that loves Christ Jesus, the Lord of Life and Glory,
so as to keep his Commandments, the Lord will love him, and interceed for him,
and make himself known unto him; according to his Words, which he spoke, He
that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and he that
loves me, shall be loved of my Father; and I will love him, and manifest
myself unto him, John xiv. 21.

Sixthly, Covetousness, which is Idolatry, is also another great Snare of the
Enemy, and many are caught therein. It is in vain for the Covetous to say, he
has a Share in the Love of God; for he has neither Love to the Lord, nor to
his Neighbor. A poor naked Man might ask him long enough for Relief, or for
his Coat, before he would give him his Hand to help, or Coat either; or any
manner of Relief: Although Christ expressly commanded it, Give to him that asks,
and from him that would borrow, turn not thou away, Matt. v. 42. How can any be
so hard-hearted, to see his Brother's or his Neighbor's Poverty, and not
administer of his Ability to the Needful's Necessity? But says the covetous or
miserable Man, I have Children, or a Family to take care of: But too often
Covetousness brings a Curse, and not a Blessing, upon Family and Children also.
Perhaps one that is covetous may say, that Charity begins at Home. But let him
remember, that if it does begin there, the Consequence most commonly is very
bad, when it ends there. Every Christian has need to have Charity (in his
Breast) in a twofold Sense, or else there is no proper Pretense to
Christianity; in short, Covetousness is out of the Love either to God or Man:
All those (with Abundance more, that I shall forbear to mention) are eminent
Snares of the Devil; and Satan lays them according to the Propensity of Man
and Woman, and suits them with their Nature. Oh! I Will warrant thee he will
color them finely, and put a pleasant Gloss upon them, to betray thy Soul, and
keep it in Bondage for ever.

Seventhly, It is he that tells the Murderer, that it is bet-to live a merry
Life and short, than to take Pains and Care all his Lifetime; and the Thief
likewise with the Robber.

Eighthly, It is he also that tells the Whoremongers and Drunkards, that so
many People are in these Practices, because it is natural for People to be so
overcome: But he don't tell them that by Nature all are Children of Wrath, and
that without this lustful Nature be overcome, there is no Salvation, Ephesians. ii. 3.

Ninthly, It is he that tells the Swearers, they are so used to it, that it is
impossible for them to leave it off. He never bids them repent and forsake,
that they might find Mercy with God and Christ that died for them; but died not
that they should live in Sin.

Tenthly, It is he that tells the Covetous, it is good to be saving, and not to
spend all his Substance in Gluttony, and Pride; no, he will bid him hate Pride,
and that he should not give much Alms, though rich in this World; for the Devil
will tell him, that it is proud People does it, only in Ambition, and to be
seen of Men; but he will not tell him, it is a Sin to be covetous: He also
tells the Proud, that they are counted happy, and that Pride is counted good
for the promoting the Commonwealth, and that it is as good to be out of the
World, as ^t of the Fashion; he te^ them, that Pride is Neatness, and how many
pretty Excuses he has, to keep People in Pride, is admirable; he don't tell
'em, that Christ the Lord was meek and lowly, and that they should take him for
an Example. He, the Lord, did not come in Splendor, and Glory, outwardly; but
plain in Speech, and also in Apparel, wearing a Coat without a Seam, being
clothed and adorned with the Robes of Righteousness and Love. This is my
Beloved! may he be thine also, gentle Reader. Oh! how lovely is he? He is the
chiefest of Tens of Thousands. I entreat you. Oh ye Children of Men, both Sons
and Daughters! don't you offend Christ, by disobeying of him, the Bridegroom of
the Righteous; but, I beseech you, in his sweet and tender Love, if you have
offended him, by sinning against him. Oh! for the Lord's Sake, and your own
Souls Sake, do so no more; but unfeignedly repent; and then, in his due Time
(when he has tried you, and found you faithful) he will embrace you with the
sweet Embraces of his Love, which is better than Wine, and far excels the Love
of Women.

Now if the poor Creature did but love the Lord its Maker, above all, and its
Fellow Creature as itself, the Enemy of Mankind would be overcome, and we made
more than Conquerors, through him that has loved us, even Christ Jesus, our
Lord; and Man and Woman would see all these (abovesaid) evil Things to be
abominable, and perhaps many more which I have not mentioned, insomuch that
Self would be abhorred as in Dust and Ashes, and the Lord would be loved, and
glorified, above all, for which End he created Mankind: But, certain it is,
that this End cannot be answered, nor the Lord so loved, without Sin be
forsaken, and hated; for the Devil is the Author of Sin, and Christ of
Righteousness.

I, says Christ, am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, John xiv. 6. And, again,
John viii. 12. I am the Light of the World. Oh! says my Soul, in Abundance of
Love, and Good Will, unto the Sons and Daughters of Men, that they would but
walk in the Way of Truth, and the true Light of the World; then they would see
clearly the Snares of Satan; which that every One, even Male and Female
(especially those that profess Christianity) might do, and escape the same, is
the very Desire of my Soul: Even so prays him, that through the Spirit of
Jesus Christ, and Ability of his Grace, labors for the Salvation of Mankind.

T. C.

FRUITS OF DIVINE MEDITATION At SEA, in the Year 1699.
Blessed is the Man that walks not in the Counsel of the Ungodly, nor
stands in the Way of Sinners, nor sits in the Seat of the Scornful; but
his Delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate Day and
Night,

Psalm i. Lay up for yourselves Treasure in Heaven,

Mat. vi. 20.
1. IT is good for Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, to think upon his
Maker, 1699.
as much as in him lies, both Night and Day;

2. Who is the Fountain of all Men's Happiness, and the Ocean of their Bliss;
not only in this World, but in that which is to come; even to all Eternity.

3. How sweet is that Meditation, that is on the Sovereign Lord of Heaven, and
on the Prince of everlasting Glory?

4. No earthly Thing is to be compared with it; all the Glory, all the Pomp,
and Vanity, of this fading, transitory World, is not comparable with it: Divine
and inward Contemplation upon God, is no less than Heaven upon Earth to the
Soul.

5. This mine Eye has seen; for which I humbly bow before the great Lord of
all; whose Goodness to Man cannot fully be set forth, neither by the most
excellent Orator, nor with a ready Writer's Pen.

6. God delights in those that are intent in looking unto Him; and it is
Man's Duty to look to him, over all visible Things.

7. How profitable, and greatly advantageous, it is to the Soul, to be inward
with God. Oh! it is altogether admirable.

8. The unspeakable Treasures of Life, and of Wisdom, are to be found in inward
Meditation, and holy Contemplation, on God.

9. When a Man, in this Sort, is delighting himself with his Maker, and
advising with Him, he can want no good Thing. In Days of old God was, now is,
and ever will be, found by Man, in this inward Concern of the Soul.

10. A Man in this State, will always curb high Thoughts of Self, as being in
the Presence of the Almighty; for then he is truly sensible of his Presence:
Who is it that will vaunt, or carry himself loftily, when God is present, and
he considers it.

11. Indeed the Presence of the Almighty is every where, but many have lost the
Sense thereof, for want of inward Thoughts on God, and studious Contemplation
on the King of Heaven, whose Sovereignty is sweet over the Works of his Hands;

12. He is full of Grace, and full of Truth, full of Mercy, and full of
Justice: His Law is Light, and his Commands are as burning Lamps; in a Word, he
is full of heavenly Majesty, and Divine Power, so that no Characters can set
forth the Fullness of God.

13. Oh! that Man were rightly sensible of these Things, it would cause him,
with an humble Heart, to implore the Majesty of Heaven for his Favor, and
petition Him for the Aid and Assistance of his Grace, to do his holy and
heavenly Will.

14. Man would then see his own Weakness and Poverty, and how unable he is to
do, or work, any good Thing of himself, without the Help of the Holy Spirit.

15. Which Gift God, through Christ, gives to that Soul which is inward in its
Thoughts upon God; whose Wisdom and Power is past finding out, unless in this
Frame of Mind the Lord reveals it.

16. But worldly Thoughts, and vain Cogitations, hinder the Mind from being
with God, the Fountain of all Good.

17. Evil Works, or Words, also stupify the Mind, and deaden the most noble
Part of Man, so that slavish Fear, instead of that Fear which is mixed with
true Love and Honor, is begotten in the Heart.

18. All Things of any evil Tendency entertained in the Soul, are an
Obstruction to its Duty to God.

19. Who would but lay up Treasure in Heaven, that the Heart might also be
there? And what Treasure like that in Heaven, or what Place so fit to lay it in
as that is?

20. If a Man did but, with considerate Thoughts, weigh in his Mind the
Shortness and Uncertainty of Time in this Life, and the boundless Ocean of
Eternity; with a Life of Bliss and Glory, or else of Woe and Misery, that will
never end;

21. Without his Heart be harder than a flinty Rock, it would lead him into
Tenderness, serious Thoughts on the Name of God, and into Humiliation.

22. Christ Jesus, the Anointed of God; was found greatly in Humiliation; even
he who said, Learn of me, and follow me, who am meek, and low in Heart. God
calls for Humility of all Men. He behold the Proud, and Scornful, afar off.

23. Every proud and exalted Thought God will bring to Judgment, and likewise
such Words and Actions.

24. And, indeed, the Thing acted, or done, must first be conceived, or
thought, before it be brought forth; for out of the Abundance of the Heart the
Mouth speaks, and the Man acts.

25. Therefore to have the Thoughts of the Heart on God, and to contemplate on
Heaven, and heavenly Things, is truly excellent.

26. And although this incumbent Duty of Man is so averse to him, in his
natural State; yet it is most easy, sweet, and pleasant, to the Soul, when the
Mind is bent after, and set on, heavenly Things.

27. And that which is still more admirable is, that God is the alone Comfort,
Joy, Helper, Leader, and Conducter, of such a Soul.

28. But, Oh! the Thoughts of Man are too much taken up with earthly and
perishing Things, being content with the Shadow, or Shell, of Divine
Contemplation, Righteousness, and true Religion; so that too few are earnestly
seeking the Substance thereof.

29. That the noble Creature Man, which God has made but a little lower than
the Angels, and given (...) Power over those Creatures that are more ignoble
that, himself, should so degenerate from his Maker, as (...) fix his Thoughts
on terrestrial Things, is admirable to Heaven-born Souls, whose God is the Lord.

30. Which Way can the Soul look, or turn itself, but that it must needs see
the Glory of the God of Heaven, unless the God of this World has blinded the
Eye of the Mind.

31. Look upwards, and we may behold the Brightness of his Glory in the
Firmament, and the Workmanship of his Hands in the Sun, Moon, and Stars:

32. Or if we look on the Earth, or in the Sea, we may see his great Wonders;
and if, in Sincerity, we behold the heavenly Works of his Hands, with an Eye of
Faith, Oh! how can it do any less but draw deep Considerations of the
Omnipotence of God.

33. Thus, beholding the Works of God, and looking on his Works of old, and the
noble Acts which he has done in former Times, will raise holy Desires to be
with Him, and to be in his Presence, when Time to us, in this World, shall be
no more.

34. It will also beget a loving Fear of the Lord in the Soul, lest that it
should offend Him.

35. Such a Soul will be inwardly concerned before the Lord, and will seek Him
with unwearied Travel of Spirit.

36. After this Manner will that Soul cry to God, in the Spirit of Prayer and
Supplication, that is traveling toward the City, whose Builder, and Maker, is
God;

37. Lord, I am poor, do thou make me rich; I am needy, O! strengthen me, even
me, O my heavenly Father! for I am the least of many: O, my Savior, have Mercy
upon me!

38. Thou see my Weakness, and know my Want, and how unable I am, of
myself to do thy Will; give me Grace, or else I die; (...) ^e by the Power, and
by the Spirit of thy Son, o^ ^e I perish forever.

39. Lord, I believe; my Faith is in thee, and in the Power of thine Anointed,
help mine Unbelief, for Jesus' Sake, I humbly pray thee, O thou great Creator
of the Children of Men!

40. O! Great, Eternal God, thou know my secret Desires, and the private
Devotion of my Heart.

41. My Sighing and Tears are after thee, O thou Beloved of my Soul!

42. All the Profit and Pleasure that is in this World is Nothing, and less
than Nothing, in Comparison of Thee, and the Enjoyment of thy Presence, O thou
Lord of Life and Glory.

43. Thou Great Creator of all Things, from whom all Things have their Being,
send forth the Spirit of thy Son into my Heart, whereby, with Acceptance, I may
cry, Abba Father.

44. O! Holy Father, let me feel thy Power, that I may be able to make War in
thy Righteousness, against the Enemy of my poor Soul.

45. Great, Eternal God, give me Wisdom to walk uprightly before thee, and
before the Children of Men: O that my Soul may seek after it forever!

46. With which, O Lord, fill my earthen Vessel, for Jesus' Sake, that I may be
gentle, and easy to be entreated to do thy Will, so that I may never rebel
against thee.

47. Lord, do not tarry long from me; for if thou hides thy Face, I am
troubled; or when the Curtain is drawn between me and my Maker, then my Spirit
within me languisheth.

48. Therefore, O Lord, arise, and the Thoughts that are at Enmity with thee,
shall be scattered from my Soul:

49. The shall my Soul be a fit Receptacle for thee, and a Temple thou do
delight to dwell in, O Living God!

50. And, Holy Father, as thou have begotten those Thoughts and Desires in my
Soul, so do for many more of the Sons and Daughters of Men.

51. Such a Soul, whose Thoughts and Meditations are on this Wise, Almighty God
never did, and never will, reject, or cast off.

52. Heaven and Earth may pass away, but the Mercy and Goodness of the Lord God
of Heaven and Earth will not pass away from those that are thus inwardly
exercised before Him.

53. The holy Men of God, and the Faithful in Ages past, bore Testimony to
these Truths.

54. And there is that of God, in the Souls of the Faithful, that can say Amen
to the same.

55. I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, says the Almighty, to, and
concerning, those who love Him truly.

56. Fear not, Worm Jacob, for I will be with thee, says the Lord; if thou
go through the Fire, it shall not kindle upon thee; and if thou go
through the Water, it shall not overwhelm thee.

AN EXHORTATION TO YOUTH, And OTHERS, to follow: BEING Part of a LETTER from T.
C. to a Friend in Dublin.
1707.
LET the Young Man and Maiden, diligently read the holy Scriptures; and whenever
they come to a Passage that affects them, let them not only turn down that
Leaf, but let them be sure that it has Place in their Hearts: And when they
read of a good Man, or Woman, then let them earnestly pray, and fervently cry
to the Lord, the great God, and holy Father of our dear Lord Jesus Christ, and
God of all the Righteous in all Ages, that he would please to make them like to
those his dear Children and Servants. Oh! that all young People might not
forget this great Command of God, Exodus 20.12.
Honor thy Parents, that thy Days may be long upon the Land which the Lord thy
God gives thee. How many stubborn Youths has the Lord cut off in their Prime,
and in the Flower of their Days: And, on the other hand, how has the Great
Almighty blessed, prospered, preserved and honored, those that have been
obedient to their Parents, and honored their Parents and Elders? And let the
young Men and Maidens note this, That none truly honors their Parents and
Elders, but those who are Pious and Virtuous; such were Joseph, Samuel, David
and Solomon; as also King Josiah, who began to reign at eight Years old. God
Almighty gives many a good Sense of his Grace at that Age, and thereabouts; he
ordains Praise many times out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings. Let the
Youth endeavor to follow those good and great Men; and for their Instruction,
I shall give a Touch of the above five Worthies.

First, In particular, beginning with Joseph. Genesis 37*
His Father sent him to his Brethren; he went willingly, Genesis 44.7* and 45.15.
(though his Brethren hated him;) and when it was in his Power to hurt them, he
rendered them Good for their Evil; a good Example for both Young and Old. Chapter
39.9.
And when tempted to Sin by his Mistress in Egypt, he said. How can I do this
great Wickedness, and sin against God? Who highly favored him for his Piety,
Virtue and Chastity.

Secondly, Samuel, 1 Samuel 1.10.
for whom his Mother prayed earnestly to the Lord; and when he had given him to
her, she gave him to God again: A good Pattern for all Mothers. When he was but
a little Lad, Chap. 3.4, 5. etc.
the Almighty called him, and he thought he had been Eli, up he gets, and said,
Thou calledst me? No, said the Old Man, I did not call thee, lie down again. He
did not grumble, as many of our Youths do: The Lord called again; he willingly
runs to Eli; he did not love his Bed so much as Obedience, and said, Thou did
call me. Eli observing that God had spoke to the Child, said to him, when he
calls again, say, Speak, Lord, for thy Servant hears. Let old Ones mind
this, and encourage their Youth to answer the Call of God betimes: So God calls
again, and he answers: Speak, Lord, for thy Servant hears. The Lord by his
Grace calls to little Ones, many times in the midst of their Play, and
sometimes in their Beds: Oh! that our Youth may do and say as little Samuel;
that they may grow as he did, and be in Favor both with God and Man.

Sam. 16.11, 13, 27, 28, 29.
Thirdly, David, his Father's youngest Son, kept his Sheep, and in that
innocent Employ the Lord was with him, to Admiration; his Father sent him to
his Brethren: But Eliah, his eldest Brother, frowned upon him, and reviled him;
he only made this soft Reply, Is there not a Cause? He overcame the great
Philistine, in the Name of the God of Israel; and God highly exalted him for
his Uprightness, Sincerity and Piety, which was very great: For notwithstanding
Saul would have killed him; yet when David had him in his Power, 1 Samuel 24.9,
10, etc. and ver. 19.
he spared him, insomuch that Saul wept, and said, If a Man find his Enemy,
will he let him go? And there was loving Greeting between them: So he overcame
the Evil of Readiness Heart, by the Good that was in his; according to those holy
Expressions of the Apostle Paul, Romans xii. 21. Be not overcome of Evil, but
overcome Evil with Good. Words worthy to be writ in Letters of Gold, and more
worthy to be observed and practiced.

Fourthly, Solomon, who asked of God Wisdom, being in his own Eyes but as a
little Child, said unto the Lord, 1 Kings 3.7, 9.
Give unto thy Servant an understanding Heart: Which Request God granted him,
and gave him also Riches and Honor. Oh! see the Benefit of pleasing God, young
Men and young Women.

Fifthly, Josiah, a young Prince, and King: How zealous was he for God's
Service and Worship! What a wonderful Reformation he made in the Land, 2 Kings
22.1, 2, 3, etc.
and how was he lamented at his Death, as generally all good zealous Men and
Women are, either Old or Young.

Having touched a little of the young Men, 2 Chronicles. 35.25.
let me just a little remember the young Women also: As for Example, Ruth and
Abigail, two discreet young Women; the first very loving, kind, and true to
Naomi, her Mother-in-law; a good Pattern for all Daughters-in-law; Entreat me
not, said she, to leave thee; for where thou go, I will go; and where thou
lodgest, I will lodge; and where thou die, there will I be buried; Thy People
shall be my People, and thy God my God. Ruth 1.16, 17.
The Lord abundantly rewarded her for this godly Resolution. Boaz had a Sense
of her Virtue and Piety, and said, All the City of my People does know, that
thou art a virtuous Woman. Chap. 3. ver. 11.
Which doubtless was a strong Motive for him to love her; and that Love
commonly lasts till Death* Whereas when Money is a Motive, it often happens
that many Evils attend.

Also wise Abigail, her ingenious Speech to David, 1 Samuel 25.23, 24, 25, etc.
and Contrivance to hinder him from shedding Blood; which he was coming to do
(thinking he had Cause) but prevented by her Wisdom: Which, to be sure, was a
great Motive to him to love her, after Nabal's Death, and to take her to Wife.
She was no proud Woman: For, said she, let thy Handmaid serve to wash the Feet
of the Servants of my Lord. Much might be said, but I design Brevity.

As there are many good Examples in Holy Scripture, whereby young People might
be stirred up to Virtue; so also there are Examples of the Judgments of God on
disobedient, impious, vain and ungodly Men and Women, even Young and Old. 2 Samuel 15.10, 11, etc. Genesis 34. Numb. 25.8.
Oh! let our Youth consider (I beseech them) wicked, disobedient Absalom, and
poor Dinah; also the Prince and the Moabitish Damsel, whom zealous Phineas
slew; for God was angry, and is angry with the Wicked every Day.

The before mentioned good Men and Women were in the Time of the Law; and let
me add to them, the Holy Pattern and good Example of our great Lord and blessed
Master, who loved Righteousness, and hated Wickedness, Psalm. 45.7. Psalm. 2.
therefore he was highly exalted, and anointed with the Oil of Gladness above
his Fellows: He had the Heathen given him for his Inheritance, and the utmost
Parts of the Earth for his Possession: Matt. 28.28.
And, what is more, all Power in Heaven and Earth.

Oh, Dear young Men and Maidens! He is our great Pattern, whom we are (and
ought) to take for our Example; Luke 9.23.14.27.
walking in all Humility and Reverence: He (says Christ) that will be my
Disciple (that is, his Scholar) must take up his Cross, deny himself, and
follow me. Oh blessed Pattern! Oh glorious Example! let us follow him whilst we
have Breath in this World; it was always well for them that followed him. What
think ye, Oh young Men and Maidens! Mark 10.21.23.
had it not been well for that Rich young Man, that he had left all, and
followed dear Jesus: Be ye your own Judges; look on your Pattern ( i. e. Christ
Jesus) when he was but twelve years old; see what he was doing; forget not that
Saying which his Mother laid up in her Heart, Luke 2.49.51.
Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's Business? Oh, dear Youths! it is
good Business, I can say it through some good Experience; let me tell you for
your Edification, I have served my Master, Holy Jesus, and followed him several
Years according to the best of my Understanding, and I have always found him a
good Master; his Service is sweet, and his Work is delightful. I have a great
deal more to say for my Lord and Master, Matt. 11.29 30.
but my Design is Brevity: His Yoke is easy, and Burden is light. He has said
it, and I have experienced it. Wherefore I am the more free to invite you to
follow him, and be his Scholars. An Eminent Servant and Scholar of his said. 1
Cor. 11.1.
Be ye Followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. The Apostle Paul exhorts
Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.12.
a young Scholar, and his Son, in the Faith, to be a good Example to others; as
also his Son Titus. We are also told of four young Women, who were
Prophetesses, and diverse others; Titus. 27. Acts 21.9.
a more particular Account of whose exemplary Lives and Actions are recorded in
holy Scripture for our Learning; unto which, with the Grace of God in the
Heart, I recommend all young Men and Women, and conclude these small Tokens of
my very dear Love in Christ, our Holy Lord and Master, desiring the above may
be as so many Patterns for them to follow.

A Loving INVITATION TO YOUNG and OLD, In HOLLAND, and Elsewhere, To Seek and
Love ALMIGHTY GOD, and to Prepare in Time for their ETERNAL WELFARE.
Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, and call ye upon him while he is near,

Isa. lv. 6.
To the READER.
HAving from my Childhood been a Lover of the Dutch, and that Love being
increased by traveling in Holland and Germany, it came weightily on my Mind to
invite and persuade this People (with others, into whose Hands this may come,
and especially the Youth) To love, serve and fear, the LORD, the ALMIGHTY, the
Great JEHOVAH, and that they first seek the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, as Christ exhorts or commands, Mat. vi. 33. Those ponderous and
extraordinary Expressions, with the large Promise thereto annexed, are well
worth the due Notice, and weighty Consideration, of all, both Youth and Aged;
but seem to be very apt to the State and Condition of those that are just
entering into the Business, and Affairs of the World. Oh! that the Youth had
but Faith in the blessed Lord JESUS, and owned his pure Doctrine, now in their
tender Years; and in the Prime of their Days, that they would remember their
Creator in the Days of their Youth, before the Evil Days come; Oh! Eccl. 1 1.
that in their blossoming and blooming Springtime, they might be like to
lovely Branches, and growing Trees, of Righteousness, bearing much Fruit, much
good Fruit of Piety and Virtue: In which, says our holy Lord Jesus Christ, is
your Heavenly Father glorified. This is the real and hearty Desire of my Soul,
for the Youth of this and all Generations, Male and Female, yea, both Young and
Old, in all Nations throughout the World: The universal Love of GOD flows and
overflows in my Soul, like a living Stream, at this Time, as also at many
others, to all my Fellow-mortals. Oh the great Love of God in Christ Jesus, our
great, holy, and good Father, Lord, and Master, is wonderful to Mortals! whose
Divine Love is abundantly, and also universally, shed abroad to all Nations,
through his Eternal Spirit and Grace in the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of
Men, in order to draw, lead, and guide Men and Women from Earth to Heaven.

Thus being desirous (according to my Measure) to promote Truth and
Righteousness in the Earth; also being sensible of the Love, Mercy, and
Goodness of God, in my very young and tender Years; I am willing, for the Sake
of well-inclined young Men and Women, to send forth into the World this loving
Invitation: And an desirous, for the Love I bear to the People of the Dutch
Nation, that this might be translated into the Dutch Language; hoping it may be
beneficial to some well-inclined Souls, in order to (...) them up to seek,
serve, and love Almighty God. Amen.

So wishes, and heartily prays, a Friend to, and Lover of all Mankind.

T. C.

A Loving INVITATION TO YOUNG and OLD, IN HOLLAND, and Elsewhere, etc.
IT is a Thing truly excellent for Mortals to love, 1709.
serve, and fear Him that made them, and gave unto all Life and Being: And to
begin this Work betimes, is very advantageous to the never dying Soul. It is
also an indispensable Duty, which is incumbent upon every one, Male and Female;
and whoever is found in the Neglect thereof, will certainly have Cause dearly
to repent it, and unless they do repent before they go hence, and see Man no
more, will be miserable to all Eternity. Which solid Consideration, has often
been weighty on my Mind, and I could not be clear (as I thought) in the Sight
of God, without laying of it before Men and Women.

Now, that we may so do, consider, Truth commands us, Reason persuades us, and
Example is very powerful and inviting. Oh! that the Children of Men would be
wise to Salvation, and embrace the Love of God in his dear and well-beloved
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, John 14.6.
who himself said, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Oh! surely here is a
Threefold Cord, ( i. e. Truth, Reason and Example,) which is not easily
broken: God Almighty grant (for Christ's sake) that by it some poor Soul might
be drawn to him even now in their tender Years: To Day, to Day* if any will
hear the Voice of the Lord, Oh! Let them not harden their Hearts; for that is
provoking to him that made us. How know we whether he, who made the Heavens,
will be pleased to give us another Hour? How know we, but that after this Day
we may never open our Eyes, till we open them in Eternity? Oh Eternity,
Eternity, that boundless Ocean! who can fathom those Words, for Ever and Ever?
What will this World, and all its Glories and Vanities signify, or avail to
poor Souls, when rolling from Side to Side on a Dying-bed.

It will therefore be well for both Old and Young to note this:

First, The Old, because it is not likely they should have many Days, according
to the Course of Nature, and a common Proverb, i. e. The Young (may live, and
they) may die, but the Old must die.

Secondly, The Young, because they know not but they may die Tomorrow.

In the great and notable Day of the most High, Oh! then, then, heavenly Things
will be found serious and solid Truths, and not Toys and Trifles, nor
indifferent Things; when He shall come as in Flames of Fire, to render
Vengeance (which is only his) upon all the Workers of Iniquity, and shall come
to judge the Secrets of Men's Hearts by that great Man, and just Judge, the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Wherefore, let me prevail with some poor Souls, now in time, to lay the Truth
to Heart, and to be found in the Work of God in their Day: That so for their
Pains here, they may receive their Penny hereafter; and that enlivening, that
quickening Answer of Well-doing, may be their Portion, and the Lot (the
glorious Lot) of their Inheritance: Come ye blessed; Matt. 25.21, 23, 34.
Well done, good and faithful Servant: Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord. Oh
powerful Voice, and Heart-ravishing Sentence! Enough to make one alive, though
dead; and exceeding joyful, though sorrowful even to Death. Oh! this divine
Favor and Grace, wherewith the most High will favor those that love Him, and
faithfully serve Him, in this his great and notable Day, will far exceed the
Favor of Kings and Princes: For those that get the latter, can only be happy
(or so accounted) in this World, which is but momentary; and those who are
living and sensible Witnesses of the former, are certainly happy, even in this
World (although Men may not see it) and likewise everlastingly happy in that
World which is to come. To be sensible of God's Grace in the Heart, and to
follow the holy Teachings of it, is preferable to all Things here below, it
will make ^e more Wise and more Comely, than all outward Learning, Beauty, or
Parts whatever. God Almighty gra^, I beseech him, that all our young Men, our
ri^^ Men, our wise Men, may only glory in Him, according to the Language of the
Spirit in the (...) Scriptures, Let not the young or strong Man glory (...)
Youth or Strength, nor the rich Man in his Riche^ (...) the wise Man in his
Wisdom: But he that glory (...) let him glory in the Lord; or in this, That he
know (...) Lord. Let the Wits of the Age consider this well* let the Boaster
and Disputer rightly note this, and he will have Cause to bow before Heaven's
Majesty: What becomes of the young Man and young Woman's Strength, and lovely
Beauty, when their Heads are laid in their cold Grave? What will become of, or
of what Service will the Riches of the rich Man be to him, when he shall
receive his Summons to his long Home? May he not then say, Oh! that I had been
as industrious to get Heaven, and Peace with my Maker, as I have been to get
this World. Let all Worldly-minded Men and Women remember the wonderful
Expostulation of Christ Jesus with the rich young Man. Matt. xix. 16, 17, etc.
This is not to hinder any in their outward Concerns: For the Heart of a Man
may be in Heaven, though his Hands may be in his Employment.

And as to the wise Man: Pray what will become of his great Wit, his acquired
Parts, his nice and farfetch'd Arguments and Criticisms, when pale-faced Death
shall look him in the Face, and strike him with his sharp Arrows? Then he will
find, that it had been much better for him, that he had lived well, although he
had not talked so much, or so well: To talk well, is good; but to live well is
much better. To talk finely, and live badly, is of little Worth. Oh! that the
great Master-workman of all, may drive home this Nail, in the Heart of him
whose Eye shall look thereon, by his mighty Hammer, the Hammer of his Word, his
Heartbreaking, Heart-melting, and Heart-piercing Word; according to the
Doctrine of the holy Spirit in the holy Scriptures, (...). 23.^^.
Is not my Word as a Fire? Is not my Word as a Hammer? Is not my Word as a
Sword* (i.e.) to burn, to break, to cut down all Manner of Sin: Not (...)
destroy Man, but Sin in Man. Hear farther the (...) of the holy Spirit; Deuteronomy
^0.14. R^. ^0.7, 8, 9.
Say not in thine Heart, (...) ascend up into Heaven, to fetch it down (...)?
Or who shall go down into the Deep, or (...) Seas, to fetch it from thence? But
what says (...) The Word is nigh thee, in thy Heart, and in thy Mouth, that
thou may do it. This was, and is, and ever will be, the Doctrine of the
Gospel: From which People may perceive, that Christ Jesus is near to them; near
to Save, near to Deliver, near to Redeem. The great Jehovah, the blessed Jesus,
the holy divine Spirit, is not only a God afar off, but also a God near at
hand, Psalm. 46, 1.
and a present and sure Help in the needful Time. Oh! blessed be his Name, for
ever and ever.

Now I appeal to the Consciences of all Men, whether they have not, or do not
sensibly witness, something (of a contrary Nature to Sin and Unrighteousness)
to reprove them, and convince them of the Evil of their Ways, and Doings,
perhaps sometimes in the midst of their Vanity, in the Song, in the Dance, or
in the Game; or sometimes after a Debauch, or for their Pride, either in Mind
or in Apparel, for Overreaching, or Covetousness: All which (with all Manner
of Evils) are of the Devil. And the King of Heaven is lifting up his Holy and
righteous Spirit as a Standard against it, and against him, who is the Author
of it. Oh! let this his convincing Grace take place in thy Heart, O Mortal Man!
For know of a Truth, it is the very Grace of God to thy Soul; for infallible
Proof of which (besides the Experience of the Faithful) take these two Texts of
holy Scripture, (the Doctrine of which will stand for ever, notwithstanding all
the Opposition of Men) i. e. John 14.16. John 16.8. Tit. 2.11.
I will pray to the Father, says Christ, and he will give you another
Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, that he may abide with you for ever; and
when he is come, he shall convince the World of Sin. Again, The Grace of God
which brings Salvation, has appeared unto all Men, teaching us, that, denying
Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly,
in this present World. Why should the Almighty show to Men the Evil of their
Ways* Why don't he let them run on in their Vanities, without Control? (Oh ye
Children of Men!) It is his mere Grace, and his mere Mercy to the precious,
dear-bought, and never-dying Souls of poor mortal Mankind: For he would have
none to perish; if any perish, their Destruction is of themselves, but their
Help is of the Lord. Oh! that People would be entreated and persuaded, through
loving Invitation, to follow the Lord fully, and do his Work faithfully.

Now let me return a little to, and let my Pen drop somewhat concerning that
Threefold Cord abovementioned. I again humbly beg of the Lord, the great God,
and Father of Spirits, and of our dear Lord Jesus, that this may be
instrumental, in his Hand, to draw some poor seeking, traveling Soul, from
Earth, toward Heaven; the which, if it does, let the Praises alone be given to
God, through his well-beloved Son.

First then: As to Truth; I would hope few in this Generation, who profess
Christianity, need to say, What is Truth? God Almighty, Christ Jesus, the Holy
Spirit, is that Infinite, Divine Truth, which will endure for ever: And he has
said, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, with all thy Mind
and Strength. And indeed He is an Object that is thereof richly worthy; and
this is his Law, which is to endure for ever; and he which does and teaches
it, is to be called Great in the Kingdom of God; Mat. 5.19.
and that it might not be forgotten, he wrote it in stony Tables: Which Law,
Jacob's Seed broke and transgressed. Wherefore, thus says the Lord, who spoke
it by the Prophet, Jer. 31.33.
I will put my Law in their inward Parts, and write it in their Hearts: Oh!
there it is written in large Characters, very plain and legible, and easy to be
read of Mankind. And whereas Moses, the Man of God, was an Instrument to
promote the holy Law outwardly, written on Tables of Stone, among the Children
of Israel; so Christ Jesus, in this Gospel-day, is promoting and proclaiming
the Power of this Law inwardly engraven in Men's Hearts by God's Finger,
throughout the whole World: This great Law of Love (in which all the Law and
the Prophets is contained) Christ not only lived in it, and declared it to
Mortals; but he also died in it, and for it, and for us also, and sealed his
holy, glorious Testimony, and Doctrine, with his most precious Blood: This is
He, of whom the Voice from the most excellent Glory, said, Mat. 17.5.
This is my Beloved Son, in whom, I am well pleased, hear ye Him. This is He,
of whom the former Lawgiver said, Deuteronomy. 18.18.
The Lord your God shall raise up a Prophet from amongst your Brethren, Him
shall you hear in all Things. This is He who said, I am the Way, the Truth, and
the Life. John 14.17.
This is He that said, He dwells with you, and shall be in you: And again, I
stand at the Door and knock, Rev, 3.20.
if any Man will hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in unto him. Oh!
Methinks his Love is wonderful; he not only commands Obedience, but invites to
it: Oh! who can be so hard-hearted and so cruel to Him, and themselves also, as
to slight and refuse such heavenly divine Offers of infinite Love, Grace and
Mercy? Rev. 22.17. Isa. 55.1.
The Spirit and the Bride says, Come; and all that are a-thirst, may come, and
drink freely; and buy heavenly Milk, and rich Wine, without Money; or any
natural or outward Price.

Secondly, Touching Reason: It is very reasonable, that we should serve and
love God Almighty, in this Space of Time that we have here in this World, and
work the Works of Piety and Virtue; for, and because, there is solid Peace
therein: Here none can make afraid, but the Soul is calm and quiet, as being
anchored in a safe Harbor. Here no Law can take hold of us. If any should
imagine, that there is no future Rewards or Punishments, which no Mortal can do
without Blushing, or Self-condemnation, as I conceive: Yet a Life of Holiness
is a much better Life, even for the Body, for its Health, and most sweet
Repose; and Pleasure that is solid, and not flashy, and its outward Tranquillity
in every Respect; I appeal to the reasoning Wits of the Age, whether the above
be not a great and undeniable Truth^ Besides, all true Men and Women, in
Practicing as above, have a living Hope and Faith, through and in Christ, of a
glorious Rest to Eternity, which is very reasonable to believe, since
undeniably Christ wrought such wonderful Works, and mighty Miracles, which
before were never wrought by Man on Earth: So that those must needs be
Self-condemned too, that believe not in Him, his Works and Grace. There is no
Writ nor Wit in the whole World, that did, can, or ever will be able to make
void, or lay waste the great, mighty; and miraculous Works of Truth, which were
done by the Blessed Jesus. Moses was a mighty Man of God, and highly favored,
and greatly beloved, of Him, and did many mighty Works; yet Christ exceeded
him, as also did his Dispensation. Moses went through the Sea: Christ went upon
the Sea. Moses prayed for Bread from Heaven, and it was given in Abundance:
Christ with a few small Fishes, Mat. 15.36.
and seven Loaves, fed many Thousands (which were unreasonable to expect; but
from a Divine Hand) Moses prayed for Water for the People: John 21
Christ made Wine, and admirable Wine too, even of Water. Moses preached the
Law and Judgment to Israel only: But Christ Jesus preached Grace, Mercy, Peace
and Truth, not only to Israel, but also to all the World, through Divine Faith
in God, in and through Repentance, and the Work of the Spirit. Oh! is not here
Reason and Truth pleading with, and persuading poor Creatures, to love, serve
and follow, reverence and fear; their Creator.

Whether the above Matter be pleasant News to our sprightly Youths, I Will not
determine; but I am positive, they will find it Truth one Day.

It Is likely some such Doctrine as this might better please the Sparks of the
Age, and the jolly young* Men and Maidens up and down in the World, viz.
Rejoice, Eccl. 11.9.
O young Man, and young Woman, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the Days of thy
Youth; follow the Lust of thy Heart, and the Sight of thine Eyes: But, let them
remember, that for all these Things God will bring them to Judgment: They must
surely come to Judgment: They Will have it inwardly and secretly in their Hearts,
here in this World (notwithstanding they may endeavor to hide it from Men; but
they cannot hide it from Heaven, from the All-seeing, Heart-piercing Eye of the
Holy One: He who inhabits Eternity, whose Dwelling is in the Light; and whose
Eye goes through the Earth, behelding the Evil and the Good:) Likewise they
will have Condemnation without End, in the World that is to come. Oh, let the
Youth and Aged seriously consider of it!

And farther, let them call to Mind, the great and heavy Judgments that have
fallen upon wicked and ungodly Men, many of which were foretold by the
Messengers of Heaven, and came to pass according to their Sayings, viz. The
Flood of Waters, which destroyed the Old World (which the very Indians in
America have a notable Notion of, handed down to 'em by the Tradition of their
Father to this Day.) As also the Destruction of the Land, and Inhabitants of
Sodom and Gomorrah: And the Thousands of Thousands that have been destroyed in
Battles and Fights; which will still be, and continue to the World's End,
unless People come into the Love of God, which will teach them to Love one
another; and into the Faith and Doctrine of the Prince of Peace, which is, Mat.
7.12.
To do unto all Men, as we would have them do unto us, and to do Good for Evil;
which to be sure is not to destroy. Likewise the Destruction of Jerusalem, and
Scattering of the Jews, the Seed of faithful Abraham; and diverse dismal and
terrible Earthquakes, which have happened in these latter Ages of the World;
some of the dreadful Ruins of which, mine Eyes have seen in my Travels. Surely
there is much Reason to walk in Reverence, and holy Fear, before the great Lord
of all: He who made the Heavens and the Earth, the Seas, and the Fountains of
Water, and has given Life and Breath to all that move therein, can take it
from them at his Pleasure; in the Twinkling of an Eye.

Oh! Happy is that Empire, Kingdom, State, or Province; Emperor, King, or
Governor: Family, or particular Person, whose Inhabitants live and dwell in the
holy Fear of God, and in the Self-denying Life of Jesus: No greater Happiness
or Felicity, than to be one of these. Oh! let my Soul dwell here, and be in
Unity and Fellowship with all such for ever.

Now, as to the the and last Part of the abovesaid Threefold Argument, viz.
Example; which, as the Proverb says, is above Precept. Good Example is very
taking with many, and often happens to be very affecting to the younger Sort more
particularly: For they look out much at others, and take great Notice of the
Words and Conduct of their Elders and Superiors. Genesis 27, etc.
Good Jacob was a good Example to his great Family: He was a pious affectionate
Father, a loving Husband, a faithful Servant, and an obedient Son: The History
of his Life and Travels in Holy Scripture is affecting: Oh! how he sought God
betimes! how humble, how lowly, as well as lovely, does he behave himself in
his Pilgrimage! His Father and Mother called him, and bid him go; he does it,
without any Replies to the contrary; not like some of the Youth of this Age.
And on his Way, being benighted, he lays himself down, his Pillow was hard, but
his Bed large, and the Heavens was his Curtain; his Sleep was sweet, and his
Dreams precious. (Oh! the very Thoughts of it affects me at this Time.) In
which Sleep he sees Angels; and when he awakes, he says, Surely this is none
other than the House of God, and the Gate of Heaven. Now he makes the
Conditions of his Covenant with his Maker, which (as to outward Things) was as
small as well could be, viz. Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on, and the
Presence of his Maker, with His Blessing. This was now when he was about to set
up for himself in the World, his Mind was not high, neither sought he after
great Things; notwithstanding which, the Almighty gave him in Abundance. So
onwards he went, and came to Laban, and became his Servant. I could wish that
all young People, that are Servants, would follow his Steps in Faithfulness;
then might they be a Blessing to their Masters, as he was to his. I ever
observed in my Travels (having traveled much in diverse Nations, and made many
Observations) that Almighty God has greatly blessed obedient, industrious
Children and Servants: Which Observation, I hope, will be of good Use to the
World, if well considered. And on the other Hand, I have taken Notice of the
contrary, and have perfectly understood, that God's Hand has been manifestly
against those that have been disobedient, and ill-natured, and idle; which may
be an useful Caution to all. Now the Lord blessed the good Service, and
faithful Industry, of this his Servant with great Increase; as also with many
Children, for whom he was concerned as a tender Father, even to the very last:
And (like a pious and godly Father) prayed to the Lord for their Preservation;
and was zealously concerned to cleanse his Family from Superstition and
Idolatry; and calls them to go up to Bethel, or the House of God, Oh! that all
Heads of Families, would be concerned for their Posterity, and seek God, and
the Things of his Kingdom, for their Children and Servants, more than the
Things of this World; there being too much Care for the one, and too little for
the other, generally speaking: So that there is Need of this Caution. Now this
good Man was not only concerned for his Family in his Life, but ever at his
Death also* For he, waiting for the Salvation of God, and being sensible of it,
very livingly and sensibly blessed his Seed, and was opened in Faith to speak
exactly to each of their States and Conditions. I refer to the History of it in
Holy Scripture, the which I believe will be affecting to pious Minds. Oh! what
a Race he left behind! All his twelve Sons were Patriarchs, and great Fathers
of many People, who were highly favored of God, and had been to this Day, had
they walked in the Steps of their Fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: From whom
came many valiant and noble Men, of and for God; as Moses, Joshua, Samuel,
David, Solomon, Josiah, Elijah and Elisha; also the Holy Blessed Star, and Sun
of Rihgteousness, Holy JESUS, whom the degenerate Offspring of good old Israel
slew, and hanged on a Tree: Also the holy Apostles, were great Examples of
Virtue: Also the blessed Martyrs, and many modern good Men, might be brought in
for inviting Examples, to stir up the Minds of Men and Women, to serve, love,
and follow the Lord, and to believe in Him, and in his dear Son, and in the
Appearance of his Grace working in the Soul, in order to the convincing and
converting of it.

To be particular in all the above Instances, would swell this far beyond what
is intended; and considering the many and large Volumes that are in the World,
though a large Door opened before me, yet am now willing to conclude, and
recommend the Work, with the Reader, to the Grace of God, in and through his
dear Son Christ Jesus, our great Example: To whom, with the Father, through the
Divine Spirit, be Glory for ever.

T. C.
Written at Frederickstadt, in Holstein.
Forcing a Maintenance, Not WARRANTABLE from the HOLY SCRIPTURE, FOR A MINISTER
of the GOSPEL. BEING An ANSWER to some False and Erroneous Pages, writ by
Joseph Metcalfe, tending to stir up PERSECUTION.
Freely ye have received, freely give,

MAT. x. 8. I have coveted no Man's Silver of Gold,

ACTS xx. 33. I have preached the Gospel of God freely,

2 COR. xi. 7.
The PREFACE to the READER, of what Persuasion soever.
IT being a known Principle of the People called Quakers, that the Gospel of
Jesus Christ ought to be preached freely by his Ministers; yet,
notwithstanding, diverse People, of diverse Persuasions, either for want of
Charity, or through Prejudice, or wrong Information, or all three, do say, or
believe, that the Quakers Ministers or Teachers are paid for their Preaching; I
do positively declare to the World, that it is an utter Falsehood and Scandal
upon the said People: For we cannot in good Conscience make a Trade of our holy
Calling, neither is the Word of God to be bought or sold for outward Gain;
witness the Apostle's Answer to Simon Magus, Acts viii. 18, 20. And if we
cannot pay our own, pray how can we pay others, and be clear of Guilt, or have
the Answer of a good Conscience, we believing it to be Evil? And every Body
that knows the Holy Scriptures, knows that what is not of Faith is Sin; and yet
our Adversaries would have us commit this Sin; and if we will not do it
willingly, they will force it from us by the Power of the Magistrates, although
the Holy Scriptures and Reason is clearly against them, as is plainly
manifested in the ensuing little Tract.

And as for my Part, I have traveled many Thousands of Miles, and preached the
Gospel among the said People many Years* as Thousands of them can witness, and
never received my Consideration therefore, neither directly nor indirectly;
neither do I reckon they are beholden to me for so doing, for a Necessity is
laid upon me, and woe is me if I preach not the Gospel; neither do I boast, for
I have done but my Duty, and in that Sense am but an unprofitable Servant,
according as Christ taught, for all the Profit is of Christ. And if Occasion
were, there are many other Ministers among the said People, could bear the like
Testimony.

Oh, but (say the People) your Teachers are generally rich!

Why should any begrudge us that which we have, since the Almighty blesses our
Industry in our honest Trades and Callings, which other Teachers, through the
like Industry and Blessing, might obtain, if their Dependency for a Maintenance
were more upon God, than the People.

Yet notwithstanding those Teachers receive so much Money of the People, and
the Quaker Preachers none at all (except they are poor and necessitous) they
are full of Complaints: Whereas there is no Complaining in all our Streets.

We should starve (cry they) if we had not a Law to compel.

Christ's Ministers of old, when he sent them forth, they had no Law, and yet
they lacked nothing; Is Christ or the Men changed nowadays? The Men
doubtless: For now they cry, More, more, mere Money: Let every true Christian
judge in this Matter.

T. C.

1713.
I Shall first take notice of his Preface, to one called a Quaker, in which he
says, That he thinks that there is sufficient Matter of Conviction in the Texts
and Arguments improved.

Answer. But every sincere Soul, when they come to see the Texts themselves,
will have Cause to think to the contrary; for had they been fairly produced,
they would have saved the Labor of a further Reply, they being far from
countenancing any forced Maintenance to Christ's Ministers. And as for his
Arguments improved, they smell so strong of Persecution, that I would
charitably hope no sober Christian or Magistrate, who inclines to Moderation
(which ought to appear in all) will take any further Notice of them, than to
pity his Ignorance.

Yet notwithstanding his mighty Arguments and great Improvements, he gives them
this Blow, He has but little hopes of his being convinced, (to whom he writes)
because of the Efficacy of Error and Delusion, etc.

He would have had more Reason to have writ so, if he had first proved Error
and Delusion upon him. And truly, he would have been greatly deluded, if he had
believed that great Untruth, That forcing a Maintenance for a Gospel Minister
was warrantable from the Holy Scriptures; if he be sober, and in his Wits, one
would believe that he cannot (when he seriously considers of it) but be
convinced that he is mistaken.

And as for his Prayers, the Scripture says, We know that God hears not
Sinners: And that he is a Sinner, is plain, in wresting and perverting the
Scriptures, as he has done, and as I shall show through the Help of Christ, my
Lord and Savior.

Forcing a Maintenance, Not WARANTABLE from the HOLY SCRIPTURE, FOR A MINISTER
of the GOSPEL.
NOw, 1713.
pray let us observe what he says to the Matter in hand.

1st. As to the Laws of New England, he says, The Laws of this Province require
that the Inhabitants of each Town shall take due Care to be constantly provided
with a Gospel Minister: And that each Minister shall be sufficiently supported
and maintained by the Inhabitants of the Town.

That all the rateable Estates, and Inhabitants in the Town shall be assessed,
and pay proportionable to such Maintenance.

And that such as refuse to pay accordingly, shall have their Proportion taken
from them by Distress.

Answer. I shall not here dispute the Injustice of this Law so largely as I
might (only I must add, they have no such Example from Christ nor the Apostles,
with this Proviso, that it is made amongst a Society of Men for themselves, and
those of their own Communion) but if this is intended to force those of other
Professions, and who cannot for Conscience Sake join with them, believing them
to be Antichristian Ministers, (as to be sure all such are as go about to
maintain such Doctrine as this Priest Metcalfe does, That it is warrantable
from Scripture to force Maintenance for Ministers) Pray would he be willing the
Papists, or Church of England should take away from him by Force? Surely no:
Then I say that it is an unjust Law, and far from the Nature of that Royal Law,
which says, Do to all Men, as you would that they should do unto you; Christ
says, This is the Law, and the Prophets. And doubtless the Gospel falls not
short of it (though this N. E. Minister does) though I hope it is not the Mind of
all in Profession with him. Now the Law being unjust, it is no Crime to reject
it: Yet for conscience Sake, and the Lord's Sake, we submit to it in passive
Obedience; and it is well known to all that know any thing of the Quakers, that
their Principle is against resisting the outward Power.

Next to the Question, Whether it be Warrantable from Scripture, and the
Doctrine and Practice of Christ and his Apostles, to put such Laws in
Execution, to take from Men, although the Minister preaches not to them, for they
cannot believe they are sent of God?

This is his great Question, as he states it in his first Page, which he
pretends to answer from Scripture, but falls far short of it; and he goes on
thus:

1st, It is Warrantable from Scripture, etc. that the Inhabitants of each Town
shall take due Care, in order to their being supplied with a Gospel Minister.

Answer. This is as foreign from his Question, as Rome is from Boston. What is
that to the Purpose? Let the Impartial judge; if he cannot prove a forced
Maintenance from Scripture, he does nothing to his Purpose, nor according to
his grand Question in his Title Page, etc.

Then he goes on to his second Assertion, and says,

2dly, It is Warrantable from Scripture, that Gospel Ministers be honorably
supported and maintained: Such Maintenance is a Debt due from the People to the
Ministers in strict Justice, and not as a mere Act of Charity: For it is the
Hire of their Labor, and the Wages of their Work.

Answer, Hereby he owns himself, and all that are in his Practice, to be
Hirelings, though he will not allow others to call him or them so; and quotes
these Texts of Scripture to prove it, Luke 10.7. 2 Cor. 11.8. 1. Cor. 9.7, 14.
Gal. 6.6. 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. and adds as falsely, and says,

The Argument which the Apostle uses for the Gentiles Ministering to the Jews,
reaches this Case, Romans 15.27.

Answer, Surely the Man forgets himself, for tho Apostle only spoke of a free
Collection for the poor Saints at Jerusalem, as in the two foregoing verses
plainly appears, Verse 25. But now I go to Jerusalem to minister unto the
Saints, Verse 26. For it has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a
certain Contribution for the poor Saints at Jerusalem. When will our greedy
Priests take so much Care of the Poor?

As to the Texts of Scripture above quoted, I shall take the Pains to set them
down at large, that the Reader may see how they answer his grand Question: For
what Purpose he concealed them (in his) in Figures, is best known to himself.
Truly if he had set them down at large, it must needs have been plainly
manifested, to every Body that should read them, that he was in the wrong: For
they assert no such Thing, as he would have them to prove, viz. a forced
Maintenance for Gospel Ministers. The first is Luke 10.7. And in the same House
remain eating and drinking such Things as they give (What could be more against
him?) for the Labourer is worthy of his Hire: Go not from House to House, and
into what City ye enter, and they receive you, eat such Things as are set
before you. Where is legal Force here?)

Let this Man have a care left he be one of those that are blinded: For he must
needs be blind, if he cannot see that this holy Text makes not for his Purpose,
but directly against him; here is not a Word of legal Force. It is so far from
it, that they were only to eat what was set before them, if they received them
who were true Ministers sent of Christ, which yet will be hard Work for
persecuting Priests to prove themselves so; be they of what Religion they may.
Well, what shall we do for this legal Force? Why truly we cannot find it in the
Gospel, or the New Testament. Christ came to fulfill the Law. and change the
Priesthood, and put an End to carnal Ordinances. But it may be Joseph Metcalfe
is an Old Testament Man (as a certain N. E. Convert said, on an Occasion well
known to some of them) if he be, and will follow the Letter of the Law, he must
go to knocking down Oxen, and killing of Sheep, which Work I believe they of
his Cloth are generally too high for.

The next is 2 Cor. 11.8. I robbed other Churches, taking Wages of them to do
you Service.

Surely can any Body be so bold as from this Text to say that the Apostle made
a common Practice of Preaching for Wages, as our modern Priests do now a days?
I hope no Christian will imagine from those Words of the Apostle, that he was a
Thief, or sacrilegious Person, but only a Freedom of Speech, which he used to
those whom he loved, as in Verse 11. is plainly expressed. It is a familiar Way
of Expression among ourselves, where we know we may be free, when any Thing is
given to us from our Friend, Oh I shall rob thee too much: To put any other
Construction upon the Apostle's Words, would be to make the Apostle a
sacrilegious Person, and a Robber, which is absurd. But pray let him speak
fairly a little for himself, and he will wipe off these Money loving Priests
very handsomely. Verse 7. I have, says he, preached to you the Gospel of God
freely. Oh! that cutting word freely, what shall we do with it? Though it was so
near our legal Minister, yet he thought fit not to meddle with it, and in the
9th Verse (just under, as the 7th just above, by which the poor Man is hedged
in, how he will get out I know not) the Apostle says, And when I was present
with you, and wanted, I was chargeable to no Man. And tells them in the same
Verse, that he kept himself from being burdensome to them, and that he
resolved to keep himself so. We dare all those that preach for Hire, and have
Money for Divining, to come to such a Resolution. However, if they will not
come to this good Resolution, let them forbear abusing and persecuting those
that (by the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ) are.

The next is 1 Cor. 9.7, 14. Who goes a Warfare at his own Charges? Who
planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the Fruit thereof? Who feeds a Flock,
and eats not of the Milk thereof? Even so has the Lord ordained, that those
which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel.

Joseph has left out what he thought made against it, from the 8th Verse to
the 13th, and 15th, where holy Paul says, (though he had Power to eat and drink
Verse 4. at free Cost, yet he does not say any where, that he had Power to take
it by Force, and we think it ought to be preached from an inward Necessity, and
not for an outward Maintenance) I have used none of these Things, neither have
I written those Things, that it should be so done unto me. I wish Joseph
Metcalfe, and others in his Station, could say so honestly.

Now I may proceed to say something to each Particular above, as it lies in
the holy Text.

And, 1st, Who goes a Warfare at his own Charge? There are some, though very
few, I could heartily wish that there were more that would follow his Practice
that wrote it, who himself was one that did sometimes do it, as there, when he
wrought at his lawful Calling, and helped those that were with him: And blessed
be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, there are some who do go on in
this holy Warfare of preaching the Gospel in this Age of the World at their own
Charge, who have nothing to boast of neither; for a Necessity is laid upon
them, and Woe is unto them if they preach not the Gospel. Though if any be
poor, and want Help, we have nothing against it, but are for helping of those
who can give a good Account of their Calling, and we are so free to do it, that
we need no Forcing to it, nor no Law for it.

2dly, Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the Fruit thereof?

Well, he that has planted a Vineyard, let him eat the Fruit of it, and
welcome; but let him leave other Folks Vineyards alone, left he be counted a
Robber in the worst Sense; for if the holy Apostle robbed, it was by Consent;
but these Preachers nowadays rob without Consent, even Vineyards which they
never planted, but would destroy if they could: Oh! high, base, and
Antichristian Practice, with a Witness.

3dly, Who feeds a Flock, and eats not of the Milk thereof? But who feeds
a Flock, and milks the Flocks of others?

Answer, Antichrist and Persecutors, that cannot be content with the Milk that
their own Flocks give, but will needs be milking and fleecing too those poor
Sheep which cannot in Conscience join with them, believing that their Way is
not the Door into the true Sheepfold, but that they are climbing up some other
Way, like Thieves and Robbers. And because the poor Sheep of the true Shepherd
Jesus Christ, bleat forth those Things, those inwardly ravening Wolves, who
have got only the Sheeps Clothing outwardly, being known to be such by their
Fruits of Persecution, will needs put the poor Sheep in their Pounds, when and
where they have Power, or else take it by Force, that is to say, legal forsooth.

4thly, Even so has the Lord ordained, that they that preach the Gospel, shall
live of the Gospel.

Yes, he has ordained that they should live, but not that they should force a
Living. A blessed Ordination, and with holy Reverence be it repeated; for and
because every true Minister of Jesus knows the sweet Benefit of it in a
twofold Sense. 1 st, He has a holy Living for his Soul; he is richly fed at
his great Master's Table, with the finest of the Wheat, and as with the holy
Honey, or Sweetness of the Word of Eternal Life, which is Strength to him in
Weakness, Riches to him in Poverty, and Joy and Peace to him in Persecution,
which the World, and all the Persecutors therein, can never take away from him;
blessed be God in Christ for ever.

2 dly, As to his bodily Living, if he be a true Man, and not a Lover of filthy
Lucre, or Gain, he will have Cause to say, as his great Master's Servants did
of old, that he lacked nothing, especially if his Call is from God and Christ,
and not from Man or Money. Oh! this Money, that is a loud Call indeed to our
Men-made Ministers: If at any Time there chance to be two Calls, I always
observed that the highest Bidder carried the Priest. But where shall we find
that the Lord has ordained that a Minister shall have fifty or an hundred
Pounds per Annum (in all the holy Records) for Preaching the Gospel? No, our
great High Priest said to his, Freely ye have received, freely give. But if it
had been his Mind, he could as well, and with as great and as good Authority as
any of these Men, have said, If they will not give it you freely, take it by
Force. But those Forcers know not of what Spirit they are of; if they do, they
must needs be the greater Hypocrites, and so their Condemnation the greater.

Gal. vi. 6. Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate unto him that
teaches, in all good Things.

Yes, let those which these Men teach, communicate to them; for communicate and
legal Force are Words of different Signification. I hope by this Time this
Preacher's Eyes will be opened to see his Error, in Pleading for legal, forced
Maintenance, especially from Christ's and the Apostles Practice and Doctrine,
as recorded in the Holy Scriptures.

The next Text which he quotes is 1 Timothy v. 17, 18. Let the Elders which rule
well, be counted worthy of double Honor, especially they which labor in the
Word and Doctrine; for the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that
treads out the Corn, and the Labourer is worthy of his Reward.

Very well, what is this to his legal Force? Here is nothing of it; those that
rule well, will not force any Body, nor set the Magistrates upon their Backs,
because they cannot conform to their Ways; those must be antichristian Teachers
for certain, being opposite to Christ: For he indeed was persecuted, but never
persecuted any, nor forced any, though it was in his Power; for which Reason we
cannot give those Men that double Honor which they desire; and for those who
say they labor in the Word and Doctrine of our meek Lord, to set the
Magistrates upon us, is wicked Ruling, instead of ruling well.

And as for the poor Ox that treads out the Corn, I am far from having him
muzzled: But when he bites, and with his Horns pushes the Sheep, and tramples
the growing green Corn to Dirt, I think then he ought to be muzzled and hoppled
too.

In his second Page he says, 3dly, It is the Duty of every Inhabitant in a Town
to pay proportionable toward Ministers Maintenance.

Ans. No, if they are not all of one Persuasion (and if they were all of one
Persuasion, he has no such Precedent from Christ nor the Apostles to force,
neither legal nor illegal) and are not free in the Choice of such Minister: He
runs too fast there, without he is popishly inclined, to persecute every Body
into his Persuasion, which has been too much the Practice of some of the N. E.
Magistrates and Ministers. I may not here forget, though I forgive, the
Salutation of a certain Person, when I first entered the Streets of their
Metropolis of N. E. Oh (says he) what a Pity it was that they did not hang all
the Quakers when they hanged the other four. Remarkable was the Answer that one
of his Neighbors made him, I wonder you are not ashamed to say so; for you
know that the Judgments of God have been on our Country ever since. I mention
this as a Caution to the N. E. Ministers, that they would teach their People
more Manners to their Neighbors, and to Strangers; and to let them know, that
sometimes the abovenamed People cannot be quiet in their solemn Meetings, for
the Worship of Almighty God, in their chief Town of Boston; which, as I
understand, is very much owing to Lies and Reproaches which the People have
from their Priests and Pulpits. All which is a Shame to moderate Christians;
some of which, of all Persuasions, I hope there are in the Country and
Territories of New England.

For first, says he, None were exempted of old from paying of Tithes for the
Maintenance of the Ministry.

By his Leave, he is mistaken, for those that did not join with them in
Circumcision were exempted.

2dly, Every Hearer ought to pay proportionable toward the Maintenance of the
Preacher, Gal. vi. 6. And every Inhabitant ought to be a Hearer [what against
their Conscience?] for it is Sin to forsake the Assembling themselves together,
Heb. x. 25. And one Sin can never excuse another.

Ans. If I should ask him, he being a Presbyterian, whether it be a Sin to
forsake the Assemblies of the Papists, or Church of England, Baptists, or
Quakers, and come to theirs, I presume he would say no: Then to what a Nonplus
he has brought himself and Brethren, especially in Old England, for forsaking
the Church, and setting up Meetings of their own: Truly he has made them all
Sinners in so doing; I do not know how his Brethren in N. E. will resent it;
but I dare say his Brethren in O. E. will give him no Thanks for this unlucky
Turn; how he will excuse himself in this Sin of Ignorance I know not. Would not
this have been a topping Writer for the Papists when they burned the
Protestants for not coming to Church?

3dly, In Page 2d he says, The Apostle directs in Acts of Charity, that every
one contribute in Proportion as God had prospered him, 1 Cor. xvi. 2. And that
there should be Equality, every one bearing their equal Proportion of such a
Burden, 2 Cor. viii. 13, 14. He goes on, Much more ought there to be a
Proportion or Equality observed in the Maintenance of the Ministry, which is a
Matter of communicative Justice; so it was under the Law, and so it should be
under the Gospel.

Ans. Notwithstanding these Priests will bring those Texts of Holy Scripture,
that tend to promote Charity to the Poor, and many Instances out of ancient
Authors for stirring up Charity to the Poor; yet they will not, when it comes
to their Case, allow it to be as Charity, but a Debt; as says our Author in
his first Page: And J. Mather, in a little Book set forth to promote the
Maintenance of their Ministers, in which I observe he tells them, If they will
stand to the old Law of the Jews, they must have but a Tenth of the Tenth;
which I suppose will not satisfy those Men that have Hire for Preaching, and
Money for Divining: And therefore I think it their best Way, to let the Jews
old Law alone, and take to the new Law and Covenant of our Great Lord Jesus.

And further, if they will bring Instances of Charity to the Poor, out of
Scripture, and other Authors, let them be just, and always when they would make
the Application of it to the Ministry, to put honestly the Word Poor before
Ministry; viz. poor Priest, poor Minister; otherwise let them let fall their
Argument for Charity for the Poor (which no good Christian will go about to
dispute against) and see what their Arguments for Justice in the Case will do
for them. They say it is a just Debt, a Matter of communicative Justice; but
when People do not see Cause to commune with them, but quite the contrary, and
buy none of their Ware or Merchandise, pray what Justice is there in this? Why
truly none, but a great Deal of Injustice.

4thly, He says, If any Man fail of doing his just Proportion, he thereby
exposes either the Minister to lose so much of his just Due (but he falls short
of proving it a just Due) or the other Inhabitants to pay more than their just
Proportion, and so he is guilty of manifest Wrong and Injustice.

No, where the People are not consenting (and if they were consenting, the
New Testament is silent to any such Way of maintaining Gospel Ministers) to
this Proportion, but see an Evil in it; and there is no Force under the
glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, as I have abundantly and clearly (to
those who are not blinded) proved above, even from the very Texts of Scripture
which he brings and wrests to prove the contrary, of which let the Impartial
judge. Thus he and they building their Structure of Maintenance upon a bad
Foundation, viz. Legal Force, it will fall to the Ground, if the Magistrates do
not help; for whose Help he calls very loud, and well he may, considering he
and others of his Mind are ready to faint and fall without it. But by what has
been said, I would charitably hope, all moderate Christian Magistrates will
take Care that the Preachers eat only the Grapes of their own Vine, and the
Milk of their own Flock, and keep so far just as to let other Folks Grapes and
Milk alone. But if the Priests and Magistrates will join together in
Persecution, then will we poor Sufferers appeal from them to our great High
Priest, and just Judge of Heaven and Earth, and through his Grace patiently
suffer what he shall please to permit to come upon us.

5thly, In his 3d Page he says, The public Ministry of the Gospel in any Town
is a public Privilege, and every Inhabitant is considered therein, and
partakes in the Privilege: For the Preaching of the Gospel is the great Engine
of Salvation, and Means of Faith, Romans i. 16. x. 17.

If he means that there is no other Preaching the Gospel but from his Sect, we
openly declare to the World, that we differ from him in our Judgment, and we
believe upon good Grounds too. And what Gospel, or Glad Tidings (which the Word
imports) can that be to People to preach to them, That a certain Number of them
are eternally ordained for Damnation; and for ought these knowing Men know,
they may themselves be some of them; for they cannot tell who these damned Ones
are. I think it would be abundantly better if those prying Ministers would let
the secret Will of Him that made them alone; for that belongs to God, and not
to Man. The revealed Truths belong to us, and our Children. And to tell People
they can never be free from the Act of Sin while in this World, is really
miserable News, and dreadful Tidings indeed; since Sin is the Cause of God's
Wrath and Damnation, and since we cannot in Conscience join with such
Anti-Gospel Ministers, they ought not in Conscience to take our Money or Goods
from us.

Again he says, Every one is invited to take of the Water of Life freely, Rev.
xxvi. 17.

But, by their Leave, theirs is the Water of Death, if we must always sin even
in our best Duties, then he knows, that the Wages of Sin is Death; and may not
any good Christians be truly thankful when they are delivered from such a
sinful Ministry? And what a Knock he gives himself in saying, We take of it
freely, and his Pages are writ on purpose to make People believe they ought to
pay for it, and that they may force it from them too. So we may plainly see,
that their Waters, which proceed from them in such bitter Streams, are the
Waters of Death; because we cannot have them freely, according to the Doctrine
of the Holy Ghost in the Holy Scripture, which he himself has brought.

Again, whereas he says, Where there is no Vision, or Preaching the Gospel, the
People perish, Prove. xxix. 18.

This is contrary to what they say, when they teach that Vision and Revelation
is ceased.

He goes on, Being without God, without Christ, without the Covenant, they are
in a hopeless, perishing Condition.

If he would infer from these Words, that where there is no public vocal
Teaching the People perish, the Almighty has been kinder than this Minister;
for he has graciously promised, that he would teach his People himself: The
Children of the Lord are taught of the Lord, etc. And thine Eyes shall behold
thy Teachers, who cannot be removed into a Corner, Isa. xxx. 20. which cannot
be meant of outward Preachers, for they are often removed into Corners, but
God, Christ, and the Holy Spirit, cannot. And Christ promised to send the
Spirit of Truth, which should lead and guide into all Truth (not into Sin.) Now
to say that such who have not outward vocal Preaching perish, is absurd; and he
must want Charity, and then all his Harangues in his Pulpit are but like
sounding Brass.

But now, says he, Where the Kingdom of God is preached, every Man is at
Liberty, and has an Opportunity to be pressing into it ( and I add, without
paying for it) Luke xvi. 16. But where the Kingdom of Satan is preached ( which
is Sin Term of Life) the People have Liberty to fly from it. Further he says,
If any refuse the Counsel of God against themselves, it is their own Fault.

Ans. If any do so, it is their own Fault indeed; but to refuse the evil
Counsel of a sinful Minister, is a Virtue, and no Fault at all.

Again, They have a Price put in their own Hand, although being Fools, they
have no Heart to improve it.

We are willing to be counted Fools by such Wiselings; but let him know, that
Wisdom himself said, He that will be wise, must first become a Fool.

He proceeds, and says, It was a Privilege to them that were invited to the
Marriage of the King's Son, though they made light of the Invitation, and would
not come, Mat. 22.

Ans. Those that rightly come to the Marriage of the King's Son, the Lamb of
God that takes away the Sins of the World, must put off the Garment spotted
with the Flesh, left it be said to them, Friend, how came thou in hither, not
having on the Wedding Garment? Let every true Christian fear, left he bring on
himself that awful Sentence, Depart from me all ye that work Iniquity, I know
you not; notwithstanding they had eat and drank in his Presence, and in his
Name they had cast out Devils, and done many wondrous Works, and he had taught
in their Streets; yet nevertheless, because they were found in the Acts of Sin,
they must depart from him.

Now, says he, Every Inhabitant partaking in the public Privilege of a Gospel
Ministry, Reason and Justice requires, that every one should bear a Part of the
external Charge, in order to the Maintenance of it.

Ans. But every Person not partaking of what he calls so, and believing that,
as these erroneous Priests preach it, to be a Bondage, and not a Privilege; to
force such to pay too, is altogether unreasonable, and great Injustice; let all
sensible Christians judge.

4thly, He says, It is warrantable from Scripture, that such Inhabitants as
refuse to pay any Thing toward the Support of the Ministry, should have their
just Proportion taken from them by legal Distress.

Ans. We want him, or any of his Brethren, to show us that Warrant from Holy
Scripture; for he has not done it yet: And where shall we find that it is
warrantable from Scripture, and the Doctrine and Practice of Christ and his
Apostles? For what he has produced from Holy Scripture, has fairly proved to
the contrary; and as for his Legality, that great Word, it is only what others
of his Spirit have pleaded in former Ages. Did not Nebuchadnezzar persecute the
Servants of God by a Law? Could not they say they suffered legally? Did not the
Jews say concerning our Lord, We have a Law, and by that Law he ought to die?
Did not the People of M^^sachusetts make a Law, and by it hang the poor
innocent Quakers? Did not all those say, that those suffered legally? And do
not some of the N. E. Ministers justify it in their Pulpits to this Day, though
others there are (I believe) really sorry for it?

Oh, but (say our modem Teacher, who have Money for it) we hope you will not
compare us Christians to Jews and Heathens.

Why not, if found in their Practices? For when once People go to persecute
others for their conscientious Dissent, it is most certain they go from the
Spirit of Christ, as may fairly be proved from Christ's own Expressions; and
doubtless all Persecutors are Antichrists, notwithstanding their fine Gilding
of it over with the Words, Legal Distress, and Prosecution.

In his fourth Page he begins thus, For it is a just and legal Debt, as has
already been proved (to those that agree to it, and contract it, he should have
added.)

Ans. But unjust and illegal to those that cannot for Conscience Sake consent
to it, and therefore it is a Mistake in him to say, 'It has already been
proved;' for he has not, nor can he prove it (to force any by a coercive
Power) to be consonant to the Holy Scriptures.

In Page the 4th he says, God has given his Ministers a just Right to some
Proportion of every Man's Estate, in the Place where they minister.

What, Jews, Heathens, and all? What, every Man whatsoever? Where proves he
that? For my Part, if I were a Minister for Money, I should think that what I
got from other People against their Wills, would never prosper, but would be a
Curse to, and upon me, and tend to the Consumption of the rest of my Estate,
rather than augmenting of it: And I have heard some moderate Ministers, who
have Money for their Preaching, say the same.

He goes on further, and says, And that Part of each Man's Estate, which God
gives Ministers a Right to by his just and equal Law.

Ans. By his just and equal Gospel he forces none; but leaves every one to be
fully persuaded in their own Minds.'

And he must needs say, That the Gospel Power exceeds the Power of any Law
whatsoever.

And the Gospel is free, not forced, as he in vain would endeavor to prove
from Holy Scripture. That must be an unjust Law that forces People to buy
whether they will or no, and therefore none of God's Law or Way; for all his
Laws and Ways are equal.

And he also says in Page the 4th, They have as much Power to challenge it as
any other Debt or Wages.

Not without People agree with them, and hire them. (And though they do agree
with them, I do not grant that they have any Color from the New Testament to
make any such Law, even among themselves; it being inconsistent with the Nature
of the glorious Gospel of Christ.) Upon which a Passage comes into my Mind
between an Indian and a N. E. Minister well known to some of their Teachers in
New England, who (for Preaching) took from a Dissenter from the Presbyterian
Way one of his Cows; the Indian asked him why he did so? The Priest answered,
If I hired you to make a Fence for me, would you not expect your Wages? Yes
(says the Indian) but be no hire you; and when me do Man's Work, then Man pay
me; but when you do God's Work, then God pay you.

The poor Indian was in the right, for truly God's Pay is bettter than all the
Silver and Gold in the World.

O but, say they, how must we Live?

If they had Faith in God and Christ, they need not fear a Living in this World.

But, say they, The People are so hard-hearted, that if there were not a Law
for it, the Ministers might starve.

Then their Doctrine must starve the Peoples Souls, or else surely they would
not let their Bodies starve: That must needs be a lifeless, dull, dead
Ministry, that will not open Peoples Hearts, so as to keep the Preachers from
starving; but I think there is no Fear of their starving, for they generally
live like Lords among the People. But let them remember withal, that they are
not to lord it over the Heritage of God.

It is, says he, agreeable to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, that
such as refuse to pay their just Debts, should be distrained for the same, by
virtue of the civil Sword amongst Christians, Romans xiii. 14.

Ans. He should first prove the Debt to be just, and then this Text would have
been to his Purpose: For those that contract Debts, ought to pay them.

In Page the 5th, he talks of the Law and Light of Nature, and Reason, and
says, It is the Law of God written in the Heart, Romans ii. 15. He adds, All the
Laws of God do sweetly harmonize both one with another, and the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles; there is no Manner of Jarr between any of these.

Ans. But there is a wonderful Jarr between the corrupt Nature or Law of Man,
and the divine Nature or Law of God; he should have distinguished between the
corrupt Nature, Reason and Law, and the Divine; for except he rightly divides
between the Precious and the Vile, he cannot be as the Mouth of God to the
People. Now the corrupt and covetous Nature in those that seek their Gain from
their Quarter, and preach for Hire, and divine for Money, says, 'That those
that cannot pay them' (though for Conscience sake) they must be forced, to it,
whether they will or no.

But the divine Nature of Christ and his Apostles says, Freely you have
received, freely give. Matt. x. 8. If their Gospel is not free, they have not
received it from Christ. Also, if they have not received it freely, they may
call it their own Gospel, but it is not Christ's. And though Christ's Ministers
had Power to eat and drink, and to forbear, working, yet, says the divine
Nature in the Apostle, I have used none of those Things; neither do I write,
that it should be so done unto me, 1 Cor. ix. 15. And that it is not
Covetousness, that diverse Quakers so called, cannot pay the covetous Priests,
is manifest; for they take much more, and sometimes double and treble, as I
could easily bring many Instances and living Witnesses to prove what I assert,
from Virginia, Maryland, and abundantly in New England (without going over to
Great Britain) in which many Thousands of Pounds have those legal Ministers
taken by Force, within these fifty Years, from such as for Conscience Sake,
could not put it into their own Mouths; and then War has been proclaimed
against those poor Sheep. Well, let the Righteous judge, not the Self-Righteous
(I do not mean them) but those which are clothed upon with the Righteousness
of the Lord Jesus Christ, as He wrought it outwardly for them, and also as He
works it by his Holy Spirit, in their Hearts.

Next to his 3dly, Touching Government and Magistrates, which the People called
Quakers ever owned and honored in their Way, though they could not cringe,
scrape and bow, after the common Mode of the sinful Times, nor give Titles to
them in Flattery: But we reckon that those Magistrates that are a Terror to
Hypocrites and Evildoers, ought to have a hearty inward Respect and Honor
shown to them generously in Action and courteous Expression, and not in a
Parcel of idle Compliments. Such Magistrates as the above, were never a Terror
unto us, but we have blessed God on their Behalf in our Solemn Assemblies
publicly, and also often in the Secret of our, Souls privately; and many times
prayed for our Persecutors also. I wish this Priest be not too much inclining
to such. May his Eyes be opened!

He goes on, and endeavors to animate and stir up the Magistrates to
Persecution, by insinuating, that those who for Conscience Sake cannot give any
Thing to the Priest, are evil, unjust and wicked Persons; who, notwithstanding,
take them in a general Way, and their Conversations are as just as the
brightest of their Church Members, as diverse of themselves are forced to
acknowledge.

If for this Testimony to our Innocence, any should imagine we boast, it is he,
and such as he, that are the Occasion of this confident Boasting, and we have
our great Apostle, even Paul, for our Example.

Now I hope the Magistrates will take Care not to persecute the Just, but to
turn the Edge of their Swords against the Evildoers; and then doubtless they
will not bear their Swords in vain, and let the Edge of it be as sharp and keen
as it will, we fear it not: For against true Men there is no Law (which is upon
a just Basis or Foundation) that will harm them.

I tenderly and lovingly, as a Minister of Jesus Christ, and true Lover of good
Government, exhort and warn all Magistrates to be careful to keep within their
own Province: For Conscience is none of theirs; it is the peculiar Province of
Jesus Christ; the great Territory of the King of Kings, and Judge of the Quick
and Dead; and he will render unto every Man a Recompense.

Now if Conscience were only a Cloak for Covetousness, it ought to be stripped
off, but it is plain that cannot be our Case: For we lose much more by our
Denial (and sometimes a great deal more, than as much more) by our not paying
freely, as is above said. But we may (I hope) presume that the Magistrates know
their Duty, without being taught it from the Pulpit: I would have no
free-spirited Magistrate to let Priests ride them: For if they do, it is to be
doubted they will ride them to Death: For persecuting Men of their Cloth, seem
to have but little Mercy. I once heard a Priest say to a Couple of Justices (a
Church of England Preacher for Money, but as himself said to some of his
Neighbors, a Presbyterian in his Heart) Do your Office, which was upon my poor
Self, who had been preaching against Sin and Evil, according to the best of my
Understanding (why what is the matter?) He has been preaching, says the Priest,
in a Place not Licensed, and has broke the Law. Well, says another Justice
beside the aforesaid two, Then you have broke the Law first, for you preached
there before him; and though it was our Meeting by Appointment, yet we quietly
heard him read his Sermon, and I dare say, he never had quieter Hearers in all
his Days than we were.

And indeed Reading is the general Practice of some modern Teachers, far from
the Practice of Christ, the Apostles, and primitive Christians, when
Christianity shone in its primitive Beauty and Glory, and when Christians
depended more upon the Gift of the Holy Ghost (or Spirit) and less upon natural
Parts and human Inventions, which is worthy of the solid Consideration of all
true Christians.

I have also observed that those Magistrates which have joined with persecuting
Priests in persecuting Men of sober Lives and Conversations for their religious
Dissent and Persuasion, that they have not prospered; and many sober People,
not of our Society, have taken notice of the same. This is offered to the
serious Consideration of Men of high Degree (in Reverence and great Humility.)

And though J. M. flatters the Magistrates, telling them, they bear the visible
Image and Character of Gods, in order to flatter them into a persecuting
Spirit, yet I hope, and believe, that he will not find many Magistrates nor
Ministers of his Mind: For if all the Magistrates and Ministers in N. E. were
as much for Persecution as he seems to be by his writing, what might all those
expect, who differ from the Presbyterian Way in N. E. if they had Power? But
blessed be God, I certainly know that there are diverse moderate People, who are
against Persecution, even amongst the Presbyterians in New England.

In his Page 7th, he says, In Case of People's Defect in this Matter (of paying
for Preaching) legal Compulsion is the only Remedy (What no other Remedy?) and
must be used, otherwise Religion, which is a People's Life, will soon fall to
the Ground.

Ans. Where will his Doctrine land? What, cannot Christ uphold his Church
without the Magistrates? The Religion of Christ, the Apostles, and primitive
Christians, stood, and stands yet, without being supported by the civil
Magistrates. What, has he got some new Religion, which cannot stand without the
outward Power? But it seems some of the N. E. Ministers reckon that they must
fall, if the Magistrates do not uphold them. They (i. e. the Magistrates) are,
says J. M. the Keepers of both Tables.

Ans. But I thought that God had been the Keeper of his People, and Christ the
Shepherd of his Sheep, and the Holy Ghost the Comforter of them; I thought this
Infinite Being had been the great Preserver of Men in Religion.

In his 8th Page, he brings diverse Texts of Scripture to prove the Power of the
Magistrates, which we never denied, especially when he exercises his Power and
Authority to the Terror of Evildoers, and the Praise of them that do well. And
at the latter End of the said Page he says, From the whole I conclude, with
Submission to better Judgments, that it is Warrantable from Scripture, and
agreeable to the Doctrine and Practice of Christ and his Apostles, for the Laws
aforesaid to be put in Execution.

Ans. But alas! this is all beside his Assertion; his Business was to prove a
legal forced Maintenance for Gospel Ministers, or else he does nothing. What!
has he been traveling through all his Pages, and brought forth nothing but
this windy Doctrine at last? He speaks of Submission to better Judgments, and I
would have him, if he dare to do it, submit to the Judgment of Christ and his
Apostles, who I think have fairly decided the Question in favor of the poor
abused Quakers, that it is not according, but contrary to the Language of the
Holy Ghost, in the Holy Scripture, that Gospel Ministers Maintenance should be
forced by a coercive Power. From what has been said, let all ingenuous
Christian Readers judge.

In Page the 9th, Nevertheless, says he, if any Arguments can be produced from
Scripture, or right Reason, of greater strength and Weight to prove the
Negative, than this may be to maintain the Affirmative; I hope I (...) readily
subscribe thereto.

Ans. A body would from those Expressions almost hope for a Recantation from
him, especially if he seriously considers the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles, as here noted at large.

But, says he, till I receive further Light, Conscience commands me to conform
to that Measure I have.

Ans. He had best to have a Care of the commanding Power of an evil Conscience.

He goes on, And while I do conscientiously conform to that Measure of Light
within me, walking in Obedience to all its Commands and Directions.

Ans. But suppose that Light in him should be Darkness, then, as Christ said,
How great is that Darkness? As for certain, it is, when he goes about to prove
that for Truth which is contrary to Christ's Doctrine.

As to his saying, Then the Quakers must let fall the grand Article of their
Religion.

Ans. Let him a seriously read over the first Chapter of John, as also many
other Places of the Holy Scripture on that Subject of the Light, and if he is
not one of those which are blinded, perhaps he may be undeceived, and his gross
Mistake rectified. I hope he is careful of Preaching such Doctrine in his
Pulpit.

A certain Church Member of the Presbyterian Way in N. E. told me, that their
Minister told them in his Pulpit, That we denied the Bible or Holy Scriptures.
And made the poor Woman really believe it to be true, than which, nothing could
be more false; but the honest Woman thought she would try me. Was you, says
she, brought up among Quakers? Was your Father and Mother Quakers? Yes, said I,
they were so called. And, says she, would they suffer you to read in the Bible
when you were a little Boy? Yes, and correct me too, because I was not so
willing to do it as they would have me to be.

Thus have the poor Quakers been abused in diverse Pulpits in N. E. and other
Places, for which Reason, I would give this Christian Advice, to all professed
Christian Ministers in N. E. and elsewhere, wherever this may meet with them,
who have so abused us. That for the Time to come, they do not tell the People
in their Pulpits, that the Quakers deny Christ, the Scriptures, the Power of
the Magistrates, and many other Things, which would make a Volume of
themselves, if they were all penned. For them to cry out in their Pulpits, Have
a Care of the Delusions of the Quakers, and at the same time to delude the
People to believe Lies of them, is really horrid.

Oh but, say they, the Quakers are more Orthodox now than they were (when in
Truth it is the Calumnies that have been cast on us, are now made more manifest
to be Falsehoods.) And then ought not they to be glad at the News of our
Reformation?

T. C.
NOw I shall consider his Postscript, in writing of which he has dipped his Pen
deep in the Gall of Bitterness in some Parts of it, which I shall touch a
little upon, as I shall come to them.

But to begin, Notwithstanding, says he, all that I have said in the preceding
Discourse concerning Maintenance: Yet as to my own Particular, if a temporal
Maintenance had been my chief Aim, I should have discovered great Folly in
accepting a Call from so small and poor a People.

Ans. From his Words, one may conclude it was his Aim, though not his chief Aim;
and then as to the Shepherd's Call, ought it not to be from the great Shepherd
Jesus Christ? And if they will answer this Call, he says, Go forth. Where do we
find any Example for a Minister of the Gospel, to stay and preach to only one
particular Congregation? Pray let them produce if they can.

But now suppose a Place should present to J. M. where the People were richer,
and more of them; Would he not leave his poor Flock, to go to the rich? Pray
let him have a Care, as he says, that his own Heart do not deceive him: We but
too plainly perceive, by the Practice of those money Ministers, that the
loudest Call, is the most Money. I Query, upon this great Word Call, whether
the Sheep use to call the Shepherd, or the Shepherd the Sheep? Do not they
strangely invert the Order of Nature here in their pretended Call from the
People? Christ the true Shepherd said, My Sheep hear my Voice. So that He and
his Servants, or Ministers, call the Sheep, and not the Sheep them; and those
holy Shepherds called their Sheep freely, though these must have Money for
their Calling, and the Sheep call them too: Neither will that satisfy some of
those Shepherds, but they will needs have Money from some poor Sheep that never
called them; and if they cannot give it them freely, they will have it by
Force. A young Shepherd said to one at Salem in N. E. That though Paul had Power,
and did not use it, yet he would use his Power. But that blessed Apostle never
pretended to any forcible Power, except the Force and Power of Love.

He, the said J. M. complains of his small Income for Preaching, and of his
Poverty; though it is probable he has more than all the twelve Apostles, and
seventy Disciples, when they were sent forth by their great Lord and Master;
and to be sure he has more Money for Preaching, than they all had. But he has
confessed his Call is not Divine, therefore not from Christ; for he says, If he
had a divine Call, he could forego every Thing in the World. And so he is but a
legal literal Preacher, and Minister: A Minister that forces himself to offer,
and would also force those who receive not his Offering, to pay him, though
against their Conscience.

And as for his Family's Starving, I never heard nor read of any Christian
Minister's Family's Starving, especially in a Christian Country; nor I believe
he nor any Body else. Certainly there is need to cry out to those Men, O ye of
little Faith! Who clothes the Lilies, and feeds the Sparrows, shall be not take
Care of you? O ye of little Faith! I fear they forget the Doctrine of Him, whom
they sometimes call the Lord.

As to what he writes in his second Page of his Postscript, if he duly minds
what I have writ in answer to his, I think he cannot imagine that the flaming
Vengeance there poured out by him upon us, can any way touch us; but let him
and them which are concerned in this Work (for I understand he had the Help of
a cunning Man in this Work) have a Care, that it fall not on themselves: And
truly the poor Quakers may be truly thankful that the flaming Sword is not in
their Hands; for if it were, Experience, yea, woeful Experience, has taught us,
that we might expect but little Mercy from some of them. And pray why cannot
they be more patient, since they hold that God has ordained whatever comes to
pass? For they see it come to pass that we cannot join with them, cannot they
let the Ordinance of God alone? I remember an Expression of Cotton Mather, in
one of his scurrilous Pieces, that the best Way to deal with the Quakers, was
to let them alone. Then, according to C. M. this Man, and he that helped him,
has taken the worst Way to deal with us: And truly they lose Ground generally
when they meddle with us.

As for his foolish Pity and bitter Lamentation over us, we desire that they
would lament over themselves and their Children, as our Savior did over the
Jews when they persecuted; and truly those who justify their Forefathers in
Hanging the Quakers, and their other Ways, of so bitterly persecuting them as
they did, had not only need to lament, but to repent too. And even now, they
prove themselves to be the Persecuters (and not we) by Forcing their
Maintenance from us. The Presbyterians in O. E. alias Great Britain, they are
one with us in this Doctrine, that Forcing a Maintenance for Ministers from
them that do not hear them, is altogether wrong and unjust: And how comes it to
pass, that the same People are otherwise minded in New England? Let them
resolve this Question.

I shall consider those Texts of Scripture which he has thrown at us (and
gently return them unto him again.)

At the End of his Postscript he says, The Judgments of God are a great Deep.
(Yes too deep for his legal literal Buckets to fetch them up) Romans xi. 7. The
Election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded.

I hope he will give the Almighty Leave to elect whom He pleases. Were the
Election in the Power of this Priest, let the Reader judge whether we might
expect any of it.

He cites 2 Cor. iv. 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that are lost.

Ans. Now why did this Priest hide the fourth and next Verse, was it not for
fear the Light of the Quakers Doctrine should shine unto People? Which is thus
(the fourth Verse opening and explaining the third) In whom the God of this
World has blinded the Minds of them which believe not; lest the Light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them. Or
as in the 6th Verse, For God who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has
shined in our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God,
in the Face of Jesus Christ. He thought good to hide this Gospel, but I think
good to make it manifest; which puts me in mind of a Proverb, Who is so blind
as those that will not see?

He goes on, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 10, 11, 12. They received not the Love of the Truth,
that they might be saved; and for this Cause, God shall send them strong
Delusion, that they should believe a Lie; that they all might be damned, who
believed not the Truth, but had Pleasure in Unrighteousness. And Jude 8, 10,
11, 12, 13. These filthy Dreamers despise Dominion, and speak evil of
Dignities, but speak evil of these Things which they know not; woe unto them,
Clouds they are without Water, raging Waves foaming out their own Shame;
wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever.

To all which I answer, 1 st, We have received the Truth in the Love of it, the
Holy Spirit bearing Witness with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God:
Which holy Witness, is stronger for us, than the Witness of Ten thousand
Priests can be against us.

2 dly, So the Cause being taken away, the Effect of Delusion cease.

And 3 dly, Pray let them be careful of deluding themselves and the People, by
keeping them in Ignorance and Darkness: Telling them, they cannot be cleansed
from Sin, while here in this World. For all those that believe this, do believe
a Lie with a Witness, and are strangely and strongly deluded. This is a
miserable Gospel, contrary to the Doctrine of the holy Apostles, who are
positively opposite to that evil Tenet. If (says the Apostle) we walk in the
Light, as he is in the Light, then the Blood of Jesus Christ, his Son,
cleanses us from all Sin. And Christ came to destroy the Works of the Devil,
and to save his People from their Sin. And pray beware of taking Pleasure in
pleading for Unrighteousness.

4 thly, As to these filthy Dreamers, pray be careful what you dream in your
Pulpits to the People; for some of you will not allow of the immediate
Operation of the Holy Ghost; wherefore beware of filthy Dreams, and old Wives
Fables.

5 thly, We despise not those who are dignified in Truth, and rule well in the
Church (not with Rigor and Persecution) and we account them worthy of double
Honor; but Persecuters are not so much as worthy of single Honor, and we
should be but Hypocrites to give it them.

6 thly, And what celestial Rain, or holy divine Water, is there in those
cloudy dark Preachers, who preach Damnation to the greatest Part of the World?
Let them look to it, and repent in Time.

7thly, Raging Waves, foaming out their own Shame.

Ans. If Persecution is not the Fruits of Rage and Shame, I do not know what
is. Pray courteous Reader judge.

8thly, Wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever.

Now because many cast this Text in our Teeth, I shall write a little to it,
thus; This must be intended to those who wander from the Holy Spirit, Gift, and
Grace of God; in themselves, by and from which every true Minister of Christ
ought to exercise his Gift, and not to speak when, where, and what he pleases:
Oh happy World! if all professing to be Christian Ministers did not wander from
this Gift into the Inventions and Traditions of Men. And further, this cannot
be taken in an outward Sense, because Christ himself and his Apostles traveled
much, and said, Take us for Examples; follow us, as we have followed Christ.
And all that know any thing of Letters, know that the Word Apostle signifies a
Messenger, which necessarily implies a Traveller; and diverse of these blessed
Ones had no certain Dewlling Place. Our dear Lord himself had not whereon to
lay his Head, as himself says; and those who conscientiously travel to turn
People from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to the Power of God,
and are instrumental to turn many to Righteousness, notwithstanding all Men can
do to blacken them, yet the holy Text says, Dan. viii. 2, 3. They shall shine
as the Brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars, for ever and ever. Amen.

T. C.

Some OBSERVATIONS on CHRIST's SERMON on the MOUNT.
If ye love me, keep my Commandments,

JOHN xiv. 15. Ye are my Friends if ye do whatsoever I command you,

JOHN xv. 14.
The PREFACE to the READER.
CHRIST being the great Author of the Christian Religion, I have thought to
make some Observations on his Sermon which he preached on the Mount, Mat. v,
vi, vii.
might be acceptable to some of his Followers; especially such who desire to
fulfill his holy Will, and not to (...) satisfied in a Form and Show only of his
Religion.

And also considering that it is the greatest Collec^^ of his Words left us in
the New Testament by the Evan^^^^ts in any one Place, I was in Hopes that some
Observa^^^s thereon might tend to promote the reading of it in the Holy
Scriptures.

But the greatest End I had in this Undertaking was, That the Professors of the
Name of Holy JESUS might live and walk in his Truth, and in the Doctrine which
he has there laid down for his Followers to practice; and that in so doing,
they might have Peace to their Souls here, and Rest in the Kingdom of Glory for
ever.

It is by some accounted and locked upon in Youth to be a commendable and
worthy Practice to write down Sermons, and to copy and read them over: And, I
believe, it will be generally acknowledged, that there was never any Sermon
preached in the World, that can be compared with this of Christ, which he
preached in the Mount, and is recorded by the Evangelist Matthew, in his 5th,
6th, and 7th Chapters; which if our young and rising Generation would often
read, and sometimes write it down (if Time would admit) but be sure to take
Care to practice it; this would be truly noble in them; and which if they find
they want inward Strength to perform, then that they would seek it in Secret at
the Hand of the Almighty JEHOVAH, in whom is everlasting Strength; and it is
recorded in Holy Scripture, James 1.5. Psalm. 34.10. Prove. 8.17.
That he gives liberally, and upbraideth not. He will not upbraid thee because
thou art but a Child, or tender in Years: Oh, therefore, seek Him betimes! for
it is written, They who seek Him early, they shall find Him.

The Christian Religion being run into many Divisions and Sub-divisions, this
Holy Sermon, if Christians would walk according to it, might and would help to
heal their Differences, and to soften them in their Sentiments one of another.
And it is to be believed and hoped, that all Parties will confess, that the
Doctrine in this Sermon is good, and ought to be promoted amongst all who
profess the worthy Name of the Lord Jesus; and whoever walks contrary to this
Rule must needs be in the Wrong.

The general End of Preachers is, or should be, to have their Doctrine taken
Notice of, and put in Practice; and this being Counsel from the Wonderful, Isa.
9.6.
Counselor, the Mighty God (and Savior) the Everlasting Father, and Prince of
Peace, we should take more than ordinary Notice of it.

Considering also, that he not only spoke his Doctrine, but lived in it; and
not only lived in, but died in it, and for it, and us also. Wherefore we are
deeply engaged to hear Him with an obedient Heart and Ear. Mat. 3.17.
This (says the Voice from the most Excellent Glory) is my beloved Son, hear ye
him. And Moses, the Man of God, says, Deuteronomy. 18.19. Acts 3.23.
That he that will not hear him, shall be destroyed from amongst the People;
viz. from an Inheritance with the Saints, in the Kingdom of God, and his Christ.

I have carefully transcribed the Sermon verbatim, and made some Observations
on it afterward, I think on every Verse a little, as I found Openness to it on
my Mind; and it is recommended to the serious Perusal and Consideration of all
those who tenderly and unfeignedly love our Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity.

T. C.

Some OBSERVATIONS on CHRIST's SERMON on the MOUNT.
MATTHEW v. 1, 2.
1718.
AND seeing the Multitudes, he went up into a Mountain: And when he was set,
his Disciples came unto him, and be opened his Mouth, and taught them, saying,
etc.

Our Lord seeing the Multitudes, for the advancing his Father's Glory, his own
Kingdom, and the Good of Souls, went up into the Mountain, and sat in the Power
of the Father; and when so set down, his Disciples came unto him: Which shows
the Necessity of coming to Christ, to hear his Word, and that Christians ought
to assemble themselves before him, that he may speak to them either
immediately; or if he pleases to enlarge the Heart of any of his Ministers to
declare his Word; and as his Disciples then personally came unto him, so now we
ought to come to him in Spirit; Matt. 18.20
and then, when but two or three are so come to him, he is as really present
spiritually, as he was personally in the Mount. And as this Meeting in the
Mount was powerful and glorious, so will all those be, in Measure, where Jesus
is really present in Spirit. And he opened his Mouth, and taught them. Thus
when true Believers meet before Christ, he teaches them, and opens the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, and speaks truly to the State of the People,
even now spiritually, as he did then vocally; and his Word is with Power and
great Glory. Oh! may all his Servants and Ministers, who are sensible of his
divine Call, minister according to their several Gifts and Capacities, in his
Power, and by his holy and divine Authority: This must reform the World, and
change the Hearts of poor Mortals, and forward the Work of Reformation, which
(with godly Sorrow it may be truly said) goes but too slowly on in the World.
Christ being thus set in the Power of the Father, opened his Mouth, and let
fall a Shower of Blessings on those whose Hearts were prepared to receive them;
for his great Love and tender Compassion is generally manifested to poor Souls,
when they with Love and Zeal to him, and for the Honor of his great Name, meet
and assemble before him. He begins and says,

Verse 3. Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

It is a safe and blessed State to be truly and spiritually poor, and to be
rightly sensible of it before the Most High; for then we are nothing, nor have
any Thing, but from the Lord, and without Him Man sees himself undone, his Soul
must starve, he must go naked, if the Almighty do not feed him, and clothe him;
and when he or she sees themselves poor and wretched, miserable, blind and
naked, without Christ, notwithstanding all the fine Things they may enjoy in
this World, which is of a fading Nature* Oh! then how the Soul cries, how it
begs for Mercy and Grace; a dry Form of Words will not satisfy it then; but it
begs with Tears, Lord, help me, or I perish! Save me, or I am undone for ever!
Here the Soul humbly approaches the Throne of Grace by Prayer; and if an Answer
is not quickly received (for such a Soul is apt to think the Time long) it
waits patiently with that Servant of God, who said, Though He s^ay me, yet will
I trust in Him: Job 13.15.
For I know (...) no Help for me but from thee, Oh! my God, and my Savior!
says the truly poor Soul; the Food which must keep Life in me, is thy Word;
and the Raiment which I want, is thy Righteousness, as thou wrought it for me,
and works it in me also. The Lord looks with a compassionate Eye on such Souls,
and does not use to turn them away empty; but as they abide in the Patience,
waiting for his Appearance in Hope, he assures them of the Kingdom; and a great
Turn and Change is witnessed; for the Blessing of Christ makes them rich, which
adds no Sorrow with it; Prove. 10.22.
for the greatest Sorrow was, and is, for want of it; now their Treasure and
Heart is in Heaven, and heavenly Things are their chiefest Delight; now they
are clothed with Christ's Righteousness, he has put it upon them, and they
show it in the Sight of Men, a thorough Change being wrought both within and
without also; Romans 8.16.
The Holy Spirit bearing Witness with their Spirits, that they are the Children
of God; and Christ says, Theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Verse 4. Blessed are they that mourn: For they shall be comforted.

The Mourning here spoken of, is that of a godly Sort, which may sometimes
appear outwardly: 1 st, For the Soul may mourn for its own Sins and Iniquities:
2 dly, For want of a Savior; and, 3 dly, For the Iniquities of others. Romans
3.23.
For, first, all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God; and since we
have all sinned, we have all Need to mourn before the Lord, and bow ourselves
before the Most High; and when he sees that we are humbled before Him, he then
will comfort us. (...) will send the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth in his
Name, who will come unto us; and when he is come, we ^ay plainly know and
understand it is he, by what h^ ^^th, according to Christ's own Rule, which is
infallib^ and certain; says he, When he is come, John 16. v. 8, 9, 10, etc.
he will reprove (or convince) the World of S^ of Righteousness, and Judgment*
Of Sin, because they believe not on me; of Righteousness, because I go to my
Father, and ye see me no more; and of Judgment, because the Prince of this
World is judged. Thus, according to Christ, that which shows us our Sin, and
convinces us of it, is the Spirit of Truth, the Comforter; that, after we have
mourned for our Sins which he convinces us of, then he comforts us with inward
Comfort and Consolation. 2 dly, This Comforter also convinces us of our formal
Righteousness, when it is only formal, without the Power of Christ; and then
the Soul mourns after the Life and Power of Godliness, 1. Tim. 4.8. and 6.6.
which indeed is great Gain, with true Contentment; and has the Promise of the
Things of this Life, and that also which is to come. And so here we are
comforted by the Spirit in the Promise, in which we have Faith to believe in
Christ, and that he will verily do as he has promised. 3 dly, It also
convinces us of Judgment, when we judge with wrong Judgment; and when we mourn
for our Mistake, he makes us sensible of this righteous Judgment, which judges
the Prince of this World, who is judged by Christ; and then instead of
Mourning, we are ready to sing with the Saints of old, Salvation, and Glory,
and Honor, Rev. 19.1, 2.
and Power, unto the Lord our God, for true and righteous are his Judgments,
for he has judged the great Whore which did corrupt the Earth with her
Fornication, and has revenged the Blood of his Servants at her Hand.

Secondly, The Soul being truly in Love with Christ, and he being absent from
the Soul in some Sense; or if he seems to stay a great While from it, although
to try and prove the Soul; this makes us mourn greatly, like the Spouse in the
Canticles, who sets forth the Beauty, Cant. 5.6.
and excellent Parts, and Comeliness, of her Beloved, and all her Sorrow is, he
had withdrawn himself: And well may a Soul be sorrowful, when Christ
spiritually withdraws himself: Mat. 9.15.
The Children of the Bride-chamber mourn in the Bridegroom's Absence, but
rejoice in his Presence, says Christ; who is the very Perfection of Beauty and
Holiness. But the Soul abiding in his Love, and seeking of Him, and waiting for
Him, in his own due Time he will certainly come to that Soul; for he is the
Truth who said, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

3 dly, Again pious Souls cannot but mourn for the Sins and Abominations of the
Times, Heb. 6.6. Rev. 11.8.
which is a great Exercise to them, and affects them with Sorrow and Mourning;
but they are comforted with blessed Promises, which the Holy Ghost, at Times
and Seasons, immediately applies to their Souls, as recorded in the Holy
Scripture; and let it be remembered, that all our good Times and Seasons are in
the Hand of the Lord. It is recorded in the Holy Scripture, that God would have
his People spoken comfortably to; Isa. xl. 1. And that He would give them
Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of Joy for Mourning, and the Garment of Praise for
the Spirit of Heaviness; that they might be called Trees of Righteousness, the
planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified, Isa. lxi. 3.

Verse 5. Blessed are the Meek: For they shall inherit the Earth.

Ram. 11.20. James 4.6. Psalm. 25.9.
Be not high-minded, says one of his Servants; and another says, God
resists the Proud, but gives Grace to the Humble; again, The Meek will he
teach his Way, and the Meek will be guide in Judgment; as the Holy Scripture
witnesses. So that well said our Holy Savior, that the Meek should be
blessed; Grace is given to them, and God is their Teacher, and their Guide in
Judgment; a most blessed Gift, Teacher and Guide: A great Blessing indeed, to
receive Grace from Almighty God, to be taught his Ways by Him, and to have the
Holy One to be our Guide in Judgment. And he who has all Power in Heaven, and
in Earth, committed into his Hand, says as above, That the Meek shall inherit
the Earth: They have the rightest and truest Enjoyment of all the Things of
this Life; whereas the Proud and Scornful are a ^^urden to themselves and
others, and hardly any Thing pleases them, or any Thing good enough for them;
when, on the other Hand, the meek and contented Mind has (according to a good
general Maxim) a continual Feast.

Verse 6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after Righteousness: For
they shall be filled.

Let it be remembered, that as our mortal Bodies cannot enjoy Health long,
without a natural Appetite to Meat and Drink, so our Souls cannot live unto
Holiness, without a Spiritual Hunger, and an inward Thirst after the
Righteousness which Christ puts upon his Saints; not by Imputation only, but
actually also: Such Souls He will fill as holy Mary witnessed, and bare her
Testimony to the Truth thereof, viz. He has filled the Hungry with good
Things, Luke 1.53.
and the Rich he has sent empty away. When we are emptied of Sin and Self,
then there is Room for the Almighty to pour into us of his Spirit (if we would
fill any Thing, it must be empty) so must we be empty, if we hunger and thirst
after Righteousness; truly, then shall we pray to our heavenly Father for
divine Food, and it will be our Meat and Drink to do his Will; and we shall
delight to feed upon his Word, as Christ says, Man shall not live by Bread
alone, Matt. 4.4.
but by every Word which proceeds out of the Mouth of God. This is holy Food
for the Soul, which nourishes, and keeps it alive to God, and without which it
is dead, notwithstanding it may have the Form and Fashion of a living Body. And
as this Hunger and Thirst, or Desire, must be Spiritual, so must the Food be
also, It being the Spirit that quickens, John 6.63.
and gives Life to the Soul; wherefore let a Spiritual Hunger and Thirst be in
the Soul after God, and his Righteousness. A righteous Soul being ^^^tly
athirst after the Lord, cries out; As the (...) ^^^eth after the Water-brook,
Psalm. 42.1.
so does my Soul (...) living God. And this holy Thirst was (...) that his
Heart was many times sweetly opened to praise the Lord. It Is true, we have an
Adversary, that would be filling us with many Things, fleshly, worldly, and
Satanical; but we are to shut up our Hearts against him, and to keep out all
those Things, and to stand open to Christ, and empty before him; and if we find
this our Adversary too hard for us, we are to fly, and cry to the Lord for
Succor and Help, who is a God not only afar off, but also near at hand, and a
present Help in the needful Time, as many of his Servants and Children have
experienced and witnessed him. Wherefore, to be truly hungry and thirsty after
Christ and his Righteousness, intitles us to his gracious Promise, who says,
they shall be filled.

Verse 7. Blessed are the Merciful: For they shall obtain Mercy.

It is highly necessary for Mortals to show Mercy, in all their Words and
Actions one to another; and also to the Creatures, which God has made for the
Use of Man; it is usually said, that a merciful Man is merciful to his Beast,
which generally is true; and if Men are merciful to their Beasts, how much more
ought they to be merciful one to another. Where Mercy is to be extended, it
ought not to be done sparingly, Matt. 18.32, 33, 34.
since thereby (according to Christ's blessed Doctrine) we are to obtain Mercy.
That Servant that showed no Mercy to his Fellow, had no Mercy showed unto him
from his Lord. It is also recorded, In the Name of the Lord, Micah 6.8.
he has shown unto thee, O Man, what is Good, that thou should do justly,
love Mercy, and walk humbly with thy God; by which it appears, that we are not
just in the Sight of God, if we are cruel and unmerciful one to another: And we
ought not only to be merciful, but to love it; which, if we are truly humble,
we shall certainly do; Mercy will lessen, and not magnify, Weakness, Failings,
or small and trivial Things one in another: And sometimes, as the Case may
require, some larger Things; and yet there is Room for seasonable Reproof and
Correction: But Mercy must be mixed with Justice, else the Correction may end
in Tyranny. We ought to be gentle to all Men, which is a true Token of true
Gentility: So to be truly merciful, is to be blessed, and to obtain Mercy.

Verse 8. Blessed are the Pure in Heart: For they shall see God.

By which we may understand, that we are to take Care of our Hearts, and to
keep a strict Watch over them; and not admit unclean or unchaste Thoughts, or
sinful Desires, to have an Entrance therein. And if at unawares they should at
any time enter, we must not entertain not love them, but turn them out; for we,
in this, should be like our heavenly Father, Habak. 1.13.
of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity with any Allowance or Approbation:
Otherwise it will hinder us from seeing God, and from the sweet Enjoyment of
his most precious Presence, and beholding the only Begotten of the Father, and
the Fullness of his Grace and Truth, which we cannot see if our Hearts are
impure: An Instance of which, we have in the Scribes and Pharisees, Matt.
23.25, etc.
though they were outwardly Righteous and clean, yet within were very impure, so
that they could not see God, though He was in Christ reconciling the World to
himself: Notwithstanding their nice discerning Eyes, yet they could not see
him, for the Impurity of their Hearts; which was so great, that they murdered
the Just One, their Hearts being full of Deceit and Hypocrisy. Make Clean the
Inside, Matt. 23.26.
that the Outside may be clean also, says Christ: From whence it appears, that
a true Christian must be clean, both within and without also. The true
Beginning of the Work of Purity and Sanctity, must be first within; and being
Innoccent and Pure in Heart, we shall then see the Glory of the Father, the
lovely Beauty of the Son, and the Power of the Holy Ghost, or Spirit.

Verse 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children
of God.

This Peacemaking is excellent Work, and a blessed Calling; what Pity it is,
that there is not more such Workmen in the World, who would set themselves
heartily to it, which if they did, in a right Spirit, God would certainly
prosper the Work in their Hands, and plentifully reward them with his own
Peace, which passes the common Understanding of the natural Man. If our
ingenious Men, our Men and Women of Skill, and good natural Parts, would take a
little Pains, nay, when the Case requires it, a great Deal, the Almighty would
richly reward them. This Work is not too mean even for Princes, and Nobles; no,
not even the greatest Monarchs on Earth, without it be too mean for them to be
called the Children of God. And if the Children, of God are Peacemakers, what,
and whose Children are they, who break the Peace of Nations, Communities, and
Families? Wherefore, 1 Pet. 3.11.
we should seek Peace with all Men, and ensue it, or sue for it, by our
continual seeking of it, being a precious Jewel, when found; and though this
Office may seem a little unthankful in the Beginning, or at first, yet in the
End it brings forth the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness, as many so laboring
have witnessed. And Christ, to encourage the Work, says, They shall be called
the Children of God; which are Words of the King of Kings; and if the Princes
of this World would promote this Work among themselves, it would save them a
vast Expense of Treasure, and of Blood; and as these Peacemakers are to be
called the Children of God, they who are truly concerned herein, are not only
so called, but are so in Deed, and in Truth.

Verse 10. Blessed are they who are persecuted for Righteousness Sake: For
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Persecution may be considered in relation to Calumny (...) ^^proach, and in
Imprisonments, Confinements, or the like, or taking away Life or Goods on a
religious Account, for conscientious Scruples, etc. What sad Work has there
been on this Account in the World, not among Turks and Jews only, but amongst
Professors of Christ and Christianity, which is indeed a great Reproach to that
holy Name. Persecution for Righteousness-Sake, is not fit for Turks or Jews,
much less for the Professors of our meek Lord; his Dispensation and Gospel
being absolutely the Reverse to it, which is a shameful Sin to all Men, in all
Nations: But however, the Persecuted have this Comfort in the Midst of all
their Sufferings, they are blessed of Christ their Lord; who himself suffered
for them, and are promised by him the Kingdom of Heaven. By which Doctrine, it
may be safely concluded, that the Members of his true Church never persecuted
any, though they have been often persecuted by many, as the large and
voluminous Books and Tracts (of persecuting for Religion) now extant, do
plainly make appear; by which the Eyes of many are open to see the Ugliness of
it; and a Spirit of Moderation begins to grow and spring a little in the Earth,
in diverse Parts thereof.

It were to be desired, Philip. 4.5.
that all Christians Moderation might more and more increase, and might appear
unto all Men; because God is at hand, who will justify the Innocent (whom he
knows better than any Man, because he sees their Hearts) and he will condemn
none but the Guilty. How shall the Jews be converted, or the Turks convinced
to, and of the Verity of the Christian Religion, while its Professors are
tearing and rending one another to Pieces: Had it not been for the Immoderation
and Persecution among Professors of Christ in Christendom, so called, it is
probable Christianity would have made a far greater Progress in all the four
Quarters of the World long before this Time, then it has now done. Persecution
has been proposed by the Immoderate, to lay Heats and Divisions, and cure
Breaches; but the ancient History of Persecution, and the modern Practice of
it, fully convince us, that it has always tended to make the Hot hotter, the
Divisions greater, and the Breach wider, and so the Contention to grow endless;
which nothing will end, but a calm and quiet Temper of Mind, the Mind being
cooled by the gentle Influences of the Holy Spirit of Christ, the immaculate
Lamb; who came not to destroy, nor devour, but to seek and to save that which
was lost, and gone astray, that he might bring them home to his Fold of Rest,
in his Father's Kingdom.

Verse. 11. Blessed are ye when Men shall revile you and persecute you, and
shall say all Manner of Evil against you falsely for my Sake.

Verse 12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad: For great is your Reward in Heaven;
for so persecuted they the Prophets, which were before you.

There is a Persecution as before hinted, by Calumny, and Reproach, or
Reviling, by Evil-Speaking, and Falsities, which, for the most part, it is
better patiently and quietly to suffer, for Christ's Sake; and if we are
abused, to appeal to him, for many times Words beget Words, till at last it
comes to Prejudice, and breaks the Unity and Peace of Brethren, and Families;
so that in a general Way, one had better suffer the Calumnies and Reproaches of
evil Men, with a tender Concern for God's Glory, resting in the Blessing of
Christ; and that thou will most surely feel, if thou can appeal to him on this
wise, Lord, thou knows I suffer this Wrong for thy Sake. In such Sufferings
there is an inward Joy, a Spiritual Rejoicing; and the Heart of the Persecuted
is abundantly more glad, through the Blessing and Goodness of Christ, than the
Persecutor's, whose Conscience accuses him in Secret. And as to personal
Persecution, it is no more than the Prophets, and our Lord, did suffer before
(...). And with that Consideration Christ comforts his suffering Seed: And
those who suffer with him, and his Seed, these have the Promise of reigning
with him; and himself has promised them a Reward, 2 Timothy 2.12.
no less than the Kingdom of Heaven.

Verse 13. Ye are the Salt of the Earth: But if the Salt have lost its Savor,
wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be
cast out, and to be trodden under Foot of Men.

Here Christ shows that his Followers must season the Earth, by living a
savoury Life, and by walking according to his Doctrine, whose Doctrine is
wonderfully set forth in this excellent Sermon; and if we live up to those holy
Rules, we shall then be serviceable in our Generation, and our Lives will teach
the People as well as our Words, and sometimes better too, by how much Example
is better than Precept; and indeed Christians ought to be careful in both; in
Life to live holily, and in Words to be sparing, observing to Let your Words be
few, and savoury, Eccl 5.2. Ephesians. 4.29. Col. 4.6.
and seasoned with Grace, that they may administer Grace to the Hearers: Thus
should we season the World, and salt it with the Salt of the Covenant; but if
we lose this Savor of Grace, and take a Liberty which Christ and his Truth do
not allow of, of speaking at random Things which are not convenient, nor
edifying, but altogether unsavory; then, according to our Master, which is in
Heaven, we are good for nothing, but to be cast out ( i. e. out of the Church)
and then we shall be trampled upon by Men, as in Truth we deserve: Not that our
Bodies are to be killed, or destroyed; for the Door of the Church is always
open to receive true Penitents. 1 Cor, 11.32.
But for this End and good Purpose we are chastened of the Lord, that the Soul
may be saved in the Day of the Lord. And those who know godly Sorrow for their
Sins, and turning from the Evil of their Ways, by Amendment of Life, those
Christ forgives, and advises his Church to do the same, saying, If he repent
forgive him; Luke 17.3.
which Repentance, is best manifested by a new Life, and holy and blameless
Conversation; for Words, without Works, are good for nothing, but to be trodden
under Foot of Men.

Verse 14. Ye are the Light of the World: A City that is set on a Hill cannot
be hid.

True and faithful Christians are indeed as Stars in God's Firmament, which are
of excellent Use to People in the Night Season, and more especially when they
are not clouded, and in a particular Manner to those who travel on the Seas,
for when they have not seen the Sun for a Season, then they are good Guides to
the Seafaring Man; and likewise in the Wilderness, on the Land; and this World
is like a Wilderness, and like the troubled Sea, to some poor Souls; and then
good Men, and good Women, are serviceable, to reprove and instruct in
Righteousness: Dan. 12.3.
Such (says Daniel the Prophet) shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament,
and as the Stars, for ever and ever. And these are like a City set upon a Hill,
which cannot be hid.

Verse 15. Neither do Men light a Candle, and put it under a Bushel; but on a
Candlestick, and it gives Light to all that are in the House.

Mortal Men, when divinely enlight'ned by the Grace and Spirit of Christ, ought
to exert themselves to their Master's Glory, and excite others, and stir them
up to their Duty; and to endeavor, as much as in them lies, to promote the
Kingdom and Interest of their dear Lord; for Men are God's Candles, as the
Scripture says, Prove. 20.27. and 24.20. Job 21.17.
The Spirit of Man, is the Candle of the Lord; and this Candle is often lighted
by Christ, who lights every Man that comes into the World, John i. 9. and is
the true Light of the Great Father of Lights. The great and good End of
Christ's lighting Man's Spirit, and illuminating him with Divine Light, is,
that he may shine out to others, in a good Conversation, and a holy Life, which
is both serviceable to others, and himself also; and answers the End of Him who
enlight'ned him by the Fire of his Word, or with a Coal from his holy Altar;
being thus lighted, and walking in it (as the Nations of them that are saved,
Rev 21.23, 24.
shall walk in the Light of the Lamb.) Here all the House, or Society, is truly
lighted by such Lights; and those who have received greater Gifts, or Degrees
of Divine Light, from Christ, than some others, and may have a larger Share of
natural or acquired Parts, ought not to hide it (as our Lord phrases it) under
a Bushel, but put it (in its proper Place, or) on a Candlestick; and as the
Candle is of little Use when it is put out, therefore we ought to be very
careful to keep to Watchfulness and Prayer, that it be kept lighted in Time of
Darkness; for the Candle of the Wicked is often put out.

Verse 16. Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good
Works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

Since there is a bright and shining Nature and Quality in the holy Lives of
Christ's Servants, and in the Conversation of his faithful Followers, therefore
it should and ought to be manifest, and to appear before Men; our Lamp should
be burning, and our Light shining; Mat. 25.8.
and we should take Care to get and keep holy Oil in our Vessels, that
therewith our Lamps may be supplied, otherwise Folly instead of Wisdom will
appear in our Conversations, which will be a Hindrance (when our great
Bridegroom comes) to our Entrance into Life, or God's Kingdom, and greatly
hinders our Master's Glory, which by all Means we are to endeavor the
Furtherance of; and Men generally take more Notice of our evil Works, and,
where an evil Eye is open, will sooner see them, than our good Ones; so that we
had need to be very careful, and keep a holy Watch in our Conversations, that
our Light may so shine, as that our Father which is in Heaven may be glorified,
in our bringing forth much good Fruit.

Verse 17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or Prophets: I am not
come to destroy, but to fulfill.

Verse 18. For verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one Jot, or
one Tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled.

The Excellency of the Dispensation of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ is
really wonderful! having no Manner of Tendency toward destroying the Law of God
given by Moses; for Christ's Doctrine comes up through it, fulfils it, and goes
beyond it, in Perfection, and in the Beauty of Holiness, and in the Life and
Power of pure Religion.

Gal. 3.24, 25.
The Law, says the Apostle, is a Schoolmaster, to bring us to Christ; and no
Man can come truly to Christ, nor be in him, or be a new Creature, without
coming through the Law, and keeping the Commandments: But these Commandments
are to be distinguished from the superstitious Traditions, and ceremonious
Customs, of the Jews. The Scribes and Pharisees (who though they sat in Moses'
Seat) did not do as Moses did; but crucified him whom Moses prophesied of,
Deuteronomy. 18.15.
saying, The Lord your God shall raise up a Prophet from among your Brethren,
like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken. Christ and his Disciples teach the
Law, though not the Traditions of the Jews; who were very careful of their
small Tithes, of their own Interest, though but of, or in small Things,
neglecting the weighty Matters of the Law, which is in nowise to be passed by,
but to be fulfilled while Heaven and Earth endure.

Now the Law and Commandments which our Lord spoke of, are generally understood
to be those Ten Commandments recorded in the xxth Chapter of Exodus, with other
absolute Commands written by Moses (distinguished from the Jews Traditions) and
such as were general to Mankind: For Christ is the general Savior, both of the
Jew, and also of the Gentile, who believe in, and obey him: And that those
Commandments may the more be minded, and taken Notice of, and imprinted in
Peoples Thoughts, they are here, in Part, transcribed out of the xxth Chapter
of Exodus.

I. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.

II. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any Likeness of any
Thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or that is in the Water
under the Earth: Thou shall not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them.

III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: For the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

IV. Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy.

V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother: That thy Days may be long upon the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

VI. Thou shall not kill.

VII. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor.

X. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, nor his Wise, nor his
Manservant, nor his Maidservant, nor his Ox, nor his Ass; nor any Thing that
is thy Neighbors.

All which our Holy Lord Jesus Christ fulfilled in his own Person, and taught
it to the People, as this his most holy Sermon will witness abundantly: And all
who profess his great Name, must, and ought to teach the same.

Verse 19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and
teach Men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven; but
whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Here we are strictly enjoined, as we value our Reputation in Heaven, both to
do, and to teach, the Commandments, and Law of Moses; though not the
Ordinances, Commandments, or Traditions, of the Scribes. Now the Scribes and
Pharisees taught diverse good Things in Words, as we understand by Christ; But
(says he) be ye not like unto them; for they say, and do not: Example being
often of more Force and Power than Precept: They might have said as some of our
modern Scribes do, to the People, You must not do as we do; but do as we say:
But, according to Christ, this will not serve their Turn; for he shuts the
Gates of Heaven against all them (and all such) though his own Hearers, as in
the next Verse.

Verse 20. For I say unto you, Except your Righteousness shall exceed that of
the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no Case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Those Scribes and Pharisees had a Righteousness, but it was one of their own
making, an outside One only; whereas within they were full of Deceit and
Hypocrisy; they cried up Righteousness in Words, and ^et cried out against him
who taught it in the greatest Purity, and sought his Destruction; they were
notable Examples to all Persecutors for Religion. Our Lord, and his Servants,
did not, nor do not, speak against outside Holiness, so as the Inside be the
same; for a living Man has both Inside and Out; so has living Righteousness an
inward and outward Purity, which is manifest by its Fruits; and those Fruits
are Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22, 23.
which is, "Low (...) Temperance, Patience, Experience, Hope, and Charity, or
Brotherly Love;" of which those People showed very little to Christ; he was
very sensible of their Envy and Malice, which was very contrary Fruits to
Holiness; and therefore he tells them that hear him, That their Righteousness
must exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, or they in no Case shall enter
the Kingdom of Heaven.

Verse 21. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old Time, Thou shall not
kill; and whosoever shall kill, shall be in Danger of the Judgment:

Verse 22. But I (...) unto you, that whosoever is angry with his Brother
without a Cause, shall be in Danger of the Judgment; and whosoever shall say to
his Brother, Raca, shall be in Danger of the Council; but whosoever shall say,
Thou Fool, shall be in Danger of Hell Fire.

Here we may learn that the Law provided nothing against Anger, only in this
Case, against shedding of Blood; and many times if Anger is too much kindled,
it sets the Soul on Fire of Hell, if it be not timely quenched. People, as it
grows hotter, call one another out of their Names, and take the Name of the
Lord in vain, break the third Commandment, swearing by Him, and cursing of Men:
We may plainly see by Christ's Doctrine, that the first Degree of Anger
(without Cause) is dangerous; but the second is very dangerous. Soft Words from
a sedate Mind wi^^ wonderfully help in this Case: It is not easily conceived
what a mighty Advantage Satan has upon one that is angry without a Cause: And
we are often apt to think we have Cause when we have none at all; and then we
make Work for Repentance, without which we are in Danger of Hellfire. Ephesians.
4.26.
Wherefore every true Christian ought to watch against the Evil of Anger; and
yet there may be Anger (where there is real Cause) without Sin.

Verse 23. Therefore if thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, and there remembrest
that thy Brother has ought against thee,

Verse 24. Leave there thy Gift before the Altar, and go thy Way, first be
reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy Gift.

The Christian Religion admits of no Malice nor Guile; the Worship of it is in
Spirit and Truth, and Love, without Hypocrisy, without Deceit, or Hatred: If we
come to the Altar, this will hinder our Acceptance. Though we may indeed have a
Gift, we are to seek Reconciliation, and not say, Let him come to me, I will
not go to him; but Christ tells us, we must go to him; (...) if the (...) to
the Offended, in a meek and Christian Spirit; and seek Reconciliation, if thy
Brother will not be reconciled, if the Fault be in him, thou have done thy
Duty, and thy Gift will be received, and Christ will manifest himself to thee
by his Grace and Spirit. But yet art thou to seek for Peace, he having ordained
it, and laid it as a Duty incumbent on thee.

Verse 25. Agree with thine Adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the Way with
him: Lest at any Time the Adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge
deliver thee to the Officer, and thou be cast into Prison.

Verse 26. Verily I say unto thee, thou shall by no Means come out thence, till
thou have paid the uttermost Farthing.

It is plain from hence, that Jesus is for a quick and speedy End to
Differences; says he, Agree with him quickly; for it is of dangerous
Consequence to let Disagreements lay long, it eats like a Canker, and it
destroys the very Nature of Religion. Personal Differences is a great Hurt to
Families, to Churches, and to Nations, and Countries, especially when espoused
by Parties; then what rending, tearing, and devouring Work, it makes: Wherefore
take Christ's Counsel, and agree quickly; and if the Difference be on the
Account of Debt, as is often likely, if the Debt be just, it is better to offer
up one's Self, and all that he has in the World, than to stand out with one's
Adversary, till it come to the utmost Extremity; and for Christians to go to
Law one with another, 1 Cor. 6.1.
is contrary to the Apostle's Advice; and oftentimes the Gainer of the Cause,
loses by going to Law; so that it is good to agree quickly; it being profitable
so to do, both spiritually and naturally.

Verse 27. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old Time, Thou shall not
commit Adultery;

Verse 28. But I say unto you, whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after her,
has committed Adultery with her already in his Heart.

The Law was against Adultery; but the Gospel is against Lust; and where there
is no Lust, there can be no Adultery* for then the Occasion of Adultery is
taken away; and the Cause being taken away, the Effect of Course cease.
Behold the chaste and pure Doctrine of Christ, and his holy Dispensation,
greatly excelling the Law, or Mosaic Dispensation! Our blessed Savior does not
admit of an unchast^ or lustful Looking upon Women; much less of immodest
Salutations, Touches, Embraces, or Discourses, James 1.15.
which all tend to beget Lust in the Hearts of Men; and Lust conceived, brings
forth Sin; and Sin when finished, brings forth Death to the Soul.

Verse 29. And if thy Right-eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy Members should perish, and
not that thy whole Body should be cast into Hell.

Verse 30. And if thy Right Hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from
thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy Members should perish, and
not that thy whole Body should be cast into Hell.

Christ compares the sinful Lusts and Inclinations, Which are the Cause of Men's
Destruction, and their being cast into Hell, to a Right-eye; or a Right Hand
(two of the most useful and serviceable Members of the Body) not that he
intended that we should cut off our natural Members, but that we should cut off
these sinful Lusts, and cast them from us, though they were as a Right-eye, or
Hand. Now, observe, it is very much against Nature, and very painful to pull
out an Eye, or to cut off an Hand; so Sin, of many Kinds, is very agreeable to
Nature, or the natural Man, and it is very hard for him to part with it; he
pleads the Use of it, and when Christ, the Physician of the Soul, comes to put
his Incision Knife to it (which is his Word) poor Man is too apt to fly from
it, and to shrink from under its holy Stroke: The holy Baptist, John,
understanding our Lord's Doctrine, and being sensible of the powerful Working
of Christ^ Word and Spirit, says. Matt. 3.10.
(...) is the said to the (...) of the Trees, therefore every Tree which
brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the Fire; which Fire
is nothing less than Hell, which, without Repentance, and Amendment of Life,
will be our Portion.

Verse 31. It has been said, whosoever shall put away his Wife, let him give
her a Writing of Divorcement.

Verse 32. But I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his Wife, saving
for the Cause of Fornication, causes her to commit Adultery; and whosoever
shall marry her that is divorced, commits Adultery.

The great Husband of Souls here plainly shows, that Husbands should be
^ender to their Wives; and his Apostle says, Col. 3.19.
Be not bitter against them. Men and their Wives ought to live together in
Love, and be good Examples to their Children, and Servants; and not part one
from another, except for the Cause of Fornication; and that should be proved;
for some Men are only jealous of their Wives, and some without a Cause, and
where there is Cause (as a Man may think) it ought to be clearly proved before
they part from one another; a Man ought to be tender of his Wife, as of his own
Body; "For they two are one Flesh." Men and their Wives are often too apt to
magnify one another's Faults, and to put the worst Constructions upon each
other's Words and Actions, when they differ, which widens Breaches, instead of
healing them: Whereas Love, and true Charity and putting the best, and not the
worst Construction on Things, would chase away Wrath, Strife, and Hatred; and
though Moses gave the Jews that Permission of Divorcement, for the Hardness of
their Hearts; yet Christians ought to live so, that there should be no Need of
it amongst them. And if Christians do part upon the Account of Fornication (for
they are not permitted to part on any other Account by Christ, as above) they
are to marry no more, while each other live; for if they do, they are
pronounced by Christ, to be Adulterers, Luke 16.^8.
and Adulteresses.

Verse 33. Again ye have heard, that it has been said by them of old Time,
thou shall not forswear thyself, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths.

Verse 34. But I say unto you, swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is
God's Throne:

Verse 35. Nor by the Earth, for it is his Footstool: Neither by Jerusalem, for
it is the City of the Great King.

Verse 36. Neither shall thou swear by thy Head, because thou can not make
one Hair, white or black.

Verse 37. But let your Communication be yea, yea; nay, nay; for whatsoever is
more than these, comes of Evil.

It was allowed to the Jews to vow to the Lord, and swear by his Name, provided
they performed their Vows, and Oaths. But here our Lord prohibits and
disallows, or abolishes, all Swearing, with an I say unto you, swear not at
all. Though our swearing Christians will have it, that he here prohibits only
vain Swearing, or common Swearing, which cannot be, because the Oaths he here
speaks of were solemn, James 5 12.
and to the Lord. And the Apostle James tells us. We must not swear by any
Oath. Neither did the primitive Christians swear at all; and Christians ought
to be so just in their Conversations, as that their solemn Words or Promises
would give them Credit, without any Need of Oaths. If Occasion or Need be, thou
have Liberty to add Yea to thy Yea, and Nay to thy Nay, or solemn Words
equivalent to it; and if more be Evil, it must also be Evil to require more,
and that it is Evil if it be more (as all Vows and Oaths are) we have Christ
for our Author, a good Foundation to Build upon.

Verse 38. Ye have heard that it has been said, an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth
for a Tooth.

Verse 39. But I say unto you, that ye resist not Evil: But whosoever shall
smite thee on thy Right Cheek, turn to him the other also.

Verse 40. And if any Man will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let
him have thy Cloak also.

There was Room and Liberty, by the Law of Moses for a Man to revenge himself,
if he had an Injury done to him; but Christ teaches patient Suffering; we are
not to give any Offense, but we are to take them quietly for his Sake, in which
Jesus was an excellent Example to us, whose Sufferings was not for himself,
Isa. 50.6.
but for us; he turned his Cheek to the Smiter, and his Face to those that
plucked off the Hair: But to a Man of Courage and Choler, this indeed is no
small Cross; Mat. 10.38. Chap. 16.24.
but he must deny himself, and take up Christ's Cross daily, and follow him, if
he will be his Disciple: And as for the Law, it is better never to meddle with
it, in a general Way; and if thy Coat by Law is taken away, thou had better
give him thy Cloak, than stand out another Trial with him: And it is much if
thou art not a Gainer by so doing. But the Gain is not urged as the best
Motive: But Obedience to Christ, our great Lord, and good Master; who said. If
ye love me, keep my Commandments.

Verse 41. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a Mile, go with him twain.

It can hardly be suposed that any would take the Pains to force or violently
compel a Man to go a Mile with him, unless on some extraordinary Occasion: But
many times through Over-perswasion, or much Invitation, One may be in that
Sense compelled to do that which One is not inclined to, and in such Case, we
are to be liberal in answering the Love and Goodwill of our Friend, so
compelling of us: For Love begets Love, and cannot easily be withstood, as in
the Parable of the Wedding, or Marriage-Supper; they were to be compelled to
come to it; Luke 14.23.
we are not to understand by outward Constraint, or Cruelty, but by the Force
and Power of Love; Divine Love has a great Power, and is of a compelling
Nature, according to this Distinction, and Consideration; and then we should be
unkind, and ungrateful, if we did not answer with suitable Returns.

Verse 42. Give to him that asks thee, and from him that would borrow of
thee, turn thou not away.

We are here to suppose the Asker to be in real Want and Necessity, and the
Borrower also to stand in need, and the Asked to be in a Capacity, and of
Ability to supply and assist the Asker, and Borrower; and then in such Case we
are by no Means to refuse to give to him that asks, nor to turn away from him
that would borrow of us, and if we are not in a Capacity to supply, then to use
mild and friendly Expressions; for Christians should be courteous and kind to
all, and particularly to the Distressed. And if we think that the Askers or
Borrowers are not worthy or deserving for their own Sakes, we should, if need
be, give and lend for Christ's Sake, and in Obedience to him, though it cross
our own Inclinations.

Verse 43. Ye have heard that it has been said, thou shall love thy Neighbor,
and hate thine Enemy.

Verse 44. But I say unto you, love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, do
good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and
persecute you.

Verse 45. That ye may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven, for
he makes his Sun to rise upon the Evil, and on the Good, and sends Rain on
the Just, and on the Unjust.

The Hebrews had Liberty to hate their Enemies, but we have not understood that
ever any People, by any Dispensation, had any Liberty to hate their Neighbors
or Friends: So that those that are in that State, are far beyond the Line of
Truth. But, says our holy Lawgiver, I say unto you; love your Enemies. If we
love our Enemies, we can in nowise destroy them, although it were in our Power.
Again, Bless them that curse you. But alas! how apt are Men (and even those who
would think it hard to be told they are disobedient to Christ) to render
Railing for Railing, and Cursing for Cursing, instead of Blessing ( Do Good to
them that hate you) If we are sensible of any Body that hates us, and have real
Demonstration of it (for sometimes we imagine it, when it is not so) yet are we
to do them all the good. Turns we can (And pray for them which despitefully use
you, and persecute you) Thus we are not to render Evil for Evil, but to
overcome the Evil with that which is good. Sweet was our Lord's Example to us
in this, Luke 23.34.
when he said, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. If
spiteful Persecutors did really know what they do, when they persecute the
Just, their Damnation must needs be very great; but if we do Good for Evil, as
Christ has taught, then are we the Children of our heavenly Father, who makes
his Sun to rise on the Evil, and on the Good, and sends Rain on the Just, and
on the Unjust.

Verse 46. For if ye love them which love you, what Reward have ye? Do not even
the Publicans the same?

Verse 47. And if ye salute your Brethren only, what do you more than others?
Do not even the Publicans so?

Our Virtue is much more shining in loving those who do not love us, than in
loving those that do; and it is natural for us to love them that love us, and
we should be ungrateful if we did not: But the Reward is greater, if we love
them that do not love us, which must be manifested in Deeds, as well as Words:
For saying and doing, sometimes are two Things, which made the Apostle say, 1
John 3.18.
Our Love must not be with Word, and with Tongue only, but in Deed, and in
Truth. Also Publicans (Men by the Jews ranked with Sinners, when they said, He
eats with Publicans and Sinners) they do so; i. e. love those that love them.

And as to friendly and hearty Salutations, that may be necessary or needful,
we should not only manifest them to our Brethren, but as Occasion requires to
all, it being a shining Virtue in Christians to be kind to Strangers, and to
show forth a generous and loving Temper and Deportment to such as may not be of
us; though not by a flattering; modish, or complimental Way, yet hearty and
respectful, according to the Plainness of Christ, and the Simplicity of his
Gospel, without Respect of Persons, Respect being generally, or too generally;
shown to high, more than to them of low Degree. As we are not to refuse our
friendly Salutations to the Great, or the Rich, so we are not to neglect the
Poor, for the Publicans do so.

Verse 48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is
perfect.

Christ would have us to be perfect in the Practice of his Doctrine, and to
live up to it in perfect Obedience, according to the best of our Judgments, and
Understandings, and not to do his Work by Halves, but honestly, and perfectly,
according to the Measure of Grace received, some having received twice, some
thrice so much as some others, as the Parable of the Talents plainly shows:
So that what Discoveries or Manifestations of Grace, Light or Truth, we have
received, we ought to walk up to them perfectly; Even as your Father which is
in Heaven is perfect: As the Almighty is perfect in his Love, Justice, Mercy,
Grace, and Truth, unto poor Mortals, in Christ Jesus, his only Begotten, and in
all his Works; so ought we to be perfect in our known Duty: As it is written,
Ye shall be holy, for I, the Lord your God, am holy. Levit. 19.2
So must we be according to our Degree of Grace received.

It Is supposed, no Body will imagine that any Mortal can come up in Degree with
the Almighty, but according to our Measure, Gift, and Degree of Grace received,
we are to be holy and perfect, as God, our heavenly Father, and Christ, our
dear Lord, is so in Fullness.

CHAP. 6. Verse 1. Take heed that ye do not your Alms before Men, to be seen of
them, otherwise ye have no Reward of your Father which is in Heaven.

Verse. 2. Therefore when thou do thine Alms, do not sound a Trumpet before
thee, as the Hypocrites do, in the Synagogues, and in the Streets, that they
may have Glory of Men: Verily I say unto you, they have their Reward.

Verse 3. But when thou do Alms, let not thy Left Hand know what thy
Right Hand does:

Verse 4. That thine Alms may be in Secret, and thy Father which sees in
Secret, himself shall reward thee openly.

The Christian Religion, in its Purity, according to the Doctrine of the
Founder of it, is a compassionate Religion, and full of Pity, as well as Piety;
it is a holy Composition of Charity, and Goodness. The Apostle thus describes
it: James 1.27.
The pure Religion, and that which is undefiled before God and the Father, is
this, To visit the Fatherless, and Widows, in their Affliction; and to keep
himself unspotted from the World. This is pure Religion, and this is the
Christian Religion; happy are these who walk up to it, and live according to
the Precepts of him who dictated them; then the Widows, and the Fatherless,
would not be neglected; the Poor would be very generously taken care of, and
our Garments kept clean, and all done as secretly as may be; for when we
proclaim our Alms-deeds, and Charity, we lose our Reward from our heavenly
Father; also when Alms is given, it ought to be done in the Spirit of Love, and
Meekness, and so received; else the Receiver loses a second Benefit, and the
Giver his heavenly Reward. Prove. 19.17.
To give to the Poor, is to lend to him that made us, and we shall have good
and greater Measure returned us again. If we hope to have the Gates of Christ's
Kingdom opened to us at last, our Hearts must also be opened to the Poor and
Needy, when in Distress; remembering the Words of Christ, where he says to some
who were waiting for, and wanting an Entrance into the Kingdom, saying, Lord,
Lord, open unto us; he tells them, Mat. 25.42.
I was hungry, and ye gave me no Meat; I was naked, and ye clothed me not; I
was sick, and in Prison, and ye visited me not. They answered, Lord, when saw
we thee hungry, naked, sick, or in Prison, and did not feed thee, cloth thee,
and visit thee? He answers, In as much as ye did it not to one of these which
believe in my Name, ye did it not to me. He sympathiseth with his poorest and
meanest Members, whatever others do, and takes that done to them, as done to
himself, whether it be Good or Bad. We should be good to All, but especially to
Christ's Members, or the Household of the Faithful Keepers of his Commandments;
and Alms-deeds have the Approbation of Goodness from the universal Testimony of
all Men, in a general Way. Our Alms being thus distributed according to our
Ability, and the Necessities of the Object, without Ostentation, and in Secret,
our munificent Father, who sees in Secret, will openly reward us.

How many rich Men are there in the World, who have made great and costly
Entertainments for their rich Friends, Neighbors, and Relations (and if their
Substance be so great, that it is not felt by them) they had the more Need to
remember the Poor: When they never so much as spare the Tithe of it to them,
though the poor have ten times the Need of it, and though Christ says, When
thou make a Feast, Luke 14.12.
invite not thy rich Friends, for they will invite thee again; but call the
Poor, the Lame, and the Blind, etc.

Verse 5. And when thou prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites are, for
they love to pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the Corners of the
Streets, that they may be seen of Men; verily I say unto you, they have their
Reward.

Verse 6. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou
have shut thy Door, pray to thy Father which is in Secret, and thy Father which
sees in Secret, shall reward thee openly.

Verse 7. But when ye pray, use not vain Repetitions, as the Heathen do: For
they think they shall be heard for their much Speaking.

Verse 8. Be not ye therefore like unto them: For your Father knows what
Things ye have need of, before you ask him.

Prayer is absolutely needful for the Being and Well-being of an inward
reformed Christian; an outside formal Christian may use the Form, though
unreformed; but it avails but little without Reformation. And private Prayer,
according to Christ's Rule, is effectual, and rewardable, agreeable to his
Doctrine. He also speaks against Hypocrisy, and loving to be seen of Men, with
a Command not to be like unto them. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy
Closet. When we feel, and are sensible of a Divine Call, this must of course be
the right and best time (for Christ has not set us a distinct Hour) then we are
to enter into the Closet of an humble Heart or Mind, or some secret Place in
private. This is Christ's Order for particular Persons in a general Way; but is
not intended to prevent such who are rightly concerned to pray in the public
Assemblies, or Gathering of the Church; for we have Christ for our Example, who
prayed openly and publicly with his Disciples.

But when ye pray, use not vain Repetitions, as the Heathens do; for they think
to be heard for their much Speaking. Formal Repetitions of Prayer, repeated Day
by Day, when they are not according (but contrary) to the States of those to
whom they are read or repeated, must needs be vain, and People may vainly make
use of the Lord's own Form in that Case (though it is the best in the World)
and to think to be heard for their much Speaking, is to run into the Error of
the Heathen. Be not ye (says Christ) therefore like unto them; for your Father
knows what Things ye have need of, before ye ask him. Prayer is a Gift from
God, and from Christ, and as we wait on God in Christ's Name and Power, he will
give us that Gift, when he sees we stand in need of it, or it will be for our
Edification: For he has promised to pour out the Spirit of Prayer, and of
Supplication, upon his People. And our great Apostle said, if he prayed, 1 Cor.
14.15.

Romans 8.26.


he would pray with the Spirit. In another place he says, We know not what we
should pray for, as we ought; but the Spirit itself makes Intercession for us,
with Groanings that cannot be uttered. Likewise the same Apostle says, The
Spirit also helps our Infirmities. Those had not found out the Way of reading
Prayers unto the People in common, neither of making of them; though it will be
acknowledged that they had as much of the Mind of Christ, as any of our modern
Prayer-makers or Sayers; and since there is no Form like that of Christ's, it
is here set down, that People might take diligent Care to learn it, and to
teach it to their Children. But if they learn it rightly, they must also learn
to live in it: That is, live according to it; otherwise they will mock, instead
of serving him, that made both it and them for his own Honor, and the Glory of
his Name.

Verse 9. After this Manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in Heaven,
hallowed be thy Name.

Verse 10. Thy Kingdom come: Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.

Verse 11. Give us this Day our daily Bread.

Verse 12. And forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors.

Verse 13. And lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil; for thine
is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever. Amen.

Verse 14. For if ye forgive Men their Trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you.

Verse 15. But if ye forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your Father
forgive your Trespasses.

A short Form, and but few Words, but of excellent Composition. And truly happy
are th^se, who live so in their Conversation, that they may, when they use
them, do it without Falsnoo^, or Deceit (...) joying the Answer of Peace in the
Practice of the^ and the Sense of Grace influencing the Soul.

1 st, Our Father which art in Heaven. The great Creator is indeed our
universal Father, has made us all, and all Nations, of one Blood; but there is
another, a nearer Relation than this, to be Child of God by Regeneration; for
otherwise; if we live in an unregenerate State, in our natural Sins and Lusts,
all which are of Satan, John 8.44.
then Christ says, Ye are of your Father the Devil; and the Lusts of your
Father ye will do; a strong Reason: Mat. 12.40.50.
But in another Place, Whosoever shall do the Will of my Father which is in
Heaven, the same is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother. It is into this
Relation that the Soul ought to come, that can truly and religiously say, Our
Father, etc.

2 dly, Hallowed be thy Name. Do we sanctify the holy Name of the God of the
whole Earth? Do we religiously observe to fear and serve him? Do we profane
his awful Name, by taking it in vain, and living in Sin and Vanity? Which,
instead of hallowing and sanctifying his Name, is to dishonor and reproach it
on our Part, though he will hallow and honor his own Name in Justice and
Judgment, on profane and ungodly Livers, at the last Day, when he shall come
to judge the Quick and the Dead by Jesus Christ; God will not be mocked; Gal.
6.7.
such as every one sows, such shall they reap, whether Sin unto Death, or
Righteousness unto Life.

3 dly, Thy Kingdom come. His Kingdom is a Kingdom of Righteousness. Happy
Souls! who seek the Righteousness of it betimes, and continue in it to the End.
If this kingdom comes, Satan's (which is a Kingdom of Sin and Unrighteousness)
must needs (...).

Oh! that the rising Generations might be strong to overcome the wicked One,
and to be Instruments to pull down his Kingdom, and promote the Kingdom of God,
and his Christ; and if we do not believe that Satan's Power and Kingdom may and
ought to be destroyed in us, How can we pray without Hypocrisy for the Coming
of God's holy Kingdom? Believing we must live and die in Sin, is a great
Support to Satan's Kingdom, and a great Hindrance of the Coming of the Kingdom
of the Dear Son of God.

4 thly, Thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Most certainly the Will
of God is punctually and perfectly done in Heaven; hardly any who makes use of
this blessed Form but believes it; but this is the Misery of many Souls, to
believe it not possible for them to do God's Will here on Earth, as it is done
in Heaven. So that such pray in Unbelief, or without a true Faith; and the
Apostle says, (...) ^ 23.
What is not of Faith is Sin. Is it not also a kind of charging Christ with
commanding that which cannot be done? It is worthy our sedate Consideration. He
has sown Grace, and ought in Justice to reap it from all Mortals. Matt. 13.3.
The great Sower, Christ, sows in all Sorts of Men or Grounds: The Grace of God
appears to all Men, Titus ^.11.
and teaches them to deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and that they should
live soberly, and righteously, and godly, in this present World. But Antichrist
teaches, that it cannot be done here on Earth as in Heaven.

5 thly, Give us this Day our daily Bread. We not being capable without his
Blessing of procuring our Bodies or Souls Bread, either natural or
supernatural; and because our Souls cannot live without the last, no more than
our Bodies without the first, therefore we ought to pray to our heavenly and
most holy Father for both, without Doubting; and this should be done daily,
either in Words, holy Sighing, or Spiritual Groans; the Almighty knowing the
Language of the Soul in the one, as well as the other.

6 thly, Forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors. Or (as one of the
Evangelists has it) our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us; which is to the same End and Purpose; for if a Debtor is indebted to us,
and happens, through some Accident or other, to be insolvent, and have not
wherewith to pay, we are to forgive him, else how can we expect God to forgive
us. For we are all his Debtors, and have nothing (that we can call our own in a
religious Sense) to pay that great Debt, which we owe to him, our Mighty
Creditor; who might lawfully cast us into an Eternal Goal. But Oh! his Infinite
Mercy and Love is very great to us, poor Mortals; and he would have us to
imitate him, and forgive one another, as we expect he should forgive us. And
since Offenses and Trespasses will come, we must forgive, and the more freely,
when the Person offending sues by humble Petition to the Offended for it; then
if we forgive not, neither will our heavenly Father forgive us our Trespasses.

7 thly, And lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from all Evil; for
thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever. Amen.

That is, to lead us into Truth and Righteousness, which is the same with
leading us out of Sin, and out of Temptation: For we pray to be led out of it,
by praying not to be led into it; seeing we are not to understand that the
Almighty will tempt any Man to Evil. If (says the Apostle) any Man is tempted,
(...) 1.^^
let him not say he is tempted of God, for God tempts no Man, but he is
tempted when he is drawn away of his own Lust. Though he does sometimes permit
and suffer us to be tempted, and when we fall into diverse Temptations, and
escape them, we have Cause to be joyful, and thankful that we are delivered out
of them, and to give the Glory to God, who is the great Preserver of Men. Whose
is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever. Amen.

Verse. 16. Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the Hypocrites, of a sad
Countenance, for they disfigure their Faces, that they may appear unto Men to
fast; verily I say unto you, they have their Reward.

Verse 17. But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine Head, and wash thy Face,

Verse 18. That thou appear not unto Men to fast, but unto thy Father, which is
in Secret, and thy Father which sees in Secret, shall reward thee openly.

Christ would have all our Works of Piety, Virtue, and Charity, all our
religious Duties, done in the Divine Love, and filial Fear of God, and not for
vain Glory, or Ostentation: And truly, without we expect our Reward from Men,
there is no Need of an outward hypocritical Show, in such extraordinary Duties,
as is that of Fasting, when truly called to it, and truly performed; which the
Jews were much in Practice of; and being but formal Hypocrites (many of them)
in it, our Lord reprehends them, and wants his own Hearers to shun the like
Deceit; and tells them, if they fast secretly, their heavenly Father will
reward them openly; yet we must not be open Sinners, nor private Ones neither;
for open or public Sin is Damning, if not repented of, and forsaken, as well
as private Deceit.

Verse 19. Lay not up for yourselves Treasure upon Earth, where Moth and Rust
does corrupt, and where Thieves break through and steal.

Verse 20. But lay up for yourselves Treasure in Heaven, where neither Moth nor
Rust does corrupt, and where Thieves do not break through nor steal.

Verse 21. For where your Treasure is, there will your Heart be also.

Earthly Treasures are very apt to take up the Mind, and to draw it from
Heaven, and because Christ would have his Children to be in Heaven with him, in
tender Love he advises them not to lay up for themselves Riches or Treasure on
Earth. If it be said we lay it up for our Children, it may be said also, it is
the same Snare to them, as to the Parents, and sometimes a greater; and when it
is gotten, it is liable to many Casualties, and creates a great deal of Care
and Trouble; wherefore Christ tenderly advises to seek after, and lay up
another Treasure, of another Nature, in another, and a safer and better Place,
which will not be liable to the like Casualties of the former Treasure and
Place, and urges us to it, with this great Reason; For where your Treasure is,
there will your Hearts be also. Oh! may every true Christian's Treasure and
Heart be there for ever.

Verse 22. The Light of the Body is the Eye; if therefore thine Eye be single,
thy whole Body shall be full of Light.

Verse 23. But if thine Eye be evil, thy whole Body shall be full of Darkness:
If therefore the Light which is in thee be Darkness, how great is that Darkness.

It is not Good to look on Men nor Things, with an evil Eye; but singly to look
on One's Self and others, in the Fear of God, having a single and singular Eye
to his Glory; and then being enlightened by his Divine Light, we shall discern
between Good and Evil; whereas if there be any double Dealings, or looking, or
thinking; or if ungodly Self be in the Bottom, and not the Glory of God; then
our Light is turned into Darkness, and that Darkness will be very great; James
1.8.
as it is said in the holy Scriptures, a Double-minded Man is unstable in all
his Ways: So that our Savior's Doctrine is good; to have a single Eye, and to
avoid all double Dealing.

Verse 24. No Man can serve two Masters: For either he will hate the one, or
love the other; or else be will hold to the one, and despise the other: Ye
cannot serve God and Mammon.

We cannot give our Hearts to God, and to this World, and the Things of it
also, so as to set our Affections on both, as says the Apostle, 1 John 2.15.
If any Man love the World, The Love of the Father is not in him. And again,
The Love of Money, it is the Root of all Evil; 1 Timothy 6.10.
i. e. the inordinate Love of it, and seeking after it, and serving of, and for
it, more than for our Maker and Savior. Then let us despise the World, and the
Things of it, in Comparison of our God, and our Savior. We do not understand
by those Words of Christ, that he intended to debar us from seeking a
comfortable Accommodation for ourselves and Families, in this World; but that
we should not set our Hearts and Affections upon it; for we cannot equally
affect both Heaven and Earth.

Verse 25. Therefore I say unto you, take no Thought for your Life, what ye
shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your Body, what ye shall put on:
Is not the Life more than Meat, and the Body then Raiment?

Verse 26. Behold the Fowls of the Air: For they sow not, neither do they reap,
nor gather into Barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye not much
better than they?

Christ would have us without anxious Thoughts about our Livings in this World,
i. e. about our Eating, Drinking, and Clothing, and tells us, that the Life is
more than Meat, and the Body than ^^^iment; by which he shows us, that he which
gave the Life, will, by his Providence, support it; and as he has formed the
Body, he will form that which must feed it; and that we might the more depend
upon God's Providence, he brings us to learn, or teaches us by the Fowls of the
Air, who neither sow nor reap, nor gather into Barns, and yet their great
Creator feeds them; and asks, if we are not much better than they? So that we
being more noble Creatures, need not doubt of the Care and Providence of God,
and his Blessing on the Labor of our Hands; though our Hearts are not
concerned unnecessarily about it, but we have freely given them to God, and to
his Christ, our Savior.

Verse 27. Which of you by taking Thought can add one Cubit to his Stature?

The Farmers or Planters cannot by their Thoughtfulness cause their Corn,
Fruits, nor Cattle, to multiply or grow; nor the Tradesman his Custom, Goods,
or Business (without a proper Application, which our Savior is not against)
only he would have us without an incumbered and over-caring Mind. The Merchant
likewise, by all his Thoughtfulness, cannot bring home his Ship from far, nor
carry her safe to her desired Port. All Things on this wise are in the Hand of
Almighty God, and it is our Duty to trust in him, and to depend upon his Divine
Providence, for Meat, Drink, and Clothing, for Happiness here, and hereafter,
for ever.

Verse 28. And why take ye Thought for Raiment? Consider the Lillies of the
Field how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin.

Verse 29. And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon, in all his Glory, was not
arrayed like one of these.

Verse 30. Wherefore if God so clothe the Grass of the Field, which Today is,
and Tomorrow is cast into the Oven, shall he not much more clothe you, Oh! ye
of little Faith?

Verse 31. Therefore take no Thought, saying, what shall we eat, or what shall
we drink, or wherewithal shall we be clothed?

Verse 32. (For after all these Things the Gentiles seek) for your heavenly
Father knows that ye have need of all these Things.

Many People now, as well as then, are very fond of their Clothing, and love
to be gay and fashionable therein, and some are not a little proud of their
Clothes, and are not a little thoughtful how they may deck themselves to be
admired: When our plain Lord, who wore a Vesture without a Seam, John 19.23.
sends us to the Lilly to consider her Beauty and Glory, and innocent
Thoughtlessness, declaring, that Solomon, in all his Grandeur and Splendour, was
not arrayed like one of these: For this is a natural Sweetness and Gaiety that
the Lilly is clad with; but Solomon's (as is also most Men's and Women's) is
generally but artificial: Well, if God so clothe the Grass of the Earth, will
he not clothe us: If we believe not, we must have but very little true Faith.
So that it would be much better for us to consult how we shall do to please
God, and honor him, and his holy Son, and Divine Name, than to consult what we
shall eat or drink, or how, or wherewith we shall be clothed, which Things the
Gentiles sought after, more than after God. But we knowing that our heavenly
Father sees that we have need of all these Things, should chiefly leave it to
him, and first seek his Kingdom and Righteousness.

Verse 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all
these Things shall be added unto you.

Verse 34. Take therefore no Thought for the Morrow: For the Morrow shall take
Thought for the Things of itself: Sufficient unto the Day is the Evil thereof.

Here is a glorious Gospel Promise; upon seeking the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, all these Things shall be added to us, viz. Meat, Drink, and
Raiment, the necessary Things that we want, to support us in these lower
Regions, or while we are here in this World; but then, withal, let us remember
it must be our first Work, it must be the chief Desire of our Souls; it must be
first in several Senses; first, as to our young and tender Years; first, in the
Morning of every Day; first, in respect of, and before all other Things; first,
as it has pleased God to give us a Being in this World, and being in the Prime
and Flower of our Years, we should then devote our Souls to God, and his Work
and Service, and enter into Covenant with him, with full Purpose of Heart, and
Design of Soul, to keep the same truly and inviolably; for it would be better
not to make Covenant, than to make it, and break it; neither should we slight
or put off the Work of God till we are old, and in our declining Years; as
though we give him the Refuse, and broken End of our Days, and conclude, it
will better become me when I am old to serve Him: Oh, no! Learn the Fear of God
truly, and practice it when thou art young, and thou will not easily depart
from it when thou art old: As thou will find it hard to get into a holy Life
and Conversation, when thou have been spending thy Youth in Folly and Vanity:
Remember thy Creator therefore in the Days of thy Youth, before the Evil Day
come. The Autumn of Man's Years is here in diverse Respects called the Evil Day:
Oh! it is exceeding sweet and precious so see and be sensible of an innocent
Life, and modest, sober Conversation, in Youth; when they are in their
blooming, flowery Years, to be scented with Grace, and Truth, must needs be
affecting. When Youth are laden with Fruits of Grace, and of the Holy Spirit,
how pleasant is the Taste of it; it generally relishes well with all Men, and
naturally brings Praise to God, as well as Peace to the Soul. May the Youth of
this present Generation, as also Generations to come, be such holy Plants, that
God's Right Hand may be seen in planting them: When after being fruitful, and
doing the Work and Service of their Day, and answering the noble End of God in
making and planting them here in this World, they may be transplanted into the
Eternal Kingdom of Heaven; which, doubtless, they will, who first seek his
Kingdom, and the Righteousness of it.

2 dly, If we consider that our Life and Being is daily granted to us, and we
supported by the Goodness and Providence of Almighty God every Day, it is but
just that he should have the first or prime of our Thoughts in the Morning of
the Day; and he (being the First and the Last) ought to be last, as well as the
first, in our Thoughts, also in the Evening. The Royal Psalmist says. Psalm.
137.6.
If I prefer not Jerusalem before my chiefest Joy, then let my Right Hand
forget its Canning, and my Tongue cleave to the Roof of my Mouth; much more
ought we to prefer our Creator to all Things, and to have our Thoughts on him,
first: and foremost in all Things, and every Day.

3 dly, For what are the Things of this World in Comparison of those that are
to come, all these are fading and transitory; but the Things of that which is
to come, are durable, and permanent; and therefore ought to be first and chief
in our Minds. That which is chief in our Hearts, may be said to have the first
Place there; One Thing (says a Servant of God) have I desired, Psalm. 27.4.
and that will I seek after, that I might dwell in the House of God all the
Days of my Life. This was the first or prime Thing, which he and we was, and
are to seek for, and after. As for the Morrow, we need not be too thoughtful or
anxious concerning or about it, for we know not whether we shall live to enjoy
it, so that as Christ says, Sufficient unto the day is the Evil thereof.

CHAP. vii. Verse 1. Judge not, that ye be not judged;

Verse 2. For with what Judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what
Measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.

A great and wise Expression, or Sentence, from a Righteous and Just Judge; the
Judge in Heaven, and of Earth, to whom all Power in both is given; by which we
may easily perceive we are to be very careful in our Judgment and Censures of
others, and that we are not^ash and censorious therein; considering that with
what Judgment we judge our Neighbors, or Fellow-mortals, with such shall we
also be judged ourselves, and that Measure which we measure out to others,
shall be filled to us again, when it comes to our Turn to be judged or censured
by others, for any Thing which we have done or said, we are ready, then to cry
out for Charity; are we so careful to be charitable in our judging and
censuring others?

It is better to suspend personal Judgment, without We could see the Hearts of
Men; and if we think we do, then to imitate God and Christ, who mixes Mercy and
Love with Judgment; Rashness and Extremes in Judgment, being commonly hurtful.

Verse 3. And why beholdest thou the Mote that is in thy Brother's Eye, but
considerest not the Beam that is in thine own Eye?

Verse 4. Or how will thou say to thy Brother, let me pull out the Mote that is
in thine Eye, and behold a Beam is in thine own Eye.

Verse 5. Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the Beam out of thine own Eye, and
then shall thou see clearly to cast out the Mote out of thy Brother's Eye.

Most true it is, that the Transgressions of others are most afflicting to
those who fear God, and this is not intended to hinder the Good from reproving
the Evil; but shows us, that we must be clear of Evil in ourselves when we
reprove others, else the Guilt of Hypocrisy will be, and is by Christ cast upon
us, and laid at our Door. We are more to look at our own Failings, than at the
Failings of others; and to take special Care that we are clear of that which we
reprove others for; and is it not Deceit, to set up for Reformers of others,
when there are great Defects in ourselves? It is too general a Faults in poor
Mortals to be quicker sighted to see the Faults of others, than their own. It Is
worthy reciting our Savior's Words to the Jews, who brought the Woman taken in
Adultery to him; and told him. By their Law she ought to die; he answers, He
that is without Sin, let him cast the first Stone at her. John ^.7.
So they being guilty, and convicted of Sin in their own Consciences, left her
to Christ, and went their Way: And when we have done what we can to convince
others of Sin, we must leave them to Christ at last; whether we are in Sin, or
without it; but we shall be the better able to help to reform others, if we are
clear from Guilt in our Hearts.

Verse 6. Give not that which is holy to Dogs, neither cast ye your Pearls
before Swine, lest they trample them under their Feet, and turn again and rent
you.

When we see the biting and persecuting Nature, and dirty selfish Spirit of
Men, it is to little Purpose, generally, to cast before them the precious Pearl
of Truth, or to show unto them the deep Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, or the
light of Life, they being in a brutish Spirit; but when People are sober, and
show forth Humanity and Moderation, then are holy Things valuable to them, and
the Things of Christ's Kingdom, and his Doctrine, precious in their Eyes, or
Esteem: Wherefore it greatly behooves Christ's Ministers to minister that to
the People which is suitable for them, and rightly to divide between the
Precious and the Vile, and to give to every one their Portion, according to
their Deeds; Mercy to whom Mercy, and Judgment to whom Judgment belongs;
without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy or Deceit; and not to flatter and
daub those who are in the doggish and swinish Nature.

Verse 7. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and
it shall be opened unto you.

Verse 8. For every one that asks, receives; and be that seeks, finds;
and to him that knocks, it shall be opened.

Verse 9. Or what Man is there of you, whom if his Son ask Bread, will be give
him a Stone?

Verse 10. Or if he ask a Fish, will he give him a Serpent?

Verse 11. If ye then, being evil, know how to give good Gifts to your
Children, how much more shall your Father which is in Heaven give good Things
to them that ask Him?

Our kind and tender Redeemer would stir up and provoke Souls to Prayer and
Supplication; he has been liberal in his holy Advice; and to stir us up to it,
here are moving Expressions, if thy Heart be open to receive them: Can we have
easier Terms if we were to make them ourselves with the Lord, than to ask, and
have; seek, and find; knock, and the Gates are opened; provided we ask in Faith
tenderly, and seek in Humility, and knock with Divine Wisdom and Submission?
Our Lord's own Practice shows that we should be tender, submissive, and servent
in Prayer; and then the servent Prayer of the Righteous avails much with the
Lord. Christ urges us to it, and brings ourselves for Example; What Man is
there among you, who if his Son ask Breed, or a Fish, will he give him a Stone,
or a Serpent? Surely no: No Father would deal thus with his Child; But when his
Child is hungry, and wants and asks Bread, he gives it to him: So when the
Almighty sees our Hunger, and we tenderly seek Divine Assistance and
Refreshment from Him, He, in his own Time, satisfies such Souls with Bread from
above, and the Thirsty with Living Water out of the Wells of Salvation: Oh!
blessed be his Holy Name for evermore. Evil Men know how to give good Things to
their Children, therefore we may well conclude that our heavenly Father knows
how to give with much more Discretion and Understanding the good Things of his
Kingdom, to true, asking, seeking, knocking, or praying Souls.

Verse 12. Therefore all Things whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto
you, do even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets.

Well may this be called the GOLDEN RULE; for if we square our Lives and
Actions by it, it will certainly mete us out the true Way to Happiness and
Glory. We are generally apt to say, when any One does Ill to another, "Would he
be willing to be so served himself?" And if we followed this Rule in all our
Concerns, it would be well; whether in Relation to public or private Business;
whether in Trade or Religion, or in our domestic Affairs: The Law and the
Prophets point at it, and our Savior plainly lays it down for a Rule for us to
walk by.

Verse 13. Enter ye in at the strait Gate; for wide is the Gate, and broad is
the Way, that leads to Destruction, and many there be which go in thereat.

Verse 14. Because strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way, that leads unto
Life, and few there be that find it.

It is afflicting to consider how natural it is for People to walk in this
broadWay, and they who walk in it are many; for here is Room for People to walk
if they are Proud, Whoremongers, Adulterers, Thieves, Swearers, Liars,
Drunkards, Covetous or in any other evil Course of Life, this broad Way has
Room enough in it for them to walk in; but let them know, it leads to
Destruction, and the End is eternal Misery, and their many Companions will
administer no Consolation to them, when they lift up their Eyes in Hell. And
whereas the Way that leads to Life, is called strait; it is only strait to
Flesh and Blood, or the Will of unregenerate Men: Oh! it is a pleasant Way,
exceeding pleasant, Psalm. 133.1.
when Brethren walk together in Love and Unity. The Enemy of Mankind would
persuade Souls that it is narrower than it really is, when they have some saint
Inclinations to make Trial of it. It may truly be said, that, Psalm. 119.1.
Prove. 3.17.
"Blessed are the Undefiled in this strait and narrow Way, who walk in the Law
of the Lord:" For, His Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and all his Paths are
Peace. And although the Way to the Kingdom was strait and narrow, yet there are
Hills and Valleys therein as well as Plains, until we get through the Gate to
Glory: There shall we know no more Sorrow, nor Pain; but shall praise and
glorify God and the Lamb for ever.

Verse 15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps Clothing; but
inwardly they are ravening Wolves.

Verse 16. Ye shall know them by their Fruits: Do Men gather Grapes of Thorns,
or Figs of Thistles?

Verse 17. Even so every good Tree brings forth good Fruit; but a corrupt
Tree brings forth evil Fruit.

Verse 18. A good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit, neither can a corrupt
Tree bring forth good Fruit.

Verse 19. Every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit; is hewn down, and
cast into the Fire.

Verse 20. Wherefore by their Fruits ye shall know them.

The great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, shows the Care which he takes of his
Sheep, and forewarns them to be careful of false Prophets, and Deceivers; who
though they may clothe themselves with Words like the true Ones, yet inwardly
they would destroy all that do not join with, or receive them; and they are for
biting the poor harmless Sheep of Christ, and if they could, or it were in
their Power, would devour them, their Minds being in the ravening Nature. But
our Holy, and All-wise Bishop, that we might be preserved from them, tells us
how we may infallibly know them: Saying, Ye shall know them by their Fruits,
giving us to understand, the Reasonableness of his Doctrine and Assertion of
knowing them by their Fruits. Do Men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of
Thisties, says Christ? Surely No. That is altogether unnatural, as well as
unreasonable and impossible. In the Grape there is a sweet and pleasant
Nourishment, these Fruits being cordial and wholesome; but it is bad meddling
with Thistles and Thorns, they being generally very unprofitable to Mankind,
and hurt the good Seed, wherever they grow among it. Well, where must we go for
the Grapes, and the Figs? To be sure we must go to the Vine, and the Fig Tree:
Christ is the Body of this Vine, and his People are the Branches, who bring
forth such Fruit (according to the Divine Life or Sap which they receive) as he
taught, and teaches, to his Followers. So that if Men's Words be like the Words
of Angels, if they have never so great Parts and Endowments; yet if their Fruit
be evil, if they live in Sin, and do Iniquity, and bring forth the Fruits of
Malice and Rage, or devouring Persecution, they then are none of Christ's
Sheep, though they my have their Clothing: For every good Tree brings forth
good Fruit; and a corrupt Tree brings forth evil Fruit. So if the Fruit be
evil, the Tree is certainly corrupt. Our Lord elsewhere says, Make the Tree
good, Mat. 12.33.
and the Fruit will be good also; and to be made truly good (since we are all
corrupt by Nature, and in the Fall) we must be cut off from that Nature, and
grafted into Christ, who said, I am the Vine, and ye are the Branches: John
15.5.
And then our Lives and Fruits will be changed. And then, A good Tree cannot
bring forth evil Fruit, nor can a corrup Tree bring forth good Fruit: And every
Tree that brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the Fire.
It would be very unnatural, and a mere Prodigy, for one Tree to hew down
another, and cast it into the Fire, as they are natural Trees: Mat. 3.10.
But that Ax (which John speaks of) will be laid to the Roots of the corrupt
Trees, and will hew them down, and they will be cast into the Fire, as Christ
speaks. This is not a destroying the Bodies of Men that Christ speaks of but an
inward work in the Soul, showing the powerful Nature of the Dispensation of the
Gospel of Christ, which is not material Cutting, or Burning with material Fire,
or Sword: But Christ's Word is a Fire and Sword to cut down and burn up the
evil Nature in Man. The Apostle confirms this Doctrine of his Master thus, 1
John 2.2^. and 3.8.
He that does Righteousness is righteous, but be that sins is of the Devil*
The Apostle is plain and full, as is Christ, who ^ts his Doctrine over again,
with, Wherefore by (...) Fruits ye shall know them.

Verse 21. Not every One that says unto me, Lord! Lord! shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven.

It is not our Profession that will give us Admittance into Heaven, nor a Name
of Religion, nor religious Performances, if we love Sin and Unrighteousness,
nor our praying, preaching, hearing, reading or discoursing of, or arguing for
Christ, if we do the Works of Satan; for there are many who may yet go farther
than this, and yet not have Admittance into the Kingdom of God and our blessed
Lord Jesus, as is plainly manifest in the next Verse.

Verse 22. Many will say unto me in that Day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name have cast cut Devils, and in thy Name
have done many wonderful Works?

Verse 23. And then I will profess to them I know ye not; depart from me, ye
that work Iniquity.

So that professing Christ's own Name, and prophesying therein, without working
the Works of God, will not do. Nay, though they may cast out Devils, which
indeed is a great Work, and here is not only one Devil in the Singular Number,
but Devils in the Plural. They say they have cast out Devils, and truly there
are many Devils in poor Mortals sometimes, as was said by them to Christ; Our
Name is Legion, for we are many. There are the Devils of Pride, Covetousness,
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Theft, Envy, Murder, Lying, Swearing, Hypocrisy,
Cheating, Back^iting, etc. and abundance more, which cannot easily be named;
and though it may be said, and that truly, that all these proceed from the
Devil, who is an evil Spirit; yet it may also be said, that there are many evil
Spirits; and if all these evil Spirits are cast out of Man, and others of an
evil Nature enter him again, his last State is worse than his Beginning, as
Christ speaks about the strong Man armed, who kept the House till a stronger
than he came, who, Mat. 12.45.
when he came, spoiled his Goods, and dispossessed him; but coming again found
the House (or Heart) swept and garnished, swept from many Immoralities, and
garnished with Self-righteousness and carnal Security; and the Man off his
Watch, and not at home with Christ, who is stronger than Satan, he then
reenters, and seven worse Spirits with him. So that we had need to be on our
Watch, and keep near to Christ, lest after all our Experience, and wondrous
Works, our last State be worse than our Beginning, and we shut out of the
Kingdom in the End. For these say, that they had done many wonderful Works in
Christ's Name: So that we may work miraculous Things, and be sensible of
wonderful Power and Strength from Christ; and yet, without persevering in the
Way of Holiness and Self denial, may fall short of Heaven. Wherefore it is bad,
and of dangerous Consequence, to live in Sin and Iniquity; or to lean toward
it, so as to plead for it, or believe we cannot live without it while in this
World. For if we live and die in it, we may justly (according to the above
Doctrine, of Christ) expect that he will say unto us in the great Day; Depart
from me, ye that work Iniquity.

Verse 24. Therefore whosoever hears these Sayings of mine, and does them, I
will liken him to a wise Man, which built his House upon a Rock.

Verse 25. And the Rain descended, and the Floods came, and the Winds blew, and
beat upon that House, and it fell not; for it was founded upon Rock.

Oh! what abundance of excellent Sayings, and Doctrine, what holy Precepts has
Christ here recommended to the Professors of his Name, and to them which
believe in him, and the Almighty Father and Maker of Heaven and Earth, Surely
we are greatly beholden to our Lord Jesus Christ for those plain Divine
Sayings. But to commend them only is but little, or to read them, or hear them:
The keeping and the doing of them is the main Thing; the Thing that is needful;
and to press the Practice of them, Jesus has made this apt Comparison.

1 st, He that hears them, and does them, I will liken him to a wise Man: And
indeed it is great Wisdom to keep them (that is, to practice them) and as great
Folly to live contrary to them, and plead against them.

2 dly, Who built his House upon a Rock. This Rock is Christ, the Rock of Ages,
and his Holy Spirit, or the Holy Ghost, as Christ said to Peter, when Christ
was revealed to him: Mat. 16.17.18.
Flesh and Blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in
Heaven: "Thou art Peter" (or a Stone or Rock) thou art a Man, though thy Name
signifies a Rock; and as thy Name signifies a Rock, so "on this Rock will I
build my Church" (that is on the Spirit of the heavenly Father, which revealed
Christ to Peter) and the Church of Christ so built, "the Gates of Hell cannot
prevail against it." And Peter was one who heard these Sayings, and did them,
when he had received the Holy Ghost or Spirit; for which every true Believer
ought to pray continually, until he receive it; through the Help of which he
may, without Doubt, keep those holy Sayings. For of ourselves without it, we
cannot do any real Good, either in Speaking, Thinking, or Acting.

3 dly, And the Rains descended, and the Floods came, and the Winds blew, and
beat upon that House, and it fell not; because it was founded on a Rock. If
Rain from above be poured out in Wrath on Man, for Sin and Iniquity, and Floods
of Persecution, or the Windy Words of Men come upon this House, it will stand:
If Sickness and Death itself, and many other Storms, that we may meet with
here, in this low World, should beat against our Building, we being built upon
the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, shall surely stand them all out, and live
through all, if we observe to hear or read Christ's Sayings, and to practice
the same; then are we on the Rock, and shall not fall for that Reason.

Verse 26. And every one that hears these Sayings of mine, and does them not,
shall be likened unto a foolish Man, which built his House upon the Sand.

Verse 27. And the Rains descended, and the Floods came, and the Winds blew,
and beat upon that House, and it fell; and great was the Fall of it.

If we read or hear these Sayings, or Doctrine of Christ, and do not dwell in
the Life of it, nor practice the same, it were better we knew it not. For as
our Savior says, He that knows his Master's Will, and does it not, shall be
beaten with many Stripes. And doubtless it is great Folly to be sensible of
Christ's holy Will, and Doctrine, and not to do it: If we profess Christianity,
and to build our Profession on Christ, and yet not observe to keep his Sayings,
the Foundation of our Building will be but very loose and sandy; and when those
Rains, and Floods, and Winds, which Christ speaks of, shall descend and come,
and beat against this Building, it must needs fall, and the higher his Building
is, the greater will be the Fall of it.

Thus ended the best Sermon that ever was preached by Man; in which is set
forth the great Truths of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, with Blessings and
Rewards to the Righteous, and holy Believers in him, who put in practice his
Precepts; and Reproof to the Disobedient, and Unfaithful; with Promises of the
Kingdom of Heaven to the former, and to the latter a being shut out of it. And
when he had ended his Doctrine for that time, and finished his Divine Sayings,
the People were smitten with it, to Admiration, as well indeed they might.

Verse 28. And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these Sayings, that the
People were astonished at his Doctrine.

Verse 29. For he taught them as one having Authority, and not as the Scribes.

They were astonished at his Doctrine, and well they might, for it excelled
even the Law, and went beyond it, as when he tells them, 'twas said of old
Time, or in the Law, Thou shall not Kill: He taught that we must not be angry
without Cause. And whereas the Law gives Liberty to hate our Enemies; he
charges us to love them, and pray for them, and do good to them; again the Law
prohibits Adultery; Christ prohibits Lusts, both in the Eye, and in the Heart.
And whereas the Law commanded to perform their Oaths to the Lord; Christ
commands not to swear at all. Now those who are not angry, it is not likely
they should kill; those who love their Enemies cannot hate or destroy them;
those who have not Lust in their Hearts or Eyes, cannot commit Adultery; and
those who never swear, cannot foreswear themselves: All which he with Divine
Power and Authority from above taught. He was not dry and formal like the
Scribes: So likewise his Ministers, and the Preachers of his Gospel, should
wait on him, to be endued with a Measure of his Divine Spirit and Holy Grace,
that the Hearers might be edified, and the Father, Son, and Spirit, might have
the Glory, who over all is worthy for ever.

POSTSCRIPT.
SINCE I wrote the above (which was written at Sea in my Voyage from Barbados to
London) I have heard that a learned Man has wrote upon this excellent Sermon
of Christ (which far exceeds what I have done) at which I rejoice; for the more
Christ is glorified, and his faithful Followers edified, the greater is our
Cause of Rejoicing; and if it exceeds this, it is no wonder, this being done by
one who does not profess to understand Grammar, neither is a Master of Words,
nor scarcely of good English. Peradventure through the Meanness of the
Instrument, the Glory of God, and Praise of Christ, may the more appear; as
said Christ, Out of the Mouths of Babes thou have ordained Praise, or Strength:
And again, Thou have revealed these Things to Babes and Sucklings. And the Jews
marvelled that the Apostles of Christ should know the Things of God, being
unlearned Men. But I had a Concern working a long Time on my Mind, and could
not be easy nor satisfied until I had made some little Essay toward this Work;
and considering my own Weakness, it kept me back a great While; but in giving
up to the Work, I had Peace and inward Satisfaction therein: For I thought it
my Duty to publish and promote, as much as I well could, the Doctrine and
Sermon of Christ, my Lord and Master; since the very Life and Marrow of true
Christianity is therein to be found, in a very great Degree; and, without
Controversy, those who live up, and according to the Doctrine here laid down by
Christ in this Sermon, will be blessed in this World, and that to come, of
whatsoever Denomination they may be.

T. C.

Some truly tender SCRUPLES of CONSCIENCE, about that Form of Prayer, called
the COMMON PRAYER, As used by the MEMBERS of the Church of ENGLAND.
1717.
1. AS to the Reading the Holy Scriptures, either privately or openly, that I am
not against, but would encourage it in all Christians and true Believers in
Christ, and we ought to excite one another thereto, and more especially to put
in Practice what we read to be our Duty, otherwise the holy Letter will kill
(as says the Apostle, 2 Cor. iii. 6.) which is to be understood when we
practice contrary to what we read therein. As for Example, where our Lord
says, Every idle Word that Man shall speak, they shall give Account thereof,
in the Day of Judgment, Matt. xii. 36. Again, "God will not hold him guiltless,
that takes his Name in vain." Exodus 20.7. "That Servant that knew his Lord's
Will, and did it not, shall be beaten with many Stripes," Luke xii. 47. These,
and many more Portions of Holy Scripture, are condemning and killing to those
who live in Sin and Evil, which the Letter is absolutely against, and without
true Repentance, accompanied with Amendment of Life, though the Holy Bible be
read every Day, it will but add to our Condemnation. But if People truly repent
of the Evil of their Ways, and awake to Righteousness, and sin not, as the Holy
Scriptures themselves hold, and Christ taught, then unto such Souls they are a
rich Treasure, and as a Cabinet full of precious Jewels, "able to make the Man
of God wise to Salvation, through Faith" in Christ (by the Influence of the
Holy Ghost or Spirit) It is not the Reading (divinely inspired Writings, or)
the Bible, which is scrupled; but the formal Reading of formal composed Prayers
and Songs, at set Times, instituted by such whose Principle is, that there is
now no Divine Revelation, and that we cannot live without sinning, while we are
in this Life, according to the Tenor of the Common Prayer; holding, that we sin
as long as we live, as if God's Power were not stronger to preserve out of Sin,
than the Devil is to keep us in Sin, contrary to the Work and Doctrine of the
Holy Apostles, who were sent of God to turn People from Satan's Power, to the
Power of God; whose Glorious, Eternal Power, is above the Power of Sin, Death,
and the Devil.

In the Common Prayer some unsound Words, and also some Scripture Expressions,
perverted to a wrong Use, I would a little open, or write a few Words
concerning.

1 st, "As to that Expression in the Common Prayer, that we are miserable
Sinners."

2 dly, "And that we are full of Bruises and putrefying Sores."

3 dly, "And from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, there is no
Soundness in us."

4 thly, "And that we have left undone the Things which we ought to do, and do
those Things which we ought not to do; and this to be repeated for Life."

First then, If People must be miserable Sinners all their Days, to what End
did Christ come into the World and preach the Gospel, and suffer Death, the
painful Death of the Cross? Did he not come to put an End to Sin, and to
destroy the Works of the Devil, whose Works are Sin? Did he not preach against
Sin, both within, and without? Witness the 5th, 6th, and 7th Chapters of the
Evangelist Matthew. Yea, his Birth, Life, Preaching, Suffering, Death and
Resurrection, and Ascension into Glory, were all against Sin, the Devil, Death
and Darkness, and all the Works and Deeds thereof. Christ died for our Sins,
and we should die to them, and live to him: He came to save us from the Act of
Sin, as well as the Imputation of it; and takes away the Guilt of Sin, on
Condition of true Repentance and Amendment of Life, as the Doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles do largely and plainly demonstrate, as any who are come to the
Years of Discretion, and who can but read the Holy Scriptures, may plainly
discover.

The Apostle says, Whatsoever Things are holy, whatsoever Things are pure,
just, and of good Report, seek after those Things. And again, No unclean Thing
can enter the Kingdom of Heaven; but certainly all Sin is unclean. Read over
the Holy Scriptures, from the Beginning to the End, their Nature and Tendency
is against all Sin; and as it is true, that we all have been Sinners, surely
therefore all true Christians, and true Believers in Christ, have Cause
reverently to bow, and to be truly and humbly thankful, that Christ, our great
Lord, by his offering himself for us, has taken away that Imputation; so that
now through true Faith, and Belief in Christ, accompanied with true Repentance,
and Amendment of Life, the Imputation of our former Sins is taken away; for
which Cause we praise God, and adore his Eternal Majesty for ever.

2 dly, As to the Word miserable, a Christian may indeed be poor; but since
Christ is come to make us happy and comfortable, through the Hope of eternal
Salvation, in his Name and Power (as we are not to think ourselves better than
we are) so we cannot say nor think we are miserable, unless we are without God
and Christ; and then we are miserable indeed; but no Mortal can be miserable,
who has Christ; for he that has the Son, has Life (Eternal Life) abiding in
him: To be truly in Christ, is to be truly happy; this Doctrine is as clear as
the Sun at Noonday, or as a Morning without Clouds: A Soul, when it comes to
see itself undone without a Savior, and see Sin to be exceeding sinful, and is
ready to cry to the Almighty, Lord, Help, or I perish! Save me, or I am undone
for ever! Then the Soul sees itself miserable; but it is for want of Christ:
And when Christ is come into, or unto the Soul, then its Misery vanishes, or
flies away; but from Day to Day, and Week to Week, yea, all the Days of one's
Life; to be miserable Sinners, is a miserable Case indeed, destroying the very
Nature of Christianity: Wherefore, some tender, conscientious Souls, cannot
join with such miserable Sinners and Sayers, who neither say nor do that which
they ought.

3 dly, As to these Sayings, We are full of Bruises and putrefying Sores, from
the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, and that there is no Soundness
in us.

Can any Congregation of such People as these (if they say truly, and if they
do not say truly, what will the Consequence be, let the wise in Heart judge)
can, I say, such a people be the Church of Christ, or his Spouse, or beautiful
Bride? Christ says, If the Inside be clean, the Outside will be clean also;
And he came to cleanse the Souls of poor Mortals, and to heal them, and wash
them from Sin, and does it by his spiritual Baptism, and the Fire of his Word;
also the abovesaid Church and People, contrary to this putrified and unsound,
constant and continual Confession, do both promise and vow, that they will
forsake the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World,
and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and walk in God's Holy Will and
Commandments, all the Days of their Lives: The very highest Pitch of Perfection
any Man or Christian can attain in this Life! and yet contrary to those Vows
and solemn Covenants, they tell the Almighty, from Time to Time, that they are
unsound, nay, that there is no Soundness in them; but that they are putrified
from Head to Foot (as above) and by their common Practice intend to tell Him so
as long as they live in this Life: This is unsound Work indeed: And truly those
who are tenderly conscientious, may well scruple to join with it, or with those
who are in such Ways, Words and Works.

Those bruised, putrified, sore and unsound Souls, are therefore tenderly, in
Christian Love, advised to come to Christ, the Physician of Value, and great
Doctor of the Soul, that he may heal them, and wash their sinful, putrified
Souls, and unsound Hearts, "by the Washing of Regeneration, and renewing of his
Word and Spirit." Ye are clean through the Word which I have spoken unto you,
says our Savior, John xv. 3. They were cleansed, by putting his Word in
Practice; for, says Christ, Mat. vii. 24. He that hears these Sayings of
mine, and does them, I will liken him to a wise Man; so, consequently, he that
does them not, is foolish, sinful, and unclean.

4 thly, And further, say they, We have left undone those Things which we ought
to have done. Now, doing the Truth, and doing that which is right, is what we
ought to do; and committing Sin, is that which we ought not to do: Certainly
any Man of Sense and Understanding, would think it Mockery, if his Children or
Servants should serve him so from Time to Time, and make a common Practice of
it: By this Confession (if it be genuine) they must needs know better than they
practice or do, they knowing what they ought to do, but not doing it; and our
Lord Jesus Christ says positively, He that knows his Master's Will, and does
it not, shall be beaten with many Stripes: And again, Be ye not like the
Scribes and Pharisees; for they say, and do not; therefore be ye not like unto
them.

But what can be expected from those who say they sin in their best Duties? And
if so, they sin whenever they read the Common Prayers; and by the same Rule,
the oftener they read them, the oftener they sin; wherefore, how can a sincere,
devout Soul, who unfeignedly loves the Lord Jesus Christ, so as to keep his
Commandments (for that is to love him truly, and according to his own
Definition of it; If ye love me, keep my Commandments, says Christ) I say, how
can any such sincere Soul join with such wrong Doers and Sayers; it must needs
be an unsafe Practice to do what One knows should not be done; the Nature of
such Doings being very provoking, either to God or Man: What Man in the World
would like it, in either Son or Servant?

Oh! what would become of poor, degenerate Man, if the Lord Almighty were not
very indulgent, if he were not a God gracious and merciful, slow to Anger, and
of great Loving Kindness to poor Mortals!

5 thly, And as to their singing David's Psalms in Meter; how often do they
sing that which is not true as to themselves, and also that which is not
according, but contrary to their States and Conditions? As when they sing,
"That they water their Couch with their Tears; and that they practice what they
know, when they confess they do that which they ought not to do, and leave
undone that which they ought to do."

The Apostle said, he would sing with the Spirit, and with the Understanding
also. And again, We know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit itself makes Intercession for us, with Groanings which cannot be
uttered, Romans viii. 26. In the primitive Times of Christianity, they prayed and
sung as they were helped by the Holy Ghost, or Spirit, and not by Book, or
stinted or set Forms; but Oh! the primitive Soundness of Christianity is too
much lost and defaced; and therefore some who desire to come again to the
primitive Soundness and Purity of the Christian Religion, scruple to join with
such unsound Formalities, and that conscientiously, for the Reasons above, and
more which might be given.

When such Scruples are mentioned, the Members of the Church of England usually
reply, that the Scriptures vindicate them in their Form, which, how well they
do so, let it be freely and fairly examined; not for Contention, but for
Edification in the pure Love of Jesus.

1 st, "The Scripture says, that there was a People that was full of Bruises
and putrefying Sores, etc."

Ans. But that was in the Time of the Law, when the People had transgressed the
Law, and were under the Law; for had they done their Duty, and kept the Law,
they could not truly have said so, Isa. i. 6. They were then indeed gone astray
like lost Sheep, and that brought them into that sore, putrified State, and
bruised Condition, and "their Law did not make the Comers thereunto perfect;
yet (as says the Apostle) the bringing in of a better Hope did," which was the
Hope of the Gospel; so that the Apostle preaches Perfection under the Gospel
Dispensation, though some of our worldly-wise Men will not allow of it; and I
hope we are not under the Law, but under Grace; "and the glorious Law of the
Spirit of Life, in Christ Jesus, has and does set the true Believers free from
the Law of Sin and Death;" so that a true Christian cannot say truly (with the
false and rebellious Jews, of whom the Prophet there speaks) "That he is full
of putrefying Sores, and that there is no Soundness in him, and say it all the
Days of his Life."

2 dly, Again the Scripture says, Psa. li. 5. I was shapen in Iniquity, and in
Sin did my Mother conceive me.

Ans. The Psalmist was at that Time under deep Convictions for the great Sins
he had been guilty of, in the Matter of Uriah; 1 Kings 15.5.
but by his Expressions in the 9th, 10th, and 11th Verses of the same Psalm, it
is plain he believed a better State attainable; and surely these Expressions
cannot be applicable to all Men, at all Times; for we read of them who were
sanctified from the Womb; neither can it be reasonably or charitably supposed,
that all Women (especially chaste and virtuous Christians) do all conceive
their Children in Sin, and bring them forth in Iniquity; and if it were so
(which God forbid) it don't follow, that we must live in it all our Days; no
surely, if we believe Christ, and the Holy Scriptures, whose Doctrine is holy,
and Commands Holiness, in both Testaments. And if People would walk in the Holy
Light of Christ, who enlightens every Man that comes into the World, as
recorded in Holy Scriptures, they would then be cleansed from their Sin, from
both the Act and (...) Imputation, as says the Apostle, If we walk in the
Light, as he is in the Light, then have we Fellowship one with another, and the
Blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses us from all Sin, 1 John i. 7.

3 dly, "There is none that does God, no not One," Romans iii. 12.

Ans. It is beyond all Doubt the Apostle spoke of the People in their
unconverted State; for if they had been come to the Work of Conversion and
Regeneration, they must, and it is impossible but they should, do some Good;
and though there was a Time that none did Good, it was under the Law, and not
under Grace; and spoken of the Unbelievers, and not Believers; especially since
Christ has brought a Covenant of Grace, in order to teach and help us to live
righteous, virtuous, holy, religious, and sober Lives and Conversations, Titus
ii. 11.

4 thly, They object the Words of our Savior to the young Man in the Gospel,
where he calls Christ Good Master, asking him, "What good Thing he should do
that he might inherit Eternal Life?" Christ answered, Why call thou me good?
There is none good but One, that is God, Mat. xix, 17.

Ans. And true it is, in our Lord's Sense, for comparing Men to Christ (who is
God) there is none good; the young Man thought he had been speaking to a Man
like himself, and knew not that he was speaking to the Good and Gracious Son of
the Most High God; but if we compare Men with Men, it must be granted that
there is, was, and will be, some good Men, Women, and Children, in that Sense
and Consideration; and our Lord shows how we may know these good Men, Women,
and Children, By their Fruits ye shall know them, says Christ; Men do not
gather Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of Thistles: A good Tree cannot bring forth
evil Fruit, neither can an evil Tree bring forth good Fruit; wherefore by their
Fruits ye shall know them. How plain is the Doctrine of Christ, if People would
but lend an obedient Ear, and give him a faithful and sincere Heart, and serve
him in a pure Mind, without Deceit, or Guile, taking up his holy Cross (to the
corrupt Will of Man) in true Self-denial: The Scripture says, If we confess our
Sins, 1 John 1.9.
he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all
Unrighteousness: Where then is the Sin, when God has cleansed us from all
Unrighteousness? Indeed it is very meet, and our Duty, to confess our Sins;
they truly say, That,

5 thly, The Scriptures in sundry Places excite us to confess our Sins.

Ans. For poor Mortals have all sinned, and, by their sinful Nature, we are all
Children of Wrath, and this is a strong and mighty Motive for us in Truth to
confess our Sins, because God is so just and merciful to forgive and to pass be
our Iniquities; and indeed if the Weight of our Sins were upon us, and the true
Sense of the Heinousness of Sin and Evil, it would certainly bow us in deep
Reverence and Humility before the Throne of Grace, and melt our Spirits into
true Tenderness before the Most High and Immortal JEHOVAH; and then it is that
he forgives us, and cleanses us from all Iniquity, and would (according to the
Apostle's Doctrine) purify us to Himself a peculiar People, zealous of (and
for) good Works, and against bad Works, and Words, and Thoughts also: And when
God has so cleansed the Soul, then of Course these common, and often repeated,
dry Confessions full of Sin and Putrefaction, must fall, and we should fear to
offend any more. Let it be tenderly, and in Christian Love, asked, How often do
our Common Prayer People go into their Closets, or privately retire into some
secret Place, and there pour out their Cries and Tears to the Almighty, and
humbly confess their Faults to Him alone? I ask, would not such an Exercise be
more acceptable to God, than a popular Repetition daily and formally made? This
I leave to the Consideration of all sober Christians, and to the Judgment of
the truly Pious. And how like Mockery it looks, as soon as they come from their
Prayers and Confessions, they (many of them) will vainly laugh, and be full of
idle Words and Discourse, and some of them curse and swear, and take the Awful
and Sacred Name which they have been addressing (or pretending to address) in
vain, and profane that Holy Name of God and Christ, which they have been using
in their Devotion, which I have been an Eye and an Ear Witness of many a Time,
to the Sorrow and Grief of my Soul, and which has, in Part, occasioned these
Lines; as also hoping it may be a Motive to stir up some to more holy Living,
and that the Name of God and Christ might be glorified, and the precious,
dear-bought Soul saved. Let us also remember, that the Holy Scriptures to
abundantly require and command us to forsake our Sins; the Holy Text says, He
that confesses and forsakes his Sins, shall have Mercy.

6 thly, And whereas the Apostle John, in his first General Epistle, Chap. i.
Verse 8. writes, If we say we have no Sin, we deceive ourselves; from whence it
is objected, we ought always to confess our Sins.

Ans. Yes, we should do so when ever we commit any, or knowingly do Evil; but
when the Almighty has cleansed us from all Unrighteousness, then our Sins are
done away by the Grace of his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and we are washed by
Regeneration; then it cannot be true to say we are miserable and putrified
Sinners, when at the same Time also Christ has purified and sanctified his
Church and People.

It is true which St. John says. Chap. i. Verse 10. (that opening and
explaining the 8th Verse) If we say we have not sinned, we make Him (i. e. God)
a Liar; for that all have sinned; so that it is plain that he speaks of the
State of Man before he comes to the Work of Conversion, or to be renewed by
Grace; for when we come truly to know Christ, and to see and believe in him,
then we witness a Change from our corrupt and evil Nature, and sinful Course of
Life, which is as clear as the Shining of the Sun without Clouds at Noonday
from the same Apostle's Words, which I shall transcribe for Information and
Edification of any who may see this.

The first General Epistle of John (the beloved Disciple of our Lord Jesus) 3d
Chap. 6th Verse to the 10th: -- Whosoever abides in him (i. e. Christ) sins
not: Whosoever sins, has not seen him, neither known him. Little Children,
let no Man deceive you: He that does Righteousness, is righteous, even as he is
righteous: He that commits Sin, is of the Devil; for the Devil sins from
the Beginning. For this Purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might
destroy the Works of the Devil. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin;
for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sir, because he is born of God. In
this the Children of God are manifest, and the Children of the Devil; whosoever
does not Righteousness, is not of God (and as above) he that commits Sin, is
of the Devil.

This is naked Truth, without any Covering, and the very Sum and Substance of
true Religion. Oh! that all true Christians would lay it to Heart, and ponder
it in their Minds, and then resolve whether they will be Sinners to the End of
their Days, or whether they will repent, and turn from the Evil of their Ways;
the latter of which, that poor Mortals may come to witness for themselves, is
the Desire and Prayer of my Soul.

If it be further objected, "That our Savior taught his Disciples a Form:" He
did so; and a glorious Form it is; and they did as they prayed, and were taught
of Christ, and so they did it truly, and in true Faith, believing they should
witness what they said and prayed to be fulfilled. Our Father which art in
Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be done in Earth, as
it is in Heaven. Give us this Day our daily Bread. And forgive us our
Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into
Temptation, but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power,
and the Glory, for ever. Amen.

Christ said to some of old, Ye are of your Father the Devil, because his Works
ye do: And all Sin is his Work, and by our Works (as above) we are manifest,
whether we are the Children of God, or of the Devil.

A LETTER TO A FRIEND in IRELAND; Containing a RELATION of some sorrowful
INSTANCES of the sad Effects of INTEMPERANCE, as a Warning to Young People.
PROVE. xii. 2. A good Man obtains Favor of the Lord: But a Man of wicked
Devices will be condemn.

Verse 7. The Wicked are overthrown, and are not: But the House of the
Righteous shall stand.

ISA. v. 22. Woe to them who are mighty to drink Wine, and Men of Strength to
mingle strong Drink.


The PREFACE to the Tenth Edition of this Letter to a Friend.
Temperate READER,
THE longer we live in the World, the more we see the Danger and many
Mischiefs, Miseries and Inconveniences, Intemperance occasions to Mankind, not
only in Eating, Clothing, Buying and Selling, etc. but particularly in that
great Sin of Drinking to Excess. And though a Risque is run of incurring the
Displeasure of some ill-natured Over-lovers of Strong-liquors, th which has
been experienced by the Author, through some of the former Impressions; yet
they having found such general Acceptance in many Parts of the World, and being
serviceable to People of all Persuasions, I, for the further Service of poor
Mortals, adventure to put forth this Tenth Edition, with this additional
Preface, in Order (if possible) to persuade all rational Souls to forsake so
destructive and vile an Evil: Which gross Sin has these had Effects attending
it (with many more that might be set down) which affects both the Aged and the
Youth; for whose Sakes ( viz. the Youth) it was at first chiefly intended, in
order to stir them up to the Love of pure Religion, and pious and virtuous
Living.

1st then, In the Aged, it has those bad Effects, viz. They are bad Examples
to their Youth, who when reproved, may reply, My Father before me loved strong
Liquors, as well as I: He loved a Glass of Wine: He loved a Bowl of Punch; he
loved good Cider, and good Ale, and would be merry with it, and why may not I,
as well as he? He was a wise, good Man, when he was sober; and pray where is
the Harm of loving good Liquor, and being merry?

I answer; The Harm is in the immoderate and extravagant Use of it. It is only
the Excess which this Letter detects, and is intended to discourage. I have
known some who have quarrelled with public Preaching, because they have been
guilty of the Faults spoke against: And the Author expects to be buffeted for
this Publication, by some of these mighty Sons to drink Wine, and to mingle
strong Drink ( i. e. Punch, Setterena, Tiff, Flip, etc.) I had like to forget
Sampson (as I have several others) which so overcomes those Men of Might, as to
get from them their precious Time (which cannot be bought with Money) and their
Money, besides Health and Credit, Understanding and Reason, and all. And pray
where is the Difference then between the Man and the Beast, though the Man be
full of Days?

What can we say to the Youth of such Parents (that will avail) while their
Parents show them such evil Examples? And as it is in that, so it is in all
other Evils, Parents Examples are very hurtful in evil Things, though very
helpful in that which is good. If a Man sees a Youth to be out of Order, and
reproves him for being in Drink, Evil-speaking, Pride, Covetousness, etc. and
be guilty of the same, his Child may answer, Why, Father, I had not done so, if
I had not seen thee (or you) do it? And it being an incumbent Duty in a Father,
Mother, Master, or Mistress, to reprove their Youth for Evil; if we are not
clear in ourselves of what we reprove in our Children or Servants, and our
Children or Servants miscarry through our bad Example, what a melancholy
Reflection will that be to us, if rightly considered! which indeed would be
this, I have been instrumental to my poor Child's Ruin and Destruction! A
melancholy Reflection to any sober Christian!

Also, except there is a large Income, instead of taking Care to put the Youth
in a reputable Way to live in the World, it brings them to Poverty: And if
there is a large Estate, it puts them in the Way to spend it. And, Oh! how many
are spending their precious Time in Taverns, and Ordinaries, and at the same
Time their Wives and Children suffering and weeping at home? And some sober,
modest Women (for the Men are mostly addicted to Drinking to Excess) would
suffer unspeakable Hardships before they would expose their Husbands; and
indeed they that do it in such a modest Way, being forced to it by such ill
Practices, are much more to be p^tied than blamed.

2dly, Concerning the Youth, it mightily hurts them (as it does the Aged also)
as to their Religion, Reputation, Health and Estate, etc.

1st, As to their Religion, it not only clouds their Understanding, and darkens
the Nobility thereof, but it unfits them for all and every religious Duty.

2dly, Some who value a good Name, had rather lose their Lives, than lose their
Reputation through immoderate Drinking. For if the Youth be single, and
addicted to immoderate Drinking, no wise and virtuous Person will tie
themselves to them for Life, by Marriage; which State of Life, to a wise and
virtuous Pair, is far exceeding in Happiness all other Company or Conversation
whatsoever. It is better to be one of these than to enjoy a Kingdom: And, on
the other Hand, it is better to be a Slave in Turkey, than to be married to an
intemperate Person.

3dly, Intemperance destroys the Health of the Body, which we generally esteem
before Wealth. And if a Man were a King, Prince, or Duke, if he did not enjoy
his Health, what good would all his Honor, Power, and Wealth, do him? Oh! what
Abundance of Young People have destroyed themselves by this Sin? As it is
written. The Wicked do not live out Half their Days: And where this Sin is
growing general in a Country, that Country is growing to its Ruin and
Destruction. It wastes the People, decays Trade, and is very destructive to
Religion, and an Inlet to Atheism. Good People are afraid to live in such a
Country, and bad People flock to it, and often make their Exit in it.

4thly, And many a fair Estate has been embezzled and spent through
Intemperance, which honest Parents, with great Labor, Care, and Industry, have
got together, and left to their Sons and Daughters, who have extravagantly
spent it upon their Lusts; and thereby have brought Infamy on themselves, their
Fathers, and their Posterity, whenever it has pleased God that they have left
any behind them; besides (which is worst of all) dishonouring God, and bringing
a Scandal on the Christian Religion.

Some of our wise Kings and Queens in Great Britain, being sorrowfully affected
with the Heinousness of this great Sin, have made strict Laws against
Intemperance: And where the Legislative Authority makes little or no Provision
against it, or when they do make any, do not take Care to put it in Practice,
such a State or Colony must needs be in a declining Condition. And for
particular Families and Persons, we may see too much of this Evil in our
Neighbourhoods, almost in all Parts of the World, which causes solid, sober,
pious, virtuous, and truly religious Christians to mourn, and humbly to bow
before the Most High God, begging of Him, for Christ's Sake, that He, by His
mighty Power, would be pleased to reform the unregenerate World.

This is the Prayer and fervent Desire of an entire Lover of Mankind, both Body
and Soul, and who desires their Welfare in this, and the World to come.

T. C.

A Letter to a FRIEND.
Barbados, 7 th 1 st Mo. 1718-19. My Dear Friend,
IT is long since I had a Line from thee; 1718.
but not long since I thought of thee and thine, with Friends of your Nation;
where I know the Lord has a Seed, who loves him, and does delight and desire
to serve him, and are accounted to him for a chosen Generation; and that this
Generation may spread and prosper in the Earth, is my earnest Travel in Spirit
both Night and Day, at Times and Seasons. There is also an Exercise upon my
Mind for the Offspring of this Seed, the Children of those Men and Women, who
have confessed the Name of Christ before Men, in a holy, Self-denying Life, and
sober Conversation; and I do certainly know, that many pious Souls join with me
in this Exercise, bowing the Knee to the Lord of Sabbaths for the Peace,
Prosperity, and eternal Welfare of the present arising Generation. Oh! how
exercising it is to good Men and Women to see their Youth take those Ways which
lead to Destruction, and go in Company with the Wicked, whose Ways lead to the
utter Ruining of both Body and Soul, and whose Steps take hold on Hell.

It is a great Evil which many are prone to (i. e.) Keeping of vain and idle
Company, which has brought many a young Man, and young Woman, to utter Ruin and
Destruction, both Body and Soul. How many fair Estates have been ^asted! How
many fine Youths destroyed by keeping evil Company, and by Excess in Drinking,
is really lamentable to consider! It keeps the Poor in Poverty; it makes the
Rich many times poor, and brings both Rich and Poor into Disgrace; it breaks
and destroys the Health and natural good Constitution of the Body, and instead
thereof fills it with Misery and Pain; and which is yet more, it destroys the
Soul, which is the most noble Part of the Man; so that it is a sore threefold
Evil, but the last the worst, by how much the Soul is the more lasting and
better Part. Several terrible Instances of this Nature I have met with in my
Travels among the Children of Men; three or four of which I may inform thee of;
and it may be affecting unto thee, as it has often been to my Mind, when I
have thought thereon.

The first Instance of a young Man, given to ill Company, and hard Drinking.
THE first is of a certain Beautiful young Man, a Physician by Profession, who
was much addicted to ill Company, and to drink hard, and was sometimes visited
with strong Convictions; in one of which Visitations he sent for me, and told
me his Condition, and made solemn Covenants, if God would but that once spare
him, he would not do the like Evil again. At that Time it did please the
Almighty to spare him; but he soon forgot how it had been with him; and fell
into the same Sin again; although he had a most notable Admonition in a Dream,
but a little before. His Dream was this, which is very remarkable, we being
then at Sea, in Sight of Great Britain, he saw in his Dream a great and
spacious Town, the Buildings high, and Streets broad; at which he landed, and
going up the Street, he espied a large Sign, on which was written in great
Golden Letters, SHAME, to which he went, and at the Door stood a Woman, with a
Cann of drink in her Hand; who asked him to drink? To which he replied, With
all his Heart, for he said, he had drank nothing but Water a great While: So he
took the Cann, and drank a hearty Draught, which, as he said, made him merry,
and he went reeling up the Street, when, behold on a sudden, a grim Fellow met
him, and arrested him in the Name of the Governor of the Place, before whom he
brought him. This Governor, he said, was like a great Black Dog, the largest
that ever he saw, who grinned at him, and passed Sentence on him, and sent him
to Prison, there to lie for ever. He told me this Dream, with such an Emphasis,
as made me to tremble, which was thus interpreted to him; I told him, that he
was an ingenious young Man, and might easily discern the Interpretation of this
Dream, which to me seemed to be ominous to him: The great Town and high
Buildings, is thy great and high Profession; the Sign, on which SHAME was writ,
with the Woman with the Cann at the Door, shows the great Shame of the Sin of
Drunkenness, and that it is thy Weakness; and that grim Fellow, that arrested
thee, is Death, who will arrest all Mortals; and the great black Dog, the
Governor of the Place, is the Devil; who, when his Servants have served him to
the last, will torment them for ever. -- God forbid, it is but a Dream, was his
Answer to me. I said, it was a very significant one to him.

About three Days after, the same Person went on board a Ship, whose Loading
was Wine and Brandy; the Master gave a Cann of Wine to him, and said the same
Words, as the Woman said to him in his Dream, and he answered with the same
Expressions, and it had the same Effect upon him; for he took such a hearty
Draught as made him too merry, insomuch that he overset the Boat, and was
drowned, much in Drink: And I seeing him sink down, and his Dream so punctually
fulfilled, I was very heavy in my Mind for several Days.

Oh! methinks I could wish that the many righteous Judgments of the most High,
might effectually Work on the Hearts of those People, who are in the Flower of
their Age, to their Conversion and Salvation.

The second Instance of a Merchant, addicted to the like destructive Practices.
THE second is of a Merchant, about Thirty-five Years of Age, whom I saw take
Leave of, and bid adieu to this World: He was one who had spent much Time in
keeping unprofitable Company and Over-drinking, which Practice wasted his
Strength and Flesh, as it did his Time and Money, and brought him into a deep
Consumption; as it has done many to my certain Knowledge; besides bringing the
racking painful Distemper of the Go^t, and many other Miseries; so that at last
it brought him to his Chamber; and then to his Bed: And in his Sickness, he
several Times sent for me, and made serious Acknowledgments of his former
misspent Time, and hoped, if the Lord would spare him, to be more careful for
the Time to come. But he was no longer to be trusted here in this World; for he
went not out until he was carried in his Coffin: He held my Hand fast in his,
until he died, and was sensible to the last.

One Day, as he lay on his Deathbed, he called me to him, into his Chamber,
and, charged me to caution the young People to be careful how they keep (and
spend their Time in) Evil Company, for it had been his Ruin, and now lay as a
great and heavy Burden on his Conscience: Oh! says he, if they did but feel one
Quarter of an Hour, what I feel, they never would keep such Company any more:
Tell this to my former Companions:

And indeed there is a great deal of Hurt done by young Men getting together to
drink Wine, or other strong Drink: I wish the Woe; mentioned in the Holy
Scriptures, may not be the Portion of many of them; who are mighty to drink
Wine, and Men of Strength to mingle strong Drink; and sit late at it, which
many Times brings Sufferings on Parents, Wife, Children, and Servants, as well
as themselves; and is a very disorderly Practice, being a Reproach to all
Christian Societies and Families, wherever such Things are.

There is a great Concern upon me against this growing Evil in our young
Generation; and I hope, in Christ our Lord, that diverse Heads of Families will
come under the like Exercise in themselves: And then, if our Youth will neither
hear nor fear the Lord, nor us, we shall be clear, and their Blood will be on
their own Heads, as a worthy and honorable Elder, and Man of God (of your
Nation) said: One of whose Offspring is the Subject of the third Particular,
that I shall mention to thee, of the many I have been acquainted with, in my
Pilgrimage here, in and on this Part of the Globe of the Earth and Sea; for
these are but few Instances of many that I have met withal: I may therefore
thus proceed.

The third Instance of another young Man, who much embraced the same destroying
Delights.
THE fifth of the first Month, at Bridge-Town, in Barbados, S. E. Son of W. E.
died. His Death was sudden; and, as was reasonably supposed, he destroyed
himself by Drinking and undue Company-keeping, and sitting long at it. A
Person, to whom he himself had told it, told me, That he and Four more, at one
Sitting, drank above twenty Quarts of double-distilled Rum-Punch; which put him
in a violent Fever: So that he ran about the Streets, with a naked Sword, and
talked of killing one of the Neighbors, in this drunken Fit. The next Day he
came to me, and a^ me, Whose Door the Blood would have lain at, if he had, in
that Fit of Disorder, killed any Body? By which Query, I thought he was not yet
rightly come to himself: Because there were some ordinary Reports about the
Town concerning him, he reckoned those who broached and spread those Reports,
would have been culpable, and must have answered for his Murder, if he had
committed any: But this was but covering his Sin.

He seemed to fall out with Religion too; for he said, He would come no more to
Worship, till he should have Justice done him, as to the Reports: Though poor
Soul, he had the more need to present himself before his Maker, and bow before
the Most High God, and repent in great Humiliation. The same Day in which he
neglected his Duty, he was taken sick, and that Day-week was buried. He sent
for me, and I went to him: He had but little Sense of his End, as I could
perceive, and remained so till the Night he died. I was by him when he died,
and saw him fetch his last Breath. A few Minutes before he gave up the Ghost,
he trembled and shook exceedingly, and shrieked out, to the Astonishment of all
those present, which pierced my very Soul within me: For he seemed to go out of
the World in an extreme great Agony.

I never saw any depart the World any ways like him; and indeed it was very
amazing, and greatly affected my Mind with Sorrow: For I thought he was very
unfit to die. Oh! methinks I could heartily wish, that such Objects might be as
so many strong Motives, to stir up and to awaken the Offspring of good Men and
virtuous Women (as also any professing Christianity) to fear the Lord, and walk
in his Ways, whose Ways lead to Life, in which the Sting of Death is taken away.

The Children of godly Parents have much to answer for, in Slighting or
Neglecting the wholesome Counsel, good Advice, and faithful Admonition, of their
faithful and careful Parents; whom they Disgrace and Dishonor, contrary to the
Command of God, who says, Honor thy Parents, that thy Days may be long in the
Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee: And none can truly Honor their
Parents, who Dishonor God their Maker.

The fourth Instance of a young Woman who often absented herself from Meetings,
for the sake of much bad Company.
THE fourth Instance, which I shall give thee, is concerning a young Woman, of
about 25 Years of Age; who was brought up very finely, tenderly, and
delicately, with her Lockets, and Chains of Gold, and Waiting-Maid: But her
Parents living too high for their Income, broke in Peoples Debt; and their
Children, as they grew up, were put to their Shifts. What pity it is! that
Youth are not brought up to some Business, whereby they may get a Livelihood in
the World, if their Parents should drop before them: And though Parents may
have a handsome Interest in this World, yet it has been thought by some great,
as well as wise Men, that to put out Youths to Trades and Business, is both
profitable and honorable: Instances of the evil Consequences of the contrary,
have been very many, as woeful Experience does daily teach us; and this young
Woman was one: For falling into evil Company, she ran into Debt, and was put
into Prison; where was a Murderer, whom, it is said, she was accessory to loose
from his Chains; and for so doing was put in Chains herself, along with him,
when he was taken again: And now, instead of her Gold Chain, she must take up
with an Iron One; and in a little Time, is to be tried for her Life: And in
Expectation of Death, and being in great Distress, she sent for me, and
entreated me to come and see her die, and much lamented her Condition: Oh! said
she, that that I might be a Warning to all young People, to be careful that
they keep not evil Company, and spend their Time which should be spent in
Worship, in airy Company, and other vain Diversions, when they should be doing
their Duty to God. And then she would weep bitterly; she being very penitent,
it very much affected me; and I told her, That I did believe, if she in her
Heart was clear, and no ways consenting to the Murder, her Life would be given
her: But then Woe and Misery would be her Portion, if she did not amend her
Ways. And as I was leaving her, she charged me, to warn young People that they
might be careful that they spend not their Time in Vanity, and to keep out of
vain and wicked Company, which she said had brought her to that Misery and
Shame: And that they should take the Counsel and Advice of good Friends (which
if I had done, said she) I had not brought Reproach on my Friends, and on my
Parents.

In a little Time after, she was brought to Trial, and acquitted by the Jury. I
saw her once since, and reminded her of her Duty; which, she said, She hoped to
perform; and that it should be a Warning to her, while she lived in this World:
And that such Examples may be a Warning to all People, is the earnest Desire of
a Lover of Souls, and Servant of Jesus.

T. C.

SINCE I wrote the above, there being a Person in this Place, who would be
sometimes overtaken in Drink, I sent it to him to copy over, hoping it might
have some good Effect on him: And truly before he had copied the Relation of
the first Person, he was so smitten with the Sense of the Judgment of the
Almighty, that he cried out, even to Roaring, and said, "He was a condemned
Person, and that he felt the Fire of Hell." He sent for me, and several others,
and begged of us to pray for him: He was told, That the Hand of God was upon
him for his Sin, and desired to take Warning in time, and repent, left the Lord
should cut him off in his Iniquity. The Lord did accordingly cut off this
Person, he dying suddenly, by hard Drinking, as I was informed by a Letter from
Barbados; though he promised, if the Lord would spare him then, to be more
faithful for the Time to come; and was then under deep inward Exercise (...)
Mind. I mention this as a Corrobration of the above Instances, for further
Admonition. This Person was in a considerable Post in that Government: His Name
I forbear to mention, for diverse Reasons. If thou and Friends see meet, I could
desire, from the Exercise that is on my Mind, that this might spread;
peradventure it might be some Stroke upon some, for their Good.

A LETTER TO AQUILA PACA, HIGH SHERIFF of Baltimore County, in the Province of
Maryland, and to other Friends there.
Barbados, 1 st of 12th Mo. 1718. Loving Friend Aquila Paca,
1718.
MEETING here with Captain Swaddle, bound for your River, I found a Concern on
my Mind to send a few Lines, remembering the good Opportunities I had at your
Meeting in that Neighborhood, together with those few poor honest Souls that I
met with there; and I desire thee to give my dear Love in Christ to them.

Dear Friend, I am tenderly concerned in the Love of God, and his dear Son, to
beg of thee, that thou let not the World, nor any Thing therein, either the
Riches, Pleasures, or Friendship thereof, draw thy Mind from that Measure of
Grace which has been manifested to thee; for God has visited thee in his
tender Love and Mercy, as thou well know, and has often begotten good
Desires in thee, and convinced thee of the holy Truth, as it is in Jesus. Oh!
says my Soul, that thou may more and more grow therein, to thy bringing forth
much good Fruit, to the Glory of God, and the eternal Good of that Part in
thee, which will never die.

Salute me to thy Wife and Children, and the Neighbors, and their Children
also, all whom I wish well in this World, and also in that which is to come,
the same I wish to all those who love Christ, so as to keep his Commandments.

If thou see meet, thou may read what (...) at the Close of your Meeting on
a First Day, (...) Meeting I hope you keep up in Order to worship God in
Christ's Name; for to such as meet in his Name, he has promised to be in the
Midst of them, wherever they so meet; the which, he has graciously fulfilled
at many Times.

Dear Friends, it is in my Mind to visit you with the Salutation of Brotherly
Love, in our holy Lord Jesus Christ, and may let you know, that though I have
been long absent from you in Body, yet have I been often present in Spirit with
you, and you have been often in my Mind, with Prayers to the Lord for your
Growth in the holy Truth which he has been pleased to make known to you, and
many times I have desired of the Almighty, that he would be pleased to preserve
a Seed in your Parts that should serve him, and be accounted to him for a
Generation. I have also desired that the Lord would visit your young Ones, and
bring them to the Knowledge of his Truth: And I pray God, that the tender
Visitation that was on diverse of them, when I was present with you, may by them
never be forgotten, but that they may be Plants of Righteousnese, of God's own
Right Hand planting.

And, Dear Friends, forsake not the Assembling of yourselves together, in the
Name of Christ, remembering how you have been visited with the Heart-melting
Power, and the sweet Presence of the Most High, in your silent waiting on, and
worshipping him in his Holy Spirit and Truth, as well as when you have been
vocally visited by the Ministers of Jesus.

Such Worshippers (as our Lord said to the Woman of Samaria) the heavenly
Father seeks to worship him; and those whom God finds under such Exercise,
such find him to be unto them all in all; He is unto them Wisdom,
Righteousness, Justification, Sanctification, and Redemption.

Oh! Dear Souls, look to him (who is invisible to the outward Eye) who is God
over all, and is blessed for ever, and may you, if this comes to you, feel the
Divine Life and Spirit of Christ, in the Reading of this little Epistle of
Brotherly Love.

Live in Love, for God is Love, and all those who dwell in Divine Love, they
dwell in God; wherefore love one another, that thereby you may be known to be
Christ's Disciples: For, says he, by this shall all Men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye have love one to another, or if ye love one another; as one of
the Evangliests has it.

And keep low in Mind, and humble in Spirit; for the Humble God will teach of
his Ways, and the Meek he will guide in Judgment, and those whom he teaches,
are taught the Mysteries of his Kingdom, which Mysteries he teaches to
Spiritual Babes and Sucklings (Glory to his holy Name!) He often hides those
holy Mysteries from the Wise and Prudent, and reveals them to such Men, Women,
and Children, as are little in their own Eyes, and despised by the Wise in
natural Wisdom, or the Wisdom of this vain World.

Oh! mind your heavenly Guide Dear Friends, let me entreat you; for he leads
out of all Sin, and out of all Vanity and Evil, of what Kind soever; and as our
Savior says, into all Truth. When Christ comes by his Grace and Spirit into
the Heart, then He opens the Soul, and enlightens the Understanding, even in
our common Conversation; and much more (at Times) in our solemn Meetings, when
we meet together to worship and serve him; so that it is good to wait upon the
Lord, and to seek him with the whole Heart.

Dear Friends, though my Heart is full of Love and Good Will to you at this
time, as at many others also, I must now conclude, and commit you into the holy
Arms of him, who is all Divine Love, begging the God of Love and Peace to keep
you, and preserve you to his heavenly Kingdom; to whom be all Glory, and
Praise, Might, Majesty, and Divine Dominion, through his dear Son, and the Holy
Spirit, for evermore.

T. C.

CHRIST'S Kingdom Exalted: BEING A Short ESSAY, in Order to promote Truth and
Righteousness in the Earth, and to discourage Unholiness, Ungodliness, and
Unbelief.
PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
IN order to promote and exalt the Kingdom of the dear Son of God (according to
the Gift and Measure of Grace received) I was concerned to write the following
Tract at Sea; and considering the evil Tendency of the Belief and Principle
which has overspread a great Part of the Professors of Christianity, that we
cannot be free from Sin in this Life; and that it is contrary to the Doctrine
of the holy Scriptures of both the New, and Old Testament; I could not be easy
in my Mind, without opposing such a dangerous Tenet: For if we believe that we
must always sin, this being a sinful Faith, "according to our Faith, so it will
be unto us;" and if we die in our Sins, Christ has told us, "where he is gone,
we cannot come." And holy Record informs us, "that no unclean Thing can enter
God's Kingdom."

I have also, for the further Satisfaction of the true Christian Believer,
collected the following Texts of Holy Scripture, which maintain the Doctrine of
Holiness and Perfection; and directly oppose that evil Principle, and that
Doctrine, that we can never be free from Sin, in this Life.

Walk before me, and be thou Perfect, Genesis xvii. 1.

Ye shall be Holy, for I the Lord your God am Holy, Lev. xix. 2. -- xx. 7. --
xi. 44, 45.

And ye shall be holy Men unto me, Exodus xxii. 31.

Noah was a just Man, and perfect in his Generation, Genesis vi. 9.

Without Holiness, no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. xii. 10, 14.

We should be Holy, and without Blame before him, in Love, Ephesians. i 4.

To present you Holy, Unblameable, and Unreprovable, in his Sight, Col. i. 22.

If any Man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy, for the Temple of
God is Holy, which Temple ye are, 1 Cor. iii. 17.

So be ye Holy in all Manner of Conversation, because it is written, Be ye
Holy; for I am Holy, 1 Pet. i. 15, 16.

What manner of Persons ought ye to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness,
2 Pet. iii. 11.

Thou shall be perfect with the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. xviii. 13.

The Lord said, Job was perfect and upright, Job i. 1, 8.

Be ye therefore perfect, the Words of Christ, Matt. v. 48.

I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, John xvii. 23.

Howbeit we speak Wisdom among them that are perfect, 1 Cor. ii. 6.

Finally, Brethren, be perfect, be of one Mind, 2 Cor. xiii. 11.

That we may present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus: That ye may stand
perfect and complete in all the Will of God, Col. i. 28. -- iv. 12.

Now the God of Peace, etc. make you perfect in every good Work, Heb. xiii. 20,
21.

That ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing, James i. 4.

Having therefore these Promises dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from
all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God, 2
Cor. vii. 1.

Unto a perfect Man, unto the Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ,
Ephesians. iv. 12, 13.

This we wish, even your Perfection, 2 Cor. xiii. 9.

Let us go on to Perfection, Heb. vi. 1.

Be not overcome of Evil, but overcome Evil with Good, Romans xii. 21.

Ye have overcome the wicked One; this is twice repeated in one Chapter, 1 John
ii. 13, 14.

Ye are of God, and have overcome, 1 John iv. 4.

Whatsoever is born of God overcomes the World, etc. 1 John v. 4, 5.

To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Tree of Life: Rev. ii. 7.

He that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second Death, Verse 11.

To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, Verse 17.

To him that overcomes, will I give Power over the Nations, Verse 26.

He that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white Raiment, Rev. iii. 5.

Him that overcomes, will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he
shall go no more out, Verse 12.

To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, Verse 21.

He that overcomes shall inherit all Things, Rev. xxi. 7.

Consider then, courteous Reader, I pray thee: What was all this Language of
the Spirit, all these Words of God, and all these Commands, Exhortations, and
glorious Promises, for? What is the End and Tendency of them?

If the Almighty commands Things that cannot be done, what will that make of
him? If his Servants labor and exhort us to Things not to be done, where will
those Absurdities land? Surely it must center in the Mouth of the unprofitable
Servant, and such as charge God foolishly. And are all those fine and glorious
Promises made to put us on to fight against Sin and Satan, without a
Possibility of overcoming? God forbid; and may be, Christian Reader, forbid
also, that thou should believe such a gross and palpable Mistake and Error.

Oh! that the Almighty Lord may send forth more and more his Holy Light and
Truth, and that thereby be might lead and guide the Inhabitants of the Earth;
so that they might not give up the Cause of Christ, but manfully resist, even
to Death, that at last they might have a Crown of Life.

T. C.

CHRIST'S Kingdom Exalted, etc.
1719.
IN the Christian World it is too generally believed, that People on this Side
the Grave cannot be free from Sin; which Principle, or Belief, is a great Let
and Hindrance to the glorious Work of Reformation, and mightily obstructs
People in their Way to Eternal Glory, and tends to uphold the Kingdom of Satan,
which every good Christian (with Saint Paul) should be for pulling down; and,
in order to this, should make Use of the Weapons that he did, that is, the
Armor of Light; which Weapons were, and are, The Preparation of the Gospel of
Peace, the Girdle of Truth, Helmet of Salvation, Breast Plate of Righteousness,
Shield of Faith, and Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. This is
indeed a holy War, to war against Sin and Satan; and also heavenly Armor, the
Armor of Light; and this holy Apostle was a valiant Soldier, who was also
victorious in this War: Oh who would but list themselves under Christ's Banner,
and fight this Fight of Faith with Courage, and true Christian Valor! Then
would they witness the Truth of that Saying of the Apostle, "That the Weapons
of this Warfare are not carnal, but mighty, through God, to the pulling down
the strong Holds of Sin and Satan." Oh! down with those strong Holds, down with
them; let every Lover of Jesus Christ say, and pray, That the Kingdom of God,
and his Christ, may be exalted over all, for ever. Sin is the chief Support of
Satan's Kingdom, which Christ came to destroy and put an End to, and to bring
in Righteousness, actual Righteousness, as well as imputative; he came to save
his People from their Sins, not only by Imputation, but by holy Action also; as
his holy Doctrine in his excellent Sermon on the Mount, and his many other
Divine Expressions, do plainly and abundantly manifest. Now considering the
great Evil of this dangerous Principle, I have been deeply affected on Account
of poor Mankind, to whose utter Ruin and eternal Destruction it most certainly
tends. If we were to reason as Men and rational Beings, with what Spirit and
Courage should we undertake any Business, Journey, or Concern, if beforehand
we were grounded in a Belief that we could not perform our Undertaking? Or what
Nation or People in the World would have any Courage to engage their common
Enemies, if at the same time they did believe they should never overcome them,
would not this abundantly dispirit and discourage them in their Engagement, let
any rational Soul judge? Oh! this Belief of Sinning to the End of our Days, is
a mighty Engine of Satan, in order to support his Kingdom, and a wonderful Prop
to uphold it. Pray what signifies all the Preaching and Writing in the World
against Sin, though never so elegantly or scholastically wrote or delivered by
the greatest of Orators or Ministers, if, at the same Time, this Doctrine be
upheld and maintained in Pulpits, Prints, and otherwise, etc. and received and
believed by the People? Let Truth and right Reason in this Matter bear Rule and
be Judge, and the Cause will be determined against the Kingdom of Sin and
Satan: But the. Kingdom of Christ is an Everlasting Kingdom, and of his
Dominion there shall never be an End. This is a Word of Encouragement to the
Followers of Christ to be faithful to the Commands of Christ.

Though the Devil is a great King, and a mighty Prince; though he is King over
all the Children of Pride and Disobedience, and Prince of the Power of the Air;
yet "the Lamb and his Followers will have the Victory" over Sin and him,
although sometimes it may fare with them as with their Lord, who obtained it
through Sufferings; and let it be remembered by them, that they shall in the
End reign with him; also, Fear not, little Flock, says Christ, for it is your
Father's good Pleasure to give you a Kingdom; by which Words, when received in
Faith, the Soul is inspired with Courage, and holy Boldness, to resist the
Tempter; though we may have the Disadvantage of being but few, and Satan and
his Followers many, who support his Kingdom, with this sinful Principle and
Doctrine abovementioned. One great and wily Way which he uses to uphold his
Kingdom, is to wrest and abuse the Holy Scriptures, and strain them to his evil
Purposes, as he served our Lord, the Captain of our Salvation, as will be shown
hereafter: And indeed when he makes Use of any of the Words of God, it is for
an evil End, and that End must needs be wicked, which is to keep People in Sin,
or to create a Belief that we cannot live without it in this World; the which,
if he can obtain, and cause People to believe, he knows he has a great
Advantage over them: For how should Clay, or Dust and Ashes, overcome Sin, who
confess they are, and believe they always shall be, Sinners? Wherefore let us
examine and see what Use he makes of those Scriptures, which he brings (...)
support People in Sin, and by which he makes them believe they can never live
without it; some of which are as follows, viz. First, Beginning with that
^^ying of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. xix. 17. to the young Man that asked him,
What good Thing he should do to inherit Eternal Life, calling him good Master;
our Savior replies, Why call thou me good, there is (...) is good, but one,
that is God. The young Man thought he was speaking to a mortal Man; and it
seems to have been the Will of Christ by this Remark, both to caution his
Disciples against the Use of vain Compliments, and to let them know that this
young Man had not true Faith in him; as He was the Son of God: And it is most
certainly true, that in Fullness and Perfection, there is no Man good, compared
with God; but comparing Men with Men, there are good Men, Women, and Children,
who fear God, and do truly love Christ, and there have been a few such in all
Ages, and will be some such, to the End of the World. To construe Christ's
Words otherwise, would be to abuse the Holy Scriptures, which Satan makes a
common Practice of doing.

2 dly, Another is that Expression of Solomon, in the 8th Chapter of 1 Kings,
Verse 46. There is no Man that sins not. The Learned say, this should be
interpreted, and who may not sin. But though it may truly be said of Men in one
Part of their Lives or other, or in the State of Man in the Fall or
Degeneration (in which State of Unconversion) there is no Man that sins not:
Yet in the Regeneration or new Birth, the Apostle John, in the 3d Chapter of
his first Epistle, and 9th Verse, says, that Whosoever is born of God, does
not commit Sin, for his Seed remains in him: And be cannot sin, because he is
born of God. It is this Seed which would beget this new and living Birth, which
makes us Children of God, and Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, which Satan would
destroy; for he knows he shall have an Enemy of every such Soul, and therefore
it is the Devil's Interest and Endeavor to destroy every such Birth and such
Belief, that Christians can possibly attain to live without Sin in the World.

3 dly, Prove. 20th Chapter, 9th Verse, Who can say, I have made my Heart clean,
I am pure from my Sin, the Words of Solomon, the Son of David, who prayed to
the Almighty in his Psalms: Create in me a clean Heart, and renew a right, or
pure Spirit within me; which Prayer was no doubt answered: But this is the Work
of God, and to him all Things are possible, even that which looks impossible to
Men; for He can make a Man more pure than Gold. So it being the Work of God, no
Man can say, that he has done it, that he has purified himself, or made
himself clean. Can the Almighty make a Man pure? It might with much Truth be
answered he can; and it is supposed no good Christian can, or will deny it: And
then what will become of that absurd Antichristian and Antiscriptural Tenet,
that we cannot be clean or pure from Sin, in this World?

It may be said, if there are any who live without Sin, they are but very few
(a sorrowful Truth indeed!) but is it not every One's Interest to strive to be
one of those Few, as it is also his indispensible Duty: Our Lord also says,
that the Way to his Kingdom is strait and narrow, and that there are but few
that find it. Must we therefore give up the Cause, and not seek the Kingdom,
and because of the Difficulty of Christ's Cross here in this World, must we go
in the broad Way, where there is much Room and Company. May every true
Christian say, the Lord forbid (I humbly pray) and not only say, but do that
which is right in the Sight of God.

4 thly, The next is an Expression of Solomon's, Ecclesiastes, Chapter 7th,
Verse 20. There is not a just Man upon the Earth that does Good, and sins
not. This should be interpreted as the former, and who may not sin: He speaks
of a Man in the State of his Vanity and Sin, before a Reformation; for Divine
Wisdom, and the Fear of the Lord (which he taught) keeps the Heart clean, and
preserves from the Snares of Sin, Death, and the Devil: So that this State of
Sin that he here speaks of, must be before Man attains to the Wisdom of God,
and before he comes truly to live in his Fear. Therefore he must certainly do
Good, who lives in the Fear of God, which (as the same Solomon says) is the
Beginning of Wisdom; and to depart from Iniquity, is a good Understanding. So
that he shows Man his State of Vanity, and also his State of Sin, as above, and
teaches People how to avoid it, by fearing the Lord, and walking in the
Counsel of Wisdom ( i. e.) Christ's Counsel, who is the Wisdom of God to
Salvation. That all Men are Sinners, before the Work of Conversion, is true,
and that the Devil designs to keep them there to their Lives End, is as true;
and no likelier Way can he do it, than by keeping them in a Belief that they
must live in Sin, and cannot live without it whilst they live in this World;
and when they come to die, then Fear surprises the Hypocrite, and Terror takes
hold of the Ungodly: And many times, when too late, they see the Snares which
the Devil and Sin has brought them into. Oh! what pity it is, that this Veil
of Darkness is not done away, in time of Youth, Strength, and Health, when the
Bones are full of Marrow, and the Veins are full of Blood: But the Design of
Satan is to lead People on in this pernicious Principle till Death, and then
before they are aware, they may drop into Eternal Woe and Misery, where the
Wicked and Ungodly must be turned, with all them that forget God: For into
Heaven, where Christ is, "if we die in our Sins, John 8.21.
we (as Christ said) cannot come."

5 thly, The Apostle John, in his first Epistle, Chapter 1. Verses 8, 9, and
10. writes thus, If we say we have had (as it may be turned) no Sin, we deceive
ourselves, and the Truth is not in us. If we confess our Sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. If
we say we have not sinned, we make him a Liar, and his Word is not in us; which
answers to the 8th Verse, If we say we have no Sin, we deceive ourselves. The
9th Verse fully lets us into the Meaning of the 8th Verse (i. e.) if we confess
our Sins, for all ought to confess, and also to forsake their Sins, all having
sinned, and being by Nature Children of Wrath; otherwise we have no Assurance
of Mercy from the Holy Scriptures: Then he ( i. e.) the Almighty, is faithful
and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness.
And pray what Sin is there, when we are cleansed from all Unrighteousness? And
then in the 10th Verse he says, If we say we have not sinned, we make him a
Liar. There is no doubt but that we have sinned, which is what the Apostle
plainly points at in the 8th Verse. And if any Man sins (when he repents and
forsakes) we have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ, the
Righteous: And God is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins. But then we
must repent and forsake, if we expect to find Mercy; though we have Sin, or
have had Sin, we must not always have it, for if we have it always, Woe will be
to us, according to the Words of God and Christ. Thus we see how Satan is put
to his Shifts to support his sinful Kingdom, and how he abuses the Holy
Scriptures, when he makes use of them, as will be further made manifest in what
fol]ows, as the same Apostle does plainly demonstrate in his third Chapter of
the above Epistle, Verses 7, 8, 9, and 10, saying, Let no Man (nor the Devil
neither, say I) deceive you: He that does Righteousness, is righteous: He that
commits Sin, is of the Devil. This is plain and naked Truth, let who will
like, or dislike it. Further, in the 9th and 10th Verses he again repeats to
the same Purpose, saying, In this the Children of God are manifest, and the
Children of the Devil: Whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God. (Ergo,
then he must be of the Devil, while he is in Unrighteousness.)

There are diverse other Places in the Holy Scriptures, which he abuses in like
Manner, and which he and his Children wrest to uphold him and his Kingdom of
Sin and Unrighteousness, and themselves therein: So by and through the Grace of
God, we may see his Wiles and Delusions, and the Rottenness of his Cause, as
also the unsafe and dangerous Foundation of his Building, through endeavoring
unduly to support the same, by that which was always designed to destroy him
and his Kingdom (i. e.) the Holy Scriptures. May all Men judge in this Matter,
whether that Spirit which would bring, pick, and cull out a few Verses, and
sometimes a few Words out of a Verse, in order to make them speak contrary to
the whole Scope and Tenor, or Tendency of the Holy Scriptures, and to plant a
Belief that we shall never overcome Sin and Unrighteousness in this World, though
they (i. e.) the Holy Scriptures all along exhort, and teach us to avoid Sin
and Unrighteousness, and live a holy righteous Life in this present World; I
say, may all Mortals judge whether such a Spirit can be of God, or whether it
be not of, and from the Father of Lies: Wherefore, if it be plainly proved,
that there have been those who have overcome Sin and Satan, and that Christ
repeatedly, and his holy Apostles (he in them, and they in him) exhorted to
fight against Sin and the Devil, who is the Author of all Sin; and Christ
faithfully promising most sweet and gracious Rewards to those who shall
overcome, in order to encourage the spiritual Warrior to a faithful
Perseverance, and resisting of Sin and Satan: Then it is hoped that Satan will
be wounded, his Kingdom shaken, and this evil destructive Principle, in some
Measure laid waste in some poor Soul or Souls, into whose Hands these may come.

1 st Then, Beginning with the great Apostle of the Gentiles, (a notable
Soldier in the Lamb's spiritual War) I have, says he, fought a good Fight, 2 Timothy 4* 7, 8.
I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith. Henceforth there is laid up
for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give
to me at that Day: And not to me only, but unto all those that love his
appearing. And if this be not Encouragement, what is? He also says, Be ye
Followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. Here is Example, 1 Cor. 11.1.
Exhortation, and Encouragement, with Experience.

2 ldy, Another of the Apostles, John, in his first Epistle, Chap. 2d, Verse
13th, is positive, that those young Men he writes to, had already overcome the
wicked One. I write unto you, says he, young Men, because you have overcome the
wicked One. And in the 1^th Verse, he repeats it again, as though he would
doubly and deeply imprint it in their Minds, I have written unto you, young
Men, because ye are strong, and the Word of God abides in you, and ye have
overcome the wicked One. Here were young Men, who were truly valiant and noble,
to wage War with the wicked One. If it was possible for them, why is it not
possible for us also? Oh! that our young Men of this Generation, would take
those young Men for their Examples, to make War with this wicked One, and truly
endeavor to pull down his Kingdom. It is worth our Notice, that those young
Men had the Word of God abiding in them; by this Sword of the Spirit they
overcame, by it they were cleansed, by taking heed to walk according to its
Directions, Psalm. 119.9.
as it is written, Wherewith shall a young Man cleanse his Ways? By taking heed
thereto, according to thy Word. The great Reason why young Men are overcome,
instead of Overcoming, is their Heedlessness to, and of the Word; for
notwithstanding their Bones may be full of Marrow, and their Veins full of
Blood, and Nature strong, having many Temptations to Sin and Evil; yet, by
taking heed to the Word, they might be reformed: And through the immediate
Power and Strength thereof, may overcome the wicked One. So here were young Men
who actually overcame Sin and Satan, that this holy Servant of Jesus wrote to,
by way of Encouragement. Is the Arm of the Lord shortened? Surely No. It is
true, Mortals are short in their Duty, but not the Almighty in his Holy Arm of
Power, nor his dear Son, in his unparalleled Love, and most pure Doctrine;
whose Doctrine shall be set down, as the Spirit indicted it to the seven
Churches in Asia. First, to the Church of Ephesus. Secondly, to the Church of
Smyrna. Thirdly, to the Church of Pergamus. Fourthly, to the Church of
Thyatira. Fifthly, to the Church of Sardis. Sixthly, to the Church of
Philadelphia. Seventhly, to the Church of Laodicea.

First, To the Church of Ephesus, Rev. ii. 7. He that has an Ear to hear, let
him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches, to him that overcomes will I
give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the Midst of the Paradise of God.
Here is an excellent Promise and blessed Encouragement to such as believe, and
are faithful, and are desirous to fight in the Lamb's War against Sin and
Satan: The same Apostle gives a Description of this Tree of Life, in the
abovesaid Book; "That it bears twelve Manner of Fruits, and bears its Fruits
every Month, and its Leaves are for the healing of the Nations;" which
mystically points at Christ, who is faithful in his precious Promises and
Doctrine, and has that Virtue in him, that, through Faith, will heal the
Nations of their Wounds which Sin has given them. Those who continually eat of
the Tree of Life, shall live for ever; but a flaming Sword will turn every Way,
to keep the unbelieving Sinners from it: None in a State of Sin and
Disobedience can come to enjoy the Paradise of God. The above is an excellent
Promise to all those who overcome Sin, and the Devil, who is the Author of it.

Secondly, To the Church of Smyrna, Rev. ii. 11. He that has an Ear to hear,
let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches, He that overcomes shall
not be hurt of the second Death: Which is that eternal Death which is in Hell,
or that Lake of Fire which burns for ever, where the Worm never dies, and the
Fire never goes out. This holy Warfare is certainly a Fighting for Life,
against eternal Death and Hell; which is of much greater Consequence than
natural Life and Death. Oh! Fight for your Lives against Sin and Satan, against
Pride and Vanity, and all Manner of Wickedness; put on the whole Armor of
Light; look unto God, through Christ the victorious Lamb, that you may be saved
from the eternal Lake of Fire, and not be hurt of the second Death. Oh! may we
know a dying daily to Sin, to the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, that we may
live unto God, through Faith in his dear Son Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, To the Church of Pergamus, Rev. ii. 17. He that has an Ear to hear,
let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches, To him that overcomes will
I give to eat of the hidden Manna; and I will give him a white Stone, and in
the Stone a new Name written, which no Man knows, saving he that receives
it. Here are four excellent Promises to him that overcomes, the Lord opens his
Treasury of Life, and of Wisdom, in order to invite Souls to the mighty Battle
of the Lamb, who is not like the Princes of this World, who sometimes promise
great Things to their Soldiers or Followers, and do not perform; but God's
Promises are all Yea and Amen for ever.

The first Promise is, to eat of the hidden Manna: The Children of Israel eat
Manna (outwardly) as it is written, in the Wilderness, and are dead; but those
who eat of this hidden Manna, this Angels-food, and who are hid with God in
Christ, these shall never die ( i. e. spiritually) for this hidden Manna is the
Flesh and Blood of the Son of God, who said, Except ye eat my Flesh, and drink
my Blood, ye have no Life in you, John vi. 31, 49, 50, 51, etc.

Second Promise is, to have a white Stone; this Stone is Christ, who is the
chief Corner Stone of God's Building or Church, the New Jerusalem, which the
wise Letter-learned Master Builders set at naught; but He is the Head of the
Saints Building or Corner, and a Holy Precious Stone, the Elect or Chosen of
God, the Gift of God, to all those who truly believe, and overcome Sin, as he
did; and as it is written. If he give us his Son, shall he not with his Son
give us all Things? There is Abundance of Talk and Writing about the
Philosopher's Stone; but this White Stone (which is the Gift of God to those
who overcome Sin, and Satan) is the true Philosopher's Stone. (A Philosopher is
a Lover of Wisdom, and Christ is the Wisdom of God:) This Stone will certainly
do Miracles for them that have it, through the Virtue of its Power, it will
procure Joy in Tribulation, Patience in Afflictions, Health in Sickness, Riches
in Poverty, Strength in Weakness, Liberty in Bonds, and to sum up all (which
indeed is a great Sum) Life in Death.

Third Promise, and in the Stone a new Name: How many gay Sparks and Beaus
would do Abundance to gain Honor or a Name among Men? Nothing is dear to them
in this World, neither their Estates, nor the nearest Relation they have in the
World, so that they may gain a Name here below; no, not even their own Lives;
but, Oh! did Mortals know the Virtue of this Name, and were they in Love with
it, then the World, and all its fading Beauty and Vanity, would be nothing to
them in Comparison of this Name, which is better than the Names of Sons of
worldly Glory, and Maids or Daughters of Honor; for those outward Names are
fading, viz. Today a King, a Prince, a Duke, an Earl, a Lord, a Knight, and
(has been, and may be again) Tomorrow on the Scaffold: But this Name which the
King of Kings gives those who overcome Sin and Satan, is a Name which will
outlast Time, and it will endure to Eternity.

Fourth Promise is, "That it should be secret (only to the World) but surely
known to him that has it." Great Men, when their Acts and Titles of Honor are
blazoned abroad in the World, they have many Enemies many Ways, who envy them;
and yet some are so vain as to love Grandeur and Popularity, notwithstanding;
but he that has a Name that Christ gives, so long as he (...) sensible of it
in himself, he is therewith satisfied.

Now as this is the Portion (and more, which is hereafter mentioned) of those
who overcome the wicked One, then, on the contrary, what will become of those
who live and delight in Sin, and are daily overcome with it? For the Holy
Scriptures are positive, That the Wicked, with all those that forget God, shall
be turned into Hell. This is the determinate Will of God: And that we may take
the more Notice of it, to observe and do his Will, he has caused it to be
written down in the Language of the Holy Spirit, in the Holy Scriptures of
Truth, which are of no private Interpretation; but naked, and open to mean
Capacities. The Holy Scriptures are not to be interpreted to the private
Interest of any particular Person or Set of Persons only; but are a general
Benefit unto all the faithful Believers and Followers of Christ, through the
whole World.

Fourthly, To the Church at Thyatira, Rev. ii. 26. to the End; And he that
overcomes, and keeps my Works unto the End, to him I will give Power over
the Nations, and I will give him the Morning Star. He that has an Ear to hear,
let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. The Spirit still
continues promising his gracious Privileges upon Condition of overcoming:
Wherefore, if it had been impossible to have overcome Sin and Satan, then all
these Promises would have been in vain, and the Holy Scriptures deceiving,
which would be to make Christ and the Apostles Deceivers; but Christ, his
Apostles, and the Holy Scriptures, are true, and every One that contradicts
God, is a Liar.

Let it be observed, that there must be a keeping the Word to the End also; for
diverse have run well for a Time, and overcome many Sins, through the Help and
Goodness of God, and yet afterward have run into Sin again, whereby they have
grieved the good Spirit of God, by which they should have been sealed to the
Day of Redemption, and so the Lord has taken his good Spirit and Gift of Light
and Grace from them, and left them to themselves, and their own Hearts Lusts;
but such as hold out in Well-doing to the End, the same shall be saved, and
those shall have Power over the Nations; the Laws of Men, or Powers of the
Earth or Hell, cannot hurt them; but they will be as Kings and Priests unto
God, ruling over their own Spirits; such an One is greater than one that rules
a City, and cannot govern himself. Another excellent Gift is promised here to
the victorious Christian Warrior, viz. I will give him the Morning Star: It Is
indeed a very comfortable Gift, to behold the Morning Star, after a long,
tedious, stormy Night, earnestly waiting for the Morning: Oh! it is wonderful
pleasant. This Morning Star the Writer of these Lines has witnessed, both as
to his natural and spiritual Travels; but especially to his inward State and
Condition as a Christian. Those that have a true Sight and Sense of this Divine
Star, are made to rejoice; for then they do infallibly know, that the Day of
the Most High is at Hand, and that his Kingdom draws near unto them. Amen, Holy
Lord Jesus!

As the Day Star is a Forerunner of the natural Day, so is the heavenly
Morning Star a Forerunner of the Day of the Most High to the Soul.

Fifthly, To the Church of Sardis, Rev. iii. 5. He that overcomes shall be
clothed in white Raiment, and I will not blot his Name out of the Book of Life;
but I will confess him before my Father, and before his Angels. He that has an
Ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. These
Promises of God, through his Spirit, and through his Servant, to the Church of
Sardis, is, "That those who overcome shall be clothed in white Raiment;" and he
says in the 4th Verse of the same Chapter, "That that Church had a Few in her
who had not defiled their Garments, who should walk with him in White, for
(says he) they are worthy." So that there were a Few undefiled Ones, who had
overcome; although others were blameable, whom the Spirit reproved sharply; but
also, as above, promised that those who overcame should be clothed in white
Raiment; which Raiment is that clean Linen called the Righteousness of the
Saints, or elsewhere, the Wedding Garment, and the Garment unspotted of the
World, without having which, we may expect to be asked, how we dare to presume
to approach the Holy Presence of a Just and Righteous God, who is of purer Eyes
than to behold Iniquity with Allowance or Approbation, as it is written,
Friend, how came thou hither not having on the Wedding Garment? And by the
Promise to the Church, that those who overcame, "their Names shall not be
blotted out of the Book of Life." It plainly appears, that those who fight the
Lamb's Battle, and overcome Sin and Satan, their Names are upon Record in
Heaven, and written in the Lamb's Book of Life: It also appears, that we may
have done well or valiantly in some Things, yet if we suffer ourselves to be
overcome of Sin, there is Danger, though our Names are in, we may have them
blotted out of, the Book of Life.

Third Promise is very excellent and glorious, viz. But I will confess him
before my Father, and before his Angels. Oh! wonderful Honor! to have Christ
confess that we are his, and belong to him, and have been Men of Courage in
this holy War, and overcame the Enemy, and been victorious in this Fight of
Faith; to confess us there before God and his Angels, must needs be unspeakable
Honor done us before the Armies in Heaven, He expressed again his repeated
Advice to those who have Ears, saying, He that has an Ear, let him hear what
the Spirit says to the Churches: Which is much wanting among Men, and also a
believing Heart: I query, Is not God, Christ, and the Holy Ghost, stronger than
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil? But is not this Belief of it not being
possible to overcome Sin, and saying, that we cannot do it while we are here in
this World; as much as to believe and say, that Satan and Nature is stronger
than God and Grace.

Sixthly, To the Church at Philadelphia, the Spirit says, Rev. iii. 12, 13.
Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall
go no more out: And I will write upon him, the Name of my God, and the Name of
the City of my God, etc. He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear what the
Spirit says unto the Churches. Here is Promise upon Promise, all to persuade,
excite, and invite People to fight the Fight of Faith, believing they shall
obtain the Victory, and to destroy the Principle of Unbelief: The Overcomer,
through Grace, is to be made a Pillar in the Temple of God; that is, one of his
Church, who helps to support the Credit of it, through a true Christian
Reputation in his Conversation. Such an One is a Pillar in the Church-militant
here on Earth, and will, if he is faithful to the End, be also of the
Church-triumphant in Heaven; and he will not go out any more, but will abide
in, and with Christ, for ever. Here are Gospel Promises and Privileges, happy
are they who through Faith attain thereto: How much have Christians need to be
concerned before God, for the excellent Gift of Faith, since without Faith it
is impossible to please God. And as our Savior says, If ye had Faith but as a
Grain of Mustard Seed, ye might say to this Mountain, be removed, and cast into
the Sea, and it should be so. Now though Sin indeed is grown a very great
Mountain, in this Age and Generation, yet through true Faith it is removed,
according to the Doctrine of Christ (blessed be his Holy Name.) Upon those
Overcomers, the Lord has also promised as above, to write upon them the Name
of God, and the Name of the City of God, which is new Jerusalem, which comes
down from Heaven, which is the Mother of all Saints. Gal. 4.26.
Here is a train of glorious Expressions, and mighty Promises, enough to
inspire the tender Soul with strong Desires after God and Christ, and his
Kingdom. My Heart is deeply affected at this Time, in the Sense of the Love of
our heavenly Father; and my Spirit is greatly concerned for the Welfare of the
Children of Men, my Fellow Mortals. Oh! that they might believe, and that
believing they might have life, through the Name of Christ. It is observable,
that to overcome, is the Condition of obtaining all these great and glorious
Promises; and Overcoming is repeated seven Times, once to every Chucrch. And to
say after all those glorious and fair Promises, that Sin and Satan cannot be
overcome, is not the Consequence of such Saying or Belief, to make Christ a
Deceiver? Which is absurd and Antichristian Doctrine.

Seventhly, To the Church of Laodicea, Rev. iii. 21.22. To him that overcomes
will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father in his Throne. He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear
what the Spirit says to the Churches. What greater Promise could Christ make
to his Church than this, to take her into his Throne, and into his Father's
Kingdom, into his Bosom of Love? This is wonderful kind indeed. But then, Oh!
Christian, the Condition is to overcome, as Christ overcame.

Now since it may be beneficial to Christians to understand, and to consider
duly, this great Fight or Battle, and how this great Conqueror overcame; and
because we are to follow him, and to take him for our Example, let us have a
Description of it, it being the greatest Encounter or Battle, that ever was in
the World, between the Prince of Life, and the King of the bottomless Pit. The
History of which, is worth the Reading of the greatest Prince or Monarch on
Earth, since they must leave this low World, and lay down all their Crowns when
Death calls, them to fight this Battle, and to follow this Monarch, who has
all Divine Power in Heaven and Earth, and to take his Direction, is every Man's
Duty and Interest, both Noble and Ignoble. The holy Evangelists, Matthew and
Luke, give us an Account of this great Fight, in the 4th Chapter of Matthew,
and 4th Chapter of Luke, and agree in the most weighty Matters, though they did
not exactly word it alike, yet the Substance is the same, and the Temptation,
Conflict or Battle, all one. 1 st, Satan bids Christ (as Matthew and Luke has
it) command the Stones, or Stone, to be made Bread. 2 dly, To cast himself down
from the Pinnacle of the Temple. 3 dly, To worship the Devil, or fall down to
him. Matt. Chap. 4th, 1st Verse, to the 11th. Then was Jesus led up of the
Spirit into the Wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil. And when he had fasted
forty Days and forty Nights, he was afterward an hungered. And when the Tempter
came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of God, command that these Stones be
made Bread. But he (i. e. Christ) answered and said, it is written, Man shall
(or does) not live by Bread alone, but by every Word that proceeds out of the
Mouth of God. Then the Devil takes him up into the holy City, and sets him
on a Pinnacle of the Temple, and says unto him. If thou be the Son of God, cast
thyself down: For it is written, He shall give his Angels Charge concerning
thee (it is observable that the Devil was here at his old Trade of perverting
of the Holy Scriptures: The Scriptures saying, that He shall give his Angels
Charge concerning thee, to keep thee in all thy Ways, etc. as in the Psalms:
Which Words Satan left out, for they gave much Light to see his Temptation.
those Words which exposed him he hides, for he hates Light and Truth) and in
their Hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy Foot
against a Stone. Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shall not tempt
the Lord thy God. Again, the Devil takes him up into an exceeding high
Mountain, and shows him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them.
And says unto him, All these Things will I give thee, if thou will fall down
and worship me. Then said Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan: For it is
written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
Then the Devil leaves him, and behold, Angels came and ministered unto him.
Behold how the Savior of the World overcame the Devil, and his Temptations. As
he did, so ought all Christians to resist the Tempter, as it is written, Resist
the Devil, and he will fly: Here we may see he is a conquered Enemy; and we are
told, By Christ's Spirit we must overcome, as he also overcame. After our Lord
had fasted forty Days, and forty Nights, he was hungry, at which Time the Devil
urged him, if he was the Son of God, then to make the Stone or Stones Bread,
knowing him to be hungry: Thus after the same Manner he tempts us poor Mortals,
by laying his Snares, and baiting his Hook, according to the Nature and
Propensity of the Person he is engaged withal: If a Man, Woman, or Child, be
addicted to Passion, Pride, Swearing, Lying, Drunkenness, taking the sacred
Name in vain, idle or vain Discourses to steal away our precious Time: Let the
Sin be what it will, that which we are most naturally addicted to, there will
he lay his Temptations, for he preys upon our Weakness, and plies the weakest
Part in us most; for which Reason, we have need to keep a strict Watch: As
Christ advised to watch and pray continually, left we should enter into
Temptation; for it is no Sin to be tempted, but the Sin is to entertain, and
enter into the Temptation; if we overcome, as Christ did, it is an Honor to be
tempted, and a secret Joy springs in the Soul, in a Sense of its Victory, in
sore Conflicts between the Enemy and the Soul; the Lord manifesting his Divine
Grace for our Assistance and Help. Here we can take the Advice of the Apostle,
when he says, Count it all Joy when ye fall into diverse Temptations; and also
overcome them as Christ did, by Resistance.

If it be objected, though Christ overcame, yet I Am a poor sinful Creature, and
have no Power; but he had and has all Power, both in Heaven and Earth,
committed into his Hands, so that he might well overcome him. It is well if
thou see thou have no Power, and if thou also see that Christ has
wonderful Power; then since we have no Power of ourselves, we must, by Prayer
and humble Supplication, apply to him for it, in time of Need; believing, that
he who has made so many encouraging Promises as are before recited, has also
Grace, and will give both Grace and Glory to those who diligently seek him:
Else why did he make so many excellent Promises to the spiritual Warriors? This
is worthy of the Notice of all, that Satan is a conquered and limited Enemy and
Adversary. It Is a sweet Portion of Gospel Tidings, and good News, that the
Devil cannot force any One whether he will or not into Sin; for if he could, no
Flesh could be saved. As for Instance, if a Man, Woman, or Child, were tempted
by Satan to tell a Lie, he cannot for^e thee to it against thy Will; so that
there must be a cowardly giving Way, and falling from the Lamb's Standard, or
Ensign, and going over to Satan, if Man is overcome of Sin and Wickedness: For
if we stand stiffly against him, although we be weak in ourselves, our great
Master, who sees us in Secret, if we cry to Him for Help, will come to our
Assistance, He whom Satan could never conquer; therefore it is safe for all
professing the Name of Jesus Christ to keep near unto Him, through Faith in his
Name and Power, which ever was, is, and will be, a strong Tower to those who
fly thereto for Safety. Christ did not do as the Devil tempted him, or
persuaded him to do; but he withstands the Temptation, with this Reply, It is
written, Man lives not by Bread alone, but by every Word that proceeds out of
the Mouth of God: For there is Life in every Word of God. Thus our Lord
overcame him; for Satan cannot resist, so as to make void, or lay waste the
Words of God in the Holy Scriptures of Truth, when they are bro't into our
Minds by his Spirit to uphold and promote the Kingdom of God and Christ, and to
destroy the Kingdom of Sin and Satan; though he ( i. e. the Devil) makes Use of
those Sacred Writings, often wresting them, and bringing them for evil Uses,
and wrong Purposes, as most certainly he does, when he alleges from them,
that People cannot live otherwise than in Sin.

"Then (as Matthew has it) he had our Lord to the Pinnacle of the Temple, and
bid him cast himself down; for, says Satan, it is written, he shall give his
Angels Charge concerning thee, left at any Time thou dash thy Foot against a
Stone." Though he was once overcome, yet he has the Boldness to tempt yet
again: As Christ overcame him by his Power, making Use of the Holy Scriptures,
he now tries what he can do with the Scriptures, he tempts Christ with them,
that he might tempt his Father; and so he tempts poor Mortals by the
Scriptures, to keep them in Sin, by making a wrong Use of them, and misapplying
them; and if he can hold them in Sin, he knows it is the ready Way to cause the
Almighty to be angry with them; and if they hold out in it to the End, to turn
them at last into Hell, where the Wicked must be turned. And he begins his
Temptations with an, If thou be the Son of God, though he knew very well that
he was the Son of God; yet like some of his evil Seed, or Seed of Evildoers,
tempted him to show a Sign; but our Lord did not gratify either him or them,
but rebuked them both, as they well deserved; and so by Denial and Resistance
he overcame, and we also must the same Way. After this our Lord makes a true
and right Use of the Scriptures, saying, It is written again, thou shall not
tempt the Lord thy God. And truly, those who read the Holy Scriptures, and know
how much they speak against Sin, and for Righteousness, and who yet
notwithstanding live in Sin and Ungodliness, and plead for it even from these
Sacred Writings, which were wrote on purpose to destroy Sin, should seriously
consider, whether they are not guilty of tempting of God, which Christ says it
is written thou shall not do. Oh! that People would turn away from Sin and
Satan, and break off from their Sins by Repentance, and their Iniquities by
Amendment of Life, which is the Way to have the Days of their Tranquillity
lengthened out in this World, and to be happy in that which is without End to
come; for, as it is written, The Wicked do not live out Half their Days; which,
according to my Observation, is a true general Rule. How many have been taken
off in their Prime and Strength, and in the Flower of their Years, who might,
according to the Course of Nature, have lived many Years, had they been sober
and temperate, and lived in the Fear of God? If it be asked, do not pious young
People die also? Yes, but not so frequently as intemperate Ones; I have had
Occasion to observe it in diverse Parts of the World; and besides, if pious
young People leave this World, their Exchange is glorious; whereas the Wicked
and Ungodly make a sad and bitter Exchange; and since Life is so uncertain, and
Death so sure and certain to all, even to Male and Female, what Care and Fear
ought there to be on all, of offending so merciful? God, and so sweet a
Savior, who overcame, to show us the Way to overcome also; and died for Sin,
that we might die to the World, and the sinful Part of it, and live to him,
exhorting of us to overcome as he also did, and then promises to take us for
his Companions with himself, and his Father, in his heavenly Kingdom.

Satan repeats his Temptation again a third Time; for he is an unwearied Enemy,
and will tempt poor Mortals over and over, many Times; but he is to be resisted
as often as he tempts, if we will follow the Counsel and Example of Christ; and
this was his last Temptation for that Conflict, as one of the Evangelists
observes, "he takes him up into an exceeding high Mountain, and shows him all
the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of it. A Temptation which takes with
Abundance of Souls; the Glory, Riches, and Greatness of this World, ruins many,
they having it, and being swelled with Pride therein; some are destroying
themselves to get it, and cannot attain to it; and many would endeavor to
create a Belief of themselves, that they are greater, richer, and more noble,
than they really are, which is a Temptation of the Evil One; for we ought to
think meanly of ourselves; and if we will follow Christ's Example, make
ourselves of no Reputation; and when Satan would tempt us to be proud, or high
of Mind, we then should resist, as Christ did, who said to the Devil in this
Temptation, Get thee behind me Satan, for it is written, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. If this holy Rule was followed, as
Christ instituted it, then we should overcome Sin and Satan: Christ's
Institution is, That the Hour comes, and now is, that those that worship the
Father, must worship Him in Spirit and in Truth. It is too much Worship or
Homage to fall down to or worship Satan; but the Duty of every Christian is to
worship the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, for he it is whom we should only (i.
e.) chiefly, and mainly, serve and worship, and that not only in a formal Way,
but with Hearts truly devoted to do his Will; we are to worship the Father in
Spirit and in Truth, into which the Devil can never come; though he may get
into the Form of it, he cannot overcome us, where the Power of Christ is lived
in; for by the Power of God, which dwells in Christ, who overcame, by the same
Power, Christians do and should overcome: So the Devil was forced to fly when
Christ resisted him, and so he will when Christians resist him in Christ: And
when Christ had overcome, then the Angels came and ministered unto him; likewise
the Guardian Angel of God's holy Presence will administer sweet Comfort and
Pleasure to every true Soul, who stands truly for the Cause of God and Christ
against Sin and Satan, sincerely endeavoring to pull down Satan's Kingdom, or
Sin, which upholds it, and faithfully desires to exalt the Kingdom of God and
his dear Son. Now he or she that believes, and overcomes (for without Belief,
it is impossible to overcome) those are truly entitled to all the abovesaid
precious Promises, and Privileges, otherwise the Wrath of God will be revealed
from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men, and against all
those who hold the Truth in Self-righteous (...) ^ighteousness. Again,
Tribulation and (...) every Soul of Man that does Evil, of the Jew first, and
also of the Gentile; but Glory, Honor, and Fear is every Man that works
Good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile; for there is no Respect of
Persons with God, Romans ii. 9, 10, 11. Here the W^^s of God are equal, but the
Ways of Man and Satan are unequal; Sin, Iniquity, and Transgression, are of the
Devil, and of Man in the Fall; but Righteousness, Holiness, and Truth, are of
God, to which Man is restored, through Regeneration and Reformation. Glory over
all be given to God and the Lamb, for ever. Amen.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS ON THE CALL, WORK, and WAGES, OF THE MINISTERS of CHRIST.
1720.
SOMETHING has been on my Mind to write, concerning the Work of the Ministry of
the Gospel of Christ, with a Design of Instruction to Ministers in particular,
and the Benefit of others in general.

It is an unspeakable Benefit to Mankind, to be favored with a Powerful,
Living Ministry, which edifies the Church of God, and builds up the true
Believers in the most Holy Faith (according to the Word of God) in Christ
Jesus, who is the Great Minister of the true Tabernacle and Sanctuary, which
God has pitched, and not Man; and this Great Minister sent forth his Ministers
and Servants, Mat. 10.^6.
saying, I send you forth as Sheep among Wolves; be ye therefore wise as
Serpents, and harmless as Doves. He did not send them forth as Lords over his
Heritage, nor as persecuting Priests, or mercenary Hirelings, but said to them,
Freely you have received, freely give: Here is no ^ompulsion nor Force enjoined
by Christ; but it is (...), from his own Doctrine and Example, that his
Ministry is a free Ministry, blessed be his Holy Name and Truth for ever: Nor
do we read or understand of any Alteration thereof by Christ: Indeed the
Ministers of Antichrist have made an Alteration (contrary to this Doctrine of
his) in their Ministry; but the Holy Apostles, who after Christ were the first
Planters of Christianity in the Earth, when it shone in its primitive Beauty
and Glory, they followed the Counsel of their Lord and Master, and ministered
freely: Then was the Power of Christ's Ministry and Gospel through his
Ministers and Servants great, and the Glory and Beauty thereof ravishing to
pious Souls. Oh! may every true Minister, and every sensible Soul, bow before
the Most High, and bless the Holy Name of Him that lives and reigns for ever,
for this unspeakable Gift of Christ's Holy Ministry, which always was, now is,
and ever will be, convincing and converting unto Souls, who are not slow of
Heart to believe in God, and in his dear Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is our
great High Priest, and the Bishop of Souls; he saw the Need that his Church had
of this his Ministry, and therefore he established it in his Church, and among
his Followers, to the End of Time.

Now, in order to this great and wonderful Work, he told his Disciples (when he
was going into his Glory and Kingdom of his Father) That he would pray to the
Father, and he would send them another Comforter, John xiv. 17. xvi. 7, -- 11.
the Spirit of Truth, and that he should abide with them for ever. And he also
told them, That when he is come, he shall first reprove or convince the World
of Sin, because they believe not in me; for if they believed truly in Christ,
they would love his spiritual Appearance; but O how many are there in the
World, who slight this high Favor, and Grace of God and Christ, calling this
wonderful Gift and Grace, the Light of Nature; whereas Christ says it is the
Holy Ghost; and the Apostle Paul says, "It is God's Grace, that teaches us to
deny Ungodliness, and has appeared unto all Men." Oh that the Children of Men
might love that which appears to them, and convinces them of their Sins; and
surely it is a great Sin not to believe in the Spirit and Light of Christ: Such
unbelieving Souls are in Darkness, and not yet turned from Darkness unto Light,
and from the Power of Satan, to the Power of God, which was the very Work
Christ's Ministers were sent of God to do.

2 dly, And he convinces or reproves the World of Righteousness, because I go
to the Father, and ye see me no more. When their Righteousness is only wrought
in the Wisdom of Man, and not by the Power of God, whether it be in Preaching
or Worship, when only the Form, and not the Power, is witnessed, this then
convinces them that they have been building their Religion upon a wrong
Bottom, and a sandy Foundation; and shows the formal Minister, that he is
only a Minister of the Letter, and not of the Spirit; and the formal
Worshipper, that he is not yet come to worship in Spirit and Truth; and the
Professor of Christ in Words, that he denies him in Works and inward Faith;
because Faith without Works is Dead, as Works without this spiritual Faith is
Dead also.

"Beause I go to the Father," is the wonderful Cause given by Christ, for it is
Christ's Righteousness that must save the Soul, and Christ being gone to the
Father, the Soul must go there to him, for all his Gifts and Favors, Mercies
and Blessings, and must witness him in Spirit to be with them, and in them, as
He is in the Father. When Christ was personally on Earth, He taught us by Words
vocally expressed; but "henceforth know we him so no more." Now He teaches us
by his Spirit, Light, and Life, which convinces us of Form without Power, and
Letter without Spirit, and Religion without Life, and Righteousness without
Grace, and Light and imputative Righteousness, without actual Righteousness,
and actual or formal Righteousness in our own Wills (only) All this, and much
more, it convinces us, not to be effectual to Salvation, and shows us that
the spiritual Power, and Presence of Christ, is absolutely necessary for the
Work of the Ministry, and the Conversion of Souls.

3 dly, He convinces the World of Judgment, because the Prince of this World
is Judged. He, the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, when he is come, shows us
our wrong Judgment, and convinces us of the Evil of being too censorious,
rash, and uncharitable, in Judging, and plainly gives us to understand, that
such Judgment is from the Prince of this World, who is King over all the
Children of Pride, and that this Prince or evil Spirit, is judged by the
righteous and just Judge of Heaven and Earth, Christ Jesus. He also convinces
us of the everlasting Truth, as it is in Jesus, and is our sure Comforter,
while we keep therein, in Doctrine, Worship, and Conversation. John 14.26.


4 thly, He shall bring all Things (or those Things) to your Remembrance, which
I have spoken unto you. Wherefore this Gift is absolutely necessary for a
Minister of Christ; and every true Believer in him, wants this Remembrancer,
which must needs be a great Comfort to us, to have his excellent Speeches and
Divine Doctrine brought by his own Spirit to our Remembrance, if we do love him
in Sincerity.

5 thly, He shall receive of mine, and show it unto you, John 16.14.
says Christ. Take of his Light, his Life, his Grace, his Wisdom, his Mercy,
Peace, and Truth, and show it unto you. Oh infinite Love from a tender Savior!
Well may we admire his Goodness, and entirely love him above all Things in this
World.

6 thly, Christ speaks in diverse Place, concerning this wonderful and
extraordinary Gift of the Holy Ghost or Spirit, and in the 14th Chapter, and
16th and 17th Verses of John, He thus drops his Divine Words, I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever; even the Spirit of truth, whom the World cannot receive, because it sees
him not, neither knows him: But ye know him, for he dwells with you, and
shall be in you. Oh! ye Ministers of the Lord Jesus Christ, in this his Gift is
your Strength, your Comfort, and your exceeding great Reward, both here and
hereafter, for ever; far exceeding Silver or Gold, or the Diadems of Princes:
The whole World wanting this, lies in Wickedness, and must lie there
unavoidably, if they have not the Sense of this unspeakable Gift: There cannot
be Salvation, nor any saving Ministry without it; it being absolutely needful,
to the Being and Well-being of a Minister of Christ: And indeed the holy Text
is plain, and positive, that he that has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of
his; none of his Minister, none of his Believer: Oh! No, they cannot be his in
any good Respect whatsoever, without his Spirit. But if it should be objected.
How shall we do to know the Minister or the Man who has this Divine Gift, or
Spirit of Christ, since it may be pretended to both by Ministers and People;
and yet they may not have it in Reality? This indeed is a great Point, and
highly necessary to be searched into, which is to be known by our Lord's Rule,
which he has prescribed for that End. Do Men (says He) gather Grapes off
Thorns, or Figs off Thistles? (Surely No. The Grape is gathered from the Vine,
and the Fig from the Fig Tree.) Wherefore by their Fruits ye shall knew them.
Now those (according to this true Rule) who have the Spirit, or Holy Ghost,
they bring forth the Fruits of it: Which Fruits are Love, Charity, Meekness,
Temperance, Patience, Experience, Hope, Faith, and Wisdom from above, which is
pure and peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, to all, and every Thing
that is Good. And those who have the Holy Spirit, bring forth the Fruits of it
as naturally, as the Vine does the Grape, and the Fig Tree the Fig. Also,
Whatsoever Things are holy, just, honest, pure, and of good Report, or tends to
Piety, or Virtue; in a Word, every Thing that is Good, is the Fruit of the
Spirit of God and Christ: And they are brought forth with Divine Life and Power
in that Minister and People, who through true Faith in the blessed Jesus, have
received the Gift of the Holy Ghost, or Spirit of Christ.

The Minister of the Gospel being thus fitly furnished to every good Word and
Work, he is ready to answer the Call of his great Lord and Holy Master, which
is in Heaven; he wants not the Call of Man, nor Authority from Man, nor Wages
of Man. But those who bring forth Fruits contrary to the above, can neither be
true Minister, nor Christians, according to the Doctrine of our Holy Lord.
Being thus qualified by the Most High, those Ministers are freely given up to
serve the Lord, and go wheresoever he is pleased to send them, though he send
them as Lambs among Wolves: And it is worth noting, that Christ's Messengers
and Ministers are called and sent of him; they do not run of themselves, nor in
their own Will; which if they did, their End would be like the forward false
Prophets of old, who did not profit the People at all.

Our great Lord seeing what Need the World had of true Teaching, and of true
Teachers, sends his Ministers forth into it, saying. Matt. xxviii. 18, 19, 20.
All Power is given unto me in Heaven and Earth: Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all Things whatsoever I have commanded
you: And lo, I am with you always, even unto the End of the World.

Many of his excellent Sayings and Commands may be found in that wonderful
Sermon which he preached on the Mount, Matt. 5th, 6th, and 7th Chapters.

Here Christ shows has Ministers his Power, and sends them forth in his own
Name, for there is none other given under Heaven for Salvation; and Christ
comforts his Ministers with a glorious Promise, of being with them to the End
of the World. Oh the wonderful Sweetness of this gracious Promise! and such are
all his Promises, for they are Yea, and Amen, for ever. Wherefore Christ's
Ministers may well go forth without Doubting, having their Authority from the
King of Kings. Again he says, Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel
unto every Creature. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he
that believes not, shall be damned, Mark xvi. 15, 16. So Christ says. Go; but
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil says, Stay; for the Spirit of Sin and Satan
is for obstructing the Work of Christ, and hindering the free Gospel Ministry,
and the Motions (...) the Word and Testimony of Jesus; and is for quenching it
in those in whom it may appear: It is a new Mode or Fashion, contrary to the
primitive Order of Christ, above mentioned, for Ministers to stay, and be tied
to an outward Benefit, or a particular Meeting or Congregation; which Way of
Preaching, or Reading (Reading being much in Practice now a Days) is quite
contrary to the Call, and Practice of Christ, and his Ministers, and of the
Mar^yrs, and Confessors of Jesus: As also (...) many of the most noted
Reformers in Religion. Oh but it is objected, if Ministers should always go
about among the Nations, what would become of their Families, or how must they
live, and be maintained? To which may be answered, as the Ministers of our Lord
were, when He at the first sent them forth; who, when they returned to their
Master, he asked them, if they lacked any Thing? They answered, No. But instead
of lacking any Thing, the Devils were subject to them. Pray let the serious
Christian consider, here is now a wonderful Change. Is it in Christ, or in the
Hireling Money-loving Priest? It is certainly in the Men, and not in Christ
Jesus, ^or He is the same to Day, Yesterday, and for ever. Where the Power of
Christ Rules, there the Devil and his Power must of Necessity be subject.

But some object, that People are not so free now a Days; were there not a Law
to maintain Ministers, the Ministers might perish or starve in this Generation;
if so, then their Ministry must starve the Peoples Souls. But this Thought of
starving, is for want of the Gift of God, and Power of Christ; which Power in
the Ministry would wonderfully open Peoples Hearts toward God, and those who
are his true Servants and Ministers; who said, freely ye have received, freely
give. Oh! faithless Generation, what, shall we mistrust him who provides for
all his Creatures, even to the Ravens and Sparrows, and will He not much more
provide for his Servants and Ministers? How should we receive Power from on
High, if we want Faith, and cannot depend on the providential Hand of God?

Christ sends his Ministers into the World, in order to propagate his Gospel of
Salvation, and to let the World know that he is come to put an End to Sin, and
bring Life and Peace to the Soul, according to the Angels Testimony of him,
that his Name should be called Jesus (which is a Savior) for he shall save his
People from their Sins, Matt, i. 21. The Apostles of Christ also, according to
their holy Commission, declared, that God had sent his Son to bless us, Acts
3.26.
in turning of us from the Evil of our Ways. But that Doctrine must certainly
be opposite to this of the Angels, Christ, and his Disciples, which teaches,
that we must live in Sin while on this Side the Grave, and that there is no
being free from it while we are in this World; though Christ himself came for
that very End and Purpose, to put an End to it, and to save us from it, and to
bring unto, and into, the World, everlasting Righteousness; as also is that
Doctrine which maintains, that there is no Perfection that we can attain to in
this Life; though Christ says, Be ye perfect (for or) as your Father which is
in Heaven is perfect; as he is perfect in Fullness, so are we to be perfect,
according to the Measure of Grace received. This Faith and Belief is much
wanting in this unbelieving Generation, which is the Reason that People remain
in their Sins, and the Peoples Leaders cause them to err, and their Ministers
minister in their Sin, and minister Sin to the People. Oh! that the Great Lord
of All, may grant the Faith which purifies the Heart unto the Children of Men,
and especially to his Ministers, that they might be instrumental to the
convincing and converting Souls to Christ, and his "Gospel, which is the Power
of God to Salvation, to all them that believe." And as without believing, and
being baptized, we can neither be saved, nor truly preach the Gospel; How do we
believe in Christ if we remain in our Sins? For Christ says, If ye believe not
that I am He, ye shall die in your Sins: So it is plain, that the true Faith
and Belief in Christ takes away our Sins, and that if we remain in our Sins,
it is evident that we have not the true Faith of Christ. It is not enough to
have a notional or historical Faith or Belief that Christ is the Son of God,
but we must also believe that this is He, that as the Angel declared to Joseph,
should save his People from their Sins. This was before he was born of the holy
Virgin and those People mightily mistake the Doctrine of Christ in the Holy
Scriptures, who think or believe they shall be saved in their Sins; and those
Ministers must needs be antichristian, who preach and write, that there can be
no living here in this World without Sin, which is also contrary to their own
Doctrine at other Times, and to their solemn Covenant in the Water Baptism (or
Sprinkling) in which they promise for their Children, to forsake the Devil, and
all his Works, (and without Doubt all his Works is Sin, no Christian can
pretend to greater or higher Perfection, than to forsake the Devil, and all his
Works) the Pomp and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh, and to keep God's holy Will and Commandments, and to walk in the
same all the Days of our Live^ so that according to this solemn Covenant, here
is no Day for Sin; yet those Covenanters at other Times will say, preach,
dispute, and write, that the best Saints cannot live without Sin, and that
People sin in their best Duties; if any think to mock the Almighty after that
Manner, they will be much mistaken in the Day of the righteous Judgment of God:
For Christ came to put an End to Sin, and to finish Transgression, and to
destroy the Works of the Devil, which all Sin most certainly is. And it is
plain, that John, the beloved Disciple of Christ, believed this, from his own
Words, I write unto you, young Men, because ye have overcome the wicked One. I
have written unto you, young Men, because ye are strong, and the Word of God
abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked One, 1st Epistle of John, ii.
13, 14. To which I shall add, what he says through the Spirit to the seven
Churches in Asia.

To the Church of Ephesus, Rev. ii. 7. He that has an Ear, let him hear what
the Spirit says unto the Churches, To him that overcomes, will I give to eat
of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God.

To the Church of Smyrna, Rev. ii. 11. He that has an Ear, let him hear what
the Spirit says unto the Churches, He that overcomes, shall not be hurt of
the second Death.

To the Church of Pergamus, Rev. ii. 17. He that has an Ear, let him hear what
the Spirit says unto the Churches, To him that overcomes will I give to eat
of the hidden Manna, and will give him a white Stone, and in it a new Name
written, which no Man knows, save him that receives it.

To the Church of Thyatira, Rev. ii. 26, 27, 28, 29. He that overcomes and
keeps my Works unto the End, to him will I give Power over the Nations, and
he shall rule them with a Rod of Iron, as the Vessels of a Potter shall they be
broken to Shivers, even as I received of my Father, and I will give him the
Morning Star. He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says
unto the Churches.

To the Church of Sardis, Rev. iii. 5, 6, He that ove^^^meth, the same shall be
clothed in white Raiment, and I will not blot out his Name out of the Book of
Life; but I will confess his Name before my Father, and before his Angels. He
that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.

To Church of Philadelphia, Rev. iii. 12, 13. He that overcomes, will I make a
Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no (...) out; and I will write
upon him the Name of my God, and the Name of the City of my God which is New
Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God, and I will write upon
him my new Name. He that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the
Churches.

To the Church of Laodicea, Rev. iii. 21, 22. To him that overcomes, will I
grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I overcame, and am set down with my
Father in his Throne. He that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says
to the Churches.

Surely that Soul who cannot by all this see that there is an Overcoming, must
certainly be blind as to a spiritual Sight of the Doctrine of Christ; and what
is it but to make Christ and the Holy Spirit a Deceiver, to promise all those
great Things to his Churches, if they cannot perform the Conditions He
prescribes; and if it were true (as it is not) that it is impossible to
overcome Sin and Satan, then would Christ be a hard Master, which is absurd and
wicked to suggest. But this Overcoming must not be in our own Wills, nor in our
own Time, nor with our own Weapons, but according to the Apostle Paul's
Testimony of the Saints Weapons, and their Warfare, and also of his own Fight
and Victory, viz. 2 Cor. x. 4. The Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal, but
mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong Holds (Satan's Holds of Sin
are strong Ones, if never to be overcome.)

But with these Weapons we may overcome: And He bids the Christian put them on,
and calls them the whole Armor of Light (opposite and contrary to Satan's dark
Power) and he names them after this Manner: Stand therefore, having your Loins
girt about with Truth, and having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and
your Feet shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace; above all, taking
the Shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery Darts
of the Wicked, and take the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit,
which is the Word of God, Ephesians. vi. 13 -- 17.

I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith,
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness; which God, the
righteous Judge, shall give to me at that Day, and not to me only, but to all
them who love his Appearing, 2 Timothy iv. 7, 8.

Thus the Saints and primitive Christians were victorious in this Christian and
Spiritual Warfare, and they encouraged others to follow them, as they did
Christ. The very Belief of this Doctrine, that we can never overcome Sin and
Satan, is contrary to the Faith of Christ, and is a mighty Engine of the Wicked
One to destroy Souls; for what Encouragement can any have to the Work of
Reformation, or to believe in or press after the New Birth, if they do not
believe in the New Birth, or that they may or can be reformed, or created again
anew in Christ Jesus, unto good Works, and that they must not walk after the
Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof. Oh that Ministers and People would consider
that awful Sentence of Holy Scripture, viz. If ye live after the Flesh, ye
shall die; but if ye, through the Spirit, mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye
shall live, Romans viii. 13. (The Want of a lively Hope and Faith in Christ, the
Great Lord of Heaven and Earth, is great, very great indeed.) Oh that true
Faith in him might abound and increase in the Earth more and more! then would
he inspire the Soul with inward Strength and Grace to resist the Devil, and
overcome him, and actually to do the Works of God, and to forsake the Devil,
and all his Works, and then, and not until then, is Christ's Righteousness
imputed unto us; so that true Christians are truly righteous, not only by
Imputation, but by Action also. Oh that those who make Profession of Holy Jesus
would deny themselves, and take up their daily Cross, and follow him in the
Regeneration! otherwise, how can they be his Disciples or Ministers? And then
would true Christianity flourish in the Earth; then would Christ be exalted
over all, who, with the Father and Holy Spirit, is God blessed for ever.

Now to return a little to Christ's Baptism, viz. He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved. Here our Great Baptizer, and Chief Minister, is
positive, that they shall be saved who are baptized with his Baptism; from
which, with strong Reason, we may conclude, that the Baptism which is
absolutely necessary to Salvation is not Water Baptism, which was John's, but
Spiritual-baptism, which is Christ's; and for this Reason also, that most
Christians that have any Spiritual Understanding, do plainly see, that
notwithstanding People being baptized, or sprinkled, with elementary Water,
many live wicked, ungodly Lives, and die in that State; but quite the contrary
Effect has that Baptism which is of the Holy Ghost, and Spiritual Fire, which
is Christ's Baptism; for that where it is witnessed, and where People not only
talk of it, but live according to its holy Operation on the Soul, it saves and
cleanses from Sin and Evil, it washes by Regeneration, and renews the Soul
by Grace, with Divine Life and Power.

The Call of a true Minister, is from and by Christ, he must come to the School
of Christ, and take his Degrees there; in the universal Love of God he must
learn and experience Patience, Humility, Faith, Hope, Mat. 11.29.
and Charity; Learn of me, says He, for I am meek and lowly in Heart; and yet,
notwithstanding, He was the great Heir of all Things, and all Power in Heaven
and Earth was given unto him, He humbled himself to the Death of the Cross, for
the Sake of Mankind; and as the living Father sent his Son, so the Son sends
his Servants contrary to the Will of Man, as the Apostle Paul said, But I
certify unto you, Brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me, is not
after Man; for I neither received it of Man, nor was I taught it but by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. i. 11, 12. Hereby it is plain he thought there
was no absolute Necessity of outward Learning, nor outward Call by Man.

And as there is no absolute Necessity of outward Learning to make a Minister
of Christ, so there is no Need to force an outward Maintenance; for Christ will
take Care of his Servants, and feed and clothe them, when he sends them, as he
did his Disciples, who went forth without Staff or Scrip, yet acknowledged;
after their Return, they lacked nothing. And as Christ said, Freely ye have
received, freely give; so there is no outward Compulsion or Force in Christ's
Doctrine or Religion: Some are indeed of another Opinion, and have practiced
the contrary, and bring those Words of Christ to uphold them in the Practice of
forcing Religion, where he says, in the Parable of the Marriage Supper, Go,
compel them to come in; which was no other Compulsion or Force but that of
Love, which is the greatest Power in Heaven or Earth; to construe our Savior's
Words in any other Sense, would be absurd, and contrary to the whole tenor of
his Doctrine and glorious Ministry.

Thus then the Work of Christ's Ministers is to bring the People to Christ, as
He is their Redeemer and Savior from Sin, and as He is their Comforter, and
good Remembrancer, and their spiritual Guide into all Truth, in the Performance
of which Work, they will have their Reward in this World, and in the World to
come everlasting Life. Amen.

CONCERNING Personal Election and Reprobation.
A CONCERN came upon me, in Christian Love to the Honest-hearted of the
Presbyterian Way, to show unto them how their Teachers have misled them, and
misrepresented the Words of God, in their pretending to prove the Doctrine they
hold of Personal Election and Reprobation, and in their wresting the Scriptures
in Support of it.

Some of the Texts of Scripture whereby they vainly endeavor to defend it, and
whereupon they chiefly found their Tenet, are these, viz.

1st, Concerning Jacob and Esau, Romans ix. 13. Mal. i. 2, 3. 2dly, Concerning
the Lord's hardening Pharaoh 's Heart, Exodus ix. 16. Romans ix. 17. 3dly, He that
made them, will not have Mercy upon them, and he that formed them, will show
them no Favor, Isa. xxvii. 11. 4thly, Has not the Potter Power, over the Clay
of the same Lump, to make one Vessel to Honor, and another to Dishonor, Jer.
xviii. 6. Romans ix. 21. 5thly, Therefore he has Mercy on whom he will have
Mercy, and whom he will he hardens, Romans ix. 18.
1 st, Relating to Jacob and Esau, the Case was thus: The Almighty showed
Rebecca (the Mother of them both) while the Children were yet unborn, That the
Elder should serve the Younger, Genesis xxv. 23. Romans xi. 12. Not that the Elder
should be damned to Eternity, and the Younger only saved, as it is hoped will
appear plain and clear in the Sequel, and the contrary be plainly proved, both
from Scripture and right Reason. First then, These two ( Jacob and Esau) were
the Sons of godly Isaac, to whom, with faithful Abraham, was the Promise of
God, and to their Seed, Genesis xvii. 18. and both Jacob and Esau were blessed in
the Name of God, and in his Faith also: For (says the Author to the Hebrews)
Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau by Faith, Chap. xi. 20. This he wrote when he was
illustrating the invincible and mighty Power of Faith, by the many wonderful
Works that had been done thereby; and doubtless the Faith there spoken of, is
the true Faith; and whatever is foretold in and through true Faith will most
certainly be fulfilled, as this great and significant Blessing of Isaac to his
Sons was: The good, old Man, calls his eldest Son to him, being disposed to
bless him, and bids him seek Venison, and make him Savoury Meat, Genesis xxvii.
3.4. (such as he knew his Father loved) that my Soul may bless thee before I
die; and Rebecca their Mother knowing (from what God had showed her before they
were born) that the Elder should serve the Younger, Genesis xxv. 23. for whom she
had also the greatest Love; she calls Jacob and opens the Matter to him, and
bids him get Savoury Meat for his Father, Genesis xxvii. 14, 17, 18. which,
through her Importunity, he did, and after he had prepared it, he brought it to
his Father before his Brother came, and his Father blessed him in Faith, Verse
28; but he did it against his natural Inclination; for he would have had his
Son Esau to have had the Blessing of Preference, Verses 24, 25, because he was
the eldest Son, and by Nature it was his Birthright; but he, in his profane
State and Condition, had despised and sold it for a Thing of little Value to
his Brother Jacob; so that Jacob, having, by his Brother's Consent, bought it
of him, had a Right to it on a double Account, both by Promise and Purchase. 1
st, By the Promise of God before he was born: And, Secondly, By Purchase of his
Brother. But pray let it be observed, that this was the Blessing of Preference
only, that Blessing which Esau sought with Tears, but could not find it;
nevertheless he had a Blessing pronounced to him by his Father, through Faith,
Chap, xxvii. 39. though he does not seem to have had a right Sense thereof, for
he was at Times in a profane Spirit, Heb. xii. 16, 17. and in Enmity and
Malice against his Brother Jacob, as appears by that murdering, persecuting
Mind, that then was unmortified in him; for, says he, the Days of Mourning for
my Father are at Hand, and then I will slay my Brother Jacob, Genesis xxvii. 41.
But then, as his Wickedness was great, his Conversion must be by so much the
more glorious. It would be well if all murdering Persecutors would (in this his
Conversion) take him for an Example; for instead of killing his Brother Jacob,
when he met him on his Return to his Father's House (from whence he had fled)
he fell on his Neck, and kissed him, and wept, Genesis xxxiii. 4.

It is hoped that no Christian Ear will be offended to hear of the Conversion
and great Change of this profane Person, who, though he was not favored with
the Blessing of Preference, or the natural Blessing of Birthright (which he
sought with Tears, and could not find, Genesis xxvii. 38.) yet the Blessing of
God's Grace and Favor (being the free Gift of the Almighty to him) with the
Fatness of the Earth, he had, and it was delivered to him by his Father by
Faith, as says the Apostle, in the forecited Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap.
xi. 20.

Which Blessing was by their Father Isaac thus expressed to each of them. 1 st,
to Jacob, that the Purpose of God according to Election might stand, Romans ix.
11, 12. which Choice, or Election, before they were born, or had done Good or
Evil, was, that the Elder should serve the Younger, or the Younger be preferred
before the Elder; not that one should be damned, and the other saved; there is
no Damnation to Eternity that we read of concerning Esau, but a choice Blessing
of God, of a quite different Nature. Unto Jacob he said thus; God give thee of
the Dew of Heaven, and the Fatness of the Earth, and Plenty of Corn and Wine,
be Lord over thy Brethren, and let thy Mother's Sons bow down to thee, etc.
Genesis xxvii. 28, 29. And, 2 dly, Unto Esau he says (exceedingly trembling) Verse
33. Behold thy Dwelling shall be of the Fatness of the Earth, and of the Dew of
Heaven from above, and by thy Sword shall thou live, and shall serve thy
Brother; and it shall come to pass, when thou shall have the Dominion, that
thou shall break his Yoke from off thy Neck, Verses 39, 40.

These Blessings have not only Respect to their own proper Persons, but also to
their Posterity; but far from pre-ordaining them, or any of them, to Damnation;
and we have good Ground to believe, from (what is above, together with) the
Reformation wrought in Esau himself, much better Things of him; for it is
written, When the wicked Man turns away from his Wickedness which he has
committed, and does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his Soul
alive, Ezekiel. xviii. 27. So when a righteous Man turns away from his
Righteousness, and commits Iniquity, and dies in them, for his Iniquity
which he has done shall he die, Verse 26.

Having thus far taken Notice of the Purport of the Blessings of Jacob and
Esau, relating to their Persons; who were both blessed with the Dew of Heaven,
and the Fatness of the Earth, I would add this Remark, "Let none curse him or
them whom God has blessed."

And whereas the Apostle, reciting the Words of the Prophet Malachi, says,
Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated, Romans ix. 13. This was not said of
them before they were born, or had done either Good or Evil; but was justly
denounced by the Almighty for the Cruelty and Hatred of the Children of Esau to
the Children of Israel, as is fully and clearly expressed by the Prophets,
David, Ezekiel, Amos, and Obadiah; Psalm cxxxvii. 7. Ezekiel xxv. 15. xxxv. 1
-- 15. xxxvi. 5. Amos i. 11, 12. Obadiah 10, to 16. and was written many Ages
after.

Secondly, The next Text under Consideration is, "that the Lord hardened the
Heart of Pharaoh," Exodus vii. 13. But it should be observed, he had first
hardened himself against God and his People, and then God hardened him yet
harder, in order to show his great Power to Mortals, which well consisted with
his Justice to the Wicked and Unmerciful; for as God is merciful to the
Righteous, so He is Just in his Judgment to the Ungodly.

So that God was clear of that evil Heart of Unbelief in him, and it is but
just, and also reasonable, that when Man, having been often visited, refuses
the Offers of God's Love, that He should visit such in and with his righteous
Judgment (who have slighted his Mercy and Grace) And then, according to Holy
Scripture, his Destruction is of himself, but his Help is in the Lord, Hos.
xiii. 9. So that God is true, and and every Man, contradicting him, is a Liar,
Romans iii. 4.

Wherefore may all have a Care of hardening of their Hearts as Pharaoh did, for
that is provoking to the Almighty, and then He justly gives them over to an
evil Heart of Unbelief, and to a reprobate Mind, and so they depart from the
living God. The Lord said unto Pharaoh, let my People go, over and over, and it
was the Mind of God he should have done it: Without those Men who hold the
contrary, would make the Almighty such an one as themselves, to say one Thing,
and mean another. What is that but to charge the Almighty with Hypocrisy? A
Thing hated of him, and his Dear Son, Christ Jesus. No, no, Pharaoh might have
obeyed the Lord in a Day of Visitation: But he refused, and said, Who is the
Lord, that I should obey his Voice, to let Israel go? I know not the Lord,
neither will I let Israel go, Exodus v. 2. And he continued to harden himself
against God, and his People, cruelly persecuting them, and forcing them to make
Brick without Straw, before we read that the Lord hardened his Heart. Oh! that
all hard heared, persecuting, unbelieving People, might take Warning by him in
time, before it be too late.

It is clear, he might have let the People Go; because God by Moses commanded
him so to do. And who can deny, that what God did, was more proper to soften,
than to harden his Heart, by letting him see the Miracles wrought in his Name,
and the Ceasing of the Plagues he had inflicted; therefore it was possible for
him to have done what God required of him; he was not predestined to that
Obduration, until he had hardened his own Heart; and then it was, is, and
always will be, just with God to suffer his, or any other Man's Heart to become
hardened, and give them up to a reprobate Mind, Romans i. 29.

Thirdly, The following Scripture is wrested, and falsely made use of, viz. Isa.
xxvii. 11. He that made them, will not have Mercy on them; and He that formed
them, will show them no Favor. This Text has, in some of the Writings of
those that espouse the aforesaid Doctrine, been brought to vindicate that
despairing, destructive, evil Principle, of Pre-ordination of particular
Persons to Destruction and Damnation: But this Text, with the rest, brought for
that End, is grossly perverted; for in the same Place the Case is fairly stated,
and the Reason clearly shown, why God will show them no Favor, viz. "Because
they were withered Branches, and People of no Understanding; therefore he that
made them, would not have Mercy upon them, and he that formed them, would show
them no Favor." From whence it appears, they might have been fruitful, but
would not, and had been green, but were withered from their Greenness; much
like those who Christ expostulates with, when He says, How often would I have
gathered you as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not,
Matt. xxiii. 37. If thou badst known in this thy Day, the Things which belong
to thy Peace, but now they are bid from thine Eyes, Luke xix. 42. Which shows
the great and fervent Desire of Christ to save Souls, and his tender Love to
poor Mortals, and that they had a Day of Visitation, in which they might have
been gathered, which is far from ordaining them to Destruction from all
Eternity.

So that God is fully clear of all Men, and their Blood is on their own Heads,
and their Destruction is of themselves; whereas they might have Help in the
Lord, and his Christ, through Faith, which he offers to Man freely; but Man
will not receive or embrace it. And further, it should be observed, that if the
whole Texts of the Prophecy of Isaiah in his 37th Chapter be considered, it
will plainly appear, that he is so far from uttering an express or positive
Decree of their final Destruction, that he clearly and fully foretells their
Recovery and Restoration out of that State.

Fourthly, They argue from the Words of the Apostle, Has not the Potter Power
over the Clay, to make of the same Lump one Vessel to Honor, and another to
Dishonor? Romans ix. 21. Yes, doubtless he has; but the Potter does not make
Vessels with Design to destroy them, or to break them to Pieces, but for Use
and Service; and it is contrary to his Will and Interest, when any Vessel marrs
under his Hand. And it is very plainly expressed by the Prophet Jeremiah, after
mentioning his beholding the Work of the Potter, in the 18th Chapter, 6th, 7th,
and 8th Verses, O House of Israel, cannot I do with you as this Potter? says
the Lord? Behold as the Clay is in the Potter's Hand, so are ye in mine Hand, O
House of Israel. At what Instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and
concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If that
Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their Evil, I will repent of
the Evil that I thought to do unto them. All which is contrary to the Doctrine
of an absolute, unconditional Predestination: The Lord, in his Wisdom, and to
show his Power, does make Souls more or less honorable, as he pleases; but it
is very plain, from Scripture, and right Reason, that He makes none with Design
to destroy them, or has ordained any to eternal Damnation. Though He has
ordained Damnation for wicked and ungodly Men, yet he never ordained that Men
should be wicked and ungodly.

Fifthly, They urge the Apostle's Words, but to as little Purpose as the
former, Rom ix. 18. He will have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and whom he
will be hardens. It Is true, that God has abundantly shown us in the Holy
Scriptures on whom He will have Mercy, viz. He has Mercy on the Poor in
Spirit; the Humble He teaches of his Ways; the Meek He guides in Judgment; He
clothes the Meek with Salvation: He has the Righteous in everlasting
Remembrance; He loves them which love him; He saves them who love his Dear
Son, and believe in him; He gives to them eternal Life, and Christ loves
them, and manifests himself unto them. And his beloved Disciple John
declared, If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ,
the Righteous; and he is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only,
but also for the Sins of the whole World, 1 John ii. 1, 2. And the Author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews says, But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower
than the Angels, for the Suffering of Death, crowned with Glory and Honor,
that he, by the Grace of God, should taste Death for every Man, Heb. ii. 9. And
all who believe in, and obey him, will partake of the Benefit of his Death and
Suffering; but the Wicked is snared in the Work of his own Hands, Psalm. ix. 16.

Thus it was in my Mind, and has been, for some Years, to show to the
Presbyterian, Independent, or Baptist People, or any other, who hold the
Doctrine of particular personal Election or Reprobation, the Weakness of some
of (what they call; their Proofs, for this (as I take it) corrupt and dangerous
Doctrine of theirs, and the Misapplication of those Texts of Scripture, which
they advance to maintain their absurd Notion, of Souls being foreordained to
Damnation eternally, whether they do Good or Evil, and that it is so
determined, before we are born into the World, Oh! that those People might come
to true Repentance, and lay hold of the universal Love of God to eternal Life,
through the living Faith of Jesus Christ our Lord, in the tender Bowels of
whose Love to all are those Lines written, and in great Love and Goodwill they
are invited to search the Scriptures, and to see whether the whole Scope of
them do not show the contrary to what they hold in Relation to personal
Reprobation to Destruction, foreordained before we are born, or have done
either Good or Evil; there not being one Text to be found to prove that
Doctrine: But there are abundance which set forth the Love, Mercy, and Goodness
of God, to Mankind; only two of which I shall add hereunto, viz. And God saw
that the Wickedness of Man was great in the Earth, and that every Imagination
of the Thoughts of his Heart was only Evil continually. And it repented the
Lord that he had made Man on the Earth, and it grieved him at his Heart, Genesis
vi. 5, 6. And Jonah arose, and went unto Nineveh, according to the Word of the
Lord, and entered, and said, Yet forty Days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown.
So the People of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a Fast, and put on
Sackcloth, from the greatest of them, even to the least of them. And God saw
their Works, that they returned from their evil Way, and God repented of the
Evil that he had said he would do unto them, and be did it not, Jonah iii. 3,
4, 5, 10. I heartily desire that these two Texts may be duly considered, and
weighed, therein the Mercy, Loving Kindness, and long Forbearance of God, being
so clearly and fully manifested, that I think may be sufficient to convince
every unprejudiced Mind of the Error of believing in that Principle of the
absolute Predestination of the Almighty of any Part of Mankind to Destruction.

A LETTER TO COTTON MATHER, in New England.
HAVING received a courteous Letter from Cotton Mather, one of the greatest
Preachers among the People of New England; he being in Community with the
National Church there, and having preached a Sermon concerning the Power and
Excellency of Christ within, recommending People thereunto, and commending our
Society therein; but differing from us in some Particulars, which Particulars I
was concerned to answer as follows, viz.

Franckfort, the 20 th of 3d Mo. 1726. Courteous Friend, C. M.
1726.
THINE, dated November 30. 1725. I received a few Days ago, I having been
visiting the People along the Seashore in the Jerseys (in the Love of Christ,
hoping to bring some to him) among whom, in a general Way, the Gospel which I
had to preach in his Name, found Acceptance, for which I was truly thankful;
and though I had no earthly Consideration for so doing, yet I had that inward
Satisfaction, that I thought I would not exchange or part with it for the
Bishop of Rome or Canterbury's Revenue: And at my Return I received thy
friendly Letter, which I was glad of, and that mine to thee found that
Acceptance, so as to answer my Request.

And whereas thou say thy Aim and Hope has been to persuade us who call
ourselves Friends (we professing ourselves Friends to all People) that our
superior Stress should be upon the grand Point of Christ within; we having
found, by Experience, living and blessed Experience, the great Benefit and
Comfort of his most sweet and glorious Presence, by the Manifestation of his
Power, Spirit and Grace, in and to our Souls, we cannot do otherwise than lay
the greatest Stress thereon, our Benefit therein, and thereby, being not easily
expressed, so as to be understood by the carnal Mind, or to those who are in a
State of Degeneration; Christ within was, is, and ever will be, the Hope of the
sanctified Soul's Glory, though a Mystery hid from Ages of unregenerate People,
or from those who are in the Reprobation; Know ye not your ownselves, that
Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates, says the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. xiii.
5. Col. i. 2.

From the above I would not be understood, as though I believed that Christ is
no where but in his People; neither did I ever understand any of our Friends
so, though we have been often misrepresented on that Head.

And as to the Ceremony of the Hat, and the Plural Language to single Persons,
I thus answer, that many of us left that Way of Salutation and Speaking, through
strong Conviction, accompanied with these Reasons;

1 st, It being a Respect we pay Almighty God, He being our Head, is honored
by uncovering our Head (as said the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. xi. 4.) We think for
that Reason it is not right to uncover our Heads to Men; but that to give one
another our Hands, in an inward and hearty Respect, is better.

2 dly, We read in the Holy Scriptures, that Mordecai could not bow to Haman
for Conscience Sake, Esther iii. 4. and I think it may safely be concluded,
that he did not take off his Hat, or uncover his Head, though he was in Danger
to have suffered for it. And,

3 dly, The three Children of God walked in the Presence of the great King of
Babylon (and those present with him) with their Hats on; and they stood the
King's Fury, and the Fire, though seven Times hotter than usual, with their
Hats on, as there related in Dan. iii. 21.

I beseech thee, my good Friend, to consider the Tenor of the Holy Scriptures
maturely, and then I hope thou will not think the Hat, and the Language of Thee
and Thou to a single Person, to be needless Ceremonies and Encumbrances,
according to our Principle and Practice; I do not write thus to thee for
Contention, nor in a contentious Spirit or Mind, but in the innocent Love of
our dear Lord Jesus, and for Edification, or, if Need be, for Information.

Also, as to Thee and Thou to a single Person, I answer, That the Holy
Scripture (or the Words of God therein recorded) is by all Protestant
Professors of Christ, acknowledged a Rule to us all, next to the Holy Spirit,
from whence they came, or the Holy Ghost, that our Savior promised "should
lead into all Truth, and abide with the true Believers for ever;" and that God
and Christ's Spirit, does not contradict the Holy Scriptures, which came and
proceeded from thence: This general Proposition we all agree to, if we rightly
understand one another.

Then, according to this Rule, our plain Language is right, otherwise I shall
be obliged to thee to show us wherein we err from that good Rule. Now, the Most
High thought good to teach and use that Language in the Beginning to our first
Parents; so that it is our Mother Tongue, and it is the Language of the Bible,
or Holy Scriptures, from Genesis to the Revelations. I suppose I need not tell
thee, that You to a single Person had its Rise from Pride and Flattery; and
thyself knows, that You to a single Person, is neither good English, nor good
Grammar.

And if I am rightly informed, your Forefathers, as well as ours, made use of
this plain Scripture Language of Thee and Thou to a single Person, in their
first Separation from the common Sinners of their Times.

Though I thus apologize for the plain Scripture Language, yet in Respect of
Faith or Grace, and Principles to be believed, which are absolutely necessary
to Salvation, I call these but small Things; but we are not to despise the Day
of small Things, if we are faithful in the little, or less, we have the Promise
of more or greater Things, Luke xix. 17.

I pray thee excuse this long Letter of Epistle; for it seems to me but meet
that we should render a Reason for our Disuse of those Things used by some (of
most Societies) professing the Christian Faith.

And in Respect of Water Baptism, and the Bread and Wine: 1st, As to
Water Baptism, I have this to answer, the which I hope thou will charitably
construe.

The first Account that we have of it, is from John the Baptist, who first
practiced it, according to the Account the Evangelists give concerning it, and
he said, I indeed baptize with Water, but he (Christ) shall baptize you with
the Holy Ghost, and with Fire; plainly distinguishing between the two Baptisms,
and the two Natures of them; adding, I shall decrease, but he shall increase:
He spoke not of their Persons; but of their Dispensations.

William Dell, a bright and learned Man in his Day (and, as I take it, when he
flourished most in Divine Religion) wrote an excellent Piece on the Subject of
Baptism, which be pleased to peruse; it is very evangelical, and well worth
reading; I shall take Care to procure thee one of his Books; I am the more
concerned about this Subject, because thou art positive about our coming to it,
if we improve in Wisdom: But I would hope to be in some Measure instrumental to
convince thee that there is no absolute Need (in order to Salvation) to go into
or unto the Water or Element; but that it is absolutely necessary for us to go
unto and into Christ, that being the Way to be new Creatures, as it is written,
He that is in Christ, is a new Creature, 2 Cor. v. 17.

Our dear Lord on this Subject says, John truly baptized with Water, but ye
shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost: Here our Savior, as well as John,
distinguishes between the two Dispensations: John's was indeed a glorious
Dispensation in its Time; but Christ's far exceeds it in Glory, and is to
endure for ever.

The Apostle Peter remembered this Doctrine of Christ, when the Holy Spirit's
Baptism was come, Then, says he, I remembered the Word of the Lord, John
baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost, Acts xi. 16.
The Apostle Paul, the great Apostle of the Gentiles, says, He was not sent to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel; which, when truly preached, has a spiritual
baptizing Power attending it; and if we come rightly to be baptized with the
Holy Spirit, and Fire of the Divine Word, we shall witness a Renovation, and
the Work of Reformation and Regeneration will go forward more and more, both
without and within, in Body and in Spirit, for which every true Christian and
Minister of Christ longs and prays with fervent Desires; the Apostle says (and
pray be pleased to judge for what Reason) That the Kingdom of Heaven is not
Meat or Drink, but Righteousness, Romans 14.17.
Peace, and Joy, in the Holy Ghost. Oh! may the Most High inspire thy Soul when
thou reads these Lines is my tender Desire.

I know I am writing to one who in many Things is far before me; so that I
write in a Fear, mixed with Christian Love; and if it meet with the same Love
in thee, that will cover a Multitude of Faults.

And as to the Supper or Ceremony of Bread and Wine (which is called a
Sacrament, which Word we find not in the Bible) we do not understand that our
Lord laid it as an Injunction on his Followers to observe or practice to
Perpetuity; or that the Observation thereof is absolutely necessary to
Salvation, and that his Church should be in the Practice of the Elements of
either Water to dip in, or sprinkle with, or Bread and Wine to eat or drink, as
a lasting Ordinance, to be observed by his Believers in an outward Way for ever.

Christ said, This do ye, as often as ye drink it, in Remembrance of me; which to
me seems to leave it indifferently: Also from the Debates and Contentions of
Christians about it, and the Blood that has been spilt and shed in this
Controversy, and the many Doubts arising concerning it, I think it is evident,
that Christ was not positive that his Followers should be found to Perpetuity
therein; and where he says, Take, eat, this is my Body which is broken for you,
or for many; and drink, this is my Blood which is shed for many; I believe it
is not to be doubted but that he pointed at his Flesh and Blood, rather than
the Bread and Wine (as in a Figure) and that also he had an Eye to his
spiritual Flesh and Blood or Body, as where he says, Except ye eat my Flesh,
and drink my Blood, ye have no Life in you; the which every true Christian
should daily feed upon, and without which we have no Divine Life in us; and as
himself also said, My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed.

And it is worthy of note, that much of his Holy Words, and heavenly Doctrine,
was spiritually to be understood; My Words says he, are Spirit and Life; a
glorious Speech to such as truly witness and understand it, which is much
better felt by a true believing Christian than expressed: Ohmay we so open our
Hearts to our beloved Jesus, that he may come in unto us, and that we may sup
with him, and he with us, and that he may notonly sup with us, but take up his
Abode with us, and we with him, for ever: And not only in us twain, but in all
those who truly love, believe in, and follow him throughout the World; so
wishes, and prays, in Sincerity, thy real Friend,

T. C.
P. S. I hope thou will excuse this long Letter, thy Vital Christianity being
instrumental toward this our corresponding together by Way of Epistle, which
if it prove any Way to thy Satisfaction, I shall rejoice. In reading several of
thy latter Tracts, I have had Love in my Heart toward thee, which was yet more
renewed in perusing thy Vital Christianity, and thy friendly Letter to me.



YOUTH PERSUADED TO Obedience, Gratitude, and Honor, to GOD, and their
PARENTS. ALSO Some TOUCHES upon the LIFE of MAN from the CRADLE to the GRAVE.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy Days may be prolonged in the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee,

DEUTERONOMY. v. 16. etc. Man that is born of a Woman, is of few Days, and full of
Trouble,

JOB xiv. 1.
To the READER.
READER,
THIS little Piece is the Fruits of a few leisure Hours which the Author had at
Sea, he being under a solid Concern for the present rising Generation, that
they may flourish and grow in Piety and Virtue; and that the Days of their
Tranquillity may increase, and be lengthened out in this World.

And also, chiefly, that when they go off the Stage of Life, they may have the
Enjoyment of the Peace of God, and of his dear Son, our Lord Jesus Christ,
through the Holy Ghost, with a full Assurance of an eternal Inheritance and
Habitation in the glorious Kingdom of Heaven.

The Author hopes that religious and well-inclin'd Parents will join with him
in this so necessary and noble a Work of seeking the Youth's Welfare; and
desires, as they may approve this Labor of Love, that they would be
instrumental to disperse or bestow this among, or to their Children and
Neighbors, the Charge being inconsiderable.

And if any are benefited hereby, it will abundantly satisfy for the Labor
taken herein. And may the Lord of all bless thee and thine, in all good Things,
who is worthy to be loved, served and obeyed, by all Mortals, to whom Praise
only is due for ever.

YOUTH persuaded to Obedience, Gratitude, and Honor, to GOD, etc.
ONE of the first Things pious and good Christians generally endeavor to
instill into their Children, in their Youth, is, 1730.
the true Knowledge of God; and that he made them, and for what End.

The Almighty made us all on Purpose for his Glory, and that we should serve
and worship Him, as said the Four and Twenty Elders who stand before the Throne
of God, and worship Him continually, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive Glory, and Honor, and Power: For thou have created all Things, and for
thy Pleasure they are, and were created, Rev. iv. 8, -- 11.

Man being a noble (if not the noblest) Piece of this visible Creation, was
doubtless made and created for a Purpose of his Glory.

But Sin is of the Devil, and did, and (if not repented of) always will
dishonor God, and bring Ruin upon both Body and Soul.

Therefore, O Youth! be prevailed upon before it be too late, rightly to
remember thy Creator in thy Youthful Days, before the evil Day come. And
certainly it will be an evil Day to thy Soul, when God by his Spirit leaves
striving with thee, and leaves thee to thyself: For he has said, His Spirit
shall not always strive with Man, for that he also is Flesh, Genesis vi. 3.

While therefore God by his Spirit is striving with thee, and calling thee by
his Grace to Repentance, and to turn from the Evil of thy Ways, saying, Turn
ye, turn ye, why will ye die? Turn at my Reproof, and I will pour out of my
Spirit upon you, and make myself known unto you. Again, I stand at the Door and
knock (here is a holy Stroke at the Heart) if any Man will hear my Voice (see
the universal and unlimited Love of God in Christ to poor Mortals) and open the
Door, I will come in to him, Rev. iii. 20.

If Man will open the Door of his Heart to his Maker and Savior, he will come
unto, or into his Soul. O Soul! no Guest in the World like this heavenly Guest;
no Companion, no Friend in the World, like this great, this choice Friend,
Almighty God. Oh! seek him while he is yet to be found, and call upon him while
he is near. Let the wicked forsake his Way, and the unrighteous Man his
Thoughts (that are evil) and return to the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon
him (and as say the Righteous, who seek the Glory of God, and the Good of
Souls) and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon, Isa. lv. 7.

Therefore, Turn, turn, O turn! why will ye die, ye curious Workmanship of
God's holy Hands, ye fine and beautiful young Men and Women?

The Youth should also gratefully and obediently remember their careful
Fathers, and indulgent and tender Mothers: Unto such Youths God has promised a
Reward, the which Promise I have seen fulfilled in many Thousands; and God is
more and more fulfilling of it every Day; and will fulfill it to the End of Time.

And how reasonable is it that we should remember with Tenderness, our Father
who begat us, and not to disobey him in his lawful and just Commands, nor
wittingly or willingly vex or grieve him?

Pray how shall we be ever able to pay or retaliate him for all his Care, and
the Cost and Charge he has been at in bringing of us up, till we come to be
young Men and Women? Can we ever do enough for him that has done so much for
us?

Oh! how unhandsome it is, as well as irreligious and unchristian, for a young
Man or Woman, when their Parents are old, and perhaps full of Aches and Pains,
or otherwise in Years and in bad Health, to treat them with Scorn and Contempt,
or be surly and churlish, and flout at and disobey their wholesome Counsel and
Advice.

On such young People I have seen the heavy Hand of God in my Day, and made
Observations thereof, many and many a Time. O! the many disobedient Youth that
I have seen, that have been Examples and Warnings to others, of the just
Judgment of God Almighty, upon disobedient and profane young People; and
indeed too many old Ones too.

But the Youth are too apt to think and say, Our Bones are full of Marrow, and
our Veins of Blood, and our Blood is warm; we cannot be so dull and heavy as
old Men.

Well, who has filled, and by whose Providence are your Bones and Veins full
of Marrow and Blood? Is it not God? Is it not in Him you live, move, and have
your being? What has the Devil and Sin to do with all this? Should not God
have the Marrow of your Days? And should not Youth serve Him with their purest
or finest Blood? And should they not be warm, and not lukewarm or cold, in and
toward the Things of God and Heaven?

Thus to be vigorous and manly in the Work of God, is truly and rightly to
honor our Parents, as God commands.

It is not to honor them with the Mouth and Lips only, but with the Heart, and
with serving God; for that is the Honor spoken of in the Holy Scripture.

None can rightly honor their Parents, who dishonor God. If a young Man or
Woman is religious, and of a discreet Conduct, and of a sober and just
Conversation: That indeed is a real Honor to, and honoring of our Parents.
For, say People, when they behold just and religious Youths, when their Father
is living, Oh! how happy is that Man in his Children! And indeed it is an
honorable Happiness: When, on the other Hand (Pity! Oh! Pity! Pity!) how many
fine Youths, to look at (at a Distance, to outward Appearance) have, through
their Disobedience, and vile Practice, brought down the gray Hairs of their
careful and tender Parents, with Sorrow to the Grave.

And, as if their own Ruin and their Parents was not enough, bring, through
their Intemperance and Folly, Ruin and Destruction on their Posterity also; and
what their Parents have with great Labor gained to bring them up, and educate
them till they come to Maturity, they in a little Time spend extravagantly and
intemperately, as well as foolishly and inconsiderately; and so bring Ruin and
Destruction swiftly on themselves and Posterity.

And another Subject but seldom spoken of, or handled, is the extraordinary
Regard we should have to oblige our Mothers, and the tender Care we should take
to nourish and comfort them in Age; and not vex or grieve them, if possible we
could help it, for many Reasons, besides our religious Duty, as above, in
Relation of Honor to Parents. And let me remind the Youths of this Age, of
either Sex, that in the Time of the Law (the Law of God under the Mosaical
Dispensation) the disobedient Youths were to be brought out of the Camp or
City, and all the People were to stone them to Death.

It Is true, our Gospel Dispensation, or the Dispensation of our sweet Jesus, is
not so rigorous; but much more mild and gentle, as to the Body; yet, as to the
Soul, without Repentance, the Disobedient to natural Parents in general
(besides to our Father in Heaven in particular) entail, upon them an eternal
Curse in the World to come, and many Crosses and Difficulties in this World.
And herein the Gospel exceeds the Law, it gives Time for Repentance, mixes
Mercy with Judgment, and sanctifies our Troubles, Crosses and Afflictions, to
us, through Repentance and Amendment of Life; whereas the Law in old Time was
executed without Mercy or Pity, and with fierce Wrath, Vigor and Anger.

But to return to the tender Mother. Oh! the tender Soul of the tender Mother,
how it yearns over the disobedient Son or Daughter! And who that has not a
Heart of Flint or Adamant, but would comply or yield to the wholesome Advice
and Counsel of so tender a Parent, who brought us into the World? Affection to
such a near Parent, one would think should constrain us to it.

However, if Religion or Affection is not so predominant, let Reason do it.
First, It Is a rational Consideration that thy Mother suffered many Pains, and
much Sickness, which thou were the Occasion of, even before thou were brought
forth into the World, besides the dolorous, bitter Pangs and Pains of
Childbirth, which have cost the Life of many a tender Mother.

And consider the first Month after thou were born, O the Care and tender
Concern, the Watching, Labor and Charge, cannot easily be expressed! What
running to the Physician upon every Symptom or Suspicion of being ill, or out
of Order? And must all this be forgotten? O Height of Ingratitude! which too
many poor young People are guilty of.

Though blessed be the Almighty Lord, there are some who are truly and humbly
thankful to God and their Parents for their Being, and their Well-being,
believing they can never fully requite Him or their Parents.

Now, after our first Month, what a deal of Fatigue and Trouble we give our
Mothers, who still, if they give us Suck (as many Mothers do; even Queens and
Princesses, and many noble Women, not disdaining to give their Children Suck
from their own Breasts, which certainly is the most natural Way of bringing up
and nourishing them; though, on some Considerations, a Nurse may be dispensed
with) how do we partake of their own Blood, to the wasting of their Spirits,
and oftentimes their Flesh also?

Surely nothing but Love and Duty could engage a Mother to the great Care and
Fatigue which she is obliged to in Nursing and Suckling her Children,
especially if beforehand in the World? Who can express the Toil and Care to
keep the poor unthinking little Ones quiet, and the many weary Steps and
Contrivances to keep them from Crying? Although, by the Way, when they grow up,
their Mothers may cry Night and Day too, and they take but too little Notice of
it (i. e.) the rebellious, ungrateful, and disobedient Youth.

O Youth! must all this be forgotten? Must all this have no Consideration with
you, and bear no due Weight upon your Minds! Oh! surely no: God forbid!

The first Year being gone (which is oftentimes but the Beginning of Sorrow to
the Parents) then they cannot easily be trusted alone, or out of Sight, except
in some good Hand; and if it is never so little missing, then cries the Mother,
Oh! where is the Child? What have you done with my Child? Who has got it? And
never rests till she is satisfied about it; and when it is brought to her, O how
she embraces and kisses it, as if she would wrap its Soul up in her own! and
then the Heart, the Bosom, and the Breast, are all open to it. What endearing
Expressions are poured out to it from its tender Mother! as, My Dear, my Love,
my Jewel, etc. and sometimes from some Sort of Persons such fond Expressions as
are not justifiable.

But, O melancholy Consideration! all this Love and Tenderness is too often
rewarded with Hard-heartedness and Cruelty; the Mother may cry, and die too, if
she will, for her Dear Love, and Precious Jewel, when grown up to Man or
Woman's Estate! From such Ingratitude may the Lord deliver us!

This Consideration is remarkable, as we are also the Workmanship of God, and
human Creatures, That of all the Creatures God has made, there is scarcely any
so helpless so long as Man; so that Man is so much the more obliged to his
Parents, and particularly his Mother, who feeds us when we cannot feed
ourselves, and carries us long before we can go alone, and defends us from
Harm, or we must perish. After all this, to be unkind and disobedient to our
Parents, is great Ingratitude; and I scarce ever saw it go unpunished, even in
this World: And pray let the Youth consider how it is like to fare with them in
the next; for I address myself to those who believe the sacred Writings of the
Holy Scriptures; for to others, some Things herein may seem fabulous, as
Judgment to come does to the Atheist, though diverse of them feel it begin to come
before they go out of the World, as has been the Case of many which might be
mentioned.

From the Breast, and the Arms, to the seventh Year of our Age, who can relate
the World of Trouble our parents have with us to keep us out of Harm's Way, to
keep us from bad Company, to keep us in Health as much as lays in their Power,
to clothe us, and keep us whole and clean, and take Care that we learn no ill
Words or Manners; for about this Time, little Youths are very apt to learn Good
or Evil; and the careful, virtuous Parents, would do well to endeavor to
cultivate their tender Minds, and to plant Things good and profitable in them
betimes. It often turns to good Account (though not always) and when it does
not, the Parents, having done their Duty are clear of their Blood, and of what
Mischief may befall them through their Ungodliness, and Folly, and Intemperance,
afterward.

From the Seventh to the Fourteenth Year, then the Care of wise and thoughtful
Parents is to give them suitable Learning, and to seek for the best Master that
can be got for them, which indeed is a great Point of Prudence; for corrupt and
intemperate Teachers are often hurtful to Youth, and Men of bad Principles may
be Instruments of instilling the like Principles into the Children. A good
Understanding, good Manners, and good Principles, a religious, wise and
discerning, Parent, would esteem before Letters and Figures; although to be
well instructed in these also, is considerable, but the other preferable. And
here let Teachers and the Youths be careful of Idleness, for that is the Mother
of many Mischiefs; and bad Words, bad Actions, and bad Company, ought to be
avoided, which taint and corrupt the Minds of the little tender Youths.

It Is melancholy to think of it, that some Youths, who never heard bad Words
in their Father's House, such as taking the Sacred Name in vain, Cursing,
Swearing, Talking rudely, etc. should come from School full with it, so that
the good Intention of the Parents in giving their Youth Schooling, is then
circumvented in a great Degree; to regulate which, the Parents and Tutors
should join together in a wholesome Discipline. Some indulgent Parents mightily
hurt their Youth by tying up the Hands of their Teachers from discreet
Correction. No discreet Teacher will use Broom or Mop-stick, or Door and
Window-bars, to correct their Youths; that would be unmanly, as well as unwise;
but the Rod never did hurt, in a skilful Hand. And both at Home and at School,
it is profitable for the Youth to be diligent in Reading the Holy Scriptures,
which are preferable to all other Books, though other good Books are profitable
also, and beneficial to improve the Understanding; whereas filthy and
irreligious corrupt Romances, and profane Play-Books often poison, and are the
Bane or Ruin in of Youth; and when once they come to be in Love with those
black dark Works, sacred Truths are of little Value with them, which is an
evident Token or Sign of the evil Tendency of evil Books: Though there may be
some Sort of Philosophy in some of them, yet, it it is vain, and Lies, and
Deceit, we had Need to be careful our Youth are not spoiled therewith; and
indeed those of riper Years are often hurt thereby, else why did the learned
Apostle Paul write to the primitive Christians, to beware lest any of them
should be spoiled through [wrong] Philosophy, and vain Deceit, Col. ii. 8. If
all this Care and Pains, besides Charge, should be forgotten, it betokens great
Stupidity.

From Fourteen to Twenty-one, more Care comes on a-fresh upon the Heart and
Mind of the faithful and loving Father, and affectionate and tender Mother,
that their Offspring may do well, both as to this World, and also to that which
is to come. It is indeed commendable, and also a Duty in the Parents, to take
Care in putting their Children in a Way, as much as lies in their Power, to
live in the World; but, above all Things, to endeavor to promote their eternal
Happiness and Interest in the Life to come. This is so much the more
honorable, by how much the one is external, and the other eternal. O Eternity!
Eternity! that we did but think more upon it, though we thought less of the
Externals; although some think too little upon the substantial Part of them
too, and forget to be just in the Things of Meum and Tuum, or between Man and
Man.

But to return to the Youth; and as to Trade, the Law of Nations forbids them
to trade, or to trade with them, till they arrive at the Years of Twenty One,
as supposing their Understanding not fully ripe for Business till that Age; and
therefore many, and some of the wisest Heads on the Earth, and Men of vast
Estates, have thought it rational and proper for Youth to be put Apprentice for
seven Years: This is looked upon as expedient, although they have many
Thousands to give them when they come to Age: And indeed many Youths have been
ruined and undone for Want of such Service; and some of the brightest and
finest of our young Men have spent more before they arrived to that Age, than
their Parents had to begin the World withal; nay, some, many times more, for
want of Employ in some commendable Calling; for having so much idle Time on
their Hands, they have taken to idle Company, and become idle Companions
themselves also; and so the Youth have corrupted one another, to their geat
Hurt and Damage, as to their outward Substance; and which is yet worse, as to
their Soul's Welfare; and such evil Communication corrupts good Manners; and if
they were employed in Business, they in this Respect would be out of Harm's
Way, out of the Way of those Rooks that would make a Prey of them.

In order to the Well-doing and Being of the Youth in the Time of his seven
Years Servitude, we ought to be very careful to choose such Masters as are of
good Report: First, as to their Religion, Ingenuity, Industry, Justice and
Temperance, and one who has acquired to a Way of living well: Such a Master is
worthy, and ought to be obeyed. It often happens, that before this Time is
over, the Youth are uneasy, and are wont to go home to their Parents, with
Complaints; but without a real Occasion or Necessity. It is far better, and
much more honorable for young Men to stay out their appointed Time: And then
when they come to have their lawful Liberty, it will be more sweet to them; and
People will be the more free and engaged to deal and trade with them, and the
Parents will have the greater Encouragement to set them up in their Calling. A
common Maxim, which is generally fulfilled, is worthy of Note here (i. e.)
Those that are good for their Masters, are good for themselves, and it mostly
happens so.

And as to Masters, since they are generally Gainers by the Service and Work of
their Servants, they ought to use them well, as to their Accommodations, and
not to exact their Labor to Oppression, remembering we have all a Master,
which is in Heaven, and that every one of us (let our Condition be what it will
in this World) must be accountable for the Deeds done here on Earth, to him in
his Kingdom.

It must not here be forgotten, that Servants ought not to serve their Masters
with Eye-service; but justly do their Duty as though they were actually
present, or really in View. And as their Indentures bind against Cards and
Dice, and all unlawful Games, and Gaming being very destructive to Youth, as
well as to their Masters Interest, it is in an especial Manner to be avoided;
for Gaming leads into many other Evils, and, at the best, tends to draw the
Heart and Mind from heavenly to earthly Things. Also the Servant is not to see
his Master any Ways defrauded, it being all one in the Foundation, whether the
Servant does it himself, or sees (with Approbation) another do it; and that
which would make the Time the pleasanter, and seem not so long and tedious, is
to be cheerful and good natured, and to be sure to frequent the public Worship
of Almighty God; and Masters would do well to let their Servants go sometimes
to more private Duty; and if the Servant be conscientious, the Master will be
no Loser by such Indulgence. Also Servants ought to be kind to their Masters
Children, which is reputable; and Masters ought not to let their Children
insult their Servants; and if the Servants merit Correction, let it be done
prudently, and not in a Fury, or in the Heat of Passion; for such Correction,
in the Heat of Passion, oftener hardens the Heart, than amends the Manners of
the Youth so corrected.

Both the Master and the Servant ought strictly to observe, and not to break
their Covenants which they have mutually agreed to in their Indentures, signed
and sealed before Witnesses, or else they lose their Title to Justice, and as
it is not prudent nor just, neither is it lawful so to do. It is a great
Hapiness in a Family when the Master and Mistress, Menservants and
Maidservants, live together in Love and Good Will, and endeavor to promote
each others Interest: Then when there is Occasion to part, the good Wishes of
each other go along with these who go, and stay with those who stay. And the
Care of Parents in this Affair, is worthy the Youth's solid Thought and
Consideration.

Thus after the fine and sprightly young Man has faithfully served his
Apprenticeship, and is arrived to the Age of one and twenty Years, when it is
lawful for him and others to deal and trade one with another, then it may be
suitable for him to marry according to the Ordinance of God, and his early
Institution in Paradise, who then said (and his Word is the same to this Day)
It is not good for Man to be alone, whatever others may say to the contrary.
Oh! what Pity and Shame it is, that so many (otherwise) great Wits, and fine
flourishing young Men, should plead and practice against lawful Marriage, to
their lasting Reproach and Infamy; and if they should have any Posterity, it is
a Scandal on them also, though they are innocent; for through their Parents
Faults, they are pointed at as illegitimate: And the inevitable Consequences of
such filthy Mixtures, are monstrous Confusion.

But let us hope and endeavor better for our present rising Generation, and
our hopeful and flourishing Youths: And since the State of Marriage is an
exceeding happy State of Life, if performed in the Fear and Love of God, and
with Consent of Parents and Parties concerned; and otherwise the Reverse:
Therefore considering the Bashfulness of some Youths (and sometimes to a great
Fault) it might be well for the Parents in Time to propose Marriage to their
Children, who sometimes have been lost for Want of performing it in the Fear
and Love of God; and indeed it being one of the greatest Concerns in Life, and
being for Life, a young Man and a young Woman ought therefore to act therein
with the greatest Care and Caution, as ought the Parents also. And let the
Parents be helpful to their Youth, according to their Ability, and according to
the Industry of the Youth, and still be helping them, which is an Encouragement
to ingenious and virtuous young People. By being too strait-handed, there may
be a wishing for the Death of the Parents, saying, They cannot carry it with
them to their Graves; yet the Parent is not to impoverish himself for his
Children; for that has sometimes ruined both Parents and Children also.

The Parents may propose, but the Youth ought to choose, because they must live
and die by it; the chief Motive of Marriage ought to be pure and true Love,
which the Parents cannot give to the Children for each other; they may give
them Money, and give them Advice, but they cannot give them Love; and Parents,
by over-awing and over-perswading them, have brought Ruin on many a beautiful
Son and Daughter.

In this Case of Marriage, the Choice (if we design to be happy for Term of
Life) ought to be a virtuous Person: That ought to be our chiefest Aim. Our
Happiness does not consist in either Riches, or Beauty; for Riches make
themselves Wings, and fly away, Prove. xxiii. 5. And Beauty is a fading Flower:
Virtue is much more preferable and enduring; to have all these together in one
Person, is such a Rarity as is hard to be found. And in this great Case of
Marriage, it is an excellent Thing to be equally matched, or in the Apostle's
Words, equally yoked: Not one of one Persuasion in Religion, and the other of
another; not one very old, and the other very young: First, For where Two of
different Persuasions marry, and have Children, which Way must the Children
steer their Course? After the Father, or the Mother? And if the Parents are
both true to their contrary Principles, who must prevail in relation to their
Childrens Way and Worship? Many Inconveniences, and much Confusion, must
naturally be the Consequences of such Marriages.

Those who marry on Account of Riches, are very often disappointed; for they
very soon are on the Wing; they will fly away, sometimes in the Flames, and
sometimes they will steal away in the dark by Theft; and sometimes they will
swim away by Water, or fly away with Canvas Wings, and never return; and
sometimes by the Intemperance and Extravagancies of the Man or Woman, are most
profusely wasted. And here let it be noted, that to live comfortably in the
World, there must be both in the Man, and also in Woman, Industry and
Frugality; for otherwise, if One has a hundred Thousand a Year, it might all,
and more than all, be spent in Excess; and if the Man be extravagant, the Woman
and her Family must suffer; and likewise, if the Woman is extravagant, and
lives to Excess, that Man cannot thrive in the World; so that both must manage
their Affairs with Frugality and Industry; and then no Doubt, but through the
Blessing of God, they may be very happy in one another, and in their outward
Affairs, and in Christ Jesus the Lord: But then the Blessing of God must be
sought chiefly, and above all.

Also the very Old marrying with the very Young, is mostly attended with
Inconveniency, as daily Experience teaches; for too generally such Matches are
on the one Side for Riches; for where do we find a young Man that marries a
poor old Woman, or a young Woman that marries a poor old Man? And how often
have we heard young Ones say, They would never marry old Ones any more? And one
may well suppose, they had not married those old Ones they did, if it had not
been for their Riches; and many Times Providence has disappointed them in the
Enjoyment of what they so much sought for.

We now suppose our blooming young Man and Woman well married and settled in
the World, according to their own, and Parents, and Relations Liking and
Choice; and now, according to the Apprehension of themselves and others, they
are in a happy State, and are really so in one another: Oh the Love and
Endearments of such a Pair, who can fully express it? It has something of the
Resemblance of the State of our first Parents in Paradise; and happy, yea,
thrice happy would they be, that make it their Care and Study to live so, and
do live so until they die; and then when one of these happy entire Lovers dies,
it sometimes happens that the other cannot survive long, but shortly does die
too.

But as our Parents in Paradise, so we in this Paradisical State, have the same
subtle, serpentine Spirit to war withal; for Satan envies us this Happiness,
and uses all his Craft and Subtlety to break the Love and strict Union between
Man and Wife, and to turn it to Hatred and Bitterness; so that instead of dying
for one another, they wish one another dead; and sometimes the innocent
Sufferer dies indeed, with Sorrow and Grief; and the Survivor meets with one
who pays off all former Scores.

In order to circumvent our grand Enemy, and keep to our first Love as much as
lies in our Power, we must strictly avoid Anger, Jealousy, Intemperance, wilful
Separation, and the one too much insisting in his or her Will, against the
others, etc. But in Cases dubious, or difficult, the Author of all Things has
given the decisive Power to the Male, because the Female was first in the
Transgression; but it were better if these Two had but one Will, as they are
one Flesh, and that there were no other Power between them two, but the sweet
and cordial Power of Love; in that Mortals (especially when it is in that which
is divine) ever were, and still are, and always will be, happy.

1. Anger ought as much as possible to be avoided, between a Man and his Wife.
In a Heat or Rage, that may be done or said in an Instant, which one or both
may have Occasion to repent of all their Days; and when once done, it cannot be
undone. Again, and as often as a Man is angry with his Wife, or a Woman with
her Husband (without a sufficient Cause) so often do they make Work for
Repentance, and without which the Fault cannot be done clean away. Let the
angry Person remember the good Advice in sacred Record, Let not the Sun go down
on thine Anger, Ephesians. iv. 26. And if it was not to go down on the Anger of the
common People, much more it ought not between a Man and his Wife. And let
special Care be taken, that both be not angry together; for that would be the
Way to fire the whole House presently, so that the House would be too hot to
hold them.

2 dly, Jealousy. Oh cruel Jealousy! Jealousy is cruel as the Grave, and burns
as a Fire in the Soul, and will certainly consume it, if it be kept alive. It
ought indeed to be carefully watched against, and each Person to avoid all
Actions that might give, or have any Umbrage that Way. A free, open
Disposition, would mightily help to quench the burning Flames of Jealousy. And
Love, sincere Love, will mightily circumvent our fiery Enemy, the Prince of
evil Flames, who strives to stir up that (and not only that, but other) and all
false Fires whatsoever. If we would live in Peace and Love, let us put on
Charity; and that will lead us to put the best Construction, and not the worst,
on the Words and Actions one of another. This is a safe and good general Rule
for a Man and his Wife to observe; and not only for a Man and his Wife, but for
all others on all Occasions of Difference. For what sad Work would it make in
the World, and who could escape from Censure, if the worst Constructions were
put on all their free Words and Discourses? Yet some may be censured deservedly
notwithstanding. Oh! but this Divine Love is such a wonderful Thing, it will
quench the Darts of the Devil, and he cannot wound us while this pre^^ls.

Worthy to be rememb^red is that great Saying of the Son of God, By this shall
all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another, John xiii. 35.
And this between a Man and his Wife, is doubtless highly necessary; and without
it, they must be unhappy.

3 dly, Intemperance is a sore Evil in a married State (it is bad in any, and
worse in that) for it not only destroys the Peace of the Family, but that by
which (under Providence) the Family subsists, and is supported; ( i. e. the
Increase or regular Income of it) and it also destroys the Health, debauches
the Mind, quenches cordial Love, hurts Posterity, in causing weakly Children,
destroys Credit and Reputation, and has brought many a Family to Poverty,
Ruin, and Disgrace. Oh the Misery! Intemperance brings on People and Families,
in Drinking especially, and also in Eating and Apparel, it is hard to be
expressed in Words. Oh! what cruel Hardships it brings on Persons and their
Families, and that especially of drinking to Excess, which the Male Kind are
most guilty of. How barbarous it is for a Man to be carousing in a Tavern till
Morning, and his Wife weeping by herself at home, waiting for him? And when he
comes in, sometimes in great Disorder, and often in such Fits, he is very
mischievous, and commits much Folly and Outrage, of which he would be ashamed
when sober. Surely, if Man or Woman were not wholly deprived of Consideration,
they would or should consider maturely, and think solidly of the evil
Consequences of this great Evil, and Sin of Intemperance.

4 thly, Wilful Separation, between a Man and his Wife, is of dangerous
Consequence, That was very fatal to our first Parents, and seems to infect the
Posterity to this very Day. Fair Eve leaving her dear Adam, cost her dear. She
had not been so open to the Intrigues of vile Satan, if she had had her Adam
with her; and though the Female is generally the weaker Vessel, yet her
Strength is greatly augmented with the Presence and Company of her Husband; and
so is the Husband in the same Consideration. Daily Experience teaches, that it
is of ill Consequence for Women to go much abroad without their Husbands, or
young Women, without some Body to protect and defend them, from the Insults of
rude Persons, except on Family, or some other laudable Concerns. Women's
Business being much in their own Families, and Men's also, to leave their Wives
long, without Necessity, on Account of Business, is often hurtful to both. And
Men and their Wives to sleep separately if in Health (or by Consent, without
good Reasons) is very unnatural, and often tends to lessen the Love and
Affection they ought to have for each other.

It is good for married People to advise with each other, about the Affairs of
their Families, they being so nearly related; and to be subject to one another
in Things indifferent; and not strenuously to insist on their own Wills, one
against another; for that often breeds Contempt and Discontent, and mightily
tends to lessen the Love and Affection, which they ought to have for one
another. It would be well for married People to disclose their Differences as
little as may be, to any but themselves; and not to be contented or satisfied,
till they are made up again; always remembering their Marriage-Covenant, which
is to be loving and faithful till Death. Some married People have been heard to
say, That the longer they lived together, the more they loved one another.

As the Design of the Almighty in the Beginning was, in his Ordinance of
Marriage, that the Man and the Woman should be Help-meets to each other in
diverse Relations: So it behooves us to answer this great End and noble Design,
in his Fear.

In our domestic Affairs, we should draw together, and help one another; the
Woman in her Household Affairs at home, and the Man in his necessary Affairs
abroad, seeking to God for a Blessing upon their Labors: And if Accidents
happen, or Losses or Crosses, by Fire or Water, by Sea or Land, the loving
Husband, and the tender Wife, will help to comfort the most grieved with soft
and kind Expressions; such as My Dear, since it is our Lot to meet such
Disappointments, and great Losses, since we could not help it; and we are not
become poor through Idleness, or Extravagancy, let us endeavor to bear it as
patiently as we can; and let us comfort and cheer up one another: We do not
know but all this may be for the best; and if the Almighty sees meet, He can
give us more than ever we yet had. If not, let us endeavor to be content, and
try to make it up in loving one another.

And as to Religion, a Man and Woman fearing God, may be very helpful to one
another, they having many Opportunities, to speak their Experiences to each
other; and Times, wherein they may read the Holy Scriptures, and explain their
Sense, of particular Passages and Places to one another and the Family, without
Interruption or Fear of Offense, or offending contending Persons; and by
stirring up one another to true Religion, and the Fear and Worship of the most
High God.

Thus living and continuing in the Love and holy Fear of God, and true Faith of
Christ, they have good Ground to hope at last to die in his Favor. Oh who
would but hope to live and die like such a Pair!

T. C.

FREE THOUGHTS COMMUNICATED TO FREE-THINKERS: In Order to promote Thinking on
the NAME and WORKS of GOD. WITH A RELATION of a remarkable Providence, which
fell out at Port Royal, in Jamaica, suitable to the Subject, written at SEA.
[The Preface and Postscript by another Hand]
The Fool has said in his Heart, there is no God,

Psalm xiv. 1.
PREFACE.
THE Author, in the Course of his Conversation, having met with some Persons,
who avowing the Principles he opposes in the following Tract, have been forward
to assume the Character of Free-thinkers, might have thereby been determined to
such a Title and Direction of his Work. And as it is to be feared, the Number
is too great of those who love a false Liberty both in Acting and Speaking, it
is not to be wondered at, should they endeavor to justify themselves therein
by so specious a Pretense as that of Freedom. A Privilege so undeniable to
every Man, that, without it, none could possibly be praised or condemned for
any Determination or Action whatsoever; but it must be imputed to that Power
alone, which imposes a Necessity toward either Good or Evil; so that in such
Case, all Distinction of Virtue and Vice must cease in our Apprehensions of
Morality, and human Society lie in the greatest and most deplorable Confusion
for Want of it. Far be it therefore from any judicious or honest Person to
endeavor to exclude or dissuade any from a just Freedom in Speculation or
Practice. (...) those who pretend to this, entirely satisfy themselves, that
they have fully and sincerely made use of it, and that in their Enquiries they
have faithfully collected, and impartially considered, that Evidence the Nature
of the Subject might have required, or has afforded them. Those who deny an
eternal Existence, Power and Providence, which has created and preserved the
World, seem neither to have observed Nature, nor consulted that Reason, which
yet some of them may much pretend to follow. To such the following
Considerations are recommended by the Author; which deserve to be read with
Attention and Seriousness, for the Good Will and sincere Views with which they
seem to have been written.

The Author to the Reader.
THE Author having been much pressed in Spirit to write the following
Considerations upon the present Subject and Occasion, begs they may be read
with Attention, and examined without Prejudice. He hopes the learned and
ingenious Reader will excuse any Faults in Style or Method, having Respect to
the Sincerity of Intention, which he professes to have had in his Undertaking;
and humbly prays that a Divine Blessing may attend it, to the Satisfaction and
eternal Advantage of all whom it may concern.

Free Thoughts communicated, etc.
1735.
HAVING had some Discourse with a young Man of bright natural Parts, concerning
another World, and of leaping out of this into that in the Dark, which must
needs be very dangerous; and fearing that many take that great Leap out of this
World into the next in that Manner, I have been induced to write these Lines.

Upon which I cannot forbear immediately asking, What Man in his Senses will
venture (naturally speaking) to leap in the Dark, he knows not where? Or into a
Pit, he knows not the Bottom of? To think of it is terrifying, and must needs
shock any considerate Free-thinker.

Now, though a Man, having a bright Genius, and a large Share of natural Parts,
may acquire much literal and natural Knowledge; yet, for Want of a spiritual
Understanding, which is derived from the Divine Spirit, he may greatly err
concerning true Faith and Religion, and have no Apprehension of the eternal
Kingdom and Judgment of God, or of another World; which it might be well for
the ungodly were not, or were never to be at all: Which, were it to be
supposed, yet to live virtuously (as the Bishop of Sarum observed to that great
Libertine the Earl of Rochester) would be an Advantage to Men, even in this
World.

But if there should be an eternal, righteous Kingdom (of which we may be
internally and spiritually sensible) and a State of Life therein to come; then,
O then, what will become of the Wicked, and all who forget God! and what
Perturbation of Soul must attend such, when, under the Convictions thereof,
they shall be ready to launch into Eternity. I beseech thee (O Soul) seriously
to consider, before it be too late.

The great Savior of the World says, The Kingdom of God is within you, Luke
xvii. 21. That is, inwardly and spiritually, to be known and perceived. He also
says, I am the Light of the World, John viii. 12. He, by his divine and
supernatural Light, lights us through this dark World to his spiritual and
glorious Kingdom, where he rules and reigns in transcendent Majesty and
Brightness; of which his faithtul Subjects are in some Measure sensible: Glory
to the King of Kings for ever.

And that eminently wise Apostle Paul says, He was sent to turn Men from
Darkness to Light. Darkness he calls the Power of Satan, and Light the Power of
God. Now as a Man walking in outward Darkness is in continual Danger of
falling, not knowing whither he goes; so also a Man living and walking in
spiritual Darkness (which is the Power of Satan, where the wonderful Power and
Works of God cannot be seen nor understood) must needs be in the greatest
Danger of falling into the bottomless Pit of Perdition, where horrible Darkness
and unutterable Misery prevails for ever.

The many bitter Cries, dreadful Shrieks, and heavy Groans, which my Ears have
heard from such dark Souls, ready to depart the Body, have been enough to
convince me of the Judgment of another World, though there had been no other
Demonstration of it to me. May our fine Wits, and sprightly Youths concerned,
repent in Time. Oh, my Heart is pained for them; and my Soul mourns in secret
for many of my former and latter Aquaintance, as I have also tender Desires for
the Well-doing and Well-being of Mankind in General.

If any, by duly thinking of these Things, should be awakened and convinced of
their State, and their former Lives and wicked Practices; and have so much
Light as to see the Danger of living without God in the World; but be ready to
conclude, that if there be indeed a righteous God, who will reward every Man
according to his Works, there can then be no Hope for them, such wretched
Sinners. Oh Souls (if this be the Case of any) look not at such Thoughts, which
(in the midst of your just Apprehensions) Satan taking Advantage, may thus
suggest to you; who having got you deep already in the Mire of Sin, would by
such Infusions plunge you deeper both into Sin and Despair.

Be it remembered that Christ died for Sinners, even the Chief (as Paul says)
and he can make a chief Saint of a chief Sinner, as appears in the Case of that
Apostle by his own Testimony: God has, and can do it, though it be wonderful!

Wherefore abide not in Darkness, but repent, and turn to the Light of Life!
strive and struggle for Life, the Life of God in the Soul of Man! turn ye to
the Divine Light, turn to God, who is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all!
live and walk in the Light of God, which is far above the Light of human
Reason; therein shall we have Fellowship with the Father of Lights, and his Son
Jesus Christ; whose Religion is Spiritual: God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him (aright) must worship him in Spirit and Truth.

God must be worshipped in Thought, Word, and Deed; that is, in all Things we
ought to express an humble Reverence and Adoration to the Sovereign Being,
frequently meditating on his great Name; but all Evil and sinful Thinking we
must refrain from with Abhorrence, as displeasing to him; and is of the Devil
that evil Spirit; and which indeed is contrary to the Nature and End of
Free-Thinking; which is a sincere Exercise of the rational Faculty, in order to
distinguish between Good and Evil, Truth and Falsehood, that we may choose and
acknowledge the one, and avoid and reject the other. And here it may not be
unfit to recommend the Care of all our Thoughts, from whence proceed our Words
and Actions as naturally, as good and evil Fruit from the different Seed sown
in the Earth.

And as the truest and most sublime End of thinking (which is the reasonable
Service of every intelligent Creature) is the Contemplation, Fear, and
Adoration, of the Almighty Creator; so are we thereto greatly encouraged by
that Scripture of Mal. iii. 16, 17, 18. which I am concerned here to transcribe
and recommend, and is as follows, Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often
one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a Book of Remembrance
was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his
Name. And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that Day when I make
up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a Man spares his own Son that serves
him. Then shall ye return and discern between the Righteous and the Wicked,
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.

In which Scripture we may observe how great and glorious a Reward is promised
to those that sanctify the Name of the Lord; the Consideration of which, must
needs raise their Love and Admiration, and add to their present Delight in such
holy Thoughts.

But, on the contrary, it is to be feared, that evil Thinkers and Actors, when
the Divine Spirit and Light would inspire them with good Thoughts, or convince
them of their Sins, endeavor to stifle or overcome such Thoughts or Motions as
would awaken them to Righteousness, or restrain them from Sin; and strive, by
their natural Wit, to reason the good Spirit out of their Souls; at the same
Time opening their Hearts to the evil Spirit and his Suggestions, which they
hug, to their own Destruction. But indeed to judge rightly of these Things, if
a Man have ever so much natural Wit, and strength of Reason, it must be
sanctified through his faithful Subjection to the divine Will, and raised by
divine Inspiration; which as far surpasses human Reason, as Heaven is above the
Earth. May our Men of bright natural Thought think clearly and seriously of
this. This is evident in the Case of that great Apostle Paul, who was educated
at the Feet of Gamaliel, in the perfect Manner of the Law, yet, by all his
Knowledge, could not justly distinguish concerning Religion, but was a
Persecuter of the Church of Christ: But when his Knowledge and Spirit came to
be sanctified by the Grace and Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, then, and not
till then, he became of great and good Use and Service to his Maker and
Mankind. Then his Reason and Religion became Spiritual, who had not conferred
with Flesh and Blood, but had been obedient to the heavenly Vision, Gal. i. 16.
And he says (1 Cor. xv. 19.) If in this Life only we have Hope in Christ, we
are of all Men most miserable. So that his Hope and Expectation (as of all
faithful Believers) must have been of another Life, and the Kingdom of God
hereafter; For here (says he) we have no continuing City, but seek one to come,
Heb. xiii. 14. And though the Condition of such, in this Life, is often exposed
to much Persecution and Trouble for their Faith's Sake, toward the Name of
God, and Testimony against this World, and the evil Spirit ruling therein; yet,
blessed be the most High, He gives them Strength, and the Assurance of his
Favor, whereby they endure to the End, as well as that he refreshes them with
his outward Blessings and Comforts: So that they may well say with his ancient
Servant Job, Shall we receive Good at the Hand of the Lord, and not Evil? Job
ii. 10. Thus Afflictions have been indeed usually called, but they often, in
the Hand of God, are Means of redeeming the Soul, and raising up many excellent
Virtues, when they are rightly submitted to.

But to return. I would enquire what Subject we can possibly choose so worthy of
our Meditation, or from whence so great Benefit can redound both to Spirit and
Body? The Fear and Thoughts of Almighty God, which are inspired by his Grace,
sanctifying our Hearts, thereby render us more fit to receive his Favors both
to Spirit and Body, which he multiplies according to his Wisdom and good
Pleasure; and all our Faculties and Passions being redeemed and governed by the
Spirit of Faith, we shall possess and enjoy all Things in a more regular and
excellent Manner. But who is there that has not been so great a Partaker of
the many Blessings, with which the infinite Creator fills the World, and in
an especial Manner encompasseth Mankind, as not to be thereby obliged to a
continual Acknowledgment thereof, and Remembrance of the great and bountiful
Author? The State therefore of the Wicked and Rebellious, is stigmatized in
Holy Scripture, with this Character in particular, that God is not in all their
Thoughts, Psalm x. 4. And indeed for this came his Judgment upon the old World
of the Ungodly, who cannot be supposed ever to have thought of the adorable
Lord, since every Imagination and Thought of their Hearts were only Evil
continually, as the Almighty himself has complained. Genesis vi. 5.

But instead of the Returns of Faith and Love, how sad a Consideration is it,
that there should among Men be found any so vile and foolish, as even to deny
the divine Existence, and the Effects of his infinite Power in the external
Creation, and to affirm that all Things have come by Nature, without God, or
any supernatural Power; which evil Tenet, some have endeavored to justify and
support by natural Reason: ( Wherein the Name thereof may indeed be abused; but
Reason itself, which concludes nothing without Evidence, can never declare in
Favor of a Proposition, for which, not only none can appear, but against which
the whole World is full of it. But let this be disposed for the Judgment of
Reason. When therefore it is said. That all Things have come by Nature; if
thereby we are to understand that natural Things are severally Self productive,
this will be disposed by daily Experience; for we may observe, that they depend
one upon another, and upon various Causes for Production and Subsistence,
without which, neither, in a State of Nature, could possibly be. But if it be
meant of the universal System of natural Things collectively, this will less be
allowed of many, than of any Particular of them; because that would destroy the
Nature of a Self-productive Power, which cannot be limited from being infinite,
and therefore can be but one: One Infinite Supreme Nature therefore only can
have self-existed, and must have been the supernatural Author and Power, by
whom all other Beings have existed: Which refutes the above Error, and
rationally proves and establishes the great Truth in the Question.

And this the Christian Religion teaches in the greatest Perfection, that the
Creator of all Things is God, an Infinite Eternal Spirit, who fills all
Things; who having been pleased to manifest his eternal Power and Godhead in
the visible Frame of the Universe, bears Witness of himself therein, by his
Providence and Judgments; and in every Soul of Man by his inward Inspirations;
especially the sincere Believer, in whom his Spirit dwells and operates.

Oh! that Men therefore would lift up their Minds, and open their Hearts to
him, when by his Holy Spirit He reproves them for Sin, and brings a Damp upon
their Spirits for Evil; from which they would, perhaps if they could, run, or
divert themselves from the Sense of it: But alas! there is no fleeing from his
Presence, who is every where; nor avoiding his Judgment whose Kingdom
comprehends all Things: (but Woe especially is to them with whom his Spirit
ceases striving!) Holy David certainly was very sensible of this, when he wrote
that admirable Description of the Divine Onmipresence, Psalm cxxxix. 7th Verse
to 12. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy
Presence? If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there: If I make my Bed in Hell,
behold thou art there. If I take the Wings of the Morning, and dwell in the
uttermost Parts of the Sea, even there shall thy Hand lead me, and thy right
Hand shall hold me. If I say, surely the Darkness shall cover me, even the
Night shall be Light about me, yea the Darkness hides not from thee; but the
Night shines as the Day: The Darkness and the Light are both alike to thee.
With these Apprehensions of the infinite Power, and Presence of the Almighty, I
shall pass to the Relation promised in the Title Page, which may here be
properly inserted.

My Author was Jonathan Dickinson, Merchant in Philadelphia, who was present
with the young Men, whom this extraordinary Providence befell, at Port Royal, in
Jamaica; he gave me the following Account. Two ingenious young Men (who were
lately arrived at Jamaica from London) discoursing about Earthquakes, asserted
that all Things came by Nature; and so argued thereupon, that it brought Terror
upon the Company, who were many at Dinner in an upper Room: That whilst this
lasted (to the Astonishment of all present) the Earth began to move and
tremble, which put most of them to Flight in such Haste, that they ran one
almost over another, some down Stairs, others leaping over the Balcony. But my
Author said, he considered that there was no running from Divine Providence,
and that the same Hand which moved the Earth, was able to preserve him; in
which he trusted, and was preserved: (And not only then, but at other Times,
especially among the Cannibals of Florida; as his Book of God's protecting
Providence, etc. signally evinceth.) Thus as he continued with the young Men in
the same Room (Oh! terrible to relate, and my Heart and Hand tremble in the
Writing thereof) the mighty Hand of an offended God struck these young Men with
Death, and they fell down, and never rose more, being in all Appearance
unprepared for so sudden a Change. And how many other gay witty young People
have been suddenly snatched away by Death, though perhaps not so immediately, nor
in so extraordinary a Manner, seems worthy of Reflection. The Author of this
Account added, that he took up the young Men, and laid them one upon a Bed, and
the other upon a Couch; but that they never spoke again after their Blasphemy
against God and his Works. Upon which I think it very natural, as well as
necessary, to remark, that this was indeed an eminent Instance of the just
Judgment of God against such as deny his wonderful Power and Providence in the
Creation; with this terrible Circumstance, that these unhappy Persons were cut
off in the midst of their ungodly Discourse and corrupt Reasoning, without so
much Time afforded them as to ask Pardon, and crave Mercy of a provoked Lord;
which is very dreadful to consider: And I especially recommend it to the
serious Reflections of all such as affect the Name of Free-Thinkers (as they
are commonly distinguished) that they may no longer (under such a Pretense)
abuse their Understandings with a Latitude of profane and evil Thinking; who,
as they must needs be sensible, they have not conferred the excellent Faculty
of Reason upon themselves; so they may as certainly conclude they never
received it to exclude his Existence, Power and Providence, out of the World,
who gave it them; nor to employ it to their own Destruction, by such a
Perversion thereof, which must inevitably be the Consequence, without timely
and due Repentance; but that they may apply themselves to him for true Wisdom,
who is the eternal Fountain of it, who would direct all their Thoughts aright
therein, then would they find a substantial and enduring Happiness and
Satisfaction, in the honorable Thoughts and Practice of true Religion and
Virtue; and that all vain and evil Thoughts, directly tended to the Misery and
Destruction of Mankind.

Lastly, if any Expression in this short Tract should prove successful to
promote, in any Measure, the Contemplation of the Divine Being; the
Consideration of Man's Duty to him, his Almighty Creator, or to convince but
one Soul of the Error of his Thoughts and Ways; the Author will think himself
richly rewarded for his Endeavors, and reverently ascribe the Glory and Praise
to God, the prime Author and Mover of every good Thing, who is worthy for ever.

The POSTSCRIPT.
IF we duly consider the Nature of human Understanding, as we shall necessarily
be led to admire the wonderful Author of so excellent a Gift to Mankind,
according to the Power and Extent thereof; so shall we be forced to acknowledge
its Imperfection, not only where the Natures of Things exceed its Views, but
also in tracing and explicating that Evidence which many of them afford; but
especially as to its Influence in a moral Respect, how subject is it to be
obscured, and its Faculties disabled by the Violence of those Passions and
Affections with which human Nature is too ordinarily agitated. So that Man
cannot but want some extraordinary Assistance; and he under the greatest
Obligation to submit every Faculty and Affection to the Direction and Disposal
of that infinite Power and Wisdom, which having so wonderfully constituted, can
best preserve, and conduct him to a State of Happiness.

Can it then be thought unrighteous in the Supreme Disposer of all Things, so
to have fashioned our Natures, and ranged them (though above many other Beings,
yet) in such a State of Dependence, as continually to express his Sovereign
Power and Rectitude? Since by our entire Resignation to his Divine Hand, we may
be transformed to a greater Likeness of him, and have a Spirit and Nature
superinduced of Divine Extraction from the Father of Lights; whom to know and
contemplate, through the Revelation of his Son Jesus Christ (his infinite Love
to Mankind) is eternal Life and supreme Happiness.

Which Mystery, far above human Understanding, He has been pleased to reveal
by his Spirit, who searches the deep Things of God, in order to work in us
Faith in, and the highest Admiration of that exalted Name, by whom he has
visited our low Estate, and would redeem it in him, into the greatest Dignity
it is capable of. The Particulars of whose Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection,
and Ascension into eternal Glory, though highly admirable, and which the
blessed Apostle, who had been an Eyewitness of his Glory, says, The Angels
desire to look into, 1 Pet. i. 12. can none of them however be perverted to a
Sense of being repugnant to Reason; because not impossible to infinite Love, or
infinite Power; who could abase himself from his Glory, and be made Flesh in a
Virgin; could work all Miracles, and the greatest of all, the raising himself
from the Dead; and could ascend up where he was before. All which are agreeable
to right Reason, and appear so with Ravishment to that enlightened and
sanctified, especially with the Evidence of the Holy Spirit the Comforter,
which confirms the humble Believer in the saving Faith and Knowledge of these
Things to the End. And I am glad of this Occasion to distinguish to thee (
ingenious Reader) that though no divine Truths are contrary to natural Reason;
yet, as they far transcend it, they are not comprehensible by it, as other
Truths within the Reach of its Capacity are: As no Nature below Man, nor
qualified with Reason as he is, can possibly know as he knows. Which
Observation is not of the least Importance to us: For if it therefore follows,
that no Man knows the Things of God, but by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. ii. 11.
then can no Man without the Revelation of the same Spirit, know the Mystery of
the Divine Power, by which he was created, and by which he must be eternally
saved and blessed. Grace therefore (or the Divine Spirit by its Influence and
Inspiration) must be received and obeyed as an infallible Oracle, if we would
know and pursue those Things which tend to our present and future Happiness; as
also the Authority of the Holy Scriptures submitted to, as having proceeded
from the same Grace, of which they faithfullly testify, and of that which is
necessary to be by us believed and practiced.

The Excellency and Necessity of which divine Record to Himself, Man certainly
must acknowledge, when he considers, that That alone has given him an Account
of his own Origin (which, what Man could have known?) And that he still may the
better understand himself, of his Lapse and Corruption from that Excellency and
Glory of his Nature (in which he was created) by departing from the Truth, into
a Fable and Notion of Independency of Nature, and Sufficiency of Wisdom without
God. So that he is become as the Beasts which perish, as to the Necessity of
Dissolution to his mortal Part; and in his greatest natural Honor, may, in
that Respect, be compared to them; which is sufficient to humble him under the
Sense of his weak elementary State, with all the Glory and Advantages that may
attend it.

But if Man will not be convinced of the Imperfection and Vanity of his Nature,
by the Infirmities and Miseries to which it is continually subject; nor of the
Glory of the Eternal Majesty, by the infinite Wonders thereof, throughout the
Universe; rejecting the Testimony of his own Senses, of every created Thing,
and of the Scriptures of Truth; nor yet behold His Glory in the Appearance of
the Savior, which he reveals in every Conscience; then must his Blindness be
concluded incurable, and his Destruction unavoidable.

FINIS.

