A Short NARRATIVE Of MISCHIEF done by the French and Indian Enemy, ON THE
Western Frontiers Of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay; From the Beginning
of the French War, proclaimed by the King of France March 15th 1743, 4; and by
the King of GREAT BRITIAN March 29th 1744, to August 2d 1748.

Drawn up by the Reverend Mr. DOOLITTLE of Northfield in the County of
Hampshire; and found among his Manuscripts after his Death.

And at the Desire of some, is now Published, with some small Additions, to
render it more perfect.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, in Queenstreet. MDCCL.

A Short NARRATIVE, etc.
MY Purpose is only to relate Facts, as near as I am capable, from the best
Information I could get: But it is probable there may be some Mistakes from
Misinformation, arising from the different Apprehension Men have had concerning
Facts, and the different Interests Men have in View: Some having a Desire to
render their own, and the Actions of their Friends better than they were, and
the Actions of others worse than they ought to appear: Which makes it difficult
in every Case to obtain an impartial Account.

On the 15th of March 1743, 4, France being instigated by Spain (which was in
open War with England) declared War with Great Britain: France had in Concert
with Spain long laid this Scheme; hoping hereby to bring down England to their
Will: And the aspiring young French Monarch hoped to make himself great; and
render his Neighbors low. The King of Great Britain soon had the News; and on
the 29th of the same Month declared War against France.

What has been done by the Nations in Europe, on the Seas, or Continents, I am
not about to relate; (...) what was done in these Western Frontiers of the
Massachusetts.

1744.
The first Year of the War passed without any Mischief; and was spent in
putting our selves into a Posture of Defense.

1745.
But in the Year 1745, July 5th, the Indian Enemy came to a Place called the
Great Meadow on Connecticut River about sixteen Miles above Fort-Dummer; and
took one William Phips as he was hoeing his Corn. The two that took him led him
near half a Mile from the Place and stopped: Upon which (as we have heard from
the Indians) one went down a steep Hill to fetch something they had left: on
his Return Phips caught hold of one of their Guns, shot him down, and then
fell upon the other with his Hoe, which he had carried with him; struck him
down, and chopped him very much, and then attempted to run away: But three
Indians coming up at that Instant, shot him down, killed and scalp'd him, and
mangled his Body very much: and we have heard, the Indian which he wounded with
his Hoe, died afterward of his Wounds.

July 10. The same, or some other Party of Indians, came to a Place called the
Upper-Ashuelot, killed and scalp'd Deacon Josiah Fisher, as he was driving his
Cows to the Pasture, about half a Mile from the Garrison.

October 11. A considerable Party of French and Indians, came to a Place called
the Great Meadow; and made an Attempt on the Fort, but did not succeed: But
took Mr. Nehemiah How Captive, and carried him to Quebec, where he died in
Prison above a Year after he was taken. As these Enemies went off they killed
and scalp'd one David Rugg, who with another Man was coming down the River in a
Canoe; the other Man made his Escape: and they killed a Number of Cattle.

1746.
April 19. The Enemy came to the uppermost, and most Frontier Place in
Connecticut River called Number Four; where they took three Men as they were
going to Mill about half a Mile distant from the Garrison; viz. Capt. John
Spafford, Isaac Parker, and Stephen Fainsworth. They were Prisoners some time
in Canada; but are since returned to their Homes.

April 22. A Man was shot upon between Northfield and Deerfield; but only shot
through the Brim of his Hat.

April 23. About fifty of the Indian Enemy came to a Place called the
Upper-Ashuelot early in the Morning, and designed to have rushed into the
Garrison just after the People went out: But one at a little Distance from the
Garrison saw them, and gave Warning to the People. -- They pursued those that
were out of the Garrison, and took one Nathan Blake Captive, who after a long
Imprisonment is returned to his Friends. The Enemy approached near the
Garrison-Gate, shot down one John Bullard, who soon died; and stabbed one Daniel
McKenny's Wife in the Back with a long Knife, who soon died. Soon after which,
the Enemy burnt seven Buildings, not only to devour the Peoples Substance, but
to conceal their Dead; for humane Bones were found in the Ashes: They killed
also twenty three Cattle.

April 26. It is probable some of the same Indians Waylaid the Road between
Lunenburg and Northfield, and killed and scalp'd one Joshua Halton of
Northfield; who was returning from Boston with a considerable Sum of Money for
billeting of Soldiers.

May 2. The Enemy came again to Number Four; and as a few Men went out in the
Morning about 50 or 60 Rods from the Fort, the Enemy lay in a Barn, fired on
them; and killed one Seth Putnam: as the Enemy were scalping of him, Major
Josiah Willard, with two Men, ran near to them, fired upon them, and made them
immediately retreat in Confusion: and we hear by the Captives that two of the
Enemy were killed as they were scalping Putnam.

May 6. A Party of Indians came to Lower-Ashuelot, and lay about the Garrison,
till they observing Deacon Timothy Brown and Robert Moffet going out of the
Garrison toward Upper-Ashuelot, Waylaid them, and fired upon them. Moffet
shot on them and broke the chief Indian's Arm: They were both taken Captive,
and carried to Canada; but are since returned.

At the same Time, a Party lay about the Garrison at the Upper-Ashuelot; and as
one of them ventured to come up to the Fort, and shook the Gate in the Night,
the Watch shot at the Gate, and shot the Indian through the bottom of his Belly:
who died before he reached Crown Point.

May 9. A considerable Party of Indians came to Fall-Town; with a Design to
rush into the Fort in the middle of the Day, when the Men were Abroad: but a
Soldier a little distant from the Fort discovering them, alarmed the Fort; but
he himself could not recover the Fort. There being but three Men in the Fort,
defended themselves; the Women assisting in charging the Guns. The Enemy
approached near the Fort; but were soon repulsed; did no Mischief, except
slightly wounding John Buck, burning one House, and killing ten Cattle. The
chief Indian had his Arm broke, and one or two more were wounded.

The same Day Sergeant John Hawks and John Mihils, being a little distant from
Fort-Massachusetts, riding on a Horse; two Indians Waylaid them, fired upon
them, and wounded both of them. Mihils made his Escape to the Fort. Sergeant
Hawks falling from the Horse, the Indians ran to scalp him; but he soon
recovering, presented his Gun: One Indian jumped down the Bank, the other got
behind a Tree: one being a little distant from his Gun, the other discharged;
in their Language, as we have since heard, called for Quarter; but he not
understanding them, continued hallowing to the Fort to come and help take them;
but they not hearing, the Indians made their Escape.

May 10. Some of the Indians, that were the Day before disappointed at
Fall-Town, turned off to Colerain, about ten Miles North West from Deerfield,
and Waylaid the Road; and as one Matthew Clark with his Wife and Daughter, and
three Soldiers, were going from the Garrison to Clark's House, they fired upon
them: they killed and scalp'd said Clark, and wounded his Wife and Daughter:
one Solider played the Man, fired several Times -- defended and bro't off the
Woman and her Daughter to the Fort, who are recovered of their Wounds.

May 24. There came a large Body of the Enemy to Number Four. Capt. Pain with
his Troop arriving there while the Enemy lay in Ambush; about twenty Men went
out of the Fort to view the Place where Putnam was killed: the Ambush rose,
fired upon them, and endeavored to run between them and the Fort. Capt.
Stevens and a Number of Men issued out of the Fort for their Relief: a Skirmish
began, in which Aaron Lion, Peter Perrin, Joseph Mercy of Capt. Pain's Troop;
Samuel Fainsworth, and Elijah Allen, belonging to the Fort, were killed:
Quartermaster Bacon wounded, and Ensign Obadiah Sartle taken Captive, who is
since returned Home: He says, he saw five of the Enemy dead after the Fight:
They left thirteen Blankets, five Coats, a Gun and other Things.

June 11. A considerable Number of Indians came to Fort-Massachusetts; fell
upon some Men who were at Work some Distance from the Fort; killed, and scalp'd
Elisha Nims; wounded Gershom Hawks: An Ambush arose near the Fort, and
endeavored to intercept those who were running to the Fort, but were repulsed
by a brisk firing from the Fort: They took Benjamin Tainter Captive, who is
since returned Home. They killed near One Hundred Creatures belonging to the
English and Dutch. A few Days after, one of the Indians was found buried in the
Side of the Bank of the River; and also some long Leading-Lines bro't to lead
Captives Home in Triumph, were found.

June 19. A large Body of the Enemy came again to Number Four; and as Capt.
Stevens and Capt. Brown, with about fifty Men were going into the Meadow
perceived by the Dogs with them, that there was an Ambush by the Causey; which
put them into a Readiness for an Engagement: One of Capt. Stevens's Men saw one
of the Enemy, and fired at him: Upon which, the Ambush arose, and a sharp
Engagement ensued: the Enemy were forced to retreat, drawing off their dead
Men, as was known by the Signs afterward discovered: None of our Men were
killed on the Spot: Jedidiah Winchel was wounded, and died of his Wounds a
Fortnight after: David Parker, Jonathan Stanhope, and Cornet Heaton, were
wounded, but are recovered: a Scalp was dropped by the Indians, supposed to be a
French Scalp: one Gun, eight Blankets, and other Things left by the Enemy.

June 24. A Party of the Enemy came near to a Fort called Bridgman's-Fort,
about two Miles below Fort-Dummer: fell upon some Men at Work in the Meadow,
killed William Robbins, and James Bar^^r: and took one Daniel How, and John
Beaman Captive, who just before he was taken shot an Indian and killed him;
they are since returned from Captivity: they also wounded Michael Gilson, and
Partrick Ray, who are recovered of their Wounds.

July 3. A small Party of the Enemy laid an Ambush at Col. Hinsdell's Mill. Col
Willard with about twenty Men went to get some Grinding: when they set the Mill
a going, went to search round the Mill to see whether there were not an Ambush:
and some of the Men happening to go where the Ambush was, the Enemy fired upon
them: our Men engaged, and pursued them a little Way, and recovered of the
Enemy the most of their Packs: one Wright was slightly wounded.

July 28. David Morrison of Colerain, a young lad, seeing a Hawk light on a
Tree a little distance from his Father's Fort, went to shoot him: there
happened to be about twelve Indians at the Place, who took him Captive: We have
no certain News what became of him.

August 3. A large Body of the Enemy came to Number Four. The Dogs gave
Information that the Enemy were about them: Early in the Morning some went out
near to a Nursery, and were fired upon by some Indians who lay there. One
Phillips was killed: the Enemy run off: our Men charged their Guns and returned
to the Fort. Some time after, when they went to fetch Phillips into the Fort,
the Ambush arose, and fired about an Hundred Guns at them: the Men fired some
time, retreating to the Fort. The Enemy continued firing 'till the next Day:
then burnt the Buildings, killed the Cattle, and drew off.

August 6. About thirty Indians came to Winchester; Waylaid the Road: and as
six of our Men were passing, they fired on them, killed and scalp'd one Joseph
Rawson, and slightly wounded Amasa Wright.

August 11. A small Party of Indians came to Northfield: Shot upon Benjamin
Wright a young Man, as he was riding after Cows to bring them out of the Woods;
but his Horse brought him into Town, and he died the following Night.

August 15. A Number of Indians shot upon four Men near Shattuck's-Fort, but
hurt none. A few Days before, they hung up white Flag in Sight of the Fort.

August 17. Some Indians came to a Place called Pequalog; killed and scalp'd
one Ezekiel Wallingford, who was alone out at some Distance from the Fort.

August 20. About seven or eight Hundred of French and Indians came to
Fort-Massachusetts, and laid Seige about twenty-four Hours. After which, they
desired to speak with the Officer; who admitted the Messenger into the Fort,
who said in the Name of the General, that if they would surrender, they should
be well used. Our Men consulted together, finding they had not Ammunition to
stand them many Hours, though they had been sparing in firing; and considering
the Number of Sick they had in the Fort, though it it their wisest Method to make
the best Capitulation they could: accordingly resigned themselves Prisoners of
War into the Hands of the French; with the General's Promise, that none of them
should be given into the Hands of the Indians; and that the Sick, and such as
could not travel should be carried. Yet notwithstanding, He the next Day
delivered one Half of our People into the Hands of the Indians; who the next
Night killed one of our Men, who was sick, rather than carry him. The French
treated our Men civilly and tenderly: So also did the Indians those with them
according to their Manner. Thirty-two Men, Women and Children surrendered; many
of whom died in Canada.

The Reason of this Garrison's being lost, was, it is want of Ammunition; which
had they been well supplied with, they might have defended the Fort, and done
much greater Spoil on the Enemy than they did: yet we have had Intelligence
that near fifty of the Enemy were killed before the Fort surrendered.

By whose Neglect the Fort was lost, we know not; but it is probable had the
Officer been deficient, he would have been disgraced. But want of Ammunition
was not only the Calamity of that Fort; but also of the greater Part of our
Garrisons at that Time.

There was one Man killed in the Fight, and many died in Prison at Canada: Some
are returned Home. And the Fort was burnt down; which it cost the Province many
Hundreds to re-build.

August 22. As about ten of our Men were going from Deerfield to Colerain, two
or three Indians lying by the Road, fired on them; shot down one Constant Bliss
a Connecticut Soldier: the rest made off as fast as they were able: The Indians
scalp'd Bliss: and finding some Rum our Men left; the Indians took it, got very
merry with it, and (as they told afterward) the next Morning when they awaked,
they were near one of the Garrisons at Colerain: The Rum had liked to have
proved as fatal to them as to our Men.

August 25. Thirty of this Army came to Deerfield; not being satisfied with
what was done at Fort-Massachusetts; and fell upon some People in the South
Part of the Meadow: They killed and scalp'd Samuel Allen, Eleazer Hawks, Jun.
Oliver Amsden, Simeon Amsden, of Deerfield, and Adonjah Gillet, a Soldier: they
wounded Eunice Allen; and took Samuel Allen, a Child of about nine Years old:
Allen killed one of the Enemy just before he was killed; and it is supposed
another was killed by some other Person.

Had there not been a continual firing in the Town from Day to Day; the People
would have took the Alarm, and might have been upon the Enemy before ever they
could have got out of the Meadow: Which shows the great Necessity of Order and
Discipline in Frontier Towns.

This Summer a Proclamation was issued for inlisting Soliders for an Expedition
against Canada: and a great Number freely inlisted, hoping the Time was coming,
that God would deliver us out of the Hands of our Enemies in Canada: and the
Soldiers especially inlisted out of the Garrisons; some in order to be freed
from the Province Service, which they were weary of; others with some more
generous Views for the public Good: and all Endeavors to put a Check to the
Fury of the Enemy were stopped: the whole Concern was to get ready for the
expected Expedition: but how this turned out, we all know: great Numbers of Men
kept in Pay and Idleness 'till disbanded, to the Ruin of many of them, and the
great Hurt of the Country.

1747.
March 30. About thirty or forty Indians came to a Fort called Shattuck's- Fort
between Northfield and Col. Hinsdel's, with a Design to burn it: they had made
Faggots of dry Spruce and Pitch Pine; dipped the Ends of them in Brimstone;
brought Fire in a Kettle covered with a Blanket; and coming silently to the
Fort in the Night, set it on Fire; which burnt down that Part of it which stood
on the South Side of the Brook: but presently after the Fire began, the Wind
which was Southerly, turning to the Northward, and the Soldiers getting into
the other Part, by help of the Brook and Wind, prevented the Progress of the
Fire to the North-Side: and then the Enemy with Surprise observing the sudden
Turn of the Wind, in our Favor, drew off without doing any other Mischief. The
English fired at them, and broke the Leg of one of them.

March 31. Capt. Eleazer Melvin with some of his Company who were then at
Northfield, pursued them to the Great Meadow, shot across the River at them,
and killed one of them. They burnt the Fort which the English had deserted.

April. 7. An Army of French and Indians came to Number Four, and laid Siege to
the Garrison. Capt. Stevens being there with about thirty Men, made all
necessary Provision for their Defense; especially by digging Trenches from
under the Fort, about a Yard outward in several Places, at so near a Distance
to each other, as by throwing Water we might put out the Fire, in Case the
Enemy by their four Wheel Carriages laden with Faggots shoul'd set any outward
Part of the Fort of Fire. They continued shooting, and throwing their
Fire-Arrows for near two Days: and then desired to speak with the Captain, who
admitted three of them into the Fort; three of our Men going out to the Enemy
at the same Time: they demanded the Fort; and promised our Men to carry them
safe to Mount-Real, to their Friends, if they would surrender: but the Captain
assured them he should not resign the Fort. -- After which they continued
firing, and made some Preparation to Storm the Fort, till the next Day; and
then they requested the Captain to sell them some Corn; he told them he would
grant them five Bushels of Corn for every Hostage they should send into the
Fort, to be kept till the Enemy should bring and deliver so many of our
Captives from Canada. But on the third Day they drew off, having done no
Mischief, except slightly wounding Joseph Ely and John Brown. Governor Knowles
was so pleased with Capt. Stevens's Conduct, as to make him a Present of a very
costly Silver-hilted Sword.

April 14. This or another Army came to Northfield, with a Design to have taken
Part of the Town. The next Day a little after Sunset, they killed and scalp'd
Nathaniel Dickinson and Asahel Burt, as they were bringing Cows out of the
Woods; and then drew off in the Night to Winchester, and the two Ashuelots, and
burnt down those three Towns; which a little before had been deserted by the
Inhabitants, because the Soldiers were all drawn off without any Orders to
assist the Inhabitants in removing or carrying off their Substance:

Such little Concern has there been to the poor People in the Frontiers at
other Times as well as this.

May. 25. As Col. William Williams with a considerable Body of Canada-Soldiers
were by Order of the Government re-building Fort-Massachusetts; an Army of the
Enemy came upon them with a Design to frustrate them. Major Williams of
Stockbridge had been to Albany for Stores; and was now on his Return with a
Number of Wagons near the Fort: He sent a few Men this Morning to mend the
Way, and give Notice to the Fort that they were a coming: when they had got
within fifty or sixty Rods of the Fort, they saw the Enemy creeping toward the
Fort: They fired upon them; which made them discover themselves, and fire at
our Men who were on the Guard, and at Work; and pursue those who were coming
from Major Williams: Our Men fired from the Fort, and pursued them at some
distance from the Fort; 'till the Enemy seemed to aim to get between them and
the Fort, and then they retreated. The Enemy killed one Stockbridge-Indian, and
wounded three more of our Men, who are since recovered. What Mischief was done
upon them is uncertain. -- But we have the following Account by the Way of the
Indians -- The Enemy discovered our Men when they went over, and immediately
carried News to Canada: They sent out an Army of six Hundred: when they came
near to Hoosuck, finding Part of our Men were gone to Albany, three Hundred
went to Way-lay them; but falling in the Rear, supposed, by the Wagons and
Signs of Men, there was a great Army gone from Albany, they therefore sent away
a Post to them at the Fort, to give them Information: Who coming in the Time of
the Engagement, was the Cause of their drawing off as they did; and that they
lost Ten in the Engagement.

July 15. About thirty or forty Indians came to Fall-Town, and shot upon
Eliakim Shelden as he was hoeing Corn in the Field: the escaped to the Fort,
but died the Night after.

August. A Party of Indians went to Ashuelot, and killed three Cattle: Our Men
went out after them, shot at them, and they at our Men, but no Mischief was
done them.

August 26. A Party of the Enemy came to a Village South-West of Northampton:
and killed and scalp'd Noah Clark as he was thrashing in his Barn.

October 1. Peter Boovee, a Soldier at Hoosuck, or Massachusetts Fort, went out
a Hunting: A Party of the Enemy discovering him, took him Captive, and carried
him to Canada: He is since returned.

October 16. As Major Willard, Captain Alexander, and others, were coming from
Ashuelot to Northfield; in Winchester they met some Cattle running, as though
pursued: Captain Alexander being foremost, saw a French Man in the Path coming
toward him: When he saw our Men, he jumped out of the Path behind a Tree.
Captain Alexander shot at him, and shot him in the Breast: The French Man came
up to him, saluted him handsomely; but he soon grew faint, and as our Men
supposed, was dying: They being afraid the Indians were near, made haste and
left him: After our Men were gone, the Indians came to him, and he revived;
they carried him some Way; but fearing the English would pursue them, left him;
and a few Days after he came into Northfield, and resigned himself Prisoner to
Captain Alexander. After he was healed of his Wound, he was carried to Boston;
where he was kindly entertained. And in the Month of February following, was
conducted back to Canada; and has been since out with the Indians, and done
Mischief on our Frontiers.

October 19. As John Smead, who was taken at Fort-Massachusetts, and had just
returned from Canada, was traveling from Northfield to Sunderland, was
Waylaid by a small Party of Indians, and killed and scalp'd.

October 22. About forty of the Enemy came to a Place called Bridgmans-Fort,
and took one Jonathan Sartle, as he was going from Col. Hinsdel's-Fort into the
Woods. After which they burnt Capt. Bridgmans-Fort, House and Barn.

November 14. As twelve of our Men were drawing off from Number Four, a
considerable Party of the Enemy Waylaid them within half a Mile of the
Garrison; shot upon them, killed and scalp'd Nathaniel Goold and Thomas
Goodale: Oliver Avery was wounded, John Henderson was taken Captive. It is
observable; that the Night before; this Goodale, when he met with some
Difficulty to obtain Liberty of his Officer to come off, said he would come
notwithstanding all the Powers above and below.

March 15. The Snow being very deep, and our Men not fearing a small Party of
sculking Indians, about eight of our Men went out about 60 Rods Distance from
Number Four to get Wood: The Enemy about ten in Number come within 30 Rods of
the Fort; run to meet our Men, fired upon them, killed Charles Stevens, wounded
one Andreas, and took Eleazer Priest Captive. Our Men not having Snow Shoes
could not run out of the Path and make their Escape: Nor had the Men in the
Garrison Snow Shoes to pursue them, which the Enemy were informed of by the
French Prisoner the Month before: For some of the Garrison told him as he went
along, they would gladly accompany him Part of the Way, but they had neither
Indian Shoes nor Snow Shoes. Thus poorly have our Garrisons been stored; whilst
many Hundred Pair of Snow Shoes lie on Spoil some where or other, which the
Province have paid for.

1748.
March 29. About twelve or fifteen Indians Waylaid the Scout-Path from Fort
Dummer to Colerain: Lieutenant Sergeant and four more went out in this Path to
get some Timber for Oars and Paddles: About a Mile from Fort Dummer they were
fired upon; Moses Cooper was mortally Wounded the first Shot, and made his
Escape to the Fort as fast as he could; he died the next Night: Lieutenant
Sergeant, his Son and Joshua Wells engaged the Enemy, fighting on a Retreat;
Wells was soon killed; Sergeant encouraged his Son; said they should have Help
from the Fort: They charged many Times: Sergeant shouted as often as the Enemy
did, and called upon them to come out and fight boldly. These two fought on a
Retreat half a Mile; but Lieutenant Sergeant was killed, and his Son taken:
They could not have any Help from the Fort; there being but a few Men there,
and some of them sick with the Measels, and others not having Snow-Shoes in
Readiness, could not go on the Snow.

April 16. One Badcock was taken at Paquoig as he was at Work in his Field.

May 8. About twelve Indians lay in Ambush near an House at South Hampton, and
killed one Noah Pixley.

May 21. About thirty Indians lay in Ambush near Fort-Massachusetts, to take
our Men as they should come out toward Deerfield. Sergeant Elisha Chapin going
out from Deerfield, with a Number of our Men, went silently along the Road, and
came within a few Rods of them. One of the Enemy standing up looking toward
the Fort discovered them: Chapin suspecting they might be Stockbridge Indians,
called to them: Upon which the Ambush jumped up and ran: Chapin and one or two
more next to him fired at them and killed one of them, and got his Scalp: They
left a Gun, the most of their Blankets, and many other Things.

May 25. Capt. Melvin with eighteen Men, who went out after the Enemy, came to
the Lake a little South of Crown-Point; saw two Canoes about 50 or 60 Rods from
the Shore, going to Crown-Point (these doubtless were the Indians who were
drove from Hoosuck the Week before) Capt. Melvin and his Company shot 50 or 60
Guns: The Indians made a great Lamentation whilst they were shooting at them:
Crown-Point immediately took the Alarm; fired their Cannon: And that Night our
Men perceived the Enemy had got before them in their Way Home. Capt. Melvin
took a contrary Course, when he come across their Track, so that he escaped
them, 'till he came on West-River on the 31st of May; they laid an Ambush on
the Bank of the River, where they were satisfied Capt. Melvin would come
between them and the River: Providence so ordered it that Capt. Melvin stopped
within a few Rods of the Muzzles of the Enemies Guns; they fired on him: Our
Men jumped up the Bank, and fired at them; some of our Men that were in the
Rear made up the River; our Men fired some Time at them, and suppose they
killed several of the Enemy. Six of our Men were killed, viz. Joseph Petty,
John Howard, John Dod, Daniel Man, Isaac Tailor, and Samuel Severance. Capt.
Melvin and his Men came in, all but Six, at different Times at Fort Dummer.
This was a surprising Stroke, and struck a great Damp into the Spirits of our
Men who had Thoughts of going into their Country; when they found how far the
Indians would pursue them to get an Advantage upon them.

June 16. A large Body of the Enemy Waylaid the Road between Col Hinsdell's
Fort and Fort Dummer: Thirteen of our Men going from Col. Hinsdell's to Fort
Dummer, were shot upon; three were killed on the Spot. Some Time after, the
Bones of a Man were found where they lodged the first Night: Joseph Richardson,
Nathan French, and John Frost were killed on the Spot. The Man that was killed
where they Lodged the first Night is supposed to be William Bickford; the rest
were taken Captive, except three who made their Escape in the Fight.

June 26. As Capt. Humphrey Hobbs was passing with a Scout of forty Men from
Number Four to Fort Shirley, they were pursued by One Hundred and fifty of the
Enemy: and West of Fort Dummer, as our Men stopped to eat some Victuals, their
Guards being out, and the Man set to watch their back Track discovered the
Enemy, who gave the Alarm. There immediately began a very hot Fight: The Enemy
rushed on very violently; but our Men stood their Ground and gave them a warm
Reception: The Fight lasted four Hours, in which Time three Men were killed,
viz. Samuel Gunn, Ebenezer Mitchel and Ely Scot; and three very dangerously
wounded, viz. Samuel Graves, who was shot in the Head, and some of his Brains
came out; Daniel Mc'Keney had his Thigh broke; and Nathan Walker had his Arm
broke, and the Bullet lodged between the Bones of the Arm: Ralph Ryce was
slightly Wounded: Capt. Hobbs shot the last Gun at the Enemy, and is supposed
to have killed the chief Indian who encouraged them in the Fight. After the
Enemy were drawn off, Capt. Hobbs brought off his dead and wounded Men; came
about half a Mile, and buried his Dead as well as he could in the dark: The
next Day he bro't his Wounded into Fort Dummer, and the next Day to Northfield.
The Enemy doubtless lost many; they went off without Shouting, and when some
Captives saw them about a Week after, they looked very sorrowful. This was a
very manly Fight; and all will grant our Men quitted themselves like Men, who
Need not to be ashamed.

July 8. A Number of Indians came to the Upper-Ashuelot, and killed eleven
Cattle. About the same Time a Fort of ours was taken at Lunenburg; two Soldier
were killed; a Man and Woman and five Children were taken Captive, but are
since returned.

July 14. The Enemy that fought with Capt. Hobbs having been as far as West
River, and left Part of their Company, returned and Waylaid the Road between
Col. Hinsdell's-Fort and Fort-Dummer; and as seventeen Men were going to
Fort-Dummer, were shot upon. Sergeant Thomas Tailor commanded the Men to fight
them; but the Enemy rushed upon them, killed two Men on the Spot, and wounded
two more whom they carried about a Mile and killed. The Men killed were Joseph
Rose, Asael Graves, -- Billings, and -- Chandler: Nine were taken Prisoners,
viz. Sergeant Thomas Tailor, Thomas Crisson, John Henry, -- Lawrence, --
Walker, Daniel How, Jun. -- Edghill, Daniel Farmer, and Ephraim Powers. Four
escaped; one of whom was badly wounded, but is since recovered.

July 23. A small Party of the Enemy came to Northfield, and Waylaid the
Town-Street; and as Aaron Belden was going from one Fort to another a little
before Sun rise, they shot him down and scalp'd him; and run off into the Woods
before any Body was really apprized what was the Matter. Thus bold and daring
had the Enemy grown, before the Cessation of Arms.

August 1. A Large Body of the Enemy came to Fort-Massachusetts, and laid an
Ambush: The Dogs made a Rout, which made the Men sensible that the Enemy were
there. Capt. Williams and the Officers were consulting how to go out, and come
upon them in their Ambush; but a few Soldiers ran out without Orders near where
the Dogs barked: The Enemy arose some few of 'em and fired, which caused the
Captain and his Men to rush out; one of the Enemy called to the Captain to come
along: Our Men went so far, that the Ambush arose partly behind them nearer the
Fort: Our Men stood and fired several Times a-piece without any Thing to
shelter them from the Bullets; and retreated firing, to the Fort: In the Fight
Lieutenant Hawley was shot through the Leg, Ezekiel Wells had his Thigh broke,
but is almost recovered; one Abbot was shot through the Body, who died in a Day
or two; we have heard considerable Spoil was done upon the Enemy. A Cessation
of Arms being heard of in Canada, put a stop to the Enemy's coming out.

REMARKS. The following Remarks are easy and natural from the preceding H^^^^y.
1st. WHAT a great Difference there is between our managing a War, and our
Enemies: The most we do is to defend our selves at Home; but they are for an
offensive War. And it is true if they have any, they must have this; for a
defensive War they can have none with us: For not a Man of ours has seen a
French Settlement all this War, except such as were carried Captive or went
with a Flagg of Truce.

2ndly. It is a rare thing we can obtain an Indian Scalp, let us do what Spoil
we will upon them; so careful are they to carry off and conceal their Dead. For
at Fort-Massachusetts, where it is probable near sixty have been killed, never
have been found more than three Scalps; which shows us that our Men will not
venture out after the Enemy on any Scalping Act whatsoever: Our Men will not
venture their Lives and Service, on such uncertain Encouragements; if they
should be much greater than ever they have been. The like is demonstrated at
Number Four, where they have killed so many of the Enemy, never a Scalp could
be recovered.

3dly. We may observe, Of how much Importance the Enemy judge those two Forts
at Number Four and Hoosuck, to be to us, Hence their repeated Endeavors to
destroy them; which they would not do, were they not advantageous to us, and in
their Way in coming upon us. -- And it shows how much it must encourage our
Enemies, for us to give up either of them.

4thly. We may observe, How safely the Enemy can draw off, when they have done
Miscief. I think but one Instance has there been all this War of our pursuing,
and overtaking the Enemy to do any Spoil on them, and there are many Reasons
for it: One is, that no Body may move 'til an Account is sent to the chief
Colonel; and then Men must be mustered, which takes so long a Time that there
is no possibility of our taking them. Another Reason is, that we never have Men
near, equipped to pursue them in the Woods; and when they have gone a few Miles
in the Woods, they are discouraged and return Home.

5thly. It is observable, That the continual changing of Schemes renders all
Measures for the War unsuccessful. Before any one single Scheme is tried, it is
flung up, and nothing ever prosecuted to Advantage: There is scarce any one
Scheme of more than six Months continuance.

6thly. We may observe, That when the Province have voted any Number of Men for
a particular Service; by that Time the Commissary can furnish the Men with
their Provisions, their Time is expired; and this was the Case the Summer past:
It took the greater Part of the Summer to supply the Garrisons with Provisions;
they were so scarce: And the Soldiers who were designed as Scouts toward
Crown-Point, were a good Part of their Time employed in guarding Provisions to
the Forts.

7thly. It is observable to all who know the State of these Frontiers, That
there is not due Provision made to furnish Men out on any Occasion after the
Enemy. There is neither Bread nor Meat, Shoes, Blanketts, etc, that a Number of
Men may take on any sudden Occasion. They have their Bread to bake, their Meat
to cook, and other Things to get; when they should be on their March: And so
long as this is the Case, the Enemy never need fear our annoying of them when
they have distressed us.

8thly. It is observable, That all this War we have never kept Men in the Woods
toward Crown-Point to discover their large Bodies coming down upon us, and
give Notice of an approaching Enemy: So that they come securely Week after Week
upon us; yea, we have since found that the Enemy have camp'd several Months
within thirty or forty Miles of Fort-Dummer.

9thly. Another Thing observeable, Is the great Temptation Soldiers have to be
unfaithful in the Service. For there is no Distinction made, as to their Wages,
between a Soldier posted in an Old Town, one in a Garrison, and one marching in
the Woods; who when he is in the Woods, wears out as many Cloths as his Wages
will procure, besides all his Hardships and Sufferings. Soldiers therefore
choose to Lodge in the Garrison; and think hard if they must be kept in the
Woods, when others have as much Pay in Old Towns, who eat and lodge well.

10thly. We differ much from the French with Respect to the War. They will not
give Men Commissions, 'till they have been out in the War and done some Spoil
on their Enemies. If the like Method was pactised with us; there would be fewer
Commissions, and more its probable would be done on the Enemy, in order to
obtain them: But so long as no Regard is had to this in promoting of Men, we
cannot expect Men will exert themselves as they ought to do.

11thly. The Reader may observe, How much the People in the Western-Frontiers,
must be distressed by the War; and how falsely they judge, who think the War is
an Advantage to them. Their Case is most distressing: The repeated Alarms take
them off from their Business Day after Day for forty or fifty Miles together.
And the Reader is to observe, that in the preceding History there is no
mention of great Numbers of Times of the Enemy being seen and shot at, both in
the Night and Day Time; and of their setting open Gates, and turning Creatures
into Fields to devour Crops. It was not the Design of the Author to give you an
Account of the People's Losses; but of the Mischief done: If any envy the
Inhabitants in the Frontiers their Portion, they may come and take their Lot
with them.

12thly, It ought to be observed, That great Injustice is done the Inhabitants
in the Frontiers in pressing them out of their Business, into the Province
Service, either to follow the Enemy or convoy Stores, and not rewarding them
suitably. They are sent out Day after Day with their Horses, and have not half
so much per Day as they must give a Man to labor for them in the mean Time.

Lastly, We may observe, Than in this War, as we increased our Number of Men in
our Forts or Scouts, the Enemy have increased their Numbers; and the longer the
War continued, the oftener they came, and the more bold they grew. Which shows
us, what we must expect, if the War breaks out anew: Especially at this Time,
when there is no Provision made for Men in our Frontiers.


