Ianua Coelestis. OR, THE Mystery of the Gospel IN THE Salvation of a Sinner,
Opened and Explained; Wherein the Nature of the Gospel-Salvation is stated, the
Possibility of the Sinner's being saved is evinced, the Terms of the
Gospel Covenant are ascertained and cleared, the Importance of Salvation is
illustrated, and the great Concern of every Soul is excited and enforced: In
several DISCOURSES on Acts xvi.30.

By JOHN BARNARD, A. M. Pastor of the First Church in Marblehead.

-- GOD our SAVIOR, who will have all Men to be saved, and to come unto the
Knowledge of the Truth.

I. Tim. ii.3, 4. BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND. Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in
Queen Street, and D. GOOKIN near the South-Meeting. 1750.

To the Flock of the LORD JESUS, in Marblehead, under my more special Care.
Dearly Beloved,
MY Heart's Desire, and Prayer, for you, and your Children, is, that you all
may be saved. Therefore I have labored among you, with but little
Interruption, (through the Goodness of GOD,) for more than Thirty-four Years,
warning every Man, and teaching every Man, that I might present every Man
perfect in CHRIST JESUS. Though there have been many Imperfections attending my
Ministry among you, and I have great Reason to c^^ out, my Leanness! my
Leanness! and earnestly to ask it of you to join with me in fervent
Supplications to the GOD of all Grace, to pardon, and accept, my Person, and
poor Services; nevertheless, I can truly say, that I have longed after you all,
and have not shunned to declare unto you the whole Counsel of GOD, nor counted
my Life dear unto me, so that I might fulfill the Ministry, which I have
received of the LORD JESUS, being willing to spend, and be spent, in your
Service.

My Obligations, especially to many of you, for the unwearied Kindnesses which
you have shown to me, are very great; which I thus openly acknowledge, with
Thanksgiving unto GOD, on your Behalf, and my earnest Prayers that all may be
rewarded into your own Bosoms, and upon your Posterity.

Writing has been no little Burden to me, in my declining Years; yet I have
been willing to comply with your Desires, and the Desire of many others, in
transcribing these Sermons for the Press; and I do it the rather, that I may
leave with you, when I am dead and gone, the Sum of that Gospel which I have
been preaching to you from the Beginning. CHRIST, and SALVATION by him, is the
Marrow of the Gospel. CHRIST the LORD, as well as SAVIOR; Salvation from Sin,
as well as Wrath, I have ever inculcated upon you, as absolutely necessary,
that you might not deceive yourselves with a false Faith, and a vain Hope.

And, Oh! that there were a serious, and through Concern of Soul, what you shall
do to be saved, more generally awakened in you; that the Sincerity of your
Faith, and Repentance, might be evident by the Purity of your Lives, in
Conformity to the holy Example, and excellent Laws of JESUS CHRIST; that your
Faith, and Love, and Obedience, may go abroad unto all Men, and we may glory in
you, in the Churches of our GOD, that your Faith grows exceedingly, and your
Charity toward each other, and to all Men, abounds; that the Town may be as
Remarkable for the Sanctity of it is Manners, and the amiable Virtues of the
Christian Life, as in former Years, it has been notorious for the contrary.

I know, my Brethren, that, as for many of you who attend the Businesses of the
Sea, your Temptations are very many; nevertheless, as I bless GOD for the great
Reformation of Manners, evident unto all Men, and the flourishing Condition of
the Town, the happy Fruits of it, so I entreat you to prosecute the more through
perfecting of that good Work, and that you would, each of you for yourselves,
be careful to be furnished with that inward Principle, which alone will truly
fortify you against Temptations, and support, and strengthen your Virtue. To
this End suffer me earn^stly to recommend two Things to the diligent Practice
of every one of you; I mean

First, The Religion of the Closet, that you make Conscience of it, every Day,
Morning, and Evening, to retire alone, and pour out your fervent Prayers to the
GOD of all Grace, to convert, and save you; let no Day pass without your Visits
to GOD, your best Friend, for his gracious Help.

The other Thing is the Religious Sanctification of the LORD's Day; let no Part
of that holy Day be spent in unnecessary Labors, much less in Sports, and
Diversions; but employ the whole of it in religious Exercises, either public,
or private; ever remember that the Religion, and Comfort, of the ensuing Week,
will very much depend upon your strict Observation of that holy Day; it shall
be a Sign between me and you, that I am the LORD that does sanctify you. Exodus
xxx.15.

May these Sermons, for the printing of which you have so generally, and
cheerfully, been at a great Part of the Charge, not only abide in your Houses,
but be often, and seriously, read over by you, and yours, and by the Blessing
of GOD, be treasured up in your Hearts, and have a due Influence upon your
Lives, that you may believe, and practice, so as to approve yourselves the true
Disciples, and Followers of the blessed JESUS.

GOD grant you may be a pure, and holy Church, established, and built up in the
Words of Faith, and good Doctrine, that you, and your Children after you, may
continue to walk in the Truth, being knit together in one Body, in Christ, with
that Charity which is the Bond of Perfectness here, and the Glory and Happiness
of the upper World. And when you shall have Occasion to invite an other ^o
minister unto you in holy Things, in my Stead, I beseech you, let there be an
hearty Unanimity, and condescending Goodness, upheld in that difficult Affair;
and earnestly beg it of GOD, and use your best Endeavors, that you may be
furnished with one of the best Gifts, well studied in the Doctrine of Salvation
by JESUS CHRIST, and who will naturally care for your State: and may he,
through the Blessing of the Most High, do more, and greater, Services for you,
than I have done.

Through the sparing Mercy of God to me, I have lived to bury by much the
greatest Part of the Church, and Congregation, I first received the Charge of,
(I think there are but three Males of the Church now living,) you have risen
up, and your Children are rising, in the Room of your Fathers, and their
Grandfathers. Oh! may I be serviceable to your Faith, and an Helper of your
Joy! Brethren; Pray for me, that your aged Pastor, whom you cannot expect to
continue long with you, may not be left to a fruitless old Age, but that he may
continue to bring forth Fruit, as long as it shall please GOD to spare him to
you; Fruit that shall abound unto your Account, and unto his own; that when he
shall rest from his Labors, he may be found faithful, and his Works may follow
him, in the gracious Rewards of them: and may you, who are his Hope now, be his
Joy, and Crown of Rejoicing hereafter; that both he that sows, and you who
reap, may rejoice together, in the Presence of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, at his
appearing. To whose Blessed Spirit, and Grace, I commend you all.

^our unworthy Pastor, John Barnard.
Marblehead, Jan. 1 1749, 50.
CONTENTS.
SERMON I, II, III, IV. The Nature of the Gospel Salvation. p. 9, 25, 46, 64.
SERMON V, VI. The Possibility of the Sinner's Salvation. p. 84, 104. SERMON
VII. Salvation not solely in the Sinner's Power. p. 125. SERMON VIII. Knowledge
necessary to Salvation. p. 143. SERMON IX, X, XI, XII. Faith absolutely
necessary to Salvation. p. 161, 179, 197, 214. SERMON XIII, XIV, XV, XVI.
Repentance absolutely necessary to Salvation. p. 234, 253, 271, 290. SERMON
XVII, XVIII. To be saved a Matter of the highest Importance. p. 310, 331.
SERMON XIX, XX. Sinners ought to be very solicitous to be saved. p. 352, 372.
SERMON XXI. The Saint Instructed, comforted, and ^ounselled. p. 394. SERMON
XXII. An Earnest Address to Sinners. p. 416.
The Nature of the Gospel-Salvation. SERMON I.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
IT is one of the Aphorisms of Solomon, Prove. xxii.3. A prudent Man foreseeth
the Evil, and (...) himself; but the Simple pass on, and are punished. How
natural is it for us, when we are under the Apprehension of any threatening
Danger, to use our utmost Prudence and Diligence, that, if possible, we may
happily prevent it^ falling upon us. And he must be very simple, and stupid,
indeed, whose Fears are not sufficiently awakened, by the real Prospect of
approaching Evil, (especially if the Evil be great) to put him upon improving
his best Foresight, and active Caution, by the most probable, and likely,
Means, to defend himself from the impending Mischief, which he may possibly,
and lawfully, with due Application, avoid the Force of. Though every one, it is
true, does not equally foresee the Danger that threatens him, whilst it is yet
at a Distance from him, and so, for Want of a greater Sagacity, the Evil, which
might have been prevented, oftentimes, surprises many an one, at unawares, and
falls heavy upon them, when they least expected it; yet, who is there, in the
Exercise of his Reason, that sees and knows, himself to be in imminent
Danger, that will tamely wait till the impending Mischief has seized upon him,
and then exert himself, in the Improvement of his Knowledge, and Power, to get
rid of it, as well as he can; and will not rather timely bestir himself, and
think what Methods he shall take to divert the Stroke, and would not do all
that lay in his Power, to ward off the coming Blow? That, at least, he might
lighten the Evil, and render it less hurtful to him, if he could not wholly
avoid the utmost Force of it. This is the constant Practice of every wise Man,
who has his Thoughts about him, in his Regards to his Body, and his temporal
Interests.

Thus, when the Arrows of Death are flying, thick, and unseen, among us, This
was first preached at the Time, when the mortal Smallpox raged in the Town.
how common is it for us to hear, those who are exposed to the Danger, cry out,
with a great deal of Earnestness and Concern of Mind, Where shall we go? What
shall we do? that we may be safe.

But is it not strange! to see Persons so very much in an Agony, for the Safety
of their Bodies, mighty inquisitive, what Methods they shall take, to save
themselves from the Evil they fear; and being willing to do any Thing, that
lies in their Power, to escape the Death that threatens them; and, at the same
Time, to see them so little, so very little, concerned for the Salvation of
their precious and immortal Souls, which are so vastly preferable to their
Bodies, and are much more certainly in Danger of a Death upon them, a Death
which far exceeds that which the Body is liable to, both in its Weight, and
in its Duration; I say, is it not strange, that those, who call themselves Men,
who glory in their Reason, and value themselves upon their Understanding,
should act a Part so unworthy of themselves, and contrary to all the Principles
and Dictates of right Reason! Here, if any where, the Proverb of Solomon holds
good, in the full Extent of it, and he is the prudent Man, who, upon the
Foresight of the Evil, the Danger his Soul, his true Self, is in, hides
himself, gets out of the Way of it as fast as he can; whilst he is the most
simple, and foolish Creature imaginable, who passes on still, in his wicked
Ways, rushing into the Jaws of Death, and Damnation, even when he sees it,
till, at length, the severe Punishment, which he has justly deserved for his
Folly, takes fast hold upon him, and it becomes too late for him to think of
escaping.

The Words I have read are expressive of the great Concern of every wise, and
prudent Person, and should be the Matter of the most serious, and earnest,
Solicitude of every one of us all, here before the Lord; What must I do to be
sav^d?

The Introduction, and Occasion, of these Words, as laid down in the Context,
are very remarkable; for therein we have a wonderful Display of the sovereign,
and rich, Grace of God, in pitching upon so notoriously wicked a Person, as the
Philippian Jailer, (the Person speaking in my Text,) and in such a Manner, and
at such a Juncture, recovering of him from the very Brink of Death, and Hell,
into a State of Salvation.

The sacred Historian acquainteth us, that, as Paul and Silas, those eminent
Servants of God, were preaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and, in his Name,
working of Miracles, to confirm the Truth of their divine Mission, at Philippi,
a noted City in Macedonia, the Master of a certain Damsel, being deprived of
the Gains she brought him, by Divination, by Means of the holy Apostles having
commanded the soul Spirit to depart out of her, stirred up the Rabble to join
with him in a Tumult, and laid hold on those holy Men of God, and haled them
before the Magistrates of the City; who, at the Clamor of the People, very
contrary to the Roman Manner, ordered them to be beaten, and then to be
committed to close Prison. The Iail Keeper, fierce, and cruel enough, in his
Temper, and more so in his Enmity against those excellent Ministers of Christ,
thrust them into a Dungeon, and fastened their Feet in the Stocks. But, while
those Servants of the most high God ceased not to sing his Praises, under all
the Insults they met with from Men, even in a Prison, and at Midnight, the God
whom they served wonderfully appeared for their Help, and caused an Earthquake,
most probably confined to the Bounds of the Court of the Prison, which shook
the Foundations of the Prison House, in so terrible a Manner, as to force open
the Prison Doors, and, at the same Instant, sent an Angel to loose the Bonds,
and take the Fetters, from off the Prisoners, and set them at Liberty.

The Iaylor, awakened out of his Sleep, in a very great Fright, at the Noise,
and Shock of the Earthquake, got up to see what was the Matter, and whether his
Charge was safe, and coming to the Prison, he was more exceedingly surprised to
find the Doors standing wide open; and, concluding that the Prisoners had made
their Escape, and that, according to the Roman Law, he should now suffer that
Death, which he supposed would have been inflicted upon them, he therefore, to
avoid that Punishment which he imagined would inevitably fall upon him,
furiously attempted to lay violent Hands upon himself; for he drew out his
Sword, and would have killed himself, Ver. 27; by which he plainly manifested
the Rashness, and Cruelty, of his Temper, and the violent Fierceness of his
Passions.

But, whilst as yet the Point was only aimed at his Breast, and before his
trembling Hands could execute the hasty Orders of his turbulent Passions, Paul
and Silas, more compassionate to him that had abused them, than he was to
himself, (imitating herein the Example of their great Master, who sought the
Welfare, and not the Hurt, of his worst Enemies) when they saw what he was
about to do, eagerly cried with a loud Voice, saying, Do thy self no Harm, for
we are all here. Ver. 28. This Behavior of those Men of God, as well it might,
surprised him with Joy, and Wonder; with Joy, to find his Life safe from
Danger, by the Presence of all the Prisoners, who, he supposed, were fled, and
gone; and with Wonder, to find those very Men, whom he had, but a little
before, basely insulted, to become the chief Instruments of his Preservation;
forbearing to hazard his Life, by endeavoring to preserve their own by an
Escape from their Confinement, which they might easily, and justly enough, have
done, and so obligingly staying his Hand, when he was just going to embrue it
in his own Blood; and thus recover him from the Edge of the Precipice, who
sought to tumble them down into Destruction. This Goodness was more than Roman
Bravery! In the midst of his Surprise, he called for a Light, and sprang in,
and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas. Ver. 29. Most probable
it is, when he called for a Light, and sprang into the Prison, that he had no
other Design than to see if, indeed, the Prisoners were safe, and to make them
secure; but when he approached those holy Men, and beheld the Gravity, and
Composedness, of their Countenances, how sedate and calm, how majestic and
serene, they were, under the Convulsions of Nature, which had happened, and
which had thrown him into such an Agony of Mind as filled his Body with
Trembling, from which he could not as yet free himself, it struck him with an
Awe and Reverence of them; and this, together with the Thoughts of their
Goodness to him, in preserving his Life, when it was in their Power to have
suffered him to hurry himself into his own Destruction, raised in his Mind a
very great Veneration for them, as more considerable Persons than they, at
first, appeared to him to be, and procured from him those Tokens of Civility,
and Respect, which he now showed them, in his falling down before them, and
bringing them out of their close Confinement.

Whether the Iaylor had, before this, heard any Thing, distinctly, about the
Doctrines of the Gosspel, which Paul, and Silas, preached, is uncertain; but,
doubtless, those holy Men now took the Opportunity, while, under the Influence
of what had happened, the Fierceness of his Temper was greatly abated, and his
Mind was more disposed to Civility, and Thoughtfulness, to bestow their
charitable Instruction upon him, and show him, that there is a great God, who
made Heaven, and Earth, and all Things that are therein; and that this
surprising Thing, which had now befallen them, was no other than the Effect of
the overruling Providence of that God, whom they served; who, in Answer to
their Prayers to him, had thus signally appeared for them, as, by this
wonderful Work, to procure their Enlargement; and, at the same Time, doubtless,
they acquainted him with the Necessity of his serving this great God, and
making his Peace with him, through his Son Jesus Christ, that he might be forever
happy in his Favor; and let him know, what a terrible Thing it would be, if he
should at last be found in a State of Sin, and Rebellion, against this God: And
now the Holy Spirit of God sat in irresistably with the awful Providence, and
some such Discourse (we may well suppose) the Prisoners had with him, and
showed him to himself, what a vile wretched Sinner he had been all his Life
long; and awakened in him a greater and more weighty Concern, than that of the
Safety of his Body, even what he should do to obtain the Forgiveness of his
Sins, and the everlasting Salvation of his Soul. He that just before had been
so severe to those Servants of God, as, without particular Direction, to thrust
them into a Dungeon, and fasten their Feet in the Stocks, and, perhaps, with
the Rabble, looked upon them as the Troublers of their City, by their teaching
of Customs which it was not lawful for them (they though it) to observe, now
entertained quite another Opinion of them, and treated them with the greatest
Respect, and Honor, and esteemed them Men of God, and, as such, addressed them
with this most important Enquiry, Sirs, What must I do to be save? Whatever his
Thoughts had been, heretofore, about the Doctrine of Salvation, (if he had,
indeed, heard any Thing about it) yet now, you see, he is awakened to a very
great Concern to know, and a ready Willingness to do, all that was necessary in
order to his Salvation; which evidently breathed the Temper and Spirit of one
that was under the Pangs of the New Birth.

The Words are expressive of the deepest Concern of Mind that can be; like a
Man in an Agony, he cried out, Sirs, What must I do to be saved? And it is
plainly evident that, by being saved, he meant the eternal Salvation of his
Soul; the Circumstances he was in, and the Answer of the Apostle to him,
clearly evinces this.

If you consider the Circumstances he was in, when he uttered this important
Question, you will find the Life of his Body was then in no Danger; the
Earthquake was, probably, over; the Prisoners were safe with him, under his
Command; the P^^rs, that arose in his Mind, about one, or other, or both, of
these, were now at an End; he had got over his Fright, had had Time to compose
himself to Decency, and good Manners, had attended to the Discourse of the
Prisoners with him; and, though there was no particular Occasion for any
special Concern about the Safety and Welfare of his Body, yet you find him very
sollicitous to be saved; he was convinced that he still stood in Need of
Salvation; and what was the Salvation which he was apprehensive he needed? Was
it the Salvation of his Body? No; that was already safe -- It was therefore the
Salvation of his Soul, not a temporal, but his eternal Salvation, that he was
inquisitive about. He was convinced that there is a great God, who made, and
governs, the World; he was sensible how highly he had offended this God, by a
very vicious Course of Living; and this led him to consider, that his Soul, his
rational and immortal Part, was in imminent Danger of perishing; and therefore
it was this, that he was so greatly concerned for, and exceeding solicitous to
preserve.

And if we consult the Answer which the Apostle and Silas gave, to the Iaylor's
Enquiry, it will put it beyond all Doubt; that this was what they understood to
be the genuine Intent of it, What shall I do to be happy forever? What Methods
must I take to escape the Anger of God, and obtain an Interest in his Favor?
For they said to him, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou sha^^ be saved.

Thus, it pleases God, sometimes, to display his sovereign Grace, in calling
Home unto himself, and unto Virtue, and Glory, so wicked a Person as this
Iaylor, and that in a very extraordinary, and wonderful Way, and Manner; he
created a new Thing in the Earth, and, in his Wonder-working ^^vidence, opened
a Door of Mercy to him, and that, at a Time, when there was but a Step between
(...), and Death, and Damnation; when the vile (...) was about to commit a
Murder (...) post himself down into everlasting (...) What a glorious Instance
is this, of the (...) and rich Grace of God, unto poor miserable Sinners? By
this, every one may see, that, though they have gone far, and long, in their
Rebellions against the God that made them, there is still Room for them to
repent, and turn from all their Transgressions, and a Possibility that they
also may obtain Mercy, and find Favor with the Lord.

And yet, you may observe, that God, as a wise Agent, treats him, as a rational
Creature, in the very Article of his Conversion, and though his happy Change
was brought about in such an extraordinary Manner, yet, he is not forced to be
happy, against his Will; but is first put upon serious Thoughtfulness relating
to his spiritual State, and then filled with a deep Concern of Mind about his
Salvation, and is made seriously inquisitive after it, with an earnest Desire
to know, and an hearty Willingness to do, whatsoever was requisite to his being
saved. Sirs, What must I do to be saved?

And what was his great Concern ought to be ours also; for we too have Souls
within us, equally in Danger of perishing, and our most serious Thought and
Care, Industry and Diligence, are necessary, in Order to their being saved.
This, therefore, is the Doctrine, which, by divine Assistance, I shall
discourse to you on, from these Words; viz.

DOCTRINE.

It is of the highest Concernment to perishing Sinners, to be very sollicitous,
what they shall do to be saved; or, to know, and practice, all that is
necessary, in Order to their Salvation.

In speaking to this Doctrine, I shall endeavor to show you,

1. What it is to be saved; or, What is that Salvation which perishing Sinners
stand in Need of?

II. That perishing Sinners may be saved; or, there is a Possibility,
notwithstanding their present miserable Condition, that they may be eternally
saved.

III. That perishing Sinners must know, and practice, all that is necessary, in
Order to their Salvation; or, there is something to be done, by them, that they
may be saved.

IV. This is a Matter of the highest Concernment to them, and therefore they
ought to be most seriously sollicitous about it.

I shall, as God shall enable me, offer some Things* distinctly, to each of
these Heads; and I begin with the first of them, at this Time; viz.

I. To show you what it is to be saved; or, what is that Salvation which
perishing Sinners stand in Need of? And,

1. More generally.

Now, to be saved, in the Language of the sacred Scripture, means, for poor
Sinners to be rescued from all that Infelicity which they are affected with, or
in Danger of, and to be brought to the Enjoyment of all that Happiness,
Satisfaction, and Joy, which they want, and are capable of: That is, to be
delivered from Evil, and instated in the Possession of all that is truly Good.
And forasmuch as the human Nature is constituted, not only of a fleshly Body,
but a spiritual Soul, therefore our Salvation is to be considered in its
Respects unto each of these essential Parts of the Man, though as having its
chief Reference to the spiritual Part in us.

That there is such a Thing as, what is generally called, the Soul, or, more
strictly speaking, a Spirit, very distinct from gross Matter, which goes into
the very Essence of the human Nature, and is the grand Characteristick of it,
is very evident, in that we think, and reason, upon absent Objects, and are
capable of examining, and judging, of such Things, as our Senses have nothing
to do with; all of which lies wholly out of the Reach of mere Matter,
howsoever disposed, and modified, figured, or moved; and is abundantly
confirmed to us in the sacred Pages, which assure us, Job xxxii.8. That there
is a Spirit in Man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives them
Understanding: And Zech. 12.1. That the Lord formed the Spirit of Man within
him. That this rational Spirit in Man is capable of a State of true Happiness,
in the Enjoyment of all that is refreshing, and delightful, to it, there is not
the least Reason to doubt, because it is capable of perceiving what is
agreeable to its Nature: And, there is as little Reason to question, whether
Man, in his present Condition, is destitute of that Happiness he is capable of,
or no: For, there are innumerable Things, besides the constant Uneasiness of
his Mind, to convince him, that he is so far from being happy, at present, that
he really is in a miserable Condition. Not only are the Bodies of Men subject
to various Pains, Diseases, Casualties, and Death, but there are also certain
Distempers, Maladies and Disorders, and what is called Death, suitable to their
Nature, brought upon the Souls of Men, by the first Apostasy of the human
Nature. Hence, the Divine Oracles inform us, that we are, by Nature, Dead in
Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. ii.1, 2, 3. We are under the Power of a spiritual
Death, already begun upon us, in our walking according to the Course of this
World, according to the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit that now
works in the Children of Disobedience; and by having our Conversation in the
Lusts of the Flesh, fulfilling the Desires of the Flesh, and of the Mind: And,
as the Consummation of this Death, we are Children of Wrath; Heirs to the Wrath
and Vengeance of an almighty God: And that this is not a Condition peculiar to
any particular Set of Men, as of those that finally go on in their Sin, the
Apostle shows us, by adding these Words, even as others; that is, we Jews, as
well as Gentiles, we Apostles, as well as the Rest of Mankind, yea, we, who
through the Grace, and Favor, of God, are freed from the Dominion of Sin, and
are brought into a State of Peace and Friendship with God, as well as those who
are yet the Servants of Sin, and at Enmity against God; that is, this is the
sad Condition of all Mankind, and that by Nature, as he adds: Which plainly
teaches us, that all Men, even by Nature, by their natural Descent from the
first Man, or, as they come into this World, and while as yet the regenerating
Grace of God has not wrought a Change in them, are languishing, and dying,
under the Distempers of their Minds, and are ready, every Moment, to fall under
that Wrath which compleateth the Death of the Soul, and will be the
Consummation of Misery upon them.

Now, because the Sinner, as such, is thus perishing in his Iniquity, therefore
he wants to be saved from all that he already feels, and all that he is in
Danger of; and because Sin has forfeited Heaven, and Happiness, as well as has
exposed him to Wrath, and the Curse, therefore he stands in Need of the
Happiness, which he has lost, as truly as to be delivered from the Misery he
feels, or fears: And hence to be saved, includes in it, what is called, a
privative, and a positive, Felicity; or, a Deliverance from every Evil, which
the Man is subject to in Body, and in Soul, and a Recovery to the full
Possession of all the Good, which he is destitute of: both of which the
perishing Sinner absolutely needs.

And, accordingly, I shall now

2. More particularly speak to these two Heads.

1. For the Sinner to be saved is, for him to be delivered from all that Evil
which he is subject to.

2. For the Sinner to be saved is, for him to be brought to the full Possession
of all that positive Good, which he is destitute of, and wants.

1. For the Sinner to be saved is, for him to be delivered from all that Evil
which he is subject to. For, while the Man remains, at present, under the
Power of any Evil whatsoever, or is subject to any hereafter; any Thing that
breaks in upon the regular, healthful, Temperament of his Body, and gives him
Pain and Uneasiness, and much more that which reduces it to Dust, and Ashes;
or, that is contrary to his Nature, as a rational intelligent Agent, capable,
of discerning between Good, and Evil, and of delighting it self in that which
is just, and equitable, fit, and decent; or, that is destructive of his
Well-being, either by causing a Separation between his Soul, and Body, or, that
depriveth his Soul of her inward Satisfaction, and Joy, and the Fruition of
that which is the only solid Foundation of her Comfort; and, in the Room
thereof, produces Perplexities, Horror, and Anguish in the Mind; it is very
evident, that all this while, the Man is in a State of real Misery: And
consequently, all that Guilt, and Depravity, which is contrary to the very
Nature of the Soul, as a spiritual intelligent Agent, and all that Punishment,
which brings a Dissolution upon the constituent Parts of the human Nature, or
which stripeth the Soul of her Peace, and Comfort, and becomes burdensome to
her, are the great Evils which Sinners want to be delivered from. That is to
say, the Sinner's Salvation consists in a Deliverance from all moral, and
penal Evil.

The Distribution of all Evil into Moral, and Penal, the Evil of Sin, and the
Evil of Punishment, seems, to me, to be too just to admit of any Dispute.
For, whether the Evils, I call penal, come immediately from the Hand of God, or
result from the settled Laws of Nature, or are occasioned by the Actions of
free Agents, in each of these, and every other Case, it amounts to the same
Thing; they originate from the Will and Determinations of the supreme Ruler of
the World, who has established the Laws of Nature, and employeth what
Instruments he pleases, to bring about his own Designs: And they are
Punishments, in the original Constitution, whatever be the kind Ends, and
Purposes, they may be overruled unto, in his infinite Wisdom, and Goodness;
because, had Man never sinned, he would have never suffered. Perfect Purity
infers perfect Happiness, according to the particular Nature, which is the
Subject thereof. Nor can it, in Reason, be supposed, that an infinitely
righteous, and good God would ever inflict any Sort of suffering upon a
perfectly innocent, and unconsenting, Being. So that there seems, to me, to
be no Foundation for a real Distinction of natural Evils, from Penal, in the
original Constitution, respecting moral Agents. Here then,

1. The Salvation, set before us in the Gospel, consists in a Deliverance
from all moral Evil. By moral Evil some understand whatsoever is contrary to
the Sentiments of a Man's own Mind, concerning Right, and Good. From hence the
Libertine takes Encouragement to indulge his vicious Appetites, under the
Pretext of this vain Plea, that there is no such Thing as moral Good, or Evil;
that the Sentiments of Men's Minds are various, and one thinks that to be
Evil, which another thinks to be Good, for him; and consequently (they say)
the Difference between Good, and Evil, arises, only from the different
Sentiments of Men, and not at all from any Thing of an essential Difference in
the Nature of Things. And yet, even these Favorers of Vice, Confounders of
Order, and Destroyers of all Good, will all of them, to a Man, as readily
grant, as other Men, that their Children, and Servants, ought to honor, and
obey them; that every Act of Kindness they do for another ought to be
gratefully acknowledged; and that no Man ought to do them any Injury, or
Injustice. And has not every Man as good Reason to demand, and expect, the same
Treatment from others, as they have? And what is this? but to acknowledge that
there is an essential Difference between Justice and Injustice, Gratitude, and
Ingratitude, Kindness, and Cruelty. And indeed, every Man, at first Sight,
approves, and is pleased with Acts of Justice, and Goodness, and has an inward
Reluctance and Abhorrence, at Acts of Injustice, Oppression, and Cruelty. But
whether every Man has a clear Discernment of what is Right, or no, this
hinders not but that there is an essential Difference between Right, and
Wrong, whatever be the Prejudices, and Bias, upon his Mind, which preventeth
his clear Perception. For, truly, moral Evil is not, so properly, what is
contrary to the Sentiments of a Man's own Mind, as what is contrary to right
Reason. For a Man's Mind may be warped, or clouded, but right Reason ever
remains the same. And because right Reason resulteth from the original
Intellect, the Fountain of Knowledge and Rectitude, therefore the clearer
Discoveries are made to us of his Mind and Will, so much the plainer shall we
discern between moral Good, and Evil. And because this original Intellect is
our supreme Lord, who has given Being to us, and has furnished us with all our
Powers, and has so far made known his Mind, and Will, to us, as to show us
what is morally good, or evil, therefore moral Evil consists in a Contrariety
to his Will, made known unto us, and moral Good lies in a Conformity to his
Will; the Sentiments of our own Minds, when we have a clear Discernment of
Things, agreeing thereunto.

So that moral Evil may be considered, either, as a direct Violation of the Law
of our Maker, which is diametrically contrary to Right, and Equity, and
rendereth us guilty; or, as such a Perversion of our Powers, from that regular
Order our Maker appointed for them, as that we do not, and cannot, without
divine Aids, exercise them, in their Regards to moral Good, and Evil, as we
ought to do; and this rendereth us depraved. Guilt, therefore, and Depravity,
are the two great Branches of moral Evil, which it is one main End, and Design,
of the Salvation, revealed to us in the Gospel, to deliver the Sinner from; the
particular Consideration of which, I have not now Time to enter upon, but must
leave to the Afternoon.

SERMON II.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
I Began, in the Morning, to consider the Nature of that Salvation which is
proposed to us in the Gospel, and said, it includes in it a Deliverance from
all that Evil which the humane Nature is subject to, whether Moral, or Penal;
and that moral Evil is to be considered as comprehending both Guilt, and
Depravity, in it. I shall now, by divine Assistance, go into a more parti^ular
Consideration of that Guilt, and Depravity, ^^ich we are saved from; and
therefore, I observ^*

(1.) The Sinner is said to b^ saved, when he is delivered from all that Guilt
which is justly chargeable upon him. It Is a most sad, and melancholy Truth,
That every Man is a Sinner; there is a dreadful Charge against him, a mighty
and heavy Load of Guilt, lying upon him; Part of which Guilt he brought into
this World with him, and Part thereof he has contracted, whilst he has
tabernacled in the Flesh.

1. Part of his Guilt, I say, every Sinner has brought into the World with him.
It very much puzzled the Wits of former Ages, and has exercised the bright
Genius's of the present to give a satisfactory Account, how Moral Evil entered
into our World. If it be asked, How came the first Man to sin, and be obnoxious
to suffering? The Answer seems not to be difficult; viz. Whatever Abuse a
free Agent should make of his Powers, is unavoidably, and in itself, vicious
and sinful; and whatsoever is sinful, necessarily infers Punishment: And it
can no more be inconsistent with the Perfections of the great Maker of the
World, that a free Agent should be left to abuse his Powers, than it is a
Contradiction to them, for him to make a free Agent; which, I suppose, none
will be so hardy as to affirm. However, all we are now properly concerned about
is, how Sin and Suffering have taken Place upon the Humane Race; or how can we
account for what we plainly see, that Men are sinful, and liable to suffer?
Whence arises this Sinfulness of our Nature, and the Punishments we are
subjected to? There is no Dispute, whether a Man that personally violates the
divine Law, becomes guilty; but whether all Mankind are chargeable with Guilt
before God, upon the Account of Adam's Transgression, does not appear so
evident to some. Yet, whatever be the Sentiments of Men of deeper Penetration,
I cannot but conclude, from the Scripture-Account of this Matter, and, I think,
from the Reason of Things, that every Child of Adam, descending from him, in
the ordinary Way of Generation, becomes legally guilty of his first
Transgression. For the Proof of this, I shall confine myself to the
Scripture-Account of this Matter, which seems, to me, necessarily to infer
it. What less did David mean, when he said, (Psalm. li.5.) Behold, I was shapen,
(or brought forth) in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceiv^ me; but to
notify to us, that we all come guilty into this World? For, certainly, David
did not intend, by that Passage, to give us an Account of any particular Sin of
his Mother, as if she had been guilty of any unlawful Commerce, which rendered
him an illegitimate Conception, and Birth: In this his Father would have been
as deeply concerned, as his Mother, and it may be more so, whom, yet, he takes
no Notice of: And, besides, David being Iesse's Eighth Son, rendereth it very
unlikely, that there should be any criminal Congress, in the begetting of him.
But it is evident that David spoke of that Crime which he looked upon as his
own, a Guilt chargeable upon himself, and that from his very Birth, yea, from
his very Conception; and therefore before he could have personally violated any
Law. Nor is there any Reason to suppose, that David spoke of this as a
particular Case, and what was appropriated to himself only, to be thus guilty
from the Birth and Conception, but it is that which is common to all Mankind
with him; which therefore speaks the universal Guilt of the humane Nature, by
the Apostasy of Adam. And, what less, than the universal Guilt of all Mankind,
by Virtue of the first Man's Transgression, could the Apostle Paul intend, when
he said, Wherefore, as by one Man, Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin;
and so Death has passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned? Romans v.12.

I am very sensible that great Pains have been taken by some, of late, as well
as by Erasmus, and others, formerly, to evade the Force of this Text, as a
Proof of the original Guilt of Adam's first Sin, or Fall, cleaving to the
humane Nature, by torturing it, in such a Manner, as to make it speak little
short of evident Nonsense. But after all, let the unprejudiced Reason of
Mankind but duly observe the Intention, and Force, of the Apostle's Reasoning,
in this, and the preceding, and the following Verses, and nothing can be more
evident than, that he designed a Proof of the Sin, and Guilt, of all Mankind,
in, and by, the Sin, and Fall, of the first Man. For the Apostle plainly aimed,
at the giving a Reason of the Necessity of Christ his dying to reconcile us
unto God, and the illustrating the Grace of God, in sending his Son into the
World, to be made a Sacrifice of Atonement for us; wherefore is all this? And
he gives this strong Reason, and Necessity, for it, that all were originally,
and by Virtue of the first Sin, guilty, and therefore, without Christ's atoning
Sacrifice, all were dead: By one Man, Sin entered into the World, and Death by
Sin, and so Death has passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned. What
Argument would there be in the Apostle's Words, why Christ should die for us,
if all were not dead? And, what Consequence would there be, from one Man having
sinned, and deserved Death, to the passing the Sentence of Death upon all Men,
if the Sin of that one Man were not chargeable upon all, and did not
necessarily bring the Sentence of Death upon all Men, as well as upon himself?
And what Justice could there be, in the Sentence of Death passing upon all Men,
for the Sin of that one Man, if all Men were not, some Way or other, in the Eye
of the Law, and Justice of God, truly guilty of that Sin? Either, by that one
Man being constituted the public Head of all Men, or by his including all Men
in his Loins, or, possibly both Ways. Some have made a mighty ado, in their
Criticisms upon the Greek Phrase, here used, (ephesians o) rendering it, Quatenus, as
far forth, or so far, as if by this they thought to overthrow the Force of the
Apostle's Reasoning; but, alas, they forget, that this Preposition, with a
dative Case, as Grammarians speak, usually signifies in; and we have a famous
Instance among many others, of this very Phrase, as used by the sacred Writers,
which necessarily determines the Sense of it; I mean, in the Gospel of Mark,
(Mark ii.4.) where we are told, that when they could not come nigh unto him,
(namely Christ) for the Press, they uncovered the Roof where he was; and when
they had broken it up, they let dow^ the Bed, (ephesians o) in which the sick of the
Palsy lay. And accordingly the plain Meaning of the Phrase, in the Apostle's
Use of it here, is, in whom, that is, in that first Man, in Adam, in whom all
have sinned. That is, all are truly guilty of that first Sin, or Lapse of the
first Man, which brought Death into the World; and therefore the Sentence of
Death has been passed upon all Men, as well as upon that one first Man, as the
just Desert of his first Transgression, and all are become dead; and therefore
there is a Necessity of Christ's dying for us, both to recover us from Death,
and reconcile us to God.

But that no Stone may be left unturned, by which if possible, to undermine the
Doctrines of the Gospel, we are told, by some of the admired Writers of the
present Age, That Death is no Punishment, and therefore no Sign and Proof of
Sin, and Guilt lying at the Door. But, I beseech you, was not Death threatened,
as a Punishment, to Adam, in Case of his Disobedience? Was not the Sentence of
Death pronounced upon him, in the Day of his Apostasy, and this, as the
Fulfillment of the Threatening, and as a designed Punishment upon him, for his
having transgressed the Law of his Maker? Was it not this very Sentence, Dust
thou art, and unto Dust shall thou return, or dying thou shall die, that
rendered the humane Nature, or Adam, and his Posterity, mortal? And after all
this, is not Death a Punishment? No, say some; because God knows how to make
Death to become a Mercy to us, and recompense the Loss of the present Life,
with a State of everlasting Life, and Happiness, in Heaven. And it is well for
us, that an infinitely wise, and good, God will abundantly make up for all the
Sorrows, and Labors, and Loss, of the present Life, by conferring an
everlasting Life, upon his People, in a better World. But, all this while, it
is forgotten, that this is the sp^^ial Grace of the Gospel Dispensation, to
render Death a Mercy to us; whereas the Sentence of Death is denounced, upon
the humane Nature, antecedent to all the Grace of the Gospel, and under that
original Dispensation of the Law, or Covenant of Works, as it is called, which
knew of no Act of Favor to a guilty Creature, nor any Act of Punishment upon
an innocent one. So that, under the original Constitution, either Adam's
Posterity would not have been mortal, or else their Death is a Punishment upon
them, and included in the Threatening. And, therefore, I conclude, that Death
is, by the original Sentence of Heaven, a Punishment upon all Mankind, and
consequently, a plain Indication of the Interest, and Share, which all Mankind
has in the Lapse, and Guilt, of the first Man. Accordingly, the Apostle goes on
to observe, Romans v.14. That Death reign^d from Adam, even over them that had
not sinned after the Similitude of Adam 's Transgression: That is, over Infant
Children, who had never violated any Law, by their own personal transgressing
of it, as Adam had done. And further, the Apostle informs us, Ver. 17. By one
Man's Offense, Death reigned by One: That is, it reigned over the whole humane
Nature, by the one Offense of that one Man. And, to put it beyond all Dispute,
he adds, Ver. 18, 19. By the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to
Condemnation; for, by one Man's Disobedience, many were made Sinners. That is,
by that one Man's Disobedience, and Offense, all were rendered guilty, and
subject to Condemnation. And when the Apostle says, of all, that they are, by
Nature, Children of Wrath, Ephesians. ii.3. it necessarily infers, that all Men
are, by Nature, guilty, or they could not be, by Nature, Children of Wrath.

Nor can I see any Thing repugnant to right Reason, in considering the first
Man, from whom all were to descend, as a common Head; and all his Descendants
as sharing, and partaking with him, in his Innocence, or Guilt, and the Fruits
thereof. This Conception of Adam as a common and public Head, in whom all
Mankind were virtually included, and with whom they were to stand, or fall, the
Scripture plainly leads us into, by opposing Adam, and Christ, as two public
Heads of two very different Stocks, and from whom very opposite Virtues and
Powers flow; 1 Cor. xv.22, 47. As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all
be made alive; -- The first Man is of the Earth, the second Man is the Lord
from Heaven. Now here it might be asked, How are all made alive in Christ? Is
it what naturally and necessarily follows upon Christ's being made alive? Or
is it not rather the Fruit and Effect of the Merits of Christ that Life is
procured for us? Why thus Death is not merely consequential upon the Mortality
of the first Head, but the Effect of his Deserts; so that as Righteousness and
Life are from the Merits of the second Head, in like Manner is Sin and Death,
the Fruit of the Transgression of the First to all his natural Descendants.

And if all Mankind were included in the Loins of Adam, which seems to be the
Truth of the Case, the Reason, why all should partake in his Guilt, is so much
the stronger. But, after all, if we could not see into the Reason of the Thing,
yet, since we have so plain, and full, Account of it in the holy Scriptures, it
is to be numbered among the Credenda, the Things to be believed by us; and we
may be satisfied in this, that the divine Mind knows how to reconcile it to
his Justice, and Goodness, though we should not be able to do it. So that I
reasonably conclude, that there is such a Thing a^, an Original Guilt,
chargeable upon every natural Child of Adam; or, that every Man is born into
this World guilty, by Virtue of Adam's first Transgression. But then

2. There is a Guilt chargeable upon every Man, as that which he has personally
contracted, by his own Disobedience to the Law of God, his rightful Sovereign,
while he has lived in this World. There is no Man that lives to such Years of
Understanding, as that it may be properly said of him, he acts voluntarily,
but what becomes guilty, by his personal Transgressions against the Divine
Commandments, either, by doing what is forbidden, or, by leaving undone what is
required: So that we may all say, in the Strain of the Apostle James, In many
Things we all offend, Jam. iii.2. For what is Sin, and Guilt, but as we are
told, 1 John iii.4. a Transgression of the Law; whosoever commits Sin
transgresses also the Law. And what Man is there to be found, amongst all the
Descendants from the first Man, that has not transgressed the divine Law
innumerable Times, in Thought, in Word, and in Deed? The Law of our Sovereign
is very extensive, and reaches not only to every Man, but to all of Man, to
the Government of all our Actions, natural, civil, and religious, of all our
Words, of what Kind soever, and of all the Thoughts that come into our Hearts;
so that we cannot speak a Word, nor think a Thought, any more than do an
Action, which does not, some Way or other, fall under the Cognizance of the
Law. And who, then, can say, I have kept my Hands clean, and my Heart is pure
from mine Iniquity? Both Jews and Gentiles, are all under Sin; for all have
sinned, and come short of the Glory of God. Romans iii.23. It Is a true
Observation of the Preacher, Eccles. vii.20. There is not a just Man upon
Earth, that does good, and sins not.

And because the Law is transgressed, therefore it brings its Charges, and
Articles against the Sinner, that, in this and the other Instance, he has
departed from the Rules of the Law, and become guilty, of doing what was
plainly prohibited to him, and of neglecting to do what was positively required
of him. For he that offends against a Law, by transgressing its Injunctions,
or Prohibitions, is guilty; Jam. ii.10. and this the Law accuses him, and
passes Sentence upon him, and condemns him, for all his sinful Violations
thereof. And not only does the Sinner stand charged, and condemned, by the Law
of God, for every Transgression found upon him, but his own Mind takes Part,
with the Law, against him; by witnessing to all his sinful Actions, and
severely reproaching him for them; and thus the natural Conscience, that is in
every Man, joineth with the holy and righteous Law of God, in bringi^g in the
Man as guilty, because he has departed from the Law of his Maker, his
Sovereign, and his Judge, which he was under the strongest Obligations
carefully to have observed. Agreeably the Apostle, in his Epistle to the
Romans, observes, Romans ii.14, 15. The Gentiles are a Law unto themselves, --
their Conscience also bearing Witness, and their Thoughts the mean while,
accusing of them.

This shows us, that Guilt is an Evil that is contrary to the very Nature of
the Soul, as a spiritual, intellectual Agent, whose first Property, as such a
Being, is to act rationally, or, to do that which is right, and fitting to be
done; because all Guilt arises from an acting contrary to what is Right, and
Equity, and is a doing of what ought not to have been done: And therefore it
is, that the Soul cannot take a View of her own Sinfulness, in violating the
divine Law, which is the Result of the highest Reason, and unsullied Intellect,
without rising up against herself, and charging her own Guilt Home upon
herself, with bitter Taunts and Reproaches; which is truly to be in a miserable
State, as being her own Tormentor.

This, therefore, is included in the Sinner's being saved, namely, for him to
be delivered from all this Load of Guilt, which is justly chargeable upon him;
for till this is done for him, he is under a Sentence of Condemnation, and
continually exposed to the Stings of an enraged Conscience. The Soul is saved,
when its high Crimes, and Misdemeanors, are no longer imputed, or reckoned to
it, but her Guilt is cancelled, and her Iniquity is taken away.

Though it be true, that the Soul cannot so cease to be guilty, as to have it
said of it, that it has never done any Thing amiss, yet it ceases to be guilty,
as to the Imputation, or Charge of any Crime, or Blame, to it, for what it has
done; it is delivered from the prevailing Force of any Accusation against it,
and is set Rectus in Curia, by a free, full, and absolute Pardon of all its
Transgressions. Hence the Psalmist prayed, Psalm. li.1. Have Mercy upon me, O
God, according to thy Loving kindness, according to the Multitude of thy tender
Mercies, blot out my Transgressions; and, Ver. 9. Hide thy Face from my Sin,
and blot out all mine Iniquities: And he instanceth in one particular Sin, in
such Terms as these, Ver. 14. Deliver me from Blood-Guiltiness, O God of my
Salvation: By which he did not mean, to be delivered from the Act of shedding
innocent Blood, for that was past, and could not be recalled; but he prayed,
that the Guilt he had contracted, by shedding ^nnocent Blood; might be
pardoned, and forgiven to him, and never be articled against him; and, as a
Fruit of this Pardon, he prayed, Ver. 12. that God would restore to him the Joy
of his Salvation: That is, that he would graciously give him such a Sense of
the Pardon of his Sin, as might rescue his Mind from the inward Shame, and
Confusion, the Horror, and Anguish, which his Guilt had brought upon him; that
his Guilt being taken away, his Soul might have restored to it, its lost Peace
and Joy, in a Sense of the divine Favor toward him.

And because all Sin carries, in the very Nature of it, the highest Affront,
and Indignity, to our Sovereign, and Judge, as being the vilest Insult upon his
Authority, and Contempt of his Law, which rendereth it unreasonable to hope for
a free, and full Pardon, without a due asserting the Honor of the Lawgiver,
and the Rectitude of his Law, therefore it seems necessary, that a Mediator
appear on our Behalf, who, by the Perfection of his Obedience, and the Validity
of his Atonement, should purchase the Forgiveness of Sin for us, and take away
all our Guilt, by his bearing it for us, and so clear the Way, for the infinite
Mercy of God to reach us, and cover all our Iniquities, and impute not our
Transgressions to us. Hence the great Redeemer wears the Name of Jesus,
because he saves his People from their Sins. Mat. i.21.

(2) The Sinner is said to be saved, when he is delivered from the Depravity,
the Pollution, and Power, of Sin over him. For, there is not only a Guiltiness
chargeable upon the humane Nature, in having transgressed the Law of its Maker,
but there is a Depravity also of that Nature, consisting in the perverting, and
disordering, of its Powers, by which it is defiled, and polluted, and brought
under the Dominion of Sin; and this as the Result of the Apostasy, or Defection
of the first Man from the Paths of Virtue.

It is, I think, readily acknowledged, on all Hands, that the infinitely wise,
and good, and holy God, could not form a rational Creature, a moral Agent, with
viciated Powers; that is to say, whose Powers should be incapable of performing
their several Offices, in that regular Manner, which its very Nature plainly
declares, it was intended they should, and by which it would, in it self
considered, necessarily, and unavoidably, become subject to Disorder, and
Irregularity, in its Actions; because, this would be evidently to make the most
holy God the Author of Sin, than which nothing is more inconsistent with his
very Nature. Accordingly, the sacred Writings inform us, Genesis i.27. That God
created Man in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him. And,
doubtless, this Image of God, in which Man was created, did not consist only,
nor chiefly, in that Dominion which God gave to him over the Creatures, but in
the moral Rectitude, and Purity of his Nature; that is to say, in the perfect
Harmony of his Powers, and the regular Subordination of the lower Powers to the
Influence and Government of the higher; or, the Subjection of the Will, and
Affections, and lower Appetites, to the Dictates of the supreme Intellect in
us. That this is, that Image of God, in which Man was at first created, is best
understood by considering, wherein the divine Likeness is restored to the
humane Nature; because this shows us what was lost by the Fall, and therefore
what our Nature was, at first, possessed of; and this, we are told, from the
unerring Oracles of Truth, consists in a being renewed in ^nowledge, after
the Image of him that created him, Col. iii.10. and after God, (that is, after
the Image of God) is created in Righteousness, and true Holiness. Ephesians. iv.24.
Which plainly shows, that that Image of God, after which Man was at first
created, chiefly consisted in the Understanding, the pure Intellect, in us,
having the Sway over us; and that, under the Influence thereof, all our
Actings, whether, within ourselves, or respecting those about us, should be
right, and pure, and that there should be nothing contrary to Equity, and
Holiness, found upon us.

Though this was the Condition of the humane Nature, as it came out of the
Hands of God, yet, we may easily observe, that this is no^ the Case with us at
present; and that Man must be very ignorant of himself, or arrogantly stubborn,
who will not own, that he finds within himself, the sad Want of this divine
Image, and such a Depravation of his Nature, as has put his Powers out of
their regular Course, and subjected his Reason, and Understanding, to the
domineering Influence of his boisterous Will, and turbulent Appetites, and
Passions; so that he either sees not what is right, and fitting for him to do,
or, if he has some weak Prospect thereof, yet he has no Power to perform it.
The uninlightened Heathen saw something of this Depravity, and confessed it;
Hence were those Sayings, Nitimur invetitum. Video meliora proboque deteriora
sequor. Facilis Descensus Averni, ^ed re^ocare Gradum, superasque ^vadere ad
Auras, Hic Labor, Hoc Opu^ ^st.
and we who enjoy the Benefit of divine Revelation cannot remain Strangers to
this Depravity of our Nature, unless we wilfully shut our Eyes against the
Light, or imagin^ ourselves too big to entertain the Thought of what, we
suppose, casts such a Blemish upon us. But whatever be the Reproach brought
upon us, by such an universal Depravity, we find the sacred Scriptures clearly
painting out our Nature, in all the Deformity, and Ugliness, of Corruption,
Defilement, and Si^^ulness, as blind to Reason, and under the Government of
diverse Lusts, and Passions, and that from the very Birth. Hence, as long ago as
the early Days of Job, you have Zophar saying, Job xi.12. Vain Man would be
wise, though Man be born like a wild Ass's Colt. Fond as Man is of his Wisdom,
and Sagacity, yet he is, by Nature, and from the Birth, as ignorant as the dull
Ass, as ungovernable, and intractable, as the wild Ass, and as truly under the
Influence, and Power, of his Appetites, as the very Brutes, which have nothing
else to govern them. And what less can the Psalmist mean, when he described the
natural State of Man, as corrupt, -- they have all gone aside, they are
altogether filthy, -- they have no Knowledge. Psalm. xiv.1, 3, 4. Hence also the
Prophet Isaiah, under the Similitude of a disordered, defiled, Body, gives us
a lively Description of our Depravity, saying, Isa. i.5, 6. The whole Head is
sick, and the whole Heart faint; from the Sole of the Foot, even unto the Head,
there is no Soundness in it; but Wounds and Bruises, and putrefying Sores. And
the Prophet Jeremiah gives us an Account of the gross Ignorance, and general
Propensity of Mankind to that which is Evil, saying, Jer. iv.22. They are
sottish Children; they have no Understanding; they are wise to do Evil, but to
do Good they have no Knowledge. And our blessed Savior, who perfectly well
understood Mankind, speaks of them, Matthew. xii.33. as corrupt Trees, that
must first be made good, their Nature must be altered, before they can bring
forth good Fruit. And, if our Savior's Rule hold good, That a Tree is known by
its Fruits, the universal Depravity of the human Nature is known, by the
universal Inclination, and Tendency, there is in all Mankind, unto that which
is evil and sinful: Which every Man, by a little Observation may evidently
perceive in himself. And hence, the Apostle tells us, in the latter Part of the
seventh Chapter to the Romans, of Sin dwelling in us; of a Law in our Members
warring against the Law of our Minds, and bringing us into Captivity to the Law
of Sin; and that we are sold under Sin; and because hereof, in us, in our
Flesh, dwells no good Thing; and that we cannot find how to perform that
which is good. In his Epistle to the Ephesians, the inspired Writer further
acquaints us, Ephesians. iv.18. (...) have our Understandings darkened, being a (...)
the Life of God, through the Ignorance (...) is in (...), because of the
Blindness of our Hearts. And (...) any Thing more plainly point out, the
Depravity, Pollution, and Defilement, of the human Nature, and the Power, and
Dominion which Sin has over it, than this Account which the sacred Scriptures
gives us of it, as having our Understandings darkened, our Wills perverted, our
Affections disordered, and even our Mind, and Conscience defiled. Tit. i.15.

Nor need we to fear to look upon this Depravity* and Pollution, of our Nature,
as a moral Evil, or to call it by the Name of SIN, for the Scripture plainly
calls it so; Rom vii.17. Sin that dwells in us; Romans vi.12. Sin, that
reignet^ in (...) mortal Bodies: And, Sin, that works Death in us. Romans
vii.13. The Apostle, having observed, that Sin, taking Occasion by the
Commandment, deceived him, and slew him, started an Objection; Was then that
which is good, (as the Commandment is) made Death unto me? To this he answered,
God forbid; but Sin, that it might appear Sin, working Death in me, by that
which is good, that Sin, by the Commandment, might appear exceeding sinful.
That is, it is not the Commandment, but our own Corruption, that works Death.
Sin shows itself to be Sin, by its Opposition to the Commandment, and this
operateth unto Death. It Is easy to observe, that Sin must be in us, before it
can operate; it cannot oppose the holy, just, and good Commandment before it
has a Being in us; and therefore it is in us radically, originally, it is
wrought into our Make, and Constitution, since the Fall, and is that which
operateth in us, to the breaking of the divine Commandment, and so works
Death. Besides, this Depravity of our Nature, and Power of Sin over us, is
evidently a Defection from the original Law of our Make, and that Rectitude,
and Purity, which the human Nature was at first formed in; for it came out of
the Hands of its almighty Creator very good; and therefore this Depravity
cannot but be be a moral Evil, as every, even the least, Departure, from what
ought to be, truly is.

But, perhaps, some Man will say, How came the humane Nature to be thus
universally depraved, and sunk under the Power of Sin? To which I answer, that
I am not ashamed to acknowledge, that I know no more of the particular Manner
of the communicating this Depravity, than I know how the Bones do grow in the
Womb of her that is with Child; or whence the Wind comes, and whither it
goes. Yet, I think, I may venture to affirm, in the general, that it is the
Fruit of the Sin of the first Man. The concurring Influence of the Almighty
Creator, and supreme Ruler, of the World, is necessary to every Creature's
regular Exercise of those various Powers it is furnished withal. Whenever,
therefore, this divine Influence is withheld from any Creature, the Powers of
that Creature will be (...), will be thrown into Darkness, Disorder and
Confusion, and the Actings thereof will become irregular. And what is there
more just, and reasonable, than that a Creature, who wilfully acted
irregularly, while under that divine Influence, should have it withheld from
him for the future? Which unavoidably renders his Nature depraved. And because
the human Nature, by its original Apostasy, forfeited the Concurrence of the
divine Influences to render its Actions regular, therefore our Depravity is an
evil Disposition in us, communicated to us, from a Nature so evilly disposed,
by Virtue of its Apostasy from God: Though, at the same Time, it is allowed
that repeated Acts of Sin strengthen the Habits thereof. It appears exceeding
strange, to me, that any, who are ready enough to acknowledge, that the Fall
has brought many Disorders, and Weaknesses, upon the human Body* should suppose
this to be all, and that the supreme Spirit, in us, is no Ways viciated, and
tainted, thereby, or, weakened, and disordered, in its Powers. For who can
reasonably imagine, that the Body, which is but the bare Instrument in sinning,
should be made to suffer in any of its Interests, and the Soul, or Spirit, the
chief Agent in sinning, be allowed to escape unpunished. It seems, to me,
that a pure Spirit upon its first Act of Sin, must unavoidably suffer in its
Nature, in the Confusion it is thrown into, and the disorderly Working of its
Powers; because the very first Act of Sin, it can be guilty of, necessarily
carries in it, the irregular Exercise of its Powers; and the Appetites must
have gained the Ascendency over the Intellect, before it could possibly fall
into any Sin: And what can be more just, than for that Spirit to be left under
the Government of its Appetites, which first, contrary to the Law of its
Nature, subjected itself to their Rule over it? Is it not thus with fallen
Angels? And why should it not be thus with fallen Man also? (Though, through
the infinite, and distinguishing Goodness of God, there is a glorious Method
proposed for the Recovery of Mankind from this Depravity, while there is none
for fallen Angels.) How was it possible for fallen Man to communicate his
Nature, to his Descendants, any otherwise than as it was, polluted, and
depraved? For, who can bring a clean Thing out of an unclean? Not one. Job
xiv.4. And therefore, (Job xv.14.) What is Man, that he should be clean? And he
which is born of a Woman, that he should be righteous? And it may be, the
various Disorders brought upon the Body, by the Lapse of the first Man, may
necessarily involve the Spirit, while in Union to the Body, in this Depravity,
and Subjection to Sin, by interrupting those clear Perceptions of the Mind,
which otherwise it would have had, and by infl^ming the Appetites, and
Passions. For whatever weakneth Reason, and strengthens the Appetites,
brings a moral Pollution upon the human Constitution, and necessarily leads
into Sin. Possibly, from this Consideration it is, that the holy Apostles of
our Lord, particularly Paul, so often styles the Sinfulness of our Nature,
Flesh; and terms the working thereof in us, fleshly Lusts, and stigmatizes
the Mind with the Brand of, a fleshly Mind; and calls upon us, to mortify our
Members which are upon the Earth; to crucify the Flesh, with its Affections,
and Lusts; and to make no Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof.

Now, from hence, we plainly see, that this Depravation of our Nature, is an
Evil, which every Sinner, that is, every Man, needs to be saved from; and
therefore our Salvation consists, partly, in the Recovery of our Nature, from
the Pollution, as well as from the Guilt of Sin. For, until the spiritual Part
in us, is recovered from the usurped Power of Flesh, and Sense, and the lower
Appetites, and Passions; and is restored to the Throne in us, and gives Law to
the Will, and Affections, and keeps the Body under, bringing it into
Subj^ction; that is, until the divine Image is renewed upon us, in Knowledge,
and Righteousness; the Man is not saved; but is a Servant unto Sin, a Drudge to
the World, and a Slave to the Devil: And if there were no other Evil attending
him, this were enough to render him an unhappy, and miserable Creature.

This Part of our Salvation is accomplished for us, by the Son of God, in our
Nature, undertaking to be the Head of all spiritual Influences to us, as Adam
is the Head of all corrupt Ones; first purchasing the Holy Spirit, and his
divine Revelations, for us, and then sending that Divine Spirit to accompany
the Preaching of his Word, upon our Hearts, to open our Eyes, and turn us from
Darkness, to Light* and from the Power of Satan, unto God; that thus
enlightening of our dark Minds, and renewing our stubborn Wills, all that is
amiss in us may be rectified, and we may be enabled to put off, as concerning
our former Conversation, the old Man, which is corrupt, according to deceitful
Lusts, and may put on the new Man, and so have the Image of our heavenly Father
renewed upon us. Therefore Christ is said, To give himself for us, that he
might redeem us from Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People,
zealous of good Works: Tit. ii.14. And we are said, Chap. iii.5. To be saved by
the Washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. That is, we are
saved, when there is that blessed Change produced in us, by Workmanship of the
divine Spirit, whereby our Tempers are altered for the better, our Lusts are
mortified, Sin is subdued, and Grace reigns in, and over us, by our supreme
Intellect's being restored to its proper Ascendency, and duly influencing of
our Wills, and regulating our Affections; and thus we become the Children of
God, having our Fruit unto Holiness, and the End everlasting Life.

This Work of Renovation in us, which is so great a Part of our Salvation, is,
indeed, but begun in the Soul, and carried on unto greater Perfection, while we
are in the present World, attended with the Remainders of Corruption in us, and
surrounded with manifold Temptations; and will be perfected in the upper World,
when Grace shall be completed in Glory.

I should now go on and consider the second Thing proposed, namely, The
Sinner's Salvation as including in it a Deliverance from all that Punishment
which is due to him for his Sin: But I will shut up, at present, with a brief
Reflection.

USE. See then, what a sad, and lamentable, Condition Sin has brought all
Mankind into; a most deplorable State indeed, a Condition from which they stand
in infinite Need of being saved; and yet from which they are utterly unable to
save themselves. To be guilty, and depraved, is the first born of Misery, and
the Inlet to every other Kind, and Degree, of Unhappiness. And if ever any poor
Creature can stand in Need of Salvation, most certainly those who are
chargeable with these do. Yet this is the lamentable Case of every individual
Person, that is born into this World, in the ordinary Descent from the first
Man: For both Jews, and Gentiles, are all under Sin, -- and the whole World is
become guilty before God. Romans iii.9, 19. This is the sad Fruit, and Effect, of
Adam's Transgression, that there never was, nor ever will be, any Man in the
World, the Man Jesus only excepted, but what is concluded under the Guilt of
Sin, and depraved thereby.

Jesus Christ, indeed, knew no Sin, he was holy, harmless, undefiled, and
separate from Sinners; Satan could find no Depravity in him, to fasten his
Temptations upon, neither was Guile found in his Mouth; there was no original
Guilt, by a Descent from Adam, cleaving to him, for he was neither included in
his Loins, nor in his Covenant: But as for all others that have descended from
Adam, by ordinary Generation, they come guilty, and polluted into this World,
and are sadly perishing in their Iniquity. Our first Father sinned, and we in
him, and so all Men are under Sin, and in a State of Misery, by Means of his
first Transgression.

As the human Nature, at first, came out of the Hands of its Maker, it was a
pure, and a happy Creature; it knew no Imperfection in its Frame, was
unacquainted with the Stings of G^ilt, the Fury of its Passions, and an utter
Stranger to every Degree of Misery; it had no inward Guilt to abase, and
torment it, nor any Disorder to confound, and prey upon it. But, alas! How
dreadfully has the Venom of Sin poisoned our very Souls! and the fell Monster
devoured us! The Fall has brought Ruin and Misery, upon one of the most noble
of the Creatures of God; it has stripped this high, and heaven-born Thing, of
its primitive Luster, and Vigor, has invaded its Powers, and rendered them
weak, and feeble, and laid it grovelling in the Dust, wallowing in the Mire,
unable to help itself, and unworthy that any else should; it has brought the
ignoble Stain, and Blemish, of Guilt, and Pollution, upon it, banished Peace
from its Breast, and filled it with Shame, and Remorse, with Regret, and
Horror, rendered it a Terror to itself, an Offense to Heaven, and the Insult of
Devils; that well may we lament, in the Strain of the weeping Prophet, Lam.
v.16. The Crown is fallen from our Head, w^ unto us that we have sinned.

SERMON III.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
I HAVE made some Entrance upon the Consideration of these Words, the last
Opportunity, and from them have noted this Doctrine; L.

DOC. It is of the highest Concernment to perishing Sinners, to be very
solicitous, what they shall do to be saved; or, to know, and practice, all that
is necessary, in Order to their Salvation.

In speaking to this Subject, I proposed, by Divine Assistance, to show,

I. What it is to be saved; or, what is that Salvation which perishing Sinners
stand in need of.

II. That perishing Sinners may be saved; or, there is a Possibility,
notwithstanding their present miserable Condition, that they may be eternally
saved.

III. That perishing Sinners must know, and practice, all that is necessary, in
Order to their Salvation; or, there is something to be done, by them, that they
may be saved.

IV. This is a Matter of the highest Concernment to them, and therefore they
ought to be most seriously solicitous about it.

I have offered something upon the first of these Heads, and said,

I. For the Sinner to be saved is, for him to be delivered from all that Evil
which he is subject to.

And,

II. For the Sinner to be saved is, for him to be brought to the full
Possession of all that positive Good, which he is destitute of, and wants.

Under the first of these, I considered Evil, as Moral, and Penal; and
accordingly, the Sinner is saved,

1. When he is delivered from all moral Evil* As, when he is delivered from
that Guilt, which he brought into the World with him, by Virtue of Adam's
Transgression, and from all he has contracted by his personal Transgressions;
and when he is freed from the Depravity of his Nature, and the Power of Sin
over him.

I proceed now to say,

2. For the Sinner to be saved is, for him to be delivered from all that
Punishment, which is due unto him for his Sin. Penal Evil comprehends in it
all those Sufferings, of every Sort, whether in Body, or in Mind, which the
humane Nature is subject to. For I know of no Sorts of Suffering that a moral
Agent could be subject to, under the original Constitution, which are to be
looked upon as purely natural Evils, and do not fall under the Consideration of
Punishments. Who ever supposed that the perfect Spirits which attend the Throne
of God, ever meet with any Sufferings? Nor could Man, in a State of perfect
Innocence, be liable to suffer. All Suffering, therefore, is primarily, in the
first Intention, and Design thereof, properly Penal, or a Punishment, and the
Fruit, and Desert of Sin* Moral Evil infers Penal Evil; Guilt produces
Punishment, as the Cause the Effect: We are therefore told, Romans vi.23. The
Wages of Sin is Death. Death is what flows from the Nature, and is the just
Desert, of Sin. Therefore when God speaks of punishing any, it is ever because
of Sin. Amos iii.2. I will punish you for your Iniquities: And Job observed,
Job xxxi.3. Is not Destruction to the Wicked, and a strange Punishment to the
Workers of Iniquity? Now, this seems to me to be the lamentable Case of every
Child of Adam, that as he deriveth Guilt, and Depravity, from his first
Parents, so he is justly liable to suffer Punishment, and the Sinner is, by
Nature, perishing under the Sentence of Condemnation, which is out against him.
This Punishment will ever actually succeed to Guilt, where the Crime is
sufficiently known, and the Judge fully able to punish; unless, upon some
weighty Considerations, the Sin be forgiven, and the Guilt taken away.

The Sanction of the Divine Law threatened Death, in Case of Disobedience, Genesis
ii.17. Thou shall surely die; and the infinitely wise God meant as he said, as
appears from the subsequent confirming of the Sentence, upon the fallen
Creature. So that all that is included in the Sentence of Death is the
Punishment due to the Sinner; and though, what this is, in the utmost Extent
thereof, may not be so clearly understood from the Terms of this short
Sentence, yet, it may be fully known, by considering the farther Revelation of
the Divine Mind concerning it, which is but an Explanation of the original
Terms: And accordingly, we find, that the primary Sentence of Death, included
in it, (as we shall see presently) not only the Harbingers, and completing, of
Death, upon the Body, but the Languishments, Uneasiness, and Pains of the Soul,
while in Union to the Body, and its perfect Misery hereafter. Here then we may
distinctly consider the Sinner's Salvation as consisting in a Deliverance, from
that Death which the Body is subject to, and from that Death, and Misery, which
shall take Place upon the Soul of the Sinner, and all as the Punishment of Sin.

1. The Sinner's Salvation consists in a Deliverance from the Death of the
Body, as the Punishment of Sin. Here observe,

1. The Death of the Body is, originally, the Punishment of Sin.

No Man, that I know of, disputes whether the real Death of Adam's Body be
included in the original Sentence denounced against him, as a Punishment upon
him, in Case of his Disobedience: But the Dispute is, whether Death be
threatened, and now takes Place, upon Adam's Posterity, as a Punishment upon
them.

I have, I confess, under the former Head of Guilt, very much anticipated
myself, and proved Death to be a Punishment to Adam's Posterity, as well as to
himself; nevertheless I will a little more distinctly consider it. How far
there might have been any natural Virtue in the Tree of Life, which Adam, if he
had not sinned, might freely have eaten of, to have preserved the human Body
from the Arrests of Death, I am not able to say; but this I think, I may
venture to affirm, that if Adam had not sinned, he had not died. That almighty
God, with whom it is easy, would have preserved the Body of Adam, (which,
whilst in its State of Innocence, doubtless, differed very wide, in the
Excellency of its Temperament, as well as external Beauty, from what it was
after Sin had taken Place) so that it should never have been subject to any
Death, seems, to me, very evident, because Death is threatened as a
Punishment: And I cannot see, if the Body of Adam had continued immortal, but
the Bodies of his Descendants must have been immortal also. But now we find
that we inhabit mortal Bodies; that we cannot continue here always; our Days
are but few, our Age but as an Hand Breadth; our Life is as a Vapor, which
appears for a little while, and then vanishes away; and we all know that God
will bring us to Death, to the House appointed for all the Living. But why are
we thus brought to Death? Why are our Bodies mortal? Truly, Sin is the Cause of
it. The Apostle therefore said, Romans viii.10. The Body is dead because of Sin.
The Body is dead, that is, is subject to Death, because of Sin, that is, as the
Punishment for Sin, which the Body is so much the Cause of, and to purify it
from the Defilement of Sin. Thus, it is confessed, Death was a Punishment to
Adam. But how can Death be a Punishment to Adam, and so great that the
Threatening of it was supposed to be enough to deter him from sinning, and yet
be no Punishment upon his Posterity? Does not the original Threatening import
thus much that Death should be a Punishment upon all that descend from Adam?
Dying thou shall die, may fairly be understood to include thus much in it, thy
Nature shall become mortal, and all the Branches that spring from thee shall be
subject to Mortality. Though the Posterity of Adam are not expressly mentioned,
so neither is the Woman mentioned, who, according to the Scripture-Account, was
included in Adam, as truly as his Children, when the Sentence of Death was
first denounced; and therefore if that Sentence had any Respect to her that was
to be taken from his Ribs, it had an equal Respect unto them that were to
proceed from his Loins; and that it truly respected, and included, all Mankind,
and that as a Punishment upon them, we have an inspired Expositor assuring us,
when he said, Heb. ix.27. It is appointed to Man once to die. It is evident the
Apostle had his Eye upon the original Statute, by which Death was appointed as
the Lot, and Portion, of Mankind; and where is this Statute to be found? But in
that Transaction with Adam, in the Day of his Make, wherein the sovereign Lord
threatened Death, in Case of Disobedience, and threatened it as a Punishment.
And the same inspired Writer has told us, 1 Cor. xv.56. The Sting of Death is
Sin, and the Strength of Sin is the Law. Where observe that the Apostle is
speaking of the Descendants from the first Man, and, says he, the Sting of
Death is Sin, it is Sin that wounds us unto Death, and makes Death bitter, and
terrible to us; but whence has Sin this Power? Is it merely by a natural
Causality, or a bare Consequence of Adam's Mortality, that Sin brings Death
upon us? No such Matter, the Strength, or Power, of Sin over us, is the Law. It
is the Law of God, that original Law, published to Adam, threatening Death as
the Punishment of Sin, that gives Sin its full Force, and Virtue, to bring
Death upon us. So that Death is a Punishment upon all Adam's Posterity.

And to make this plainer yet, let us again consider the Apostle's arguing in
the fifth Chapter to the Romans, Verse 12. As by one Man Sin entered into the
World, and Death by Sin, and so Death has passed upon all Men, for that all
have sinned. By Death here, as in the first Sentence of it, I understand all
Penal Evil, of every Kind, which the human Nature is subject to, or capable of;
and this Death takes Place as a Punishment upon all Men, by Virtue of the Sin
of one Man; by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin: Even so,
for in this Sense the Particle ( kai, and) is to be understood here, as it is
rendered at the 14th Verse of this Chapter, and in many other Places, even so
Death passed upon all Men; as Death passed, in the Sentence thereof, as a
Punishment upon the first Man, even so it has, in like Manner, passed upon all
Men, and that for this Reason, for that, or rather, in whom all have sinned.
Therefore the Apostle goes on to add, Ver. 18. Therefore by the Offense of one
Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation. Here it is plainly asserted, that
the Sentence of Condemnation takes Place upon all Men, for the Offense of one
Man. And though the Words, Judgment came, and so the Words, the free Gift came,
are not in the Original, in this Verse, yet are they no unrighteous
Interpretation, with an iniquitous Design to serve a Party-Cause, as some may
imagine, but are the most just, and proper, Supplement, that could be, fetched
from the general Design, and from the express Words, of the Apostle, in the
16th Verse. So that the plain and evident Intention of the Apostle here, is to
show us, that as the Sin, or Lapse, of the first Man, brought Sin upon all Men,
so did it Death also as the Punishment of Sin. In a Word, It is granted that
all Adam's Posterity are mortal; now, had the Grace of the Gospel never
appeared, would their Death have been a Punishment, or only, a Suffering to be
made up to them in another State?

But I would observe a little farther upon the original Sentence, that the Form
of it, which in the Hebrew is, Dying thou shall die, includes in it all the
Harbingers, Forerunners, and instrumental Causes of Death. The Sentence does
not seem to intend, that even the Body of Adam should, immediately upon his
Transgression, fall under the actual Power of Death, but that he should
immediately become subject unto Death, and after having passed a Life in this
World, for a certain Number of Years, attended with the Warnings, and
Beginnings of Death, in Sickness, and Pains, and various Accidents, and
Calamities, he should at length die. Though none of these are expressed in the
first Threatening, yet, they are afterward, in the pronouncing of the Sentence
upon the guilty Creature; which, by the Way shows us that much more is included
in the Threatening than is expressed. For thus we read, Genesis iii.17, 18, 19.
Cursed is the Ground, for thy Sake, in Sorrow shall thou eat of it, all the
Days of thy Life; Thorns, also, and Thistles, shall it bring forth to thee, and
thou shall eat the Herb of the Field; in the Sweat of thy Face shall thou eat
Bread; till thou return unto the Ground; for out of it wast thou taken; for
Dust thou art, and unto Dust shall thou return. It all plainly speaks his
Continuance in Life, for some certain Period, but in such a Condition as
evidenceth, that a Punishment sits heavy upon him. The Curse upon the
Ground, the Thorns, and Thistles, it should bring forth unto him, include the
many Calamities his Life should be subject to, in his Business, and Employment;
his eating of Bread in the Sweat of his Face, indicates the toilsome Labor,
and Pains, and Weaknesses, that should attend him; until, at Length, he should
return unto the Ground, from whence he was taken. And accordingly* we fin^, in
the sacred History, that Adam lived, after this terrible Sentence was passed
upon him Nine Hundred and Thirty Years, and then died. This has been the
general Condition of Mankind, ever since, to live a longer, or shorter Time,
here upon Earth, and more, or less, attended with the Harbingers, and
Forerunners, of Death, in the many painful, and languishing, Diseases, or
Accidents, they are subject to, till, anon, their Breath goes forth, and they
return to their Earth. And, doubtless, those many Pains, and Diseases, that
weaken, and torment, the humane Nature, are to be accounted a Part of the
Punishment of Sin, and included in the first Threatening, as well as Death
itself. And however a surly Temper may refuse to own, that there is any Evil in
them, yet the dolorous Sensations of Mankind, under the Exercise of them,
affords us a full Conviction that they are Evil; and we are sure that they are
not Moral, and therefore are Penal Evils.

2. Now our Salvation is comprehensive of a Deliverance from all of this
Unhappiness, and Misery, both the Beginnings, and the Consummation of the Death
of our Bodies. Nor can we be said to be saved from the Punishment which Sin has
brought u^^n us, if we are left wholly under the Power of th^^e. For while the
Creature groaneth to be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, and we our
selves groan within our selves, because of the sad Effects of the Curse, which
we painfully experience in every Stage, and Condition, of Life, how are we
saved? What a mighty Favor should we esteem it, if we might be totally freed
from all the Perplexities, Embarrassments, Difficulties, and Uneasinesses,
which we meet withal, in the various Businesses we are concerned in; and from
all the painful, and grievous Maladies, and Disorders, our Bodies are liable
unto, while we are in this World? But an absolute Freedom, from these miserable
Circumstances, would no ways be suitable to our present State of Probation; and
therefore, for the Exercise of our Virtue, and the Proof of our Submission to
the divine Government, they are allotted to us, as Part of our present Portion,
from which we can plead no total Exemption. However, thus far our Salvation
includes, at present, a Deliverance from them, that the Curse of them shall be
taken away, and they shall be made sanctified Mercies to us; so that they shall
never befall us, but if Need be, (1 Pet. i.6.) they shall be ordered for us in
Measure, and proportioned to our Strength, that we may be able to bear them, 1
Cor. x.13. and they shall all be made to work together for our Good, Romans
viii.28. Till, anon, we shall wholly get out of the Reach of them, and never
more meet with any Thing to vex, or grieve us. Thus the Grace of the Gospel
Dispensation comes in, and sanctifies all our Sufferings to us, and converteth,
those Things which were originally Penal Evils, into real Blessings to us, not
only by supporting of us under them, but by rewarding of us for them; which
Adam's Covenant, or the first Transactions of God with Man, would no Ways admit
of. Those, indeed, that are truly under a Dispensation of Grace, are in
themselves considered, chargeable with Sin enough to vind^cate the Justice, and
Goodness, of God, in all the Sufferings they undergo; so that they are not
Sufferings inflicted upon such as deserve no Punishment: But as for those that
remain utter Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, and are, as yet, under
Adam's Covenant, every Suffering they undergo is a proper Punishment upon them.

And though the original Sentence of Death is not so reversed, as that good Men
are excused from the Trouble of dying, for there is no Discharge in this War,
but if Christ be in you, the Body is dead because of Sin; Romans viii.10. yet our
Salvation carries in it such a Deliverance from the Power of Death, as that we
shall not be always held under its Bonds, but we shall have our dead Bodies
raised out of their Graves, to a more glorious Life, without being subject to
any more Death. Therefore our Savior has assured us, John v.29. They that
have done Good shall come forth, (namely out of their Graves) to the
Resurrection of Life. There will, indeed, be a Resurrection of the Wicked, as
well as of the Good, but to very different Ends, and Purposes; for the dead
Bodies of the Wicked will be raised, that they may rec^ive the Reward of the
evil Deeds done in the Body, even the just Punishment which they have deserved;
and therefore our Lord said, They that have done Evil shall come forth to the
Resurrection of Damnation: Whereas the dead Bodies of holy, and good Men shall
be raised, to receive the Reward of all their Services in a glorious, and
blessed Immortality. Thus, in our Salvation* Death shall be swallowed up in
Victory.

2. The Sinner's Salvation consists in a Deliverance from all that Death
which the Soul is subject to, as the Punishment of Sin.

Here,

1. There is a Death which the Soul, or Spirit of Man is subject to, as the
Punishment of Sin.

The Soul, or Spirit, which I have before showed there is in Man, is, not only
an essential, but, the more noble, and excellent Part of our Nature. It Is this,
in us, that thinks; that is the self-moving Principle, which determines all
our Motions, and Actions; that forms a Judgment of the Agreement, or
Disagreement, of our Actions with the Will* and Law, of our Maker, the perfect
Rule of our Conduct; and it is this that is entirely free, and voluntary, in
its Actings, and is subject to no Compulsions; and therefore it is this Soul
which rendereth us Subjects capable of Religion, and of Rewards, and
Punishments; and of Consequence, whenever Sin is chargeable upon us, we may be
sure the Charge lies at the Door of this Soul. The Body, and all the
Concernments of it, can only be made Use of as Means to entice us into Sin; yea
Satan himself, that subtle and foul Spirit, can go no farther than to become a
Tempter to that which is Evil, and accordingly he wears the Name of, the
Tempter, Matthew. iv.3. it is the Soul that must first hearken to, and comply
with, the Temptation, must determine in Favor of the Evil she is tempted to,
and put us into Motion for the doing of it, before any Sin can be committed by
us: And it is this Soul, in its primitive State of Purity, that must first
suffer itself to be biassed, and prejudiced, with a false View of Things,
before it could possibly give such a wrong Determination, as to fall into any
Sin. So that the Soul is every way the chief Agent in sinning. And to this
agrees the Scripture Account of the Rise of Sin; where we read of the Sinners
of the old World, Genesis vi.5. that every Imagination of the Thoughts of their
Heart were evil continually; and of the vile Person, Isa. xxxii.6. that his
Heart will work Iniquity; and that Hos. iv.8. they set their Heart on their
Iniquity; and our Savior observes, Matthew. xv.19. out of the Heart proceeds
evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, False Witness,
Blasphemies; and the Prophet Jeremiah advises, Ier. iv.14. to wash the Heart
from Wickedness: in all which Places, (and many more,) by the Heart, the Soul
is evidently meant, and that as the chief Agent in all Sin.

From hence therefore we may fairly conclude, th^^ the Soul, which is the chief
Agent in sinning, mu^^ suffer a Punishment, proportionable to it is Deserts, and
suitable to it is Nature. Though there is no express Notice taken of the Soul,
in the original Sentence denounced against Adam, in the Day of his Apostasy,
yet it must be remembered that the Sentence was pronounced upon the Man, or the
humane Nature, Thou shall surely die; and till it be made to appear that the
Soul, or Spirit, is no Part of the human Nature, that it is not the most
distinguishing Part of the Man, nor the most active, and deeply guilty, in
every Violation of the Divine Law, we may well conclude, that the Sentence,
which was passed upon the Sinner, was levelled against his Soul, as well as
against his Body. Nor can I see how either the Wisdom, or the Justice of God,
can be reconciled to the inflicting a heavy Punishment upon the Body of sinning
Man, and the Soul, the principal Actor, be suffered to go away free.

But to this Consideration, let us add, the fuller Discoveries of the Divine
Mind, relating to this first Sentence, in the subsequent Revelation it has
pleased God to favor the World withal, and this Matter will appear in a
clearer, and stronger Light. I am sure, there can be no Absurdity, or
Inconsistency with Reason, in our looking upon all the after Accounts, which
the great Lawgiver makes known to us, of his punishing of Sinners, but as so
many Explanations of what is truly included in the original Sentence;
(provided, there be nothing brought into the Account that is flatly
contradictory, or plainly unreconcilable, to that Sentence;) Because the
infinite understanding of God comprehends at one entire View all that he
meant as a Punishment of Sin, and admits of no future Discoveries of any new
Punishment, as Men do; though he makes new Discoveries or Revelations thereof
to us. By this fair stating of things we may evidently see, that Death was
originally intended as a Punishment upon the Soul, as well as upon the Body:
and I need only to take Notice of a very few, of the many Texts of sacred
Scripture, which speak this too plainly to be denied. Thus, in the Prophet
Ezekiel we have the great God saying, Ezekiel. xviii.4. All Souls are mine; as the
Soul of the Father, so also the Soul of the Son, is mine, the Soul that sins
it shall die. Now, let it be granted, that the Soul here is to be understood
personally, yet how unreasonable is it to suppose, that the Soul, which is the
grand Characteristick of the Person, and is expressly mentioned, should be
exempted from the Penalty spoken of, and be subject to no Death. Again, the
Apostle James observes, Iam. v.20. He, that shall convert a Sinner from the
Error of his Ways, shall save a Soul from Death. Let this, also be understood
personally, yet not only is the Soul a constituent Part of the human Person,
but it is the Soul that is the special Subject of Conversion, and it evidently
is that which is converted that is saved from Death. Once more, Our blessed
Savior advises us, Matthew. x.28. to fear him who is able to destroy both Soul,
and Body, in Hell. Here is a Punishment spoken of, as appropriate to the Soul,
and distinct from the Punishment to be inflicted upon the Body, in as plain
Terms as Words can make it. Let none think to evade the Strength of this by
saying, what God can do is one thing, and what He will do is another; for
unless this Passage plainly, and fully, intend, that God designed to punish the
Soul, as well as the Body, in Hell, there would be no Force in the Advice. So
that this Punishment upon the Soul, spoken of in the subsequent Discoveries of
the Divine Mind, to me, shows us what was intended by the original Sentence of
Death: for all the after Threatenings of God, upon guilty Sinners, are built
upon that, as all his after Promises are founded upon the first Promise of
Salvation, or Deliverance. But here it must be observed, that the Soul is not a
Subject capable of such a Death, as our Bodies are liable to; nor is there any
Necessity at all, from the Threatening of Death, that it should. It Is enough
that the Soul be subject to such a Death, as it is Nature renders it capable of,
even as the Body undergoeth such a Death, as it is Nature capacitateth it for:
this is all that can, in Reason, be supposed to be meant by Death. If, by
Death, be intended only a Separation of Soul and Body, or the dissolving their
close Union; such a Death the Soul may properly enough be said to suffer, as
well as the Body, whenever that Separation between them shall be made. But if,
by Death be intended the Loss of Life, and Action, and the Separation of the
several Parts, or Particles, of the Body, and it is turning into Dust, and
Rottenness, as the Consequent of the Soul's Separation from it; such a Death
the Soul is not capable of, because it is not constituted of corporeal Parts,
as the Body is, but is a spiritual Substance, whose Life is in itself, by the
original Grant of it is Maker, and is no ways dependent upon it is Union to the
Body. Therefore we are not to expect any such Death, as the Body is subject to,
to befall the Soul, as the Punishment of Sin upon it: for the Soul, or Spirit,
in Man, is, in this Sense, an immortal Being* and existeth for ever. Whether
the Inferences our Reason may draw from the Nature of Spirit, so far as it
falls under our Conception, are fully conclusive, in Proof of the Soul's
Immortality, or no, yet this we are sure of, that the sacred Pages every where
treats it as an immortal, never-dying Being; and therefore threatens the
wicked with an Eternal Punishment, and encourages the virtuous with the Promise
of Eternal Life.

That Death therefore which the Soul is capable of consists, in the unhappy,
and miserable Condition which it will be thrown into, as the just Punishment of
it is having trampled upon the Divine Authority; something of which the Sinner
often experiences while he is yet in the Body, in the inward Reproaches,
Horror, and Anguish, of his own Mind: and the completing of which Misery will
take Place upon the Soul of the Sinner, when it passes out of the Body, into
the unseen World, in the inexpressible, and endless Torments which will then
attend it: for this the whole Tenor of the Divine Writings, especially the
clearer Revelations of the New Testament, gives us to understand, will be the
Punishment of finally impenitent Sinners.

Thus what Fear, what Terror, what Anguish of Soul, seized upon Cain? the first
open Transgressor* of Adam's Descendents, when, in the Horror of his Spirit, he
cried out; Genesis iv.13, 14. My Punishment is greater than I can bear; behold,
thou have driven me out this Day from the Face of the Earth, and from thy Face
shall I be hid; and I shall be a Fugitive, and a Vagabond in the Earth; and it
shall come to pass, that every one that finds me, shall slay me. Yea, what
Anguish of Mind was Adam himself thrown into, immediately upon his Sin? when he
was afraid, and hid himself. Genesis iii.10. In which, by the Way, you may
observe, that his Soul, or Spirit, suffered Punishment. Was it not the Horror
of his Conscience, in that he had sinned, in betraying innocent Blood, that put
Judas upon hanging himself? Matthew. xxvii.5. Was it not the Anguish of his Mind,
that set Felix, the Roman Governor a trembling, before his Prisoner, when he
reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance and Judgment to come? Act. xxiv.25. Are
we not told? Isa. lvii.20, 21. The Wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it
cannot rest; there is no Peace, says my God, to the wicked. And do we not
read, Prove. xviii.14. of a wounded Spirit, which who can bear. What a dreadful
Account does the Scripture give us of the Punishment of Sinners in the future
World! We are told, Ps. ix.17. The Wicked shall be turned into Hell, they shall
go away into everlasting Punishment: Matthew. xxv.46. They shall be punished with
everlasting Destruction: 2 These. i.9. and that, in Hell, they are torm^nted in
Flames. Luke xvi.24. So even sinning Angels are reserved in everlasting Chains,
under Darkness, unto the Judgment of the great Day. Iud. ver. 6.

This future Punishment will fall heavy upon the Soul of the guilty Sinner, in
the other World; for however the Divine Patience may bear with Sinners now,
then will be the proper, determined, Season of Retribution; and God, our Judge,
is Omniscient, and perfectly well acquainted with all the Sinner's
Transgressions of his Holy Law, though their Sins may have been committed ever so
secretly, and hidden from the View of Men. Ier. xxix.23. I know, and am a
Witness, says the Lord. There is not a vain Thought in our Hearts, no more
than an idle Word under our Tongues, but thou, O Lord know them altogether.
Ps. cxxxix.2, 4. The Lord is also an Omnipotent God, who has all Power in his
own Hands, and can inflict the threatened Punishment, upon the greatest Sinner;
He has said, Deuteronomy. xxxii.39. See now, that I, even I, am He, and there is no
God with me, I kill, and I make alive, I wound, and I heal, neither is there
any that can deliver out of my Hand. The unbiased Justice of God also stands
armed with it is Terrors, to pursue the guilty Sinner, and bring all that
Vengeance upon him, which is the just Desert of his Crimes; for, Romans iii.4.
God is righteous, who takes Vengeance. So that there is no possible Way of the
Sinner's escaping, unless, upon proper Considerations, the infinite Mercy of
God interpose, to pardon, and save him. This Punishment, in whatsoever it may
particularly consist, is entirely destructive of the Comfort, and Well-being of
the Soul; though it does not strip her of her Existence, because of her immortal
Nature, yet it necessarily fills her with exquisite Uneasiness, Pain, and
Anguish.

2. Then, therefore, is the Soul saved, when it is fully delivered from all of
this Punishment, which is the just Desert of it is Crimes, and it neither
feels, nor fears, the Effects of it is own Guilt, which are not suffered to
take Place upon it. For the very Fears of Punishment are no small Part of the
Present Punishment of the Wicked, whose Distress, and Perplexity, will be in
Proportion to the Degree of their Fears; and therefore the Salvation of the
Sinner necessarily includes in it, not only a Deliverance from future Misery,
but from the least Degree of the Fears of any. It Is mentioned, therefore, as
one of the happy Effects of an Horn of Salvation being raised up for us, Luke
i.74. that we should serve him without Fear. The devout Soul experiences
something of this, while in this World, in the Joy of Faith, though not in
Perfection, nor always; but, in the future World, he will know no Wrath, nor
fear any. The great Article of our Salvation, accomplished for us by the
almighty Redeemer, is that, Romans v.9. we shall be saved from Wrath, through
Him; for He is Jesus that delivers us from the Wrath to come. 1 These. i.10.
By Him, we are saved from all the dismal Effects of the tremendous Wrath of a
provoked, and almighty God, and that, not only from the lighter Showers
thereof, in temporal Judgments, but, from the most dreadful, and amazing Flood
of Vengeance, rolling, in all it is Fury, upon the condemned Sinner, in the
Second Death. This is to be saved, when the Soul is not only secured, from the
Sting of the first Death, that it shall have nothing to fear, after it has
taken leave of the Body. but, from the least Degree of that insupportable
Punishment, which is called the second Death, and which more immediately
seiseth upon the Soul itself, and is everlasting, for ever falling upon it.
Blessed, and holy, is he that has Part in the first Resurrection, on such the
second Death has no Power. Rev. xx.6. And there is not a sinful Man, Woman, or
Child, among us, but what stands in Need of Deliverance from this Punishment.
This seems to be what the Iaylor was peculiarly, and in Earnest, concerned
about, when he cried out, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? viz. what he should
do to be delivered from the Guilt of his Sins, from the Wrath of God, and from
the Damnation of Hell. Consider what you have heard, and the Lord give you
understanding in all Things.

SERMON IV
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
IN the Morning, I showed that the Salvation of the Gospel consists in a
Deliverance from all that Punishment which Sinners are subject to, as included
in the Sentence of Death, both upon the Bodies, and Souls of Men. And so having
showed our Salvation contains a Deliverance from all Evil, Moral, and Penal,
I proceed now to the second Head, viz.

II. For the Sinner to be saved is, for him to be brought to the full
Possession of all that positive Good, which he is destitute of, and wants.
The Soul, considered as vicious and sinful, is utterly destitute of all that
Good which is commensurate to it is Nature, and Condition; so that it neither
has any within itself, but what is mixed, and adulterated, it is Power of
discerning is greatly obscured, and it is Power of acting, suitably to it is
rational Nature, is weakened, and interrupted, by the Impediments of diverse
Lusts, and Passions; nor has it any fair Title to any true Good out of itself.
It is it is Unhappiness, that, in the midst of all the Evils it is liable unto,
there is none to speak comfortably unto it; nor any sure Foundation, in the
whole Circle of created Nature, for it is Satisfaction, and Joy. If it looks
within itself, it sees that Sin has deprived it of that Innocence, and
Integrity, which was it is original Beauty, and Delight; if it surveyeth, far
and wide, around itself, it sees Nothing but a wretched Forfeiture of all that
Good, which it was primarily designed, and capacitated for. And though, through
the Weakness, and Stupefaction, which Sin has brought upon it, the Soul may,
for the Present, be very insensible of it is own destitute Condition, and be
ready to cry out, in a boasting Manner, with the Laodicean Church, Rev. iii.17.
I am rich, and increased with Goods, and have Need of Nothing; I can see
clearly, choose wisely, perform my Part fully, and rejoice in my own Strength,
and the mighty Advantages of it; yet, must it be said to her, as in the
following Words, Thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked; neither able to see clearly it is Interest, and the Way to it, nor having
any thing, within itself, to afford it Peace and Comfort, nor able to defend
itself from impending Dangers. In this State of Poverty, Nakedness, Want, and
Blindness, the Soul of the Sinner is miserably perishing; and therefore it is
an essential Part of his Salvation, to have it is present, and future Wants
supplied, with a full Title to, and seasonable Possession of, all that Good
which it is Nature, and Condition, do in any Manner require.

And thus;

1. The Soul is saved, by having it is present spiritual Wants supplied. That is
to say, to have all the Disorders of the Soul rectified, it is Diseases healed,
it is ghastly Wounds cured, it is Desires, and Aversions, regulated, and
satisfied; herein consists very much of our Salvation for the present,
because this is an accommodating the Nature, and Condition, of the Soul, with
what she needs. For, since the Fall, the Soul is naturally in a very
languishing Condition, an universal ill Habit has seized upon all the Powers
of it; as the Prophet Isa. i.5, 6. elegantly deciphereth it, The whole Head is
sick; etc. The Understanding, that is sickly, and out of Order, unable to
perform it is Office, and see clearly, by Reason of the Darkness which is upon
the Mind; the Will, the commanding, and active Power in us, is faint, weak, and
without Strength, because of the Bands that are upon it, from a perverse Bias;
the Affections are unsound, distorted, irregular, being wrongly placed, and
impetuous in their Actings; the Conscience is covered with Wounds, Bruises, and
putrefying Sores, filled with Pain, and Uneasiness, and often nummed and
stupefied: And what can be a more destitute, and deplorable Condition, than
this is, to a spiritual and intellectual Being? Which was, at first, formed
pure, and upright, which saw clearly, chose wisely, and affected regularly, and
delighted itself in all its Actions; which was made but little lower than the
Angels, as in the Strength, and Vigor, so also in the Rectitude, and Harmony,
of all its Powers. To fall from the greatest Fullness of Rectitude, and
Happiness, our Nature was capable of, into the Want of it all, is an amazing
Fall indeed!

Hence this necessarily goes into our Salvation, to have this spiritual, and
immortal Being, in us, recovered from all those sad, and dismal, Effects of our
Apostasy from God; to have a new Nature given to us, disposing of us to act up
to the original Dignity, and Design, of our Make, in a constant Care to do the
Things, that are fitting and right; that are pleasing, and acceptable to God,
and are virtuous, and commendable, among Men. This is called Ephesians. ii.1. a being
quickened, or, being made spiritually alive: And, 2 Pet. i.4. a partaking of
the divine Nature; and a new Creature. 2 Cor. v.17. Not that there is any
Physical Change passed upon the Soul, but there is a moral one wrought in it,
and upon all the Powers of it, by which something of the divine Nature, or
Likeness, is put upon it, in the Temper, and Disposition of it, whereby the
Soul is enabled to live a new Life, in the regulating of its Actings; and thus,
Old Things are done away, and behold, all Things are become new. For, by this
Means, the Understanding is enlightened to a true Discernment of spiritual, and
divine Things; the Will is renewed to a Capacity, and Strength, whereby it is
enabled to choose the Good, and refuse the Evil; the Affections are duly placed,
and exercised, are brought into Subjection, under the Government of right
Reason; and the Conscience is purged from dead Works, to serve the living, and
true God; and thus the whole Soul becomes the Workmanship of God, created, in
Christ Jesus, unto good Works. Ephesians. ii.10. This blessed Work is wrought in us,
by the converting Grace of God, which renews, and changes the Heart of the
Sinner, and makes it to be a gracious, and an holy Soul. 'Till this Work of
Grace be accomplished in the Soul, it remains in a State of Corruption, and
Depravity, of Subjection, and Slavery, under the tyrannizing Power and
Dominion, of Sin, and Satan; and therefore cannot possibly be saved, whilst the
Chains upon it are so heavy, and the Bondage so cruel. A new Nature is an
essential Part of our Salvation. We are not, we cannot be, saved, until we are
rescued from our Slavery, and are asserted into the Liberties of the Sons of
God. Hence it is that the Salvation of the Gospel carries in it, Acts xxvi.18. a
being turned from Darkness, to Light, and from the Power of Satan, unto God; a
Sanctification of the Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. ii.13; a coming to the Knowledge, and so
to the Practice, of the Truth. 1 Timothy ii.4. And hence it is, that the
Conversion of the Gentiles, is called their Salvation, Through their Fall (that
is, of the Jews) Salvation is come unto the Gentiles. Romans xi.11. The Rejection
of the Jews made Way for the Calling in, and Conversion, of the Gentile World,
and this their effectual Calling, and Conversion, is their Salvation. Thus
also, the Conversion of the Jews, in the latter Days, is styled their
Salvation; Ver. 26. And so all Israel shall be saved; and how their Salvation
shall be brought about, the Apostle informs us, by quoting a Prophecy of
Isaiah's, As it is written, there shall come out of Sion, the Deliverer, and
shall turn away Ungodliness from Jacob. That is, the Jews shall be converted to
the Faith, and Laws, of the great Messiah, whom, at present, they disown and
reject; and then they shall be saved.

Besides, the Sinner has the Peace of his own Mind broken, and his Conscience
most sadly wounded, by Sin, that he cannot take a Survey of himself, without
being inwardly displeased with himself, and his own Actions, and fearfully
apprehensive of the Anger of Almighty God, who, he is sensible, is justly
offended with him: And therefore our Salvation comprehends in it, the
Restoration of Peace to the Man's own Mind, from a well-grounded Hope of the
Mercy of God, through the Merits of Jesus Christ, and the pleasing Prospect of
the renewing Influences of the Spirit, and Grace of God, in the Soul; which
affords the Rejoicing of the Conscience, in its Testimony for us, that in
Simplicity, and godly Sincerity, not by fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of
God, we have our Conversation in the World. This is a blessed Peace with God,
and with a Man's Self. It Is called, Phil. iv.7. The Peace of God, which passes
all Understanding; and the Mind's being kept in perfect Peace. Isa. xxvi.3. It
is the blessed Legacy which our compassionate Lord has left to all his
Disciples, Ioh. xiv.27. And the Fruit of Righteousness, which is sown in Peace;
Jam. iii.18. And truly, great Peace have they that love the Law of God, and
nothing shall offend them. This inward Tranquillity, Peace, and Calm of Mind, is
founded in the Merits of Christ, resulteth from the great and precious Promises
of God, and arises, not from heated Imagination, and sudden Impulses, but,
from a Man's View of himself, in Compare with the Characters given, in the
sacred Oracles, of the renewed Soul, whereby the Holy Spirit witnesses with
his Spirit, that he is a Child of God, and an Heir of Salvation. Though every
true Christian is not, always, in the actual Enjoyment of this inward Peace,
and Joy, in Believing, but only while under the lively Exercise of his Graces,
yet he has a Right to it, and at Times, as it pleases God, tastes the Sweet
of it, and will finally have his Salvation completed, by entering into the Joy
of his Lord.

2. The Soul is saved, by having its future, and eternal, Wants supplied. For,
however the Body is but temporary in its Duration, and, we know, will, sooner,
or later, return to its original Dust, yet the Soul is of an immortal Nature,
and shall exist, when separated from the Body, and continue to exist throughout
an endless Eternity: Which gave Occasion to that solemn Caution of our Savior,
Luke xii.4. I say unto you, my Friends, be not afraid of them that kill the
Body, and after that, have no more that they can do; they cannot kill the Soul.
And the God, who formed the Spirit of Man within him, has given us sufficient
Assurance, that he will not so destroy the Soul, as to put an utter End to its
Existence, but will deal with it, as with a Creature of endless Continuance, by
bestowing everlasting Rewards, and Punishments, upon it: Which is a plain
Conviction to us, that the Soul must have an everlasting Duration, that it may
be a Subject capable of everlasting Rewards, or Punishments.

Hence, in that future, and eternal, State, which the Soul is passing into, it
will stand in Need of the endless Possession of a Good, that is every Way
suitable, and agreeable, in its Nature, and Duration, to such a spiritual,
intellectual, and immortal Being, to complete its Happiness, in the
satisfactory Enjoyment of it. For however its present Wants may be supplied,
with all that its Condition requires, yet, if in that future, and eternal,
State, it is passing into, the Soul, should be left naked, and destitute, of
what would be necessary for its Comfort, and that throughout an endless
Duration, it could not possibly avoid being truly, and forever, miserable.

And because God himself, is the only Fountain of all true Good, and Heaven,
wherever it is, is the peculiar Seat of perfect Happiness, therefore the Soul
cannot possibly be happy, in the future World, not have its Nature gratified,
nor its Desires answered, if it should not be admitted to dwell in the special
Presence, and partake of the Expressions of the peculiar Favor, of that
infinitely glorious, and happy, Being; but, instead thereof, must be forever
banished from the blissful Seat, and the delightful Tokens, of the Divine
Loving Kindness. And yet, this heavenly Glory, and Happiness, the Soul has no
Claim, or Title, to, in its present, natural, corrupt, State, as fallen, and
sinful: Because all Sin is such a Contrariety to the divine Nature, and Law, as
forfeiteth the Favor of God, and the heavenly Inheritance. Therefore it is
said of Sinners, 1 Cor. vi.10. They shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; and
we are assured, Heb. xii.14. Without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord. God,
and Heaven, are too pure and holy, for an impure, unholy Soul, while it
remains such, ever to arrive at the Possession of: The Disagreement between
their Natures, would forever keep the guilty, filthy, impure Thing, at the
greatest Distance from God, and Heaven.

Hence, therefore, as this is the chief Good, which the Soul wants, to return
to God as its Center, so is it the very Top, and Perfection, of the Salvation
of the Soul, finally to be brought into the more immediate Presence and full
Enjoyment of the supreme Good, in the special Tokens of the distinguishing
Favor, and Love, of the infinitely blessed God, in the heavenly World.
Therefore our Salvation is called, Matthew. vii.21. an entering into the Kingdom
of Heaven; and, a seeing God, Matthew. v.8. and a being where Christ is, Joh.
xiv.3. And you may observe, that the Apostle Peter mentions this as the
Consummation, and Perfection of our Salvation; 1 Pet. i.9. Receiving the End of
your Faith, the Salvation of your Souls. That is, when you receive, for so the
Participle is often to be understood; when you receive the End of your Faith;
their Faith was placed on God, and Christ, whom having not seen, (says he) ye
love, though now ye see him not, yet believing ye rejoice; -- now the End, or
finishing, or consummating, of their Faith, is the Enjoyment of the Object of
it; then their Faith is finished, attaineth its End, when it is turned into
Vision, and Fruition, in the Possession of what their Faith was fixed upon;
thus receiving the End of your Faith, you receive the Salvation of your Souls;
the Salvation of your Souls will be perfected in this. This Salvation, this End
of our Faith, we shall receive in Heaven, the special Seat of the blessed
Reward, of which the Apostle had spoken, in the Beginning of the Chapter,
saying, Ver. 3, 4, 5. God has begotten us to an Inheritance, incorruptible,
and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you; who are
kept, by the Power of God, through Faith, unto Salvation. There, in Heaven, our
Faith will have an End, and there will be no farther Use, and Occasion, for it;
because there, Vision, and Fruition will succeed in the Room of it.

Farther, we are to observe, that in Order to the future Wants of the Soul
being supplied, it must be every Way gratified, both from within itself, and
from every Thing it converseth with, and that in such a Manner as to leave no
Appetite unsatisfied, and so as to render it completely happy. For if there
should be any Thing wanting, within itself, either as to the perfect Harmony of
its Powers, or the Capacity to take in what it thirsts after; or, if there be
any Thing wanting, in what it converses with, to afford it true Delight, and
Satisfaction, it would remain, so far at least, in a State of Misery, because
in a State of Craving, and Want.

Therefore, this is necessarily included in the Salvation of the Soul, that it
be perfectly holy, without the least Remainder of Corruption, or Taint of Sin,
or so much as an unholy Thought entertained in the Heart. Hence we are told, 1 John iii.2. It does not yet appear what we shall be, but when he (Christ) shall
appear we shall be like him; being made conformable to the perfectly holy Lord
Jesus Christ. Our Powers shall also be enlarged to take in the Objects that are
presented to them, and our Knowledge of God, and Christ, and the stupendous
Wonders of Creation, Providence, and Redemption, be as perfect as our finite
Nature will admit of: Therefore the Apostle says, 1 Cor. xiii.12. Now we see,
through a Glass darkly, but then Face to Face; now we know in Part, but then we
shall know even as we also are known. Our converse will then be, not wi^h weak,
imperfect Creatures, of jarring Tempers, separate Views, and Designs, and full
of Jealousies, and Suspicions, but, with such pure Spirits, as are wholly
purged from all the Feculency, and Alloy, which here cleaves to us; that
perfectly harmonize in the same Temper, Views, and Designs, and therefore
afford unspeakable Pleasure and Delight, to each other. Heb. xii.22, 23. We
come to the innumerable Company of Angels, to the general Assembly of the
Church of the Firstborn, to the Spirits of just Men made perfect. Our
Employment will fill the Soul with the most delightful Entertainments, in the
most devout and raised Contemplations, and the ravishing and incessant Anthems
of Praise, and Hallelujahs, to our Almighty Maker, and Redeemer. Rev. iv.8.
They rest not, Day, and Night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty,
which was, and is, and is to come. And of Consequence, our Enjoyments will be
of all that Heart can wish for, by which every Appetite will be completely
filled, and every Desire abundantly gratified; and so the Soul will be rendered
truly happy.

But, I must add, that whilst the Soul is separated from the Body, it cannot,
we may suppos^, but have some longing Desire after a Union to that she so long
dwelt in, and had a Fondness for: And therefore her Salvation comprehends in
it, the gratifying of this Desire, by a Reunion of Soul, and Body; though not
of so gross a Body as was her Companion, and very much her Impediment, in this
World, for Flesh, and Blood, cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; but a Body
raised, and purified, refined, and spiritualized, and rendered immortal; a
proper Mansion for a pure Spirit, a fit Vehicle for her various sublime
Operations. Therefore the Apostle informs us, of the Resurrection of our
Bodies, and what Sort of Bodies they will be; 1 Cor. xv.42* etc. It is sown
(says he) in Corruption, it is raised in Incorruption; it is sown in
Dishonor, it is raised in Glory; it is sown in Weakness, it is raised in
Power; it is sown a natural Body, it is raised a spiritual Body: And he adds,
Ver. 53. This Corruptible must put on Incorruption; and this Mortal must put on
Immortality. And to complete the Fullness of our Salvation, both in Soul, and
Body, it is an eternal Salvation, Heb. v.9. And our Savior says of the
Resurrection Bodies, Luke xx.36. Neither can they die any more, for they are
equal unto the Angels of God. When thus the purified, and happy Spirit shall
receive the raised Body, refined, and spitualized, into an intimate Union with
itself, never more to be separated from it, then will (...) arrive at the
Consummation of its Salvation, and ^^tain the End of its Faith; what its Faith
aimed at, and what it will be forever perfected in.

This may suffice, to show what it is to be saved; I should now proceed to the
Second General Head proposed, that perishing Sinners may be thus saved; but I
shall conclude the present Discourse, with a Reflection or two on what has been
said.

USE 1. With what Indignation, and Abhorrence, of Soul, should we now take a
View of our original Apostasy, that Fountain of Evil, in us? It is a sad and
most Heart-affecting, and Soul humbling, Prospect, to behold, such an amazing
Ruin, as is brought upon what was, once, so beautiful, and glorious a Creature,
as Man, by so vile, and base a Thing as Sin is. The Thought hereof is enough,
one would think, to raise in our Minds, the utmost Abhorrence, and
unconquerable Aversion, to so great an Enemy to our Nature, and Happiness;
which has, not only rendered us guilty, and depraved, but has exposed us to the
most severe Punishment, in the Loss of all that is good, and delightful to us,
and the suffering of all that is painful, and tormenting. While Man continued
an innocent Creature, there was no foreign, nor domestic, Punishment, to
distress, and torment him; he felt none, and he feared none. But the first Sin
has driven the human Nature from its original Mansions of Light, and Joy, and
cast it down from Heaven, into the lowest Abyss, into outer Darkness. It has
deprived us of our God, the Perfection of Being, and of all Good; has thrust us
out of his blissful Presence, and Favor, and doomed us to an everlasting
Destruction, in Hell, there to suffer the Vengeance of eternal Fire; that
unless some kind, and almighty Arm, appear to help us, and rescue us from the
devouring Jaws of the burning Vault, and make up the Breach between God, and
us, we are undone, and perish for ever. We are too apt to have our Resentments
kindled against those, and to hold them for our Enemies, and treat them
accordingly, who, we see, at any Time, designedly, attempt to hurt us, in our
Bodies, or any of our bodily Interests; (though in Reality, nothing can hurt us
but what is detrimental to our Souls, in their Purity and Happiness) and should
we not then look upon Sin, with the utmost Abhorrence, and Detestation, as
truly our grand Enemy, the Bane of our Comfort, the Destroyer of our Purity,
Peace, and Happiness, which at first, and ever since, has designedly sought our
utter Destruction, in Soul and Body, forever? Should we not look upon our
original Guilt, and Pollution, as the Origin of all the Evils we suffer, of
Pains and Sicknesses, of Losses, and Bereavements, of Plagues, and Famines, and
Wars? It Is this that has sold us into Slavery to vile, and sordid Lusts; that
has bound our Hands, and rendered us unable, without special Divine Assistance,
to perform any acceptable Service to our God, or profitable to ourselves; it is
this that has forfeited Heaven, and all the Glories, of the upper World, which
are not to be regained for us, but at the Expense of the Blood of the incarnate
Son of God; and it is this that has exposed us to Fear, and Horror, and the
Damnation of Hell, which none but the blessed Jesus can save us from. And shall
we, then, maintain any Friendship with it, consult its Interest, and seek the
gratifying of it! Your Iniquities have separated between you, and your God,
Isa. lix.2. And your Sins have withholden good Things from you, Jer. v.25.
Should we not, then, abhor, and loath it, and our selves for it; and contract
an implacable Hatred, and Aversion to Sin, as that which we cannot possibly be
in Friendship with, upon lower Terms, than the Loss of all that is truly dear
to us, and the suffering of all that will make us completely, and forever
miserable? O how earnest should we be in coming to an immediate, and fixed
Resolution, with ourselves, never more to have any Thing to do with the
unfruitful Works of Darkness, of which we have so much Reason to be ashamed,
and the End whereof is Death. Had it not been for the Apostasy of the human
Nature, we should have shone bright, with the radiant Likeness of the Deity
upon us, and have been admitted to near, and intimate Communion with our Maker,
and Converse with Angels; the Earth would have been an universal Paradise to
us, and we had known nothing of the Pains, and Terrors of dying; but, Oh! how
is the Gold become dim, and the fine Gold changed! and what was ruddier than
the Rubies, and more polished than the Sapphire, is become blacker than a Coal,
and embraces the Dunghill. So has Sin turned a noble Creature into a Devil,
covered him with Blackness, and Deformity, rendered him a Shame to himself, and
the Contempt, and Sport, of every soul Spirit; converted a Paradise into a
Wilderness, made Death necessary, and unavoidable, and the Hell, that follows
close at the Heels thereof, his deserved, and dreadful Portion. And with what
Distress, and Anguish, of Soul, should we cry out, upon the View hereof, with
the A^ostle, Romans vii.24. O wretched Man that I am! Who shall deliver me from
the Body of this Death?

2. Hence, Brethren, ye see the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
undertaken to redeem, and save us, from all of this Evil, both Moral, and
Penal. The Apostle illustrates, and commends to us, the Love and Grace of God,
and Christ, in his appearing on our Behalf to save us from Sin, and Punishment,
in the fifth Chapter to the Romans; When we were without Strength (says he)
Christ died for the Ungodly; God commends his Love to us, in that, while we
were yet Sinners, Christ died for us; that we might be saved from Wrath through
him; that we might be reconciled to God, by the Death of his Son; that by him,
we might receive the Atonement; that by the Obedience of that one Man many
might be made righteous; and the free Gift of God might come upon all Men unto
Justification of Life; that Grace might reign, through Righteousness, unto
eternal Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. And is it possible we can think of
these Things, and not see that we owe all that we are, and have, and hope for,
unto the blessed Jesus!

View over thine own wretched Condition, by Nature, and Practice! See what thou
art, and what thou deservest! A guilty, defiled, unworthy, Hell-deserving
Creature! And how can thou hope to escape from all this Unhappiness and
Misery? Can the Wisdom of thine own Heart prudently contrive the Methods of thy
Redemption? Or, will the Strength of thine own Arm be sufficient, effectually
to rescue thee from the Powers of Darkness, the Arrest of divine Justice, and
the Punishment of the Damned? Or, have thou a full Price in thy Purse* Merit
enough of thine own, to buy off thy Guilt, and Punishment, and procure the
divine Favor to thee? Alas! thou art empty, and destitute, wretched, and
miserable, poor, and blind, and naked; and there is nothing within the Compass
of merely created Nature, that is able to help thee. Be it known unto you, that
by the Name of Jesus Christ only, can you be made whole; neither is there
Salvation in any other; for there is none other Name, under Heaven, given among
Men, whereby we must be saved. Acts iv.12.

Though thy Redemption, and Salvation, take their Rise from the Good Will of
the eternal Father, yet it is Christ alone that has merited all for thee. And,
Oh! at how dear a Price has he purchased our Redemption from Sin, and Hell! Not
with corruptible Things, as Silver, and Gold, but with the Price of his own
most precious Blood, which he has given as a Ransom for many. Thus Christ has
redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us. Gal. iii.13.

And as he alone has merited all for us, so does he, of his Fullness, confer
all upon us; his Word to teach and instruct us; his Spirit to convert, lead,
and guide us; his Grace to purify us, and make us meet for the Inheritance of
the Saints in Light; and his Heaven, and Glory, as our satisfying, and
everlasting Portion.

Oh, let the Thoughts hereof greatly endear the blessed Jesus to thy Soul, as
the most amiable Object, the chiefest among Ten Thousands, and altogether
lovely; may it knit thy whole Heart unto the dear Redeemer, in the most sincere
Faith, and fervent Love, and fixed Resolution to be his obedient Servant, and
Follower forever.

3. Let us, then, prosecute the mortifying of Sin in us, by the most sincere
Humiliation, and unfeigned Repentance. Unless Sin be mortified, it will prove
the Death, not only of the Body, but of the Soul also; yea, there is a
spiritual Death already preying upon the Soul, by Reason whereof, we are dead
in Trespasses, and Sin, Ephesians. ii.1. Our great Work is to get Sin mortified in
us, that we may be delivered from the Curse of it, and be ourselves restored to
Life and Happiness.

But, in Order to mortify Sin, it is not enough to lop off some of its Branches;
for so many Persons may do, and very much escape the Corruption that is in the
World, through Lust; and yet be under the reigning Power of Sin over them; but
we must strike at the Root, the Sin that dwells in us, and endeavor to get
this Root of Bitterness, which bears Gall, and Wormwood, subdued, and slain*
that receiving its Death Wound in the Soul, it may no longer have the Dominion
over us. To this End, as we must, by Faith, repair to the Blood of Christ, for
the Pardon of our Guilt, both original and actual, so must we unfeignedly
repent, and turn from all Sin, both of Heart and Life, that we may be renewed
unto a Life of Holiness, for the Time to come. The stronger is our Faith, and
the more sincere, and thorough, our Repentance is, by so much the more will
indwelling Corruption be mortified in us, and Grace will reign in us, unto
eternal Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans i.21. Let us, then, whenever
we find our selves tempted, and enticed to Sin, through the corrupt Workings of
our own Hearts, or the Allurements of the World, strongly resist the
Temptation, by considering the infinite Evil of all Sin, even the least, and
how alluring soever it may appear, under its false Pretentions of Friendship to
us, yet, such is the deadly Nature of it, that there is an absolute Necessity
of one of these two Things, either, that we must repent of it, or, we must
suffer for it; neither of which are to be chosen by a wise Man, if they can
possibly be avoided. Wherefore,

1. Remember, that if, at any Time, you gratify the corrupt Part which is in
you, by complying with any Temptation to Sin, you must certainly repent of it.
There is not the least Sin, that any Man can possibly commit, but he must, he
will, repent of it, one Time, or other; and if his Repentance be seasonable,
and hearty, it will be the best Thing that he can do. Not that his Repentance
can take away the Guilt of ^is Sin; for it is only the Merits of the Obedience,
and Sufferings, and Death, of Christ, who has appeared a Surety for us, and
borne the Curse, in our Stead, that can take away our Guilt, by disarming the
Law of its Power to condemn us; yet, Repentance is made absolutely necessary,
by the Appointment of God, and from the Nature of Things, to our being saved;
as I shall more particularly show hereafter. But if any Sinner does not
willingly and designedly repent, and turn from his Sins, now, whilst he has the
Opportunity of benefiting himself by it, he shall, finally, be forced to the
bitter Part of Repentance, whether, he will, or no, when it will be all too
late, and to no good Purpose, for him. And is Repentance so pleasant, and
delightful, as that any Man should choose to do that which will necessarily
bring him to it? Do but consider what is included in Repentance, and then say,
whether any wise Man would choose to allow himself in any Sin whatever. The
least that can be supposed in Repentance is, an hearty Sorrow that ever we have
sinned, and a deep Concern of Mind, to have the Guilt of our Sin done away. And
would any wise, and thinking Person, allow himself in that which he knows,
beforehand, he shall certainly be sorry for afterward? Will it not be very
burdensome to him, to have his Mind filled with Uneasiness? To have his own
Heart reproach him, and taunt him, for his Folly, in doing that which he knew
would be just Matter of Grief to him? And how great will be the Difficulty of
getting his Mind freed from this Burden, and of obtaining any clear Perception,
any comfortable Hope, that his Sin is forgiven him, and God is at Peace with
him: But and if the Sinner does not experience this Shame, and Sorrow, for his
past Sins, now, and that so prevalent in him, as to make him dread, and abhor,
and carefully watch, and strive against, and endeavor to avoid, every sinful
Thing, for the future, and so as to produce a real Reformation, and Amendment
in him, he will hereafter be more grievously sorry, and even be filled with
Rage, and Indignation against himself, another Day, when he shall come to lie
down in everlasting Sorrow, without a Possibility of his ever being saved from
it. And is it fitting, and reasonable, for any Man to buy Repentance at so dear
a Rate! Let therefore the Thought that you must, sooner, or l^ter, repent; be
strong, and forcible, to prevail upon you, now, immediately, and without Delay,
to break off from all your Iniquities, to yield no sinful Compliances with the
corrupt Desires of the Flesh, or of the Mind, but resist, strenuously, in the
Faith, all Temptations thereunto; though they should be gilded over with ever
so splendid an Appearance. Come, now, to the good Resolution, which E^ihu
proposed, Job xxxiv.31, 32. Surely, it is meet to be said unto God, -- I will
not offend any more; -- if I have done Iniquity, I will do no more.

2. Remember, seriously, and often, remember, that if you are found, at last,
in your Sins, you must suffer for it. If the Guilt of Sin remain chargeable
upon you, and you are under the Power of Corruption, when you come to stand
before your Judge, (as certainly this will be the Condition of all unconverted,
impenitent Sinners,) that Guilt, and Pollution, will as certainly bring a most
heavy Punishment upon you. For, it is but a righteous Thing with God, to punish
them that go on in Disobedience to him, and refuse to be reclaimed. Hence, they
that sin, are said, To do such Things as are worthy of Death, Romans i.32. That
is, they deserve Death for what they do, the natural Conscience of Man himself
being Judge. For thus every Man judges, and that rationally, when the Case is
brought Home to himself. There is no Man but what judges, that a disobedient
Child, or Servant, ought to be corrected. And what Man is there, who does not
judge, that, he, that should rob him of his Interest, or reproach his Name, or
make a vile Attempt upon his Life, and give him many a Wound, would deserve to
be punished? Are not these Things Crimes, deserving to be punished, when they
are committed against another, as well as when against ourselves? Yea, is not
the Crime so much the greater, when committed against the infinitely great, and
wise, and good, and holy, God, than when it is only against a poor, mean, Worm
of the Dust? Verily; all Sin is a robbing the great God of the Glory due unto
his Name, and an impudent, though vain, Attempt, to destroy his very Being.
Does it not then deserve to be punished, when such a Crime is levelled against
the Majesty of Heaven, and Earth, as when it is levelled against ourselves? Let
no Man deceive himself. Thy own Conscience tells thee, that thy Sin deserves
to be punished. And is not the Punishment severe enough to deter thee from
being guilty of the Crimes that deserve it? To lose the Favor of God, who is
the Fountain of all Good; to be banished from Heaven, and Happiness, and never
more know Light, and Joy; to be cast out into outer Darkness, and lie down in
Hell, in everlasting Burnings; to be associated with Devils, and damned
Spirits, in the infernal Prison; and to be in exquisite Pain, and Torment,
forever and ever! Is not this Punishment heavy enough! Or, can thou make
Light of it, as if it were easy to undergo all this? Make the Trial; hold thy
Hand in the Flame, for one Quarter of an Hour? Do thou shrink, and start
back, at the Thought of it! How then will thou bear to lie in the Fire of Hell,
Soul, and Body, throughout eternal Ages? Well then, knowing the Terrors of the
Lord, O be persuaded, with all Earnestness to mortify thy corrupt Part,
diligently to shun that Sin, and strenuously resist those Temptations thereto,
which, if complied with, and indulged, will most certainly bring upon thee all
this amazing Punishment, without a Possibility of thy escaping.

See, then, how much all Sin ought to be hated, subdued, and mortified, by
thee, since it spoils thee of thy Glory, and exposes thee to the greatest
Misery. Thou would not have needed to be saved, for thou would have been in
no Danger, if it had not been for Sin. And will thou, then, hug this thy grand
Enemy, and cherish it in thy Bosom, as though it were thy best Friend? Jer.
ii.19. Know therefore, and see, that it is an evil Thing, and bitter, that thou
have forsaken the Lord, thy God: And when ever thou art solicited, and enticed,
to gratify the corrupt Workings of thy own Heart, or comply with the
Temptations of others, to do any Thin^ that is offensive to thy God, call to
mind the deadly Consequents of all Sin, and say with Joseph, Genesis xxxix.9. How
shall I do this great Wickedness, and sin against God? Go, therefore, to God in
Christ, with thy earnest Importunity that he would graciously give unto thee
Repentance unto Life, and Salvation; and let thy Heart be ever under the Aw of
those Words of Wisdom, with which I now conclude; Prove. viii.36. He that
sins against me, wrongeth his own Soul; all they that hate me, love Death.

The Possibility of a Sinner's Salvation. SERMON V.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
THESE Words present us with the View of the very great Solicitude, and Concern
of Mind, the Iaylor was in, about the Salvation of his Soul, being very
inquisitive to know, and willing to do, all that was necessary, in Order to his
being eternally saved: And what was his great Concern, ought to be ours: From
whence I have noted this Doctrine, namely,

DOCT. It is of the highest Concernment to perishing Sinners, to be very
solicitous, what they shall do to be saved; or to know, and practice, all that
is necessary, in Order to their Salvation. I have proposed to speak to this
Text, and Doctrine, in the following Method, viz.

I. To show you what it is to be saved, or, what is that Salvation which
perishing Sinners stand in Need of.

II. That perishing Sinners may be saved; there is a Possibility,
notwithstanding their present miserable Condition, that they may be eternally
saved.

III. That perishing Sinners must know, and practice, all that is necessary, in
Order to their Salvation; there is something to be done, by them, that they may
be saved.

IV. This is a Matter of the highest Concernment to them, and therefore they
ought to be most seriously solicitous about it.

I have already spoken to the first of these Heads, and have showed you what it
is to be saved; what is intended, and meant, by the Phrase, in the Gospel-Sense
of it; what the Iaylor was apprehensive he needed; and what every Sinner will
unavoidably perish without: Namely, a Salvation of the whole Man, but which the
Soul is, in a more peculiar Manner, the Subject of, and which consists in a
Deliverance from all that Evil, both Moral and Penal, which every Sinner is
perishing under the Power of; and in the Possession of all that Good, which
Sinners are destitute of, and want. Which may serve to show us the sad, and
lamentable Condition Sin has brought all Mankind into; fill us with Love and
Admiration of the dear Redeemer; and should raise our Indignation, and
Abhorrence, against our Apostasy, the Fountain of Evil in us; and put us upon
unwearied Endeavors to mortify Sin in us, remembering, that we must repent of
Sin, or dreadfully suffer for it. I shall now proceed, by divine Assistance, to
the Consideration of the Second General Head proposed, viz.

II. That perishing Sinners may be saved; there is a Possibility
notwithstanding their present miserable Condition, that they may be eternally
saved. Though it be true, that every Sinner has forfeited Heaven, and
Happiness, and has deserved the Wrath, and Curse of God; which is most solemnly
denounced against all Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness, of Men, and will, most
certainly, and terribly, be executed, in the utmost Fullness thereof, upon every
guilty Sinner, another Day, if he repent not; yet is it also a most glorious
Truth, and Heart-reviving Consideration, that, after all the Provocations they
have given to the divine Majesty, and their Ill-deservings at his Hands, poor
Sinners, pining in their Sin, and Guilt, may possibly be saved from that Wrath,
which is justly due unto them, and be restored to the Happiness which they have
lost. Were there no Possibility of this, it would be altogether in vain for any
Sinner to entertain any Thought about being saved; for all his Care, and
Concern about it, would not, in the least, affect that, which has not so much
as a bare Possibility, that it ever should be; and all the Exhortations of the
Gospel, and Persuasions of the Ministers of it, to the poor Creature, to do any
Thing toward his own Salvation, would be so far from manifesting any real
Pity, and Compassion to him, or showing any Act of Kindness to him, or Desire
to help him, that they would be but a cruel sporting with his Misery, and
mocking at his Calamity; and our severe Taunts, and Sarcasms, would but add to
his Unhappiness, and make that which is his Torment, sit the heavier upon him;
because his Condition would be, like that of Devils, to lie down in endless
Despair.

It is the Hope of Success, that puts a Man upon taking any Pains, to obtain
the Good he wants, or to free himself from the Evil he is apprehensive of.
This makes the Husbandman toil, and sweat, because, he that ploweth, ploweth
in Hope of a Crop; this puts the Merchant upon venturing his Goods, and the
bold Sailor his Person, upon the boisterous Ocean, in Hope of Gain; and this
animates the hardy Soldier to the Battle, even the Hope of Victory. And it is
this Hope that gives a Spring to all our Labors to be saved. The Psalmist
said, Psalm. cxix.166. I have hoped for thy Salvation, and done thy Commandment.
The Hope of Salvation encourages to Obedience, and exciteth the Man to run,
that he may obtain. Without Hope, the Man would not stir one Step, nor move one
Finger, about it, but lie down in Despair, which forever cutteth the Sinews,
and disableth the Man for Labor. Unless the Sinner had some good Hope, or some
good Foundation to build his Hope upon, that, notwithstanding all the Guilt he
is chargeable with, there is a Possibility of his being pardoned, and that he
may escape all that Wrath, and Vengeance, that hangs over his Head, he will
never be solicitous to do any Thing toward his Salvation, nor be at all
seriously inquisitive, what he must do to be saved: But when he comes to a
thorough Apprehension, not only of the vast Ruin, that is impending over him,
but, that there is a Possibility, notwithstanding of his nefandous Wickedness,
and though he has brought this Misery upon himself, by his own Folly, in
rebelling against the Author of his Being, yet, that he may, after all, be
delivered from the threatening Danger, upon proper Methods, and due Pains taken
therefore: This adds Vigor to his Mind, and Strength to his Arm, it makes
him inquisitive, what is necessary to be done, and willing to put his Hand to
the Work; this makes him resolute, and courageous, diligent, and laborious,
and stirs him up to a Readiness to lay himself out, to master all the
Difficulties, and Impediments that lie in his Way, that he may, since it is
possible, escape so great an Evil, as that which threatens him, and obtain so
matchless a Good, as that which is set before him. When they of old, who were
exhorted to Repentance, cried, Jer. xviii.12. There is no Hope; either that
their past Iniquities should be forgiven, or, that they should escape the
Judgment threatened, it is no Wonder to hear them saying, in the following
Words, We will walk after our own Devices, and we will every one do the
Imagination of his evil Heart: They will be at no Pains to turn from their evil
Ways, and to make their Doings good. But if we hope for that we see not, then
do we, with Patience, (in the Use of our best Endeavors) wait for it. Romans
viii.25.

This, therefore, is the Encouragement, which I am, now, in the Name of my
great and gracious Master, to give unto every Sinner here before the Lord, (and
to all that read this) that though your Sins have brought you into a most
deplorable, and perishing Condition, yet there is a Possibility, that the
greatest Sinner of you all may be saved. Sirs, your Case is not altogether
hopeless, and without Remedy; no, bad as it is, there is a May be of Mercy, an
who can tell but the Lord will be gracious unto you: and if there were no more
than this, it is enough to preserve from Despair, and quicken you to Duty; but
I can assure thee, there is Balm in Gilead, there is a Physician there, so that
the Hurt of the Daughter of my People may be healed; if it be not their own
Fault. Here then, that I may discourse distinctly, let us consider, I. What
Sinners may be saved. And, II. The Ground of Hope, that there is a Possibility,
that perishing Sinners may be saved.


I. What Sinners are they that possibly may be saved? Or, to whom is it
possible that they may obtain the Salvation of their So^ls? And this is to be
affirmed of every Sinner, that is, as yet, but in a perishing Condition, and is
not ^^olly perished, and lost forever, beyond all Recovery. That is to say,
every Sinner that is, as yet, on this Side of eternal Misery, who yet enjoys
the Day, and Means, of Grace, and has Time, and Opportunity to work out his own
Salvation. The Apostle, referring to the Promise which God the Father made to
his Son, to hear, and help him, in building up his Church, in the World,
saying, Isa. xlix.8. I have heard thee, in a Time accepted, and in the Day of
Salvation have I succored thee; makes Application of this, unto every one,
unto whom the Gospel of Salvation is preached, and says, 2 Cor. vi.2. Behold,
now is the accepted Time; behold, now is the Day of Salvation. That is, now,
while we are in this World, under the Enjoyment of the Means of Grace, whilst
the Patience, and Forbearance of God, is exercised toward Sinners, and Christ,
and Grace, and Heaven, are offered to them; now, whilst it is a Time of
Probation, and Trial, with them, and while as yet the State of Retribution has
not overtaken them. Here,

1. It Is true, that there are some Sinners who cannot hope for Salvation.

There are some Sinners, who never enjoyed any Day, and Means, of Grace, and
Salvation; and there are others, whose Day of Grace is over with them; neither
of these can hope for Salvation, for it is not possible to them; but as for all
such, upon whom God is wa^^ing, that he may be gracious, their Salvation is
possible.

(1) There are some Sinners who never enjoyed any Day of Grace; with whom,
there never was any Time of Probation, and Trial, for eternal Happiness; for
whom, a Savior from Sin, and Wrath, never was provided; and who never had one
Offer of Salvation made to them: And with Respect unto such Sinners, there is
no Room to hope, that they will ever obtain Mercy from God, but Salvation is
utterly, and everlastingly, impossible to them. This is the sad Case of
Apostate Spirits, those, once glorious, Angels that kept not their first
Estate, but left their own Habitation. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O
Lucifer, Son of the Morning! It would be in vain for them to cry out, What must
we do to be saved. The infinitely gracious God has no Reserves of Mercy for
them; Christ took not on him the Nature of Angels; therefore is Salvation far
from them: They sinned without a Tempter, and therefore are punished without
any Mixture of Mercy, but are reserved in everlasting Chains, under Darkness,
unto the Judgment of the great Day, Jude ver. 6. So that there is no
Possibility of their Escape from that miserable State they are doomed unto.

(2) There are other Sinners whose Time of Probation is at an End, and the Day
of Grace, which they once enjoyed, is forever over with them; they are entered
upon the State of Retribution, and inherit the Reward of all their evil Deeds.
This is the unhappy Condition, of all such as have died in their Sins, and gone
into the other World in an impenitent, unconverted Frame, and carried all their
unpardoned Guilt with them. When they were in this World, the Door of Hope
stood open to them; God called upon them to repent, and turn from all their
Transgressions; Christ wooed them, with much Entreaty, to come to him, and
live; they enjoyed many precious Means, and Opportunities, and Seasons of
Grace; they were waited upon Year after Year, and Sabbath after Sabbath; but
now that they are gone down to the Congregation of the Dead, the Door is shut,
forever shut, upon them; and there is no Room for them now, since they did not
before, to cry, What shall we do to be saved. So the old World had their Day of
Patience, and Long-suffering, all the while that Noah, a Preacher of
Righteousness, warned them of the approaching Deluge, and then they might,
possibly, have improved their Advantages, the Price they had in their Hands, to
have secured the Favor of God, and to have escaped the Damnation of Hell, but
seeing they had no Heart therefore, they are, now, Spirits in Prison, 1 Pet.
i.19, shut up under the Curse, without a Possibility of their ever altering
their Condition for the better. Though while there is Life, there is Hope, yet
dead, and damned, Sinners cannot hope for the Mercy, and Truth, of God; for
there is no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom, in the Grave, Eccl.
ix.10. there remains no more an Opportunity, or Capacity, to do any Thing for
the Welfare of their Souls; their State is fixed, and unalterable, throughout
Eternity; so that, if they are not saved already, it is wholly impossible they
ever should be. This our Savior gives us to understand, by the Parable of the
rich Man, where Dives, having passed through his State of Probation, and
entered upon that of Reward, and finding it to be a State of Uneasiness, and
Torment, to him, entreats Abraham, to send Lazarus to dip the Tip of his
Finger in Water, and cool his Tongue; that is, to administer any, the least
Degree, of Comfort to him. In Answer to which, Abraham first, shows him the
Unreasonableness of his Request, for that, in his Lifetime, he enjoyed his
good Things, and did not make a wise Improvement of them, and, now, it was but
just, that, in that World he was lodged in, he should go without them: Son,
(said he,) remember, that thou, in thy Lifetime, receivest thy good Things:
And, then, he lets him know the utter Impossibility of his Request's being
granted, from the irreversible Determination of the supreme Lord of all, who
has so fixed the State of every Man, in the other World, as by an unpassable
Gulf, that none can alter their Condition, and go from the one to the other:
Besides all this, between us, and you, there is a great Gulf fixed, so that
they which would pass from hence, to you, cannot, neither can they pass to us,
that would come from thence. Luke xvi.25, 26. So that such as have gone out of
this World, in their Sins, with their unpardoned Guilt, and depraved Nature,
both rendering them unsit for the Society of the Blessed above, are not in a
perishing Condition, but have totally perished already; and therefore all Hope,
of their being saved, is cut off, and gone forever; there is no possible Way,
that we know of, by which they can be rescued from that State of Damnation,
which, by the righteous, and unchangeable, Judgment of God, has already seized
upon them.

2. But then, as for all such Sinners, as are on this Side the Grave, and the
eternal World; who are not yet gone down to the Blackness of Darkness forever;
who have the Grace of the Gospel preached, and the Offers of Salvation
mercifully tendered, to them; these, whatever be their Circumstances in this
World, either civilly, or morally considered, whether they be high, or low, or
whether they are greater or lesser Sinners, may, notwithstanding all, be
finally saved: There is a Possibility, though they are, at present, in such a
State as that it may truly be said of them* they are miserably perishing, yet,
that they may, after all, by the astonishing Grace of God, be truly converted,
and eternally saved.

I know but of one Exception, out of all the various Sorts of Sinners, that can
be thoug^t of; and that is, of such as are guilty of the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, of which our Lo^d said, M^^th. xii.32. It shall not be forgiven, neither
in (...) neither in the World to come. What ^his Sin a^^inst the Holy Ghost is,
I think, we may sufficientl^ understand, by considering of the ^ont^^t: For
there we find, that our Savi^ur having wrought diverse notable Miracles, as
particularly, the casting out of Devils, which could, by no Rules of Reason, be
supposed to be performed by the Assistance of Devils, because this would
suppose Satan to be divided against himself, but were wrought by the Agency of
the Divine Power, or, by the Power of the Holy Ghost; yet, the Pharisees, who
had evident Conviction of the Truth of the Miracle, and all imaginable Reason
to conclude it was performed by a divine Energy, from the very Nature, and End,
of the Miracle, that they might evade the Force, which the Acknowlegment of its
being wrought by the Holy Ghost, would bring them under, to own Jesus Christ to
be a Person truly sent from God, rather chose to act contrary to the Light, and
Convictions, of their own Minds, and prosecute their Enmity to Christ, by a
maliciou^, and wilful, imputing his Miracles to the Agency of the Devil. So
that this Sin seems, to me, to consist, in a Person's maliciously, and
contrary to the Convictions of his own Mind, imputing the miraculous Works of
the Holy Ghost, to the Operation of infernal Spirits. And this seems to be
one Reason why this Sin, above all others, remains unpardonable; because such
a fixed Malice, against Jesus Christ, as influenceth any Person designedly, to
reject the highest Evidence that can be given, of the Truth of his Mission from
God, and consequently, the Truth of the D^ctrine^ which he taught, leaves no
possible Way, for such an one, to receive Conviction of his being the Savior
of Sinners, and therefore no Room for the pardoning Mercy of God to reach and
save him.

Whether any, in our Days, may be guilty of this Sin, in the full Sense of it,
I am not able to say, because I don't know but that occular Evidence of the
Miracles of Christ, may be necessary to complete it. But this I may venture to
affirm, that none of those, who conscientiously sit under the Preaching of the
Gospel, have ever yet been guilty of this Sin, whatever their melancholy
Thoughts of themselves, may, at Times, suggest to them; because it is ever
accompanied with Malice, and Rage, against the Gospel, and its Ministry.
Setting aside therefore such Sinners against the Holy Ghost, (none of which, I
may venture to say, are here,) and it must be affirmed, that, as to every other
Sinner, who is yet alive in this World, how many soever his Transgressions may
have been, and however highly aggravated, and long continued in, there is a
Possibility of his being saved. Therefore you may observe, that Christ said, in
the Verse before his Account of the Sin against the Holy Ghost; Ver. 31.
Wherefore, I say unto you, ^ll Manner of Sin, and Blasphemy, shall be forgiven
unto Men. Though the Dead cannot hope for the Mercy of God, yet the living
Sinner has this to encourage him, to Pains, and Diligence, in working out his
own Salvation, that the Thing is possible; as he, who was in great Danger of
drowning, cried out, Help, I am yet alive; so may every Sinner say, I am yet
alive, it is yet a Day of Grace with me, Oh! What must I do to be saved! As he
yet enjoys the Means of Grace, he may possibly, be prevailed upon, though he
has so long turned a deaf Ear to the Calls of the Gospel, to embrace the
Tenders of Mercy, and Pardon, and Life, which are as yet made to him, and be
succeeded in his Endeavors to work the Work of God, and so happily partake of
Salvation in the End. And this, I take it, is the comfortable Condition of
every Sinner here, (or that shall read this,) even of the greatest.

II. I am now to set before you, the Ground of Hope, that there is a
Possibility, that perishing Sinners may be saved. This will sufficiently
appear, by considering these four Things, viz. 1. The Mercy of God: 2. The
Death of Christ: 3. The Offers of Salvation: And, 4. The Instances, on sacred
Record, of Sinners, and very great ones, being finally saved.

1. It is evident, from the Sovereignty, and Riches, of the Grace, and Mercy of
God, that it is possible perishing Sinners may be saved. By this, I do not
mean, what may be argued, merely from such Considerations as our natural
Reason, destitute of Revelation, under the best Improvement of it, could
entertain of the gracious, and merciful, Nature of God; for, I know of no
Reason we have, to conclude the Possibility of the Salvation of sinful Man, any
more than of sinning Angels, purely from any natural Conceptions we can have of
the Nature of God: And therefore, by the Grace, and Mercy, of God, I
understand, those favorable Regards, which, according to the Counsel of his
own Will, God has determined to show to the unworthy, miserable, Children of
Men, as he has made the Revelation of such his Designs of Favor to us, in his
Holy Gospel. Here observe,

1. The boundless Goodness of the divine Nature is the Origin, and Fountain,
from whence all Acts of Favor, to any of the Creatures, are derived, and
therefore from whence peculiarly flows all gracious, and merciful, Designs, to
guilty, miserable Creatures. If God were not infinitely good, there could be no
Possibility of any Sinner's receiving any, the least, Favor from him. But
though God be infinitely good, yet that any guilty Creature shall escape the
Punishment, which his Sin has justly deserved, and be received into a State of
Peace, and Friendship, with his offended Sovereign, does not necessarily result
from the Goodness of the divine Nature, because, possibly, the Demands of
Justice, and the Rights of the divine Authority, and Holiness, may lay in the
Way of consummate Goodness exercising it self, in such a Manner, until some
Expedient is fixed upon, for Justice, and Mercy, Righteousness, and Peace, to
meet, and harmonize, in the great Design. So that the Pardon, and Salvation, of
a Sinner does not flow from any Necessity of Nature, in God, and therefore
cannot be argued, by any Principles of Reason, from the divine Goodness; but
they are free Acts of the divine Will, and (as all Acts of Grace are) must be
resolved into Good Pleasure, and not Necessity of Nature. Accordingly, the
Apostle speaking of the original Purpose of God to save Sinners, resolves it
into this, it is according to the good Pleasure of his Will, Ephesians. i.5. Hence it
follows, that we must first know what the Will of God is, relating to the
Salvation of a Sinner, before we can conclude it possible, or not; and because
no Disquisition our rational Powers can make, into the divine Nature, will ever
discover to us what turns purely upon the divine Will, therefore there is a
Necessity of our having a Revelation from God, which shall show us what his
Will is, in this Case, before we can peremptorily conclude any Thing about it.
And therefore, by the Grace, and Mercy, of God, I understand, what God has
revealed to us, in his Gospel, or Word, of his Designs of Grace, and Mercy, to
poor Sinners; for this, and this only, is the solid Foundation of our Hope of
Salvation, fetched from the Goodness of the divine Nature.

2. Such is the open, and full, Declaration, in the Gospel, of the gracious,
and merciful, Designs of God to Sinners, as does abundantly evidence the
Possibility of a poor perishing Sinner's being saved. For, therein we have, not
only a clearer Discovery, beyond what our natural Reason could make, that the
Lord, our God, is a God gracious, and m^^ciful, long-suffering, and abundant in
Goodness; but also a full Account of what our God, according to his gracious
Nature, and mere good Pleasure, has determined to do, even to forgive Iniquity,
Transgression, and Sin, Exodus xxxiv.6, 7. With thee, says the Psalmist, there
is Forgiveness, that thou may be feared, Psalm. cxxx.4. Says the Apostle, 1 John i.9. If we confess our Sins, he is faithful, and just, to forgive us our
Sins. And another Apostle assures us, 1 Timothy i.15. This is a faithful Saying,
and worthy of all Acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World, to save
Sinners. God himself says, Jer. xxxi.34. I will forgive their Iniquity, and I
will remember their Sin no more. And our blessed Lord commanded, Luke xxiv.47.
That Remission of Sins should be preached, in his Name, among all Nations. So
that from these, and innumerable other, Texts of Scripture, which reveal to us
God's gracious Designs, we may very fairly conclude, that it is possible for
the very chief of Sinners to be saved: And there are two Considerations,
respecting the Grace, and Mercy of God, made known unto us, in his holy Word,
which plainly show us, that every Sinner, even the greatest, may entertain the
Hope of the Possibility of his finally finding Acceptance with God, if he will
but diligently improve the Means he is directed to; namely, the Sovereignty,
and Freedom, the Riches, and Fullness, of the Mercy, and Grace of our God.

First, The Mercy, and Grace of God is infinitely sovereign, and free. By the
Sovereignty, and Freedom, of the Grace, and Mercy of God, I intend, that God
acts his own Pleasure, without being controuled by any, or accountable to
any, for what he does therein; that there is nothing, out of the divine Nature,
sufficient to procure Acts of Grace, or limit them; nothing, but what is in
himself, that effectually moves God to show Mercy to any, or say how far his
Mercy shall extend.

Grace, and Mercy, may be needed by a poor Creature, and so he may be the
proper Object of them, if there be nothing in the Way to hinder their reaching
to him; but yet if ever God show Favor to a guilty Sinner, it must be because
it so pleases him; not because he is necessitated, or obliged to it, but
because it is the free Act of his sovereign Will, and Pleasure. And, indeed,
this is included in the very Notion we have of Grace, or Favor, that it is
absolutely free; to which Purpose, the Apostle elegantly, and most conclusively
argues, Romans xi.6. If by Grace, then it is no more of Works; otherwise Grace
is no more Grace; but if it be of Works, then it is no more Grace; otherwise
Work is no more Work. So that, how much soever the Condition of the Sinner may
render him needy, yet, it is not from any Thing of Worthiness, or Desert, in
the greatest, and best of Men, that they partake of the Grace, and Mercy of
God, in their Pardon, and Salvation; but from the good Pleasure of God alone.
Hence God says, Romans ix.15. I will have Mercy, on whom I will have Mercy; and I
will have Compassion, on whom I will have Compassion. And the Apostle Paul
gives us this Account of the Sinner's Salvation, 2 Timothy i.9. Who has saved
us, and called us with an holy Calling, not according to our Works, but
according to his own Purpose, and Grace, which was given us, in Christ Jesus,
before the World begun.

From hence I argue, That since the Grace of God is sovereign, and free,
therefore there is Room for every Sinner, even the greatest, and most unworthy,
to hope that he, as well as any other, may possibly partake of the Benefits of
it, and be saved; because that which is freely dispensed, is equally free for
every Person to receive, that will come, in the appointed Way, for the
Reception of it. If we were to found our Hopes of Salvation upon any Excellency
in our selves, or any Thing we have done, or can do, to deserve it, I doubt, no
Sinner, upon a serious View of himself, and Reflection upon his past Life,
would be able to form to himself any comfortable Hope, so much as of the
Possibility of his Salvation; because he may plainly see so much in his Heart,
and Life, as renders him altogether unworthy of so great a Favor. But since
the Grace of God is sovereign, and free, this gives proper Encouragement unto
every individual Sinner to hope, that, if he will be at the Pains to labor
after it, he may be a happy Sharer in the so great a Salvation.

Secondly; The Grace of God is infinitely rich, and full. By which I mean, that
there is nothing in the Sinner, no Degree of Sinfulness, and aggravated
Provocation, (except only the Sin against the Holy Ghost, as I at first
observed) that can set Bounds to the Mercy, and Grace of God; nothing out of
God himself can limit the Flow of his Grace. The Reason of the Exception is
not, because they that commit the Sin against the Holy Ghost properly limit the
Mercy of God, which is infinite, but because such never will come into the Way
of receiving it; so that the Grace of God is every Way sufficient to save any
Sinner whatever, with whom it is yet a Day of Probation, and Trial. Therefore
we read, Ephesians. i.7. of the Riches of his Grace; and, Psalm. li.1. of the
Multitude of his tender Mercies; and that he will abundantly pardon, Isa. lv.7.
All of which speaks the infinite Fullness of the Grace of God, so that no
Unworthiness, no Ill-deservings, in the Sinner, shall hinder his partaking of
it, if it be not his own Fault, by his obstinate rejecting the Offers that are
made to him. There is Grace, and Mercy, enough in God, to save the greatest of
Sinners, as effectually as the least, because there is such a Fullness, and
Sufficiency, of it, as is equal to the greatest Extent of Sins, and the highest
Demerit of the Sinner. Hence we may observe, though the Ephesians were very
great Sinners, gross Idolaters, vile Magicians, and lived in all abominable
Immoralities, yet they became Heirs of the saving Grace of God, and the Apostle
gives this as the Reason of it, Ephesians. ii.4, 5, 7. God, who is rich in Mercy,
for his great Love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in Sins, has
quickened us, together with Christ; by Grace ye are saved; -- that in the Ages
to come, he might show the exceeding Riches of his Grace, in his Kindness
toward us, through Jesus Christ. And the same Apostle gives us this Account
of the hideously black Sinners, among the Corinthians, 1 Cor. vi.9 -- 11. But
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

There is so much of Malignity in the Nature of every Sin, and so high an
Injury, and Offense, offered to the infinitely great, and holy God, even by any
one Sin, and that the least that can be thought of, that nothing, short of the
infinite, rich Grace of God, can save the Sinner from the Guilt, and Punishment
of it; and the same infinite Grace is every Way full, and sufficient; for the
Salvation of one Sinner, as well as of another, because it is infinite: So that
there is no Sinner has so multiplied his Transgressions, but that the
super-abundant Mercy of God can multiply to pardon, and save him. Therefore the
Apostle observes, Romans v.20. Where Sin abounded, Grace did much more abound.

From what I have briefly remarked, it is very evident, that every Sinner has
sufficient Encouragement, from the gracious Nature of God, discovered to him,
in the divine Oracles, to hope that he may be saved, and to use his best
Endeavor therefore, because he may, from the Freeness and Riches, of divine
Grace, plainly see, that there is a Possibility that, after all his Wickedness,
he may obtain Salvation.

2. It is farther evident, that it is possible that perishing Sinners may be
saved, if we consider the great End of the Incarnation, and Death, of Jesus
Christ. It is, indeed, a mavelous Instance of the Grace and Mercy of God, and
his astonishing Compassion, to poor miserable Sinners, that he should entertain
the Thought of sending his own Son into the World, to appear on our Behalf, and
much more that he should actually deliver him up, to become subject to the Law,
and die a shameful, and painful, and cursed Death for us. And what was the
great End of all this Grace, and Mercy, to poor Sinners? Why did Jesus Christ
assume our Nature, appear in our Flesh, and tabernacle among Men upon Earth?
Why did he subject himself to a Life of Sorrows, Harships, and Difficulties,
and, at length, give up his Life, and that by his own voluntary Act, when he
neither deserved to have it taken from him, nor was it in the Power of all
Creatures to deprive him of it, against his Will? Why, I say, did Jesus Christ
willingly submit to all of this? Was it only to teach us Mortification to the
World, and Resignation to the Will of God? Any ordinary Person might have been
made Use of, by the infinitely wise God, as a fit Instrument to this End; and
there would have been no Occasion for so extraordinary a Person as the Son of
God, to have appeared, and died, for this Purpose only. Surely Christ came into
the World, and suffered, and died, for no less End, and Purpose, than to be a
complete Savior, for sinful Man, in whose Nature he appeared, and suffered.
Thus, as the Apostle expresses it, (...). iv.4, 5. In the Fullness of Time, God
sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that
were under the Law. Here,

1. Observe, That the End of Christ's appearing, and Death, was to be a
spiritual Savior. His great Design in all that he did, and suffered, was not
to be a temporal Savior, as the Jews, through the Darkness that was upon their
Minds, expected him to be; but it was to be a spiritual, and eternal Savior,
to save from Sin, and Wrath, to free us from the Power of Sin over us, and to
deliver poor Sinners from the Punishment of Sin, that Jesus Christ descended
from Heaven, was clothed with our Flesh, and subjected himself to the Death of
the Cross. He wears the Character of a Savior throughout the Book of God, and
many ancient Prophesies of him speak his being a spiritual one; but the
New Testament, which is a clearer Revelation of Jesus Christ most fully sets
him forth to us in this Light. This is given as the Reason for his Name, Matthew.
i.21. Thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his People from their
Sins. The Word was made Flesh, and died, for this very End, to take away our
Guilt, and procure a Pardon for us, to deliver us from Wrath, and purchase
eternal Life for us; that is to say, that we might be eternally saved. For this
End, God sent not his Son into the World, to condemn the World, but that the
World, through him, might be saved, Joh. iii.17. When God sent his Son into a
World, that had rebelled against him, and greatly exposed themselves to his
righteous Displeasure, had Mankind been generally apprehensive of the Coming of
such a Person, they would have had sufficient Reason to have feared, if not
informed otherwise, that it was to make Reprisals upon them, to vindicate his
Father's Honor, and punish them very severely for the Indignity, and Contempt
they had cast upon his Father; but this was not the End of that Mission of the
Son of God; no; but, instead thereof, the grand Intention of the Son of God's
being sent into the World was, to save the World. To save the World from what?
from Pestilence, Famine, and Sword? No; we see the World plagued, and punished,
with these to this Day: But it was to save the World from the Power, and Guilt,
of Sin, and to bring Men to God, and to eternal Life. God so loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him, should not
perish, but have everlasting Life, Joh. iii.16. Jesus Christ came into the
World, to prevent Sinners perishing, to rescue them from their Misery, and to
procure Life, and Happiness for them. This was an End befitting an infinitely
wise God to project, and worthy the Son of God to accomplish. Therefore, when
Christ was in the World, he said, Joh. x.11, 28. I am the good Shepherd; the
good Shepherd gives his Life for the Sheep. -- And I give unto them eternal
Life, and they shall never perish; neither shall any Man pluck them out of my
Hand. Let this suffice at present.

SERMON VI.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
I AM upon arguing the Possibility of the Sinner's Salvation, from the great
End of the Incarnation and Death of Jesus Christ; and have observed, that the
great End of Christ's appearing, and Death, was to be a spiritual Savior. I
now go on to say,

2. The Death of Christ was a proper Sacrifice. It was an expiatory Sacrifice,
offered to his ete^nal Father, in our Room, and Stead, to make Atonement for
our Sins, to take away our Guilt, and reconcile us unto God, by the Blood of
the Cross. The whole Law, and Intention, of Sacrifices, was attended, and fully
answered, in his Death. He, who was perfectly innocent, was slain, and that not
for himself, but on the Behalf of those that were guilty; and was offered up
unto God, and the Virtue of his Death is pleadable, with God for the Remission
of Sins, and the divine Acceptance. Isa. liii.5, 6. He was wounded for our
Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities; -- and the Lord has laid on
him the Iniquity of us all. 1 Pet. iii.18. Christ has once suffered for Sins;
the Just for the Unjust; that he might bring us to God. Romans iv.25. He was
delivered for our Offenses, and was raised again for our Justification. Ephesians.
v.2. Christ has given himself for us, an Offering, and a Sacrifice to God.
Heb. ix.12. By his own Blood, he entered in once into the holy Place, having
obtained eternal Redemption for us. From all which it is plainly evident, that
Christ died, not merely as an Example of Patience, and Resignation, to the Will
of God, but, as our Substitute, who therein suffered the Penalty due unto us
for our Sins, and so his Death was a proper Sacrifice of Atonement. He took
Part in the same Flesh, and Blood, with us, that he might come into a Capacity
of dying, and that so that Nature, which had offended God, might suffer; and he
tasted Death for every Man, Heb. ii.9. But forasmuch as it was not possible for
him to be holden of Death, because of his own perfect Innocence, and the divine
Power he was invested withal, therefore he is risen for our Justification: By
his Resurrection from the Dead, giving us utmost Assurance, that he has
completely answered all the Demands of the Law, and Justice, of God; and that
therefore we, through him, may now be justified before the Tribunal of God,
without any, the least, Impeachment of his Justice, and Holiness; and that now
He (Christ) is able to save unto the uttermost, all that come unto God by him;
seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them. Heb. vii.25.

3. From hence we may argue, that it is very evident, there is a Possibility
that every Sinner, who has the Gospel preached to him, may be saved; and that
if we consider, both, for whom Christ died; and the efficacious Extent of the
Virtue of his Death.

1. Let us consider a little for whom they were that Jesus Christ died. Surely,
he was not at the Pains of dying for those, who had no Sin chargeable upon
them, and who therefore were in no Danger, whose State, and Condition, was
already safe, and their Happiness secure. For such needed no Sacrifice of
Atonement, and therefore no Savior. But we are told, Matthew. xviii.11. The Son
of Man is come to save that which was lost. They were the poor, lost, undone
Sinners, whom Christ came to save; and therefore such as we are. He did not
come to save righteous Persons, who had never offended the infinitely holy God;
but guilty Sinners, who had provoked the divine Anger, and were liable to the
Wrath, and Curse of God. Hence Christ himself said, Matthew. ix.12, 13. They that
be whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick: I am not come to call
the Righteous, but Sinners, to Repentance. So that they are Sinners, whom
Christ died for, and came to save; Sinners indefinitely, that is, any Sinner,
and every Sinner, that will accept of Salvation by him: Not the more ordinary,
and less offensive Sinners only, but all Sorts of Sinners, and such as seem to
bid the fairest to be utterly lost, and undone, by the Number and Aggravation,
of their Sins, yet, even such as these, while on this Side Death, and Hell, and
capable Subjects of Mercy, may possibly be eternally saved. And therefore
Christ will reject no one Soul that comes to him for Salvation. He has said,
Joh. vi.37. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.

2. If we consider the efficacious Extent of the Virtue of the Death of Christ,
we shall see the Ground of Hope, given to every Sinner, that possibly he may be
saved. For the Virtue of the Death of Christ is of sufficient (...) all Sorts,
and Degrees of Sins, (...) tinged as Scarlet, or Crimson. 1 John (...) blood of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanses from a^^ Sin: Not from some Sins only, and those
of lesser Guilt, but from all Sin, though of ever so deep a Stain. Therefore it
is represented, Zech. xiii.1. as a Fountain opened, for Sin, and for
Uncleanness: As a Fountain, there is a sufficient Fullness in it; it is a
Fountain opened, to which every one may repair; for Sin, and Uncleanness, for
every Kind, and Degree of Sins. So that the most profligate, and notorious
Sinners, Sinners as infamous, and detestable, as a ravening Publican, or a
common Prostitute, may wash therein and be clean. This Christ gives us
Assurance of, when he said to the Pharisees, Matthew. xxi.31. Publicans, and
Harlots, go into the Kingdom of God, before you. The very worst of Sinners, by
becoming the Followers of Jesus, partake of the Benefits of his Death, before
the less offensive Pharisee, who refuses to own, and submit to him.

The Virtue of Christ's Death is founded in the Dignity of his Person, and in
the Father's Appointment of him to the high Office of a Savior; and therefore
must be equal to all that the Father demands, in Way of Satisfaction, to
repair the Injury done, unto him, by Sin. And that the Death of Christ was
every Way equal to the Demands of the Father, is abundantly evident, from his,
the Father, releasing Jesus out of the Prison of the Grave, by a glorious,
triumphant Resurrection. Hence therefore the Merits of the Death of Christ are
sufficient to extend, in the full Efficacy of them, to one Sinner, as well as
to another, to Sinners of every Denomination, yea, to the very chief of
Sinners: Which made the Apostle say, 1 Timothy i.15. Jesus Christ came into the
World to save Sinners, of whom I am chief. So that Christ, by dying, has broken
asunder the Bars of the Pi^* and procured Liberty for the lawful Captives of
Hell, and has unbarred the Gates of Heaven, and made it possible for the
greatest, and vilest of Sinners, to have a free Admittance into that Kingdom of
God.

Since therefore it is the great End of the Incarnation, and Death, of the Son
of God, to save Sinners, and that of every Sort, and the Merits of his Death
are efficaciously extensive to the most enormous Offender, this shows, it is
possible, that thou, O Sinner, may be saved, by him; Christ is able to subdue
thy Corruptions, to forgive thy Sins, to redeem thee from Death, and Hell, and
to bring thee to Heaven. None are excluded from the Benefits of the Merits of
the Death of Christ, (...) those that exclude themselves, by their turning
their Back upon him, and refusing to accept (...) offered Salvation.

3. It is very evident, from the whole Tenor of the Gospel-Offer, that there is
a Possibility that per^shing Sinners may be saved. The Design of the Grace of
God, and the Gift of Christ, as a Savior, to a sinful World, would, perhaps,
have been all ineffectual, and to no Purpose, if it had not pleased God to make
known unto the World, that he had entertained Thoughts of Mercy toward sinful
Man, and provided a Savior for him; and made the Tender of Salvation to us, in
and by him. Now this is the general Scope, and Intendment, of the divine
Revelation, contained i^ our Bible, to make known to us the divine everlasting
Purposes of Mercy to lost Sinners, and show us the Method, which God, in his
infinite Wisdom, and Goodness, has fixed upon, in which to rec^ver a perishing
World from their wretched, miserable Condition, into a State of Peace, and
Friendship with himself, and, consequently, unto complete, and endless
Happiness; and, herewithal, to make the Offer, of Pardon, and Grace, and Life,
to every Sinner where the Gospel is preached. Thus the glad Tidings was, first,
published to Adam, by God himself, and in him to all the World, in that grand
Foundation Promise, of the Seed of the Woman bruising the Head of the Serpent,
Genesis iii.15. In the Faith of this, the ancient Patriarchs lived upon the
Expectation of the Savior, and Deliverer; and, doubtless, the traditionary
Account of this, laid the Foundation of all the World's hoping for the
pardoning Mercy of God. Upon the Birth of ^he promised Seed of the Woman; into
the World, the joyful News was published, by a Chorus of the heavenly Hosts;
and ever since, in various Ways, down unto our Time, there has been an open
Publication, and Offer, of Salvation, by Jesus Christ; by Jesus himself, and
then by his immediate Apostles, and by the succeeding Ministers of the Gospel;
and the like Publication, and Offer, will continue to be made, even to the End
of the World. And this clearly shows the Possibility that perishing Sinners may
be saved. For do but consider,

1. Why is it that the great God condescends to use Means with Sinners, to
bring them to Salvation? Why does he not let them alone, ^o walk on in their
own Way, to grope in the dark for what they want, and to sport themselves in
the Light of the Sparks of their own Kindling, 'till they lie down in Sorrow?
Why does he proclaim Liberty to the Captive, and the Opening of the
Prison-Doors unto them that are bound? Why, does he tell them of a Savior, and
a mighty One, provided for them; and show them in what Way they may obtain
Salvation by him? Why does he send his Ministers, in his Name, to make the
Offer of Salvation to them; to woo, and entreat Sinners that they would be
reconciled unto God? Why does he send his Holy Spirit, in and wi^h the
Preaching of the Gospel, to move upon the Hearts of Sinners, and convince them
of their Sin, and Misery, and their Need of a Savior, and to persuade them to
accept of Jesus Christ, and all his saving Benefits? Why, I say, is God at all
this Cost, and Pains, with poor despicable Sinners*But to this very End, and
Purpose, that he might open their Eyes, and turn them from Darkness, to Light,
and from the Power of Satan, unto God; that they may receive the Forgiveness of
Sins, and an Inheritance among them that are sanctified, by Faith that i^ in
me; said Christ, Acts xxvi.18. And Paul informs us, 1 Timothy ii.4. That God would
have al^ Men to be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth.

As for those to whom Salvation is not possible, the Wisdom of God uses no
such Means; he takes no Pains with them; he sends no Gospel, and its
Ministry to them; nor is it reasonable to expect that he should. The Devils,
and damned Spirits, are beyond a Possibility of Salvation; and therefore
Christ, and Grace, and Heaven, are never preached, and offered, unto them.
Though Christ a Savior, by his Word, and Spirit, was once preached unto many
of those Spirits that are now in Prison, yet he never was preached to them in
Prison, nor ever will be. Would they give ever so much, were it in their Power,
to give it, that they might have but so much as one Offer of Pardon, and Life,
made unto them, they never shall hear so much as one Sermon of the Possibility
of their Salvation preached unto them, throughout all Eternity.

But to perishing Sinners, while they are in this World, is this Grace given,
that the unsearchable Riches of Christ are preached, and God is graciously
making the most free, and full, Offer of Salvation, by Jesus Christ, to them.
He has given full Commission to his Ministers, to say to every Sinner, Luke
ii.10, 11. Behold I bring you good Tidings of great Joy, -- unto you is born a
Savior, Christ the Lord: Acts xiii.38. Be it known unto you, therefore, Men,
and Brethren, that through this Man, is preached unto you the Forgiveness of
Sins.

2. The Offer of the Gospel is universally extensive to every individual Sinner
that hears it. The Commission runs in these Terms, Mark xvi.15, 16. Go ye,
into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature; he that believes,
and is baptized, shall be saved. Every Creature, that is, every Child of Adam,
wheresoever the Word of this Salvation is sent. There is no Man exempted out of
the Proclamation of a general Pardon, but such as except themselves, by their
own wilful Refusal to come up to the Terms proposed; that is, those that will
not accept the Offer. The Proclamation runs in the most general Expressions
that can be; Isa. lv.1, 2. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters;
and he that has no Money, come ye, buy, and eat, yea, come, buy Wine, and
Milk, without Money, and without Price; -- incline your Ear, and come unto me,
hear, and your Soul shall live. Isa. xlv.22. Look unto me, and be ye saved, all
the Ends of the Earth. Rev. xxii. Whosoever will, let him take of the Water of
Life freely. For Christ gave himself a Ransom for all, 1 Timothy ii.6. And this is
the Will of him that sent me, (said Christ) that every one which sees the Son,
and believes on him, may have everlasting Life, John vi.40. So that there is
no Limitation of the Offer of Salvation, to this or that particular Person
only, but every Sinner, under the Gospel, has Salvation set before him, and
graciously tendered to him, and shall assuredly be welcome, if he will but be
so wise for himself, as to come and partake thereof, that he may live forever.

3. I would farther observe, The Divine Sinc^rity in the Offer of Salvation.
Dissimulation and Hypocrisy, are far from God; for he is a God of Truth, and
without Iniquity; just, and right, is he, Deuteronomy. xxxii.4. And therefore as he
makes the Offer of Salvation, universally, unto all Men, without Exception, so
he is most hearty, and sincere, in the Tenders of Pardon, and Grace, and Life,
to every poor Sinner. Why else does he make the Offer? Why beseech Sinners
every where to accept it? Why does he wait upon them with so much Patience,
being unwilling to take a Denial? And that there may be no Room left for any,
even the greatest of Sinners, to doubt, or call in Question, the Sincerity, and
Willingness of God, that he should partake of the Gospel-Salvation, the great
God has been pleased to condescend to our Weakness, and Frailty, in giving to
us the highest Confirmation of his Uprightness, and sincerely honest Intention,
by adding his Oath to his Word, in these strong Terms, Ezekiel. xxxiii.11. As I
live, says the Lord God, I have no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but
that the Wicked turn from his Way, and live; turn ye, turn ye, from your evil
Ways; for why will ye die. Thus by two immutable Things, in which it is
impossible for God to lie, the Word, and Oath, of God, we may have strong
Consolation, all imaginable Encouragement, in our flying for Refuge to lay hold
on the Hope set before us. So that the Offers of the Gospel do most clearly and
fully evidence to us, the Possibility there is, that perishing Sinners may be
saved; and that every particular Person, to whom this Gospel is preached, may
be as welcome to come, and accept of this Salvation, as if he were, therein,
mentioned by Name. Oh! if I could but see any Instances, of as vile Sinners as
I am, that have partook of Salvation, perhaps, may some be ready to say, This
would indeed encourage me to think that it will not be in vain for me to seek
after it. Wherefore,

4. Lastly; Let us now take a View of the Instances, that are left us upon
sacred Record, of Sinners, great, and vile Sinners, being saved; and this will
farther confirm to us the Truth of the Proposition, the Possibility that
perishing Sinners may obtain Salvation; that Sinners of all Sorts, who yet have
a Day of Grace, and Patience, lengthened out to them, may obtain the Pardon of
their Sins, and the Salvation of their Souls, even all that Salvation set
before them in the Gospel. Here, the Time would fail me to mention, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and Samuel, and David, and the Prophets, the Apostles also,
and the holy Disciples of our Lord, recorded both in the Old, and New
Testament, who were all of them guilty Sinners, and some of them very great
Ones, and yet they found Mercy with God, and partook of his Salvation. Yea, the
Time would fail me to take Notice of the many notorious Sinners, spoken of in
the sacred Pages, who afterward became the Heirs of Salvation; as Manasseh,
and Rahab, and Mary Magdalene, and the rest of them. I shall therefore content
myself, with some Touches upon the two famous Instances which my Text
particularly relates to, namely, the Person speaking, and the Person spoken to.

First^ Observe, who was the Person that spoke; who cried out in the Text,
Sirs, What must I do to be saved? Was it not the Iaylor, at Philippi? Now it is
very apparent that this Person, not only was one of the common Herd of Sinners
among the Philippians, as a gross Idolater, and doubtles^, wallowed in impure
Lusts, whose God was their Belly, and whose Glory was in their Shame, and who
minded only earthly Things; but he was a very great Sinner, from the Account we
have of his personal Behavior. For, beside his Crime, in readily receiving the
faithful Servants of Christ into a Prison, (if he were not concerned in the
first (...) of the Rabble upon them,) and that for no other Cause, but their
preaching the Gospel of Christ, and showing unto Men the true Way of Salvation,
by the only Redeemer, whom God had appointed for that very End; which he (the
Iaylor) ought by no Means to have done, if he had known it, as probably he did,
because by this he partook of their Crime, who unjustly committed them; I say,
beside this, he sufficiently manifested his Hatred, and Malice, and persecuting
Spirit, against those holy Servants of God, by thrusting them into the Dungeon,
and making their Feet fast in the Stocks, Acts xvi.24. Hereby he plainly
discovered his Enmity to the Cross of Christ, the Cruelty of his Temper, and
the inward Rancor of his Mind against those holy Men, by inflicting upon them,
a Punishment of his own devising, very distinct, from, and far exceeding, the
Orders he had received from his Superiors, who only charged him to keep them
safely, v. 23; that is, to keep a strict Watch and Guard over them, that they
might be brought out upon Trial, when demanded: Whereas, a Dungeon, and the
Stocks, are distinct Punishments themselves, and very different from a close
Confinement. Moreover, he was guilty of Self-Murder, in the Sight of God; and
that not only by harboring the Thought, and Intention in his Heart, but in
prosecuting that his Intention, by an overt Act, v. 27. He drew out his Sword,
and would have killed himself, if those very Men of God, whom he had greatly
abused, had not prevented him. This was such a plain Proof of the Fierceness,
and Cruelty, of the Man, his unbridled, and insupportable Anger, and Rage, and
of his real, murderous Design, as, in some Cases, would have amounted to a
legal Proof of Murder against him, in an humane Court of Judicature, which
tries, not the Hearts, but the Actions, of Men: And therefore much more
rendered him guilty before that God, who knows all the Secrets of the Heart,
and passes Judgment upon them, as well as upon the outward Actions of the
Children of Men. But if this be looked upon as the Effort of a sudd^n Passion,
which threw him into this Frame of Mind, then it only proves that he was so
vile a Creature, as to be ready, upon every Temptation, to commit the most
flagitious, and monstrous Crimes.

And yet, after all this Wickedness, this poor, wretched, miserable Creature
was converted, and saved; for, he believed in God, and was baptized, v. 33, 34.
That is, he believed in that God whom the Apostle made known to him, and he
believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, whom the Apostle preached to him, he
believed the Word of God, which Paul had declared to him, and accordingly made
Profession of his Faith, and Obedience to the Son of God, by being baptized
into his Name.

Secondly; The other Instance I would take Notice of is that of the Person
spoken to, in my Text, particularly the Apostle Paul, to whom, with Silas, the
Iaylor cried out, Sirs, What must I do to be saved? This same Paul, while he
wore the Name of Saul, was a very great, and notorious Sinner. Though he made
his Boast, that, touching the Righteousness of the Law, he was blameless;
having been a strenuous Asserter, and fond Practicer, of the Rites, and
Ceremonies, of the Jewish Church, yet, nevertheless, upon examining his open
Conduct, we shall find, that he had been impious to God, and very injurious to
Man; which he afterward acknowledged, when he said of himself, 1 Timothy i.13.
Who was, before, a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, and injurious. As a Blasphemer, he
was full of Malignity against Christ, and his Doctrines, every where speaking
against them, casting all imaginable Contempt, and Reproach upon them, and not
content with his own Revilings, and Blasphemies, he pleased himself with the
base, and mean Gratification, of exciting, and even compelling others to
blaspheme, Acts xxiv.11. As a Persecutor, he was an hotheaded, furious,
bigoted, Jewish Zealot; and so madly set was he upon the cutting, or drawing
all Men to his own Size, that he meanly craved Power, and Authority, from the
chief Priest, Acts ix.2. to execute the vilest Office that could be, a busy
Pursevant, and lawless Cutthroat, that he might vent his Rage upon the poor
Christians, and persecute Men for Conscience Sake: And he carried ^his
implacable Spirit with him wherever he went, Acts xxii.4. Persecuting this Way
unto the Death, and delivering into Prison, both Men, and Women; so that he
spared neither Age, nor Sex, but imprisoned, and beat, in every Synagogue, them
that believed, v. 19; And when they were put to Death, gave his Voice against
them; and, being exceedingly mad against them, persecuted them even unto
strange Cities, Acts xxvi.10, 11.

And how injurious was he in all this? Thus to lord it over the Estates, and
Persons, and Lives, and Consciences, of his honest Neighbors, who could not go
his Lengths, and conform to his Rites and Ceremonies. What Right had he to
possess, or imbezzle, the Estates of his dissenting Neighbors? Who could give
him Power over their Persons, and Lives, that did not agree with him in the
Form, and Modes of Worship? It Is an amazing Guilt to take away the Liberty, and
Lives, of Men, that are otherwise honest, and good Subjects, as though they had
forfeited the common Rights of Mankind, and their very Being, merely because
they differ from others in their Faith, or dissent from them in the
Circumstantials of Religion, while yet they may agree with them in the
Essentials. This is at once to get into the Throne of God, and give Law to
Conscience, and to strip the human Nature of its truest Glory, as reasonable,
and religious, and put out that Candle of the Lord, which he has lighted up in
the Breast of every Man. Yet thus was Saul a ravening Wolf, devouring the Sheep
of Christ, and a vile Murderer, while he vainly thought he did God good Service.

But now let us turn to the bright Part of the Character of this wonderful Man,
and behold! notwithstanding all the Fury, and Madness, the Impiety, and
Unrighteousness, we have seen him guilty of, even this notoriously wicked Saul
became an eminently holy Paul; the Wolf is turned into a Lamb, and the grand
Enemy of Christ, and common Pest of his Neighbors, at length, is made a real
Convert, a glorious Instance of the sovereign, and rich, and powerful, Grace of
God, a zealous Preacher of that Jesus, and a bold Defender, and warm Cherisher
of those Christians, whom but a little before, he so furiously persecuted. We
have a particular Account of the extraordinary Manner of his Conversion, in the
Ninth Chapter of the Acts: While he was yet breathing out Threatening, and
Slaughter, against the Disciples of the Lord, and was approached, in his Zeal,
near to Damascus, the designed Seat of his Action, Acts ix.3, 4, 5, 6. Suddenly
there shined round about him a Light from Heaven; and he fell to the Earth, and
heard a Voice saying to him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said,
Who art thou Lord? And the Lord said unto him, I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest: And he trembling, and astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have
me to do! After which we find Christ saying of him to Ananias, v. 15. He is a
chosen Vessel unto me, to bear my Name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the
Children of Israel. And now, how fervent a Preacher of Christ did he become? At
Jerusalem, and every where, among Jews, and Gentiles, he proved that Jesus was,
indeed, the Christ, the ancient promised Messiah; and traveled far, and wide,
by Sea, and Land, and with many Arguments, exhorted, and persuaded Men, to turn
from their Vanities, to the living God; and though he had been brought up at
the Feet of Gamaliel, and was well read in all the Learning of the Jews, yet he
determined to know nothing, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified, 1 Cor. ii.2.
Yea, he counted all but Loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ
Jesus, Phil. iii.8. And so unwearied was he in his Labors, in the Gospel, that
he could say, even when he was humbly acknowledging himself as nothing, 1 Cor.
xv.10. I labored more abundantly than they all.

How surprising also were the Sufferings of this great, and good Man, in that
very Cause of Christ for which he had formerly made so many Sufferers? He was
no sooner entered upon the Work of the Gospel Ministry, but they laid wait for
him, and sought to kill him; and throughout all his Travels, we find Bonds, and
Afflictions abide him, at Jerusalem, at Lystra, at Iconium, at Philippi, etc.
so that he could give this Account of himself, 2 Cor. xi.23. In Labors more
abundant, in Stripes above Measure, in Prisons more frequent, in Death often; of
the Jews five Times received I forty Stripes, save one; thrice was I beaten
with Rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered Shipwreck, a Night, and a Day,
I have been in the Deep, etc. And yet none of these Things moved him, nor did
he count his Life dear to him, so that he might finish his Course with Joy, and
the Ministry which he had received of the Lord Jesus.

Since then we plainly see, in such remarkable Instances, that some of the
greatest, and chiefest of Sinners, have been converted, and saved, this
strongly argues the Possibility there is, that any, and every other Sinner may,
in like Manner, experience the regenerating Grace of God, and be saved. The
Apostle Paul takes Notice of his own Conversion, as an illustrious Specimen,
Encouragement, and Earnest, of what other Sinners might possibly obtain. 1 Timothy
i.16. For this Cause, (said he) I obtained Mercy, that, in me, Jesus Christ
might, first, show forth all Longsuffering, for a Pattern to them which should
hereafter believe on him, to Life everlasting. This is a mighty Encouragement
to every Sinner, let his past Crimes be what they will, to hope, that he is not
out of the Reach of Mercy, and to strive that, if by any Means, he also may be
converted, and saved, by Faith in Jesus Christ; seeing that, in this great
Apostle, he has such a clear Evidence, and Instance, of the Possibility of his
own Salvation.

These Things may suffice to confirm the Second Head, and show the Possibility
of perishing Sinners being saved. I should now go on to the Third general Head,
viz.

To show you, that perishing Sinners must know, and Practice, all that is
necessary in Order to their Salvation; or, there is something to be done, by
them, that they may be saved. But I choose to close the present Discourse with
a few brief Reflections.

USE 1. Oh! How much is the Grace of our God to be forever admired by us! Is
there a Possibility that perishing Sinners may be saved; and thou, O poor
Sinner, among them? Is God ready, and willing to confer his Grace upon thee; to
pardon all thy Sins, and bring thee safe to Heaven? And will thou not then
shout forth Grace! Grace! Grace! unto our good God, that he has had such
Thoughts of Kindness toward thee?

Did not the Almighty, at first, form us noble Creatures, holy and upright? and
had he not an undoubted Right to all our Services? Yet, instead of serving our
God, have we not rebelled against him, and rebelled against our own Reason, and
brought Misery, and Ruin, upon ourselves? Might not God justly say of us, as of
his People of old, Hos. xiii.9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self? Yet,
after all our Rebellions, and all our Self-Destructions, is there a Possibility
that we may be delivered from this Death? May we yet be numbered amongst the
Children of God, and Heirs of Salvation, in the heavenly World?

Is all our H^lp to be found in God himself, whom we have so greatly offended?
Has he, in infinite Wisdom, and Goodness, contrived the whole Design, and by
his mighty Power effected it, in such a Way as is to the Astonishment of Men,
and Angels? Could we merit this Favor at the Hands of God, when we were so
deeply guilty before him, and so fixed in our Enmity against him? Or does God
forbear to execute his Threatening upon us, because he fears us, or hops for
any Reward from us?

Has such Favor been showed to fallen Angels, as to offer unto them Terms of
Pardon, and Salvation? Has not God chosen to pass them by, and suffer them to
remain Devils, fixed in their Enmity against him, and under unavoidable
Damnation?

But to thee, O perishing Sinner, has he opened the Treasures of his Grace,
discovered the tender Compassions of his yearning Bowels; and, in his
distinguishing Love, sent his own Son to die for thee, and, even now, stands
at the Door of thy Soul, with outstretched Arms, inviting thy Return to him,
that, of an Heir of Death, and Hell, thou might be made an Heir of Life, and
Glory?

Oh! How ought thou, then, to see, and admire, and praise, this mavelous
Grace of God* manifested to thee? and to be encouraged, from the Prospect of
it, to resolve, from this Time, to return to thy first Husband, the God that
made thee, and cleave unto him forever? And has any Sinner, here, tasted that
the Lord is gracious, and perceived the Sweets of the Divine Loving Kindness,
in renewing, and pardoning of him? How ought such a Soul, in an holy Transport
of Thankfulness, and Praise, to say with holy Paul, Ephesians. i.6, 7. It is to the
Praise of the Glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the
Beloved; in whom we have Redemption, through his Blood, the Forgiveness of our
Sins, according to the Riches of his Grace.

2. Hence see, That no Sinner has any just Reason to despair of Mercy. There is
a Possibility of perishing Sinners being saved; The Grace of God, the Death of
Christ, the Offers of the Gospel, the many Instances on sacred Record, all
plainly declare this; and therefore thou, O Sinner, whoever thou art, may
possibly share in this B^essedness. Art thou particularly excluded, by Name,
from the Offers of Salvation? Search the Scriptures, see; where do thou find
the Exception? No; no; Thou art as certainly included within the Compass of
offered Mercy, as if thou were expressly mentioned.

Art thou utterly unworthy that God should show such Favor to thee, as to
forgive thy Sins, renew thy Nature, and save thee? why; so were all that ever
have been saved before thee.

Have thou been a very great Sinner? Have thy Sins been greatly multiplied, and
highly aggravated? and art thou afraid that there is no Room, for thee, in the
pardoning, saving Mercy, of our God? why; have thy Sins exceed Lot's, and
Noah's, and David's, or Manasseh's, and Peter's, or Paul's, and the Iaylor's?
Whose Sins were against greater Light, and stronger Bonds, and more provoking,
than some of the Saints recorded in the holy Scriptures? Let thy Sins be what
they will, red like Scarlet, and deep dyed as Crimson, yet the Grace of God,
and the Blood of Christ, are sufficient to cleanse thee from them all. Isa.
i.18. Come now* let us reason together, says the Lord, though your Sins be as
Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they
shall be as Wool.

Take, therefore, the Encouragement, O Sinner, which the Possibility of thy
being saved gives thee, and hearken not to the Temptations of the Devil, or
Suggestions of thy own Heart, to slight the Kindness of God unto thee, to
despair of his Mercy, or turn the Grace of God into Wantonness, but be up, and
doing, and the Lord be with thee.

3. Hence see, That, if any of you miss of Salvation, the Fault will be
entirely your own. It is possible you may, great Sinners as you are, after all
your repeated Transgressions, and often Refusal of the offered Mercy of God,
yet, it is possible, you may be converted, and pardoned, and eternally saved.
If, therefore, any of you, at last, come short of the Rest remaining for the
People of God, where will the Blame of all lie, but at your own Doors? God has
entertained the graciou^ Design of saving you; He has sent his Son into the
World, to purchase Salvation for you; He makes the free, and full, Tender of
Salvation to you; He sends his Ministers, a^ Ambassadors for Christ, to court
you into a Compliance with his offered Grace; He sets before you the Instances
of other Sinners, great, and vile, as yourselves, who have sought, and obtained
Salvation; and, moreover, sends down his Holy Spirit to accompany the preaching
of his Word, and assist you in working out your own Salvation: so that if,
after all this Cost, and Pains, you miss of Salvation, you will have none to
blame, but yourselves. Christ will say to you, as to the unbelieving Jews, in
his Day, Joh. v.40. Ye will not come unto me, that ye may have Life. If you
perish, it will be because you will not do, what you can do, to promote, and
secure, your own Salvation, and not because yo^ cannot save yourselves. So that
God, and his Throne, will be faultless forever, in your eternal Damnation; and
your Blood, the Blood of your Souls, will be upon your own Heads. Oh! what a
terrible Aggravation will this be, of the Misery of every impenitent Sinner,
that perishes from under the Gospel, to think, when he shall come into the
Place of Torment, that he has brought all of this Misery upon himself; and,
Fool that he was, when he might, he would not be saved from it!

4. Oh! Let this, now, be the hearty Cry of every Soul, here present, what must
I do to be saved? It is yet possible, O Sinner, through the tender Mercy of the
most High, that thou may be saved. It is yet a Day of Grace with thee; God
is waiting upon thee, with much Patience; but no Man alive can say, how long
this Possibility will last. It is certain, that when once Death has done it is
Office upon thee, and fetched thy Soul, out of thy Body, to appear before thy
Judge, it will be no longer possible for thee to make thy Peace with God, if
thou have not done it before. The present Time, in this World, is thy only
working Time; if once this Day be over with thee, the Night of Death will put
and End to thy Labor, and all thy Advantages, and Opportunities, will be lost,
and gone forever. Hence the Preacher advised, Eccl. ix.10. Whatsoever thy Hand
finds to do, do it with thy Might; for there is no Work, -- in the Grave,
whither thou go. If thou should foolishly neglect to mind thy eternal
Interest, and to do all that is proper for thee to do for thy Salvation, until
Death, and Judgment, overtake thee, it will be in vain for thee, then, to cry,
Oh! what must I do to be saved! Thou may then, indeed, be forced to roar
out* Oh! I am lost! I am undone! I am damned! but thou will not be able to do
any thing to deliver thyself from the Place of Torment: it will be all too late
for thee, then, to seek the Blessing, though thou should be ever so much in
an Agony, and shed ever so many Tears about it.

And who is there of you can tell, how soon, or suddenly, Death may come upon
him, and seal up his Hands from this important Work? A few Years, yea, a few
Days, nay, a few Minutes, for ought thou can tell, may finish thy Course of
Probation, and irrecoverably fix thee in the State of Retribution. Thou may
be dead, and damned, before to Morrow: and it may properly be said to thee, as
Michal to David, 1 Samuel xix.11. If thou save not thy self to Night, to Morrow
thou shall be slain.

Oh! Then, let no Sinner be unconcerned about so important an Affair, lest he
sadly repent his Folly, when it shall be too late to correct his Error; but
now, while he may, let it be the serious Enquiry of every Soul, What must I do
to be saved? And diligently set yourselves to the immediate Performance, of all
that is necessary for you to do, in Order thereunto. Now is God's Time, Oh, let
it be yours also, lest it should be no longer possible for you to obtain Mercy.
I conclude, at present, with those awful Words, Heb. iii.15, 18. While it is
said, to Day if ye will hear his Voice, ^arden not your Hearts, as in the
Provocation: -- to whom swear he that they should not enter into his Rest? but
to them that believed not.

Salvation is not solely in a Sinner's own Power. SERMON VII.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
THESE Words are expressive of the very great Concern of the Iaylor, at
Philippi, about what was necessary for him to do, in Order to his being saved:
he saw it was necessary that something should be done, or he must perish; and
he was very solicitous to know, and do, what was requisite, to obtain the
Pardon of his Sins, and the Salvation of his Soul. Herein he acted like a wise
Man; and what was his great Concern ought to be ours. The Doctrine, which
therefore I have laid down agreeable to the Intendment of these Words, was,

DOC. It is of the highest Concernment to perishing Sinners, to be very
solicitous, what they shall do ^o be saved; or, to know, and practice, all that
is necessary in Order to their Salvation. I have proposed, by Divine Help, to
speak to this Text, and Doctrine, under these Four General Heads. viz.

I. To show you what it is to be saved; or, what is that Salvation which
perishing Sinners stand in Need of.

II. That perishing Sinners may be saved; there is a Possibility,
notwithstanding their present miserable Condition, that they may be eternally
saved.

III. That perishing Sinners must know, and practice, all that is necessary, in
Order to their Salvation; there is something to be done, by them, that they may
be saved.

IV. This is a Matter of the highest Concernment to them, and therefore they
ought to be most seriously solicitous about it.

I have heretofore somewhat distinctly spoken to the First, and Second of these
Heads; and showed you that the Sinner's Salvation consists in a Deliverance
from Moral, and Penal Evil, and in the Possession of all that is truly Good:
and, the last Opportunity, I showed you the Possibility of it, that perishing
Sinners, those who are as yet the capable Subjects of the Divine Mercy, may
obtain Salvation. The Sovereignty, and Riches, of the Grace and Mercy of God,
the great End of the Incarnation, and Death of Jesus Christ, the whole Tenor of
the Gospel Offer, and the many Instances, upon sacred Record, do all most
plainly evidence the Possibility of the Sinner's Salvation. I shall now, by
Divine Assistance, proceed to the Consideration of the Third Thing proposed.
viz.

III. That perishing Sinners must know, and practice, all that is necessary, in
order to their Salvation: or there is something to be done, by them, that they
may be saved. What must I do to be saved? said the Iaylor. It fully speaks
the Necessity that something must be done. Natural Conscience told him that he
must do something, or perish; he was sensible he must be himself active, if he
would be saved; and therefore is very solicitous to know what he must do, that
he might do it. What must I do?

It is true, the infinitely great and good God has done mavelous Things, for
the Recovery of poor sinful Man from the deplorable Circumstances he has
plunged himself into, and bring him into an happy State. The most tender
Compassions of the Deity have been exercised toward him, and God is loath to see
Sinners perish; He has, in infinite Wisdom, contrived the intricate, and
amazing, Scheme of a guilty Sinner's escaping Punishment, with a proper Salvo
to his injured Authority, and Rectitude; His boundless Power has effected the
grand Design, in the wondrous Method of sending his own Son, to offer a
Sacrifice of Atonement for Sin, and, by his own Arm, to destroy all the
mischievous Devices of the evil One, and work out Salvation for them; and by
sending his Holy Spirit to apply the Benefits of the Death of Christ unto them.

But, though the whole work is of God, both as to the effectual Impetration,
and Application, of our Salvation, yet, there is something for us, to do, in
our own Persons, that we may be saved. What must I do, said the Iaylor. There
is something requisite to be done, on our Part, as well as on God's Part. The
wise God does not mean to deal with us as though we were mere Machines, but he
treats us as we are, rational Agents, (who only are capable of Salvation,)
and requires of us, as such, that we be active, and not merely passive, in the
great Work of securing our own Happiness. However passive we may be in the
Divine Majesty's conferring of his Grace, and Favor, upon us, that
incorruptible Seed, by which we are begotten unto God; (and, indeed, we can be
no other than passive in the Divine Gifts, because we cannot give them to
ourselves;) yet must we be active, in our seeking it, receiving it, and
improving of it, that we may be saved.

Let no Man be so weak, as, from hence, to argue, that the Sinner can save
himself, by any Strength, and Power, purely, his own. For as the original
Design, so the whole Power, and Efficacy, is all from God, who works all our
works in us; Isa. xxvi.12. and to whom alone belongs all the Glory.
Nevertheless the Sinner must not think to lie wholly idle, and imagine that
there is nothing for him to do, because he cannot do all; but he must besti^
himself in the Use of Means, and diligently employ himself, in those various
Methods, which the Wisdom of God has seen meet to appoint, as the ordinary Way
of obtaining Salvation.

We may illustrate this by a familiar Instance in the natural Life. It is the
Lord alone that is the God of our Life, and the Length of our Days: Deuteronomy.
xxx.20. He first gives Life, and Being, to us, and then lengtheneth out our
Life to what Duration he pleases, so that no Man can pass one Moment beyond
the Bounds which are set to him; and it is the Blessing of God, concurring to,
and with, all Means, that makes them any Ways instrumental, either to produce
us into Being, or support us in Life, without which we should never have drawn
one Breath, nor could we subsist one Moment. And yet the Man must not be wholly
unconcerned, and inactive, about his own Preservation, but he must do his Part
to feed, and nourish, and defend himself; and unless he will be at Pains, about
these, he can, upon no solid Principles, Physical, or Moral, expect to have his
Life continued. For, though God can support the humane Body, in a miraculous
Way, for what Length he pleases, without Food; as he did Moses, who was forty
Days, and forty Nights, in the Mount with God, and did neither eat Bread, nor
drink Water; Exodus xxxiv.28. yet we have no Reason, either from the View of our
Nature, or from any Encouragement that he has given us, to expect that God will
take any extraordinary Methods to preserve us, when ordinary Ones are at Hand,
and we are so foolish as not to improve them.

So is the Case here: It is God only who, by his Almighty Power, can make a
dead Soul to live; it is his Energy, and Blessing, upon the Means, which makes
them efficacious, and quickening, to beget us again unto himself, and to a
lively Hope of eternal Life; and no Power, separate from God, will be effectual
to make us spiritually alive, or to maintain the Divine Life in us, unto
Salvation. But yet the Sinner, as a rational Agent, must put his Hand unto the
Work, and diligently attend to the ordinary Means of Conversion, and Salvation,
and carefully perform the Duties required, on his Part, or he may not expect to
partake of the Divine Life, or have Right to the Salvation of God. For God will
save no Man against his Will, and consequently not without his Labor, and
Pains; for he that is not willing to be at the Pains to take the Methods,
appointed, leading unto Salvation, (though there should be no such necessary
Connection between them, as that he that uses the Means could not possibly
miss of the End, but only a fair Probability that in this Way he might be
saved;) he evidently manifests, that he had rather go without Salvation, than
give himself the Trouble of doing what is proper to obtain it; and therefore
shows that he is not heartily willing to be saved.

Upon the true stating of this Point, I suppose* the Gospel Methods of
Salvation very much turn* and the want of a due Observation hereof, is,
perhaps, the great Reason, why some, on the one Hand, ascribe all to the Power
of Man, and so rob God of his true Glory; and others, on the other Hand, so
ascribe all unto God, as to leave Man no Power to do any Thing in working out
his own Salvation: both of which set of Principles, if acted upon, in
Contradistinction to each other, are equally dishonorable to God, and
destructive to the Souls of Men; whereas, while they go Hand in Hand, by
allowing unto God, the Things that are God's, and unto Man, the Things that are
Man's, they sweetly conspire to show forth the Divine Glory, and secure our own
real Happiness. I shall therefore,

[I.] Show you, That the Sinner cannot save himself, merely by the Virtue,
Power, and Efficacy, of all that he can do. And yet,

[II.] That it is absolutely necessary that the Sinner do something, in order
to his own Salvation.

[I.] The Sinner cannot save himself, merely by the Virtue, Power, and
Efficacy, of all that he can do. After all that the Sinner can possibly do,
toward his own Salvation, yet, as the original Design is from the Grace of
God, so the Efficacy is all from the Power of God, and not from the Man
himself. For we are born not of Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the
Will of M^n, but of God, Joh. i.13.

It was possible, indeed, unto Man, in his State of Innocence, to have secured
his own Happiness, by his own Power; that is, by the common Concurrence of the
Providence of God with his natural Powers, or those Powers which God had
furnished him with as such a Creature; because his Strength was proportioned to
that State he was in, and was every Way sufficient to perform that Duty which
his Maker required of him. For it may not be supposed that an infinitely wise,
and righteous, and good God should require more of his Creature, which he had
just made, and which had not yet, in any Thing, offended him, than it was
capable of performing; and yet, for want of performing what was absolutely out
of it is Power to do, turn it out of his Favor, and make it a miserable
Creature, by a positive Act of his own sentencing of him thereto. The
Perfections of God, as well as Divine Revelation, assure us, that all the Works
of God, as they first came out of his Hands, were very good; and consequently,
that Man was made perfect in his Kind, not only in his Body, but in the Purity,
and Vigor, of his Mind, which was the Divine Image upon him.

But the Case is greatly altered with fallen Man; for beside the Guilt which he
has contracted by the Fall, (which I have formerly observed is justly
chargeable upon all his Posterity,) the Moment the first Man sinned he lost his
original Rectitude, and his Nature then became polluted, and impure; and, I
think, there is no Room to question the Communication of this Impurity unto all
his natural Descendants, (as I have showed,) because he could communicate no
other Nature, to them, than that which he had. And because the humane Nature,
as lapsed, is become tainted, and defiled, therefore, of Consequence, it has
lost it is original Strength, and Vigor, and there is a moral Weakness, and
Impotency, upon it; partly, from the Darkness upon the Mind, and partly, from
the Prejudices upon the Will, and Affections, a^ising from the Depravation
which Sin has brought upon them; and from hence, the Man is, now, whatever he
was at first, incapable of yiedling an Obedience, as extensive, and perfect, as
the Law of God requires; and yet if he fail, in the least Tittle, of living up
to the whole of his Duty, he will lose his End, and miss of Happiness; unless a
Dispensation of Grace relieve him. Nor is there any Injury done to Man, or any
Injustice in God, in the Demands of an Obedience which Man is not, now, able,
of himself, to perform; because the Rights of the Divine Authority, and the
Demands of the Law, remain unalterably the same; that is to say, God always
was, and always will be, our Sovereign Lord, while we have any Being, and it is
always due to him, and to his Law, to be obeyed perfectly, without any Defect.
The Relief which God has graciously provided for lapsed Man, that his
Condition might not be altogether hopeless, and what rendereth it a
Dispensation of Grace, is, that he is ready to receive us to his Favor, and
bestow the Blessing upon us, upon the Consideration of what a Surety has done,
and suffered, to merit the Divine Favor for us, (whose Merits became ours by
our Compliance with such and such proposed Terms,) and his providing, and
offering, supernatural Strength, to enable us to come up to the Terms proposed.
This is all the Grace that is needed by a fallen Creature, who has greatly
weakened, though not left, the Powers of Reason; and leaves him to act the
rational Part, in the diligent Use of Means, to secure his own Happiness, at
the same Time that it shows him, a Sufficiency herefor is not of himself.

To him that now, since the Fall, expects to be saved by his own
Performances, Two Things are requisite, namely, That there be something of
Merit, in his good Deeds, to make Amends for his former Offenses; and that he
has sufficient Power, within himself, to live up to the whole Law, in the
utmost Perfection of Obedience, for the future: both of which are wanting to
the Sinner, which makes it impossible for him to be saved, by any Virtue,
Power, and Efficacy, purely his own. For

1. There can be nothing of Merit in all that a Sinner can possibly do, by
which to make Amends for any past Offenses. He that has trespassed upon the
Divine Law, but in any one Instance, has, by so doing, made a Forfeiture of all
that Happiness he was a Candidate for, and incurred the Displeasure of his
Sovereign; and therefore, in Order to his escaping Punishment, and having any
just Claim to his forfeited Happiness, it is absolutely necessary that there be
something, either his own, or another's made his, that shall be meritorious;
that is, shall be of sufficient Worth, and Value, in Consideration whereof it
will be an Act of Justice, as well as Mercy, in God, to overlook his Guilt, and
be reconciled to him; otherwise the Penalty of the violated Law will
unavoidably take Place upon him, and render his Condition miserable. No^* this
is most certainly the Case of every individual Child of Adam, naturally
descending from him, that he is become guilty before God, for so the whole
World is; Romans iii.19.

Let us then suppose that this guilty Creature should yield the most perfect
Obedience to the Divine Law, even to the least Tittle, for the Time to come,
and this accompanied with his deepest Sorrow for his past Offenses, yet, it is
evident, that it is utterly impossible there should be any Thing of Merit in
all this; and that for this plain Reason; because, in the utmost Perfection of
such his Obedience, he would but do what the Divine Law ever requires of him,
and so only perform a present Duty; and because the greatest Exactness of
Obedience is but a present Duty, therefore there can be nothing meritorious in
it, to expiate, and wipe off, a former Crime. Hence our Savior taught his
Disciples, Luke xvii.10. When ye have done all these Things which are commanded
you, say, we are unprofitable Servants, (...) done that which was our Duty to
do. He that p^y^ for a present Purchase, cannot discharge a former Bond by it:
nor he that does a present Duty, by it, make Amends for a former Transgression.
Therefore the most critical, and exact, Obedience will not atone for our past
Offenses. Hence (...) is that the sacred Scripture assures us, Romans iii.20. By
the Deeds of the Law, there shall no Flesh be justified in his Sight; for by
the Law is the Knowledge of Sin. And as for his deepest Sorrow, this is no more
than is agreeable to his rational (...), to be so affected at the Sight of
having done a wrong Thing, but is no Amends to his Sovereign for his having
violated his Commands.

So that no Man can be saved by the Efficacy of his own Deeds, as to any Thing
meritorious i^ them. All the Merit of a Sinner's being justified, accepted, and
saved, is from the incarnate Son of God alone, who has given his Life a Ransom
for many, that by his once offering himself to his eternal Father, he might
purchase the Forgiveness of Sins, and our final Acceptance with God: for, we
are made accepted in the Beloved; in whom we have Redemption, through his
Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins. Ephesians. i.6, 7. So that the meritorio^^ Cause
of the Sinner's Salvation, is, not from himself, but from God, who has
provided the Sacrifice of his Son for us, and graciously accepts the penitent
Believer to Favor, and Life, upon the alone Account thereof. And this being
such a wondrous Act of Grace in God, toward a rebel Creature, as is to the
just Admiration of Men, and Angels, gives the Denomination of a Covenant of
Grace, to the Transactions between God, and Man, considered in the Mediator so
graciously provided for us, and ascribes the whole Glory of our Salvation to
the infinitely free, and rich, Grace of our God.

2. The Sinner has not sufficient Strength, and Power, of his own, to perform
the whole Will of God. Upon Supposition, that a Man's living up to the whole
Law, with the greatest Exactness, were truly meritorious, and were sufficient
to make Atonement for a former Transgression, (which I have showed it is not,)
yet, still it would not be possible for any Sinner to be saved by all that he
can do; because he has not Strength and Power enough, of his own, to perform
the Will of God, and observe the Divine Law, in the full Extent of it, and
without all Defect, and Interruption.

For, do but consider what it is that the Law of God requires of us, even a
sinless Perfection in our Obedience, and that to every Iota; that we carefully
perform every Duty to God, and to our Neighbor, and ourselves; that our
Actions, and Words, and Thoughts, and all of them, be kept under the strictest
Government of the Divine Commands; that our Hearts and Souls, be engaged in our
Obedience, as well as our Bodies; and that we act, in all, from a conscientious
Regard to the Authority of God; that we constantly intend the Glory of God, as
the ultimate End of all we do; and that we patiently submit to all the
Disposals of Divine Providence, though ever so Cross to our worldly Interest,
and Views, and our present Ease, without the least Murmuring, or Heart-rising
against what we meet withal; and that we do all of this always, as long as we
live, and that without the least Failure, or Interruption, in any Part of our
Duty: And consider also, how much of Darkness we evidently perceive to be upon
our Minds; how many Errors, and Mistakes, we are liable to, through the
Ignorance that is in us; and what a strong Bias, and Propensity of Inclination,
there are upon us, to please, and gratify Self, in innumerable Instances, which
are contrary unto the holy Laws of God; and how much this Bias is improved, and
strengthened, by the many Temptations that surround us; I say, do but consider,
how extensive the Law is, and what Weakness is brought upon the Humane Nature,
by the Fall, besides what the Man brings upon himself, by his early
contracting the Habits of Vice, before he begins seriously to think of saving
his Soul, and say now, Who is sufficient for these Things? Where is the Man
that is capable of performing the whole Will of God? What Strength, what Power
is there left in the fallen Creature to obey the Divine Law, universally,
constantly, uninterruptedly? Whatever Man might have done, in his State of
Innocence, it is certain, the Principles of Rebellion contracted by his
Apostasy from God, have stripped him of his Power, for a Life of complete
Obedience, have blinded his Mind, biassed his Will, and Affections, and defiled
his Conscience, and so rendered him carnally minded, at Enmity against God, and
not subject unto his Law, nor indeed can he be, Romans viii.7. until there is a
Change wrought in him.

If ever, therefore, the Sinner be saved, it must be by the Virtue, and
Efficacy, of a Power superior to his own, assisting, and strengthening of him,
to overcome his natural corrupt Inclinations, and surrounding Temptations, and
to yield such an Obedience unto God, as will be pleasing, and acceptable unto
him. God will not save any who will not be obedient to him, (as I shall show
hereafter,) but then, That he has pleased to make any Abatements of the
rigorous Demands of the Law, and to furnish the Sinner with sufficient Power,
to yield that Obedience which he, now, insisteth upon, all turns upon a
Covenant of Grace; wherein there is full Provision, by the Influences of the
Death of Christ, and special Operation of the Holy Spirit, to enable the Man to
perform an Evangelical, that is to say, a sincere, and hearty Obedience unto
God; which is what the Divine Majesty, under the Gospel Dispensation, requires
of him, instead of an universally perfect Obedience, which is the strict Demand
of the Law. Hence the Apostle says, Romans v.6. When we were without Strength,
Christ died for the ungodly: and, we are not, of ourselves, sufficient to think
any Thing as of ourselves, but our Sufficiency is of God. 2 Cor. iii.5. Hence
the Prophet Isaiah, speaking of Gospel Times, and the gathering of the Gentiles
into the Church, says, Isa. xl.29. He gives Power to the faint; and to them
that have no Might, he increases Strength. Hence also, you find, in the sacred
Scriptures, the great Works of Conversion, and Salvation, ascribed to the
mighty Power of God alone, even to that Power which created the World, and can
raise the Dead. Therefore the preaching of the Gospel is said to be, Romans i.16.
The Power of God unto the Salvation of every one that believes; and we are
said to be, Ephesians. ii.10. The Workmanship of God, created, in Christ Jesus, unto
good Works; and we read, of the exceeding Greatness of his Power, to us ward
who believe, according to the working of his mighty Power, which he wrought in
Christ when he raised him from the Dead. Ephesians. i.19, 20.

Since therefore the Sinner, when he has done his best, cannot merit any Thing
at the Hands of God, and has not sufficient Strength, of his own, to perform
the whole Divine Law, it follows, that it is impossible he should be saved by
the Virtue, Efficacy, and Power, of his own Performances: his Salvation does
not result from himself, but from the sovereign and rich, Grace, and the
mighty, and efficacious, Power, of God. Romans ix.16. It is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God, who shows Mercy.

Before I proceed any farther, let us make a few Reflections on what has been
observed, under this Head.

USE. 1. This teaches us the very great Danger there is in depending upon our
own Works, (...) meriting any Thing at the Hands of God. Since there can be
nothing of Merit in all that M^n can do, therefore for any to place their Trust
in any Works of their own, as meritorious, will be but to lean upon a bruised
Reed, which will certainly deceive them; and to build their House, their Hope
of Salvation, upon a sandy Foundation, which will not endure the Trial.
Besides, for a Man to depend upon his own Works, as meriting any Thing for him,
will be to disclaim the crucified Jesus, and shut his Merits out from having
their proper Influence into his Salvation; th^^ which, what can be more
contrary to the whole Strain of the Gospel, as well as dishonorable to Christ?
The great Design of the Gospel is, to show us how infinitely we are beholden to
Jesus Christ, for his purchasing Pardon, and Grace, and Life, for us, at the
Expense of his own most precious Blood. And needs then must it be exceeding
dangerous for any, thus to frustrate the Grace of God, and render the Death of
Christ, as to them, in vain, by their fond Imagination of their being saved by
Works of their own. So, Israel has not attained to the Law of Righteousness;
wherefore? because they sought it, not by Faith, (...) as it were by the Works
of the Law. Romans ix.31, 32. For they being ignorant of God's Righteousness, and
going about to establish their own Righteousness, (...) not submitted
themselves (...) the Righteousness of God. Chapter x.3. For if Righteousness come
by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. Gal. ii.21.

2. This also teaches us the great Folly, and Arrogance, of those who dream of
Works of Supererogation. It is one of the remarkable Instances of the Folly,
and Pride, of the Church of Rome, that she teaches her Votaries, that they may
lay up a Stock of good Works, over and above what is necessary for themselves,
to supply the Defects of their Neighbors, who may be less exact in their
Obedience; and upon this Foundation, very many of their superstitious
Practices, are built; as their praying to dead Saints, their Indulgences, and
Pardons, and praying Souls out of Purgatory; etc. But how amazing is the Folly,
even to Stupidity! How excessive is the Pride! Nor can I see it to be
reconcilable to any Principles but these Dregs of the Romish Apostasy, for any
pretended Protestant to affirm, that every true Believer may be called the Lord
our Righteousness. Our Blessed Lord has taught us, that the wise Virgins
answer the Foolish, who beg it of them to give them of their Oil, Matthew. xxv.9.
Not so, lest there be not enough for us, and you. Can a Man have Oil to spare?
Can he have Grace enough for himself, and others? Who cannot possibly live up
to that Perfection, which the Law requires of him; and if he could, would
merit nothing thereby, for himself, much less for another.

3. This teaches us where to place our whole Dependence, and to whom we should
go, for Salvation, and where to ascribe all the Glory of it. Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be all the Glory. Not to ourselves, or an
Arm of Flesh, but to the rich Grace of God, and the Merits of Jesus Christ. It
is all from the infinite Grace of God, designing, and laying out the Scheme,
and perfecting of it, in the Methods of boundless Wisdom, and Love; and the
Merits of Jesus Christ, who has loved us, and washed away our Sins, in his own
Blood; and the Efficacy of the Divine Omnipotent Spirit, the Fruit of the Grace
of God, and Purchase of Christ, who quickens whom he will, and divides to
every Man severally as he will; that any are converted, and pardoned, and
saved. And this should put us upon going to this one God, Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, for the Manifestation of his Grace to us, in the Workmanship of the
Holy Spirit in us, and Application of the Merits of his Son to us, that we
might be the Heirs of the Hope of Life. For whither shall we go, but unto him,
with whom are the Words of eternal Life? This also should direct us to ascribe
unto God the Glory of his Grace, manifested toward us in JESUS CHRIST our
Lord; saying with the Apostle, Ephesians. ii.4 -- 8. God, who is rich in Mercy, for
his great Love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in Trespasses, and
Sins, has quickened us, together with Christ; -- that, in Ages to come, He
might show the exceeding Riches of his Grace, in his Kindness toward us,
through Christ Jesus: for, by Grace ye are saved, through Faith, and that not
of yourselves, it is the Gift of God.

Having said these Things, to prevent Mistakes, I now go on, to maintain the
Assertion; viz.

[II.] That it is absolutely necessary that the Sinner do something, in order
to his own Salvation. Though the Sinner cannot be saved, mer^^ly by the Virtue,
Power, and Efficacy, of his own Performances, yet God never designed to
encourage him in his Sin, by leaving him under the Dominion of Sloth, and
Idleness, and an inactive Unconcernedness, about his Soul, and his eternal
Interest; as if there were nothing for him to do, but to lie still, contented
in his Sin, and Rebellion, against his Maker, until it should please God, by
his own almighty Power, and sovereign Grace, to convert, and save him. I know
of nothing but a positive Divine Command, that could more embolden any Man in
his evil Ways, and vindicate, and truly excuse, him, in his leading a Life of
Irreligion, and Debauchery. But is it possible for the Holy God, who is of
purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, thus to Countenance Sin, and abet the
Sinner, in all his vicious Courses of Ungodlyness, and Unrighteousness? No
verily: Nothing is more contradictory to his Nature, and declared Will. And
therefore the infinitely wise God, who is perfectly well acquainted with the
humane Weakness, has, nevertheless, assigned to him, as a rational Agent, a
Work to do; and peremptorily demanded it of him, to be active, and diligent, in
his Attendance upon it, that he may not finally perish, through his own Sloth,
and Negligence. Thus, He has commanded us, Phil. ii.12. to work out our own
Salvation, with Fear, and Trembling: Eccl. ix.10. to do with our Might,
whatsoever our Hands finds to do: Joh. ix.4. to work while it is called to
Day, ever the Night come, wherein no Man can work: and, 2 Pet. i.10. to give
all Diligence to make our Calling, and Election sure. Hither, also, look all
those Texts, that require it of us, to run, to wrestle, to strive, to fight;
that is, they enjoin upon us to use utmost Diligence, and begrutch no Pains, to
obtain the incorruptible, and heavenly Crown. And he reproves the Sinner's
Sloth, and Negligence, saying, Matthew. xx.6. Why stand ye, here, all the Day
idle? and pronounces a most heavy Doom upon the slothful, as a wicked Servant,
saying, Matthew. xxv.26, 30. Thou wicked, and slothful Servant; cast ye the
unprofitable Servant into outer Darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing
of Teeth. All of which plainly speaks the absolute Necessity of the Sinner's
being active, in doing something, in order to his own Salvation. Though he
cannot save himself, by his own Power, or merit Heaven by his own Performances,
yet there is something that lies within his Power, weak as he is; and this he
must do, as ever he would hope to be saved.

And this leads us into the grand Inquiry, What is it that the Sinner must do?
What is necessarily incumbent, on his Part, that he may obtain Salvation?

Now, there are two Things, which comprehend in them all that is required of
the Sinner, both of which are plainly included in the Language of the Iayler,
What must I do to be saved? It speaks his hearty Desire to know the Way of
Salvation, his Willingness to be acquainted with his Duty, and his Readiness to
take proper Pains to inform himself; and it shows also his Resolution to reduce
his Knowledge into Practice, and do whatsoever he should know to be his Duty to
do, in order to the obtaining the Salvation of his Soul. And accordingly the
Answer to the Enquiry, Wh^^ must the Sinner do to be saved? lies in these two
Words, Knowledge, and Practice: The first of which I shall particularly
consider in the latter Part of the Day.

Knowledge necessary to Salvation. SERMON VIII.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
I Showed you, in the Forenoon, That the Sinner cannot possibly save himself,
because he cannot merit any Thing at the Hands of God, by all that he can do,
nor has he sufficient Strength, and Power, of his own, to perform the whole
Will of God. Nevertheless it is absolutely necessary that the Sinner do
something, in order to his own Salvation. I now proceed to a particular
Consideration of what the Sinner must do; namely,

I. The perishing Sinner must know all that is necessary to his Salvation.

II. The perishing Sinner must reduce his Knowledge into Practice, and be ready
to do all that he shall know to be his Duty. I shall offer some Things to the
First of these, at this Time: viz.

I. The perishing Sinner must know all that i^ necessary to his Salvation: all
that is necessary for him to know. And, indeed, our Knowledge of the Things
necessary unto Salvation, is to be laid in the Foundation, as of our Practice,
so of our Hopes of being saved, proportionable to the Advantages, and
Opportunities, which Persons have of coming at the Knowledge of them. Therefore
our future Happiness is sometimes represented, in the Scriptures, as turning
upon our Knowledge: as our Lord said, Joh. xvii.3. This is eternal Life, to
know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent. What
therefore every Sinner has to do is, to take Pains to inform himself, that he
may be acquainted with those Things which are necessary for him to know. Here
then observe;

1. There are certain doctrinal Articles to be believed, and Duties to be
performed, in order to the Sinner's Salvation. The Christian Religion, (and the
Method of a Sinner's Salvation contained in it,) does not consist of any
uncertain Principles, or an indigested Heap of Articles, and Duties which a Man
accidently stumbles upon, or which, casually come into his Mind; nor of such as
are purely the Result of humane Invention, Inclination, or secular Interest;
but it is a well digested Scheme, the Product of infinite Wisdom, and
Understanding, and contains in it certain, and established Articles,
necessary to be believed by us, and plain Duties, necessary to be practiced by
us, and these in order to promote the highest, and noblest Ends that can be,
the Glory, and Honor, of our great Maker, and our own everlasting Well-Being.

Thus, as Articles of our Faith, the Christian Religion contains in it, the
Doctrine of one, only, living, and true God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
infinite, eternal, unchangeable, in his Being, Wisdom, Power, Holiness,
Justice, Goodness, and Truth, the Maker, the Preserver, and the Ruler of the
World. It contains in it, the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, his being the only
begotten Son of God, the promised Messiah, the Savior of the World, in the
Fullness of Time, appearing in the humane Nature, and offering of himself unto
the eternal Father, a Sacrifice, for the Sin of the World, rising from the
Dead, on the third Day, ascending up into Heaven, and sitting at the right Hand
of God, making continual Intercession for us; and that he will appear a second
Time, as the great Judge of the World. It contains in it, the Doctrine of the
Holy Spirit, as the principal Agent in the forming of the new Creature, as the
Director and Leader, of us in the Paths of Righteousness, and the Bestower of
all Comfort upon us. It contains in it, the Doctrines of the Resurrection of
the Dead, the final Judgment, and the everlasting Rewards, and Punishments, of
the future World. And it contains in it, the Doctrines of Regeneration, the
Necessity of the New Birth, of Repentance, and an holy Life, and of the Word,
Sabbaths, Sacraments, and Prayer, as the ordinary Means of producing Holiness
of Life in us.

And as it contains these Doctrinal Articles, most, if not all, necessary to
be believed by us, so the Christian Religion consists of many Duties, to be
performed by us, which may be all comprehended under that general Expression,
of living soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present World. It is the
great Design of the Gospel of our Salvation to teach us these Articles of
Faith, and bring us to the Practice of these Duties, and of all that are
comprehended in them, and fairly reducible to them.

2. The Knowledge of these Doctrines, and Duties, is necessary to our being
saved. The Sinner's Salvation, (I am speaking of such as live under the
Gospel,) turns upon his Belief of the Gospel Revelation, and his practicing the
Duties contained in it, so far as he has Opportunity, and Occasion, to attend
them; because the Gospel Revelation is the full, and only, Discovery of the
Divine Mind in what Way a Sinner may be saved: and this plainly tells us,
Mar. xvi.16. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved: and, Rev.
xxii.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right to
the Tree (...) Life.

But, unless the Sinner knows what the Gospel requires him to believe, and
do, how can he, either believe, or do it? Here, I do not mean* that it is
necessary unto Savation, that every Person so know the great Doctrines of the
Gospel* as to be able to unriddle all the Mysteries contained in them, or to be
able to answer all the Objections, which crafty Men, who are subtle to deceive,
may possibly propound to them; nor yet so to know all the Duties of
Christianity, as to be nice Casuists in every possible Difficulty; but it is
necessary to every one that would be saved, to be so far acquainted with the
great, and main, Articles of the Christian Religion, as is requisite to his
firm Belief of all that is essential to a true Believer; and with the great
Duties of Christianity, as is sufficient to direct, and govern, his Heart, and
Life, by the Rules of Piety, Justice, and Temperance. Thus far, I readily
acknowledge, our Belief, (and Practice too,) is founded in our Knowledge, and
what a Man knows nothing of, he cannot believe. But then, this does not
necessarily intend any more than, that a Man be acquainted with the
Proposition, to be believed, and understand the Terms of it; and it by no Means
follows, that a Man must understand the Essence, or Mode of Existence, of the
Thing spoken of in the Proposition; or that he should understand the Ratio of
the Truth, or Doctrine, contained in such Proposition, before he believes the
Proposition, which he fully understands. For Instance; I should have all
imaginable Reason to believe the Truth of this Proposition, whose Terms I
understand, That the Square of the longest Side of a Right-angled Triangle is
equal to the Square of the two shorter Sides, when several Persons, of approved
Integrity, and Skill in the Mathematics, tell me it is so; though, at the same
Time, I should be entirely ignorant of the Ratio of it, and be incapable of
understanding it, for want of a more through Acquaintance with the Mathematics.
Therefore, to lay this down for a Principle, that we are to believe nothing but
what (...) understand, meaning thereby, that we must not only understand the
Terms of the Proposition, but, have a clear Idea, of the Ratio, and Nature, of
the Thing spoken of, is to lay down a very false Principle; and it shows the
Weakness of those that assert it, as well as the Weakness of all the Structure
they build upon it. It is an infallibly true Proposition, That God is; but
where is the Master of Reason that understands what God is? It is an
undoubted Proposition, which every Man firmly believes respecting himself, I
Exist; but where is the Man that thoroughly knows his own Nature, or the Manner
of his own existing? There are, and will be, Mysteries in Christianity, as well
as in Nature, (let Men say what they will,) though the Words of the Revelation
are perfectly well understood, and grammatically put together. And
notwithstanding all the Mysteriousness that there may be in the Nature, Modus,
or Ratio, of a Doctrine revealed from Heaven, yet this hinders not, but that
we are bound to believe such a Revelation, properly at^ested; and this is not
to believe in empty Sounds, but to believe Truths, handed to our Minds by such
Words, regularly connected, as are easy, and familiar to us; which is all the
Way of believing that I know of.

Thus, I say, it is necessary that Sinners become acquainted with the essential
Articles of the Christian Religion that they may believe them, and with it is
Duties, that they may do them. For while Persons remain ignorant of the
Doctrines, and Laws, of Christ, which contain the Way unto Salvation, how is it
possible they should be saved? seeing they know not the Pathway thereof. This,
peculiarly, is that Knowledge, which, the Wise Man tells us, Prove. xix.2. it
is not good that the Soul be without.

A Man, indeed, may know a great Deal, may be well read in the Doctrines, and
Duties, of Christianity, and yet not be saved after all; because, it is
possible, he may act contrary to his Light and Knowledge. But if he remain
entirely ignorant of the Way of Salvation, if he knows not what he must do to
be saved, how then can he be saved? If the Understanding be not informed, and
enlightened, how shall the Man act any otherwise than as the Brute Creature, by
external Force, and Impulse? Or how shall the rational Mind be directed to the
proper Object, or right Manner, of it is religious Worship, and Adoration? Nay,
how shall the Hands, and Feet, be guided unto any virtuous Action? That is,
without Knowledge the Man acts blindly, and in the Dark, and can never offer
unto God a reasonable Service. Hence said our Savior, Matthew. vi.23. If thine
Eye be evil, thy whole Body shall be full of Darkness; if, therefore, the Light
that is in thee be Darkness, how great is th^^ Darkness? Men may be in the
Light, and it prove their Condemnation, because they act contrary to the Light
which they have; but if they are in total Darkness, if the Light that is in
them b^ Darkness, and that through their own Default, because they shut their
Eyes, and act as if they were in the Dark, how can they possibly escape
Condemnation? Yet a little while, (said Christ) the Light is with you; walk
while ye have the Light, lest Darkness come upon you; for he, that walks in
Darkness, knows not whither he goes; While ye have the Light believe in the
Light, that ye may be the Children of the Light. Joh. xii.35, 36. And the
Apostle John said, 1 John i.6. If we say we have Fellowship with him, and walk
in Darkness, (the Darkness of Ignorance, and Sin,) we lie, and do not the
Truth. He will but deceive himself with vain Hopes of Salvation, who is in the
Dark about the Way leading thereto; which is generally the Case of the Heathen
World, who, though they have some Hope, or rather Notion, of a future Happiness,
yet, are destitute of Gospel Light, which alone shows the Way to it.

It is not to be wondered at to see Men do amiss, who know no better. If they
are Strangers to the true God, how shall they serve him? If they are in
Ignorance by what Means to appease his Anger, how shall they be at Peace with
him, and reap the Benefits of his Friendship? If they know not Jesus Christ,
but are utter Strangers to his Person, Offices, and Benefits, how shall they
believe in him, and be saved by him? Hence we find so great a Stress laid, in
the Scripture, upon Knowledge, that our Renovation is said to be in Knowledge;
Col. iii.10. and they, that take away the Key of Knowledge, are said, Luke
xi.52. to hinder Men from entering into the Kingdom of Heaven: and it is given
as the Reason, why the Jewish World did not receive, and believe, on Christ,
Joh. i.10. because the World knew him not. Whilst Persons know not their Duty,
how can they possibly perform it? It is a reasonable Service which God
requires of us, and not what we stumble upon by Chance. The ignorant Soul is
evidently perishing, and his Condition is hopeless, at present, because his
Ignorance hinders his doing any Thing toward his own Salvation. Therefore the
Prophet observes, Isa. lix.8. The Way of Peace they know not, and there is no
Judgment in their goings; they have made them crooked Paths, whosoever goes
therein shall not know Peace. So that it is necessary that Sinners be
acquainted with the great Fundamental Doctrines, and Duties, of the Christian
Religion, in order to their being saved. And therefore,

3. The Sinner must take Pains to inform himself in the Knowledge of those
Doctrines, and Duties. Since there are various Doctrines to be believed, and
Duties to be performed, in the Christian Life, and the Knowledge of these is
necessary to our Faith, and Practice, because, without the Knowledge of them,
we can neither believe the one, nor practice the other, therefore, this is what
the perishing Sinner, who is advantaged with the glad Tidings of the
Possibility of Salvation, has firstly to do, namely, to be at some Pains with
himself, to inform his Mind, that he may know what those Doctrines, and Duties,
are, which are necessary for him to believe, and do. For, this Knowledge is not
born with any Man, nor does he bring into the World with him any natural Light,
which is sufficient, of itself, as he grows up to Years of Understanding, to
discover these Things unto him; though he brings with him a Capacity to
receive the Light, when it is objected to him, and the Clouds, and Dust, that
surround him, are removed. It may be truly said, to every Man, that has any
Knowledge of these Divine Things, as Christ sai^ to Peter, with Respect to one
of the essential Articles of our Faith, Matthew. xvi.17. Flesh, and Blood, has
not revealed it unto thee, but my Father, which is in Heaven. For the Things
that are necessary unto Salvation are spiritual, and heavenly, and so only
spiritually discerned, by the Revelation of the Gospel, and the Assistance of
the Spirit of God: for the natural Man, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. ii.14.
receives not the Things of the Spirit of God, for they are Foolishness unto
him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.

Something, indeed, of the Knowledge of God, and the Duties of Morality, may be
discovered by the Light of natural Reason, and Conscience; but the great, and
peculiar, Doctrines of the Gospel, and how to worship God acceptably, and even
the moral Law, in the full Extent of it, as enlarged, and explained, and
refined, by the great, and only, Savior of the World, turn purely upon
Revelation: though some, who have the Advantage of Revelation, are ready vainly
to imagine, that their own Reason is sufficient for all the fine Discoveries,
which that Revelation has helped them to.

God has been pleased graciously to condescend to our Weakness, and made a
full, and clear, Revelation of all that is necessary to be known by us, in
order to our Salvation: He sent his Prophets, in ancient Times, fully
commissioned with Authority from him, to declare his Mind, and Will, unto his
People; and, in the latter Days, has spoken to us by his Son, who lay in the
Bosom of the Father, and was perfectly acquainted with all the Divine Counsels
of Peace, whom he has sent to teach, and instruct, Sinners, in the Way of
Life, as well as to die for them. And Jesus Christ has been faithful, in the
House of God, as a Son, personally declaring what he had received of the
Father; and has commissioned, and inspired with his Spirit, his holy Apostles
after him, to make such farther Discoveries, of the Mind of God, as were
necessary to complete the Canon of the Scripture, and render it a perfect Rule
of Faith, and Manners. Farther also, Jesus Christ has commissioned a standing
Order of Men, whom he has promised to be with to the End of the World, Matthew.
xxviii.19, 20. to go, and disciple all Nations, -- teaching them to observe all
Things* whatsoever he has commanded. And, I trust, we can appeal to our
People, and say, with the great Apostle Paul, Acts xx.20. We have kept back
nothing that was profitable unto you; and that we have not shunned to declare
unto you all the Counsel of God. v. 27.

But though, it has pleased God to make the clearest Revelation of what he
requires of us, and his Ministers should be ever so faithful in instructing
their People, what that Revelation is, and in their best Endeavors to enforce,
not by Violence, but by Reason, and Persuasion, the Belief, and Practice, of
it; yet, if Persons will not, themselves, be at any Pains, to improve the Helps
and Advantages, God has favored them with, that they may come to the Knowledge
of the Truth, as it is in Jesus, they will, after all, remain in Ignorance, and
perish among them that are lost. If, therefore, perishing Sinners would be
saved, they must thirst after this Knowledge, and Endeavor, in all proper
Ways, to enlighten their Minds, that they may know the Things which are freely
given us of God.

To this End, they must daily read the Word of God, and search the Scriptures,
which contain the whole of the divine Revelation, that they may see with their
own Eyes, and found their Faith, and Practice, upon the Word of God, and not
the Creeds, and Commandments, of Men, nor the uncertain Impulses of their own
Minds. Thus God's People of old, were commanded, Deuteronomy. xi.18, 19. ye shall lay
up these my Words in your Heart, and in your Soul, and bind them for a Sign
upon your Hand; and you shall teach them your Children, etc. And the Bereans
are commended, Acts xvii.11. In that they searched the Scriptures daily,
whether those Things were so.

But beside this, they must also attend upon the Word preached, and so wait at
the Posts of Wisdom's Gate, and hear, that they may receive Instruction in the
Words of Life; for Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God,
Romans x.17.

To these they must add their frequent, and serious Meditation upon the Word
read, and heard; call to mind the Truths that have been handed to them, and
weigh well the Doctrines, and Duties, that have been taught them, that, by
ruminating upon them, they may the better digest them, and see more of the
Nature, Excellency, and Necessity, of them, and may have them ever ready at
hand to influence them in the Whole of their Conduct and Behavior.

And when there occurreth any reasonable Difficulty to them, in any Article of
Faith, or any practical Duty, it would be Prudence in them to have Recourse to
such as may be more knowing than themselves, especially to their Ministers, not
dogmatically to determine their Faith, or enjoin their Commands upon them, but
to open to them the Scriptures, enlighten their Minds, and explain their
Difficulties, that they may be enabled, themselves, to see their Way more
clearly.

To all of which they must add their fervent Prayers to the Father of Lights,
that he would please to cause a divine Light to shine into them, and give them
Understanding, that they might know the Way in which they should walk, that
they may live and keep the Word of God; saying, with the Psalmist, Ps. cxix.18,
19. Open tha^ mine Eyes, that I may behold wondrous Things out of thy Law; I am
a S^ranger in the Earth, hide not thy Commandments from me.

For all of these, (which I have but now hin^ed at, and shall have Occasion to
speak more largely to hereafter,) are proper, appointed, Means of coming at the
Knowledge of those Things which are necessary to be known, in order to
Salvation. And these are what the Sinner can do; he can read, and hear, and
meditate, and ask Advice, and pray to God; and these he must do, or he will
neglect the Means of Salvation; and if he continue ignorant, and, at last,
perish for lack of Vision, it will be a wilful Ignorance, in him, and his
Destruction will be from himself. This is the Direction, and Encouragement, of
the Wise Man, Prove. ii. ini^. My Son if thou will receive my Words, and hide my
Commandments with thee, so that thou incline thine Ear unto Wisdom, and
appliest thine Heart unto Understanding; yea, if thou cryest after Knowledge,
and liftest up thy Voice for Understanding, if thou seek her as Silver, and
searchest for her, as for hid Treasures; then shall thou understand the Fear of
the Lord, and find the Knowledge of GOD.

This, then, is the first Thing the perishing Sinner has to do, in order to his
being saved, namely, to get his Mind well informed, by a diligent Use, and
Improvement, of all proper Means, that he may know what is necessary to be
known by him.

From what has been said, upon this Head, we may learn these Things, viz.

USE. 1. That a Man cannot, regularly hope to be saved in all Religions.

There are some Things necessary to be known, and done, in order to Salvation;
and unless those necessary Things are to be found in all Religions, (which they
are not, because some of them, at least, depend upon Revelation, which some
Religions, in the World, are wholly destitute of,) a Man cannot be saved in all
Religions; because he cannot know, and do, all that is necessary to Salvation:
and because these necessary Things are peculiar to the Christian Religion,
therefore, there is no Salvation, that we know of, but in, and by, That only;
and of Consequence no Man can regularly hope to be saved, in any other
Religion. The Doctrines of the Christian Religion are certain, and invariable;
The Canon is completed by Inspiration from God; and what has so come from God
no Man may alter, add to it, or diminish from it. The Duties of Christianity
are the same, throughout all Generations, and incumbent upon all Persons, in like
Circumstances; and therefore were not intended for one Set of Men that call
themselves Christians, and not for another; and it is in the Knowledge of these
Doctrines, and Practice of these Duties, that God has been pleased to let the
World know, that Salvation is attainable; and he has not informed us of any
other Method of Men's being saved. Therefore we may safely conclude, that we
know of no Salvation, attainable by any Man, but in the Christian Religion;
because Salvation does not necessarily result from the Divine Nature, but is a
free Act of the Divine Good-Pleasure. Hence, let Men be of what Religion they
will, and appear externally very Devout toward God, and Just toward Man, yet,
if the Doctrines they embrace, are not Christian, but Pagan, or Mohammedan, or
Jewish, and if the Duties they perform are not such as are required of them in
the Christian Religion, and done by them upon the Foundations of that Religion;
yea, suppose a Sect, that are called Christians, who yet hold those Tenets, and
do those Things for Duties, which are truly contrary to, or subversive of, the
Christian Religion; all their apparent Devotion, and exemplary Justice, will
not avail them to Salvation, that we know of. That is, as far as we are capable
of forming any Judgment, a Man cannot be saved in all Religions, nor regularly
hope for it.

2. We may from hence see, that it is very unsafe trusting to this Principle,
That a Man shall be saved, by living up to the Light, and Knowledge, which he
has. For I do not know, no^ have I any solid Foundation to build such a
Conclusion upon, That any Man shall be saved, who lives up to his natural
Light, (supposing such a Thing,) while he is wholly destitute of Revelation;
because all the possible Ways of Salvation, that we can know of, must be
included in a Divine Revelation, and not inferred from the Nature of God; (as I
have formerly showed.) Much less then can it be safe for any, who have a Divine
Revelation in their Hands, to choose to follow the Dictates of their own
Reason, without any Regard had to that Revelation. For, though, I doubt not,
where there is a sincere Willingness to know, and do, according to what the
Christian Religion requires, God will graciously accept, according to that a
Man has, and not according to that (...) has not, 2 Cor. viii.12. yet, he
that has the Mean^, and Opportunity, of knowing, and doing, better, and, for
Want of a due Improvement of them, lives in the Disbelief of any essential
Article, and Neglect of any of the great Duties, of the Christian Religion, can
have no good Grounds to hope that he shall be saved: because the Belief of
those Articles, and Practice of those Duties, are necessary, to Salvation,
according to the Gospel Dispensation; and all the Ignorance such an one can
pretend to is wilful. Luke xii.48. He that knew (...) (his Lord's Will,) and
did commit Things worthy (...) Stripes, shall be beaten with few Stripes;
compared with him who sins directly against Light, and Knowledge.

3. We may from hence learn, how justly they will miss of Salvation who will
not be at the Pains to inform themselves, in what is necessary for them to
know. For, they must make light of Salvation, indeed, who, though they hear of
the Excellency, and Possibility, of it, yet, do not think it to be worth their
while to be at any Pains, to acquaint themselves with what is necessary for
them to know, that they may be saved. Surely, nothing can be more Just, than
that they should go without the Benefits of it, who do not esteem it worth
their having. The Apostle said, 2 Cor. iv.3, 4. If our Gospel he hid, it is hid
unto them that are lost; in whom the God of this World has blinded the Minds
of them which believe not, lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who
is the Image of the invisible God, should shine into them. This is true, not
only of those Nations, who never had the Gospel preached to them, but of those,
who, though they live where the Gospel is preached, yet, remain in gross
Ignorance, through the Blindness of their Minds, the Prejudice of various Lusts,
and their wilful neglect. For the Gospel, or Methods of Salvation, by Jesus
Christ, are as truly hid from them, who will not endeavor to acquaint
themselves with them, as from those who do not enjoy them: As those are in
Darkness, who shut their Eyes against the Light, as truly as those who have not
the Light shining upon them. And this wilful Ignorance will be so far from an
Excuse for them, another Day, how^ver they may think themselves excused by it
now, as that it will greatly aggravate their Condemnation; because, they
enjoyed the Means of Knowledge, but refused to improve them. They will not
only, as certainly miss of Salvation as the Pagan World, but, their Punishment
will be so much the greater, because their Ignorance was affected; which
argues a very high Degree of Slight, and Contempt, cast upon the offered Mercy
of God. Hence it was, that our blessed Savior said, John iii.19. This is the
Condemnation, (this in a peculiar Manner is the aggravated Condemnation,) that
Light is come into the World, but Men love Darkness, rather than Light, because
their Deeds are evil.

4. Hence learn, That it is your great Duty, and the first Thing you have to
do, in order to your Salvation, to be at Pains to inform yourselves of all that
is necessary to be known. This is what nearly concerns you; and should stir you
up to do what you can, that your Minds may be instructed in all necessary
Truths; (Especially those of you who are very much interrupted, the greatest
Part of the Year, by your being upon the Waters, should the more diligently
improve this recess of the Winter, to gain the Knowledge of spiritual and
divine Things;) and put you upon begging it of God, to make your speculative
Knowledge to become a saving Illumination, through the Influences of his Holy
Spirit, and that he would give you a spiritual Understanding in the Mysteries
of his Kingdom. And need have you to take Pains to inform yourselves better,
because it is to be feared, that many among us, and through out the Christian
World, notwithstanding all the Labor that is bestowed upon them, and though
they are taught better, yet through their Heedlessness, and Neglect duly to
improve the Means they enjoy, remain in great Ignorance of the Doctrines, and
Duties, of the Christian Life, to this very Day: and it may be said to such, as
the Apostle to some of the Hebrews, Heb. v.12. When for the Time ye ought to be
Teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which be the first Principles
of the Oracles of God; being Babes, and unskilful in the Word of Righteousness.
I charitably persuade myself, that many Persons would do better if they knew
better: they would not allow themselves in such ill Things, as they do, to the
Dishonor of God, and the Injury of their Neighbor, were it not that the loose
Education they have had, and their Prejudice in Favor of Self, blind their
Eyes, that they (...) not see that they do very wrong Things; and so their
Ignorance is very much the Cause of their ill Manners. But then such their
Ignorance is very much their own Fault, when a little close thinking, and
examining of the Rule, would show them their Mistake, and correct their Errors.

Well then; have you any serious Thoughts of being saved? Do you hope that God,
for Christ his Sake, will pardon all your Sins? Do you expect to go to Heaven
when you die, and leave this World? And will you not then be at some Pains to
know the Way thither? Will you not endeavor to acquaint yourselves with what
you must believe, and do, in order to your Interest in Christ, and Salvation by
him? Will you not be more constant, and attentive, in your reading, and
hearing, the Word of God? Will you not more accustom yourselves to frequent,
and serious, Meditation, on spiritual, and divine Things? Will you not consult
your Teachers, and meekly submit to their faithful Instructions? Will you not,
from this Time, be more constant, and fervent, in Prayer to God, to enlighten
your Minds, and show you the Path of Life, and cause you to walk in it? Believe
it; if you neglect these Things, your Ignorance of God, and Religion, will be
no Excuse to you, in the great Day of Account; however any may palliate their
Crimes, and silence the Clamors of their own Consciences, and stop the Mouths
of their Neighbors, by this vain Pretense, now. Hence, you may observe the
great God saying, concerning his ancient People, Isa. xxvii.11. It is a People
of no Understanding; therefore he that made them will not have Mer^^ on them,
and he that formed them will show them no Favor.

God has been at the Pains, not only, to give you the common Understandings of
Men, but, to bring his Word home to you, to put it into your Hands, that it may
be as a Lamp unto your Feet, and a Light unto your Path, and therein has
plainly told you, what you must do to be saved; He has showed you what is the
good Way you should walk in, and warned you of the Danger of all evil, and
sinful Ways, that you may avoid them* and he has sent his Servants, his
Ministers, rising early, and sending them, even from your Youth up, to take you
by the Hand, and lead you in the Way wherein you should go. Thus God has done
his Part, and the Means are plainly before you, and within your Power.

But if, after all, you will not do your own Part, and improve the Means you
enjoy; if you will cast the Word of God behind your Backs, and absent
yourselves from the House of God; or will not mind what you read, and hear, nor
ask it of God to seal Instruction to you; know it for certain, that it will be
a wilful Ignorance in you, if, under all these Means, you should remain
Strangers to the Things of your Peace; and if, at last, it should be said of
any of you, as of God's professing People of old, Hos. iv.6. My People are
destroyed for lack of Knowledge, you will be found to be Self-Destroyers; and
have no Body to blame but your own selves, because you rejected Knowledge, and
despised Instruction. And, Oh! how sadly will you mourn, at the last? when thy
Flesh, and thy Body, are consumed: and thou shall say, How have I hated
Instruction, and my Heart despised Reproof, and have not obeyed the Voice of my
Teachers, nor inclined mine Ear to them that instructed me? Think therefore,
seriously, of those awful Words of our Savior, (with which I now conclude,)
Joh. xv.22. If I had not come, and spoken to them, they had not had Sin; but
now they have no Cloak for their Sin.

Faith absolutely necessary to Salvation. SERMON IX.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
THE Doctrine, I have once and again offered from these Words, you may
remember, was,

DOC. It is of the highest Concernment to perishing Sinners, to be very
solicitous, what they shall do to be saved: or, to know, and practice, all that
is necessary, in order to their Salvation. The Method I have proposed to
pursue, in discoursing upon this Text, and Doctrine, is,

I. To show you what it is to be saved; or, what is that Salvation which
perishing Sinners stand in Need of.

II. To evidence that perishing Sinners may be saved; or, there is a
Possibility, notwithstanding their present miserable Condition, that they may
be eternally saved.

III. That perishing Sinners must know, and practice, all that is necessary; in
order to their Salvation; or, there is something to be done, by them, that they
may be saved.

VI. This is a Matter of the highest Concernment to them, and therefore they
ought to be most seriously solicitous about it. Having, in some former
Discourses, showed you what Salvation is, and the Possibility of it, I entered
upon the Third of these Heads, the last Opportunity: viz.

III. That perishing Sinners must know, and practice, all that is necessary, in
order to their Salvation; or, there is something to be done, by them, that they
may be saved. Under this Head, I proposed to consider these two Things, for the
clearing of it. viz.

[I.] That the Sinner cannot save himself, merely, by the Virtue, Power, and
Efficacy, of all that he can do. And yet,

[II.] That it is absolutely necessary that the Sinner do something, in order
to his own Salvation. And wha^ he must do, I said, is comprehended under that
of his Knowledge, and his Practice.

I. The perishing Sinner must know all that is necessary, in order to his
Salvation.

II. The perishing Sinner must reduce his Knowledge into Practice, and be ready
to do, all that he shall know to be his Duty, in order to his being saved. I
have gone through the First of these, namely,

I. The perishing Sinner must know all that is necessary, in order to his
Salvation. I have observed, that there are certain doctrinal Articles to be
believed, and practical Duties to be performed, as necessary unto Salvation;
and the Sinner must know what these are, or he cannot believe the one, nor
perform the other; and therefore he must take Pains with himself to inform his
Understanding aright, that he may know what the Things are which the Lord his
God requires of him, that he may be saved. Thus far I have gone, and now
proceed to the Consideration of the Second Head; viz.

II. The perishing Sinner must reduce his Knowledge into Practice, and be ready
to do, all that he shall know to be his Duty, in order to his being saved. This
is evidently implied in the Language of the Iaylor, when he said, What must I
do to be saved? it speaks his Readiness to put into Practice whatsoever he
should know to be his Duty to do. It is not enough, that Sinners know what the
Terms of Salvation are, in what Way, and by what Means, they may obtain the
Forgiveness of their Sins, escape Hell, and get safe to Heaven, but, though
this is their Duty, and they cannot rationally hope to be saved in their
Ignorance, yet, they must put their own Hands to the Labor, and exert
themselves to do all that is required of them; vigorously run that they obtain
the incorruptible Crown, and manfully fight, that they may overcome all
Obstacles that lie in their Way, and diligently observe the Laws of their God,
that they may be accepted of him; for all their most perfect Knowledge, without
Practice, will never carry them to Heaven.

They do but greatly deceive themselves, who imagine this to be all that is
required of them, in order to their partaking of the great Salvation of the
Gospel, that they be well read, and studied, in the Principles, the Doctrines,
and Duties, of the Christian Religion; that they know the Truth, and are able
to discourse upon it, with Clearness, Copiousness, and Cogency, that they stand
up to assert, and defend, the Truth, against Opposers, and are able to
convince, and put to Silence, the Authors, and Fomenters, of Errors, and
Heresies. These are laudable Qualifications, and amiable, in their Place; and
they do well that covet earnestly the best Gifts; yet show I unto you a more
excellent Way. They must do, as well as say, if they would partake of the
matchless Benefits of Salvation, contained, and offered, in the Truths of the
Gospel. The Apostle James therefore said, Jam. i.22. Be ye Doers of the Word,
and not Hearers only, deceiving your own selves. Men may hear the Word
diligently, attentively, and with much Affection, and yet deceive themselves,
with false grounded Hopes of Happiness, for want of doing according to what
they hear. Though they make the greatest Proficiency, in the speculative
Knowledge of Divine Truths, yet they will fall short of the Blessing, if they
are not careful practically to improve what they know. The Scribes, and
Pharisees, in our Savior's Time, were the great Doctors of the Law, among the
Jews; it was their peculiar Business to study the Law, and explain it, and
teach it to the People; and yet, for all that, our Lord said to his Disciples.
Matthew. v.20. Verily, I say unto you, except your Righteousness shall exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes, and Pharisees, ye shall, in no Case, enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. And the Reason was, not because the Scribes, and
Pharisees, were ignorant of the Law; no, they knew the Law, and were acquainted
with their Duty; but, because they did not reduce their Knowledge to Practice,
and live up to what they knew; though they made their Boast of the Law, yet,
through breaking the Law, they dishonored God; their Hearts, and Lives, were a
Contradiction to their Knowledge, and they were very defective in moral Duties.
Therefore it was said of them, Matthew. xxiii.4. They bind heavy Burdens, and
grievous to be born, and lay them on Men's Shoulders, but they themselves will
not move them with one of their Fingers. They were knowing enough, in all the
Points of their Religion, to teach, and instruct others, and insist upon their
being very exact, in every little Rite, and Mode, and yet they would not so
much as put forth their Hand, they would not be at the trouble to move a
Finger, to perform what they knew to be their Duty. Therefore our Lord
pronounced a Woe upon them, saying, v. 23. Woe unto you, Scribes, and Pharisees,
Hypocrites; for ye pay Tithe of Mint, and Annise, and Cununin, and have omitted
the weightier Matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith.

So, in the Christian World, Men may not only be great Masters of Reason, above
their Neighbors, but, by reading, and hard Study, may arrive at uncommon
Measures of Knowledge in the Doctrines, and Duties, of Christianity; they may
be well studied in the Christian Religion, in all the Parts of it, as a
Science, and may make great Proficiency, and Improvement, in the speculative
Knowledge of it, and yet, for want of acting according to their Knowledge, and
living up to the Truths they are acquainted with, at last, be found amongst the
Workers of Iniquity, and come short of the Rest that remains for the People
of God. There are many, it is to be feared, among professing Christians, who
satisfy themselves with this, that they know as much as their Neighbors, they
have been well instructed in their Youth, and have had the Advantage of setting
under a learned, and orthodox Ministry, and are become well ac^uainted with the
Principles of the Christian Religion, and they doubt not but that they shall
fare as well, in the Conclusion, as those precise, scrupulous, weak Creatures,
as they account them, who will not allow themselves to go their Lengths, and
practice as they do. But, let me tell all such Self-Deceivers, that all the
Knowledge, and Learning, in the World, will not save them, unless they make it
their constant Care to live according to what they know, and add to their
Knowledge Temperance, and Patience, and Godliness, and Brotherly-Kindness, and
Charity; for without these Things they will remain barren, and unfruitful, in
the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Persons may be well read in the Holy
Scriptures, they may have them at their Fingers Ends, and yet perish, at last,
for want of a real Conformity to what the Word of God requires of them. As
one, among ourselves, once well expressed it The Reverend Mr. Nehemiah Hobart,
of Newton, in a Latin Panegyric upon some of Mr. Cheever's Scholars.
: Dum Probitas indocta Polum petit, atque prehendit,
Doctos, si pravos, Praedam sibi poscit Avernus.
While untaught Virtue 'll scand, and gain, the Pole,
Wide Hell demands the lettered, guilty, Soul.


In short, the End of all Knowledge is Practice. As all Knowledge in the Things
of Nature, and Art, that has not, some way or other, an Influence, for the
better, upon the Practice of Mankind, is vain, and insignificant; so, in
Religion, whatever fine Speculations any may entertain about it, who have not
their practical Judgment improved thereby, and are not careful to rectify their
Hearts, and Lives, by the Knowledge which they have, they are, in the Account
of the sacred Scriptures, but as the Horse, and Mule, without Understanding.
Psalm. xxxii.9. Yea, their Knowledge will but so much the more aggravate their
Crime, and increase their Punishment, while their Lives are a Contradiction to
what they know to be their Duty; for, to him that knows to do good, and does
it not, to him it is Sin: Jam. iv.17. It is Sin, with this peculiar
Aggravation, that he acts against the Light of his own Mind, and stands
self condemned in what he does.

So that, as ever perishing Sinners would be saved, it concerns them not only
to know, but to do, all that is necessary in order to their Salvation. There is
something to be done, by the Sinner himself, that he may escape Hell, and get
safe to Heaven, and all that is necessary to be done by him is included in
these two Words, Faith, and Repentance, which therefore are a direct Answer to
the great Enquiry, what must I do to be saved? Thus the Apostle Paul gives us
the Summary of all his preaching, and what he ever taught, both publicly, and
privately, as the great Duties incumbent upon every one that would be saved, in
that saying, Acts xx.21. Testifying, both to Jews, and also to the Greeks,
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. According to
this great Example, I shall now consider these, as the two main Hinges upon
which all our Practice turns, and therefore as including all that is
necessary for the Sinner to do, that he may obtain that eternal Salvation that
is set before him in the Gospel. And I shall begin with the last of them first.

I. It is absolutely necessary, that perishing Sinners believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, in order to their being saved.

II. It is absolutely necessary, that the perishing Sinner repent of all his
Sins, in order to his being saved.

These two grand Points of Christianity are well worthy of our most serious
Consideration, being of such Weight, and Importance, that no Man can be a true
Christian, without them; and yet being designed for Persons of the meanest
Capacity, as well as those of more enlarged Minds, I am apt to think, that
there is not that Difficulty in a sufficiently right understanding them which
some are ready to imagine; because an infinitely wise and good God cannot be
supposed to require such Things, as Duties necessary to the Salvation of
Mankind, as exceed the Capacity of the Meanest, and puzzle the Understanding of
abler Heads, to entertain a just Conception what it is that is demanded of
them. I shall endeavor therefore, with all Plainness, to show you, as God
shall enable me, the Nature, and Necessity of them.

I. It is absolutely necessary, that perishing Sinners believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, in order to their being saved.

This being a very great, and essential Doctrine, and Duty, of Christianity,
laid down in the Gospel, in the strongest Terms, and often repeated, and most
peremptorily required of us, I shall endeavor to lead you into a right
Conception of it, by distinctly considering these following Heads; which, I
trust, will open to you, the Nature, and Necessity, of a true Gospel Faith,
even that Faith which if a Man have, he shall be pardoned, justified, and
eternally saved; and show you what the Sinner must do to obtain it: viz.

I. I shall show you, what it is to believe in Jesus Christ, or what that Faith
in Christ is, which the Gospel requires of Sinners, as necessary to their
Salvation.

II. I shall evidence that this Faith in Christ, which the Gospel requires, is
absolutely necessary to the Sinner's Salvation.

III. I shall then consider, what the perishing Sinner must do to obtain this
Faith in Christ, that he may be saved.

I. I am to show you, what it is to believe in Jesus Christ; or what that Faith
in Christ is, which the Gospel requires of Sinners, as necessary to their
Salvation.

Here I shall not trouble myself, nor you, with the many School Distinctions,
about the Nature of a justifying, saving, Faith; the most of which appear to me
to be no better than vain Disputations, and idle Wranglings, to no good
Purpose: for the greatest Part of Mankind are not capable of receiving them,
and entertaining any clear Conception of them; and, probably, the far greater
Part of true Believers know nothing at all about them; and if they knew more of
them than they do, they would but serve, rather, the more to puzzle their
Heads, than to better their Hearts, or Lives, and very much tend to bewilder
them in Uncertainties of their own State, or puff them up with a vain Conceit
of themselves; as, on the one Hand, we see many good Christians walking in
Darkness, and calling in Question the Truth of their Faith, because their Minds
have been greatly clouded with the Smoke, and Dust, arising from the subtle,
and intricate, Distinctions, and Disputations of Men; and very loose, and
carnal Professors, on the other Hand, fondly concluding the Certainty of their
Faith, and highly opinionated of themselves, because their Tongues are tip'd
with a peculiar set of Phrases, they have been taught to be the distinguishing
Characters of a saving Faith, which yet they understand not. The Gospel Account
of that Faith in Christ, which is necessary to Salvation, and so to our being
justified, and accepted of God, seems, to me, sufficiently plain, and level
to the lowest Capacity, and I shall not endeavor to make it less plain, but,
if possible, to remove the Rubbish, and wipe off the Dust, that it may appear
in a fair Light, and you may see more distinctly what that great Duty of
believing is, which is required of you.

Only I would observe, that in discoursing upon the Doctrine of Faith in
Christ, I am not concerned to enter into any particular Consideration of the
Belief of the Being of a God; because, though this is forever included in the
Gospel Dispensation, and the Faith therein required of us, yet it is nothing
peculiar to the Christian Religion, but is the common, and only certain,
Foundation of all Religion; and I am prone to think, that there are but very
few, if any in the World, and I am pretty sure that there are none such among
ourselves, but what believe there is a God; though many are Fools enough to say
in their Hearts, as their secret Wish, and, if they could, would, persuade
themselves, that there is none.

The Faith that I am to treat of is, That Faith in Jesus Christ, which the
Gospel alone requires of us. I say the Gospel alone; for, it was required of
the Jews, under the Old Testament Dispensation, to believe in the Messiah to
come, to whom all their legal Sacrifices, Services, and Priesthood, had a
special typical Reference, in which Sense the Gospel was preached unto them, as
the Writer to the Hebrews observed; Heb. iv.2. yet, by this, I would be
understood to distinguish the Faith of the Christian, not only from that of a
Pagan, (...) Mohammedan, but, from the Faith of the Jew; inasmuch as the new
Testament, which is, strictly speaking, the Gospel, requires of us Faith in
the Messiah, or, Jesus Christ, as already come, to all the Intents, and
Purposes, he was originally designed for; as the promised Deliverer, who should
recover the World from the dreadful Effects of Satan's Malice, and Power, in
engaging the human Nature in a Revolt from it is rightful Sovereign.

And because this is so great an Article of real Christianity, and that you may
not be mistaken in so important a Point, upon which all our Hopes of future
Happiness are dependent, I shall now proceed, with all convenient Plainness,
and Brevity, to set before you, what appears to me to be, the true Gospel
Notion of Faith in Christ, or, what the Gospel intends by a Sinner's
believing on the Lord Jesus Christ, to the Salvation of the Soul: for this the
Apostle, in the Verse following my Text, gives, as a direct Answer to the
Iayler's Enquiry; Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved.

Now, in the General, this Faith, which the Gospel requires, in order to a
Man's being justified, and saved, does not seem to me, to mean, the Act of any
one particular Power, only, of the Soul, but, of all the Powers of it, and so
it is the whole Soul exerting itself, in it is Regards toward the Lord Jesus
Christ, according to the Demands of the Gospel. It must be the Act of the whole
Soul, because the whole Soul is designed to be brought Home to God, by the
Faith of Jesus Christ; and Faith must have it is Regards to the Lord Jesus
Christ, as the special Object of it, because it is in, and by, him alone, as
our only Mediator, that we can have any Access unto God; and it must be
according to the Demands of the Gospel, because therein only we have a
Revelation from God, how we may have Access to him, by Faith in Christ Jesus.
And therefore, as I conceive, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, includes, more
particularly, these Things in it.

1. A serious, and firm, Persuasion of Mind concerning the Truth, and
Certainty, of all that is revealed to us, in the Word of God, relating to Jesus
Christ, and the Way of Salvation by him.

2. An entire Satisfaction with the Methods of Salvation, by him, propounded to
us in the Word of God.

3. An hearty Acceptance of, and Closure with, the Lord Jesus Christ, as our
Savior, according to the Gospel Offer.

These Things, which seem to me to be level unto every ones Capacity, and
comprehend in them that Faith in Christ, which the Gospel Revelation insisteth
upon, as necessary to Salvation, require to be more distinctly considered by
us. And I beseech you to give Attention to these Things, for they are your
Life; and, as we go along, see whether these Tokens of Salvation are to be
found upon you. Accordingly,

1. That Faith which the Gospel demands, as necessary to Salvation, includes
in it, a serious, and firm* Persuasion of the Mind of the Truth, and Certainty,
of all that is revealed to us, in the Word of God, relating to Jesus Christ,
and the Way of Salvation by him. Under this Head, are considerable, The general
Nature of Faith, as being a firm Persuasion of the Mind; The special Nature of
this Faith, as differencing of it from that which (...) merely humane, in that
it is the Persuasion of the Mind of the Truth, and Certainty, of all that is
revealed to us, in the Word of God; and the special Object of this Faith,
namely Jesus Christ, and the Way of Salvation by him, as so revealed. So that I
am to consider,

The general Nature of Faith, as being the serious and firm Persuasion of the
Mind of Things reported to us. The Seat of this Faith is the Mind; Romans xiv.5.
Let every Man be fully persuaded in his own Mind. By the Mind, in this Place, I
specially intend the Understanding, that noble Power in us, by which we have
any Conception of Things handed to us by our Senses, deduced by our Reasoning,
or reported to us. The exercise of the Mind about those Things which are the
Objects of Faith is, it is being seriously, and firmly persuaded of them; and
the Foundation of this Persuasion, or what produces this Exercise, of the Mind
is, the Report that (...) made to us of any Matter, or Thing. So that Faith, in
the general Notion of it is, the Persuasion of the Mind concerning any Thing
which is reported to us. And thus those Things that might, possibly, be
objected to our Senses, or be deduced from Principles of Reason, yet, by being
first handed to the Mind, by Report from others, become properly the Objects of
our Faith. So, Through Faith, we understand that the Worlds were framed, by the
Word of God, so that Things which (...) seen were not made of Things which do
appear. Heb. xi.3.

Though in a more lax Way of speaking, we often use the Words, Faith, and
Knowledge, promiscuously, yet they are really two distinct Things. We come at
all our Knowledge, by our Senses handing the various Images of Things to our
Minds, and by our Reasoning upon them: and when those Images of Things, in our
Minds, are exactly agreeable to the Objects which excite them, our Knowledge is
then certain, or, it is true and proper Knowledge; but so far as the Images, or
Conceptions, in our Minds, come short of a correspondent Agreement to the
Truth, and Reality, of the Things represented by them, so far our Knowledge is
uncertain, and imperfect, and at best can be no more that a fluctuating
Opinion. By Reasoning, and Discourse, we infer less evident Truths, from those
that are more plainly, and certainly, evident to us; and if, from certainly
known Principles, we make a just Inference, we have a certain Knowledge of the
Conclusion also; but if, either our Principles are not certainly true, but
false, or precarious, or, our Inference is not just and good, we have no true
Knowledge of the Thing concluded upon, but deceive ourselves with a vain Notion
of it.

But now, Faith does not result from this, or the other, Object, striking
immediately upon our Senses, nor from our Reasoning upon such Ideas as our
Minds are stored withal, but is grounded purely upon Testimony, and arises
from the Evidence we have of the Credibility of the Thing reported to us; If I
say the Truth, why do ye not believe me; Joh. viii.46. so that the Mind
yeildeth it is Assent to the Truth of what is testified, upon the Evidence he
have, or which we suppose we have, of the Veracity of the Speaker.

Thus, again, Faith is a very different Thing from Fancy, which, according to
some, is but a faint Resemblance of those Things which are perceived by our
external Senses; and therefore while the Imagination has but a confused Notion
of Things, it is not to be wondered at, that those, who are very much under the
Power of it, should be led into Wildness, and Confusion. Whereas the Objects of
our Faith, I now mean our Christian Faith, are Things which Eye has not seen,
nor has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive of them; they do not arise
from our Senses, nor from our Reasonings, but God has revealed them unto us,
in Terms plain, and easy to be understood.

Farther, Faith is very distinct from Presumption. For Presumption is no other
than the Mind'^ being persuaded of the Truth, or Certainty, of a Thing, upon no
Foundation, or without any sufficient Evidence to support it; which, in
Religion, is of the most dangerous Consequence: whereas the Faith required of
us, is the Persuasion of the Mind, of any Truth, or Fact, upon full, and clear
Evidence of the Ability, and Integrity, of the Speaker; and we may depend upon
it, that God will never find Fault with any Man, for his not believing what he
had no sufficient Evidence of. Hence the Writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews
gives this Definition of Faith, Heb. xi.1. Now Faith is the Substance of
Things hoped for, the Evidence of Things not seen. Faith is built upon full
Evidence, as the only solid Foundation of it.

And because Faith is founded upon Testimony, therefore, according to the
Evidence we have of the Credibility of that Testimony, so will the Mind be
either firmly persuaded of the Truth of the Thing reported to us, or remain in
Doubt, and be at Uncertainties about it: and thus our Reason is assisting to
our Faith, by forming a Judgment of the Credibility of the Thing reported to
us; for though we may not be able to see into the Reason of the Thing reported,
(as is the Case of all who, at first, are instructed in the Principles, and
Documents, of any Art, or Science,) yet we may have all imaginable Reason to be
satisfied in the Veracity, and Integrity, of the Reporter, and so be able to
give a good Reason why we believe what he has told us; but if, either the
Thing, testified to, be flatly contradictory to the Principles of right Reason,
or the Speaker be unworthy of our Credit, we then suspend our Faith, and
believe nothing of it. This seems to me to be the general Nature of Faith.
But then

2. I must consider the special Nature of that Faith, which is required of us
in the Gospel, and that is, the firm Persuasion of the Mind of the Truth, and
Certainty, of all that is revealed to us, in the Word of God; by which it is
differenced from that Faith which is merely humane.

Humane Faith is, the Assent of the Mind to the Truth of what any Man has told
us, upon probable Evidence of his Knowledge of the Thing reported by him, and
his Veracity in delivering himself to us according to his Knowledge, and
without any Design of imposing upon us; and as our Evidences, of the Truth of
an humane Testimony, are more or less strong, and conclusive, so our Faith will
be firm, or wavering; and because the fullest Evidence of the Truth of an
humane Testimony, unattended with Divine Credentials, can amount to no more
than a moral Certainty of the Ability, and Integrity, of the Speaker, which by
no Means supposes the Impossibility of it is being otherwise, so our Faith, of
what is spoken, though it may be every Way sufficient to influence us in our
Practice, and Conduct, in all the Affairs of this World, yet, can be no more
than the Mind's Assent to the very great Probability, not absolute Certainty,
of the Truth of the Thing spoken.

A Divine Faith, which is the Faith required of us as necessary to Salvation,
is the Assent of the Mind to the Truth of a Thing spoken, upon a Divine
Testimony, or because God himself has spoken it. And because we have the
highest Assurance of the Infallibility of God, that he cannot be deceived, and
imposed upon, with any wrong View, and Conception of Things, but (...) a most
perfect Knowledge of them, as they truly are in their real Nature, and all
their Circumstances; and of his infinite Purity, and Veracity, which cannot
possibly admit of his designedly imposing upon us; therefore, upon having
sufficient Evidence of any Thing's being a Revelation from God, we have full
Assurance, not of the Probability, but, of the absolute Certainty of the Truth
of the Thing so revealed, without the least Grounds for Doubting, and
Hesitancy; and the (...) here upon becomes firmly persuaded, that (...) God
has spoken is infallibly true, though, at the same Time, she cannot comprehend
the Reason of the Thing revealed. This is the Faith which God requires of us,
and therefore has he spoken to us; and upbraideth our Unbelief, saying, (...)*
xiv.11. How long will ye provoke me? How long will it be ever ye believe me? It
was well pressed by Iehoshaphat, King of Judah, 2 Chronicles. xx.20. Hear me, O
Judah, and ye Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Believe in the Lord your God. And
justly did the Apostle, for the Comfort of his Companions, upon what God had
told him, say, Acts xxvii.25. I believe God.

There is no one Principle in Nature, that carries clearer Evidence with it,
and strikes the Mind with greater Force, than this, That God is true; and it
is utterly impossible that it should be otherwise. The Apostle therefore makes
his Appeal to the common Sentiments of all Mankind, as well as assures the
Believer, of the absolute Certainty of the Word, and Promise of God, saying,
Heb. vi.18. It was impossible for God lie. And therefore, whatever Doctrines
God is pleased to reveal to us, though ever so far transcending all that our
Reason can possibly comprehend, our great Duty is, to pay this just Regard to
the Authority, and Veracity, of the Speaker, as firmly to believe what he has
spoken, because he is infallibly true; and not first to search into the Nature
of the Doctrine, and credit, or reject, it according as we can understand the
Mystery contained in it, or no: for this is, not to believe what God says,
but, to believe the Report of our own Reason. Can nothing, I beseech you, be
true, but what thou understandest the Nature, and Reason of? Where is the Man
that has so little Modesty, and so much Ignorance, as to assert, or even
suppose this! And what then, should hinder the Divine Being from revealing such
Things to us, as are absolutely true, and yet exceed the Power of our narrow
Conceptions to understand them. Verily the naked Word of God is as certain as a
Demonstration, and more so, because, possibly, a Man may be mistaken in forming
a Demonstration, as many great Men have been; whereas the Word of God is
infallibly true, and therefore more to be depended on than a Demonstration.
Reason must submit to Faith, or give Place to it, in supernatural Things, which
fall not within it is Sphere, but are above it; yet there is the highest Reason
to credit the Truth of them, when God has revealed them: because we owe the
Submission of our Minds to the Truth of a Revelation from God, as truly as the
Subjection of our Wills to the Authority of his Precepts. And as God never will
require it of us, to believe what he does not afford us sufficient Evidence of
it is being a Revelation from him, so neither will he ever require us to believe
any farther than he has seen Cause to reveal; and therefore, though the Nature
of the Thing revealed may remain a Mystery to us, yet the Truth of it is what
we are more specially concerned with, as the Object of our Faith, and whatever
lies hid in the Nature of it does not belong to us: for secret Things belong
unto the Lord our God, but those Things which are revealed belong unto us.
Deuteronomy. xxix.29. Thus the Truth of this Revelation, that Jesus Christ is the only
begotten Son of God, is all that we are concerned to believe; but how he is the
only begotten Son of God, belongs to us neither to know, nor believe; if it
did God would have revealed it unto us.

This, then, is the great Thing demanded of us, to believe, credit, and yield
the Assent of our Minds, to the Truth of all that God has spoken to us, in his
Word, which he has confirmed with the most incontestable Evidences of it is
being a Revelation from him; Heb. ii.4. God himself bearing Witness, to the
first Publishers thereof, both with Signs, and Wonders, and diverse Miracles,
and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his Will. And therefore we are called
upon, Man. i.15. to believe the Gospel; to give Credit to all that God, in his
Gospel, has spoken, and revealed to us.

This Faith, being the Assent, or Persuasion, of the Mind, founded upon divine
Testimony, cannot, considered in Reference to the Object of it, admit of
Degrees; because all that God has said is equally infallibly true; but yet,
considered as it is in us, so it admits of various Degrees, and is more or
less strong, and firm, according to the different Degrees of Evidence which we
have, of such a Thing's being a Revelation from God, and proportionably to the
different Degrees of Application, which we make of the Evidences offered to us,
to our own Minds. I should proceed to a third Head, but must leave it to the
Afternoon.

SERMON X.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
I Told you, that it is necessary that the Sinner reduce his Knowledge into
Practice; which includes in it Faith, and Repentance. Under the Head of Faith,
I showed you, in the Morning, that Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ comprehends
in it, a serious and firm Persuasion of Mind of the Truth of all that is
revealed concerning Christ, and the Way of Salvation by him; where I considered
the general Nature of Faith, and the more special Nature of that Faith required
in the Gospel.

3. I am now to consider the more special Object of this Faith, namely, the
Lord Jesus Christ, and the Way of Salvation by him. The general Object of our
Christian Faith is, indeed, the whole Word of God, even all that the Lord our
God has spoken to us, or all the Revelations which he has made to us of his
Mind, and Will, concerning us, and our Duty; whether Predictions, Prophecies,
Doctrines, Precepts, Promises, or Threatenings, to which I may add Histories,
which are contained in the Canon of the Holy Scriptures, which have been
spoken, and written, by holy Men of God, moved thereunto by the Holy Ghost: for
all Scripture is given by Inspiration of God; 2 Timothy iii.16. and therefore all
of it is to be believed: but the more special Object of our Faith, (and which I
am more particularly concerned with in my Discourse on the Subject before me,)
as necessary unto Salvation, and which rendereth it a justifying, saving,
Faith, is, the Lord Jesus Christ.

There are two Things respecting Christ, considered as the special Object of
this Faith, the Persuasion of the Mind, that fall under Consideration, namely,
that he is a Person sent from God, and the ancient promised Messiah, and that
all that he has spoken is true.

First, Thus Christ is the special Object of our Faith, as a Person sent from
God, upon which very much depends the Authority he assumed, and the Truth of
what he affirmed, and taught; and therefore this was what he often insisted
upon, and proved to his Hearers, that he was sent from God* Joh. v.36, 37. The
Works, which the Father has given me to finish, the same Works that I do, bear
Witness of me, that the Father has sent me: the Father himself, which has
sent me, has born Witness of me. And this Christ not only endeavored to
convince the World of, but it is what he earnestly desired, and prayed for,
Joh. xvii.21. that the Worl^ might believe that thou have sent me.

Besides, Christ is the Object of our Faith, as that very Person who was
promised, of old, to come into the World, under the Character of the Messiah,
and Deliverer; and if the Marks, and Characters, of that very Person, given in
the Writings of the ancient Prophecies, had not exactly agreed in him, and in
him only, the Jews would not have been to blame for their rejecting him, and
refusing to own him to have been the ancient promised Messiah of God: but
inasmuch as all the evident Characters of the Messiah met in him, and in no
other, therefore their Unbelief was justly chargeable upon them, and our Lord
said to them, Joh. viii.24. if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in
your Sins. He, that is o erchomenos, He that was to come. Matthew. xi.3. So that
this is what we are to believe, and be persuaded of in our Minds, that that
very Person, promised firstly to Adam, and then to Abraham, and afterward to
the People of God, in his ancient Records, under the Character of the Messiah,
and Deliverer, has already come into the World, and Christ was he, and we look
for no other. But then,

Secondly; We are to believe all that Jesus Christ has told us, concerning
himself, and that the Doctrines which he has taught us are true. Thus we are to
credit what he has (...) us concerning himself, especially, that he is the Son
of God, and the Savior of the World. For thus Christ asserted, concerning
himself, that he was the Son of God; and that not only, by Implication, in
stiling God his Father, but in express Terms, Matthew. xxvii.43. He said I am the
Son of God: and this we are to believe concerning him; one great Intention of
the Gospel being to lead us into the Faith hereof. Joh. xx.31. These Things are
written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, (the promised
Messiah,) the Son of God, and that believing ye might have Life through his
Name.

And so are we to believe that Jesus Christ is the Savior of Sinners. For this
is couched in the very first Promise concerning him, and is often spoken of, in
the Old Testament; and at his Birth the Angel proclaimed, Luke ii.11. Unto you
is born a Savior, which is Christ, the Lord: and he himself has told us,
Matthew. xviii.11. The Son of Man, (by which Style Christ was well known,) is
come to save that which was lost; that is, to save lost Sinners. And his
Enemies flung it at him, in the Way of Scoff, Matthew. xxvii.42. He saved others;
that is, He assumed this Character to himself, to be the Savior of others.
This then is what we are to believe concerning him, that he is, indeed, the
Christ, the Savior of the World; otherwise we shall never look to, and depend
upon him, for Salvation.

But farther, we are to believe all that Christ has told us, and all that is
related in the Gospel, concerning him, to be infallibly true; that there was
such a Person, as Jesus Christ, who lived, and died, as Jerusalem, in the Time,
and after the Manner, recorded of him; that he taught such Doctrines, and
wrought such Miracles, as we have an Account of in the Gospel; that he died for
our Offenses, lay under the Power of Death for a Time, and then rose again for
our Justification; that he ascended up into Heaven, and ever lives to make
Intercession for us; and that he will come again to Judge the Quick and the
Dead. These, and all that is contained in the Word of God, concerning Christ,
and the Way of Salvation by him, we are to yield the Assent of our
Understandings to, being firmly persuaded in our Minds of the Truth of them
all: and this Use, and Import, of the Word, Faith, is the first, and lowest
Degree, or perhaps Kind, of Faith in Christ, that is required of us in the
Gospel.

There are many who do not get thus far; though they have read, and heard, the
Gospel, and have had the Evidences, of it is being a Divine Revelation, plainly
laid before them, yet they do not credit the Report, or assent to the Truth of
is, as a Revelation from God, but, instead thereof, openly reject, and oppose
it, and even strain their feeble Powers to nullify it. So did the unbelieving
Jews of Old, with whom the Scepticks of the present Age, join, in their
Opposition to the Truth of the Gospel: though this is the first necessary
Ingredient of our Faith in Christ, to credit what the Word of God has told us
concerning him, and the Truth of the Doctrines he has taught us.

Though this is the general Notion of Faith in Christ, yet, this, alone, is not
all that the Gospel intends by that Faith in Christ which will save us, that
Faith which, if a Man have, will entitle him to the Pardon of his Sins, and his
final Acceptance with God, according to the true Meaning of the Phrase, He that
believes shall be saved. For not only the Devils thus believe and tremble,
Jam. ii.19. and could say, Luke iv.34. I know thee, who thou art; the holy one
of God; but we find many, who live under the Gospel, and have their Minds, in
some Measure, persuaded of the Truth of the Divine Revelation, yet are far from
being true Believers in Christ: their vicious, and immoral Lives plainly
declare, that they are not Believers, in the Gospel Sense of the Word. They,
therefore, who think this is all that the Gospel intends, by Faith in Jesus
Christ, that the Understanding be convinced, in some Measure, of the Truth of
the Things, concerning Christ, reported to them, and stop here, will certainly
find this Faith will not save them; because, with all this Faith in their
Heads, they may remain, in their Hearts, and Lives, but as very Devils, and at
a great Distance from Christ, and Salvation by him. Wherefore I proceed to say,

2. Faith in Jesus Christ includes in it, an entire Satisfaction with the
Methods of Salvation, by him, propounded to us in the Word of God. A Man may be
convinced of the Truth of what is told him, by such strong Arguments as shall
silence all Cavilling, and take off the Force of every reasonable Objection,
while yet he is far from being satisfied with the Report, and from approving
what he is even compelled to credit. Thus, a Man may have an historical Faith
in Christ, he may be forced by the Strength, and Clearness, of the Evidence set
before him, to own the Truth of the Gospel History, in the General, and to
credit, in particular, what it affirms concerning Christ, his Person,
Miracles, Doctrines, Actions, and Sufferings; and yet, at the same Time, be no
Ways satisfied with, or acquiesce in, the Methods of Divine Grace, which the
infinitely wise, and good, God has fixed upon, as the only honorary, and
effectual, Way, to bring about the eternal Salvation of guilty Sinners, by this
Jesus; but rather be fond of some Methods, and Schemes, of his own devising,
which, he is ready to think, lay out a much nearer, and more agreeable, and
ratitional, and safe, Way of Salvation, than that which is proposed to him in
the Gospel. And because he has a very great Fondness for his own Thoughts of
Things, how different so ever from what is revealed, here he fixes himself,
this alone he approves of, and all his Hopes, and Expectation, of Salvation,
are founded upon this; and so he believes, not according to what God has
revealed to him in his Word, but, according to the Reasonings, and Sentiments,
of his own Mind. This, now, is not to be a Believer in Christ, according to the
Scripture Use of the Phrase, but to be a Believer in self, in his own Reason,
and Understanding.

This, I am very much persuaded, from what I have seen of their Writings, is
the Condition of the Generality of the Infidels, and Deists, of the present
Age. They are so prejudiced against the Methods of Salvation, by Jesus Christ,
revealed in the Gospel, the Humility, and Self Denial, that is requisite to be
beholden to Christ, and receive all, they would hope for, in a Way of Grace,
and Favor; and the Holiness, and Purity of his Doctrines, that they cannot
bring themselves to approve, and acquiesce in, what seems to pour such
Contempt upon themselves, and abridge them of their gratifying their most
prevailing Appetites. They imagine they have found out a much nearer, and
easier, Way to be happy; it is but to comply with the Dictates of Nature,
uncorrected as it is, which they suppose to be the most rational Method that
can be taken, and make no doubt but the Supreme Being will be favorable to
them. From these Prejudices, and their Fondness for their own Sentiments, and
high Opinion of their own Performances, mean as they are, they are put upon
finding Fault with the Gospel Revelation, and lay hold on every little
Objection, though ever so frivolous, and search out Difficulties where there
really are none, that, if possible, they may invalidate the Credibility of it;
and all, not so much, because they do not see sufficient Reason to credit the
Gospel, as, because they can by no Means approve what is so disagreeable to the
Haughtiness of their Minds, and the Dissoluteness of their Manners, Howeve^,

This, I conceive, was the Case of the Jews, when Christ was amongst them; and
therefore the Apostle said of them, Romans ix.31, 32. They attained not unto the
Law of Righteousness; (they were not accepted of God as righteous, and so
justified, and saved,) wherefore? (said the Apostle, and he gave this Reason
for it,) Because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the Works of
the Law; for they stumbled at that stumbling Stone. They did not believe in
Christ, because they were offended at him. They missed of Salvation, not so
much for want of an historical Faith, but because they did not approve of the
Way of Salvation by Jesus Christ, they were prejudiced against him, and the Way
of Salvation by him, and they thought it more reasonable, and safe, for them to
seek for Salvation, by the Law of Moses, than by the Gospel of Christ. So that
it was their Prejudice against the Person, and Doctrines, of Christ, and Want
of approving the Grace of the Gospel, that put them upon rejecting the Lord
Jesus Christ, and not their Want of sufficient Evidence, and Conviction, that
he was truly sent from God, and the ancient promised Messiah. Therefore our
Lord upbraided them, saying, Joh. v.43. I am come, in my Father's Name, and ye
receive me not; if another shall come, in his own Name, him ye will receive. So
when Theudas, and Judas, Acts v.36, 37. came, in their own Names, pretending to
be the Saviors of that People, to deliver them from the Oppressions of their
temporal Enemies, many of them, readily received them; but when Christ came,
with full Credentials from his Father, to save them out of the Hands of their
spiritual Enemies, they received him not, because they were prejudiced against
his Person, and Doctrine.

The Evidences of Christ's Mission from the Father, and consequently the Truth
of what he taught them, shone in so full, and strong, a Light upon them, that,
though they did all they could to close their Eyes, and shut out the Light from
them, yet they could not help seeing something of it, and acknowledging his
Credentials; and therefore, when the chief Priests, and Pharisees, who were
most inveterately set against him, were assembled together, to vent their
Spite, and Rage, at him, and took Counsel together to put him to Death, the
Force of Truth compelled them to own his Divine Mission, and say, Joh. xi.47.
What do we; for this Man does many Miracles. And when the same Principles of
Malice, and Rage, against our Lord, put them upon severely threatening of his
Apostles, and straightly charging them, that they, hence forth, speak to no Man
in the Name of Christ, the Evidences of a Divine Power, accompanying their
Ministry, forced them to say, Acts iv.16. What shall we do to these Men! For
that, indeed, a notable Miracle has been done by them, is manifest unto all
them that dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it.

From all which is appears, that even the wicked Jews themselves had an
historical Faith in Christ, for they could not but inwardly credit his Mission,
when they thus owned his Miracles, because herein they had the same Sort of
Proof, and as strong, for the Belief, that Jesus Christ was sent from God, as
they had for Moses. But their Prejudices against Christ, as a mean, and
obscure, Person, who did not head their Nation in all the Grandeur of of a
temporal Prince, as Moses had done, nor work that Deliverance for them, from
their outward Enemies, which they vainly expected from the Messiah, made them
refuse to own, and submit to him. So that they were wilfully blind, even when
they could not help seeing; they obstinately rebelled against the Light, which
shone forceably upon them; which occasioned our Lord's charging their Sin, in
not believing on him, upon their Obstinacy, and Wilfulness; Joh. ix.41. Jesus
said unto them, if ye were blind, ye should have no Sin, (that is, in not
believing on him,) but now ye say, we see, therefore your Sin remains: for ye
will not come unto me, that ye may have Life. Joh. v.40.

True Faith in Jesus Christ, therefore, necessarily includes in it, a full
Satisfaction of Mind in the whole Method, which God has seen meet, in his
infinite W^sdom, and Goodness, to fix upon, to bring a poor guilty, condemned,
Sinner, to Life, and Happiness, by the Incarnation, and Death, of his only
begotten, and dearly beloved, Son. The great God has proposed to gratify his
own free, and rich Grace, in the Salvation of the guilty Sinner, not for the
Sake of any Worthiness in the Sinner, or of any Thing he can do to obtain it,
but, in and by the Merits of his own Son, appearing, on our Behalf, to offer
himself, in our Nature, a Sacrifice of Atonement, to appease the Divine Anger,
and reconcile us unto God. Therefore God is said, Romans iii.25. to set him forth
to be a Propitiation, through Faith in his Blood, for the Remission of (...)
that are past. What is our Faith in his Blood? But, as, the Assent of the Mind
to the Truth of it, that Christ has actually shed his Blood for us, so, the
Soul's entire Acquiescence in this wonderful Method of Divine Grace, and
Satisfaction (...) the glorious Designs of Mercy, in God, to the Sinner, and
Honor to himself, and Son, in the Way of saving him by the Sufferings, and
Death, of Jesus Christ.

Until all the Prejudices of the Soul against Jesus Christ, and the Way of
Salvation by him, are removed, and the Man acquiesces in this, as the Way of
God's Appointment, let the Mind be ever so truly persuaded of the Credibility
of the Gospel Revelation, the Sinner will never look to Christ, to be saved by
him. Any other Way, that has not our Prejudices to struggle with, though ever
so false, will be acceptable to us; while that which is the only true Way of
Salvation, and, perhaps, we cannot help thinking so, shall be rejected by us,
while our Prejudices remain upon us. Th^^ the Cry of old was, Joh. xviii.40.
Not this M^^ but Barrabas.

In this Sense, as denoting the Soul's Acquiescence in the Divine Methods of
Salvation, by Jesus Christ his Meriting all for us by his Death, and not
expecting of it from the Merits of any Works of our own, (I take it,) it is
that Faith (...) opposed unto Works, (though it is never to be separated from
them,) in the Justification of a Sinner in the Sight of God. For, all the Works
of moral Obedience that can be thought of, without the Understanding's Assent
to the Truth of the Gospel Revelation, and the Mind's approving the Way of
Salvation which God has, therein, marked out for us, will leave the Man at as
great a Distance from Christ, and Salvation by him, as if there never had been
any such Person; whereas the Soul's Approbation of the Methods of Grace,
revealed in the Gospel, leads it to Christ, the Savior, and is productive of
good Works.

And yet, even this Aquiescence, and Satisfaction, of Soul, in the Method of
Salvation by Jesus Christ, may go no farther than the Affections approving of
it, and so is not comprehensive of the whole of that Faith which the Gospel
requires, as necessary to Salvation. Wherefore I go on to add,

3. Gospel Faith includes in it, an hearty Acceptance of, and Closure with,
the Lord Jesus Christ, as our Savior, according to the Gospel Offer. That is,
the Soul becomes willing that Jesus Christ, and he alone, should be it is
Savior, and accordingly makes Choice of him, as such, and heartily, and
thankfully, receives him, seriously dedicateth itself to him, to be redeemed
by him, and to become his Servant forever, depending upon him for
Righteousness, and Salvation.

A Man may not only acknowledge the Truth, and Reality of a Thing, but see
something of it is Excellency, and be satisfied in the Goodness of it, in it is
Place, and yet not look upon it as good, for him, and therefore never close
with it, or be at any Pains to secure it for his own. But when once the Soul is
thoroughly convinced of the Truth of a Thing, and that it is not only good in
itself, but good for him, and is sensible that he cannot do well without it,
that the Enjoyment of it is necessary to constitute his own Happiness, then the
Soul, not only is carried out in it is earnest Desires, and Labors, after it,
but, upon the first Opportunity, willingly parts with all lesser Interests for
the Sake of it, readily lays hold upon it, closes with it, and secureth a
special Propriety in it. This is the natural Acting of the reasonable Mind,
with Relation unto all that it apprehends to be good for it.

Thus it is here; When the Mind is thoroughly convinced of the Truth of the
Christian Religion, and approves of the Methods of Divine Grace, revealed in
the Gospel, and sees that this is a most excellent, and the only sure, Way of
Salvation, because what the infinite Wisdom, and Goodness, of God has chosen,
and laid out for us, then the next Act of the Soul is to close in with this
Way, and, accordingly, to receive Jesus Christ, as freely offered to us in the
Gospel: and because the Soul is sensible that her everlasting Well-being is
dependent upon her Interest in this Salvation, therefore she will begrutch no
Labor, and Pains, nor count any of the little Interest of Flesh, and Sense,
and this World, too much to part with to obtain it. Hence it is said, Romans
x.10. With the Heart, Man believes unto Righteousness. That is with the active
governing Power of the Soul, the Will. The Faith that justifies, and saves
us, is not seated only in the Head, much less in the Feet only, but in the
Heart; which implies the Consent of the Will, concurring with the Assent of
the Understanding, and the Approbation of the Affections, in accepting the
gracious Offers of the Gospel. And when this governing Power of the Soul, the
Will, thus closes with the Way of Salvation, set before us in the Word of God,
and sincerely receives, and heartily submits, to Jesus Christ, as our alone
Savior, then is the Man a true Believer, (...) the Gospel Sense, and has that
Faith, like our Father Abraham, which is imputed to him for Righteousness. Romans
iv.22.

But it must be (...) that this Closing with the Lord Jesus Christ, ^s our
Savior, must be in the Way, and upon the Terms, of the Gospel, that is to say,
in that Way, and upon those Terms, which God has appointed; for it cannot be
supposed, that the great God, who is Sovereign of his own Favors, will save
any Man, but in his own Way, and upon his own Terms. And because the Condition
of the Sinner is, that of a guilty, ignorant, impotent, Creature, alienated
from the Life of God, a Stranger to the Way of Peace, and without Strength,
either to overcome his Enemies, perform his Duties, or to lay hold on eternal
Life, therefore it has pleased God, in great Wisdom, and Condescension to
furnish the Lord Jesus Christ, as our great Redeemer, with all those
Qualifications which are adapted to our Condition, that he might effectually
accomplish the whole of our Salvation: and, consequently, our Faith must
necessarily have it is Respect to Christ, under the Consideration of those
special Qualifications, in order to our partaking of his Salvation.

Since, therefore, God has sent his Son, under the Character, and with the
Qualification, of the great high Priest of our Profession, by the offering of
himself a Sacrifice for our Sin, and pleading our Cause, to make up the Breach
between God and Man, and reconcile us to God, and God unto us, our Faith in
Christ must include in it, our Closure with him in the Character of a Priest;
that is, the hearty Consent of our Souls that Christ should be all that unto
us, that any Priest can be, and our Reliance upon the Merits of his Atonement,
and the Prevalency of his Intercession, to slay the Enmity, and reconcile us,
in one Body, unto God. Thus he is the Propitiation for our Sin, through Faith
in his Blood; Romans v.9, 10. that, being justified, through his Blood, we may be
saved from Wrath, through him; for, if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled
to God, by the Death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved
by his Life.

And because God has, in these last Days, spoken to us by his Son, a Prophet
mighty in Word, and Deed, whom he has sent to teach, and instruct, Sinners in
their Duty, and the Way of Peace, and Life, by his holy Doctrines, and most
exemplary Walk, therefore our Faith in Christ necessarily includes in it, our
Closure with him under the Character of a Prophet, who has faithfully revealed
to us the Will of the Father; that is, our hea^^ Consent to be taught, and
instructed by him, and sincere resigning of ourselves up to the Directi^^^ of
his Word, and Conduct of his Spirit; and to that we call no Man Master, for one
is our Master, even Christ. Matthew. xxiii.10.

Farther, since God has given him to be Head over all Things, to his Church,
and set (...) as King upon his holy Hill of Zion, to rule in the midst of his
Enemies, to give Law to his People, to communicate all divine Influences to
them, and confer the promised Blessedness upon them; therefore our Faith in
Christ necessarily includes in (...) our hearty Closure with him under the
Character of a King, whose Kingdom is, not of this World, but, spiritual, and
heavenly, intending the subduing of our Lust, the Mastery over our Appetites,
the preparing of us, by a Life of Holiness, for, and at last bringing of us to,
a Life of consummate Happiness, in the heavenly World; that is, that we yield
the hearty Consent of our Souls that Christ should set up his Kingdom in us,
and rule over us, and that we pay that Homage, and Subjection, which is due to
him as our Lord, by our ready hearkening to his Voice, obeying his Commands,
and following of him, and by our depending upon him, and seeking to him, for
all Divine Influences, to enable us to resist Temptations, perform Duties, and
to persevere in the Way of Well-doing, and to confer the Crown of Glory upon
us. Thus, Acts ii.36. We are to know, assuredly, that God has made this same
Jesus both Lord, and Christ.

This is what, I suppose, is intended by that Expression, in the Writings of
many Divines, a Closure with a whole Christ.

I must observe farther, that the Gospel proposes no other Savior to us but
Christ alone; it acquainteth us with no other, but the Incarnate Son of God, as
equal to the great Work of saving a Soul from Sin, and Satan, from Death, and
Hell, and bringing of it to God, and Happiness; so that Christ will admit of no
Competitor, nor suffer any of this Glory, which belongs to him alone, to be
given to another; and therefore in our Closing with Christ, we must sincerely
renounce, all Dependence upon any other, whether Saint, or Angel, and all
Ability, and Self-sufficiency, of our own, either to merit Pardon, and Life, or
to deliver ourselves from the Tyranny of our spiritual Enemies, the Hands of
Divine Justice, and the condemning Power of the Law, or to confer those
gracious Qualifications upon ourselves which make us meet for the heavenly
Inheritance; and must make Mention of his Name, and his Righteousness, even of
his only, knowing there is Salvation in no other, for there is none other Name,
under Heaven, given among Men, whereby we must be saved. Acts iv.12.

Thus, there must be a Closing with Christ, a whole Christ, and none but Christ.

And now, after all the Disputes, that have greatly divided the Christian World
into Parties, about a justifying, saving Faith, the particular Act, and the
critical Mode of the Acting, of Faith; and whether Faith is an Instrument, or a
Condition, of our Justification; and under what particular Considerations
Christ is the Object of a justifying Faith; or about whatever other Nicety,
concerning Faith, it is Object, and Operation, learned Men may employ their
Thoughts, and puzzle the Minds of others; I am verily persuaded, that I have
given a just, and plain, Account of that true saving, justifying Faith in
Christ, which is so much spoken of in the New Testament, and is ever intended,
when we are there told, He that believes shall be saved, and that a Man is
justified by Faith, and the like Expressions: which do not mean a particular
Act of any one distinct Power of the Soul, only; but intend the Acting of the
whole Soul, and all it is Powers; the Understanding, in crediting the Truth of
the Gospel Revelation, relating to Jesus Christ; the Affections, in their
Approbation of the Methods of the Grace of God by him; and the Will in it is
Choice of, and Closure with, Jesus Christ, as our alone Savior, in all his
mediatorial Offices: and in whom soever this Faith is found, I doubt not but
that Person will be finally justified, and saved.

And if we do but seriously attend to the true Scope of the Gospel Account of
this Matter, we shall plainly see, that the Word Faith, when referred to Christ
as the Object of it, and as denoting the Way unto Salvation by him, is always
to be understood in this Sense. Sometimes indeed, we find it denotes the Act
of some particular Power of the Soul, as when our Lord said to the Jews, Joh.
x.38. Though ye believe not me, believe the Works, etc. which evidently means
their crediting of him, if not for his Word, yet for his Works Sake. Thus also
he said, Joh. v.44. How can ye believe which receive Honor one of another, and
seek not the Honor which comes from God only? which plainly refers to the
Prejudice of their Affections, and Fondness for worldly Things, which
occasioned their Want of an entire Acquiescence in the Methods of Divine Grace.
But when the Scriptures speak of believing in, or on, Christ, in order to
Salvation, they always intend the Act of the Will, together with the
Understanding, and Affections; and therefore those Phrases are explained by
that of our receiving him. Joh. i.12. To as many as received him, -- even to
them that believe on his Name. Hence Faith in Christ is often, in Scripture,
called a Coming to him: Joh. vi.35. He that comes to me shall never hunger, he
that believes on me shall never thirst; all of which do most strongly imply
the Act of the Will in our Choice of, and Closure with, Christ; that we come to
him, and receive him, as Disciples to their Master, as Criminals to their
Surety, and Advocate, as Subjects to their Lord, and King; that by our thus
coming to him, and believing on him, he may of God be made unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.

Thus I have endeavored, as clearly as I could, to set before you the Nature
of that Faith which is required of us in the Gospel, even that Faith in Jesus
Christ, which whosoever has, may upon good Grounds hope, that God, for Christ's
Sake, will pardon, and justify, and eternally save him. I should go on to
evidence the Necessity of this Faith, but I will conclude at present, by saying,

USE. Take heed, every Soul, of deluding yourselves with a false Faith. Many
have done so before you, and you are not out of Danger of being deceived to
your utter undoing. I beseech you, therefore, be very careful in this important
Affair, upon which all your eternal Salvation turns. Don't imagine that your
Faithfulness, Fidelity, or moral Honesty, in what you do, and say, is a saving
Faith; for though these, as the weightier Matters of the Law, are called Faith,
Matthew. xxiii.23. Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, yet this is no more than a moral
Heathen, who never heard of Christ, may be Owner of. Don't rest in an
historical Faith, that you believe the Reports of the Gospel, for though this
be a true Faith, yet it is not all the Faith the Gospel requires, in order to
Salvation; this, doubtless, was the Faith of Simon Magus, of whom it is said,
Acts viii.13, 23. that he believed, and yet that he was in the Gall of of
Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity. Neither delude yourselves with a temporary
Faith, which may somewhat engage the Affections to like and approve what the
Gospel makes known to you; for so the stony Ground Hearers receive the Word
with Joy; Mat. xii.20. and Herod heard John gladly, Mark vi.20. Be not deceived
with a particular Faith that your Sins are all pardoned; for though this may be
the joyful Portion of him that has heartily accepted, and submitted himself,
to, Jesus Christ, yet, without the Evidences of this espousal between Christ,
and the Soul, it is no better than a vain Presumption, and delusive
Self-Confidence. Yea, if you had the Faith of Miracles, so that you could
remove Mountains, yet, without closing with Christ, your Condition would be no
better than that of Judas, to whom our Lord gave Commission, as w^ll as to the
other Eleven, Matthew. x.8. To heal the Sick, cleanse the Lepers, and raise the
Dead. See to it therefore that your whole Heart, and Soul sincerely embrace the
Lord Jesus Christ, according to the Offer, and upon the Terms of the Gospel,
and resign yourselves wholly up to him, to the Government of his Righteous
Scepter; then may you conclude that your Faith is right, and such as God in his
Word requires of you: for he is thy Lord, and if thou thus Worship him, he
will greatly delight in thy Beauty, and thou shall receive the Blessing from
the Lord, and Righteousness from the God of thy Salvation. For so has Christ
said, Joh. x.27, 28. My Sheep hear my Voice, and I know them, and they follow
me; and I will give unto them eternal Life, and they shall never perish;
neither shall any Man pluck them out of my Hand.

SERMON XI.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
THE Doctrine I have noted, from these Words, was,

DOC. It is of the highest Concernment to perishing Sinners, to be very
solicitous, what they shall do to be saved; or, to know, and practice, all that
is necessary, in order to their Salvation. The Method, I proposed to take, in
the prosecuting this Subject, was this.

I. To show you what it is to be saved; or, what is that Salvation which
perishing Sinners stand in Need of.

II. To evidence that perishing Sinners may be saved; or, there is a
Possibility, notwithstanding their present miserable Condition, that they may
be eternally saved.

III. That perishing Sinners must know, and practice, all that is necessary, in
order to their Salvation; or, there is something to be done, by them, that they
may be saved.

IV. This is a Matter of the highest Concernment to them, and therefore they
ought to be most seriously solicitous about it. I am upon the Third of these
Heads; viz.

III. That perishing Sinners must know, and practice, all that is necessary, in
order to their Salvation; or, there is something to be done, by them, that they
may be saved. Under this Head I have proposed to consider, the Nature, and
Necessity, of saving Faith, and the Way to obtain it.

The last Opportunity I showed you, what it is to believe in Jesus Christ, what
that Faith in Christ is, which the Gospel requires, as necessary to Salvation;
namely,

1. A serious, and firm Persuasion of Mind concerning the Truth, and Certainty,
of all that is revealed to us, in the Word of God, relating to Jesus Christ,
and the Way of Salvation, by him.

2. An entire Satisfaction with the Methods of Salvation, by him, propounded to
us in the Word of God.

3. An hearty Acceptance of, and Closure with, the Lord Jesus Christ, as our
Savior, according to the Gospel Offer. Having, under these Three Heads, showed
you what I verily think to be the true Nature of that Gospel Faith, which, if a
Man have, he shall be pardoned, justified, and eternally saved; I now proceed
in the Second Place,

II. To evidence, that this Faith in Christ, which the Gospel requires, is
absolutely necessary to the Sinner's Salvation. This will be abundantly
evident, by considering the Tenor of the Gospel Revelation, and the Nature, and
Reason of Things.

1. It is very evident from the whole Tenor of the plain, and positive
Declaration of the Gospel, that this Faith in Jesus Christ, is absolutely
necessary to the Salvation of the Sinner. The whole Gospel is an utter Stranger
to any Way, of a poor guilty Sinner's partaking of the Salvation, he stands
in Need of, without this, of his believing on the Lord Jesus Christ; if you
search from one End to the other of it, you will find no Encouragement given,
to any Sinner, to hope that he may be saved, without this Faith in Christ,
which I have described. The very End, and Design, of the Gospel Revelation, are
to make known Jesus Christ, his Person, Nature, Offices, and Benefits, and to
show us the Methods of Salvation, by him; to set before us the wondrous Grace
of God, in the Gift of his Son, to be a Savior for us, guilty Sinners; to
acquaint us what Christ has done, and suffered for us, to bring about our
Salvation; and to proselyte us to the Faith of the Son of God, that, by him, we
might be saved. But to be more particular.

1. The whole Gospel does most positively insist upon our Faith in Christ, in
order to our Salvation. Christ himself, personally, and his Apostles, in
Commission, and Charge, from him, constantly preached this Doctrine, and urged
it upon their Hearers, that they must believe that they might be saved. Thus,

1. Jesus Christ himself, personally, preached the Necessity of this Faith, in
order to Salvation. Our blessed Lord upon the Confinement of John in Prison,
began his public Ministry, with preaching the Necessity of Faith, as one of
the great Duties of Christianity, upon which the regular Hope of Salvation is
built. Mark i.14, 15. Now, after that John was put in Prison, Jesus came into
Galilee, prea^^ing the Gospel of the Kingdom of God; and saying, the Time is
fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at Hand, repent ye, and believe the
Gospel. This is the peculiar Grace, and Demand, of the Gospel, the Word of the
Kingdom, that Men should believe in the Messiah, who, in the Fullness of Time,
came into the World, for this very Purpose, to set up the Kingdom of God among
them, as a Specimen of, and Preparation for, the Kingdom of Glory, in Heaven;
which Grace, and Demand, the Law, as contradistinct from the Gospel, was an
utter Stranger to. The Law, or Covenant of Works, (that is, that Dispensation
wherein the Great God transacted with Man, before the Fall, and showed him,
upon what Conditions, he might enjoy his Favor, or incur his Displeasure,)
runs in these Terms, Do, and Live, Disobey, and Die: by a personal, perfect,
and perpetual, Obedience to every Iota of the Divine Commandment, innocent Man
might have obtained an Establishment in the Favor of God, and have enjoyed an
everlasting Life. But this, we have seen, is impossible unto fallen Man, and
would not avail him, to merit Heaven, if he could, now, yield such an
Obedience. Whereas the whole Tenor of the Gospel Dispensation, (wherein God
transacteth with Man, after the Fall, and which lays the Foundation of our
future Happiness in the perfect Obedience, and expiatory Sufferings, of a
Mediator, and Surety, and is therefore styled a Covenant of Grace,) runs in
these Terms, Believe, and Live; believe in that Mediator, and Surety, that you
may obtain Life through him. This is what the Lord Jesus Christ, when he
tabernacled among Men, in Flesh, constantly preached, saying, Joh. iii.16, 18.
God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life: -- He that
believes on him is not condemned. And so you find him saying to Martha, Joh.
xi.25, 26. He that believes on me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:
whosoever lives, and believes on me, shall never die. Hence Christ said to
the Man, whom he had cured of his Blindness from his Birth, Joh. ix.35. Do
thou believe on the Son of God? And when the Jews came to our Lord, seemingly
very solicitous to know what they must do to be saved; what (say they,) Joh.
vi.28, 29. shall we do, that we might Work the Work of God? That is, that Work
which God requires of us, which is peculiarly pleasing to God, and by which we
may hope to obtain the Divine Favor: our Lord, in Answer to their Enquiry,
tells them, This is the Work of God, what God specially insisteth upon, that
ye believe on him, whom he has sent. Hence Christ said, to his Disciples, Joh.
xvi.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Our blessed Lord wrought his
miraculous Works on Purpose that the People might believe on him; therefore he
said to the Jews, Joh. xii.36. While ye have Light, believe in the Light, which
specially refers to the Light of Conviction, which the Miracles of Christ
carried with them, that he was sent from God, the promised Messiah, and the
Savior of the World; as is evident from what follows v. 37. But though he had
done so many Miracles before them, yet they believed not on him. And,

2. Jesus Christ gave it in strict Charge to his Apostles, (and so to his
Ministers after them,) to preach this great Gospel Duty, the Faith of Christ,
to the World; and this is one of the great Things they have insisted upon, in
all their Writings. After our Lord was risen from the Dead, and was about to
ascend up into Heaven, he gave his plenary Commission to his Apostles, and in
it strongly enjoined it upon them to preach to the World the absolute Necessity
of believing in him; for this was the Intent of what he said, Mark xvi.15, 16.
Go ye into all the World, and prea^h the Gospel to every Creature; he that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. And accordingly they made it their
great Business, from which no Threatenings, nor Sufferings, could ever
discourage them, faithfully to preach Christ, and the Necessity of Faith in
him, wherever they went. How often do we find this inculcated in the Acts of
the Apostles. Acts x.42, 43. He, that is, Christ, commanded us to preach unto
the People; -- to him give all the Prophets Witness, that through his Name,
whosoever believes in him, shall receive Remission of Sins. Acts xiii.38, 39.
Be it known unto you, Men, and Brethren, that* through this Man. (Christ,) is
preached unto you, the Forgiveness of Sins; and, by him, all that believe are
justified from all Things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of
Moses. And the Word of God increased, and the Number of the Disciples
multiplied, and a great Company of the Priests were ^bedient to the Faith. Acts
vi.7. And as many, as were ordained to eternal Life, believed. Acts xiii.48.
Thus they testif^ed both to Jews, and also to the Greeks, Faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ. Acts xx.20. And this is mentioned as the direct, and plain,
Answer of the Apostle, to the Iaylor's Enquiry; Acts xvi.31. And they said,
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. This Doctrine of
Salv^tion by Faith in Jesus Christ, they constan^ly asserted, and preached,
notwithstanding all the Opposition they met withal; and when the Iewi^h Council
forbad them to teach any more in the Name of Jesus, they boldly say to them,
Acts v.29 We ought to obey God rather than Men; and when they departed from the
Presence of the Council, -- they daily, in the Temple, and in every House,
ceased not to teach, and preach* Jesus Christ: v. 41, 42. and Believers were
the more added to the Lord, Multitudes both of Men* and Women. v. 14. And you
may observe the same Strain running through all the Apostolical Epistles. Romans
i.16, 17. The Gospel of Christ is the Power of God, to the Salvation of every
one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek: -- for the just
shall live by Faith. Romans iii.26. That he might be just, and the Iustifier of
him which believes in Jesus. 1 Cor. i.21, 23. It pleased God, by the
Foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe; -- we preach Christ
crucified, etc. Gal. vi.16. and iii.22. We have believed in Jesus Christ, that
we might be justif^^d by the Faith of Christ: that the Promise, by Faith of
Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe. Ephesians. i.12, 14. Who first
trusted in Christ, -- in whom, also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed
with the Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Earnest of our Inheritance. So I
might go on, through all the Epistles, to quote to you such Passages as show
the Necessity of Faith in Christ; but I shall content myself with turning you
to one Text more, which shows us, that this Faith in Christ is so strongly,
and peremptorily, insisted on, as if all the other Commands of the Gospel was
summed up, and contained, in this, and this were the whole of what God required
of us; The Place I refer to is in the first Epistle of John, iii.23. where the
Apostle observes the very great Stress laid upon this Duty, and says, This is
his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son, Jesus Christ.

Now, that all of this Faith, and Believing, in Jesus Christ; which was
preached, and urged, as necessary to Salvation, by Christ, and his Apostles,
means no other than that Faith which I have described, is very evident from
the Account which the holy Scriptures give us of the Faith of Abraham, the
Father of the Faithful. For, when God first called Abraham out of Ur of the
Cha^dees, to go unto a Land which he would show him, and promised to make of
him a great Nation, and to bless him, Abraham believed God; That is, he was
firmly persuaded of the Truth of all that God had said to him; nextly, he was
reconciled to, and acquiesced in, what God proposed to him, laying aside all
his Prejudices against leaving his Country, and Kindred, and traveling to a
strange Place; and, then, he also closed with the Proposal, by yielding a ready
Obedience to the heavenly Voice, and departed, as the Lord had spoken to him.
Genesis xii.1 -- 4. When, after that Abraham had gone Childless, until he, and
Sarah, his Wife were well stricken in Years, God renewed his Covenant with him,
and promised him a Son, by Sarah; Genesis xvii.16. Abraham believed God, being
fully persuaded of the Truth of what God had said to him. And when their Son
Isaac was grown up to be a young Man, God, to try Abraham, commanded him to
offer him up a Sacrifice upon Mount Moriah; here was the Test of Abraham's
Faith; his Faith still held out, he credited what God had said, and was firmly
persuaded that the Promise should be made good to him, even in this very Isaac;
and he overcame all the Prejudices, that might arise in his Breast, against the
offering of him up, even with his own fatherly Hand; and he yielded a ready
Compliance with the Divine Command, and so heartily closed with what God
demanded of him; he took his Son, the Wood, the Fire, and the Knife, and went
up to the Mount, built an Altar, laid the Wood in Order, bound his Son, and
laid him upon the Pile, and, with the Knife in his outstretched Hand, was going
to execute the Divine Command, in the utmost Extent of it, when, lo, a counter
Order stayed his Arm, and God provided a Ram, for a Sacrifice, in the Room of
his Son. This is that Faith which Abraham is so famous for; Romans iv.20, 21, 22.
He staggered not at the Promise of God, through Unbelief, but was strong in
Faith, giving Glory to God; and being fully persuaded, that, what he had
promised, he was able also to perform; and therefore it was imputed to him for
Righteousness. Thus was Abraham, our Father, justified by Works, when he had
offered Isaac, his Son, upon the Altar; see thou how Faith wrought with his
Works, and by Works was Faith made perfect? And the Scripture was fulfilled
which says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for
Righteousness. Jam. ii.71, 22, 23. But, besides all this,

2. The Gospel does most plainly assure us, that there can be no Salvation for
us, without Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. The Gospel not only positively
insisteth upon our Faith in Christ, that we may be saved, but it does also, in
very full, and strong Terms, assure us, that the Condition of those who believe
not will be very contrary to that of being saved. So said our Lord, Joh.
iii.18. He that believes not is condemned already, because he has not
believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God. and John says, v. 36. He
that believes not the Son, shall not see Life; but the Wrath of God abides on
him. Hence also Christ told the unbelieving Jews, Joh. viii.24. If ye believe
not that I am he, ye shall die in your Sins; and he acquainted them, Joh.
xvi.9. that w^^n the Spirit is come, he will reprove, or convince, the World of
Sin, because they believe not on me. And when he sent forth his Disciples, with
a Fullness of Power, to preach his Gospel to every Creature, not to Jews only,
but to the Gentiles also, he commissioned them to declare it, to all the World,
what are the Terms of a Sinner's Salvation, and that he insisteth upon it, that
they believe in him, and that, without coming up to these Terms, all their
Hopes of Salvation would be vain: Mar. xvi.16. He that believes not shall be
damned. And we are told, 2 Thessalonians. ii.12. that they all might be damned, who
believe not the Truth; and are assured, Luke xii.46. that the Portion of
Unbelievers will be very miserable; and that the unbelieving shall have their
Part in the Lake which burns with Fire, and Brimstone. Rev. xxi.8.

So that this is the Term, Condition, Proposal, Demand, (call it what you
will,) of the Gospel, upon which God will accept the Sinner to Mercy, freely
pardon all his Sins, and receive him unto eternal Life, and without which he
will have no Favor for him: we can therefore assure you, from our great Lord,
and Master, that if you will comply with this Demand, and thus believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ, you shall be saved; but and if you will not you shall be
damned. There will be no Possibility of your being saved from Sin, and Wrath,
according to the whole Scope of the Gospel Revelation, without Faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ. And then,

2. It is farther evident, from the Reason, and Nature, of Things, that this
Faith in Jesus Christ, is absolutely necessary to a Sinner's being saved. I
only now suppose there was such a Person as Jesus Christ, who lived a certain
Time in this World, and then offered up himself a Sacrifice unto God, for this
very End to save ^oor perishing Sinners, and that there is Salvation in no
other Name. Upon these Suppositions, which are plain and evident Truths of the
Gospel, and which therefore I need not now labor in the Proof of, we may very
well argue, and justly conclude, that no Person, that lives under the Gospel,
can possibly be saved, without the Faith in Christ I am speaking of.

For, How is it possible that any Man shall finally obtain Favor with God, who
makes God a Liar? 1 John v.10. He that believes not God* has made hi^ a
Liar, because he believes not the Record that God gave of his Son. Will God
put up such an Indignity, and cherish, in the Arms of his Love, him, that not
only has offered him the greatest (...), but continues thus to spit in his
Face? Or can any Man be the better, as to his eternal Interest, for the
Incarnation, and Death, of the Son of God, who, though he has the Opportunity
of receiving the clearest Conviction of the Truth of the Gospel History, yet,
does not so much credit it, as to believe that there ever was any such Person
as Jesus Christ, who taught such Doctrines, wrought such Miracles, suffered
such Indignities, and was crucified at Jerusalem, as are recorded of him; and
much less believes him to be the Son of God, and Savior of the World? No,
most certainly: because all that Christ is, and all that he has done, and
suffered, are, to such, a perfect Nullity; His very Person has no Being, in
their Esteem, nor ever had, because they do not believe the Truth of it, that
there ever was such a Person. Or, if they grant so much, that possibly there
has been a Person in the World of that Name, at the Time, and Place, specified,
and that he lived, and died after the manner as is affirmed; yet, inasmuch as
his Character, the Son of God, and Savior of Sinners, and so the grand
Intention of his Life, and Death, is utterly disbelieved, and looked upon, by
them, as a mere Chimaera, and the vain Whims of a deluded Fancy; therefore they
can never look to him for Salvation, nor ever be willing to accept any he
should make the Offer of to them; nay, they would despise it all, as an idle
Dream. So that from the Reason, and Nature, of Things, a crediting the Reports
of the Gospel is absolutely necessary to Salvation.

And so is our unprejudiced affecting of, and acquiescing in, the Methods of
Salvation by Jesus Christ. For, suppose a Man should so far credit the History
of the Gospel, as to put it upon the same footing with the Works of Socrates,
or Caesar, as to his believing, upon probable Evidence, that there was such a
Person, who said, and did, such Things, as are reported concerning Jesus
Christ; yet, can it be imagined, that God will dispense with the Glory of his
Wisdom, and Power, and ineffable Love, of his Holiness, and Rectitude,
manifested in the Salvation of a Sinner, by the Incarnation, and Death, of his
own Son, and be willing to look upon this amazing Effect of his infinite
Understanding, and boundless Goodness, as nothing, and less than nothing, only
that, after all, he might save a poor, guilty, perishing Creature, whom he
could make forever miserable by a Word's speaking, who can, by no Means, be
prevailed with to acquiesce in, and approve of, the Method of Salvation, which
God himself has laid out, and acquainted him with, in his holy Word; but
designs, and hopes, to get to Heaven in some other Way, which, perhaps, he
likes better, as being more agreeable to his present Conception of Things, and
suited to his corrupt viciated Inclination? That is to say, Is it fitting that
God should lay aside his own admirable Contrivance, every Way adjusted to the
Rights of his Nature, and Dominion, and to the Condition, and Circumstances, of
the Creature, to gratify the peevish Humor of the Sinner, and save him in that
Way, only, which his weak Reason, or raging Lusts, think to be best? Verily, a
Man, of but low Understanding, would be put to no difficulty to determine, how
unfitting, how unreasonable this would be. And we may be sure of it, that God
will have the Sinner to know, that he shall be saved in a Way of the Divine
Appointment, or not at all. If God's Way will not please him, he may be sure
that his own Way will not be pleasing to God. It is the highest Reason, that
our finite Understandings should give Place to the infinite Understanding of
God; and that he, who must be entirely beholden to the boundless Goodness of
God, to rescue him from Misery, and bring him to Happiness, if ever he partake
of his Salvation, should be entirely satisfied with the Wisdom of the Divine
Contrivance, without which he may not, he cannot, upon any reasonable
Foundations, expect to reap the Benefit of it.

And farther, should a Man, in the General, approve the Methods of the Grace of
God revealed in the Gospel, but yet not look upon them as suitable to him, in
Particular, and therefore not accept of Jesus Christ, as he is offered to him
in the Gospel, nor acknowledge him, as he ought, for his Savior; can it
reasonably be imagined that Jesus Christ would be a Savior to such an one?
Will he save any Man against his Will? Will he convey Light, and Understanding
to the Simple, who are so exceeding foolish as to refuse to hearken to his
Instruction? Will he give the Mastery over their Lusts, and Passions, lead in
the Paths of Righteousness, and conduct to Glory, those obstinate Creatures
that refuse to submit to his Government, and say of him, we will not that this
Man should reign over us? Will his Atonement, and Intercession, be of any Avail
unto such as will not own him for their Surety, and depend upon what he does
for them? Nay; can the Lord Jesus Christ be a Savior to such as refuse to
accept of him, in that Capacity, and will neither hearken to his Instruction,
submit to his Authority, nor have any Dependence upon his Atonement, and
Intercession? Verily, it is utterly impossible, in the Reason of Things, that
they, who slight, and reject, the Savior, should be saved by him. They cannot
be his Disciples, who will not put themselves under his Tuition; they cannot be
his Servant, who will not take him for their Lord; they can receive no Benefit
by his Death, who will not place their Trust in the Merits thereof. Psalm.
lxxxi.11, 12. Israel would none of me; so I gave them up unto their own Heart's
Lusts.

Salvation depends upon our Union with Christ, the second Adam, as
Condemnation is brought upon us by our Union with the first. 1 Cor. xv.22. As
in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. We cannot be
naturally, and corporally, in Christ, as we were in Adam; all our Union to him
is spiritual, and mystical, hidden from our Senses, and the View of the World,
and yet it is real, and effect (...) by the same Spirit, that was in him,
possessing, and dwelling, in us; and by our being considered as foederally one
with him, in the Covenant of Grace. I in them, said Christ; Joh. xvii.23. Thine
they were, and thou gave them me, said he; v. 6. and again, abide in me, and
I in you. Joh. xv.4. Hence we are said to be the Body of Christ; 1 Cor. xii.27.
each one, as Members in particular, being incorporated into him, being, by one
Spirit, baptized into one Body; v 13. and by our own Consent, espoused to him,
and become Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones. Ephesians. v.23, 30.
So that Christ and Believers are one, by the Father's Donation, by the
Inhabitation of the same Spirit, and by their own Consent: but how is it
possible that the Spirit that is in Jesus Christ should be in them, or that
they should be considered foederally as one, who withhold their own Consent,
and believe not on him? The Apostle says, Ephesians. iii.17. That Christ may dwell in
your Hearts, by Faith. Christ his dwelling in the Heart speaks a very close,
and intimate, Union; and the Apostle informs us how their Union is brought
about, and maintained, and that both on Christ's Part, and our own: on Christ's
Part this Union is accomplished by his Spirit, possessing, and influencing of
us, v. 16. being strengthened with Might, by his Spirit, in the inner Man; that
Christ may dwell in your Hearts: on our Part, this Union resulteth from our
Faith; that Christ may dwell in your Hearts by Faith. So that it is our Faith
in him, that uniteth the Soul to Christ, and makes it to become foederally one
with him. But then, what Portion can they have in God, or what Inheritance in
the Son of God, who believe not? As well may the Body be united to the Soul
without the Vinculum, or necessary Bond of Union, as a Soul be united to Christ
without Faith.

By the Union of the Soul to Christ, the Salvation of such an one is sure, and
certain, though he may not be able to know it, and take the Comfort of it, yea,
though he should be exercised with very distressing Doubts, and Fears,
concerning his future State; for the Certainty of their Salvation has it is
Dependence, not upon their Knowledge of it, but, as upon the Stability of the
Promise of God, who is infallibly true to his Word, so upon the Permanency, and
Perpetuity, of him, who is their Head, to whom they are united, as Members of
his Body; and therefore because he, their Head, is safe, and ever will be so,
in the full Possession of the ineffable Delights of the heavenly World; of
Consequence all the true Members of his Body shall be safe, as he is, and share
with him in the unutterable Felicity he is possessed of. Thus our Lord himself
argued, and assured his Disciples, and comforted them under the sorrowful
Apprehensions of his Departure from them, Joh. xiv.19. Because I live, ye shall
live also. Whereas those that are destitute of true Faith in Christ, which ever
includes a Subjection to him, as well as crediting of him, whatever their
Profession may be, and whatever Denomination of Christians they are of, must
necessarily die, and perish, even as a Branch that is cast forth, and
withers, that Men gather, and throw into the Fire. Joh. xv.6.

Thus we see, that ^aith in Jesus Christ is absolutely necessary to the
Salvation of the Sinner, both from the plain, and positive, Declaration of the
Gospel, and from the Nature, and Reason of Things: so that this is one Thing
the Sinner must do to be saved. But then, Can the Sinner thus believe, and be
saved? Wherefore I proceed,

III. To consider what the perishing Sinner must do, to obtain this Faith in
Christ, that he may be saved. Since Faith in Christ is absolutely necessary to
Salvation, and this is what I must do, to believe in Christ, that I may have
everlasting Life, how shall I come at this Faith? Can a poor sinful, weak,
Creature do all this of himself? Can he not only credit the Reports of the
Gospel, but overcome all his Prejudices, and heartily close with the Offers of
the Gospel, and so believe in Jesus Christ, as God requires in his Word, by
the mere Strength of his own Powers? No, verily; We have already seen that he
is weak, and impotent, and not able to save himself; not only because he
cannot, by any Means, merit the Forgiveness of his past Sins, but also because
he cannot, of himself alone, come up to the Terms, which the Gospel demands,
that he may be forgiven: he has lost the Vigor of his Powers, has contracted a
vicious Bias upon them, and is become destitute of a sufficient Strength to
believe, according to the true Scripture Account of a saving, justifying Faith.
It is the Sinner's own Fault if he believe not; but it does not follow from
thence, that, if he believes, it is from the Strength of his own Powers. This
Faith is not the Product of Nature, nor grows in Nature's Garden, by all the
merely humane Art, and Skill, that any Man is Master of; but is a supernatural,
and Divine Work, produced in the Soul by the Finger of God, the Workmanship of
the Holy Spirit, who is the special Agent herein, and the principal Former of
the New-Man, and all the Parts thereof, within us. Hence Faith is said to be
the Gift of God; Ephesians. ii.8. and wrought by the working of his mighty Power.
Ephesians. i.19. Therefore also God is said, Romans xii.3. to have dealt to every Man
the Measure of Faith; which, whether it be understood of the Faith of working
Miracles, or that Faith which is a believing in Christ unto Salvation, it
comes to the same Thing, the one being the Workmanship of God, as truly as the
other. Hence the Divine Spirit is called the Spirit of Faith: 2 Cor. iv.13. and
we find the Apostle praying for the Thessalonians, in that Strain, 2 Thessalonians.
i.11. That God would fulfill all the goo^ Pleasure of his Goodness, and the
Work of Faith with Power.

But then, can the Sinner do nothing? Must he wait till it shall please God to
Work all his Work in, and for him, without any Thing of his own Labor, and
Pains, to obtain this saving Faith? Does not God require it of him to Work, and
that while it is yet Day with him? Yes, most certainly, there is something the
Sinner can do, and must do; and though he must wait upon God to do all for him,
effectually, because the sovereign God works freely, and powerfully, yet, he
must not wait idly, but in the diligent Use of the Means, which are of Divine
Appointment, that he may obtain the Blessing. Though a sovereign God may in
various, unexpected, and surprising Ways, excite Persons to improve the Means,
yet none may rationally look for the Blessing from him, without them. So that
the Question returns upon us, What then must we do to be saved? Or, seeing this
Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is so necessary unto Salvation, what shall I do,
that I may obtain this precious Faith? What can, and what must, the Sinner do,
in order to his being a true Believer in Christ?

In Answer to this I shall mention a few Things, which as they lie within the
Compass of humane Power, so they seem to me to be such a direct, and unfailing,
Method to obtain the Gift of Faith from God, as never disappointed any that
seriously, and diligently improved it. But I must leave the particular
Consideration of them to the Afternoon Service.

SERMON XII.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
HAVING formerly showed you what is that Faith in Christ which is required of
us, I endeavored, in the Morning, to evidence the absolute Necessity of this
Faith to a Sinner's being saved, both from the plain Declarations of the
Gospel, and the Reason of Things: and then proposed to consider what the Sinner
must do to obtain this precious Faith; which I now proceed to specify in
several Particulars. As,

1. The Sinner must seriously affect himself, with the Consideration of his
miserable, undone State, and, in himself, helpless Condition, out of Christ.
This the Sinner can do, his rational Mind capacitateth herefor; and this he
must do, as ever he would have the Divine Gift conferred upon him. No Man will
seek a Remedy until he is sensible of his Want of it. And there is no Man, I
suppose, so far gone, and sunk, under the Power of Sin, and Lust, but what can,
whilst he has the Use of his Reason, and is capable of thinking at all, by
seriously attending to the Dictates of natural Conscience, and comparing
himself with the Word of God, be sensible that he is a very great Sinner, that
he has, in many Things transgressed the Divine Law, and, thereby, has highly
offended the Divine Majesty. Natural Conscience will inform him, that all Sin
is most contrary to the very Nature of an infinitely Holy God, and cannot but
be hateful to him; and, if he look into the sacred Oracles, he may plainly see
all Sin condemned, and that the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against
all Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness, of Men: Romans i.18. That the Holy God has
denounced his Curse upon all Sorts of Sinners, and therefore upon himself,
because he has lived in such Sins, as Impiety, Profaneness, Intemperance,
Lewdness, Unrighteousness, Falsehood, Malice, Envy, Pride, or some other
Violation of the Divine Commands, which his own Conscience is privy to, and
which are most clearly condemned in the Word of God. It is in the Sinner's
Power to have some Sight of his own Sinfulness, because he is a Judge of his
own Actions, and the Obliquity of them, in their Departure from the Rule; for
his Conscience not only bears Witness to what he does, but his Thoughts in
the mean while accuse him. Romans ii.15. It Is in his Power, by serious
Consideration, which he is capable of, in some suitable Degree, to affect
himself with a View of the Baseness of his Sin, as it is contrary unto all
Right, and Equity, of the Injuriousness of it to himself, in all his Interests,
and of the Heinousness of it, as it is a Contempt of the Authority of the God
that made him, and bestows all his Enjoyments upon him. And can he not, in
like Manner, affect himself with the awful Thoughts, the fearful Apprehensions,
of that tremendous Wrath, and Vengeance, of the Almighty God, which his Sin
exposes him unto? And can he not, from the common Light which he receives
from the Scriptures, upon this View of Things, reason the Case with himself,
and see what a deplorable Condition he is in, as a lost Son, that has foolishly
wandered from his Father's House, and is now famishing, and dying, in the Want
of all that is necessary to his Support, and Comfort?

Yea, farther, it is in the Sinner's Power to affect himself with the Thoughts
how utterly unable he is to help himself; that he can make no Amends to God for
his many past Transgressions, nor repair the Injury he has offered unto the
Divine Majesty by his many Rebellions against him. Though he may have some
Thoughts rising in his Mind, that he will go and humble himself before God, and
confess his Iniquity to the Lord, and now put away his Sins, and live, for the
future, more according to the Laws of God, yet little close Thinking will show
him, that all of this is but a present Duty, and no Satisfaction for past
Offenses, and that nothing he can do will avail to divert the Divine Anger from
him; and that unless a gracious God, from the boundless Goodness of his Nature,
and for the Sake of the Merits of his Son, has Mercy on him, pardon, and save
him, he must unavoidably die in his Sin, and perish forever. There is no Sinner
that reads the Gospel, or has it preached to him, but what may plainly see,
that Sin has forfeited Heaven, and deserved Hell, and that Pardon, and eternal
Life, are to be obtained in, and by, Jesus Christ, and by him alone.

These Things the Sinner can weigh in his own Mind, and somewhat affect himself
with the serious Consideration of them; and thus put himself into the Way of
the Divine Spirit his effectual enlightening, and convincing of him, in order
to a through Conversion; and this he must do, that he may be led hereby unto
Jesus Christ, the only Savior from Sin, and Wrath. And,

2. The Sinner must bring home to his reasonable Mind, the Evidence, which is
laid before him, of the Truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. This also lies
within the Reach of the Sinner's natural Power. The Reason, and Understanding,
which God has furnished him withal, as a Man, fitteth him to judge of the
Evidence of the Truth of Things. The Sinner can as well seriously, and
impartially, search into the Evidences of the Truth of the Christian Religion,
as he can into the Truth of any Matter of Fact that is reported to him; and he
can weigh in his Mind, the Nature, and Strength, of those Evidences, and see
whether they carry so much Clearness, and Force, in them, as would move him,
upon the like Evidence, to credit any History of China, or ancient Rome; or
would influence him to engage in any Business, of Consequence to him, relating
to those Countries, which he never saw; and accordingly Act upon the Evidence
which he shall receive of the Truth of the Gospel History, as he finds the
Matters, contained therein, are of importance to him.

Thus he can see the full, and abundant, Testimony given to the sacre^ History
of the Gospel, by the Evangelists, who all concur in their Testimony to the
Matters of Fact, related by them, which they had the fair Opportunity to be
perfectly well acquainted with, being Eye, and Ear, Witnesses thereto, and the
Truth of which Testimony they sealed with their Blood; who all of them appear
to be honest, upright, Men, and Men of Truth, who abhorred lying; and who had
no worldly Interest in View, to bias them to what they report, but much the
contrary. Thus, he can see the Force of the Evidence of the Truth of it, That
Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and Savior of the World, arising from the many
plain Passages of the Scripture History that assert it, from the many open,
clear, and incontestible, Miracles wrought by our Lord, and his Apostles, in
Confirmation of it, and the exact Agreement of the many ancient Prophecies in
him, and in no other Person whatever.

So that the Sinner can reason himself into (...) historical Faith, or
Crediting, of the various Facts related in the Gospel, and other Writings of
the Apostles, which are left to us; and therefore into an historical Faith of
Jesus Christ his being the only, all-sufficient, and willing, Savior of
Sinners, as the Gospel reports him to be. His Invitat^on to Sinners to come
to him, and live; the Pains he is at in sending his Ministers to ^oo them to
accept of him; and, above all, his own dying for Sinners, are clear
Convictions, how ready, and willing, he is to receive all that come to him, for
Salvation; and his Divinity, as the Son of God, the Authority, and Power, he is
invested with, as Mediator, together with his prevailing Intercession at the
Right Hand of the Majesty on high, which the Scripture record of him, are a
full Proof that he is able to save, (...) the uttermost, all that come unto God
by him.

And as every Man can thus be at some Pains with himself, to reason himself
into the Belief of the Christian Religion, whence God said to his ancient
People, Isa. xlvi.8. Remember this, and sho^ yourselves Men; bring it again to
Mind; and our Savior said, Luke xii 57. Why even of yourselves judge ye not
what is right? so something of this he must do, that he may be found in the Way
of his Duty which is God's Way; as did Cornelius, when he sent for Peter, to
tell him Words whereby he might be saved: and without this, if, at last, the
Sinner be found in his Unbelief, it will be justly articled against him, that
he walked not in the Light while he enjoyed it, and therefore it is a righteous
Thing with God that he should be cast into outer Darkness.

3. The Sinner must stir up himself to take hold on Christ, and receive him for
his Savior. That is, the Sinner must try to believe. For there is no one Duty
that God requires of us, how utterly impossible soever it be to Flesh, and
Blood, and the Powers of Nature, but what it is our Part to use our best
Endeavors to perform that Duty, and look to God to help us, to do what we have
no Strength to do of ourselves. The Grace, and help, of God is to be looked for
in Conjunction with our own Endeavors, not in a Separation from them. Hos.
vi.3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord. Thus, impotent as
Man i^, he must take hold on the Strength of God, that he may be at Peace with
him. Isa. xxvii.5. This the Sinner must do; and this he can do. It Is a vain
Thing for him to say, he cannot try what he can do. Jesus Christ is freely
offered in the Gospel unto every Sinner, without Exception; and since there is
no Man but what can, by a due Improvement of his rational Powers, come to some
Conviction of his own Sinfulness, and what a wretched miserable Condition Sin
has brought him into, what imminent Danger he is in of perishing forever, and
that Jesus Christ the incarnate Son of God, and he only, is able to help him;
how naturally does this Conviction lead the Sinner, as a rational Agent, (and
who readily does so, in all other Cases,) to take Pains with himself, to make
out after Christ, that, if possible, he may lay hold on, and receive the Remedy
provided for him, and freely offered to him in the Gospel? And, at least, so
much he can do, namely, to rouse, and stir up, himself, by a serious
Consideration of the Necessity of his being saved; as the Lepers, in Israel,
argued, if we enter into the City, we shall die there; if we sit still here, we
die also; come let us fall into the Host of the Syrians, if they save us alive,
we shall live, if they kill us, we should but d^e; so may the Sinner say to
himself, if I continue in my present Condition, I perish; if I attempt to go to
Christ, I can but perish; I will therefore arise, and try what I can do: He can
seriously bear it in Mind, that there is nothing of equal Importance to him,
nothing which so nearly concerns him; that this is the one Thing needful to
him; and that, if he be not saved, he must perish forever under the Wrath of
God; and that yet it is possible for him to obtain Mercy with God, through the
Mediation of the great Redeemer; I say, he can awaken, and stir up, his Soul,
by such Considerations as these, to make out after an Interest in Jesus Christ,
and try what he can do to open his Heart, at the Call, and Invitation, of
Christ, that he may receive him, who offers to come in, and sup, with him,
that, receiving him, he may obtain the Blessing through him, even Life
forevermo^^ Though he be very sensible, that the utmost Strength of his own
Powers is insufficient to make a true Believer of him, yet he has sufficient
Encouragement to exert what little Power he has, and try to believe, because a
compassionate God has said, Matthew. xxv.29. Unto every o^e that has shall be
given, and he shall have abundance; that is, God is graciously ready to assist,
and strengthen, the willing, though feeble, and enrich the diligent, though
poor, Soul, with all the Blessings he needs, while the slothful shall be sent
empty away, and can rationally expect no Help and Assistance from him. So, the
Man, with a withered Hand, had evidently no Power, within himself, to stretch
it out; and had he replied to the Command of Christ, stretch forth thine Hand,
Alas! Master; It is withered; and how then shall I stretch it out? doubtless,
his helpless Condition would have remained upon him: but, when, in Obedience to
the Command of Christ, he stirred up himself, and but attempted the Difficulty,
which was surely too hard for him alone, then he received a Fullness of Virtue,
and Power, from Christ, and be stretched it forth, and it was restored whole,
like as the other. Matthew. xii.10, -- 13.

4. The Sinner must earnestly ask it of God, to bestow this Faith, in Jesus
Christ, upon him. Though the Sinner may, by the Strength of his own rational
Powers, credit the Report of the Gospel, as an History, yet, can he not,
thereby, be brought to close with Christ, and work a true Evangelical Faith in
himself; he cannot overcome all the Prejudices, that he labors under, against
Christ, and the Way of Salvation by him, because he has a natural Love to the
Ways of Sin, and high Opinion of self; neither can he truly submit to Christ as
his Lord, because his carnal Mind is at Enmity to the Divine Law. But, however,
he can ask it of God to renew his Heart, and Mind, and put a new Bias upon him,
and make him willing, and enable him, to accept Christ as offered to him in the
Gospel. If ever he believes to the saving of his Soul, it must be from an Act
of Favor in God, accomplishing this great Work in him, by the supernatural
Assistances, and Operation, of his Holy Spirit. For this Faith is the Gift of
God. Ephesians. ii.8. By Grace ye are saved, through Faith, and that not of
yourselves, it is the Gift of God. It is true that, the Grace of the Gospel,
and the Way of Salvation, by Jesus Christ, is not a Method found out by the
Strength of the humane Powers, but is the Gift of God, who has revealed it
unto us; but then, this is not what is chiefly, if at all, the Intendment of
the Apostle, in this Place, as some, who seem to take a great deal of Pains to
set aside the special Divine ^nfluences, in the Conversion of a Sinner, would
persuade us. It is very evident that the Apostle speaks, here, of that Faith
by which we are saved; by Grace ye are saved, it is an Act of Grace, and
Favor, in God, to save any of you, through Faith, as the appointed Means of an
Union to Christ, and Salvation by him; and this Faith does not flow from the
Strength of Nature, not of yourselves, but is the special Work of God, it is
the Gift of God: and the Reason which the Apostle gives, in the following
Words, confirms this; For, says he, We are his Workmanship, created, in
Christ Jesus, unto good Works. From whence it is apparent that the Apostle
intends, not an outward Act of Favor shown to us, as the Doctrine of Faith,
contained in the Gospel; but a special Work of Favor wrought within us: as if
he had said, It is the Work of God to make true Believers of you, to (...) you
to Christ, so that, (as he goes on,) ye are not, now, without Christ, and
Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, but are in Christ Jesus, made nigh by the
Blood of Christ, etc.

Now, though the Sinner cannot give Faith unto himself, yet he knows where to
go for it, even unto that God whose Gift it is; and he knows what he must do to
obtain it, even to ask it of that God, who is graciously ready to bestow it
upon them that sincerely pray to him therefore. God is wont to dispense his
Gifts, and Favors, is the Way of Prayer, as what ascribes to him the Glory of
his Sufficiency, Dominion, and Goodness, and owneth our entire Dependence upon
him, and so much the more endeareth the Mercy to us, when we receive it in
Answer to our Prayers. And this is what the Sinner can do. The same natural
Powers, that enable him to ask a Favor of any of his Neighbors, capacitate
him to po^^ out a Prayer to his God; so that he can, if he will, beg this Mercy
from God, to Work his own Work in him, even a Work of Faith with Power. And
this he must do, by his constant, daily, sincere, importunate Prayers to God,
to create him in Christ Jesus unto goo^ Works; and if the Sinner will but be
diligent, and serious, to do his Part, to obtain this Gift of God, he may
depend upon it, that God will not be wanting to confer of his Grace upon him;
for he has given him all imaginable Encouragement to wait upon him, in this
Way, saying, Matthew. vii.7, 8. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: for every one that asks,
receives etc.

In this Way, then, let every Sinner do what he can, that he may obtain like
precious Faith, to the saving of his Soul; and the Lord be with him. Before I
proceed to consider the second Thing the Sinner must do to be saved, I shall
conclude this first Head, with making some Improvement of what has been said
upon it.

USE. 1. Hence we may see the Reason, why Faith in Jesus Christ is so strongly
insisted upon in the Gospel, and so frequently urged by his faithful Ministers;
viz. because Faith is absolutely necessary to the Salvation of Men. As the
Belief of the Being of a God is the grand Principle upon which all Religion is
built, so Faith in Christ is the fundamental Principle of Christianity; and
therefore the Gospel, which aims at making Men to be Christians, and in this
Way to bring them to Heaven, and Happiness, preaches nothing more than this
Faith in Christ. All our Christianity is denominated from our Faith, because
this Faith is the very Point upon which all our Christianity turns. It is the
Principle in us, that gives us a Right to the Christian Name, that is
productive of Love, and good Works, the Christian Life, and ensureth to us a
Title to the pardoning Mercy of God, and the Glory of Heaven, the Christian
Hope; and without this Faith, we can neither serve God, so as to please him,
nor finally find Acceptance with him; we can neither be Christians; nor get to
Heaven. Hence it is that so great a Stress is laid upon Faith, in the Gospel,
and hence we so frequently, and earnestly, press it upon you, to believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ. The Sin of Unlief, under the Gospel, is therefore the great
damning Sin; all other Sins may be forgive^, upon a sincere, and hearty,
Believing in Christ, but if Men continue in their Unbelief, how shall they
escape the Damnation of Hell? Heb. x.26. There remains no more Sacrifice for
Sins; if the only atoning Sacrifice, which Christ has offered, unto God, once
for all, be rejected. Whatever be the Fullness, and Sufficiency, of Christ's
Merits, or his Willingness to save all that come to him, yet, without Faith in
him, no Man can receive any saving Benefit from his Appearing, and Death, he
can neither be enriched with the Virtues, and Graces, of the Christian Life,
which slow from him, nor enjoy the happy Lot, and Portion, of Christians, in
the upper World; he can neither be a good Man, nor be saved. And, if so, then
of Necessity such must fall under the Displeasure of the Almighty, and there
will be no possible Way for them to escape his righteous Judgments; there
remains a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation,
which shall devour the Adversaries. v. 27. It is not Men's being in such or
such an exalted Station, and making a Figure, in this World; it is not their
great natural Parts, or rich acquired Endowments of humane Learning, and
Knowledge; it is not their accumulated Wealth, and Abundance, that will carry
them safe to Heaven; nor is it their moral Honesty, and civil, and courteous
Behavior, among Men, that will avail to their Acceptance with God; no; they
may possess the World in the greatest Fullness, and be very inoffensive in their
Lives, and yet be banished from Heaven, after all. But the great Thing that
will open the Gates of Heaven, to the departing Soul, is, a true Gospel Faith
in Jesus Christ. Hence our Lord said to his Disciples, Joh. xiv.1, 3. Ye
believe in God, believe also in me; -- I go, and prepare a Place for you, and I
will come again, and receive you to my self, that where I am, there ye may be
also. And since this Faith in Christ is so absolutely necessary to Salvation,
is it to be wondered at that the Gospel so largely insisteth upon it? Or can
the Ministers of the Gospel bear to see their People go down to the Place of
everlasting Darkness, and Misery, and not urge, and press, it upon them, to
believe in Christ, that they may be saved?

2. From hence we may see the Reason, why so many, in the Christian World,
perish in their Sins; even because they do not truly believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ. It was the Complaint of the Prophet, of old, Isa. liii.1. Who has
believed our Report? and the Apostle makes the like Complaint, Heb. iv.2. The
Word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith, in them that
heard it. And thus it is also in our Days; many who hear the Word of God
preached, in great Plainness, and with great Fervency, yet do not mix it with
Faith, nor believe our Report, a vain Philosophy, with an Affectation of being
wise, above what is written, have conspired, with the Lusts of Men, almost to
banish Faith even from the professing World. Our Savior has told us, Matthew.
xx.16. Many be called, but few chosen. Alas! It is a most sad, and melancholy
Thought, that so very many perish from under the Gospel, the best Means of
their being saved: though they are lifted up to Heaven, in their near
Approaches to the Confines of that happy Country, yet they, at last, perish in
their Unbelief, and are brought down to Hell. And how can it be otherwise, when
we see the Lives of Men are so generally spent in the Service of Sin; in
Impiety, and profane Cursing, and Swearing, and Neglect of the Worship, and
Contempt of the Ordinances of God, in Unrighteousness, Fraud, Oppression,
Falsehood, Uncleanness, Intemperance, Malice, Slander, ungovernable Anger, and
the like? And that, so far as we are capable of discerning, as they live, so
they die, without any visible Change in them, or any great Concern what will
become of them? Yet these are numbered amongst Christians, they openly profess
themselves to be Believers, and because they say, they believe in Christ, and
it may be do so, with something of an historical Faith, therefore they pacify
their Consciences, and doubt not but that all shall be well with them,
hereafter; till, anon, they die, and drop down into Hell; and then they find,
to their Cost, that their Faith, such as it was, cannot possibly save them,
because, after all their Pretentions, they really had not that true Faith in
Jesus Christ, which the Gospel requires. There are two great Defects in most
Men's Faith; The one is, that it is defective as an historical Faith; there is
somewhat of the Nature of that Kind of Faith in them, but it is not built upon
the only sure Foundation; they believe the Scripture History, and so believe in
Christ, but, upon no other Foundation than this, that it is Part of the
Religion of their Country, and not because they have, upon due Search, received
full Conviction, in their own Minds, arising from the Testimony, and Seal of
God himself, of the Truth of what they believe; and thus the Faith which they
have, is rather an Opinion, than the Evidence of Things not seen, and so their
Faith, as Dr. Bates expresses it, Fol. p. 590.
may be absolutely true, but relatively false: and no wonder, if the House be
thus built upon the Sand, that the Storm quickly overthrows it.

Another Defect in their Faith, supposing it to be true as historical, is, that
it is not that Faith which the Gospel requires unto Salvation; it may be a
Part, (though the lowest,) but not the Whole of true saving Evangelical Faith,
which forever includes in it, not only a Belief that there was such a Person
as Christ Jesus, who said, and did, what is affirmed of him, in the Scriptures,
but a sincere, and hearty, Choice of him, in all his Offices, and with all his
Benefits, for our Savior; that is, that we truly subject ourselves to his
Teaching, and Government, as well as hope for Redemption through him; that we
sincerely consent, and be willing that he should save us from Sin, as well as
from Wrath, that he should make us holy, as well as make us happy. Without this
all a Man's historical Faith, should it be strong enough to remove Mountains,
will signify just nothing at all to save him.

So that, after all the open Profession, and Pretentions, and Hopes, of the
Generality of them that are called Christians, it may be said of them, They
have not Faith, they are not true Believers, in the Gospel Sense; and because
^hey believe not, therefore it is that they (...) Rebellion against their
Maker, and, at last, perish in their Sins. Hence is that Exprobration of the
Apostle James, Jam. ii.14. What does it profit, my Brethren, though a Man say
he has Faith, and have not Works? Can Faith save him? Which is to be
understood of a naked crediting the Report of the Gospel, or an historical
Faith in Christ, which can save no Man. Possibly, many Pieces of Divinity,
whose Writers, in treating of a saving, justifying, Faith, have chose to
express themselves in such Terms, That Faith is a firm Persuasion of the Mind
of the Truth of the Gospel, (though I readily understand them, as meaning by
it, not a naked Credit of the Gospel History, but such a Faith as has it is
Influence upon the Heart, and Life, and therefore called a firm Per^wasion;
including in it a Reception of Christ, upon Gospel Terms, and that purifyeth
the Heart, and works by Love* yet, I say, possibly such Writings,) may have
contributed, not a little, to the deceiving of many, who are ready to catch at
every Shadow, to countenance a false Faith.

3. See from hence the exceeding Perverseness of the humane Nature that it is so
difficultly brought to believe spiritual, and Divine Things, Faith in Christ is
absolutely necessary unto Salvation, and there is the surest Foundation laid
for this Faith that can be desired, in the Certainty of the Truth of the
Gospel, and the Evidences that Christ was sent from God, and that Salvation is
to be obtained by him, and by him only; and why is it then, that Men do not
believe the Gospel, and believe in Christ? Our Lord himself, has told us, Luke
xxii.67. Ye will not believe. Men more easily believe other Things, of very
considerable Importance to them, and Act upon the Faith thereof, though they
are often confirmed but by very weak Arguments; but how hard and difficult is
it to persuade them to believe in Christ, upon the strongest Arguments, and
clearest Evidence? The Pretension, indeed, often is, that they do not see with
their bodily Eyes, or they cannot understand all the Mysteries contained in in
the Doctrines that are revealed to them. But since there is the fullest
Evidence of the Truth of what is reported to them, and such Evidence as would
clearly determine them in other Cases, this shows, that it proceeds from
the desperate Perverseness of their Hearts, that they believe not. Joh. viii.46.
Though I tell you the Truth, (said Christ,) Ye believe me not: And why?
because, Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the Lusts of your Father ye will
do. So the God of this World has blinded the Minds of them which believe not 2
Cor. iv.4.

Who can understand all the Mysteries in Nature? and yet we are even compelled
to believe the Things which we understand not. And why then will not Men be
prevailed with to believe the Truths of the Gospel, sufficiently confirmed,
though they contain Mysteries in them? Said the Apostle, Gal. iii.1. O foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the Truth; before
whose Eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth, crucified among you? It
is a strange Fascination, this, upon the Minds of Men, that they should require
stronger Evidence, for their Belief of the Truth of the Gospel, than the Nature
of the Things will admit of, or than they require in other Cases. The Doctrines
of Faith are not to be proved by Sense, and Experience, nor by Reason, and
Demonstration, but by Testimony; and when this Testimony is clear, and full, we
have then all the Evidence that the Nature of the Thing does require, or will
bear. Upon this Foundation Men Act in all the Affairs of the present Life,
wherein Testimony is concerned; and is it not most unreasonable, that they will
not Act upon the same Evidence, or rather greater, in Matters wherein their
eternal Interests are concerned? This argues the Fascination of their Minds,
that their Hearts are desperately wicked, and therefore it is that they will not
believe; not for want of sufficient Proof of the Truth, and Reality, of the
Things proposed to them, but because they will not.

4. This should put us upon the serious Examination of ourselves, whether we
are true Believers in Christ, yea, or no. There are many, doubtless, who delude
themselves, with a false Faith, and false Hopes of Heaven, and Happiness, who
will, at last, be found to be destitute of the Faith, and miss of eternal
Salvation. What Reason, then, have we to be very much concerned, lest we also
be mistaken, in a Matter of so great Importance to us, and where there will be
no Possibility for us to correct the Error afterward? Heb. iv.1. Let us
therefore fear, lest a Promise being left us of entering into his Rest, any of
you should seem to come short thereof. If Faith, in Jesus Christ, be absolutely
necessary unto Salvation, then, by this, we may know whether we are in a State
of Salvation, whether we have good Grounds to hope that all our Sins shall be
pardoned, that God is reconciled to us, and will finally accept us in the
Beloved; and surely, it is richly worth our while to have some good Evidences
of this, that we may walk in the Light of the Lord, and joy in the God of our
Salvation.

I will only, now, briefly say, (agreeable to the Account I have given of a
true Gospel Faith in Christ,) are we careful, to our crediting the Reports of
the Gospel, to add, our cordial Approbation of the Methods of Divine Grace, in
the Way, and Manner, of the Sinner's Salvation, by the Incarnation, and Death,
of the Son of God? Are we satisfied in the Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness,
of this Way of Grace, and Favor, admire the Excellency of the Divine
Contrivance, love the Holiness, and Purity, of the whole Scheme, and adore the
Perfections of God, thus manifested for the Relief of poor perishing Sinners?
Is Jesus Christ, the chief Subject of the Divine Revelation, and the great
Author of our Salvation, exceeding precious to us, above all the Enjoyments of
this World? Have we sincerely, heartily, made Choice of the Lord Jesus Christ
for our Savior, in all his mediatorial Offices, and are we willing, not only
to rely upon the Merits of his Sacrifice, but, to put ourselves under his
Instruction, as a Teacher sent from God? Have we taken him for o^^ Head, and
resigned ourselves up to his Government, opened our Ears to hear his Voice, and
inclined our Hearts to comply with all that we shall know to be his Command?
Have we thus closed with him, as our Savior, that he may, of God, be made unto
us, Wisdom, and Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption? Then may we take
the Comfort of it, and know that we are in him, and he in us; and that this our
Faith, though but weak, and as a Grain of Mustard Seed, shall grow up, and bear
Fruit, unto eternal Life: for thus we are assured, 1 John v.12, 13. He that
has the Son has Life; -- These Things have I written unto you, that believe,
on the Name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal Life.

5. Lastly; Let us all, then, be persuaded to live by the Faith of the Son of
God; to live in the Exercise of a true Evangelical Faith in Christ, now, that
we may live with him forever, hereafter, in Glory. Our Salvation turns upon
this; and the final Trial, of those that live under the Gospel, will be,
whether they have complied with the great Demand of the Gospel, and have
believed on the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ; whether they have received him
into their Understanding, Affection, and Will, and entirely submitted
themselves to him, as their Master, and Lord. For, not every one that says to
me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the
Will of my Father, which is in Heaven; said Christ, Matthew. vii.21.

As to the Heathen World, who have not had the Gospel of Christ preached to
them, they will be judged by the Law of Nature, and be condemned, not for their
not believing on Christ, of whom they never heard, but, for their not
glorifying of God, when they had such evident Demonstrations of his Being, and
glorious Perfections, and their Relation to him, and Dependence upon him, from
all the Works of God arou^^ them. But the Case is otherwise with us, and the
final Process, with us, will be, according as we (...) true Believers in
Christ, or no.

Let us, then, now, be persuaded to embrace the Gospel Offer, and open the
everlasting Doors of our Souls, and receive Christ, the Lord, into our Hearts,
into our whole Hearts, that we may be found of him, in Peace, at the great Day.

And therefore, consider, how highly reasonable it is that you should credit
the Reports of the Gospel, concerning Christ, and the Way of Salvation by him,
which is so every way confirmed to be the Truths of God, testified to by the
Amen, the faithful, and true Witness, and ratified with his Blood.

Think also, how reasonable it is that you should approve of the whole Method
of Salvation by Jesus Christ, as most worthy of God, and advantageous to
yourselves. In what Way could the Divine Understanding, and Wisdom, more open,
and display themselves, than in this admirable Contrivance, wherein the Honor
of the Divine Sovereignty, and Dominion, is fully asserted, the Holiness of his
Law vindicated, his Justice satisfied, and his Mercy forever magnified, and
made glorious? Or, in what Method could God himself have more clearly
manifested the Superabundance of his Love, and Good Will, and more strongly
allure, and attach us to himself?

And consider, Is not Jesus Christ infinitely worthy of thy highest Affection,
and thy most humble Submission? Worthy is the Lamb, that was slain! Rev. v.12.
Is not he worthy that thou should come to him for Instruction, who teaches
so as never Man taught? Is he not worthy that thou should own, follow, and
obey him, who is Lord of all, the King of Glory? Is he not worthy that thou
should put thy Trust in him, look to him, and rely upon him, for Grace, and
Glory, and every good Thing, who has died to purchase all, and then again, and
everliveth, to see to the Bestowment of all upon thee?

O be persuaded, then, to yield the hearty Consent of your Souls, that this
Jesus should be your Savior, and resign up your whole selves unto him, to be
his only, entirely, and forever. And therefore begrutch no Pains to obtain this
precious Faith, in a due Improvement of your rational Powers, in searching into
the Truth of the sacred Writings; by a serious Reflection upon your unhappy
Condition, while separated from him, in whom all Fullness dwells; and by a
diligen^ Attendance upon the Word Preached, as the appointed Means to beget
Faith in you; that by your fervent Supplications to God, to Work this Faith in
you; that there may not be found in any of you an evil Heart of Unbelief,
departing from the living God, but, that you may be of them who believe, to the
saving of your Souls.

And if it has pleased God, who is never wanting to crown with Success, the
sincere, and honest Endeavors of those, who carefully seek the Blessing from
him, by the supernatural Operations of his Holy Spirit in you, to convey the
Divine Light into your Minds, in the Knowledge of Christ, and to warm your
Hearts with the Love of him, and bend your Wills to submit to his Discipline,
so that any of you can lay your Hands upon your Hearts, and say, I have
sincerely chosen the Lord Jesus Christ for my Savior, with a fixed Resolution
of Soul, to be a diligent, and constant, Follower of him; Thus I believe, Lord
help my Unbelief; then may thou, O happy Soul! say, 2 Timothy i.12. I know whom
I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed to him: And unto such an one, I may, in the Name of Christ, offer the
Word of Comfort, and say, as he did to Mary, Luke vii.50. Thy Faith has saved
thee; go in Peace.

Repentance absolutely necessary to Salvation. SERMON XIII.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
THE Point I am upon, from these Words, is, Doc. It is of the highest
Concernment to perishing Sinners, to be very solicitous, what they must do to
be saved; or, to know, and practice, all that is necessary, in order to their
Salvation.

I am upon the Third general Head under this Doctrine, namely,

III. That perishing Sinners must know, and practice, all that is necessary, in
order to their Salvation; or, there is something to be done, by them, th^^ they
may be saved. Though they cannot save themselves, yet there is something
necessary to be done, by them, and they must know what this is, and then reduce
their Knowledge into Practice. And in Answer to the grand Enquiry, What (...)
the Sinner do to be saved? I have said these two Things are absolutely
necessary.

I. It is absolutely necessary, that perishing Sinners believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, in order to their being saved.

II. It is absolutely necessary, that the perishing Sinner repent of all his
Sins, in order to his being saved. I have discoursed upon the Doctrine of Faith
in Jesus Christ, and showed you, what I apprehend to be the Gospel Sense of
that Faith in Christ, which is necessary unto Salvation, namely, a firm
Persuasion of the Mind, of the Truth of all that is related in the Word of God,
concerning Jesus Christ, and the Way of Salvation by him; and an entire
Satisfaction in the Gospel Method of Salvation by Christ; and an hearty
Acceptance of, and Closure with, the Lord Jesus Christ, as our only Savior,
according to the Offer of the Gospel. This Faith in Christ, I showed you, is
absolutely necessary, both, from the plain, and possitive, Demand of God, in
his Word, and from the Nature, and Reason of Things. This, therefore is one
Thing, in Practice, which the sinner has to do, thus to live a Life of Faith in
the Son of God, which that he may attain unto, he must seriously affect himself
with the Consideration of his miserable Condition out of Christ, being home to
his reasonable Mind the Evidences of the Truth of the Gospel of Christ, stir up
himself to take hold on Christ, and earnestly ask it of God to bestow this
Faith upon him. I proceed now to the Second Thing, under the Head of Practice;
namely,

II. It is absolutely necessary that the perishing Sinner repent of all his
Sins, in order to his being saved. Faith and Repentance are inseperably
connected, so that the one cannot possibly subsist without the other; for
whatever Precedence, in Order of Nature, as the Principle from whence it
springs, Faith may have to Repentance, yet can Faith no more be without
Repentance, than the Sun can exist without it is Rays, nor can Repentance be
without Faith, any more than the Rays can be without the Sun; and therefore
both are absolutely necessary to Salvation. And because this, of Repentance, is
a Duty incumbent upon every one of us, and so great a Matter as our eternal
Salvation is dependent upon it, I shall therefore endeavor, by Divine
Assistance, to make it plain to you in this Method;

I. By showing you, what that Repentance it, which is required of us, as
necessary to Salvation.

II. I shall evidence, that such a Repentance is absolutely necessary unto
Salvation, and no Man can reasonably hope to be saved without it.

III. I shall consider, what the perishing Sinner must do, to obtain this
Repentance unto Salvation.

I. I am to show you, what that Repentance it, which is required of us, as
necessary unto Salvation. Here it may be observed, that if Repentance be
considered as it respects the first turning of the Man, from that which is
Evil, to that which is Good, it means the same Thing with Conversion, and
Regeneration; and if we consider it as it respects particular Sins, or
particular Duties, or the Progress the Man makes, in mortifying of Sin, and
advancing in Holiness, so it is the same with Sanctification; so that it is
comprehensive both of the Beginning, and the Progress, of a Life of Holiness.
And that we may have a true, and just, Conception of this Duty of Repentance,
and not deceive ourselves with any false, and mistaken, Notions, about a Matter
of such great Importance to us, it will be fitting for us to observe, the
Account which the sacred Scriptures gives us of it; that we may, from thence,
know what is that true, and genuine, Repentance, which the Lord our God
requires of us, and which will be acceptable, and pleasing to him. Here, I do
not design, now, to multiply Texts, of which the Scriptures are full, showing
us the true Nature of Repentance, but, I shall only turn you to a few, out of
many, in both Testaments, which will serve to give us a full, and clear,
Account of this necessary Work.

Thus, we have the old Testament Description of Repentance, in those Words of
the Prophet, Isa. lv.7. Let the wicked forsake his Way, and the unrighteous Man
his Thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord. And again, the same Prophet
thus describes it, Chapter i. v. 16.17. Wash ye, make you clean; put away the Evil
of your Doings, from before mine Eyes; cease to do Evil, learn to do Well.

The New Testament Account of Repentance exactly agrees with this of the old,
as is evident, from the whole of that excellent Sermon, which our Lord
delivered at the Foot of the Mount; Matthew. Chapter v.vi.vii. which is no other than
a clear Directory, and strong Persuasion, unto Repentance; and agreeably also
the Apostles of our Lord call upon us, Romans xii.9. To abhor that which is evil,
and cleave to that which is good; and to cleanse ourselves from all Filthiness,
of Flesh, and Spirit, and to perfect Holiness, in the Fear of God: 1 Cor.
vii.1. and Paul tells Agrippa, this was what he preached, to Jews, and
Gentiles, Acts xxvi.20. That Men should repent, and turn to God, and do Works
meet for Repentance; and we are assured that the great Design of the Grace of
God, manifested to us in the Gospel, is, Tit. ii.12. to teach us to deny
Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, and that we should live soberly, righteously,
and godly, in this present World. So that, from these, and many other Places of
Scripture, that might have been named, which give us a plain, and full,
Account, what that Repentance toward God is, which is required of us, in order
to our being saved, we may evidently see that it comprehends these two Things
in it, as essential to it; viz. [I.] The forsaking of all Sin. [II.] The
leading of a virtuous and holy Life.


[I.] The perishing Sinner must sincerely, and heartily, forsake all his
sinful, and Vicious Courses. For, he is not, nor can he justly be esteemed, a
true Penitent, who does not forsake the Sins, which his Nature, Constitution,
or Practice, may addict him unto; because the very Nature of Repentance
includes in it, the Abandoning of all Sin, of every Sort, Kind, and Degree.

But then, it must be remembered, we may not suppose, that he is not a true
Penitent, who has not so absolutely, and entirely, forsaken all Sin, as never
more to be found guilty of any, the least, Transgression of the Divine Law, in
Thought, in Word; or in Deed. Such a complete Victory over Sin is, indeed, to
be the Aim of every Penitent; he should be still pressing forward, to the Mark
for the Prize of his high Calling, and endeavor to be as sinless as the holy
Angels, and perfect Spirits, in Glory, are; but, after all his Endeavors, his
Care, and Watchfulness, there will be still a Remainder of Corruption in him,
while he is in the Body, in a militant State, and he will often have Cause to
complain, as the holy Apostle does, Romans vii.23. of a Law in his Members,
warring against the Law of his Mind, and, sometimes, bringing of him into
Captivity to the Law of Sin. A sinless Perfection, however pretended to, by an
haughty, and ignorant, Generation, is not to be attained unto, by the holiest
of Men, while they are in the present evil World; but it is reserved, as the
just Reward, and consummate Happiness, of the good Man, in Heaven. The
Evangellical Repentance, therefore, which is, now, required of us, is more
accommodated to our present State of Probation; and there is nothing more
included in it, than, through the Grace of Christ assisting of us, we are
capable of, even while we are, here, attended with our inward Weaknesses, and
surrounded with many, and strong, Temptations. And that I may give you a true
Account of this Part of Repentance, and set before you what the Word of God
requires of us, I shall mention some Things particularly, as included in it.
As now,

1. The perishing Sinner must be truly, and heartily, sorry, and ashamed, for
all his past Sinfulness. This is an essential Ingredient in true Repentance,
that a Man be suitably affected with Sorrow, and Shame, at his having done
amiss; for no Man can be supposed to repent of what he has done, if he is not
thoroughly sensible that he has done, what he ought not to have done; and it is
impossible for an intelligent Agent to receive a through Conviction, that he has
done amiss, without being inwardly sorry, and ashamed, at his very Heart, for
what he has done; because Falsehood, and Error, or a doing of that which is
contrary to Truth, and Right, is as burdensome to right Reason, when the Man
perceives it, as Pain is to Sense. As a Man cannot be sensible of a Wound,
given to the Body, without feeling the Pain of it, and being uneasy at it, how
manfully soever he bears it; so neither can he perceive the Wound, which Sin
gives unto his Soul, without his Mind's being suitably affected with Pain: and
the Pain of the Mind is to be sorry, and ashamed.

From hence, indeed, all true Repentance takes it is Rise; for he that is
sincerely sorry, and ashamed, that he has done a wrong Thing, feels such a
Pain, and Uneasiness, in his Mind, as is likely to make him very careful, for
the future, to do so no more; and the more heartily he is affected with an
Uneasiness, of Mind, from a Sense of what he has done, so much the more careful
will he be, to avoid the Temptations to expose himself to the like Uneasiness,
for the Time to come. Hence you find the Psalmist expressing his Repentance by
that, of being sorry for his Sin: Psalm. xxxviii.18. and the Apostle thus writes
to the penitent Corinthians, 2 Cor. vii.9, 10. I rejoice, not that ye were made
sorry, but that ye sorrowed unto Repentance; for ye were made sorry after a
godly Sort; for godly Sorrow works Repentance unto Salvation. In like Manner
the Prophet Ezekiel directed the Sinners of old, Ezekiel. xx.43. Ye shall remember
your Ways, and all your Doings, wherein ye have been defiled, and ye shall
loath yourselves in your own Sight, for all your Evils that ye have committed.

The penitent Sinner, therefore, must call to Mind, what a vile, wretched,
sinful, Creature he has been, what a desperately wicked Heart he has within
him, bent to Backsliding, prone to Evil, and averse to all that is Good; he
must call over his past Life, that he may be able to see, in how many
Instances, he has done what he ought not to have done, and left undone the
Things which he ought to have done. And the Thoughts, that he has, in so many
Instances, and those attended with many very great Aggravations, injured, and
affronted, the infinitely great, and holy, and good God, should make him with
Sorrow, and Shame, to go before the Lord, and confess his Transgressions, and
bewail himself, in the Strain of the returning Prodigal, Luke xv.21. Father, I
have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be
called thy Son. The Thought, that he has injured himself, hurt, and wounded his
own Soul, and exposed himself to the Resentments of a Sin hateing God, should
also put him upon crying ^ut against himself, as David did, 2 Samuel xxiv* 10. I
have sinned greatly in that I have done. for I have done very foolishly. The
Sense of the Evil of Sin, and of his own Sinfulness, should excite in him an
inward Self-loathing, and fill him with Grief, and Brokenness, and Contrition,
of Soul, for his Folly, and Baseness, his Ingratitude, and Rashness, in having
been guilty of so great an Evil as Sin is; an Evil so contrary to our Relation
to, and Dependence upon, our Maker; so Affronting to all the Compassion, and
Love, the Purity of the Life, and the great Ends of the Death, of the most
endearing Savior, so unbecoming our rational Natures, and so destructive of
all our valuable Interests, that we may well wonder at ourselves, how it is
possible, any Temptation should be strong enough, to prevail upon us, to allow
ourselves to have any Thing to do with it.

The Degrees of this inward Sorrow, and Shame, are not equal, indeed, in all
true Penitents; but, partly from different Tempers, and Constitution^, and
partly from the different Degrees of Conviction, which Persons receive, of the
vile Nature, and dreadful Consequents of Sin, the Degrees of this Sorrow will
be exceeding various, in different Persons, yea, in the same Person, at
different Times; so that Rivers of Water shall slow down his Eyes, at one Time,
from whom, at an other Time, and upon like Occasion, not a Tear can be
extorted: yet, notwithstanding this Diversity, where there is a sincere
Repentance, there will, be more or less, something of the Truth, and Reality,
of this godly Sorrow for Sin. When Peter preached to a great Concourse of
People, assembled at Jerusalem, and plainly laid before them the Evidences of
their Guilt, in crucifying of the Lord of Glory, who was so far from deserving
the ill Treatment they gave him, that he truly merited the highest Veneration,
and Applause from them, both as a common Benefactor, and as bringing with him
sufficient Credentials of his Mission from God, and his being the ancient
promised Messiah, and they saw the Truth, and felt the Force, of the Apostle's
Reasoning, it is remarked of them, Acts ii.37. When they heard this, they were
pricked in their Heart, and said, unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles,
Men, and Brethren, what shall we do? The Sense of their Sin, and Guilt, deeply
pierced them; it went to their very Hearts; it pricked, and wounded, their
Souls within them; they felt the Smart of it; and were filled with Shame, and
Sorro^ of Soul, at the Thoughts of what they had done: and when Conviction was
thus excited in them, and they felt the Reproaches of their own Minds, for
their past Folly, now they were inclined to receive Advice about their future
Conduct, and manifested their Repentance, by a Readiness to apply themselves to
what they should know to be their Duty; Men, and Brethren, say they, what shall
we do? If ever the Sinner be brought to Repentance, he will feel something of
the Smart of Sin, in the Wounds which it has given to his Soul within him, and
the Lashes of his Conscience will fill him with Grief, and Remorse, and make
him to say with Hezekiah, Isa. xxxviii.15. I shall go softly, all my Days, in
the Bitterness of my Soul.

2. The perishing Sinner must not only be sorry, and ashamed, that he has
sinned heretofore, but he must now sincerely turn from all his Transgressions.
Repentance has an Object from which it turns, and that is Sin. That Sorrow
for Sin, which is not followed with a Ceasing to do Evil, which produces no
Indignation at Sin, nor Care to avoid it, for the future, will be to no good
Purpose; and as it deserves not the Name of Sorrow for Sin, so neither will it
be any Part, nor Evidence, of a true Repentance. The Nature of, and chief Thing
in, Repentance is, a turning from Sin, and leaving of those wicked Practices,
which, heretofore, a Man has accustomed himself to. Therefore the Prophet says,
Ezekiel. iii.19. If thou warn the Wicked, and he turn not from his Wickedness, nor
from his wicked Ways, he shall die in his Iniquity. And hence the wise Man
advises, Prove. iv.14, 15. Enter not into the Path of the Wicked, and go not in
the Way of evil Men; avoid it, and pass away. Yea; there must be a turning from
every evil Way, a forsaking of Sin, as Sin, and therefore one as well as
another. For, how does he repent of his Errors, who holds any of them fast,
and refuses to let them go? Nay; how can Sin be embittered unto him, who still
takes Delight, and Pleasure, in any Way of Wickedness? Whosoever, therefore,
stops short of putting away the Evil of his Ways, and Doings, and is not
careful to avoid every sinful Thing, is no sincere Penitent. The Command of the
great God is, Ezekiel. xviii.30. Repent, and turn yourselves, from all your
Transgressions; so Iniquity shall not be your Ruin. This turning from Sin must,
therefore, be entire, from all Sin, without allowing of ourselves in the known,
wilful, Commission of any one Sin whatever. If we turn not from all our Sins,
but hug any Lust in our Bosom, we may not reasonably hope for Salvation;
because the least Sin, lived in, and indulged, brings Death upon the Soul.
For, though one Sin, in it is own Nature, may be more heinous, and, by Reason of
the Circumstances that attend it, may be more aggravated, than an other, yet,
all Sin, of what Kind soever, is directly contrary unto the Divine Law, and
therefore is the highest Affront to the Authority, and Dominion, the Wisdom,
and Purity, of the sovereign Lawgiver; and, at the same Time, contaminates,
and defiles, the Soul, and brings it under the Power of Guilt; and thus renders
the Soul most unlike to the Holy God, at Enmity against him, and obnoxious to
his righteous Vengeance, and therefore utterly unfit to enjoy him: and
consequently, will forever be a Bar in the Way of the Salvation of the Soul, if
it be not truly, and seasonably, repented of; that is, if the Soul be not
purged from it.

So that the Sinner must turn from every Sin, and that, not only from the
grosser Transgressions, but, from those that are wont to be accounted
comparatively small; and, not only from those which he may have least
Affection, and Inclination to, but, those that are most dear to him, and what
his Temper, and Constitution, his Company, or his Business, may render him most
easily addicted to. For thus our Savior addresseth us, Matthew. v.29, 30. If thy
right Eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; -- if thy right
Hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee; it is profitable for thee,
that one of thy Members should perish, and not that thy whole Body should be
cast into Hell. He that would so run, as to obtain the Prize, must lay aside
every Weight, and the Sin that does most easily beset him. And this his turning
from all Sin must be, both in Heart, and in Life.

1. The penitent Sinner must, in his Heart, turn from all Sin. For if the Heart
of the Sinner be not broken off from it is Love to, and Delight in, the Ways of
Sin, it is certain that it never was truly broken, and humbled, within him, for
his Sin. It is the Heart that is the Fountain of all Sin, the Sink of all
Abominations, out of which, as Christ has told us, Matthew. xv.19. proceeds
evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Theft^, false Witness,
Blasphemies. There can, therefore, be no true Repentance, until the Heart is
cleansed from all Wickedness. The Fountain must be first made pure, before the
Streams will be clear: the Tree must first be made good, and then it is Fruit
will be good. And, indeed, herein lies the very Essence of Repentance, in
getting a new Heart, and right Spirit; and therefore, in the sacred Scriptures,
Repentance is so described, Jer. iv.14. Wash thine Heart from Wickedness, that
thou may be saved: and Cleanse your Hands, ye Sinners, and purify your
Hearts, ye double minded: Jam. iv.8. and so again, Ezekiel. xviii.31. Make you a
new Heart, and a new Spirit. All of which carry in them, the Heart's being
turned from the Love of Sin, and cleansed, and purified, from that vicious
Inclination, and Delight, which it has to the Ways of Sin. In Repentance, there
must be an inward, hearty, Detestation, and Abhorrence, of every Thing that is
contrary to the holy Law of God, and displeasing to him. There must be a
sincere Willingness to part with all Sin, even the least, and that which has
been dear to a Man, as a right Eye, or right Hand. This turning of the Heart
from Sin, is, in Scripture, called, Ephesians. iv.22. a putting off the Old Man,
which is corrupt, according to deceitful Lusts; Col. iii.5. A mortifying the
Members, which are upon the Earth; Gal. v.24. A crucifying the Flesh, with it is
Affections, and Lusts; and a being dead unto Sin. Romans vi.11. That is, the
Appetites, and Lustings, to Sin and Evil, which used to prevail in the depraved
Soul, are now brought under, and subdued, and become like to one mortified,
crucified, slain; or, at least, that has received his Death's Wound; so that
they have, no longer, the Life, Power, and Vigor, to rule, and govern, the
Soul, as they had heretofore: and thus the Man becomes freed from Sin, and it
no more reigns in his mortal Body, that he should obey it in the Lusts
thereof.

When there is this habitual turning from Sin, in the Heart, that the Man can
truly say, with Paul, Romans vii.15. That which I do, I allow not; for what I
would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I; when the Man sincerely hates
Sin, as Sin, and therefore hates all Sin; when he hates it with a perfect
Hatred, perfect in it is Nature, though not so in Degree; then is he a true and
real Penitent, in the Sight of God, though he should not be able, always, to
keep himself pure from every Transgression. For the Heart is that which God
chiefly looks at; and if that be right in his Sight, if that be truly turned
from the Love of Sin, and be set against it, though, through Weakness, and
Inadvertancy, or the Power of Temptations, the Man may fall into any particular
Act of Sin, short of an absolute Renunciation of the Lord his God, yet, the
merciful, and good God, for Christ's Sake, will graciously overlook it, and
accept of him as a true Penitent, a real Convert; yea, though the Man should
have no Opportunity to express his inward Hatred of that Sin, and manifest to
the World his Repentance of it, by any such outward Acts as are the visible
Signs thereof. But then,

2. The penitent Sinner must, in his Life, turn from all Sin, as he has
Opportunity therefore. It is the vain Pretense of some, their Hearts are good,
they say, while their Lives are stark naught. If, therefore, there should be an
Opportunity given to the Sinner, by the Continuance of his Life in this World,
after his being first renewed unto Repentance, to manifest that he has an
inward Hatred of Sin prevailing in his Heart, by the outward Acts of forsaking
his former sinful Courses, shuning, and resisting, the Temptations thereto; he
must not, then, content himself with saying, or imagining, that he hates all
Wickedness in his Heart, and, yet, at the same Time, allow himself in the
Practice of it; but, he must make it his constant Care, and serious Endeavor,
to abstain from all Sin. For, if he continues to walk in any Way of
Wickedness, by doing those Things which the Divine Law forbideth, or by leaving
undone what it requires, knowingly, and designedly so, he will have great
Reason to question the Sincerity of his Heart, whether it be truly turned from
Sin, or no; yea, rather, he will have Cause to conclude, that his Heart is not
washed from Wickedness; because a solicitous Care to avoid every sinful Thing,
out of Regard to God, and our own eternal Interest, is one of the best
Evidences of the Heart's Aversion to Sin, and a clear Sign of Uprightness:
which occasioned the Psalmist's saying, Psalm. xviii.23. I was upright before
him, and have kept myself from mine Iniquity. Thus a Tree is known by it is
Fruit; which is our Savior's Argument, Matthew. vii.16 -- 20. Ye shall know them
by their Fruits; -- every good Tree brings forth good Fruit, but a corrupt
Tree brings forth evil Fruit; a good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit,
neither can a corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruit: -- wherefore, by their
Fruits, ye shall know them. And therefore unto the inward Hatred of all Sin,
there must be added the outward Abstinence from every Thing that we know to be
contrary to the Mind, and Will, of God, concerning us. The penitent Sinner must
abhor Sin, in his Heart, and abstain from it, in his Life; lest, under a
Pretense of Honoring the Lord, in his Heart, he cast Dishonor, and Reproach
upon him, by his Actions. There must be, as much as in him lies, an actual
turning from all his Transgressions. He that stole, must steal no more; he that
used himself to swear vainly, must swear no more; he that addicted himself to
lying, must lie no more; he that accustomed himself to Drunkenness, must be
drunk no more; and so of all other Vices, and Sins, he must no more allow
himself to do that abominable Thing, which the Soul of the Lord hates.

Repentance, it is true, is progressive, and not wrought up to the highest
Degrees of Perfection at once, nor, indeed, in this Life; but, notwithstanding,
the Sinner must pursue, more and more, the Attainment of the Mastery over his
Lusts, and Passions, and more thoroughly cleanse his Hands, as well as his Heart,
from all Wickedness, that, if possible, he may abstain from the very Appearance
of Evil, and keep himself pure from every Transgression. Particularly, he must
set himself to oppose, and mortify all that his Conscience, enlightened by the
Word of God, tells him is sinful. For, Happy is he, who condemns not
himself, in that Thing which he allows. Romans xiv.22.

In short, it must be a Man's fixed Resolution, and steady Endeavor, not to
allow himself in any known sinful Thing whatever. And, if the prevailing,
steady, Bent of the Mind, stand fixed against all Sin, and it be the sincere,
and great, Care of his Life, to avoid it, though many may be the Imperfections,
and Failings, which, after all, will be found in such an one, yet, is such a
Man one that, in the Gospel Sense, heartily forsakes all Sin, and is so far a
true Penitent, in the Sight of God, who, according to the Tenor of his
Covenant, in Christ Jesus, will overlook his Failings, and accept of him to
Mercy.

This is the first Part of Repentance, a sincere, and hearty, forsaking of all
Sin; I proceed to the second, viz.

[II.] The perishing Sinner must be exceeding Careful, to lead a virtuous, and
holy Life, in an universal Obedience unto all the Commands of God. This is the
other Part of Repentance, which consists, not only in a turning from that
which is Evil, but, in a doing that which is Good. And it is a very necessary
Part of Repentance, which always means the Amendment of the Heart* and Life;
a being, and doing better, than heretofore we were wont to be, and do.
Therefore the Prophet Jeremiah called upon the People to repent, in these
Terms, Jer. xxvi.13. Therefore, now, amend your Ways, and your Doings, and obey
the Voice of the Lord, your God. As the Sinner is to turn from Sin, so he must
return to his Duty to God. Repentance, and Amendment, do not lie wholly in
Negatives, and a not doing the ill Things that a Man has been heretofore
accustomed to, but they consist also in Positives, in a performing all that
Duty which is required of him. He that puts off the old Man, -- must put on
the new Man, which, after God, is created in Righteousness, and true Holiness.
Ephesians. iv.22, 24. The penitent Sinner must bring forth Fruits, meet for
Repentance; Matthew. iii.8. he must not remain barren, and unfruitful, but yield
such Fruits as are the genuine Product, and Evidence, of Repentance, even such
Fruits as are answerable to his Pretentions, and evidential that he has a new
Heart in him, and that he leads a new Life; that is, the Fruits of holy
Obedience unto God; a walking in a^^ the Ordinances, and Commandments, of the
Lord, blameless, which, before his Repentance, he had no just Regard to. Hence
the Terms run in this Strain, Isa. lv.7. Let the Wicked forsake his Way, -- and
let him return unto the Lord. That is, let him return to his Duty, and
Allegiance, unto God, as his rightful Sovereign, and acknowledge the Divine
Authority over him, and submit himself entirely to the Government of the Will
of God, in all Things concerning him. Thus God, by his Prophet, informs us who
is the true Peni^ent, saving, Ezekiel. xxxiii.14, 15. When I say unto the Wicked,
thou shall surely die; if he turn from his Sin, and do that which is lawful and
right; if the Wicked restore the Pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in
the Statutes of Life, without committing Iniquity; he shall surely Live; he
shall not die. Where we may observe, that the Sinner must not only turn from
his Sin, but he must do that which is lawful and right; he must yield Obedience
to the Divine Commands, or walk in the Statutes of Life. For the Will of God,
made known to us, is the only sure and certain Measure of Right, and Wrong,
Truth, and Falsehood; and therefore the only perfect Rule of our Duty, and sure
Guide in the Way of Life. It will be no true Repentance, such as God requires
of us, and will accept at our Hands, such as becomes our Nature, Relation, and
Dependence, if it be not accompanied with Obedience, and that both of Heart,
and of Life.

1. There must be an inward Principle of Obedience. That is, It must be the
fixed Purpose, Intention, and Bent, of the Heart of the Penitent, to obey the
Will of God, in all that he knows to be his Duty. The Heart, and Soul, in the
more constant Temper, and Disposition of them, must be ready inclined to
perform the whole good, and acceptable, and perfect, Will of God, as he has
revealed his Mind, and Will, to us, in his holy Word. Thus the Heart must
become sound in the Statutes of God, by a steady Conscious^ess of the
Obligations we lie under, to obey whatsoever the Lord our God requires of us,
and in a serious Fixedness of Mind, to make his Will the Rule of our Walk. Thus
there must be an inward Affection to the Things of God, an hearty Love, and
Delight, in his Law, and a Readiness, at all Times, to comply with his
Precepts. So must we be able to say, with the Psalmist, Psalm. cxix.128. I
esteem all thy Precepts, concerning all Things, to be right. For this is the
Character of the thrice blessed Man, Psalm. i.2. His Delight is in the Law of
the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate, Day, and Night. When it is the
constant habitual Temper of the Soul to be obedient unto the Will of God, this
will argue, that there is a real, through, Change wrought in the Heart, that it
is New, in all the Powers of it, otherwise it would not be fixed for new
Obedience, but remain unsubject to the Law of God; this infers that we are
born again, are become the Children of God, are not under the Dominion of Sin,
but under Grace; and that, therefore, we are no longer in a perishing
Condition, but have eternal Life begun in our Souls, and reigning in us, by
that Grace, which reigns, through Righteousness, by Jesus Christ our Lord.
Romans v.21.

Though such an one should not have the Opportunity to manifest the sincere
Desire, and fixed Purpose, of his Mind, in this, or that, particular Instance
of Obedience, nevertheless, God will graciously accept the Heart, that is thus
devoted to his Service; and he will esteem the Man a true Penitent whose
Delight it is to do his Will. In this Sense those Words of the Apostle may well
be understood, as truly as of the particular Charity which they firstly relate
to; 2 Cor. viii.12. If there be first a willing Mind, it is accepted, according
to that a Man has, and not according to that he has not. This holds true,
with Respect to our Charity, and Love, to God, as well as to our Love, and
Charity, to our Neighbor. So that should Death overtake such a Man, who has
his Hear^ so set for Obedience to the Divine Commandment, before he should have
the Opportunity to make any Progress in a Life of Holiness, the Willingness of
his Mind would be accepted by God, in the Room of his Performances; and he
would be received to the promised Rewards of the heavenly World, though he
should have no more than truly, and heartily, set out in the Way thither, while
he was in this. This was the Case of the penitent Thief, upon the Cross, who,
by the sovereign Grace of God, experienced a wonderful Change in his Soul, from
a Love to Sin, unto a Love to God, and Christ, and Holiness, but a few Minutes
before he expired; so that he had no Opportunity to lead a Life of holy
Obedience, nor, indeed, so much as to give any Evidence of his Repentance, save
only by his immediate reproving of his fellow Sinner, owning the Attrociousness
of his Crime, and expressing some Trust, and Dependence, on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and these all in a Breath; and yet, we find Christ saying to him, upon
the certain Knowledge he had of the real Change in his Heart, Luke xxiii.43.
Verily, I say unto thee, to Day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

SERMON XIV.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
I Have entered upon the Consideration of the great Duty of Repentance, as
necessary to Salvation; and am upon the View of the Nature of this Duty, and
have showed you that it interdeth the forsaking of all Sin, in Heart, and Life;
and a living virtuously in Obedience to the Divine Commands; in order to which
there must be an inward Principle of Obedience. I now go on to say,

2. As there is Opportunity, there must be an honest sincere Endeavor after an
actual Obedience to the Will of God. It will not suffice for any to say, I love
God, and love his Commandments; but we must endeavor to live unto God, and
Holiness, by conforming of our whole Walk to the Rules of the Divine Precepts.
For whosoever keeps his Word, in him verily is the Love of God perfected. 1 John
ii.5. It must be the determined Resolution of our Wills, and our daily Care to
put that Resolution into Practice, to lead obedient Lives, to do Justly, to
love Mercy, and to walk humbly with our God. And, indeed, if the Heart be true,
in it is inward Principle of Obedience, it will put a Man upon being holy in all
Manner of Conversation, and Godliness, and that in Obedience to the commanding
Will of God. So, a good Man, out of the good Treasure of the Heart, brings
forth good Things. Matthew. xii.35. And that our Repentance may be genuine,
uniform, and sincere, our Obedience must respect all the Commandments of God
universally, and particularly those we have been most defective in, and are
most difficult to Flesh and Blood to perform.

1. The penitent Sinner must endeavor after an universal Obedience, without
Exception. The Divine Law is one entire Body of Rules of holy Living, flowing
from the supreme Fountain of Dominion, Wisdom, and Holiness; and because the
same Authority, Reason, and Purity, is stamped upon, and runs through, the
whole of the Divine Commandments, therefore, the Sinner, in returning to his
Duty to his God, must be careful to obey every known Command, without suffering
any one of them, designedly, to be disregarded by him. The earnest Desire of
his Heart must be that of the Psalmist, Psalm. cxix.5, 6. O! that my Ways were
directed to keep thy Statutes! then shall I not be ashamed, when I have Respect
unto all thy Commandments: And accordingly it must be his daily Practice to
order his Steps in the Word of God, that he may cleanse his Way, by taking heed
thereto. He must not content himself, and think this to be enough, that he is
obedient unto some of the Divine Precepts, such as, perhaps, are more agreeable
unto his Temper, and Condition; but he must be careful, as much as in him
lies, as he has Opportunity, and a Call thereto, to observe, and do them all.
For, if he wilfully allow himself in Disobedience to any known Precept, it will
argue that his Heart is not right with God; and that the Duty which he
performs, is not attended so ^^ch in Obedience to the Will of God, (...) from
^^me other Principle, and Motive; and therefore all that he does will be far
from an acceptable Obedience. Hence the Apostle James said, Jam. ii.10.
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one Point, he is guilty
of all. Because a wilful Transgression of the Divine Law, in any one Point,
proceeds from an inward Principle of Disobedience; which is, in the Nature of
it, equally levelled against the whole Law, under like Circumstances, and
Temptations.

The penitent Sinner, therefore, must be careful to live in the Practice of all
known moral Duties; he must worship the Lord his God, in Public, and in
Private, and thus give unto the Lord the Glory that is due unto his Name; he
must think, and speak, reverently of the holy Name of God, and not allow
himself to profane it at any Time; he must deal justly with all Men, be true to
his Word, and Promise, and fulfill his Engagements, and Betrustments; his Lips
must be under the Law of Kindness, and his Hands be ready to help the Indigent,
and relieve the Necessitous; his Heart must be enlarged with an universal
Benevolence, and his Light shine in all the Offices of Kindness, and
Beneficence, even to all that are about him; and he must, knowingly, give no
Man any just Occasion to complain of his injuring of him, in any of his
Interests.

He must also diligently attend upon all the Duties of instituted Religion, and
devoutly, and heartily, serve his God, in all the Ways of his own Appointment.
He must remember to keep his Day holy, through out the whole of it, free from
all Diversions, and all unnecessary Labors; he must wait upon God in all his
holy Ordinances, take his Mark, and Livery, upon him, and partake of the Food
of his Soul, which is provided for him, in the House, and at the Table, of the
Lord. For, how has he returned unto the Lord, as a true Penient, who will not
be persuaded to do the Things which God requires of him, but lives in the
sinful Neglect of them?

Yea, the sincere Penitent should endeavor after the greatest Constancy in his
Obedience, without allowing of himself in any wilful Interruptions therein;
because God always has the same Right to his Service, and Obedience, at one
Time, as much as another.

This universal Obedience is what the penitent Sinner should carefully
endeavor after, as he has Opportunity for it; and humbly mourn over all his
Defects, and Short-comings, in Duty. This is what our God requires, and most
earnestly wishes, of all that would be truly his People, saying, Deuteronomy. v.29.
Oh! that there were such an Heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep
all my Commandments, always.

2. The penitent Sinner must particularly set himself to the Practice of those
Duties, and Virtues, which he has, heretofore, been most defective in. It was
his Sin, and Guilt, that he, formerly, neglected to do those Things that were
required of him, as it was that he did those Things that were forbidden to him,
and therefore, in his Repentance, he must not only abstain from the forbidden
Fruit, which he has, heretofore, delighted in, but, he must evidence the Truth
of it, by endeavoring careful^y to perform the various Duties of Piety,
Justice, Sobriety, Temperance, Meekness, Humility, Charity, and the like, which
he has been, form^^ly, averse to.

Thus, if he has been one that, through the Pride of his Countenance, would
not call upon God, but lived without Prayer, in his Closet, and in his Family,
he must, now, be so much the more exact, and constant, in this Part of his Duty
to God, and his own Soul. When Saul became a through Penitent, it was remarked
of him, Acts ix.11. Behold, he prays!

Or, if he has been remarkable for a profane Mouth, and a foul Tongue, for
filthy, and corrupt Communication, he must endeavor, now, after the greater
Eminency in the Sobriety, Purity, and Modesty, of his Speech, and the virtuous
Government of an unruly Tongue.

So, if he has been notorious for Tavern-haunting, setting long at the Wine
Press, until new Wine inflame him, and used often to intoxicate himself with
strong Drink, he must, now, be more exemplary in the Virtues of Temperance, and
Moderation, and carefully shun the Places, and Company, by which he was
enticed, and overcome.

And, if he has been infamous for violent, and unruly Passions, for Cruelty,
Severity, Wrath, for Oppressions, and Unkindnesses to his Neighbors, he must,
now, endeavor to be as remarkable for his Patience, Meekness, Gentleness,
Forbearance, Long-suffering, Equity, Brotherly-kindness, Goodness; and in this
Way let the World about him see, that the Wolf is converted into a Lamb, by the
Power of the Grace of God that is in him.

Remarkable is the Instance of the Iaylor in my Context; before his Conversion,
he was a Man of a very fierce, and cruel, Disposition; whereas no sooner does
the Grace of God take Possession of him, and make him a true Penitent, but you
find his Temper mightily altered, and those very Servants of God, whom he had
just before maligned, insulted, and abused, he now takes into his House, washes
their Stripes, and sets Meat before them; and so treats them with all proper
Expressions of Kindness, and Benevolence. So the true Penitent will be
exemplary in those Virtues, in which he was, heretofore, most defective.

3. The penitent Sinner must set himself to the Practice of those Duties, which
are most hard, and difficultly performed. There are some Duties, in the
Christian Life, abundantly more hard, and difficult, than some others, and
require the greatest of our Skill, and Vigilance, and the exerting our
Strength, or we shall not be likely to practice them, as we ought to do. There
are some Things which are our Duty, as Christians, which yet are so easy, so
agreeable to the humane Nature, and so suitable unto our Circumstances, that
the natural Man, without the Aids of supernatural Grace, readily complyeth with
them; while he can, by no Arguments, be prevailed upon, to regard such other
Duties, as are attended with more of Difficulty. But the true Penitent must not
only apply himself unto such Duties, as may be observed with the greater Ease,
and without any great Opposition to his natural Temper, and Inclinations, or
worldly Interests, but, he must, as well, make Conscience of performing those
Duties, and practicing those Virtues, which are most hard to Flesh, and Blood,
and are most cross to his Constitution, and Temptations, and most opposite to
his carnal Views; and that because he must be careful to practice all Virtues,
as well as to reform all Vices. Here I will take the Liberty to mention two
only; viz.

1. The penitent Sinner must be ready to forgive those that injure him. This is
a very hard, and difficult Lesson, in Christianity, and what is taught in no
other School but that of Christ's. Corrupt Nature prompts us to revenge
Injuries; the Philophers of Old thought it argued a mean Soul, to bear
Indignities, and Affronts, and taught Revenge, as an Evidence of an high, and
great, and noble Spirit: but our Master, Christ, better understood both the
Nature of God, and of Virtue, and, by his own Example, and by Precept, has
taught us quite otherwise. And hard, and difficult, as it is to perform this
Duty, yet, he that will be a true Penitent, a real Christian, must, in some
good Measure, come up to it, and lay aside all Thoughts of Revenge, and
suppress his undue Anger, and Resentments, and be ready to render good for
evil. 1 These. v.15. See that none render Evil for Evil, unto any Man; but ever
follow that which is Good, both among yourselves, and unto all Men. How does he
forsake all Sin, who does not abstain from all revengful Retalliations, and
subdue an implacable, and malicious Spirit, which is most contrary to the
infinitely good God, and is agreeable only unto the infernal Spirit? And what
is there more positively forbidden in the sacred Pages? Romans xii.19. Dearly
beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give Place unto Wrath; for it is
written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. Or, how does he
practice all Virtues, and Duties, who will not exemplify, in his Life, those
amiable Virtues of Meekness, Patience, Charity, and a forgiving Spirit? Or, how
can he, upon good Grounds, hope to be forgiven, who will not forgive? when our
blessed Savior has made it a Badge of our Discipleship, and has taught us to
pray, in his excellent Platform, Matthew. vi.12. Forgive us our Debts, as we
forgive our Debtors: and added upon it this cogent Argument, v. 14, 15. If you
forgive Men their Trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but
if ye forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
Trespasses.

2. The other Instance I shall name is, that of making Restitution unto those
whom we have injured. This is, often Times, an exceeding hard, and difficult
Task, and what many, who would be accounted true Penitents, are not easily
persuaded to comply with. But, notwithstanding all the Difficulty, in the Thing
itself, or the Circumstances attending it, and all the Reluctance of our own
Minds thereto, arising from the Apprehensions any may have of their exposing
themselves to Reproach, yet, it is a Duty indispensibly incumbent N^n
rem^ttitur Peccatum, donec restituitur oblatum.
upon every one that has injured his Neighbor, in any Instance, to make him
just Satisfaction therefore; nor can he be a true Penitent without his best
Endeavors for this End. For if any Man has injured an other, by Force, or by
Fraud, by violently taking from him, or craftily, underhandedly, by tricking,
and overreaching of him, by false Accounts, or in Form of Law, or any other
Ways deprived his Neighbor, of what he himself has no just, equitable, and
conscionable Right, and Claim to, he has, herein, done to his Neighbor a Piece
of Injustice: and it will not be sufficient, to such an one, to leave off, or
forbear, the committing of the like Acts of Injustice, for the future, but he
must pay the Debt he has already contracted, by making Amends for the Injury he
has formerly done. He continues the Injustice upon his Neighbor, until he
makes him ample Amends, by restoring what he had so unrighteously taken away
from him; and therefore he can be no true Penitent while he designedly
continues the Injury, nor until he makes Restitution of the full Damage, or at
least peremptorily determines that he will do so, the first Opportunity that
he shall have for it. So that the penitent Sinner must resolve with Zacheus,
Luke xix.8. If I have taken any Thing, from any Man, (wrongfully,) I will
restore him, (at least the full Value, if not) fourfold.

Thus, I have endeavored to describe unto you, the Nature of true Evangelical
Repentance, that Repentance which the Gospel of God our Savior requires of
us, and so have shown you what the perishing Sinner must do, in this Respect,
that he may obtain eternal Salvation; namely, that he must sincerely, and
heartily forsake all Sin, and be exceeding careful to lead a virtuous, and holy
Life, in the Practice of all known Duties, even the most hard, and difficult.
And this, I take it, is that Repentance which God commands all Men, wherever
the Gospel is preached, to observe, and which is absolutely, and indispensibly
necessary to Salvation; which I should, now, proceed to evidence, and to show
what the Sinner must do to obtain it; but I shall conclude the present
Discourse with making some Reflections on what has been said.

USE. 1. If Repentance be such as we have heard, then it is to be feared, that
there are many who flatter, and delude themselves, with vain Imaginations, and
false Hopes, of their being true Penitents, when they really are not. I cannot
suppose that there are any, who have lived under the preaching of the Gospel,
but what have received some Conviction, that they must repent of their Sins,
some Time or other, and they have some secret Purposes within themselves, that,
some Time before they die, they will alter their present Course of Life, and
walk more conformably to the Christian Law, that they may get safe to Heaven at
last. There are but few, if any, so hardened in their Sins, as fixedly to
resolve they never will repent.

But then, the very great Mischief of it is, that many are apt to mistake about
the Nature of Repentance, and willingly deceive themselves, by too easily
taking up with that, for Repentance, which really is not so; or, at most, is
but a Part, and that too the smallest Part, of it. They pacify their Minds, and
quiet their Consciences, with something that looks like Repentance, and some
fond Hopes that they are Penitents; so they feed upon Ashes, a deceived Heart
has turned them aside; Isa. xliv.20. Whereas, if they would but give
themselves Time to think closely, and survey themselves in the Glass of the
Divine Oracles, they would awaken out of their vain Dream, and plainly see,
that they are yet in their Sins, in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of
Iniquity, and therefore are not in the Way that leads unto Salvation.

Possibly, there may be some, who, through the Power of a virtuous Education,
and a docile, and ingenuous, Temper, may have kept themselves free from the
grosser Transgressions, so that no Man has wherewith justly to accuse them, and
they may be able to say, of external moral Duties, as the young Man, in the
Gospel, Luke xviii.21. All these have I kept from my Youth up: And from hence
they conclude, that they are among the Number of true Penitents, and that
nothing more is required of them. As for their lesser Errors, in their Conduct,
they see no great Harm in them, nor are they sensible of all the Evils that are
in their Hearts; and therefore are at no Pains to purge themselves from
prevailing Pride, and Vanity, Censoriousness, and Worldly-mindedness, and the
like. Though such, like the Pharisee, are ready to say, God, I thank thee, that
I am not as other Men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this
Publican, yet are they not true Penitents, in the Sight of God, nor shall they
go down to their House justified; Luke xviii.11, 14. Because the Heart, as well
as Life, must be cleansed.

There are others, perhaps, who will cry, they are sorry for their Sins, and,
it may be, will shed many Tears, when they are reproved for them; and all this
be but an affected Sorrow, or the natural easy flow of their Passions; and be
nothing hearty and sincere: or, if they have some inward real Grief, it is not
because they have acted contrary unto Right, and Equity, and done that which is
most offensive to the great, and holy God; but only because they find they have
disobliged some of their Friends, or some Way or other hurt themselves, in some
of their worldly Interest; and therefore all their Sorrow, and Tears, have
nothing of true Repentance in them, so long as they can still hug their Lusts,
and will not let them go.

Many others may have some weak Purposes for a Life of Religion, and
accordingly do something toward the reforming of their Lives, and begin to
leave off some of their evil Practices, and perform some neglected Duties; but
then their Purp^^es are but weak, and their Reformations are very partial; they
only wash the Outside, and reform in a few externals, while their Hearts remain
full of Pollution, and they love the Vices they seem to part with: or they
reform only such Sins as mostly expose them to the Observation, and
Resentments, of Men, while they cherish those which they see to be less hurtful
to them; or, it may be, all their Duties they do to be seen of Men, or attend
only those that are most easy, and agreeable to their Temper, and Condition,
while they desire to be excused as to such other Acts of Obedience as are
contrary to their Inclination, or are difficult to perform; or all their
Obedience is not the Obedience of the Heart, and because God has commanded
them, but only to oblige a Friend, and to serve themselves.

Many, again, will promise fair, but will not be at the Pains to shun the
Temptations by which they are easily drawn away. How many have been convinced,
by sad Experience, that the bad Company, they associate themselves with, has
led them into almost all Manner of Mischief, and overthrown their Purposes,
which they have some Times had, for a Life of Religion? And yet they will not
be at the Pains to shake off their old Companions, and forsake those foolish
ones, that they may live. How many have been made sick, by their Intemperance,
and have been convinced, that they have hurt their Bodies, their Names, their
Interest, by their Drunkenness? and now they have seemed to be mighty sorry,
and have promised to leave off their intemperate Drinking; and yet would not
cross their Humor so much as to shun the Places, and Company, where, they could
not but know, they should be entangled again, in their old Sin.

And because they find, they have had some Sort of Sorrow for their Sins, they
entertain some Purposes of Amendment, and, it may be, reform some Evils, they
were addicted to, and now give themselves to a Round of external Duties, of
reading, and hearing, the Word of God, attending upon Prayer, and Sacraments,
etc. they are ready to conclude favorably of themselves, and think they are
true Penitents, and doubt not but they shall be saved. Thus, they flatter, and
delude, themselves, with a good Opinion of themselves, that they are what they
really are not, and with a confident Expectation of what they never shall
possess, without a more through Repentance than ever they were yet Masters of.
For, let all such Self-Deceivers know, that all their external Sorrow, and
Tears, all their faint Purposes, and outward Reformations, are* at best, but
some of the Out-Lines of Repentance; and are ineffectual unto Salvation; unless
they are accompanied with a through Change of the Heart, from the Love of Sin,
to the Love of God, and Holiness; and such a Change in their Lives, as carries
in it, their sincere, and honest, Endeavors to abstain from all Wickedness,
though ever so dear to them, and to practice every known Duty, though ever so
contrary unto Flesh, and Blood, and jarring with their carnal Interest, and
Views. For they have not truly repented, who hug any Sin in their Bosom, and
roll any Iniquity, as a sweet Morsel, under their Tongues, and refuse to part
with it; nor they that live in a wilful Disobedience to any one of the
Commandments of God, and refuse to do what the Lord our God requires of them;
as suppose Prayer, or instituted Worship, or the Forgiving of Injuries. The Man
must become a New Man, in Heart, and in Life, in Principle, and in Action,
before he is a real Penitent; and with all the Repentance he is, or can be,
Master of, without this, he will certainly perish at last. Job xx.12 -- 14.
Though Wickedness be sweet i^ his Mouth, though he hide it under his Tongue,
though he spare it, and forsake it not, but keep it still within his Mouth; yet
his Meat, in his Bowels, is turned, it is the Gall of Asps within him: it will
prove exceeding bitter, and pernicious to him, in the Conclusion.

2. Let every Sinner, here before the Lord, be persuaded sincerely, and
heartily, to repent, that he may not perish. This is the proper Business of
every one of us all; for I know not any one that can have nothing to do with
Repentance, but he that has never sinned; which is not the Condition of any one
upon the Face of God's Earth: for, Alas! we are all of us Sinners, having been
guilty, in many Things, and daily; so that if God should be strict to mark our
Iniquity against us, there would be enough, in the best of us, to procure our
everlasting Condemnation.

And how greatly are we advantaged, by the Light of the Gospel, showing to us
what is sinful, and wherein the real Nature of Repentance lies, and the
Advantage it will be to us; and providing for us the blessed Help of the Holy
and Divine Spirit, to enable us to go through the great Work of an Evangelical
Repentance? The Heathen World were under mighty Disadvantages, to what we are;
they walked in Darkness, and had but very obscure Notions of Repentance, the
Nature, and the Benefits of it, or how to attain to it; God seemed to bear with
their Wickedness, and overlook their Disorders, as though he regarded them not,
while he neither plainly showed them their Duty, nor provided for the
Performance of it: but now, by, the Light of the Gospel, he has made full
Provision for our Repentance, showing us wherein it consists, and how we may
attain to it; and therefore it concerns us, in a special Manner, to repent of
all our Wickedness, and return to our Duty to our God. Said the Apostle, Acts
xvii.30. The Times of this Ignorance, God winked at, but, now* has commanded
all Men, every where, to repent. Now, that the Light of the Gospel shines upon
us; now, that God has told us our Duty, and provided the best Helps for our
performing it; now, we should be peculiarly concerned to walk as the Children
of the Day, and put off the Works of Darkness, and have no Fellowship with
them, lest, we at last find, to our Cost, that God will not bear with us, with
whom he has taken so much Pains, as he does with the Heathen World; but will
punish us very severely for our wilful persisting in our evil Ways, when we
were shown the Danger of them, and had all proper Means to direct, and turn, us
into the right Way. So we find our blessed Savior upbraiding the Cities,
wherein most of his mighty Works were done, because they repented not; Matthew.
xi.20, 21, 22. though he came preaching Repentance; and pronouncing an heavy Woe
upon them, for their Incorrigibleness, saying, Woe unto thee, Chorazin, Woe unto
thee, Bethsaida; for if the mighty Works, which were done in you, had been done
in Tire, and Sidon, they would have repented long ago, in Sackcloth, and Ashes:
but I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tire, and Sidon, in the Day
of Judgment, than for you.

Let us then be prevailed upon, this Day, to set ourselves, in good Earnest, to
break off from our Iniquities by Righteousness, and from our Transgressions by
returning unto God: and let us be very particular in our Repentance of all
known Sins, both in our Acknowledgement, and Confession, of them, with deep
Humiliation for them, before the Lord; and in our special Care to put every
Iniquity from us, without sparing the most darling, or allowing ourselves in
any Sin for the Time to come. As to Sins of Ignorance, doubtless, God will
graciously accept of a general Confession, and Repentance for them, because a
particular one is not to be had; but he requires a particular Repentance for
our particular known Sins. Therefore David said, Psalm. xix.12, 13. Who can
understand his Errors; cleanse thou me from secret Faults; keep back thy
Servant from presumptuous Sins, let them not have Dominion over me.

And then, let us be exceedingly careful that our Repentance be through, go into
our whole Soul, and be levelled against all Sin. It is the being the Servant of
Sin that exposes a Person to the Wrath of Heaven. Col. iii.6. The Wrath of God
comes on the Children of Disobedience. The good Man, the true Penitent, may
fall into Sin, but he is not a Child of Disobedience, he is not the Servant of
Sin; no; he is made free from Sin, and is become the Servant, and a Child, of
God. Let us therefore be careful in making through Work, in our searching out
all Leaven, and put it far away from us. The Character of the sincere Penitents
is that, Psalm. cxix.3. They do no Iniquity, they walk in his Ways. One reigning
Sin, one unmortified Lust, though it may seem to a small one, (suppose Lying,
for Instance,) will prove the Destruction of a Man's Soul forever, if not
repented of. Therefore spare no Lust, no Agag, though ever so gorgious in it is
Attire, and delicate in it is Behavior. For it will be a certain Argument that
a Man is the Servant of Sin, if he lives in Subjection to it. Therefore
endeavor to get your Hearts cleansed, and purged, from the Love of Sin; that
the Love of Sin being mortified in you, you may be the less inclined to
perpetrate any wicked Thing, and the more easily overcome Temptations to it.
There may be many Considerations, which may restrain, or prevent, a Man from
the actual committing of this, or that Wickedness, while yet he loves it in
his Heart, and, by his Love to it, evidences, to the Heart-searching God, that
he is not a real Penitent, whatever he is thought of by Man. Hence the Psalmist
said, Psalm. lxvi.18. If I regard Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord will not hear
me. Get, and keep, the Heart pure; banish from thence all atheistical, profane,
and Irreligious Thoughts, all proud, revengful, malicious, impure, lewd, and
discontented Thoughts, and suffer them not to find Lodging within you. Let it
be the earnest Desire of your Souls, that all Sin may be thoroughly mortified,
and subdued, so as never more to reign in your mortal Bodies. Pray with the
Psalmist, Psalm. cxix.133. Order my Steps in thy Word, and let not any Iniquity
have Dominion over me.

Use your best Endeavors, that you may obtain a complete Victory over Sin, and
Satan, and the World, by maintaining a continual Conflict with them, striving
for the Mastery; and think no Pains too much to reform your Heart, and Life. Be
upon your Watch, and Guard, that you may be able to spy out your Danger, and
may ward off the fiery Darts of the evil One. Apply yourselves, with the
greatest Earnestness, to the Blood of Christ, to procure the Death of Sin in
your Soul* that you may be enabled to crucify the Flesh, with it is Affections,
and Lusts. The Blood of Christ, not only takes away the Guilt, but, proves
the Destruction of Sin in the Soul; and the Consideration of the Death of
Christ, is one of the most powerful Arguments to Repentance, in that it, at the
same Time, presents us with a View of our Guilt, and the Deserts of our Sins,
and shows ^s the Mercy of God, through Christ, in his Readiness to pardon us.

Let us, then, all of us, be persuaded, thus to repent of, and forsake all our
Sins, and to lead a Life of new Obedience, that we may not perish, but be
eternally saved: and do this now, without Delay, lest you should miss of the
only proper Opportunity for Repentance. Heb. iv.1. Let us fear, lest a Promise
being left us, of entering into his Rest, any of you should seem to come Short
of it. What can be more unreasonable, than to defer a Matter of such
Consequence to us, as Repentance is, unto a Time, which, at the best is most
improper, and which yet, after all, we have no Assurance of?

And let us be very frequent in renewing of our Repentance, that, if possible,
we may let no Sin escape us unrepented of. There is not a Day passes us,
wherein the very best of us have not some Sin or other, of Thought, Word, or
Deed* to charge ourselves withal. Our daily Sins of Omission, or Commission, of
Ignorance, and Infirmity, if not of Presumption, should put us upon calling
ourselves to an Account, at the Close of every Day, and upon humbling of
ourselves, before God, confessing of our Transgressions to him, and imploring
his pardoning Mercy, through the Merits of Jesus Christ, that we may be able to
lay ourselves down in Peace, with a comfortable Hope of God's being reconciled
unto us.

And remember, for your Encouragement, how grateful, and pleasing, it will be
to Heaven, to see you become a real Penitent. Though, like the prodigal Son,
you should have wandered from your Father's House, and have consumed all your
Substance in riotous Living, and have be^^ reduced, with the Swine, to feed
upon Husks, and not had enough of them neither to fill, and satisfy you; yet
if, after all, you will come to your right Mind, and fixedly resolve to return
to your Father, and acknowledge your Fault, and be resolute, and careful, to
live in a dutiful Obedience, and Submission, to his Will, for the Time to come,
your heavenly Father is graciously re^dy to meet; and receive thee, and express
his most tender Compassions to thee, in freely forgiving all thy past Offenses,
in making abundant Provision for thy future Welfare, and in Welcoming of thee
to his open Arms, with the most endearing Affection, and the highest
Expressions of Joy. For thus we read, (with which I shall now conclude,) Luke
xv.7. There is Joy, in Heaven, over one Sinner that repents, more than over
Ninety and Nine just Persons, that need no Repentance: and that because, as the
Father expresses it, v. 24. This my Son was dead, and is alive again, he was
lost, and is found.

SERMON XV.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
THE Doctrine, which several Times has been named, from these Words, you may
remember, was this, viz.

DOC. That it is of highest Concernment to perishing Sinners, to be very
solicitous, what they must do to be saved; or, to know, and practice, all that
is necessary, in order to their Salvation.

I am upon the Third general Head under this Doctrine, namely,

III. That perishing Sinners must know, and practice, all that is necessary, in
order to their Salvation; or, there is something to be done, by them, that they
may be saved. They must know what is necessary to be known, and do what is
necessary to be done, or they cannot reasonably hope to be saved. And as it is
necessary to Salvation that a Person believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, so is it
necessary that he repent of his Sins; these are the two comprehensive Duties
which the Gospel requires of us. Having showed you, what is to be understood
by Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Necessity of it, and the Means to
obtain it; I have entered upon the Consideration of the Doctrine of Repentance,
and proposed,

I. To show you, what that Repentance is, which is required of us.

II. To evidence, that such a Repentance is absolutely necessary unto Salvation.

III. To consider, what the perishing Sinner must do, to obtain this Repentance
unto Salvation. I have endeavored to set before you a distinct View of the
Nature of true evangelical Repentance, as it consists, in a forsaking all
sinful, and vicious, Courses, a being heartily sorry, and ashamed, that ever we
have sinned, having our Hearts set against all Sin, and honestly endeavoring,
in our Lives, to abstain, from every Kind of Sin, for the future; and in
leading a virtuous, and holy Life, in Obedience to the Commandments of God,
having our Hearts influenced by an inward Principle of Obedience, and our Life,
as much as may be, under an actual Conformity unto the Divine Will, in all
Things, without any wilful Exception; being particularly exemplary in those
Duties, and Virtues, we were most defective in, and sincerely endeavoring the
Practice of those that are most hard, and difficult, to perform; being ready to
forgive those that injure us, and to make Restitution unto those whom we may
have injured. I shall now proceed,

II. To evidence, that such a Repentance is absolutely necessary to Salvation;
and no Sinner, let his worldly Circumstances be what they will, can reasonably
hope (...) be saved without it. The absolute Necessity of this Repentance, in
order to our being saved, will fully appear, if we do but diligently hearken to
the constant Language of the sacred Scriptures, and the concurrent Voice of
natural Conscience; for both the Word of God, and the Reason of Mankind, assure
us, that there can be no Salvation for any Sinner without Repentance.

1. Let us hearken to the constant Language of the holy Scripture, and we shall
find that it is most plain, and full, and positive, in the demanding Repentance
of every Sinner, as absolutely necessary to Salvation. It is Divine Revelation,
only, that acquainteth us, how, in what Way, and upon what Terms, a poor guilty
Sinner may find Acceptance with God, and be eternally saved. This is a Path
which the most penetrating Reason of Man would never have discovered because it
resulteth from the Divine Will, and Pleasure, which no Man could be able to
discern, until God himself should please to make it known. And we may be well
assured, that, whatever the Divine Revelation plainly, and positively,
requires of the Sinner, in order to his Salvation, is absolutely necessary to
that End, and that there is no possible Way of obtaining the End without it;
because this Revelation is no other than the Will of God, made known to us, and
showing us what he requires of us, what he insisteth upon, and peremptorily
demands of us, as the Condition, the Terms, the Way, and Method, of our
Salvation.

It cannot be supposed possible, for any Sinner, who, as such, has forfeited
the Divine Favor, and incurred his Displeasure, to be saved against the Will
of God; that is, to partake of his Favor, whether he will, or no: or that any
Man can be saved, in any other Way, than that which God himself has proposed
to us; for this would be, either, to suppose ourselves, who are but foolish,
and weak Creatures, to be stronger than almighty Power, and wiser than infinite
Understanding, which is the grossest Absurdity, and Blasphemy: or else it
supposes, that God, in the strongest Terms, demands something of us, in
order to our enjoying of his Favor, which, yet, we may well enough hope for
without it, yea, though we should act the most directly contrary to his Demands
upon us; than which, what could render him more trifling, and his demands more
contemptible!

Let us, then, seriously attend to what the infinitely great, and wise, and
good, God does most plainly, and positively, demand of us, in his holy Word.
And,

1. More generally. How plainly, and peremptorily, is Repentance insisted upon,
in the holy Writings, in order to the Sinner's Salvation? This was the
Doctrine, and Duty, which the Forerunner of our Lord inculcated upon his
Hearers, saying, Matthew. iii.2. Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand:
and again, v. 8. Bring forth Fruit meet for Repentance; and yet again, v. 11. I
indeed baptize you, with Water, unto Repentance.

And this was what our blessed Lord, himself, insisted upon, when he entered
upon his public Ministry, after his Baptism, by John, as we read in the
Evangelist Matthew, Matthew. iv.17. From that Time, Jesus began to preach, and to
say, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand. This also our Lord gave in
Commission to his Apostles, and Ministers after them, Luke xxiv.47. That
Repentance, and Remission of Sins should be preached, in his Name, among all
Nations.

And accordingly, we find the Apostles of our Lord, wherever they went,
preaching Repentance, to their Hearers. So at Lycaonia, said the Apostl^ Paul,
Acts xiv.15. We preach unto you, that ye (...) turn from these Vanities, unto
the living God, wh^^ made Heaven, and Earth. And when he saw the Superstition,
and Idolatry, of the Athenians, said he, Acts xvii.30. The Times of this
Ignorance God winked at; that is, he suffered all Nations to walk in their own
Ways, according to the vain Imaginations of their own Hearts, without giving
them any immediate Direction from Heaven; but now commands all Men, every
where, to repent; that is, now, that the Gospel is preached unto the World, and
God, therein, has made a Revelation of his Mind and Will, to Mankind, He
commands all Men, every where, without Exception, to repent. This is the
plain, and positive Command of God, and that to every individual Person,
wherever the Gospel comes, let the Condition of Men, in the World, be what it
will, to repent, and turn from all their Transgressions, and lead a holy, and
virtuous Life. The outward Condition, and Circumstances, of Men, upon worldly
Accounts, will have no Influence to their future Salvation; and they will be
never the nearer to Heaven for their being raised above their Fellow-Men, in
Riches, and Honor; but the greatest Men upon Earth, as well as the smallest,
if they would have any Part in the Salvation of God, hereafter, must be
careful, now, to glorify him, by forsaking their Sins, and yielding a sincere
Obedience to the Authori^y of the living God, who has made them, and raised
them, and to whom all Mankind must be accountable. The Apostle Peter also,
preached the same Doctrine to the Jews, as Paul did to the Gentiles, saying to
them, Acts iii.19. Repent ye, and be converted, that your Sins may be blotted
out, when the Times of refreshing shall come from the Presence of the Lord. By
which Manner of Expression, he lets them ^now, that they could not, reasonably,
entertain (...) Hope of the Forgiveness of their Sins, nor ^^nsequently of the
Favor of God, the Salvation of their Souls, and the Joys of Heaven, without
Repentance.

Thus also, the Divine Revelation informs us, that this was one great End of
the Incarnation of the only begotten Son of God, and therefore was the Word
made Flesh, that he might seek, and save, them that were in a lost, undone,
perishing Condition, by calling them to Repentance: hence said our Lord, Matthew.
ix.13. I am not come to call the Righteous, but Sinners, to Repentance.
Therefore also has the incarnate Son of God laid down his Life, to mortify Sin
in us, as well as to procure a Pardon for us; that, by his Death upon the
Cross, we might be enabled to crucify the Flesh, with it is Affections, and
Lusts; that is, that Sinners might become true Penitents. Hence we are told,
Tit. ii.14. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity,
and purify, unto himself, a peculiar People, zealous of good Works. And
therefore also has our blessed Lord risen from the Dead, not only that he
might justify us, but that he might give us the Victory over our Sins, and
deliver us from the Power of them. Hence we read, Acts v.31. Him has God
exalted with his Right Hand, to be a Prince, and a Savior, for to give
Repentance to Israel, and Remission of Sins.

And not only did Christ, while on Earth, preach Repentance to Sinners, but he
assured the World, that there was no Possibility of any Man's obtaining
Salvation, without it; and therefore he said unto the Jews, who told him of the
Galileans, whom Pilate slew, and of those that were destroyed by the Fall of
the Tower of Siloe, Luke xiii.3, 5. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish. He did not mean, that they should perish in the same Manner, but as
certainly perish, and miss of the Divine Favor, and the Happiness of the
heavenly World. So absolutely does our Savior insist upon our complying with
the Call, and Invitation, which he has made, in his Word, to Sinners, that
they repent of their Sins, and return to their Duty to God, and be obedient to
all his Laws, that he assures us, that, in the Process of the great Day, when
he shall appear as the Judge of the World, whoever is then found to have lived,
and died, in any Course of Wickedness, whatever be their Profession, and
Pretentions, he will utterly reject them, and exclude them from Heaven, and
Happiness, forever. Matthew. vii.21, 22, 23. Not every one that says unto me,
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will
of my Father which is in Heaven: many will say unto me, in that Day, Lord,
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name, done many wonderful
Works? and in thy Name, have c^^t out Devils? and then will I profess unto
them, I never knew you; depart from me, ye that work Iniquity. And farther, he
plainly tells us, Matthew. xiii.41, 42. That, at the End of the World, the Son
of Man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather, out of his Kingdom,
all Things that offend, and them which do Iniquity, and shall cast them into a
Furnace of Fire; there shall be wailing, and gnashing of Teeth. The Certainty
of which Doom, upon impenitent Sinners, he confirms, by repeating it, in the
Parable of the good, and bad Fishes, enclosed in the same Net, till a
Separation is made, and then the good are gathered into Vessels, and the bad
are cast away, as refuse, and vile; v. 49, 50. So shall it be, at the End of
the World; the Angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the
just, and shall cast them into the Furnace of Fire; there shall be wailing, and
gnashing of Teeth. So that, upon a general View of the Gospel Revelation, we
have a most full, and plain Evidence, that Repentance is absolutely necessary
to Salvation.

2. If we descend into Particulars, we shall see, that the sacred Scriptures
are most full, and plain, and positive, and peremptory, in their Demand of
Repentance, and that sincere, and unfeigned, from every Sinner, as absolutely
necessary to his Salvation. Thus, if we take a View of the two essential Parts
of Repentance, namely, the Sinner's forsaking of his Sins, and his leading of
an holy Life, in Obedience to the Commandments of God, this will appear
manifest to us.

1. The holy Scriptures do most strongly, and indispensibly, insist upon the
Sinner's forsaking of his Sins, as absolutely necessary to his being saved.
Thus they positively demand of us, that our Hearts be turned from all Sin, and
Wickedness; from the Love of Sin, to an Hatred of it. Jer. iv.14. O Jerusalem,
wash thine Heart from Wickedness, that thou may be saved; how long shall thy
vain Thoughts lodge within thee? Psalm. xcvii.10. Ye that love the Lord, hate
Evil. Which Words are not barely directory, to them that have the Love of God
prevailing in them, but they are of the Force of a positive Command, even upon
all Men, to love God, and hate Evil, as ever they would be found among those
holy ones, that have the Tokens of Salvation upon them: for the Lord preserves
the Souls of his Saints, not of those that go on in their Trespasses. The like
peremptory Command we have in the Epistle to the Romans, Romans xii.9. Abhor that
which is Evil; that is, we must have an inward, hearty, Detestation of every
Thing that is vicious, and sinful, as of that which, of all Things, is most
offensive, and loathsome to us. Therefore also we are told, Romans ii.29.
Circumcision is that of the Heart; that is, the cutting off, and putting away,
the Superfluity of Naughtiness, which is in the Heart. Thus, we are commanded,
to deny Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts; Tit. ii.12. that is, the very Lustings
of the Heart after the Ways of Ungodliness, and after worldly, carnal, sensual
Pleasures, must be suppressed, and mortified. And so we read, 2 Cor. vii.1.
Having therefore these Promises; that is, if we hope for any Benefit by the
great, and precious Promises of God, if we would entertain any well grounded
Hope, that God will be a Father to us, and own us for his Sons, and Daughters,
and so would hope to be saved, we must cleanse ourselves from all Filthiness,
of Flesh, and Spirit; that is, the inward Filth of the Heart, and the outward
Filth of the Hands, must be purged from us. Thus also, we read, Gal. v.24. They
that are Christ's, those that truly belong to him, are his real Disciples, and
are interested in the Benefits of his Death, and so shall be saved by him, have
crucified the Flesh, with the Affections, and Lusts; that is, the fleshly
carnal Lusts, and vicious Affections of the Heart, must be crucified, slain,
and put to Death, or we cannot be saved by Christ.

As the Heart must be purified from the Love of Sin, so, as we have
Opportunity, we must show, in our Lives, and Conversation, our ^^horrence of
every wicked Thing, by our careful Endeavors to keep ourselves pure, and
unspotted from the World. The sacred Scripture therefore demands it of us, 2 Timothy ii.19. Let every one, that names the Name of Christ, depart from
Iniquity: 1 Thessalonians. v.22. Abstain from all Appearance of Evil; have no
Fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather reprove them. Ephesians.
v.11. Thus it is positively injoined upon us, Col. iii.5. Mortify your Members,
which are upon the Earth, that is, resist, suppress, abstain from all Acts of
Sin, as Fornication, Uncleanness, Inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and
Covetousness; and the Reason is given in the following Words, for which Things
Sake the Wrath of God comes upon the Children of Disobedience. q. d. By such
sinful Practices, you disobey the Commandment of God, and expose yourselves to
his Wrath, which will certainly overtake you, if you repent not.

And that, therefore, no Man may flatter, and delude himself, with a vain
Imagination, that, notwithstanding all these plain, and positive Injunctions,
in the Word of God, yet, his forsaking of his Sins is not so absolutely
necessary, but that it may be possible for him to be saved, though he should
continue to go on in his wicked Courses, I say, to prevent such fatal
Delusions, the holy Scriptures do, in the plainest, and strongest Terms, assure
us to the Contrary, and that no Men can ever get to Heaven in their Sins. Hence
said the Apostle, 1 Cor. vi.9, 10. Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with
Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor
Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And so, in his Epistle to the
Galatians, the Apostle reckons up the Works of the Flesh, the various Sins
which Men are generally addicted unto, as Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath,
Strife, Sedition, Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revelling, and such
like; and says he, upon them all, and in as plain Terms as Man can speak, Gal.
v.21. I declare unto you, as I have before said, (namely in his former
preaching to them,) that they, which do such Things, shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. Yea, so far shall all such, as live in any Way of Wickedness,
be from getting safe to Heaven, that the Word of God lets us know, for
certain, that they shall perish under the Wrath, and Curse, of the Almighty,
and that forever. Thus, Psalm. lxviii.21. God shall wound the Head of his
Enemies, and the hairy Scalp of such an one as goes on still in his
Trespasses. Romans viii.13. If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die. And what
can be plainer, and fuller, than that in the Epistle to the Ephesians? Chapter v.
v. 6. Let no Man deceive you, with vain Words; for because of these Things,
(the several Sins he had before mentioned,) the Wrath of God comes upon the
Children of Disobedience.

And now, is it possible for us to hear these, (and innumerable more Texts,
that might be mentioned, to the same Purpose,) and not see the absolute
Necessity there is, of the Sinner's forsaking of his Sins, in order to his
obtaining Salvation? Is it possible for any Man to be saved in his Sins, or can
he upon any good Grounds, entertain the Hope thereof, after all this plain
Revelation of the positive Will of God to the contrary? Surely, it is not
possible; and therefore the Sinner must repent of, and turn from, his Sins, or
forever go without the Salvation, set before him in the Gospel. Besides,

2. The holy Scriptures do most peremptorily insist upon the Sinner's leading a
virtuous, and an holy Life, in Obedience to the Commands of God, as absolutely
necessary to his being saved. When our Savior preached that excellent Sermon,
commonly called, the Sermon on the Mount, wherein he explained, and unfolded,
the moral Law; and exhorted his Disciples to all Holiness of Heart, and Life,
and assured them that he came, not to destroy the Law, or the Prophets, but to
fulfill them; that is, not to free Men from their Obligations to obey the Divine
Will, contained in the Law, and the Prophets, but to enforce their Obedience
thereto, and, that therefore, till Heaven, and Earth, should pass away, one
Jot, or one Tittle, should in no wise pass from the Law; He concludes his
Discourse, by showing them, how absolutely their future, and eternal, Welfare
was dependent upon their present Obedience. Matthew. vii.24 -- 27. Whosoever
(said he,) hears these Sayings of mine, and does them, (that is, who lives
in Obedience to the Will of God,) I will liken him unto a wise Man, who built
his House upon a Rock; and the Rain descended, and the Floods came, and the
Winds blew, and beat upon that House, and it fell not; for it was founded upon
a Rock. That is, his Hope of Salvation was well founded, so that no Storm, no
Trial, should be able to overthrow it, and disappoint him. But, on the other
Hand, Every one that hears these Sayings of mine, and does them not, (that
is, he who, though he know the Will of God, does not live in Obedience to his
Precepts, but leads an irreligious, immoral, wicked, sinful Life,) shall be
like unto a foolish Man, who built his House upon the Sand; and the Rain
descended, and the Floods came, and the Winds blew, and beat upon that House,
and it fell, and great was the Fall thereof. That is, all his Hopes of
Salvation were ill founded, and will not be able to endure the Trial, the
through Search of the great Day, which is hastening, bu^ will certainly
disappoint him, and leave him in a most ruinous, and miserable Condition.
Nothing can be more plain than, that the Design of this Parable is, to teach
us, the absolute Necessity of our being truly virtuous, and religious, that we
make it our constant Care to observe the Divine Commandments as the Rule of our
Lives, and endeavor to govern all our Actions by it, and that we be holy unto
the Lord, as ever we hope to be saved.

Thus also, our Savior informs us, who they are, whom God, his Father,
loves, and consequently, who shall be accepted of him to the Joys of Heaven,
even he that has my Commandments, and keeps them: Joh. xiv.21. And he
acquainteth us, in plain Terms, who they are, that shall have eternal Life,
namely, his Sheep, who hear his Voice, and follow him. Joh. x.27. That is,
those who live up to his Instructions, and follow his Example, or, in short,
the obedient Christian. And farther, our blessed Lord lets us know, that it is
an universal Obedience that is required of us, and that nothing short of this,
or our sincere Endeavors after it, will be sufficient to denominate us real
Christians, and entitle us to his Favor. Ye are my Friends, (said he,) if ye
do whatsoever I command you. Joh. xv.14. Then, and not else, are ye my Friends,
if ye are universally obedient; these are the Terms, by which you will manifest
your Friendship to me, and upon which I will be your Friend, and admit you to
partake of the Benefits of my Friendship; viz. if ye do whatsoever I command
you. Hence Christ said to the young Man, who enquired of him, what good Thing
shall I do, that I may have eternal Life? Matthew. xix.17. If thou will enter
into Life, keep the Commandments. As if he had said, This you ought to do, to
be saved, keep the Commandments of God; you cannot possibly enter into Life,
and be saved, without this.

The same Doctrine of Obedience, the Apostles of our Lord, every where,
insisted upon; assuring of us, that, Gal. vi.15. In Christ, neither
Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, avails any Thing, but a new Creature. That
is, no Names, Forms, Modes, and Profession, of Religion, will give any Man a
Right, and Title, to the Benefits of Christ's Incarnation, and Death, without
his being a new Creature; or without such an inward Change in his Heart, and
outward one in his Life, as carries in it an universal, (though not altogether
perfect,) Obedience to the Will of God, made known to him. So the Apostle, in
his Epistle to the Romans, informs us, Romans ii.6, 7. That God will render
unto every Man, according to his Deeds; to them, who, by patient Continuance in
the Way of Well-doing, seek for Glory, and Hono^r, and Immortality, Eternal
Life. And that we may know for certain, that only those, who continue in the
Way of Well-doing, shall finally enjoy eternal Life, while the Disobedient
shall miss of Happiness, and have a miserable Portion assigned to them, he
goes on to say, v. 8, 9. But unto them who are contentious, and do not obey
the Truth, but obey Unrighteousness; Indignation, and Wrath, Tribulation, and
Anguish, upon every Soul of Man that does Evil, of the Jew first, and also of
the Gentile. So that none shall be saved, whether they be Jew, or Gentile,
whether the Followers of Moses, or Jesus, but such as are careful to live in
Obedience to the Will of God; these, and these only, shall enter into Life:
whereas all such as do wickedly, whose Lives are a Contradiction to the Law of
God, and Contempt of his rightful Authority, shall feel his righteous
Displeasure, and melt away.

Wherever the Apostles of our Lord went, they constantly preached Religion, and
Righteousness, and called upon Men to practice the great Duties of Piety, and
Goodness, of Temperance, and Meekness, of Justice, and Mercy, of
Brotherly-kindness, and Charity; Ephesians. iv.32. That ye be kind one to another,
tender Hearted, forgiving one an other, even as God, for Christ's Sake, has
forgiven you. Thus, Tit. ii.11 -- 13. The Grace of God, which brings
Salvation, has appeared unto all Men, teaching us, that, denying Ungodliness,
and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this
present World; looking for the blessed Hope, and glorious Appearing of the
great God, and our Savior, Jesus Christ. Thus, they require it of us, 2. Cor.
vii.1. To perfect Holiness, in the Fear of God; Tit. iii.8. To be careful to
maintain good Works; and in plain Words call upon us, Heb. xii.14. To follow
Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord. And what can be clearer, and
more determinate than those Words of Christ? Luke xii.47. That Servant, which
knew his Lord's Will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his
Will, shall be beaten with many Stripes: and those of the Baptist, Matthew.
iii.10. Every Tree which brings not forth good Fruit, shall be hewn down, and
cast into the Fire.

From these, and many other Passages of the holy Scriptures, i^ is ver^
evident, beyond all Contradiction, and without Room to doubt, or hesitate about
it, that a holy, virtuous, religious Life, a Life conformable to the Divine
Law, as the only sure Rule of our Walk, is absolutely necessary to a Sinner's
being saved. And thus we see, from the whole Tenor of those holy Writings, both
in General, and Particular, what it is that God indispensibly requires of us,
viz. that we forsake all our Sins, and lead holy Lives; and this shows us the
absolute Necessity of Repentance, in all the main Parts of it, in order to a
Sinner's being saved. And now,

2. Let us attend to the Voice of natural Reason, and Conscience, and this will
plainly inform us, that it is absolutely, indispensibly, necessary to the
Sinner's being saved, that he become a true Penitent. I do not say, that
natural Reason is sufficient, of itself, to inform us, that the Sinner might be
saved, upon his Repentance; because I do not know whether it would have been
able to have discovered any Thing about Repentance, either the true Nature of
it, or that Repentance would, by any Means, have rendered the Sinner acceptable
unto God: for I know of nothing, which our Reason, alone, can conceive of, in
the Nature of God, that can infer the Necessity, or Readiness, of the Divine
Being to forgive a Criminal, upon his Sorrow for his past Offenses, and his
Care to be obedient for the future. This I am sure of, that our natural Reason
would never have told us, what we now know to be the Divine Will, concerning
sinful Man; it never would have discovered to us the Counsels of Peace, which
the Gospel, alone, has revealed to us, (...) ^od's accepting the penitent
Sinner, to Mercy ^ith him, through the Merits of his incarnate Son. Bu^ this I
say, that our own Reason, since we have the Advantages of Revelation, can now
most clearly see, that there is no Possibility of Salvation for any sinful Man,
without Repentance. This will sufficiently appear from two Considerations, viz.
The Purity of the Divine Nature, and the Nature of Salvation. Thus

1. Our own Reason assures us, upon a due Consideration of the Holiness, and
Purity of the Divine Nature, that the Repentance of the Sinner is absolutely
necessary to his Salvation. Natural Reason might, probably, discover something
of the Purity of the Divine Nature, and since it has pleased God to give a
more full Discovery, by Revelation, what an infinitely holy God he is, our
natural Reason, and Conscience, readily subscribeth to the Scripture Account of
the Divine Being, which the Prophet Habakkuk gives us, in these Words, Hab.
i.13. Thou art of purer Eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on
Iniquity; and which the Psalmist sets before us, when he says, Psalm. v.4, 5.
Thou art not a God that have Pleasure in Wickedness, neither shall Evil dwell
with thee; the foolish, (the wicked,) shall not stand in thy Sight; Thou hate
all the Workers of Iniquity. We are now sure, that God is as Holy, as he is
Great; that he is at an infinite Remove from all Sin; that he is so far from
being tainted with the least possible Degree of moral Evil, that he hates it
with a most perfect Hatred, wheresoever it is found, and cannot look upon it,
but with utmost Detestation, and Abhorrence.

From whence it plainly follows, that, supposing the Divine Majesty to be, as
he truly is, infinitely good, and to be ever so ready, and disposed, from the
Goodness of his Nature, to show Kindness to his rational Creatures, who have
transgressed his L^w, and rendered themselves obnoxi^us to his righteous
Displeasure, I say, supposing all (...), yet, there is an utter Impossibility,
from the Purity of his Nature, that he should ever receive a guilty, polluted,
Sinner into his Favor, and so save him, while he remains under the Power,
and Dominion of Sin, and continues to walk in a Course of Disobedience to the
Divine Authority, and Law. Were God ever so really, and strongly, inclined to
pardon the Sinner's Guilt, without any Considerations, but that of his own
merciful Nature, yet, I humbly conceive, his Justice would put in an effectual
Bar against such a Procedure; and until the Demands of Justice, upon the
Criminal, are fully answered, the Door is shut upon Mercy, and there is no Way
for it to reach to the Offender. So that the Sinner's Guilt, or the Obligations
he lies under to suffer, seems to forbid the Purity of the Divine Nature,
which is equally concerned for Justice, and the Rights of the Sovereign, as for
Mercy to the miserable, from receiving a guilty Creature into Favor, until he
is some Way or other purged from his Sin. But then, the Pollution, and
Defilement of Sin, is such, that they evidently stand in direct Opposition to
the Purity of the Divine Nature; and therefore, until the Sinner be cleansed
from these, there is an utter Impossibility for an infinitely holy God to look
upon him, with an Eye of Favor, and hold any Communion with him. Because this
would be to blend Holiness, and Sin, the two greatest Contraries, together;
which is more impossible than to incorporate Light, and Darkness. It is a
Contradiction to the natural Notions we have of the Sovereignty, and Dominion
of God, of his Equity, and Justice, as well as of his Holiness, and Purity, to
imagine, that he will, or can, reward, with the Tokens of his Favor, the
wilfully disobedient, impeniten^, Sinner. Because this would be to make the
infinitely holy, and pure God, to become the Author, or, at le^st, the
Encourager, and Abetier, of all Sin, and Wickedness; which would entirely
overthrow his Dominion, and make void his Law, and be the most vile
Prostitution of Justice, in clearing the Guilty: all of which are most
contrary, and Abhorrent, to the Divine Nature, and Perfections.

Nay, farther; Let us take into our Consideration the clear Revelation of the
abundant Grace of the Gospel, that God has sent his dearly beloved Son into
the World, for this very Purpose, to die for Sinners, that they, through him,
might be saved; yet will not this Grace, in the least, take off from the Force
of the Obligation, and Nec^ssity, the Sinner lies under to repent of his Sin^,
and lead a Life of Obedience, in order to his being saved. For, if it could be
supposed, that the holy God, for the Sake of the Death of his Son, would pardon
the impenitent Sinner, and save them that go on in their Trespasses, what would
this amount to? but, that the infinitely holy, and wise God would have been at
the extraordinary Cost, and Pains, to send an extraordinary Person into the
World, the dearest Object of his everlasting Love, of the most exemplary
Holiness, to give us the most excellent, and holy Doctrines, and Precepts, and,
at length, to lay down his very Life, and shed his most precious Blood, as an
Offering, and Sacrifice, for Sin; and all to give the greatest En^ouragement to
Mankind, to persist in their Rebellions against the God that made them, and
take the most effectual Method, to banis^ V^^tue, and Holiness, and Obedience
to the Divine Law, out of the World, and to turn this Earth into a very Hell of
Wickedness! And can any Design be more co^^radictory to itself, than this would
be? Or could (...) Set of Thoughts carry in it a more horrid* and ^lasphemous,
Imputation upon the Divine (...), Counsels, and Administrations, tha^ ^his
wor^^ do? If the Sinner is to be saved in his Sins, where, I beseech you, then,
is the Holiness of God? Or what Occasion was there for the Incarnation, and
Death, of the Son of God? Or, where is the Wisdom of God in this whole Design?
And why might not sinning Angels come in for a Share in this Grace, and Favor
of God, (if it may be called so,) as well as sinning Man, although they remain
still but very Devils?

So that Reason, and Conscience, in any Measure attended to, do most fully
assure us, from the Consideration of the Holiness, and Purity, of the Divine
Nature, that the Repentance of the Sinner is absolutely necessary to his
Salvation. Let these Things be, and abide with you.

SERMON XVI.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
I Endeavored, in the Morning, to show you the absolute Necessity of
Repentance, from the express Language of the sacred Scriptures, both in general
Terms, and with regard to the particular Branches of this Duty; and the Voice
of Reason demands this at our Hands, if we consider the Purity of the Divine
Nature. I proceed to argue,

2. If we consider the Nature of Salvation, our own Reason will assure us,
there can be no Possibility of a Sinner's enjoying of it, without Repentance,
preparing of him for it. I have, in the Beginning of these Discourses,
sufficiently showed, that Men will exist in another State, and World, when they
depart from hence; and I only now take it for granted, that as the Man leaves
this World, so he will be in the next; as the Tree falls so it will (...);
there will be no altering of the Temper, and Disposition, of the Man, from
sinful, and vicious, to virtuous, and holy, after the State of Probation is
ended with him; but the Man will remain forever, in that World he passes into,
either a good, and virtuous, or a bad, and wicked Man, as he was at the Time
when he left this World; saving only, that his virtuous, or vicious,
Disposition will advance to greater Degrees, in it is Kind, and a more fixed,
and unalterable, Temper of Mind. If, indeed, the Man should alter from bad, to
good, after he leaves this World, it is plain, he would then become a true
Penitent. But I suppose him to remain in his Impenitency; and if he does so,
then our Reason tells us, that, upon this Supposition, he cannot possibly be
saved.

For, let us consider wherein the Salvation of a Sinner consists, and see
whether, he that remains in his Impenitency, can possibly enjoy it, while he
continues in that Condition.

I have, formerly, showed you, that the Salvation of the Sinner consists, in
Part, in a Deliverance from all that Evil, both of Sin, and Punishment, which
the Soul of the Sinner is more specially subject unto. But now, it is very
evident, that the impenitent Sinner is not saved from the Evil of Sin, which is
the worst of Evils, and the procuring Cause of all other. For he is Impenitent;
that is, he continues in Sin, under the Power, and Dominion, of it: and how
great an Evil soever Sin may be, in the Defilement, and Blemish, the Disorder,
and Confusion, the mean Vassa^^ge, and Slavery, brought upon the Soul by it,
yet all of this remains upon the impenitent Sinner; he that is unholy, will
be unholy still: so that, in this Regard, he is not, nor can he be saved:
unless, to be sinful, and holy, regular, and irregular, a Slave, and free, mean
the same Thing.

Nor can he possibly be saved from the Evil of Punishment, without Repentance.
For, besides that the Justice of God stands ready armed against the Sinner,
while he remains in his Sins, and continues to act contrary to that which is
holy, just, and good, yea, though there should be no Degree of Misery inflicted
upon him, from the more immediate Hand of a terrible God, when he passes into
the other World, yet, his own Conscience will then fly in his Face, and,
whether he will, or no, will be his continual Tormentor. When the Man shall be
uncloathed of Flesh, and Sense, there will be none of those Objects, which here
give a Diversion to the Mind, and hinder for the present, it is close
Reflections, to interrupt the Mind from taking a View of her own Conduct; and
then the Conscience of the Sinner, which is privy to all his Actions will be
filled with dreadful Apprehensions of the base, and mean part she has acted,
how much below, and unbecoming her rational Nature her Conduct has been, and
what a State of Purity, and Peace, and Happiness, she has lost by her own
Folly; and the severe Reproaches of Conscience, in the Prospect hereof, will be
a Worm, within the Breast of the Man, that never dies, a Fire that never goes
out, and will render him truly miserable, and forever so. For he cannot get rid
of himself, who then will become his own worst Enemy.

I have also formerly showed you, that to be saved is, to possess all that
positive Good which the Soul stands in need of. And, without taking Notice of
the present spiritual Good which the Soul wants, which is utterly
inconsistent with a State of Impenitency, let us consider the future Good it
wants, in the coming World; (that is to say, the Happiness of the heavenly
World;) and it will plainly appear, from the Force of natural Reason, that the
Sinner cannot possibly be saved, without altering his Temper and becoming a
real Penitent.

For, the inward Principle of Rebellion, and Hatred of God, and Goodness, which
sways the Soul of the Impenitent, in all his Acts of Sin, ut^erly incapacitates
him to partake of the Blessedness of the heavenly State, if there were no Law
of God to forbid it to him. The Society, the Enjoyments, the Employments, of
that pure, and happy World, in which the substantial Felicity of Heaven
consists, would, of all Things, be the greatest Aversion of the polluted
unholy Soul; because, what, of all Things, he is most unlike to, and at the
greatest moral Distance from. So that, if it were possible, for the ^^atifick
Vision to open, in it is full Luster, before him, and for the impure Soul, to be
encircled with all the Glories which flow from thence, it would be so far from
rendering of him completely happy, that it would become his greatest Torment,
and give him the highest Uneasiness; because, it would ^e a confining of him to
what is most contrary to his very Nature, and prevailing Inclination, and
therefore would be a greater Burden to him, than for a living Man to be chained
to a dead Carcass. The impenitent Sinner could not possibly attend the holy,
and pure, Services of Heaven, but would ^y from them, as having no Principle of
Holiness in him to render them entertaining to him: nor could he participate in
the Enjoyments of Heaven, because there could be no Agreement between Persons,
and Things, whose Natures are so directly opposite. So that the Enjoyment of
God, and Heaven, were the Thing possible, would be no Happiness to the Sinner;
and it is utterly impossible he should enjoy them, from the Inconsistency of
his impure Nature, with the holy Nature of the Divine Being, and the Retinue of
his Court; which rendereth it absolutely impossible that any Sinner should be
saved, without Repentance.

Thus we see, both, from the sacred Scriptures, the declared Will, and Law of
the great God, and, from the Reason, and Nature of Things, the pure, and holy,
Nature of God, and the Essence, and Constitution, of that Salvation which is
proposed to us, the absolute Necessity there is, that the perishing Sinner
should repent of, and forsake, his Sins, and lead a new, and holy Life, in
Obedience to the Commands of God, in order to his being saved. Hence it is,
that Repentance is called, Acts xi.18. Repentance unto Life; and, 2 Cor.
vii.10. Repentance unto Salvation; because it is the Means leading to them, and
there can be no Life, and Salvation, for a poor Sinner, without it. Having thus
made good the second Head, I now proceed to the third Thing proposed, viz.

III. To consider what the perishing Sinner must do to obtain this Repentance
unto Salvation. We have seen what Repentance is, and the absolute Necessity of
it; but, in very Deed, can the poor, languishing, dying Sinner, thus repent of
his Sins, of himself, that he is so often called upon to repent? Can he hate,
and forsake, the Sins, which are so delightsome to him; and love, and practice,
the Holiness, which he is so averse to; and this, by his own Strength, the
Force of his Free Will, and the Power which now belongs to him, as such a
Creature as he is? No; verily, I have showed, under a former Head, that, as the
Sinner has nothing of Merit to deserve Salvation, so neither has he sufficient
Strength, of his own, to work out his Salvation; and therefore he is not able,
of himself, to become a true Penitent.

But then is the Sinner a mere Machine, and wrought upon only by external
Force, and Violence? No, surely; he is a rational Agent, and God deals with
him as such; and therefore there are some Things he must do, to obtain
Repentance unto Salvation. For, though God can, if he please, suddenly change
the Heart of a Sinner, without his being at the Trouble to do any one Thing, to
bring forward so great, and good, a Work; yet, according to the Gospel
Dispensation, where the ordinary Means of Grace are enjoyed, it pleases the
Divine Majesty to accomplish his Designs of Mercy, in this Way, of the Sinner's
diligent Improvement of those Means, which he has appointed for the designed
End. Though God has not bound himself to the Use of Means, but can work
without them, when he pleases, yet he has tied us to the Use of Means, nor can
we expect Success in any of our Concerns without it. Since God has been pleased
to appoint, and direct to, Means, to bring the Sinner to Repentance, if,
therefore, he will but seriously, and diligently, attend upon those Means, he
may comfortably hope for the Divine Blessing, to accompany his Endeavors, and
render them effectual to bring him to a through Repentance, and finally to
Salvation. Accordingly, I shall briefly name some Things, which every Sinner
can do, and which he must do, as ever he would hope to be saved.

1. He must seriously weigh, in his own Mind, and deeply affect himself with
the Sense of, the evil Nature of Sin, and his own Sinfulness. To find out the
Disease is half the Cure. To be truly sensible of the Evil of Sin, and our own
Sinfulness, will go a great Way to promote our Repentance. For it cannot be,
but that a rational Agent will be at some Pains to shun, what is hurtful to
him, when he has the certain, and present, Knowledge of it. Now, this lies
within the Sinner's Reach; his rational Nature capacitates him to take a View
of Sin, both in the Nature, and in the Effects of it, that by a certain, and
present, Perception, what an Evil Sin is in itself, and how hurtful unto him,
he may be excited to fly from, and avoid it. But, alas! the great Unhappiness
is, that, for want of thinking, the Sinner does not discern the Evil of Sin,
nor see the Detriment which it does to him; he feels himself some Way
gratified by it, and, from thence, draws up too hasty a Conclusion, that it is
good for him, and therefore makes light of all Cautions, and Warnings, against
it; and he fancies it would be a greater Evil to him, to deny himself of any of
the present Gratifications of Sense, than to give Way to them.

If therefore the Sinner would come to Repentance, that he may be saved, he
must be at some Pains, more thoroughly to examine the Nature of Sin, and weigh in
his own Mind, what a vile, base, and disingenuous, Thing it is, how contrary
unto all Right, and Equity, and repugnant to our own Reason; that every Sin,
more directly against God, is not only Disobedience to our rightful Sovereign,
but base Ingratitude to our best Friend, to whom we are beholden for our very
Being, and all the Comforts of it; that every Sin, more immediately against our
Neighbor, is not only a violating the Law of God, but an abuseful Injury done
to our Fellow Creature, and a not doing to others, as we would they should do
unto us.

And the Sinner must weigh in his Mind, what will be the Issue, the Fruit, and
Rewards, of his Sins, if persisted in; even nothing short of Death, and
Damnation, and that forever; to inherit devouring Fire, to dwell with
everlasting Burnings, to lie down in Fire and Brimstone, in Hell, throughout
eternal Ages. A most dreadful Issue indeed!

He must also seriously bethink himself, what a great Sinner he has been, in
how many Things he has offended, in Thought, in Word, and in Deed, from his
Youth up; and how aggravated his Transgressions have been; and what a Monster
of Wickedness, and Ingratitude, what a Child of the Devil, and Spawn of Hell,
his Sins have rendered him.

And it is not enough that he some Times casts an Eye upon these Things, and
vieweth them as at a Distance, which makes no Impression upon him, but he must
bring these Thoughts home, and close, to himself, and deeply affect himself
with them, and endeavor to keep them present with him, that he may see, and
feel, what an Offense Sin is unto God, and how dreadfully injurious it is unto
himself; that, being thoroughly apprehensive of the exceeding Sinfulness of Sin,
his Heart may be pricked within him, and he may be sensible of the dismal
Smart, and Pain of it; and thus may be grieved for his past Sins, and be
excited to a prudent Care to shun all Sin, for the Time to come. Thus says the
Prophet, Jer. ii.19. Thy own Wickedness shall correct thee, and thy
Backslidings shall reprove thee; know, therefore, and see, that it is an evil
Thing, and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord, thy God, and that my Fear
is not in thee, says the Lord God of Host.

2. The Sinner must fixedly resolve against all Sin, and to lead a Life of holy
Obedience, for the Time to come. Fixed Resolutions will enable a Man to
overcome many Difficulties, which he was ready, at the first View of them, to
look upon as insuperable: this carries the hardy Soldier through the Toils of
the War, and helps him to master the Hardships, and overcome the Dangers, he
is called to encounter with. And so will it assist the Sinner, in his Conflict
with his Corruptions, and Lusts, and mig^^ily enable him to beat down his
spiritual Enem^es; whereas the Want of this will render him, who has some
Thoughts of altering his present sinful Conduct, but an easy Prey to every
Temptation.

And this also, in some Measure, lies within the Sinner's Power. He is capable
of resolving, against that which he sees, and knows to be Evil, and hurtful
to him, and to do that which he knows to be Good, and profitable, to him. For
the Will of a rational Agent is ever determined by the present Discernment of
the Understanding; that is, it chooses that which, all Circumstances
considered, it apprehends to be best, and refuses that which it sees, or
supposes, to be worst for the Man. And, therefore, when the Understanding,
upon the present View of Things, has judged such, or such a Thing to be bad,
and really to our Hurt, and Damage, the Will resolves against that Thing; and
though the present Resolution of the Will may be superceded, either by some
Circumstances afterward presenting the same Object as Good, or, through some
Prepossession of the Affections, or, through Inadvertency, and want of calling
to Mind the Evil which we formerly saw in the Thing resolved against, (which is
very much the Case of those Sinners who break through their former Purposes,)
yet, when the Understanding has taken a through View of Things, and has a clear
Discernment of the Nature, and Consequents, of them, and the Will has passed a
fixed, and resolute, Determination concerning them, it will not be easy to
alter such Resolutions.

Thus the Sinner, from the plain Conviction which he has of the Evil of Sin, in
the odious Nature, and terrible Consequents, of it, must pass it into the
fixed, and settled, Determination of his Will, to have nothing more to do with
the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but say, as Elihu expressed it, Job xxxiv.31,
32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, -- I will not offend any more; if I
have done Iniquity, I will do no more. And, inasmuch as a Man will not always
have Opportunity to go through an exact Examination, and comparing of Things, in
order to form a present Judgment, therefore it will be fitting for him, when,
upon a more settled, and through, Search, he has truly discovered Sin to be the
worst of Evils, to resolve that he will have nothing more to do with it, upon
any Consideration whatsoever, and to make this fixed Resolution the Rule of his
Walk, and Actions, for the future. And, being convinced of the Beauty of
Holiness, the Wisdom of Religion, and the Advantage of devoting himself, to the
Service of God, he should come to a fixed Resolution with himself, to walk in
all the Ordinances, and Commandments of the Lord blameless, and that whatever
he shall discover to be the Divine Will concerning him, he will endeavor a
ready, cheerful, and exact, Obedience, and Submission, thereto, as his present,
and perpetual, Duty, and Interest; and say with the Psalmist, Psalm. cxix.106. I
have sworn, and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments.

But then, let him remember to take up these Resolutions, not merely in his own
Strength, but in the Name of Christ, looking to, and depending upon, him, for
Power to keep them; and immediately, without deferring it, put his Resolutions
into Practice.

3. The Sinner must watch, and strive, against all Temptations to Sin, and to
the Performance of his Duty. He that designeth to alter, and change, the Course
of his Life, from vicious, to virtuous, must expect to meet with many
Temptations, and Impediments; and his Resolutions will be but of little
significancy to him, nor will he be able to make them good, unless he will be
at some Pains with himself, to guard against whatever would be an Hindrance to
him, and to improve whatever would tend to further him, in the Performance of
them. Resolutions are to no Purpose, unless they are reduced to Practice. And
how shall he be able to practice, as he has resolved, who neglects the Means
to fulfill his Engagements? Surely, no Man will say, that the Sinner has not
Power to be upon his Guard, against what he apprehends to be hurtful to him,
or to exert himself, and improve the Advantages he may have, to the Performance
of what he sees to be good for him.

The Sinner, therefore, must watch over the corrupt Workings of his own Heart,
that, if possible, he may spy out his Danger from that Quarter, and may
sti^le, and suppress, the first Motions, and Stirrings, of Sin, in him; and he
must watch against the Snares, and Temptations, of a false, and deluding World,
and against the Suggestions, of a busy, and malicious Devil; that he may not be
diverted from his Purposes, and be drawn into that which would be hurtful to
him. Hence is that Apostolical Direction, 2 Pet. v.8. Be sober, be vigilant,
because your Adversary, the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking
whom he may devour.

And he must strive, as well as watch, laying himself out, in the Improvement
of his Reason, and the Motives the Word of God furnishes him withal, to resist
the wicked one, and to master the various Temptations that assault him: he must
so fight, not as one that beats the Air, but endeavor, by all Means, to keep
under his Body, and bring it into Subjection; 1 Cor. ix.26, 27. And be careful
not heedlesly, or wilfully, to give Way to Temptations; and, as much as may be,
shun the Company, the Places, the Occasions, by which he was, heretofore, and
may be again, overcome, and drawn into Sin.

He must also watch, and strive, for the Performance of his Duty; he must
embrace the Opportunities, and improve the Seasons, Occasions, and Advantages,
he may have, to attend upon the Duties of Religion, and to exercise Justice,
and Charity. Hence is that of our Savior, Matthew. xi.12. From the Days of John
the Baptist, until now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence; and the
violent take it by Force. There must be a sort of holy Violence used to take
Heaven, a Violence upon ourselves, in the mastering of our fleshly Appetites;
and a Violence in resisting Temptations, that we may beat down all Opposition,
in our Way thither; and a Violence in our Endeavors to run in the Race set
before us, that we may obtain the Prize.

4. The Sinner must earnestly pray to God to give him Repentance unto
Salvation. The Sinner, it is true, cannot thoroughly repent of himself, and change
his own Heart, and Life; all his Consideration, Resolution, Watchfulness, and
Strivings, alone, will not be sufficient to make a real Penitent of him: but
God is able, by his almighty Spirit, and Grace, to convert, and change him, and
form him a new, in Christ Jesus, unto good Works. Therefore Repentance is
called the Gift of God; Act. xi.18. God granted unto the Gentiles Repentance
unto Life: 2 Timothy ii.25. God gives Repentance to the Acknowledgment of the
Truth. And since Repentance is among the peculiar Works, and Gifts, of God,
therefore the great Business of the Sinner is, humbly, and earnestly, to ask
this Gift of God. For certainly, this the Sinner can do; he has the Power of
Reason, and Speech, and can put up a Prayer to God, as he can make a Petition
to Man: and he that will not be at the Pains to ask this heavenly Gift, when
his own Salvation is dependent upon it, will be left, deservedly, to go without
it, and so miss of the Salvation of his Soul.

This, then, is what the Sinner has to do, to be in Earnest, and importunate in
Prayer to God, daily, to create in him a clean Heart, and renew a right Spirit
within him; to cry, with the Leper, Matthew. viii.2. Lord, if thou will, thou
can, make me clean. He must make it his fervent, and daily, Prayer to the God
of all Grace, that, by the Spirit, he may be enabled to mortify the Deeds of
the Body; that the old Man may be crucified, and the Body of Sin may be
destroyed, that he may not hence forth serve Sin; that he may be assisted in
his Conflict with all the Enemies of his Salvation, that, being strengthened
with Might in his inner Man, he may, finally, come off a Conqueror, and more
than a Conqueror, through him that has loved him. He must sincerely, and
daily, pray to God, to enlarge his Heart, that he may run in the Way of the
Divine Commandments; to make his Heart sound in the Statutes of God, that he
may not be ashamed; and effectually to turn him from Darkness, to Light, and
from the Power of Satan unto God.

To encourage the poor Sinner, in his daily, and important Requests, at the
Throne of Grace, for Mercy, God has been pleased, most graciously, to
condescend to our Weakness, and in his most tender Compassion to us, declared,
that he is more ready to give his Holy Spirit, unto them that ask it, than any
earthly Parent is to give the Necessaries of the present Life, which lie within
his Power, to his beseeching Children. For thus He has assured us, Luke xi.13.
If ye, being evil, know how to give good Gifts unto your Children; how much
more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit unto them that ask him. In
this Way, let every Sinner do his best to obtain Repentance unto Salvation, and
I verily persuade myself that none, who do so, shall miss of the heavenly Gift.

I shall now make some Improvement of what has been said, and so conclude this
Third general Head under the Doctrine.

USE. 1. From what has been said, we may clearly see the wonderful Grace, and
Wisdom, of God, displayed in this Method of the Sinner's Salvation. What
wonders of Grace open to us, when we consider how ready, and willing, the Lord
is, to receive a poor, vile, polluted, Creature to Mercy, through the Atoning
Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, upon his unfeigned Repentance? It is great
Condescension, and Grace, in God, that he should be willing to pardon, and
save, a rebel Creature, upon any Terms, though they should have been ever so
hard, and difficult, for him to perform; but how astonishing is the Grace of
our God, that he only says to the Sinner, Wash, and be clean! that he is ready
to accept the Sinner into his Favor, upon his leaving off his Rebellions, and
Endeavor to be hearty, and steady, in his Obedience, for the future!

And how apparently is the Divine Wisdom manifested herein? That when God, in
his tender Mercy, provided for the Salvation of a perishing Sinner, he did it
in such a Way, as forever maintains the Rights of his Sovereignty, the Honor
of his Law, and his most strict Regards to Virtue, and Holiness; and therefore
has made it absolutely necessary, that he, who would partake of his pardoning
Mercy, should repent, and forsake his Sins, and lead an holy Life, or he cannot
be saved. Thus, Ephesians. ii.4, 5, 7. and iii.10. God, who is rich is Mercy, -- even
when we were dead in Sins, has quickened us; -- that he might show the
exceeding Riches of his Grace, -- to the Intent, -- might be known, by the
Church, the manifold Wisdom of God.

2. From hence we learn, how vain are all the Hopes of Salvation for any
Sinner, unless he forsake his Sins, and lead an holy Life. We have seen, that
Repentance is what God does, in the most plain, and full, and positive, Terms,
require of Sinners, as absolutely, and indispensibly, necessary to Salvation;
vain is it then for any Sinner to imagine that, possibly, he may be saved, and
get to Heaven, while he continues in his Sins unrepented of. Be not deceived;
if ever, O Sinner! thou would entertain any good Hope of arriving safe at
the happy Mansions above, when you leave this World, you must become a true
Penitent. Can any Thing be plainer than this? Rev. xxi.27. There shall in no
wise enter into it, (into Heaven,) any Thing that defiles, neither whatsoever
works Abomination, or makes a Lie. And is there, then, the least Room for
any Man to hope to go to Heaven, with his Sins about him? The Word of God, and
his own Temper, absolutely forbid it.

It is not, O Sinner! because thou make a Profession of the Christian
Religion; it is not because thou attendest upon the external Duties of
Religion; it is not because thou enjoyest the outward Privileges of the
Disciples of Jesus; it is not because many of thy Neighbors, and thy Minister,
may think well of thee; that thou shall at last be saved: None of these Things
will carry thee to Heaven. If thou do not leave off thy Sins; if thou do
not forsake thy vicious Curses, thy Profaneness, and Sabbath Breaking, thy
Coursing, and Swearing, thy Intemperance, and Drunkenness, thy Unrighteousness,
Falsehood, and Lying, thy Lewdness, and Debauchery, thy Pride, and Avarice, thy
sinful Anger, Wrath, Malice, Revenge, and the like; it thou art not careful,
and industrious, to observe all the Commandments of God, and do not make
Conscience of walking before him in Holiness, and Righteousness, all the Days
of thy Life; thou can never be saved. All thy Prayers, and Cries, and Tears,
all thy Sorrow, and M^^rning, yea, and all thy Faith, and Dependence, will do
thee no (...) good, without an Alteration, and Change, of (...) Heart, and
Life, from the Love, and Practice of Sin, to the Love, and Practice of
Holiness. Nay; There is none on Earth, or in Heaven, that can save thee,
without Repentance. For the Hypocrite's Hope shall perish. Job. viii.13.

3. Hence learn, how trifling all Excuses are, for a Continuance in Sin, and
Neglect of Duty. God does most positively insist upon Repentance, the forsaking
of all known Sin, and the Performance of every known Duty, as we have
Opportunity, as the Condition, and Terms, upon which, for the Sake of the
Merits of his dear Son, he will finally save the Sinner. How trifling is it
then, for any to think to have themselves excused, in the Commission of this,
and the other, Sin, because of their natural Temper, and Inclination, or the
Custom of themselves, and others, leading them into it? Ought thou not, in
Obedience to a positive Command of God, by a sincere Repentance, to subdue, and
mortify, thy own vicious Disposition, and stem the Current of thy own evil
Manners, and the sinful Customs of the World around thee? How vain, and
trifling, is it for thee to suppose, that thou shall be excused in thy Neglect
of one Duty, because of thy careful Attendance upon an other? Or, that thy
Tything of Mint, Anise, and Cummin, will atone for thy Neglect of the weightier
Matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith? How frivolous will all thy Pleas
be, for the Neglect of any known Duty, fetched, either from a vicious Modesty,
and false Shame, or from the Difficulty of denying thyself, and forgiving thine
Enem^es, and repairing the Injuries thou may have done unto others? What are
all these Excuses, and all that thou can make, when set in Competition with a
positive Command of God? Yea, are these Excuses any Ways fit to be laid in the
Balance, against the Salvation of thy own Soul? Or, will thou have the Face to
plead them, think you, in the Day, when thou shall appear before the tremendous
Judgment Seat of Christ? Verily, then, thou will be speechless, Matthew.
xxii.12.4.

4. Fourthly, and I have done; Let us all be persuaded to come up to the Terms
of Repentance, which we see so absolutely necessary to our Salvation. We cannot
possibly be saved without Repentance: and is not our own Salvation worth
regarding, and striving for? Is it not highly reasonable, and fitting, that we
should be mostly concerned, for that which is our main Interest, as well as
great Duty? Does not God, and Nature, tell us, we must forsake all our Sins,
and be obedient, that it may go well with us forever? If we repent of our Sins,
the merciful God will certainly, for the Sake of the Merits of Jesus Christ,
forgive (...) all our Sins, and cleanse us from all Unrighteousness: He will
save us from the Punishment of our Sins, and make us the Heirs of everlasting
Salvation.

I know, very well, that Repentance is an hard, and difficult Work; and that
which makes it to be so is, the corrupt Bias of our depraved Nature, and the
Sinner's having a long while accustomed himself to do Evil. So great is the
Difficulty of overcoming, vicious Habits, and Dispositions, which become fixed
by repeated Acts, and long Custom, that the Prophet said upon it, Jer. xiii.23.
Can the Ethiopian change his Skin? or the Leopard his Spots? then may ye, that
are accustomed to do Evil, learn to do well. This, indeed, is a very good
Reason, why they, who are yet in their Youth, should betimes set themselves to
the great Work of Repentance, that it may be so much the easier for them to
live virtuously; because, as yet, a long addicting of themselves to that which
is Evil, has not so fixed the Habits of Vice, as to render it next to
impossible for them to alter them.

But however, hard, and difficult, as it is, yet Repentance is absolutely
necessary; and the indispensible Necessity of it, one would think, should be
sufficient to put every Man upon Endeavors to surmount all Difficulties: for
that which is absolutely necessary, must be done, let the Difficulty be what it
will. Through the Mercy of God, it is not Impossible to the greatest, and the
oldest, Sinner, now, at last, truly to repent of his evil Deeds, and turn unto
the Lord his God. The greatest Difficulty lies in the first Attempt, in the
first Beginnings of a virtuous Life. If Sinners would but apply themselves, in
good Earnest, to this necessary Work, they would find, by the Grace of God, who
is ever ready to assist the willing, that they might, by Degrees, conquer their
most stubborn vicious Appetites, and Habits, and be brought to lead Lives of
holy Obedience to the Divine Commandments. And when once they have made some
good Entrance into the Way of Holiness, it would then become more easy,
pleasant, and delightful, to them to walk therein; and their Path, like that of
the Just, would shine more, and more, unto the perfect Day. Therefore our
blessed Lord has assured us, Matthew. xi.30. His Yoke is easy, and his Burden is
light. When once the Sinner has got the Mastery over his Corruptions, though
but a partial one, (which only is to be expected in this Life,) he would then
have the Pleasure of acting, as becomes a rational, and wise Agent, so as to
preserve his Innocence, and be victorious over what has been truly hurtful to
him. It was an Observation of Mon. St. Everemont, Vol. 3. P. 177.
There is a secret Pleasure in detesting what has displeased us. To be sure
this will hold good in true Repentance; and the Pleasure of hating our Sins,
which have done us the greatest Injury, will greatly make Amends for all the
Difficulty we have been put to in subduing of them.

Well then; Let every Sinner be in good Earnest in his Endeavors to put off
the old Man, and put on the new Man, striving for the Mastery, that, if by any
Means, he may avoid the Paths of Death, and lay hold on eternal Life. Consider
the present Shame, and Unprofitableness of Sin, and the future Issue of a
wicked Life; look back upon your past Experiences, and look forward, to the End
of Things, and say now, Romans vi.21. What Fruit had ye, in those Things, whereof
ye are now ashamed? for the End of these Things is Death.

And think seriously, what it cost the incarnate Son of God, to buy off the
Punishment of Sin. View Sin in the Light of the Sufferings of Christ. What
Poverty, and Meanness did he submit to? What Shame, Reproach, and Contempt, was
poured upon him? What Pains in his Body, and Anguish in his Mind, did he
endure? What an horrid, and bloody, Death, did he undergo? How did he bear the
Insults of Men, the Rage of Devils, and the Hidings of his Father's Face? in
the Day when God laid upon him the Iniquity of us all. Look, now, upon Christ,
whom your Sins have pierced, and mourn. Zech. xii.10. And especially, when
Christ is evidently set forth, before your Eyes, as crucified, at his holy
Table, let it put you upon feeding upon this Christian Passover with bitter
Herbs. Let the Sight of the suffering Jesus, at once, convince you of the
infinite Evil of Sin, and fire you with the greatest Indignation against it,
and quicken your Endeavors to be the Death of that which has slain the lord of
Life, and Glory. 1 Pet. iv.1, 2. For as much as Christ has suffered in the
Flesh, arm yourselves with the same Mind: for he that has suffered in the
F^e^h has ceased from Sin, that he no longer should liv^ the rest of his Time,
to the Lusts of Men, but to the Will of God.

And let none abuse the Grace of God, in his Re^diness to receive the returning
Sinner to Mercy, and encourage themselves in Sin, for the present, upon
Presumption to repent some Time hereafter. What Name can be bad enough for such
vile Baseness, and black Ingratitude, as so to turn the Grace of God into
Wantonness? Shall we continue in Sin, that Grace may abound? God forbid! said
the Apostle, Romans vi.1, 2. with the greatest Indignation, and Abhorrence. No;
let us all, rather, take the Encouragement that is given us, and because the
God of Israel is a merciful God, ready to pardon Iniquity, Transgression, and
Sin, therefore now, immediately, without Delay, set ourselves, in good Earnest,
about the great and necessary, Work of Repentance, and, as with Ropes about our
Necks, with the deepest Humiliation, and sincere Acknowledgements of our past
Transgressions, and our utter Unworthiness of the least Mercy from him, let us
return unto the Lord our God, from whom we have revolted by our Iniquities. Let
us all now see, that there is no Evil so great as Sin is; and strengthen our
Resolutions, and be more strict upon our Watch, and diligent in our Endeavors,
and fervent in our P^^yers, for the Time to come, against our Corruptions. And
though we cannot attain unto perfect Holiness, in this Life, yet let us press
after it, as far as we can, striving for the Victory over our Lusts, and
Passions, and laboring to conform ourselves to every Command of God; that the
Remainder of our Days may be spent in the Service of our Maker, and our Judge:
then shall we ^e of the happy Number that order their Conversation aright, and
shall see the Salvation of God. For thus says the Apostle, with whose Words I
now conclude, Romans vi.22. But now being made free from Sin, and become Servants
unto God, ye have your Fruit unto Holiness, and the End everlasting Life.

To be saved a Matter of the highest Importance. SERMON XVII.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
IT is an Enquiry of the greatest Importance that can be, and what well
becomes every one of us to make, and to be most earnestly concerned to give a
good Answer to. This therefore is the Doctrine I have observed from these
Words; viz.

DOC. It is of the highest Concernment unto perishing Sinners, to be very
solicitous, what they must do to be saved; or, to know, and practice, all that
is necessary, in order to their Salvation.

There have been four general Heads named, as included in this Text, and
Doctrine, worthy of our most serious Consideration.

I. To show you what it is to be saved; or, what is that Salvation which
perishing Sinners stand in Need of.

II. To evidence that perishing Sinners may be saved; or, there is a
Possibility, notwithstanding their present miserable Condition, that they may
be eternally saved.

III. That perishing Sinners must know, and practice, all that is necessary, in
order to their Salvation; or, there is something to be done, by them, that they
may be saved.

IV. This is a Matter of the highest Conc^rnment to them, and therefore they
ought to be most seriously solicitous about it.

I have, at several Times, gone through the handling of the three first of
these Heads; and have showed you, what that Salvation is which the perishing
Sinner stands in Need of; and that he may possibly obtain it; I have also
showed you what the Sinner must do to be saved, namely, he must comply with the
Demands of the Gospel, by believing on the Lord Jesus Christ, and repenting of
all his Sins; the Nature, and Necessity, of which two great Gospel Duties, I
have endeavored to set before you, and have also showed you the Method to
obtain these precious Gifts of God. I come now to the fourth, and last, general
Head, under the Doctrine: viz.

IV. This is a Matter of the highest Concernment unto perishing Sinners, and
therefore they should be most seriously solicitous about it. There is nothing
of so much Concernment unto the Sinner, as that he may be eternally saved; the
Loss, or Gains, of a Soul, Heaven, or Hell, all turn upon it; nor is there any
Thing so worthy of his most steady Care, and Solicitude. A Soul is too big a
Thing to be trifled with; Heaven, and Hell, are too august, and awful, to be
sported with; if any Thing demands our serious Thought, and closest Care,
these do. Here are two Things which fall under Consideration; namely,

I. To be saved is a Matter of the highest Importance to every perishing Sinner.

II. There is the greatest Reason, why every perishing Sinner should be most
seriously solicitous that he may be saved.

I. The first Thing here is, to show you, that to be saved is a Matter of the
highest Concernment unto every perishing Sinner. This is an Affair which every
Child of Adam is concerned in, and that in the highest Manner, and Degree, that
possibly can be. There is nothing so nearly concerns us all, nor any Thing of
such Importance to us, as this, that we escape Hell, and get safe to Heaven.
Every Man's Interest is wrapped up in it, and it is his greatest Interest,
compared with which, every Thing else is as nothing.

To make this plain, let us distinctly consider,

1. First; Every Child of Adam is concerned in this great Affair.

2. Secondly; This is a Matter of the highest possible Concernment to us all.

1. First; Every Child of Adam is concerned in this great Affair. It is an
Enquiry which every one is to make, What must I do to be saved? Salvation!
Where is the Man that has no Concernment in it! This is a Matter that belongs
not to a few only of the Sons, and Daughters, of Men, but it appertains to
every individual Person, that ever did, or ever shall, descend from Adam, in
the ordinary Way of Generation. If there be any Person here that has no Soul in
him, let him withdraw, as having no Concern in this Discourse; or if there be
any Man whose Soul stands in no Need of Salvation, let him look upon himself
as unconcerned herein. But, as no Man is destitute of a Soul, so neither is
there any Soul but what wants to be saved. There never was, nor ever will be,
any one single Person, proceeding from the Loins of Adam, but what, as he came
into, and before he departs out of, this World, wants to escape the Misery,
and be secured of the Happiness, of the other World. For, there is no Man, of
all Adam's natural Offspring, but what is a Sinner, and guilty in the Sight of
the holy God; and, considered as such, is destitute of the Divine Favor, and
liable unto the Curse of God; and therefore is perishing in his Sin, and
needs to be saved. The Apostle therefore said, Romans iii.9. We have proved
both Jews, and Gentiles, (under which Distribution he comprehends the whole
World of Mankind, from Beginning, to End,) that they are all under Sin. There
is none among them exempted from being a Sinner; for as he adds, v. 23. All
have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God. And because all have sinned,
therefore all are obnoxious unto Punishment, and so are in a miserable
Condition, by Reason of Sin. Hence the Apostle said, in the same Epistle, Romans
v.12. By one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death
passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned. Which, at once, shows us, the
real Guilt cleaving to all descending from the first Man, by Virtue of his Sin,
and Fall; and the wretched miserable Condition which Guilt has involved them
in. And how clearly does the Apostle argue the miserable Condition both of
Jews, and Gentiles, i. e. of all Men, from their Sinfulness? says he, Romans
iii.10.17. They are all under Sin; and as a Consequence of this, there is none
righteous no not one; they have no real Goodness in them; besides* they are
hurtful, and injurious, to one another; Their Throat is an open Sepulcher, with
their Tongues they have used Deceit, the Poison of Asps is under their Lips;
their Mouth is full of Cursing, and Bitterness; their Feet are swift to shed
Blood. And over and above all this Unhappiness attending them, for the Present,
the End of their wicked Life will be complete Misery; Destruction, and Misery,
are in their Way, and the Way of Peace they have not known. But of these Things
I have discoursed more largely, under some former Heads.

Now, because all have sinned, and are become guilty, and are miserable in
their vicious Temper, and Disposition, and liable to the Displeasure of
almighty God, to suffer the just Punishment of their various Sins; from hence
it follows, that it is a Matter, which concerns every individual Person, to
be saved from Sin, and the Misery consequent upon it. There is not a Mother's
Child in this Assembly, (or that reads this,) no, not throughout the whole
Earth, but what the great Affairs of Salvation have a Relation to, and they
have their Concernment in them, whether they will, or no; that is to say,
Salvation, or Damnation, Happiness, or Misery, will be their Unavoidable
Portion.

1. This is a Matter which belongs unto the great, and honorable, and rich,
among the Sons of Men. As for the great ones of the Earth, they are not so
elevated as to be altogether above Want; they are also liable to fall, and can
feel Pain, even as other mean Men; and therefore it as much concerns them to
escape the Damnation of Hell, and possess the Joys of Heaven, as any Men in the
World. For though the mighty Monarchs, supreme Judges, and wealthy Dives, of
this lower World, are so much raised above the Level of the Rest of Mankind,
that, in their exalted Station, they seem to be out of the Reach of many of the
Dangers, which threaten those who move in a lower, more labored, and turbulent
Sphere, yet, in this Regard, those Grandees are but equal to the poorest
Peasant, the meanest Beggar, that waits at their Doors, that they are, alike,
subject to the Vengeance of almighty God, for their bold Transgressions of his
holy Law, which no Privilege of Peerage, and Escutcheon, will exempt them from
Obligations to obey: And therefore they want to be saved, as much as any, the
meanest, of their Fellow Creatures. They may flatter themselves, that they are
above the Laws of Men, and accountable to none upon Earth; but they will find
that there is a God in Heaven, who is higher than the highest, whose Government
reaches even to them, whose sacred Laws take fast hold upon them, and to whom
they must be accountable, in the Day, when the Father, without Respect to
Persons, will judge according to every Man's Works. 1 Pet. i.17. And because,
most commonly, the Condition of the great, and rich, and honorable, in this
World, is attended with more, and stronger Temptations to Vice, to Contempt of
God, and his Law, than that of other mean Men; and often they contract greater
Guilt, by sinning against the best Advantages, misimproving the best of
Tallents, and by giving the greater Scope, and Liberty, to their Lusts, and
Passions, their Pride, and Luxury, their Avarice, and Ambition, their
Oppression, and Cruelty; therefore surely this Matter belongs unto them, one
would think, more, if possible, than unto others; because their Danger is so
much the greater, and their Misery, if they perish, so much the more
insupportable. Persons, who are exalted in the Earth, and make a Figure among
the^r Neighbors, do but deceive themselves, while they imagine the Salvation
of the Soul, and the future Happiness, spoken of in the Gospel, does not
concern them, and that it is only for the meaner of the People, who are very
much destitute of worldly good Things, to lay in for being happy in a Time to
come; such of whom the proud Pharisee could say, Joh. vii.49. This People, who
know not the Law, are cursed: It is for this poor accursed People, in this
World, to trouble themselves about Salvation, in the next; as for us, we are
the Darlings of Providence, and in very happy Circumst^nces, at present, and
doubt not bu^ we shall be always s^^; may the great ones of the Earth be ready
to say. But, remember, O un^^inking Persons, that if you are but equal Sinners
with the meanest of the People, and much more if you ex^^ed them in Wickedness,
(as too (...) such do,) you are as truly under the Maled^^^^n of the Divine
Law, as they, and therefore y^u (...) in Need of Salvation as much as the (...)
of them all; y^^, and r^ther the more, (...) it will be a more dreadful, and
amazing, (...) thee, to fall, from the Height of thy (...) ^^j^yments, and
Satisfactions, in this World, into the very Dr^gs of Misery, in the fu^ure
World.

2. (...), on the other Hand, this is a Matter which (...) unto the poor, mean,
and low, among the S^ns of Men. Think not, O poor P^rs^n, whoev^r thou art,
that, because thou art low, and d^spised, among Men, that therefore God will
despise thee, and this his great Salvation is not for thee. Think not that it
belongs, only, to the rich, and great, those who seem now to be highly
distinguished by Divine Providence, to gain Heaven hereafter; as if Heaven were
inseparably intailed upon them that p^ss^ss^d the most of this Earth; but as
for us, poor ones, alas, we are the Outcasts of the Earth, contemned by our
fellow Creatures, and seem to be neglected by Providence, and shut out from the
Benefits of it; and how then can we hope to enjoy the special Favor of God, or
partake of the Salvation, and Happiness, of the heavenly World? So may some
poor Person be ready to say. When the Psalmist reflected upon the unequal
Distributions of Providence, in this World, and took a View of the Prosperity,
Grandeur, Magnificence, and Ease, of many about him, and his own low,
afflicted, distressed, Condition, among Men, he was ready to draw this wrong
Conclusion, Psalm. lxxiii.13. Surely, I have cleansed my Heart in vain, and
washed my Hands in Innocence. As if he had said, to what Purpose is it (...) me
to serve God; I see how his Favors are dispensed upon Earth; and it will be
vain for me to entertain the Thought of obtaining his Favor in Heaven; but he
corrects himself, v. 15. If I speak thus, behold, I should offend against the
Generation of thy Children; I should lay a stumbling Block in their Way, and
cause them to fall. Such mistaken Conceptions of Things, perhaps, may have
enervated all Attempts, in some poor Persons, about their own Salvation; as if
Salvation, and Heaven, were Matters too high for them, and what they had
nothing to do with. But remember, O thou poor, and aff^icted one, that thou
have a Soul to save, as well as the richest of Men, and thy Soul is as valuable
in it is Nature, and as precious in the Sight of God, as the Soul of* the
wealthiest and most honorable among the Sons of Men. No outward Circumstances
of Riches, and Honor, can make any real Alteration in the Nature of the Soul,
or render it truly better or worse.

Men, indeed, may despise thee, for thy Poverty, but so does not God, who is
the Maker of the Poor, and Rich together, and who respects thee, as truly as
the greatest of Men, in the Offers of Salvation; and thou shall be as welcome
to put in for an Interest, and secure a Share in the Salvation of God, as any
among the higher Orders of Men. It pleases God, sometimes, indeed, to select
some Instances of his Grace, from amongst the Rulers, the Counselors, and the
great Men of the Earth, an Abraham, a David, an Hezekiah, a Chamberlain of the
City, and some of Caesar's Household, and after all their Abundance, which they
possessed here, bestow upon them the Kingdom of Heaven, as the Reward of their
Virtue; but, more ordinarily, they are the lower Rank of Men whom God, in his
sovereign Wisdom, and Goodness, calls, and chooses unto himself, in whose
Conversion, and Salvation, his rich Grace will be admired, and glorified
forever. Hence said the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.26. -- Ye see your Calling, Brethren,
how that not many wise Men, after the Flesh, not many mighty, not many noble,
are called; but God has chosen, the foolish, -- the weak, -- the base Things
of the World, and Things which are despised, etc. And the Apostle James
addresseth us in such Terms as these, Jam. ii.5. Hearken, my beloved Brethren,
has not God chosen the Poor of this World, rich in Faith, Heirs of the
Kingdom. And when John sent some of his Disciples to our Lord, that they might
receive Conviction from hi^ ^wn Mouth, and Works, that he was the true promised
Messiah, said Christ to them, Matthew. xi.4, 5. Go, and show John again those
Things which you hear, and see; the blind receive their Sight, and the lame
walk, the Lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and
the Poor have the Gospel preached to them. This is one of the wonderful Works
of Christ, and a manifest Proof of his Messiaship, and of the Grace of God
through him, that the Poor have the Gospel preached to them; i. e. the Poor are
evangelized, invited to partake of Salvation, and are instructed in the Way to
Heaven. The poorest Person, then, here before the Lord, (or that reads this*)
though he should be destitute of worldly P^ssessions, and Accommodations, and
has neither House, nor Land, Silver, nor Gold, nor any Titles of Honor, to
d^stinguish him among Men; yea, though he should be but a poor Servant, or a
poor Slave, yet, has his Concernment in the great Salvation, offered in the
Gospel. He has a Soul to save, and there is nothing of that Weight, and Moment,
to him, as Salvation is. To thee therefore, O Soul in peril, poor as thou art,
is this Salvation sent; and unto thee it belongs to take Care that thou
may be saved.

In short; The great Requisites of Salvation, namely, Faith in God, and in his
Son, Jesus Christ, and a crediting the Reports of the Gospel, and an holy,
religious, virtuous, Life, as the Product of this Faith, that is, that thou
forsake all known Sins, and walk in Obedience to the holy Commandments of God,
are the indispensible Duty of every individual Person, whether high, or low,
rich, or poor; so that there is not so much as one of us all but what have our
Concernment in this Matter; and to each of us, in particular, may it be said,
Arise thou, for this Matter belongs unto thee.

2. Secondly; I am now to consider, That this is a Matter of the highest
possible Concernment unto us all. As it respects us all, without Exception,
so it respects us chiefly, and above other Things; yea, there is nothing that
is of equal Importance to us with this, What must we do to be saved? There are
many Things which we are all of us called upon to be concerned about, but there
is none of them all that is to be compared with this, of our being eternally
saved, as to the Nearness, and Importance, of it to us. What is there that does
so nearly concern us, as to acquaint ourselves with our Duty, and our main
Interest, and diligently, and steadily, to perform the one, and pursue the
Attainment, and Security, of the other? We may be negligent, and regardless, of
every Thing else, in Comparison with this, and be no great Sufferers by our
Negligence; but if we are careless, and unmindful, supine, and remiss, in this
momentous Affair, we shall be the greatest Sufferers imaginable. We cannot
neglect our Duty, and our best Interest, without smarting for our Folly. It Is
vain to be anxiously careful what we shall do to provide for our Bodies, to
preserve them from Dangers, or to recover them from any unhappy Circumstances,
which they may have fallen into, while we are remiss, and careless, about our
Salvation: for this is, of all Things, most needful, yea, the only needful
Thing to us. Hence our Lord said to Martha, when she was encumbered about
worldly Things, Luke x.42. But one Thing is needful. The Things we are so prone
to concern ourselves about, respecting our Bodies, and their comfortable
Subsistence, are little, and trifling, lighter than the small Dust of the
Balance, when weighed against the Salvation of our Souls. All our Happiness is
laid up in this; and while other Things are but transcient, and fading, this
Salvation is of the most lasting, and durable, Importance to us.

But to be more particular; There are two Things which will clearly evidence,
that it is a Matter of the highest Concernment to perishing Sinners to be
saved: namely, [I.] It is to save ourselves, our own precious, and immortal
Souls. [II.] Our Happiness, or Misery, turns upon it.


[I.] It is to save thyself, O perishing Sinner, to save thy precious, and
immortal Soul, and therefore it is of the highest possible Concernment to thee.
What is there so near to us as ourselves? And what (...) so nearly concern us?
Is there any Thing (...) dear to us as ourselves? An^ can any Thing (...) much
affect us, as that which touches our very selves? What then can be of such
Consequence, and Importance, to us, as this is? What is there that can so
justly challenge, and employ, our chiefest Thought, and Care, and Labor, as to
save ourselves? It is therefore our own Salvation that we are called upon to be
concerned about. The Apostle thus persuades us, Phil. ii.12. Work out your own
Salvation. It is a Salvation that relates, not to our separate worldly
Interests, but, to our very Persons. Save yourselves, said the Apostle Peter.
Act. ii.40. Neither is it the Salvation of our Bodies only, from any temporal
Evils, that may endanger them; but it is the Salvation of our Souls, that
Divine Spark that is in us, which distinguishes us from the Brute; it is that
intellectual, and immortal, Part in us, which rendereth us capable of partaking
of the pure, and endless, Joys of Heaven, or undergoing the exquisi^e, and
everlasting, Pains of the Damned. Though every Man, in his Wits looks upon
himself obliged, by the grand Law of his Make, and the first Principle of self
Love in him, to do what he can to preserve his Body, from the Evils which
threaten i^, ye^, is it not of much greater Importance to him, to save his Soul
from impending Misery, exquisite, and endless, than to save his Body from any
Evil, which it can possibly (...) su^ject to? especially, when we consider,
that, over and above, he will have this Advantage by saving of his Soul, that
his Body also will, anon, come in for a Snare in it is Salvation; whereas by
saving his Body, only, and for the present, he loses both Soul, and Body,
forever he^^^fter. Hence Christ said, Matthew. xvi.25. Wh^soever will save his
Life shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his Life, for my Sake, shall find
it. He that thinks to save the Life of his Body, at the ^^pence of his Soul,
will sadly be deceived, and, in the Conclusion, will lose the Life which he
thought to have saved; but he that will rather (...) the Life of his Body, that
he might save his Soul, shall joyfully find, in the End, that he has saved the
Life of his Body also.

It is the Salvation of the Soul that was chiefly intended by the Iayler, when
he cried out, Sirs, What must I do to be saved? He did not mean, what must I do
to preserve my natural Life, the Life of my Body? for that was then safe, nor
was there any known Danger that threatened it; but he meant, what must I do to
save my Soul? The wonderful Works of God, and the preaching of the Apostle,
(which, doubtless, at that Time, he took the Opportunity for,) awakened in him
a Concern of quite an other Nature than the present Welfare of his Body, and
his Soul then became his chief Care. And this is that which renders it a Matter
of such infinite Importance to us all, because, O Man, it is thy Soul, thy
precious, and immortal Soul, that thou art to be thoughtful about the Salvation
of. Thus Moses bespake Israel of old, Deuteronomy. iv.9. Only take heed unto thyself,
and keep thy Soul diligently. And there are two Things which render our
Concernment herein truly great, and of the highest Importance to us all; viz.
That our Souls are our better Part, and they are our immortal Part.

1. Our Souls are, by far, our better Part. I cannot say, that our Souls are
our whole selves, because I think the Body to be essential to the humane
Nature, and consequently to the Identity of that Nature, in any one humane
Person, or to the Sameness of the Person of every Individual partaking of that
Nature. But however our Bodies may be essential Parts of ourselves, yet our
Souls are far more excellent, noble, and glorious Parts of ourselves, and there
fore it is of the highest possible Concernment to us, to save our Souls;
because it is to save all that is dear to us, not only our Bodies, but that
Part of us which far more transcends our Bodies, in Excellency, and true Worth,
than the Light of the Sun does the Glimmerings of a Glowworm. For, a wise Man
will ever account that to be of the greatest Importance to him, and what justly
challenges his greatest Care, Thought, and Inspection, which is, in itself, of
the greatest Value, Worth, and Excellency; as he is more concerned to preserve
his Treasure, his Gold, and Jewels, than the deal Cabinet that contains them;
or to preserve his Life, than a single Joint of one of his Fingers.

Now, if we take a through View of ourselves, what Part is there of us, that is
so valuable, and excellent, in it is Nature, and Capacity, as our Soul? It may
well be said of the Soul, as of Wisdom, the Merchandise thereof is better than
Silver, and the Gain thereof than fine Gold; She is more precious than Rubies,
and all the Things thou can desire are not to be compared with her. So
precious is the Soul, that the Redemption thereof cease forever, as to any of
the Enjoyments of this World being a fit Price to give in Exchange for it. This
is the great End of all our Faith, and Virtue, that our Souls may be saved in
the Day of the Lord Jesus; so said the Apostle, 1 Pet. i.9. Receiving, the End
of your Faith, the Salvation of your Souls.

And what are our Bodies, whose Welfare, Ease, and Comfort, we are so prone to
be very much concerned about, if compared with our Souls? What are they, but
Lumps of gross Flesh, and Bones, Blood, and Sinews, made up, perhaps, of a
little finer Clay than the common, and curiously, indeed, molded, and
diversifyed, in the several Parts, and Powers, of them? Whereas, thy Soul, O
Man, is of a spiritual, intellectual, Nature, near a Kin unto Angels, shining
bright with the Rays of the Deity upon it. For, as Elihu observed, J^^ xxxii.8.
There is a Spirit in Man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives them
Understanding. It is this Spirit that animates, and acts, the Body, which,
however capable of the animal Life, dies, and returns to it is original Dust,
whenever the Soul, that active Principle of the humane Life, takes it is final
Leave of it. The Body is, indeed, wondrously made, in it is Parts, Contexture,
and Powers, but how much more noble are the admirable Faculties, and Powers, of
the Soul? How susceptible is the Soul, by Virtue of that Understanding she is
furnished with, of all Kinds of Knowledge, natural, and divine? And what a
large, extended, capacious, reach has the Understanding, like the Sun,
compassing all it surveyeth, and surveying all that it compasses, and not
limited to Objects of Sense? How rec^ptive is it of the Discoveries of Truth,
as well as inquisitive after it, in the Mysteries of Art, of Nature, and of
Grace? And how swiftly does it move, and mount from Earth, to Heaven, and, in
the Twinkling of an Eye, leap, from a Converse with the lowest Shrub, to survey
the Wonders of Divine Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, in the Magnitude, Order,
and Revolution, of the heavenly Bodies, which roll over us? Yea, how capable is
it of searching into the hidden Mysteries of Divine Wisdom, Grace, and Love, in
the Redemption of fallen Man; and of discovering such a Fullness, Excellency,
and Beauty, therein, as raises it is Admiration, and fixes it is Gratitude, and
Praise? Thus it can look into the third Heavens, and contemplate the Glories of
the Deity, and view over the Wonders of the incarnate Son of God, enthroned at
the Right Hand of the eternal Father.

What a wonderful Power is the Will, the Volition, and Choice, of the Soul?
What a surprising Sway, and extensive Dominion, has this governing Power in and
over us? And yet with what perfect Lib^^^^, and Freedom, does the Man Act in
all his Choice, and Determinations? Though the Will always, and necessarily, is
obsequious to the Understanding, and determines upon what that directive Power
apprehends to be best, and, in this Sense, can never be said to be free, yet,
is it forever free from all external Compulsion, so that no outward Force can
compel, or control it, in it is Acts, or necessitate it to Act contrary to it is
own Determinations.

What an amazing Self-Consciousness attends the Soul, a Power of reflecting
upon itself, of viewing over it is own Actions, and passing a Judgment upon
them, as they are morally good, or evil, either to our Plaudit, and Comfort, or
to our Condemnation, and Uneasiness?

And how is the Soul furnished with various Affections, and Passions, which are
as a strong Guard about it, for our Defense, and Safety, that we may be put
upon shunning what appears to ^e hurtful, and be influenced to embrace what
seems to be beneficial, and advantageous to us, and, according to the
Situation of Things with us, to afford us Pain, or Pleasure, Delight, or
Torment?

But, to all of these natural Endowm^^^ let us add the Consideration, of the
Capacity of the Soul for very great, farther, additional Excellencies, and
Improvements, especially in moral Perfections, which none of all the visible
Creation, besides Man, are capacitated for; view the Soul as a Subject capable
of receiving the most excellent Virtues, and Graces, while here, and of perfect
Purity, and unsullied Rectitude, hereafter; receptive of the Beauty of
Holiness, the Image of God upon it, in this World, and of a State of complete,
and endless Glory, and Happiness, in the Presence, and Enjoyment, of God, and
Christ, and Fellowship with holy Angels, in the heavenly World; and say, now,
what is there so excellent, and noble, and of so much Worth, and Value, as our
Souls are? Verily; This is, by far, our better Part, to which our Bodies,
beautiful, and wondrous, as they be, are not worthy to be compared; and
therefore the Welfare, and Salvation, of our Souls are, of all Things, Matter
of the highest Concernment to us.

2. Our Souls are our immortal Part, that Part of us which shall never die, and
upon this Account are preferrable to, and more to be regarded by us than, our
Bodies; and therefore we ought above all Things to be concerned that they may
be saved. After all our Care of our Bodies, to preserve, and defend them, and
render them easy, and comfortably provided for; though we should heap up Gold,
and Silver, in an Abundance, and give our Bodies the utmost Fullness of
Entertainment, and gratify all their Senses to the Height, yet shall we not be
able, by all our Thought, and Pains, to keep them alive, that they should never
see the Pi^. Psalm. lxxxix.48. What Man, (what strong Man,) is he that lives,
and shall not see Death? Enoch, and Elijah, were favored with an immediate
Translation to a better World, without going through the ordinary Road, and
such may be the Portion of those holy ones, who shall be found alive at the
second Coming of our Lord; but otherwise, to die is the common Lot of all Men,
and the living know that they shall die. For our Bodies are corruptible in
their very Nature, being constituted of such Materials as we know to be
perishable, and so put together as renders them subject to a Dissolution; and
by the Law of their Maker, they are doomed to return to their original Dust:
for thus he has said, Genesis iii.19. In the Sweat of thy Face shall thou eat
Bread, till thou return unto the Ground; for out of it wast thou taken; for
Dust thou art, and unto Dust shall thou return. So that it is appointed unto
Man once to die.

But now, our Souls are immortal, and shall never die, never cease to have a
Being, a Being capable of Action, and Enjoyment.

There go no corruptible Materials, like those of our Bodies, and therefore no
jarring Qualities, into the Make of our Souls, from whence we are ready to
conclude they partake of a natural Immortality. Nor can we conceive how any
external Force, from mere Matter, can have any effect upon them to produce a
Dissolution, nor how any Kindred Spirit should be able thus to hurt them;
because a Spirit is destitute of the known Properties of Matter, and not
passible, as that is. Every Man will readily grant that it is better to be a
Man than a Brute; and yet; if we have nothing to do with an After, and Endless,
Existence, the Brutes have much the better of us in this Life, in that they
have more exquisite Sensation, at least as full bodily Gratifications, are
subject to no Remorse, and take Leave of Life without any Reflection, and
Concern. And what Nation, and People are there in the World, who have not some,
though it may be, very imperfect, Conceptions, of their existing after Death?
The Phythagorean Metempsychosis is entirely founded upon this Conception; and
so are the Elysian Fields of the ancient heathen Poets. Yea, Eternity seems
evidently to be stamped upon the Desires, and Actions, of the Soul. How
craving, and thirsty, is the Soul after a State of Immortality? What a strong
Appetite has it to live forever, in Children, and Lands, and Monuments, and the
various Methods Men take to be known in future Ages? And however transcient the
Actions of Men are, in a Physical Consideration, yet, in a moral one, they are
permanent, and abiding. The natural Notions we have of the Goodness, and
Justice, of God, and the View of his providential Distributions among Mankind,
in this present World, and the Influence, which the Consideration of the
Immortality of the Soul, has upon Persons and Societies, to promote their moral
Virtue, and suppress all that is vicious, and disorderly, all strongly pleads
for it.

However, whether the Soul of Man be immortal in it is Nature, or no, it has
Immortality stamped upon it by the Law of it is M^ker. Though the almighty
Creator could easily annihilate our Spirits, if he pleased, (which, I suppose,
no created Being could do,) yet, He has sufficiently given us to understand,
that he will not; and therefore, in his holy Word, we find, the Former of the
Spirit of Man within him, ever treating it as an immortal Being, and prop^sing
eternal Rewards, and Punishments, to it; (as we shall see under some of the
following Heads,) which assures us, that whatever the Soul be in it is Nature,
it is immortal, by the Determination of it is Maker, and shall never cease to
have a Being. Hence we are told, Eccl. xii.7. When the Dust returns to the
Earth, as it was, the Spirit shall return unto God, who gave it. And, Matthew.
x.28. they, that kill the Body, are not able to kill the Soul.

And now, what is there of such Concernment, and Importance, to us, as the
Safety, and Welfare, of such an excellent, and immortal, Being, as the Soul is?
What can, in Reason, be supposed to challenge our Thought, and Care, equal to
that which is, in it is own Nature, most valuable, and durable? If that Part of
us, which is to last forever, which shall exist when Time itself, or the
Succession of Ages, shall be no more, is not worthy of our most serious
Consideration, what shall be done for it is Safety, and our most diligent Labor
to promote, and secure, it is eternal Well-being, What can be so? It Is this
precious, this immortal, Soul of thine, that distinguishes thee from the common
Herd, and raises thee to something of an Equality with the Angels of God; this
Soul, which is more excellent than Rubies, and more durable than the finest
Gold; it is this high, and Heaven-born Soul, that thou art to take Care of, and
endeavor to save, by a Life of Faith, and Obedience, by inuring of it to
Virtue, that it may be prepared for Glory. And, surely, since it is thy own
Soul, thy very self, thy better Part, thy immortal Part, therefore thou
ought, above all Things, to be greatly concerned for it is Welfare; and do
all that thou can, that it may possess itself in perfect Peace, and want
nothing to render it secure from Misery. Will thou act so foolish, and
unreasonable, a Part, as to be greatly concerned for thy Body, what thou shall
eat, and what thou shall drink, or wherewithal thou shall be clothed, and how
thou shall preserve thy Body from Dangers, and from Death, and use thy best
Endeavors for it is Safety, and to restore it to Health, and Ease, when
Sickness, or Pains, invade it? Will thou do all this for that which is but
perishable Dust, and must shortly dye, whether thou will, or no? and, at the
same Time, will thou be altogether unconcerned about thy Soul; thy Soul, which
is, in the very Nature of it, so vastly preferable to thy Body; thy Soul, which
is much more thyself than thy Body is; thy Soul, in which thou will exist, when
thy Body shall be turned into Dust, and Putrefaction? Will thou not be more
concerned, that this thy Soul may be made Partaker of a Salvation, suitable to
it is Nature, and Wants, and Duration? Oh! What Stupidity, and Madness, has
seized upon the Children of Men! Oh! What a foolish Bargain does he make of it,
who risqueth his precious, his immortal Soul, for the Sake of gaining any of
the short-lived Pleasures, and Enjoyments, of a dying Body, and a perishing
World! Remember the Words of our blessed Lord, who very well the Worth of a
Soul, and the Vanity of the World, What is a Man profited, if he shall gain the
whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or what shall a Man give in Exchange for
his Soul? Matthew. xvi.26.

So that from the Consideration of the Nature of our Souls, as our better, and
our immortal Part, it is evident to every reasonable Man, that it is a Matter
of the highest possible Concernment, and there is nothing of equal Importance,
to us all, that we do all that we can, in the diligent Improvement of all our
Abilities, Opportunities, and Advantages to secure their eternal Salvation.

SERMON XVIII.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
IN the former Part of the Day, I entered upon the Consideration of the fourth,
and last general Head, viz. That it is a Matter of the highest Concernment unto
perishing Sinners to be most seriously sollicitous about their Salvation: and
have showed you that it is a Matter of the greatest Importance that can be to
obtain Salvation, i^ is so to every individual Person, because it is to save
our own selves, our Souls, which are our better, and immortal Part. I would now
farther argue,

II. It appears to be a Matter of the highest possible Concernment, to
perishing Sinners, to save their Souls, if we consider, that their Happiness,
or Misery, and that complete, and endles^, turns upon this very Point. Surely
no Man in the Exercise of his Reason, will think, that his own Happiness, or
Misery, is a Matter that does not greatly concern him. The whole Bent, and
Thirst, of the humane Nature is after Happiness: Who will show us any Good? is
the constant Language of Mankind. The very Make of our Bodies, and Endowments
of our Minds, point to a Prospect of, a Pursuit after, and a ready embracing,
what is agreeable, delightful, and entertaining to us, or, what will render us
happy; and are armed against what would have a Tendency to make us any Way
miserable. And however Men may differ in their Apprehensions of what is
Happiness, and what is Misery; or be mistaken in their Thoughts of the Way, and
Means, to obtain the one, and avoid the other; yet, this is what all Mankind
agree in, that every Man would be happy, if he could, and no Man would be
miserable, if he could help it. So that there is no Man but what looks upon
Happiness, and Misery, as what do above all Things, more immediately and
directly, concern him, and estimateth all other Things as he apprehends they
make for one, or other, of these; and consequently, that Happiness, and that
Misery, which are most full, and complete, which are most durable, and lasting,
are, of all others, what he is most concerned to pursue, and embrace, or
carefully to shun, and avoid.

All the Difficulty, then, lies in thoroughly convincing the Minds of Men,
whatever be their other Notions of Happiness, and Misery, that true real
Happiness, or Misery, and that complete, and endless, turn upon this Salvation,
which I am speaking of; that they will certainly be happy, completely, and for
ever so, if their Souls are saved; and that they will be certainly, fully, and
forever, miserable, if they are not saved. If Men were but once thoroughly
convinced of this, that their Happiness, or Misery, perfect, and everlasting,
turn upon the Salvation of their Souls, they would then see the Necessity of
their exercising a due Care about it, and need no farther Proof, that to save
their Souls is a Matter of the highest possible Concernment to them. I shall
therefore endeavor to lay the plain Conviction of this, briefly, before the
Minds of Men under these three Particulars.

1. That Men will certainly be happy, or miserable, according as they are duly
careful, to secure the Salvation of their Souls, or not.

2. This Happiness, or Misery, will be perfect, and complete in their Kind.

3. Their Happiness, or Misery, will be eternal, and never have an End.

And now, give me your serious Attention, while I offer something to each of
these.

1. Men will certainly be happy, or miserable, according as they are duly
careful, to secure the Salvation of their own Souls, or not.

Particularly;

1. He will certainly be an happy Man, who is duly concerned about the
Salvation of his Soul. He that is truly solicitous, what he must do to be
saved, and, accordingly, sincerely endeavors to acquaint himself with the
Whole of that Duty, which he owes to God, his Neighbor, and himself, and is
diligent to perform his Duty, without any allowed Omissions, in all the several
Branches thereof, in a Life of Faith, and Obedience; that Man certainly is, and
will be, an happy Man.

He is an happy Man, let his Circumstances, in worldly Regards, be what they
will; because he acts up to the Dignity of his Nature, and follows the
Dictates of his own Mind, duly informed, and exercised, and therefore
preserves the inward Peace, and Tranquillity of his Mind, which is the solid
Foundation of his Comfort, and Joy; and does not lay himself open to the just,
and severe, Reproaches of his own Heart, which alone would damp his Joy, and
mar his Comfort. Happy is he that condemns not himself, in that Thing which
he allows. Romans xiv.22. Thus Godliness affords him Contentment in every
Condition, and that inward Satisfaction, which the World cannot give, and the
Rejoicing of his Conscience, testifying for him, that he has acted as becomes
a rational Creature, that he has done his Duty, and that he has secured his
main Interest, and that, let come what will come, he is safe, and has no just
Reason to fear any Evil. So said the Psalmist, Psalm cxix.165. Great Peace have
they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. What are all the
Pleasures, arising from the Objects of Sense, compared with the Satisfaction of
Mind, arising from a Man's being pleased with himself, upon a serious View of
his walking in the Ways of Wisdom, which are Ways of Pleasantness, and Paths of
Peace.

And such a Man will certainly be happy, in the Favor of his Maker, and
Sovereign, and his Judge, who cannot but observe, approve of, and take Delight
in, all such whose Hearts are perfect toward him, as their's are, who are
careful to believe all that God has revealed to them, and to practice all that
he has required of them. Blessed are the undefiled in the Way, who walk in the
Law of the Lord. Psalm cxix.1. Their Faith of what God has spoken, and in the
Lord Jesus Christ, accompanied with unfeigned Repentance, secureth to them,
according to the Gospel Covenant, the Forgiveness of their Sins, a Deliverance
from the Curse, and a Title to Heaven hereafter. How readily, may we well
suppose, from the Goodness of the Divine Being, as well as from his express
Declarations, does he admit such among his Favorites, lend them his Ear, and
fix his Eye, and Heart, upon them, for good, and receive them into his special,
and glorious Presence. And what can any Ways give Uneasiness to them, or affect
them with any Degree of Misery, so long as the Great God, the Fountain of all
Good, stands engaged, from his peculiar Love to Holiness, and holy Persons,
and from his gracious, and un^ailing, Promise, to protect, and defend them, to
supply all their real Wants, to suffer no Evil to come nigh them, to make all
Things work together for their Good, and finally to bring them safe to the
happy World? Romans viii.31. If God be for us, who can be against us?

2. He will certainly be a miserable Man, who is not duly concerned about the
Salvation of his Soul. If a Man will not be inquisitive what he must do to be
saved; if he will not be at the Pains to observe, and practice, according to
what the Word of God directs him to, and requires of him, that he may save
his Soul, he is, and he will be, a miserable Man, whatever may be his outward
Circumstances, and Condition in the present World.

What though such an one should enjoy the utmost Affluence of worldly
Pleasures, Riches, and Honors? He is miserable in the midst of all, under the
Power, and Tyranny, of base Lusts, and sordid Passions, which prey upon him,
and lead him captive at their Will; so that should he march at the Head of
Armies, or sit on the Throne of Empire, and promise himself Liberty, and think
Scorn to be under the Restraints of Law, yet is he, the worst of Servants, 2
Pet. ii.19. the Servant of Corruption being brought under Bondage thereto. And
one would think this to be Misery enough, to be in Bondage, and Slavery; for a
rational Soul to be perpetually trudging on in the meanest, and dirtyest,
Employments, crouching under the Burdens of Earth, and Filth, and obsequious to
the Will of the most tyrannical, and the basest, of Masters. But besides, such
a Man is miserable from his own Reflections, and he cannot think soberly,
without the Accusations, and Condemnings, of his own Heart; so that either he
must not think at all, or not think to Purpose, on what he has most Reason to
think closely, or else his own Thoughts will be a Torment to him. And if this
be Pleasure, to do those Things which are accompanied, or followed with the
tormenting Reflections of a Man's own Mind? I pray, what is Misery!

Moreover, he will be miserable, under the deserved Punishment of his foolish
Neglect of God, and his own Soul. For if he is not saved, (and this he has
taken no Care of,) he will, and must certainly be damned: Mar. xvi.16. He that
believes not shall be damned. There is no middle State between these two, but
one, or other of them, Salvation, or Damnation, the Pleasures, and Joys, of
Heaven, or the Fire, and Brimstone, of Hell, will most certainly and
unavoidably, be the Portion of every Individual among the Sons, and Daughters,
of Men. Hence you find our Savior, distributing all Mankind into these two
Companies, namely, Matthew. vii.13, 14. those that are going in the broad Way
leading to Destruction, and those that are going in the narrow Way that leads
unto Life. The final State of all Men will be Life, or Death, either to partake
of Glory, Honor, Immortality, and eternal Life, resulting from the Presence,
and Favor, of God, or Indignation, and Wrath, Tribulation, and Anguish, as the
necessary Effect of a Separation from him, who is the Fountain of Life. So
that, as our Lord has informed us, Joh. v.29. They that have done good, shall
come forth to the Resurrection of Life; and they that have done evil, unto the
Resurrection of Damnation. From whence we see plainly, that there is no
Possibility of avoiding one, or other, of ^hese two States, Happiness, or
Misery; and that, of Consequence, he who does not partake of Salvation unto
Life, and Happiness, must necessarily be miserable, and cannot possibly escape
the Damnation of Hell.

And now, is it a little, trifling, insignificant Matter to thee, whether thou
art saved, or damned? Is Heaven to be despised, and Hell sported with? Let the
Condition of the damned in Hell be what it will, whether thou conceivest of it,
just as it is, or no, yet it is a State of Misery, directly opposed unto true
Happiness, and to all that is comfortable and delightful to us? And now, is a
State of Misery to be chosen, rather than Happiness, by a rational Creature? Or
can it be equal to thee, whether thou art happy, or miserable? Say, now, O
Soul, does there any Thing concern thee equal with this? Should any Thing touch
thee so nearly, tenderly, and effectually, as this? Or can thou employ
thyself about any Thing of greater Importance to thee? What is there, of all
the Concernments of this World, but what rises lighter than Vanity, when
weighed against the Salvation of thy Soul?

But then, and what adds to the Importance thereof;

2. This Happiness or Misery, will be perfect, and complete, in their Kind. It
will not be an Happiness, or Misery, of a lower Nature, and Degree, that will
be the certain Fruit, and Effect, of thy Care to save thy Soul, or thy Neglect
of it; like what the Generality of the unthinking World is ready to call
Happiness or Misery, viz. the having, or not having, such, or such Measures of
the Profits, Pleasures, and Honors, which are gratifying to our Senses; but it
is an Happiness, and Misery, greater in Kind, and more extensive in Degree, and
therefore vastly more weighty, than all that ever any did, or possibly could,
experience in this World. It is superlative, and intense, Happiness, or Misery.

First; The Happiness of being saved is unspeakably great. It Is great in Kind,
beyond any Thing this World can produce, and great in Degree, far exceeding
what the Objects of Sense can reach to. Hence it is styled, Heb. ii.3. So great
Salvation; but it does not say how great; for the Powers of the Tongue, and the
Force of Language, are too weak, and feeble, to express it; nor can our most
enlarged Conceptions compass the Fullness thereof: Think all that you can, as
belonging to this Salvation, and it is so great Salvation, and more; for, Eye
has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man, the
Things which God has prepared for them that love him. 1 Cor. ii.9. This
Happiness is, indeed, described, in the sacred Pages, by such Allusions, as
serve to raise in our Minds, the brightest, and most exalted Idea of it, that
any Thing, we converse with, can afford us; as the Joys of Marriage, the
Fullness of Riches, and Honor, of a Kingdom, a Throne, a Crown, and the like;
but all of these Metaphors, by which a Representation of it is attempted, fall
vastly below what it is, in the real Nature of it. It is such a State, as
comprehends in it, a full, and perfect Freedom from all Evil, of every Sort,
and Degree, and the fullest Enjoyment of the most complete Good, even a Good
every Way equal to our spiritual Nature, and answerable to our most enlarged
Desires: and therefore we may justly conclude it to be an Happiness equal to
what our Nature is capable of, i. e. the highest we can possibly enjoy. So that
if we remain utter Strangers to the particular Instances, which go into the
Composition of this happy State, and know not of what it consists, yet,
having full Assurance of the Reality, and Compleatness, of it, one would think
these should be enough to determine us, in our Resolutions, to use our best
Endeavors to obtain it. But the sacred Scriptures acquaint us, with some of
the essential Ingredients of this Happiness, which serve to enlarge our
Conceptions of it, and sire our Ambition, and Thirst, to secure it to
ourselves: such as, the Enjoyment of the Blessed God, the infinite Fountain of
Being, Perfection, and all Good; and of Jesus Christ, the incarnate Son of God,
the great Purchaser of all our Happiness, and the immediate Center of it; and
of the Holy Spirit, as the God of all Grace, and Consolation; and of Heaven,
the supreme Seat of all true, and unsuspected Felicity. If we can conceive of
any Place more glorious than Heaven, wherever it is, and of any Objects more
completely delightful, and satisfactory, than God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
then may we look out for a State of Happiness beyond that of the Salvation of
our Souls; or else, remain assured, that herein lies the utmost Degrees of
Felicity, beyond which our Nature, yea, the Nature of Angels, cannot possibly
aspire.

Secondly; Thus also the Misery is intense, and insupportable. It is set before
us, in the holy Scriptures, in the most strong, and lively, the most
surprising, and frightful, Metaphors; it is called, Mat. xxiii.33. The
Damnation of Hell; it is termed, Mat. xxii.13. a being cast into outer
Darkness, where shall be weeping, and gnashing of Teeth; it is expressed, Rev.
xxi.8. by a Lake of Fire and Brimstone: It is painted out, Matthew. xxv.41. as
being cursed and associated with the Devil and his Angels. And yet it is
certain, that the most glaring, and horrid, Images, the most astonishing, and
terrifying, Appearances, that Words can raise in the Minds of Men, are but a
faint Resemblance of what this Misery really is. It includes in it, a total
Deprivation of all that is joyous, and comfortable, to us, even to the minutest
Degree thereof; so that, like Dives, the poor miserable Creature will not have
so much as a Drop of Water to cool an enflamed Tongue, though it be roared out
for with ever so much of Anguish. Besides, this Misery carries in it the most
exquisite Pain, and Torment, that can be; from the fierce Wrath of an angry,
and Almighty, God, falling heavy upon the Soul; (and who knows the Power of
his Anger! Oh, who can tell what the Weight of an almighty Arm is!) and from
the dreadful, pungent, and continual, Stings of an enraged Conscience, like an
Harpy let loose upon the Soul, and preying upon it, and kindling a Fire, in the
Breast of the Sinner, hotter and more tormenting than any will be without him.

Think now, O Sinner, is it not most reasonable, that, the greater the
Happiness is, which is proposed to a Man, so much the greater should be his
Concern to secure an Interest in it? And the greater the Misery is, which we
are warned of the Dangers of, so much the more circumspect, watchful, cautious,
and earnest, we should be, that, if possible, we may escape the fearful Evil
that threateneth us? Is it not thus with Men, in all the Affairs which relate
to the present Life, and World? So much the greater the Treasure is, which, it
is proposed, he might gain to himself, by such, or such, likely Methods, which
never have been known to have failed them, that have made a through Trial of
them, so much the more readily will a Man hearken to the Proposal, and
diligently apply himself to the Use of the directed Means, and be the more
laborious, and unwearied in his Pursuit after the End aimed at, and not be
easily diverted therefrom: he that would not be moved to put a Finger to the
Business, for the Sake of gaining five Shillings, will be wrought upon, to
undergo many Fatigues, encounter many Difficulties, and run almost any Hazards,
from the fair Prospect of getting Thousands a Year. And so, the greater Danger
any Man is warned, and apprised of, the more he will bethink himself, by what
Means he shall best guard against it, and the more vigorously fly from, or
exert himself to overcome it: he that would not turn aside out of the Way of a
feeble Enemy, will yet carefully shun a potent one, and get, as fast as he can,
out of the Way of a Nest of Rattle Snakes, and fly, unarmed, from the roaring
Lion, and the ranging Bear.

And why should not Men act as reasonable, and prudent, a Part, in the greater
Affairs of their Souls, as they are wont to do in the lesser ones of their
Bodies? Since the Happiness, or Misery, of their Souls, in another World, is
not only as certain, but far greater than any that can happen to their Bodies,
in the present World, why should they not be most intensly concerned, most
solicitous, and thoughtful, about this Matter, and be most active, and
diligent, and laborious in the Use of the most probable Means, to save their
Souls? Is not the completest Happiness, our Natures are capable of, worth our
striving for? Why then are we so much engaged in pursuing lesser Degrees of
Happiness, nay, what has nothing of true Happiness in it, and so negligent of
that which is real, and substantial? If the most intense Misery does not
challenge our Thought, and Pains, to avoid it, why do we start at Thunder, look
pale, and tremble, at the shaking of the Earth, or fear to go down into the
Grave? Verily it is a Matter of the greatest Consequence that can be, to fly
from the Wrath to come, and to lay hold on eternal Life. For,

3. This State of Happiness, or Misery, will be eternal, and never have an End.
It Is an amazing Circumstance attending the Happiness, or Misery, of the other
World, that they are boundless in Duration. When we have measured the Duration
of them by all the Art of Arithmetic, and added all the Sums together that we
can possibly number, and, when we have done, let each individual Unit, of this
aggregated Number, be estimated at a Million of Ages, it will bring us no
nearer to the Period of their endless Duration, than the first single Unit, in
Numbers, standing for a Millionth Part of a Minute, would do. For that which
has no End, can have no Approaches to it. He that shall be happy, in the
future, heavenly, World, will continue to be so, without ever meeting with any
Thing to break in upon the Harmony of his Mind, or give the least Disturbance,
or Uneasiness, to him, throughout the never-ending Ages of Eternity. And he
that shall be miserable, in the future State, will know no Period, or
Mitigation, and Abatement, of his inexpressible Pain, and Anguish, throughout
the endless Ages of Eternity.

Eternity! How amazing is the Thought! All Words are lost in describing it! Our
very Thoughts are swallowed up in Meditation upon it! Oh! What Weight does the
Consideration of it add to the Good, or Evil, the Happiness, or Misery, of the
other World! To be happy, and for ever so; this is Happiness indeed! To be
miserable and forever so; this is Misery in all its Terrors!

Such shall the Happiness of the Saints be, in Heaven; it will be as lasting as
it is perfect, in Kind, and Degree: of which the holy Scriptures assure us,
when they style our Salvation, an eternal Salvation; Heb. v.9. and our
Redempt^^n, an eternal Redemption; Heb. ix.12. and the Life in Heaven, an
eternal Life; Mar. x.30. and the Mansion there reserved for us, an House
eternal in the Heavens; 2 Cor. v.1. and our Inheritance, incorruptible,
undefiled, which fades not away; 1 Pet. i.4. and our Glory, an eternal Weight
of Glory; 2 Cor. iv.17. and all of this as directly opposed unto Things that
are seen, and temporal.

Such also shall be the Misery of Sinners in Hell; the same Word of God
assures us, Mar. iii.29. it will be an eternal Damnation; it is not only Fire,
but everlasting Fire; Matthew. xviii.8. There, (...) are told, Mar. ix.44. the
Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched; it is a Fire that burns without
Intermission, and without End: and we are assured, it is a Wrath to come; Luke.
iii.7. It will ever be to come, in the Duration of it. And hence our Blessed
Lord has given us this Account of the two different States, of the good, and
Bad, Matthew. xxv.34, 41, 46. the one shall inherit the Kingdom prepared for
them; the other shall depart accursed into everlasting Fire; these, the Wicked,
shall go away into everlasting Punishment; but the Righteous into Life eternal.
And what Words can make it plainer to us, that the Happiness of Heaven, and the
Misery of Hell, will be, each of them, eternal, and without End?

Well then; surely, to be happy, or miserable, completely so, and that forever,
this is a Thing of the greatest Concernment, to us all, that possibly can be,
and, what, above all Things, challenges our most serious Thought, the deepest
Attention, and the closest Application. For, what can affect us, and make any
Impression upon us, if Things eternal will not? Has it not pleased God, in his
boundless Wisdom, and Goodness, to set before us the Prospect of eternal
Happiness, and eternal Misery, as the strongest, and most powerful, Arguments,
to cure us of our fond Affection to the transitory Enjoyments of this World,
which are so apt to engross all our Thought, and Care, and Labor, and to
excite in us a greater Regard to our Souls, and make us seriously solicitous,
what we shall do to be saved? And shall we act the rational Part, if we go
counter to all this Wisdom, and Goodness, and suffer ourselves to be chiefly
affected with the lower, and short-lived, Pleasures, or Inquietudes, of the
Body, and present Time, and little regard those complete, and durable ones of
the other World? What Ingratitude to God! what Treachery to ourselves! would
this be; and how dreadfully will it aggravate our Condemnation!

Put the Case, that a State of eternal Existence in Happiness, or Misery, were
a Matter of Uncertainty to us, yet the bare Possibility, and much more the
great Probability, that such a Thing might happen to us, makes it infinitely
reasonable, that we should choose to act upon the Belief of it; because we
could receive no great Damage, by our Belief of it, if it should chance to be
false, and should be infinitely advantaged by it, if it happen to be true. But
if the Word of God be true, (and there is no Reason to doubt it,) then it is
beyond Dispute, that we shall exist forever, either in the Enjoyment of the
Pleasures of Heaven, or under the Torments of Hell. And think now; How poor a
Thing is an Happiness that will presently have an End, and then be succeeded
with a contrary State of Misery, of a much greater Duration? How low are those
Joys while they last? and how fleeting are they, and soon over, and gone? A Man
can hardly have any Taste, or Relish, of them, for Fear of what is a coming,
and because it hasteneth so swiftly upon him. A State of Uneasiness, that
lasts but for a little while, and then is succeeded with perfect Ease, with
endless Pleasure, who would count it Misery? Who could not, who would not, bear
one Quarter of an Hour's Pain, though very great, to be freed from Pain forever
after? The Thoughts of the following Ease, and Pleasure, without any Mixture of
Pain, and Sorrow, and the Quickness of the pleasurable State's arriving, would
take away the uneasy Sensations of the foregoing Misery, or at least greatly
abate them, and render them very tolerable. But what Satisfaction can there be
in a Moment's Pleasure, followed with an endless Eternity of Pain, and Torment?
It is the Length of Pain that is the most insupportable Part of it; it
increases by Continuance, and grows more weighty by it is Duration. The
Succession also of Pain ^o Pleasure aggravates it; whereas the last Series
being pleasant, after which no Fit of Pain shall return, greatly enhances the
Joy. In short; What can any Man desire, and seek after, if not to be
^^mpleatly, and forever happy? And what has he any Reason to shun, and fly
from, if not from that Wrath, and Misery, which is exquisite, and which, while
he is under the dolorous Impressions of it, will still be forever to come?

These Things, then, do abundantly show us, that this is a Matter of the
highest possible Concernment unto every perishing Sinner, to be very solicitous
what he must do to be saved; to be in good Earnest about the Salvation of his
Soul; for it is thy own Salvation, the Salvation of thy pre^ious, and immortal
Soul, and thy Happiness, of Misery, complete and endless, turns upon it.

I should now go on to the second Thing I proposed under this last general
Head, namely, that therefore there is the greatest Reason why every perishing
Sinner should be most seriously solicitous that he may be saved: but I shall
conclude with an Inference, or two, from what ha^ been said.

USE I. Hence see the Reason of your Ministers Importunity with you, that you
would truly believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and unfeignedly repent of all
your Sins, and lead new, and holy Lives: because a Life of Faith on Christ, and
Obedience to him, is the Way to be saved. And if to be saved be a Matter of
such great Importance, if nothing does, or can, concern you so much, as that
you may, at last, escape Hell* and get safe to Heaven; and your Happiness, or
Misery, and that perfect, and eternal, depend upon this very Thing; can it then
be wondered at, that your Ministers are so unwearied, and importunate, in their
Cries to Heaven for you, and in their solemn Addresses to you, that you might
be persuaded to come to the Faith of the Son of God, and walk before him in
Holiness, that you may be saved. For, what is there that can engage our Concern
about you, equal to this? We may be concerned to see you thrive, and flourish,
in the World, and be glad to see you prudently avoid all those Courses that
tend to hinder, and take all those Methods that may happily promote, your
worldly Prosperity; we are concerned to see the divine Protection over you,
when you go out, and when you come in, and defend you, and your little ones,
from the Arrows of Death; but we cannot be equally concerned for these Things,
as we are to see you and your Children, walk in the Truth, a sober, a virtuous
Generation, with the evident Tokens of Salvation upon you; and to have the good
Hope, through Grace, that we shall meet you in Heaven, and, together with you,
partake of that far more exceeding, and eternal, Weight of Glory, those
perfect, and endless, Satisfactions, and Delights, which God has promised unto
his Servants, after they have finished their Course of Faith, and Obedience,
here. It is this Concern for your future, and eternal, Happiness, which engages
our Thoughts, fills us with Cares, and Fears, and Tears, and makes us
fervent in our Labors, incessant in our Addresses to you, and willing to
spend, and be spent, for you; nor could we be faithful to the great Interest of
our Lord, nor faithful unto you, whose Souls are committed to our Trust, if we
did not labor herein, striving with all our Might, and using all the Art of
Persuasion we can, that, if by any Means, we may be instrumental to save the
Souls of them that hear us. It is not wholly for our own Sakes, (though Necessity
is laid upon us, and Woe is unto us if we do it not,) nor is our Office in the
Ministry of the Gospel of Christ, (it is well known,) the Way to worldly
Riches, and Honor, but it i^ for your own Sakes, that we address you so
warmly, press you so earnestly, and are loath to take any Denial, that you would
save yourselves from an untoward Generation, that you escape the exquisce,
intolerable, and everlasting, Misery of the Damned, and may possess the State
of true, unsuspected, and endless, Happiness, among the Righteous, in the
coming World. This, being a Matter of the greatest Importance that we can
possibly ^ent with you about, does sufficiently demand of ^s, to lift up our
Voice like a Trumpet, to cry aloud, and not spare, in our warning every Man,
and teaching every Man, that we may present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus.
And so far should our Fidelity, in pressing our Master's Will upon you, and our
Endeavors to recover you from the Paths of Sin, to the Practice of your whole
Duty, be from alienating your Hearts, and Affections, from us, as though we
were your Enemies, because we tell you the Truth, ^^at, in all Reason, you
ought so much the more to be conciliated to us, as your best Friends, and
highly to esteem of us, in Love, for our Work's Sake. For, in our thus doing,
my Brethren, we seek not yours, but you, that we may, if possible, win you
over to a Life of serious Religion, and true Happiness, and that you yourselves
may, finally, reap the Advantage of our wholesome Instructions, and earnest
Importunity, in the eternal Salvation of your own Souls.

Brethren; Our Hearts Desire, and Prayer, for you (...) is, that you may be
saved. Oh! How can we bear the Thought, of our dear People their perish^^g
under the Wrath of God! With what Heart-Aching must we look upon any of you,
who are our Charge, and see you going on in your Sins, wilfully despising your
own Souls, slighting the offered Mercy of God, and turning your Backs upon
Heaven, and rushing yourselves down into the Torments of the Damned, and all
for the Sake of the empty, vanishing Pleasures of Sense, and Time! How terribly
piercing must it be unto us, to stand by the Bedside of any of our People, in
their dying Hours, and see the Anguish of their Souls, lest they drop into
Hell; and hear their dismal Complaints against themselves, for their foolish
Neglect of their eternal Interest, and it may be, in the most doleful Accents,
crying out, Oh! all is too late! all is too late; And how shocking must it be
to us, think you! to see a drunken, profane, irreligious, debauched, impure,
Wretch, leaving the World, in a stupid Unconcernedness about the eternal State
he is pressing into, and dying, as he lived, senseless of God, and Religion,
and his own Soul!

These Things make our Hearts to bleed within us; and well may we lay ourselves
out, in our earnest Pleadings with God for you, and our importunate Pleadings
with you, on the Behalf of God, that you would seriously bethink yourselves,
and carefully, and timely, shun the dreadful Danger, and escape as for your
Lives, the Lives of your never-dying Souls, to the Hope set before you, and may
get safe to Heaven. Now th^n, (as the holy Apostle expressed it,) 2 Cor. v.20.
We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did bese^ch you by us, we pray you
in Christ's Stead, be ye reconciled unto God: and as he goes on, we then, as
Workers together with him, beseech you also, that ye receive not the Grace of
God in vain. And if, under God, we are happily instrumental of converting any
one Soul, let him know, (Jam. v.20.) that he who converteth a Sinner from the
Error of his Ways, shall save a Soul from Death, and shall hide a Multitude of
Sins.

From hence we may learn the amazing Folly they are guilty of, who make the
Things of this World their chief Concern. For, since it is a Matter of the
highest Importance to a perishing Sinner, to be saved, because it is the
Salvation of his own Soul, and his eternal Happiness, or Misery, turns upon it,
one would think that every Man should endeavor wisely to subject, all the
Businesses, and Affairs, of this Life, to the greater Interests of an other,
and better Life, and do all that he does with an Eye to his future, and
everlasting Well-being. How amazing is it, then, to see so many guilty of this
Folly, in the Exaltation of it, to neglect their Souls, and their eternal
Interest, and lavish away all their Thought, and Time, upon their Bodies, and
the Concernments of it? And this Folly is to be found not only among the
Necessitous, who are forced upon a great Deal of Care, and Pains, to get their
daily Bread, but among the wealthy, who, one would think, have enough of this
World, and need the less to be concerned about it; and not only among weak,
ignorant, simple People, but among the well educated, and instructed Part of
Mankind, who, one would think, should know better. Thus the Apostle lamented
the Case of the Philippians, in his Day, Phil. iii.18, 19. Many walk, (of whom
I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping,) the Enemies of the Cross
of Christ, whose End is Destruction, whose God is their Belly, whose Glory is
their Shame, who mind earthly Things. And is there not just Reason for the like
Lamentation over the Professors of our Days? How surprising would it be, if the
Sight were not so common, to see Men in a continual eager Pursuit after the
Riches of this World, and give their Minds, and Bodies, scarce any Rest, but
unweariedly turn every Stone, to accomplish their greedy Desires, and yet
hardly ever allow themselves one serious Thought, how to get durable Riches,
and Righteousness, or, what they shall do to be saved! What a prodigious Sight
is, a Man sweating, and puffing, upon the Hunt after the low empty Titles of
Honor, amongst Men, and yet so unconcerned about his Soul, as to leave it
exposed to Shame, and everlasting Contempt! Ah! poor unthinking Creature! Are
the Riches, and Honors, of this World worthy thy Care? and are thy Soul, and
Heaven, and eternal Happiness unworthy thy Concern? I beseech you, think
seriously, a little, and you will, doubtless, see abundant Reason to correct
thy present Folly, and Madness.

But of all Folly, and Madness, none rises to so high a Degree, as that of
those who rather take Pains to damn their Souls, than to save them; who are so
hot in their eager Pursuit of the World, that they will stick at no Wickedness,
or Villainy, no Falsehood, and Lying, no Fraud, and Cheating, to compass their
Designs; and drive on so furiously, in the Ways of Sin, in their Drinking, and
Whoring, and Blasphemies, as if they were afraid that Damnation would not come
fast enough, but they must needs meet it half Way. O thou mad Fool! Who give
thyself such a Loose in thy vicious Practices, that thou slickest not to call
for Damnation upon thyself, and upon thy fellow Creatures, and whose Mouth is
full of Cursing; whose Folly can be equal with thine! Is it, indeed, a
pleasurable Thing to be damned; to lie burning in Hell, under the Torments of
Fire and Brimstone, throughout an endless Eternity? Can thou, indeed, bear
Damnation, and sport thyself in the Flames, and laugh in the midst of devouring
Fire? Oh! lay thine Hand upon thy Mouth, confess, and bewail, thy past Folly;
remember the Battle, and do no more.

In a Word; Let us all seriously consider, that the greatest Gratifications of
the bodily Appetites, and Indulgence of our Senses, with any of the Enjoyments
of this World, are not to be compared with that complete, and endless,
Happiness, which is included in the Salvation of our Souls; nor will make
Amends for the exquisite, and everlasting Pains, which will be the dismal Issue
of a Life of Sense, and Irreligion; and therefore wisely learn to live by
Faith, and not by Sight, and improve the Things here below, in a due
Subordination to our spiritual, and eternal Interest: that whatever our State,
and Condition, may be in this World, we may be truly, and forever, happy, in
the next. Hearken therefore diligently to the Advice of our Blessed Savior,
Luke xvi.9. Make to yourselves Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, that
when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting Habitations.

Sinners ought to be most Seriously Solicitous to be Saved. SERMON XIX.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
IT is a very important Enquiry, and demands the closest Regards, from us
all, to the Truths contained in it; which I have endeavored to comprize in
this Doctrine, viz.

DOCT. It is of the highest Concernment unto perishing Sinners, to be very
solicitous, what they must do to be saved; or, to know, and practice, all that
is necessary, in order to their Salvation.

The Method I proposed, in discoursing on this Text, and Doctrine, was;

I. To show you what it is to be saved, or what is that Salvation which
perishing Sinners stand in need of.

II. To evidence that perishing Sinners may be saved; or, there is a
Possibility, notwithstanding their present miserable Condition, that they may
be eternally saved.

III. Perishing Sinners must know and practice, all that is necessary, in order
to their Salvation; or, there is something to be done, by them, that they may
be saved.

IV. This is a Matter of the highest Concernment to them, and therefore they
ought to be most seriously solicitous about it.

I am upon the last of these Heads; under which, I told you, I should consider
these two Things; namely,

I. To be saved is a Matter of the highest Importance to perishing Sinners.

II. There is the greatest Reason, why perishing Sinners should be most
seriously solicitous that they may be saved.

And I have spoken to the first of these, and showed you, that every Child of
Adam, from the highest to the lowest, is concerned in this Matter, and it is an
Affair of the highest possible Concernment to him; because it is to save
himself, his precious, and immortal Soul, than which nothing can so nearly
affect any Man; and his certain, complete, and endless, Happiness, or Misery,
turns upon it, than which nothing can be of greater Importance to him. If any
thing in the World is, or can be, of Weight, and Moment, with us, certainly
this of our being saved ought to be so, and that the highest that possibly can
be; our own Weal, or Woe, complete, and endless, unvoidably depends upon it.

I proceed now to the second Thing under this Fourth general Head.

II. To show, that there is the greatest Reason, why every Sinner should be
most seriously solicitous about his being saved. You see how solicitous the
Iaylor was about his Salvation; he expressed himself with the greatest Concern,
and even with Agony of Soul, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? He was most
earnestly desirous to know what he ought to do, and he was willing to do all
that he should know to be necessary, that he might be saved. And so ought every
Sinner to be in good Earnest about his own Salvation; his Heart, and Soul,
should be engaged in it, and he should apply himself hereto with the greatest
Thoughtfulness, and Diligence; and not treat the Affairs of his Soul, and his
eternal Salvation, as though they were little trifling Matters, to be regarded
only by the By; but he should have his Heart set upon them, resolvedly fixed
and determined to Mind them above all Things, and not suffer any Thing to
divert, and hinder him from his constant Pursuit after them. He should be ever
ready to hearken to Instruction, that he may be acquainted with the best Means
to further his Salvation, and be ever ready to apply the Mean^ to the End, that
if possible he may obtain it. He should slip no Opportunity unimproved,
willingly lose no Advantage, to promote his Salvation, and be very careful not
to allow himself in any Thing that would prejudice his Views, quash his Hopes,
or be an Impediment to his obtaining the Crown of Life* Th^^ every Sinner
should be most seriously solicitous, what he shall do to be saved. The
Reasonableness of this I shall endeavou^ to enforce from these several Heads of
^rguing; viz. 1. This is of all Concernments the greatest, and most necessary.
2. It is a Matter of very great Difficulty. 3. After all the Attempts of many*
there are really but few that shall be saved. 4. Every one that shall be saved
will b^ s^^iously solicitous about it.


1. This is of all Concernments the greatest, and most necessary. I have, I
think, already evidenced, that it is a Matter of the highest possible
Concernment unto poor perishing Sinners to be saved, and I do not now mean to
go over the former Heads of Argument, nor to advance any new ones, in Proof,
that our eternal Salvation is, of all Concernments, the greatest; but I shall
only take Occasion from hence to argue the Reasonableness of every Man's being
most solicitous about it.

For, certainly nothing can be more reasonable than, that every Man should
employ his deepest Thought, and industrious Care, chiefly about that which, all
Things considered, is of the greatest Importance to him. It argues great
Prudence, clear Understanding, mature Judgment, to give every Thing its due
Weight, in our Thought, and Concern about it. If it be a Matter of no great
Worth, and Value, in it self, and of no great Importance to us, to what Purpose
will it be to spend our Thought, and Time, about it? For if we obtain it, we
shall be little, or nothing the better for it; or if we miss of it, we shall be
no great, if any, Sufferers by the Loss of it: And it would be Folly indeed to
disquiet our selves for nothing. It is an Argument of very great Weakness, and
Indiscretion, in Persons, to weary themselves for very Vanity, and to labor in
the Fire to no good Purpose; to have their Hearts set upon Trifles, and their
Souls engaged in that which is but Lies, and Vanities, and Things wherein there
is no Profit, as the Prophet Jeremiah spoke, Jer. xvi.19. But to have our Minds
deeply engaged, and our Labor vigorously spent, about what does most nearly
concern us, and is of mighty Consequence to us; to secure what will render us
completely, and forever happy, and fly, at the utmost Distance, from what would
make us perfectly, and forever miserable; this will argue that we have a just
View of Things, that we are wise, and prudent, in the Judgment which we make of
them, and in our proportioning our Concern to the Importance of them: This will
be to be wise for ourselves, for our best Interest, and for our latter End.

It is a Rule of Prudence, in the Affairs of the present Life, that a Man
should be careful to secure a much greater Interest, though it be at the
Expense of a lesser. Any Man will readily part with a Shilling to secure his
Inheritance, or suffer a joint to be taken off that he may preserve Life. Since
therefore the Salvation of the Soul, as our great and main Interest,
unspeakably transcendeth all the Interests of the Body, and this present World;
(as we have seen;) This then is what Men ought to be most thoughtful about, and
laborious after, let the World go how it will with them, that they may get safe
to Heaven, and may have their Desires more than answered, and their Hopes
greatly exceeded, in the full, and lasting, Enjoyment of all that God has
promised.

We see what Pains Men take to gain what they esteem, and value, of this World;
the Merchant projecteth, and bends his Thoughts, and ventures his Substance,
and often hazards his Person, to increase his Stores; the hardy Warrior
undergoes the Fatigues of the Champain, long Marches, cold Lodgings, hard Fare,
and stands the Enemies Fire, to get him a Name; and, when they have done all,
their Estates wear away, and their Laurel soon withers. And shall we not be
as eager, and lay ourselves out as fervently, to gain the Happiness of Heaven,
which is substantial, and durable? The Apostle observed of the Grecian Racers,
who exactly dieted, and prepared their Bodies, beforehand, and then strained
their Nerves, spent their Lungs, and tired their Bodies, with the Violence of
their Motion, 1 Cor. ix.25. They do it, to obtain a corruptible Crown; (a
pitiful, Wreath of Oaks, or Laurels, that fade in the using,) but we an
incorruptible; a Crown of Glory in Heaven, which fades not away. And surely,
this incorruptible Crown is worth contending, and agonizing for; it is the unum
necessarium, the one Thing needful, and every Thing else is of no Value in
comparison with it. Hence our Lord said, Luke x.41, 42. Martha, Martha, thou
art careful, and troubled, about many Things; but one Thing it needful; and
Mary has chosen that good Part, which shall not be taken away from her. It is
very evident, that, by the one Thing needful, our Lord meant the Salvation of
the Soul; for the sacred Story informs us, that the Two Sisters, Martha, and
Mary, at whose House our Savior then was, were very differently employed; that
whilst Mary very devoutly sat at Iesus's Feet, and heard his Word, diligently
attending to his pious, and heavenly, Instruction, which peculiarly related to
her spiritual, and eternal Interest, Martha was cumbered about much serving,
that is, in making Provision for the Entertainment, and Accommodation of the
Body; And said Christ to her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful, and troubled,
about many Things, i. e. such Things as relate only unto the Body; and the
present Life, and therefore are but of lesser Moment; whereas, there is but one
Thing needful, the Care of the Soul, and this good Part Mary has chosen, while
she is diligently hearkening to my Instruction, and therefore we will not take
her off from this important Affair, to attend only the Services of the Body,
and such a needless Ado about providing for it.

Our present Life does not consist in the Abundance which a Man possesses;
Luke xii.15. much less does our real Happiness depend upon it. We may be truly
happy without any great Matter of this World; but we cannot possibly be happy,
even in the greatest Fullness of this World, unless we partake of the Salvation
offered in the Gospel; yea, a Man may possess the greatest Affluence of this
World's Good, and be miserable after all, but it is impossible he should be
miserable who is secure of the Salvation of his Soul; unless to possess all
that is agreeable, and delightful, that is entertaining, and pleasureable, to
our rational Nature, and to have a clear unclouded perception of our
Enjoyments, without the least Fear of ever losing them, be the same Thing with
being miserable. And therefore, what is there that any Man can be solicitous
about, if not about this so great Salvation, which is so absolutely necessary
to our true, and complete, and everlasting Happiness? Since therefore, to be
saved is of the greatest Concernment to us, certainly then we ought to be most
seriously solicitous about it. But I have carried something of this Argument
into the former Discourse, and therefore will not any farther enlarge upon it
now, but proceed to the Second Head of Reasoning proposed; viz.

2. It is a Matter of exceeding great Difficulty to be saved, and therefore
poor perishing Sinners had need to be most seriously solicitous about it. As
Salvation is a Matter of the greatest Importance, so it challenges our greatest
Solicitude; but yet, notwithstanding the great Importance of it, if it were a
Thing that could easily be obtained, by bare wishing for it, or with very
little Pains, there would then be no need for us to exert ourselves to the
utmost, and lay out our whole Strength; because less Labor, and Pains, would
be sufficient to answer the End. That which is easy to be done, needs no
great Pains in the doing of it.

But then, the exceeding great Difficulty of being saved, added to the
Importance of it, shows us that there is no Room for us to be careless, and
negligent, in this Matter, and to think of sparing ourselves for Things of
greater Worth; but it requires, the whole Bent of our Minds, with all proper
Diligence, and Fidelity, the applying ourselves closely to the Labor, and
putting forth our Strength and Vigor, our judicious Discernment, firm
Resolution, regular and steady Appetites, and Aversions, that we may overcome
the Difficulties, remove the Impediments, and, at last, get out of the Reach of
Misery, and possess everlasting Felicity.

It is a Principle of right Reason, that, when a Matter is of the greatest
Concernment to us, and at the same Time exceeding Difficult, the Difficulty
should be so far from discouraging of us, that it should only quicken us to the
greater Intenseness of Thought, Strength of Resolution, vigorous Endeavors,
and patient Labors, that we may be able to surmount the Difficulty, and master
the Opposition, and beat down whatsoever stands in the Way of our securing
what is so needful for us. Accordingly, it is an Observation of the Preacher,
who is also the wise Man, Prove. 1.10. If the Iron be blunt, and he do not what
the Edge, then must he put to the more Strength; but Wisdom is profitable to
direct. So much the more difficult the Work is, which is necessary for us, so
much the more need have we to use our Prudence, and Strength, that we may
improve every Advantage, by wheting the Edge, making Use of the best Means, and
putting to the more Strength, by exerting ourselves with the greater Vehemence,
and directing ourselves by Wisdom, in the prudent applying our Skill, and
Might, according to the Nature, and Circumstances, the Weight, and Importance,
of the Business we have before us; that we may conquer the Difficulty. And
because it is a very hard, but necessary, Work, for the perishing Sinner to
come up to the Terms of the Gospel, and live a Life of Faith on the Son of God,
to overcome the Propensity of his Nature, and his contracted Habits, to that
which is Evil, and alter the Bias of his Mind, and the Tenor of his Life,
therefore it so much the more stands him in Hand to be in good Earnest, to lay
himself out to the utmost, with all imaginable Solicitude, and fixed
Resolution, and constant Labor, that he may secure his own eternal Salvation.
For, Since Salvation is possible to him, (as we have seen,) let the Difficulty
be ever so great, this should only so much the more whet his Appetite, and put
him upon shaking off his Sloth, and rouse his Courage, and Resolution, Vigor,
and Strength, that he may not fail of so great a Good, through his own Default;
but may, in the Conclusion, reap the Benefit of all his Labors, in the full
Enjoyment of the Crown of Glory he so earnestly contendeth for. Hence is that
of the Apostle, Heb. vi.11, 12. We desire, that every one of you do show the
same Diligence, to the full Assurance of Hope to the End; that ye be not
slothful, but Followers of them, who through Faith, and Patience, inherit the
Promise.

And indeed, who can imagine that so great a Matter as the Salvation of the
Soul, so extensive a Benefit, as eternal Life, and Happiness, in Heaven, could
be obtained without Difficulty? Are great Things to be done without
proportionable Thought, and Pains? Who acquireth any great Measures of
Knowledge, without much study, which is a Weariness to the Flesh? Or who
increases in Riches, ordinarily, but he that is diligent in his Business? Or
how shall he gain the Mastery that will not strive for it? The wise Man
observed, Prove. xiv.23. In all Labor there is Profit. He that would enjoy the
Profit must labor for it. And is it not fitting, then, that complete, and
endless, Happiness should require our earnest, unwearied Struggle to obtain it?
A too easily gained Happiness would be in Danger of being contemptible in our
Eyes, and utterly slighted by us. There is a Congruity, and Suitableness to our
Make, and Temper, that what is of greatest Worth, should cost us dearest: the
greatest Good should be purchased with the greatest Labor.

And truly, there is no little Difficulty in being saved, whatever vain Minds
may think of it. It is not a few good Wishes, now and then, or a few lazy,
inactive Desires, that will be sufficient to escape the Misery of the
Impenitent, and obtain the Happiness of the Righteous. A Balaam may cry, Number.
xxiii.10. Let me die the Death of the Righteous, and let my last End be like
his! And all be but a vain Wish, while he is not careful to live the Life of
the righteous. Nor is it enough that a Man be in a good Mood, and Fit of
Devotion, now and then; that he put on a sober Frame, and Temper, of Mind,
perhaps, once a Week, when he puts on his Sabbath Apparel; or that, upon
some special Occasions, while he is under strong Convictions, or the
Apprehensions of sore Judgments, or the quick Sense of signal Mercies, he can
then do something that looks like working out his own Salvation: it is not
enough that he say over a few Prayers, that he frequent the House of God, that
he do his Neighbor no Hurt, and that he be charitable to the Poor; These
Things, alone, will never carry a Man to Heaven, and interest him in the great
Salvation set before him in the Gospel. No; It requires more Labor, and
Pains, than all of this comes to, that we may scale Heaven's Walls, and win
the (...) Crown of Glory. Therefore we re^d, Matthew. xi.12. From the Days of
John the Baptist, until now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the
violent take it by Force. Not tear i^ to (...), as slighting, despising, and
endeavoring to destroy it; but, use an holy Violence, and Force, in unfainting
Struggle of Mind, and agonizing Conflict with all Opposition, like that of
Soldiers storming a City, that they may seize upon the Kingdom of Heaven, and
make it their own. So must we, if we would overcome the Difficulties that lie
in our Way, and make the Kingdom of Heaven our own; otherwise we shall be in
Danger of being overpoured by Numbers, and fail of the Grace of God, and Hope
of Life.

Let us a little consider the Difficulties in the Way of the Sinner's
Salvation, and which require his greatest Solicitude, diligent Labors, and
constant Watchfulness, that he may be able to master them; and these
Difficulties arise from the Sinners own Heart, the World about him, and from a
malicious Devil.

(1.) There is that in the very Heart of the Sinner himself, which rendereth it
exceeding difficult for him to be saved. For there is in the Heart of every
Sinner, by Nature, a very great Aversion, and direct Opposition, both to the
Nature of Salvation, and the only Way leading thereunto; so that the Sinner
must first master himself, alter his Bent, and Inclination, and go against the
Grain of his own Heart, which surely is no easy Matter, ever he can be saved.

Though it be true, that there is no Man, in his Wits, but what would be saved
if he could; that is, there is no Man but what would choose to avoid every
Thing that he thinks to be hurtful to him, and to possess all that he
supposes to be delightful to him; because every Man has a natural Desire of
Happiness, and Dread of Misery; nevertheless, when we consider what the
Salvation is, which I am speaking of, and the Happiness included in it, we
shall see, that there is that, in the Heart of the Sinner, which is directly
opposite thereto. For the Salvation, under Consideration, necessarily includes
in it, the perfect Rectitude of the Soul, and, what is Consequent thereon, the
Enjoyment of God, or the Soul's Union unto God, the Perfection of Holiness, as
it is Center, without which the Man cannot be happy: but, alas! when we look
into the Heart of the Sinner, and view it in it is natural State, we shall find
it corrupt, and depraved, vicious, and impure, and therefore, in the
Disposition, and Temper of it, as contrary unto Rectitude, as Darkness is to
Light, and so utterly averse from an Union with the infinitely holy God. Hence
it is that the Apostle observed, Romans viii.7. The carnal Mind is Enmity against
God. That is, there is in the depraved Heart of the Sinner a natural Enmity to
that Rectitude, and Holiness, which is essential to the Divine Nature; and
consequently an Enmity unto his own true Happiness.

And how strong is the Aversation, in the Heart of the Sinner, to the only
prescribed Way of Salvation? God requires those Things of the Sinner, in order
to his being saved, which are extremely contrary unto the natural Bent of his
own Heart; and that without any Impeachment of his Justice, and Goodness, any
more than for an earthly Monarch to require it, of his rebel Subjects, to lay
aside their rebellious Principles, and submit to his Government, as the Way to
enjoy his Favor.

Thus God requires of the Sinner to believe the Gospel, and to believe in
Jesus Christ, to forsake all Self-Dependance, and go to Christ, and depend upon
him, alone, as meriting all for him: but now, the Sinner is slow of Heart to
believe the Gospel; yea, there is in him an evil Heart of Unbelief; the
Doctrine of a crucified Savior appears Foolishness unto him; the Revelations
concerning the Natures, Person, Offices, and Benefits, of Christ, are not only
unaccountable, but, impossible to his carnal Reason; he is too highly
opinionated of his own Understanding* to think himself obliged to believe what
he cannot see through; or he is too proud of his own Excellencies, and fond of
his own Strength, to be beholden to an other; and therefore, as Christ said of
the unbelieving Jews, in his Day, so may it be said unto all Sinners, under the
Power of their Apostasy, Joh. v.40. Ye will not come unto me, that ye may have
Life: and, Joh. vi.44. No Man can come unto me, except the Father, which has
sent me, draw him.

So also God requires it of the Sinner, that he subdue his corrupt
Inclinations, that he mortify his Members which are upon the Earth, that he
endeavor to keep under his Body, and bring it into Subjection, and not allow
himself in the Gratification of any one inordinate Lust; and he requires it of
him to obey every Divine Precept, both of the first, and second Table of the
moral Law, and that he carefully observe all the Parts of instituted Worship,
and Religion: but what an Aversion is there, in the Heart of the Sinner, to all
of this? how difficultly is he persuaded to abandon the Ways of Wickedness, and
to walk in the Paths of Godliness? his carnal Mind is not subject to the Law of
God, neither indeed can be. P^om. viii.7. No; the Carnality must first be
subdued, the Enmity be slain, the Man's Heart must be changed, before he can
yield an acceptable Obedience to the Law of God. The Sinner loves his Lusts,
he rolls them, as sweet Morsels, under his Tongue, and, from the Delight, and
Pleasure, he takes in them, it is hard, and difficult for him to part with
them. The Way of the Divine Precepts is a strange uncouth Thing to him, it
thwarts his natural vicious Appetites, contradicts his sensual Pleasures, and
forbids every lawless Indulgence of them, and from hence it becomes very
distastful to him; and therefore he chooses to walk in that Way which is
pleasing to him, and to turn from that holy Commandment, which is so contrary
to his corrupt Inclinations. Thus, as the Prophet described the foolish Conduct
of Sinners, Isa. lxvi.3. They have chosen their own Ways, and their Soul
delighted in their Abominations. So their Passions influence their Wills, and
their Wills ride their Understandings, and thus they choose their own evil
Ways, because they delight in their Abominations.

And now, suppose it to lie entirely within the Compass of the Sinner's own
Power, and Will, to save himself, i. e. supposing that the Sinner could believe
in Christ, and forsake his Sins, and lead a new Life, when he pleased, yet,
since there is this very great Disagreement between the Temper of his Heart,
and the Nature, and Way, of Salvation, it follows that it must needs be
exceeding difficult, yea, one of the hardest Things in the World, for him to be
saved, and that the Sinner had need to stir up his Strength, and exert his
Power, to overcome this Difficulty. For how shall he be able to go against the
Grain, and Bent, of corrupt Nature, without striving for it? What Strength must
he put forth to swim against so powerful a Current? Till his Heart is changed,
and the corrupt Bias of his Mind is altered, it is impossible to him to be
saved, because of his own natural Aversions to Goodness, and strong Propensity
to Evil. But what Pains must he take, what Agonies must he endure, to alter,
and change, his vicious Heart, and Affections? Verily, this is a Matter of
exceeding great Difficulty, and therefore the Sinner had need to be more than
ordinary diligent, and laborious, both in the Concern of his Mind, and his
active Pains, to subdue the corrupt Workings of his own Heart, and to watch,
and strive against, that he may gain the Mastery over Sin, and embrace all
Opportunities, and Encouragements, to his Duty.

But then, it does not lie wholly within the Sinner's Power to save himself,
and that because Nature cannot go contrary to itself. The Tree that has stood
long bent one Way, cannot unbend itself: no more can corrupt Nature alter
itself* and of crooked, make itself straight, of vicious, and depraved, make
itself holy, righteous, and good. In what Way, by what Means, that are level to
the Sinner's own Ability, can he change his own Heart? The Ethiopian may as
well change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots, as they that are accustomed to
do Evil, may, by any Power of their own, learn to do well. It is an insuperable
Difficulty to the Man himself, and what he will never be able to master,
without the supernatural Aids of the omnipotent Spirit of God, which only can
convert the Heart of a Sinner; which Spirit is to be obtained by an earnest,
and diligent seeking of it, in the Ways which God has appointed. So that, when
the Sinner has done all that he can, by any Strength of his own, toward his
own Salvation, the Difficulty, of being saved, will remain so great upon him,
that unless God, by his almighty Spirit, turn, and draw, him unto Christ, he
never will be converted, and saved. Hence is that of the Prophet, Jer. xxxi.18.
Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. q. d. Thou, O Lord, only art able to turn
me, and if thou turn me not, I shall not be turned. Therefore to all his other
Care, and Pains, the Sinner had need to add his daily, fervent, unworried
Supplications to the God of all Grace, for the Presence, and special Operation
of the Divine Spirit, that while he is diligently attempting, in God's Way, to
work out his own Salvation, with Fear, and Trembling, it would please God, of
his infinite Grace, to work in him to will, and to do.

2. The World the Sinner lives in, and necessarily converseth with, renders it
very difficult for him to be saved. As the World, and the Things of it, have an
easy Access to us, strike us directly, and are present with us, so they fill
our Minds, clap an heavy Bias upon them, and turn them aside from spiritual,
and heavenly Objects; and this renders it very difficult for the Sinner to
hearken to the Instructions of Wisdom, and duly regard his Soul, because the
constant Clamors of the Senses, and the mighty Force sensible Objects have upon
him, draw him another Way.

Thus, the very Businesses of the World, which Men are necessarily, in some
Measure, engaged in, for the Support, and allowed Comfort, of their Bodies, and
to provide for their Families, to fence against Hunger, and Nakedness, and
Cold, and Want, often prove a very great Interruption, and Hindrance, to the
Sinner in regarding his spiritual Interest, as perhaps, other wise he would do.
The Cares about his present Circumstances, the constant Hurry he is kept in,
his deep Concern to manage such an Affair to his best Advantage, or by what
means to extricate himself from such an Embarrassment, these, with many other
such like Affairs relating to the Body, are very prone to engross all the Man's
Thoughts, and Time, and so put him upon turning a deaf Ear to the Calls of
Christ, to come to him, and accept his offered Salvation. It may be, he will
give the Word a hearing, and so the good Seed is sown, but it falls upon
thorny Ground, where the Cares of the World, and the Deceitfulness of Riches,
choke the Word. Matthew. xiii.22. This our Savior elegantly illustrates in the
Parable of the Marriage Supper, wherein, after he acquaints us that the great
King had prepared his Dinner, killed his Oxen, and Fa^lings, and made all
T^ings ready, and sent his Servants to call in those that were bidden; he tells
us of the base Treatment he met with, viz. they all, with one Consent, began to
make Excuse; and why? the World, the World, called them an other Way: One
pleads, I have bought a Piece of Ground, and I must needs go and see it; an
other urges, I have bought five Yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove them; a third
cries, I ^ave married a Wife, and therefore I cannot come: So, they made light
of it, and went their Ways, one to his Farm, and another to his Merchandise,
Matthew. xxii.5. and Luke xiv.18.

Easy Circumstances insensibly sink the Mind into a State of Indolence, and
present Fullness very much takes off the Mind from a due Concern about ^uturity.
He that wa^loweth in present Pleasures is in Danger to be swallowed up by them,
so as to loose all Thoughts of any Thing beyond them. What pleases us
powerfully attracts us; it approaches, and attacks us on our weak side, (being
naturally inclined to think well of ourselves,) and therefore easily subdueth
us, and hurries us away. All that is in the World is Lust, adapted to Lust* and
serves to inflame it; our Covetousness, while the Objects are at a Distance
from us; our Pride and Wantonness, our Luxury, and Passions, when we enjoy
them; and because all tends to excite, and nourish Lust, therefore the serious
Thoughts of God, and Religion, and the Salvation of their own Souls, seldom, or
ever, can find a Welcome with Sinners. 1 Timothy vi.9. They that will be rich,
fall into Temptation, and a Snare, and into many foolish, and hurtful Lusts,
which drown Men in Destruction, and Perdition. When a certain young Nobleman
came to Christ, seemingly very desirous to know what he must do to inherit
eternal Life, our Lord, to make Tr^al of the Sincerity of his Desires, by his
willingness to part with Earth, that he might gain Heaven, directed him to sell
all that he had, and give to the Poor, and he should have Treasure in Heaven;
but he, being unwilling to purchase Heaven, at so dear a Rate, went away
sorrowful, for he was very rich; whereupon Christ observed to his Disciples,
Luke xviii.24, 25. How hardly shall they that have Riches enter into the
Kingdom of God? It is easier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, than
for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of God. The Design of which was to
show, not the Impossibility, but, how exceeding difficult, the Delights of the
present Life, render it, for a wealthy Sinner to be saved.

And who can stand before Envy? or encounter with Hardships, and manifold
Tribulation, without being put to Pain, and Uneasiness? The Frowns, and
Terrors, of the World lie in the Way, and often prove an Impediment to the
Sinner's Salvation. These look with a threatening Aspect upon him, and he cannot
bear the Thoughts of Self-Denial, and taking up the Cross, and enduring the
Heat, and Burden of the Day. To suffer for Religion, in the Cause of God, and
for Righteousness Sake! Oh! how irksome, and grievous, is the very Thought of
it to a carnal Heart? He cannot bear to be poor, and low, and despised, and
therefore will not stick at any Thing to avoid these Inconveniences. Like the
unjust Steward, he cries, Luke xvi.3. Dig I cannot, to beg I am ashamed. How
many have there been, who once made some fair Show of setting out in the Ways
of Religion, they began to bethink themselves what they must do to be saved,
they applied themselves to the Practice of many Duties, but, alas! the Sun beat
upon them, a little Tribulation, and Persecution, the Hardships of the Way, and
the Scorn of Fools, has offended them; they were soon discouraged, and shrunk
back, for Fear of meeting the Lion, and the Bear, in their Way; and all their
good Purposes have come to nothing. So many of the professed Disciples of
Christ were offended at the Prospect of the Sufferings, which he faithfully
warned them of; This is an hard Saying, (say they) and who can bear it? and,
from that Time, they went Backward, and walked no more with him. Joh. vi.60,
66. Thus the Sufferings of the present Time offend Men, and discourage them
from walking in the Way that leads unto Life; and so for Fear of exposing
themselves to Hardships, Sinners neglect the Salvation of their Souls.

(3.) The malicious Devices of the Devil add to the Difficulty of the Sinner's
being saved. Sinners had need to be very serious and solicitous about their
Salvation, because Satan, the grand Adversary, prompted thereto by his innate
Malice, and Envy, makes Use of his utmost Skill, and Power, to interrupt, and
hinder them, in their Thoughtfulness, and Labors, about the great Concerns of
their Souls. Hence is that Caution of the Apostle, 1 Pet. v.8. Be sober, be
vigilant, (be very solicitous, and wathful,) because your Adversary, the Devil,
as a roaring Lion, walks about seeking whom he may devour. The subtle Devil
makes Use of all Artifice, and Cunning, to direct the Mind of the Sinner from
thinking seriously what he must do to be saved; and sometimes by the Hurry of
the World, otherwhile by Company, and carnal Pleasures; sometimes by persuading
him, that there is no Need of all this Ado, and Strictness, in Religion; one
while suggesting to him, that he is Young, and has many Days to come, and it
will be Time enough for him, to think of being serious, and religious,
hereafter, when he draws to the Close of his Life; an otherwhile, he tells him,
that it is now too late for him to think of altering his Course, he has no Time
for it, nor would it be of any Advantage to him to labor about it, because the
Season is over, and gone, with Respect to him; so does he try all Methods,
that, by any Means, he may take Sinners off from a due Application of Mind to
that which truly is their great and main Business. Thus he uses his best
Endeavors to enslave them more and more under Bondage unto Sin, and to hinder
their Repentance, and Conversion, and Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; as
well-knowing, if once their serious Thoughtfulness should be productive of
these Things in them, that then he should lose so many of his Subjects, and no
longer have the Pleasure of tyrannising over them. Therefore he throws out his
Lure, to ensnare, and entangle them; therefore he baits his Hook with very
bright, and shining Appearances; therefore he turns himself into all Manner
of Shapes, and accommodateth himself unto all Tempers, and Constitutions, and
suiteth himself to every Business, and Employment, and windeth himself into
every State, and Condition, that, if possible, he may still hold the Soul his
Vassal, and lead it captive at his Will. And what Need is there then, of
Circumspection, and Watchfulness, of serious Thought, and Application of Mind,
of diligent Labor, and Pains, to overcome his Temptations, and disappoint his
Designs, that the poor Soul may escape, as a Bird, out of the Snare of the
Fowler, and may flee away, and be at Rest.

From all of which, it appears, how exceeding difficult it is for a poor
perishing Sinner to be saved. Sin, and Lust, within him, and the World, and
Devil, without him, all conspire to oppose his Salvation; and because it is
thus an hard, and difficult Matter, to get safe to Heaven, from the many, and
powerful Enemies, which lie in the Way, and must be first subdued, therefore
the poor Sinner had Need, if he would be saved, to exert himself to the utmost,
and daily, yea, hourly, look about him, and within himself, that he may
timously spy out the rising Danger, and ward it off, and be active, and
unwearied, firm, and unshaken, in his Resolutions, and Endeavors, to master
these Difficulties, and save his own Soul. For great Difficulties will not be
overcome without great Care and Labor. So much for the present.

SERMON XX.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
I Showed you, in the Morning the Reasonableness that every Sinner should be
most seriously solicitous to be saved; because it is of all Concernments the
greatest; and it is a Matter of exceeding great Difficulty, to get safe to
Heaven, from the Corruption of our own Hearts, the World we live in, and the
Malice of the Devil. I now proceed to argue,

3. After all the Attempts of many, and the Endeavors they may use, there are
but few that shall be saved at last; and this serves farther to show, what
Need the perishing Sinner has to be very solicitous, and in Earnest, that he
may be found in the Number of those happy few. Though the Number of them that
shall be saved, considered absolutely, and by themselves, will be found, at
last, to be a great Multitude, which no Man can Number* Rev. vii.9. whom Christ
has redeemed, by his Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and
Nation, in ^^l Ages, and Places, of the World; yet, comparatively considered,
they are but a small Company, as the Gleaning of Grapes, and as the Shaking of
an Olive Tree, when there are left two or three Berries in the Top of the
uppermost Boughs, four or five in the outmost fruitful Branches thereof; so is
the Remnant according to the Election of Grace, a small Company, a little
Flock, chosen, and few. Hence our blessed Lord said to his Disciples, Luke
xii.32. Fear not little Flock, it is your Father's good Pleasure, to give you
the Kingdom.

The greatest Part of the World have not the Gospel of Salvation preached to
them; they never heard of Jesus Christ a Savior from Sin, and Wrath; and thus
they are destitute, and have been so through all Ages, of a Light to guide
their Feet into the Way of Peace, as well as of any Sacrifice of Atonement,
that they know of, sufficient to take away Sin. And supposing that every Age
should have produced, which it has not, in the unenlightened World, a Plato, a
Socrates, an Epictetus, Men that endeavored to search out the Truth, and
discover their Duty, as far as the Strength of natural Light would assist them,
and carefully practiced according to the Discoveries which they made, yet what
are they to the Bulk of the heathen World, that neither knew their Duty, nor
did according to what they knew.

As for those who have been advantaged with the Light of the Gospel and who
have made Profession of the Christian Religion, it is to be feared, if we take
a View of their Lives, that the most of them, by far, will come short of
Salvation. How many Nations of them are vile Idolaters, worshipping the Beast,
and his Image? And what vast Numbers in the Protestant Nations openly live
profane, vicious, and immoral Lives? Christ said, Matthew. xx.16. many be called,
but few chosen. Many enjoy the external Call of the Gospel; Christ, and
Salvation, are preached to them, but there are but few that are effectually
called, and chosen, but few who sincerely embrace the Offers of the Gospel, and
obtain Salvation. There are but few real Penitents, but few true Believers, but
few sincere Converts, even among the many Professors of the pure Religion of
Jesus. As for a great Part of them that are numbered among Christians, alas!
it is too apparent that they are nothing at all concerned about the Salvation
of their Souls; they scarce entertain so much as one serious Thought in their
Hear^s about it, from Day to Day, nay, it may be, from Year to Year; their
Minds are wholly taken up about other Things, though of infinitely less Worth,
and Moment; they are inquisitive enough what they shall do to live, in this
World; they are very solicitous that they may grow rich, and great, and make to
themselves a Name, and a Family, in the Earth; but the Salvation of their
Souls, what they shall do to please God, to escape Hell, and get to Heaven,
these are the least of their Concerns. If their natural Life be in Danger by
Sickness, they will readily cry out, what shall I do? They will enquire of
every Neighbor, and send for a skilful Physician, to direct them what to do,
and be ready to follow the Directions that are prescribed to them: but when did
you ever hear them seriously enquire of their pious Neighbor the Way to
Heaven? When do you know them apply themselves to the Ministers of the Lord,
whom he has appointed as spiritual Physicians, to minister to their Souls? When
do they go to them with that important Enquiry, What must we do to be saved?
Possibly, if their Minister be a Man of great Learning, and Prudence, and
through Acquaintance with the Circumstances of the World, and the Manners of
Men, they may sometimes go to him for Advice in some difficult temporal
Affairs, but when do they go to him for Direction in their spiritual Concerns,
which it more specially belongs to his Office to be helpful to them in, and
in which they more stand in Need of his Assistance, and Counsel. Paul, and
Silas, may preach to them Year after Year, and allure them with all the Charms
of the Gospel, and set before them the Terrors of the Law, and woo them with
all the Art of Persuasion, and yet they remain as in a dead Sleep, and are not
awakened to any Sense of their Danger, nor cry out, Sirs, what must we do to be
saved?

Yea, among those that seem to be somewhat concerned about the Salvation of
their Souls, how exceeding negligent, and careless, are many of them? They will
not be at any great Cost, and Pains, about it; they don't appear to be in
Earnest, and engage with any great Warmth, and Heat, of Spirit, after it; they
regard it, rather, only as a Matter by the By, which they would show some
Respect to, for Forms Sake, when they have little, or nothing, else to do; and
hence they, at last, miss of Salvation, because of their Indolence, and
Negligence, about it. If they were but as much in Earnest, and took as much
Pains to save their Souls; if they were but as zealous in the Service of God,
and to get an Interest in Christ, and a Portion in Heaven, as they are to get
the World, or to gratify some sordid Lust, or other, very probably they might
be saved: but, alas! they only entertain some few, slighty, transient Thoughts
about it, and do not much concern themselves, what their future Condition shall
be, so they may but be easy, and comfortable, for the present: and by this
Means it is that many, very many, Sinners come short of that eternal Salvation,
which, probably, they hoped for. When one said to our Lord, Luke xiii.23. Are
there few that shall be saved? Our Savior, without directly gratifying his
vain Curiosity, gave such an Answer to the Enquiry, as showed him the Necessity
of his own, personal, zealous Endeavors, that he might be one of that happy
Number; because there are many that finally miss of the Good they hoped for,
from their supine Negligence, in not taking the proper Pain^ to obtain it; said
he, v. 24. Strive to enter in at the str^it Gate; for many, I say unto you,
shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able. As if he had said, do you
strive, do you be in Earnest, and industriously lay yourself out, in this
great, and important Affair, because there are many, who will miscarry in their
Attempts, to get to Heaven, through their own Negligence; though they seek to
enter in, are desirous of it, and willing to do something, yet they seek it
only in a very careless, off-handed Manner, and are not in Earnest in what they
do. And this, indeed, is that which proves the Destruction of the greatest
Part, by far, of those that perish from under the Gospel; they have some
Thoughts about the Salvation of their Souls, but they treat it as though it
were but a very small, and indifferent Matter, and are slothful, and inactive,
and will not give themselves any great Trouble to secure it, and so they fall
short of the Rest, which remains for the People of God.

A very great Part, of those that hope to be saved, ground their Hopes upon a
false Bottom, upon some very great Mistake, or other, which at last, deceives
them, and cuts off all their Expectation. Thus, some are ready to imagine, that
a little external Service, bodily Exercise, and Lip-labor, in saying their
Prayers, and now and then reading, and hearing the Word of God, will serve the
Turn well enough, and with this they content, and satisfy themselves, supposing
that they shall be accepted for what they do. There are others, that think all
the Qualifications for Heaven are to be found in Benevolence, and Charity, and
therefore they will be sure to wrong no Man, and endeavor to be good, and
kind, in their Speech, and Actions, to all about them; while they have no
Reverence for their Maker, call not upon his Name, nor regard his Worship.
Others are the Reverse of these, and conclude all Religion lies in external
Acts of Worship, and all they have to do is to be careful not to profane the
Name of God, to observe divine Appointments; these, they think, will save them,
though they have no Regard to their Neighbor's good Name, nor make any
Difficulty of wronging him, when they can do it with safety from the
Resentments of human Laws. There are some that (...) invent many Excuses, and
find out diverse Pleas, for their Continuance in their Sins, and foolishly
suppose, those Pleas will be as available with the holy God, as they are
satisfactory unto themselves. Others, again, fly to the Mercy of God, and
Merits of Christ, and if they can but confidently believe Christ has dyed for
them, and that God for Christ's sake has pardoned all their Sins, they conclude
their Salvation is sure, though they have nothing of good Works to prove the
Truth of their Faith, and without their making so much ado, as sometimes their
Ministers tell them is necessary, about their being holy in all Manner of
Conversation. And how many are there that shelter themselves under their
Impotency? They cry, they are poor Creatures, they do what they can, they say,
and leave it wholly with God to do all for them; and, at the same Time, will be
at no Pains with themselves, to forsake their Sins, and to lead a new, and holy
Life. Thus there are innumerable that delude themselves with foolish
Imaginations, and vain Hopes, and idle Excuses, in their careless Neglect of
their Duty, till, at last, they find themselves sadly mistaken, and so perish
forever. So that notwithstanding the great Number of Professors, there are but
few that shall be saved. To which Purpose the Apostle Paul, in allusion to a
Passage in the Prophet Isaiah, said, Romans ix.27. Though the Number of the
Children of Israel be as the Sand of the Sea, yet only, a Remnant shall be
saved.

Since therefore the Number, of them that shall be saved, will be but small, a
few only, of Mankind in General, and from among Professors in Particular, this
shows us what Reason there is that every perishing Sinner should be exceeding
solicitous, inquisitive, and diligent, that he may not be found among the
common Herd, the wandering Drove, who deceive themselves, mistake their Way,
and finally lie down in Sorrow; but may be numbered among those happy few, who
are led by the divine Spirit in Paths of Righteousness, and shall, at the
Conclusion of their present Life, arrive at the End of their Faith, the
Salvation of their Soul^.

Were Salvation common unto all Men, without any Difference between them, let
their own Conduct, and Behavior, be what it would, then, indeed, there would
be less Cause for any Man to be in great Concern of Mind about it; because
every Man might, without any great Hazard, reasonably expect to have his Share,
with his Neighbors, in what is common to all Mankind, whether he be at any
special Care, and Pains, about it, or no. But since there are only a few that
shall be saved, a small Number, out of the many that hope to get to Heaven,
that will be duly qualified to arrive at the upper Mansions of Light and Joy*
seeing the Multitude are going in the Way that leads to Destruction, and
many, who seem to set out fair, and do many Things, yet, after all, will be
found to have deceived themselves with a vain Presumption, and really miss of
that Happiness, which they dreamt of possessing, and perish in their Sins; what
full Conviction have thou! O Sinner! from hence, of the great Reasonableness of
thy gi^ing all Diligence to make thy Calling, and Election sure? that thou
should be in the greatest Concern imaginable, apply thyself hereunto in good
Earnest, set thy very Heart to these Things, and use all possible Pains with
thyself, in a wise Improvement of the best Means, and prudent husbanding the
favorable Opportunities, to make thy Peace with God, and secure a Title to the
future Happiness? lest, through thy Carelessness, thou, even thou, O Sinner,
should be carried down in the common Current, and have thy Portion with the
Multitude, and lose thy Soul, and perish for^ver. How earnestly would thou
strive to be one of the ten, that out of an Hundred, should by a wise Forecast,
in improving present Opportunities, procure to thyself a Noble-man's Estate?
And how much more highly, then, does it concern thee to endeavor, by all
means, (which, by the Way, are more certain, and successful,) that thou may
be one of that small Number, who shall possess a Crown of Glory that fades not
away.

4. Lastly; Every one that shall be saved will be most seriously solicitous
about it. Sometime or other, first or last, this Solicitude of Mind will take
Hold on all that ever are, or shall be recovered from the Paths of the
Destroyer, and turned into the Ways of Peace, and Life. This Solicitude, and
Concernment, of Mind, are the Pang^ of the New Birth, through which the Soul
pass^^, in it is being born an Heir of Salvation; so that he never will, he
never can, be saved, at least in the ordinary Method of God's bringing a Soul
ho^^ unto himself, who is not first seriously thoughtful, and concerned, to
know, and practice, all that is necessary to his Salvation.

1. All that have been saved, have been saved in this Way. To which of the
Saints will thou turn? They will all tell thee, they have been first awakened
to some Sense of their own miserable Condition, of the Necessity of Salvation,
and a Thoughtfulness what they must do in order to it; and have been brought to
a willingness to attend their Duty, and do whatsoever they have been convinced
that God required of them, to obtain his Favor. Though this Concern of Mind
has been infinitely various in the Degrees of it, yet none have been able,
regularly, to lay Claim to the promised Blessedness, who have not, more or
less, had some Experience of it. Thus the Iaylor cried out, Sirs, what must I
do to be saved? And thus it was with the Hearers of John the Baptist; when he
had set the Terrors of the Lord before them, saying to them, Luke iii.7. O
Generation of Vipers, who has warned you to flee from the Wrath to come? we
are told, that the People asked him, saying, Master what shall we do? Yea, the
Publicans, those noted Sinners, came unto him with the same important Enquiry,
saying, Master, what shall we do? And the very Soldiers, that lawless
Generation of Men, felt the Power of his awakening Doctrine, and, with Concern
of Mind, demand of him, saying, and what shall we do? They all seem to have
been filled with a very great Concern about the Salvation of their Souls, and
were very inquisitive to know what they must do, and willing to do all that he
should Acquaint them with as necessary to be done by them, that they might
escape the tremendous Wrath which he had warned them of, and might obtain a
State of complete, and endless Happiness. Thus also it was with the numerous
Converts, which, out of many Nations, were proselyted to the Christian Faith,
and Manners, at the Preaching of Peter, in the Time of Pentecost: it is said,
Act. ii.37. When they heard this, they were pricked in their Hearts, and said
to Peter, and to the Rest of the Apostles, Men, and Brethren, what shall we do?
The Manner of the Expression, as well as the Account given of them, that they
were pricked in their Hearts, show that they were in very great Concern what to
do, to escape the Misery which, they were then sensible, they were exposed
unto, and obtain that Salvation which Jesus Christ had purchased, by dying for
Sinners; and this their Concern made them in Earnest in their Enquiry after the
Way of Salvation, and willing to submit themselves to any proper Methods of
obtaining it. Thus also it was with Paul himself, at his first Conversion. The
Lord Jesus, in an unusual Manner, met that little Benjamite, when he was
ravening as a Wolf to devour the Flock of Christ, and stopped him in the midst
of his Rage, by a surprising Light from Heaven, out shining the Sun at noon
Day, and by an audible Voice, from the excellent Glory, said to him, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me! and then it is remarked of him, Act. ix.6. He
trembling, and astonished, said, Lord! What will thou have me to do? So that
the Conversion of the Sinner, whatever extraordinary Circumstances may attend
it, is brought about in this Way, of applying to his rational Mind, and
awakening in him a serious Concern about his own eternal Welfare, and disposing
of him to a Willingness to submit to the Counsels of Heaven; and though many,
that hear the Gospel preached, may be strongly prejudiced against the Methods
God has prescribed, and with Naaman, the Syrian, turn away in a Rage, and say,
2 King. v.12. Are not Abana, and Pharpar, Rivers of Damascus, better than all
the Waters of Israel? may I not wash in them, and be clean? yet, if ever they
truly wash, and be clean, if ever they become real Converts, they will be
brought to a Sense of it, that God's Way is the best, and be made willing to
comply with it.

2. And indeed, it is highly reasonable that it should be so; that every one,
that would be saved, should be seriously solicitous about it. Who can suppose
the strait Gate of Regeneration can be passed without striving? However the
Pangs of the New Birth may be stronger, more dolorous, and lasting, in some,
than in others, yet, who can, in Reason, imagine that any Man will, or can, be
happy, who is not first desirous to be so, and willing to put himself to some
present Trouble that he may be so? that is, he must experience something of a
painful Concern of Mind, about his Soul, and his eternal State, how he shall
escape the Wrath and Curse of God, and what he shall do to inherit eternal
Life, before he shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

For, every sincere Convert must experience something of the Conviction of Sin.
The Spirit of the Lord, like a Spirit of Judgment, and Burning, must awaken the
Sinner to a Sense of the Sinfulness of Sin, and his own Sinfulness, or how
shall he convert and turn from his Evil Ways? Though he has, heretofore,
entertained ever so fond an Opinion of Sin, as very delightful, and pleasurable
to him, yet, every true Convert must be brought to a Conviction of the Evil of
Sin, that it is the most hateful, loathsome Thing that can be, both in the
Nature of it, as contrary to God, and in the Consequents of it, as hurtful to
himself; or how shall he part with what he has delighted in? Though he was once
opinionated of himself, could wipe his Mouth, and say, I have done no Evil, in
living in the Gratification of the fleshly Appetites; I have but followed
Nature, and done no harm: Yet when ever he is brought to a Sense of his Duty,
he will then see his own past Sinfulness; when the Commandment came, Sin
revived; Romans vii.9. when the Commandment, the Rule of Duty, in its holy
Nature, and Extent, appears before him, (as it must before he can do his Duty,)
then he will see his own Defects, what a vile, wretched, guilty, polluted
Creature he has been; that though he may have lived an inoffensive Life among
Men, yet, that the holy God sees Sin enough in him to damn him to the lowest
Hell, if he should be strict to mark his Iniquity against him. This Conviction
of Sin is absolutely necessary to the Sinner's turning from it, and his turning
from Sin is absolutely necessary to his Salvation; for no Man will, or can,
repent of that which he does not think to be Evil, or, of what he looks upon
himself to be clear of: and if he be thoroughly convinced of the Evil of the Way
he has lived in, it will excite a Concern to alter his Course. Especially,

If we consider, that a Conviction of Misery felt, or impending, produces a
Concern to be delivered from it. It is but reasonable that a Man be first
apprehensive of his Unhappiness, or Danger, before we can suppose him to fly
from it. He that, like Paul, once thought himself alive, knowing no Hurt, or
Danger attending him, without the Law, while he remained a Stranger to the Law,
and it is Sanctions, when the Commandment comes, and appears in it is full
Latitude before him, will see Sin revive, in the Trespasses of the Law he has
been guilty of, and then he will also see himself Dead, under the Sentence of
Death which the Law passes upon him. And the through Apprehension the Soul has
of the Wrath of an Angry, and almighty God hanging over it, and just ready to
fall upon it is guilty Head; the Apprehension, that there is but a Step between
him and Death, and eternal Damnation; that the grim Bailiff stands ready to
seize him, and hurry him away into the infernal Prison; that Hell from beneath
is gaping for him; and grinning Devils, as the Executioners of Divine
Vengeance, are waiting to plunge him into the burning Vault, the Place of
Torment, and everlasting Despair; the Apprehension, I say, of this deplorable
Condition, and the utmost Danger the Soul is in of perishing forever, should,
and will, in all Reason, produce a Solicitude, and Concern of Mind, to know, in
what Way, by what Means, it may be possible for him to escape from this
dreadful Misery, that is impending over him.

To all which add; The Sense of the Mercy of God, in Christ, gives
Encouragement, and Excitement, to the Soul, to bestir itself, and do all that
is necessary to be done, that it may be saved. The Conviction, and full
Persuasion, of the infinite Mercy of God, through Christ, the Gospel reveals,
gives abundant Encouragement to the awakened Sinner, to hope, that,
notwithstanding all his former, multiplied, and greatly aggravated Sins, there
is a Possibility of his obtaining the Pardon of all, and so of his escaping
that terrible Wrath, and Vengeance, which he had deserved, and securing the
Blessing which he wants; and this leads him, with Earnestness of Soul, to
seek the offered Mercy, in the Way of God's Appointment; without which
Encouragement he would despair, and perish. Seeing that the Lord is a merciful
God, who takes no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but is ready to forgive
Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin, and to receive into the Arms of his
everlasting Lovingkindness, every true Penitent, the Sinner is hereby excited
to cry out, with Earnestness of Soul, as the Iaylor did, what must I do to be
saved? Thus it has been, more or less, with every Convert, and infinitely
reasonable is it that it should be so. So the returning Prodigal, when he came
to himself, said, Luke xv.17, 18. How many hired Servants of my Father, have
Bread enough, and to spare? and I perish with Hunger! I will arise, and go to
my Father. etc.

Now, this being the natural, and certain Frame, and Temper, of Mind, which
every one, that shall be saved, has, first or last, produced in him, to have
his Thoughts greatly taken up with, and his Labor, and Pains, very much
employed about, the important Concern of the Salvation of his Soul, therefore,
if thou, O Sinner, would be saved, thou also must be thus solicitous, and
careful, about thy own Soul, and not suffer it is main Interests to lie
neglected, or to be regarded by thee only, as if it were a Matter of the
greatest Indifference to thee, whether thou art saved, or damned. For how can
you expect, that God should go out of his ordinary Method to save thee, when
thou will not be at the ordinary Pains to save thyself? Or, can you reasonably
depend upon being saved, in a Way that is foreign to your rational Nature? No;
verily, you may not. If then, you would be saved in God's Way, in a Way suited
to your Nature, and Capacity, it must be by your being awakened unto a deep
Sense of your Sin, and Misery, and the Mercy of God, in Christ, and a very
great Solicitude of Mind, to be delivered from the Wrath to come, and to obtain
the promised Mercy of God unto eternal Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Thus I have showed you the Reasons, why Sinners should be very solicitous what
they must do to be saved; namely, because it is of all Concernments the
greatest, and therefore deserves your best Thought, and Care: and it is a
Matter of exceeding great Difficulty for the Soul to be recovered from the
Power of the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, and therefore it so much the more
requires your deep Thought, and intense Labor, to overcome the Difficulty:
and, after all, there are but very few that shall be saved, the greatest Part
of Mankind, through their Ignorance, and Folly, their Wickedness, and
Negligence, come short home, and therefore there is the more Need for you to be
cautious, and diligent, that you may be of the happy few: and all that are, and
shall be saved, have been, and will be, truly solicitous in their Concern about
it, and therefore, if you would be associated with them, in the Reward, you
must join with them, in the Labor; if you would come to their happy End, you
must walk in the Way with them.

And so I have gone through the doctrinal Handling of my Text, and showed you,
at several Times, what that Salvation is which perishing Sinners stand in Need
of, that it more specially intends in it the Salvation of the Soul, consisting,
in a Deliverance from all that Evil of Sin, and Suffering, which it is subject
to, and in the full Supply of it is Wants, with spiritual, and eternal good
Things; That perishing Sinners, after all their Unworthiness, may yet,
possibly, through the Mercy of God, and Merits of Jesus Christ, obtain
Salvation; That, in order to their being saved, they must know their Duty, and
carefully practice it, by living a Life of Faith, and Repentance; and that,
Salvation being a Matter of the greatest Importance, it requires your greatest
Solicitude, Care, and Labor, to secure an Interest in it.

I shall now conclude the present Discourse with a few brief Reflections upon
what has been offered; and leave the larger Application of the whole to an
other Time, God willing.

USE. 1. From hence it appears how greatly they are mistaken, who think that it
is a very easy Matter to be saved. There are many Persons who imagine, there i^
(...) great Difficulty, is getting to Heaven* the W^y is all smooth, and easy,
in their Apprehension, (...) though they could ride thither in their Coaches,
or be carried there in their Feather-Beds: They flatter themselves that there
needs not to be all this Ado about Faith, and Repentance, and there is no
Necessity of their being so very careful, and circumspect in their Walk. What!
shall we think, (say they,) that God is an arbitrary, tyrannical, and cruel
Master, to exact so severely at our Hands? No; no; He is the best of Beings,
and will be more easily pleased than some morose People think for, who tell us
we must be so careful, and observant; they think, and they doubt not, but, they
may save themselves without all this Pains. So many think, it is enough to
believe as the Church believes; and if they have done any Thing amiss, it is
but confessing their Sins to the Priest, and paying a small Matter for his
Absolution, and all will be well with them. And many others are so vain as to
imagine, they may save themselves, upon much easier Terms than their Preachers
tell them of; why, (say they,) if we go to Church, and say our Prayers, and
wrong no Body, what can you require more of us.

But let no Man deceive himself; if this Doctrine be true, and surely it is,
then the Salvation of the Soul is a Matter that requires very great Care, and
Solicitude, and there is a great deal of Difficulty attending it. As we would
not represent the Way to Heaven, to you, easier than it is, lest we should lead
you on in a vain Dream of Happiness, till you are awaked out of it by
surrounding Flames; so neither would we render it more hard, and difficult, to
get to Heaven than it is, lest we should discourage you from attempting it, and
dishonor our Lord, by bringing up an evil Report of him, and of his good Land.
But then, give us leave to deal plainly, and faithfully, with you, and show you
the Way to Heaven (...) truly is, not easy to the natural Man, but hard, and
difficult; however the Path Way thereof is easy, and pleasant, to the renewed
Soul. So our Lord himself has represented it saying, Matthew. vii.14. Strait is
the Gate, and narrow is the Way, that leads unto Life, and few there be that
find it. It is a strait Gate, so that a Man must strive, and struggle hard, to
get through it; and it is a narrow Way, so that if a Man be not careful and
circumspect in his Walk, he will be in Danger of falling down the Precipice, on
one Hand, or the other. Many that seem to set out in this Way, for want of due
Care, stumble, and fall, and perish forever. Hearken, my Friend; Is it an easy
Matter to conflict with, and subdue, an Army of inbred Lusts? to deny ourselves
of what is pleasing to our Senses, and gratifying to our natural Appetites? Is
it easy to be continually upon Duty, watching, and warding, against the many,
powerful, and subtle Temptations, arising from the Men, and Things, of the
World, which we, more or less, necessarily converse with, while we are in the
Body? Or, is there no Difficulty in combating, not only with Flesh, and Blood,
but, with Principalities, and Powers, and the Rulers of the Darkness of this
World, and spiritual Wickednesses in high Places? Surely, they that think it an
easy Matter to be saved, do greatly mistake the Nature of Salvation, and the
Way to it, and it is to be feared have never yet entered into the Path Way
thereof: and yet it is easy, pleasant, delightful to the renewed Soul. Hence
our Lord, said, Matthew. xi.30. My Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light.

2. From hence we may learn, the Necessity of the supernatural Grace of God, in
the Conversion, and Salvation, of the Sinner. Since there are so many
Difficulties lying in the Way of the Sinner's Salvation, and those of such a
Nature, Kind, and Degree, as we have seen it is very apparent, that the Sinner
is not able to surmount them all, by any Strength of his own. Where shall he
find sufficient Power, in himself, to subdue those lustings unto Sin in him,
which already have got the Power, and Dominion, over him? Or how shall he be
able to bring into Subjection those that have disarmed him of his Strength, and
have already brought him into Bondage? What Might, and Power, purely his own,
has he against so great a Company, as the World, and Devil, muster against him,
when he has already one within, that sideth with them, who waits to betray
him into their Hands? The infernal Spirit is both too subtle, and too powerful
for him, in his lapsed State, as we may be well assured, seeing we know he was
an overmatch for Man in Innocence. Since therefore fallen Man is without
Strength, and no Ways equal, in himself, to the many Difficulties that lie in
the Way of his Salvation, it is necessary, therefore, that he should be
furnished with a full Supply of Strength, and Might, from an other, if ever he
obtain the Mastery, and win the Crown, he is to contend for. And from whence
shall he derive this foreign Aid, sufficient to overcome the World, and Devil,
and Self, the most powerful Adversary, but from that God alone, who only is
able, and is graciously willing, to help him, and strengthen him with Strength
in his Soul? So that, in order to the Sinner's Conversion, and Salvation, there
is an absolute Necessity of the supernatural Grace of God; that is, such
Measures of favorable Communications, and Assistances, from God, to the Soul
of the Sinner, as do exceed that natural Strength, and Ability, which belongs
to him, as such a Creature: which supernatural, or extraordinary Assistance
from God, every Sinner should humbly, and earnestly, petition for. Hence the
Apostle, speaking of the Good Man's safe Arrival unto the heavenly Habitations,
or his being e^^rnally saved, said, 2 Cor. v.5. Now He, that has wrought us
for the self same Thing, is God. The self same Thing means what the Apostle
had just before spoken of, viz. our having an House eternal in the Heavens, our
Mortality being swallowed up of Life, that is, the eternal Salvation set before
us in the Gospel; now, says the Apostle, he that has wrought us for the self
same Thing, not has wrought the self same Thing in us, but has wrought us for
the self same Thing, that is, has by his own mighty Power, and Grace, fitted,
and prepared us for Glory, or has made us meet to partake of the Inheritance
of the Saints in Light, is God, and not ourselves.

3. Hence, we may try ourselves, whether we are in the Way to Salvation, or no.
None are, or shall be saved, but such as are, or have been, solicitous about
it; nay, even the poor Creature that neglected his main Business till the last
Hours of his Life, and yet between the rearing of the Cross, and his expiring
on it, found Mercy; or, between ^e Saddle and the Ground, has obtained a
Pardon, has first, from a Sense of his undone Condition, been put upon earnest
seeking for Mercy, and Pardon, and Life. And certainly then, they that, upon
any good Grounds, would entertain the Hope that they have a fair Claim to the
Mercy of God, and would now take the Comfort of it, that they shall finally be
accepted of him, must be able to perceive within themselves the Sincerity, and
Prevalency of their Desires, and Labors, to obtain it.

Come then, and let us put ourselves upon the Trial. Are we in good earnest to
save our own Souls? Do we find that this is what our Hearts are set upon, and
that we cannot be contented without it, that we may be the Heirs of so great
Salvation? Our Savior has told us, Matthew. vi.21. Where your Treasure is, there
will your Hearts be also. If the Salvation of our Souls be our chief Treasure,
what we most value, and have the greatest Regard to, (and one would think that
we cannot possibly propose any thing beyond it,) we shall certainly have our
Hearts much set upon it, and suffer nothing wholly to divert us from it. Are
we, then, more deeply concerned for the Salvation of our Souls, than about any
of the Affairs of the Body, and the present Life? Have we received such full
Conviction of our own Sinfulness, and Misery, as has excited in us the greatest
Care, and Diligence, to know, and do, all that is required of us, that we may
shun the threatened Evil, and embrace the promised Good? Are we sincerely
desirous to be taught our Duty, and instructed in the Way of Life? Are we bro't
to an hearty Willingness to put our Hands to the Performance of what we discern
to be the Duty required of us, that we may be saved? Does every little
Difficulty discourage us from minding our spiritual Interest, and attending
upon the Service of God, and our own Souls, when much greater would not be able
to prevail upon us to neglect our worldly Business? Or, do we endeavor
resolutely to break through all Impediments which lie in our Way, and to guard
against every Thing which we know would be an Hindrance to us, in securing of
our great and main Interest? Are we resolved to take the Kingdom of Heaven, and
to leave nothing undone, that lies within our Power, to force an Admission
into that glorious City? Is a Christ, with his Cross, heartily Welcome to us,
and can we part with all for him? If we are thus seriously solicitous about our
eternal Welfare, then have we the comfortable Tokens that the Things which do
accompany Salvation are found upon us; which should encourage us to go on
rejoicing, in the good Hope, that he, who has begun this good Work in us, will
perform it unto the Day of Jesus Christ.

4. To have done; Let it now be the serious Care of us all to be found in the
Number of the few that shall be saved. The Consideration, that there are but
few that shall be saved, should not discourage us, and cause us to lie down in
Despair, but should serve to stir up, and awaken our Powers, and quicken our
Diligence, and make us the more earnest, and laborious, that we may be of that
small, but happy, Number. Did the Fewness, of those that escaped the Deluge,
hinder Noah from preparing the Ark? Or of those that were saved from the
devouring Flames of Sodom, discourage Lot from fleeing to Zoar? Yea, who is
there of us, that, upon the Apprehensions of a very great Mortality, or a
sudden Earthquake, from the Destruction whereof but few of us should escape
with our Lives, would not be greatly concerned to use their best Endeavors,
that, if possible, they might be some of the Few, who should have their Lives
given them for a Prey? And, O perishing Sinner! Shall not Destruction from the
Lord be a Terror to thee? Will thou not be willing to be of the Number of the
Few, that shall be eternally saved, when the Generality of Mankind shall perish
in the Deluge of Fire, issuing from the Wrath of God forever? Will thou choose
to go to Hell for Company's Sake, and because thou see so many are bound
thither? Or cannot you be happy, because others will not? O! hearken to the
Apostle's Advice, Acts ii.40. Save yourselves from this untoward Generation.

Let none of us, then, be wanting to ourselves, and our own Happiness; but stir
up ourselves to take hold on God, to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, to
repent of all our Sins, and to lead holy Lives, and be not slothful in this
important Business, but fervent in Spirit, in a vigorous Conflict with our
ghostly Enemies, and in our constant, and steady Performance of this Work of
the Lord, and of our own Souls; that we may be found among the select Company,
that are called, and chosen, and faithful, who shall overcome by the Blood of
the Lamb, and to whom belongs the Rewards of eternal Life. I leave with you
that serious Advice of the Lord Jesus to his Disciples, Luke xxi.36. Watch ye
therefore, and pray, always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all
these Things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man.

The Saint instructed, comforted, and counseled. SERMON XXI.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
THrough the merciful Help of God, I have, in Twenty several Discourses, gone
through what I intended in the Doctrinal Handling of these Words, and under the
general Doctrine, which was,

DOC. It is of the highest Concernment unto perishing Sinners to be very
solicitous, what they must do to be saved,

Have, by Divine Assistance,

I. Showed you, what it is to be saved;

II. Evidenced, that perishing Sinners may be saved;

III. Showed you, that perishing Sinners must know, and practice, all that is
necessary, in order to their Salvation; and

IV. Proved, that it is a Matter of the highest Concernment to them, and
therefore they ought to be most seriously solicitous about it.

Having distinctly spoken to these several Heads, and made some brief
Reflections, as we went along, upon the several Parts thereof, I shall now
proceed, (by the same Divine Help) to the larger Improvement of the whole; (as
I told you I should, the last Time I discoursed to you upon these Words,) in
which I shall endeavor to apply, the Truths that have been delivered, more
closely to the Conscience of every one, by a particular Address both to the
Saint, and to the Sinner; under one or other of which Characters, every
individual Person, in this Assembly, and through out the whole World, is
comprised. I would to God, that ye were all the Lord's People, and that, not
only in Profession, but, in Sincerity, and in Truth; but, alas! it is to be
feared that there are many among us, who have never yet given up their Hearts,
with their Names, to God in Christ; who remain, even to this Day, under the
Power of Sin, and Lust, the World, and Devil; who are going on, in their
Trespasses, unconcerned about their eternal State; and who never yet, with any
seriousness, and solicitude of Mind, have made that Enquiry, what must we do to
be saved? Though this be too much the Character of Mankind, in General, yet, I
cannot but hope, and am verily persuaded, that there are some amongst us,
devout Men, and Women not a few, who have felt the mighty Power of the Word,
and Spirit, upon their Hearts, and have thereby been enlightened, and
convinced, and have had produced in them a very great Solicitude, and Concern
about the Salvation of their Souls, and are sanctified in Christ Jesus, and are
constantly pursuing the Death of Sin, and the Increase of Grace, in their
Souls, that they may, as the devoted Servants of God, enjoy his Favor, and be
happy in his Presence, in the heavenly World, through out eternal Ages. And
therefore I shall now address myself, more particularly, to each of these, that
I may give to every one their Portion in due Season.

The general IMPROVEMENT.

USE. I. Let me address myself to the Saint, and apply these Gospel Truths to
the real Christian, who has believed our Report, embraced the Lord Jesus
Christ, and unfeignedly repented of all his Sins; who has truly, and joyfully
experienced the Divine Workmanship upon his Soul, in a through Conversion unto
God; and consequently, whose Salvation is already begun, and firmly secured to
him, in the Covenant Promise of the unchangeable Jehovah. Unto such an one I
have a Word of Instruction, of Comfort, and of Counsel, to offer in the Name of
Jesus, and from his holy Oracles.

1. This Doctrine may serve to instruct the Saint, the real Christian, what
dear Obligations he is brought under to the lovely Jesus, the great Savior, to
love, admire, and praise him forever. Thou, O Saint of God! know what
Salvation means; thou have been made sensible of the Worth, and Excellency of
it, by thy View of the Want of it, and thy happy Experience of the blessed
Fruits of it. Thou, O holy Soul! have been thoroughly awakened unto a serious
Solicitude, and earnest Concern of Mind, about thy own Salvation. Thou have
felt the Pangs of the New Birth, and, by the Workmanship of the Divine Spirit
upon thy Soul, and the Grace of God which is given to thee, by which thou art
made a Saint, thou art turned out of the Paths of the Destroyer, and art
walking in the Path Way of Life; the Prison Doors have been opened to thee, thy
Bonds have been loosed, and thy Fetters taken off from thee; the Prey has been
taken from the Mighty, and the lawful Captive of Hell has been delivered, and
thou have been plucked as a Brand out of the Burning; and now thou art entered
upon the Possession of the first Fruits of thy Salvation, and partakest of the
blessed Earnest, and Pledge, of it is final Perfection; thus thou art admitted
to a Pisgah Sight of the Land of Promise, and all Heaven opens before thee!
For, Joh. iii.36. He that believes on the Son has everlasting Life. Thou have
sincerely accepted the offered Grace of the Gospel; thou have heartily closed
with Jesus Christ, the only Savior, upon Gospel Terms, and believe in him
with all thy Heart; thou art now made willing to part with all thy Sins, even
the most dearly beloved of them, for Jesus's Sake, and truly mournest that thou
art no more effectually delivered from the Power of thy corrupt Lusts, and vain
Affections, and art continually maintaining an holy Combat against the Flesh,
the World, and the Devil, striving for a more complete, and perfect Victory
over them; and the fervent Thirst of thy Soul is, that thou might perfect
Holiness, in the Fear of God, that thou might become more like unto God, and
Christ, and be enabled to do the Will of God, whilst thou art upon Earth, with
that Exactness, Delight, and Constancy, as Angels do in Heaven. Thus Heaven is
come down into thy Soul, and eternal Life beats thick in every Part of thy
renewed Mind; and thou have the good Hope, through Grace, of ascending to the
blessed Mansions of the upper World, which lie beyond Death, and the Grave,
there to possess a State of perfect Purity, and Happiness, and that forever;
which Hope is the Solace of thy Soul in the House of thy Pilgrimage, and a
Treasure thou would not part with for all this World.

1. And now, O thou Child of God, and Heir of Salvation! From whence is it that
thou art made a Partaker of so great, and distinguishing, a Favor of God unto
thee, as to have eternal Life begun in thee, whilst thou art on this Side
Heaven? Has thy own Purse purchased it, or thine own Arm effected it? Whence is
it that thou have derived thy New Nature, and thy blessed Hope? Does this
spring from thy Corrupt Nature? Whence is it that thou art recovered from the
Gates of Hell, and art admitted within the Gates of the New Jerusalem? Whence
is it that thou art delivered from the Power of Sin, and Satan, and the World,
over thee, and art brought, at length, to live a Divine Life; to act
reasonably, and preserve the Peace of thy own Mind; to act religiously, and
enjoy sweet Communion with the blessed God; to live virtuously, and become a
Blessing to all about thee? Does this Fruit grow in Nature's Garden? Whence is
it that thou have altered thy Nature, and the Course of thy Life, and have
turned thy Feet out of the dirty, and gloomy Way that leads to Hell, and art
now bound for Heaven, the Land of Promise, and have the Glory, and the Joys, of
that delightful Country, already in thine Eye, and Heart? Say now; Is all of
this from thy Self? Is it from the Wisdom of thine own Heart, and the might of
thine own Hands, that thou have gotten thee these Riches? Or, are there any
among the mere Sons of Men to whom thou art beholden for the happy Change that
is wrought in thee, and the blessed State thou art brought into? No: no: When
thou wast in thy wretched forlorn Condition, under the Power of Sin, and a
Sentence of Death, there was none, among all the Creatures of God, that could
accomplish Deliverance for thee; when thou wast cast out to the loathing of thy
Person, polluted, and perishing, in thy Blood, thou might have looked within
thyself, and all Refuge would have failed thee, and have cried for Help to all
the Creatures around thee, and there would have been none Eye to have pitied
thee, nor any Arm to have succored thee, none would have cared for thy Soul;
none could have been able to have rescued thee from the Jaws of the devouring
Pit, and to have brought thee into a State of Salvation. No: It is Jesus
Christ, the mighty, and the only Savior, whose Compassions have been moved
toward thee, and whose right Arm alone has wrought Salvation for thee; He
looked and there was none to help, therefore he made bare his Arm, he traveled
in the greatness of his Strength, and came with Garment died in Blood, mighty
to save; by his Incarnation and Death he has rendered thy Salvation attainable,
subdued the fierce Enemies that lay in the Way, appeased Divine Justice which
was incensed against thee, and has begun the blessed Work in thy Soul, which
shall be completed in Glory, by his Holy Spirit which he has given thee.

Though the first Rise of all thy Happiness is from the pure Love, and
Good Will, flowing, from the Breast of the eternal Father, to his poor rebel
Subjects, seduced from their Allegiance to him, by the powerful Craft of the
infernal Spirit, the abandoned Enemy to the Divine Government; for he has
chosen us, -- and predestined us to the Adoption of Children, -- according to
the good Pleasure of his Will: Ephesians. i.4, 5. yet the full Accomplishment of all
for thee resulteth from the Lord Jesus Christ; the Love in his Heart, and the
Strength of his Arm, has done all for thee; to him thou art entirely beholden,
for all that thou already art possessed of, and all that thou hopest for.
Behold! how he has loved thee! Lo! How he has loved thy Nature, (which
probably bears the nearest Resemblance to that Vehiculum Christi, that
illustrious Form, in which the Son of God appeared among the Sons of the
Morning, and afterward to the Patriarchs of old;) so as, from Everlasting,
from the Beginning, or ever the Earth was, to rejoice in the habitable Parts of
the Earth, and to have his Delights with the Sons of Men; Prove. viii.23, 31.
and in the Fullness of Time to take that Nature into an inseparable Union with
himself, and become God manifest in Flesh! 1 Timothy iii.16. Behold! How he has
loved thee personally, called thee by Name, and chosen thee out of the World,
taken thee near unto himself, put his Mark upon thee, and will love thee to the
End! For thy Sake, he left the Delights of his Father's Court, and Bosom,
descended from the pure Realms of ineffable Light, and Joy, laid aside his
Robes of State, and made a visible Appearance in our mean lower World,
tabernacling among Men, in the tattered, filthy Garments of Flesh, that he
might teach thee the Way of Life, by the Heavenliness of his Doctrine, and the
Purity of his Example, and all to win a Mortal's Love; to allure thee to
Virtue, and Glory, by the Cords of Love, and Bands of a Man. For thy Sake, he
became a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Griefs, submitted himself to a
State of Meanness, and Poverty, endured Reproach, and the Contradiction of
Sinners, made himself of no Reputation, took upon him the Form of a Servant,
humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross.
Phil. ii.7, 8. Lo! how they reviled him, as a Glutton, and a Wine-Bibber, a
Friend of Publicans, and Sinners, a Deceiver, and Impostor, and as acting by
Power derived from Beelzebub the Prince of Devils! Behold the Man! clad in mock
Robes of State, led about a Pageant in Derision, insulted by the Rabble,
ridiculed by the very Scum of the World, buffetted, scourged, spit upon, and
covered with a Load of the vilest Indignities! View him in his Agony, sweating
great Drops of Blood! Behold him in the last Hours of his Life, that dismal
Tragedy from which the Sun withdrew his Face! See him hanging, betwixt Earth
and Heaven, upon a Cross, between two notorious Malefactors; the Blood
trickling from his nailed Hands, and Feet, and flowing, in a full Stream, from
his pierced Side; and in this doleful Posture, and with the most exquisite
Pains, groaning, and dying, for thee! for thee, who had no Beauty, or
Excellency, in thee! for thee, who was in a State of Enmity against him! Romans
v.8. While we were yet Sinners Christ died for us! Died, to purchase the Pardon
of thy Sins, and procure for thee all that Grace, and Glory, which thou did
stand in need of! and thus, Heb. v.9. Being made perfect, or having finished
what he had undertaken on thy Behalf, He became the Author of eternal Salvation
unto all them that obey him. So that thou art beholden entirely to Christ for
thy Salvation, as the Effect of what he has done, and suffered for thee, Heb.
ix.26. who has appeared once, in the End of the World, to put away Sin, by the
Sacrifice of himself; by the which offering, he has forever perfected them
that are sanctified. Heb. x.14.

See then, O holy Soul! the mighty Obligations thou art brought under to the
dear Jesus! All that thou art, and all that thou hopest for, as a Christian,
and a Saint, thou art indebted to the Lord Jesus Christ for, who has merited
all for thee, and bestowed all upon thee. Are thy Sins forgiven to thee? Ephesians.
iv.32. God, for Christ's sake, has forgiven thee. Art thou delivered from the
condemning Power of the Law? Gal. iii.13. It is Christ has redeemed thee from
the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for thee. Art thou purified to the
Love of God, and Obedience to, the Truth? Heb. ix.14. It is the Blood of Christ
that purges thy Conscience from dead Works. Art thou numbered among the
Children of God? Gal. iv.5. It is Christ that has redeemed thee, that thou
might receive the Adoption of Sons. And it is He, and He only, that has
merited the Grace of Acceptance for thee, that now the eternal Father, for the
sake of what he has done, and suffered, for thee, will receive thee to the
promised Mercy of eternal Life, as though thou had never offended him. Hence
said the Apostle, Ephesians. i.6, 7. He has made us accepted in the Beloved; in whom
we have Redemption, through his Blood, the forgiveness of Sins.

And as Christ has merited all for thee, so it is he that bestows all upon
thee. It is he, the dear Redeemer, that has first purchased the Holy Spirit,
and then sent him down into thy Heart, to dwell in thee, and to lead thee, and
to work all thy Works in, and for, thee; without whom thou could neither
believe, nor repent, neither receive Christ, nor enjoy any saving Benefit from
him. Thus he told his Disciples, when he was about to take his personal leave
of them, Joh. xvi.7. It is expedient for you, that I go away; for if I go not
away the Comforter will not come unto you; but, if I depart, I will send him
unto you. It is he that has sent the Holy Spirit into your Heart, to be in you
the Sanctifier, and Comforter, to cause all Grace, and Comfort, to abound
toward you. Joh. i.16. Of his Fullness it is that you receive and Grace for
Grace. The Father, has communicated all Grace to the Son, the Spirit being
given to him without Measure, that through his Hands, as our great Mediator,
all might flow down unto his People, answerable to their various Necessities;
and therefore there is not the least Spark of true Grace in thy Soul, but what
thou have received from Christ. (Compare, Psalm. lxviii.18. with Ephesians. iv.8.) He
ascended up on high, and received Gifts for Men, that he might give Gifts to
Men. As a Prince, and Savior, he gives Repentance, and Remission of Sins;
and, by the Workmanship of his Spirit in thy Soul, it is, that the Grace of
Faith is produced in thee, whereby thou realizest invisible Things, layest hold
on them, and receivest them as thy Portion, and Inheritance. It is he that
helps thee to lean upon him, as thy Beloved, to cast all thy Care upon him,
and to commit thy Soul to him, as the Lord God of Truth, who has redeemed
thee, with an assured Hope, that he is both able, and willing, to keep, what
thou have committed to him, against that Day. And having purchased Heaven for
thee, at the Price of his own most precious Blood, he takes thee by the Hand,
to hasten thy lingering Steps, and to conduct thee in the Way thither, and
finally to bring thee, as a Son, or Daughter, to eternal Glory.

2. Say now, O devout Soul! art thou not infinitely indebted to the dear
Redeemer? Has he not laid thee under the most strong, and powerful
Obligations, to love, and prise, to admire, and praise, and glorify him forever?

How ought thou to love the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity, and Truth, and
to value, and prise him above the dearest Enjoyments of this World, and be
ready to part with any Thing, and every Thing, Estate, and Friends, and Name,
and Life itself, for him, who has not thought it too much to lay down his Life
for thee? Is there any Object, in the World, so amiable, and lovely, and so
worthy of thy Love, as the Lord Jesus Christ is, in himself? Whose Beauty shall
attract thy Love, if not that of the Son of God, in Union to the most perfect
Man, of the exactest Form, the sweetest Temper, and Heir of all Things! View
him in his increated Excellencies, as the only begotten Son of God, and see how
the Perfections of the Deity shine forth in him, in their full Luster. View him
as our Immanuel, God manifest in Flesh, and behold the Fullness of the Godhead
dwelling in him; Col. ii.9. fairer than the Children of Men, and anointed with
the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows, Psalm. xlv.2, 7. and say of this Jesus,
he is the chiefest among Ten Thousands, and altogether lovely. And is he not
most worthy of thy highest Love and Affection, for what he has done for thee?
Great Acts of Kindness demand proportional Returns of Love, and Gratitude. And
has he not loved thee, and died for thee, that he might wash away thy Sins in
his own Blood? Rev. i.5. Oh! let this Love of Christ constrain thee to love
him, to give him the best Room in thy Heart, and to determine with thyself to
know, and love, and prise, nothing so much as Jesus Christ, and him crucified.
Could thou have acted up to the dignity of thy Nature, as a rational
intelligent Being, if Christ, the Second Adam, had not appeared for thy Help,
to recover thee from the Apostasy of the first, and derive a New Nature to
thee? Or could thou have possibly possessed thy own Mind, in any tolerable
Peace, and Serenity, and have been calm, and easy, within, when thy Affairs,
without thee, have been attended with many, and great, Difficulties, if he had
not spoken Peace to thee, and said, Joh. xiv.27. Peace I leave with you, my
Peace give I unto you; not as the World gives, give I unto you; let not your
Heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid: xv.11. These Things have I spoken
to you, that my Joy might remain in you, and that your Joy might be full? Or
could thou have looked, beyond this World, with a joyful Prospect of an
happy Deliverance from the exquisite, and endless Torments, which shall
unavoidably seize upon those, who live irreligiously, and act unreasonably; or
with any good Hope of having thy Nature perfected, and thy Happiness
completed, in the better World, if Christ had not delivered thee from the
Wrath to come; 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. and consecrated, and opened, a new, and living
Way into the Holiest, by his Blood? Heb. x.19, 20. Could thou have acted
like a Man, and have lived like a Christian, and have enjoyed the good Hope
thereof, if it had not been for the most compassionate Savior, to whom thou
art beholden for all? How much then, O thou redeemed of the Lord! do thou
owe thyself, thy very self, and all that thou have, unto the incarnate Son of
God? How ought thou to prise, and value, and love him, with the most
vehement Flame of Affection, such as no Waters shall be able to quench, nor any
Floods to drown? 1 Pet. ii.7. Unto you that believe, he is precious. One Christ
should be of more Worth to thee, than all this World; because he has done more
for thee, than the whole World has done, or can do. How ought thou, then, to
be filled with admiring Thoughts of his wondrous Love to thee, to triumph in
his Praise, to abound in Thankfulness to him, to delight in Fellowship with
him, to value his Image wheresoever thou beholdest it, zealously to assert his
Cause, strenuously to defend his Interest, and to consecrate thyself, thy
wholeself, most entirely, with the most co^^ial voluntariness, with the
greatest Ardency of Affection, and with the most delightful Cheerfulness, unto
his Service forever; resolving with thyself to do all that thou can to
promote the Honor of his Name? Say then, with the admiring Apostle, Phil.
iii.7.8. What Things were gain to me, I counted Loss, for Christ; yea,
doubtless, I count all Things but Loss, for the Excellency of the Knowledge of
Christ Jesus, my Lord. But I may not dwell upon the delightful Meditation; I
pass therefore to say,

2. This Doctrine speaks a Word of Comfort unto the true Christian. Have thou,
in good Earnest, been seriously solicitous about the Salvation of thy own Soul?
And, under the great Concern of thy Mind, what thou should do to be saved,
have thou betaken thyself to the only Savior? And, by the Grace of God
assisting of thee, have thou laid hold upon the Salvation offered in the
Gospel? Do thou not only assent unto the Truth of the Gospel Revelation, but
art thou satisfied with the Method which God, in his infinite Wisdom, and Love,
has fixed upon, to accomplish thy Salvation, by the Incarnation, Obedience, and
Death, of his dearly beloved Son? And, do thou now heartily consent, that
this Jesus shall be thy Savior, in all his mediatorial Offices? And, in the
Faith of what Christ has done, and suffered, for thee, do thou commit thy
precious and immortal Soul into his saving Hands, venturing thy everlasting
Concerns in his Keeping? Does the Faith of the Son of God purify thy Heart, and
Life? Does it make thee careful to mortify thy Corruptions, and to lead a new,
and an holy Life, in Obedience to all the known Commands of God? Does it put
thee upon Endeavors to honor God, by worshipping of him, and him only, in
Spirit, and in Truth, in all the Ways of his Appointment, in public, and in
private? Art thou very careful to exemplify the Divine Love, flaming in thy
Soul, by thy Love, and Beneficence, unto thy Fellow Creatures, by doing all the
good you can, to all about you, both to their Bodies, and to their Souls,
carefully avoiding all that would be hurtful, and injurious, to their Persons,
Names, or Interest? In short; do you abound in Works of Piety, and Mercy, in
Righteousness, and Charity, in Temperance, and Patience, in Meekness, and
humbleness of Mind, in Chastity, and Sobriety? Then art thou one of them that
shall be saved; the evident Tokens of Salvation are found upon thee; yea, thou
art already saved; the great, and good Work is begun in thy Soul; and unto thee
belongs the Consolations of God, which are not small. Unto you I am sent,
with that reviving Message, Isa. xl.1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye, my People,
says your God; speak ye comfortably unto them; cry unto them that -- their
Iniquity is pardoned. And, for thy Comfort, remember,

1. That good Work which is begun in thee shall certainly be completed. It is
a Well of Water that shall never fail, but spring up unto everlasting Life. For
he, who has begun the good Work in thee, will perform it, unto the Day of
Jesus Christ, Phil. i.6. The Seeds of Divine Grace, sown in thy Heart, are
immortal, incorruptible, and, having sprung up, and brought forth Fruits, will
endure until they are perfectly ripened in Glory. The Divine Life, that is
formed in thee, like the Author of it, abides forever. No Floods of Temptation
shall be able to extinguish it. No Storm, from the fiery Blasts of the evil
One, shall be able to overthrow it. Thy Foundation is sure, and immovable, the
Rock of Ages, the Rock of everlasting Strength. Though thou fallest, yet thou
shall arise, and thy God shall be thy Light about thee. Thy very Lusts, which
are so much a Burden to thee, shall not prove utterly too hard for thee; but
thou shall, anon, see thy Desire on those thine Enemies, and obtain a complete
Victory over them; yea, the Time is hastening, when thou shall see those
Egyptian Taskmasters, which held thee under cruel Bondage, no more again
forever. For faithful is he that has called you, who also will do it. 1 These.
v.24. The Perseverance of the Saints i^ not only a comfortable Doctrine, but a
very great Excitement unto all Holiness, whatever may be suggested of it is
Tendency to indulge spiritual Sloth, and Dissoluteness of Manners; and he that
finds himself emboldened to neglect his Duty, especially Prayer, and
Watchfulness, upon Pretense of his being a Convert, and there is no fear of his
falling away, may very justly suspect, that all his Hopes of a Work of Grace in
him, have hitherto been but mere Presumptions. For wherever there is a real
Work of Grace, in any Soul, that Soul will but be the more quickened to Duty,
and the Thoughts of his Perseverance will stimulate him to greater Diligence,
and Fidelity. What Soldiers fight so manfully, intrepidly, incessantly, and
resolutely, as those that follow a victorious General, under whose Conduct they
may be sure of Success? The Apostle well says, 2 Timothy iv.18. The Lord shall
deliver me from every evil Work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly
Kingdom. These whom God will preserve to his heavenly Kingdom, he will also
deliver from every evil Work, that they shall not be too hard for them.

2. Thy Sins, and thine Iniquities, shall all be forgiven to thee. Though thy
Transgressions have been many, and great, more in Number than the Sands and the
Pile of them has reached to the very Heavens, yet they shall all be washed
away, in the Blood of the Lamb of God, which takes away the Sin of the World;
not one of them all shall ever be brought into Remembrance, and articled
against thee, to condemn thee. So says the Apostle, Romans viii.33, 34. Who shall
lay any Thing unto the Charge of God's Elect? it is God that justifies: who is
he that condemns? It is Christ that died; yea, rather, is risen again; who is
even at the right Hand of God, and also makes Intercession for us. So that the
Law itself, which thou have many a Time broken, shall not be able to condemn
thee, for thou art not under the Law, but under Grace. Romans vi.14. Satan the
great Adversary, and Accuser of the Brethren, will in vain clamor against
thee; he is a bafled Enemy, and will be bruised under thy Feet. Romans xvi.20.
Thy own Conscience, which has been Witness to (...) thy Crimes, shall be purged
from dead Works, and witness to thy Sincerity. 2 Cor. i.12. And the awful
Justice of God, though accompanied with his strictest Holiness, will assuredly
acquit thee; and because he is just, therefore will he be the Iustifier of him
which believes in Jesus. Romans iii.26. So that there is none in Heaven, Earth,
or Hell, that will, or can, condemn thee; and that because Christ, in whom thou
believe, has died, risen again from the Dead, and interceedeth for thee.

3. Fear not, then, O holy Soul, there shall no Evil befall thee. Thou art
delivered from the Evil of Suffering, because from the greater Evil of Sin,
which is the procuring Cause of all Sufferings. Though thou must meet with
Afflictions, whilst thou art in this Vale of Tears, yet, these are not worthy
the Name of Sufferings; and this is thy Comfort under them all, that they are
all included in the the Covenant of thy God, and Father, who in great Wisdom,
and Love, appoints them for thee, if need be, in Measure, not to hurt thee,
but to do thee good in the latter End; and has said, Romans viii.28. All Things
shall work together for good, to them that love God. Art thou poor, and
despised? yet, thou art rich in Faith, and Heir of a Kingdom. Art thou called
to bear the Cross, in Bereavments, Losses, Disappointments? Why, they are but
the common, and beaten Rode unto the Crown. And none of these Things shall be
able to separate thee, from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus, our
Lord. v. 39.

Yea; This is thy Comfort, that thou have nothing to fear in Death itself,
which is disarmed of it is Sting, and cannot hurt thee. Thou may now look
Death in the Face, with Calmness, and an easy Countenance, and take a View of
all the Terrors of it, ghastly as they are, with an holy Composure of Mind; and
though thou may feel some Reluctance at the Thoughts of the Parting of Soul,
and Body, two such near, and intimate Friends, yet, may thou take Comfort in
this, that their Separation will be but for a while, and in order to a joyful,
happy, and endless Meeting. For thy Savior, by dying, has conquered him that
had the Power of Death, and delivered thee from the Bondage thou wast subject
to, through the Fear of Death: Heb. ii.14, 15. and has given thee full
Assurance, Hos. xiii.14. that he will ransom thee from the Power of the Grave,
and that the last Enemy, which is Death, shall be destroyed. 1 Cor. xv.26. So
that thou may now sing the Song of Triumph, v. 55. O Death, where is thy
Sting! O Grave, where is thy Victory?

4. As thou have no Evil to fear, so thou shall not want any good Thing. Thy
Redeemer is strong, and mighty, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, and he will
assuredly perform that which shall be good for thee. With what Strength does
the Apostle argue? Romans viii.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered
him up for us all, how shall he not, with him, also, freely give us all Things?
What will a God of infinite Goodness withhold from them on whom he bestows his
well beloved Son?

Shall thou want any temporal good Thing? No; thy heavenly Father knows what
you stand in need of, and has made all over unto thee, in his everlasting, and
well ordered Covenant; so that, of Things present, ^ll are yours, 1 Cor.
iii.22. and shall certainly be conferred upon you, so far as they shall be good
for you; and surely, thou can not, in Reason, desire more: So that thou can
say, Psalm. xxiii.1. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. He will
sufficiently provide for thee, yea, bestow an Abundance upon thee; if he sees
that to be best for thee. However, the least Measure of earthly Enjoyments,
which he may see Cause to alot unto thee, shall be made, truly, a Blessing to
thee, answer to all the Ends of the present Life, and afford thee more Comfort;
than the greatest Revenue of many Wicked. Psalm. xxxvii.16.

Art thou but a Brother of low Degree, in Grace? and do thou feel thy Wants,
and Weaknesses, and mourn because of them, and earnestly thirsts after
greater Measures of Grace? This is thy Comfort, that he, who deals forth* to
every one, their Measure of Grace, severally, as he sees meet* will
strengthen, and increase, thy Grace, so as to make it answerable unto thy Day,
to the various Duties, and Trials, he appoints for thee, and will cause all
Grace, needful, to abound unto thee; for he has said, 2 Cor. xii.9. My Grace
shall be sufficient for thee.

In a Word: thou shall more certainly be brought to heavenly Glory, hereafter.
The everlasting Mercies of the heavenly World are thy Portion, which thy
heavenly Father has reserved for thee, and thy Savior is gone before to take
Possession of, on thy Behalf: and assured thee, Rev. iii.21. He that overcomes
shall sit down, with him, in his Throne, even as he overcame, and set down,
with his Father, in his Throne.

Oh! what abundant Consolation, then, belongs to thee, thou Child of God, and
Heir of Salvation! and should thou not, now, mightily encourage thyself,
hereby, to go on singing in the Ways of the Lord, rejoicing in Hope of the
Glory of God? But I pass on to a third Head, viz.

3. This Doctrine, also, affords a Word of Counsel unto the serious
Christian. And it is, in short, this; Know thyself, and live up to thy
Character. Know thyself to be a Man, a rational, and understanding Agent,
capable of seeing into the Reason of thy own Actions, and of giving an Account
of them; and scorn to stoop to the Meannesses, that are below thy Nature, and
bring thee upon the Level with the Brutes around thee; and suffer not thyself
to be governed by low Appetites, and Passions, but by Reason, in all that thou
do. Know thyself to be but a frail, mortal, dying Man, who must, e're long,
leave this World, and all the Enjoyments of it, and pass into the World of
Spirits, and appear before thy Judge, and render to him an impartial Account,
of all that thou have done in the Body; and let the Thoughts hereof moderate
thy bodily Appetites, and influence thy Conduct, that when thy Account comes
to be audited, thou may receive the Approbation of thy Master, and he may,
then, say to thee, well done good, and faithful Servant. And know thyself to be
a Christian; one raised out of the Dregs of the Apostasy, who partakest of a
new, and Divine Nature, being born of God, redeemed by the precious Blood of
the Son of God, and inhabited by the Spirit of God, and under an Oath of
Fealty, to do no wicked, and base Thing, to be true to thy God, and to observe
all his holy Commandments; and be exceeding careful, not to allow thyself in
any Thing, that shall be dishonorable to thy Descent, and slur the Luster of
thy Name. Abhor every mean, and dirty Thing, as unbecoming a Man, and much more
unworthy thy Profession, thy Relation, thy present Enjoyments, and thy vaster
Hopes. Remember,

1. Thou have been at the Pains of a Process of Repentance. Thou have felt the
Smart of the Wounds, which Sin has given to thy Soul; it has cost thee many a
Sigh, and Groan, and Tear, and thou have been in Distress, and Agony, of Soul,
to get these Wounds healed, and to have the Breach, between God, and thy Soul,
made up again. And will thou not, then, dread what has been so painful, and
grievous, to thee? Will thou be so unwise, as to have any Thing to do, with
that which thou have paid so dear for already? Will thou foolishly give new
Wounds to thy Soul, and aggravate thy old Sores, and procure to thyself greater
Smart than, it may be, thou have ever yet groaned under? Or is it nothing to
thee, to provoke thy heavenly Father, thy best Friend, to turn away his Face
from thee, and leave thee, full of Horror, to grope in the Dark, and lament thy
forsaken Condition? Though thou can not fall from Grace, totally, and
finally, yet, be not high minded, but fear, lest, by thy Falls, thou should
procure to thyself such broken Bones, as shall make thee to go halt, and
mourning, all thy Days after.

2. Call to Mind thy peculiar Advantages. Thou art recovered to thy right Mind,
art brought out of Darkness, into mavelous Light; thou have been privileged
with a Spirit of Discerning, and have seen more into the deep Things of God,
than others, and know the Hope of his Calling, and the Riches of the Glory
of his Inheritance in the Saints, and have the Divine Paraclete for thy Guide,
and Comforter; Oh! then, see to it that you walk, not in Darkness, but as a
Child of Light. Put on the whole Armor of Righteousness, and make no Provision
for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof, lest Darkness overtake you, and you
stumble, and fall. Walk in the Light, while you have the Light with you; and
let all thy Actions be brought to the Light, that thy Deeds may be made
manifest, that they are wrought in God. Joh. iii.21.

3. Thou have put on Christ Jesus, the Lord, in thy Profession, and in thy
serious Dedication of thyself unto him, to be his Servant; thou believe that
he has died for thy Offenses, and risen again for thy Justification; and will thou not, then, walk in him, and be a Follower of him? Will thou allow, and
cherish, what Christ died to save thee from? Is this thy Kindness to thy best
Friend? Will thou enter into a Conspiracy, with those that have been the
Betrayers, and Murderers, of thy Lord? Or, can it be pleasing to thee, to do
any Thing that is offensive, and affronting to him, on whom thy Faith, thy
Love, thy Hope, thy all, is placed? Oh! that having received Christ Jesus, the
Lord, you would be careful to walk in him; Col. ii.6, 7. walk in his Spirit,
walk in his Strength, walk in his Steps; rooted, and built up in him, and
stablished in the Faith, as ye have been taught. Ye have escaped the Corruption
that is in the World, through Lust; Oh! be not again entangled therein, and
defiled thereby, but keep yourselves pure, and unspotted, from the World; and
let the Life of Christ be the Pattern, and Incentive, of your godly
Conversation, and the Death of Christ, the crucifixion of Sin in you, that you
may adorn the Doctrine of God your Savior, in all Things.

4. And, O holy Soul, art thou not one bound for Heaven? Is not thy Hope, and
thy Treasure, and thy Heart there? Oh! then, seek not thy Rest, and
Satisfaction, in the Things of this World; but live above the World. Col.
iii.1. Being risen with Christ, seek those Things which are above, where Christ
is, at the Right Hand of God. Let your Eye be fixed upon unseen eternal Things,
your Mind intent, and your diligent Care, and Labor, employed upon them. Be
patient under all Afflictions, content in every Condition; endure Hardness, as
good Soldiers of Jesus Christ; and be not weary in Well-doing, knowing you
shall certainly reap, if ye faint not, and that none of the Sufferings of the
present Time are worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed.
Suffer not the Hopes, or Fears, of this World, to influence you to the doing of
any Thing that is impious toward God, or unrighteous toward your Neighbor;
but remember who, and what, thou art, whom thou derivest from, and what thou
art born to; and let the lively Sense of the Dignity of thy New Nature, and the
Largeness of thy future Hopes, animate thee to a sober, a righteous, and a
godly Conversation; that, as the Apostle directs, Phil. ii.15. You may be
blameless, and harmless, the Sons of God, without Rebuke, in the Midst of a
crooked, and perverse Nation; among whom ye shine as Lights, in the World.

Having thus, instructed, comforted, and counseled, the real Christian, I
should now proceed to address the Sinner, but must leave it at present.

An Earnest Address to Sinners. SERMON XXII.
ACTS XVI.30. And said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
I Have, as God has enabled me, endeavored to apply the Truths I have been
discoursing on, from these Words, unto the real Christian, by showing him his
peculiar Obligations to the dear Redeemer; by comforting him in the House of
his Pilgrimage with the Consideration, that the good Work begun in him shall be
completed, his Sins shall all be forgiven, he has no Evil to fear, nor shall
want any good Thing; and by counselling of him to live like a Man, and as
becomes a Christian. And now I shall conclude this Subject.

USE. II. Secondly; by most earnestly addressing myself to the Sinner, and
seriously applying these Gospel Truths unto those that ^re yet i^ their Sins,
and have no Interest in the Salvation, I have been discoursing on. And, alas!
that, it is sadly to be feared, this is the lamentable Condition of, by far,
the greatest Part of them who call themselves Christians! All Men have not
Faith; yea, Multitudes, in the professing World, are destitute of true saving
Faith, and never yet knew what an hearty sincere Repentance meant; but,
notwithstanding all the Offers of the Gospel that have been made to them,
remain in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bonds of Iniquity, unto this very
Day. Surely, it is no Trespass upon the Rules of Charity, to say so, when there
are so many Passages, in the sacred Scriptures, to support it, and we see it
too sadly confirmed, by the bad Lives of Professors; their vicious, and
immoral, their impure, profane, unrighteous, lewd, and debauched Lives, plainly
declare, that they are, as yet, under the Power of Sin, and Lust; and the Ease,
and Quiet, of their own Minds, in their present Condition, show that they are
not very solicitous, what they must do to be saved. Unto such, therefore, I
have something to offer, by Way of Lamentation over them, Awakening to them,
accompanied with an earnest Exhortation, and Persuasion, that they would, from
this Time, be most seriously concerned about their own Salvation. May a
gracious God mercifully accompany these Things with a divine Power upon the
Hearts of Sinners!

1. What Cause is there for our grievous Lamentations, to see so many poor,
perishing, Sinners, so dreadfully unconcerned about their eternal Salvation! It
is a most melancholy Thing, indeed, to think of, that wherever we go, the
greatest Part of those we converse with, are a Company of poor deluded
Creatures, whose Minds the God of this World has so blinded, that, though they
are in the most extreme Danger of perishing, and that immediately, yet, they
see it not; whose Hearts are so hardened against themselves, that, though they
are pining, bleeding, dying, under the Gashes, and Wounds, of Sin, yet, they
are wholly insensible of their Condition; and when they are faithfully told,
and warned, of their Danger, are unwilling to make Use of any proper Remedies,
to help themselves; and often turn, and vent their Spleen against those (...)
would help them. Who, that had not lost his Humanity, could go into a Bethlem,
the Receptacle of miserable Objects, and be unmoved at the Sight of Humane
Nature, sunk, and degraded, and turned into so many rueful Shapes, in the
shocking Instances of the Frantic, and Mad, who spend their Time in picking of
Straws, or the wild, and raveing, who roar, and sing, and curse, in the midst
of their Distractions; and Cut, and Wound, and basely defile themselves, and
throw any Thing that comes in their Way, at those that come near them? And, is
it not enough to make our Hearts to bleed within us, to see thee, O Sinner,
acting this foolish, and mad Part? How many are there of you, that, hitherto,
have been unconcerned about their eternal State; who have spent all their Time,
and Thought, upon the mean, low, trifling Concerns of the Body, which are not
worth regarding, in compare with the greater Concerns of the Soul? How many are
there, who, notwithstanding the imminent Danger they are in, that one would
wonder how they sleep easy, yet, such is the Luney upon them, they can spend
their Days in Mirth and Jollitry, in Frolic, and Revelling, as if nothing
ailed them, and they were in no Hazard of perishing the next Moment? Oh! how
lamentable is the Prospect, to see many a poor Creature, like the Demoniac,
among the Tombs, crying, and cutting themselves; Mark v.5. and so madly set
upon their Lusts, and eager in their Pursuit after them, (and many Lusts which
they can pretend neither Profit, Ple^sure, nor Honor, in the gratifying of
them, but they serve only as an Evidence of the more exalted Degree of Madness,
that is in them,) as if their chiefest Concern were to damn themselves, and not
to save their own Souls? Thus, they not only drink in Iniquity, like Water, but
even draw it with Cart Ropes; they take Pains, and lay themselves out, to the
utmost of their Power, to be as profane, and irreligious, and shamefully
immoral, as ever they can, as if they were resolved to storm Hell, and take it
by Violence. What less do thou do, who art, almost, continually calling for
Damnation upon thyself, and upon all about thee!

Oh! what a melancholy Thing is it, to see the poor Sinner so stripped of his
Reason, and Understanding, as to put from him all the mean^ of his Help and
Safety, and turn his Back upon the Opportunities of his being converted and
saved? To see him slight the Word, neglect the Ordinances, and despise the
Ministers, of God, which are the appointed Means of his Salvation? Truly, for
this, our Hearts ache, and in the Anguish of our Minds, for thee, when we see
thee, thus, ready to lay violent Hands upon thyself, upon thy precious Soul, we
cry aloud to thee, Oh! do thyself no Harm! For this, also we mourn before our
God, Day, and Night, and earnestly cry to the God of all Grace, that he would
recover thee to thy right Mind, that thou may, at length, act the Part of a
reasonable Creature, and seriously regard the Things of thy Peace, in this the
Day thereof, ever they are hidden from thine Eyes.

And, Oh! What Matter of Grief, and Lamentation is it, to see so great a Part
of those, who seem to be willing to do something about their own Salvation,
yet, at the same Time, so remiss, and cold, and really so little solicitous,
and in earnest, about it? who do all they do, in their spiritual Concerns, in
such a careless, off-handed, and perfunctory Manner, as plainly manifests,
they are not much concerned how Matters go with them, and they do not trouble
themselves whether they are saved, or no? It may be, the Word preached has,
sometimes, met thee full in the Face; it has showed thee to thyself, in all thy
odious, and loathsome Colors, which thy Lusts have deformed thee withal, and
then, like Faelix, when Paul reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, and
Judgment to come, thou have trembled at the View of thy monstrous Appearance,
and the Thoughts of what will become of thee, at last, for all thy
Unrighteousness, and Ungodliness; and yet, for all that, thou have had no
farther Care excited in thee, than only, like the foolish Virgins, to make a
Blaze, an outward Show, and Profession, of Religion, and, to this very Day,
thou have not been in any through Solicitude of Mind, nor taken any real Pains,
to obtain a supply of Oil in thy Vessel, Grace in thy Soul, that thou may be
saved; but have been easy, and contented, in thy present Condition, let Things
go how they will with thee hereafter. What a Laodicean Spirit has seized a
great Part of Professors? How vainly do they dream they are full, and have need
of nothin^ when they are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked? Nay, have not some been so hardy, as to take Pains to strifle the
Convictions of their Sin, and Danger? Have they not designedly gone into the
Hurry of the World, or to their merry Companions, to their Cups, and Music,
that they might drink, and sing, away the Care of their Souls? And, alas! by
their often stifling Convictions which, if diligently improved, might have
issued in their through Conversion, and eternal Salvation, they have provoked
the Holy Spirit of God to depart from them, and give them up unto their own
Hearts Lusts, and to a Damnation that flumbereth not.

This, indeed, is the great Reason, why so many perish from under the Light of
the Gospel; not so much from a direct, positive, Unbelief, or because they do
not believe that Jesus Christ is the Savior of Sinners, or do not think that
they themselves stand in need of Salvation by him; or because they peremptorily
resolve, that they will not obey, and serve God; there are but very few, among
Sinners that perish, that go this Length; but because they will not be at the
Pains to come to Christ that they may have Life, through him; they will not lay
themselves out, in the diligent Use of those Means, God has directed them to,
in Order to obtain Salvation. There is Help provided for them, and that which
is sufficient, be they ever so weak, and infirm, in themselves; there is Balm
in Gilead, and a Physician there; but they will not go to the Physician, nor be
at the Trouble to observe his Prescriptions, and so they dye, and perish, with
the Remedy in their Hands, because they would not be at the Pains to apply it.

And, truly, we tremble for thee, to think what a Maze thou will be plunged
into, when the midnight Cry is heard, and thou beginnest, with Anguish of Soul,
to say, Lord, Lord, open to us, but sadly find the Doors of Mercy, and
Heaven, forever shut upon thee. Luke xiii.25. This, it is to be feared, is the
dreadful Delusion of a very great Part of Professors, that they satisfy
themselves with attending, in a careless Manner, upon a Round of external
Duties, they are, it may be, beneficent, and kind, to their Neighbors, and do
no Injury to any Man, (and it is well if they get so far,) and yet, after all,
they perish forever, for want of a due Care, and Solicitude, of Mind, to obtain
the one Thing needful, an inward Principle of divine Grace, derived from
Christ, the great Head of all spiritual Influences, to direct, and govern them,
in all that they do. Thus, Folly, and Madness, are in thy Heart, O Sinner,
while thou live, and what Cause is there for Lamentation, and Mourning, that
after that you go down to the Dead. Eccl. ix.3.

2. I have something to offer to thee, O Sinner, whoever thou art, for thy
Awakening, and Conviction. You have heard what Salvation is, the Possibility of
it, and the Way leading to it; and now, what will thy Condition be, if thou art
not among the Number of them that shall be saved? Art thou not a vile guilty
Sinner? Has not the God that made thee, that gave Life, and Being, to thee, a
Right to thy Service? Is it not a due Debt, which thou owe unto the God of
thy Life, to love him, to obey his Laws, and submit to his Will? And yet, have
thou not hitherto been most vilely ungrateful to thy Maker, and Benefactor, and
refused to own, worship, and obey him? Has not thy whole Life been a Contempt
of his Authority, and a denying of the God that is above? And if thou go on
in thy Rebellions against God, will there be any Possibility of thy escaping
the Damnation of Hell? It is as true as Gospel, Mark xvi.16. He that believes
not shall be damned. Whilst, therefore, thou continuest in thy Sins, thou art
assuredly bound to a State the most directly contrary to Salvation that can be.
As Salvation consists in a Deliverance from all Evil, both Moral, and Penal,
so Damnation will consist in the inheriting of those Evils, in the utmost
Fullness thereof. Thy Soul will become more like a Devil, in the Depravity of
it is Temper, the Perverseness of it is Appetites, and the Fierceness of its Rage
against God, and all Goodness, and this alone will render all Places an Hell
unto thee, from thy own Wickedness. And can thou bear the Thought of becoming
a very Devil?

The mighty Load of thy unpardoned Guilt will sink thy Soul down into most
amazing Torments. And can thou bear to ly down in a Lake, burning with Fire
and Brimstone? But who, Oh who! knows the Power of Divine Anger! as is his
Fear, so is his Wrath! Psalm. xc.11. Thou can not raise in thine own Mind such
dreadful Images of the Pains, and Torments of Hell, as the Wrath of an
Almighty, provoked, God, will inflict upon thee, when thou shall arrive there.
And if there were no other Pains, and Torments, but those of the uneasy
Reflections of thine own Mind, and the severe Reproaches it will sting thee
withal, they would be enough to render thee truly, and forever, miserable. For
how can he cease to be miserable, who is at the greatest Enmity with himself?

But then, as Salvation consists, in the Possession of all possible Good, so
thy Damnation will include in it, a total Deprivation of every Thing that is
delightful, and comfortable to thee. If thou go down into Hell, at last,
thou will then lose all that thou esteemedst comfortable to thee, in this
World; for thou can carry (...) all thy carnal Delights, and sensual
Enjoyments, with thee, out of this World; and thou will know none of the true
Pleasures of the World to come, but they will be forever hidden from thine
Eyes. Thou will, then, be everlastingly banished from Heaven, and Happiness;
and it would be impossible for thy polluted, vicious, Soul to enter into those
pure Regions of Light, and Joy. And Hell, itself, is not a Place of Enjoyments,
but of Sufferings. So that there is nothing comfortable there, unless, to dwell
with devouring Fire, and inhabit everlasting Burnings, be so. And, in all, how
can he enjoy the least degree of Comfort, who shall be forever separated from
the blissful Presence of God? For God will say to the Sinner, Matthew. xxv.41.
Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting Fire. This will be thy miserable
Condition, O Sinner! Misery complete, and endless!

And will it be any Abatement of thy Misery* that, in thy Life Time, thou had
thy good Things, or that, in Hell, thou meetest with thy old Companions in Sin?
No verily; but it will render thy Condition so much the worse: thy former
Comforts, and thy old Companions, will but increase thy tormenting Reflections.

Say now, art thou resolved to go to Hell? Is a State of complete Misery, to be
preferred to a State of perfect Happiness in Heaven? Is Damnation more
delightful to thee, than Salvation? Will thou then choose to walk in the Way
that leads to Damnation? Have thou ever yet believed in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and repented of thy Sins? Nay art thou not still going on in thy Sins,
delighting in Wickedness, and pursuing after thy Lusts with Greediness? Do
thou not live in the plain, known, Violation of thy Duty, both to God, and Man?
And will not the Wrath of God come upon the Children of Disobedience, for these
Things? Col. iii.6.

Thou have heard, indeed, of Jesus Christ, the Savior; but have thou ever
closed with him, upon Gospel Terms, as thy Savior, and put thyself under his
Government, and submitted to his Laws, and the Guidance of his Spirit? Nay,
have thou not, hitherto, refused to come to Christ, that you might have Life?
and said concerning him, as they, Luke xix.14. We will not have this Man to
reign over us?

But think, Oh, seriously think, with thyself; Whether will this thy Unbelief,
and Impenitency, lead thee? What will be the Issue and Conclusion, of all thy
Impiety, and Profaneness, to God, thy Unrighteousness, and Falsehood, to Men,
thy Intemperance, in thy Lusts, and Passions? Will not this thy Hardness, and
the Impenitency of thy Heart, prove a treasuring up unto thyself Wrath, against
the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the righteous Judgments of God? And will thou, then, continue in this broad Road of Sin, which assuredly leads down to
everlasting Destruction?

Possibly, you may be ready to flatter yourselves, that God is so good, that he
cannot inflict Misery upon his Creatures, and that you have Nothing to fear
from infinite Goodness. But know, O Sinner, that the Lord is as holy as he is
good; he is as just as he is merciful; and though he is a common Father to all
his Offspring, yet is he a God that takes Vengeance upon his rebellious
Subjects. Why else are Devils cast out of his Favor, and shut up under his
Wrath? And shall not thou feel the sad Effects of his Anger, as well as Devils?
The Devils never sinned to thy Height of Wickedness, they never (that we know
of,) refused his offered Salvation, despised his Mercy, and contemned the Blood
of his Son: but thou have made light of all his Grace, crucified the Son of God
afresh, and put him to open Shame. And think thou, now, that he will not
hold thee for an Enemy: Verily, (...) will do so; and thou will find it a most
terrible Thing to fall into the Hands of the living God! And what will thou do,
in the Day when God rises up to make Inquisition for Iniquity? Can thou
resist his Arm, and withstand his Power? Shall the Potsherds of the Earth
contend with their Maker? Will thou be a Match for omnipotent Power? It may be,
when the Terrors of Death surround thee, and thy guilty Soul is filled with
Horror, at the Prospect of appearing before thy impartial Judge, then thou will
roar out, in the Anguish of thy Heart, as I have known some to do before thee,
Oh, Almighty God, there is no coping with thee! However, when thou passe^^ into
the other World, thou will dreadfully experience, that there is no standing
before an omnipotent God, who, by a Word speaking, can crush, and damn, thee to
the lowest Hell.

It is, now, possible, through divine Grace, for thee to escape the Damnation of
Hell. I am commissioned, in the Name of Christ, to say to thee, Mark xvi.16. He
that believes shall be saved; and, He that confesses, and forsakes his Sins,
shall have Mercy. Prove. xxviii.13. But if, after all, thou will go on in thy
Sins, and will not be reclaimed, until, at last, thou tumblest down into Hell,
what a terrible Aggravation of thy Misery will it be to thee, to think, that
you so long enjoyed a Day of Grace, and Patience, and there was, then, a
Possibility of your obtaining Mercy, but you slighted and despised it all; that
you not only rebelled against the Authority of your rightful Sovereign, but
contemned all the Mercy and Grace of a most compassionate Savior; that you
might have escaped the doleful Place of Torment, but, Fool that you was, you
rashly chose to ramble on, inconsiderately, and madly, in the Way that
necessarily led thither; and now all Hope of Salvation is at an End forever?

Oh! that you would now suffer these things to sink deep into your Hearts, that
they may serve to awaken thee out of thy Security, and convince thee of the
Necessity of thy becoming seriously solicitous, what you shall do to be saved.
And remember, it will be most unaccountable Folly, and Madness, in thee, O
Sinner, when thou receivest any Conviction of thy Sin, and Danger, to betake
thyself to the Business, and Hurry, of the World, or to thy merry Companions,
and intoxicating Cups, and much more to commit the old Sin over again, which
thy Conscience is convinced of, and troubles thee for, in Hopes to pacify, and
lull the Clamors of thy own Mind, and so get rid of the Burden of thy own
Reproaches. For if thou will not suffer thy Conscience, now faithfully to
perform it is Office, to admonish thee for the Evil of thy Ways, to warn thee of
thy Danger, and check thee in thy sinful Career, and excite thee to fear, and
dread, and fly, from, the Wrath to come, and lay hold on the Hope set before
thee, as the only safe Way to a well established, and lasting, Peace in thy own
Breast; know it for certain, it will roar most terribly hereafter, and
everlastingly reproach thee, when there shall be no Possibility of thy escaping
from under the sev^rest Lashes of so rigid, and impartial, an Executioner. For,
How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation? Heb. ii.3.

And therefore,

3. I do now most earnestly exhort you, even every Sinner, here before the
Lord, to be most seriously solicitous, what you shall do to be saved. I think,
I have undeniably proved, that Salvation is your greatest Concern, and that
every one ought to be most seriously solicitous about it; and now, I beseech
you, my Brethren, and my Friends, that you would, from this Time, make the
Salvation of your own Souls your great Concern. Oh! don't trifle with your
Souls; do not live in a careless Uncernedness what becomes of them. In what
Words shall I address you, so as effectually to persuade you, to engage with
Seriousness, and pursue with Diligence, this great, this important, this
necessary Duty. Two Things I will hint at, namely,

1. Remember, that thy Salvation is well worth thy utmost Labor, and Pains, to
secure it. Our Blessed Savior, has told us, Luke x.42. But one Thing is
needful. And what is that one necessary Thing, but this? That thou may be
saved: that thou make sure that thou have a true lively Faith in Jesus
Christ; that thou unfeignedly repentest of all thy Sins; that thou have the
Grace of God in thy Soul, renewing, and sanctifying, of thee, and that, under
the Influence, and Operation, of that Grace within thee, thou do sincerely
endeavor to serve the Lord, all the Days of thy Life, in Holiness, and
Righteousness; that, in this Way, thou may obtain the promised Mercy of God,
even eternal Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

It is not necessary that you enjoy an Abundance of this World, which you are
so apt to be fond of, for even your present Life, neither the Continuance, nor
the Comfort, of it, do not depend upon an A^undance of these Things. So said
our Lord, Luke xii.15. A Man's Life consists not in the Abundance of the
Things which he possesses. It is of no great Consequence whether you are
clothed in Purple, and fine Linen, or with a Garment of Camel's Hair, girt
about you with a Girdle of a Skin; whether you fare sumptuously every Day, or
feed upon Pulse. Persons may go without, what are called, the Delights of
Sense, and yet be comfortable here, and happy forever hereafter; and they may
possess the greatest fullness of those Delights, and yet their present Life be
uncomfortable, and their future State unspeakably miserable. The whole World
will not compensate the loss of a Soul. This therefore is the one Thing
needful, that thy Soul be saved, in the Day of the Lord Jesus.

This is a Matter of such Consequence, that, one would think, no prudent Man
would begrutch any Care, and Pains, to secure it. For what though it should cost
thee a great deal of Labor, to resist, and subdue, the corrupt Workings of thy
own Heart, to withstand the Temptations of the World, and Devil, and to lead an
holy Life, in Conformity unto the Rules of the Gospel* What though thou should
be exposed to some, yea many, temporal, Inconveniences, and Sufferings, for
the sake of Christ, and his holy Religion? What though thou should lose the
Friendship, and Favor, of Men, because you dare not break Friendship with God,
by complying with their vicious Humors, or sinful Manners? Will not thy
eternal Salvation abundantly make amends for all? Are not the Joys of Heaven,
pure, and endless, an Overballance for the Toil, and Fatigue* the light, and
momentary Sufferings, of the Way thither? Yea, verily; the Sufferings of the
present Time, are not worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be
revealed in us. Romans viii.18.

2. Remember, Oh Remember, that the Time will come, when you will most
earnestly wish, and passionately desire to be saved. If this be not thy great
Care, whilst thou art in this World; if thou should now have little, or no,
Thought about thy Salvation; if thou should now neglect thy Soul, and be
regardless what becomes of thee, in the other World; yet, when thou passest
over into that other State, thou will be feelingly convinced of thy Want of
Salvation, and be most earnest in thy Desires, and importunate in thy Cries,
Oh, what shall I do to be saved! Thou will, then, sadly see, that, of all
Things, thou ought to have been most seriously solicitous about getting to
Heaven, and escaping the Damnation of Hell, whilst thou had the favorable
Opportunity therefore. Though thy Desires after Salvation are, now, but weak, and
languid, yet, then, they will be most strong, and fervent. Thou will, then,
most passionately long, Oh! that I were saved from this Misery, which my
foolish Neglect has brought upon me! Oh! I would give a World, if I had it, for
an Interest in Christ! Oh! for an Opportunity to make my Peace with God, and
secure my eternal Welfare! And, with what Earnestness will thou, then, cry to
God, to have Mercy upon thee, and save thee from the Place of Torment! So you
find the foolish Virgins, at the last, and great, D^^, crying out, with bitter
Anguish of Soul, Matthew. xxv.11. Lord, Lord, open to us! So you see Dives, in
the deepest Distress, crying, Luke xvi.24. Father Abraham, have Mercy on me;
and send Lazarus, that he may dip the Tip of his Finger in Water, and cool my
Tongue; for I am tormented in this Flame! The least Degree of Mercy will, then,
be welcome to thee, how much soever thou, now despisest the greatest. But,
alas! all thy Cries, and Tears, will be in vain, and to no Purpose.

Well then; Let every Sinner be persuaded, to set himself, in good Earnest,
about this great, and necessary Work, and heartily accept the Salvation which
is now offered to him. If ever you escape Misery, and obtain Mercy; if ever you
get safe to Heaven, and save your own Souls, you must be in Earnest about it.
So great a Matter is not to be accomplished by vain Wishes, and ineffectual
Desires. Therefore now apply thine Heart hereunto, and suffer no Difficulty to
discourage thee herefrom.

But, I am sensible, there are two Objections, which Sinners are apt to make,
against their being very solicitous about their own Salvation; namely; That
they cannot ^^ve themselves, they cannot convert, and change their own Hearts;
and that they have some Design to take Care of their Salvation, but hereafter
will do as well as now; and so they neglect to do any Thing about it, in the
proper Season of it. I shall, therefore, endeavor to obviate the Force of
these Objections, by setting before you two necessary Directions. viz.

1. Do what you can about your own Salvation. Though it be true, that thou
can not save thyself by any mere Strength, and Power of thine own; and those
that would go about to persuade thee, that all lies within thine own Power, do
but endanger thy leaning upon a bruised Reed, and a broken ^taff, whether they
mean so, or no; yet, nevertheless, there is something for thee to do, which
thou can do, and must do, as ever you would hope to be saved. Christ
therefore said, Luke xiii.34. Strive to enter in at the straight Gate. God does
not require more of any Man than he is able to perform. What he requires more
than thou have Strength for, he stands ready graciously to afford his
Assistances to thee, to enable thee to perform it. But he requires it of thee,
to do thy own Part, what thou can do, about thy own Salvation. Surely,
nothing can be more reasonable than, that thou should do what thou can, in
so important an Affair, and that thou should look to, and rely upon, God to
perform what thou art not sufficient for of thyself. And, unless you will do
this, you may not reasonably expect any special Assistances from him. Whereas,
if you conscientiously perform what you are able to do, you may, then,
comfortably hope for the Divine Blessing to accompany your Labors, and make
them effectual to your Conversion, and Salvation. Hence is that of the Apostle,
Phil. ii.12, 13. Work out your own Salvation, with Fear, and Trembling; for it
is God which works in you, both to will, and to do, of his good Pleasure. So
that there is something you can do, and this you must do. Particularly, let me
say,

1. You must endeavor to acquaint yourself with what God requires of you. The
Word of God is the Mean, and Instrument, which God himself has appointed for
this End, to bring Men to the Faith of Jesus Christ, and so to convert, and
save them: therefore it is said, Jam. i.21. to be a Word able to save; and to
make wise unto Salvation. 2 Timothy iii.15. If God should send an Angel, from
Heaven, to you, he could not more fully, and plainly, tell you your Duty, and
Interest, than they are already told you, in the Word of God; nor would one,
coming from the Dead, be able to give you greater Confirmation, than what is
already given, of the Certainty of the sacred Scriptures being a Revelation
from God, and of the infallible Truth of that Revelation. If therefore, O
Sinner! thou would make sure of thy Salvation, thou must attend upon the
Means thereof, and that with Diligence, and Seriousness. And this thou can
do. Thou can read, or hear, the Word of God, with the same Ease, and
Attention, that thou can any other Book, or Writing. To this End, therefore,
you must be frequent in reading the sacred Scriptures, which are the Power, and
the Wisdom, of God unto them that believe, and carefully weigh, and consider,
what you read, not to satisfy a vain Curiosity, or to furnish you with Matter
for Discourse, as it may be some do, but to inform, and direct, your
Conscience, and Influence your Practice, that you may know your Duty, and be
ready upon every Occasion, to attend upon it. So must you search the
Scriptures, for in them ye may have eternal Life. To this End you must also
carefully attend upon the Word preached, and not turn your Back upon it, as the
Manner of some is. For God has appointed an Order of Men for this very End and
Purpose, to explain, and apply, his Word unto the Hearts, and Consciences, of
Sinners, that they may be awakened, convinced, and converted, and saved; and
so, by, what is esteemed by many, the Foolishness of Preaching, it pleases God
to save them that believe, 1 Cor. i.21. It is not, indeed, in the Power, or
Holiness, of Ministers, that the Word they preach becomes effectual to the
Conversion, and Salvation, of any Man, but only by the Blessing of God upon
their Ministry; a Paul may plant, and Apollos water, but it is God only that
gives the Increase, 1 Cor. iii.6. But since the Ministry of the Word is God's
appointed Way, to bring Home a poor wandering, lost, Sinner to himself,
therefore you must be careful not to neglect these Means of Grace, by absenting
your selves from the Ministration of the Word, for every little Business, and
trifling Occasion, but you must make Conscience diligently to improve the
Opportunities of waiting at the Posts of Wisdom's Gates, and hear that your
Souls may live. And while you are hearing, give Attention unto the Things that
are spoken unto you, in the Name of the Lord, and lose not the Advantage, by
allowing your selves in sleeping, or your Minds in wandering, but stir up your
selves, and give the more earnest Heed to the Things which you hear, and
treasure them up in your Hearts, for your Direction in Life, that your Steps
may be ordered in the Word of God. And be sure to cherish the Convictions you
receive from the Word of God, of Sins to be avoided, and Duties to be
performed, and never allow your selves to act contrary to the Light of your own
Minds. Thus come to the Word of God, both read, and heard, with an open, honest
Heart, that it may become a Savor of Life unto Life unto your Souls.

2. You must be frequent, and serious, in the Consideration of those Things
which may be helpful to quicken you to your Duty. This the Sinner can do, and
this he must do. He can think; for the God that formed the Spirit of Man
within, has made thee a rational Creature, capable of Thought, and Reflection;
and you find that you can think upon your worldly Business, and view in your
Minds what would be hurtful to it, and what would help to promote it. And can
you not as well think upon your spiritual Concerns? What you have to do in
them? what would further, or what would hinder them? And you must think, as you
would hope to be saved; for you cannot imagine so vain a Thing as that God will
save you without the Use of your own Reason, and Understanding. The Want of
serious Consideration is one of the greatest Reasons, why so many Sinners,
under the Light of the Gospel, go on contentedly in their evil Ways, and refuse
to be reclaimed; so said God of his ancient People, Isai. i.3. Israel does not
know, my People does not consider, and therefore articles against them, Ah!
sinful Nation, a People laden with Iniquities etc. This is what God requires of
you, that you seriously bethink your selves, that you thoroughly weigh Things in
your own Mind, that you may be able to discern the Beauty, and Excellency, the
Reality, and Importance, of serious Religion: Hag. i.7. Thus says the Lord,
consider your Ways. And this Method God has been wont to follow with his
Blessing, for the Conversion of Sinners. So it was with the Prodigal, Luke
xv.17. when he came to himself, to the proper Use, and Exercise, of his Reason;
and David tells us, Psalm. cxix.59. I thought on my Ways, and turned my Feet
unto thy Testimonies.

Well then, let every Sinner be persuaded to think, and weigh things in his own
Mind; don't begrutch a little Portion of Time to think on the great Concerns of
thy own Soul; but go alone, retire from Company, and worldly Business, and
think seriously with thyself, what is thy present Condition? Whither art thou
bound? What have thou been doing all thy Life long? What art thou now doing for
God, and thy own Soul? How do Matters stand between God, and thy Soul? Is thy
Peace made with God? Think, O think with thy self, if thou should die before
to Morrow, (and thou do not know what a Day may bring forth,) what will
become of thy immortal Soul forever?

Think, my Friend, think what an awful, and critical, Judgment will unavoidably
follow upon thy Departure out of this World: for it is appointed unto Man once
to dye, and after that the Judgment. Heb. ix.27. How will thou be able to hold
up thy Head before the tremendous Bar of thy impartial Judge, if thou art found
out of Christ, and in thy Sins?

And think of that long, and endless, Eternity thou art hastening into; an
Eternity of Weal, or Woe, of the most complete Happiness, or perfect Misery,
thou art capable of.

Why, O Sinner, art thou so averse to serious Consideration! Is it because thou
can not bear the Thoughts of thy Guilt, and appearing before thy impartial
Judge? Why surely, it is better for thee to bear the Thoughts, thereof, now,
and timely prevent the ill Consequence, than forever to bear the Punishment of
thy Folly, hereafter, in neglecting it, and to have thy Thoughts a perpetual
Torment to thee, without a Possibility of escaping out of thy miserable
Condition.

Would Sinners be persuaded to accustom themselves to such Thoughts as these,
though but for one half Quarter of an Hour in a Day, they would probably, have
an happy Influence upon them, to bring them unto Repentance, and Salvation.
Hearken then to the Wish of God, Deuteronomy. xxxii.29. Oh! that they were wise, that
they did understand this, that they would consider their latter End.

3. Come to a Resolution to part with all that would hinder thy Salvation, and
to perform every Thing that would forward it. He that has a great, and
necessary Business upon his Hands, must rid himself of all that would be an
Impediment to him, and improve every Thing that would help to facilitate his
Work. This is thy Case, O Sinner; thou have the very important, and necessary,
Work, of securing thy own Salvation, to Mind; and there is no Sinner but what
may come to a fixed Resolution carefully to attend it, and to avoid what would
hinder, and do what would further him, in this great Business; as is evident,
in that he would resolve, and practice accordingly, to abandon any of those
sinful Courses he has been addicted to, (suppose Swearing, or Drunkenness,) and
to perform known Duties, (suppose Prayer, Reading, Hearing, etc.) if thereby he
might gain a great Treasure in this World. And will thou not do as much for thy
Soul, as thou would for thy Body, and to obtain the immense, and endless,
Treasures of Heaven, as to get the fading Treasures of Earth!

Come then, O Sinner, come to a serious Resolution with thyself, to part with
any Thing, and every Thing, which, upon a diligent Search, thou find to be
an Hindrance to thy Salvation; resolve to part with the most delightful, and
fondest, of thy Lusts, though it should, heretofore, have been as dear to thee
as a Right Hand, or a Right Eye: thy Lusts of Impiety, and Profaneness, thy
Lusts of Intemperance, or Uncleanness, thy Lusts of Covetousness, and
Injustice, thy Lusts of rash Anger, Malice, or Revenge, whatever it be that
stands in the Way of thy Salvation, come to a fixed Resolution to have
nothing more to do with it. Say with penitent Ephraim, Hos. xiv.8. What have I
any more to do with Idols? Come to a Resolution to part with any of thy worldly
Enjoyments, at the Call, and for the sake, of Christ; and let none of the
Objects of Sense be preferred to the only Savior: say with them, Isa. xxvi.13.
Other Lords, besides thee, have had Dominion over us, but by thee only will we
make mention of thy Name. Come to a Resolution, as much as possibly you can, to
forsake the foolish, and vain, and wicked, Company, that would entice, and draw
you, into the Ways of Sin; say with him, Psalm. vi.8. depart from me, all ye
Workers of Iniquity.

And take up fixed Resolutions to perform every known Duty, and so to be found
in the Way of the Blessing. Resolve, from this Time forward, to make it thy
constant Endeavor to live according to the Dictates of thy Conscience, and to
have a steady Regard to whatsoever the Lord thy God has commanded thee, that
you may walk in all his Ordinances, and Commandments, blameless. You do, or may
easily know the Commandments; and, if you would enter into Life, let it then be
your constant Care to walk in the Pathway thereof, the Way of Peace, and Life:
say with him, Psalm. cxix.176. I have gone astray, like a lost Sheep, seek thy
Servant, for I do not forget thy Commandments. If once thou would come to a
fixed Resolution in this Point, thou would not be far from the Kingdom of
God.

4. Earnestly cry, and pray, to God, to save thee. The Lord is a God that
hears Prayers, and therefore unto him should all Flesh come, for all that
Help they stand in need of. Though it be true, that no Sinner can save himself,
yet, inasmuch as God is able, and willing, to save thee, therefore should
thou be earnest, and unwearied in thy sincere Prayers to him to bestow his
Salvation upon thee. Prayer is of mighty Efficacy with God, to open the Eyes of
the Blind, and to cleanse the leprous Soul. Let no Man pretend, he cannot pray,
he knows not how to pray. It is a vain Pretense, yea it is a false Plea. He
that can speak can pray. Pray that God would teach you to pray. This God
expects, and requires, at your Hands, saying, Amos v.4. Seek ye me, and ye
shall live. It is the Generation of them that seek him, that receive a Blessing
from the Lord, and Righteousness from the God of their Salvation; and he has
not left thee without Encouragement to hope, that he will save thee, if thou will but be earnest, and diligent, in the Use of thy own Endeavors, and
serious, and importunate, in asking this Mercy at his Hands: He has told thee,
Romans x.13. Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved.

Well then, O Sinner, retire into thy Closet, daily, and there pour out thy
Soul unto God, in fervent Prayer, that he would work his own Work in thee; that
he would effectually convince thee of thy Sin, and Misery, without which
Conviction thou will never be in Earnest to be saved. Earnestly pray to God, to
strengthen your Resolutions, and Endeavors, for a Life of Faith, and
Obedience, without which divine Assistance, they will all be but languid, and
faint, and come to nothing. Earnestly pray to God, to discover to you the
Worth, and Excellency, the Fullness, and Sufficiency, the Compassion, and
Tender-heartedness, of the Lord Jesus Christ; how ready he is to receive thee
among his Disciples, and to bear with thy Weaknesses, and overlook thy
Infirmities, and how every Way able he is to save thee, even to the uttermost;
that in him, you may discern a Remedy for all the Diseases of your Soul, and
may not be left to lie down in Despair. And earnestly pray to God, that, by the
powerful Influences of his Holy Spirit, he would effectually draw you home to
Christ, and enable you to come to him, and close with him, that, through him,
you may obtain eternal Life: for no Man can come unto the Son, except the
Father, which has sent him, draw him, Joh. vi.44.

Suffer not a Sense of thy Sins to discourage thy Prayers; for though thou
should have been one of the most notorious, and flagitious Sinners, yet, if
thou art not resolved to hold on in thy evil Ways, but, sincerely purposest to
forsake them, and, in a Sense of thy Need of divine Help, wilt come and throw
thyself at the Feet of God, with thy earnest Prayers, and plead his merciful
Nature, and the Merits of his Son, he will not deny thee. Therefore God said,
by his Prophet, Jer. xxix.12, 13. Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go
and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you; and ye shall seek me, and find
me, when ye shall search for me with all your Heart. Come then to this
Conclusion with yourself, I must certainly perish, if God do not help me: I can
but perish, if he should deny to help me; I therefore must, and will, try what
sovereign and rich Grace will do for me; I will earnestly call upon the Name of
the Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee to deliver my Soul!

Thus be frequent, and in earnest, in your Supplications to the God of all
Grace, for the Bestowment of the heavenly Gift upon you; and humbly say, before
the Lord, with good Jacob, Genesis xxxii.26. I will not let thee go, except thou
bless me. And think not to obtain the Blessing, without asking, and striving
for it. Let the Sense of the Danger thou art in of coming short of it, make
thee the more importunate, and unwearied. I will leave with you the Words of
Ionah's Mariners, Jon. i.6. What meanest thou, O Sleeper! Arise, and call upon
thy God; if so be that God will think upon us, that we perish not.

These Things thou can do; and do you but do what you can, and God will not
be wanting to help you. And then,

2. What thou meanest to do, for thy own Salvation, do now. There is many a
Sinner, who, at last, misseth of Salvation, purely by his delaying to improve
the proper Season, of obtaining Mercy, till it is over, and gone. He is ready
to think, that it is but a reasonable Thing, that he should forsake his Sins,
and lead a new Life, that he should accept of Christ, according to the Offer of
the Gospel, that so he may be found of him, in Peace, at the great Day, and he
purposes to do so, some Time, or other, before he dies; but, for the Present,
he has this Business to mind, and that Lust to gratify, and therefore he must
put off the Concerns of his Salvation, to a more convenient Season.

But know, O delaying Sinner, that thou actest the most foolish, and
unreasonable, Part that can be; and that not only of postponing a Business of
the greatest Consequence, to that which is of little, or no Moment to thee;
but, in Running the desperate Hazard of thy never being saved at all. For,
besides, that the Objection against minding thy Salvation, and the eternal
Concernments of thy Soul, will be as strong, if not stronger, to Morrow, than
it is to Day, because Sin will have gotten the faster Hold on thee, and thou will have the more to repent of; I say, besides this, for ought all that thou
know, thou may not have an other Opportunity to regard thy eternal
Salvation in, if thou do not set thyself to improve the present now.

Now, through the Grace, and Patience, of a good God, thou have a fair
Opportunity to secure thy everlasting Happiness; Christ is now standing at the
Door of thy Soul, and loudly, and earnestly knocking for Entrance; He is now
wooing, and entreating thee, with many very powerful Arguments, and
Persuasions, to give a due Entertainment unto his Gospel, to believe the
Reports of it, and accept him for thy Savior, to obey, and follow him, and
live. What would the damned Spirits, in the infernal Prison, give, were it in
their Power, might they enjoy but one such precious Opportunity, as you are now
favored withal!

But if you slight the Means, and despise the Day, of Grace, and neglect to
improve the present Season, wherein the Patience, and Long-suffering, of God,
is waiting upon you, you do not know, but the holy God may be provoked to give
you up to penal Obduration, to Blindness, and Hardness, of Heart, that seeing,
you shall not see, neither shall you understand with your Heart, and convert,
and be healed; for he has said, Genesis vi.3. My Spirit shall not always strive
with Man.

Or, however, for ought that you can tell, Death may come upon you speedily,
and suddenly, and put an utter End to all your Opportunities, ever you are
aware; and then the Day, and Means, of Grace, will be at an End with you
forever; for there is no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom, in the
Grave, whither thou go. Eccl. ix.10. Then though thou should seek the
Blessing, carefully, and with Tears, yet would thou be utterly rejected, and
find no Place for Repentance.

Oh! then, I beseech you, my Friend, set thy self hereunto in good Earnest, now
before it be too late; now, be exceeding solicitous what you must do to be
saved; now, lay hold on the Salvation that is tendered unto you; accept the
Lord Jesus, with all his pardoning Mercy; plead the Merits of his Obedience,
and Suffering, for the Forgiveness of your past Sins, the subduing of your
Corruptions, the quickening of you in Grace, and Holiness, that you may be
enabled so to run as to obtain the incorruptible Crown: and do with your Might,
what your Hands find to do, in this important Work, and that now, while you
have a Price in your Hands therefore; and be not such Fools as to neglect it,
until the Night come wherein no Man can Work.

And remember, that thy Soul, thy All, lies at Stake. And since the eternal
Welfare of thy precious, and immortal, Soul, depends upon your wise Improvement
of the valuable Opportunities, and blessed Means, which God, in his infinite
Goodness, has put into your Hands; and you know not for how long, or short, a
while, these Advantages shall be continued to thee; but may be sure that thou
now have a good one, therefore, now, arise thou, be up, and doing, the Lord be
with thee.

I conclude all with that earnest Address of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. vi.1, 2.
We, then, as Workers together with him, beseech you also, that ye receive not
the Grace of God in vain: for he says, I have heard thee in a Time accepted,
and in the Day of Salvation have I succored thee: behold, now is the accepted
Time; behold, now is the Day of Salvation.

Thus, my Brethren, I have, through the Favor of God, in sparing, and
enabling, of me, set before you the great Doctrines of the Gospel, and opened
to you the true Way unto Life, and Happiness; and endeavored to move you with
the most cogent Reasons, and pressing Arguments, to secure your own Salvation,
by a Life of Faith, and Holiness: and may God, of his infinite Goodness, so set
these Things home upon our Hearts, and the Hearts of our Children, that I who
have spoken them, and you who have heard them, (and they that shall read them,)
may not fail of the Grace of God, but may happily meet together in the
Redeemer's Kingdom above, and shout our incessant, and endless, Praises, to
God, and the Lamb.

Now, unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
faultless, before the Presence of his Glory, with exceeding Joy; to the only
wise God, our Savior, be Glory, and Majesty, Dominion, and Power, both now,
and ever. AMEN!

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 33. Line 9. after him, add of. p. 43. l. 14. after by* add, the. p. 52.
l. 11, 12. r. Interpolation. p. 132. l. 20. r. become. l. 26. r. lost. P. 162.
l. 5. r. IV. p. 172. l. 17. before The, add 1. p. 185. l. 22. after Manners,
add a Period. p. 187. l. 5. for is, r. it. l. 35. for gratify, r. glorify. p.
203. l. 17. for was* r. were. p. 110. l. 25. for their, r. this. p. 214. l. 7.
from Bot. after capacitateth, add him. p. 216. l. 17. after yet, add a. p. 232.
l. 11. for is, r. are. p. 233. l. 12. dele and. l. 14. for that, r. and. p.
237. l. ^9. r. ii. Cor. p. 242. l. ult, for of, r. off. p. 260. in the Margin,
r. Non. p. 261. l. 6. r. virtuous. p. 262. l. 7. r. awake. p. 190 for 200. p.
345. l. 31. r. safe. p. 347. l. 2. after you, add may. p. ^^8. l. 33. before
from add 2. p. 361. l. 25. for fay, r. say. p. 370. l. 21, for direct, r.
divert. p. 378. l. 36. for feeing, r. seeing. p. 384. l. 19. r. give. p. 387.
l. 30. r. is. p. 408. l. 25 after Sands, add a Comma. p. 410. l. 26. after
Behalf put a Semicolon. p. 418. l. 29. r. Lunacy. p. 421. l. 31. after Duties
put a Semicolon.

There are some Mistakes in pointing, which an intelligent Reader, will easily
discern.

BOOKS Sold by Rogers and Foul in BOSTON.
SERMONS on various Subjects, Divine and Moral. With a sacred Hymn suited to
each Subject. Designed for the Use of Christian Families, as well as for the
Hours of devout Retirement. By I. WATTS, D. D. Formerly published in two
Volumes, and now reduced into one. DIscourses on the World to come: Or, The
Joys and Sorrows of departed Souls at Death, and the Glory and Terror of the
Resurrection. Wherein, after some Representations of the Happiness of Heaven,
and a Preparation for it, there follows a rational and Scriptural Account of
the Punishments in Hell, and a Proof of their eternal Duration. With a plain
Answer to all the most plausible Objections. By I. WATTS, D. D. Formerly
published in Two Volumes, and now reduced into One. CAtechisms or Instructions
in the Principles of the Christian Religion, and the History of Scripture,
composed for Children and Youth, according to their different Ages; to which is
prefixed a large Discourse on the Way of Instruction by Catechisms. By I.
WATTS, D. D. A Preservative from the Sins and Follies of Childhood and Youth,
written in a Way of Question and Answer: To which is added a large Catalogue of
remarkable Scripture Names, collected for the Use of Children, and explained
for their better Acquaintance with the Holy Scriptures. By I. WATTS, D. D.
HORAE LYRICAE. Poems, chiefly of the Lyrick Kind, in three Books. Sacred I. To
Devotion and Piety. II. To Virtue, Honor and Friendship. III. To the Memory of
the Dead. By I. WATTS, D. D. FRiendship in Death; in twenty Letters from the
Dead to the Living. To which is added, Thoughts on Death, translated from the
Moral Essays of Messieurs de PORT ROYAL. By Mrs. ELIZABETH ROW. THE Life of
Mrs. ELIZABETH ROW. With some Account of Mr. WALTER SINGER, her Father, and
Mr. THOMAS ROW, her Consort. PRactical Discourses on the Parable of the TEN
VIRGINS. Being a serious Call and Admonition to Watchfulness and Diligence in
preparing for Death and Judgment. By BENJAMIN COLMAN, D. D. late Pastor of a
Church in Boston, New England. THree valuable Pieces, viz. Select Cases
resolved, First Principles of the Oracles of God, or Sum of Christian Religion;
both corrected by four several Editions; and a private Diary; Containing
Meditations and Experiences. Never before published. By THOMAS SHEPARD, M. A.
of Emanuel College in Cambridge in England; Afterward Minister of the Church of
Cambridge in New England. With some Account of the Rev. Author. A Present for
an Apprentice: Or, a sure Guide to gain both Esteem and Estate. With Rules for
his Conduct to his Master, and in the World. More especially, while (...)
Apprentice, his Behavior after he is free, Care in setting up, Company with
the Ladies, Choice of a Wife, Behavior in Courtship, and Wedding Day,
Complaisance after Marriage, Education of Children, etc. By a late Lord Mayor
of London. A Present for a Servant-Maid: Or, the sure Means of gaining both
Love and Esteem. To which are added, Directions for going to Market; for
Dressing any common Dish, whether Flesh, Fish or Fowl; and for Washing, The
whole calculated for making both the Mistress and the Maid happy. A Summary
Historical and Political, of the first Planting, progressive Improvements, and
present State of the British Settlements in North America; with some transient
Accounts of the Bordering French and Spanish Settlements. By W. D. M. D. To be
continued. THE HISTORY of the MARTYRS: Being a Cloud of Witnesses; Or, the
Sufferers Mirror, made up of the Swan-like Songs, and other choice Passages of
a great Number of Martyrs and Confessors, in their Treaties, Speeches, Letters,
Prayers, etc. in their Prisons, or Exiles; at the Bar or Stake, etc. By Mr.
MALL. With a Recommendatory Preface by Mr. FLAVEL. THE Imperfection of the
Creature, and the Excellency of the Divine Commandment; illustrated in Nine
Sermons on Psalm. 119.96. By JOHN BARNARD, A. M. Pastor of a Church in
Marblehead. SEVEN SERMONS, preached at the Lecture in the West Church in
Boston, 1748. By. J. MAYHEW, Pastor of said Church. SERMON. I. Concerning the
Difference betwixt Truth and Falsehood in Speculation, and betwixt Right and
Wrong in Practice. II. Concerning the natural Abilities of Men to discern these
Differences. III. Concerning the Right and Obligation to private Judgment in
Matters of Religion. IV. Objections against private Judgment answered. V, VI,
VII. Concerning the Love of God and our Neighbor. THE LI^E and CHARACTER of
the Rev. BENJAMIN COLMAN, D. D. late Pastor of a Church in Boston. THE Friendly
Instructor: Or, a Companion for young Masters and young Misses. In which their
Duty to GOD and their Parents, their Carriage to Superiors and Inferiors, and
several other very useful and instructive Lessons are recommended, in plain and
familiar Dialogues. With a recommendatory Preface, by the Reverend Dr.
DODDRIDGE. Dial. I. Against Lying. II. On reading the Scripture. III. On
reflecting on what is read. IV. On the Death of a Child. V. On Prayer. VI. On
keeping the Sabbath. VII. On a proud and haughty Carriage toward Inferiors.
VIII. On Sickness and Death. IX. Peace of Mind in the near Views of Death and
the Grave. X. On Recovery from Sickness. XI. On Diligence and Obedience to
Parents. XII. On a suitable Behavior in the Worship of God. XIII. On remembering
what we hear. XIV. On the Use to be made of what is heard. XV. Encouragement
received in hearing. XVI, Between Eliza and Maria, two Sisters. THE authentic
Narrative of the Success of TAR-WATER, in curing a great Number and Variety of
Distempers; with Remarks: By Thomas Prior, Esquire To which are subjoined, two
Letters from the Author of Siris: showing the Medicinal Properties of
Tar-water, and the best Manner of making it. BENNET'S Christian Oratory in two
Volumes, Dunlop's Sermons in two Volumes, Hale's Contemplations two Volumes,
Bennet's Memorial of the Reformation, Henry on Prayer, Flemming's confirming
State, etc. Crawford against Infidelity, Duke of Marlborough's Life, Moses
unveiled, Jacob's Wrestling, Wright on Regeneration, Bible epitomiz^d. THOUGHTS
on Education* Tending chiefly to recommend to the Attention of the Public,
some Particulars relating to that Subject; which are not generally considered
with the Regard their Importance deserves. By the AUTHOR of BRITAIN'S
REMEMBRANCE^.
BOOKS Sold by D. Gookin over against the South Meeting House in BOSTON.
FLAVEL'S Works. 2 Vol. Fol. BUNYAN'S Works. 2 Vol. Fol. DODDRIDGE on the
Evangelists and Acts. 3 Vol. Quar^o. CRUDEN'S Concordance; STACKHOUSE'S Body of
Divinity; Spectator 8 Vol. Female Spectator 4 Vol. Platform of Church
Discipline; Mariner's Ka^lenders; Compasses and Epitomie^. BARNARD on the
Imperfection of the Creature. Lately imported from London, A System of Moral
Philosophy, Vol. 1. by the late Reverend and learned Mr. HENRY GROVE, of
Taunton. Published from the Author's Manuscript, with latest Improvements and
Corrections. By THOMAS AMORY. Also to be bad of said Gookin, Bibles,
Testaments, Psalters, Psalm-Books, Spelling-Books, Primers and Catechisms.
Paper of all sorts, Account Books, etc. etc.

