Mr. Edwards's SERMON At the ORDINATION Of the Reverend Mr. Job Strong, June
28. 1749.

CHRIST the great EXAMPLE of Gospel Ministers.

A SERMON Preached at Portsmouth, At the ORDINATION of the Reverend Mr. Job
Strong, To the Pastoral Office over the South Church in that Place, June 28.
1749,

By Jonathan Edwards, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Northampton.

BOSTON: Printed and sold by T. Fleet, at the Heart and Crown in Cornhill 1750

Christ the Example of Ministers.
John XIII. 15, 16. For I have given you an Example, that ye should do as I
have done to you. Verily verily, I say unto you, The Servant is not greater
than his Lord, neither he that is sent, greater than he that sent him.


WE have in this Context, an Account of one of the many very remarkable Things
that passed that Night wherein Christ was betrayed (which was on many Accounts
the most remarkable Night that ever was) viz. Christ's washing his Disciple's
Feet; which Action, as it was exceeding wonderful in itself, so it manifestly
was symbolical, and represented something else far more important and more
wonderful, even that greatest and most wonderful of all Things that ever came
to pass, which was accomplished the next Day in his last Sufferings. There were
three symbolical Representations given of that great Event this Evening; one in
the Passover, which Christ now partook of with his Disciples; another in the
Lord's Supper, which he instituted at this Time; and another in this remarkable
Action of his washing his Disciple's Feet. Washing the Feet of Guests was the
Office of Servants, and one of their meanest Offices: And therefore was fitly
chosen by our Savior to represent that great Abasement which he was to be the
Subject of in the Form of a Servant, in becoming obedient unto Death, even that
ignominious and accursed Death of the Cross, that he might cleanse the Souls of
his Disciples from their Guilt and spiritual Pollution.

This spiritual washing and cleansing of Believers was the End for which Christ
so abased himself and gave himself for them. Tit. ii. 14. Who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar People. Ephesians. v. 25, 26. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for
it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water. -- That
Christ's washing his Disciple's Feet, signified this spiritual washing of the
Soul, is manifest by Christ's own Words in the 8th verse of the Context. Peter
says unto him, Thou shall never wash my Feet. Jesus answered him, If I wash
thee not, thou have no part with me. Christ in being obedient unto Death, even
the Death of the Cross, not only did the part of a Servant unto God, but in
some Respects also of a Servant unto us. And this is not the only Place where
his so abasing himself for our sakes is compared to the doing of the part of a
Servant to Guests. We have the like Representation made in Luke xxii. 27. For
whether is greater, he that sits at Meat, or he that serves? Is not he that
sits at Meat? but I am among you as he that serves. And wherein Christ was
among the Disciples as he that did serve, is explained in Matt. xx. 28. namely,
in his giving his Life a Ransom for them.

When Christ had finished washing his Disciple's Feet, he solemnly requires
their Attention to what he had done, and commands them to follow his Example
therein. Verse 12. -- 17. So after he had washed their Feet, and had taken his
Garments, and was set down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done
unto you? Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am. If I then
your Lord and Master, have washed your Feet, ye also ought to wash one
another's Feet: For I have given you an Example, that ye should do as I have
done to you. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the Servant is not greater than
his Lord, neither he that is sent, greater than he that sent him. If ye know
these Things, happy are ye if ye do them.

When our Savior calls on his Disciples to imitate the Example he had given
them in what he had done, we are to understand him, not merely by the Example
he gave in the emblematical Action, in washing his Disciple's Feet, in it self
considered; but more especially, of that much greater Act of his that was
signified by it, in abasing himself so low, and suffering so much, for the
spiritual Cleansing and Salvation of his People. This is what is chiefly
insisted on as the great Example Christ has given us to follow: So it is once
and again afterward, in the Discourse Christ had with his Disciples, this same
Night, v. 34. of the Chap. wherein is the Text; A new Commandment I give unto
you, that ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one
another. Chap. xv. 12, 13. This is my Commandment, that ye love one another, as
I have loved you. Greater love has no Man than this, that a Man lay down his
Life for his Friends. And so in 1 John iii. 16. Hereby perceive we the love of
God, because he laid down his Life for us; and we ought to lay down our Lives
for the Brethren.

Christ in the Words of the Text, don't only intend to recommend this Example
of his to the Disciples as Christians, or some of his professing People, but
especially as his Ministers This is evident by those Words he uses to enforce
this Counsel, Neither he that is sent, is greater than he that sent him. In
which Words he manifestly has respect to that great Errand on which he had sent
them, when he bid them go and preach the Gospel to the lost Sheep of the House
of Israel. Mat. x. 5, 6. and on which they were to be sent after his
Resurrection, when he said to them, Go ye into all the World, and preach the
Gospel to every Creature. The same Errand that Christ has respect to John xx.
21. As my Father has sent me, even so send I you.

And what confirms this is, that Christ elsewhere recommends to Officers in his
Church, that are in that respect chief among his Followers, the Example which
he set in his abasing himself to be as a Servant that ministers to Guests at a
Table, in his giving his Life for us; Matt. xx. 27, 28. Whosoever will be chief
among you, let him be your Servant; Even as the Son of Man came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his Life a Ransom for many.
Compare Luke xxii. 25, 26, 27, 28.

The Work and Business of Ministers of the Gospel is as it were that of
Servants, to wash and cleanse the Souls of Men: For this is done by the
preaching of the Word, which is their main Business, Ephesians. v. 26. That he might
sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water by the Word.

The Words of the Text thus considered, do undoubtedly lead us to this
Conclusion, and teach us this Doctrine, viz.

That it is the Duty of Ministers of the Gospel, in the Work of their Ministry,
to follow the Example of their great Lord and Master.

And this is what I would by Divine Assistance make the Subject of my present
Discourse.

And I propose to handle this Subject in the following Method.

I. I would observe wherein Ministers of the Gospel ought to follow the Example
of Christ.

II. Give some Reasons why they should follow his Example.

III. I would endeavor to make a proper Application of those Things to my
self, and others that are called to this Work of the Ministry.

IV. Show what Improvement should be made of them by the People of this Church
and Congregation.

I. Then, I would show wherein Ministers of the Gospel ought in the Work of
their Ministry, to follow the Example of their great Lord and Master Jesus
Christ.

And here,

1. In general, Ministers should follow their Lord and Master in all those
excellent Virtues, and in that universal and eminent Holiness of Life, which he
set an Example of in his human Nature.

The Ministers of Christ should be Persons of the same Spirit that their Lord
was of: The same Spirit of Humility and Lowliness of Heart; for the Servant is
not greater than his Lord. They should be of the same Spirit of
Heavenly-mindedness and Contempt of the Glory, Wealth and Pleasures of this
World: They should be of the same Spirit of Devotion and fervent Love to God:
They should follow the Example of his Prayerfulness; of whom we read from Time
to Time of his retiring from the World, away from the Noise and Applauses of
the Multitudes, into Mountains and solitary Places for secret Prayer, and holy
Converse with his Father; and once of his rising up in the Morning a great
while before Day, and going and departing into a solitary Place to pray; Mark
i. 35. and another Time, of his going out into a Mountain to pray, and
continuing all Night in Prayer to God, Luke vi. 12. Ministers should follow
Christ's Example, in his strict, constant and inflexible Observance of the
Commands which God had given him, touching what he should do and what he should
say; he spoke nothing of himself, but those Things which the Father had
commanded him, those he spoke, and always did those Things that pleased him,
and continued in through Obedience and the greatest Trials, and through the
greatest Opposition that ever there was any Instance of. Ministers should be
Persons of the same quiet Lamb-like Spirit that Christ was of, the same Spirit
of Submission to God's Will, and Patience under Afflictions, and Meekness
toward Men, of the same Calmness and Composure of Spirit under Reproaches and
Sufferings from the malignity of evil Men, of the same Spirit of Forgiveness of
Injuries; of the same Spirit of Charity, of fervent Love and extensive
Benevolence; the same Disposition to pity the miserable, to weep with those
that weep, to help Men under their Calamities of both Soul and Body, to hear
and grant the Requests of the needy, and relieve the afflicted; the same Spirit
of Condescension to the poor and mean, Tenderness and Gentleness toward the
weak, and great and effectual Love to Enemies. They should also be of the same
Spirit of Zeal, Diligence and Self-denial for the Glory of God, and Advancement
of his Kingdom, and for the Good of Mankind; for which Things sake Christ went
through the greatest Labors, and endured the most extreme Sufferings.

2. More particularly should Ministres of the Gospel follow the Example of
their great Master, in the Manner in which they seek the Salvation and
Happiness of the Souls of Men. They should follow his Example of Love to Souls:
Though it be impossible that they should love them to so great a Degree, yet they
should have the same Spirit of Love to them, and Concern for their Salvation,
according to their Capacity. Love to Men's Souls in Christ was far above any
Regard he had to his temporal Interest, his Ease, his Honor, his Meat and
Drink; and so it should be with his Ministers. They should have the same Spirit
of Compassion to Men under their spiritual Calamities and Miseries, that he had
of whom we read Mark vi. 34. That when he came out and saw much People, he was
moved with Compassion toward them, because they were as Sheep not having a
Shepherd; and he began to teach them many Things. The Word translated moved
with Compassion, signifies, that he was most sensibly affected, and had his
inmost Bowels moved with Pity. And again we read Luke xix. That when Christ was
riding to Jerusalem, that wicked City, but a few Days before his Crucifixion,
and was come to the Descent of the Mount of Olives, where he had a fair View of
the City, when he beheld it, he wept over it, on account of the Misery and Ruin
they had brought themselves into Danger of by their Sin; although the Sin by
which especially they had made themselves thus miserable, was their vile
Treatment of him; (for Jerusalem was a City that had been peculiarly injurious
to him) and though Christ knew how cruelly he should be treated in that City
before that Week was past, how he there should be set at naught, and with great
malignity bound, falslely accused and condemned, reviled, spit upon, scourged
and crucified: Yet all don't prevent his most affectionate Tears of Compassion
toward them. When he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it,
saying, If thou had known, even thou, (thou as wicked as thou art, and as
vile as thou have been in thy Treatment of me; even thou) the Things which
belong unto thy Peace! but now they are hid from thine Eyes. (Compare Matt.
xxiii. 37. and Luke xiii. 34.) One would have thought he would have been more
concerned for himself than Jerusalem, who had such a dreadful Cup to drink, and
was to suffer such extreme Things by the Cruelty of Jerusalem that Week. But he
as it were forgets his own Sorrow and Death, and weeps over the Misery of his
cruel Enemies.

Ministers should imitate their great Master in his fervent Prayers for the
good of the Souls of Men. We find it to be Christ's Manner whenever he undertook
any Thing of special Importance in the Work of his Ministry, first to retire
and pour out his Soul in extraordinary Prayer to his Father. Thus when he was
about to enter on a Journey, and go a Circuit throughout all Galilee to preach
in their Synagogues, he rose up a great while before Day, and went out, and
departed into a solitary Place, and there prayed. Mark i. 35 -- 39. And when he
was about to choose his twelve Apostles, and send them out to preach the
Gospel, he first went out into a Mountain to pray, and continued all Night in
Prayer to God. Luke vi. 12. etc. And the Night before his Crucifixion, wherein
he offered up himself a Sacrifice for the Souls of Men, he pours out his Soul
in extraordinary Prayer, for those he was about to die for, as we have an
Account in John xvii. That wonderful and most affecting Prayer of his, was not
so much for himself as for his People. Although he knew what amazing Sufferings
he was to undergo the next Day, yet he seems as it were to be unmindful of
himself, and to have his Heart all taken up with Concern about his Disciples;
which he manifests in his spending so much Time in comforting and counselling
them, and praying for them with great Affection, Compassion, earnest Care and
fatherly Tenderness. And the Prayers that he made in the Garden of Gethsemane,
under the amazing View of the Cup he was to drink the next Day, seem to be
intercessory; especially the last of the three Prayers which he there made,
when being in an Agony, he prayed more earnestly; and his Sweat was as it were
great Drops of Blood falling down to the Ground: When he did not pray that the
Cup might pass from him, as he had done before, but that God's Will might be
done. (Compare Luke xxii. 44. with Matt. xxvi. 42.) That Prayer, as the Apostle
teaches us, Heb. v. 6, 7. was a Prayer that he put up as our High Priest; and
therefore must be a Prayer of Intercession for us, a Prayer offered up with his
Blood which he sweat in his Agony; as Prayers were wont to be offered up with
the Blood of the Sacrifices in the Temple. His Prayer at that Time, Thy Will be
done, was not only an Expression of Submission, but had the Form of a Petition,
as it is in the Lord's Prayer. He prayed that God's Will might be done in his
being enabled to do the Will of God, persevering in Obedience unto Death; and
in the success of his Sufferings; which might in an eminent Manner be called
the Will of God, as it is in Ps. xl. 7, 8. Then said I, Lo, I come; -- I
delight to do thy Will, O my God.

Ministers should follow the Example of Christ in his Diligence and
Laboriousness in his Work. He went about doing Good, and healing all that were
oppressed of the Devil. Act. x. 38. So abundant was he in Labors, that
oftentimes he scarcely allowed himself Time to eat or drink; insomuch that his
Friends sometimes went out to lay hold of him, saying, He is beside himself.
Mark iii. 20, 21. That three Years and an half of his public Ministry was so
filled with Action and Labor, that one of his Disciples that constantly
attended him, and was an Eyewitness of his Activity, tells us, that if all
that he did should be written, the World would not contain the Books.

Ministers should follow the Example of Christ, in his Readiness not only to
Labor, but suffer for the Salvation of Souls, to spend and be spent for them.
In this Respect the Apostle Paul imitated his Lord and Master; Philip, ii. 17.
Yea, and if I be offered upon the Sacrifice and Service of your Faith, I joy
and rejoice with you all. Col. i. 24. Who now rejoice in my Sufferings for you,
and fill up that which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ in my Flesh, for
his Bodies sake, which is the Church. 2. Cor. xii. 15. And I will very gladly
spend and be spent for you. Christ in his Prayers, Labors and Sufferings for
the Souls of Men, is represented as traveling in Birth with them. Isai. liii.
11. He shall see of the Travel of his Soul. In like manner should Ministers
travel for the Conversion and Salvation of their Hearers. They should imitate
the Faithfulness of Christ in his Ministry, in speaking whatsoever God had
commanded him, and declaring the whole Counsel of God. They should imitate him
in the Manner of his preaching; who taught not as the Scribes, but with
Authority, boldly, zealously and fervently; insisting chiefly on the most
important Things in Religion, being much in warning Men of the Danger of
Damnation, setting forth the greatness of the future Misery of the Ungodly;
insisting not only on the outward, but also the inward and spiritual Duties of
Religion; being much in declaring the great Provocation and Danger of spiritual
Pride, and a Self-righteous Disposition; yet much insisting on the Necessity
and Importance of inherent Holiness, and the Practice of Piety. Behaving
himself with admirable Wisdom in all that he said and did in his Ministry,
amidst the many Difficulties, Enemies and Temptations he was surrounded with,
wonderfully adapting his Discourses to Persons, Seasons and Occasions: Isai. l.
4. The Lord God has given me the Tongue of the learned, that I should know how
to speak a Word in Season to him that is weary.

Ministers should follow their Master in his Zeal, so wonderfully mixed and
tempered with Gentleness and Condescension in his dealing with Souls; preaching
the Gospel to the Poor, and taking a gracious Notice from Time to Time of
little Children. And they should imitate their Lord in his following the Work
of the Ministry, not from mercenary Views, or for the sake of worldly
Advantages, but for God's Glory, and Men's Salvation; and in having his Heart
engaged in his Work; it being his great Delight, and his Meat to do the Will of
his Father, and finish his Work, John iv. 34. and having his Heart set on the
Success of his great Undertaking in the Salvation of Souls; this being the Joy
that was set before him, for which he run his Race, endured the Cross, and
despised the Shame; his Delight in the Prospect of the eternal Salvation of
Souls, more than countervailing the Dread he had of his extreme Sufferings.
Many Waters could not quench his Love, neither could the Floods drown it, for
his Love was stronger than Death; yea, than the mighty Pains and Torments of
such a Death.

II. I proceed now to the second Thing proposed in the handling this Subject,
which was to give some Reasons why Ministers of the Gospel should follow the
Example of their great Lord and Master Jesus Christ.

1. They should follow his Example, because he is their Lord and Master. Christ
as he is a divine Person, is the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and so one of
infinite Dignity, to whom our supreme Respect and Adoration is due; and on that
Account he is infinitely worthy that we should regard, not only his Precepts,
but Example. The infinite Greatness and Honourableness of his Person recommends
his Virtues, and a Conformity to them as our greatest Dignity and Honor.

Christ is more especially the Lord of Christians; who are therefore under
special Obligations to follow him. He is their Shepherd, and surely the Flock
should follow their Shepherd. He is the Captain of their Salvation; and it
becomes Soldiers to follow their Captain and Leader. He is their Head; not only
their Head of Rule and Authority, but their Head of Influence and
Communication, their vital Head, and Christians are Members of his Body: But
Members, as partakers of the Life and Spirit of the Head, are conformed to the
Head.

But Christ is still in a more peculiar Manner the Lord and Master of Ministers
of the Gospel, as they are not only Members of his Church, but the Officers of
his Kingdom, and the dignified Servants of his Family. It Is the Manner of a
People to imitate their Prince, but especially the Ministers of his Kingdom,
and Officers of his Household. It Is the Duty of the whole Army to follow their
General, but especially of those Officers that have a Commission under him.

2. Ministers of the Gospel are in some Respects called and devoted to the same
Work and Business that Christ himself was appointed to. Ministers are not Men's
Mediators; for there is but one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ
Jesus: They are not our Priests to make Atonement and work out Righteousness
for us; for Christ by one offering has perfected forever them that are
sanctified: They are not Lords over God's Heritage; for one is their Master,
even Christ. But yet Ministers of the Gospel, as Christ's Servants and Officers
under him, are appointed to promote the Designs of that great Work of Christ,
the Work of Salvation. It Is the Work that Ministers are devoted to; and
therefore they are represented as Co-workers with Christ. 2 Cor. vi. 1. We
then, as workers together with him, beseech you also that ye receive not the
Grace of God in vain. Christ is the Savior of the Souls of Men; Ministers
also, are spoken of in Scripture as saving Men's Souls. 1 Timothy iv. 16. In doing
this, thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee. Romans x. 14. If by
any Means I may provoke to Emulation them which are my Flesh, and might save
some of them. 1 Cor. ix. 22. That I might by all means save some. And whereas
it is said Obad. 21. Saviors shall come upon Mount Zion; Ministers of the
Gospel are supposed to be there intended.

The Work of Ministers is in many Respects like the Work that Christ himself
was appointed to, as the Savior of Men; and especially the same with the Work
which Christ does in his Prophetical Office; only with this Difference, that
Ministers are to speak and act wholly under Christ, as taught of him, as
holding forth his Word, and by Light and Strength communicated from him. Christ
himself after his Baptism, followed the Work of the Ministry: He was a Minister
of the true Sanctuary, (Heb. viii. 2.) He spoke and acted as his Father's
Minister; was a Minister of the Gospel, and as such preached and administered
Sacraments. Pastors of Churches are Ministers of the same Gospel; but in their
Ministry they act as the Ministers of Christ. Jesus Christ is the great Bishop
of Souls; Ministers are also Bishops under him. Christ came into the World that
he might be the Light of the World; Ministers are set to be Lights unto the
Churches, and are also said to be the Light of the World. Matt. v. 14. Christ
is the bright and Morning Star; Ministers are Stars (...) Christ's Hand. Christ
is the Messenger of the Covenant; Ministers are called Messengers of the Lord
of Hosts. Christ is his People's Shepherd, the good Shepherd, the great
Shepherd of his Sheep. Ministers are also frequently called Shepherds, and are
directed to feed the Flock of Christ, which he purchased with his own Blood.

Seeing therefore it is thus, that the Work that Ministers are called and
devoted to, is no other than the Work of Christ, or the Work that Christ does,
certainly they ought to do his Work; which they don't do, unless they imitate
him, and do as he does, or as he has set 'em an Example.

3. The Example of Christ is most worthy of Ministers Imitation. His Example
was perfect, without Error, Blemish or Defect; and therefore worthy to be made
our Rule, and to be regarded and followed without Exception, Limitation or
Reserve; unless in those Things which he did that were proper to his peculiar
Office. Christ's Virtue was not only perfect, but was exercised in those
Circumstances, and under those Trials, that rendered his virtuous Acts vastly
the most amiable of any that ever appeared in any Creature whether Man or
Angel. If we consider the Perfection of the Virtue that Christ exercised, his
Virtue did exceed that of the most eminent Saints, more than the purest Gold
exceeds the meanest and foulest Oar: And if we consider the Manner of its
Exercise, and the Trials under which it was exercised, and the blessed Fruits
it has brought forth, so his Virtue exceeds that of all other perfectly
innocent Creatures, and even of the brightest Angel, as the Sun in its Glory
exceeds the Stars.

And this Example was set us in our own Nature, and so is especially fitted for
our Imitation. There was in the Man Christ Jesus, who was one of us, and dwelt
among us, such Exercises of Virtue as became our State and Circumstances in the
World, as those who dwell in frail Flesh and Blood, and as Members of humane
Society, and dwellers in such a World of Sorrow and Death.

And then these amiable Exercises of Virtue in Christ, were exhibited chiefly
in the Things which he did in that Work wherein Ministers are called to act as
Co-workers with him. The bright and glorious Example of Christ that is set
before us, is chiefly in what he did during the three Years and half of his
public Ministry; and in the Devotion, Heavenly-mindedness, Humility, Patience,
Meekness, Forgiveness, Self-denial and Charity, which he exercised in the
Labors and Sufferings he went through for the good of the Souls of Men: And
therefore is especially set for the Imitation of those who are set apart that
they may make it the whole Business of their Lives to seek the same good of
Souls.

4. Ministers should follow that Example of Christ which has been spoken of,
because if they are fit for Ministers, and are such as have any Right to take
that Work upon themselves, Christ has set them this Example in what he has done
for their Souls. I have given you an Example, (says Christ in the Text) that
you should do as I have done TO YOU. Ministers should be animated in this Work
by a great Love to the Souls of Men, and should be ready to spend and be spent
for them; for Christ loved them, and gave himself for them: He loved them with
a Love stronger than Death. They should have Compassion to Men under their
spiritual Miseries, as Christ had Pity on them. They should be much in Prayer
for the People of their Flock, considering how Christ prayed and agonized for
them, in tears of Blood. They should travel in Birth with the Souls that are
committed to their Care, seeing their own Salvation is the Fruit of the Travel
of Christ's Soul. They should exercise a meek and condescending Spirit to the
mean and weak and poor, and should as it were wash the Feet of Christ's
Disciples; considering how Christ condescended to them, when they were wretched
and miserable and poor and blind and naked, and abased himself to wash their
Feet.

The chief Trials of Christ's Virtue, and so their most bright and eminent
Exercises were in the Abasement, Labor and Suffering, that he was the Subject
of for our Salvation. Which certainly may well endear those Virtues to us, and
greatly engage us to imitate that Example: So the Things whereof this Example
consists, were Things by which we have infinite Benefit, without which we
should have been unspeakably miserable for ever and ever, and by virtue of
which we have the glorious Privilege of the Children of God, and have a full
Title to the Crown of exceeding Glory, and Pleasures for ever more, at God's
right Hand.

III. I now proceed, as was proposed, in the third Place, to apply what has
been said to my self, and others that are employed in this sacred Work of the
Gospel Ministry, and to such as are about to undertake it, or are Candidates
for it; and particularly to him that is now to be solemnly set apart to this
Work in this Place.

We are those to whom these Things especially belong: We may hear Christ saying
to us this Day, I have given you an Example, that ye should do as I have done.
For the Words of Christ in the Text were not only spoken to the twelve, but are
also spoken unto us. We have now had represented to us, though in a very
imperfect Manner, the Example that Christ has set, and what Reasons there are
that we, above all others, should imitate it.

It is not only our great Duty, but will be our greatest Honor to imitate
Christ, and do the Work that he has done, and so act as Co-workers with him.

There are two kinds of Persons that are given to Christ, and appointed and
devoted of God to be his Servants, to be employed with Christ, and under him,
in his great Work of the Salvation of the Souls of Men; and they are Angels and
Ministers. The Angels are all of them, even the most exalted of them, subjected
of God the Father to our Redeemer, and given to him as his Servants, to be
subservient to the great Designs of his saving and glorifying his Elect; Heb.
i. 14. Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them who
shall be Heirs of Salvation? And doubtless, they were created for this very
End; God made them for his Son, to be subservient to him in this great Work;
which seems to be the chief Design of all God's Works. And the Employment of
Ministers of the Gospel in this Respect, is like that of the glorious Angels.
The Principalities and Powers in heavenly Places, esteem it not any Debasement,
but their great Honor, to be employed as Christ's Ministers in this Work; for
therein they are employed as the Ministers of God, in the greatest and most
honorable of all God's Works; that Work of God wherein his Glory is chiefly
displayed, and which his Heart was chiefly upon from Eternity. It Is the Honor
of the Son of God himself, that he is appointed to this Work. It was because
God the Father infinitely loved his Son, and delighted to put Honor upon him,
that he appointed him to be the Author of that glorious Work of the Salvation
of Men. And when we consider the Greatness, Importance and Excellency of it, we
have Reason to be astonished at the Condescension of God, that he would ever
improve mere Creatures as Co-workers and Ministers of Christ in this Affair;
for who is sufficient for these Things? 2 Cor. ii. 16. Who is fit, or worthy?
Who is equal to a Work of such Dignity, and vast Importance? Especially have we
Reason to wonder that God will employ not only holy and glorious Angels, but
feeble, frail, sinful Worms of the Dust, in this Work, who need Redemption
themselves: And yet the Honor that is put upon faithful Ministers, is in some
Respects greater than that of the Angels: They seem to be that Kind of Servants
that are the most dignified of the two. For Christ makes his Angels to be
ministering Spirits unto them, unto the faithful Ministers; and the Angels are
their Angels: As faithful Ministers of the Gospel are not only Ministers to the
Church, but dignified Members of the Church, that Spouse of the King of Glory,
on whom the most glorious Angels, the highest Ministers in the Court of Heaven,
are appointed to attend. And then Christ seems especially to delight to carry
on his Work of the Salvation of Souls, through the Ministrations of Men, who
have that Nature that Christ is united to, and that are of those Sons of Men
with whom he had his Delight before the World was made. So it is by the
Ministration of Men, that the Scriptures are given; they were the Penmen of the
holy Bible; and by them the Gospel is preached to the World: By them Ordinances
are administered, and through their Ministrations especially Souls are converted.
When Christ himself was employed in the Work of the Ministry in the Time of his
Humiliation, but few comparatively were brought home to him, immediately by his
Ministrations: It pleased Christ to reserve this Honor for his Disciples and
Ministers after his Ascension, to whom he promised that they should in this
Respect do greater Works than he, Joh. xiv. 12. and accordingly it was by their
preaching that the Gentile World was converted, and Satan's Kingdom overthrown.
Thus God delights to perfect Praise out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings,
that he may still the Enemy and the Avenger.

It will be our great Honor that we are called to this Work of Christ, if
therein we follow him; for therein we shall be like the Son of God: But if we
are unfaithful in this Office, and don't imitate our Master, our Offense will
be heinous in proportion to the Dignity of our Office, and our final and
everlasting Disgrace and Ignominy proportionably great; and we who in Honor
are exalted up to Heaven, shall be cast down proportionably low in Hell.

Let us further consider, that our following the Example of Christ in the Work
of the Ministry, is the way to enjoy the sensible joyful Presence of Christ
with us. The Disciples had the Comfort of Christ's Presence and Conversation by
following him, and going where he went. When we cease to follow him, he will go
from us, and we shall soon loose Sight of him.

Our being conformed to Christ's Example, will also be the way for us to be
conformed to him, and partake with him in his Privileges: It Is the way for us
to have his Joy fulfilled in us. Christ in doing the Work which the Father
appointed him to, obtained a glorious Victory over his Enemies, and having
spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphed over them. If we imitate his
Example, it will be the way for us in like Manner to conquer Principalities and
Powers, yea, to be much more than Conquerors: It will be the way for us always
to triumph in Christ Jesus. It will be the way for us to obtain Success in our
Ministry, and actually to be made the happy Instruments of the Eternal
Salvation of Souls. Christ has not only told us, but shown us the Way to
Success in our Business, and the way to Victory over all that oppose us in it.
And our imitating Christ in our Ministry, will be the way for us to be
Partakers with him in his Glory; the way for us in like manner to be approved,
and openly honored and rewarded by God; the way to be brought to sit with
Christ on his Throne, as he is set down with the Father on his Throne. And as
Christ is now exalted to shine as the bright Luminary and Glory of Heaven, so
our following his Example, will be the way for us to be exalted to shine with
him, as the Stars forever and ever. Dan. xii. 3. And as Christ in Heaven
rejoices in his Success, and will receive his Church, presented to him without
Spot, as his everlasting Crown; so our imitating Christ in our Work, will be
the way to partake with Christ in this Joy, and have the Souls, whose Salvation
we are the Instruments of, to be our Crown of Rejoicing forever. Thus Christ
and we shall rejoice together in that World of Glory and Joy where there is no
more Labor or Sorrow. And we must enter into that Joy and Glory, in the way of
following Christ in our Work; there is no other way for Ministers to enter
there.

And that we may thus follow Christ's Example, and be Partakers with him in his
Glory, we had need to be much in Prayer for his Spirit. Christ himself, though
the Eternal Son of God, obtained the Holy Spirit for himself in a way of
Prayer, Luke iii. 21, 22. Jesus being baptized, and praying, the Heaven was
opened, and the Holy Ghost descended like a Dove upon him. If we have the
Spirit of Christ dwelling in us, we shall have Christ himself thereby living in
us, and then we shall undoubtedly live like him. If that Fountain of Light
dwells richly in us, we shall shine like him, and so shall be burning and
shining Lights.

That we may be and behave like Christ, we should earnestly seek much
Acquaintance with him, and much Love to him, and be much in secret Converse
with him.

It Is natural, and as it were necessary for us to imitate those whom we are
much acquainted and conversant with, and have a strong Affection for.

And in order to our imitating Christ in the Work of the Ministry, in any
tolerable Degree, we had need not to have our Hearts overcharged, and Time
filled up with worldly Affections, Cares and Pursuits. The Duties of a Minister
that have been recommended, are absolutely inconsistent with a Mind much taken
up with worldly Profit, Glory, Amusements and Entertainments.

And another Thing that is of very great Importance, in order to our doing the
Work that Christ did, is, that we take heed that the Religion we promote, be
that same Religion that Christ taught and promoted, and not any of its
Counterfeits and delusive Appearances, or any Thing substituted by the subtle
Devices of Satan, or vain Imaginations of Men in Lieu of it. If we are zealous
and very diligent to promote Religion, but don't take good Care to distinguish
true from false Religion, we shall be in Danger of doing much more Hurt than
Good, with all our Zeal and Activity.

IV. I come now to the fourth and last Thing at first proposed, viz. to show
what Improvement should be made of what has been said, by the People of this
Church and Congregation, who are now about solemnly to commit their Souls to
the Charge of him whom they have chosen to be their Pastor, and who is now
about to be set apart to that Office.

And you, my Brethren, as all of you have immortal Souls to save, if you have
considered the Things that have been spoken, cannot but be sensible, that it not
only greatly concerns your elect Pastor to take heed how he behaves himself in
his great Work, wherein he is to act as a Co-worker with Christ for your
Salvation; but that it infinitely concerns you how you receive him, and behave
toward him. Seeing that it is for your eternal Salvation that he is appointed
to watch and labor; and seeing his Business is to do the Work of Christ for
you, it is natural and easy to infer, that your Reception and Entertainment of
him should in some Respect imitate the Church's Reception of Jesus Christ. Gal.
iv. 14. My Temptation which was in my Flesh, ye despised not, nor rejected; but
received me as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus. Christ in the Text,
commands those whom he sends, to follow his Example, and then in the 20 v.
following, he directs those to whom he sends them, how to treat them. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, He that receives whomsover I send, receives me; and
he that receives me, receives him that sent me. Seeing the Work of your
Minister is in some Respects the same with the Work of Christ, and he is to be
appointed and devoted to do this Work for your Souls in particular, surely you
should esteem him very highly in Love for his Work's sake, and do all that is
in your Power to help him, and put him under the best Advantages to imitate his
great Master in this Work, to give himself wholly to his Work, as Christ did
during the Time of his Ministry, and to be successful in his Work. And as it
was observed before, that it is impossible that Ministers should in any
tolerable Degree imitate the Example of Christ in their Work, if their Minds
are overcharged with worldly Cares and Concerns, you ought so to provide for
him and support him, that he shall have no need to entangle himself with these
Things; otherwise you will not only bring a great Temptation upon him, which
will vastly tend to hinder him in the Work of Christ among you, but will for
the sake of sparing a ^^^^le of your worldly Substance to your selves,
foolishly and miserably starve your own Souls, and the Souls of your Children,
and will but cheat your selves; for you will not be in the way to prosper
either in your spiritual or temporal Concerns. The way to have your Houses
filled with Plenty, is to honor the Lord with your Substance, and with the
first Fruits of all your Increase. Prove. iii. 9.

And as it is your Duty and Interest well to support your (...), so it concerns
you to pray earnestly for him, an^ ^^ch one to do what in him lies in all
Respects to encourage and help him, and strengthen his Hands, by attending
diligently to his Ministry, receiving the Truth in Love, treating him with the
Honor due to a Messenger of Christ, carefully avoiding all Contention with
him, and one with another. And take heed in particular, that you don't forsake
him to follow those, who under Pretense of extraordinary Purity, are doubtless
doing the Devil's Work, in separating themselves, and endeavoring to draw off
others from the Ministers and Churches in the Land in general.

If you think I have spoken something freely to you, I hope it will be
considered, that this is probably the last Time you will ever hear me speak
from the Pulpit, and that I shall never see you again 'till we see one another
in the invisible eternal World, where these Things will open to us all in their
just Importance.

And now nothing is left but to express my sincerest Wishes and Prayers, that
the God of all Grace would be with you, and your elect Pastor, and that he
would give you in him a great and long lasting Blessing, that you may enjoy
much of the Presence of Christ with you in him; that in him may be made up the
great Loss you sustained by the Death of your former faithful and eminent
Pastor, whose Praise was in all the Churches; and that you may receive him as
you ought to receive a faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, and may be a great
Comfort to him, and may receive great spiritual and eternal Benefit by his
Means; and that you may be each other's Crown of Rejoicing in the Day of the
Lord Jesus.

FINIS.

