OBSERVATIONS ON THE IMPORTANCE OF THE Northern Colonies UNDER Proper
Regulations.

NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by JAMES PARKER, at the New Printing-Office, in
Beaver-Street, 1750.

To the Right Honorable HENRY PELHAM, Esquire
Chancellor and Under-Treasurer; First Lord Commissioner of the Treasury, and
One of His Majesty's Most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.
SIR,
PERMIT me, with great Submission, to lay the following Observations before
you, which by the most Judicious with us, have been thought not unworthy your
Honor's Consideration; I should not otherwise have been troublesome.

TO satisfy those in whose Hands Providence has placed the Power of doing Good
to their Country, and Mankind, that vast Numbers of his Majesty's good Subjects
upon this Continent, and increasing, who at present know not well which Way to
turn their Hands, without deviating from the first Principles, and Intention of
Colonies, viz. that, of interfering in the Produce and Maunfactures of their
Mother Country; may be usefully employed, so as to become highly beneficial to
the British Empire in general, and to themselves in particular, is all my
Ambition; besides that of being of the Number of

Your Honor's Most Humble and Most Obedient Servants, ARCH. KENNEDY.

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
THAT the Trade of the Plantations is of the last Importance to Great Britain,
is allowed of on all Hands; and to show that it might be made much more
beneficial* especially with regard to these Northern Colonies, if properly
directed, is the Intention of the following Observations; which I shall
introduce with a short Paragraph or two from some late eminent Authors.

PROVIDING and encouraging of proper and profitable Employment and Manufacture
for the Inhabitants of a Country, and the suppressing of vicious Habits, and
pernicious Trades, is the great End as well as great Art of Government; and
according as the Governors of different Countries understand this Art, and
apply it, so are the Circumstances, Trade and Wealth of these Countries. The
Inhabitants of the Earth are like a Mine, which, according as it is wrought,
yields Riches to all the different Countries in the World. Poverty and Want,
Affluence and Riches, are only the Effects of the different Methods how
Monarchs and States work here: And where those in a Government are not at due
Pains to employ the Wisdom, Power and Authority of the Legislature, for
encouraging the Labor of the People, and leading them into useful Trade and
Manufactures, that Government lays no Foundation for its own Support, unhinges
itself, and must soon totter into Destruction with the People. And,

IT is the first and capital Concern of every valuable Member of a Community,
to promote the Interest thereof: His own Security, Peace and Happiness depend
upon it; for, in Proportion as the Society flourishes or declines, in the very
same Proportion must his own particular Interest, and that of his Family and
Friends, increase or decay:

A DUE and just Sense of this, and a warm and honest Inclination to fulfill the
Dictates of this Sense, is what is properly and truly called Public Spirit,
the first and greatest of moral Virtues; without having a warm Feeling of which
it is impossible to be an honest Man. That there is sometimes Hypocrisy in
this, as there may be in regard to all other Virtues, cannot be denied: But how
criminal soever this Hypocrisy may be in them that are guilty of it, yet it is
a strong Argument in support of the Virtue itself; for the more Mischief a
false Patriot is able to do, the more worthy, the more amiable, the more
laudable is the Character of a true Citizen, who acts from the great and
glorious Desire of doing Good to all.

Put but a poor and languishing City under my Care, I will render it rich and
flourishing, was a Saying of Themistocles, the Athenian; Which kind of Ability
is what alone constitutes a great and able Politician.

But to proceed:

OUR Southern Colonies are, I doubt, at their Ne plus ultra, if not upon the
Decline; it cannot, I think, well be otherwise, considering the great
Encouragement our foreign Neighbors, French, Dutch and Spaniards meet with;
which, together with their own Parsimony, Industry and Liberty of Exportation
to such Markets as they think will best suit their Expectations, will in a few
Years enable them to outstrip us in every Article of the West India Trade. Our
Southern Colonies, besides, are so unhealthy and disagreeable to an English
Constitution, that few go thither but with a View to return in a few Years with
Estates; and no more People will go there, or continue there, than are
necessary to raise the Commodities wanted, which are of so different a Nature
from those of Great Britain, that they can never interfere, and consequently
can never give the least Umbrage.

THE Northern Colonies open quite a different Scene* they are healthy Climates,
and are as yet but in their Infancy, and capable of the most extensive
Improvements; they increase in People, and will increase. Men living in healthy
Climates, paying easy or no Taxes, not molested with frequent Wars, must vastly
increase by natural Generation.

MR. Halley observes, That in Countries long settled, the Growth and Increase
of Mankind, is not so much stinted by any Thing of the Nature of the Species,
as it is from the cautious Difficulty most People make to adventure on the
State of Marriage, from the Prospect of the Trouble and Charge of providing for
a Family; nor are the poorer Sort of People to be blamed, since their
Difficulty of subsisting, is occasioned by the unequal Distribution of
Possessions, all being necessarily fed from the Ground, of which yet so few are
Masters; so that besides themselves and Families, they are yet to work for
those that own the Ground that feeds them, and of such does by very much the
greater Part of Mankind consist; otherwise it is plain that there might well be
four Times as many Births as we now find.

BESIDES, many flow hither daily from our own Dominions, and from other Parts
of Europe: Not less than seven Thousand Souls have been brought into
Philadelphia this last Summer; and if I have been rightly informed, many
Thousands have been brought in there yearly, for these many Years past. It has
been computed that the Northern Colonies, taken one with another, double the
Number of Inhabitants every thirty Years. If this is the Case, we shall soon
become powerful States; and the more powerful we grow, still the more People
will flock hither; and here is Room, Business, and full Employ for all, and
Millions yet unborn. It is hard to determine about the present Number of
Inhabitants upon this Continent: I have only been able to learn from a public
Paper, that the Number of the People in New Jersey, taken by Order of the
Government in 1738-9, were 43388 Whites, 39^1 Blacks. By a like Order from
Governor Morris in 1745, the Number of Whites amounted to 56797, and 4606
Blacks; and by an Increase in this Proportior, the Inhabitants will be doubled
in less than twenty four Years.

MR. Little supposes the Northern Colonies receive yearly to the Value of L.
600,000 in British Manufactures; and why may not we suppose this to be expended
at the Rate of, one with another, 20 s. a Head, which will amount to 600,000
Souls; and less I believe there is not, one with another, in these fourteen
Colonies; those in 120 Years will be 9,600,000 Souls, and the Demands of the
British Manufactures in Proportion, viz. L. 9,600,000; or rather none at all,
if we are not very soon properly employed; and this can only be done by turning
all Hands (by a proper Encouragement, not by coercive or restraining Laws) to
the raising Naval Stores, and Ship-building. Of this, and this only, we are
capable, and no Part upon the Face of the Globe more so; we have all the
Materials in great Perfection, Timber in Abundance, and good, and some perhaps
better than what England, or any other Part of the World affords, viz. the red
Cedar, and the Locusts, the Mulberry red and white, of an extraordinary quick
Growth, and which may be brought into any Shape, and are much more durable than
any Oak, especially in Places often wet and dry: Iron enough to supply the
whole Universe, not at all inferior either to the Spanish or Swedish. And those
very Flatts alone in the Mohawks Country, are sufficient to supply the Navy of
Great Britain with Hemp, for Ages to come. Hitherto our Hands have been chiefly
employed in the raising and manufacturing of Wheat, which is indeed the only
Thing we can call a Staple with us, every other Branch of Trade is but
precarious, and even that is become pretty much so, and will be more and more
so: The first Inducement to this Manufacture, was the Supply of our Southern
Colonies, which for some Time did tolerably well; but as we have increased
vastly, while they have been at a Stand, their Markets are overstock'd: Wheat I
have seen at 3s 6d; and when at 3s. it is not worth the Labor* It has indeed
bore a tolerable good Price since the Commencement of the War; but that has
entirely been owing to the Supply given to our Enemies, who could not be
supplied from Europe, and without which, had the War continued a Year longer,
many of them would have been obliged to abandon their Settlements. And this
leads me to a short, but I hope not an improper Digression, viz. That if our
British Parliament, in Case of a War, would think fit to enumerate every
Species of Provisions, in the same Manner as Naval Stores, etc. are enumerated,
only during the War; it would distress our Enemies in America more effectually
than by any other Method they can possibly think of* The greatest Obstruction
you can put upon any Fleets going home from America, is to prevent their being
supplied with Provisions from the Continent, by Way of Coracoa, etc. Nor should
we have much to apprehend from any Attacks from Europe with their Fleets, as
after such long Voyages there is an absolute Necessity for Refreshments, which
cannot be had but from hence. This M. D' Anville found by fatal Experience;
could he possibly have refreshed his Troops, he would have made great Havoc
along this Continent: Had he touched at New York instead of Jebucta, he would
have been Master of the Place in a few Hours; and a small Party from Canada at
the same Time, might have been Masters of Albany in as little Time; by which
Means they would have been possessed of Hudson's River, the whole Furr Trade,
and at the same Time the Command of many thousand fighting Indians, who would
very soon have drove us all into the Sea. This is no Utopian Tale; the French
know their Interest, and will pursue it first or last. It is true, we might
have dislodged them, but at what an Expense I am not able to determine; or that
ever we should be able to recover our Indians, is much to be doubted; and if
ever the French become absolute Masters of the Indians, adieu to our English
Settlements: And should they even attempt this and succeed, of which I make
little doubt, if even at the Expense of a Million, they will be Gainers. This
is a Point of no small Importance to the Public, and with the Public I leave
it.

Is it not high Time then, to think of securing, at least, our Northern
Frontiers while the Peace lasts, which from all Appearances cannot be very
long? The barbarous, unheard of, unprecedented Manner of making War there,
ought to move Compassion in every human Breast; a Manner peculiar to the
Canadians, of murdering Women, and Infants in their Cradles. In what Manner we
are to set about it, I must leave to better Judges to determine: From
Assemblies, by Experience, we have little to hope for; their Distance from the
Danger abates much of their Humanity and Concern; and their public Spirit is
in Proportion to their Res angusta domi, and Education. Some of them I have
been told, in order to save the Expense of a Rat-Trap, have lost a great Part
of their Winter Grain by that ravenous Tribe of outlandish Rats, which have
lately infested this Country: Nobody here, I hope, will attempt a Parrallel.
Were they, however, but as solicitous for the real Good of the Community, as
they are about gratifying particular Resentments, and grasping at more Powers
than may be consistent with a proper Balance, which seems to be the two grand
Points they have hitherto had in view, it would be happy for those they
represent: While we can command our Purse-Strings, we are in no Danger from
Power; but if in the Scramble we should lose that, whom shall we have to thank.
I would not have it imagined here I mean any particular Assembly, no One
therefore I hope will adopt it.

WE are well assured, the French would hardly have been able to have fitted out
a single Privateer this last War, had they not been supplied with warlike, as
well as other Stores of all Kinds, from this Continent. Our Legislatures here
are not, I doubt, fully authorized to prevent those Inconveniences; and though
some were willing, others in hopes, I presume, of making great Advantages,
would decline it: Nothing therefore, but a British Parliament, can put this
Affair upon a proper Footing.

But to return:

WHAT we have from the West Indies for our Flour* Beef and Pork, etc. is
generally Rum, Sugar and Molasses; all consumed here; which, from a proper Use
of Distilling, and Penals, we might as well be without. In some Parts of
Scotland and Ireland, and in most Parts of Europe, they hardly know what Rum
and Molasses is; they are not, however, without both Spirits and Sweets from
their own Produce. For my own Part, therefore, as we have Nothing from thence
of a Staple, fit for Exportation, I cannot help thinking it would be more for
the Advantage of the Community, to eat up our Flour at home, than to drink it
out in a most pernicious Spirit from abroad. The little Trade however, we carry
on with foreign Neighbors (for like the industrious Be, no Stone is left
unturned, or Port in America untried, to bring something home to the Hive, or
in other Words to answer the Balance due to Great Britain) is what at present
keeps Life and Soul together. But this cannot be called a Branch of Trade,
being so precarious, and liable to so many Accidents; the Breath of a French or
Spanish Governor puts an End to it. Besides, its so severely crampt by the late
Sugar Act, to very little other Purpose than that of distressing us in one
considerable Article in our Returns, that is, we formerly used to supply the
French etc. with Lumber, Flour, Beef, Pork, Horses, and most kind of our
Produce; for which we had in return, Sugars chiefly, which were carried to
foreign Markets, and the Produce lodged in England: Those Sugars are now
altogether in the Hands of the French, our Competitors in this, as well as
every other Branch of Trade, more especially in America.

THE surprising Progress they have made for these thirty Years past, by
promoting the Interest of their Colonies, and which they are (...) so intent in
pursuing, appears from (...) in our Papers from Paris, 19th (...) October, O.
S. 1749, viz. The Crown is particularly attentive to put its Colonies in
America upon a good Footing; to this End all the young People who offer
themselves, are encouraged upon very advantageous Terms, etc. This, continued
for thirty Years to come, will enable them to supply themselves, and France
too, with all Kinds of Naval Stores, and every Thing else North America
produces. At this Time they are collecting Materials with great Assiduity, and
building Ships of War and Merchant Men in Quebec River. So much for our Wheat
and Flour, which has hitherto employed most of our Hands. How usefully, or of
what mighty Advantage it has been, or ever like to be to the Community, in
regard to our Returns, I shall leave to others to determine.

THE Furr Trade is in a great Measure engrossed by the French; a great Part of
the Share we have in it is from them; which, together with Flax Seed, a late
Branch of Trade, but precarious, as it is subject to Accidents of the Seasons,
is all the visible Returns we have to make for the vast Importations from
Europe; and both together, I doubt, will hardly defray the Expense of the
Apparatus of our Tea Tables. As to our Beef and Butter, Ireland will ever cut
us out in those two Articles; while there are any of those Commodities abroad
in our Plantations, those from America don't go off. Our long and severe
Winters keep our Cattle low, nor do they recover much before they are attacked
by the intense Heat of our Summers, and a numerous Breed of Insects, which
prevents their kindly Feeding.

THIS, I think, is the present Situation of our Affairs; if I am mistaken, I
shall be glad to be better informed. A Situation melancholy enough! Vast
Numbers of People, and daily increasing, uselessly employed, which is the worst
Sort of Employment. In Debt we are, and in Debt we must be, for those vast
Importations from Europe: and as we increase, so will our Debts, without, from
the present Prospect of Things, ever being able to make suitable Returns; and
of Course, we must become Bankrupts, unless relieved; and that soon, either
from Necessity or Encouragement. Necessity, the great Mother of Invention,
which has no Law, nor regards no Law, will, when we can be no longer trusted
(which in a few Years will unavoidably be the Case) naturally lead us to
interfere in the Manufactures of Great Britain, and to supply ourselves as well
as we can* How far, or how soon, this may be brought to any Degree of
Perfection, with the Assistance of those Numbers of foreign Artificers, as well
as those from our own Dominions, which daily arrive among us, both needy and
ingenious; I shall not take upon me to determine: I may however venture to
affirm, the Thing is practicable; and where People in such Circumstances are
numerous and free, they will push what they think is for their Interest, and
all restraining Laws will be thought Oppression; especially such Laws, as
according to the Conceptions we have of English Liberty, they have no Hand in
the contriving or making.

GIVE me leave here to mention, some such now in being; at least, we think them
so, as well as some others of a more pernicious Tendency, with which, it is
said, we are threatened. Enumerating our Produce, and confining it to one single
Market, is a Solicism in Trade, and the Bane of Industry. Hats, though we live
almost in the Center of the Furr Trade, we are prohibited to export, though made
from those very refuge Furrs not fit for a foreign Market. By the Sugar Act, we
are debarred trading with our foreign Neighbors, for Rum, Sugar or Molasses,
which was a considerable Help to us in our Returns, as before observed. The
high Duty upon Iron from these Colonies, is no small Discouragement, while
Foreigners have Leave to import it Duty free, and in foreign Bottoms. Quere.
Those threatened are, viz. From an anonymous Writer upon Trade, (at least the
Title Page of my Book is gone) in a Tract dedicated to Sir Robert Walpole, Page
77, says, I have before observed, that some of these People (meaning the
Northern Colonies) have manufactured some of their own Woollens and Linnens; to
prevent the Increase of which, first, with Regard to weaving Woollen and
Linen, let an exact Account be taken of all Looms now erected in the
Plantations, and likewise a Register of all Persons now employed, viz. Such as
now get their Living by weaving; that for the Future, no other or more Looms be
tolerated, nor any other Persons be allowed to follow, occupy or possess, the
Privilege of weaving, but such as are now living, and follow the said
Employment, in all the Plantations respectively. In regard to Rope-making, they
should not be allowed to make above a Six-Inch Rope. 2 dly, As to what regards
the Iron Manufacture, let them be restrained from making Anchors for Shipping,
which weigh above a Hundred and Twelve Pounds; from making all Manner of
Ordnance, or Great Guns, or even Shot for such; and from making any Fusees,
Muskets or Pistols; in short, all sorts of Firearms and Swords, as also all
Manner of Locks, and Joint Hinges, with all Manner of Tools for Artificers; as
Carpenters, Sawyers, Joyners, Bricklayers, and all Sadlery and Cutlery
Iron-work, together with all sorts of Nails, less than Weight-Nails,
Horse-Nails only excepted: But let them not be deprived (I have hardly Patience
to go on) of mending any of the aforesaid Utensils. And in Page 80, after a
good deal more of the like Stuff, he condescends to soften Matters, by telling
that great Man, With regard to Stockings, if they are deprived of Weaving and
Looms, as is proposed, it would surely seem hard, to deprive them of Knitting,
etc, And even the noted Mr. Gee, in his Discourse on the Trade and Navigation
of Great Britain considered, P. 81, is pleased to say, That they also be
prohibited from manufacturing Hats, Stockings, or Leather of any kind, etc.

SHOULD the Government at any Time think fit to take these Gentlemen's Advice,
I shall not take upon me to say, what the Consequences might be; this however I
will lay down for a Maxim, and I have it from a very good Hand, that Liberty
and Encouragement are the Basis of Colonies; the one carries them thither, and
the other keeps them together when they are there; and Violence and oppressive
Laws will put an End to both. Of the first, we are thankfully to acknowledge
the great Share we have enjoyed; an equal Share of the latter, will make us a
happy People, and useful Subjects. The several Notices taken of this Affair,
both by the King, Lords and Commons, and of Consequence, the Directions from
Time to Time from the Lords of Trade, to the several Governors, hitherto to
very little Purpose, to know in what Shape we might be usefully diverted from
interfering in the Manufactures of Great Britain; are happy Omens, and show a
favorable Disposition in the Government. As there seems nothing then wanting
but a proper Method, it is to be hoped, every Man that has the least Regard to
his own Welfare, and that of his Country, and Posterity, or who has ever
seriously reflected on the moral Obligation every Individual is under, of
adhering to, and promoting the Interest of the Society in which he live, and of
which he is a Member; will contribute, either by his Advice or otherwise, every
Thing in his Power, to so good a Design. In Consequence of which, I shall
humbly offer my Sentiments, with this only Request, Si quid novisti rectius,
candidus imperti.

IT has been before observed, that these Colonies are capable of supplying the
Navigation of Great Britain, both Navy and Merchants, with every Thing, and
Article wanted, equally good with what they have from other Parts of the World,
and that at an infinite less Expense, as it will cost them nothing but the
Manufactures of their own Produce for us.

I THEREFORE would humbly propose, That each of the Northern Colonies be
encouraged to build and send home, a Capital Ship, or two, yearly, according to
their Abilities, altogether from their own Produce, ballasted with Pig or Bar
Iron, Pitch, Tar, Turpentine; laden with Timber of all Sorts and Demensions,
Masts, Spars, Bark, Pot-Ash, and Saltpeter, etc. I would the rather choose this
Method, because there will be an immediate, a constant, and continued Demand.
That of running up a Merchant Ship now and then, from green Timber, is of no
Consequence or Advantage, but rather the Contrary, as it gives our Timber a bad
Character. The common Method is, a Merchant or a Factor brings in, or sends a
Cargoe; a Ship of such and such Demensions is bespoke; the Carpenters hurry
into the Woods, and she is run up as fast as their Hands can, and there is no
more Thought of building till another Cargo or another Order comes; what less
then can be expected? Whereas that of building Ships of War, will give
immediate Encouragement for raising, and bringing into a general Magazine, all
kinds of Naval Stores; and this continued for a few Years, will turn most of
our Hands that Way, and when once set a-going, it will be no difficult Matter
to keep them a-going; their own Interest will lead them on; and as we increase
in Numbers, great Stocks of Timber and Naval Stores will be laid up, and in all
Probability we shall be able, (capable I am sure we are) to supply Europe with
Ships of all kinds. This will reduce the Price of Freight; an Article which all
our Rivals in Trade have long labored to bring about in their own Favor.

That a Fund, equal to that expended in Great Britain, for the Building such
Ship or Ships, be lodged in each respective Colony for that Purpose, and in
such Hands, as the Governor and Council shall think proper; giving at the same
Time Security, That all Payments be made, after a fair Perusal of Vouchers, by
Warrant from the Governor in Council. By lodging a Fund in this Manner, and for
these Purposes, the Government can run no Manner of Risque; because, I presume,
it will be put into the Hands of the most substantial Merchants and
Freeholders, who will become Security for one another; and as no Part of it is
to issue, but by Warrant from the Governor and Council, after a careful Perusal
of Vouchers, upon a Certificate from the Overseers, or proper Officers of the
Magazines, for Work done, or Stores lodged; it will remain safely in their
Hands, till the Whole is expended: And even then, it will every Shilling return
to Great Britain, from whence it came, together with the Effects: Could we
persuade the People of Great Britain of the Truth of this, it must convince
them at what an easy Rate they may procure the Effects and Produce of our
Labor, in Materials so essentially necessary to their Prosperity and
Well-Being, which are now had from Foreigners in a very different Manner. The
Accounts to be made up quarterly, audited and transmitted.

That proper Persons from his Majesty's Yards be appointed to reside for some
Time in every County, who are to instruct the People as to the Quantity,
Quality and Dimensions of such Timber, and other Kinds of Naval Stores, as will
best answer the Purpose; This they will soon learn, and it will be of great
Use, as those at a Distance from Rivers may employ all their Hands during the
Snow; all which to be immediately paid for, and lodged in proper Yards for his
Majesty's

That some of those be also appointed to direct the Building: A Detachment of
those superanuated, as I understand, by a late Order none are admitted into his
Majesty's Yards above Forty or under Twenty, would be of mighty Use upon this
Occasion. Our own People are all dextrous* Ax-Men, being used to it from their
Infancy. By this Means, as we increase in Numbers, great Stocks will be laid
up. In Mills we abound.

That some Persons of Skill be appointed to direct the Manufacture of Pot-Ash,
and for collecting and manufacturing Saltpeter, of which, it is said, there is
an inexhaustable Fund in the Mohawks Country, from the Dung of those
innumerable Flocks of wild Pigeons which breed there.

That proper Persons be appointed to collect Bark, by which Means great
Quantities of English Timber may be saved. By the Statute they are obliged to
cut their Timber about the End of April, for the Sake of the Bark, which it is
generally agreed hurts the Timber, and may be one Reason why foreign Timber is
so much better (as will hereafter appear) than English Timber; whereas cut
about Mid-Winter, or at a proper Season, it proves immortal; for which Reason
many Speculations have been offered for other Methods of Tanning; witness the
Premium in Ireland, to the Person who shall effectually tan the greatest
Quantity of Hides with Tormantile Roots, before May 1749, L. 10.

That proper Persons direct the preparing Pitch and Tar from the Tree; hitherto
it has only been from the Knots, at least in this Province, which is but
precarious. Pity it is, that that Scheme concerted by the Lord Godolphin, had
not succeeded in 1710; three Thousand Souls of Palatines were sent over at a
considerable Expense, which was to be reimbursed from their Labor in Naval
Stores. General Hunter had the Direction of the Whole; I was a Witness of the
indefatigable Pains he took, and had some Share in the Fatigue; they were
settled upon the Manor of Livingston, near a Forest of Pitch Pine Trees, in
order for preparing them for Pitch and Tar; but unfortunately there was not one
of them, nor any One in the Country, knew any Thing of the Matter; which
together with a Change of the Ministry at that Time, put an End to a very good
Project.

That Magazines be erected in every County, fit to receive Naval Stores, at the
same Time, provided with such of the Manufactures of Great Britain, as the
Country, either from Necessity or Choice, seem most likely to fall into. By
this Means, they would very probably soon find out the Difference of laboring
almost a whole Year about a Field of Wheat, for a precarious Market, and that
of raising Naval Stores for ready Money, or such Necessaries as they want, much
cheaper, and much better than they can possibly make them. It is common with
the Country People, to carry Wheat to the Country Stores, for such Necessaries
as they want in their Families; a proportionable Quantity of Hemp would surely
answer much better, as it is easily carried, soon weighed and thrown by:
Besides, those Store-Keepers generally put their own Prices upon the Wheat;
whereas, the Price of Hemp will be fixed according to its Quality; by which
Means it will be equal to ready Money in every Shop in Town or Country, as
proper Officers may be obliged to take it off their Hands, at the stated Price;
and if those British Magazine Manufactures, were even carried into every Nation
of the Indians, I cannot help thinking, but that it would be of great Advantage
to the Public, whether carried on by the Public, or by a Corporation with a
joint Stock: Nor can I think any Inconveniency would attend, the converting the
whole County Taxes and Quit-Rents into Hemp, etc. I mean, making it a Tender.
There are few or none of our Farmers* but raise more or less of this Commodity
for their own Use, perhaps only by Dew-Rotting; but with a few Directions, it
cannot be doubted, that they will soon fall into the other Method: Rotting of
it under the Snow, I am told is the best Way.

In Holland and Ireland, as I have been told, they raise a Ton of Hemp from an
Acre of good Land; and I am credibly informed, from the Low-Lands in the
Jerseys, they raise 30 Hundred. Now, I will venture to affirm, there is at
least of Low-Land, and Up-Land contiguous, 20,000 Acres upon the Mohawks River,
as good for Hemp as any in the World. Here then is 20,000 Tons of Hemp yearly,
for the Use of the Navy; and they may have 20,000 Tons more from other Parts in
this Government, if wanted.

It is to be observed, that during almost four Months in the Year, that is,
during the Severity of our Winters, all Labor is at a Stand; which is a mighty
Hardship upon the Poor, and which will ever keep up the Price of Labor: A
Tradesman or Labourer must live, and of Course must charge during the eight
Months he is employed, one third more, to support himself and Family, during
the four Months in which he cannot be employed; such is the Case as we are at
present circumstanced. But being properly encouraged in the raising Naval
Stores, will be an effectual Remedy for this Evil. Because Thousands, Men,
Women, and Children, old and young, may, under proper Covers, with Stoves, be
employed in the Manufacture of Hemp, Sail-Cloth, Linen, etc. during that
Season, which would give great Relief to the Poor, and an Advantage to the
Public; and those in the Country, may be fully employed in bringing
Ship-Timber, Masts, etc. to the Water Side, and Logs for Deal and Plank, to the
Mills.

That all Duties be taken off Colony Iron* and laid upon foreign Iron. By a
modest Computation, this Article alone, carries out of England, at least L.
200,000 yearly in Cash, which never returns in any Shape; besides that of its
being imported in foreign Bottoms, if I am not mistaken: Whereas, from us they
may have it by Way of Ballast, at an infinite less Expense.

That proper Sloops or Flats, be purchased or built for his Majesty's Use, to
collect such Naval Stores as may be brought to the several Creeks or Landings,
during the Sleying* Time: This will greatly encourage such as live out of the
Way of common Navigation, and may not be able, even with the Assistance of our
common Sloops, whose Compliment seldom exceed that of a Man and Boy, to take in
such heavy Timber as they may be able to bring to the Water Side on their Sleys
during the Winter Season.

That L. 50 yearly, be paid out of the Quit-Rents, to the Town or Precinct,
which brings to the general Magazine, the greatest Quantity of well prepared
Pitch and Tar from the Tree, upon Oath.

The same to such as bring in the largest Quantity of Hemp, well prepared; and
so in Proportion for other Articles.

That proper Encouragement, as in Scotland and Ireland, be given to such as
excel in any of the Articles of Naval Stores, Pot-Ash, Saltpeter, etc.

That all Master-Workmen, and Overseers of Work, be obliged to keep a Journal,
especially such as reside in the several Counties* of all Occurrences; giving
an Account how they succeed, or are like to succeed; on Account of the Nature
of our Timber; what Obstruction they meet with, and how to be remedied, etc.
all which to be transmitted with the Accounts quarterly.

That every Master-Workman and Overseer, after three Years Service in the
Country, be entitled to 500 Acres of Land, without paying any Fees, and cleared
of all Taxes, military or civil Services for seven Years, and the under
Artificers be likewise duly encouraged.

That a Duty of One Shilling, be laid on every Barrel of Flour and Bread
exported, and One Shilling upon every Barrel of Beef, Pork, etc. as a Fund for
the Encouragement of the Importation of Artificers versed in the Manufacture of
Naval Stores, and for binding out Apprentices.

That no Vessel built in the Province, be liable to the above Duties, or any
Tonnage, or other encumbrances from Acts of Assembly; provided that the Sails,
Rigging, and Iron Work, be likewise of the Produce and Manufacture of this
Colony.

I DO not mean here, to put the least Discouragement upon that grand Article of
our Trade, viz. the raising and manufacturing our Wheat; to encourage
Shipbuilding among our selves, in order to prevent Strangers from engrossing
our Ship Freights, to the no small Loss to the Province, is all that is meant.

I CANNOT however help thinking, that if all our Hands are to be continually
this Way employed, but that it will in a Number of Years, become its own
Executioner, unless we do as the Dutch do with their Spices, burn one Half of
it.

AND whereas in the Infancy of Times here, many Persons took up large Tracts of
Land, chiefly along the Rivers, paying little or no Acknowledgement to his
Majesty; (one Nowadays, possessed of 500 Acres, pays more to his Majesty,
than some of those possessed of 100,000;) and those Possessors, either from
Indolence, or a View of disposing of them in Time to great Advantage, have, in
a great Measure, neglected the improving of them, and absolutely refuse to
fell; which has been of great Prejudice to the settling and improving of this
Colony. Now, left they should take into their Heads, to think in the same
Manner, in Relation to their Timber, etc. I would have it enacted, That the
Officers appointed to reside in the several Counties, be fully empowered to cut
and carry away, with free Egress and Regress* all such Timber, etc. as may be
though it fit for the Use of his Majesty's Navy, being first valued by two of the
nighest Neighbors, nominated and appointed by such Justice of the Peace as the
said Officers shall apply to, with a Penalty for Neglect of Compliance.

That proper Encouragement be given to the Whale Fishery, which I am confident
would answer, from the many Accounts I have had from Masters of Vessels, who,
in coming upon this Coast early in the Spring, with much ado are able to steer
clear of them. That the Sturgeon Fishery would turn to good Account, I make no
Doubt.

THUS have I delivered my Opinion according to the best of my Knowledge, and
hope, and sincerely wish, every Member of the Community, capable of Reflection
on our present or future Circumstances, will duly weigh and consider it, and
either add, alter or diminish, according to his better Judgment, or substitute
Something in its Place; for most certain it is, unless our Hands are turned to
something else, than what they are at present about, we must become lower than
the lowest of his Majesty's Colonies, even than North Carolina it self; useless
to ourselves, and a Burden, if not an Eye-fore to Great Britain. The sorry
Figure we have hitherto made in the Revenue Accounts at home, is, I believe,
one Reason why we have hitherto been so little taken Notice of. I do not indeed
believe, all the Duties paid to the Crown from our own Produce, for these Fifty
Years past, would defray the Charge of one Year's Expense of the four Companies
posted here, for upwards of Fifty Years, for our Protection, together with a
Ship of War, and sometimes two. What Duties are paid at home for the Goods we
consume, I can make no Estimate: Let us however, by all the Means in our Power,
make the People of Great Britain sensible of what we are capable, even at the
Expense of sending home proper Persons for that Purpose. They have generally
but a very vague Idea of these Colonies; one very general is, I think, that of
keeping us under, and poor, in order the better to keep up our Dependence: How
well judged shall be hereafter considered; most certain it is, however, if we
were so happy as to have a Balance in our Favor, as the People in the
Southern Colonies have, that we should just do as they do, that is, send our
Children home for their Education; have all the Necessaries, as well as the
Extravagancies of Life, from that Fund; few Families would be without one or
two English Suits for themselves, Sons and Daughters: And as we are at least
ten to one, and many Degrees colder, we should take off a hundred Times more of
the Woollen Manufactures, and so in Proportion as we increase. Whereas, at
present, look into what Country House you please, on a working Day, either in
this Province, Jerseys, or Connecticut, and you will there see every one of the
Family, well and warmly clothed in Homespun from their own Produce, both with
Woollen and Linen.

WE have here our Woollen Counties as well as they have in England:
Long Island, Gardner's-Island, Martha's-Vineyard and Nantucket, raise vast
Numbers of Sheep, as does Monmouth County in New Jersey, where they make very
considerable Improvements: And there are very few Persons of any Standing, but
what raise more or less for this Purpose chiefly.

THAT of Bounties, upon the present Footing, I think from a long Experience we
may conclude, have little or no Meaning; they are tedious to come at, and often
not worth the Soliciting. Will any Farmer raise a hundred Weight of Hemp, be it
more or less, or a Barrel of Tar, with a View to the Bounty in England? Surely
not: Whereas, if when lodged in proper Magazines, or Warehouses upon the Spot,
by the Raiser or Manufacturer, upon Oath, the Bounty was to be paid, and he or
they afterward had the Liberty of disposing of it to the best Advantage,
Bounties might probably answer. But by building Ships of War, the Intention can
never fail; because there will be a constant Demand for all the Articles of
Naval Stores, and therefore no Manner of Use for continuing the Bounties.

IN the Execution of a Scheme of this Kind, it is not to be doubted, but that
many Rubs and Obstructions will offer, perhaps from a weak Representation of
the Nature and State of the Case, or from Inattention in those in whose Hands
the Interest of the Public is lodged, who seldom care to enter into expensive
Projects, which their Predecessors have either neglected or over-looked. From
the Russia and other Companies, who engross the Northern and East Country
Trade, we must expect no small Opposition. Our Materials, with great Injustice,
have hitherto been represented, either from Ignorance or Prejudice,
insufficient both as to Quality and Quantity; and it is much to be apprehended,
those Prejudices will be continued, from the vast Influences those great Bodies
or Companies, must have upon the public Affairs.

IN the Debates upon the Sugar-Act, all that could be said in our Favor, had
very little Weight. We have been represented of no Manner of Consequence to
Great Britain, when put in Competition with the Southern Colonies; at present,
indeed, not without a good deal of Reason, as they are daily throwing in vast
Sums to the Revenue, while we are daily substracting more or less: Nay, I have
heard, that it is even a Doubt with some of our grave Politicians, whether
Great Britain had not better be without those Northern Colonies altogether;
with whom I readily join in the Affirmative, if they are not put under a proper
Management.

I SHALL here beg Leave to insert an Extract from Mr. Pepys (Secretary to the
Admiralty) his Memoirs; which, as it is a Piece not commonly to be met with, it
may in some Measure amuse the Curious, and at the same Time, show the absolute
Necessity there ever has been, and ever like to be, for the Use of foreign
Timber, in the Service of the Navy, etc. which I once more do affirm, may be
had from hence, equally as good to all Intents and Purposes, as any they ever
had, or can have, from any other Part of the World; and Pity it is, they had
not thought of us at the Time of the Report.

RESOLUTIONS taken at a Conference held at the Office of the Navy, April 17th,
1686, between his Majesty's Commissioners there, and us the underwritten
Shipwrights, upon Enquiries then proposed by the Secretary of the Admiralty, on
the Behalf of his Majesty, touching the present Condition of this Kingdom, in
Reference to Plank for Ship-building.
Enquiry 1. How far it may be depended on, that England may at this Day supply
itself with a sufficiency of that Commodity, for answering the Occasions both
of the Merchants and his Majesty's Service (in the State the Royal Navy now is)
without foreign Helps?

Resolution. That it is in no wise to be relied on: Forasmuch as from the Want
of Plank of our own Growth, and consequently the Highness of the Price of what
we have, the Shipwrights of this Kingdom (even in our Out-Ports, as well as in
the River of Thames) have been for many Years past, driven to resort to
Supplies from abroad, and are so at this Day, to the occasioning their spending
of one Hundred Loads of foreign* for every Twenty of English. Besides, were our
own Stock more, the Exclusion of foreign Goods would soon render the Charge of
Building insupportable, by raising the Price of the Commodity to double what it
is, and more, at the Pleasure of the Seller.

Enquiry 2. From whence is the best foreign Plank understood to be brought?

Resolution. Either out of the East Sea, from Dantzick, Quinborough or Riga; of
the Growth of Poland, and Prussia; or from Hamburgh, namely that sort thereof,
which is shipped from thence, of the Growth of Bohemia, distinguished by its
Color, as being much more black than the other, and rendered so (as is said)
by its long sobbing in the Water during its Passage thither.

Enquiry 3. What Proportion this foreign Plank may be reckoned to bear to the
English?

Resolution. For so much as concerns smaller Vessels, of Four-score Tons
downwards, whose Works call for not more than Two-Inch Plank, of Twenty Foot
long at the Highest, meeting at thirteen and fourteen Inches in Breadth, our
English Plank will (from the Nature of the Wood) last longer than any foreign
of the same Dimensions. But for Ships of three Hundred Tons upwards, which
requires the Service of three or four-Inch Plank, from Twenty-six to Forty Foot
long, meeting at fourteen or fifteen Inches Breadth at the top End; universal
Practice shows, that the white Crown Plank of Prussia, and the forementioned
black of Bohemia, do in their Durableness equal, or rather exceed that of our
English Production of the like Dimensions; which we conceive to arise from this
plain Reason, viz. That the foreign Oak being of much quicker Growth than ours,
their Trees arrive at a Stature capable of yielding Plank of these Measures,
while they are yet in their sound and vigorous State of growing; whereas that
of England, advancing in its Growth more slowly, arrives not at these
Dimensions, 'till it become to, or rather is past the full of its Strength;
Fifty Years sufficing for raising the foreign, to what the English will not be
brought in a Hundred and Fifty: But whether we are right or not in this
Reasoning, it is upon daily Experience most evident, that our East India, and
other Ships of greatest Burden, built with this large foreign Plank, well
chosen, prove in their Durableness without Exception; variety of Instances
lying before us of Ships built wholly of English Stuff, (as well in his
Majesty's Yards as Merchants) which have perished in half the Time, others of
the like Burden composed wholly of foreign, have been observed to do: Also it
is, that the English Plank of short Lengths, cut out of young growing Timber,
is manifesty better than East Country, and therefore is preferred thereto in
laying of a Gun Deck, as far as the three Streaks next the Ship's Sides, where
short Stuff will serve, (the Quality of its Wood bearing better with being kept
wet and dry, as it generally is in that Place;) yet where, (upon the same Gun
Deck) long Plank is necessary, that of foreign Growth is, for Strength and
Duration, always preferred, from the Reason, as we conceive, before given,
namely, that of its being cut while in its Vigor, which the English will not
admit, so as to bear those Scantlings; and to this is to be further added, the
general Waniness, want of Breadth at the top End, and ill Method of Conversion
of our English Plank; daily Practice showing, that Twenty Loads of foreign,
shall, in working, go further upon a Ship's Side or Deck, than a Hundred Loads
of like Lengths of English, after its Wanes, and other Defects shall be cut
away.

Moreover, it is yet to be noted, that in planking of a Ship with foreign
Plank, the Builder shall not be driven to put in above three or four Pieces;
whereas in a like Ship, done with English, he shall be obliged to use a
Hundred, to the no less Impairment of the Strength of the Work, then Increase
of its Charge, both in Stuff and Labor; so that upon the Whole, our unanimous
Opinion is, that large Plank well chosen, of the foreign Growths before
mentioned, is, in its Service, at least as durable, in its Cost less
chargeable, and the Use of it, through the Scarcity of English, become at this
Day indispensable.

Jonas Shish, Hen. Johnson, Pet. Narberry, Abr. Greaves, Jos. Lawrence, John
Shish, Jam. Yeames, Wm. Collint, Rob. Castle.

We do fully concur in the Resolutions above written.

A. DEANE, J. BERRY, WILL. HEWER, J. NARBOROUGH, PH. PET, B. S. MITCHEL.

At the Court of White Hall, Oct, 8th, 1686* Present, the King's most excellent
Majesty, his Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark, etc. A Paper having been
this Day, (by his Majesty's Command) presented to the Board by Mr. Pepys,
Secretary of the Admiralty of England, containing certain Resolutions, taken at
a Conference held at the Office of the Navy, the 17th of April last, between
his Majesty's Commissioners there, and the Body of the most eminent
Ship-Builders of this Kingdom, upon Enquiries proposed to them by the said
Secretary, on Behalf, and by Direction of his Majesty, touching the present
Condition of England, in reference to Plank for Shipbuilding; and the said
Paper being now read, and solemnly considered, his Majesty was pleased to
declare his being so far convinced therefrom, of the Safety, Benefit, and
present Necessity of making use of Plank of foreign Growth, in building and
repairing of his Royal Navy, as to resolve, that the principal Officers and
Commissioners of his Navy, be at Liberty to contract for, and make Use in his
Service aforesaid, of Oaken Plank of foreign Growth, of the Sorts mentioned in
the Resolution to the second Enquiry, contained in the said Paper; and to
order, that the said original Paper, under the Hands of the Commissioners of
the Navy, and Master Builders, be, (for the public Importance thereof)
carefully laid up and preserved, among the Papers and Records of the
Council Table.

JOHN NICHOLAS.

FROM the following Computation of Latitudes, it is evident, the Advantage is
in our Favor, as we have more Sun to ripen our Timber, and a sufficient
Intenseness of Cold, to consollidate it; besides the easy Conveyance and
Navigation, by Means of the Snow and a Number of fine Rivers.

GREAT BRITAIN.
Situated between 2 00, 8 00 East, West from London Its greatest Breadth from
E. to W. is about 320 Miles. Length from N. to S. is about 490 Miles. Situated
between 50 00, 59 00 of Latitude, Its greatest Breadth from E. to W. is about
320 Miles. Length from N. to S. is about 490 Miles.
TERRA CANADENSIS.
Situated between 265 00, 305 00 of Longitude. Its greatest Breadth from E. to
W. is about 1200 Miles. Length from S. to N. is about 1800 Miles. Situated
between 30 00, 62 00 of Latitude. Its greatest Breadth from E. to W. is about
1200 Miles. Length from S. to N. is about 1800 Miles.
SCANDANAVIA.
Situated between 6 20, 33 00 of Longitude. Its greatest Length is about 1030
Miles. Breadth is about 840 Miles. Situated between 54 10, 71 6 of Latitude.
Its greatest Length is about 1030 Miles. Breadth is about 840 Miles.
GERMANY.
Situated between 5 00, 18 00 of Longitude. Its greatest Length is about 550
Miles. Breadth is about 510 Miles. Situated between 46 00, 55 00 of Latitude.
Its greatest Length is about 550 Miles. Breadth is about 510 Miles.
POLAND.
Situated between 14 00, 32 00 of Longitude. Its greatest Length is about 660
Miles. Breadth is about 600 Miles. Situated between 47 00, 59 00 of Latitude.
Its greatest Length is about 660 Miles. Breadth is about 600 Miles.
MUSCOVIA.
Situated between 26 00, 166 00 of Longitude. Its greatest Length is about 1250
Miles. Breadth is about 1100 Miles. Situated between 49 00, 70 00 of Latitude.
Its greatest Length is about 1250 Miles. Breadth is about 1100 Miles.
To this I shall add, the State of the Royal Navy of England (from Mr. Lediard)
at several Periods, as so many Steps by which it arrived to its present Power
and Glory.

In the Year 1573, Queen Elizabeth first brought it to its Glory, and in which
it has continued, or rather from whence it has been increasing ever since.

Ships of 100 Guns, 1 From 88 to 60 Guns, 9 From 58 to 40 Guns, 49 From 38 to
20 Guns, 38 From 18 to 6 Guns, 29 Ships, in all 146
By an Abstract in Pepys' s Memoirs, the State of the English Fleet in Pay was,
in the Year 1678, upon the Prospect of a War with France, as follows;

First Rates, 5 Second Rates, 4 Third Rates, 16 Fourth Rates, 33 Fifth Rates,
12 Sixth Rates, 7 Fire Ships, 6 In all 83
From the same Memoirs; the State of the Royal Navy; as it was on the 18 th of
December 1688, being the Day K. James withdrew.

First Rates, 9 Second Rates, 11 Third Rates, 39 Fourth Rates, 41 Fifth Rates,
2 Sixth Rates, 6 Bombers, 3 Fire Ships, 26 Hoys, 6 Hoys, 6 Hulks, 8 Ketches, 3
Smacks, 5 Yatchs, 14 In all 173
At the Death of King William, the Royal Navy consisted of

First Rates, 7 Second Rates, 14 Third Rates, 47 Fourth Rates, 62 Fifth Rates,
36 Sixth Rates, 15 Fire Ships, 11 Bomb Vessels, 13 Yatchs, 15 Advice Boats, 3
Brigantines, 5 Sloops, 10 Pink, 1 Ketch, 1 Store Ships, 3 Hulks, 12 Hoys, 16
Smacks, 2 Hired Store-Ships, 3 Hospital Ships, 77 In all, 323
A List of the present Royal Navy, from the New York Gazette, May 2 d, 1748.

First Rates, 6 Second Rates, 11 Third Rates, 47 Fourth Rates, 80 Fifth Rates,
40 Sixth Rates, 52 Sloops, 55 Bombs, 8 Yatchs, 7 Hospital and Store Ships, 6 In
all, 312
The Charge of Building a Ship of each Rate, and furnishing her with Masts,
Yards, Sails, and Rigging, with a Proportion of Eight Months, Boatswain's and
Sea Stores. From Mr. Burchett.

For a Ship of 100 Guns, L. 35553 a Ship of 90 29886 a Ship of 80 23638 a Ship
of 70 17785 a Ship of 60 14197 a Ship of 50 10606 a Ship of 40 7558 a Ship of
30 5846 a Ship of 20 ^710
The Value or Cost of the whole Royal Navy, (from Mr. Lediard) according to the
State thereof in the Year 1734, supposing every Ship to the furnished as above.
Ships, Guns, Cost of One. Cost of All. 7 100 L. 35553 L. 248,871 13 90 29886
388,518 16 80 23638 378,208 24 70 17785 426,840 30 60 14197 425,910 34 50 10606
360,604 25 40 7558 188,950 ^1 30 5846 5,846 29 20 3710 107,590 30 Fireships,
Bomb-Vessels, Sloops and Yatchs, which I suppose one with another, 2000 60,000
209 Ships, Cost, L. 2,595,337

FROM hence I would only infer, that if these Colonies had been taken into the
Case, at any proper Period of Time, how many Millions might have been saved to
Great Britain, and what a flourishing People should we have been at this Day;
and should we be so happy as to have this past Error speedily mended, what a
flourishing People we may in Time still be; of which Great Britain will reap
the Advantage: Because, it is infallibly true, that whatever Wealth the
Plantations gain, by any Article of Trade that does not directly interfere with
the Trade of Great Britain, is so much Gain to Great Britain, since every such
Acquisition is sure to center there at last; and therefore, it is the Interest
of Great Britain to encourage and promote the Industry and Labor of the
Plantations; which never fails to increase the Wealth and Power of
Great Britain and is the Case of all distant Provinces, with respect to their
Mother Countries, which always increase in Power in Proportion as their
Colonies nourish.

IN Opposition to this, some of our judicious Essay* Writers upon Trade, have
represented, that the most effectual Way to keep up our Dependence, is to keep
us low and poor; that is to say, in their own Words, or something very like
them, to deprive us of making Use of those Means which Providence has been
pleased to put into our Hands, for the Ease and Comfort of Life, from what we
raise and manufacture from our own Produce and Labor; for that which can be
raised for us in Great Britain, without the Goodness of putting us in the Way,
or telling us how we shall ever be able to pay for those Necessaries.

IN Answer to which, I shall only beg Leave to Subjoin some few Observations
from the famous Mr. Trenchard, upon this Subject, who seems to have understood
it better than all of them together.

THE other Sort of Colonies are for Trade, and intended to increase the Wealth
and Power of the native Kingdom; which they will abundantly do if managed
prudently, and put and kept under proper Regulations. Now Colonies planted in
proper Climates, and kept to their proper Business, undoubtedly do this. Our
Northern Colonies do, or may, if encouraged, supply us with Timber, Hemp* Iron
and other Metals; and indeed may supply us with most or all the Materials of
Navigation, and our Neighbors too through our Hands; and by that Means settle
a solid Power in Great Britain, not precarious and subject to Disappointments,
and the Caprice of our Neighbors; which Management would make us soon Masters
of most of the Trade of Europe.

I WOULD not suggest such a Thought, as that any of our Colonies, when they
grow stronger, should ever attempt to wean themselves from us: However I cannot
think too much Care can be taken to prevent it, and to preserve their
Dependencies upon their Mother Country. It is not to be hoped, in the corrupt
State of human Nature, that any Nation will be subject to another, any longer
than it finds its Account in it, and cannot help itself. Every Man's first
Thought will be for himself, and his own Interest, and he will not be long to
seek for Arguments to justify his being so, when he knows how to attain what he
proposes. Men will think it hard to work, toil, and run Hazards for the
Advantages of others, any longer than they find their own Interest in it, and
especially for these who use them ill.

No Creature suck the Teats of their Dams longer than they draw Milk from
thence, or can provide themselves with better Food; nor will any Country
continue their Subjection to another, only because their Great Grand Mothers
were acquainted. This is the Course of all human Affairs, and all wise States
will ever have it before their Eyes; and will consider therefore how to
preserve the Advantages arising from Colonies, and avoid the Evils; and I
conceive there can be but two Ways in Nature to hinder them from throwing off
their Dependence; the One to keep it out of their Power, and the other out of
their Will: The first must be by Force, and the latter by using them well, and
keeping them employed in such Productions, and making such Manufactures, as
will support themselves and Families comfortably, and get Wealth too, or at
least, not prejudice their Mother Country. Force can never be used effectually
to answer this End, without destroying the Colonies themselves; Liberty and
Encouragement are necessary to carry People thither, and to keep them together
when they are there, and Violence will hinder both. Any Body of Troops
considerable enough to awe them, and keep them in Subjection
****************************** will soon put an End to all planting, and leave
the Country to the Soldiers alone; and if they did not, would eat up all the
Profit of the Colony. For this Reason, arbitrary Countries have not been
equally successful in planting Colonies, with free Ones; and what they have
done in that Kind, has either been by Force, at a vast Expense, or departing
from the Nature of their Government, and giving Privilege to Planters, which
were denied to their own Subjects: And I dare say, a few prudent Laws, and a
little prudent Conduct, would soon give us far the greatest Share of the Riches
of all America, and perhaps, drive many of other Nations out of it, or unto our
Colonies for Shelter: If Violence, or Methods tending to Violence, are not used
to prevent it, our Northern Colonies must constantly increase in People, Wealth
and Power; vast Numbers every Day flow thither -- because they have Lands given
them for tilling.

AND there are so many Exigencies in all States, so many foreign Wars, and
domestic Disturbances, that they can never want Opportunities, if they watch
for them, to do what they shall find their Interest to do; and therefore we
ought to take all the Precautions in our Power, that it shall not be their
Interest to act against that of their native Country; and that can only be
done, by keeping them fully employed in such Trades as will increase their own,
as well as our Wealth: For it is much to be feared, if we do not find
Employment for them, they may find it for us. No two Nations, no two Bodies of
Men, or scarce two Men, can long continue in their Friendship, without having
some Cement of their Unions* and where Relation, Acquaintance, or mutual
Pleasure are wanting, mutual Interests alone can bind it: But when those
Interests separate, each Side must assuredly pursue its own. The Interest of
Colonies is often to wean themselves, and is always so, when they no longer
want Protection; and when they can employ themselves more advantageously, than
in supplying Materials of Traffic to others; and the Interest of the Mother
Country, is always to keep them dependent, and so employed, and it requires all
their Address to do it; and it is certainly more easily and effectually done,
by gentle and insensible Methods, than by Power alone. Men will always think
they have a Right to Air, Earth and Water, and to employ themselves for their
own Support, to live by their own Labors, and to apply the Gifts of God to
their own Benefit; and in order to it, to make the best of their Soil, and to
work up their own Product; and when this cannot be done without Detritriment to
their Mother Country, there can be but one fair, honest, and indeed, effectual
Way to prevent it, which is, to divert them upon other Employments, as
advantageous to themselves, and more so to their Employers; that is, in raising
such Growth, and making such Manufactures, as will not prejudice their own, or
at least, in no Degree equal to the Advantage they bring; and when such
Commodities are raised or made, they ought not to be forced to find out other
Markets by Stealth, or upon throwing themselves upon new Protections. Whilst
People have a full Employment, and can maintain themselves comfortably in a Way
they have been used to, they will never seek after a new One, especially when
they meet with Encouragement in one, and are discountenanced in the other; as
without this Conduct, Colonies must be mischievous to their Mother Country, for
the Reasons before given; so with it, the greatest Part of the Wealth they
acquire, centers there; for all their Productions, are so many Augmentations of
our Power and Riches, as they are Returns of the People's Labor, the Rewards
of Merchants, or Increase of Navigation* without which, all who are sent
abroad, are a dead Loss to their Country, and as useless as dead, and the more
so, if they become Enemies; for we can send no Commodities to them, unless they
have others to exchange for them, and such as we find our Interest in taking:
But our Northern Colonies are healthy Climates, and can raise all, or most of
the Commodities which our own Country produces; and without the former
Precautions, must, by the natural Course of human Affairs, interfere with most
Branches of our Trade, work up our best Manufactures, and, at last grow too
powerful and unruly, to be governed for our Interest only; and therefore, since
the Way lies open to us, to prevent so much Mischief, to do so much Good, and
add so much Wealth and Power to Great Britain, by making those Countries the
Magazines of our Naval Stores; I hope we shall not lose all these Advantages,
in Compliment to the Interests of a few private Gentlemen, or even to a few
Counties.

So far Mr. Trenchard.
AND so far, I think, I have done my Duty, in offering the aforegoing Hints;
which, if not taken up, and improved by some abler Hands, I shall be apt to
conclude, there is some Fatality attends us. I shall now conclude as I began,
with a Paragraph from a late New England Paper, and leave the Application with
those whom it may concern.

SIR Richard Cox, of Ireland, in the Year 1733* came to the Possession of a
large* fruitful, but uncultivated Tract of Land, inhabited by a Race of
Beggars, grown by habitual Wretchedness, so hardened, that, though sensible of the
Smart, they were not ashamed to prefer Hunger and Idleness, to Labor and
Competency. He therefore directed his Thoughts to remedy this Evil, and wisely
concluded, that nothing but the Establishment of a staple Manufacture on the
Premises, would answer the Purpose: For very sufficient Reasons, he chose the
Linen; and having procured a Quantity of Flax-Seed in 1735, prevailed with
them to sow it; and by the Dint of Perseverence, and a Series of admirable
Expedients to rectify his own Mistakes, to render Sloth infamous, to excite
Emulation, to increase his Colony, if it may be so called, and to interest all
the Passions of those concerned in its Success; he has at last fixed it on such
an Establishment, as, if the same Laws are observed, bids fair to be perpetual.
Already the little Town has undergone a wonderful Change; for whereas in 1735,
it contained at most but fifty Houses, many of them fit only for Beggars; it
now contains one Hundred and Seventeen, whose Inhabitants are fully employed,
and take Pleasure in being so. This is true Patriotism and Policy united:
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.

FINIS.

