The TERRORS of the LORD.

A SERMON UPON THE GENERAL JUDGMENT, Preached at MAIDENHEAD, in New Jersey, May
the 17th 1749 BEFORE The SYNOD of YORK.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M.

ISAIAH 58.1. Cry aloud Spare not, lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, and show
my People their Transgression, and the House of Jacob their Sins.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold, by WILLIAM BRADFORD in Second-Street, 1749.

2 CORINTHIANS v. 11. Knowing therefore the Terror of the LORD we persuade Men.


MY Fathers and Brethren, the governing Passions of the human Soul, which are
indeed the great Sources of Action, are love and fear. Now the Religion of
JESUS contains Arguments nobly adapted to influence both, which is indeed its
peculiar Glory. Here are the most powerful attractives to allure our love and
strike our ingenuity that ever were presented to the human Mind. I mean
redeeming Love and Goodness, the astonishing condescension of God himself in
assuming our Nature, under the ruinous Circumstances consequent to our
Apostasy, and therein enduring voluntarily and patiently, in his Name, Body and
Soul, all that Contempt and Misery which our Sins demerited, in order to
reconcile us to GOD, and save us from Wrath and Ruin. O matchless Mercy! O
amazing Goodness! O the intolerable, incomprehensible and inxpressible Agonies
and Pains our dear dear, Lord endured! One would think that the mentioning of
this Love alone, was sufficient to constrain Mankind to follow the Redeemer's
Standard, and to dare to be Holy. But sad Experience proves the Contrary.
Degenerate Mankind, while under the Dominion of Sin, are almost wholly lost to
all sense of Ingenuity and Gratitude. Nothing truly Great and Noble has the
habitual ascendant in them. No! Immoderate Self-love is the secret Spring of
all their Motions, and therefore it is necessary to alarm those selfish Souls
out of their fatal Security and Indolence, by Arguments of Terror, that hereby
they may be brought to a sight and sense of their Danger, and consequently
constrained to the earnest Use of Means to obtain an escape.

THIS the primitive Ministers of CHRIST were well aware of, as the Text I have
chosen to discourse upon informs us. They having had the Experience of the
Terrors of God upon their own Minds, before their closure with JESUS, and
having known their Necessity, Influence and Use, did labor by the same
Arguments to persuade others to be Holy, Knowing the Terrors of the LORD we
persuade Men.

AND methinks among all the Arguments of Terror grasped in the sacred Volumn,
none is more affecting and awful than that of the General Judgment, and this is
what our Text refers to, and is therefore the Subject of our present
Meditations.

THE General Judgment, my Brethren, is one of the most grand and important
Events that comes within the Compass of human Knowledge; the Consideration
whereof should summons all our Powers to the most reverend and deep Attention.

THAT there is a JUDGMENT to come, appears from the natural Subordination of
Man to God, as a Creature to his Creator, a Subject to his Prince, and a
Servant to his Master.

FROM this Subordination, correspondent Obligations do result; for the Neglect
or Performance of which, it is but reasonable they should Account, and receive
Rewards accordingly, otherwise the aforesaid Relations and Obligations would be
vain and to no Purpose.

THERE are likewise natural Relations among Men, and Transactions which give
ground to several Duties of Justice and Humanity, by the neglect of which
others may suffer great Injury, of which they can sometimes get no redress. Is
it not then most just and reasonable that such Cases should be referred to the
common Patron of RIGHT, in order to be suitably rewarded? This was the
Apostle's Judgment in his Epistle to the Thessalonians, he assures us, that it
is a righteous Thing with God, to recompense Tribulation to those that trouble
his People, and to them who are troubled rest.

AND are there not many secret good and bad Dispositions, which are not nor
cannot be here awarded? Then is it not reasonable that there should be a Time
when both shall be disclosed and obtain an answerable recompense?

THERE have been, and no doubt are in the World, such Persons who commit great
Injuries, and yet no Justice can be got of them, either because of their
Policy, their Power, or Authority: Is it not necessary therefore that there
should be a supreme Tribunal, before which such grand, insolent and
ungovernable Criminals should be arraigned? Not to say that Conscience accuses
for the most secret Crimes, and presages a Judgment to come; yea the common
Sense of Mankind dictates the reasonableness of Punishment to the Guilty. Does
not every Person when he sees another guilty of gross Crimes, judge it unfit
that he should escape with Impunity? And will not the Mind be grated with
Indignation or Grief by beholding the Inocent and Beneficent Suffering?

IS not a future Judgment, my Brethren, when eternal Rewards shall be
dispensed, needful to excite Men to Virtue and Goodness, and to restrain them
from Vice? Certainly Men are by Nature prone to a present sensible Good, which
the fears of a greater Evil, and the Hopes of a greater Good, are necessary to
turn them from.

FEAR and Hope are doubtless the main Springs which turn the Wheels of human
Action. Now this life scarcely affords Rewards which overpoize the Difficulties
that attend Piety and Virtue; neither can human Laws extend to all Actions, and
hence, as the Apostle observes, if in this Life only we have Hope, we are of
all Men the most miserable.

AGAIN, Human Society must disband without a Judgment to come: For how can that
subsist without Justice and Charity, and can these be expected without
Conscience, and can that do its Office without Fear and Hope, without a regard
to a future reckoning?

IF you enquire concerning the Judge, I answer, the absolute Power of judging,
inseparably belongs to God the Father, he being our Creator, to his Judgment we
stand obnoxious. But the exercise of this judicial Authority, is, for wise
Purposes, committed to the Son.

IT is necessary that the Judge should be visible, in order to the clearer
Conviction and more ample Satisfaction of the Parties concerned.

MOREOVER, the Power of Judgment is a Branch of CHRIST'S Kingly Office, which
the Father conferred upon him as a Reward of his mediatorial abasure. Indeed it
is an Office of two great eminence to be conferred upon any other, to determine
the final States of intelligent Beings; the Lamb is only worthy to take the
Book of Judgment and open the Seals thereof, because he has redeemed us to God
by his Blood. It is he alone who has a Capacity for this Province, because of
his Omniscience, Wisdom and Goodness.

AND surely, Sirs, it is but right that the Lord Jesus Christ should be vested
with a Power to reward his Friends, and crush his inveterate Enemies, that so
the apparent dishonours of his Cross may be forever rol'd away.

FARTHER, the Glories of God's Wisdom and Love, are displayed in appointing so
well qualified a Person, so meek, so loving, so merciful a Judge. Not to say,
that this appointment likewise serves to beget in us, a Reverence of Christ, an
Observance of his Laws, and an Imitation of his Example.

AS to the Manner of the judicial Process, the sacred Scriptures give us the
following account hereof, viz. That a Time is appointed for it, which is called
a Day.

THAT God has registered Men's Actions in the Book of his Omniscience in order
to it.

THAT for this End, a Resurrection of the Just and Unjust shall be effected by
Almighty Power.

THAT then all Persons raised, shall be presented before the Bar of God; I saw,
says the Apostle John, the Dead, small and great, stand before God,

THAT every Thought, Word and Action shall be examined, God will bring to light
the hidden Things of Darkness, and make manifest the Counsels of all Hearts.

THAT after this, a definitive Sentence shall pass agreeable to Man's Actions,
which shall be accordingly executed.

THAT all Things shall be transacted in a fair and regular Manner, to the
Conviction of all present.

NOW, my dear and reverend Brethren, methinks the Consideration of what has
been said, should excite us, who bear the Ministerial Character, unweariedly to
endeavor (pro viribus) to alarm and persuade a secure and obstinate World, by
the Terrors of the LORD, after the Apostolical President in our Text, whatever
Antinomians and Enthusiasts mutter to the Contrary, seeing that the whole need
no Physician, but the sick. Let us urge Sinners with the utmost Importunity and
most solemn Pathos, to repent and believe the Gospel; to fly from the Wrath to
come to the great Redeemer for Shelter and Salvation.

AND should not the Thoughts of the solemn judicial Scene before us, excite
all, both Ministers and People to watchfulness and sobriety, for we know not
when the Son of Man comes, at Midnight, Cock-crowing, or in the Morning.

NOR should we be thereby less induced to sincerity and candor in our whole
behavior, and to the serious steady Performance of the secret Duties of
Religion; which will be then openly and honorably mentioned, and graciously,
but plentifully, Rewarded. O, Sirs! let us endeavor to have the Testimony of
our Consciences in our favor, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the
World. O let us improve our Talents, for we are but Stewards, and must quickly
give Account of our Stewardship. My Reverend Brethren, in order to improve to
Purpose, the Talents which a gracious God has given us, is it not necessary to
keep to the Business of our proper Province, (Hoc age, en tutois isthi) and
should we not call to mind the notable Council of the famous German, who of a
Minister of Religion became a Minister of State, and for some Mismanagement
being condemned to die, generously left for our Instruction this Distick.

Disce meo exemplo, mandato munere fungi.

Et fuge seu pestem ten polupragmosunen.




LET us relieve Men's outward Wants as far as we have Ability and Opportunity:
This, above all other Instances of Goodness, is particularized in the
scriptural Description we have of the General Judgment, I was Hungry and ye fed
me, etc.

O! let us forgive Injuries, he shall have Judgment without Mercy, who has
showed no Mercy. If we forgive not Men their Trespasses neither will God
forgive ours.

O! let us beware of rash judging, why do thou judge thy Brother, or why do
thou set at naught thy Brother, for we shall all stand before the Judgment Seat
of Christ.

AND on the Contrary, dear Sirs, O let us labor to increase in that glorious
Grace of LOVE, which hopes all Things, suffers long, and is kind, and is not
easily provoked. And let the Thoughts of the last Judgment deter us from
Injustice, Covetousness and Lightness of Mind and Behavior. Let no Man go
beyond and defraud his Neighbor, for God is the avenger of all such. Seeing
then that all these Things shall come to pass, which the Scriptures speak of
the last Judgment, what manner of Persons ought we to be in all holy
Conversation and Godliness?

THE Consideration of the last Judgment may serve to keep us from Infidelity,
because of the Confusions and Injustice that are in the World, for this is but
a short Time of Trial; after the Conclusion of this Drama, all Things will be
put to Rights and appear in their proper Colors. What though we endure unjust
invectives for a Time, God will bring forth the Righteousness of his People as
the Light, and their Judgment as the noon Day; and hence the Apostle observes,
it was a small Thing to him, to be judged of Man's Judgment.

NOW, Sirs, we should be excited to examine our Sates, our Principles of
Action, our Speeches and Works, and see whether they will stand the trial of
the last Judgment.

METHINKS, dear Brethren, the Consideration of the last Judgment, may justly
strike Terror and Consternation into every Tribe of Impeninents; if it be
considered, that it shall be universal as to Persons and Things, as well as
impartial and irreversible. God will bring to Judgment every Work, with every
secret Thing; he will bring to light the hidden Things of Darkness, and make
manifest the Councils of the Heart, as I before observed.

THE most secret impious Thought must then be disclosed, and the most disguised
Contrivances brought to the open light of Day; and it is but reasonable it
should be so, seeing the moral Good and Evil of Actions much depend upon their
Intention. The Lord Jesus, who is a discerner of the Thoughts, and searcher of
the Heart, will, in the Day of his coming, examine and open the secret Springs
of the Actions of Men; and then likewise shall their Words be scanned and
judged; and this is but reasonable, seeing they are the most natural
Indications of the Temper and Disposition of the Mind, and often do much Injury
to the Names, Bodies and Estates of Men. Our Lord assures us, that Men must
give an Account of every idle Word in that Day, (Mat. xii. 36, 37.) and that by
our Words we shall be justified, and by our Words we shall be condemned. The
Apostle Jude informs us, that Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these
Things saying, that the LORD shall come with with ten Thousand of his Saints to
execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly of their
ungodly Deeds and hard Speeches. How shall the liar, the unjust Person, the
whoremonger, the slanderer and back-biter then appear.

AND every evil Action must then be stripped of all its present disguises, and
opened in its horid deformity; yea and the Evils we have induced others to
commit, we must then answer for. There a light shall be struck into all the
Works of Darkness, through all the pretexts of Subtilty, and every impenitent
Transgressor, with out Distinction, will be covered with Confusion, and exposed
to contempt and scorn!

The Alexanders and Nimrords of the Earth, and all the Sons of Violence, of
Blood and Rapine, that have sacrificed the Lives of Thousands to their Ambition
and Avarice, and made Nations tremble before them, must stand appal'd before
their Judge to receive their final Sentence: Then will they curse the madness
of their Arrogance, and cry to the Hills and Mountains to fall on them, and
hide them from the Face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath
of the Lamb. All the human Race must appear at the dreadful Summons. The
greatest Potentates, the depest Politicians, ^he bravest Heroes, as well as
every Person of the meanest order, to receive their Doom, their final Doom! At
that Tribunal there will be no difference or respect of Persons observed
between the greatest Prince and meanest Peasant And that which makes the
General Judgment the more solemn and dreadful, is that there will be no Appeal
forever from the Sentence of the Judge.

WITH what awful Solemnity does the holy Scriptures represent the Scene of the
last Judgment, then, we are told, that there will be distress of Nations, with
perplexity, the Sea roaring and Men's Hearts failing them for fear, that then
the Sun shall be darkened and the Moon shall not give her Light, and all the
Powers of Heaven be shaken; that the Archangel's Trumpet shall sound to the
Extremities of the Earth, after which the Son of Man shall descend from the
visible Heavens in a Cloud, and appear in his own and in his Father's Glory.
Thousands of Angels shall minister to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
shall stand before him! The Son of GOD will come with Power and great Glory in
flaming Fire, to take Vengeance on those that know not GOD, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting
Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power.
Then the Sea shall give up her Dead, and Death and Hell shall deliver up their
Dead, and the whole Atmosphere be in one awful uniform Blaze! The Heavens shall
pass away with a great Noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent Heat,
the Earth also and all its Works shall be burnt up!

THEN the Almighty Judge shall be seated upon his Sapphire Throne from which the
Earth and Heavens shall flee away.

WHEN our blessed Savior came to suffer for the Sins of the World, he came in
the Form of a Servant, and veiled his Glory with a clayie Mantle; he stooped to
assume the Infirmities of Humanity in the most humble Circumstances, and was
exposed to Cruelty and Contempt: But when he comes as a Judge, he will assume
his proper Greatness, and appear with a Splendour suitable to the Dignity of his
Office, suitable to the Glory of his Character! All Nature shall tremble before
him, and the Foundations of the Hills shall shake because he is Wroth! The Sars
shall start from their Orbs, and the Canopy of the visible Heavens shall
shrivel up into a flaming scroll, and the whole Earth shall be a burning
trembling Globe of Fire. The great Redeemer will be clothed with Majesty
surpassing all Expression, the (...) of his Head will be white as Snow, his
Eyes as a flame of Fire, his Countenance as the Sun shining in his Strength,
and his Voice as the Sound of many Waters, and the Court that attends the
descending GOD, will be arrayed in all the Pomp of Heaven; in their magnificent
ROBES of State. When all these amazing Events are brought to pass, and that in
a sudden and tremenduous Manner, how shall the Wicked appear; when the Curtain
between both Worlds is drawn, and all Inhabitants of Heaven, Earth, and Hell
present themselves to us at one View, how will it strike the impenitent with
Terror and Amazement, especially when the final Sentence shall be pronounced,
Go ye Cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. How
dreadful will it be for all the Sons of Shame and Death, to behold universal
Nature dissolving in the most dreadful Agonies, and all the curious Works of
Art covered with Flame and Ruin! To hear the Heavens roaring with dreadful
Thunders, and the great Ocean bewailing the general Catastrophe, with the
loudest Murmurs! To see the visible Heavens covered with one sheet of Fire, and
sending down burning Showers upon the reeling Earth! The sulphurous Matter of
which will doubtless catch fire and burst its Bowels into burning Rivulets! How
dreadful will it be to feel the Earth totter like a Tennis Ball with
Earthquakes, and to hear the dreadful rumblings thereby caused in its Bowels;
together with the hideous Screeches of damned Men and Women! The whole Earth
will be then like a burning Vesuvius or Aetna! Where will these poor Creatures
fly for shelter who have no Friend in Heaven, or on Earth to help them in their
Distress? What shame must cover their Faces? What Anguish rack their Hearts,
when their secret Impieties are disclosed, before that vast Assembly of the
Quick and Dead! How must a Sight of their Companions in Iniquity confound them
and increase their Woe and Horror? How shall ye be able to look the great Judge
in the Face, whose Laws ye have broken, and whose Salvation ye have slighted?

O secure Sinners, your Eyes and Ears shall see and hear these Things! O what a
scrole of Mourning and Lamentation and Woe shall then be opened before you? (
Rev. i. 7.) Behold he comes in the Clouds, and every Eye shall see him, and
those also that peirced him, and all the Kindreds of the Earth shall wail
because of him, O Sinners! Sinners! realize these awful Events by frequent and
believing Mediation, and make it the Business of Life to secure a Retreat from
the Tempests of divine Vengeance, under the Wing of IMANUEL, by bewailing your
Transgressions against him, and by believing in him; set your Faces toward
Zyon with a religious Resolution, enquire the Way thither with humble
Importunity, and weep as ye go! O let your Laughter be turned into Mourning,
and your Joy into Heaviness! Rent your Hearts and not your Garments, and turn
unto the Lord your God, for though he be just and righteous, jealous and
omnipotent, yet he is gracious and merciful, slow to Anger, and of great
Kindness.

SIRS, the strongest Images we can form of the Majesty of GOD, and the terrible
Effects of his angry Resentment are infinitely too feeble and languid to give
an adequate Representation thereof. O therefore let us kiss the Son, least he
be angry and we perish from the Way, when his Wrath is kindled but a little,
blessed are all they that put their Trust in him. By this may we all be hid in
the great and terrible Day of GOD's Anger, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD. AMEN.
AMEN.

FINIS.

