MEDITATIONS ON Divine SUBJECTS: BY Mrs. Mary Lloyd.

To which is prefixed, AN Account of her LIFE and CHARACTER.

By E. PEMBERTON.

NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by J. PARKER, 1750.

TO HENRY LLOYD, OF THE Manor of Queen's-Village, Esquire;
Honored SIR,
YOU have an indisputable Claim to the following Publication, sacred to the
Memory of your late excellent Consort; who was once the Desire of your Eyes,
and whose Idea, I am persuaded, will never be banished from your Breast. While
with a melancholy Pleasure, you review her amiable Character, it will greatly
assuage your Sorrow, to reflect, how happily prepared she was for that World,
to which, it pleased God, so suddenly to remove her. Were these the Remains of
a perfect Stranger, you would doubtless peruse them with Delight, for the
sublime Sentiments of Piety and Devotion, which they contain: But they must
come with a singular Advantage, when you consider them as the pious Breathings
of a Woman, with whom you was many Years united, in the tender Ties of a
conjugal Relation.

YOUR Loss, it must be acknowledged, was very great: And, I may be allowed to
say, I had a deep Share in that awful Providence. When you was deprived of the
Companion of your Bosom, I lost the Best of Mothers. Blessed be God, we sorrow
not, as others which have no Hope! We daily' saw, for her TO LIVE WAS CHRIST;
and have therefore the highest Assurance, TO DIE WAS GAIN. She has taken
Farewell of our Earth, and ascended to her native Skies; -- changed the
unsatisfying Enjoyments of this Life, for the unspeakable Felicities of the
KINGDOM OF GOD. While we are tossed upon the Wave of this troublesome World, she
has entered the Haven of uninterrupted Rest. While we are stationed in Posts of
Danger, she has fought the good Fight of Faith, and received a Crown of
unfading Glory. May we who survive, adore the unspotted Sovereignty of that
BEING, who acts with unerring Wisdom, even in his darkest Dispensations; and
gives no Account of his Matters to the Children of Men! May we learn from her
Example, a holy Indifference to all sublunary Things; and excited to make our
Calling and Election sure!

THAT GOD may support you under the afflicting Visitation, with the
Consolations of his Grace; -- continue you long a Blessing to your Family; --
irradiate the Evening of your Life, with the Light of his divine Countenance;
-- and at last, give you a joyful Meeting, with your departed Spouse, in the
Regions of unmingled Happiness, is the unfeigned Desire of him, who still begs
Leave to subscribe himself,

Honored SIR, Your dutiful Son, E. PEMBERTON.

THE LIFE and CHARACTER OF Mrs. MARY LLOYD.
THERE is so irresistible a Charm in undissembled Virtue, that there are but
few, who do not profess to admire its Excellence: -- Something so shocking in
the naked Deformity of Vice, that the most corrupt Minds are ashamed to own
their Attachment to it. But when Men are exhorted, to regulate their Lives by
the sacred Precepts of Religion, how apt are they to look upon it as a vain and
impracticable Attempt; and complain that it offers Violence to Human Nature, by
laying an unreasonable Restraint upon the Appetites of Flesh and Blood. To
remove these groundless Prejudices, the inspired Scriptures set before us, the
bright Cloud of ancient Witnesses, who have shone as Lights a dark and
degenerate World; and earnestly invite us to be Followers of them, who through
Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. And perhaps, nothing affords greater
Encouragement to serious Minds, than to find that Men of like Passions, placed
in the same dangerous Circumstances, and surrounded with equal Trials and
Temptations, have, by the Assistance of divine Grace, bravely conquered the
Difficulties of the Christian Life, and ran with Patience the Race set before
them. This shows us, that Religion is not a bare abstracted Theory, contrived
for the Entertainment of speculative Minds; but is an undoubted Reality, of
which many of our Fellow Creatures have felt the transforming Power in their
Hearts; and exemplified in an amiable and virtuous Conduct. This has the
highest Tendency to encourage others, to imitate those instructive Patterns,
who in their Day were illustrious Ornaments of the Church, and diffusive
Blessings to Mankind. Upon this Account, the Lives of eminent Saints, have
always been esteemed the most valuable, Part of Ecclesiastical History. In this
Way, they have spoke to Survivors, even when sleeping in the Silence of Death,
and extended the Influence of their Piety, to distant Places, and through
succeeding Ages.

THERE is a public Honor due to Persons of dishnguish'd Worth: Whilst they
live, we cannot publish their Virtues, without exposing them to the dangerous
Temptation of Pride, and ourselves to the Imputation of a servile and designing
Flattery. But when they are removed from this Stage of Vanity, and raised above
the Censure or Applause of Mortals, we may safely propose their lovely
Patterns, to the Attention and Imitation of Posterity. And indeed, it would be
an Injury to Mankind, to suffer their superior Qualities, to lie buried in
perpetual Oblivion; and those Names which God has dignified by his Grace, to
perish without any Mark of Distinction. When they are ascended above these
Regions of Guilt and Darkness, and are entered into the General Assembly of the
Church of the Firstborn, it becomes us who are still confined to this Vale of
Tears, and fighting under the Banner of the Cross, to perpetuate the
Remembrance of their Virtues, and ardently aspire after that State of Purity
and Perfection, to which they are advanced.

ALL who had the Happiness of Mrs. LLOYD's Acquaintance, will be so just as to
acknowledge, that in the present Age there have appeared, but few more
excellent Examples of genuine Piety, and extensive Usefulness. Her Friends will
be pleased, to have those extraordinary Qualities, placed in a proper Light,
which rendered her their Delight and Admiration, while living, and will embalm
her Memory, now she is dead. Strangers to her, may also from a Perusal of these
Pages, be excited to despise the Pomps and Venities of Life; which are unworthy
the Pursuit of a rational Creature; and to seek after those Endowments, which
add a real Dignity to Human Nature, and prepare for a superior State of
Existence.

THESE Considerations have determined me, though in all respects unequal to the
Task, to give some Account of her Life and Character. The Reader must not
expect a pompous Detail of Facts, diversified with a Variety of entertaining
Incidents. -- She maintained one uniform Tenor of Devotion to the Supreme
Being, and diligent Attendance to the Duties of Common Life. She never affected
a public Appearance beyond the Decency of her Station; not interfered with
Affairs, foreign to her Sex. This will necessarily cut short the Historical
Part of the following Performance. I shall principally enlarge upon her
Character, which cannot, without the extremest Injustice, be confined in a very
narrow Compass.

MRS. LLOYD was born at BOSTON, in NEW ENGLAND. May 1681, of a good Family;
being the only Child of Mr. John Clarke and Mrs. Mary Atwater. Her Father, a
Commander of a Vessel, was, in her Infancy, carried into Captivity by the
Corsairs of Barbary, who to this Day infest the Mediteranean Sea, and are the
common Enemies of the trading Nations of Europe. These Barbarians generally use
those who are so unfortunate as to fall into their Hands, with the greatest
Cruelty: But Capt. Clarke being a Gentleman of Ingenuity and Address, met with
uncommon Civility, and was exempted from that servile Drudgery to which most of
their Prisoners are condemned. Here he was seized with that fatal Distemper,
the SmallPox, of which he died in a few Days. -- Her Mother was a Woman of
superior Piety and, good Sense, and lived to the Age of Sixty three, in Honor
and Usefulness. She was endued, with great Prudence; managed her household
Affairs with the justest Economy, and supported the Afflictions of Life with
Patience and Resignation. She was familiar with the Thoughts of Death, even in
her highest Health, and made it her principal Business to prepare for that
important Event. When she felt its first Approaches, she received it not as the
King of Terrors, but as a Messenger of Joy -- the Angel of her Deliverance. The
Blessed Day, (says she) is come, which I have been so long expecting and
preparing for. -- And in a few Hours expired in the greatest Tranquillity and
Peace.

THIS Gentlewoman, after Capt, Clarke's early Departure, continued several
Years a disconsolate Widow. Afterward she married Mr. John Coney; who always
treated Mrs. Lloyd with the Affection and Tenderness of a Father. Under his
Roof, she enjoyed all the Opportunities she could desire, to improve in
Knowledge and Virtue; and to obtain those other Qualifications, which were
suitable to her Sex and Character. She had equal Advantages with his own
Children: I have often heard her say, that if at any Time a Distinction was
made, it was generally in her Favor. She always spoke of this uncommon
Generosity, with the greatest Thankfulness, and paid this worthy Gentleman,
while he lived, all the Offices of FilialPiety. After his Death, she never
mentioned his Name, without some singular Mark of Gratitude and Respect.

IN this agreeable Situation, Mrs. Lloyd passed the Days of her Youth; and by
her virtuous, obliging Behavior, recommended herself to the good Opinion of
all who knew her. The Royal Preacher tells us, that Childhood and Youth are
Vanity; and melancholy Observation shows, that this beautiful Season of Life
is generally lavished away in Amusements, if not spent in an entire
Forgetfulness of God, and the great End of our Being. But perhaps, never was
any Person freer from the common Follies incident to Youth, than Mrs. Lloyd.
The Principles of the divine Life, seemed to display themselves with the first
Dawning of Reason. She often said, that she never knew the Time, when she began
to be serious. From her very Infancy, she discovered a deep Abhorrence of every
Vice, and an earnest Solicitude to devote herself to the Service of her Maker.
From a Child, she read the Scriptures with unusual Delight, -- observed her
stated Hours of Retirement, -- and took Pleasure to associate herself with
Persons of Eminence in Religion.

BUT, not with standing the Happiness of an unblemished Youth; She, in the
early Years of Life, fell under a deep Conviction of her Guilt and Misery; and
was, for many Months, anxiously solicitous for her immortal Welfare. She found
no Rest, but at the Footstool of sovereign and unmerited Grace; -- no Safety,
but in a fiducial Application, to the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ. All
her Days, she had the highest Relish for those Doctrines, which have the most
apposite Tendency to humble the Pride of human Nature, -- exalt the Riches of
divine Grace, -- and ascribe the entire Glory of Salvation to a crucified
Redeemer.

THE Beauty, of her Person, -- the Sprightliness of her Wit, -- the Charms of
her Conversation, but above all, the unfeigned Piety which crowned her other
Accomplishments, soon procured her many Admirers. She had several advantageous
Offers, of a Settlement in the married Life. She fixed her Choice upon the
Revd. Mr. Ebenezer Pemberton, Pastor of a flourshing Church in BOSTON; and one
of the most celebrated Preachers of his Age. To this Gentleman she was married
in the Year 1701. They lived together with mutual Delight and Satisfaction,
till the Year 1717; when their Marriage Relation was dissolved, by the Death of
Mr. Pemberton. They had seven Children: Three of which died in their Infancy;
Four, through the good Providence of God, yet survive. May we be Heirs of that
Grace which so eminently resided in our departed Parents, and follow them in
their exemplary Course of Virtue! -- Then, we shall shortly meet them again, in
that blessed World, where will be no more Sorrow, Separation, or Death!

THE indulgent Reader will allow me to shed a few Tears over the Grave of so
excellent a Father; who^^ instruction and Example I lost, before (...) an
Opportunity, to know their (...) and Advantage. I shall not attempt his
Character: -- I am happily prevented by the Sermons occasioned by his Death,
preached by the Revd. Drs. Colman and Sewall. His own printed Discourses show,
he had all the Qualifications requisite to constitute a great and a good Man.
The masterly Reasoner, -- the judicious Divine, -- the servant Preacher, -- the
accomplished Orator, appear in almost every Page of his Writings. He spent his
Life in the most assidous Labors, to enlarge and support the Kingdom of his
Master. He died in the full Assurance of Faith, in triumphant Views of eternal
Felicity. This was the Language of his faultring Tongue, in his expiring
Moments, I thank God, who has given me a good Hope through Christ.
Notwithstanding my many Infirmities, both in public and private; through his
Grace I have been enabled to be sincere and upright before him. And I can now
look for an House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens, when this House
of my earthly Tabernacle is dissolved. And this Hope is built only on the
Merits of Christ, who has suffered so much for me; who died, and is riser
again, and lives for ever, to make Intercession for me. And upon this
Foundation is built, my Hope for my self, my Family, my Church, and the whole
Israel of God: And I thank God, who has enabled me, in a dying Hour, to
express this my Hope.

THIS Loss must doubtless be very heavy to Her, who for many Years had been
united with him, in the most delightful Society, and resin'd Friendship. Her
tender and affectionate Nature, was ready to sink under the severe Trial. But,
she was enabled to glorify God, in the Height of her Affliction; and exhibit to
all around, an instructive Example of Christian Patience, and profound
Submission, to the Will of her heavenly Father.

IN her Widowhood, as soon as her Circumstances would permit, she entered upon
a retired Scene of Life; that she might with greater Freedom, converse with
Heaven, and inspect the Education of her Children; who were now left under her
immediate Direction. Perhaps, none ever manifested a more solicitous Concern
for the Felicity of their Offspring, than Mrs. Lloyd; or, more incessantly
traveled in Birth, that Christ might be formed in them. She lodged many an
ardent Petition in the Court of Heaven, on their Behalf; and daily recommended
them to the Grace of our Almighty Savior. She requested nothing for them, with
a passionate Importunity, but a Union to Christ, as their living Head; and an
Admission into the Number of his redeemed People. She rejoiced, to see them
increase in Knowledge, -- appear with a just Decorum, upon the Stage of Life,
-- and comfortably settled in the World. But she knew, these were poor and
precarious Advantages, insufficient to satisfy the boundless Appetites of an
intelligent and immortal Spirit. To obtain for Herself, and Posterity, the
Favor of an unchangeable GOD, and an Intrest in that everlasting Covenant, in
all Things well ordered and sure, was the Height of her Ambition. If this was
secured, she was persuaded they would be happy in Prosperity and Adversity, --
in Sickness and Health, -- in Life and Death. Therefore, she instilled into
their tender Minds, the good Knowledge of the Lord: And as they grew up to
Years of Discretion, by the most gentle and attractive Methods of Persuasion,
strove to engage them to dedicate their Youth, to the Service of God; and
sedulously to avoid those Irregularities, by which the Morning of Life, is so
frequently darkened and defiled.

SHE continued a Widow several Years; employing her Time, in Exercises of
Devotion -- the necessary Cares, of her Family, -- and the Offices of
Friendship. Afterward, she married John's Campbell, Esquire; a Gentleman. of good
Character, and in plentiful Circumstances: Who proved an affectionate Husband
to Her, and an indulgent Father to her Children. He lived but a few Years after
this Marriage; and died in a peaceful and honorable old Age.

AFTER a suitable Interval, she married Henry Lloyd, Esquire; of the Manor of
Queen's Village, in the Province of NEW YORK. With him she lived in
uninterrupted Harmony and Friendship, upwards of twenty Years. She now entered
upon a Scene of Life entirely new. Hitherto she had dwelt in a populous Town,
among her Relations, and surrounded with a large and delightful Acquaintance.
But upon her Marriage with Mr. Lloyd, she removed into a distant Province, to
the retired Solitudes of a rural Life. She accommodated herself to this Change
of Circumstances, with great Propriety and Decency; and in the calm Retreat,
enjoyed the Blessings of Peace and Plenty, and an Opportunity of improving, in
those devout Exercises, which had always been the Joy and Solace of her Life.
But though she was, in a great Measure, removed from the Society and Amusements
of the World, yet, she did not fly its important and necessary Business. In
her, Mr. Lloyd found an agreeable Companion, -- his Children, an affectionate
Mother, -- his Servants, an indulgent Mistress --, his Tenants, a kind and
beneficent Friend; who rejoiced in their Prosperity, -- sympathized with them,
in their Sorrows, -- relieved them, in their Wants, -- and was never easy, but
when performing foam charitable and benevolent Action. She soon became
acquainted with the Affairs of the Country, and engaged in them with Alacrity
and Vigor. She managed a numerous Family, with the exactest Economy; and
treated Mr. Lloyd's Children with the same Tenderness and Affection, as if they
had been her own.

So amiable a Conduct, must certainly highly, endear her, to all who were so
happy as to be related to her. Accordingly, the Family, in which her Lot was
now cast, showed her uncommon Respect; and were sensible, that in her, they
received a great and extensive Blessing.

IN this solitary, but pleasant Retirement, she managed her Time in the most
useful Manner; looking well to the Affairs of her Household, and spending her
remaining Hours, in Prayer, Meditation, and other religious Exercises;

DEATH, she kept continually in View; and so numbered her Days, as to prepare
for that decisive Moment, on which is suspended an Eternity of Happiness or
Misery. Her constant Concern, was to act her Part upon the Stage of Life, well;
to the Acceptance of her Judge; and to finish her Course with Joy. She was
naturally of a tender and delicate Constitution; but was favored with an
unusual Degree of Health, for a Woman of her advanced Years. For some Time
before her Death, she perceived a Feebleness of Nature, gradually increasing
upon her; and often said. The Lamp of Life is almost expired! -- but still
maintained her Activity, and Sprightliness of Temper. She spoke of Death with
an Air of Pleasure; and seemed to wait, with earnest, Desire, a peaceful
Dismission to eternal Rest. The Day before she died, she was in good Health;
and in the Evening, supped and conversed with her family and Friends, with her
accustomed Cheerfulness. She retired, and spent some Time in reading the Rev.
Mr. Hervey's Meditations; -- a Book she greatly admired for its sublime
Thoughts, elevated Piety, and splendid Diction. There is something so striking
in some of the last Lines she read in that admirable Performance; and so
surprizingly adapted to the Scenes of Providence, which were before her, that I
cannot forbear transcribing them. O! how thin is the Partition between this
World and another! How short the Transition from Time to Eternity! The
Partition, nothing more than the Breath in our Nostrils; and the Transition may
be made in the Twinkling of an Eye. The Eyes of that Sublime Being, -- who sits
upon the Circles of the Earth, and views all its Inhabitants with one
comprehensive Glance, -- even now behold many Tents in Affliction: Such
Affliction, as overwhelmed The Egyptians in that fatal Night, when the
destroying Angel sheathed his Arrows in all the Pride of their Strength. --
Some, sinking to the Floor from their easy Chair; and deaf even to the most
piercing Shrieks of their distracted Relations. -- Some, giving up the Ghost as
they are reclined, in all alone, under the shady Arbor, to taste the Sweets of
the flowery Scene. -- Some, as they sail, associated with a Party of Pleasure,
along the Silver Stream, while Wine and Music flow around: Some intercepted, as
they are returning Home; and some interrupted, as they enter upon an important
Negotiation.
She went to Bed, at her wonted Hour, without any apparent Symptoms of
approaching Disorder; and soon fell into a calm Sleep. About two o'Clock, she
awaked; and in a few Minutes, complained that she wanted Breath; and asked for
a Dose of Elixir, which used to relieve her in her Faintness. It was ready at
Hand, and brought immediately: She drank it down, and that Moment expired, --
without a Groan or Struggle; Novenrber 10. 1749. Thus, she passed from the
gentle Slumbers of Nature, to the final Sleep of Death: -- At once, changed a
dark and disordered World, for the transporting Abodes of Light and Joy; --
without experiencing those melancholy Scenes of Sickness and Pain, -- the
usual Attendants of a dying Bed!

A SUDDEN Death is the Object of universal Dread. And certainly, nothing can be
a more affecting Spectacle than to behold gay unthinking Creatures, removed in
a Moment, from the tumultuous Hurries of the World, and the defiling Pleasure
of Sin, to the enlightened Tribunal of God; where they must receive an
irrevocable Sentence, according to the Deeds done in the Body. With the fastest
Reason, do the greatest Part of Mankind pray, From sudden Death, good Lord,
deliver us; for t'hey waste their Days in a fatal Forgetfulness of their latter
End: And if the mortal summons surprises them unawares, it surely finds them
unprepared for the momentous Change. But to the humble, the watchful Christian,
who stands with his Loins girt, and Lamp burning, the most sudden Death can be
no Disadvantage: -- The sooner the inevitable Arrest is executed, the easier
his Passage to the Regions of unmolested Repose.

WHAT can be more desirable, than to be removed at once, from the fading
Comforts of Earth, to the unwithering Joys of Heaven! -- One Hour, prostrate at
the Footstool of Grace; groaning under a body of Sin and Death; -- the next,
standing before the Throne of God; adorned with the shining Glories of complete
Salvation! -- One Moment in the Bosom of our earthly Friends; -- the next,
united to the blissful Society of Angels, and the general Assembly of the
Spirits of just Men made perfect! -- Glorious Transition! -- not to be deplored
as a Misfortune; but congratulated as a distinguishing Happiness! -- When we
have finished our appointed Time upon Earth, and we are ready for a Removal to
an everlasting Habitation, it is a Favor to be delivered from the common
Agonies of dissolving Nature, and excused the sad Solemnity of bidding Adieu to
out Acquaintance and Friends.

BESIDES what may be learned of Mrs. Lloyd's Character, from the proceeding
Account; Justice to her uncommon Merit; and a Regard to the Edification of
Survivors, demand that I enlarge a little farther, on those various
Excellencies, which rendered her so useful in Life, and so much lamented at
Death.

HER Aspect way lovely, serene and pleasant. She spoke in a graceful Manner, in
soft and flowing Language. The Politeness of her Address, the Vivacity of her
Conversatiorn, joined to the Benevolence of her Disposition, captivated all
Companies; and made Persons of every Rank, fond of cultivating her Acquantance.

HER intellectual Faculties were vastly beyond the common Level: A penetrating
Understanding; a sprightly Fancy; a tenacious Memory; a clear and happy
Expression, raised her above the greatest Part of the Sex; more than any of
those glittering Distinctions, upon which they are apt inordinately to dote.

But, Mrs. Lloyd was sensible that the Charms of Wit and Beauty, if not
improved in the Service of Heaven, only render Persons more exquisitely base
and miserable. It was therefore her most solicitous Care, to have her Breast
animated with the Love and Fear of God; and her Life governed by the Precepts
of Religion. And perhaps, few ever acted more uniformly under is influence,
than the Person we are speaking of. She thought, spoke, and lived, as One that
set the Lord always before her, and retained an abiding Sense of his Love. She
began the Day with God, and rose early that she might have a calm uninterrupted
Opportunity for the Offices of Devotion. No Hurry of Business, -- no Diversion
of Company, -- no Avocation of Life, were suffered to exclude her stated Hours
of Meditation and Prayer: These, she attended, not as an appointed' Task
imposed upon her; but always returned to them, with Eagerness, as the most
refreshiing and honourble Employment. How she improved her Time, is fully known
only by HIM to whom those sacred Hours were consecrated. Her private
Manuscripts plainly show, they were spent in the most pious and profitable
Manner; -- adoring the AUTHOR, of her Being, -- resigning herself afresh to the
SAVIOR of Mankind, -- meditating on divine Subjects, -- strengthening her
Resolutions to live to God, and the Designs of his Glory, -- and earnestly
imploring the almighty Aids of the Spirit; without which she was sensible, she
could do nothing spiritually good.

HER Piety was not confined to the Closet, but directed, animated and supported
her, through all the business of the Day. To obey the Comamds of her Maker, -- to
submit to the unerring Disposals of Heaven, -- to maintain a happy Serenity of
Mind, amidst the various Vicissitudes of Life, -- to resist the Terrors and
Allurements of an ensharing World, -- was her constant unremitted Endeavor:

SHE read much; -- but had not Taste for any Thing, but what had an evident
Tendency to make Mankind wiser or better. Books of mere Amusement, she seldom
cared to meddle with, esteeming Time too precious, to be trisled away is
Vanity. Treatises of practical Divinity,she read with a peculiar Relish. Those
Writings, which were best calculated to inspire her with a humble Sense of the
Vileness and Corruption of Human Nature; and give her exalted Views of the
wonderful Love of God, in the mysterious Work of Redemption, -- were what, she
principally valued and studied. But above all, the BOOK of GOD, was that in
which she took the greatest Delight. This she made here her constant, Friend
and Cousellor, -- the Guide of her Youth, -- the Companion of her Solitude, --
and the Support of her declining Age. She read the sacred Pages, and other
religious Tracts, not so much to increase her speculative Knowledge, and
gratify the Inclinations of an inquisitive Mind; as to learn the self-denying
Mysteries of the Cross of CHRIST, -- detach her Affections from the Creature,
and unite them more vigorously to the ORIGINAL SOURCE of Perfection and
Blessedness.

THE Lord's Day was indeed to her, an holy Sabbath of Rest; entirely
consecrated to the Exercises of Piety, Devotion, and Charity. She retired from
the unnecessary Affairs of Life; and took Care that her Domestics might not be
encumbered with Business, but have Leisure to pay their Homage to that BEING,
whom all Ranks of Men are equally bound to adore and obey. No trifling
Disourse, -- no unprofitable, Amusements were permitted in her Presence. A
cheerful and composed Gravity, -- a profound Silence and Solemnity, appeared in
all her Conduct, on the Christian Sabbath; except she found a convenient
Occasion, to introduce a Conversation upon religious Subjects, for the
Instruction and Edification of the Company. Those sacred Hours were employed,
as a delightful Preparation for that ETERNAL SABBATH, which remains for the
People of GOD, in a future World. She naturalized herself, before hand, to the
Duties and Exercises, the Manners and Customs of the heavenly State.

WHILE she lived in BOSTON, no flight Indisposition, -- no Inclemencies of
Weather, detained her from the Assemblies of the Saints. And after her Removal
into the Country, though the Place of Workship was several Miles distant from her
Abode, she gave her constant Attendance, unless the Weather was so tempestuous,
as evidently to endanger her Health, and those who waited upon her. How she
behaved in the Temple of God, was visible to Multitude, who were at once
reproved and edified by her humble and reverent Example. There was nothing
careless and negligent, or formal and affected in her Behavior, during divine
Service. She joined in the public Prayers with Fervency and Devotion; and
attended to the pious Instractions, delivered from the Pulpit, with the closest
Appication. 'Throughout the whole Solemnity, she was all Ear! -- all
Attentions! Her Eyes were fixed, and Heart intent upon the important
Transaction. A careless Look, -- an inattentive the Negligence, -- a
ceremonious Complaisance; she esteemed the highest Absurdity; when appearing in
the more immediate Presence of our Maker, and hearing the Words of eternal Life.

SHE was a constant Communicant from her Youth; and expressed the highest
Veneration for that solemn Institution, which our blessed Lord recommended to
his Church with his dying Breath. She received the confecrated Elements, with
an ardent Desire after that Bread of Life, by which alone, our Souls can be
preserved in spiritual Health and Vigor. The lively Image of a crucified
Savor, and the astonishing Wonders of his Love to apostate Sinners, exhibited
in that Ordinance, made the most affectionate Impressions upon her Heart; and
often filled her with Transports of grateful Joy.

But though Mrs. Lloyd appropriated much of her Time to Devotion and Retirement,
yet she made this no Excuse, to exempt her from the common Duties of Life. She
descended from the Mount, with a serene Composure, and cheerful Disposition, to
engage in every necessary Employment Idleness, she accounted peculiarly
criminal in those, whom GOD has distinguished with a larger Share, than common,
of the Gifts of Nature and Providence. The Business of every Day was prosecuted
in its proper Season with a Liveliness and Vigor, that animated and encouraged
all around her. She thought it no Burden, but Privilege, to fill up every
vacant Space, with something that mighty be improving to herself, or
instructive to others. Her constant Appliplication to the Duties of Religion,
created no Distance or Reserve in her Behaviors Her Conversation was easy,
natural, and pleasant. She was cheerful without Levity, -- grave without
Affectation -- condescending to the meanest, -- obliging and helpful to ALL.

IT has been objected to Persons eminent in Religion, that they are apt to be
severe in their Censures; and take an ill-natured Pride in reflecting upon the
Conduct of others. This, whenever it appears, is a great Blemish to Religion;
and an unfailing Evidence, that the Persons to whom it is justly imputed, have
made but a superficial Progress in the Christian Life, and are under the
predominant Influence of a proud self-righteous Spirit.

Mrs. LLOYD was remarkably distant from any Thing of this Nature. She knew the
Christian Doctrine was designed, not only to enkindle in our Breasts, a sacred
Flame of Love to God; but to inspire us, with Sentiments of universal
Benevolence to Mankind. The Sanctity of her Life, was adorned with the
tenderest Condescension to the Weakness and Infirmities of others: She
enlarged, with Pleasure, upon their Virtues; and made the handsomest Apologies
for their unguarded Follies. Nothing but abandoned Vice could provoke her to
speak with Severity; and through an Excess of Charity would fain discover
something praiseworthy even in the worst of Characters: An Air of Displeasure
appeared in her Countenance, whenever an ill-natured or envious Reflection was
made in her Presence. With all the Warmth of Friendship, she defended the
absent, though perhaps a distant Stranger. To sport with the Reputation of our
Neighbor, -- to expose and aggravate his Faults, she esteemed the most
ungenerous Conduct; -- not only a direct Opposition to the Precepts of the
Gospel; but a plain Violation of the Laws of civil Society. When Scandal and
Detraction were the Subject of Conversation, where she was obliged to be
present; she always testified her Displeasure; either with an open Rebuke, or,
where this was improper, with a melancholy and forbidding Silence.

HER superior Knowledge, -- communicative Disposition, -- and constant
Goodnature, made her Conversation highly agreeable. She talked upon every
innocent and useful Subject with great Sprightliness and Freedom; but could
never bear a profane Jest, or malicious Satire, though clothed in the fairest
Dress, and adorned with the Charms of Wit and Politeness.

RELIGION was her favorite Topic, which she introduced upon every proper
Occasion, and endeavored to set in an amiable Lights, in order to recommend it,
to the Esteem and Affection of all her Acquaintance. She had a deep Sense of
the Baseness and Misery, that attend a vicious State; and was earnestly
desirous to rescue all, to whom she had Access, from its uneasy and disgraceful
Bondage. She spoke in the most elevated Language of the Glories of redeeming
Grace; and recommended an ALL-SUFFICIENT SAVIORS, with all the Beauties of
Persuasion and Eloquence. None came into her Company, but she endeavored to
inspire them with a Detestation of Vice, and assist them in the Practice of the
sublimest Degrees of Piety: Out of the good Treasure of her Heart, she brought
forth Things new and old, for their Instruction and Entertainment. She was
attended to with uncommon Delight; and few left her Company, without sensible
Regret. She possessed in Perfection the happy Art of turning the Conversation,
from Things of a trisling and indifferent Nature, to those that were important
and profitable. She easily ascended from the Earth to Hevaven -- from the
Flowers of the Field, to the Beauties of Paradise, -- from the common
Transactions of Life, to the momentous Affairs of Eternity: -- From the daily
Occurrences of Providence, she formed insructive Lessons of Prudence and Piety.

SHE had no Taste for those Diversions, in which the fashionable and polite
Part of Mankind too often spend the most valuable Part of their Time. In the
Exercises of Devotion, she found a perpetual Spring of sublime and satisfying
Pleasures, and the noblest Support under the unavoidable Trials and Afflictions
of Life. A firm Persuasion of the everlasting Love of God, -- an unshaken Trust
in the Righteousness of our almighty Savior, -- the Testimony of a good
Conscience -- and a joyful Expectation of heavely Happiness, inclined her to
look down with a generous Disdain on all he assuring Vanities of the World; and
to aspire after Nothing but the highest Degrees of Preparation for the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

THOUGH she was naturally of a warm and lively Temper; yet she kept her Passions
under the most absolute Command, and was always serene, composed, and cheerful.
Those displeasing Accidents, which often raise a sudden Tempest of Anger, even
in the Breast of good Men, hardly ever ruffled the Tranquillity of her Mind.
Upon the greatest personal Provocations, she never allowed an indecent Word;
nor betrayed an unjustifiable Resentment. If ever she expressed herself with
Warmth and Vehemence, it was in the Cause of Heaven and flowed from a
commendable Zeal against Opinions and Practices, which she thought destructive
to pure and undefiled Religion.

NOT that she was inflamed with a bitter Spirit, aginst Persons of different
Sentiments in Religion. She loved good Men of all Persuasions; and reverenced
real Religion, in whatsoever Communication she found it. All who were animated
with the Love of God, -- maintained the essential Truths of Christianity and
adorned their Profession by an holy Conversation, she embraced with a cordial
Respect, without Regard to Party-Names, or Distinctions.

SHE was a warm Advocate for what are generally styled the Doctrines of Grace.
She was firmly persuaded, they had the greatest Tendency, to exalt the Glory of
God; and afforded the highest Encouragement to perishing apostate Sinners; and
were upon all Accounts calculated to promote the Comfort and Holiness of the
Church of Christ, She therefore openly appeared in their Favor, and defended
them when misrepresented and opposed by Persons of a different Way of thinking.
But she had too deep a Sense of the Weakness of human Nature, and the Strength
of the Prejudices of Education, rashly to pronounce an Anathema merely on the
Account of a Diversity of Opinion, in these mysterious Points. Her Zeal against
Error was accompanied with a Tenderness to the Erroneous. She treated their
Persons, with Kindness and Condescension; and prayed that they might be brought
to the Acknowledgment of the Truth!

CHARITY was her darling Virtue, which she exercised. with peculiar Delight and
Satisfaction; and desired as she had Opportunity, to do good unto all Men. Her
benevolent Spirit was not circumscribed within the Bounds of any divided
Communion; but extended to all Mankind, without Distinction of, Parties. It
seemed her uninterrupted Study, to perform generous and beneficent Actions to
all, within the Circle of her Acquaintance, -- even beyond her Ability. She
knew no other Use of Money, but to assist her Friends in their Difficulties,
and relieve the Poor in their Indigence. She was always uneasy, if any left her
House, without receiving some valuable Token of her Kindness. To do obliging
Things, was the genuine Propensity of her Soul, and one of the most refined
Pleasures of her Life. The Value of the Gift, was heightened by the kind
engaging Manner in which it was conferred. Her Generosity was never extorted by
Importunity, nor dispensed with Regret. Misery and Want always excited her
compassionate Regard; and engaged her to use her utmost Efforts to remove them.
She joyfully embraced every Opportunity to diffuse Happiness to all around her;
and in the Peace and Satisfaction of her Mind, experienced the Truth of that
Maxim of our Blessed Lord, It is more blessed to give than to receive. She
condescended to the lowest Offices, that she might do good to Mankind; visited
the Poor in their Sickness; provided for their Support; and by her wise
religious Counsels assisted them to make a suitable Improvement of their
Affliction.

NO Wonder such Assemblage of Virtues, so many lovely Qualities, rendered her
the Delight of her Fiends; and overwhelmed them with Grief, at her sudden and
unexpected Removal. Though she had passed the Threshold of Old Age; yet the
Regularity of her Conduct, her exact Temperance in Diet, and the Vivacity, of
her Temper, which continued to the last; encouraged us to hope for a much
longer Enjoyment of so valuable a Life.

I AM, sensible, than in this Account to do Justice to her Memory, I have
fallen much short of what her extraordinary Merit deserves. Her Friends will be
able to add many beautiful Particulars, to those here enumerated. I have given
a faint, but true Resemblance of her Character and Conduct; though not with that
Life and Propriety, which the Excellency of my Subject requires. We value the
Pourtrait of a departed Friend, if like the Original, though not drawn by the
most skillful Hand.

I SHALL only add a few Words relating to the following Papers. They were all
written for her own private Use; and undoubtedly never designed for public
View. But when upon her lamented Death, they fell into my Hands, I thought them
too valuable a Treasure to be concealed from the World. I have therefore
selected, such of her Manuscripts, as I imagined, might be of most general Use;
and am persuaded they will afford Instruction and Delight to a serious and
devout Mind.

THE Reader must not expect any labored Criticisms, deep Reasonings, or
rhetorical Flourishes. It cannot be expected, that a Gentlewoman, who was daily
busied in the Cares of a numerous Family, could be acquainted with scholastic
Niceties, and the modern Refinments of Method and Style. The following
Collection speaks the undisguised Language of her Heart. She talks of divine
Things, in that familiar and affecting Manner, in which they appeared to her,
in her devout, Retirements. They contain some of the secret Transactions
between God, and her own Soul, when she was more solicitous to regulate the
Disposition of her Mind, than to model her Thoughts according to the Rules of
Art, and express them in the Beauties of Diction. But I am persuaded, they
contain such sublime Sentiments of Piety; such a sared Fervor of Devotion;
that the indulgent Reader will easily excuse any slight Inaccuracies, which ^
critical Eye may observe.

FINIS.
MEDITATIONS ON Divine SUBJECTS.
MEDITATION I.

Upon the TRUTH of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION; and, an Enquiry into the State of my
own Soul.

O MY ever glorious and gracious God, and heavenly Father in Jesus Christ! I
read in the sacred Oracles of Truth, that Thou did so love the World, as to
give thine only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting Life; -- and that this Life is in thy Son -- Thou
have also borne Testimony, that JESUS is thy beloved Son, in whom thou art well
pleased; -- that those who believe thy Testimony have set to their Seal, that
God is true; -- but they that believe not, have made God a Liar. I therefore
importunately pray, That thou would bestow on me, that Faith by which the
Just do live; and all those divine and heavenly Qualifications, which are the
certain Consequence, and best Evidence, of my Union to the Lord Jesus Christ;
in whom all the Promises are Yea and Amen.

All this, and whatsoever else, is requisite to my present and future
Happiness, must proceed from thee, who art the Author and Finisher of our
Faith. -- For thou have declared, That none can come to the Son, but those whom
the Father draws: And none can know the Father, but those to whom the Son does
reveal him. I desire therefore, in the Name and Strength, of my glorious and
exalted Advocate and Redeemer, humbly to plead with Faith and Fervency, for the
efficacious and all-conquering Drawings of thy holy Holy Spirit; that I may
indeed obtain a saving Knowledge, of the thee, the living and true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent.

O MY GOD! will thou be graciously pleased for Christ's Sake, to send forth thy
Light and thy Truth, to lead me into all Truth, and enable me, at this Time, to
make a faithful and sincere Enquiry, whether my Faith be true and saving?
whether indeed Christ is formed in me? May I be enable now, and at all Times,
so to believe and practice, as my tend most for thy Glory and the Salvation of
my own Soul. May I never think, speak, or write, any Thing, but what I receive
from thee, and is agreeable to thy holy Will.

I DESIRE to have my whole Dependence upon thy glorious Majesty, to enable me
always to see divine Truths in a proper Light, and to work within me the whole
good Pleasure of thy Grace, and the Work of Faith with Power. All this, and
whatever else is needful for me and mine, and the whole Israel of God, I humbly
beg for Christ's Sake: -- To whom, with thy glorious Majesty, and the blessed
Spirit of Grace, the Comforter, be rendered, the Kingdom, Power, Glory and
Thanksgiving, now and evermore, Amen.

AND now having looked up to Heaven, for divine Illumination; I will set about
this important Enquiry, viz. What is the Foudation of my Faith? -- whether I
have indeed Felt the transforming Power of this Faith, and consequently whether
I am by divine Grace; united unto Jesus Christ the Second Adam; by Virtue of
which Union alone, I can live spiritually and eternally. An historical Faith,
which is only conveyed to me by my Reason and Understanding, I know is not
sufficient; for the Devils believe and tremble, -- My Enquiry then must be,
what is a true and saving Faith; and whether I have been made the happy Subject
of this Faith. An historical and rational Faith, is indeed requisite as a
Means, in order to the obtaining a saving Faith: For I read, that Faith comes
by hearing; -- how can we believe on him of whom we have not heard? I will
therefore first examine, how far my Reason will assist me in this important
Enquiry.

EVERY one that comes unto God, must believe, that be is, and that be is the
Rewarder of those that diligently seek him. That there is a God, a Supreme
Being, the great Creator, and Lord Proprietor of all Things, not only the Light
of Nature, and the Dictates of Reason, but my very Senses, inform me. For the
invisible Things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen; being
understood by the Things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead.

I CANNOT turn my Eyes any where, from the strarry Regions, and those glorious
and magnificent. Luminaries, which adorn the Firmament above, to the lowest
Shrub, or Spire of Grass, that grows upon the Face of the Ground; from the
great Leviathan to the most insignificant Insect; but I must read indelible
Characters, of an all-wise and powerful Creator!

WHEN I consider the exquisite Formation and Beauty of the human Body, I am
filled with Admiration and Surprise; -- but when I contemplate the more noble
Part of our Frame, the intellectual Faculties of the immortal Soul, my
Astonishment increases: -- I have the most ungainsayable Assurance, that both
Body and Soul are of a divine Original. -- Thus far my Reason confirms my
Faith, with Respect to the Existence of a SUPREME BEING.

BUT as to my Faith in the Lord JESUS CHRIST, the great Savior of the Worlds,
and all the sublime and mysterious Doctrines, contained in the Christian
Religion, I want the Assistance of Revelation: -- Great is the Mystery of
Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh. -- We know these divine Truths, only
because God has discovered them unto us. But that the Book, in Which I find all
these glorious Doctrines so plainly and strongly asserted, is a Revelation from
Heaven, my Reason very much assists me in the Belief of: So that the great
Apostle of the Gentiles, with much Justice and Propriety, ranks Unbelievers
with unreasonable Men. For although the sublime Mysteries of the Gospel, are in
themselves so infinitely beyond the Ken of human Reason; nor could ever be
discovered by the dim Light of Nature; yet they are so plainly and convincingly
conveyed to us in the sacred Scriptures, and attended with so strong an
Evidence of their divine Authority, as is sufficient to obtain the Belief of
every reasonnable and unprejudiced Person.

IN this blessed Book I find an Account of the Creation, which not only may
Reason, but my very Senses, inform me is true. Here I read of the Fall of Man,
which the dearbought Experience of every Day, assures me is Fact: How is our
Gold become Dross, and our Beauty turned into loath some Defomity! Here I find
a Promise of our Recovery, by the Seed of the Woman, who was appointed to
bruise the Serpent's head. This Promise, my Reason tell me, must certainly be
fulfilled; it being made by the true and unchangeable GOD. -- But how, or in
what Manner, this Promise was to be accomplished, neither Men nor Angels dare
so much as have guessed, -- without divine Revelation. But the sacred Oracles
of Truth, inform me, that God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that all who believe in him, should not perish, but have Life
everlasting. -- This I believe upon the Authority of the Word of God. That
JESUS CHRIST is this invaluable Gift, I have the Testimony of the great God
himself, who by an audible Voice from Heaven, declared him, his beloved Son, in
whom he is well pleased. -- Upon this single Evidence I may safely venture my
ALL, for Time and Eternity. That this Voice was indeed from the excellent
Glory, and no Imposition upon the Senses of those that heard, it, appears in
that the glorious God was pleased, to confirm the Misson of Christ, by the
highest Evidence that can be, -- his Resurrection from the Dead; which could be
effected by no Power short of the Almighty Creator of all Things.

THIS, I think, is the strongest Demonstration of the Truth of all that Christ
delilivered: For it cannot be supposed, that the Fountain of all possible
Perfection would authorize a Fraud. The Facts which relate to our blessed
Savior, as they are recorded in the Gospel, are confirmed by contemporary
Writers, and exactly harmonize with the Predictions, concerning this divine
Person, which are contained in the ancient Prophets.

As to the moral Precepts of the Christian Religion, I am well assured, that
had PLATO, SENECA, and all the Masters of Reason of the Heathen World, seen
that glorious Body of Laws; those excellent Precepts contained in our Savior's
Sermon upon the Mount, they would have said, that their Author was divine, and
these Writings inspired.

THUS the great and glorious God, is pleased to deal with us as reasonable
Creatures; and by Means and Instruments, conveys to us spiritual Truth: But
after all, the sublime Mysteries of the Gospel, cannot be savingly
comprehended, in this Way alone: The Line of Reason is too short, to teach
those unfathomable Depths, which Angels themselves desire to look into. It is
the mighty Power of God which produces in us that Faith, which is unto
Salvation.

I ACKNOWLEDGE it is beyond all Expression, the greatest Blessing of my Life,
that in the Course of my Education, I was favored with the Holy Scriptures in
my own Language; and have always enjoyed the Means of Grace to help me in my
Christian Race: -- But if God had not, of his infinite Grace, sent forth a
divine Ray of Light and Life, to enable me to receive JESUS, with my whole
Soul, in all his Offices, for all his Benefits, -- Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and enternal Redemption; it is most certain, that the highest
Degrees of speculative Knowledge, and all the extenal. Means of Grace, would
have proved ineffectual to my Salvation. -- It is the Work of God to incline me
to believe in Christ. No Power short of the which created the World at first,
could create me anew in Christ Jesus; -- and nothing short of a new Creation,
will prove effectual to my Salvation. It is a transforming Act of Faith that
unites us to Christ, and gives a Title to that precious Promise, Because I
live, ye shall live also.

BLESSED be God! I have an humble Hope through the boundless Riches of free
Grace, that this Promise is fulfilled in me, and that I have the highest and
strongest Evidence of the Truth of the Christian Religion by the Witof the
Spirit! -- Not by an unreasonable Impulse made upon my Mind, but the the
transforming Efficacy which divine Truths have had upon my Soul.

I CAN testify from my own Experience, with what exalted Pleasure, the sincere
and prayerful Christian reads the sacred Records. How does the true Believer
spell out the promised Messiah, in the Types, Figures, and Ceremonies, of the
Old Testament Dispensation! -- How often do we read his Name, in brighter and
more legible Characters, in the inspired Prophecies! -- How beautifully do the
two Testaments agree, in every Thing essential to our Salvation! -- What we
find recorded in the Prophecies of the Old, we read in the History of the New.

How exact an Agreement is there between the renewed Nature, and the Precepts
of the Gospel! Our great Teacher gives us a comprehensive Summary of the Moral
Law, in those few Words: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart,
with all thy Soul, and with all thy Strength, and thou shall love thy Neighbor
as thy self. By the Operation of the blessed Spirit, I am enabled to acquiesce
in this Law; not only as my bounden Duty and most reasonable Service, but as my
highest Happiness, and greatest Privilege.

How inexpressibly refreshing, have the Promise and Invitations of the Gospel,
been to me, because of their exact Suitableness to my Wants! When God, by a Ray
of divine Light, was pleased to discover, my wretched and miserable State by
Nature and Practiced, how comfortable was it, to find the Invitations of Grace
addressed to such a polluted, selflruined Creature, as I am! -- I have nothing
to plead in my own Behalf, but must hold up my Hand at the Bar of God, and cry
out, GUILTY, GUILTY; for in thy Sight can no Flesh living be justified upon
their own Account. But blessed be thy glorious Majesty! Thou have proclaimed
thy Name, the Lord gracious and (...), forgiving Iniquity, Transgression, and
Sin: Therefore I am encouraged to pray, Pardon my Iniquity, for it is very
great; -- Heal my Soul, for I have sinned against thee.

How free and universal is the Gospel Call! Ho, every one that thirsts, come
ye to the Waters, and be that that no Money, come buy and eat, etc. And I have
an humble Hope, through the Riches of Free Grace in CHRIST JESUS, that I have
heard the Voice of GOD speaking to me in these Invitations; and been enabled by
the promised Spirit to obey the heavenly Call, with an earnest Thirst after the
Blessings of the new and wellordered Convenant; -- the dear bought Purchase of
the Redeemer's Blood; -- and to receive JESUS CHRIST in all his Offices, -- to
live upon him, as authorized by God the Father, to fulfill in his People the
whole good Pleasure of his Will. And as I receives the first Breath of
spiritual Life, from the inexhaustible Fountain of Free Grace, so I have still
my entire Dependence, upon the same unmerited Assistance, For Time and Eternity.

THIS is my strong Anchor hold, my ssafe Retreat, my Light, my Life, my
everlasting ALL IN ALL. When I look upon myself, I really find I am a poor,
indigent, helpless Creature, surrounded with numberless and powerful Enemies.
In these deplorable Circumstances, I must inevitably sink down in utter
Despair, were it not for this divine Support, this omnipotent Arm; under whose
Influence, every Strom of Temptation drives me to the Harbor, and every Onset
of the Enemy, cause me to take faster hold of my victorious Leader. -- In this
Way the Soul is safe and happy in the most tempestuous Season. -- That Soul
cannot be lost, that is united to CHRIST, the living Head of his People.

To such how pleasant and profitable are the Psalms! How often does the humble
Believer, read the Redeemer's, Name in many sublime Passages of that sacred
Book, and rise up to God on David's seraphic Wing! -- How beautfu1 is the
divine Morality contained in the Proverbs of Solomon! Who can read them, and
not blush for his many criminal Violations, of those admirable Instruction of
Wisdom! -- With what Pleasure and Advantage does the Child of God, peruse the
Song of Solomon; and find the Glories of redeeming Love in that mysterious
Composure! How often is he ready to join with the Spouse, in her pathetic
Encomiums on our Blessed Savior! He is the chiefest among Ten Thousands, yea,
he is altogether lovely; -- This is my Beloved, and this is my Friend. How
frequently, under a pressing Sense of his utter Insufficiency so much as to
think a good Thought; does he send up his importunate Prayer in the Language of
the Church: Awake, thou North Wind, and come, thou South Wind, and blow upon my
Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out! Then let ye Beloved come and eat
his pleasant Fruit. How does the humble and self-denying Christian, in this
Way, set under Christ's Shadow with great Delight, -- and his Fruit is sweet to
their Taste: He travels through the Wilderness of this World leaning upon his
Beloved; and not with standing all the Labyrinths of Sins, Sorrows and
Temptations, he is exposed to, in the Strength of his exalted Head, shall
obtain the Prize of immortal Glory.

WITH what humble Admiration does the true Believer meditate upon the sacred
History of the Incarnation; Birth, Sufferings, Death and Resurrection of our
BLESSED REDEEMER! How great a Tendency has a realizing View of those,
important Truths; to suppress the Fire of Anger, Hatred, Malice, and Revenge!
How strongly does it incline him to mortify every Sins, when he considers how
dear it cost the SON of GOD, to make Atonement for it; at what an infinite
Expense he has purchased our Deliverance from this vilest of Slavery, -- and
the Liberty and Privileges of the Children of God! How powerfully does it
persuade us to take up every Cross, with Cheerfulness and Resignation, when we
remember, that in this Way we trace the divine Footsteps of our Savior, and
follow the great Captain of our Salvation who was made perfect through
Sufferings! How irresistible does his dying Love engage us to devote our selves
to him, an holy, living, and acceptable Sacrifice!

I HAVE an humble Hope, through the powerful Efficacy of divine Grace, that I
have experienced the sanctifying Power of these Truths upon my own Soul. I find
every Deviation from the pure and perfect Law of God, is inexpressibly more
bitter to me, than the greatest Affliction. Every earnest Aspiration of my
Heart, is for greater Conformity to the divine Image and Will. It is my
perpetual Prayer, that God would send down a more plentiful Effusion of the
Blessed Spirit, into my Soul, and the Souls of my Children and Grandchildren,
to the End of Time; that every high Thought, and towering Imagination, may be
subdued to the Obedience of faith; and that every Thing contrary thereto, may
be brought out and destroyed. That we may indeed,know and fear, love and
serve, the living and true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent.

O! WHEN shall the Time be, that the Kingdoms of this World, shall become, the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ! When the Knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ shall cover the Earth, as the Waters do the Sea!

O MY GOD, and heavenly Father, in Jesus Christ! have thou not enabled me
sincerely to say, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? May not I appeal to thy
all-penetrating Eye, that it is not the golden Streets, nor sparkling Gates,
nor glittering Splendors of that glorious Place, that attract my Affections:
No, thou who art the Searcher of Hearts, know, that it is Thou thy, self,
the ORIGINAL FOUNTAIN of Perfection and Blessedness, that my Soul chooses for
my everlasting Portion; Nor is there any on Earth that I desire in Comparison
of thee: In thy Favor is Life, and thy loving Kindness is better than all its
most valuable Enjoyments. Were I advanced to the Helm of thy lower Creation;
placed in the most prosperous Circumstances, which the most fruitful
Imagination could form an Idea of; and assured that I should possess them
forever; -- without thy self, O my GOD, they would be all a Blank to me; I
should despise them as the vilest Dust under my Feet.

O! WOULD thy glorious Majesty, be pleased to hold out the Scepter of thy
Grace, and permi^ ^e to ask what I would have! Should I not immediately reply,
This is my Petition; this is my humble Request, that I may be perfectly
conformed to thy Will, and favored with the uninterrupted Enjoyment of thy
Love, And now, O my GOD! may I not receive this, and all the other Tokens of a
sanctified Heart, as an Evidence of my Union to CHRIST, and a living Witness of
the Truth and Divinity of the Christian Religion!

IF I have indeed been enabled to receive JESUS CHRIST, according to the free
Offers of the Gospel, how infinite are my Obligations to divine Grace! Infinite
beyond all Conception and Imagination! How vast is the Disproportion, between
my Obligation, and the Power of Acknowledgment! How can a finite Creature,
clogged with Flesh, groaning under the Burden of remaining Corruption, and still
struggling with Darkness and Temptation; offer up a suitable Sacrifice to thee,
who art a Being of infinite Purity and Perfection!

I DESIRE to be deeply humbled before thee, O my GOD! for all my Sins original
and actual; in every Stage Station, Relation and Circumstance of Life; in all I
have sinned, and fallen short of my Duty. I desire to be humbled in a more
especial Manner, for my black Ingratitude to the GOD of my LIFE; and my
Unfruitfulness, under the distinguishing Receipts of divine and spiritual
Mercies. How greatly have all the Faults, and Foliies of my Life been
aggravated, since GOD was graciously pleased to show me the Vanity and
Emptiness of all sublunary Enjoyments, and to lead me out to himself as my only
satisfying Portion. O astonishing Madness! that after all this, my foolish
fluctuating Heart, should be sipping at the Puddle-Streams of Creature
Comforts, to the Neglect of the inexhausted Fountain of uncreated Goodness! O
how empty and trifling has my Conversation sometimes been, when I am under the
strongest Obligations, sacredly to devote, all my Powers and Faculties, at all
Times, to the Service of Heaven!

How justly might thy glorious Majesty have punished this my Folly, with utter
Desertion! but instead of this, thou have not only strove with, but overcome my
ungrateful and stupid Heart; and enabled me to say with ardent Desire, As the
Heart pants after the Water Brooks, so pants my Soul after thee, my GOD.

ALAS! how inconceivably great is my Obligation, and how short do I fall of
performing any Part of it, as I ought! My very Tears want washing; my most
penitent Confessions, call for the Sorrows of Repentance; my most exalted
Praise are so extremely deficient; that should thou mark the Iniquity of my
best Performances, thou might justly cast them back, as Dung, in my Face,
and spurn me out of thy favorable Presence. But blessed, and forever blessed
be thy Name, for free Grace, and redeeming Love. Blessed be God, for Jesus
Christ, whom thou have given to be a Propitiation for the Sins of the World. In
his Name, and through his Merits and Mediation, I desire to come and cast my self
at thy Feet; and put in for a Share of all the Blessings of the new Covenant,
according to the free, full, and absolute Offers of the Gospel. If the
Invitation had been addressed to good People, I should have had no Hope; for I
have Nothing properly my own; but Sin and Misery: All my Confidence is placed
in thy undeserved Mercy, and the Righteousness of thy dear Son. In Obedience to
thy Command, I fly to the Blood of Jesus, for Pardon and Cleansing, for Health
and Healing. Blessed be God, for Jesus Christ, the Fountain of all Grace, to an
apostate World! -- for the promised Spirit, the eternal Comforter of his
Church! -- for the Means of Grace, and the Hopes of Glory! Time is too short,
and Eternity not too long, to celebrate the Praises of redeeming Love. I could
wish for the Tongue! of a Seraph, to assist me in this delightful Employment.
But who of all the heavenly Choir, can raise a Note equal to my Obligation!
They are not of the guilty, fallen Race of Adam, as I am; they, have never
sinned, as I have done; they are not redeemed by the Blood of the SON of GOD,
as I am. Redemption! O! the charming Sound! How beautiful are the Feet of those
who bring these glad Tidings to guilty Sinners! This is a Balm for every Wound;
a Medicine for every Disease; a Relief in every Difficulty.

TO THEE, O Lord, do I still look for all I want, for my self and Posterity,
for Time and Eternity, My Eyes are ever toward the Lord: On thee do I wait all
the Day, -- even till Faith shall be swallowed up in Vision, and Expectation in
full Fruition. Then shall I be more fully inclined and enabled, to join my
joyful Voice with all the heavenly Hosts, and sing, Blessing, Honor, Glory,
and Power, to the Lamb that was stain; for he has redeemed us with his Blood,
out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation. Amen, and Amen.

COME, Lord JESUS, come quickly, and take to thy self, thy great Power, and
reign.

MEDITATION II.
On the EXCELLENCY and ADVANTAGE of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

O MY GOD! thou have taught me from my Youth: and hitherto I have declared thy
wondrous Works: Now also when I am old and gray Headed, O God forsake me not;
until I have showed thy Strength unto this Generation, and thy Power to every
one that is to come.

FULFILL, O my GOD! That Promise which thou have made unto thy People, unto me
the unworthiest of thy Servants; -- They shall bring forth Fruit in old Age,
they shall be fat and flourishing, to show that the Lord is gracious. Enable me
to set my Seal to the superlative Excellency of true Religion; and confirm what
the whole Experience of my Life, assures me is true; and what I must say if I
was sure those were my last Words; viz. That the Christian Religion is every
Way calculated, for the Welfare of Mankind; and when reduced into Practice,
under the Influence of Faith and Love, the only sure Way to preserve us from
every hurtful and deadly Evil, -- to obtain the Peace and Pleasure upon Earth,
and Eternal Happiness in Heaven.

To prove this Proposition, I will first consider the mere moral Man, who has
nothing else in View, but the Honor and Advantage of this Life. -- This Man is
strictly just in his Dealings, generous to his Friend, charitable to the Poor,
kind and beneficient to all, as far as his Circumstances will admit. -- He is
careful to hurt Body by Word or Deed; he walks is the straight Path of Truth
and Integrity, in his Commerce with his Fellow Creatures; and governs himself
by the Rules of moral Virtue, in all his external Conduct; in eating, drinking,
sleeping, Recreation, etc. observes the Laws of Sobriety and Temperance. That
this Man has a just Claim to the Honor, Esteem and Affection, of all that
converse with him; I suppose none will deny. O how many Advantages does he
receive from his amiable Behaviors!

HIs kind and generous Disposition, naturally and necessarily advaces
his,Credit; and for ehe most part he: experiences the Truth and Benefit of
those Texts, -- He that waters, shall also be watered himself. There is that
scatters, and yet increases. The liberal Soul devises liberal Things, and
by liberal Things be stands. While the Miser is abhorred both by God and Man;
and often feels the Force of those Words: There is that withholds more than
is meet, and it tends to Poverty.

STRICT Justice in all our Transactions with Mankind, is the readiest Way to
enlarge our Business, and by that Means to increase our Estates; while the
fradulent Dealer, is in the utmost Danger of being detected and ruined. A
steady. Integrity in our whole Conduct, is upon all Accounts, most easy and
honorable. Truth wants no Contrivance or Invention; but, like a perfect
Beauty, looks best, at the nearest Approach: -- It will bear the Test of the
most critical Inquiry, and ever comes off with universal Applause. Even the
most prostigate, have a secret Reverence for that, which they have not the
Honesty to practice. Whereas the insincere and fallacious, when discovered, are
the Objects of public Contempt, and avoided by all that know them.

THAT Temperance in eating, drinking; etc. contribute to the Health of the
Body, and the Strength and Brightness of the intellectual Faculties, is a
Truth, to which the Experience of all Ages bears Testimony. Epicurus himself,
who knew no other Religion than Pleasure, lived principally upon Herbs, and the
pure Water of the Books. And nothing can be more self-evident than, that a
clear Head, and an healthy Body, is essential to the Comfort and Enjoyment of
the present Life. The dear-bought Experience of the Licentious, shows, that
Intemperance in its own Nature, has a Tendency to break the firmest
Consttution; and is attended with a melacholly Train of Sorrows and Diseases.

IF we consider those Virtues, which may be properly styled Christian, viz. --
Humility, Patience, Self-denial, and Forgiveness of Injuries; these Virtues
also carry their own Reward with them, by establishing the Mind in Tranquillity
and Peace: While Pride, Envy, Wrath, and Revenge, embitter the Spirits, corrode
the Vitals, and devour every easy Thought.

I THINK then it is evident, beyond all Contradiction, that the Precepts of
moral Virtue, with those additional Improvements, which are made to them by the
Gospel of Christ, are to all Intents and purposes calculated to advance the
Honor, Interest Peace and Pleasure of Mankind; so that every one that is under
the Government of his Reason, would choose to live in the Practice of them,
upon the Principles of Self-love, although he had no other Motive.

IT must be acknowledged, that these moral Virtues are truly excellent and
lovely in themselves, and so essential to the Christian character, that all
Pretenses to it, in a Neglect of these, is a fatal Delusion; and these vain
Professors, must expect no other Sentence from the Mouth of their supreme Judge
than that, Depart from me, I know you not, ye Workers of Iniquity.

BUT when these Virtues proceed only from the Principles of Self-love, they are
essentially defective. The true Christian, -- the spiritualminded Man, is
animated with nobler Motives and Designs. Love to God, the most perfect Being,
and Faith in Christ, the Savior of Mankind, are the vital Springs of his
Obedience to the Laws of Heaven.

WHILE the mere moral Man is compassing himself about with Sparks of his own
enkindling, and satisfied with his own Goodness; the real Christian has been
made to see, that he has nothing that he can properly call his own, but
Pollution and Deformity; and nothing to expect from God, upon his own Account,
but Destruction and Misery. He is taught by the illuminating Influence of
divine Grace, to renounce all Self-dependence, and wait at the Footstool of a
sovereign GOD, for Deliverance from all the Wretchedness of the Apostasy. By
this hie is prepared to receive the compassionate Offers of the Gospel; and
thankfully to commit himself into the Hands of an Almighty Savior: And when
once he is persuaded, by the Drawings of the Father, to come to Christ, as his
living LORD and HEAD, to say in the Language of Appropriation, MY LORD, AND MY
GOD then, and not till then, can he perform acceptable Obedience. For it is by
Power derived from the Life-giving JESUS, that we are enabled to do any Thing
spiritually Good; and we remain his poor dependant Creatures to the End of Life.

How happy are the Effects that flow from an Union with him! The humble Soul
finds Light, Life and Strength sufficient to answer all his Wants; to triumph
over all his Difficulties. Amidst all the all Darkness, Troubles and
Temptations of this tempestuous Region, he has a safe Retreat, an unfailing
Defense. The Soul finds a Rest in God, and tastes that Peace, which passes all
Understanding. He finds by happy Experience, that Wisdom's Ways are
Pleasantness, and all her Paths Peace. That Promise of our blessed Savior, is
accomplished in his Behalf; He that loves me, him will my Father honor. These
are not vain Amusements, but substantial Realities; which lay a solid
Foundation for present Comfort, and give undoubted Assurance of future
Felicity. They behold the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ, in the
Glass of the Gospel; and by this Means, are changed into the same Image, from
Glory to Glory, even by the Spirit of the Lord.

THESE distinguished Persons will all set their Seal to the Truth of this
Proposition; that the Christian Religion, is every way calculated to promote
the Welfare of Mankind; and when reduced to Practice, under the Influence of
Faith and Love, is the only sure Way to preserve us from every, hurtful and
deadly Evil; to obtain true Peace and Pleasure upon Earth, and eternal
Happiness in Heaven.

JUSTLY does Doctor Leighton, in one of his Letters say; -- Thorns grow every
where, and from all Things here below; but to a Soul transplanted out of it
self into the Root of Jesse, Peace grows every where too, from him who is our
Peace; and whom we shall find to be the more so, the more entirely we live in
him, by being dead to the World, to Flesh and Self, and all Things besides him.
O! when shall it be?

INEXPRESSIBLE is the Benefit of this Transplantation: New Life begun, and such
a Life as is certainly progressive, even to Life eternal. For, although by the
unerring Wisdom of the great Head of the Church, the Canaanites are yet left in
the Land, for the Exercise and Trial of his faithful People; yet they are
really and essentially, upon all Accounts, the only happy Persons. I shall
mention some few Instances, which will be evident to all such as have, by
supernatural Grace, been made Partakers of this thrice happy Change.

As they have been convinced of the Vanity of all Creature Enjoyments, so they
have been lead by a divine Attraction, to God the, boundless OCEAN of all
possible Good; and in him enjoy a complete and independent Hapiness. All the
Comforts of this Life come with a double Sweetness, as proceeding from their
heavenly Father, and conveyed through the Channel of the new Covenant. -- They
have a sacred Assurance that all Things are theirs, whether Paul, or Apollos,
or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death, or Things present, or Things to
come; -- All Things are yours, says the Apostle, and ye are Christ's, and
Christ is God's.

OH! how inexpressibly great, are the Blessings contained in these few Lines.
If the true Believer meets with bitter Afflictions of various Sorts, he is
divinely taught to know how just and reasonable it is, that he should be made
Partaker of the Fellowship of Christ's Sufferings. -- If in Circumstances of
distressing Poverty; the remembers the Son of God had not where to lay his
Head; and was obliged to work a Miracle to answer the Demands of the public
Tribute. -- If the Billows of Adversity rise so high, that in the Extremity of
Distres, he is ready to say, the Waters are come into my Soul; I sink deep in
the Mire, where there is no standing; then he is enabled to look to the Rock,
that is higher than he: And by Faith goes into the Garden, where our blessed
Savior was in such an Agony, that he sweat great Drops of Blood, and said, My
Soul is sorrowful even unto Death. -- If at any Time, he meets with reproachful
Treatment from those whom he has laid under the highest Obligations; he takes a
Turn in his Meditations, with Jesus Christ, to the Judgment-Hall, where he was
abused, not only by the worst of Men, but forsaken of his own peculiar
Disciples: From thence he ascends the Mount of Calvary, where this divine
Person suffered a cruel Death, and which was worse than all, endured the
Hidings of his Father's Countenance.

HAS the Lord Jesus Christ done and suffered all this for me! and shall I
think much to suffer and Affliction, that he shall see meet to lay upon me! --
"No surely!" will be the Language of every humble Believer. Let me rather
rejoice in Tribulation or Weakness, that the Strength and Grace of Christ may
be manifested in me.

How happy a Cure is an Interest in Christ, for all those malignant Passions,
which are so Destrutive to the Peace and Purity of human Nature! Whence do
these Disorders arise, but from the Misapplication of the Passions and
Affections, those powerful Engines of the Soul, which are polluted and depraved
by Sin. But no sooner are we united to Christ, but our Nature is changed; --
the Constitution of the Soul is altered; -- Life is began; -- Holiness is our
Element; -- and Sin the Aversion of the renewed Mind.

Now he understands that seeming Paradox, when St. John says in one Place, He
that is born of God cannot sin; and again in the same Chapter; If we say, we
have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us. The regenerate
Soul cannot sin, with Inclination; it crosses the Grain of the new Nature: And
yet he cannot say, he has no Sin; for he feels the Remains of Corruption,
which makes him often complain with St. Paul: O! wretched Man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this Body, of Sin and Death!

THE Desire of the Mind, no longer wander after a Variety of Vanities and
Follies, but are fixed upon God, the only Center of Rest, -- the only adequate
Portion of an imnmortal Soul. In Conseqence of this, that impetuous Thirst
after Happiness, which is implanted in the Breasts of all Men, is rectified: So
that while the natural Man, is always seeking the Living among the Dead, and
enquring, who will show me any worldly Good; -- the Heaven-born Spirit, cries
out, Lord, lift thou up the Light of thy Countenance upon me, so will I rejoice
more than when Corn and Wine are increased.

THAT which Bread is to the Hungry, Water to the Thirsty, Rest to the Weary,
that, and infinitely more, art thou, O my God! to my Soul. Thou art my Strength
in Weakness, -- my Light in Darkness, -- my best Friend in the Absence of all
others, -- my best Company in the closest Solitude, -- my satisfying Portion in
all Uncertainties. Even Death it self, cannot deprive the true Believer of his
Happiness; but completes it. While in the World, Grief and Sorrow, which in the
carnal Mind, often work Death, in the spiritual Man, produce Life and Peace. He
finds more true Comfort, in mourning for Sin, than in all the carnal Pleasures
which the World can give.

UPON the whole then, I think it evidently true, that the Christian is the only
happy Person in this World; and as to the Future, the Apostle tells us, Eye
has not seen, Ear has nor heard, nor has it entered into the Heart of Man,
to conceive, what God has laid up for them that love him. And as the Pleasure
and Advantages of Religion, are inexpressibly great here and hereafter; so the
Madness and Misery of Irreligion, are inexpressibly dreadful, both in this
World and the Next.

MEDITATION III.
On the Suitableness of JESUS CHRIST, to the Circumstances of Apostate Sinners.

OUT of the Depths have I cried to thee.

O MY GOD! Have Compassion on the Workrmanship of thy Hands, for thy Name, and
thy Mercy's Sake, in Jesus Christ our Lord.

BEHOLD what Desolation the Enemy has made in thy once beautiful Creation! How
is, our Beauty stained, and the Glory departed from us. Our Understandings
darkened; our Wills perverse; our Passions and Affections misplaced. -- Is
there no Balm in Gilead? no Physician there? Yes; blessed be thy Name, O my
God! thou have appointed the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of thy Love, to be a
complete and eternal Savior. He has paid the dreadful Debt we owed thy
Justice, to the uttermost Farthing; and has brought in everlasting
Righteousness to justify the most guilty Offenders: The immaculate LAMB OF GOD,
is strong enough to wrest the Prey out of the Jaws of the roaring Lion of Hell.
The compassionate Jesus is able to save unto the uttermost, all that come to
God by him.

HAVE thou not commanded all the Ends of the Earth to look unto him and be
saved? Have thou not promised, that whatsoever we ask in thy Name, according to
thy Will, it shall be granted? And now, O my God, and heavenly Father! I come
at thy Call, and cast my self at thy Majesty's Feet, in Obedience to thy
Command; earnestly praying, That thou would of thy free Grace, bestow upon
me, and my Posterity, all the Blessings which thou see we stand in need of.

AND now I am come to the Fountain of Grace, my Desire the shall boundless: I
put up my Request for all the Blessings of the new Covenant; and beseech thee
to fulfill in me, and mine, the whole good Pleasure of thy Will, and the Work
of Faith with Power. All the Motives to do this, must flow from thy blessed
self; I have nothing to plead, but my own Misery, and the unbounded Compassions
of thy Nature. I desire to draw near unto thee, in the prevailing Name of thy
deer Son, and ask for Things agreeable to thy Will, and nothing else.

HAVE thou not commanded me to belive in thy Son Jesus Christ? Have thou not
commanded me to love the Lord my God, with all my Heart, with all my Soul, and
with all my Strength, and my Neighbor as my self? Have thou not commanded me
to ask for thy blessed Spirit; without whose all-conquering Influence, it is
impossible for me to do any Thing that is good? And have thou not, by thy
inward Operations upon my Heart, made these Things the Sum of all my Wishes,
the Matter of all the earnest and perpetual Aspirations of my longing Soul? --
And now will thou not satisfy these Desires, which thou thy self have raised in
my Heart? Will thou not graciously hear and answer these Requests, which thou
have commanded and excited me to make? -- Behold! I lie at,thy Feet, and wait
for the Accomplishment of all thy Promises, through Jesus Christ alone: -- To
whom with thy glorious Majesty, and the blessed Spirit of all Grace, be
rendered, Blessing, Praise, Dominion and Power, now and ever more, Amen.

AND now, O my Soul! have I not abundant Encouragement, to hope for all the
Blessings of Salvation, when I consider the exact the Suitableness of the Lord
Jesus Christ, in his Offices and Qualifications, to redress the Miseries, and
supply the Wants, of apostate and miserable Sinners,

ARE all the Race of Adam, in their natural State, destitute of spiritual Life,
and prone to all Manner of Evil? The Lord Jesus Christ, the Second Adam, has
Life in himself, and gives Life unto the World. Are we lost? He came to seek
and to save, those that are lost. Are our Iniquities exceedingly multiplied? --
He came to save the chief of Sinners; and died, the Just for the Unjust, that
he might bring us to God. Are we Rebels? -- He ascended on High, and receive
Gifts for Men, even for the Rebellious, that the Lord God might dwell among us.
This is exactly what we want, and what is necessary to make us happy: For all
the Misery of Mankind proceeds from this; that we have departed from God: All
our Happiness consists in this; that we return unto him.

FURTHERS, are we altogether Bankrupts by Nature, destitute of Strength to
serve God, and Righteousness to recommend us to his Favor? -- Christ is the
LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS: In him it has pleased the Father that all Fullness
should dwell, that of his Fullness we might receive Grace for Grace? Are we
ignorant? He is the great Prophet of his Church; -- none teaches like him. Are
we guilty, condemned by the Law of God? Christ is a Priest for ever after the
Order of Melchisedec; and has made full Satisfaction to divine Justice, when
he trod the Wine Press of his Father's Wrath. Are we too weak to contend with
Flesh and Blood, and the Principalities and Powers of the Kingdom of Darkness?.
-- Christ Jesus is the King of his Church; the great Captain of our Salvation,
through whom his loyal People, shall eventually gain the Conquest over all
their spiritual Enemies.

BUT, O blind, unbelieving, impenitent Creatures that we are, while in our
natural State! -- Sold under Sin; the Captives of Hell; and Slaves to every
base and sordid Lust; and until unlightned, insensible either of our Misery or
Remedy! -- But even in these deplorable Circumstances, how wonderfully is our
glorious. Redeemer, qualified to redress our Miseries! -- He came to convince
the World of Sin. He is exalted a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance as
well as Remission of Sin. He came to proclaim Liberty to Captives, to open the
Prison Doors to them that art bound: -- He save his People from their Sins. --
He is the Bread of Life, to the hungry starving Soul; the Water of Life, to the
thirsty perishing Creature. He restores the Wanderer; reclaims the Profligate,
and receives the returning Prodigal into his dearest Embraces. He casts out
seven Devils, remits Thousands of Offenses, and then gives Grace to love much,
because much is forgive. In short, all Manner of Blessings, spiritual and
temporal, he offers freely to the greatest Transgressors.

AND now, O my GOD! will thou permit, and enable me, a poor, sinful, and
unworthy, Creature, to come in the Name, and for the Sake of this
all-sufficient Redeemer, to plead with thy glorious Majesty, for Grace to,
comply with thy Offers. For although it is Truth of the greatest Certainty and
Importance, that the Lord Jesus Christ, whom thou have graciously given, to be
the Repairer of our Breaches, is every Way qualified to perform his exalted
Office; yet O my God! if thou do not, of thy sovereign Mercy, draw us by the
Cords of thy invincible Grace, to thy Son, and thy Self, we shall, after all,
perish eternally.

O THAT thou would have Compassion upon the Souls that thou have made, and
exert thy almighty Power for our Deliveance! Shall we perish for Hunger, in
Sight of the greatest Plenty! -- Shall we die in Poverty, in View of the
richesf Treasure! -- Yes, we shall, -- if thou, of thine own mere Grace, do
not make us thy willing People in the Day of thy Power.

AND may I not have an humble Hope, that thou have performed this great Work,
in and for me? And may I not accept this as an Evidence of thy special Love? In
me, that, is, in my Flesh, there dwells no good Thing. Of my Self I can do
Nothing, all my Sufficiency is in God. In the uninterrupted Communications of
thy Spirit does the of my Soul consist.

To thee therefore, who art the Fountain of LIGHT AND LIFE, and the Giver of
every good and perfect Gift, I desire always to come and here to wait, in the
diligent Use of all appointed Means, for all suitable Good of every Kind. I
renounce every other Dependence, for Justification, but the Blood of JESUS; --
for Sanctification, but the powerful Operations of the Spirit. -- I desire now,
and perpetually, to receive this JESUS, as the Prophet, Priest, and King of my
Salvation; to bring me to all the Happiness of his redeemed People.

I COME to thee, O divine Redeemer! not imagining I have any Thing of my own to
commend me to thy Acceptance. -- Never was there any of the Race of apostate
Adam saved, but such as God was pleased to create anew in Christ Jesus unto
good Works. Never was there any prior Goodness in any of all that unhappy
Stock, to induce thy sacred Majesty, to perform that miraculous Work for them;
-- the Motives are in thy Self; -- According to the unsearchable Riches of thy
Grace in Christ, thou bestowest Redemption upon us. In the Covenant which thou
proposest to our Acceptance, thou have taken the Work into thine own Hand; this
is one of its glorious Articles, -- I will cause them to approach unto me with
their whole Hearts, and, when we thus approach unto thee, thou have graciously
promised, I will be their God, and they shall be my People. Thus, thou art the
ALPHA and OMEGA of our Salvation, -- the whole Work is thine from the
Foundation to the Top-Stone. I come to thee, O GOD THE FATHER! who art the
generous Donor, -- to thee, O GOD THE SON! who art the meritorious Purchaser,
-- to thee, O GOD THE HOLY GHOST! who art the Almighty Applier of all the
Benefits of Redemption. -- On thee, O adorable TRINITY! do I desire incessantly
to rely, till my latest Breath, for the Blessings of Time and Eternity, -- To
whom should I go but unto thee, for thou only have the Words of Eternal Life.

WILL thou be pleased to hear and answer, and do for me and mine, and the whole
Israel of God, as our various Wants and Miseries, Sins and Sorrows, require;
not according to our Deserts, but thy undeserved Grace, in Christ Jesus our
Lord. And to thy Name be the Glory forever. Amen.

A THANKSGIVING for Converting GRACE.
O My God! the Fountain of Perfection and Blessedness, and Giver of every good
Gift, through Jesus Christ, the Son of thy Love! Although I am unworthy to take thy
sacred Name, into my polluted Lips, and upon my own Account, may tremble to
appear before the Throne of thy unspotted Purity: Yet thou have been pleased,
to consecrate a new and living Way, in which we may enter into thy holy
Presence, through the Blood of Jesus: In this Way, I desire to draw near unto
thee at this Time, and pray, that I may be enabled, faithfully to recollect,
and thankfully to record, thy distinguishing Grace and Mercy, toward me thy
unworthy Creature, as vile by Nature as any of the apostate Race of Adam.

I DESIRE humbly to acknowledge, with the deepest Gratitude, that my Lot was
cast in a Land of Light; and that I have the sacred Oracles of Truth, in my own
Language; while so many Thousands perish for lack of Vision. I bless thy Name,
that I descended from pious Ancestors, and had the Privilege of a religious
Education. But although these are great Privileges in themselves, and when
accompanied, with the efficacious Power of divine Grace, are made the Means of
Salvation; yet without this sacred Energy, they would all have proved a Blank
to me, and served only to aggravate my Account: Under the most persuasive
Means, I should have turned a deaf Ear to Instruction, and perished in my Guilt
and Folly.

BUT, bless the Lord, O my Soul! and all that is within me, bless his Holy
Name; that when my Soul was all over a dark and disordered Chaos; when my
Nature was filled with nothing but Wretchedness and Pollution; -- when I had no
true Knowledge, either of my Misery and Remedy, but was dead in Trespasses and
Sins, without Power to help my self; -- That then, O, my GOD! it was a Time of
thy Love; thou by thy illuminating Grace did enable me to see my miserable,
lost guilty and bankrupt Circumstances, by Nature and Practice; and in this
distressing Exigence, when there was no human Eye to pity me, nor any created
Arm that could help me, wast graciously pleased to lead me to the Almighty and
compassionate Redeemer; and by a sweet, but powerful Attraction, incline me, in
the Want of every Thing that is good, to receive Jesus Christ as he is freely
offered in the Gospel; and in and through him, to go out to thee, the great and
glorious JEHOVAH, for all the Blessings of the New Covenant, which he has
purchased with the inestimable Price of his Blood.

IT is my Security and Happiness that in this Covenant, thou art taking the
whole Work of our Salvation into thy own Hand, and by thy divine Power,
createst thy People a new in Christ Jesus unto good Works: With Pleasure I read
the gracious and condescending Tenor of it. -- This is the Covenant, which I
will make with the House of Israel, after those Days, says the Lord; I will
put my Laws into their Mind, and write them on their Hearts: And I will be to
them a God, and they shall be to me a People. For I will be merciful to their
Unrighteousness, and their Sins and their Iniquities, will I remember no more.
-- O what an immense Treasure, is comprehended in these Promises, when spoken
by the omnipotent and faithful God! It is the good Pleasure of thy Grace, that
inclined thee to make these Promises; -- and it is the same good Pleasure, that
enabled me to receive and trust in them.

THOU have been pleased to proclaim thy Name, The Lord God, gracious and
merciful, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin. This is the strong Tower
in which thou have caused me to hope from my Youth up: Had there been any prior
Goodness necessary to attract thy Affection, I must have sunk into the Depths
of utter Despair; -- for thy allseeing Eye discerned my Poverty and Misery.
Blessed be God, for Free Grace, and Redeeming Love to the worst of Sinners!
Upon this Foundation thou did enable me to come in, and accept of the Act of
Grace, published in favor of the rebellious Sinners of Mankind.

AND now, O my God, and heavenly Father in Jesus Christ! I desire, with exalted
Thankfulness, and humble Confidence, to plead with thy gracious Majesty; --
have thou not declared, in thy unalterable Word, that thou have given thy only
begotten Son, to be a Propitiation for the Sins of the World; and assured us,
that he has satisfied divine Justice in its utmost Demands, and wrought out
pure, perfect, and everlasting Righteousness; and is authorized to secure the
Salvation of all those that come to God by him! -- And have thou not, O
Searcher of Hearts! from whom every good Thought proceeds, enabled me to give
Credit to these Declarations of thy Grace; and accordingly to commit my Soul,
into the Hands of thy dear Son, to be saved by him, in his appointed Way! --
Has not the Foundation of my Hope and Confidence from my Youth up, been the
immutable Good Will of God, who when I was dead, said unto me, Live -- the
unblemished Merits of Christ, who is the End of the Law for Righteousness, to
every one that believes, -- and the unfailing Stability of the Covenant of
Grace, according to which I expect divine Acceptance.

AND will thou be pleased, O my God! to allow me, after so many Years
Experience, to bear my humble Testimony to the Stability of this Covenant, and
the Veracity of the Covenanter. Have I not found, that thy Grace is free; and
that all thy Promises in Christ Jesus, are YEA AND AMEN: Nothing but this could
have kept me from utter Ruin.

To my Shame and Confusion, I must acknowledge, that since thou, by thy
victorious Grace, have shown me the Emptiness of all sublunary Enjoyments, and
by the magnetic Influence of thy Love, drawn me to thy self, as my only
essential Happiness, and Soulsatisfying Portion; my foolish Heart has been
wandering from my God, and too inordinately attached to Creature Enjoyments. O!
with what Self-loathing and Abhorrence, have I Reason to look back upon my past
Life, and bitterly to mourn for all the Faults and Follies that have attended
it; even my best Duties are filled with Sin and Imperfection. I desire
earnestly to deprecate the severe Enquiry of thy Justice; and cry out with the
penitent Publican, God be merciful to me a Sinner!

AND how has every Fault been aggravated by the infinite, inexpressible
Obligations I am under to thy distinguishing Grace! How justly might thou
have punished my Folly with the severest Corrections; and withheld, those
Influences, which I have so often misimproved! -- But, Glory be to thy Name,
than instead of this, thou have followed me with thy gracious Visits, through all
the various Stages and Circumstances of Life; and by thy powerful Attraction,
have still caused my foolish and fluctuating Heart, to point strongly to thee,
the only Source, and Center of all my Happiness! I never found Rest, but in thy
Self, O my God, and heavenly Father! Thou art my only Portion in the Land of
the Living; -- my Comfort in the obscurest Retirement; -- my unfailing Friend
in a strange Land; -- my sure Defense in Times of the greatest Danger. Thou
have been my Health in Sickness; -- my Strength in Weakness; -- my Light in
Darkness; -- my dwelling Place, my strong Rock, my Refuge, from my Youth up.

HOW often have I been assaulted by they Corruptions of Flesh and Blood, and
the Principalities and Powers of the Kingdom of Darkness; when I my self had no
Strength for the Battle; no Power to resist my numberless and powerful
Adversaries! but thou did strengthen me with Strength in the inward Man, and
prevent me from falling, a weak and defenseless Prey, into their destructive
Hands.

LET the set my Seal, to thy Covenant Faithfulness and Love; thou have caused
me to approach unto thee, through thy beloved Son; -- to look up to Jesus, my
Almighty Savior, and lay hold on his Strength and Righteousness; and in his
Name, and under his Conduct, I have been enabled, so far to get the Conquest,
that every Asault has engaged me more strongly to depend on my Almighty
Leader; and the hellish Legions have been disappointed, and put to Flight: --
Sin has appeared more vile, and Christ more precious, under all my Trials and
Difficulties. Christ hath' been my Strength, and Safety; -- my Intercessor and
Advocate. I have found him at all Times, the Way, the truth, and the Life.

O! ASTONISHING Grace, and Goodness, to the Worst of Sinners! -- I am nothing
in my self, but Christ is ALL IN ALL; -- He is my inexhausted Treasure, my
perpetual Support, my continual Feast, the only Foundation of my Hope and Joy;
-- upon him I depend for Perseverance to the End, that neither Life nor Death,
may separate me from his Love. I undertake no Part, in my own Strength; -- the
Work is all thine; the Motives, are altogether in thy Self: Had the Motives
been any good Thing in me, then a Failure upon my Part would have forfeited
all. But the Work of the Lord is perfect; -- thy Good Will is immutable, he
that has laid the Foundation, will also lay the Top Stone, with shouting,
crying, Grace, Grace unto it.

GLORY BE TO THE ALMIGHTY FATHER! who has parted with his Son out of his
Bosom, to be the Atonement for our Sins; and by his all-conquering Grace, has
enabled me to receive him, as my Savior and my Lord.

GLORY BE TO THE ETERNAL SON! for his righteous Life, his bitter Death,
glorious Resurrection, and continual Intercession for us.

GLORY BE TO THE HOLY GHOST! proceeding from the Father and the Son, by whose
Agency, we are enabled to think every good Thought, to perform any good Action,
and are sealed up to the Day of Redemption, Amen.

Morning ASPIRATIONS.
O MY GOD, and heavenly Father in Jesus Christ! I am unworthy to lift up my
guilty Face to Heaven, or appear in the Presence of an holy God. In my self, I
am insufficient for a good Thought: But thou, in thy mere Grace, have not only
permitted, but commanded thy poor indigent Creatures, to come to thy glorious
Majesty, in the Name, and for the Sake of thy dear Son, in whom it has pleased
the Father, that all Fullness should dwell, for all needed Good, both spiritual
and temporal, Especially for that Summary of all Good, the purchased, promised,
Spirit of thy Grace.

O MY GOD! permit and enable thy poor, impotent, and sinful Creature, to
prostrate my self before thy glorious Majesty, under a most abasing Sense of my
utter Inability, to perform this, or any other Duty,in an acceptable Manner.
Allow me to say, that all the Qualifications, to which thy gracious Promises
are annexed, must come from thy self, even the Disposition to ask for them in a
right Manner. The Preparation of the Heart in Man, and the Answer of the
Tongue, is from the Lord. I desire therefore, in the Name and Strength of my
victorious Advocate, and dear Redeemer, to ask for that Repentance, Faith,
Love, Fervency, Perseverance, and every other holy Disposition, to which thy
Promises are annexed: The Fire of Devotion must be enkindled at thine Altar, or
else it will never ascend to thy Throne. O that, there may be a blessed
Intercourse, between thy glorious Majesty, and my Soul, this Day, all my Days,
even to my Life's End! Let the Flame of Devotion ever ascend, from the Altar of
a broken and contrite Heart! May I be enabled in all the Changes, Troubles,
Temptations,Trials, Diversions, and Business of Life, so to conduct my self, as
may tend most to thy Glory, and the Salvation of my own Soul, according to the
boundless Riches of free Grace in Jesus Christ, Amen.

Lord, I my Vows to thee renew;
Scatter my Sins, as Morning Dew;
Guard my first Spring of Though It and Will;
And which thy self, my Spirit fill.
Direct, control, suggest this Day,
All I desire, or do, or say;
That all my Powers, with all their Might,
In thy sole Glory, may unite.
Mr. NELSON.
II. O! MY GOD, AND HEAVENLY FATHER! to thee do I cry, when my Heart is
overwhelmed within me. O that thou would lead me to the Rock that is higher
than I! Thou have commanded thy helpless Creatures, to lay hold on thy
Strength, that they may make Peace with thee. But thou, O Lord! alone, can
incline, and enable us so to do. -- I come to thee therefore, and earnestly
beg, that thou would give me Grace to order my Requests aright before thee;
and now, and at all Times, to do the Things, which are well-pleasing in thy
Sight.

O! MY dear Redeemer, my glorious and ascended Advocate! when thou wast upon
Earth, thou did graciously invite, all poor, miserable, and burdened Souls,
to come to thee, that they might have Rest. And the Invitation still remains
upon Record in full Force, for the Encouragement of Mankind in all Ages, to
apply to thee, under the insupportable Weight of their innumerable Sins and
Sorrows, for all desirable Succor and Relief.

O GOD! who surveyest the whole Creation, and from whom no secret Though It can be
hid: Thou know the bitter Grief, and distressing Sorrow, with which my Soul
is borne down, and under which I should inevitably sink, if not supported by
thy gracious Hand. I am oppressed with a burdensome Sense, of the ruinous
Circumstances of human Nature by the Apostasy, and that Train of Miseries,
which are the sad Consequences of it.

THOU, O gracious God, and merciful Redeemer! art the only Restorer of our
ruined Race, the only Repairer of our Breaches. I desire to come at thy
gracious Invitation, and bring my self, and my Children, and lay them at thy
blessed Feet. Thou know who of us, thou have translated out of the Kingdom
of Sin and Satan, into the glorious Liberty of the Children of God, and who of
us still remain under the tyrannical Slavery of the Prince of Darkness. Do thou
visit us with thy Favor; and make every one of us the Objects of thy
distinguishing Love.

THOU have opened a Fountain, in thy Gospel, for Sinners of all Orders, to wash
in from Sin and Uncleanness. -- Thou art inviting us to wash and be clean. -- O
that thou would engage us all to comply with thy kind Proposals! --

WHEN thou commandedst the poor impotent Man, to stretch out his withered Hand,
then thou gave him Power to obey, and he was immediately made perfecly whole.
And if thou will now speak the effectual Word, and enable me to obey thy divine
Call, and to come to thee with all my Wants and Miseries; I shall be more sure
of Success, than of any Matter of Sense whatever. For when thou say, that no
Man can come to the Son, but whom the Father draws, thou at the same Time
declarest, that whosoever comes, shall be in no wise cast out.

O MY GOD! the Invitations of thy Gospel are inconceivably great, gracious and
free, without any Prohibition or Bounds; addressed to all, in the most
extensive Forms of Expression! Ho! every one that thirsts, come; and
whosoever will, let him come, and drink of the Waters of Life freely. And the
Condition on which I am to receive these inconceivable Blessings, is only a
thankful Acceptance; they are offered without Money, and without Price.

O! SOUL-RAVISHING, and transporting Sound! How exacly suited to my hungry,
thirsty, and necessitous Circumstances! Encouraged by these thy free and
generous. Offers, I desire to cast my self and Posterity, at thy adorable Feet;
for all the important Blessings we stand in Need of, temporal, spiritual and
eternal. I have nothing of my own to bring with me, for every good Inclination
or Desire, is the Effect of thy Grace, and increases my Oligations.

I DESIRE, with a deep and filial Sorrow, to confess my Original Sin, that
Fountain of all Corruption. Behold! I was shapen in Sin, and in Iniquity did my
Mother conceive me. I desire humbly to bewail all my actual Transgressions, in
every Period and Station of Life. I desire more particularly, to abhor my self,
for all my Faults and Follies, since thou wast pleased to discover to me, the
Excellency of Christ, and his Ways, and lead me to acquiesce in him, as my only
and all-sufficient Savior, my supreme and eternal Portion.

O! HOW often has my careless and backsliding Heart, wandered from thee, the
Fountain of living Waters, the original Source of Happiness, to the
unsatisfying Streams of Creature Comforts.

BUT adored be thy Grace, thou have not suffered me to rest in any Thing short
of thy self; but have by all thy Dispensations, more and more weaned my Heart
from these deceitful Vanities. I desire now to look unto thee, O my glorious
Redeemer! as the Beginning, Model, and End of all my Salvation; and depend upon
thee for all those Mercies, which are necessary for me and mine, for Time and
Eternity. Amen and Amen.

III.
O MY GOD! by thy undeserved and sparing Goodness, I am once more brought to
the Light of another Morning; surrounded with innumerable Mercies: I desire,
with Humility and Gratitude, to offer up my Morning Sacrifice, of Adoration,
Praise, and Thanksgiving; -- with unfeigned Sorrow for all the ungrateful
Returns, which I have made for thy innumerable Favors; -- with a strong Faith
in thy glorious Majesty, to enable me, to reform what has been amiss, for the
future.

BUT, O! how incapable am I, to perform this of my self, if not excited and
supported by thy Grace! How certainly shall I depart from thee, and run into
the Practice of innumerable Follies! -- I desire therefore earnestly to beg for
the continual Supplies of divine Strength. I would bring this dead, stupid,
unthankful, unbelieving, unfruitful Heart, to thee; most humbly beseeching
thee, to possess it by thy Spirit; adorn it with every Christian Grace, and
preserve it from every defiling and hurtful Evil.

THIS is what my Soul earnestly longs for; -- then shall I be enabled to make
such an Offering, as thou with accept in Jesus Christ. -- To whom, with thy
glorious Majesty, and Blessed Spirit of Grace, the Comforter, be ever rendered,
with my whole Soul, Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power, from this Time, and
forever, Amen.

IV.
O THOU great Creator of all Things! Thou, only Lord and Proprietor of the
Universe! -- Thou God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in and through
him, the God of all Grace and Consolation! So great, so awful, so inexpressibly
glorious and perfect a Being art thou, and I so vile, guilty, and polluted a
Worm of the Dust; that I dare not have come into thy Presence, or mentioned thy
tremendous Name, had thou not commanded us to approach unto thee; and invited
lost and self-ruined Creatures, even such as have no Worthiness of their own,
to apply to the Throne of thy Grace, for all the Blessings they stand in Need
of; -- yea, thou have assured us, that whatever Requests we put up agreeable to
thy Will, in the Name of Christ, thou will hear and answer. --

O MY GOD! since I am thus permitted to draw near unto thy gracious Majesty;
will thou be pleased to draw near unto me, and afford me thy Blessing and
Presence; that I may ask those Things that are agreeable to thy Will, with
Humility, Faith and Fervency! that so they may be favorably received, and
graciously answered, through Jesus Christ.

IS it not, O my God, and heavenly Father! agreeable to thy Will, that all thy
Creatures should obey thy righteous Commandments? -- Certainly it is: -- Have I
not then a Warrant from thy Divine Majesty, to pray for that Grace and
Strength, by which I may be inclined and enabled to perform this Obedience.

IT is therefore agreeable to thy Will, that I should receive the Offers of the
Gospel, be renewed in the Spirit of my Mind, conformed to the Image of God; and
in order to this, should pray, for the Agency of thy blessed Spirit, which only
can qualify me to do any good Thing; -- and intercede with thee, that thy
Kingdom may come, and thy Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven. These are
Things which thou have commanded me to do; and therefore I am sure, are
agreeable to thy holy Will.

THESE, O my God! (allow me to say) are the Sum and Substance of all my Wishes
for my self and Posterity, to the End of Time. O! when shall the Time come,
when our great Redeemer shall triumph in this miserable Earth; and bring all
Nations, Tongues and Languages, to a cheerful Subjection to his mild and
righteous Government!

O THOU! who see the secret Recesses of our Souls, and all the dark
Labyrinths of Unbelief, Impenitence, Ingratitude, Rebellion, and Perverseness;
with all the deplorable Train, of Ignorance and Error, Sins and Follies, which
we thy corrupted Creatures are by Nature involved in. -- I acknowledge we are
unworthy of the Air we breath in, and the Earth we tread upon: It is of thy
Mercy, that we are not consumed, and because thy Compassions fail not, that we
are not cut down as Cumberers of thy Ground. Yet being authorized and
encouraged, by thy glorious Majesty, to come with humble Freedom and Boldness,
to the Throne of thy Grace, for the Supply of all our Wants. -- I desire now,
and at all Times, to improve this invaluable Privilege, to prostrate my self
before thee; and resolve here to lie, with the most importunate Cries, pleading
for free Mercy, for my self and Children,

LOOK down in infinite Compassion, upon our dark, bewildered, guilty, polluted
Natures. Behold with Pity, what endless Disorder and Confusion, (...) has
wrought in those Souls, which were once adorned with thine Image, and happy in
thy Favor. Speak the all-commanding Word, and Darkness shall give Place to
Light; -- the Beauties of Holiness shall succeed in the Room of the Deformity
and Defilements of Sin. Issue out thy sovereign Orders, that all thine Enemies,
and the Enemies of our Souls, may be brought out, and slain before thee. Let
the Kingdom of Satan be entirely demolished, and the Kingdom of thy SON, be
established upon the Ruins of his accursed Empire. O! that every rebellious
Thought might be brought down, and subdued unto the Obedience of Faith!

MAY I not appeal to thee, O thou Searcher of Hearts! that it is the great and
governing Desire of my Soul, that thou would be pleased, to look down in
Mercy upon these disordered Natures, -- these miserable and polluted Cottages,
and fit them up for thy self, make them Temples of the Holy Ghost, and then
come and take up thy Dwelling in them.

THY Presence I invite into my Soul, as the Sum of all my Happiness: Thou
know O my God! that I should look upon the whole Creation, as a dark and
disordered Scene, if not enlightened with the refreshing Rays of thy Love; and
that I despise all its Glories, Riches and Pleasures, as contemptible Dross, in
Comparison with the Smiles of thy Countenance! It is thou, O everlasting
JEHOVAH! that I choose and desire, for the all-sufficient Portion of me and
mine, in all Generations. For this boundless and inconceivable Blessing, may I
be enabled, in the Exercise of a lively Faith, to wait and pray.

WILL thy glorious Majesty, be pleased of thy infinite Grace, to remember us
with the Favor which thou bear to thy People, and visit us with thy
SALVATION! O that thou would shed abroad thy LOVE, in all our Hearts, in a
most plentiful Manner! O! that all the Powers, Affections, and Passions of our
Souls, maybe at all Times placed on their proper Objects, and be employed in
the Service, and for the Glory of their divine Original! Search and try us, O
our God, and subdue every evil Way in us, and lead us in the Way everlasting.
-- Triumph over every Thing within us, that exalts it self, against the Grace
and Government of the most High God. Let our Souls, at all Times, be filled and
possessed, with God-exalting, Christ-exalting, Sin-abhorring, Self-abasing,
Worlddespising Thoughts. Let every unworthy Apprehension, of the Supreme Being
be removed, and every latent Prejudice, against the Equity and Goodness of his
Ways, be conquered.

O FATHER, LORD of Heaven and Earth! Let thy Kingdom come, and thy Will be
done, as fully, absolutely and unreservedly, in our Souls, and in the universal
World, as it is done in Heaven. O! when shall the happy Day dawn, that thou will give to thy Son, the Heathen for his Inheritance, and uttermost Ends of
the Earth for his Possession? When the glad Tidings of Salvation, shall spread
from Pole to Pole; and the numerous Nations who now sit is Darkness, and in the
Shadow of Death, shall be enlightened, with the Knowledge of God, and of his
Christ. Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly!

O MY GOD, pardon and forgive, hear and answer, according to our various Wants
and Necessities, according to the unsearchable Riches of thy Grace in Christ
Jesus.

I DESIRE to conclude, with one earnest Petition more, as the Summary of all
the rest; which our Blessed Savior, has commanded us to make, and given us
abundant Encouragement of Success, in those reviving Words, Ask, and it shall
be given you: Seek, and ye shall find: Knock, and it shall be opened unto you:
For every one that asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him
that knocks, it shall be opened. Or, what Man is there of you, whom if his
Son ask Bread, will he give him a Stone? Or if he ask a Fish, will he give him
a Serpent? If ye then, being evil, know how to give good Gifts unto your
Children; how much more shall your Father which is in Heaven, give the Holy
Spirit to them that ask it.

DIRECTED by thy Command, encouraged by this gracious Promise; I earnestly pray
that it would please thy adorable Majesty, to spread abroad thy blessed Spirit
of Grace, the Sanctifier and Comforter, in plentiful Effusions, upon me, my
Children, Grandchildren, and all my Family, Friends, Relations, Acquaintance,
Benefactors and Enemies; and upon the whole World of Mankind, for Christ's
Sake; To whom, with thy glorious Majesty, and the Eternal Spirit, be ever
ascribed, Blessing, Praise, Thanksgiving, Dominion and Power, now and evermore,
Amen.

V.
SINCE the Glory of GOD, and the Salvation of my own Soul, is the only Affair
of Consequence; and the Holy Scriptures are the only Rule to direct, how we may
secure this important Concern: I now resolve by the Grace of GOD, (without
which, I can perform no Duty in a right Manner;) that I will, as my Time and
Opportunity permits, write down the most remarkable Passages I meet with in my
daily Reading; for my Instruction and Comfort, in the ensuing Day. And that I
may so read as to understand the Meaning of the blessed Spirit, I will lift up
my Heart to GOD THE FATHER, the Fountain of all Good, that of his infinite
Mercy, he would send down, the enlightening, renewing, and inlivening Influences
of his Spirit, into my Heart. -- TO GOD THE SON, that he would execute his
Prophetic Office, in teaching me clearly to understand, and firmly to believe,
all the grand and sublime Mysteries of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION: And that by his
Priestly Sacrifice, he would make Atonement for all my Breaches of his Holy
Laws; and by his Kingly-Power, bring my whole Soul to an unreserved Subjection
to them. -- To GOD THE HOLY GHOST, that he would sanctify and apply all the
glorious Truths, and beautiful Precepts, therein contained to my Heart: That I
may be enabled to persevere in Holiness, and press forward to Perfection, till
Grace shall be completed in Glory.

AND that it may be really and truly so, I desire, this Morning, by the
Assistance of the Blessed Spirit, to renew my Covenant with this ONE GOD,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and humbly desire, with a fiducial Confidence, in
my good and gracious God, to commit to the Custody, and devote to the Service,
of his Divine Majesty, all I have, and all I am, for Time and Eternity; with a
firm Dependence, O! my gracious and Covenant-keeping GOD! that thou will
conduct me by thy Spirit, lead me into all Truth, and preserve me from all
Manner of Evil.

I DEPEND wholly upon the Strength of thine omnipotent Arm, to fulfill all thy
Works in me, for it is by thy mighty Power, that any are kept unto eternal
Salvation.

AND now, my Soul, that thou may live agreeable to thy Privileges and
Obligations, it is necessary, that the Fire of the Morning Sacrifice, should be
kept alive by devout. Ejaculations, in the midst of all the Business, and
Occurrences of the Day. For the Grace to perform one Duty, is not sufficient
for another; but with David, our Eyes must forever be unto the Lord, we must
look up for continual Supplies, in every Time of Need. To live in this Way is
to live indeed; -- then we maintain, a constant Intercourse, between God and
our Souls; and enjoy a Nearness to God in Christ Jesus; in which Nearness,
consists all our Safety and Happiness.

O, MY GOD! whose Prerogative alone it is to give Faith, enable me now, and at
all Times, to cast Anchor, within the Vail, whither my Forerunner is entered;
that I may be kept steadfast to God, and my Duty, notwithstanding all the
Dangers to which I am exposed, in this stormy and tempestuous World.

O MY GOD! I desire this Morning, with humble Thankfulness, to acknowledge, the
innumerable Mercies of my Life, in every Stage, Situation, and Circumstance.
From the Moment of my Conception; from the Time when I hung on my Mother's
Breast, to the present Day, my Life has been filled with Mercy. When I look
all around me, I find my Self surrounded with Mercies; Food, Raiment, and a
comfortable Place of Abode, a great Degree of Health and Strength, and the Use
of my intellectual Faculties. --

THOU have bestowed upon me, O my GOD! the Powers of Reason and Recollection,
by which I am enabled to contemplate the Perfections of the Supreme Being, and
to see the visible Footsteps of thy Wisdom, Power and Goodness, which are
instamp'd on all the Works that thou have made.

BUT, O my God! I must humbly make my sorrowful Complaint, that although I know
all this, and in some Measure feel the Weight of my Obligations to thy glorious
Majesty; yet I have an ungrateful Heart, prone to backslide from thee. Were the
noble Powers and Faculties, of the Soul, if thoroughly sanctified, and
consecrated to thy Service, how happy should I live? How serene and peaceable a
State should I continually enjoy? But now I am compelled to cry out, O
miserable Creature, that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Sin and
Death!

MAY I not have Leave, O my God! with humble Confidence to say, I am instructed
where to go, with good Ground to hope for Success. My dear Redeemer has bidden
me to pray, that thy Kingdom may come, and thy Will be done, in Earth as it is
in Heaven: And if this Petition, which our glorious Lord has put into our
Mouths, be granted, all Things will be essentially and eventually right; the
Want of this is all our Misery.

THE Heart of Man in its original Purity, was a glorious Temple, a Palace
designed for the Residence of the most HIGH GOD. His Kingdom was set up there;
His Image was engraven upon our Nature; -- But Woe unto us that we have sinned.
-- By this the Spirit of God was affronted and banished, and Satan usurped the
Throne of our Hearts. What a dreadful Havoc, has the Enemy made in this once
glorious Palace!

O MY GRACIOUS GOD! I humbly beseech thee to look down in much Mercy, upon
these desolated Ruins! How are all our Powers depraved and vitiated! How does
Satan carry the natural Man Captive, and transform him into a Slave to every
vile and unprofitable Lust! O set thy Creatures free from this infamous
Servitude; -- restore our ruined Nature; sanctify those Faculties, which under
the Conduct of thy Grace, are admirably suited, to bring Honor to their
Almighty Maker, and advance their own Perfection and Happiness.

O, MY GOD! I humbly beseech thee, for the Sake of my dear Redeemer, now and at
all Times to bestow upon me, thy Grace, that I may offer up such Petitions and
Requests, as thou will graciously hear and answer; and such Dispositions of
Soul, as thou will be pleased with. On thee do I wait all the Day long; the
constant Aspirations of my Soul, shall be to thee. I will look unto thee; O, my
GOD! even when thou hidest thy Face, and wait for thee, O! may I be enabled at
all Times, and under all Circumstances, to do so in an acceptable Manner, to my
Life's End, for my Redeemer's Sake: To whom, with the Father, and holy Spirit,
be Honor and Glory, Dominion and Power now and ever more. Amen.

VI.
O my Soul, why art thou cast down, and why so disquieted, upon any Account?
Why do I not say fiducially, Hope thou in God, for thou shall yet praise him,
for the Help of his Countenance. Surely there must be some grand Defect, in
that Faith, Love, and holy Confidence, which thy God may justly expect from
one, on whom he has bestowed so many signal and distinguishing Favors. Thy
temporal Mercies, O GOD! have been great and numerous; repeated swift as the
Moments fly, and continued to the present Time. And though those are great in
themselves, and much more so, when I consider, how by my Sins I have forfeited
all Good; and am become obnoxious to every Evil: Yet they are small when
compared with those inconceivably greater Blessings, -- The Gift of thy Son; --
the Operations of thy Spirit.

HAS not thy God, enabled thee to say; -- Thou art he whom my Soul longs
for. When shall it once be, that all the Powers of my Body, and Faculties of my
Soul, will be wholly, and without Interruption, employed in thy Service, and to
thy Glory! Are not these certain Indications, of a divine Birth, -- a new
Creation; which could not be produced by any other Hand than that which at
first created all Things. And I desire to depend upon the same Almighty Power,
to finish that Work which thou have begun. And as I received all from thee, so
I owe all to thee, and desire to dedicate all to thee, renouncing all
Dependence upon myself, trusting entirely to the Strength and Grace of the
Redeemer. I desire more constantly and uninterruptedly, to lift up my Soul to
thee, by constant ejaculatory Aspirations; and to commit myself to thee, as Wax
to the Seal, that thou would form me into thy own Resemblance, and fit me
for the Service and Enjoyment of thy Self: As I desire to depend upon thee for
Strength, so I desire to trust only in the Righteousness of Christ for
Justification.

HERE I venture my All for Time and Eternity. Upon this Foundation I sat out,
in the Christian Race, when I was young; And upon a Review of the Conduct of
God toward me, in my whole Life, I have reason to set my Seal, that God is
true to all his Promises; -- that all his Ways, are Ways of Pleasantness, and
all his Paths are Peace.

IN thy Strength, O my gracious and merciful Father! I resolve to persist in
this Way, and lie waiting at the Footstool of thy Grace. -- If I perish, I will
perish here: -- To whom else should I go, thou only have the Words of Eternal
Life. Amen.

VII.
LIFT up your Heads, O ye Gates! and be lift up, ye everlasting Doors! and the
KING OF GLORY shall come in.

I DESIRE, O my God! to acknowledge with the highest Thankfulness and
Gratitude, thy unparalleled and condescending Grace, to sinful and rebellious
Mankind. That when by Sin, he had affronted the infinite Majesty of Heaven, and
caused thee to withdraw thy favorable Presence from him; yet that thou who art
the KING OF KINGS, should contrive to restore the human Race again to thy
Favor, and art inviting us to the most intimate Communication with thy self:
Knocking at the Door of our Hearts; demanding Admittance, by the external Calls
of thy Word, and the internal Operations of thy Spirit. --

THE Terms of our entertaining so divine a Guest, are the most advantageous,
that can be imagined. We are required to open the Doors of our Hearts, and give
him a joyful Admission; and resign ourselves to be governed by his just and
righteous Laws. -- What can be more reasonable and serviceable? In keeping
God's Commandments there is great Reward: And all will find that it is true,
who make the happy Experiment.

AND if the Conditions are so advantageous, What is the Blessing it self! --
Here, O my Soul! I am lost in a Crowd of Thoughts; I have no Words adequate to
my Conceptions, and my Conceptions fall infinitely short, of the Excellency of
the Subject they are employed about. If I consider the wide Destruction, which
Sin has brought upon our Frame, which from a beautiful Habitation of the most
High, is turned into a Receptacle of every base and unclean Lust: How justly
may my Head be Waters, and my Eyes Fountains of Tears, to weep for the
affecting Alteration! When I consider, the melancholy State of this lower
World, by Reason of the Fall of Man, I may say, At this my Belly trembles, an
Heart is removed out of its Place. Horrotakes hold of me, because of the
Wicked, that forsake thy Law. As to my self, upon the srictest Search, I think
I can say, that the Remains of Sin in me, are the greatest Burden I feel, and
the only Thing that makes Life bitter to me. If the Absence of the glorious God
be so dreadful, how inconceiveably reviving must be the Return of this blessed
Inhabitant!

To approach unto thee, O my God! is all my Happiness, in the Present and
future World: May I therefore never admit, any Thing into my Heart and Memory,
that shall be affronting to thy blessed Spirit! May I always endeavor by every
Means, to lift up the Doors of my Soul, and invite the Presence of this sacred
Guest. It is thy Demand, Son give me thy Heart: Give me Power, I beseech thee,
unfeignedly to obey thy Voice. Favor me with thy unerring Guidance, to lead me
in that Way, which is for the Glory, of thy Name, and the Salvation of my Soul;
for my dear Redeemer's Sake: To whom, with the Father, and Holy Spirit, be
ascribed all Honor and Glory Dominion and Power, Amen.

COVENANT ENGAGEMENTS.
THY Vows are upon me, O God! I will render Praises unto thee.

For thou have delivered my Soul from Death; wilt not thou deliver my Feet from
fatting; that I may walk before God; in the Light of the Living, Ps.lvi.12.13.

BE merciful to me, O God, be merciful to me, for my Soul trusts in thee:
Yea, in the Shadow of thy Wings, will I make my Refuge, until these Calamities
be overpast.

I will cry unto God most High, unto God that performs all Things for me.
Ps.lvii.1.2.

I.
O MOST merciful and glorious God, the FATHER, the SON, and the HOLY GHOST. I
desire to dedicate without Reserve, all I am, and all I have, to thee, to whom
of Right I belong; imploring thy continual Assistance, that I may employ my
Time and Talents, in thy Service, to the End of my Life, -- That I may take thy
Word for my Rule, thy Glory for my ultimate End, and in all my Actions advance
the Kingdom of thy Grace.

I TAKE God the FATHER, for my God and Father, -- JESUS CHRIST for my Lord and
Redeemer, -- the HOLY SPIRIT for my Sanctifier and Redeemer. And resolve, by
thy Grace, that I will hate Nothing but Sin, that I will take Pleasure in
Nothing but what is agreeable to thy Will. And I beseech my glorious God, that
he would increase my Faith, inflame my Love, and invigorate my Desires, after a
greater Conformity to, and Acquaintance with my dear Redeemer, and give me a
more full and absolute Submission to the Dispensations of thy unerring
Providence.

BLESS, the Lord, O my Soul! for the daily and common Mercies with which thou
art surrounded. Bless him above all for redeeming Love, the never failing
Spring of Grace and Goodness; in Jesus Christ the true Believer possesses all
Things: A well grounded Hope of an Interest in his Merits, is a continual
Feast, and inspires the Soul with that happy Peace and Tranquillity, which
infinitely exceeds the most delightful Pleasures of Sense. This, and this
alone, gives the Soul an Happiness independent of the whole World of Creatures,
which accompanies it wherever it goes, and supports it under the most
distressing Bereavements. -- It enables it to say, with the Psalmist, The Lord
lives, and blessed be my Rock, and exalted be the God of my Salvation. And with
the Prophet, Though the Fig Tree do not blossom, and there be no Fruit in the
Vine; yet will I rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of my Salvation.

II.
O GOD! thou art the Almighty Creator, the continual Preserver, the bountiful
Benefactor, supreme Lord and Proprietor, of all Things visible and invisible.
Thou art the only worthy Object of my Admiration, Adoration and Fear: And in
and through Jesus Christ, the delightful Object of my Love, Complacency and
Confidence. It is therefore, not only my indispensable Duty, but highest
Happiness and Safety, to consecrate my self, in the most solemn Manner, to the
ever blessed TRINITY, in whose Name, I was baptized, and to whose Service I was
devoted in my Infancy.

ADORED be thy Name, that I have been enabled from my Youth up, to take these
my baptismal Bonds upon my self, and solemnly to renew my Covenant Dedication.
O my God! forgive the Iniquity of my Holy Duties, and sprinkle all my Covenant
Transaction with the Blood of Jesus.

IF I have ever been sincere, in these my solemn Approaches to thy gracious
Majesty, it was because thou, of thy Free Grace, did make me so; -- To thee
therefore, be the Glory, Honor, Thanksgiving and Praise, -- but to me belongs
Shame and Confusion of Face. I should never have unfeignedly returned to thee,
the Lord my God, had thou not drawn me, by the constraining Charms of thy
Grace and Love; and effectually convinced me of the Vanity and Insufficiency of
every Creature, to satisfy the boundless Cravings of my immortat Soul. And
did not thou, by the Illuminations of thy Spirit, lead me to the Redeemer,
upon whose Account alone, I could possibly expect Pardon and Acceptance,
Strength and Assistance.

AND now, what Words can I take to express my Thankfulness and Gratitude, for
thy distinguishing Mercies: I desire humbly to bewail all my Ingratitude to
thee the God of all Grace and Consolation. -- How often have I grieved thy Holy
Spirit,'by my careless and inattentive Conduct, notwithstanding all the
endearing Obligations, thou have laid me under! When I review my Life I find
that in many Things I have offended thee, my heavenly Father; and in all Things
have fallen short of my Duty to God and my Fellow Creatures; -- All my Faults
have been attended with this great Aggravation, that they were a Violation of
my solemn Vows and Covenant Engagements.

How just and equitable is the Apostle's Exhortation, I beseech you therefore,
Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that you present your Bodies a living
Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable Service. How
criminal and sacrilegious is every Deviation from my Covenant Vows; every
Departure from my rightful Lord and Master.

I BLESS thy glorious Majesty, that thou have not punished me according to my
Iniquities, nor taken away from me thy forfeited Blessings. But that thou art
still continuing to me the Strivings of thy Holy Spirit, and have so far
overcome the natural Depravity of my Heart, that Sin is my greatest Aversion;
thy Service my highest Delight: That my Hopes and Fears, Desires and Delights,
my supreme Choice and Affection, centers in the living and unchangeable God. O!
that it were more perfectly so! -- If thou art my Portion, I shall certainly be
happy, though destitute of every Thing else. If thou with-holdest thy Favor, I
must be inexpressibly miserable, though placed in the Bosom of Heaven itself.

UNDER a deep Conviction of these Things, I desire again to renew, the
Dedication of my self unto thee. But what have I now to offer, but what is
thine already, by the most indisputable Title, and the strongest Obligations. I
would give up my Heart unto thee, O my God! it being the best Offering I have
to make; humbly praying. That thou would be pleased to take it, into thine
own Hand, and form it for thy self. Kindle within it, such a Flame of divine
Love, as shall destroy every other Affection, which stands in Competition with
thee. To thee therefore, O almighty Sovereign, and heavenly Father! To thee, O
compassionate Advocate and Redeemer! To thee, O eternal Guide and Comforter of
thy Church, do I dedicate my self and my Children, in an EVERLASTING COVENANT
never to be broken. Resolving to wait at the Footstool of Free Grace, for those
divine Communications, which are necessary to enable me to live more entirely
to thy Glory; and finally, to make me meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light. I desire to have my entire Dependence upon my dear Redeemer; -- his
Strength for the Performance; his Merit for the Acceptance of these my Covenant
Engagements.

IF there has been any Thing in the Transactions of this Day, that is the
Breathing of thy holy Spirit, be pleased to hear, answer and accept it; and
every Thing of my own, pity and pardon. O my gracious God! hear my Cry, attend
to the Voice of my Requests, and do for me, for mine, and the the whole Israel
of God, according to thy Covenant Faithfulness, and the Boundless Riches of thy
Grace, in JESUS CHRIST OUR LORD.

To whom, with thy glorious Majesty, and eternal Spirit, be ascribed, as is
most due, all Honor, Adoration and Praise, now and for ever more, Amen.

It grieves me, Lord, it grieves me sore,
That I have lived to thee no more;
And wasted half my Days:
My inward Powers should burn and flame
With Zeal and Passion for thy Name;
I would not speak, but for my God, not
move but to his Praise.
Dr. Watts's Lyrick Poems.
FINIS.

