The SUBSTANCE and SCOPE of both TESTAMENTS OR The Distinguishing Glory of the
Gospel.

A SERMON ON The DISPLAYS of Divine JUSTICE, IN The Propitiatory SACRIFICE of
CHRIST: Representing the Nature, Necessity, and Sufficiency, of his
SATISFACTION, the IMPUTATION of his RIGHTEOUSNESS, in consequence of it,
together with an Answer to the most important Objections.

Preached at PHILADELPHIA, in April 1749.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M.

1. COR. iii. 11. For other Foundation can no Man lay, then that is laid, which
is Jesus Christ.

1. COR. i. 21.23.24. For after that, in the Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom
knew not God, it pleased God by the Foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe. We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling Block, and unto
the Greeks Foolishness; but unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks,
Christ the Power of God and the Wisdom of God.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold, by WILLIAM BRADFORD in Second-Street, 1749.

ROMANS, iii. 25, 26. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation, through
Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins that
are past, through the forbearance of God:

To declare, I say, of this Time his Righteousness: That he might be just and
the justifier of him which believes in Jesus.


THE unsearchable Wisdom and unparrallel'd Love of God, are not only
conspicuous in the Method of our Redemption by the Lord JESUS CHRIST, but the
Glory of His Justice and Righteousness is herein likewise very apparent, as the
Verses I have read inform us; in which we have these three Things, viz. Two
important Benefits mentioned, Propitiation for, and Remission* Sin 2. The
Causes hereof assigned both meritorious and instrumental, the Blood of Christ
and Faith. 3. The Design of God herein declared, viz. The manifestation of his
Justice and Righteousness,

THE first Benefit mentioned in our Text, is Propitiation or Atonement, whom
God has set forth to be a Propitiation. It is Christ that the Apostle here
Speaks of, as appears from the preceding Verse, him the Father has purposed
and engaged in his Councils and Covenant from Eternity to be a PROPITIATION,
and has actually exhibited him as such in Time, not only by the Shadows of the
Law and Prophesies of the Prophets, but also by the open preaching of the
Gospel after his Advent. To be a Propitiation, ilasterion, either from
ilascomai, to expiate Sin or show Mercy; or from ilasco placo, to assuage,
quiet, pacify, atone, reconcile, There is in the Words a Metalepsis of the
Effect for the Efficient; Christ is called a Propitiation because he purchased
it, instead of propitiator, reconciler, pacifyer, etc. The Word ilasterion, is
the Title of the Mercy Seat; this is ascribed to Christ, because in many Things
he resembles it; it was indeed an eminent Type of him: The Mercy Seat covered
the Tables of the Law which were broke by us, to signify that by Christ pardon
is procured for us; by the sprinkling of the Blood of the Sacrifice upon it,
God was rendered propitious or favorable, and exhibited himself there upon a
Throne of Grace, so it is in Christ alone that God is reconciled to Sinners,
and through him we have access to the Father: He interposes between divine
Justice and our Guilt, and purchases the Kindness of God for us. God was
peculiarly present in a Cloud on the Mercy Seat, and gave gracious Answers
thence to his People from between the Cherubims, ( Levit. xvi. 2. Number. vii.
83.) Thus it is only in Christ that we can expect God's special Presence and a
merciful Answer to our Requests.

The 2d Benefit mentioned in our Text, which is indeed but a consequent of the
former, is the Remission of Sins, i. e. The cancelling of their Guilt, or our
Obligation through them to Punishment. Now this is obtained by the Propitiation
or Atonement of Christ. This Remission the Apostle observes, extends to Sins
that are past, i. e. Not only to Sins committed after Christ's coming, but to
Sins committed before it, even from the Foundation of the World: He only
mentions the Sins that are past, because that seemed incredible that the Effect
of Remission should exist before its Cause, and likewise that he might
represent the great Value and Efficacy of the Death and Satisfaction of Christ;
which not only extended forwards to the Time to come after it, which is easy to
conceive, but also to the Time past before it. It was a difficult and
momentuous Question, What became of the Fathers who dyed before Christ's
coming? Now the Apostle tells us, that they were forgiven, and God's
forbearance exercised toward them, the Times of Ignorance God winked at. We
must consider the Death of Christ, not as a natural but a moral Cause; it is not
strictly or properly as a Medicine that heals, but as a Ransom that frees a
Captive. Natural Causes operate nothing before their actual Existence, but
Moral Causes do. Its sufficient that they shall be, and that the Person with
whom they are effectual, accept the Promise. A Captive is released upon
assurance given that he will send his Ransom, though it is not actually paid:
Thus the Death of Christ was available to purchase pardon for Believers before
his coming; for he interposed as their Surety, and God, to whom all Things are
present, knew and saw the accomplishment of it in the Time promised; and hence
he is called the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, not only in
respect of God's Purpose concerning the certainty of his Death, but likewise in
regard of the Efficacy of it. The Salvation we derive from him was ever in him.
It is true, under the Old Testament they had not so clear Knowledge of him, yet
notwithstanding they enjoyed the Benefit of his Sufferings: For the Medium by
which his Benefits are conveyed, is not an exact Knowledge of what he did and
suffered, but sincere Faith in the Promise of God. Now the divine Revelation
being the Rule and Measure of our Faith, such a Degree was sufficient to
Salvation, as answered the general Discovery of Grace: Believers then depended
upon God's Goodness to pardon them in a way honorable to his Justice: By their
Ceremonies and Sacrifices they were taught the reality and greatness of their
Disease and Danger, and the necessity and sufficiency of a Remedy without
themselves, even in the Mesiah: And from hence, together with the Prophesies of
the Prophets respecting him, they were induced to believe that he would
certainly come in due Time and bring Salvation with him: Thus Abraham rejoiced
to see Christ's Day, and Moses valued the Afflictions of Christ more than the
Treasures of Egypt. From what has been said it appears, that the Jewish and
Christian Church is one essentially; they differ but as the Morning and Evening
Star, which is the same, but is diversely called from its Appearance before the
Sun rising and after its setting. Our Faith respects a Savior that has already
come, theirs respect him as yet to come.

NOW the meritorious Cause of the Benefits of Propitiation and Remission, is
the Blood of Christ, i. e. by a Synedoche the whole Sacrifice of Christ, which
began in the obedience of his Humiliation, and was consumated in his Death

BUT the instrumental Cause of the Application of the aforesaid Benefits to us,
and our Investiture in them is Faith, such a cordial Complacence in, and entire
Dependence on the Method of Salvation by the Death of Christ, as habitually
attracts the Mind and Life, to the Love of Truth, and Practice of Good, both
moral and evangelical, whom GOD has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith
in his Blood; and indeed the Wisdom of the divine Constitution is herein
apparent, that an actual Interest in the Benefits of CHRIST'S Death, is
communicated in a way entirely consistent with the Purity of GOD'S Nature and
Honor of his Government. Sinners must first humble themselves before GOD for
their Offenses, and accept the Mediator before they are forgiven. But the

3d. PARTICULAR in our Text, is the Design of GOD in our Redemption by JESUS
CHRIST, and that is the Manifestation of his Justice and Righteousness: Whom
God has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood to declare his
Righteousness. To declare I say at this Time his Righteousness, that he might
be just; and the Justifier of him that believes in JESUS. This Point is
repeated with earnestness by the Apostle, not only to signify its great
Importance, and inexpressible Moment, but likewise to make the deeper
Impression by it upon our Minds. The Justice of GOD is that Perfection of his
Nature, whereby he is inclined to render every one his Due: That attribute
whereby he is disposed to hate Sin, and punish Sinners according to their
Demerit; now of this the blessed GOD has given a glorious but awful
Demonstration, in the Sufferings of CHRIST; by condemning and punishing Sin, in
the Person of his only begotten and dearly beloved Son; hereby the Almighty
shows before the whole World, the Inflexibleness and Severity of his Justice,
and that he will not suffer Sin to pass unpunished.

FROM the Words of our Text thus explained, I would observe the following
Proposition, viz. That the Justice of GOD is gloriously manifest, or declared
in the Redemption of Man, by the Death of JESUS CHRIST: Although GOD spared
guilty Man for the Honor of his Mercy, yet he spared not his own Son, when he
be came the Sinner's Surety, for the Honor of his Justice.

IN speaking upon this Proposition I would,

I. OPEN the Nature of GOD's Justice. And,

II. SHOW how it is gloriously manifest in the Redemption of Man by the Death
of Jesus Christ, and then proceed to the Improvement.

NOW the Justice of GOD, is that eternal Rectitude of the divine Nature,
whereby he orders and disposes all Things, according to the Rules that his
infinite Wisdom has prescribed; and governs all Mankind with the utmost
Exactness and Impartiality in Relation to the Distribution of Rewards and
Punishments; to illustrate this we should observe, that there is an intrinsic
RECTITUDE and ODDIQUITY in Things, and that the Reasons and Relations of moral
Good and Evil, do not depend upon any uncertain and arbitrary Principle; but
are fixed and immutable, indispensable, and eternal* pursuant to this, that
Truth, Goodness, and Justice are essential and necessary Properties, in the
divine Nature; antecedent to any Consideration of the divine Will; and what he
can no more alter or unsettle, than he can deny himself or cease to be; that as
he is the Maker and Governor of the World, he has an undoubted Authority to
make Laws, and enforce them with proper Sanctions; that when Laws are thus
enacted, he setts Bounds in some Measure to his own Authority; for Justice
requires that he should not prescribe what is above Man's Strength, or if he
does, that he should give supernatural Power to obey it; that upon Obedience he
cannot without Prejudice to his Justice, deny the promised Reward, or, upon
Disobedience, finally forbear to inflict the threatened Punishment: And from
hence it follows, that GOD is necessarily obliged, both by his Nature and
Covenant, to act with the strictest Justice and Impartiality, in all his
Proceedings with Man: But I proceed to the

II. Proposed, Which was to show how divine Justice is gloriously manifest, in
the Redemption of Man, by the Death of Jesus Christ. Now the Particular in
which, or Manner how divine Justice is glorified by the Death of Christ, is the
Satisfaction that has been made thereto by it. In order to open this important
and FUNDAMENTAL POINT, of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION, and give it its just Weight,
let me endeavor to represent,

1. THE indispensable Necessity there was of a Satisfaction to Justice, in
order to our Redemption and Salvation. And,

2. EVINCE the Reality and Sufficiency of that which Christ has made thereto by
his Death.

NOW the Necessity of a Satisfaction to divine Justice in order to our
Redemption and Salvation, appears from the Consideration of the Nature of GOD,
and his Relation to intelligent Creatures.

JUSTICE being a natural and necessary Perfection of the divine Nature, has
consequently an invariable Respect to the moral Qualities of intelligent
Beings, as divine Goodness in some Degree naturally and necessarily diffuses
itself upon Agents, perfectly pure and innocent, so likewise Justice terminates
upon the Guilty and Nocent by Punishments equal to their Crimes; except a
Satisfaction intervene. If it be impossible considering the Perfection of the
Diety that Holiness should be unrewarded, then surely it must be more
impossible that Sin should be unpunished; seeing the Exercise of Justice is
more necessary than that of Goodness; for the Rewards which Goodness dispenses
are pure Favor, inasmuch as the Creature has received it is Being, and all its
Benefits from GOD, all the Services it can perform, are due to him on account
hereof, and if so, by the Payment of a just Debt, they cannot merit fresh
Benefits; but the Punishments which Justice inflicts are due and demerited, for
violating the Rights of Heaven, and all the Obligations they are laid under to
GOD; seeing Justice in it is Nature is a Perfection, it must of Consequence be
in GOD, who is possessed of all kinds of Excellency, and that in the highest
Degree of Eminence, or infinitely, and if so it is inflexible and eternal.

SIN is directly contrary to the divine Purity, and therefore he must as
necessarily hate it, as he loves himself; this is evident from the Law of
Contraries, as well as from the Psalmist's Observation, The righteous Lord
loves Righteouness, but the Wicked his Soul hates. Now Punishment is but a
natural Effect, and proper Manifestation of this Hatred; and therefore it is
not an arbitrary Constituion; it is true, the Time and Manner of it is
Infliction is founded in divine Sovereignty, but the Matter or Substance of it
is bottomed on the essential Purity and Rectitude of the divine Nature to which
Sin is repugnant.

BUT if together with what has been offered, respecting the divine Nature; we
consider the Relation Jehovah bears to the moral World, it adds much Light and
Force to this Argument.

ALMIGHTY GOD in the Character of a Governor, is obliged to protect the Laws of
his Government from Reproach and Insult.

AS it was proper and necessary, that the reasonable Creature should have a Law
to direct it, in that Homage and Service, which it had a Capacity to perform to
its Creator and Sovereign.

SO it is highly reasonable that the aforesaid Law should be confirmed by such
important Sanctions, as were necessary to procure the Creature's Obedience.

SIN being the greatest moral Evil, because opposite to the greatest moral Good
the blessed GOD, it is but suitable that it should be punished with the
greatest penal Evil, viz. Death.

NOW the Law being broken, was it not just and necessary, that the Penalty
threatened should be inflicted, either upon the Transgressor himself, according
to the immediate Intent of the Law, or upon such a Surety in his room, as was
able to make Satisfaction equivalent to the Offense; that so the Majesty,
Purity, and Righteousness of GOD might be rendered conspicuous, as well as the
Value he puts upon Obedience to his Law.

IF the Penalty threatened be not inflicted, upon a proper Occasion, does it
not reflect either upon his WISDOM, as if he had not with good Reason concerted
the SANCTION, or upon his POWER, as if he was not able to inflict it, or upon
his PURITY, as though he connived with Transgressors; or upon his TRUTH, inasmuch
as his Word is not performed. And would not Sinners be hereby induced to
contemn the Law and the Lawgiver, and encouraged in their Impieties? All which
Considerations plainly prove the Necessity of Satisfaction for the Breach of
GOD'S Laws; without this, GOD'S Hatred against Sin would not be declared, nor
the Honor of his Laws preserved, nor a suitable Fear of offending him awaked,
every of which are necessary and excellent: It is true, temporal Magistrates
are sometimes obliged to dispense with the Law, and spare an Offender, either
through inabillity to punish him, or because his Life may be of more Service to
the State; and still there is a superior Tribunal, to which the Case either is,
or ought to be referred; but GOD'S Government is very different, no Criminal
can either escape his Notice, bias his Justice, or control his Power; here is
no Exigency of Government that requires Impunity, no superior Tribunal:
Moreover the Majesty of these Laws is more sacred than that of Civil States and
Kingdoms. But,

2. I am to evince the Reality and Sufficiency of that Satisfaction which
CHRIST paid to divine Justice by his Death. And to this End, it will be
necessary to consider the PREQUISITES in order to it; and the Account the
sacred Scriptures give of Christ's Death, together with the CONSEQUENTS thereof.

NOW in order to Satisfaction, these Things were previously necessary, viz. The
personal Holiness of the Mediator; his being possessed of the divine and human
Natures; his Appointment to undertake this Province, and his Consent thereto.

HE that satisfies for another's Sin must be without Sin himself, for guilty
Blood is impure and consequently stains by its Effusion rather than cleanses:
Now the Lord JESUS was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners, he
appeared to take away Sin and in him was no Sin: To prevent his Infection with
original Sin propogated by natural Generation, he was conceived in a miraculous
Manner, by the Power of the Holy Ghost according to the Angel's Declaration,
The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power of the highest shall
overshadow thee, therefore also that holy Thing that shall be born of thee
shall be called the Son of GOD. And as he was perfectly free from original, so
likewise from actual Sin; Satan, when he came found nothing in him, to fasten
his Temptation upon; and therefore was baffled in all his Stratagems; though he
came in the likeness of sinful Flesh, yet he had no Sin: just as the brazen
Serpent had the Figure, but not the Venom of the fiery Serpent: Our Lord
fulfilled all Righteousness, and ever did what pleased his Father.

NAY our Lord was not only free from Sin, but it was impossible that he should
be tainted with it, because of the intimate Union of his human Nature with the
divine; the divine Nature being Holiness itself, and Almighty Power, must needs
by its Presence and Union insallibly prevent Sin in the Redeemer.

BUT it was not only necessary that the MEDIATOR should be personally holy, in
order to make Satisfaction, but likewise possessed of the divine and human
Natures: He must assume the Nature of Man, that he might be allied to him, and
capable of suffering in his stead, for the Deity cannot suffer. Under the
Jewish Economy, the Right of Redemption belonged to him that was next in
Blood; hence our Lord took upon him the Seed of Abraham, that he might have a
Right of Propinquity or near Alliance as Man, to redeem us, and be capable to
make Satisfaction for us in the same Nature that sinned.

NOR was it less necessary that the MEDIATOR should be GOD, that so the human
Nature might be supported under its Sufferings, and they made of infinite
Value, and so equivalent to the demerit of Sin. JUSTICE required an exact
Proportion between the Guilt of Sin, and the Satisfaction made for it, which
could not be, if the Mediator had not been GOD. The Guilt of Sin is doubtless
infinite, because committed against an infinite GOD, but the Sufferings of any
finite Nature can be but finite in Measure and Value; and there was an absolute
Necessity of a Union of the divine and human Natures, in the Person of the
Mediator, to communicate an infinite Dignity to his Sufferings: By Reason of
this Union there is a Communication of the special Properties of both Natures
to the Person of Christ, which being properly the Fountain of his Actions, must
needs communicate an infinite Merit and Dignity to them all, and hence it is
said, that the Lord of Glory was crucified; and that we are purchased by the
Blood of GOD, the human Nature being united to the divine, the Actions
proceeding from it, are not merely human, but raised above their natural Worth,
and therefore meritorious and infinitely excellent: One Hour of Christ's Life
glorified GOD, more than Millions of Ages spent in his Service by Men and
Angels, because this being done by Creatures, can be but finite and limited;
but the other being the Obedience of one who is GOD, is of infinite Excellency,
and worthy of GOD: He that comes from above, is above all; the same may said of
his Sufferings.

ANOTHER Pre-requisite to Satisfaction, is the Mediators Appointment to
undertake this Province; without this his Mediation would have been in vain,
being destitute of sufficient Authority. Now the Scriptures plainly and
positively declare our Lord's Appointment to the mediatorial Work, in these
Words for him has GOD the Father sealed, GOD anointed Jesus of Nazareth with
the Holy Ghost, and with Power, the Lord has sworn and will not repent, thou
art a Priest forever after the Order of Melchizedek. Therefore does my Father
love me, because I lay down my Life, this Commandment I have received of my
Father. These Scriptures and many others that might be mentioned, do
sufficiently show Christ's Authority and Commission to mediate.

GOD the Father in this Constitution, is to be considered as a Governor, who by
an Act of Supremacy and pure Jurisdiction, may dispense with the Execution of
the Law, upon such Considerations, as fully answer the Ends of Government.

THE Law is not executed according to the Letter of it, for that obliges the
Person that Sins to suffer, and if the Case were so no Flesh could be saved;
nor is it disannulled, for if so no Obligation to Duty or Penalty would remain,
but all Men are obliged to obey, and those who impenitently neglect it, are
under a Curse, it is therefore only relaxed in regard of its Penalty, by a
merciful Condescension of the Lawgiver.

IT is true the Moral Law cannot be relaxed, in respect of its Precept; for
that being a Copy of the divine Purity, the Almighty cannot deny himself by
contradicting it, or allowing what is intrinsically Evil; nor can it be relaxed
in Respect of the Substance and Weight of its Penalty in general, because of
the Justice and Truth of GOD engaged to issue the same.

YET that the Penalty may be relaxed, as to the Person of the Sinner, for wise
and just Reasons, is evident by considering, that it is not the Evil of the
Offender, that is primarily designed by it, but the Honor of the Lawgiver, and
the Preservation of public Order and Government; in case therefore those
valuable Ends can be attained, by substituting a Surety in the Place of the
Transgressor to suffer for him; the End of the Law is answered.

ALTHOUGH the Threatening declared the Demerit of Sin in the Transgressor, and the
Right of Punishing in the Creator and Sovereign, yet it cannot vacate GOD'S
Power to relax it upon just and wise Reasons; otherwise it would be absurd and
inconsistent with his Supremacy.

THE last Pre-requisite that I mentioned, was the REDEEMERS Consent to the
Fathers Appointment; this was necessary to make his Sufferings satisfactory;
for being GOD himself he could not be compelled by any superior Authority* its
true, after he had undertaken, he was then obliged to pay the Debt; but his
first Engagement was altogether free and of Choice.

AND seeing that the Virtue of his Sufferings does not arise merely from the
Dignity of his Person, but from his Substitution in our stead, this rendered
his Consent likewise necessary; his sufferings for others without his Consent,
if he could have been compelled thereto, would have been liable to the Charge
of Injustice; and therefore the Scriptures expressly declare his willingness to
undertake the Business of Mediation, Burnt-offering, and Sin-offering thou
did not require, then said I, lo I come, in the Volumn of the Book it is
written of me, I delight to do thy Will, O my God, yea, thy Law is within my
Heart. And hence it is said, that he gave himself for us; and that on this
Account, the Father loved him, because he laid down his Life; these Passages of
Scripture do sufficiently manifest Christ's free, and full Consent to the
Fathers Appointment, of his undertaking to be our Surety.

NOW having spoken of the Pre-requisites necessary in order to Satisfaction; it
is proper to discourse on the Account which the Scriptures give of the
Redeemer's Death, to the End we may know whether it was satisfactory or not,
and to show how divine Justice is therein glorified. Now the Scriptures
represent the Death of CHRIST under a threefold Character, viz. as a Punishment
inflicted for Sin, as a Price to redeem us from Ruin, and as a Sacrifice to
reconcile us to God. And

1. IT is represented as a Punishment for Sin, this will appear by considering,

THAT Man on account of his Transgression, was sentenced by the Law he broke to
Death; and being insolvent, the Lord Jesus Christ by his Father's Appointment
and his own Consent, engaged as a Surety to pay the Debt; and hence he is
called the Surety of a better Covenant, and he is said to be made under the
Law, that we might obtain the Adoption of Sons; he who was God over all blessed
forever, was in respect of his human Nature, and as Mediator, subject to its
Precepts, and liable to its Penalties, that by performing the one and
sustaining the other, he might redeem those that were under the Law.

THE Debt we owed was not pecuniary but penal, a Creditor may forgive the
former without Payment, because it is his Property, but the latter cannot be
forgiven without the Prince's Consent, who is Guardian of the Laws, because
public Justice is concerned in it.

JESUS CHRIST having assumed the Relation of a SURETY, became one with the
Debtor, in the Judgment of the Law; and so was liable to their Punishment
according to Justice.

AND this Punishment the Scriptures assure us, GOD as a supreme Judge
inflicted upon him; and hence he is said to be delivered up by the Determinate
Council of GOD, and that the Lord laid upon him the Iniquities of us all, that
is the Guilt of them, and Punishment due for them. It is farther said, that it
pleased the Lord to bruise him, and elsewhere that the Messiah was cut of but
not for himself* that he was wounded for our Transgressions, bruised for our
Iniquities, that the Chastisement of our Peace was laid upon him, and that by
his Stripes we are healed; that he himself bare our Sins on his own Body on the
Tree. Moreover the Sufferings CHRIST endured, were answerable to the Penalty
the Law denounced, in Substance, the Death threatened was both Temporal and
Spiritual, and thus our Lord, not only bore a Temporal Death, accompanied with
great Dishonor, and exquisite Anguish, but likewise with the Curse of GOD, and
he also bore the Wrath of Jehovah upon his Soul, and hence he is said to tread
the Wine Press of it alone: -- The FEAR and SORROW of CHRIST at the approach of
his Sufferings as well as his BLOODY SWEAT and Lamentation under them, showed
that he endured something more terrible then all outward Torments, for the
Martyrs have endured such with triumph, and surely our Redeemer could not have
less courage then they, who was the Source of their Fortitude; the Difference
then must be in the Nature of their Sufferings, GOD the Father dealt with him
as our SURETY, and not as his own SON; and therefore suspended a comfortable
Sense of his Love, and appeared as a severe inexorable Judge: Now from the
aforesaid Account of the Sufferings of CHRIST, it is evident they were PENAL;
seeing they were inflicted for Sin by the Supreme Judge, and were equivalent to
the Sentence of the Law, and we receive spiritual and special Benefits by them.

IN Christ's Sufferings we may observe the Matter and Form and Ends of
Punishment. The Matter of Punishment is something afflictive, either privative
in being deprived of some good, or positive in enduring something grievous,
both which Christ bore. The form of Punishment is when it is Inflicted for Sin,
and this distinguishes it from a Calamity. Now Christ suffered Death for Sin
not his own, and hence he is said to bear our Sins, to be delivered up to Death
for our Sins, yea, to be made Sin and a Curse for US. The End of Punishment is
the common good, partly in deterring Persons from violating the Laws, which is
the design of exemplary Punishment, and partly in maintaining the Honor and
Interest of those who have suffered by the Breach of the Laws, this is the
Design of Satisfactory Punishment, answerable to which in the Death of Christ,
the Severity there expressed is to deter from Sin, and maintain the Honor of
the great Lord of the Universe, by making compensation for the Injury done
against him by Sin.

2dly. THE DEATH of CHRIST is represented in Scripture as the PRICE of our
Redemption: Redemption in general is a delivering of one from a Calamity by a
Ransom, i. e. Some valuable Consideration, which is termed a Price; to
understand which let it be considered, that Man by Disobedience to GOD was
bro't into Misery, such Misery as the Scripture often expresses by Captivity,
which consists in a servile Subjection to Satan and Death, to which Man was as
it were committed for his Rebellion by the Supreme Judge and Governor; from
this Calamity Men could no otherwise be delivered then by Ransom, for by Order
of Divine Justice we were detained Prisoners, and till this was Satisfied, no
Discharge could be obtained; freedom from a Calamity without a Price is
Deliverance simply, but not properly Redemption: The Word Redemption to which
the Scriptures ascribe our escape (apolutrosis) signifies Deliverance by a
Ransom; and hence it is said, that CHRIST gave himself a Ransom for all,
(antilutron) This Word is exceeding Emphatical, and signifies a Ransom paid
instead of another. Anti denotes Substitution, when a Thing or Person is put in
the Place of another; many Instances might easily be given of this, so that the
Meaning of the aforesaid Words, he gave himself a Ranson for many, is this,
that he died in their stead, and by his Life as a Price obtained their
Redemption; which Truth the Apostle Paul elsewhere confirms, by saying that
Christ has Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us;
the Price upon Consideration of which we are Redeemed, is not corruptable
Things such as Silver and Gold, but the precious Blood of CHRIST as of a Lamb
without blemish and without Spot, this Price was paid in our stead to GOD, for
it was for Sin against his Majesty, that we were cast into Misery, and by his
Righteous Order detained in it; and therefore to him the Price of our
acquitance must be paid; Satan is no more then an Instrument of his Justice: If
CHRIST had died only for the Confirmation of the Gospel, or to exhibit to us a
Pattern of Suffering, as the Socinians imagine, then what was there in his Death
more than in the Death of other Martyrs, and how can we be said to be redeemed
by it? Would it not be as ridiculous as blasphemous to say, that we are
redeemed by their Death? But

3. THE Death of Christ is represented in Scripture, as a Sacrifice to
reconcile us to God; him Jehovah has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith
in his Blood.

THAT the Death of Christ was a true and real Sacrifice appears not only from
the express Declaration of Scripture, but from all the Ingredients of a
Sacrifice being found in it, Christ our Passover, says the Apostle to the
Corinthians, is sacrificed for us; and in his Epistle to the Hebrews he informs
us, that Christ has appeared once in the End of the World to put away Sin by
the Sacrifice of himself.

ONE Ingredient of a real and proper Sacrifice, was that the Person offering
must be a Priest, every high Priest, says the Apostle, taken from among Men is
ordained for Men in Things pertaining to God, that he may offer both Gifts and
Sacrifices for Sins; and was not Christ constitued a Priest by Oath after the
Order of Melchizedeck.

AGAIN, The Things offered were to be of God's appointment, otherwise it was
but Will Worship, even in freewill Offerings, though the Time of Offering was not
fixed, yet the Things to be Offered were appointed; and thus was not what
CHRIST offered, appointed and prepared by God, a Body have thou prepared me,
says Christ; this Body was animated with a Soul, which being separated
therefrom in his Death, is said to be made an Offering for Sin, by the Royal
Prophet; and elsewhere he is said to offer himself, i. e. both his Soul and
Body, ( Heb. ix.)

FARTHER, that which was offered for a Sacrifice was to be destroyed; those
Things that had life were killed, and their Blood poured out, and the other
Parts besides the Blood were burnt, either wholly or in part: Thus our Lord was
slain and his Blood shed, and his Soul was exposed to his Fathers Wrath. And as
the Jewish Sacrifices were burnt without the Camp: Thus did not JESUS suffer
without the Gates of Jerusalem. Moreover, Sacrifices were offered to God only,
and hence the Author to the Hebrews terms them Things pertaining to God: And
did not JESUS CHRIST, through the eternal Spirit, offer himself without Spot to
God, ( Heb, ix. 14.)

FROM the aforesaid Particulars it appears, that all the Ingredients or
Constituents, of a real Sacrifice are found in the Sacrifice of Christ.

HAVING already shown that CHRIST'S Death was a real Sacrifice, I would proceed
to assert and prove, that it was a Sacrifice of Propitiation or Atonement and
Reconciliation.

TO this End observe, that the Propitiatory Sacrifices under the Jewish
Economy, were figures and shadows of the Sacrifice of Christ. Now if the Types
and Shadows had any propitiatory Virtue in them, much more the Antitype, else
the Substance would not exceed the Shadow, which is absurd. That the Jewish
Sacrifices did prefigure the Death of Christ, the Apostle declares at large in
the ninth and tenth Chapters to the Hebrews, and in the second Chapter of his
Epistle to the Colosians, where he calls them Figures and Shadows of good
Things to come: but in the mean Time observes, that the Body is of Christ; as
if he should say, those Propitiatory Jewish Sacrifices had some resemblance of
this, as the shadow has of the Body, though obscure and imperfect; but the
Substance and Perfection of Atonement is in the Sacrifice of Christ.

BUT to make this very important Point more evident, let me endeavor to prove,
that all that was absolutely necessary to a Sacrifice of Propitiation under the
Jewish Economy, is to be found in the Sacrifice of Christ, e. g. The Sin of
the Offender was laid upon the Sacrifice, and likewise his Punishment was
inflicted upon it, the Sacrifice was substituted in his Room, apeased the
Almighty, and removed the Sinners guilt.

EACH of these Particulars deserves and requires our Attention. The Sin of the
Offender was laid upon the Sacrifice, or imputed to it and charged upon it, so
as to be made responsible and liable to suffer for it, as if it had contracted
the Guilt itself; even as a Surety is obliged to pay a Debt he never
contracted, yea as much as if he had: The Sacrifice was looked upon and treated
as a guilty Thing, though it had not sinned itself; hence these Sacrifices were
called Sins, ( Levit. xx. 17.) which is translated Sin-Offering. Farther they
are said to bear the Iniquities of the People, ( Levit. xvi. 22.) and the Goat
shall bear upon him all their Iniquities. We are farther informed in the
aforesaid Chapter, that the People laid their Hands upon the Head of the
Sacrifice, confessed their Sins over him, and put their Sins upon him; and
Aaron shall lay both his Hands upon the Head of the live Goat, and confess over
him all the Iniquities of the Children of Israel. Putting them upon the Head of
the Goat, signified, say the Hebrew Masters, that the Guilt was transferred
from the People to the Sacrifice that was offered for them. And hence the Escape
Goat, and other Propitiatory Sacrifices, were looked upon as execrable and
poluted Things; and those that touched them were poluted. ( Levit. xxvi.) Now
as the Sin was charged upon and imputed to the legal Sacrifices, so our Sins
were charged upon and imputed to JESUS CHRIST, as the Apostle observes to the
Corinthians, he was made Sin for us who knew no Sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him. How could he be made Sin who knew none, any other
way than by Imputation? And how can his Righteousness, who is God, be made ours
by any other Method? Sin was imputed to Christ when it was charged upon him,
and he obliged to suffer for it in our stead; as a Debt may be said to be
imputed to a Surety when he takes it upon himself, and is thereby obliged to
pay it, though he never contracted it; and Christ's Righteousness is imputed to
us when it is accepted for us, and we as realy entitled to its Benefits as though
we had performed it. Moreover,

THE Penalty of the Offender was laid upon the Sacrifice offered for him; the
Sinner deserved temporal Death and Destruction, and the Sacrifice was slain or
destroyed. A Bullock, which was a Sin-Offerring for the High Priest, and a
Goat, which was a Sin-Offering for the People, were ordered to be killed, and
the Escape Goat was sent into the Wilderness to be destroyed one way or other. (
See Levit. xvi) And in like manner the Sin Offerings for private Persons
whether Lambs, Kids, Turtle-Doves, or Young Pidegons, were to be slain, and the
Offering of Flour was to be partly consumed. ( Levit. v.)

THE Sacrifices, by having the Sins of the People laid upon them, became liable
to the Penalty, and did actually under go it: Thus it was with Christ whom they
pointed to; he himself, says the Apostle Peter, bare our Sins in his own Body
on the Tree, by whose stripes we are healed; he was bruised for our Iniquities,
says the Prophet, wounded for our Transgressions, and poured out his Soul unto
Death. Farther,

THE Sacrifice suffered the aforesaid Penalties in the Offenders room and
place, and this indeed necessarily follows from the Particulars
beforementioned, for to suffer in one's stead is nothing else but to suffer for
another what he should have suffered, that he may escape; thus the Sacrifice
suffered Death for the Offender that he might not die, and therefore died in
his stead, its Life went for his Life, Levit. xvii. 11. For the Life of the
Flesh is in the Blood, and I have given it to you upon the Altar to make an
Atonement. The Blood being the Vehickle of Life, when it goes, the Life goes;
this therefore being offered to atone for them, or save their Lives, of
Consequence the Life of the Sacrifice went instead of the Life of the Offender.

AND if, as has been before proved, both the Sin and Punishment of the Offender
were laid upon the Sacrifice, it must needs suffer in his room and place; but
for farther Illustration of this important Point of the Substitution of the
Sacrifice in the Transgressors room, it may be observed, that no Sacrifices
were instituted for Capital Offenses, such as Murder, Idolatry, etc. because
the Sinner himself was to be cut off; but for other Sins which though they in
strictness according to that Dispensation, deserved Death, yet God was pleased
to relax the Penalty of the Law in Respect of the Transgressor, and accept of
the Life of the Sacrifice for his Life: Agreeable hereto the guilty Person was
to offer a clean Beast of his own, to signify its Substitution in his stead,
for as Proprietor he had a Dominion over it to apply it to that Use.

WELL; if there was in the Sacrifices of Atonement a Substitution of the
Sacrifice in the Offender's room, and Christ was such a Sacrifice as has been
proved, then it necessarily follows that he died not only for our Good, but in
our room and place, seeing he is the Substance and Antitype to which those
Shadows pointed, and in whom they have their Accomplishment; and hence he is
said to die for the Ungodly, and to suffer the just for the unjust that he
might bring us to GOD, just as the innocent Sacrifice in the room of the guilty
Transgressor, not only the original Words in those Scriptures Huper and Anti,
but the Things spoken of manifestly declare a Substitution of Christ in the
Place of Sinners as a Sacrifice of Propitiation.

AGAIN, propitiatory Sacrifices were to appease God and turn away his Anger,
this is the Meaning of the Word Atonement, which was the Design of the
Sin Offerings, the Trespass-Offerings* and the Burnt-Offerings, Levit. vii. 7.
and i. 4. And he shall put his Hand upon the Head of the Burnt-Offering, and it
shall be accepted for him to make Atonement for him. And this was also the
Design of the Peace Offerings, and this End those Sacrifices attained, many
Examples of this Kind might be offered but I shall only, for brevity's sake,
mention one, 2 Samuel xxiv. ult. And David offered Burnt-Offerings and
Peace Offerings* so the Lord was entreated for the Land, and the Plague was
stayed from Israel. Because the Lord by those Sacrifices was rendered
propitious or well pleased, therefore they are frequently said to be of a sweet
savor to the Lord, Levit. i. Noah's Sacrifice is said to be a savor of Rest,
as it is in the Margin, Genesis viii. 21. on which Occasion God said he would not
curse the Ground any more for Man's sake. It is called a savor of Rest,
because when God is pacified, his Anger rests, Ezekiel. xvi. 42. Hence those
Sacrifices are called propitiatory. The Words Propitiation, Atonement,
Reconciliation, Pacifying, are synonimous Terms, and signify one and the same
Thing.

NOW the same Words and Effects are ascribed to the Sacrifice of Christ (or to
his Death and Blood which is the same) in our Text he is said to be a
Propitiatory through Faith in his Blood, by him, says the Apostle to the Romans,
we have received the Atonement, Romans xi. He is called our Peace, Ephesians. ii.
14. And the Chastisement of our Peace is said to be laid upon him, i. e.
Punishments necessary to procure our Peace, and by his Blood and Death we are
said to be justified and reconciled. Romans v. 9.10.

PREVIOUS to this Reconciliation, Satisfaction to Justice was necessary, which
implies not only the Suffering of a Calamity, but that in Substance, which the
Law threatened and the Sinner deserved. Justice that it may be satisfied
requires the Execution of the Law, and the Calamity aforesaid must be endured
by the Sinner, and in his stead by another, if one suffers upon his own
Account, that can be no Satisfaction for another, all these Particulars we have
already proved, are verified in the Jewish Sacrifices, and in the Substance
which they prefigured.

ONCE more I may observe, that the Jewish Sacrifices removed Guilt or
Obligation to Punishment, here observe, that Guilt may be said to be threefold,
viz. Civil, Ceremonial, and Moral. Civil Guilt consisted in a liableness to
temporal Death, for some violation of the civil or judicial Law, Deuteronomy. xxi. 9.

CEREMONIAL Guilt consisted in an Obligation to be debarred from the Privileges
of public Worship under the Jewish Economy for some Breach of the ceremonial
Law, for some legal Pollution, Levit. 5. But,

MORAL Guilt consists in an Obligation to endure eternal Death for
transgressing the moral Law, for by divine Constitution the Wages of every
moral Evil or Sin properly and intrinsically so called is Death; now the legal
Sacrifices could free from the two former Kinds of Guilt, but the Death of
Christ alone from the latter, Heb. ix. 13, 14. For if the Blood of Goats, and
Ashes of a Heifer sprinkling of the Unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of
the Flesh, i. e. promoted an external Sanctification or Expiation, as to the
Flesh, not as to the Soul and Conscience, How much more shall the Blood of
Christ purge your Consciences from dead Works.

THE legal Sacrifices could not make him that did the Service, perfect, as
pertaining to the Conscience, because they could not compensate the Injury Sin
had done to GOD, being finite, without which, Justice is engaged to punish the
Transgressor with eternal Death.

THESE Sacrifices could only remove a civil and ceremonial Guilt, or liableness
to outward Punishment enacted by those Laws* (in Instances not grounded upon
the Nature and Reason of Things, but merely upon divine Sovereignity;) and
shadow forth the Sacrifice of Christ, which being of infinite Value is
sufficient to satisfy divine Justice, remove the Guilt of moral Impurity, and
save the Soul: Under the Law we are told, that without the shedding of Blood
there was no remission of Sins, and the Blood is said to make Atonement,
Levit. xvii 11. the Reason is, because the Life was in the Blood, and therefore
when the Blood was offered to make Atonement for the Offender, the Life of the
Sacrifice was supposed to be given instead of his Life, and thus the Sentence
of the Law threatening Death was executed, and so Justice satisfied. For this
Reason the Blood of the Mediator is said to speak better Things than the Blood
of Abel, for that cried for Revenge, but this procures Remission to Believers;
and this doubtless is the Reason why so frequent mention is made of the Blood
of Christ, in the New Testament, viz. to show that our dear Redeemer has
endured the Penalty of the Law, Death itself, and thereby satisfied Justice,
magnified the Law, and made it honorable.

BUT the Reality and Sufficiency of Christ's Satisfaction to Justice appears,
not only from what has been said upon the scriptural Representation of Christ's
Death as a Punishment inflicted for Sin, as a Price to redeem us from Ruin, and
a Sacrifice to reconcile us to GOD, but likewise from the Consideration of the
Quality of the Person suffering, the Degrees of his Sufferings, and the Effects
of them.

THE Quality of his Person derived an infinite Value upon his Sufferings. Our
Redeemer was the true and eternal GOD, coequal and coeternal with his Father,
the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, the Son of
GOD, not merely by Office, but by Nature, and therefore was able to make full
Satisfaction for our Sins. The Wisdom and Justice of all Nations agree that
Punishments receive their Estimate from the Quality of the Persons that suffer:
Though the Deity is impassible, yet it was a divine Person that suffered, and
hence his Blood is called the Blood of GOD, in Scripture, this made his
Sufferings of infinite Worth.

NOR was there any Defect in the Payment he made, we owed a Debt of Death to
the Law, and his Life was offered up as a Sacrifice; yea, he trod the
Wine Press of his Father's Anger, and his divine Nature communicated an
infinite Dignity to his Sufferings, so that they were in Kind, Degree, and
Value, suited to the Sentence of the violated Law, equal to the Demerit of Sin,
and consequently satisfactory to divine Justice, provoked by it.

BUT methinks, the Consideration of the Consequents and Effects of Christ's
Death pours more Light upon this important Subject, and clearly proves the
sufficiency of his Satisfaction to Justice.

NOW there are these three Consequences of his Death that deserve our present
Attention, viz. his Resurrection from the Grave, his Ascension into Heaven, and
Exaltation to the Father's Right Hand.

OUR Lord, in Quality of our Surety, was arrested by Justice, and detained as
Prisoner in the Grave, till he had by his Death satisfied the Law and paid our
Debt; upon which he received a Discharge in his Resurrection, and hence the
raising of Christ is ascribed to GOD as reconciled, Now the God of Peace, who
brought again from the Dead the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of
the everlasting Covenant; besides it is ascribed to his Blood because that was
the full Price of his and our Liberty. Justice incensed arrested and slew him,
but Justice satisfied gave him a Release and Acquittance, of which his
Resurrection is a clear Demonstration.

THE blessed Jesus having risen from the Dead, ascended into Heaven as our High
Priest, there to interceed for us: Now his Admission into Heaven, after he had
undertaken to be our Surety, is a full and certain Proof that he has faithfully
discharged that important Trust, this is doubtless the Meaning of these Words
of Christ, John xvi. 10. He shall convince the World of Righteousness, because
I go to my Father, i. e. the holy Spirit shall convince and persuade Sinners of
the Compleatness of my personal and mediatorial Righteousness, by the Argument
of my ascending to and being accepted of my Father, for without this he would
exclude me from his divine Presence.

AFTER the High Priest had offered Sacrifices without at the Altar, for the
Sins of the People, he opened the Vail and entered into the Holy of Holies, and
there offered sweet Incense and the Blood of Sacrifices to render GOD
propitious to them, ( Levit. xvi. 14, 15.) These Things were Figures of what
Christ was to perform, the Holy of Holies was a Type of the third Heaven, as
that had a double Vail which separated it from the inner Temple, and the
outward Court, so is the third Heaven separated from the Earth by the double
Vail of the starry Heavens and airy Regions, none that was impure might enter
into the Holy of Holies, and into Heaven, we are told that no unclean Thing can
enter; there was the Throne of GOD, for as the Psalmist observes, He dwells
between the Cherubims, there the Tables of the Law, the Emblems of divine
Wisdom and Purity, there the Cherubims the Figures of the blessed Angels, there
the High Priest entered with the Blood of the Sacrifice, carrying the Names of
the twelve Tribes upon his Breast Plate.

THUS our great High Priest, after having by the Sacrifice of himself without
the Gates of Jerusalem, attoned for the Sins of his People, entered into the
eternal Sanctuary with his own Blood, bearing on his Bosom the Names of all the
redeemed, and taking Possession of Heaven for them in their Names, and there
offering their Supplications to his Father, perfumed with the Incense of his
Merits. Of this there was a miraculous sign given at his Crucifixion, for in
the Moment he expired, the Vail of the Temple was rent from the Top to the
Bottom, to signify that the great High Priest had Authority to enter into
Heaven itself as our Surety, and that his Design herein was to appear in the
Presence of God for us as the Lamb slain, ( Heb. ix. 24.)

AS our LORD purchased Salvation for us, by the real Sacrifice of himself upon
the Earth, so he applies it to us by his Intercession in Heaven, which is a
Commemoration of that Sacrifice; and therefore he is said to appear before his
Father by Sacrifice. ( Heb. ix.)

IF any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous. His Intercession is attended with Majesty and Efficacy: He does not
now supplicate with strong crying and tears, as in the Days of his Flesh, but
Wills Salvation to his People, Father I will that those thou have given me be
with me, that they may behold my Glory. Nor does his Suit ever fail of Success,
for it is just, he asks nothing but what he has bought by Blood. Moreover, he
is nearly related to the eternal Father, and has an inexpressible Interest in
his Affection; and hence we are told, that him the Father hears always.

FARTHER, the present Exaltation of our Redeemer to the highest Degree of
Dignity, Glory and Dominion, is a certain Argument of the sufficiency of his
Satisfaction to Justice by his obedient Sufferings, because it was promised to
and conferred upon him by his Father as a Reward thereof.

THAT he is now advanced to the highest Dignity and Dominion, is evident from
these Scriptures, (Ephesians. i.) When he raised him from the Dead, and set him at
his own right Hand in heavenly Places, far above all principality and Power,
and Might and Dominion; and every Name that is named, not only in this World
but also in that which is to come, and has put all Things under his Feet, and
gave him to be the Head over all Things to the Church.

THAT the Father promised to him, as Mediator, the aforesaid Dignities as a
Reward, and consequent of his Humiliation, is likewise evident from these
Places of Scripture, ( Luke xxiv. 26.) Ought not Christ to have suffered and to
enter into his Glory: This doubtless refers to the Covenant of Redemption
between the Father and the Son, before all Worlds, wherein the Son engaged to
suffer for Sinners, and the Father promised to reward him for it; for without
Reference had hereto, there was no Obligation either upon the Father or the Son
in these respects, See also Phil. ii. 8.9. He humbled himself and became
obedient unto Death; wherefore God has also highly exalted him, and given him
a Name which is above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every Knee should
bow. Heb. i. 3. When he had by himself purged our Sins, he sat down on the
right Hand of the Majesty on high.

NOW seeing the aforesaid Exaltation, of being Head of the Church, and Lord of
the Universe, was promised to the Mediator as a Reward and Consequent of his
Sufferings and Satisfaction; forasmuch as it is dispensed, it is a sufficient
Proof that the Condition is performed, on which the Promise was suspended, or
in other Words, of the certainty and sufficiency of CHRIST'S Satisfaction to
Justice.

BUT the Effects of Christ's Death, are likewise Evidences of his Satisfaction
by it, and therefore give farther force to this Argument. The La^^ made nothing
Perfect, all it is Sacrifices and Ceremonies could not cancel the Guilt, or
cleanse the stain of moral Impurity, nor open Heaven for us, all which are
necessary to our Perfection. But CHRIST by one Offering has perfected forever
them that are sanctified; he has acquired for his People, acquitance from the
Guilt of Sin, deliverance from its Stain and Dominion, and a final Admission
into the Imperial Paradise.

The Death of JESUS has blotted out the Handwriting of Ordinances which was
contrary to us, and took it out of the Way, hailing it to his Cross i. e.
entirely cancelled the condemnatory Sentence of the Law as to Believers; for in
the aforesaid Terms there is a manifest allusion to the Defacing and
Destruction of obligatory Bonds. In the End of the World our great high Priest
appeared to put away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself; his Blood cleanses from
all Sin, and not only extends its Efficacy to all Time past, but will to all
Time coming; and hence he is said to be the same Yesterday today and forever,
able to save to the uttermost all that come to the Father by him.

NOR is the Death of CHRIST less efficacious in removing the Dominion and Stain
of Sin, for by it the sanctifying Influences of the Holy Spirit are procured,
whereby we are renewed after the Image of God, and made meet for Communion with
him; hence it was that Christ promised the Comforter as a consequent of his
Ascension. ( John xvi.) Hence we are said to be sanctified in Christ Jesus, and
to have our Robes made white in the Blood of the Lamb. (Rev. vii. 14.)

AND is it not through the Blood of CHRIST that we have boldness to enter into
the holiest? (Heb. x. 19) Which is a clear Evidence of the complete
Satisfaction made by it: For without this, Justice would never suffer the
Privilege of the Righteous to be confered on the guilty and depraved. To this
very Purpose the Apostle himself argues, (Heb. v. 9.) He learned Obedience by
the Things which he suffered, and being made Perfect, he became the Author of
eternal Salvation to all them that obey him. The meaning of which is, that
there was Obedience to the Fathers appointment in Christ's Sufferings, and that
after he had perfected the End designed by them, which was Satisfaction to
Justice, he became the Author of Happiness to all that are believingly subject
to his Government and Authority.

Having gone through the Heads of Discourse proposed; give me leave, because of
the inexpressible moment of this Subject, before I proceed to the Improvement,
to offer a brief Answer to the principal Objections that are made against the
Satisfaction of Christ.

1. The Socinians object, that it is a Violation of Justice to transfer the
Punishment of one to another.

I Answer, It is so in some Cases, but not in all, e. g. When the Person
punished has not Power to dispose of his Life, does not consent to the
Punishment, and no valuable End can be answered by it, then it is no doubt
unjust to transfer the Punishment upon him. But on the Contrary, when he has
Power to dispose of his Life, consents thereto, and a valuable End can be
answered thereby, it is not unjust.

NOW every of these Things are applicable to Christ. He had full Power to
dispose of his Life, and freely consented to his Death, ( John x. 18.) I lay
down my life, no Man takes it from me, I have Power to lay it down and Power
to take it again; nor was it possible he should be held under the Power of
Death, ( Act. ii. 24.) otherwise no doubt it would have been unreasonable for
such a one as he to endure it, for worthless rebels.

MOREOVER, an infinite Good results from his Death; God is hereby glorified,
and guilty Sinners saved, and the great Ends of Government answered.

JUSTICE is no disorderly Appetite, that aims principally at the Ruin of the
Guilty, and is dissatisfied without it. No, it preserves Right with pure
Affections, and is therefore content when the Injury is repaired, from
whomsoever Satisfaction comes.

THOUGH an Inocent Person cannot suffer as Inocent, without Injustice; yet he may
contract an Obligation which will expose him to deserved Sufferings. The Wisdom
and Justice of all Nations agree in punishing one for another Fault, where
there is previous Consent, as in the Case of Hostages; though it is essential to
punishment to be inflicted for Sin, yet not on the Person sinning, for in the
Judgment of the Law, the Sinner and Surety are one.

EXCHANGE in Criminal Cases it is true is not allowed, but that is not from a
Supposition of Injustice in its Nature, for then it would not be allowed in
civil; but for other Reasons, such as these, viz. Because Life is a Depositum
committed to us, to be preserved till God or the public Good calls for it;
besides the Public would suffer loss by the Destruction of one of its Members,
and perhaps the surviving innocent, or guilty Person, grow worse by impunity.

Moreover we should remember, that there is a difference between the same
Person, when abstractly considered, and by himself, and when sustaining the
Representation of others, since such a one's Inocence, though it renders him
incapable of suffering* strictly so called, in the former of these respects,
yet not in the latter, because the Law then no longer looks upon his private
but public Character; and consequently the Punishment of those he represents
devolves upon their Proxy. These Things duly considered, the aforesaid grand
and popular Objection vanishes into Smoke.

But it is again objected, that the Punishment which our SAVIOR underwent, was
not the same which the Law threatened, and therefore is not Satisfactory; it is
but the Death of one, but a transient and temporal Death, whereas the eternal
Death of all was threatened.

I Answer, It is true there was a Difference in some Circumstances, but not in
Substance. Jesus Christ did endure a real temporal Death, and something
Equivalent to an eternal, in weight and value. He could not endure indeed the
reproaches of a sinful Mind, or the Anguish of Despair, because it is
impossible from the Nature of Things, that these Calamities could come upon an
inocent and divine Person, they being the result of personal Guilt and
Impotency to atone for it; but our Lord endured Agonies of another Kind, the
awful apprehensions of a painful ignominious Death, the Malice of Satan, and
the unrelenting Vengeance of Almighty God, which all united at once against
him; while in the mean Time the divine Nature, as it were, withdrew from his
relief. Whatever were the Ingredients of that bitter Cup which God that mixed
them, and he that drunk them, only knew, yet this we may say, that it could be
no ordinary penal pressure, which could overwhelm his Soul with such a deluge
of Grief, dissolve his Body into a sweat of Blood, and at last extort this
awful outcry, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me. This inexpressible
weight of Pain, which the dignity of his Person put an immense Value upon, made
his Sufferings equal to the Guilt of all he represented, and more than equal to
the sufferings of all Mankind; the eternal anguish of the whole human Race
could not have so much honored the Justice and Law of God, as the Sufferings
of God himself in our Nature, though but for a small space of Time.

But to open and illustrate this Matter more fully, let it be considered, that
it was impossible for the Redeemer to pay the Debt of Penalty denounced by the
Law for Sin, in all the Circumstances of it: He did indeed endure a natural
Death strictly so called, but then it was but one in the Room of Millions, the
Defficiency of which was made up by the Dignity of his Person.

BUT as to spiritual Death, though he bore something like it, viz. the
withdrawing for a Time a comfortable Sense of his Fathers love, and anguish of
Spirit, in a Degree that we cannot conceive or express; yet it was impossible
that he should endure it in all its Parts strictly and properly; for as
spiritual Life includes these two Things, viz, a Union to God by Faith and
pious Habits, from which all truly spiritual and acceptable Acts proceed, so by
the Law of Contraries, spiritual Death must needs include a real Separation
from God, a real removal or privation of pious Habits, for so long as one has
them, however clouded, weakened or out of Exercise, though he may be said to be in
a spiritual Sleep or Consumption, yet he is still alive.

NOW to suppose that the human Soul of Christ was separated from the divine
Nature, as it is without Foundation in Scripture, so it destroys the infinite
value of the Sacrifice of it to Justice, which depends upon that Union.

AND to suppose that the Soul of Christ was devoid of pious Principles or
Habits, is to make him a SINNER realy and inherently, and thus to disqualify
him entirely from being a Savior of others. The Reason is this, the moral Law
being spiritual, in Regard of its Author, Nature and Design, and Perfect also,
must needs require Purity in the Temper and Disposition of the Soul, which
cannot be without the aforesaid Habits: Now if CHRIST wanted these, he was
disconformed to the Law, and so a Sinner realy and inherently, for Sin is any
want of Conformity to, or Transgression of the Law. 1 John iii. 4. He amartia
estin, he anomia.


IF so, CHRIST would want another MEDIATOR to save him, and therefore he was
only made Sin by Imputation, being in the mean Time personally and inherently
holy, harmless and undefiled, and knowing no Sin.

WHAT was defective in the Sufferings of Christ's human Nature, in respect of
the Species or Circumstances of the Penalty threatened by the Law, was made up
by its Union with the divine, and so rendered an equivalent to the demerit of
Sin.

AND indeed, in this Constitution, the Wisdom of God appears admirably; for on
the Supposition that Christ paid the Debt in Specie in all Circumstances which
the Law required, (were that possible) the Bond would be cancelled, and all
those Christ represented actually freed from the Curse, at least from the Time
of the Payment made by the Surety, which Notion is as dangerous as absurd.

BUT an EQUIVALENT puts it into the original Creditors Power whether he will
accept of it at all, and when, and how to communicate the Benefits thereof to
the Debtors.

AGREEABLE hereto the blessed God has, in unspeakable Wisdom and Goodness, so
formed the Plan of the new Covenant, that none shall have any actual Title to,
or Investiture in the Benefits of Christ's Purchase, until they be enabled to
repent and believe.

THIS, rightly understood, entirely oversets the dangerous and inconsistent
Doctrines of the Antinomians, preserves the Harmony of the Scriptures, and
makes the Doctrines of Grace and Duties of Religion entirely consistent.

ANOTHER Objection is this, How could God receive this Satisfaction, since he
himself was the Party that gave it? Or how could the Savior of Mankind,
supposing him to be God, make Satisfaction to himself? The Answer is,

THAT the infinite Goodness of God in giving a Redeemer, does not divest him of
the Office of supreme Judge, nor hinder him from receiving a Ransom to preserve
the Rights of Justice inviolable. To illustrate this Matter, we have an eminent
Instance, not unlike it, in the Case of Zaleucus, the Prince of the Locrians,
who passed a Law, that Adulterers should loose both their Eyes; and when his
Son was convicted of that Crime, the People, who respected him for his
excellent Qualities, came and interceeded for him, Zaleucus, in a conflict
between Zeal for Justice and Affection to his Son, took but one Eye from him,
and parted with one of his own to satisfy the Law, and in this Action both paid
and received the Punishment: He paid it as a Father, and received it as a
Conservator of public Justice. In like Manner when guilty Mankind could not
pay the Forfeiture of the Law, God, the Father of Mercies, was pleased to give
it from the Treasures of his Love, i. e. the Blood of his Son for our Ransom;
which he nevertheless as the Supreme Judge received from Christ upon the Cross,
and declared it to be an Offering of a sweet smelling Savor to him, or a
sufficient Satisfaction to his Justice.

NOR is it inconsistent with Reason, that the Son of God, clothed with our
Nature, should by Death make Satisfaction to the Deity, and therefore to
himself. In a Difference between two Parties, a Person that belongs to one of
them, may interpose for Reconciliation, provided he divests his own Interest,
and leaves it with the Party from whom he comes. For Instance, when a Father
and Son, both possessed of Imperial Power, have been offended by rebellious
Subjects, it may not be improper for the Son to interpose as a Mediator, to
restore them to the favor of their Prince, and yet at the same Time he
reconciles them to himself, and procures them the Pardon of an Offense whereby
his own Majesty was violated. But the Time requires that I hasten to the
Improvement.

HAS Jesus Christ been slain as a Sacrifice of Propitiation for us? Then how
vain, how uncomfortable and perilous is the Opinion of those who deny the
Imputation of his Righteousness to Believers; for hereby they endeavor to sap
the Foundations of the Christian's Hope, and shut up the Springs of their Joy,
hereby they oppose the continued Series of Revelation both in the Old and
New Testament: To deny the Imputation of his Righteousness to Believers, is the
same Thing in effect, as to deny his being sacrificed for them, and equally
unreasonable, as has been before represented, and if CHRIST has not died our
Faith is vain, we are without Hope, Help, Comfort; but blessed be GOD, though the
Doctrine of CHRIST crucified be to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the
Greeks foolishness, yet to those that believe, it is the Wisdom of GOD, and the
Power of GOD.

HAS Christ been set forth as a Sacrifice of Propitiation, then we may hence
learn the Sinfulness of Sin and strictness of divine Justice in the Punishment
of it; its true, the Evil of Sin may be in some Measure discerned from its
malignant Nature, being an Enmity against the blessed GOD, a Contrariety to,
and dishonorable Reflection upon all his adorable Attributes, as well as a
rebellious Contempt of all the sacred and unalianable Rights of his Government
over the Natural and Moral World.

BUT the most affecting Demonstration of its Malignity appears in those
Punishments which are inflicted for it; the Torments of the Damned are, no
doubt, equal to the Demerit, and therefore expressive of the great Evil of it:
But they are too little thought upon and realiz'd by stupid, indolent
Transgressors, until it be too late to obtain a Deliverance; and temporal
Calamities cannot sufficiently represent the infinite Displeasure of GOD
against the obstinate and ungrateful Contempt of his Goodness and Government;
but in the Sacrifice and Sufferings of CHRIST it is expressed to the utmost in
the most strong and flaming Colors. Had divine Justice rent the Heavens and
appeared on this Theater, attended with the most terrible Images of Pomp and
Majesty, to punish the Affronts and Insults cast upon the Authority of GOD by
impenitent Transgressors, it could not make a deeper and more abiding
Impression upon our Minds, than the due Consideration of the Sufferings of our
Lord JESUS: The drowning of the Old World by an awful Inundation of Water, and
the dreadful Destruction of the Cities of the Plain by Showers of Fire, do not
set the Evil of Sin, and divine Severity in the Punishment of it in so strong
and striking a Light; if we consider not only the Depth of his Sufferings but
the Dignity of his Person, and near Relation to his eternal Father; he suffered
not only Torments from Men many Ways, but his Father's Wrath in a Degree equal
to the Desert of all the Sins of those he represented; and the Person who
endured these Things was the Son of GOD by Nature, and of coequal Glory and
Majesty with his eternal Father. O how inflexible is the Justice of GOD, that
would not spare even his own innocent and beloved Son, when he became Surety
for Transgressors.

AND how then shall those escape the angry Strokes of GOD'S iron Rod, who
obstinately persist in Unbelief and Impenitence, when such a dearly purchased
Salvation is set before them, and they repeatedly and earnestly urged to accept
thereof? Can they fortify themselves against Almightiness, or encounter with
divine Vengeance, the Apprehensions of which made the Soul of Christ sorrowful,
and heavy, even unto Death? Can they bear with Patience forever, that
Indignation which extorted a bloody Shower from Christ's Body; and the most
affecting Lamentations from his Soul! Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani,
notwithstanding his personal Inocence and the Supports of his Godhead? O
Sinners! For GOD'S sake, realize these Things speedily, least ye feel the
Weight of God's Vengeance forever.

AGAIN, methinks what has been said in the doctrinal Part of this Discourse,
serves to remove the Reproach of CHRIST'S Cross; this was a Stone of Stumbling,
and a Rock of Offense to the Jews, they wanted a pompous Messiah to deliver
them from temporal Bondage, and judged it absurd to expect great Things or
eternal Blessedness from one under Circumstances of the deepest Abasement, and
many of the Gentiles are of the same Stamp, and take Occasion of Prejudice one
Way or other from Christ's Cross; but to such as believe it is exceeding
precious; for they clearly apprehend that CHRIST by his Death has satisfied
Justice, made Atonement for Sin, and purchased spiritual and eternal Benefits:
The Doctrine of Christ's Sacrifice upon the Cross, is the very Foundation of
the Gospel, upon which its whole Fabric is firmly built; its the Center in
which the Lines of both Testaments meet and harmonize, the Soul that animates
the whole Frame, without which it is but a dead Carcass; this is the Source of
our Righteousness and Peace, our Comfort and Salvation: This opens a Door of
Hope to distressed Sinners, and a Fountain of Joy and Solace, to all the Saints
of GOD that will never, never run dry. For the Man Christ Jesus is to them a
hiding place from the Wind, a Covert from the Tempest, as Rivers of Waters in a
dry Place, and as the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land, sure Protection
from every Danger, sweet Refreshment in every Difficulty, and strong Support
under every Pressure; a Balm to every Wound, a Salvo to every Fear, yea, even
to that of divine Justice; for Justice being satisfied by the Blood of the
great Sacrifice becomes our Friend, and instead of barring us out of the
celestial Paradise with its flaming Sword, safely conducts us thither, and
infallibly ascertains our Salvation; for JUSTICE in its Nature requires but a
single PAYMENT, which GOD the Father having received, in the obedient
Sufferings of his beloved Son; is JUST, even IN JUSTIFYING THOSE THAT BELIEVE
IN HIM.

O therefore let us come to CHRIST, and depend upon his BLOOD alone for
Justification and Salvation; for him has GOD set forth to be a Propitiation
through Faith in his Blood; it is in vain, my Brethren, to depend upon our Works,
for he is cursed that don't continue in all Things that are written in the Book
of the Law, to do them, and if we were perfect in our Obedience in Time coming,
this Payment which is due to the Law, cannot cancel the former Debt we are
under to Justice for past Offenses; it is in vain to come with Burnt-Offerings,
and Calves of a Year old, to offer thousands of Rams, and ten thousand Rivers
of Oil, or to offer our Firstborn for our Transgression, the Fruit of our Body
for the Sins of our Souls, it is Christ, and Christ alone, that can help and
save us: O then let us with the Apostle count all Things but Loss and Dung for
the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ our Lord, that we may be found in him,
not having our own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through
the Faith of Christ the Righteousness of GOD through Faith; let us beware of the
Ignorance of God's Righteousness, least we go about to establish our own, and
so rebelliously refuse to submit to the Righteousness of GOD, seeing that by
the Deeds of the Law in Flesh living can be justified, let us then inviolably
pursue the Apostle's Sentiments, Disposition, and Practice, maugre all
Opposition to the Contrary from Men and from Devils, namely, to desire to know
nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, to worship God in the Spirit, to
have no Confidence in the Flesh, and to rejoice in Christ Jesus, who by the
Sacrifice of himself has satisfied divine Justice for us, and is our all in
all, AMEN, AMEN, AMEN. May God himself say AMEN.

FINIS.

