Mr JONATHAN TODD's Election SERMON.

At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY Held in Hartford, May 11th 1749.
Ordered, THat SAMUEL LYNDE Esquire and Mr. BENJAMIN GALE return the Thanks of this
Assembly to the Reverend Mr. Jonathan Todd, for his Sermon delivered, on the
11th Day of May Instant, before the Assembly, and desire a Copy thereof that it
may be Printed.

George Wyllys Secr.

Civil Rulers the Ministers of GOD, for Good to Men.

OR, The divine Original and Authority OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT ASSERTED;

And the Business and Duty of civil Rulers, and the Obligations on a People, to
support their Authority and maintain their Character, showed, in a SERMON
preached before the General Assembly of the Colony of Connecticut, at Hartford,
on the Day of ELECTION, MAY 11 th, 1749.

By Jonathan Todd, M. A. Paster of the Church in East-Guilford.

Psalm. LXXXII.6. I said, Ye are Gods: and all of you are Children of the most
High. Tit. III.1. Put them in Mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers,
to obey Magistrates... Some Things omitted at the Delivery, are here inserted,
as prepared for Delivery.

N. LONDON, Printed and Sold by TIMOTHY GREEN, Printer to the GOVERNOR and
COMPANY, 1749.

The Origin, Design, Business and Necessity of civil Government.
ROMANS XIII.6. For, for this Cause pay you Tribute also: for they are GOD's
Ministers, attending continually upon this very Thing.


THE Necessity of civil Government is so obvious to any One, that considers the
State and Circumstances of the World, that we may conclude, None will despise
Government, but such unhappy Persons, whose Minds and Consciences are defiled,
and themselves unto every good Work reprobate; walking after their own Lusts.

FOR, as in the Days when there was no King in Israel, and every Man did that
which was right in his own Eyes, (Judge. 21.25.) Judgment departed from them,
and all evil Works and Confusions prevailed amongst; them; So will it be
amongst every People where there is no Government. Judgment will turn away
backward, and Justice stand afar off from such a People: Truth will fail, and
he that departs from Evil, will make himself a Prey. The Feet of Multitudes
will run to Evil, and they make haste to shed innocent Blood. Wasting and
Destruction will indeed be in their Paths; and all manner of Oppressions
prevail among them. The Prophecy concerning Ishmael would soon be the just
Character of Multitudes, that He should be a wild Man, his Hand against every
Man, and every Man's Hand against him, (Genesis 16.12.)

BUT yet, there have arose, even amongst them that pretend to approve Things
that are excellent, and to believe on the Name of JESUS CHRIST, some that
despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, (Jude 7.) Under a Pretense of
Liberty, falsely so called, they would put down all Rule, and all Authority, and
Power among Men: Pleading in Defense of their licentious Doctrine, that CHRIST
has made all his People Kings; and they shall reign on the Earth.

THIS they pretend is the Liberty where with Christ have made them free. They
pretend to believe, that the Prosperity of the Church of Christ depends upon
the Destruction of all temporal Powers; and that the golden Age of the Church,
and the expected Millennium is to be introduced by weakening the Power of the
Princes of this World, and setting Men upon a Level. And therefore have
sometimes been called by the Name of Levellers.

BUT now that no Man may have any the least Ground, to pretend from any Thing
that St. Paul has written concerning thrift christian Liberty, that he was a
Friend to Anarchy, -- and councenanced such Levelling Principles, He treats
particularly upon civil Government in this Chapter: Showing the divine
Institution and Appointment, the Use and Design of it; and the great Work and
Business of those that are intrusded with the Administration thereof: Declaring
also, that GOD himself requires Obedience and Subjection to the Same.

HE injoins that every Soul be subjeft unto the higher Powers, [or the
Authority placed over them] For there is no Power, says He, but of GOD, [the
Fountain of it:] The Powers that be are ordained of GOD, v.1.

HE is so far from countenancing Disobedience to Authority, that he declares,
as v.2. Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of
GOD: and they that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation. To resist the
Government, in the Administration of that Power GOD has committed to them, is
as it were to wage War against GOD himself, and to renounce His Government, by
whom Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth, (Prove. 8.16.)
And therefore the Children of Rebellion have Reason to expect that GOD himself
will arise to plead his Cause, and vindicate his Authority; that He will speak
to them in his Wrath, and vex them in his sore Displeasure.

THE Apostle also presses Subjection to Authority from the Original Intention
and Design of Government, which is the public Good. For Rulers, says He, are
not a Terror to good Works, but to the evil; in the former Part of v.3. Rulers
acting by the Authority of GOD, (and there is no Power but of GOD) are not a
Discouragement to good works, but to the evil: They are not designed to
discourage any Thing, that tends to promote the Welfare of the World, but only
to be a Terror to such Works, as bring a Curse upon the World, and hurt the
Interests of Men. They are armed with Authority and Power, to prepare Judgments
for Scorners, and Stripes for the Back of Fools; to scatter the Wicked, and
bring the Wheel over them, (Prove 19.29. and 20.26.) Let Men but lead a
peaceable and quiet Life in all Godliness and Honesty, and the Magistrate, as
GOD's Vicegerent, will do them no Hurt; but will rather protect and encourage
them.

AND therefore says the Apostle, in the latter Part of v.3, and Beginning of
v.4. Will thou then not be afraid of the Power? do that which is good, and thou
shall have Praise of the same: For he is the Minister of GOD to thee for Good.
Magistrates are deputed and delegated to act for GOD: He gives them Power and
Authority to encourage the Virtuous; to maintain their Right and Cause.

INDEED, if Men are contentious, and do not obey the Truth, but obey
Unrighteousness, they have Reason to be afraid of the Magistrate's Power: And
therefore says the Apostle, in the latter Part of v.4. But if thou do that
which is evil, be afraid; for he bears not the Sword in vain: for he is the
Minister of GOD, a revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does evil. They are
as it were armed with GOD's Sword of Justice, and must weild it for Him. GOD
has made them his Officers not only to encourage the Virtuous, but to execute
Punishments and Wrath upon them that do evil.

WHEREFORE, says the Apostle, v.5 Ye must needs be subject, not only for
Wrath, but also for Conscience Sake. I.E. Not only for Fear of Punishment from
the Magistrate, but out of Conscience and Duty; because so is the Will of
GOD,(1 Pet. 2.15.)

FOR, says the Apostle in our Text, for this Cause pay you Tribute also: for
they are GOD's Ministers, attending continually upon this very Thing. Q. D.
It Is in Token of that Subjection you owe them, and in Support of their
Authority, you pay Tribute to them, as being GOD's Ministers, and employed in
the public Service of their Country; attending continually upon this great
Work, to which they are commissioned, as Trustees for the public Good, Scil.
to protect and encourage the Righteous, to maintain the public Peace, and
plead the Cause of Truth, and stand up for GOD against the evil Doers amongst
Men, and avenge his Authority in executing Wrath upon them.

THE Text, I think will naturally lead us, to consider the following Things,
agreeable to the Occasion of this Day.

I. THE Authority by which the civil Powers rule.

II. THE great Ends and Designs of civil Government, and the great Work and
Business of those that are entrusted with the Administration thereof.

III THE Obligations upon a People to Support Government.

I. IN the first Place, let us consider the Authority by which the civil Powers
rule.

Now the Text tells us, They are GOD's Ministers. I am sensible indeed, there
is a Distinction between the supreme Powers, and inferior Magistrates,
commissioned by them, according to 1 Pet. 2.13, 14 Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake: Whether it be to the King, as supreme; or
unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the Punishment of evil
Doers, and for the Praise of them that do Well.

BUT although there are various Degrees and Orders of Men entrusted with the
administration of Government, and the lower Orders immediately derive their
Authority from those above them, yet they all ultimately derive their Authority
from GOD; are His Ministers, and rule for Him. And therefore it is said, Prove.
8.15, 16. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice. By me Princes rule,
ana Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth.

As in Kingdoms and particular Governments, all Power descends, from the
supreme Authority upon subordinate Magistrates and Officers; so in the
universal Monarchy of the World, all lawful Power and Authority is derived from
GOD, the supreme Lord of the World. And, tho the Derivation of this Authority
be mediate, and Men are in various Ways introduced thereunto, according to the
diverse Constitutions of Kingdoms, States and Governments; yet still the
Authority by which they rule is from GOD, the Head and Fountain of all Dominion
and Authority.

It Is the most High that rules in the Kingdoms of Men by the Ministry of
Princes and Magistrates: And they minister as in His Name, and by Authority and
Commission from Him: And therefore they are styled Gods, Psalm. 82.6. I have
said, Ye are Gods: and all of you are Children of the most High.

ALL Government belongs originally unto GOD himself; but he deputes some of the
Sons of Men to act for Him; vests them with His Authority, and charges them, as
2 Chronicles. 19.6. Take Heed what ye do: for ye judge not for Man, but for the LORD.

BUT we proceed to consider,

II. IN the second Place, The great Ends and Design of civil Government, and
the great Work and Business of those entrusted with the Administration thereof.

AND in general, we may say, that the public Good is the great End, and
original Design of the Institution of civil Government. It was ordained as a
Means to promote the Peace and Welfare of the World; to guard and defend the
Innocent, shelter and relieve the Oppressed, encourage the Virtuous, and
discourage Vice and Wickedness: And This is the great Thing civil Rulers are
continually to attend upon.

POWER is given to them from above, to the End they may encourage such Things
as promote the Welfare of Mankind, and may suppress such Things as are
injurious to the World. A Sword is put into their Hands for the Protection of
them that do Well, and the Chastisements of evil Doers. Particularly,

1st. ONE End and Design of civil Government, and so Part of the Work and
Business of those that are entrusted with the Administration thereof, is, to
maintain the public Peace. Peace and Quietness is absolutely necessary to the
WellBeing of any People. It Is a fundamental Thing in all Governments, without
which none of the other Ends of Government can be secured, nor it self long
supported. A Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand, (Mar. 3.24.)

AND then, where Men cannot live quietly, they cannot live happily. Broils and
Contention will render any Society of People unhappy, and overspread the whole
Face thereof with Confusion and Misery. It Is better dwelling alone in a
Wilderness, than in the Midst of Contentions and Quarrels, where Firebrarnds,
Arrows and Death are cast about. David in such a Case wished for Wings swift as
a Dove to fly away far off to some Place of Safety and Repose, Psalm 55.7, 8, 9.

BUT now, without Government there would be endless Broils and Strifes, Wars
and Fightings. To prevent which, the GOD of Peace has ordained Government in
the World. And Rulers are Ministers of GOD to restrain the Wrath of Men, to
curb in that Spirit of Discord, so ready to prevail on all Occasions.

IT cannot be expected but that there will be some turbulent and contentious Men
among every People; unruly and fierce, inclined to improve every Opportunity to
set People together by the Ears, and scatter the Seeds of Discord, and violate
the Laws of Peace: Now Government is designed to restrain such, that People may
lead quiet and peaceable Lives.

2dly; ANOTHER End of civil Government, and so Part of the Business of civil
Rulers, is, to protect Men in the Enjoyment or their just Rights and
Privileges, both natural and acquired, civil and religious.

I SHALL not exercise your Patience, to consider the various natural and
acquired, civil and temporal Rights and Privileges of Men; which they justly
value and esteem, and could not securely possels without the Protection of
Government: It is sufficient to say, before an Auditory so well acquainted with
the Rights and Privileges of Mankind, that the great GOD, who loves
Righteousnesfs, has instituted Government for the securing of Men in the
Enjoyment of these their Rights and Privileges.

IF there were none in Authority, but every Man was left to do what was right
in his own Eyes, there would be no secure possessing of any Thing. Justice and
Righteousness would soon forsake the Earth; Rapine and Violence, Falsehood and
Oppression would every where prevail and triumph, and those that turn Judgment
to Wormwnood; and leave off Righteousness in the Earth be multiplied. Neither
Promises nor Bonds would avail Strength of Arm would be the only Law of Justice
obtaining and acknowleged among Men.

FOR the maintaining of Righteousness and Judgment therefore in the Earth, is
Government set up. And therefore GOD charges his Ministers entrusted with the
Administration thereof, to execute Judgment and Righteousness, and deliver the
spoiled out of the hand of the Oppressor, and to let Judgment run down as
Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty Stream, (Jer. 22.3. Amos 5.24)

BUT besides our temporal Rights, we have our Spiritual Ones, as we are Members
of the Body of Christ; even the invaluable Privileges of the Gospel: Which, if
they should be taken from us, what have we more!

AND yet, there may be Men disposed to take these from us; who, if unrestrained
would spread forth their Hands upon all our pleasant Things; drive us from the
House of the LORD, or disturb us in our Worship there; break down the carved
Work of the House of GOD, or cast Fire into his Sanctuary.

GOVERNMENT is therefore also designed to protect Men in the Possession of
their spiritual Privileges. And therefore it is said concerning Zion, Isa.
49.23. Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy nursing
Mothers. They are to be Guardians of the Religion, as well as the civil Rights
and Liberties of their People.

3dly; ANOTHER great Design of Government, and so what Men entrusted with the
Administration thereof are continually to attend upon, is, to encourage Men in
well Doing. The Apostle says in v.3, of our Context, Do that which is good,
and thou shall have Praise of the same, i.e. Of the Powers and Rulers.

GOVERNMENT is appointed to encourage and promote universal Righteousness and
Goodness; that Men might live not only peaceably and honestly, but religiously
in the World.

THERE has indeed been a great Cry of late Years, that the civil Magistrate
has Nothing to do about religious Matters, nor ought to make any Laws for the
Encouragement of Religion and Protection of the Church of Christ. But this is
new Doctrine to the Church of Christ: Which has always expected that christian
Kings should be it is nursing Fathers, and christian Queens it is nursing Mothers.

INDEED, whilst the civil Powers remained Enemies to the Cross of CHRIST, nor
acknowleged Him their Head and King, the Churches expected no great Help from
them. They trusted on the Arm of Christ, whom GOD had set his King upon his
holy Hill of Zion, immediately to work Salvation for them. And Christ himself
by his immediate and unseen Hand was their Defense. And there is no Doubt, but
Christ is yet able to plead his own Cause, and to maintain his little Flock in
the World, if the higher Powers of this World should neglect the Cause of Zion
and Religion, and take no Care to support the Worship of GOD, and the Cause of
Truth.

BUT yet, as it pleases GOD ordinarily to govern tne World more mediately; and
when he design Good to the Church, to raise up and spirit the higher Powers to
protect and help it; the People of Christ justly have their Eyes to these
Vicegerents of GOD for Protection and Help.

THE First Day of the new Testament-Church was a Day of Miracles, and GOD more
immediately maintan'd his Church and Cause in the World. But since Christianity
has been established amongst Men, and Kings have seen the Glory of the LORD
upon his Church, and come to the Brightness of her Rising, she has sucked the
Breasts of Kings, according to the Prophecy concerning her, Isa. 60.16.

IT was therefore an ancient Promise to the Church, that when the Gentiles
Should come to her Light, Their Kings should minister unto her, Isa. 69.10.

AND indeed, as the Kingdom is CHRIST's, and He is made universal Lord under
his Father, and all Power is given Him in Heaven and Earth, (Mat, 28.18) and He
is given to be Head over all Things to the Church, (Ephesians. 1.22.) what are the
Powers of this World but the Ministers of His Kingdom? -- And if so, their
Character Obliges them, to exert their Power for the Protection, Preservation
and Glory of Christ's Kingdom.

OR, if we only consider them as the Minissters of GOD for Good to the World,
it is impossible that they should answer to this Character, without
endeavoring to support and encourage Religion. For there is Nothing the
Welfare of Mankind is so much interested in, as Religion: Nothing that will so
beautify and bless the World; that will so promote Peace and Friendship, good
Order and Prosperity.

RELIGION is profitable unto all Things, having Promse of the Life that now is,
and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. It Is profitable to obtain the
Blessing of GOD, and to promote those social Virtues that are the Glory and
Strength of a Society Supposing, says Bishop Butler, in his Analogy of
Religion, a Kingdom or Society of Men upon the Earth perfectly virtuous for
many Ages.... All would in some Way contribute, to the public Prosperity: and
in it, each would enjoy the Fruits of his own Virtue.. Such a Kingdom would
plainly be Superior to all Others, and the World must gradually come under its
Empire: not by Means of lawless Violence; but partly by what must he allowed to
be just Conquest; and partly by other Kingdoms Submitting themselves
voluntarily to it,... and claiming its Piotection The Head of it would be an
universal Monarch, in another Sense than any Mortal has yet been; and the
eastern Style would be literally applicable to Him, that all Poople, Nations
and Languages should serve Him.... And thus, for Instance, the wonderful Power
and Prosperity promised to the Jewish Nation in the Scripture, would be, in a
great measure the Consequence of what is predicted of them that the People
should be all righteous and inherit the Land forever; Isa 60 21.

See Butler's Analogy, p. 93, 94, 95


. Indeed, it is the main Support and strongest Bond of civil Societies. And
therefore, to encourage and support Religion is one of the greatest and best
Ends of Government.

ALL wise Governments therefore, have thot, that it belonged to them, to take
Care of the Cause of Religion. Even the Heathen Governments, that have been
famed for Wisdom, and that have flourished and become great in the World, took
Care of the Religious Intercfts of their People, and encouraged what they
supposed to be Godliness.

AND where ever we find a Government in Scripture under the Direction of
Heaven, we shall find this to be a great Part of the Business thereof. If we
attentively read the History of the Kings of GOD's ancient People, we shall
find that those Princes, who obtained the Character of doing that which was
right in the Sight of GOD, appeared active in their public Character for
Religion; taking Care for the Support of the Ministers of Religion, encouraging
them to their Work; giving out Proclamations that the Ordinances of GOD be
observed, and issuing out their Orders to pull down the Altars of strange Gods,
and the high Plates and the Croves, which were disallowed of GOD, 2 Chronicles.14.3.

AND to say, at some do, that GOD himself was the King of Israel, and their
Princes and Powers but Officers under Him, tho it be true, does not weaken the
Argument; for Christ still remains King in Zion, and the lawful Governors of
his People are his Ministers and Officers, and rule for Him.

AND therefore since the Coming of Christ, and the Preaching of his
unsearchable Riches amongst the Gentiles, where ever we have hid an Account of
Nations christianiz'd, and brot to an Obedience to the Faith, and their Kings
submitting themselves unto the Scepter of Christ, we find the high Powers
becoming the Guardians of the Church, and employing their Power to maintain the
Glory and Honor of Christ's Kingdom amongst their People.

SO particularly Constantine the first christian Emperor established
Christianity throughout his Realm, and made it Part of his Business and Care to
encourage the Profession and Practice of Religion in all his Dominions.
Eusebius says concerning him, that sitting at the Table with several Bishops,
he said to them, You are Bishops of the Church as to the Internals, and I am
also constituted such, as to Externals: And much is said of his watchful Care
of the Church of GOD
. And this is represented as the Day of Christ's Victory over the Enemies of
his Gospel, in St. John's Vision, Rev. 12, and seq.

INDEED Donatus, who headed that terrible Faction, that in the early Times of
Christianity insested the Church, was wont to say, Quid Imperatori cum
Ecclesia? What has the civil Magistrate to do with the Church? But the pious
Fathers of the Church earnestly insisted upon it, that Kings were to be nursing
Fathers unto the Church.

So it was, 'till Popery lifted high it is formidable Head in the World, and the
Bishop of Rome pretended to be Christ's Vicar upon Earth, vested with Power
over the Nations of the Earth, to rule them as with a Rod of Iron, and the
World wondered after the Beast, saying, Who is like unto the Beast? Who is able
to make War with him, Rev. 13, 3.4.

THEN indeed the Romish Clergy run down the Magistrate's Power, and set on high
their Ecclesiastical Courts; pretending Power therein to execute Vengeance upon
the unruly, and Punishments upon the People; to bind their Kings with Chains,
and their Nobles with Fetters of Iron. They insisted that civil Rulers should
bow before them, and acknowledge that they held their Crowns and Scepters under
them. And therefore they allowed Magistrates to have Nothing to do about
Religion, but to give Life to the, Image of the Beast, to support the
Usurpation of the Court of Rome, and draw the Sword against those, that were
there condemned, and by them delivered over to the secular Arm.

BUT when the appointed Time of Mercy was come, that GOD would command the
Light to shine out of Darkness, and discover the Mystery of Iniquity, the
Reformers began to see that the Power exercised by the Bishop of Rome and his
Court was but a Usurpation, and to vindicate the Power of the civil Magisitrate.

IT was then received as a Doctrine of Truth amongst the reformed Churches,
that it was Part of the Business of the Magistrate to take Care about the
Worship of GOD, in their Jurisdiction; to guard and defend the Churches, to
provide that Houses for Worship be built, the Ministers of Christ maintained,
their just Authority supported, and Obedience to the Laws of CHRIST encouraged.

IT was the common Doctrine of the Protestant Nations, that the civil
Magistrate is the Keeper of both Tables of the Law.

IT is well known how much this was insisted upon, in the Beginning of the
Reformation in England, in Opposition to the Devotees of Rome.

AND herein the Reformers in the other Nations agreed with them. And therefore
the reformed Divines of Leyden, in their Collection of the Doctrines of the
Reformation, Or Synopsis of pure Divinity, represent it as Part of the Business
of the civil Magistrate, to take Care about the Worship of GOD in their
Jurisdiction, to take Care that there be such a Worship as GOD has appointed
maintained therein, and to guard the Church against the Encroachments of
Seducers. And represent it upon this Account necessary, that christian Powers
be knowing in the Scriptures, according to which the Churches are to be formed,
or reformed.

THEY observe, that the pious Rulers of Israel ever looked upon this as falling
within their Province, and being part of their Business; Whom they represent
the reformed Princes imitating. They call the cristian Magistrate the Keeper
and Avenger of both Tables of the Law See Synopsis pu^io^is Theologiae.
.

AND thus, as far as can find, the Reformers did unanimously teach, that The
Object of the Magistrate's Power, is not simply a peaceable Life, (that I may
use the Words of Rutherford) and external Peace of humane Societies, but also
Honesty and Godliness See his peaceable Plea. Disp. L.
.

AND therefore they were wont to pray, according to the Apostolical Direction,
1 Timothy 2.2. For Kings, and all that are in Authority; that they might lead a
quiet and peaceable Life in all GODLINESS and Honesty. Looking upon these
Powers as ordained of GOD, not only to promote Peace, but Godliness and
Honesty, their Prayers were unto GOD for them, that they might answer to their
Character, and the great End of Government be obtained in the peaceable, honest
and godly Lives of the People.

NOT indeed that they looked upon the civil Magistrate, as empowered to make
new Articles of Faith, or to appoint any new Institutions in the Worship of
GOD. This they have looked upon, as the Prerogative of Christ, the Head and
great Lawgiver to his Church Ms. Rutherford says Emperors have a kingly Power
politic to confirm, and add their civil Sanctions to Church Constituition, but
they have no power formally ecclesiastic to define and make Church Laws.

Vid Due Right of Presbyte'ies.


.

NOR have they pretended, that proper Ecclesiastical Government and Discipline
is to be administered by the civil Magistrate. They have not been ignorant that
there is a just and necessary Distinction between the civil and ecclesiastical
Government of a People; and that Each of these have their distinct Provinces
and Boundaries. The temporal Sword they have acknowleged to be in the Hands of
the civil Magistrate, but the spiritual Sword in the Hands of the spiritual
Officers in the House of GOD The Leyden Divines, in the Synopsis purioris
Theoligiae, say, Ecclesiastical Discipline is to be administered by
ecclesiastical Officers.... And although the Glory of GOD and the Good of the
People ought to be the Supreme Law of the christian Magistrate, who is a Keeper
and Avenger of both Tables of the Law, and He not only as a private Man, but as
a Ruler is obliged to read in the Book of GOD Day and Night, that he maybe
informed thereby, what he ought to do in protecting the true Religion and in
restoring it when gone to Decay, yet he ought not to take it upon him to
perform Ecclesiastical Offices.

Vide Synopsis purioris Theologia, Dispu L.

And says Mr. Rutherford. The Thing is not debarred as a Thing from the
Inspection, Oversight and Care of ecclesiastical Affairs, but yet the Exercise
of Acts ecclesiastical belongs to ecclesiastical Persons and the Church.... The
Church Power is to go before, and to define, prescribe and teach first, and the
civil Power to add a civil Sanction thereunto, as an accumulative and auxiliary
Supplement. See his, Due Right of Prefbyteries.

High commissioned Courts, appointed by civil Authority to act in Matters
purely ecclesiastical and belonging to the Churches, I think have generally
been looked upon as no Ways countenanced in the Word of GOD. A Commission from
the State alone cannot make any Persons an ecclesiuastical Judicatory. Not but
that it has been generally acknowlegcd that the Magistrate has a Right and
Power to call the Churches and the ecclesiastical Authority to convene, and
consider such Cases as the higher Powers recommend to them. But then, when they
come together as the Masters to be considered are purely ecclesiastical, so
they act not as Commissioners of the State, but as the proper ecclesiastical
Authority, commissioned by Christ to act in those Matters. Whereas the Case is
very different in what has commonly been called a high commissioned
ecclesiastical Court, when some few Persons, whether Clorymen or Laymen,
without the Concurrence of the Churches are commissioned to act in Things
purely ecclesiastical; to Depose Ministers, to lay on or take ecclesiastical
Censures I am not sensible indeed, that such Courts have been often appointed
in our Nation.


.

THE Reformers carefully examined the Lines of these Powers, that one might not
justle the other; and these Powers clash and be divided against each other. For
it is easy to see, that, that would tend to Ruin and Confusion, What, some
Years, since, was offered to this Purpose, by the Venerable Mr Adams, in his
Election Sermon, is worthy of a second Edition, and Reconsideration, Our Lord
Jesus Christ, says He, has set up a Kingdom in the world, He has purchased
for himself a Church with his own blood, which is to be gathered out of all
Nations and People, by the Preaching of the word, This is a body by itself,
(although it subsists among and is mingled with the several Communities and
Nations of People upon the Earth, and therefore the members of it have their
civil rights in common with them,) and being a body by it felt it has its
peculiar Laws and ordinances and is furnished with officers for the
administration of holy things that sinners may not only be Converted from the
Error of their ways, but being called home and brought into the Communion and
besom of the Chuich, they may there be built up in their most holy says unto
Eternal Life,.. When our Lord Jesus Christ first set up his Church in the world
it was at a time when it could Expect no Countenance from the Civil Authority,
The powers of this world were against it, and people ran the risque of their
Lives and all that was dear to them have below by their profession of
Christianity, But yet it was foretold that Kings should be their Nursing
fathers and Queens their Nursing mothers; And indeed in a little time, our Lord
became the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, Then it was more honor to the
Kings and great men of the Earth and they had a much better prospect by it, to
be the subjects of Jesus Christ than to be at the head of the Nations; Though the
Church of Jesus Christ could and did subsist alone for a considerable time
under the Protection of this their supreme Head, not only without the
Patronage, but contrary to the Intentions and Endeavors of the Powers of this
World, yet it is Expected since the world is become Christian, that the
Countenance, Protection and Support of the civil Power should be lent to the
Church to preserve it in all its Rights and Privileges. Where it is thus, when
each Order keep in their proper Places, when Moses and Aaron can meet, and kiss
in the mount of God, it may be hoped that things will go well with such a
People. On the other hand, When these Interests clash and these Powers are
divided against and go counter to each other, there the Glory will more depart
and there will be less of a Blessing remaining among such a People. If instead
of using their Influence and Authority for God and against Sin, there should
arise a trial of skill between the temporal and spiritual Sword which should
prove the sharper, and things should be carried to Extremities, as sometimes it
has been seen in some places of the world, what could be expected to follow
but Confusion and the Ruin of every desirable Interest? And even where things
are not carried so high, it has yet a tendency to weaken the interest of
Religion and open a door to no little Disordcr: As for the purpose, If the
Ministers of Religion, forgetting their Duty find the Obligations they are
under, should not only behave Disrespectfully themselves to them that are set
in Authority,; but (contrary to the Charge that is laid upon them, Tit. 3 1.
Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey
magistrates, to be ready to every good work) should Encourage their People to
be Refractory and Contemptuous to those that are set over them; if they should
still be declaiming against the Government; harping upon their Defects and
magnifying every little weakness and mistake and spargere Voces in Vulgum
Ambiguar, throwing out Suspicions and dropping dark Hints of I know not what
perverse and evil Designs in Rulers; much more if they should set themselves at
the Head of such uneasy Parties, as are ever presumptuous and selfwilled and
not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, as they would thereby behave themselves
utterly unworthy of their sacred Functions, so they would not a little trouble
the Camp and the Congregation clog the wheels of Government, and the Magistrate
in such a case could not be so much the minister of God to us for good. On the
other hand, If the civil Magistrates should set themselves against the
Ministers of Religion and the ecclesiastical Constitutions appointed by Jesus
Christ, the like evil Consequences would follow. If they should either sail to
speak comfortably to them that teach the good knowledge of God and through their
slackness and neglect their portions should not be given them, so that they
should be necessitated to run every man to his own field: Or if they should
brow beat and frown upon them, whilst with an honest Faichfulness and a Zeal
according to knowledge they are reftifying against Sin, and should say like
Amaziab of old, For hear, why should thou be smitten? Or if they should
cramp them in the management of ecclesiastical Discipline against Oftenders,
according to the Directions of the Gospel and Rules that are agreed upon, which
are Founded upon them, If when Councils have been called, who after solemn
seeking to God for Direction and mature Deliberation upon the matter, have
without prejudiced and partiality, testified against Disorders and
Irregularities in Churches, the civil Magistrate should think fit to Interpose
and by any means take off the Censures laid upon Offenders, what tendency can
this have but to weaken our ecclesiastical Constitution and render Discipline
contemptible? Not but that Discipline rightly Administered and Censures justly
Pronounced will certainly have their effect whatever endeavors are used for a
relaxation, and they are but in an unhappy case who have so managed themselves
as to fall under them: Or otherwise our Lord had never said, Whatsoever ye
shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on
earth, shall be loosed in heaven, Nevertheless when Offenders by making pitiful
and heavy complaints, can seem to get a redress from the secular Power, the
effects of a spiritual Censure are so much out of sight or they think them so
very remote, that ecclesiastical Discipline becomes cheap in their eyes and
will by and by be no more regarded. What I would is this, That if the civil and
ecclesiastical Authority should instead of mutually Countenancing and
Supporting of each other, come to Clash and Interfere with one neither, this
has a tendency to weaken and destroy o^^ best Interests and in process of Time
there would be little of a Blessing left among such a People.

See Mr. Adams' s Election Sermon, Page 54, sequ.


. But to proceed,

4thly; ANOTHER great End of Government, and so part of the Work and Business
of civil Rulers, is, to be a Teror to evil Doers. He is a Revonger, says the
Apostle in v.4. of our Context, to execute Wrath upon him that does Evil.

THIS indeed has of late been contradicted; and many have said, that the civil
Magistrate has no Right to punish Men for the Violation of the four first
Commands of the Decalogue, -- That, if Men should openly and dirctly set up the
Worship of Devils, and in their Assemblies invoke the Prince of Darkness, in
Opposition to the first Commandment of the moral Law, they must not be called
to an Account by the Magistrate. -- Or, if any are disposed to set up their
Thresholds, in the most idolatrous Manner to worship GOD, by his own
Thresholds, aid therein to set up their Images of Jealousy, contrary to the
second Commandment, they must not be restrained. -- Or, if they desile their
Mouths with horrid Oaths, and draw out their Tongues against the Heavens,
blaspheming the LORD of Heaven and Earth, in Opposition to the third
Commandment, the Magistrate must not yet unsheath his Sword, nor offer to
reftrain them. -- Nor call them to any Account, how much soever they prosane
his Sabbaths, in Opposition to the fourth Commandment. --

THIS is what many have pleaded of late, who would be thot zealous for GOD,
above others I don't know, that I have heard any Persons make use of the very
Expressions I have here used; but I have heard many zealously contending that
the civil Magistrate has no Business to restrain or animadvert upon
Transgressions of the first Table of the Decalogue; that no Violations of the
four first Commands of the moral Law fall uuder their Cognizance: And therefore
I could not misrepresent their Opinion by instancing in some of the most high
handed Transgressions of those Commandments: By doing which the Absurdity of
such an Opinion would the more obviously appear.
.

BUT the Apostle Paul was othcrwise minded: He looked upon the civil Powers, as
commissioned of GOD, to be Revengers to execute Wrath upon civil Doers; GOD's
Vicegerents upon Earth to call evil Doers, Men that openly trample upon the
Laws of GOD to an Account.

AND one would wonder, that any One should be of a different Judgment: For,
Nothing is more evident than that civil Rulers are invested with Power, and
instructed with a Charge to punish Evildoers. And whom must they deem
Evildoers, if not those that insult the Lord, by whom they rule? -- Must they
call him an EvilDoer, that offends against one of his FellowCreatures, and not
him that blasphemes the supreme LORD of all? What? Must they see their great
Lord and Master's Attributes blasphemed, his Name taken in Vain, his Sabbaths
prosan'd, and excuse themselves from using the Sword, wherewith they are armed,
Saying, These are not Evildoers? -- What! Not they EvilDoers, That stretch out
their Hand, and draw out their Tongues against GOD, and run upon him, even on
his Neck, upon the thick Bosses of his Buckler?

SURELY, These are some of the Evildoers, that, David, the King favored of
Heaven, and raised up on high, called Sons of Belial, that shall be all of them
as Thorns thrust away, because they cannot be taken with Hands. But the Man
that shall touch them, must be fenced with Iron, and the Staff of a spear, 2 Samuel 23 6, 7. Persons, that were not to be managed by a gentle Reproof, but
were to be restrained by Law and the Sword of Justice. We cannot think he
excepted such as these, when he said, Psalm. 101.8. I will early destroy all the
Wicked of the Land: that I may cut off all wicked Doers from the City of the
LORD.

AND the Time would fail to tell of the Practice of the pious Princes and
Governors of Israel, who brought the Wheel over the Wicked. Contemners of GOD,
and his Laws. I shall therefore not enlarge here, but proceed to consider,

III. THE Obligations upon a People to support Government.

ONE would think, that every one, that considered the great Ends and Design of
Government, and the good Work Magistrates are employed in, even to be Ministers
of GOD to their People for Good, and serve the public Interests of Mankind,
would think it a Favor, that GOD will establish a visible Authority upon
Earth, and set up any to act in his Name and Stead, who are to attend upon this
very Thing, even to employ their Power and Influence for the Good and Happiness
of the People under them, that under their Shadow they might lead quiet and
peaceable Lives, in all Godliness and Honesty; and would therefore contribute
all he may, to support their Dignity, and maintain their Character; to
strengthen their Hands and encourage their Hearts.

AND so it would be, if all Men understood the Necessity and Advantages of
Government, and were disposed to encourage what is for the Good of the World.

BUT alas! how many unreasonable Men are there, who are ever disposed to oppose
what tends to promote the Good of Mankind? -- This makes the Business of Rule
and Government so much the more difficult; -- and lays an additional Obligation
upon all that wish well to Mankind to endeavor to support Government, -- It
shows that Government is so much the more necessary, as well as a more
difficult Work.

BUT my Design, under this Proposition, is, just to hint at what it is proper
for a People to do in Support of Government, and then touch upon some
Obligations upon a People so to do.

1st; WE are to hint at what it is proper for a People to do in Support of
Government.

AND here,

1st; CHEERFULLY to pay Tribute: For this Cause, says the Apostle in our Text,
pay you Tribute also. For they are GOD's Minister, attending continually upon
this very Thing. As they employ themselves in public Service, so a Tribute is
due to them, and necessary to enable them to maintain the Honor of Government,
and to live and appear in a Manner suitable to the Dignity of their Places.

2dly; To honor and Reverence those in Authority; paying a high Regard to
their Character, and to their Persons for their Work and Office sake. This is
necessary in Order to maintain their Authority. Dis-respect, showed either to
the Character or Persons of Rulers, tends to weaken their Power, and to hinder
the good Effects of their Administration; to weaken their Hands and discourage
their Hearts.

To support Government then, we must reverence Authority, and honor those that
are improved in the Administration of Government, according to the Dignity of
their Character; considering them as GOD's Vicegerents amongst Men; bearing his
Character, and honored to be his Representatives, in the World.

AUTHORITY is a sacred Thing, and to be reverenced accordingly; and Rulers are
as it were subordinate Gods to Men, and are not to be treated as tho they were
not the Lord's anointed. That divine Law, tho conceived in so few Words, is a
binding one, 1 Pet. 2.17. Honor the King. By the King in which Place, I
understand the lawful Authority over us, whatever be the particular Form of
Government we are under. The Command is doubtless as obliging, in a
Commonwealth, as under a Monarchy.

3dly; IN Order to support Government, we must be subject thereunto. Let every
Soul, says the Apostle, in the 1st v. of our Context, be subjeft to the higher
Powers. The Rebellious and Disobedient aim not at the supporting, but
destroying the Government: Whilst they trample upon humane Laws and
Ordinances, they despise Government.

INDEED, if any Rulers should be left to frame Mischief by a Law, to command
what GOD forbids, or forbid what GOD commands, in such a Case, we easily
conclude, as the Apostles did, when they were commanded to preach no more in
the Name of Jesus, who said, Whether it be right in the Sight of GOD, to
bearken unto you, more than unto GOD, judge Ye, Act. 4.19. But then, we cannot
disobey their just Commands without despising the Authority by which they rule,
and bidding defiance to GOD, whose Ministers they are. And therefore we are
told, Context, v.2. Whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of
GOD.

THE Doctrine of Obedience and Subjection to Magistrates, has doubtless been
carried too far by those, who allow the People to make no Resistance, nor
Self-Defence, under the most arbitrary and illegal Abuses of Power, but insist,
that they tamely sit still, and see their Laws and Liberties, Religion and
Properties invaded under a Notion of Authority and Power. -- Doubtless, when
the whole Head is sick, and the Foundations of a State are removed, when the
governing Powers become tyrannical and arbitrary, and usurp a Power that never
was given them, and evidently go counter to the Instructions of that great
Lord, by whom they rule, the Law of Self-Defence is in Force amongst a People,
and they may judge, that GOD is to be Obeyed rather than Man. But then, Men
must be very careful, that, under pretense of the mismanagement of the Powers,
they don't usurp an Authority to themselves, which GOD has not given them, and
themselves embroil the State, and overthrow the Foundations of Government. --
And, whenever they refuse Subjection to any Law of Man, they must see, that
they have sure Warrant therefore in the Word of GOD; that it interferes with
some Command of GOD; for we are told, Context, v.2. Whosoevcr resists the
Power, resists the Ordinance of GOD; And they that resist, shall receive to
themselves Damnation.

4thly; IN Order to support Government we should pray for those in Authority. I
exhort therefore, says the Apostle, that firsf of all, Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and Giving of Thanks be made for all Men: For Kings, and for all
that are in Authority; that we may lead to quiet and peaceable Life in all
Gcdliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.

As large Supplies of Grace are necessary, for the faithful Discharge of the
Duties of their high Character; as their Work is difficult, and their Station
attended with great Temptations; as the Welfare of their People is much
concerned in the Wisdom and Faithfulness of their Government: We should strive
together in Prayer to GOD for them, that they may be abundantly enriched with
Grace, and endued with every needful Qualification, to be the Shields of the
Earth, and Blessings in their Places; That they may be endued with that Wisdom
that is profitable to direct; that they may have Understanding of the Times, to
know what Israel ought to do; that they may be endued with Courage to stand in
their Stations, when GOD's Way is in the Whirlwind, and in the Storm, and the
Clouds are the Dust of his Feet, that their Soul may not be melted because of
trouble, nor they reel to and fro, and be at their Wits End, like affrighted
Mariners, when the stormy Wind is raised. In a Word, we are to pray that God
would dispose them to, qualify them for, and succeed them in the due Discharge
of the Duties of their Station; that under their Administration, Judgment may
run, down as Waters, end Righteousness as a mighty Stream.

IF we have any Interest in Heaven, any Power with GOD, we should improve it in
their Behalf: If effectual fervent Prayers any thing avail, we should be
importunate in our Intercession with GOD for them. For who, not assisted of
GOD, not strengthened from above, is sufficient for the Work, to the which they
are called? A Work, the Difficulties whereof are proportionable to it is Dignity.

HE The Arch Bishop of Cambray.
was well acquainted with the Life and Business of Princes and Rulers, who
said, Happy is he who is not obliged to command, the King has the least Liberty
and Repose of any Man in his Kingdom;... is a Slave to all those he seems to
command;.. is burdened with all their Cares. The best of Rulers have sometimes,
been almost overborn with the Burden and Difficulty of their Work. The
Murmurings and Jealousies, the ill Humor and Untractableness of their People
have even discouraged their Hearts. Thus we find even the meek Moses himself,
discouraged, and saying to GOD, Numb. 11.11, 12 -- Wherefore bast thou
afflicted thy Servant? and wherefore have I not found Favor in thy Sight, that
thou layest the Burden of all this People upon me? Have I conceived all this
People? Have I begotten them, that thou should say unto me, carry them in
thy Bosom....? I am not able to bear all this People alone, because it is too
heavy for me. And if thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of Hand.
Now surely, we should not cease to pray for them, whose Business is so burden
some and full of Difficulties.

AND then, their Station is attended with Temptations proportionally great unto
the Dignity thereof. It oftentimes happens, that the Way to please the
Multitude, is, to desert the Cause of GOD, and betray the Interest of their
Country: And, if they have Resolution enough, to stem the Current of popular
Humor, and to endeavor, to the last, to prevent the Ruin a People would bring
upon themselves, they will doubtless, be often censured and reproached, and
evil entreated; all their Labor, Solicitude and Care, for an unthankful
People, being ill taken, and misrepresented. And can it be expected but that
this should try their Patience, anger their Spirits, if not provoke them to
retire like Elijah from their Post, saying as the Fig Tree; in Jotham's
Parable, (in Judge. 9.11.) Should I forsake my Sweetness, and my good Fruit, and
go to be promoted over the Trees? Or as in Isa. 3.7. I will not be an Healer;..
make me not a Ruler of the People. We know Moses himfelf was to provoked with
the Murmurings and Complainings of an unthankful People, that be spoke
unadvisedly with his Lips, and himself provoked GOD, so that it went ill with
him, (Psalm. 106.32, 33.)

BESIDES, we may conclude that the great Adversary of Men, that goes to and fro
in the Eartb, and walks up and down in, seeking what Misehief he may do, and
Whom he may devour among Men, especially endeavors to seduce those, that are
set in the higher Seats amongst Men, as knowing that, if Rulers hearken to
Lies, the People are in a fair Way, to become wicked, (Prove. 29.12.) and that
the Corruption of a Man in Power is a wounding Blow to the People. And
therefore we read, that when Satan stood up against Israel, he provoked David
to number Israel, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. His Design was to injure all the People, but
his Endeavor was to corrupt the Prince, in Order to affect it. And, if the
Temptations of Rulers are so great, our Prayers should be always ascending
before GOD in their Behalf.

BUT having thus hinted at what, it is proper for a People to do in Support of
Government, we are, 11dly; BRIEFLY to consider Some of the Obligations upon a
People thus to endeavor to support Government. And here,

1st; WE are under an Obligation to Support Government, as it is of GOD's own
Ordination. The Apostle tells us, v.1. of our Context, The Powers that be, are
ordained of GOD. And surely it becomes us to support that, which is of divine
Appointment. Surely, as GOD himself has raised Rulers on high for the good of
Men, We are obliged, to do all we properly can, to support their Dignity, and
maintain their Character.

2dly; AN Obligation on us, to endeavor to support Government, arises from the
great Necessity and Benefit of it to the World.

As the State of our World is, Government is absolutely necessary for it is
Well-Being; and there could be no tolerable Living without it: And therefore
GOD has in Compassion to Mankind, appointed Government for their own Good,
that they may lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty. As
therefore we desire the Welfare of Mankind; as we desire the Blessings of
Peace, Godliness and Honesty, it concerns us to support Government.

To be sure, All, that wish well to Jerusalem, will be Friends to Government;
for; it is the ordinary Means GOD makes use of, to support his Church in the
World.

INDEED, He, that is anointed King in Zion is able to protect his Church, if
earthly Powers should desert it, and willingly see it laboring under all
imaginable Discouragements, yea, rased to the Foundation.

AND therefore, when the civil Powers were Persecutors of the Truth, as in the
first Ages of Christianity; when they refused to exert their Power to protect
the Church, and defend the Faith, yea, rather employed their Power to pull down
and destroy the same, yet the Church was upheld, to the Admiration and
astonishing Confusion of her Enemies. The Lord alone was her Defense. As the
Rulers of the World knew him not, his own almighty Arm, in a miraculous Way,
brot Salvation to his People.

BUT since Christianity is become the Religion of many Nations, and so many
Princes have laid down their Scepters at the Feet of Christ, and as it were
taken out their Commissions from Him, he is pleased to make these Powers his
Ministers to protect his Church.

AND we may conclude, that, if amongst the christian Nations, their Rulers will
not favor Zion, it is a Day of the Lord's Displeasure with his People, and
that the Lord is pleased to take away their Hedge and their Defense: And
therefore we may expect, that it will be a Day of treading down in the Valley
of Vision, and of breaking down the Wells of Zion; Her Glory will fly away
like a Bird, and all they which pass by the Way, will pluck her: Unruly Men
will rend her in Pieces, destroy her Order, disurb her Peace, and deface her
Beauty. The Boar out of the Wood will waste her, and the wild Beast of the
Field devour her.

THEN, indeed, there will be perilous Times, and evil Men and Seducers will
wax worse and and worse, deceiving, and being deceived.

THUS we see that the spiritual, as well as the temporal Interests of Men, call
upon us to endeavor to support Government. So that for our own Sakes, for our
Families and our Friends Sake, and for Zion's Sake, We should contribute what
in us lies, that Government may be maintained, encouraged and supported amongst
us. But it is Time to come to the

APPLICATION.
I. LEARN hence, how thankful we should be for Government; and especially, if
we are blessed with faithful Rulers, that attend upon this very Thing, even to
be Ministers of GOD for Good to them that do well, and Revengers to execute
Wrath upon them that do Evil.

ALMOST any, even a tyrannous Government is better than none; because, while
the Government is never so tyrannical, there are but a few cxercising that
Tyranny: The Multitude are in the mean Time under Restraint. Whereas, if there
was no Government at all, every One would be let loose to be a Tyrant; and
every domineering Wretch would set up his own Will for a Law, to which he would
demand Obedience from Others, and inflict what Penalties upon the Disobedient
thereunto, his Malice should dictate, and his Arm could execute: So that no Man
could be secure. Fear, and the Pit, and the Snare would be upon all; and that
Text in Isa. 42.22. would be in the most literal fense fulfilled amongst them,
This is a People robbed and spoiled, they are all of them snared in holes, and
they are hid in prison-houses; They are for a prey, and none delivers; for a
spoil, and none says restore.

THE Lusts and Passions of Men are such, that if entirely left loose, to
themselves, without any Restraint of Govcrnment, the World it self would scarce
be a habitable Place, but rather a confused Scene of Intemperance, Lewdness,
Oppression, Robbery, Murder, and all Manner of Exorbitances. By Reafon of the
Multitude cf Oppressions, they would make the Oppressed to cry; Violence and
Spoil would be heard in the Midst of them, and Grief and Wounds be continually
before them. So that any Government is better than None.

BUT by how much the better, the Designs of Government are answered, by how
much the more, the Blessings of Peace, and Godliness and Honesty are promoted
by the Powers that be, by how much the more, the Vices destructive to the World
are restrained, and kept under thereby; So much the more Reason have a People
to rejoice in the Blessings of Government, and to be thankful therefore.

It Is Matter therefore of great Thankfulness, when any are favored with a
legal well constituted Government, such as that of the British Dominions,
perhaps the best in any, of the Nations of the Earth.

IT is therefore Matter of Wonder, that so many, who have sat fo securely under
the Shadow of so excellent a Government, and enjoyed so many Liberties and
valuable Blessings under the Same, have been disposed to rebel, and to exchange
so good a Government for Bondage and Slavery.

AND we have Reason to bless and to praise the most high GOD, that rules in
the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, that those Sons of
Rebellion have not been able to perform their Enterprise, but that the happy
Establishment still remains. Oh! may so great a Blessing never be taken from
the British Dominions as a Punishment of their Discontent, Frowardness and
Murmurings against the Lord, or sad Neglect to improve the Privileges in their
Hands!

It Is an unspeakable Favor of Heaven also, when a People are favored with
such Rulers, who are disposed to minister for Good unto them; who attend upon
this very Thing, to answer to the good Designs of Government, to secure Men in
the Enjoyment of their Liberties and Possessions; to maintain Truth and Peace;
Who espouse the Cause of Christ, establish the true Religion, uphold the pure
Worship of GOD, support the Ministers of Religion, make EvilDoers afraid, and
encourage those that do well. Happy has New England been upon this Account. May
such a Blessing be continued to us as long as the Sun and the Moon shall
endure! May our Judges be as at the first, and our Counselors as at the
Beginning! May our Officers be Peace, and our Exactors Righteousness to all
Generations!

II. LEARN hence, that it is a privileged People, that may choose their own
Rulers, Seeing so great and good are the Ends of Government, and it is so great
a Blessing to have Rulers attending thereunto, and exercising their Power to
the Purposes, for which it was communicated to them, such a People have an
Advantage to make themselves happy in this Respect. If such a People are not
happy in their Rulers, whom shall they blame, but Themselves?

As for other People, whose Rulers are not of their own Election, it will not
be so much to be wondered at, if, oftentimes, Men are set over them in Places of
Rule and Authority, not so equal thereunto, nor so well qualified to sustain
such Characters: For it is a rare thing, when Men are so concerned for Others
Welfare as their own. And therefore, when they advance Men over others, the
Temptation is stronger to set such over them, as their own private Interests
and Affections incline them unto.

BUT as for those, whose Rulers are of their own Election, what hinders but
they may have the best furnished and qualified among them to sustain such
Characters and Posts of Trust?

WE of this Colony may therefore look upon Ourselves as a greatly privileged
People; our Lines are fallen unto us in pleasant Places; yea, We have a goodly
Heritage.

WHENCE then proceeds that Spirit of Discontent, those Murmurings and
Complainings, and that Desire of Change so visible amongst this People? -- Must
not these Things proceed from Weakness of Judgment, or some ill Affection of
Mind; a Desire of Novelty, foolish Ambition, or a Spirit that cannot be
contented with any Condition.

How much the Disposition of such resembles that of the Israelites, who under
the best of Governments were discontented, and said, Nay, but we will have a
King over us: that we also way be like all the Nations? (1 Samuel 8.19.) They
would not be contented with their own most excellent Constitution of
Government, 'till it was indeed changed, and they found the Disadvantage of a
Change.

AT present, We enjoy the Privileges, Others wish for. They, which hate us, see
and envy, our Privileges: Our Neighbors mark the Same, and are ready to say,
Who is like unto thee, O People saved by the Lord? And why are any, amongst
ourselves, weary of their own Mercies and Privileges?

III. HENCE People may be directed in the Choice of their Rulers.

WE have heard something of the great and good Designs of Government, and of
the Work and Business of Governors and Men in Authority. And now whom shall
our Freemen present to GOD, to be authorized as his ViceGerents, and
commissioned to the great and important Work, but such as are the best
qualified to fill such Places of Honor and Trust? Such as are the most fit to
support their Character, and the most likely, in Conformity to the great Design
of Government, to employ their Power most effectually for the Good of those who
live under the Shadow of it? Such as will be the Glory of the Land, and as the
Light of the Morning, when the Sun rises, even a Morning without Clouds?

JETHRO's Direction to Moses, with Respect to the Qualifications of Men to be
improved in Places of Authority and Trust, is proper to be given to all our
Freemen; Exodus 18, 21. Thou, shall provide out of all the People, able Men,
sucb as fear GOD, Men of Truths, hating Covetousness; and place such over them.

RULERS should be able Men: Men of Genius and Parts; of a good Capacity, cool
Judgment and clear Reason; Men of Understanding and Prudence, and of an
excellent Spirit; Men of Courage and Resolution, that will stand steadfast in
the most stormy Times, when neither Flatteries nor Clamours can warp aside, but
who will remain unmovable in Days of Temptation, like Rocks, against which the
Winds spend their Rage, and the roaring Billows break in Vain.

MOREOVER, they should be sucb as fear God: Men of Religion and Piety, zealous
of the Honor of GOD, and Friends to Zion; such who prefer Jerusalem above
their chief Joy. David, the Man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the
GOD of Jacob, said, yea, the Spirit of the Lord spoke by him, and the GOD of
Israel said, He that rules over Men must be just, ruling in the Fear of GOD, 2 Samuel 23.3.

IT cannot be expected, that Men destitute of Religion, will faithfully stand in
their Station, and employ their Power, as much as may be, to answer the great
Designs of Government. Will they, who themselves are destitute of the
Principles of Virtue and Righteousness, lay out themselves to encourage the
Cause of Virtue, and be a Terror to Evildoers? Will they, in earnest,
maintain the Cause of GOD, who themselves are no Friends thereto, nor have the
Love of God dwelling in them?

Is it likely, that such will stand Steady in the Cause of Zion, if a Time of
Temptation should come on, and they might thereby increase the Number of their
Enemies, or disadvantage some appearing Interest in the World? No, there is
greater Reason to expect, they will swim with the Tide, and be carried away
with the Stream of the Times, and behave so as to secure their private
Interests, and render themselves popular, whatever becomes of the Cause of GOD
in the World.

THERE is no rational Prospect, that such, who are not themselves Lovers of
GOD, his People, his House, the Ordinances and Ministers thereof, will lay out
themselves to protect the People of GOD, to defend the Faith, to support the
Worship of GOD, to encourage the Hearts, and strengthen the Hands of the
Ministers of Religion. -- Did I say, there was no rational Prospect of this? I
might have said, that, it is a thousand Times likelier, such will desert the
Cause of GOD, and leave his Church to be trampled on, devoured and wasted by
all her Adversaries, and the House of GOD to go to Ruin; and abandon the
Ministers of the Sanctuary; yea, and help to make their Burden heavy, and
themselves contribute to weaken their Hands, and discourage their Hearts.

OR, if they will smile upon the Practice of Piety, and cherish the Worship and
Worshippers of GOD, so long as it comes not across their Interest in the World,
yet except they are fortified with the Principles of Grace and Religion, there
is but little Ground to hope they will be valiant for the Truth, and in the
Cause of the Churches, or steadfast in the Defense thereof, if once they should
look upon that a sinking Cause in the World, and see the Enemies of the Welfare
of Zion the rising Party: And thai: Promotion is likely to be found amongst
them, It Is likelier they will serve the Times, and keep in with the rising
Side. We see therefore, of how great Importance it is, that Men of Religion be
chosen to rule over us.

BUT here, Such, as are concerned in choosing Rulers over them, are to be
cautioned that they don't judge amiss as to Men's being religious. Some have
placed Religion, almost altogether, in Enthusiasm, Raptures, Impulses, and warm
Imaginations, which it is possible for a Man to abound with, who has Nothing
of the Fear of GOD: But the Psalmist directs on whom our Eyes should be as Men
of Religion, Psalm. 101.6. Scil. the Faithful in tie Land, that walk in a
perfect Way. The Secrets of Hearts are out of our View, but those that, to
Appearance, pay the highest Regards to the weightier Matters of the Law,
Judgment, Mercy, Faith, and the Love of GOD, should be in our Esteem the
Excellent of the Earth.

FURTHERMORE, they should be Men of Truth: Men of Integrity and Uprightness; of
Honor and Sincerity.

AND finally, they should be Men hating Covetousness: Men of a public Spirit,
whose Views and Designs are generous and noble, not little and selfish, and
contracted within the Limits of their own private Interest and Advantage. They
should be Men of a great, a generous and disinterested Spirit. It is not for
their own Sake, that Men are exalted to Places of Power, but it is for the
Service of the People: So that they should be Men, that prefer the public Good
to their own personal Interests.

IV. WE may also infer from this Discourse, the great Evil and Danger of
despising Government and speaktng Evil of Dignities. We have heard that
Government is of GOD: And therefore as he, that resists the Power, resists
the Ordinance of GOD; so they, that despise and make light of Government, offer
an Affront to GOD's own Majesty, in whose Name it is administered, and by whose
Authority all earthly Powers rule. And GOD himself will sooner or later, arise
and vindicate his despised Authority; and call to an Account the Sons of Men,
that have dared to despise or revile the God's, his Representatives upon Earth.

IT cannot be safe to insult, and rudely treat those that bear GOD's Name, and
are his anointed Ones in the Earth. And therefore, a Woe is denounced against
those Murmurers and Complainers, that despise Dominion, and speak evil of
Dignities, in the Epistle of Jude; and St. Peter tells us, that such are
especially reserved unto the Day of Judgment to be punished, 2 Epist. 2.9, 10.

BUT yet, Seditious Men and Malcontents are ready to imagine, many Times,
they are serving the Cause of GOD, and their Country, and doing well, all the
Time, they are sowing the Seeds of Faction; reviling the Powers that be, and
fomenting Jealousies of them amongst the People.

THEY imagine they are weak, or designing, or partial Men, that are at the Helm
of the Government: And their high Conceit of themselves strengthens them
herein. They imagine that themselves are the People, and Wisdom shall die with
them: that their Thoughts are just, their Schemes perfect; and that, were but
the Public Affairs managed according to their Notions, Things would go well
But yet they are neglected, and not promoted as, they think their Merit calls
for, nor are their Schemes entertained by the ruling Powers, as they think they
ought to be. They imagine therefore, that they are not only too much neglected,
but the Country is ruined: And that therefore they must, in Faithfulness, raise
a Cry against those in Authority, and expose their Faults.

BUT Men had need consider what manner of Spirit they are of, in all this, and
to take heed that their Hearts carry them not away, while they let such
complaining Words go out of their Mouths; and remember that Law, Exodus 22.28
Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy People.

BUT it is high Time to come to a more particular Application, in an Address to
the sundry Orders of Men, that are now assembled before the Lord, in this House.

1. AND I would, in the first Place, with all dutiful Respect, address my self
to his Honor the GOVERNOR, and the whole honorable, LEGISLATURE of this
Colony.

Honorable, worshipful, and much respected,

His HONOR'S Command came very unexpected to me a Youth, and One of the
meanest that minister in the House of the Lord, to appear in this awful Desk,
in the LORD's Message, upon this great Occasion.

BUT yet, since his Honor has been pleased so to order, tho sensible of my
own Unfitness and Weakness, I have considered it as a Call of God, and hoping
for His Assistance have inquired at the Word of the LORD, and am come to
deliver his Message.

AND I make no Doubt, but it was his Honor's Mind, that I should deliver the
Word of the Lord faithfully, as becomes a Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, and
not be sollicitous to come unto You with Excellency of Speech, or with enticing
Words of Man's Wisdom, nor to give flattering Titles unto Man, in doing of
which my Maker would soon take me away.

I SHALL therefore, with Freedom, tho with Deference and Respect to your high
Characters, apply this Discourse to You; and most earnestly recommend it to
your Honor, and all the honorable Gentlemen of the General Assembly, to
attend upon this very Thing, even to promote the Welfare of this People, and to
be Ministers of GOD unto them for Good.

GOD has ordained Dominion and Government, not for the Grandeur of Rulers, but
the Good of the People: And Power is no otherwise to be reckoned as a
Perfection, than as it is the Instrument of doing Good.

You are therefore invested with Power above Others, that you might have the
larger Capacity to do them Good.

AND you are accountable to the great LORD of the World, wbo judges among the
Gods, for your Improvement of that Power wherewith you are entrusted: Must give
an Account how you attended his Instruction, who entrusted you with the Care of
Others, and chose you to feed his People as a Shepherd his Flock, or a Father
his Family. Your high Places in the World, will not excuse you from appearing
before the Tribunal of GOD, who without Respect of Persons judges according to
every Man's Work, (1 Pet. 1.17.) And the Day of the LORD will be as terrible to
the mighty of the Earth that were not faithful in the Improvement of their
Power and Opportunity to do Good, as to other Men.

OH! be faithful then to that great LORD, whose Image you bear, whose Ministers
you are, and to whom you must give an Account, what you have done in your high
Characters, as his Representatives on Earth.

You will suffer me also, Honored Gentlemen, to remind you, that, as GOD has
honored you to be his Vicegerents and Representatives among Men, and
entrusted you with a Share of his own Authority, so that you are even called
Gods, and Children of the most High, so it is only by attending to the Duties
of your Station, and faithfully discharging your high Trust, that you will
maintain the Honor of Government, which is GOD's.

RULERS themselves may be the Occasion of bringing Government into Contempt,
and may as it were sully the Rays of Divinity upon them; so that even the Image
of GOD, which they bear, may be despised: And, by this Means GOD's Honor may
suffer in the World.

FOR the Sake of the Honor and Glory therefore of that blessed Being, whose
Representatives you are, we hope you will attend to the Duties of Government.

SOME imperfect Account whereof we have had in this Discourse; And you have in
your Hands the Book of your instruction, eventh Word of GOD, in the which you
are directed to read, all the Days of your Ministry on the Earth, Deuteronomy. 17.19
And governing according to the Rules and Instructions thereof, you will happily
fulfill your Ministry, and be Ministers of God for Good.

THIS is the Rule according to which, we hope you will rule Us.

REGARDING this, we hope you will enact such Laws, as shall be the best
calculated to preserve the public Peace, and to protect, encourage and promote
Religion and Virtue. In this Book you will find all the essential Rules of
Justice and Righteousness.

AND your Honors will doubtless judge it right and fit, to take Care, that the
wholesome Laws, enacted by you, be duly executed. Unexecuted Laws will doubtless,
ever do more Hurt than Good. They tend to bring the whole Body of Laws into
Contempt. For, if it be seen that there are Laws, which are only designed for
the Terror of the Ignorant, and, if they threaten, can do Nothing; which the
Judges and Men in Authority and Office themselves disregard, and trample upon;
it will have a natural Tendency to lessen Men's Esteem and Regard of the Laws:
And there will be Danger, that every One conclude, that he has a Right to judge
of the Expediency of Laws; and every executive Officer undertake to establish
or set aside what Laws he pleases.

AND we hope and expect that your Eyes will be upon the Faithful of the Land,
to be the Executors of your Laws, and Judges in our Gates: That the Direction,
given to Moses, will be remembered by you, Exodus 18.21. To provide out of all
the People, able Men, such as fear God, Men of Truth, hating Covetousness; and
place such over them,.,. to judge the People. It Is the reasonable Cicero
designed not only to commend Milo's Judges, but especially Pompey of whom he
says, Qui in Judici^us legendis Optimum and sapientissimum and fortissimum
quamque legit.
Expectation of your People, that your Commissions be given to Men of Wisdom,
Religion and Honor; to Men that are Friends of GOD and this People; Friends of
our Civil and Ecclesiastical Privileges.

HONORED Gentlemen, GOD has set you over this People in a dark and evil Day,
in which the Fire of Contention burns in the Midst of us, and threatens to
destroy all our Glory, and the Transgression of the Land is heavy upon it. A
Day, in which the Love of many waxes cold, and Iniquities abound: A Day, in
which Murmurers and Complainers, walking after their own Lusts, are multiplied;
and many are sporting themselves with their own Deceivings, walking after the
Flesh in the Lust of Uncleanness, despising Government; presumptuous and
selfwilled Persons, that are not afraid to speak Evil of Dignities: A Day, in
which pride, Extravagance, Injustice, Fraud and Oppression prevail amongst us
See the Proclamation for the Fast.
; and there is almost a continual Cry of Violence and Spoil in the Midst of us:
A Day, in which Men draw Iniquity with Cords of Vanity, and Sin as it were with
a Cart-Rope: In which they cast away the Law of the LORD of Hosts, mock at his
Sabbaths, and trample upon all that is sacred and holy.

AND now, who will rise up for GOD against the Evil Doers, and make up the
Hedge, and stand before the Lord for the Land that He should not destroy it?

HONORED Fathers, We look to you, saying, as Isa. 3.6. Be ye our Rulers, and
let this Ruin be under your Hands; and hope you will not say, as in the next
Verse, We will not be Healers: For surely, it belongs unto You to be Healers
in such a Day.

THE Sword of the Lord is in your Hands, and GOD has invested you with Power
and Authority above Others, that you may do more than they in pleading his
Cause in the World. And shall the Lord's Sword, in your Hands, rust in it is
Scabbord, whilst the Ministers of Religion draw the spiritual Sword in vain,
and only laughed at, pleading with bold, hardhearted and obstinate
Transgressors in their Master's Name?

WHEN Wickedness becomes bold, and Men declare their Sin as Sodom, and hide it
not, the Preachers of Righteousness can do little to restrain them. They may
lift up their Voice like a Trumpet, cry aloud end spare not, and yet avail
no'more than the Prophet, when he complained, as Jer. 6.1^. To whom shall I
speak and give Warning, that they may hear? Behold their Ear is uncircumcised,
and they cannot hearken: Behold, the Word of the LORD is unto them a Reproach:
They have no Delight in it. They are hardened against the spiritual Sword so
that there is but little Hope of their Reformation, except the Sword of Justice
will reach them, and they are afraid of the Sword in the Hands of those whom
GOD has appointed to execute Wrath upon Evil Doers, I would not be understood
here as designing either to disparage the Preaching of the Word, which God has
appointed to be especially the Means for the Conviction and Conversion of
sinners according to what the Apostle says, 1 Cor 1 21. After that, in the
wisdom of God, the would by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. Or to assert, that men may
be made truly pious and religious by any outward Compulsion, or by any
executions of Wrath upon evil Doers, by the civil Magistrate I only mean, that
gross Immoralities may be restrained, and an outward Reformation caused by the
Magistrate; Whereby the Ministers of Religion will be under the greater
Advantages to address the Consciences of men, and some Hindrances in the way cf
their Conviction and Conversion will be removed; and the Prospect of their
being recovered by Repentance will be greater At least there may be, by this
Means, a great external Reformation amongst a People, and many bold Crimes and
evil Customs restrained, which would otherwise necessarily waft and harden
men's Conscienccs, and take off all Awe of Duty from their Minds.
.

ARISE then, Ye Men of Influence and Power, anoint the Shield, and gird the
Sword upon your Armor, and bear it not in vain, but brandish it before the
Transgrestors of the Land, and cut off all the Horn of the Wicked: For this
Matter belongs unto You.

I WOULD fain hope, that our Condition is not desperate, nor our Wound
incurable as yet; but that the Power in your Hands may yet, by the Blessing of
GOD, stop the Mouth of Iniquity, and scatter away the Evil of the Land.

BE entreated then to try your Skill, and do all you think proper to recover
our Health. O let all your Power be exerted to loose the Bands and break the
Power of our Wickedness, and all your healing Medicines be produced for us.

MAY not those Sons of Idleness, whose God is their Belly, who count it
Pleasure to riot in the Day Time, and waste their Time and Estate, at Taverns
or Tippling Houses, -- Or to spend the Night, given for Rest or Sleep, amongst
Wine-Bibbers, and foolish and hurtful Company, be restrained by the Fear of
your Sword? Is it impossible by the Force of any Laws and Penalties to prevent
such an Evil?

AND can your Power and Authority do nothing more, to prevent that Cry of
Injustice and Oppression that fills the Land? -- Or, can none of the Cloaks and
Occasions of, and Excuses for the Unrighteousness of the Land be removed?

YOUR Honors are sensible, that Our Medium of Exchange is, at least, the
Occasion of, and Excuse for a great Deal of Unrighteousness. Let a Man's Demand
for any Necessary, he has to spare to his Neighbor, be never so extravagant,
let him never so much grind the Faces of the Poor thereby, his Excuse is, The
Money is fallen; On the other Hand, however great has been the Discount, since
a Debt has been contracted, the Man pretends he does well, if he pays the same
Number of Pounds or Shillings he contracted for. By which Means Righteousness
has stood afar off.

NOTHING is more evident than that our Paper Mediuum has been, at least in
this Way, an Instrument of Unrighteousness. It has been an uncertain Measure
and Standard; and so a Stumbling Block to the People, and the Cause of a great
Deal of Evil. It has put an Advantage into the Hands of Cheats and Knaves;
encouraged People to continue in Debt: And has as an Occasion, at least, made
the People to sin.

THE Country has now been groaning, many Years, under the Injustice, that has
by this Means, been common in the Land. Some have been spoiled hereby, it is
probable, of the better Half of their Substance: And the Burden has
especially, fallen upon Orphans, and Pcrsons that ought to be treated with
especial Care and Tenderness.

I DOUBT not therefore, but it was agreeable to the Mind of the LORD, that His
Prophets and Ministers should testify against these Iniquities, and the
Occasion thereof, which has so made the People to Sin. And accordingly, I
think no Minister has appeared in the Lord's Message, upon such an Occasion as
the present, for some Years, but who has cried out against the uncertain
Medium, as an Occasion of a great Part of the Injustice and Extravagance in the
Land. They have thought it their Duty, to plead for GOD and their Country with
the Legislature, who alone, they supposed had it in their Power to redress so
great an Evil, to arise and deliver the People from this Temptation to
Injustice.

AND now, it is not for me to pretend to know, or say, wherefore our honorable
Rulers have not redressed this Evil. I am not inclined to believe, that they
disregard the Entreaties and reasonable ^^quests of the Ministers of Religion,
like the Jews in their declining State, to whom, tho GOD sent all his Servants
the Prophets, rising up early and sending them, yet they hearkened not, but
mocked them.

I SUPPOSE therefore, that the great Difficulty of fixing a Paper Medium upon
any stable Foundation, and the different Sentiments of wise Men, as to what may
be the most effectual Method, to fix the Medium, may be the Reason, that as yet
it has been left undone.

BUT we hope, O Ye Fathers of our Country, that no Difficulties attending this
Matter will discourage you from doing Something to remove move this great
Grievance of your People: That no divided Sentiments, no private Interests will
induce You to leave your Country any longer groaning under this Calamity: Which
as it were stretches out her Hands to You, to implore your Help.

HER Tears are an her Cheeks, she weepeth sore, and cries for Compassion: And
let me, in her Name and Behalf, entreat your Help before she be utterly ruined
and undone. How is the faithful City already become an Harlot! It was full of
Judgment, Righteousness lodged in it; but now Oppressors! And can we expect
that Justice will re-enter amongst us, or Judgment overtake us, 'till a fixed
Medium or Standard of commutative Justice be restored to us? And if not, will
not the Lord see it, and be displeased that there is no Judgment?

LET me then with humble Importunity press it upon You, honored Gentlemen, you
would be dear to your Country, and be styled the Deliverers thereof, as you
would rescue the same from Ruin, and stand in the Breach before the Lord, to
turn away his Wrath, lest be should destroy the Land; to find out, if possible,
some Remedy for this great Calamity, and some Method to remove this
Stumbling Block in the Way of your People.

BUT leaving this Matter,

I SHALL go on, to recommend the Cause of Religion and the Churches to your
Care. Your great Power and Influence should be improved in making us if
possible, a religious People.

THE Church of Christ is the especial Care and Delight of that great LORD,
whose Ministers you are, and by whom you rule. All Things are for the sake
thereof, 2 Cor. 4.15.

It Is for the Benefit of the Church CHRIST is anointed King in Zion, and all
Things are put under his Feet, Ephesians. 1.22. And may those then, that rule for Him
on Earth, and are the Ministers of His Providence in governing this lower
World, cease caring for his Church? Surely no; for as they rule for Him, they
are ultimately to aim at the same Design, for which He received all Power in
Heaven and Earth.

You will suffer me therefore, Ye Heads and Fathers of this People, to beseech
You in the Name of Christ, for whom you rule, and for whom I speak, to employ
all your Power to Defend his Church, and advance his Kingdom: To give Vigor to
the Discipiine of his House This is not to be understood, as if Persons
proceeded against in the Church were to be delivered over to secular A^m, as
the Papists say, and thereby be imprisoned, fined. etc But the Civil Authority
is to protect the Church, whilst making use of her spiritual Sword; nor suffer
any Insults to be offered the Church; nor the Person or Prisons so proceeded
against, to enjoy any Privileges in the State, not proper for Persons under
such Circumstances. For it is easy to see. how Contemptible an Ecclesiastical
Censure will be to obstinate Transgressors, if they may be protected by the
civil Magistrate, as if in good Standing.
, and Countenance to it is Ministers, and Encouragement to pursue their pious
Labors, with more Alacrity, and less Distraction.

It Is a Day, in which you are called to show your Zeal for the Lord: A Day, in
which we have Reason to remember the Words, which were spoken before, by the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; who foretold, that there should be Mockers
in the last Time, who should walk after their own ungodly Lasts; Men, who would
separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit, (Jude 17, 18, 19.) A Day,
in which the Lord's Name and Day are openly profaned, and the Worship of GOD
is contemned, and the Ministers of his Sanctuary are misused, and set at naught.

BE entreated then to appear for GOD, and to do all that your Power enables
you, to maintain the just Honor, GOD has put upon his Day and Institutions
and Ambassadors in the World.

PARTICULARLY, be entreated to consider, whether nothing further may be done,
to put a Stop to the increasing Profanation of the Lord's Day. I would humbly
recommend it to your wife Reconsideration, whether the Sanction of your Law,
made to secure the Honor of the Sabbath, be proportioned to the great
Importance of the Thing; whether it bears heavy enough upon Sabbath Breakers:
Who seem to be greatly increased amongst us.

Be entreated also to speak comfortably to the Messengers of Cbrist, in this
Day of treading down; when they are exceedingly filled with Contempt; and their
Temptations are strong to abandon themselves to Grief, and forsake their
Charge, as Elijah when he retired into the Wilderness: And too many are forced
to betake themselves to some secular Employment for their Bread. And can you do
nothing more for their Support and Encouragement?

I HAVE often thought, that the present Way of supporting our Ministers by a
Rate, granted by the respective Parishes or Societies, is attended with many
Inconveniences, and that the Danger is very great, left the Ruin of our
Churches enter in at this Door.

NOT that I have any Doubt about the Righteousness of this Way of their
Support, And if any question the Righteousness of so supporting the Ministers
of the Gospel, I believe they may obtain abundant Satisfaction in this matter,
by reading a late ingeni us Piece, in way of A Dialogue between John Quensticus
and Thomas Casuisticus.
.

BUT as the State of the World is, many Parishes rather inquire how good a
Bargain they can make with their Minister, to how low Terms they can bring him;
than what will be an honorable Support and Maintenance for him: And the
settling Minister is obliged to look to himself, that he may have a rational
Prospect of such a Support, as will enable him to swquester his Time to the
Work of the Gospel Ministry. And then he is looked upon, by Many, as aiming
only at Money and a Living. And perhaps after all his Care, the State of the
Time so changes, as that what he contracted for, will not answer his
Necessities; and he must complain of the Deficiency thereof to his People: Who
are generally incompetent Judges in this Matter. And suppose a Majority will
allow any tolerable Maintenance; yet Murmurers and Complainers are, for the
most Part, multiplied; and, oftentimes, some turn away from the Communion of
our Churches to avoid the Charge.

WHILST the Country was small, and a Spirit of Love and Religion, and Reverence
to the Ministers of the Sanctuary remained, there was no Difficulty in this
Matter. But as the Country has increased, Religion declined, and the primitive
Zeal of God's House ccased, and Covetousness prevailed, this Matter has grown
more and more difficult: And will, doubtless, still grow more so.

So that unless there be some settled Funds, or Provision for the Support of
the Ministers of Religion, as in other Countries, under the Care and Direction
of the Government, I am afraid our Churches will gradually sink and crumble
into Pieces; and our Sanctuaries be brot into Desolation.

I WOULD therefore humbly recommend it unto your Honor's Consideration,
whether it be not fit and best, that the House and Worship of GOD be supported,
more directly, at the Charge, and by Direction of the Government.

BUT leaving this Matter with your Honors,

I WOULD beg Leave further to plead before your Honors, in behalf of the
Ecclesiastical Constitution of these Churches.

IT would trouble me, to doubt of the Love or Zeal of any of this honorable
Ajssmbly to the Constitution of these Churches; which your Laws establish: A
Constitution very dear to our Fathers; under which they enjoyed great Quietness
for many Years; and had much of the Presence of Heaven with them.

WE accept it with all Thankfulness, that our Civil Fathers have made such a
Hedge and Wall of Defense round it; and manifested their Dislike of the
Practices, which have a Tendency to destroy it.

BUT then, as Many are the Enemies of our Constitution, and are endeavoring to
break down all the Hedges about it; we hope that you will not withdraw your
Hands from the Defense thereof; but steadily Support the Constitution you have
so justly established: Which is excellent in it self, and seems to be the only
probable Means to support our Churches, and preserve Religion in them, and
prevent their utter Ruin.

I WOULD not plead against the Toleration of sober Dissenters: But then we
expect, that, whilst Dissenters from the Constitution enjoy only the Benefits
and Privileges employed in a Toleration, the Constitution it self be supported
and established: That you make a Difference between the established Churches
and those that are only tolerated Every one is sensible that it is one thing to
establish, another thing to tolerate any ecclesiastical Constitution Sundry
Ecclesiastical Constitutions may be tolerated in one Government; and it may be
fit and prudent that they be so. But there can but one Ecclesiastical
Constitution enjoy the Benefit of a civil Establishment. For should any State
or Government determine to establish Two, or more distinct Sorts of Churches,
and equally to support them, and endue each of them with equal Grants and
Privileges, the Protection either of them would enjoy from the Government,
would be very little more than is implied in a Toleration. For whilst one Sort
of these Churches was endeavoring with all their Might, to destroy the Other;
encouraging their Members, when under any Discipline or Censure at Home, to
come for Shelter and Refuge to them; the Churches so endeavoring to destroy
the Others, and weaken their Discipline, would enjoy all the civil Protection,
Encouragement and Privileges, as the Churches they would ruin; and every
offending Person would have this Encouragement to withdraw from the Church he
belonged unto, that if he can be countenanced in the other Churches and avoid a
just Censure, he shall enjoy all che civil Protection and Privileges he could
do, if reconciled to the Church to which he belongs If the Churches frown upon
him, the Civil Magistrate would smile on him. Happy then is it for Connecticut,
that our Churches have agreed to walk by One Rule; and notwithstanding some
lessen Differences, are united in the Say Brook Agreement, Which therefore our
Legislature have established as the Ecclesiastical Constitution of this Colony.
Indeed I am surprised to hear any Gentlemen asserting, that the scongregation
of Churches of this Colony are distinct from the Churches united in the happy
Agreement: For the most of our Churches always were and still remain
congregational Churches under this Agreement. But see this Matter set in a true
Light in the Defense of the Doings of the Reverend Consociation and Association
of New Haven County, etc
. And we hope, that the Enemies of our Constitution and religious Interests
will Obtain nothing, by any of their Craft, from our Lcgislature, that shall
have even the remotest Tendency to weaken, or destroy our Constitution. For, if
this our Defense be taken from us, and they are encouraged that are pulling it
down, we are doubless an undone People! And our Glory will fail; yea be turned
into Shame!

FINALLY, let me entreat your Care of the Cause of Learning and Education. The
Welfare of a People much depends upon this: Which is therefore justly a Matter
of public Care and Encouragement. Let the Education of Children therefore, in
all your Towns, be the Subject of your constant Regard: And let that public
Seminary of Learning, that has hitherto been so much of a Blessing, be kindly
supported and cherished, and put under the best Advantages, to train up the
Sons of your People for public Usefulness, in Church and State.

THESE Things I leave with your Honors; and my the LORD your GOD be with you,
and direct your Work in Truth.

II. I WOULD, in the next place, address my self to my Reverend FATHERS and
BRETHREN in the Ministry.

IF Civil Rulers are continually to attend upon this very Thing, to be
Ministers of God for Good to Men, surely the Ministers of Religion, the
spiritual Officers of CHRIST's Kingdom, are to give themselves wholly to this,
to serve Men in their best Interests.

THO therefore, My Fathers and Brethren, I am not so vain, as to think my self
sufficient, to be an Instructor unto you, yet you will suffer me to urge it
upon my self and You, to take Heed to the Ministry, which We have received in
the Lord, that We fulfill it; and so serve our Generation, in their most
valuable Concerns, by the Will of God. Let us watch in all Things, and make
full Proof of our Ministry. Let us preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the
Lord; and our selves the Servants of Souls for Jesus Sake. Let us very gladly
spend and be spent for them, though the more abundantly we love them, the less
We be loved. Let seek not our own Profit, but the Profit of many, that they may
be saved, and make our selves Servants unto all our People, in the Gospel, that
We might gain the more.

It Is an important Trust committed to us: The Souls of Men are especially put
under our Care. We are employed to treat with Men on the Affairs of their
immortal Souls; the Redemption whereof is precious.

IF we are successful, and turn many Souls to Righteousness, how great a
Service we shall be the Instruments of doing for Men -- And how much the better
they will be for us? But if they are lost through Want of Pains or Faithfulness
in us, how can we escape --! Or, what an Account can we give, when our great
Lord and Master; the Lover of Souls, who died to redeem them to GOD, and
committed so many to our Charge, shall at last inquire of us, what are become
of them? How weighty and important therefore is the Work, whereunto we are
called?

AND many are the Difficulties of this Work? Who is sufficient, said the great
Apostle of the Gentiles, for these Things? And it is especially an evil Time, we
are called to prophesy in, when uncommon Difficulties attend our Work. The
Principles of Korah are propagated among our People: And the Time is come, when
Multitudes will not endure sound Doctrine; but after their own Lusts beap to
themselves Teachers, having itching Ears; turning away their Ears from the
Truth, and being turned unto Fables. Such therefore are the Circumstances of
the Times, and the Difficulties attending our Calling, that there is but little
in the World to support and encourage us.

BUT yet, as we are employed in the Service of Christ for the Good of Men, who
will accept of, and reward our faithful Endeavors to advance his Kingdom in
the World, and to do Good to the Souls of Men; let no Discouragements or
Difficulties, no Hardship or Ill-Treatment take us off from a servent
Prosecution of our Work and Duty. Let no Abuses, nor Reproaches, nor any of the
Sufferings of this present Time move us from, or abate our Diligence in the
Work whereunto we are called. Let us learn to say with the great Apostle Paul,
Act. 20.24. None of these Things move me; neither count I my Life dear unto my
self, so that I might finish my Course with Joy, and the Ministry which I have
received of the Lord Jesus Christ. For however we are treated in the World, yet
if faithful in the House of GOD, we shall be honored in the future and
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. It is a faitful
Saying, if we suffer, we shall also reign with Him, (2 Timothy 2.11, 12.) We shall
be unto GOD a sweet Savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that
perish, (2 Cor. 2 15) Tho Israel be not gathered, yet our Judgment is with the
LORD, and our Work with our GOD, and We shall be glorious in the Eyes of the
LORD, and shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, and the Stars for
ever and ever, ( Isa., 49 4, 5. Dan. 12.3.) That everlasting Glory, that Christ
will confer upon us, will, ten Thousand Times over, recompense all our Labor
and Pains, all our Services, and Trials, in fulfilling our Ministry. Let us
therefore faint not, nor be weary in our Minds, but be strong in the Grace that
is in Christ Jesus, and endure Hardness, as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ: And
let our Zeal and our Endeavors, to serve the Cause of Christ and the Souls of
Men, be as great as our Difficulties and Trials be.

PARTICULARLY, my venerable Fathers and deerly respected Brethren, as we are
set for the Defense of the Gospel, ( Phil. 1.17.) and are appointed as Watchmen
upon the Walls of our Jerusalem, to give Warning ( Ezekiel. 3.17.) to our People
of any Danger they may be in, let us be faithful to caution and warn our People
against all hurtful Errors and Practices.

IT is sadly evident, that a Spirit of Error and Disorder has gone forth in
our Land, and unhappily broken and divided our Churches; and many foolish and
hurtful Errors, which tend to drown Men in Destruction and Perdition are
propagated. Let us faithfully Endeavor to discover to our People the dangerous
Tendency of these Things. Let us put on Courage, and cry aloud against the
Errors of the Times, tho we be esteemed by many their Enemies, because we tell
them the Truth.

I AM afraid we have been too slow in appearing against the Errors of the
Times; that we have been too ready to excuse our selves from speaking plainly
and freely in the Cause of Truth. But let us wax bold, and as we are allowed of
God to be put in Trust with the Gospel, even so let us speak, not as pleasing
Men, but GOD, which tries our Hearts, (1 These. 2.4)

INDEED we shall do well to avoid all Strife about Words to no Profit, but to
the subverting of the Hearers, and foolish and unlearned Questions that gender
Strife, (2 Timothy 2.14, 23.) And it is becoming our Character, that we strive
not; but be gentle unto all Men; in Meekness instructing these that oppose
themselves; if God peradventure will give them Repentance to the acknowleging
of the Truth, (2 Timothy 2.24, 25.)

BUT yet, when we see our People departing from the Faith, giving Heed to
seducing Spirits; when we see them as Children tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind of Doctrine, by the Slight of Men, and cunning
Craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; when we observe Men causing
Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which we have learned, and by
good Words and fair Speeches deceiving the Hearts of the Simple; it becomes us
to appear openly and boldly for God; to warn our People of their Danger, and
show them the Paths of the Destroyer.

MOREOVER, let us put our People in mind to be subject to Principalities and
Powers, to obey Magistrates, according to the Apostle's Direction, Tit. 3.1.

I HAVE heard it cast as a Reproach upon the Clergy, that they have been the
foremost in propagating the Principles of Sedition, and Disobedience to
Authority. I am persuaded the Charge is unjust: And hope, the Instances are but
few, of those that have given any Occasion for such a Charge I suppose some
Ministers. under the Power of Enthusiasm representing the Leaders and Rulers of
this People, as unconverted and Opposers of the Work of God, and usurping an
Authority that did not belong to them, was the Occasion of this Charge. And I
make no Doubt but it had an unhappy Influence upon the People, and encouraged
many to despise Government, and to speak Evil of Dignities. But yet it is
unfair to Object this to the Clergy in general.


FOR, as civil Government is of GOD, ordained out of Compassion to Mankind, and
as a Blessing to the World, it becomes those, whom God has ordained to teach
the People the Things of their Peace, and the Will of GOD, to practice
themselves, and teach their People Loyalty and Obedience to Magistrates. Let
silthy Dreamers despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, and foam out
their own Shame: The Ministers of Jesus must render to all their Dues: Fear to
whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor is due.

AND indeed, seeing the Powers that be, are of GOD, and rule for Him, I need
not call to Remembrance our Obligation to teach Subjection thereunto: I shall
only therefore stir up our Minds by the Consideration of the Licentiousness of
the Times. It is easy to observe a levelling and seditious Spirit prevailing,
and an Impatience of all Rule and Restraint. Alas for the Day! How many
Murmurers and Complainers are there, walking after their own Lusts, despising
Government? And how many are corrupted by their Pleas for lawless Liberty, tho
themselves are in the worst Sort of Bondage, being the Servants of Corruption?
O let us warn our People of the dangerous Tendency of such a Spirit, and press
it upon them, to submit themselves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's
Sake; and let them know that so is the Will of GOD.

FURTHERMORE, let it be our united Endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in
the Bond of Peace. The better we are united, the greater will be our Influence
on our People, and the greater Advantage we shall be under to serve them in
their best Interests.

It Is Matter of Mourning and Lamentation, that the primitive Union and Harmony,
that so many Years subsisted amongst us, have been so interrupted of late. For
this let Tears run down like a River, Night and Day: Let us pour out our Hearts
like Water before the Face of the LORD.

AND Oh! that GOD would unite our Hearts in his Work; that we might all join
together in Defense of the Order and Truth of the Gospel, and in promoting the
Kingdom of Christ, and the Good of Men, and in bearing Testimony against the
Iniquities of a wicked World, and the Errors of the Times.

LET us then, put on Charity, which is the Bond of Perfectness; ( Col. 3.14.)
and take heed that we do not entertain Jealousies and evil Surmisings of one
another; and that there be no more Separations and Divisions, no more
Alienations and Strangeness amongst our selves.

FINALLY, Let us give Our selves to Prayer; and for our Jerusalem's sake not
rest, until the Righteousness thereof go forth as Brightness, and the Salvation
thereof as a Lamp that burns.

III. AND lastly, I would address my self to all the People in general, now
assembled before the Lord in this House.

As Government is instituted, and the higher Powers are vested with Authority
for the Good of Men, that they may live peaceably, righteously and godly in the
World; So it is the Duty of Subjects to pray for Kings and all in Authority,
that the Effects of their Government may be answerable to the End of it is
Institution; and join their Endeavors to their Prayers, and contribute what
lies in them, to strengthen the Government, and render^^ subservient, to the
great and good Purposes of it is Institution.

WE are a People greatly privileged in Respect of our Government. We may choose
out able and Faithful Men from amongst our selves to rule over us: Men, whose
Interest is One with ours; Men of our own Religion, Lovers of our Constitution
in Church and State.

BUT we may be unhappy under the best of Governments, if we will contribute
nothing our selves to render it a Blessing to us.

LET US then in our sundry Spheres and Capacities, do our Part, that our Rulers
may be Ministers of God unto us for Good. Let us lift up our Souls, and cry
mightily unto GOD in their Behalf, that they may be always under the Direction
of Heaven, and succeeded in their Ministrations for the Good of Men.

AND let us do all we may to encourage them in their Work, which is difficult
and very important. Let us contribute what in us lies to the Preservation of
Peace, and the Advancement of Religion and Godliness, the great Ends of
Government* For, if the People will disturb the Peace, and transgress the Rules
of Virtue and Religion, tho the Rulers be never so well qualified to govern,
and never so much intent upon this very Thing, that Men might live peaceably,
virtuously and relig^ously together, yet they can never effect it The Head
cannot say to the ^^^t, I have no Need of you. Let us come to the Help of these
Powers, and endeavor to render their Government useful, by being such as
Government is designed to make us.

LET US mark those that cause Divisions, foment Jealousies, and are continually
murmuring and complaining, and weakening the Hands of our Rulers, and come not
into their Secret, nor be united unto their Assembly.

LET US fear the LORD and the King; and meddle not with them that are given to
Change. Let us study to be quiet, and to do our own Business. Let us be subject
to the Authority over us, and show all Meekness to all Men, and be ready to
every good Work.

So shall we encourage the Hearts of our Rulers, and strengthen their Hands:
And then may we hope, that they will be Ministers of God unto us for Good; that
under their Administration the Righteous may flourish, and Abundance of Peace
bless the Land; that Judgment will run down as Waters, and Righteousness as a
mighty Stream, and our Light rise in Cbscurity, and break forth as the Morning:
Then may we hope, that GOD will return, and remember Mercy for us, and renew
our Days as of old; be the Repairer of our Breaches, and the Restorer of Paths
to dwell in; be the Shield of our Help, and the Sword of our Excellency: Ride
upon the heavens in our Help, and in his Excellency on the Sky. And Happy is
the People that is in such a Case; yea Happy is that People, whose GOD is the
LORD.

FINIS.

