Mr. Mayhew's

DISCOURSE

Wherein

The Mystery of King Charles's

Saintship and Martyrdom is unriddled.

Advertisement.
THE author of this discourse has been credibly informed, that some persons,
both formerly and lately, have wrote either at, or about him -- or something;
(be cannot well tell what) in the common news papers, which he does not often
read. He, therefore, takes this opportunity to assure the writers of that rank,
and in that form, once for all, that they may slander him as much as they
please, without his notice, and, very probably, without his knowledge. But if
any person of common sense and common honesty, shall condescend to animadvert
in a different way, upon any thing which he has published, he may depend upon
having all proper regard shown to him.

J. M.

The principal Errata of the press, are as follows.

Page 29. line 10, from the bottom, insert the word and before if. p. 31. l. 4,
from the bottom, for person read persons. p. 42. l. 7. from the top, dele new
and, before arbitrary. Errors in the pointing are left to be corrected by the
reader.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Unlimited Submission AND Non-Resistance TO THE HIGHER
POWERS: With some REFLECTIONS on the RESISTANCE made to King CHARLES I. AND ON
THE Anniversary of his Death:

In which the MYSTERIOUS Doctrine of that Prince's Saintship and Martyrdom is
UNRIDDLED:

The Substance of which was delivered in a SERMON preached in the West
Meeting House in Boston the LORD'S DAY after the 30th of January, 1749/50.

Published at the Request of the Hearers.

By JONATHAN MAYHEW, A. M. Pastor of the West Church in Boston.

Fear GOD, honor the King. Saint PAUL. He that rules over Men, must be just,
ruling in the Fear of GOD. Prophet SAMUEL. I have said, ye are Gods -- but ye
shall die like Men, and fall like one of the PRINCES. King DAVID. Quid memorem
in^andas caedes? quid facta TYRANNI Effera? Dii CAPITI ips^^^ GENERIQUE
reservent -- Necnon Threicius longa cum vest SACERDOS Obloquitur -- Romans Vat.
Prin. BOSTON, Printed and Sold by D. FOUL in Queen street; and by D. GOOKIN
over against the South-Meeting-House. 1750.

PREFACE.
THE ensuing discourse is the last of three upon the same subject, with some
little alterations and additions. It is hoped that but few will think the
subject of it an improper one to be discoursed on in the pulpit, under a notion
that this is preaching politics, instead of CHRIST. However, to remove all
prejudices of this sort, I beg it may be remembered, that "all scripture -- is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for CORRECTION, for instruction in
righteousness." 2 Pet. iii. 16.
Why, then, should not those parts of scripture which relate to civil
government, be examined and explained ^^om the desk, as well as others?
Obedience to the civil magistrate is a christian duty: and if so, why should
not the nature, grounds and extent of it be considered in a christian assembly?
Besides, if it be said, that it is out of character for a christian minister to
meddle with such a subject, this censure will at last fall upon the holy
apostles. They write upon it in their epistles to christian churches: And
surely it cannot be deemed either criminal or impertinent, to attempt an
explanation of their doctrine.

IT was the near approach of the Thirtieth of January, that turned my thoughts
to this subject: on which solemnity the slavish doctrine of passive obedience
and non-resistance, is often warmly asserted; and the dissenters from the
established church, represented, not only as scismatics, (with more of triumph
than of truth, and of choler than christianity) but also as persons of
seditious, traitorous and rebellious principles -- GOD be thanked one may, in
any part of the british dominions, speak freely (if a decent regard be paid to
those in authority) both of government and religion; and even give some broad
hints, that he is engaged on the side of Liberty, the BIBLE and Common Sense,
in opposition to Tyranny, PRIESTCRAFT and Nonsense, without being in danger
either of the bastile or the inquisition: -- Though there will always be some
interested politicians, contracted bigots, and hypocritical zealots for a
party, to take offense at such freedoms. Their censure is praise: Their praise
is infamy -- A spirit of domination is always to be guarded against both in
church and state, even in times of the greatest security; such as the present
is amongst US; at least as to the latter. Those nations who are now groaning
under the iron scepter of tyranny, were once free. So they might, probably,
have remained, by a seasonable precaution against despotic measures. Civil
tyranny is usually small in its beginning, like "the drop of a bucket," Isai.
xi. 15.
till at length, like a mighty torrent, or the raging waves of the sea, it
bears down all before it, and deluges whole countries and empires. Thus it is
as to ecclesiastical tyranny also, -- the most cruel, intolerable and impious,
of any. From small beginnings, "it exalts itself above all that is called GOD
"and that is worshipped" 2 These. ii. 4;
People have no security against being unmercifully priest-ridden, but by
keeping all imperious BISHOPS, and other CLERGYMEN who love to "lord it over
God's heritage," from getting their foot into the stirrup at all. Let them be
once fairly mounted, and their "beasts, the laiety," Mr. Leslie.
may prance and flounce about to no purpose: And they will, at length, be so
jaded and hacked by these reverend jockies, that they will not even have
spirits enough to complain, that their backs are galled; or, like Balaam' s
ass, to "rebuke the madness "of the prophet."

2 Pet. ii. 16.
" THE mystery of iniquity began to work" 2 These. ii 7.
even in the days of some of the apostles. But the kingdom of Antichrist was
then, in one respect, like the kingdom of heaven, however different in all
others. -- It was "as a "grain of mustard seed." Mat. xiii. ^
This grain was sown in Italy, that fruitful field: And though it were "the
least of all seeds," it soon became a mighty tree. It has, long since,
overspread and darkened the greatest part of Christendom, so that we may apply
to it what is said of the tree which Nebuchadnezzar saw in his vision -- The
height thereof reaches unto heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all
the earth -- And THE BEASTS OF THE FIELD have shadow under it. Tyranny brings
ignorance and brutality along with it. It degrades men from their just rank,
into the class of brutes. It damps their spirits. It suppresses arts. It
extinguishes every spark of noble ardor and generosity in the breasts of those
who are enslaved by it. It makes naturally-strong and great minds, feeble and
little; and triumphs over the ruins of virtue and humanity. This is true of
tyranny in every shape. There can be nothing great and good, where its
influence reaches. For which reason it becomes every friend to truth and human
kind; every lover of God and the christian religion, to bear a part in opposing
this hateful monster. It was a desire to contribute a mite toward carrying on
a war against this common enemy, that produced the following discourse. And if
it serve in any measure, to keep up a spirit of civil and religious liberty
amongst us, my end is answered. -- There are virtuous and candid men in all
sects; all such are to be esteemed: There are also vicious men and bigols in
all sects; and all such ought to be despised.

"To virtue only and her friends, a friend;
"The world beside may murmur or commend.
"Know, all the distant din that world can keep
"Rolls over my grotto, and but sooths my sleep."
POPE. Jonathan Mayhew.

Concerning Unlimited Submission and Non-Resistance to the Higher Powers.
ROMANS XIII. 1. -- 8. 1. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For
there is no power but of God: the powers that be, are ordained of God.

2. Whosoever therefore resists the (...) resists the ordinance of God: and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.

3. For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Will thou then
not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shall have praise
of the same:

4. For he is the minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which
is evil, be afraid; for he bears not the sword in vain: for he is the
minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.

5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake.

6. For, for this cause pay you tribute also: for they are God's ministers,
attending continually upon this very thing.

7. Render therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due; custom,
to whom custom; fear, to whom fear; honor, to whom honor.


IT is evident that the affair of civil government may properly fall under:
moral and religious consideration, at least so far forth as it relates to the
general nature and end of magistracy, and to the grounds and extent of that
submission which persons of a private character, ought to yield to those who
are vested with authority. This must be allowed by all who acknowledge the
divine original of christianity. For although there be a sense, and a very
plain and important sense, in which Christ's kingdom is not of this world; John
xviii. 3^.
his inspired apostles have, nevertheless, laid down some general principles
concerning the office of civil rulers, and the duty of subjects, together with
the reason and obligation of that duty. And from hence it follows, that it is
proper for all who acknowledge the authority of Jesus Christ, and the
inspiration of his apostles, to endeavor to understand what is in fact the
doctrine which they have delivered concerning this matter. It is the duty of
christian magistrates to inform themselves what it is which their religion
teaches concerning the nature and design of their office. And it is equally the
duty of all christian people to inform themselves what it is which their
religion teaches concerning that subjection which they owe to the higher
powers. It is for these reasons that I have attempted to examine into the
scripture-account of this matter, in order to lay it before you with the same
freedom which I constantly use with relation to other doctrines and precepts of
christianity; not doubting but you will judge upon every thing offered to your
consideration, with the same spirit of freedom and liberty with which it is
spoken.

THE passage read, is the most full and express of any in the new testament,
relating to rulers and subjects: And therefore I thought it proper to ground
upon it, what I had to propose to you with reference to the authority of the
civil magistrate, and the subjection which is due to him. But before I enter
upon an explanation of the several parts of this passage, it will be proper to
observe one thing which may serve as a key to the whole of it.

IT is to be observed, then, that there were some persons amongst the
christians of the apostolic age, and particularly those at Rome, to whom St.
Paul is here writing, who seditiously disclaimed all subjection to civil
authority; refusing to pay taxes, and the duties laid upon their trafic and
merchandise; and who scrupled not to speak of their rulers, without any due
regard to their office and character. Some of these turbulent christians were
converts from judaism, and others from paganism. The jews in general had, long
before this time, taken up a strange conceit, that being the peculiar and elect
people of God, they were, therefore, exempted from the jurisdiction of any
heathen princes or governors. Upon this ground it was, that some of them,
during the public ministry of our blessed Savior, came to him with that
question -- Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar or not? Matthew. xxii. 17.
And this notion many of them retained after they were proselyted to the
christian Faith. As to the gentile converts, some of them grossly mistook the
nature of that liberty which the gospel promised; and thought that by virtue of
their subjection to Christ, the only King and Head of his church, they were
wholly freed from subjection to any other prince; as though Christ's kingdom had
been of this world, in such a sense as to interfere with the civil powers of
the earth, and to deliver their subjects from that allegiance and duty, which
they before owed to them. Of these visionary christians in general, who
disowned subjection to the civil powers in being where they respectively lived,
there is mention made in several places in the new testament: The apostle Peter
in particular, characterizes them in this manner -- them that -- despise
government -- presumpluous are they, self-willed, they are not afraid to speak
evil of dignities. 2 Pet. ii. 10.
Now it is with reference to these doting christians, that the apostle speaks
in the passage before us. And I shall now give you the sense of it in a
paraphrase upon each verse in its order, desiring you to keep in mind the
character of the persons for whom it is designed, that so, as I go along, you
may see how just and natural this address is; and how well suited to the
circumstances of those against whom it is levelled.

THE apostle begins thus -- Let every soul Every soul. This is an bebraism,
which signifies every man; so that the apostle does not exempt the clergy: such
as were endowed with the gift of prophesy, or any other miraculous powers which
subsisted in the church at that day. And by his using the hebrew idiom, it
seems that he had the jowish converts principally in his eye.
be subject unto the higher powers; The higher powers: more literally, the
overruling powers: which term extends to all civil rulers in common.
for there is no power By power, the apostle intends not lawless strength and
brutal force, without regulation or proper direction; but just authority; for
so the word here used properly signifies. There may be power where there is no
authority. No man has any authority to do what is wrong and injurious, though
he may have power to do it.
but of God: the powers that be The powers that be: those persons who are in
fact vested with authority; those who are in possession. And who those are, the
apostle leaves christians to determine for themselves; but whoever they are,
they are to be obeyed.
are ordained of God Ordained of God: as it is not without God's providence and
permission, that any are clothed with authority; and as it is agreeable to the
positive will and purpose of God, that there should be some persons vested with
authority for the good of society: not that any rulers have their commission
immediately from God the supreme Lord of the universe. If any assert that
kings, or any other rulers, are ordained of God in the latter sense, it is
incumbent upon them to show the commission which they speak of, under the broad
seal of heaven. And when they do this, they will, no doubt, be believed.
ver. 1. q. d. Whereas some professed christians vainly imagine, that they are
wholly excused from all manner of duty and subjection to civil authority,
refusing to honor their rulers, and to pay taxes; which opinion is not only
unreasonable in itself, but also tends to fix a lasting reproach upon the
christian name and profession, I now, as an apostle and ambassador of Christ,
exhort every one of you, be he who he will, to pay all dutiful submission to
those (...) vested with any civil office. For there is, properly speaking, no
authority but what is derived from God, as it is only by his permission and
providence that any possess it. Yea, I may add, that all civil magistrates, as
such, although they may be heathens, are appointed and ordained of God. For it is
certainly God's will, that so useful an institution as that of magistracy,
should take place in the world, for the good of civil society. The apostle
proceeds -- Whosoever, therefore, resists the power, resists the ordinance
of God; and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. ver. 2. q.
d. Think not, therefore, that ye are guiltless of any crime or sin against God,
when ye factiously disobey and resist the civil authority. For magistracy and
government being, as I have said, the ordinance and appointment of God, it
follows, that to resist magistrates in the execution of their offices, is
really to resist the will and ordinance of God himself: And they who thus
resist, will accordingly be punished by God for this sin in common with others.
The apostle goes on -- For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the
evil. For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. It cannot be
supposed that the apostle designs here, or in any of the succeeding verses, to
give the true character of Nero. or any other civil powers then in being, as if
they were in fact such persons as he describes, a terror to evil works only,
and not to the good For such a character did not belong to them; and the
apostle was no sycophant, or parasite of power, whatever some of his pretended
successors have been. He only tells what (...) would be, provided they acted up
to their character and (...)
Will thou then, not be afraid of the power? Do that which is good, and thou
shall have praise of the same. For he is the minister of God to thee for good,
ver. 3d, and part of the 4th. q. d. That you may see the truth and justness of
what I assert, ( viz. that magistracy is the ordinance of God, and that you sin
against him in opposing it,) consider that even pagan rulers, are not, by the
nature and design of their office, enemies and a terror to the good and
virtuous actions of men, but only to the injurious and mischievous to society.
Will ye not, then, reverence and honor magistracy, when ye see the good end and
intention of it? How can ye be so unreasonable? Only mind to do your duty as
members of society; and this will gain you the applause and favor of all good
rulers. For while you do thus, they are, by their office, as ministers of God,
obliged to encourage and protect you; it is for this very purpose that they are
clothed with power. The apostle subjoins -- But if thou do that which is evil,
be afraid, for be bears not the sword in vain. For be is the minister of God,
a revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil. It is manifest that when
the apostle speaks of it, as the office of civil rulers, to encourage what is
good, and to punish what is evil, he speaks only of civil good and evil. They
are to consult the good of society as such; not to dictate in religious
concerns; not to make laws for the government of men's consciences; and to
inflict civil penalties for religious crimes. It is sufficient to overthrow the
doctrine of the authority of the civil magistrate, in affairs of a spiritual
nature, (so far as it is built upon any thing which is here said by St. Paul,
or upon any thing else in the new testament) only to observe, that all the
magistrates then in the world were heathen, implacable enemies to christianity:
so that to give them authority in religious matters, would have been, in
effect, to give them authority to extirpate the christian religion, and to
establish the idolatries and superstitions of paganism. And can any one
reasonably suppose, that the apostle had any intention to extend the authority
of rulers, beyond concerns merely civil and political, to the overthrowing of
that religion which he himself was so zealous in propagating! But it is natural
for those whose religion cannot be supported upon the footing of reason and
argument, to have recourse to power and force, which will serve a bad cause as
well as a good one; and indeed much better.
ver. 4. latter part. q. d. But upon the other hand, if ye refuse to do your
duty as members of society; if ye refuse to bear your part in the support of
government; if ye are disorderly, and do things which merit civil chastisement,
then, indeed, ye have reason to be afraid. For it is not in vain that rulers
are vested with the power of inflicting punishment. They are, by their office,
not only the ministers of God for good to those that do well; but also his
ministers to revenge, to discountenance and punish those that are unruly, and
injurious to their neighbors. The apostle proceeds -- Wherefore ye must needs
be subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake, ver. 5. q. d.
Since therefore, magistracy is the ordinance of God; and since rulers are, by
their office, benefactors to society, by discouraging what is bad, and
encouraging what is good, and so preserving peace and order amongst men; it is
evident that ye ought to pay a willing subjection to them; not to obey merely
for fear of exposing yourselves to their wrath and displeasure, but also in
point of reason, duty and conscience: Ye are under an indispensable obligation,
as christians, to honor their office, and to submit to them in the execution
of it. The apostle goes on -- For, for this cause pay you tribute also: for
they are God's ministers, attending continually upon this very thing, ver. 6.
q. d. And here is a plain reason also why ye should pay tribute to them; for
they are God's ministers, exalted above the common level of mankind, not that
they may indulge themselves in softness and luxury, and be entitled to the
servile homage of their fellow-men; but that they may execute an office no less
laborious than honorable; and attend continually upon the public welfare. This
being their business and duty, it is but reasonable, that they should be
requited for their care and diligence in performing it; and enabled, by taxes
levied upon the subject, effectually to prosecute the great end of their
institution, the good of society. The apostle sums all up in the following
words -- Render therefore to all their dues: tribute, Grotius observes that the
greek words here used, answer to the tributum and vectigal of the Romans; the
former was the money paid for the soil and poll; the latter, the duties laid
upon some sorts of merchandise. And what the apostle here says, deserves to be
seriously considered by all christians concerned in that common practice of
carrying on an illicit trade, and running of goods.
to whom tribute is due; custom, Grotius observes that the greek words here
used, answer to the tributum and vectigal of the Romans; the former was the
money paid for the soil and poll; the latter, the duties laid upon some sorts
of merchandise. And what the apostle here says, deserves to be seriously
considered by all christians concerned in that common practice of carrying on
an illicit trade, and running of goods.
to whom custom; fear, to whom fear; honor, to whom honor, ver. 7. q. d. Let
it not, therefore, be said of any of you hereafter, that you contemn
government, to the reproach of yourselves, and of the christian religion.
Neither your being jews by nation, nor your becoming the subjects of Christ's
kingdom, gives you any dispensation for making disturbances in the government
under which you live. Approve yourselves, therefore, as peaceable and dutiful
subjects. Be ready to pay to your rulers all that they may, in respect of their
office, justly demand of you. Render tribute and custom to those of your
governors to whom tribute and custom belong: And cheerfully honor and reverence
all who are vested with civil authority, according to their deserts.

THE apostle's doctrine, in the passage thus explained, concerning the office
of civil rulers, and the duty of subjects, may be summed up in the following
observations; The several observations here only mentioned, were (...) of large
in two preceding discourses upon this subject.
viz.

THAT the end of magistracy is the good of civil society, as such:

THAT civil rulers, as such, are the ordinance and ministers of God; it being
by his permission and providence that any bear rule: and agreeable to his will,
that there should be some persons vested with authority in society, for the
well-being of it:

THAT which is here said concerning civil rulers, extends to all of them in
common: it relates indifferently to monarchical, republican and aristocratical
government; and to all other forms which truly answer the sole end of
government, the happiness of society; and to all the different degrees of
authority in any particular state; to inferior officers no less than to the
supreme:

THAT disobedience to civil rulers in the due exercise of their authority, is
not merely a political sin, but an heinous offense against God and religion:

THAT the true ground and reason Some suppose the apostle in this passage (...)
submission, with two arguments quite distinct (...); one taken from this
consideration, that rulers (...) ordinance, and the ministers of God, ( ver. 1.
2. and 4.) and the other, from the benefits that accrue to society, from civil
government, ( ver. 3, 4, and 6.) And indeed these may be distinct motives and
arguments for submission, as they may be separately viewed and contemplated.
But when we consider that rulers are not the ordinance and the ministers of
God, but only so far forth as they perform God's will, by acting up to their
office and character, and so by being benefactors to society, this makes these
arguments coincide, and run up into one at last: At least so far, that the
former of them cannot hold good for submission, where the latter fails. Put the
supposition, that any man bearing the title of a magistrate, should exercise
his power in such a manner as to have no claim to obedience by virtue of that
argument which is founded upon the usefulness of magistracy; and you equally
take off the force of the other argument also, which is founded upon his being
the ordinance and the minister of God. For he is no longer God's ordinance and
minister, than he acts up to his office and character, by exercising his power
for the good of society -- This is, in brief, the reason why it is said above,
in the singular number, that the true ground and reason, etc. The use and
propriety of this remark may possibly be more apparent in the progress of the
argument concerning resistance.
of our obligation to be subject to the higher powers, is the usefulness of
magistracy (when properly exercised) to human society, and its subserviency to
the general welfare:

THAT obedience to civil rulers is here equally required under all forms of
government, which answer the sole end of all government, the good of society;
and to every degree of authority in any state, whether supreme or subordinate:

(From whence it follows,

THAT if unlimited obedience and non-resistance, be here required as a duty
under any one form of government, it is also required as a duty under all other
forms; and as a duty to subordinate rulers as well as to the supreme.)

AND lastly, that those civil rulers to whom the apostle injoins subjection,
are the persons in possession; the powers that be; those who are actually
vested with authority. This must be understood with this proviso, that they do
not grossly abuse their power and trust, but exercise it for the good of those
that are governed. Who these persons were, whether Nero, etc. or not, the
apostle does not say; but leaves it to be determined by those to whom he
writes. God does not interpose, in a miraculous way, to point out the persons
who shall bear rule, and to whom subjection is due. And as to the unalienable,
indeseasible right of primogeniture, the scriptures are entirely silent: or
rather plainly contradict it: Saul being the first king among the Israelites;
and appointed to the royal dignity, during his own father's life time: and he
was succeeded, or rather superseded, by David, the last born among many
brethren -- Now if God has not invariably determined this matter, it must, of
course, be determined by men. And if it be determined by men, it must be
determined either in the way of force, or of compact. And which of these is the
most equitable, can be no question.


THERE is one very important and interesting point which remains to be inquired
into; namely, the extent of that subjection to the higher powers, which is here
enjoined as a duty upon all christians. Some have thought it warrantable and
glorious, to disobey the civil powers in certain circumstances; and, in cases
of very great and general oppression, when humble remonstrances fail of having
any effect; and when the public welfare cannot be otherwise provided for and
secured, to rise unanimously even against the sovereign himself, in order to
redress their grievances; to vindicate their natural and legal rights: to break
the yoke of tyranny, and free themselves and posterity from inglorious
servitude and ruin. It is upon this principle that many royal oppressors have
been driven from their thrones into banishment; and many slain by the hands of
their subjects. It was upon this principle that Tarquin was expelled from Rome;
and Julius Caesar, the conqueror of the world, and the tyrant of his country,
cut off in the senate house. It was upon this principle, that king Charles I,
was beheaded before his own banqueting house. It was upon this principle, that
king James II. was made to fly that country which he aimed at enslaving: And
upon this principle was that revolution brought about, which has been so
fruitful of happy consequences to Great Britain. But, in opposition to this
principle, it has often been asserted, that the scripture in general (and the
passage under consideration in particular) makes all resistance to princes a
crime, in any case whatever -- If they turn tyrants, and become the common
oppressors of those, whose welfare they ought to regard with a paternal
affection, we must not pretend to right ourselves, unless it be by prayers and
tears and humble entreaties: And if these methods fail of procuring redress, we
must not have recourse to any other, but all suffer ourselves to be robbed and
butchered at the pleasure of the Lord's anointed; left we should incur the sin
of rebellion, and the punishment of damnation. For he has God's authority and
commission to bear him out in the worst of crimes, so far that he may not be
withstood or controuled. Now whether we are obliged to yield such an absolute
submission to our prince; or whether disobedience and resistance may not be
justifiable in some cases, notwithstanding any thing in the passage before us,
is an inquiry in which we are all concerned; and this is the inquiry which is
the main design of the present discourse.

Now there does not seem to be any necessity of supposing, that an absolute,
unlimited obedience, whether active or passive, is here injoined, merely for
this reason, that the precept is delivered in absolute terms, without any
exception or limitation expressly mentioned. We are enjoined, ( ver. 1.) to be
subject to the higher powers: and ( ver. 5.) to be subject for conscience sake.
And because these expressions are absolute and unlimited, (or more properly,
general) some have inferred, that the subjection required in them, must be
absolute and unlimited also: At least so far forth as to make passive obedience
and non-resistance, a duty in all cases whatever, if not active obedience
likewise. Though, by the way, there is here no distinction made betwixt active
and passive obedience; and if either of them be required in an unlimited sense,
the other must be required in the same sense also, by virtue of the present
argument; because the expressions are equally absolute with respect to both.
But that unlimited obedience of any sort, cannot be argued merely from the
indefinite expressions in which obedience is enjoined, appears from hence, that
expressions of the same nature, frequently occur in scripture, upon which it is
confessed on all hands, that no such absolute and unlimited sense ought to be
put. For example, Love not the world; neither the things that are in the world;
1 John ii. 15.
Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth; Matt. vi. 19.
Take therefore no thought for the morrow; Matt. vi. 34.
are precepts expressed in at least equally absolute and unlimited terms: but
it is generally allowed that they are to be understood with certain
restrictions and limitations; some degree of love to the world, and the things
of it, being allowable. Nor, indeed, do the Right Reverend Fathers in God, and
other dignified clergymen of the established church, seem to be altogether
averse to admitting of restrictions in the latter case, how warm soever any of
them may be against restrictions, and limitations, in the case of submission to
authority, whether civil or ecclesiastical. It is worth remarking also, that
patience and submission under private injuries, are injoined in much more
peremptory and absolute terms, than any that are used with regard to submission
to the injustice and oppression of civil rulers. Thus, I say unto you, that ye
resist not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on the right check, turn to him
the other also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy
coat, let him have thy cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile
with him, go with him twain. Mat. v. 39, 40, 41.
Any man may be desied to produce such strong expressions in favor of a passive
and tame submission to unjust, tyrannical rulers, as are here used to enforce
submission to private injuries. But how few are there that understand those
expressions literally? And the reason why they do not, is because (with
submission to the quakers) common sense shows that they were not intended to be
so understood.

BUT to instance in some scripture precepts, which are more directly to the
point in hand. -- Children are commanded to obey their parents, and servants,
their masters, in as absolute and unlimited terms as subjects are here
commanded to obey their civil rulers. Thus this same apostle -- Children obey
your parents in the Lord; for this is right. Honor thy father and mother, --
which is the first commandment with promise. -- Servants, be obedient to them
that are your masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, with
singleness of your heart as unto Christ. Ephesians. vi. 1, etc.
Thus also wives are commanded to be obedient to their husbands -- Wives,
submit your selves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord. For the husband is
head of the wife, even as CHRIST IS THE HEAD OF THE CHURCH -- Therefore, as the
church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to their own husbands IN
EVERY THING. Ephesians. v. 22, 23, 24.
In all these cases, submission is required in terms (at least) as absolute and
universal, as are ever used with respect to rulers and subjects. But who
supposes that the apostle ever intended to teach, that children, servants and
wives, should, in all cases whatever, obey their parents, masters and husbands
respectively, never making any opposition to their will, even although they
should require them to break the commandments of God, or should causelessly make
an attempt upon their lives? No one puts such a sense upon these expressions,
however absolute and unlimited. Why then should it be supposed, that the
apostle designed to teach universal obedience, whether active or passive, to
the higher powers, merely because his precepts are delivered in absolute and
unlimited terms? And if this be a good argument in one case, why is it not in
others also? If it be said that resistance and disobedience to the higher
powers, is here said positively to be a sin, so also is the disobedience of
children to parents; servants, to masters; and wives, to husbands, in other
places of scripture. But the question still remains, whether in all these cases
there be not some exceptions? In the three latter, it is allowed there are. And
from hence it follows, that barely the use of absolute expressions, is no
proof, that obedience to civil rulers, is, in all cases, a duty; or resistance,
in all cases a sin. I should not have thought it worth while to take any notice
at all of this argument, had it not been much insisted upon by some of the
advocates for passive obedience and non-resistance: For it is, in itself,
perfectly trifling; and rendered considerable, only by the stress that has been
laid upon it for want of better.

THERE is, indeed, one passage in the new testament, where it may seem, at
first view, that an unlimited submission to civil rulers, is injoined. --
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake. ^ Pet. 2. 13.
-- To every ordinance of man. -- However, this expression is no stronger than
that before taken notice of, with relation to the duty of wives -- So let the
wives be subject to their own husbands -- IN EVERY THING. But the true solution
of this difficulty (if it be one) is this: by every ordinance of man,
Literally, every human institution, or appointment. By which manner of
expression the apostle plainly intimates, that rulers derive their authority
immediately, not from God, but from men.
is not meant every command of the civil magistrate without exception; but
every order of magistrates appointed by man; -- whether superior or inferior:
For so the apostle explains himself in the very next words -- Whether it be to
the king as supreme, or to governors, as unto them that are sent, etc. But
although the apostle had not subjoined any such explanation, the reason of the
thing itself would have obliged us to limit the expression [every ordinance of
man] to such human ordinances and commands, as are not inconsistent with the
ordinances and commands of God, the supreme lawgiver; or with any other higher,
and antecedent, obligations.

IT is to be observed, in the next place, that as the duty of universal
obedience and non-resistance to the higher powers, cannot be argued from the
absolute unlimited expressions which the apostle here uses; so neither can it
be argued from the scope and drift of his reasoning, considered with relation
to the persons he was here opposing. As was observed above, there were some
professed christians in the apostolic age, who disclaimed all magistracy and
civil authority in general, despising government, and speaking evil of
dignities; some under a notion that jews ought not to be under the jurisdiction
of (...) rulers; and others, that they were set free from the temporal powers,
by Christ. Now it is with persons of this licentious opinion and character,
that the apostle is concerned. And all that was directly to his point, was to
show, that they were bound to submit to magistracy in general. This is a
circumstance very material to be taken notice of, in order to ascertain the
sense of the apostle. For this being considered, it is sufficient to account
for all that he says concerning the duty of subjection, and the sin of
resistance, to the higher powers, without having recourse to the doctrine of
unlimited submission and passive obedience, in all cases whatever. Were it
known that those in opposition to whom, the apostle wrote, allowed of civil
authority in general, and only asserted that there were some cases in which
obedience and non-resistance, were not a duty; there would, then, indeed, be
reason for interpreting this passage as containing the doctrine of unlimited
obedience, and non-resistance, as it must, in this case, be supposed to have
been levelled against such as denied that doctrine. But since it is certain
that there were persons who vainly imagined, that civil government in general,
was not to be regarded by them, it is most reasonable to suppose, that the
apostle designed his discourse only against them. And agreeably to this
supposition, we find that he argues the usefulness of civil magistracy in
general; its agreeableness to the will and purpose of God, who is over all; and
so deduces from hence, the (...) of submission to it. But it will not follow,
that because civil government, is, in general, a good institution, and
necessary to the peace and happiness of human society, therefore there are no
supposeable cases in which resistance to it can be innocent. So that the duty
of unlimited obedience, whether active or passive, can be argued, neither from
the manner of expression here used, nor from the general scope and design of
the passage.

AND if we attend to the nature of the argument with which the apostle here
inforces the duty of submission to the higher powers, we shall find it to be
such an one as concludes not in favor of submission to all who bear the title
of rulers, in common; but only, to those who actually perform the duty of
rulers, by exercising a reasonable and just authority, for the good of human
society. This is a point which it will be proper to enlarge upon; because the
question before us turns very much upon the truth or falsehood of this position.
It is obvious, then, in general, that the civil rulers whom the apostle here
speaks of, and obedience to whom he presses upon christians as a duty, are good
rulers, By good rulers, are not intended such as are good in a moral or
religious, but only in a political, sense; those who perform their duty so far
as their office extends; and so far as civil society, as such, is concerned in
their actions.
such as are, in the exercise of their office and power, benefactors to
society. Such they are described to be, throughout this passage. Thus it is said,
that they are not a terror to good works, but to the evil; that they are God's
ministers for good; revengers to execute wrath upon him that does evil; and
that they attend continually upon this very thing. St. Peter gives the same
account of rulers: They are for a praise to them that do well, and the
punishment of evil doers. See the marginal note, page 6. See also the marginal
note, p. 7.
It is manifest that this character and description of rulers, agrees only to
such as are rulers in fact, as well as in name: to such as govern well, and act
agreeably to their office. And the apostle's argument for submission to rulers,
is wholly built and grounded upon a presumption that they do in fact answer
this character; and is of no force at all upon supposition of the contrary. If
rulers are a terror to good works, and not to the evil; if they are not
ministers for good to society, but for evil and distress, by violence and
oppression; if they execute wrath upon fober, peaceable persons, who do their
duty as members of society; and suffer rich and honorable knaves to escape
with impunity; if, instead of attending continually upon the good work of
advancing the public welfare, they attend only upon the gratification of their
own lust and pride and ambition, to the destruction of the public welfare; if
this be the case, it is plain that the apostle's argument for submission does
not reach them; they are not the same, but different persons from those whom he
characterizes; and who must be obeyed according to his reasoning. -- Let me
illustrate the apostle's argument, by the following stmilitude: (it is no
matter how far it is from any thing which has, in fact, happened in the world.)
Suppose, then, it was allowed, in general, that the clergy were an useful order
of men; that they ought to be esteemed very highly in love for their works
sake; ^ These. v. 13.
and to be decently supported by those whom they serve, the labourer being
worthy of his reward. ^ Tim. v. 18.
Suppose farther, that a number of Reverend and Right Reverend Drones, who
worked not; who preached, perhaps, but once a year, and then, not the gospel of
Jesus Christ; but the divine right of tithes; -- the dignity of their office as
ambassadors of Christ, the equity of sine cures, and a plurality of benefices;
-- the excellency of the devotions in that prayer book, which some of them
hired chaplains to use for them; -- or some favorite point of churchtyranny,
and antichristian usurpation; suppose such men as these, spending their lives
in effeminacy, luxury and idleness; (or when they were not idle, doing that
which is worse than idleness; suppose such men) should, merely by the merit of
ordination and consecration, and a peculiar, odd habit, claim great respect and
reverence from those whom they civilly called the beasts of the laiety; Mr.
(...)
and demand thousands per annum, for that good service which they -- never
performed; and for which, if they had performed it, this would be much more
than a quantum meruit: suppose this should be the case, (it is only by way of
simile, and surely it will give no offense) would not every body be astonished
at such insolence, injustice and impiety? And ought not such men to be told
plainly, that they could not reasonably expect the esteem and reward, due to
the ministers of the gospel, unless they did the duties of their office? Should
they not be told, that their title and habit claimed no regard, reverence or
pay, separate from the care and work and various duties of their function? And
that while they neglected the latter, the former served only to render them the
more ridiculous and contemptible? -- The application of this stmilitude to the
case in hand, is very easy. -- If those who bear the title of civil rulers, do
not perform the duty of civil rulers, but act directly counter to the sole end
and design of their office; if they injure and oppress their subjects, instead
of defending their rights and doing them good; they have not the least pretense
to be honored, obeyed and rewarded, according to the apostle's argument. For
his reasoning, in order to show the duty of subjection to the higher powers,
is, as was before observed, built wholly upon the supposition, that they do, in
fact, perform the duty of rulers.

IF it be said, that the apostle here uses another argument for submission to
the higher powers, besides that which is taken from the usefulness of their
office to civil society, when properly discharged and executed; namely, that
their power is from God; that they are ordained of God; and that they are God's
ministers: And if it be said, that this argument for submission to them will
hold good, although they do not exercise their power for the benefit, but for
the ruin, and destruction of human society; this objection was obviated, in
part, before. See the margin, page to, note.
Rulers have no authority from God to do mischief. They are not God's
ordinance, or God's ministers, in any other sense than as it is by his
permission and providence, that they are exalted to bear rule; and as
magistracy duly exercised, and authority rightly applied, in the enacting and
executing good laws, -- laws attempered and accommodated to the common welfare
of the subjects, must be supposed to be agreeable to the will of the beneficent
author and supreme Lord of the universe; whose kingdom (...) over all; Psalm.
^iii. 19.
and whose tender mercies are over all his works. Psalm. ^x^v. 19.
It is blasphemy to call tyrants and oppressors, God's ministers. They are more
properly the messengers of satan to buffet us. 2 Cor. xii. 7.
No rulers are properly God's ministers, but such as are just, ruling in the
fear of God. ^ Sam. xxiii. 3.
When once magistrates act contrary to their office, and the end of their
institution; when they rob and ruin the public, instead of being guardians of
its peace and welfare; they immediately ease to be the ordinance and ministers
of God; and no more deserve that glorious character than common pirates and
highwaymen. So that whenever that argument for submission, fails, which is
grounded upon the usefulness of magistracy to civil society, (as it always does
when magistrates do hurt to society instead of good) the other argument, which
is taken from their being the ordinance of God, must necessarily fail also; no
person of a civil character being God's minister, in the sense of the apostle,
any farther than he performs God's will, by exercising a just and reasonable
authority; and ruling for the good of the subject.

THIS in general. Let us now trace the apostle's reasoning in favor of
submission to the higher powers, a little more particularly and exactly. For by
this it will appear, on one hand, how good and conclusive it is, for submission
to those rulers who exercise their power in a proper manner: And, on the other,
how weak and trifling and inconnected it is, if it be supposed to be meant by
the apostle to show the obligation and duty of obedience to tyrannical,
oppressive rulers in common with others of a different character.

THE apostle enters upon his subject thus -- Let every soul be subject unto the
higher powers; for there is no power but of God: the powers that be, are
ordained of God. Ver. 1.
Here he urges the duty of obedience from this topic of argument, that civil
rulers, as they are supposed to fulfill the pleasure of God, are the ordinance
of God. But how is this an argument for obedience to such rulers as do not
perform the pleasure of God, by doing good; but the pleasure of the devil, by
doing evil; and such as are not, therefore, God's ministers, but the devil's!
Whosoever, therefore, resists the power, resists the ordinance of God; and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. Ver. 2.
Here the apostle argues, that those who resist a reasonable and just
authority, which is agreeable to the will of God, do really resist the will of
God himself; and will, therefore, be punished by him. But how does this prove,
that those who resist a lawless, unreasonable power, which is contrary to the
will of God, do therein resist the will and ordinance of God? Is resisting
those who resist God's will, the same thing with resisting God? Or shall those
who do so, receive to themselves damnation! For rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to the evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the power? Do that
which is good; and thou shall have praise of the same. For he is the minister
of God to thee for good. Ver. 3d. and part of the 4th.
Here the apostle argues more explicitly than he had before done, for
revereing, and submitting to, magistracy, from this consideration, that such as
really performed the duty of magistrates, would be enemies only to the evil
actions of men, and would befriend and encourage the good; and so be a common
blessing to society. But how is this an argument, that we must honor, and
submit to, such magistrates as are not enemies to the evil actions of men; but
to the good; and such as are not a common blessing, but a common curse, to
society! But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid: For be is the minister
of God, a revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Ver. 4th. Latter
part.
Here the apostle argues from the nature and end of magistracy, that such as
did evil, (and such only) had reason to be afraid of the higher powers; it
being part of their office to punish evil doers, no less than to defend and
encourage such as do well. But if magistrates are unrighteous; if they are
respecters of persons; if they are partial in their administration of justice;
then those who do well have as much reason to be afraid, as those that do evil:
there can be no safety for the good, nor any peculiar ground of terror to the
unruly and injurious. So that, in this case, the main end of civil government
will be frustrated. And what reason is there for submitting to that government,
which does by no means answer the design of government? Wherefore ye must needs
be subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Ver. 5.
Here the apostle argues the duty of a cheerful and conscientious submission to
civil government, from the nature and end of magistracy as he had before laid
it down. i.e. as the design of it was to punish evil doers, and to support and
encourage such as do well; and as it must, if so exercised, be agreeable to the
will of God. But how does what he here says, prove the duty of a cheerful and
conscientious subjection to those who forfeit the character of rulers? to those
who encourage the bad, and discourage the good? The argument here used no more
proves it to be a sin to resist such rulers, than it does, to resist the devil,
that he may free from us. James iv. 7.
For one is as truly the minister of God as the other. For, for this cause pay
you tribute also; for they are God's ministers, attending continually upon this
very thing. Ver. 6.
Here the apostle argues the duty of paying taxes, from this consideration,
that those who perform the duty of rulers, are continually attending upon the
public welfare. But how does this argument conclude for paying taxes to such
princes as are continually endeavoring to ruin the public? And especially when
such payment would facilitate and promote this wicked design! Render therefore
to all their dues; tribute, to whom tribute is due; custom, to whom custom;
fear, to whom fear; bonor, to whom bonor. Ver. 7.
Here the apostle sums up what he had been saying concerning the duty of
subjects to rulers. And his argument stands thus -- Since magistrates who
execute their office well, are common benefactors to society; and may, in that
respect, be properly styled the ministers and ordinance of God; and since they
are constantly employed in the service of the public; it becomes you to pay
them tribute and custom; and to reverence, honor, and submit to, them in the
execution of their respective offices. This is apparently good reasoning. But
does this argument conclude for the duty of paying tribute, custom, reverence,
honor and obedience, to such persons as (although they bear the title of
rulers) use all their power to hurt and injure the public? such as are not
God's ministers, but satan's? such as do not take care of, and attend upon, the
public interest, but their own, to the ruin of the public? that is, in short,
to such as have no natural and just claim at all to tribute, custom, reverence,
honor and obedience? It is to be hoped that those who have any regard to the
apostle's character as an inspired writer, or even as a man of common
understanding, will not represent him as reasoning in such a loose incoherent
manner; and drawing conclusions which have not the least relation to his
premises. For what can be more absurd than an argument thus framed? Rulers are,
by their office, bound to consult the public welfare and the good of society:
therefore you are bound to pay them tribute, to honor, and to submit to them,
even when they destroy the public welfare, and are a common pest to society, by
acting in direct contradiction to the nature and end of their office.

THUS, upon a careful review of the apostle's reasoning in this passage, it
appears that his arguments to enforce submission, are of such a nature, as to
conclude only in favor of submission to such rulers as he himself describes:
i.e. such as rule for the good of society, which is the only end of their
institution. Common tyrants, and public oppressors, are not entitled to
obedience from their subjects, by virtue of any thing here laid down by the
inspired apostle.

I NOW add, farther, that the apostle's argument is so far from proving it to
be the duty of people to obey, and submit to, such rulers as act in
contradiction to the public good, This does not intend, their acting so in a
few particular instances, which the best of rulers may do through mistake, etc.
but their acting so habitually; and in a manner which plainly shows, that they
aim at making themselves great, by the ruin of their subjects.
and so to the design of their office, that it proves the direct contrary. For,
please to observe, that if the end of all civil government, be the good of
society; if this be the thing that is aimed at in constituting civil rulers;
and if the motive and argument for submission to government, be taken from the
apparent usefulness of civil authority; it follows, that when no such good end
can be answered by submission, there remains no argument or motive to enforce
it; if instead of this good end's being brought about by submission, a contrary
end is brought about, and the ruin and misery of society effected by it, here
is a plain and positive reason against submission in all such cases, should
they ever happen. And therefore, in such cases, a regard to the public welfare,
ought to make us withold from our rulers, that obedience and subjection which
it would, otherwise, be our duty to render to them. If it be our duty, for
example, to obey our king, merely for this reason, that he rules for the public
welfare, (which is the only argument the apostle makes use of) it follows, by a
parity of reason, that when he turns tyrant, and makes his subjects his prey to
devour and to destroy, instead of his charge to defend and cherish, we are
bound to throw off our allegiance to him, and to resist; and that according to
the tenor of the apostle's argument in this passage. Not to discontinue our
allegiance, in this case, would be to join with the sovereign in promoting the
slavery and misery of that society, the welfare of which, we ourselves, as well
as our sovereign, are indispensably obliged to secure and promote, as far as in
us lies. It is true the apostle puts no case of such a tyrannical prince; but
by his grounding his argument for submission wholly upon the good of civil
society; it is plain he implicitly authorizes, and even requires us to make
resistance, whenever this shall be necessary to the public safety and
happiness. Let me make use of this easy and familiar similitude to illustrate
the point in hand -- Suppose God requires a family of children, to obey their
father and not to resist him; and inforces his command with this argument; that
the superintendence and care and authority of a just and kind parent, will
contribute to the happiness of the whole family; so that they ought to obey him
for their own sakes more than for his: Suppose this parent at length runs
distracted, and attempts, in his mad sit, to cut all his children's throats:
Now, in this case, is not the reason before assigned, why these children should
obey their parent while he continued of a sound mind, namely, their common
good, a reason equally conclusive for disobeying and resisting him, since he is
become delirious, and attempts their ruin? It makes no alteration in the
argument, whether this parent, properly speaking, loses his reason; or does,
while he retains his understanding, that which is as fatal in its consequences,
as any thing he could do, were he really deprived of it. This similitude needs
no formal application --

BUT it ought to be remembered, that If the duty of universal obedience and
non-resistance to our king or prince, can be argued from this passage, the same
unlimited submission under a republican, or any other form of government; and
even to all the subordinate powers in any particular state, can be proved by it
as well: which is more than those who allege it for the mentioned purpose,
would be willing should be inferred from it. So that this passage does not
answer their purpose; but really overthrows and confutes it. This matter
deserves to be more particularly considered. -- The advocates for unlimited
submission and passive obedience, do, if I mistake not, always speak with
reference to kingly or monarchical government as distinguished from all other
forms; and, with reference to submitting to the will of the king, in
distinction from all subordinate officers, acting beyond their commission, and
the authority which they have received from the crown. It is not pretended that
any person besides kings, have a divine right to do what they please, so that
no one may resist them, without incurring the guilt of factiousness and
rebellion. If any other supreme powers oppress the people, it is generally
allowed, that the people may get redress, by resistance, if other methods prove
ineffectual. And if any officers in a kingly government, go beyond the limits
of that power which they have derived from the crown, (the supposed original
source of all power and authority in the state) and attempt, illegally, to take
away the properties and lives of their fellow subjects, they may be forcibly
resisted, at least till application can be made to the crown. But as to the
sovereign himself, he may not be resisted in any case; nor any of his officers,
while they confine themselves within the bounds which he has prescribed to
them. This is, I think, a true sketch of the principles of those who defend the
doctrine of passive obedience and nonresistance. Now there is nothing in
scripture which supports this scheme of political principles. As to the passage
under consideration, the apostle here speaks of civil rulers in general; of all
persons in common, vested with authority for the good of society, without any
particular reference to one form of government, more than to another; or to the
supreme power in any particular state, more than to subordinate powers. The
apostle does not concern himself with the different forms of government. The
essence of government (I mean good government; and this is the only government
which the apostle treats of in this passage, consists in the making and
executing of good laws -- laws attempted to the common felicity of the
governed. And if this be, in fact, done, it is evidently, in it self, a thing
of no consequence (...) form of government is; -- whether the son, or in
different persons; -- whether in one person, whom we call an absolute monarch;
-- whether in a few, so as to constitute an aristocrasy; -- whether in many, so
as to constitute a republic; or whether in three coordinate branches, in such
manner as to make the government partake something of each of these forms; and
to be, at the same time, essentially different from them all. If the end be
attained, it is enough. But no form of government seems to be so unlikely to
accomplish this end, as absolute monarchy -- -- Nor is there any one that has
so little pretense to a divince original, unless it be in this sense, that God
first introduced it into, and thereby overturned, the common wealth of Israel,
as a curse upon that people for their folly and wickedness, particularly in
(...) such a government.(See I Sam. viii. chap.) Just so God, before, sent
Quails amongst them, as a plague, and a curse, and not as a blessing. Numb.
chap. xi.
This he supposes left entirely to human prudence prudence and discretion. Now
the consequence of this is, that unlimited and passive obedience, is no more
enjoined in this passage, under monarchical government; or to the supreme power
in any state, than under all other species of government, which answer the end
of government; or, to all the subordinate degrees of civil authority, from the
highest to the lowest. Those, therefore, who would from this passage infer the
guilt of resisting kings, in all cases whatever, though acting ever so contrary
to the design of their office, must,if they will be consistent, go much
farther, and infer from it the guilt of resistance under all other forms of
government; and of resisting any petty officer in the state, tho acting beyond
his commission, in the most arbitrary, illegal manner possible. The argument
holds equally strong in both cases. All civil rulers, as such, are the
ordinance and ministers of God; and they are all, by the nature of their
office, and in their respective spheres and stations, bound to consult the
public welfare. With the same reason therefore, that any deny unlimited and
passive obedience to be here injoined under a republic or aristocrasy, or any
other established form of civil government; or to subordinate powers, acting in
an illegal and oppressive manner; (with the same reason) others may deny, that
such obedience is enjoined to a king or monarch, or any civil power whatever.
For the apostle says nothing that is peculiar to kings; what he says, extends
equally to all other persons whatever, vested with any civil office. They are
all, in exactly the same sense, the ordinance of God; and the ministers of God;
and obedience is equally enjoined to be paid to them all. For, as the apostle
expresses it, there is NO POWER but of God: And we are required to render to
ALL their DUES; and not MORE than their DUES. And what these dues are, and to
whom they are to be rendered, the apostle says not; but leaves to the reason
and consciences of men to determine.

THUS it appears, that the common argument, grounded upon this passage, in
favor of universal, and passive obedience, really overthrows itself, by proving
too much, if it proves any thing at all; namely, that no civil officer is, in
any case whatever, to be resisted, though acting in express contradiction to
the design of his office; which no man, in his senses, ever did, or can assert.

IF we calmly consider the nature of the thing itself, nothing can well be
imagined more directly contrary to common sense, than (...) suppose that
millions of people should be subjected to the arbitrary, precarious pleasure of
one single man; (who has naturally no superiority over them in point of
authority) so that their estates, and every thing that is valuable in life, and
even their lives also, shall be absolutely at his disposal, if he happens to be
wanton and capricious enough to demand them. What unprejudiced man can think,
that God made ALL to be thus subservient to the lawless pleasure and phrenzy of
ONE, so that it shall always be a sin to resist him! Nothing but the most plain
and express revelation from heaven could make a sober impartial man believe
such a monstrous, unaccountable doctrine, and, indeed, the thing itself,
appears so shocking -- so out of all proportion, that it may be questioned,
whether all the miracles that ever were wrought, could make it credible, that
this doctrine really came from God. At present, there is not the least syllable
in scripture which gives any countenance to it. The hereditary, indefeasible,
divine right of kings, and the doctrine of non-resistance, which is built upon
the supposition of such a right, are altogether as fabulous and chimerical, as
transubstantiation; or any of the most absurd reveries of ancient or modern
visionaries. These notions are fetched neither from divine revelation, nor
human reason; and if they are derived from neither of those sources, it is not
much matter from whence they come, or whither they go. Only it is a pity that
such doctrines should be propagated in society, to raise factions and
rebellions, as we see they have, in fact, been both in the last, and in the
present, REIGN.

BUT then, if unlimited submission and passive obedience to the higher powers,
in all possible cases, be not a duty, it will be asked, How far are we obliged
to submit? If we may innocently disobey and resist in some cases, why not in
all? Where shall we stop? What is the measure of our duty? This doctrine tends
to the total dissolution of civil government; and to introduce such scenes of
wild anarchy and confusion, as are more fatal to society than the worst of
tyranny.

AFTER this manner, some men object; and, indeed, this is the most plausible
thing that can be said in favor of such an absolute submission as they plead
for. But the worst (or rather the best) of it, is, that there is very little
strength or solidity in it. For similar difficulties may be raised with respect
to almost every duty of natural and revealed religion. -- To instance only in
two, both of which are near akin, and indeed exactly parallel, to the case
before us. It is unquestionably the duty of children to submit to their
parents; and of servants, to their masters. But no one asserts, that it is
their duty to obey, and submit to them, in all supposeable cases; or
universally a sin to resist them. Now does this tend to subvert the just
authority of parents and masters? Or to introduce confusion and anarchy into
private families? No. How then does the same principle tend to unhinge the
government of that larger family, the body politic? We know, in general, that
children and servants are obliged to obey their parents and masters
respectively. We know also, with equal certainty, that they are not obliged to
submit to them in all things, without exception; but may, in some cases,
reasonably, and therefore innocently, resist them. These principles are
acknowledged upon all hands, whatever difficulty there may be in fixing the
exact limits of submission. Now there is at least as much difficulty in stating
the measure of duty in these two cases, as in the case of rulers and subjects.
So that this is really no objection, at least no reasonable one, against
resistance to the higher powers: Or, if it is one, it will hold equally against
resistance in the other cases mentioned. -- It is indeed true, that turbulent,
viciousminded men, may take occasion from this principle, that their rulers
may, in some cases, be lawfully resisted, to raise factions and disturbances in
the state; and to make resistance where resistance is needless, and therefore,
sinful. But is it not equally true, that children and servants of turbulent,
vicious minds, may take occasion from this principle, that parents and masters
may, in some cases be lawfully resisted, to resist when resistance is
unnecessary, and therefore, criminal? Is the principle in either case false in
itself, merely because it may be abused; and applied to legitimate disobedience
and resistance in those instances, to which it ought not to be applied?
According to this way of arguing, there will be no true principles in the
world; for there are none but what may be wrested and perverted to serve bad
purposes, either through the weakness or wickedness of men. WE may very safely
assert these two things in general, without undermining government: One is,
That no civil rulers are to be obeyed when they enjoin things that are
inconsistent with the commands of God: All such disobedience is lawful and
glorious; particularly, if persons refuse to comply with any legal
establishment of religion, because it is a gross perversion and corruption (as
to doctrine, worship and discipline) of a pure and divine religion, brought
from heaven to earth by the Son of God, (the only King and Head of the
christian church) and propagated through the world by his inspired apostles.
All commands running counter to the declared will of the supreme legislator of
heaven and earth, are null and void: And therefore disobedience to them is a
duty, not a crime. (See the marginal note, page 7.) -- Another thing that may
be asserted with equal truth and safety, is, That no government is to be
submitted to, at the expense of that which is the sole end of all government,
-- the common good and safety of society. Because, to submit in this case, if
it should ever happen, would evidently be to set up the means as more valuable,
and above, the end: than which there cannot be a greater solecism and
contradiction. The only reason of the institution of civil government; and the
only rational ground of submission to it, is the common safety and utility. If
therefore, in any case, the common safety and utility would not be promoted by
submission to government, but the contrary, there is no ground or motive for
obedience and submission, but, for the contrary. WHOEVER considers the nature
of civil government must, indeed, be sensible that a great degree of implicit
confidence, must unavoidably be placed in those that hear rule: this is implied
in the very notion of authority's being originally a trust, committed by the
people, to those who are vested with it, as all just and righteous authority
is; all besides, is mere lawless force and usurpation; neither God nor nature,
having given any man a right of dominion over any (...) independently of that
society's approbation, and consent to be governed by him -- Now as all men are
fallible, it cannot be supposed that the public affairs of any state, should be
always administered in the best manner possible, even by persons of the greatest
wisdom and integrity. Nor is it sufficient to legitimate disobedience to the
higher powers that they are not so administered; or that they are, in some
instances, very ill-managed; for upon this principle, it is scarcely
supposeable that any government at all could be supported, or subsist. Such a
principle manifestly tends to the dissolution of government; and to throw all
things into confusion and anarchy. -- But it is equally evident, upon the other
hand, that those in authority may abuse their trust and power to such a degree,
that neither the law of reason, nor of religion, requires, that any obedience
or submission should be paid to them; but, on the contrary, that they should be
totally discarded; and the authority which they were before vested with,
transferred to others, who may exercise it more to those good purposes for
which it is given. -- Nor is this principle, that resistance to the higher
powers, is, in some extraordinary cases, justisiable, so liable to abuse, as
many persons seem to apprehend it. For although there will be always some
petulant, querulous men, in every state -- men of sactious, turbulent and
carping dispositions, -- glad to lay hold of any trifle to justify and
legitimate their caballing against their rulers, and other seditious practices:
yet there are, comparatively speaking, but few men of this contemptible
character. It does not appear but that mankind, in general, have a disposition
to be as submissive and passive and tame under government as they ought to be
-- Witness a great, if not the greatest, part of the known world, who are now
groaning, but not (...) under the heavy yoke of tyranny! While those who
govern, do it with any tolerable degree of moderation and justice, and, in any
good measure act up to their office and character, by being public benefactors;
the people will generally be easy and peaceable; and be rather inclined to
flatter and adore, than to insult and resist, them. Nor was there ever any
general complaint against any administration, which lasted long, but what there
was good reason for. Till people find themselves greatly abused and oppressed
by their governors, they are not apt to complain; and whenever they do, in
fact, find themselves thus abused and oppressed, they must be stupid not to
complain. To say that subjects in general are not proper judges when their
governors oppress them, and play the tyrant; and when they defend their rights,
administer justice impartially, and promote the public welfare, is as great
treason as ever man uttered; -- It Is treason, -- not against one single man,
but the state -- against the whole body politic; -- It Is treason against God.
And this impious principle lays the foundation for justifying all the tyraony
and oppression that ever any prince was guilty of. The people know for what end
they set up, and maintain, their governors; and they are the proper judges when
they execute their trust as they ought to do it; -- when their prince exercises
an equitable and paternal authority over them; -- when from a prince and common
father, he exalts himself into a tyrant -- when from subjects and children, he
degrades them into the class of slaves; -- plunders them, makes them his prey,
and unnaturally sports himself with their lives and fortunes -- --


A PEOPLE, really oppressed to a great degree by their sovereign, cannot well
be insensible when they are so oppressed. And such a people (if I may allude to
an ancient fable) have, like the besperian fruit, a DRAGON for their protector
and guardian: Nor would they have any reason to mourn, if some HERCULES should
appear to dispatch him -- For a nation thus abused to arise unanimously, and to
resist their prince, even to the dethroning him, is not criminal; but a
reasonable way of vindicating their liberties and just rights; it is making use
of the means, and the only means, which God has put into their power, for
mutual and self-defence. And it would be highly criminal in them, not to make
use of this means. It would be stupid tameness, and unaccountable folly, for
whole nations to suffer one unreasonable, ambitious and cruel man, to wanton
and riot in their misery. And in such a case it would, of the two, be more
rational to suppose, that they that did NOT resist, than that they who did,
would receive to themselves damnation.

And

THIS naturally brings us to make some reflections upon the resistance which
was made about a century since, to that unhappy prince, KING CHARLES I; and
upon the ANNIVERSARY of his death. This is a point which I should not have
concerned myself about, were it not that some men continue to speak of it, even
to this day, with a great deal of warmth and zeal; and in such a manner as to
undermine all the principles of LIBERTY, whether civil or religious, and to
introduce the most abject slavery both in church and state: so that it is
become a matter of universal concern. -- What I have to offer upon this
subject, will be comprised in a short answer to the following queries; viz.

FOR what reason the resistance to king Charles the First was made?

BY whom it was made?

WHETHER this resistance was REBELLION, N. B. I speak of rebellion, treason,
saintship, martyrdom, etc. throughout this discourse, only in the scriptural
and theological sense. I know not how the law (...) them; the study of that not
being my employment --
or not?

How the Anniversary of king Charles' death came at first to be solemnized as a
day of fasting and humiliation?

And lastly,

WHY those of the episcopal clergy who are very high in the principles of
ecclesiastical authority, continue to speak of this unhappy man, as a great
SAINT and a MARTYR?

FOR what reason, then, was the resistance to king Charles, made? The general
answer to this inquiry is, that it was on account of the tyranny and oppression
of his reign. Not a great while after his accession to the throne, he married a
french catholic; and with her seemed to have wedded the politics, if not the
religion of France, also. For afterward, during a reign, or rather a tyranny
of many years, he governed in a perfectly wild and arbitrary manner, paying no
regard to the constitution and the laws of the kingdom, by which the power of
the crown was limited; or to the solemn oath which he had taken at his
coronation. It would be endless, as well as needless, to give a particular
account of all the illegal and despotic measures which he took in his
administration; -- partly from his own natural lust of power, and partly from
the influence of wicked counselors and ministers. -- He committed many
illustrious members of both houses of parliament to the lower, for opposing his
arbitrary schemes. -- He levied many taxes upon the people without consent of
parliament; -- and then imprisoned great numbers of the principal merchants and
gentry for not paying them. -- He erected, or at least revived, several new and
arbitrary courts, in which the most unheard of barbarities were committed with
his knowledge and approbation -- He supported that more than fiend, archbishop
Laud and the clergy of his stamp, in all their church tyranny and hellish
cruelties -- He authorized a book in favor of sports upon the Lord's day; and
several clergymen were persecuted by him and the mentioned pious bishop, for
not reading it to the people after divine service -- When the parliament
complained to him of the arbitrary proceedings of his corrupt ministers, he
told that august body, in a rough, domineering, unprincely manner, that he
wondered any one should be so foolish and insolent as to think that he would
part with the meanest of his servants upon their account -- He refused to call
any parliament at all for the space of twelve years together, during all which
time, he governed in an absolute lawless and despotic manner -- He took all
opportunities to encourage the papists, and to promote them to the highest
offices of honor and trust -- He (probably) abetted the horrid massacre in
Ireland, in which two hundred thousand Protestants were butchered by the roman
catholics. -- He sent a large sum of money, which he had raised by his
arbitrary taxes, into Germany, to raise foreign troops, in order to force more
arbitrary taxes upon his subjects. -- He not only by a long series of actions,
but also in plain terms, asserted an absolute uncontrollable power; saying even
in one of his speeches to parliament, that as it was blasphemy to dispute what
God might do; so it was sedition in subjects to dispute what the king might do.
-- Toward the end of his tyranny, he came to the house of commons with an
armed force, Historians are not agreed, what number of soldiers attended him in
this monstrous invasion of the privileges of parliament -- Some (...) 320,
some 400: And the author of The history of the kings of (...), says 500.
and demanded five of its principal members to be delivered up to him -- And
this was a prelude to that unnatural war which he soon after levied against his
own dutiful subjects; whom he was bound by all the laws of honor, humanity,
piety, and I might add, of interest also, to defend and cherish with a paternal
affection -- I have only time to hint at these facts in a general way, all
which, and many more of the same tenor, may be proved by good authorities: So
that the figurative language which St. John uses concerning the just and
beneficent deeds of our blessed Savior, may be applied to the unrighteous and
execrable deeds of this prince, viz. And there are also many other things which
king Charles did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose
that even the world itself, could not contain the books that should be written.
John xxi. 25.
Now it was on account of king Charles's thus assuming a power above the laws,
in direct contradiction to his coronation oath, and governing the greatest part
of his time, in the most arbitrary oppressive manner; it was upon this account,
that that resistance was made to him, which, at length, issued in the loss of
his crown, and of that head which was unworthy to wear it.

BUT by whom was this resistance made? Not by a private junto; -- not by a
small seditious party; -- not by a few desparadoes, who, to mend their
fortunes, would embroil the state; -- but by the LORDS and COMMONS of England.
It was they that almost unanimously opposed the king's measures for overturning
the constitution, and changing that free and happy government into a wretched,
absolute monarchy. It was they that when the king was about levying forces
against his subjects, in order to make himself absolute, commissioned officers,
and raised an army to defend themselves and the public: And it was they that
maintained the war against him all along, till he was made a prisoner. This is
indisputable. Though it was not properly speaking the parliament, but the army,
which put him to death afterward. And it ought to be freely acknowledged, that
most of their proceeding, in order to get this matter effected; and
particularly the court by which the king was at last tried and condemned, was
little better than a mere mockery of justice. --

THE next question which naturally arises, is, whether this resistance which
was made to the king by the parliament, was properly rebellion, or not? The
answer to which is plain, that it was not; but a most righteous and glorious
stand, made in defense of the natural and legal rights of the people, against
the unnatural and illegal encroachments of arbitrary power. Nor was this a rash
and too sudden opposition. The nation had been patient under the oppressions of
the crown, even to long suffering; -- for a course of many years; and there was
no rational hope of redress in any other way -- Resistance was absolutely
necessary in order to preserve the nation from slavery, misery and ruin. And
who so proper to make this resistance as the lords and commons; -- the whole
representative body of the people; -- guardians of the public welfare; and each
of which was, in point of legislation, vested with an equal, coordinate power,
with that of the crown? The english constitution is originally and essentially
free. The character which J. Caesar and Tacitus both give of the ancient
Britains so long ago, is, That they were extremely jealous of their liberties,
as well as a people of a martial spirit. Nor have there been wanting frequent
instances and proofs of the same glorious spirit (in both respects) remaining
in their posterity ever since, -- in the struggles they have made for liberty,
both against foreign and domestic tyrants. -- Their kings hold their title to
the throne, solely by grant of parliament; i. e. in other words, by the
voluntary consent of the people. And, agreably hereto, the prerogative and
rights of the crown are stated, defined and limited by law; and that as truly
and strictly as the rights of any inferior officer in the state; or indeed, of
any private subject. And it is only in this respect that it can be said, that
"the king can. "do no wrong." Being restrained by the law, he cannot, while he
confines himself within those just limits which the law prescribes to him as
the measure of his authority, injure and oppress the subject. -- The king, in
his coronation oath, swears to exercise only such a power as the constitution
gives him: And the subject, in the oath of allegiance, swears only to obey him
in the exercise of such a power. The king is as much bound by his oath, not to
infringe the legal rights of the people, as the people are bound to yield
subjection to him. From whence it follows, that as soon as the prince sets
himself up above law, he loses the king in the tyrant: he does to all intents
and purposes, unking himself, by acting out of, and beyond, that sphere which
the constitution allows him to move in. And in such cases, he has no more right
to be obeyed, than any inferior officer who acts beyond his commission. The
subjects obligation to allegiance then ceases of course: and to resist him, is
no more rebellion, than to resist any foreign invader. There is an essential
difference betwixt government and tyranny; at least under such a constitution
as the english. The former consists in ruling according to law and equity; the
latter, in ruling contrary to law and equity. So also, there is an essential
difference betwixt resisting a tyrant, and rebellion; The former is a just and
reasonable self defense; the latter consists in resisting a prince whose
administration is just and legal: and this is what denominates it a crime. --
Now it is evident, that king Charles's government was illegal, and very
oppressive, through the greatest part of his reign: And, therefore, to resist
him, was no more rebellion, than to oppose any foreign invader, or any other
domestic (...)
Here were two branches of the legislature against one; -- two, which had law
and equity and the constitution on their side, against one which was impiously
attempting to overturn law and equity and the constitution; and to exercise a
wanton licentious sovereignty over the properties, consciences and lives of all
the people: -- Such a sovereignty as some inconsiderately ascribe to the
supreme Governor of the world. -- I say, inconsiderately; because God himself
does not govern in an absolutely arbitrary and despotic manner. The power of
this Almighty King (I speak it not without caution and reverence; the power of
this Almighty King) is limited by law; not, indeed, by acts of parliament, but
by the eternal laws of truth, wisdom and equity; and the everlasting tables of
right reason; -- tables that cannot be repealed, or thrown down and broken like
those of Moses. -- But king Charles sat himself up above all these, as much as
he did above the written laws of the realm; and made mere humor and caprice,
which are no rule at all, the only rule and measure of his administration. And
now, is it not perfectly ridiculous to call resistance to such a tyrant, by the
name of rebellion? -- the grand rebellion? Even that -- parliament, which
brought king Charles II. to the throne, and which run loyally mad, severely
reproved one of their own members for condemning the proceedings of that
parliament which first took up arms against the former king. And upon the same
principles that the proceedings of this parliament may be censured as wicked
and rebellious, the proceedings of those who, since, opposed king James II, and
brought the prince of Orange to the throne, may be censured as wicked and
rebellious also. The cases are parallel. -- But whatever some men may think, it
is to be hoped that, for their own sakes, they will not dare to speak against
the REVOLUTION, upon the justice and legality of which depends (in part) his
present MAJESTY's right to the throne.

IF it be said, that although the parliament which firstopposed king Charles's
measures, and at length took up arms against him, were not guilty of rebellion;
yet certainly those persons were, who condemned, and put him to death; even
this perhaps is not true. For he had, in fact, unkinged himself long before,
and had forfeited his title to the allegiance of the people. So that those who
put him to death, were, at most only guilty of murder; which, indeed, is bad
enough, if they were really guilty of that; (which is at least disputable.)
Cromwell, and those who were principally concerned in the nominal) king's
death, might possibly have been very vicked and designing men. Nor shall I say
any thing in vindication of the reigning hypocrisy of those times; or of
Cromwell's maladministration during the interregnum: (for it is truth, and
not a party, that I am speaking for.) But still it may be said, that Cromwell
and his adherents were not, properly speaking, guilty of rebellion; because he,
whom they beheaded was not, properly speaking, their king; but a lawless
tyrant. -- much less, are the whole body of the nation at that time to be
charged with rebellion on that account; for it was no national act; it was not
done by a free parliament. And much less still, is the nation at present, to be
charged with the great sin of rebellion, for what their ancestors did, (or
rather did NOT) a century ago.

BUT how came the anniversary of king Charles's death, to be solemnized as a
day of fasting and humiliation? The true answer in brief, to which inquiry, is,
that this fast was instituted by way of court and complement to king Charles
II, upon the restoration. All were desirous of making their court to him; of
ingratiating themselves; and of making him forget what had been done in
opposition to his father, so as not to revenge it. To effect this, they ran
into the most extravagant professions of affection and loyalty to him, insomuch
that he himself said, that it was a mad and hair brained loyalty which they
professed. And amongst other strange things, which his first parliament did,
they ordered the Thirtieth of January (the day on which his father was
beheaded) to be kept as a day of solemn humiliation, to deprecate the judgments
of heaven for the rebellion which the nation had been guilty of, in that which
was no national thing; and which was not rebellion in them that did it -- Thus
they soothed and flattered their new king, at the expense of their liberties:
-- And were ready to yield up freely to Charles II, all that enormous power,
which they had justly resisted Charles I, for usurping to himself.

THE last query mentioned, was, Why those of the episcopal clergy who are very
high in the principles of ecclesiastical authority, continue to speak of this
unhappy prince as a great Saint and a Martyr? This, we know, is what they
constantly do, especially upon the 30th of January; -- a day sacred to the
extolling of him, and to the reproaching of those who are not of the
established church. Out of the same mouth on this day, proceeds blessing and
cursing; Jam. iii. 8, 9, 10.
there with bless they their God, even Charles, and therewith curse they the
diffenters: And their tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly evil, full of
deadly poison. King Charles is, upon this solemnity, frequently compared to our
Lord Jesus Christ, both in respect of the holiness of his life, and the
greatness and injustice of his sufferings; and it is a wonder they do not add
something concerning the merits of his death also -- But blessed saint and
royal martyr, are as humble titles as any that are thought worthy of him.

Now this may, at first view, well appear to be a very strange phenomenon. For
king Charles was really a man black with guilt and laden with iniquity, Isai i.
4.
as appears by his crimes before mentioned. He lived a tyrant; and it was the
oppression and violence of his reign, that brought him to his untimely and
violent end at last. Now what of saintship or martyrdom is there in all this:
What of saintship is there in encouraging people to profane the Lord's Day?
What of saintship in falsehood and perjury? What of saintship in repeated
robberies and depredations? What of saintship in throwing real saints, and
glorious patriots, into goals? What of saintship in overturning an excellent
civil constitution; -- and proudly grasping at an illegal and monstrous power?
What of saintship in the murder of thousands of innocent people; and involving
a nation in all the calamities of a civil war? And what of martyrdom is there,
in a man's bringing an immature and violent death upon himself, by being wicked
overmuch? Eccles. vii. 17.
Is there any such thing as grace, without goodness! As being a follower of
Christ, without following him? As being his disciple, without learning of him
to be just and beneficent? Or, as saintship without sanctity? Is it any wonder
that even persons who do not walk after their own lusts, should scoff at such
saints as this, both in the first and in the last days, even from everlasting
to everlasting? 2 Pet. iii. 3,4. -- But perhaps it will be said, that these
things are MYSTERIES, which (although very true in themselves) lay
understandings cannot comprehend: Or, indeed, any other persons amongst us,
besides those who being INWARDLY MOVED BY THE HOLY GHOST, have taken a trip
across the Atlantic to obtain episcopal ordination and the indelible character.
-- However, if these consecrated gentlemen do not quite despair of us, it is
hoped that, in the abundance of their charity, they will endeavor to
illucidate these dark points; and, at the same time, explain the creed of
another of their eminent saints, which we are told, that unless we believe
faithfully, (i. e. believingly) we cannot be saved: which creed, (or rather
riddle) notwithstanding all the labors of the pious -- and metaphysical Dr.
Waterland, remains somewhat (...) still.
If not, I fear it will be hard to prove this man a saint. And verily one would
be apt to suspect that that church must be but poorly stocked with saints and
martyrs, which is forced to adopt such enormous sinners into her calendar, in
order to swell the number.

BUT to unravel this mystery of (nonsense as well as of) iniquity, which has
already worked for a long time amongst us; 2 Thessalonians. ii. 7.
or, at least, to give the most probable solution of it; it is to be remembered,
that king Charles, this burlesque upon faintship and martyrdom, though so great
an oppressor, was a true friend to the Church; -- so true a friend to her, that
he was very well affected toward the roman catholics; and would, probably,
have been very willing to unite Lambeth and Rome. This appears by his marrying
a true daughter of that true mother of barlots; Rev. xvii. 5
which he did with a dispensation from the Pope, that supreme BISHOP; to whom
when he wrote, he gave the title of MOST HOLY FATHER. His queen was extremely
bigoted to all the follies and superstitions, and to the bierarchy, of Rome;
and had a prodigious ascendency over him all his life. It was, in part, owing
to this, that he (probably) abetted the massacre of the protestants in Ireland;
that he assisted in extirpating the french protestants at Rochelle; that he all
along encouraged papists, and popishly effected clergymen, in preference to all
other persons, and that he upheld that monster of wickedness, ARCHBISHOP LAUD,
and the bishops of his stamp, in all their churchtyranny and diabolical
cruelties. In return to his kindness and indulgence in which respects, they
caused many of the pulpits throughout the nation, to ring with the divine
absolute, indefeasible right of kings; with the praises of Charles and his
reign; and with the damnable sin of resisting the Lord's anointed, let him do
what he would. So that not Christ, but Charles, was commonly preached to the
people. -- In plain english, there seems to have been an impious bargain struck
up betwixt the scepter and the surplice, for enslaving both the bodies and
souls of men. The king appeared to be willing that the clergy should do what
they would, -- set up a monstrous hierarchy like that of Rome, -- a monstrous
inquisition like that of Spain or Portugal, -- or any thing else which their
own pride, and the devil's malice, could prompt them to: Provided always, that
the clergy would be tools to the crown; that they would make the people
believe, that kings had God's authority for breaking God's law; that they had a
commission from heaven to seize the estates and lives of their subjects at
pleasure; and that it was a damnable sin to resist them, even when they did
such things as deserved more than damnation. -- This appears to be the true key
for explaining the mysterious doctrine of king Charles's saintship and
martyrdom. He was a saint, not because he was in his life, a good man, but a
good churchman; not because he was a lover of holiness, but the hierarchy; not
because he was a friend to Christ, but the Craft. And he was a martyr in his
death, not because he bravely suffered death in the cause of truth and
righteousness, but because he died an enemy to liberty and the rights of
conscience; i. e. not because he died an enemy to sin, but dissenters. For
these reasons it is that all bigoted clergymen, and friends to church power,
paint this man as a saint in his life, though he was such a mighty, such a
royal sinner; and as a martyr in his death, though he fell a sacrifice only to
his own ambition, avarice, and unbounded lust of power. And from prostituting
their praise upon king Charles, and offering him that incense which is not his
due, it is natural for them to make a transition to the diffenters, (as they
commonly do) and to load them with that reproach which they do not deserve;
they being generally prosessed enemies both to civil and ecclesiastical
tyranny. WE are commonly charged (upon the Thirtieth of January) with the guilt
of putting the king to death, under a notion that it was our ancestors that did
it; and so we are represented in the blackest colors, not only as scismaticks,
but also as traitors and rebels and all that is bad. And these lofty gentlemen
usually rail upon this head, in such a manner as plainly shows, that they are
either grossly ignorant of the history of those times which they speak of; or,
which is worse, that they are guilty of the most shameful prevarication,
slander and falsehood. -- But every petty priest, with a roll and a gown, thinks
he must do something in imitation of his betters, in lawn, and show himself a
true son of the church: And thus, through a foolish ambition to appear
considerable, they only render themselves contemptible.

BUT suppose our forefathers did kill their mock saint and martyr a century
ago, what is that to us now? If I mistake not, these gentlemen generally preach
down the doctrine of the imputation of Adam's sin to his posterity, as absurd
and unreasonable, notwithstanding they have solemnly subscribed what is
equivalent to it in their own articles of religion. And therefore one would
hardly expect that they would lay the guilt of the king's death upon us, although
our forefathers had been the only authors of it. But this conduct is much more
surprising, when it does not appear that our ancestors had any more hand in it
than their own. -- However, bigotry is sufficient to account for this, and many
other pbenomena, which cannot be accounted for in any other way.

ALTHOUGH the observation of this anniversary seems to have been (at least)
superstitious in its original; and although it is often abused to very bad
purposes by the established clergy, as they serve themselves of it, to
perpetuate strife, a party spirit, and divisions in the christian church; yet
it is to be hoped that one good end will be answered by it, quite contrary to
their intention: It is to be hoped, that it will prove a standing memento, that
Britons will not be slaves; and a warning to all corrupt counselors and
ministers, not to go too far in advising to arbitrary, despotic measures --

To conclude: Let us all learn to be free, and to be loyal. Let us not profess
ourselves vassals to the lawless pleasure of any man on earth. But let us
remember, at the same time, government is sacred, and not to be trisled with.
It is our happiness to live under the government of a PRINCE who is satisfied
with ruling according to law; as every other good prince will -- We enjoy under
his administration all the liberty that is proper and expedient for us. It
becomes us, therefore, to be contented, and dutiful subjects. Let us prize our
freedom; but not use our liberty for a cloak of maliciousness. 1 Pet. ii. 16.
There are men who strike at liberty under the term licenliousness. There are
others who aim at popularity under the disguise of patriolism. Be aware of
both. Extremes are dangerous. There is at present amongst us, perhaps, more
danger of the latter, than of the former. For which reason I would exhort you
to pay all due Regard to the government over us; to the KING and all in
authority; and to lead a quiet and peaceable life. 1 Timothy ii. 2.
-- And while I am speaking of loyalty to our earthly Prince, suffer me just to
put you in mind to be loyal also to the supreme RULER of the universe, by whom
kings reign, and princes decree justice. Prove. viii. 15.
To which king eternal immortal, invisible, even to the ONLY WISE GOD, 1 Timothy
i. 17.
be all honor and praise, DOMINION and thanksgiving, through JESUS CHRIST our
LORD. AMEN.

FINIS.

