Mr. Dickinson's INQUIRY Into the Consequences both of Calvinistic and Arminian
Principles, Compared together.

AN INQUIRY INTO The CONSEQUENCES BOTH OF Calvinistic and Arminian Principles,
Compared together. In which the principal Things, in Mr. BEACH'S Second Reply,
to the late Mr. JONATHAN DICKINSON'S Second Vindication of God's sovereign free
Grace, are particularly considered. Occasioned by a Manuscript, Entitled, An
Inquiry into the Consequences of Calvinistic Principles. In a Letter to
LIBERIUS, Author of that Piece.

By MOSES DICKINSON, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Norwalk.

Jer. vi. 16. -- Stand ye in the Ways, and see, and ask for the old Paths;
where is the good Way, and walk therein; and ye shall find Rest for your Souls.
--

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by DANIEL FOUL in Queen Street. 1750.

Prepared for the Press, And upon due Encouragement will speedily be Published:
A Second Address to the Members of the Episcopal Separation in New England,
occasioned by the Exceptions made to the FORMER, by Dr. JOHNSON, Mr. WETMORE,
Mr. BEACH, and Mr. Caner. By NOAH HOBART, A. M. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in
FAIRFIELD. SUBSCRIPTIONS are taken in by DANIEL FOUL, Printer in QUEEN STREET,
BOSTON. And such Gentlemen in the Country as would promote such a PUBLICATION,
are desired to take Subscriptions among their Acquaintance, and send them as
soon as may be to said DANIEL FOUL the Undertaker. N B. It cannot certainly be
known, what the Price of each Book will be; but it will not exceed TWO SHILLINGS
lawful Money. A SEVENTH Book will be given GRATIS to those who Subscribe for
SIX.

An INQUIRY into the Consequences, OF BOTH Calvinistic, and Arminian
Principles, compared together. In a Letter to LIBERIUS.
SIR,
I HAVE had an Opportunity to read your Letter, which (you say,) you should
have directed to my Brother, if he had been living; but is now directed to me.
You mention many bad Consequences, which you suppose are deducible from our
Doctrines; especially concerning God's Decrees. But in Order to know whether
these Consequences are just, or whether they are peculiar to our Principles, it
will be necessary, that the Case be fairly stated. I shall therefore present
you with a Scheme, of the Principles of each Party; in as plain and as
undisguised a Manner as I can. But here I would premise, there are two general
Principles, which both Parties are agreed in; that may help us very much in our
Inquiry into the Consequences of those Principles in which we differ. viz. 1.
That God never acts inadvertently, without any Purpose or Design, and therefore
whatever God does, he certainly decreed to do. And, 2. That the Sovereignty of
God, is not (alogon) an unreasonable Dominion; and therefore his Decrees are
agreeable to all the Perfections of an infinitely perfect Being. Having
premised this; I shall place the Principles, in which we differ, in two
opposite Columns, that they may be the more easily compared together.

The CALVINISTS believe, concerning the Decrees of God, in general,

That the Decrees of God, (so far as they are the subject of this present
Inquiry) are his unchangeable Purpose, to act, or suspend acting; as he in his
infinite Wisdom sees fit.

That the Decrees of God do never influence any Event, which he has decreed,
any more than his Foreknowledge, does influence the Thing fore-known.

Concerning Election.

That God from all Eternity, out of his mere good Pleasure, elected a certain
Number of the sinful, and miserable Race of Mankind in and through Christ, to
be made Partakers of Grace and Glory.

That the Number of the Elect was fixed from all Eternity, with Respect to the
Counsel, and Foreknowledge of God; and can never be increased, or diminished.

The ARMINIANS believe, concerning the Decrees of God in general,

That the Decrees of God (according to Mr. Beach, 2d Reply p. 76) are his Will
and Pleasure, concerning the Event; which he has decreed.

That the Decrees of God do always influence any Event, which he has decreed,
more than his Foreknowledge does influence, the Thing fore-known. See Dr.
Whitby upon the five Points p. 475. and Mr. Beach, 2d Reply p. 76.

Concerning Election.

That Almighty God by an eternal and unchangeable Decree ordained in Jesus
Christ his own Son, before the Foundations of the World were laid, to save all
those in Christ, for Christ, and through Christ, who being fallen, and under
the Command of Sin; by the Assistance of the Holy Ghost do persevere in Faith
and Obedience to the End. -- Append. to Mr. Beach's 1st Reply.

That the Number of the Elect was fixed from all Eternity, with Respect to the
Foreknowledge of God; and can never be increased or diminished. Dr. Whitby, ut
supra. p. 479. and Mr. Beach; 2d Reply. p. 76.

The CALVINISTS believe, Concerning the Non-Elect.

That God does send the Non-Elect into the World, involved in Sin, and Misery;
which they contracted by the Fall of Adam their Faederal Head, and leaves them
to innumerable strong Temptations; and permits them to live and die in Sin, and
Impenitency; and will finally punish them eternally for their Sins.

Concerning Redemption.

That our Lord Jesus Christ has wrought out a sufficient Redemption for all
Mankind; and has graciously offered the Benefits of it to all that are truly
willing to accept them; but yet he has designed a particular Application of
this Redemption to some in their effectual Calling; beyond what he has designed
for others.

Concerning Grace.

That some Special and Sovereign Influences of the Spirit of God, (more than
what are bestowed upon all Men in general,) are absolutely necessary in order
to our Conversion, and Salvation: without which, we cannot incline our Wills to
that which is spiritually Good; nor do what is truly pleasing, and acceptable
to God.

The ARMINIANS believe, Concerning the Non-Elect.

That God does send the Non-Elect into the World, involved in Sin and Misery,
without any Relation (...) Adam as their Faederal Head and leaves them to
innumerable strong Temptations; and permits them to live, and die in Sin, and
Impenitency; and will finally punish them eternally for their Sins. Mr. Beach,
2d Reply, p. 26. 53, 54.

Concerning Redemption.

That Jesus Christ suffered Death for all and every Man, that by his Death upon
the Cross he might obtain for all Mankind, both the Forgiveness of their Sins,
and Reconciliation with the Lord their God, with this Condition
notwithstanding; that none but Believers, should enjoy the Benefit of the
Reconciliation, and Forgiveness of Sins. -- Append. to Mr. Beach's Reply.

Concerning Grace.

That God has given sufficient Grace to all Men for their Salvation; so that
they have it in their Power, and have a Liberty of Indifference, either to
comply, or not comply, with the Terms of the Gospel. -- Mr. Beach's Sermon. p.
21. 28.

The CALVINISTS believe, Concerning Justification.

That we are justified before God, only by the Righteousness of Christ, imputed
(...) and received by Faith alo^^.

Concerning Perseverance.

That all true Believers will persevere in a Life of Faith and Holiness, until
they obtain everlasting Happiness.

The ARMINIANS believe, Concerning Justification.

That our sincere (though imperfect) Obedience, is the Conditional Cause of our
Justification before God, through the Merits of Jesus Christ. -- Mr. Beach's 2d
Reply, p. 72. etc.

Concerning Perseverance.

That some true Believers, do totally, and finally, fall from a state of Grace,
and the Favor of God, and perish in their Sins. Mr. Beach, 2d Reply, p. 67.

This, I suppose, you will allow to be a fair Representation of the Principles of
each Party. And I am now prepared to confider the Consequences, which you think
do follow from our Calvinistic Principles. And,

1 The first Consequence (you say, p. 2.) I shall take Notice of as deducible
from Calvinistic Principles, is that vulgar one: viz. If I am elected, I am
under an absolute, inevitable Necessity, antecedent to my Conversion to Faith
and Holiness, of being saved: But if I am not elected, I am under an absolute
Necessity, antecedent to any actual Guilt, of being damned. Here let us
consider, 1. with Respect to the Elect, there is an inseparable Concatenation
of Causes; from the eternal Decree, to their final Salvation. If their eternal
Salvation is eternally Decreed, all the Means, and steps in Order to it are
decreed likewise. As the first Link of a Chain put in Motion, influences and
moves all the intermediate Links; so the primary Decree, influences all the
intermediate Causes, Means, and Steps to the final Event.

Upon which I observe, that your whole Argument turns on this Principle; that
God's Decrees, do necessarily influence the decreed Event. This Principle, you
intimate (p. 5.) you have proved to be true, by strict Demonstration. And thus
Dr. Whitby, (upon the five Points; p. 475.) The Foreknowledge of any Action,
that would otherwise be free, cannot alter, or diminish that Freedom, whereas
God's Decree of Election is powerful, and active, and comprehends the
Preparation, and Exhibition of such Means; as shall unfrustrably produce the
End. And his Decree of Reprobation is active, as far as Action is required, to
render any Man deficient, and therefore sinful of Necessity. And Mr. Beach
delivers his Sentiments in the same Words, with the Addition of some very odd
Expressions. ((...) Reply p. 76.) Whereas God's Decree of Election, (is his
(...) concerning the Event;) it is powerful, and active, etc. And his Decree of
Reprobation; (is his Will and Pleasure,) it is active, as far as Action is
required to make a Man deficient, and therefore sinful of Necessity. And all
Arminian Writers that I have been acquainted with, say there is this Difference
between God's Foreknowledge, and his Decrees, that God's Fore knowledge has no
Influence upon the Thing fore known; whereas it must necessarily be, that God's
Decrees do influence the Thing decreed. Almost all Mr. Beach's long String of
Consequences (1st Reply p. 62* 63, 64, 65, 66.) are founded upon this
Principle, that God's Decrees do influence the Event. If this be true, I must
acknowledge his Consequences are just, and his Arguments from God's Decrees, are
unanswerable. And to the same Purpose, Dr. Johnson's Defense of Aristocles, p.
12, 13. But after all it is a fatal Mistake. And the Reason that they have been
lest to such a strong Delusion, (as far as I can understand it;) is their
ill-natured Zeal to charge bad Consequences upon the Principles of the
Calvinists, which are evidently founded upon the plain D^^^^ations of the Word
of God. But we shall see, whether while you have been digging a Pit for your
Neighbors, you have not fallen into it your selves.

A very Child in the Knowledge of Divinity, who is unprejudiced, could have
told you that Praedestinatio nihil ponit in praedestinato. The Decrees of God
are immanent, and not transient Acts, in the divine Mind. Until God reveals his
Decrees, they are known to no Man: no not to the Angels that are in Heaven, nor
to Christ himself as he is Man, but to the Father only. What are God's Decrees,
but his Purpose to act or suspend acting; when, and where, and how, he in his
infinite Wisdom sees sit? Now does our Purpose to do any Thing give Birth to
the Event, which is brought to pass by us? No, it is only our acting according
to our Purpose, that has any kind of Influence, in producing the Event. It Is
true, God does influence every good Event, according to his Decrees. It Is in
him that we live, and move, and have our Beings: And it is God that works in us
that which it well pleasing in his sight. But how does he work in us? By his
Decrees! No, but by his Spirit, and Grace. But you will object, May not the
Decrees of God be considered as the Cause, or Motive, why God acts or suspends
acting? And if so, then as the first Link of a Chain put in Motion, influences
and moves all the intermediate Links; so the primary Decree influences all the
intermediate Causes, Means, and Steps, to the final Event? I answer, No, God
never does any Thing because he has decreed to do it. The Reason why God has
decreed to do any thing, is, because it a agreeable to his infinite Perfections
to do so. It is beyond our Capacity many Times, to know the Reason of the
divine Conduct: But it is certain, God does not Act in an unreasonable Manner.
Wilful and unreasonable Men sometimes, do Things for no other Reason, but
because they have determined to do them; and that is for no Reason at all. But
God forbid, that we should attribute Folly to our Maker; by imagining, that he
will do Things merely because he will do them. See Romans xi. 33. O the depth of
the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God!

But you say (P. 5.) Persons striving after Salvation, does not render it at
all more likely that they shall obtain it, than their being for the present
utterly careless and negligent: And a great deal more to the same Purpose. But
there is just thus much in all that you argue upon this Head; that since it is
God who works in you both to will, and to do, according to his own good
Pleasure; i. e. according to his Decrees; therefore you will not work out your
own Salvation with Fear, and Trembling. God has decreed to never work Faith and
Holiness in you, before you are brought to see the need of it, and to earnestly
seek it, and therefore you need not be concerned about it, since it is God who
must work in you according to his Decrees, if ever you are saved; therefore if
you are elected, God's Decrees will save you, whether he works in you or not.

But you suggest, There is a necessary Connection between the primary Decree,
and the Event. I answer, there is none at all, any more than between God's
Foreknowledge, and the Thing foreknown, In a Word, all that can be argued from
our Principles concerning Election, is no more than this; viz. that if God does
not according to his Purpose and Design, work Grace and Holiness in us, we
never shall be saved: for God cannot qualify us for Heaven without determining
to do it. Upon the whole then, if you are elected, God's Decree will do nothing
at all to fit you for Heaven. And therefore unless you are made meet for an
Inheritance among the Saints in Light, by the Spirit of Holiness, you must lie
down in Sorrow.

But I shall consider your Consequences, with Respect to the Non-Elect.

If I am not elected, (you say,) I am under an absolute Necessity, antecedent
to my actual Guilt, of being damned. And accordingly your argue (P. 3.) That
God decreed (according to us,) that the Guilt of our first Parents Sin should
be imputed to their Posterity; and that an entire and universal Depravity of
Nature should be brought upon them as the Punishment of their imputed Guilt. So
far then the Decree has a direct Influence and Efficiency to the putting
Mankind into a state of Sin, and the Non Elect into an irrecoverable State,
both of Sin and Damnation. And moreover, since that actual sinfulness of Heart
and Life, which increases the Damnation of those that perish, is the necessary
Consequence of this original Depravity; there is upon the whole, as evident,
inseparable, and necessary a Concatenation of Causes, from the primary Decree
to the final Damnation of the Non-Elect, as between the Decree and the final
Salvation of the Elect.

But I answer, it is impossible that this Consequence can follow from our
Principles concerning God's Decrees; because we don't believe, there are any
Decrees, that have any manner of Efficiency in producing any Event at all; much
less any sinful Event. However, let us see whether this Consequence will not
naturally, and directly, follow (...) your own Principles. The Arminians all
believe, that God does send the Non-Elect into the World involved in Sin and
Misery; (which I shall make appear under another Head.) They believe, that God
leaves them to innumerable strong Temptations; and that he permits them to live
according to their ungodly Lusts, and to die impenitent; and that he will
punish them eternally for their Sins. Now you must own, unless you would
blaspheme the God who is above, that God never does any Thing without Counsel
and Design, and therefore whatever God does, he certainly decreed to do. This
Dr. Johnson obeserves, (Defense of Aristocles, p. 21) The right Way of judging
of God's Decrees, is by Facts before our Eyes -- For what God does, he
doubtless decreed to do.

If therefore God does send the Non-Elect into the World in a sinful and
miserable State, and does permit them to live in Sin, and treasure up Wrath,
against the Day of Wrath; you must believe, that God has decreed to do so. Now
then if the Decrees of God have a direct Influence and Efficiency in producing
the Event (as you say they have;) the Consequence does necessarily follow, that
if your are not elected, you are under an absolute Necessity, antecedent to any
actual Guilt, of being Damned. Thus, Sir, you have raised a mischievous and
frightful Apparition, which will haunt you Day, and Night, unless you can lay
it, by reading backwards.

But you argue, If the Guilt of our first Parents Sin should be imputed to
their Posterity, and that an entire, and universal Depravity of Nature should
be brought upon them as a Punishment of this imputed Guilt, -- then the Decree
has a direct Influence and Efficiency in putting the Non Elect into an
irrecoverable state of Sin and Damnation. But pray Sir, how will it help the
Case of the Non-Elect, though it be supposed that God decreed to bring them
into the World with an entire and universal Depravity of Nature, not as a
Punishment for Adam's Sin, but for some other unknown Reason? -- Why has not
this Decree as direct and Influence and Efficiency to put them into a state of
Sin and Damnation as if it was done as a Punishment for the Sin of their first
Parents? The Arminians acknowledge the entire and universal Depravity of
Nature, (as will be further considered.) And it God decreed to leave them to
live and die in Sin, and to punish them for it; And if this Decree has a
necessary Influence and Efficiency in producing the Event; then they are put
into an irrecoverable state of Sin and Damnation, sure enough! But you will tell
me, I conclude, that according to your Principles God has given the Non-Elect
Grace sufficient to subdue their Lusts and overcome all Temptations; so that it
is in their own Power to believe, and repent, and obtain Salvation.
Nevertheless you had as good say Nothing: for, supposing that Graceless Men,
have Grace sufficient to obtain Salvation, yet according to your Principle,
that God's Decrees necessarily influence the Event, the eternal State of the
Non Elect was fixed, Millions of Ages before they had any Opportunity to
exercise their sufficient Grace. If God decreed to send them into the world
involved in Sin, and to permit their final Impenitency, and punish them for it;
and it there be a necessary Concatenation of Causes between the primary Decree
and the final Event; then they are in as Remediless a State, as if they were in
the Regions of Despair. Is this (Sir) your rational and charitable Scheme! What
a wide Door does your Principle concerning the Necessitating Influence of God's
Decrees set open; either to Desperation, or to Wretchlesness of most unclean
Living, no less perilous than Desperation!

But.

II. "The next general Consequence, (you say, p. 8.) from our Calvinistic
Principles, is, that Christ and Salvation were never offered to the Non-Elect.
An Offer upon an impossible Condition is no Offer at all. According to my own
Doctrine (you say,) all the Offer was upon an Impossible Condition. And hence
you argue, 1. That Christ did not die for the Non-Elect, any more, or in any
other Respect, than he died for the Devils. 2. That the Non-Elect, do not
refuse offered Mercy, and Grace. 3. They will not be condemned at last, for
having refused an offered Savior."


Here I observe, your Arguments to prove the Consequences, which you mention
under this Head, turn upon. two Points, viz. I. What you suppose we believe
concerning human Impotency, and, 2. From what you think to be our Opinion
concerning God's Decrees. According to us, (you say, p. 9.) It Is as impossible
for Men to convert themselves, as it is for them to create a Word. And it is
entirely agreeable with our Doctrine, (you say,) that the Non-Elect shall never
have Grace to convert them.

What concerns your Arguments, taken from our Opinion of human Impotency, will
more properly fall under the 4th Head, and shall there be sully considered. But
what I shall now consider, is the Force of your Arguments, to prove you
Consequences taken from our Opinion of God's Decrees; viz. that it is
impossible the Non-Elect should accept of an offered Savior, because God has
decreed not to give them Grace to comply with the Terms of the Gospel. -- But
as we firmly believe, that the Decrees of God have no more Influence or
Efficiency in producing any Event, than if there were no Decrees at all; surely
this Consequence can never follow from our Principles. But this very
Consequence does directly follow from your Doctrine, that God's Decrees do
necessarily influence the Event. If I should ask here, what are the Conditions
upon which the Benefits of Christ's Redemption are offered to the Non Elect?
You would tell me, Faith and Repentance: and not that universal Grace (or
Light) which the Quakers and you talk of. If I should enquire again, whether
Faith and Repentance be not the Gift of God? You would answer, Yes: It is God
who works in us all the good Pleasure of his Grace, and the Work of Faith with
Power. And if I should demand once more, whether God does in Fact leave the
Non-Elect to die without Faith, and Repentance? You would answer, yes. Well
then, what God does he certainly decreed to do. If therefore God decreed to
leave the Non Elect to die without Faith and Repentance; and if there be (as
you assert) a necessary Concatenation of Causes between the primary Decree, and
the Event decreed, then this Consequence will certainly follow, that Faith in a
Redeemer is an impossible Condition. If the Non-Elect have it not, and God
decreed to not give it, but to let them die without it, and this Decree had a
necessary Efficiency in producing the Event, (as you say it has; then Christ
never died for the Non-Elect any more than for the fallen Angels. Christ never
was in earnest offered to them (if your Principles are true,) For an Offer upon
an impossible Condition is no Offer at all. The Non-Elect never refuse
redeeming Mercy, (if God's Decrees influence the Event,) and will never be
punished for their neglecting the great Salvation! Dear Sir, what monstrous
Opinions do you seem to hold! Must the God of Truth, be charged with
Insincerity, in all his condescending and gracious Offers, Invitations, and
Encouragements, rather than you will part with your unaccountable Doctrine of
necessitating Decrees! -- But as we believe, there are no such Decrees; so we
believe, the Terms of Salvation are the same for all Men, Elect or Non-Elect.
There is but one Faith, one Lord, one Baptism, one Hope of our Calling. He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved: And be that believes not, shall be
damned. Notwithstanding any Influence that the Decrees of God have upon the Non
Elect: it is every Whit as easy for them to accept of an offered Savior as for
the Elect. These, Sir, These are our Principles, founded upon all the
Declarations of the Gospel. And therefore as Ambassadors of Christ, we proclaim
and offer to all Men, Elect, or Non-Elect, Whosoever will, let him come, and taks
of the Waters of Life freely. -- But

III. The third general Consequence (you say p. 11.) is, that the Impenitence
of the Non-Elect, or their not complying with the Gospel-Terms of Salvation, is
not their own actual Fault, but is purely the Effect of Original Sin. It Is all
the natural and necessary Effect of imputed Guilt; or the Sin of their first
Parents charged upon them, and punished in them; and this in such a Manner, as
to take off all actual Fault and Blame from them. And hence you argue, that
they will be punished only for Adam's Sin imputed to them, or propagated in
them, etc.

I answer, all the Consequences which you mention under this Head, and suppose
to be deducible from our Doctrine of Original Sin, does as much follow from the
common Belief of every Sect of Men calling themselves Christians; whether
Papists, or Protestants, (the Socinians only excepted.) The Doctrine of
original Sin has been received, and defended in the Christian Church, in all
the successive Ages of it. In the council of Palestine, (Anno 415.) the Opinion
of Pelagius and his Adherents who denied Original Sin, was condemned as a
grievous Heresy. The Opinion of the Church of Rome with Respect to this
Doctrine, may be known by the Decrees of the Council of Trent: By which they
pronounce an Anathema, (1.) Against him which confesses not, that Adam by
transgressing has lost Sanctity and Justice, incurred the Wrath of God, Death,
and Thraldom to the Devil: And is infected in Soul, and Body. (2.) Against him
which averreth that Adam by sinning, has hurt himself only, or has derived
unto his Posterity the Death only of the Body, and not Sin, the Death of the
Soul. (3.) Against him which affirms, that Sin, which is one in the
Beginning, and proper to every one, transmitted by Generation, not Imitation,
can be abolished by any other Remedy than the Death of Christ. (See History of
the Council of Trent, p. 184.) -- The general Opinion of all Protestants may be
known, by the Augustan Confession; which Mr. Beach says, his own Conscience
tells him he heartily believes, 2d Reply p. 37. In which (besides what my
Brother cited,) we have these Words, and more to the same Purpose. We mean by
Original Sin; that which the holy Fathers, and all of sound Judgment in the
Church, do so call; namely, that Guilt whereby all that come into the World,
are through Adam's Fall, subject to God's Wrath, and eternal Death: And that
very Corruption of Man's Nature derived from Adam. And this Corruption of Man's
Nature, comprehends both the Defect of original Justice, Integrity, and
Obedience, and also Concupiscence -- Wherefore these Defects, and this
Concupiscence, are Things Damnable, and of their own Nature worthy of Death. (
Harm. of Confess. p. 73.) -- And the Arminians profess, that they believe the
entire and universal Depravity of human Nature, as much as we do. If you charge
the Arminians with denying Original Sin; Mr. Beach (whose Principles you have
undertaken to defend,) will tell you; It is an horrid Slander. My Brother
having stated the Doctrine of Original Sin, in as strong Terms as any
Calvinists believe it; Mr. Beach says, (2d Reply p. 26.) I will not say, I believe
this, but I know it by Experience, and though Mr. Dickinson has accused me of
denying Original Sin; yet, for ought I can learn from these two Books, I
believe Original Sin in a more rigid Sense than he did.

The Arminians have ('it is true) a different Way of explaining this Doctrine,
(which I shall have Occasion to consider;) but yet if they don't really believe
it, we must think them some of the most abandoned Men in the World. Arminius
himself, and all the Dutch Divines that followed him (as far as I am acquainted
with the Case) did all profess their Belief of it. And the Clergy of the Church
of England, among which are many in the Arminian Way of thinking, do all of
them make the most public and solemn Profession of their Belief of this
Doctrine; and in as strong Terms as any Calvinist can do. If you tell me, that
they say a great many Things against it, and endeavor to draw a great many bad
Consequences from it, and charge them upon the Calvinists; I cannot help that, I
am not accountable for their Inconsistences. But if you think, they be not
sincere (in their Profession) you ought to look upon it, not only as a sad
Instance of the Depravity of human Nature; but likewise of the bad Influence of
Arminian Principles. In the 9th Article of the Church of England, they profess
they believe; Original Sin stands not in the following of Adam, as the
Pelagians vainly talk: But it is the Fault, and Corruption, of the Nature of
every Man, that naturally is ingendered of the Off spring of Adam; whereby Man
is very far gone from original Righteousness, and is of his own Nature inclined
to Evil. -- And therefore in every Person, born into this World, it deserves
God's Wrath and Damnation -- And that Concupiscence, and Lust has of itself
the Nature of Sin. And they profess they believe, that such is the entire, and
universal Depravity of Nature, that we have no Power naturally to do that which
is Good. As in Art. 10, The Condition of Man since the Fall is such, -- We have
no Power to do good Works, pleasant and acceptable to God, without the Grace of
God by Christ preventing us; that we may have a good Will, and Working with us,
when we have that good Will And not only so, but they have such an Opinion of
the dreadful State of Sin and Wickedness, all Men are naturally in; that they
profess they believe, All Works done by Men before they are truly justified, by
the Grace of Christ, -- are so far from being pleasing to God, that they have
the Nature of Sin. Art. 13. Where then is the Propriety of charging
Consequences upon our Calvinistic Doctrine of Original Sin, as though it was
peculiar to us, when in Fact the Arminians profess they believe it in as strong
Terms as we do? And indeed the entire and universal Depravity of human Nature,
is what has been complained of in all Ages, and in all Places, not only by the
Christians, and Jews, but by the very Heathens themselves. The whole World lies
in Wickedness, (notwithstanding what you talk, of their having Grace sufficient
for Salvation:) And the original Fountain, from whence springs all that Flood
of Wickedness, that covers the whole Face of the Earth, is their natural
Corruption. -- You don't expect, that I should now undertake to show the
Justice, and Equity of God's punishing us for the Sin of our first Parents: Or
to prove from the Word of God, that both Jews and Gentiles are all under Sin,
and by Nature Children of Wrath; being shapen in Iniquity, and conceived in
Sin; which entered into the World by one Man, of whom all have sinned. The Way
and Manner how Sin came to be propagated, is not the present Question. But that
Mankind are naturally in a sinful, and depraved State, is granted by all
Christians: (for I don't think the Socinians deserve that Name.) But whether
this will excuse Men in their continuing impenitent, and so living, and dying
in a Course of Rebellion against God; I shall consider under the following Head.

IV. The next general Consequence, which you shall take Notice of, (you say p.
20.) as flowing from our Doctrine, is, that the Non-Elect were never in a State
of Probation. They never had a Time of Trial; whether they would comply with
the Terms of Salvation, or not: For antecedent to their being capable Subjects
of such a Trial, they were laid under an Impossibility of ever being willing to
comply.

I observe here, all your Arguments under this Head turn upon what you take to
be our Opinion concerning God's Decrees, and our Opinion concerning human
Impotency. So far as this Consequence respects the Decrees of God; I have to
say, this very Consequence does certainly follow from your Opinion, that God's
Decrees do necessarily influence the Event. Upon your own Principles, the
Non-Elect have no time of Trial, any more than the fallen Angels, and are no
more to blame than if they had no Time of Probation: For if God decreed to do
what he certainly does do) leave them to live and die in Sin, and if there be a
necessary Concatenation of Causes, between the Decree, and final Event, (as you
say there is;) what time of Trial can they have? What must they try to do?
Overturn the Pillars of Heaven! And change an Event that is fixed by an
Almighty Decree! But as I observed before, with Respect to your other
Consequences, so I say now; this Consequence cannot in any Respect follow from
our Opinion concerning the Decrees; because we do not believe there are any
Decrees, that have any manner of Influence, in putting Mankind into a State of
natural Blindness and Hardness of Heart; or to render them in any Respect
incapable to comply with the Gospel.

But I shall examine your Arguments, to prove that the Consequence you mention,
does follow from our Opinion of our natural Inability to believe and repent. We
do believe (as you observe,) that Men are as unable to convert themselves,
without the special Influences of God's holy Spirit, as to make a new World.
But only there is this Difference: in one Case there is a natural
Impossibility, and in the other only a Moral. But (you say p. 23.) what would
you think of a System of Religion built upon such an Hypothesis? Suppose you
were conveyed to another Race of fallen Creatures, and you should hear one of
the Preachers addressing the People in this Manner; O fallen Creatures, fallen
through the Imputation of your first Parents Sin! You are reduced to a
miserable Condition; you are exposed to Punishment here, and to a greater
hereafter: But now I propose it to you, that if you will but only create a new
World, you shall be freed from this Misery, and obtain Happiness. You have a
Time of Probation allowed you, you have an Opportunity in your Hands of making
Trial. If you let slip this Opportunity, you are infinitely to blame, and will
be miserable for ever, with this aggravating Circumstance, that you refused
Happiness, when offered to you upon the reasonable Terms of making a World. You
inquire, what I think of such an Offer? I answer, supposing the blessed God had
given them sufficient Encouragement, that upon their using suitable Endeavors
to make a new World, he would exert a divine Power to enable them to do it; and
supposing he had appointed Means that would never fail of being Effectual, if
they were not abused; supposing also that many of them upon using the appointed
Means, had actually been enabled to do it; I would say, they were
self-condemned, if they did not do it; but would perish when so reasonable an
Offer was made to them. If God had told Moses, that he and all the People would
certainly perish by the Hands of the Egyptians, if he did not comply with the
reasonable Condition of stretching forth his Rod, and dividing the red Sea:
What if Moses had answered, "The Condition of our Deliverance is an impossible
Condition; and an Offer made upon such a Condition, is no Offer at all. The Sea
is a Mile wide, and there is a vast Body of Waters; I cannot stop the least
Brook, without a great deal of Pains, and Labor. But such a Proposal as this,
was never made to any Man before, since the World began; and I am as able to
make a new World as to do it. This is only to insult and tantalize us in our
Misery, and Danger." Would Moses have done well, to argue after this Manner;
and so neglect the Means by which this Event was to be accomplished? And so in
the present Case; though Men are under an utter moral Impossibility to convert
themselves; yet it is not impossible for them to use the Means, which God has
appointed. And as my Brother observes in the Passage cited by you, (1st Vind.
p. 39.) Don't Calvinist Divines unitedly agree that God has given common Grace
to those to whom he has not given his special and sovereign Influences? Is it
not universally allowed, that by Virtue of this common Grace, they have a Power
to abstain from open Scandal, to perform the external Duties of Religion; to
take Pains with their own Hearts to get them in a proper Frame for Duty; and
thereby to excite in themselves, some Seriousness, Earnestness, and Diligence;
to consider of their own Impotency, and continue to lie at the Footstool of
Divine Grace, for all supplies of Grace and Strength for the sake of Christ the
Mediator and Redeemer? Is it not universally allowed, that if this be their
Temper and Conduct, they have sufficient Encouragement given them in the
Gospel, to hope that they may obtain the special and saving Influences of the
blessed Spirit. And I may here further add, that it is (as far as I know,)
universally allowed, that the Means (internal and external,) which God is using
with Sinners, (at least under the Gospel;) would never fail of being effectual,
unless they abuse them. It Is true, God did not elect Men to Holiness, because
he foresaw, they would in any Measure deserve it before their Conversion. Nor
do we think, God has obliged himself, by any Promise made to unconverted
Sinners, that he will convert them, upon the Condition of some Endeavors of
their own, before Conversion. And it is in Mercy to poor Sinners, that he has
not done it. But yet it is manifest to me, that when Persons are truly
concerned about their Sin and Danger, and earnestly seeking an Interest in the
great Salvation, they have greater Encouragement given them in the Gospel, than
if God had made some certain Promises to them; suspended upon the Condition of
some Doings of their own. But you will inquire, agreeable to your Discourse (p.
21.) Did none of the Non-Elect, never do what might be reasonably expected of
Men in their Circumstances? I answer; No, never. But you inquire again, (ibid.)
What if the Non-Elect and done all this, what would have been the Event? I
answer, absurd Suppositions admit of absurd Consequences. If they had not
abused the Means of Grace, but had done what God might reasonably expect of
them, they would not have been Non-Elect. But you say, (p. 24.) That we insist
upon it, that it is not Men's doing what they can, that is the Terms of
Salvation; but their being willing to submit to Christ, which they cannot do.
-- I grant it. But the Means must be used in order to the End. And although it
is morally impossible, that we should, without the special Influences of divine
Grace, comply with the Terms of the Gospel; yet with these Assistances it is by
no Means impossible. And since a divine Blessing would accompany the Means,
unless Men hinder their Efficacy, by their own Sloth, Wickedness or
Stubbornness; surely they have no Reason to complain; If our Transgressions,
and our Sins be upon us, and we pine away in them; how shall we then live?
Surely since this is the Case, our natural Impotency to comply with the Terms
of the Gospel, will in no Measure, excuse our Neglect of the great Salvation.
And according to our Scheme Men will not (as Mr. Beach, and you imagine) have
any Thing to plead in the Place of Darkness, that their Misery was not of
themselves: That they had no Time of Trial; because the Condition of their
Salvation was an impossible Condition. And I believe my Brother's Reasoning is
well founded; and exactly agreeable to our Principles in the Passage which you
cite. (p. 25.) What I will Sinners be perfectly easy in their Consciences in
the Regions of eternal Despair; when they come to reflect, that Christ wrought
out a sufficient Redemption for them; exhibited himself, and freely offered his
saving Benefits in the Gospel to 'em; but they wilfully rejected both him, and
them! And when they reflect, that God had used all proper Means with them for
their Salvation; made known their Duty, and the Way of Salvation to them; laid
all proper Motives before them, by the Discovery of their Need of Salvation, by
Threatenings, and Warnings, by Promises, and Invitations, that he might excite
both their Hopes and Fears: sent them his Ambassadors to beseech them to be
reconciled to God; excited them to consider, and turn to God, by the common
Motions of his Holy Spirit, and long exercised Patience and Forbearance toward
them, in the Use of all these Methods, and Means of Grace: And after all, they
rejected, abused, and sinned away all these Advantages, from no other Necessity
than the Indulgence of their Lusts, and the Perverseness of their Wills, and
finally perished, because they would not come unto Christ they might have Life!
Is it possible, Conscience can be perfectly easy under these Reflections, when
awakened by Hellfire! surely, Sinners will have another View of Things in the
Regions of Despair, than is pretended by Mr. Beach in his Discourse. Their
Consciences will not allow them to argue, as this Gentleman now seems to do;
that they were excusable in not improving what Power, and Grace they had,
because Christ had not purchased greater Benefits, or had not bestowed the same
upon them, as upon some others. Such a Discourse (you say p. 26.) considered by
it self is affecting indeed! And all that you are sorry for, is, that the
Doctrine which he and I are defending, entirely undermines such moving Methods
of Address. But pray, Sir, what Doctrine? Not our Doctrine of the Decrees as I
have proved before: Nor yet our Doctrine of human Impotency; For certainly our
not being able to do every Thing, will not excuse us in doing nothing. And
since a divine Influence would accompany the Means of Grace, if improved as
they ought to be, to enable us both to will and do, can we be excusable if we
neglect working out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling? The Husbandman cannot
make his Crain sprout and spring up, when it is cast into the Ground, any more
than he can make a new World: but yet this will not excuse his Negligence, in
not breaking up his fallow Ground, and sowing his Seed.

But you say,

V. Our Doctrine entirely overthrows the Notion of Man's being a free, or moral
Agent. You confess Indeed (you say,) that our Principles admit of what Writers
call spontaneous or voluntary Freedom; which signifies nothing more, than that,
when a Man chooses any Object, or Course of Life, this Choice is the Act of the
Will. The Mind is willing without any Consideration, whether he can choose any
other Object, or Course of Life. Thus when a Person chooses to pursue a Life of
Virtue, or a Life of Vice, this Choice is the Act of the Will; the Person acts
voluntarily, in the Matter, although it is utterly impossible for him to choose
the contrary. Such a voluntary Freedom as this, is all the Liberty which our
Principles (you say) allow to Mankind. But if this be all the Liberty which in
Reality they have; the rigid Doctrine of Fatality admits of as much. And indeed
as much as this, is attributed to Bruits, as well as Men. But it is Liberty of
Choice, or Indifference, that constitutes the essential and distinguishing
Character of a free, rational, and accountable Creature. And this sort of
Liberty, as the very learned and ingenious Dr. WATTS observes, implies a Power
to choose, or refuse; to choose one Thing, or the contrary, among several Things
that are proposed, without any inward or outward Restraint, Force, or
constraining Bias or Influence.

I answer, it appears to me, very absurd, to say, that no rational Being can be
a free Agent; unless he has a Liberty of Indifference. GOD himself is
infinitely free: but can any Christian suppose, that he has such a Liberty ad
utrumque; that he can choose that which is evil?

And thus Dr. CLARKE argues, ( Demonst. p. 120, 121, 122.) From hence it
follows, that though God is a most perfectly free Agent; yet he cannot but do
always that which is best, and wisest, in the whole. The Reason is evident,
because perfect Wisdom, and Goodness, are as steady, and certain Principles of
Action; as Necessity it self. And an infinitely wise, and good Being, endued
with the most perfect Liberty, can no more choose to act in Contradiction to
Wisdom, and Goodness, than a necessary Agent can act contrary to the Necessity,
by which it is acted. It being as great an Absurdity, and Impossibility in
Choice, for infinite Wisdom, to choose to act unwisely, or infinite Goodness,
to choose what is not good; as it would be in Nature, for absolute Necessity,
to fail of producing its necessary Effect. -- And how can it be imagined, that
the blessed Angels, and glorified Saints, have a Liberty of Indifference; so
that they can choose to be separated from God, and be sent into utter Darkness,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth for ever?

And as to the Case of Mankind, though I freely grant that in many Cases Men
have a Liberty of Indifference; yet in many others, they have not such a
Liberty ad utrumvis. I have not Dr. WATTS'S Book by me, which you take your
Citations from; but I don't doubt, he would allow that in many Cases, our
Choice is determined by the Light of our Minds. However, the Question is not so
much, what was his Opinion, as what is Truth? There are innumerable Instances,
in which, I find it morally impossible for me to choose contrary to the Light of
my own Mind. I cannot make myself willing under my present Circumstances, to be
exposed to the most exquisite Torments, that ever were inflicted by cruel
Tyrants. And a Thousand Instances might be given, in which we have not a
Liberty of Indifference. Dr. CLARKE, who was no Fatalist, (unless an Arminian
may be a Fatalist,) argues in this Case, I think, very justly. ( Demonstr. p.
100.) Necessity therefore, by which the Power of acting follows the Judgment of
the Understanding, is only a moral Necessity; that is, no Necessity at all in
the Sense, wherein the Opposers of Liberty understand Necessity. For moral
Necessity is evidently consistent with the most perfect natural Liberty. For
Instance, a Man entirely free from all Pain of Body, and Disorder of Mind,
judges it unreasonable for him to hurt, or destroy himself; and being under no
Temptation, or external Violence, he cannot possibly act contrary to his
Judgment: not because he wants a natural or physical Power, so to do; but
because it is absurd, and mischievous, and morally impossible for him to choose
to do it. Which also is the very Reason why the most perfect rational Creatures
superior to Men, cannot do Evil, not because they want a natural Power to
perform the material Action; but because it is morally impossible, that with a
perfect Knowledge of what is best, and without any Temptation to Evil, their
Will should determine it self to choose to act foolishly, and unreasonably. Here
therefore seems at last to lie the fundamental Error; both of those, who argue
against the Liberty of the Will, and those who but too confusedly defend it.
And in Matters of Religion, in some Cases, I grant, Men have a Liberty of
Indifference; but in others it is manifest they have not. The very Citations
which you take from Dr. WATTS, to prove that we have in all Cases such a
Liberty, without being influenced, or biased by the Light of our Minds, do
evidently prove the contrary. When the Christian Revelation is proposed to a
Man, as coming from God; It becomes Man as a rational Creature, to consider the
Proofs, and Evidences brought to confirm it: The Prophecies, the Miracles, the
internal Excellencies, and all external Testimonies that come with it. And it
is the Will, that must employ the Mind, to dwell upon these Inquiries,
diligently, and faithfully, in proportion to the Merits of the Cause.

If it be necessary that we take so much Pains, that we may see the Evidence of
the Truth of the Gospel, in order to our believing it, then it must unavoidably
follow, that we cannot believe it without seeing the Evidences of its Truth, or
even contrary to the Conviction of our own Minds. And I May add, if we have
such a Liberty of Indifference, that we can believe the Gospel, without seeing
the Evidence of its Truth; and even contrary to the Conviction of our own
Minds; then we might believe it, if there were no Evidences of its being true:
No Prophecies, no Miracles, no internal Excellencies, and no external
Testimonies, to incline our Minds to believe the Truth of it. We could
(according to your Doctrine;) have believed it, without any Conviction of its
being true; and therefore all the Evidences of its Truth are needless, to
Influence our Belief. And what you cite from my Brother, (p. 31.) appears to me
to be to the Purpose. Suppose a Sinner, while he could not receive the Things
of the Spirit of God; but they appeared Foolishness to him, while his
Affections were placed upon his Lusts, and Pleasures, and these appeared much
the most desirable to him; could determine his Will, to the Choice of those
gracious Habits, and Exercises, which were his highest Aversion, and in which
he could see nothing desirable, and eligible; would this render him a moral
Agent? Would he be a moral Agent, by choosing not only, without any sensible
Motive in View; but even contrary to the Motives he had in View?

But you say, ( ibid.) What is this to the Purpose; did ever any Body dream of
any such Thing? I answer, it is directly to the Purpose. And all your Discourse
under this Head, is sounded upon such a Dream. Is not this the very Thing, that
you would prove; that a Man is not a free Agent, unless he has a Liberty of
Indifference; so that he can choose and refuse without being influenced by the
Light of his Mind? And don't you argue all along, that we join with the
Fatalists, because we deny that we can in many Cases, incline our own Wills ad
utrumque, to choose one Thing, or the contrary?

But you say, it is not to the Purpose; (p. 31.) because the Arminians unitedly
agree, that God has by the glorious Revelation of his Spirit, set forth in the
View of Mankind, the infinite Evil of Sin, and the Divine Amiableness of
Holiness; and that he has given to Men a Power of Consideration; whereby with
the constantly concurring Influences of his Holy Spirit, they can freely
examine, and bring home to their Minds, the Truth, Excellency, and Importance
of Religion; and the Deceit, Evil, and Bitterness of Sin; and upon such a View,
they have a Power to embrace the one, and refuse the other, by the free Choice
of their Wills. I answer, if this be indeed the Case; if it be necessary that
God by his Spirit, should discover to Men the Truth, and Excellency of
Religion; and that we must examine, and bring home to our Minds this Evidence
of the Truth, Excellency, and Importance of it, in order to our receiving it;
then we have not a Liberty of Indifference, to receive, or reject the Gospel,
without being influenced or biased by the Evidence of Truth, let into our
Minds. And I would further observe, if it be Fatalism, to believe that a Man
has not a Liberty of Indifference to believe, and repent, without a glorious
Revelation of God's Holy Spirit, to set the infinite evil of Sin, and the
divine Amiableness of Holiness, in such a Light, at to influence our Choice;
then the Arminians are as much Fatalists, as the Calvinists; and all your
Consequences under this Head, follow as much from the Doctrine of one Party, as
the other. And all the Question between us upon this Head is; Whether Persons
when they do truly believe, and repent, have not some further, and more special
Illuminations of the Spirit: Some more powerful, and sovereign Influences; than
they had before, when they were in a State of Impenitency? And whether they
have such a Liberty of Indifference, that they can believe, and repent, without
these further Illuminations and Assistances? And that you may be satisfied of
your Mistake, I would entreat you to seriously consider the Texts of Scripture
brought by my Brother; to prove the Necessity of some special Influences, of
the divine Spirit, to convert the Souls of Men; and make them meet for an
Inheritance among the Saints in Light; more than what are common to all Men in
general. And particularly, JOH. vi. 44. No Man can come to me, except the
Father which has sent me draw him. Mr. BEACH says, (2d Reply p. 43.) God has
drawn Millions, who never were actually drawn so as to come to Christ. So God
drew the whole Body of the Jewish Nation -- JER. xxxi. 3. With Loving Kindness
have I drawn them. But can you imagine that our Savior meant nothing more than
the drawing of his common Grace, and Providence, when he expressly tells us,
what his meaning was? Viz. That no Man could come to him, except the Father
draw him in such a manner, as that there would be an actual Fulfillment, of the
Prophecies of the Old Testament, spoken concerning such as believe in the
Messiah. As in the next Verse, It is written in the Prophets, And they shall be
all taught of God: every Man therefore that has heard, and has learned of the
Father, comes unto me. The Places, in the Prophets, which our Savior refers
to, are ISAI. live. 13. And all thy Children shall be taught of the Lord; and
great shall be the Peace of thy Children. And, JER. xxxi. 34. For they shall
all know me, from the least of them, unto the greatest of them; says the Lord.
For I will forgive their Iniquity, and I will remember their Sin no more.

But I had like to have forgot, that it is not so much my present Business to
prove the Truth of our Principles, as to rescue them, from the bad
Consequences, which you imagine are deducible from them. And thus I have, I
think, fairly entered into the Merits of the Cause: And whether it does not
evidently appear, that every one of these Consequences which you have
mentioned; do as much follow from your Principles, as from ours; and most of
them vastly more; I must leave it to you, and others to judge.

Mr. BEACH mentions a great Number of bad Consequences, which he thinks are
deducible from our Principles; but upon looking over them; I cannot find any of
them, but what have been fairly considered under some of the foregoing Heads:
except a general one, which he mentions (1st Repl. p. 66.) in these Words, I
verily believe, this horrible Notion of the ever blessed God, propagated by the
Calvinistic Doctrines; is the principal Cause of that Malice, and ill Nature,
which appears in many New-Light People. But is it from the Abundance of his own
good Nature, that he endeavors to load the Memory of my Brother, with personal
Reproaches, though at the same Time, he professes that he believes he is
rejoicing in Glory? The Pharisees (who he says were Calvinists,) showed more
good Nature than this comes to; for though they persecuted good Men when they
were alive; yet to make them Amends, they built Tombs for them when they were
dead. And I believe, I could give some such Instances of Uncharitableness among
some of the noted Arminians, as could hardly be found among any others that
profess Christianity. DANIEL TILENUS (in the Words of a celebrated Author,)
became so heated in Favor of Arminianism, that he declared, were he obliged to
change his Religion, he would turn Turk, sooner than Calvinist; for he denied
that the Calvinists believed in God; but owned that the Truks did. This was the
Man that Mr. BEACH depended upon for his Voucher; who, he says, was a Friend to
the Synod of Dort. And other, Instances might be found nearer home; but I take
no Pleasure in mentioning these Things.

I must now beg leave in my Turn to mention some of the bad Consequences, which
I think do peculiarly slow from ARMINIAN Principles. -- And

I. I shall consider some of the bad Consequences that follow from this
Principle; that God's Decrees do necessarily influence every Event; which he
has decreed. All your Arguments, or at least the most of them, are founded upon
this Principle; And all the Arminian Writers that I have observed, go upon the
same Principle. And indeed if they did not think, that God's Decrees do
influence the decreed Event; more than his Fore knowledge; what Pretense could
they have to fasten bad Consequences upon our Doctrine? But upon this their
Principle, they must believe the Doctrine of God's necessitating Decrees of
Reprobation. It is true, we do believe as well as they (and not at all more
than they) that God did Decree to send the Non-Elect into the World involved in
Sin and Misery, and to leave them to live, and die in Sin; and to punish them
for their Sins: But then we don't believe, that God's Decrees have any Manner
of Influence upon us, we are as much at Liberty, and act as freely, as if there
were no Decrees at all.

But they think, there is some Influence; some Efficiency in God's Decrees, to
produce the Event. And hence; though they leave the Elect of shift for
themselves; yet this Principle consigns over the Non-Elect to Sin, and
Damnation without Remedy. They have no Offer of Christ and Salvation; for an
Offer upon an Impossible Condition is no Offer at all! They have no Time of
Trial. For to what Purpose is it for them to try to counteract the Influences
of the Decrees of the Almighty? And besides, does not this Doctrine charge all
the Sin, and Wickedness of Men, upon the Holy Decrees of the blessed God?

I hope, you will not think to answer this by "Put-offs," as though the Arminians
don't believe God's Decrees; but only that God has an infallible Foreknowledge
of future Events. -- For, I suppose, there is not an Arminian of any Sense upon
Earth; who will deny, that God has decreed to permit Sin. Arminius himself
says, ( Exam. in TWISS. Vind. Lib. 2. p. 172.) Quod Deus volens permittit
Peccatum, certum est. That it is certain, that God does willingly permit Sin.
And in the next Page, you will see what he means by the Permission of Sin.
Permissio Peccati generatim considerati, est Suspensio Impedimentorum omnium,
quibus positis Peccatum not fieret a Creatura. That it is a Suspension of all
those Things, that would otherwise hinder the Commission of Sin. Now if God has
decreed to suspend, or withold all those Things that would hinder the
Commission of Sin, and this Decree does necessarily influence the Event; how is
it possible to vindicate the Decree of God, from being the Cause of Sin? If you
should think upon a Review of the Case; that Dr. WHITBY, and Mr. BEACH, and
you, have gone too far, in asserting that God's Decrees do necessarily
influence the Event, which he has decreed; but yet do still retain the Opinion,
that God's Decrees have some kind of Influence, or Efficiency in producing the
Event; (more than the Foreknowledge of God has in producing the Thing
fore-known,) how is it possible for you to clear the Decree of God, from being
in some Measure, the Cause of the Sin, and Damnation of the Non-Elect?

If God decreed to suspend, or withold all those Things, that would hinder
the final Impenitency, and Damnation of the Non-Elect, and this Decree has some
Kind of Influence upon the Event, then the Decree must in some Sense be the
Cause of it. But indeed there is no Medium in this Case; God's Decrees must
either necessarily influence the Event, or not at all, any more than his
Foreknowledge.

II. The Arminian Doctrine of Original Sin, appears to me to be very
dishonorable to God, and hurtful to the Souls of Men. The Arminians profess,
that they believe the entire, and universal Depravity of Nature; as much as we
do: As I have proved before. But yet they deny, that we derived our corrupt,
and sinful Disposition from Adam, as he was our Faederal Head, or
Representative, in the first Covenant. That we were to stand, or fall by Adam's
Obedience, or Disobedience as our legal, or Faederal Head, Mr. BEACH says (2d
Repl. p. 54.) is but a Fable. But does not this Doctrine, directly charge God
with being the Author of Sin? Dr. JOHNSON seems in some Measure to be sensible,
that this Consequence is unavoidable. He says (Pref. to Mr. Beach's 2d Repl. p.
10.) You ask, what I assign as the true Cause of the Creature's moral
Imperfection. I answer, if by moral Imperfection, you mean (as you must) if you
speak of the imperfect, or less perfect Condition, in which it is made, or
born, before it is capable of moral Action; it is no Imputation upon the
Almighty, to say, he is the Cause of it. He owns (p. 9.) that Infants are born
with material Sin; and yet thinks it is no Imputation upon the Almighty, to say
that he is the Cause of it. If Mr. Beach joins with Dr. Johnson in this; I
don't wonder he says (2d Repl. p. 26.) that he believes Original Sin, in a more
rigid Sense than my Brother did. For it is a more rigid Sense, sure enough! to
charge our Original Corruption, and sinful Depravity upon the Almighty! -- But
to go on,

III. The Arminian Doctrine of Universal Redemption, (as they explain it,)
represents the Merits of Christ's Sufferings, and Death, as being but of little
Efficacy, and Value. They deny, that ever Christ purchased Faith, or Holiness,
for any one Person Elect, or Non-Elect. So that if Persons ever arrive to
Heaven, it must be without Faith, or Holiness; notwithstanding any Efficacy,
that there is in the Merits of Christ. The Scriptures every where represent
Christ's Death, as meritorious not only to procure Pardon, and Life for us; but
likewise, to purchase the Gifts of the divine Spirit to purify our Souls, and
qualify us for Glory. And hence the Apostle says, TIT. 2.14. He gave himself
for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify to himself a
peculiar People, zealous of good Works. --

But if the Arminians should allow that there is any Efficacy in the Blood of
Christ, to cleanse us from the Pollution, and Defilement of Sin; it would
totally demolish their Scheme: because, if Christ purchased Holiness for any
Persons, it would be necessary in the Nature of Things, that they should have
it. And therefore they absolutely deny this. Thus Dr. WHITBY says, (upon the
five Points, p. 108. 109.) No Sacrifice for Sin; as such, no, not that of our
Lord Jesus Christ, can sanctify a Soul, or endow it with that divine Nature;
that inward Purity, and Likeness to God; and all those other christian Virtues,
which alone make us capable of the Enjoyment of God. -- Christ therefore by his
Death alone, cannot be said to have procured that Faith, which purifies the
Heart; or that Repentance, which renews the Mind, the Will, and Affections; but
only to remove that Guilt, which does obstruct God's Favor. He that can
receive such Doctrine, let him receive it! --

Again, according to their Doctrine, there was no Efficacy in the Death of
Christ, to render the Salvation of any one Person certain. As some do refuse
the Benefits of redeeming Mercy; so all might do it, and his Death might have
been wholly in vain; notwithstanding any Intention, that Christ had to save any
one Person: or notwithstanding any Efficacy in his Merits. When Christ made his
Soul an Offering for Sin, he could not have this Comfort, and Satisfaction,
arising from any Efficacy in his Sufferings, (according to this Doctrine;) to
see his Seed, and the Travel of his Soul, to justify many; because it was
uncertain, notwithstanding his Agonies, and Death, whether any would be
justified.

IV. Your Doctrine, that all Men have sufficient Grace for Salvation: contains
a Swarm of bad Consequences. You say (p. 31, 32.) Don't the Arminians unitedly
agree, that God has by the glorious Revelations of his Spirit, set forth in the
View of Mankind, the infinite Evil of Sin, and the divine Amiableness of
Holiness; and that he has given to Man, a Power of Consideration, whereby with
the constantly concurring Influences of his Holy Spirit, they can freely
examine and bring home to their Minds, the Truth, Excellency, and Importance of
Religion; and the Deceit, Evil, and Bitterness of Sin; and that on such a View
of Things, they have a Power to refuse the one, and embrace the other, by the
free Choice of their Wills?" And in (p. 43.) You say, "It is (according to
Arminans,) entirely in your Power, through the constant Concurrence, and
Influence of divine Grace, to choose and obtain eternal Life.

1. According to this Doctrine, GOD is not to be acknowledged, as the Author of
all that is spiritually Good in us. According to the scripture Account, it is
God that works in us both to Will and to Do. He works all the good Pleasure of
his Grace in us, and even the Work of Faith with Power. Hence the Apostle
prayed for the Ephesians, that they might know what is the exceeding Greatness
of his Power, to usward who believe according to the working of his mighty
Power. Ephesians. i. 18, 19. But according to your Doctrine, good Men have no other
Influences of the Spirit of God, than what are common to all Men. Every Man has
such constant Assistances of the Holy Spirit, that he has it entirely in his
own Power to believe, and repent; and no other Assistances are necessary. So
that if there be any good in us, more than in some others, we ourselves are the
Cause of it.

2. Your Doctrine, has a direct Tendency to lead Men into a wrong Notion,
concerning that great Change, which the Scriptures call Regeneration, or
Conversion. A saving Conversion to God, is a great, and a mighty Change; so
that when we do experience it, we are created anew in Christ Jesus to good
Works, and become new Creatures, in all spiritual Respects. And those Persons,
who have not thus passed from Death, to Life; but live and die in an
unregenerate State; they will find themselves awfully disappointed,
notwithstanding all their Self-flattery, and deluding Hopes, when they come to
appear, before the Bar of impartial Justice. And alas! How apt are Persons to
delude themselves with false Hopes! How prone to imagine, that they are in a
state of Grace, and Favor with God, when they have not so much as the Seeds of
true Holiness! Fight not (says Mr. BAXTER) with small, or great, but against
the false Hopes of christian Professors. And what a sad Tendency has your
Doctrine, to make People easy, and settle them upon their Lecs? They are told,
that as they have Grace sufficient for Salvation, they have it entirely in
their Power, to comply with the Gospel; and therefore they think but little of
the Importance, of laying a good Foundation in a saving Conversion to God.

3. This Doctrine, tends to keep poor Sinners in a state of carnal Security,
without any concern about their Salvation. A sense of our own Impotency, and
perishing State, unless God in his infinite Mercy will cast his Skirt over us,
and say unto us, Live; is almost the only Thing, that excites a Concern in the
Souls of Sinners, about eternal Things. When a Person is fallen into the Water,
so long as he thinks it is in his own Power to help himself, he is easy enough;
but when he finds he must unavoidably perish, unless he can obtain some Help,
this Reflection, will make him concerned,: so in the present Case, if Persons
had but a suitable sense, of the miserable State that they are in, whilst under
the Dominion of Sin, and their utter Inability, to help themselves; and that if
God does arise and save them, it must be owing to nothing, but his mere Mercy;
they would not be so little concerned, about the Means of obtaining the divine
Favor. You say, Some think that all unconverted Men are Arminians! And indeed
I think, all secure Sinners, are in this Respect too much tinged with
Arminianism; They have too much Self-Confidence, which is the grand Cause of
their carnal Security. But,

4. If unconverted Sinners are under some Concern about their Salvation; this
Doctrine if received, would effectually stifle the Convictions of their
Consciences; and incline them, to put off their Conversion until a further
Opportunity. As men imagine, that their Conversion, is a Thing that is within
the Compass of their own Power; they think, it will be time enough afterward.
There are but few that are so hardened in their Wickedness, as to have no
thoughts of Death, and Eternity. And the most abandoned Sinner, however he may
say to God, Depart from me, and will even venture, to meet God in his loudest
Thunder; yet at Times he says in his Heart, Let me die the Death of the
Righteous, and let last End be like his: But then he depends upon a future
Repentance and drives away the Convictions of his own Conscience, with a Go thy
Way for this Time. -- He feels himself in Health, he thinks he has a Prospect
of living many Years; and he had learned from your Doctrine; that he has a
Liberty of Indifference, and a Power to believe, and repent, when he pleases.
And if he could but convince himself of one Thing further, that though he does
all his Life time mock God, and trample under Foot, the Blood of the Convenant
as an unholy Thing; yet the Priest can absolve him, when he comes to lie upon a
Death Bed; and then he may die in Peace: I say, if he is convinced of these
Things; it is no Wonder, if he does think it will be time enough to repent,
when Old Age has cooled the Heat of his Lusts; or when he must part with his
sinful Pleasures, at the Approaches of Death.

5. Your Doctrine, (if received,) will effectually prevent the Humiliation of a
Sinner. God rejects the Proud, but gives Grace to the humble. There is
hardly any one Thing that unfits the Souls of Men to receive Christ by Faith so
much as a Principle of Self-sufficiency. A Belief that they are Something, when
they are Nothing. An Imagination that they have something that is Good, and
pleasing to God; though they are Unbelivers, and their very Minds and
Consciences are defiled. How can Men see Christ to be All, and in all, when
they have something else to rely upon? Among Men every Body can see, that a
Malefactor convicted of a Capital Offense, against a merciful Sovereign, cannot
take beter Course, than a Noble man did of late, acknowledge his Offense, with
its aggravating Circumstances, and cast himself entirely upon the Mercy of his
Sovereign. And if poor Sinners would, from a real sense of their Sin, and
Misery, cast themselves wholly upon the Mercy of God in Christ; humbly waiting
at the Mercy-seat, in the diligent Use of the Means that God has appointed,
this is the Way to obtain Mercy and find Grace to help in time of need. But
your Doctrine, teaches poor Sinners that they have sufficient Grace already, if
they do but improve it, (let them be ever so graceless;) and it is entirely in
their own Power, to secure their Salvation; what need is there then that they
should be lost in themselves, that they may be found in Christ?

6. Your Principles tend to make Men think, that the Doctrine of our Union to
CHRIST is needless. The Scriptures assure us that there is a spiritual Union
between Christ and Believers, as he is the Head of the Body which is the
Church; and they Members of the same Body. Faith is the Band of Union between
Christ and Believers. And hence Christ is said to dwell in our Hearts by Faith.
And such as believe, are in Christ. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature. -- This Union is the Foundation of our Justification, Adoption, and
Sanctification, (in the Beginnings, and progrestive Growth of it;) as well as
of eternal Glory. Our Savior says, Without me (or out of me) ye can do
nothing. But what need is there of such a spiritual Union with Christ, if all
Men have a Liberty of Indifference, to bend their own Wills, to that which is
Good; and have it entirely in their own Power, to secure their Salvation,
though they have no such special Relation to him? Thus your Doctrine leaves us
without any Foundation for a christian Hope: For Christ is in us the Hope of
Glory, if we have fled for Reluge, to lay hold on the Hope that is set before
us.

7. Your Doctrine, tends to sap the Foundation of a Life of holy Obedience. All
external Obedience, if it don't spring from a new, and vital Principle of
Grace, and Holiness, is but mere Hypocrisy. And therefore Persons that are
truly converted to God, are said, to have new Hearts. -- Their Hearts are
circumcised to love, and fear God. And God's Law is written upon their Hearts.
They act from a new Principle of supreme Love to God, and Faith in a Redeemer.
And hence their Obedience flows in an unconstrained Manner, as Waters from a
Fountain; Our Savior compares it, to a Well of living Water springing up to
everlasting Life. But according to your Doctrine, there is no need of such a
new Principle of Action: for every Man has it in his Power, to incline his
Heart, to a true and unfeigned Obedience to God's Commandments; and his
Commandments will not be grievous unto him.

8. Your Principles (if really received,)would prevent a Life of Faith, and
Dependence upon Christ. Christ is said to be our Life. And the Life (says the
Apostle,) that I now live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith, of the Son of God
The Believer has his Dependence upon Christ, not only for Pardon, and
Justification; but for continual supplies of Grace; that of his Fullness he may
receive, even Grace, for Grace. He is sensible of his own Emptiness and of
Christ's Fullness. He knows, that he has no Sufficiency of himself; but that all
his Sufficiency is of Christ. And he always finds by Experience, that when he
has the greatest sense of his own Weakness; then he is strongest; for he can do
all Things through Christ strengthening him. But by your Doctrine, Men are
taken off from Christ, to depend upon themselves. They have a Liberty of
Indifference, and a sufficient Power to hate Sin, and love Holiness, and this
is interwove in their Natures, as moral Agents; What need then have they of
fresh supplies of Grace from Christ.

9. Your Doctrine, tends to hinder Men from using any Endeavors, to obtain any
special, or sensible Communion with GOD. Our Minds are naturally exceeding
dark, and blind, with Respect to any realizing View, or Apprehension, that we
have of the glorious Perfections of God. Men ben't sensible of the Darkness and
Blindness of their own Minds, until they have been in some Measure, divinely
illuminated. I have often thought, that our Case may very well be compared, to
that of a Man tha is born, and brought up in a dark Dungeon. He knows no
Difference between Darkness, and Light, until he sees some Gleams of Light,
shine through a Chink; which for the present ravish his Heart; but when these
are intercepted, he sits and bemoans himself, in his dark, and uncomfortable
State. God is pleased to enlighten the Minds of good Men; especially at some
Seasons, and give them an inward Apprehension of his glorious Perfections, in
such a Manners, as to draw forth their whole Souls after him, as their Portion,
and only Happiness: so that the Love of God is shed abroad in their Hearts, and
they can rejoice in God, with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. So David says,
Lord, lift thou up the Light of thy Countenance upon us. And our Savior says,
He will manifest himself to true Believers. -- But according to your Doctrine,
there are no such special Sealings of the Spirit. Every Man can know enough of
God, by the constantly concurring Influences of his Spirit, and Grace, so that
he has it entirely in his own Power, to love God supremely, and delight in him.

10. Your Principles are directly Opposite to true Thankfulness. When a
Christian has a View of his own Vileness, and Unworthiness, so that he appears
loathsome to himself; and yet at the same Time, has a Sense of the Riches of
God's Grace, in plucking him as a Brand out of the Fire, this will excite true
Thankfulness. He knows, that he was no better by Nature than other Men, and he
has such a Sense of the Aggravations of his own Sins, which he committed
against God; that he looks upon himself to be less than the least of all God's
Mercies. He can say therefore as the Apostle, It is by the Grace of God that I
am what I am. He wonders at, and admires, the Riches of God's Grace; in
bringing him out of the horrible Pit, and miry Clay, when he might have been
left, as well as many others, to treasure up to himself, Wrath against the Day
of Wrath. The Language of his Heart therefore is; What shall I render to the
Lord for all his Benefits? Because thy loving kindness is better than Life; my
Lips shall praise thee. And he desires above all Things, that he may be more,
and more, conformed to God; and that he may be more, and more, devoted to his
Service. But according to your Principles, he is mistaken, after all: God has
not distinguished him, from any others, by any special Influences of his Grace;
and therefore it is owing to himself, and not to God, that he is in a State of
Grace, and going to Heaven, while many others are going to Destruction; and he
may thank himself for it.

11. Your Doctrine, renders the great Duty of Prayer, especially for spiritual
Assistances, of little or no Importance. Let a Man be converted, or
unconverted; what Influences of the Holy Spirit must he pray for? If he be
wicked, and ungodly, what divine Influences can he ask for, more than he has
already received? He can (it is true,) upon your Principles express his
Thankfulness, (such as it is,) to God, that he has made him a moral Agent; and
endowed him with such Faculties; that he has a Liberty of Indifference, to
choose that which is well pleasing in his Sight; and has granted to him "the
glorious Revelation of his Spirit, to discover to him the infinite Evil of Sin,
and the divine Amiableness of Holiness:" And though he loves Sin and rowls it
under his Tongue as a sweet Morsel, but sees no Beauty in Holiness, and has not
only the strongest Aversion to it, but looks upon the Gospel as a Delusion, and
upon all those who make any serious Profession of it with Scorn, as a Pack of
whining Hypocrites or over heated Enthusiasts, yet he has it in his own Power
to love, and delight in it, when he pleases. What now has he to ask for more?
Must he pray, that God would open his Eyes by the illuminating Influences of
his Spirit, to discover to him the odious Nature of Sin, the Amiableness of
Holiness, and the divine Glory, and Preciousness of a crucified Savior? No;
this would be as Mr. BEACH expresses it, "to gape for New-Light." Must he pray,
that God would bow his stubborn, and rebellious Will, and incline his hard, and
impenitent Heart, to a willing Obedience, to the Gospel of his dear Son? No:
This would "destroy his moral Agency." What then! Must he pray, that God would
deliver him from the reigning Power, and Pollution of Sin, by the purifying,
and cleansing Efficacy of Christ's Blood? No; "Christ never died to procure
Sanctification for any Man; he died only to obtain Pardon." Well, if he died to
obtain Pardon, man't he pray that God would pardon and justify him, by the
Imputation of CHRIST'S Righteousness, as he died our Surety and is the Lord our
Righteousness? No: for " Christ's Righteousness is infinite, and therefore
cannot be applied to a finite Creature." In a word then, may he pray, that God
would give him a new, abiding Principle of Faith, and Holiness, whereby he may
without fail, persevere unto eternal Life? No: for then he must "turn
Calvinist:" And he had as good be what he is; as to "worship Fate, under the
Notion of a God."

And upon your Principles, what spiritual Blessings can we pray for in the
Behalf of others? When Ministers Pray, that God would convert their wicked
People; what do they hope that God will do for them more than he has done? Or
when Parents pray for the Repentance, and Conversion of their wicked Children,
what can they mean by it? According to your Principles, they have Grace
sufficient already, if they would but improve it: And if God should influence
their Wills, and incline their Hearts by the insuperable Efficacy of his Grace,
what would become of their free Agency? -- But once more, and to omit many
other Things,

12. Your Doctrine tends to depreciate the Gospel, and the Means of Grace. The
Gospel is "The Power of God unto Salvation, to every one that believes." And
the Means of Grace are divine Institutions, and do never sail of producing
their salutary Effects, from any Inesticacy in them, as such; but from their
being abused.

And every sensible Christian, must needs prize and value the Gospel, and Means
of Grace, as they are appointed by God, and effectual by his Blessing, to
promote their Salvation. But instead of depending upon the Blessing of God, in
the Use of these Means; your Doctrine, teaches Men to depend upon their own
Power, and their own Wills; which must from the very Nature of their free
Agency; have a Liberty of Indifference, to Good, and Evil; whether they have or
have not, the Means of Grace. -- But to return,

V. Your Arminian Doctrine, that we are not justified by the Righteousness of
CHRIST, imputed to us; and received by Faith; is of very dangerous Consequence.

For,

I. It tends to depreciate, or undervalue the meritorious Sufficiency of
Christ's Sufferings, and Death. There is an infinite Value and Sufficiency in
the Merits of Christ: And therefore he is able to save to the uttermost all
that come to him. What your particular Opinion in this Case, is, I cannot say;
but Mr. BEACH, whose Principles you have undertaken to defend, has freely
expressed his Sentiments upon this Head. Having mentioned my Brother's Opinion,
that Adam was our faederal Head, by whose Obedience, or Disobedience, we were
to stand, or fall, according to the Tenor of the first Covenant: He says, (2d
Reply, p. 54.) This I did then, and do still call a Fable. It has not only no
Foundation in the Word of God; but is there plainly contradicted. -- Besides,
it is in many Respects, a most absurd Scheme. To name but one. This Hypothesis
makes Adam's Righteousness, infinitely more valuable, and efficacious than that
of Christ the Lord from Heaven. For according to Mr. Dickinson, if Adam had
kept but one Precept, and that for a short Time, that Obedience would have been
of such infinite Virtue; as to secure eternal Happiness to himself, and to
every single Child of his for ever: Whereas Christ's most holy Life, and
dreadful Death, could save but a Part of Mankind. Mr. BEACH could not mean
according to my Brother's Opinion, with Respect to the Extent of Christ's
Redemption; for he says (p. 38.) Mr. DICKINSON contradicts them, ( i. e. other
Calvinists,) and joins with me, in asserting that he died for every individual
of the human Race. What I would observe is, that he asserts that Christ wrought
out a sufficient Redemption for all Mankind. -- I never taught universal
Redemption in any other Sense, or in stronger Terms. And besides Mr. BEACH
confines his Meaning, to my Brother's Opinion, concerning the Effect of Adam's
Obedience; and the Advantage that would have accrued from it, to his Posterity:
And accordingly asserts, if all Mankind would have been in a confirmed State of
Happiness, by Adam's Obedience; then his Righteousness would have been
infinitely more sufficient, than the Righteousness of Christ; for Christ's most
holy Life, and dreadful Death, could save but a Part of Mankind. So that
according to him, Christ's Righteousness is so infinitely defective, that it
can save but a Part of Mankind! Is this, Sir, agreeable to the
Scripture-Doctrine, that there is such an infinite Sufficiency, in Christ's
Righteousness, that the greatest Sinner may flee to him for Shelter, from
impending Wrath? But

2. This Doctrine, teaches Men to trust, at least in Part, to their own
Obedience, for their Justification before God. And hence they are in infinite
Danger, of not attaining to the Law of Righteousness, because they seek it not
by Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law. Men may think they do Honor
enough, to the great Redeemer, whilst they acknowledge him, to be the
meritorious Cause of Salvation; though at the same Time they trust to their
religious Seize, imagining that they have some real Worth, or Value, (not
to say Merit,) in them, to procure their Justification. But alas! our best
Duties are but as filthy Rags, there is so much Sin mixed with them, that our
very Tears have need of Washing in the Blood of Christ.

VI. Your Arminian Doctrine, that true Saints may totally and finally fall from
Grace, gives Men a wrong Notion of the Covenant of Grace, and of the Mediator
of it. The Word of God assures us, that those whom God loves, he loves to the
End. That they who are justified, shall he glorified. That true Believers, will
be kept by the Power of God, through Faith unto Salvation. That when Men are
born of God, their Seed remains in them; and therefore they cannot Sin unto
Death. And that they who do sin, (i. e. live in Sin,) have not seem Jesus
Christ, neither have they known him. And therefore it follows, that they who do
see, and know Jesus Christ, will never be in such a State of Sin. But according
to your Arminian Doctrine, a Person may be a good Man to Day; and in the Love,
and Favor of God; but to morrow he may die, and go to Hell. But this Principle
supposes, that the Covenant of Grace, is as precarious as the Covenant of
Works, and Christ the Mediator of it, as mutable as Adam. According to the
Tenor of the Covenant of Grace, God will write his Laws in the Hearts of his
People, and he will be unto them a God, and they shall be unto him a People.
And hence, this Covenant is well ordered in all Things and sure. And as Christ
is an unchangeable Mediator; so the Promises are in him all Yea, and Amen. And
hence, true Believers have the greatest Assurance, of the future Enjoyment of
that great Good, which is promised: since they know him, whom they have
trusted, and that he will keep that which is committed to him. -- God is
willing in the Covenant of Grace, more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of
Promise the Immutability of his Counsel, and accordingly, has confirmed it with
an Oath: That by two immutable Things, in which it was impossible for God to
lie; we might have a strong Consolation who have fled for Refuge, to lay hold
on the Hope set before us.

Thus, Sir. I have considered some of the Consequences, which appear to me to
be deducible from your Principles, taken separately; I might mention others
that flow from them taken together; but as I have already exceeded the Bounds
of my intended Brevity, I shall mention but one; and that is, that your
Principles tend to make Persons believe, that it is vastly easier to obtain
eternal Happiness, than the Scriptures represent the Case. And hence, how
naturally do Men content themselves with a mere Form of Godliness; while they
deny the Power of it? Our Savior ( who knews what is in Man) says, Luke xiii.
24. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate; for many, I say unto you, shall seek
to enter and shall not be able. And Matthew. vii. 13, 14. Enter ye in at the
strait Gate; -- Because strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way, that leads
unto life; and few there be that find it. But you say (P. 43.) It is (according
to the Arminians,) entirely in your Power, through the constant Concurrence,
and Influence of divine Grace, to choose, and obtain eternal Life. If you have
it entirely in your own Power to obtain eternal Life; what need is there, that
you should work out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling? I must acknowledge,
your Doctrine that God's Decrees do necessarily influence the Event; does
eternally block up the Way against the Non Elect; otherwise all Men might
obtain eternal Life with all imaginable Ease. And therefore it is no Wonder, if
Men who embrace these Principles, say, We shall have Peace, though we walk in
the Imagination of our own Hearts, to add Drunkenness to Thirst.

These Consequences which I have mentioned, do naturally follow (as I firmly
believe,) from your Arminian Principles. But however, if the People who embrace
these Principles, don't appear generally, to be less concerned about their
Salvation than other Men, I must confess, I shall have Reason to question;
whether I am not mistaken. For the Effect, will bear some Proportion to the
Cause, by which it is influenced. You say, (p. 8.) That you are unqualified to
hold the Balance, to weigh the actual Effects of the respective Doctrines. But
Mr. BEACH seems to be more ingenuous, and to freely own, that the Calvinists do
for the present live better Lives than the Arminians. His Words are (2d Reply
p. 78.) And if any of you are wicked, (as I hope not,) yet this is not so much
the Fault of the Man, as his Principles; whereas if we are vicious, (as it is
too true,) it is the Man, and not his Principles, that is to be blamed. His
meaning must be, that the Calvinists are either better by Nature, or have
better Advantages to be religious, than the Arminians; and that it is this, and
not their Principles, that makes the Difference in their Lives. I grant, some
Allowance ought to be made, upon the Account of the superior Advantages, which
the Calvinists generally have, more than the Arminians: But it is manifest,
this is not the only Thing, that makes the Difference, for there are some
Arminians that enjoy the same Advantages with others; and yet are vicious.

But he intimates that the Calvinists were not always the most religious; The
Pharisees (he says, ibid.) were rigid Proedestinarians, or Calvinists, as they
are now called. And to prove this, why could he not say as Mr. Dodwell? St.
Paul being bred a Pharisee, spoke and is to be interpreted, ex mente
Pharisaeorum, according to the Doctrine of the Pharisees. But be it so, that
the Pharisees held the Doctrine of Predestination to eternal Life. Then it will
follow, that this was the Doctrine of the Jewish Church. For they were not
only, the most strict in their Morals; but the most orthodox in their
Principles, of any Part of the Jewish Church. There were a great many of them
Hypocrites, it is true; and they held one grand Error; for being ignorant of
the Righteousness of God, they went about to establish their own Righteousness:
and in this Respect they were Arminians. And their Hypocrisy, and Wickedness,
was chiefly owing to this Principle; and not to their believing the Doctrine of
Predestination, any more than their believing the Resurrection.

But Mr. BEACH brings one Instance more, (p. 79.) Look back (says he,) upon the
State of our Nation, just one hundred Years past, in the Time of the grand
Rebellion, never did these Principles prevail so much-before, nor since, and
never, was there so much Wickedness in the Nation. The grand Rebellion! I
acknowledge the Propriety of the Expression.

For to rebel against the Sovereign Authority of the Law, and set up the
lawless Will of a misguided Prince as the Standard of Government; is as grand a
Rebellion as can be against any earthly Authority. But Mr. BEACH is mistaken,
when he thinks that our Principles prevailed chiefly in the Time of that grand
Rebellion: For Archbishop LAUD, (who was no small Instrument in that
Rebellion,) and a number of the Clergy of the Church of England, did openly
profess the Arminian Principles at that Time; which they would not dare to have
done some Time before. Dr. JOHNSON (Pref. p. 11.) owns, that Calvinism
prevailed in the Church of England, from within the Marian Persecution, to the
Restoration; i. e. until about 100 Years after the Reformation. So that it was
these Principles, that comforted, and supported the holy Martyrs, when they
were called to pass through the fiery Trial, when they could rejoice with Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory. And Mr. BEACH is likewise mistaken, when he
thinks, that there was more Wickedness in the Nation before the Restoration,
than there has been since: for it is manifest, that the People in general were
much more sober, and serious at that Time, than after the Restoration; when a
Flood of open Wickedness covered the Nation; the Dregs of which, have not been
purged off until this Day.

Thus, Sir, I have finished the Task, which you have assigned me. And may the
God of Truth, lead us into all Truth.

I am, Sir, Your humble Servant MOSES DICKINSON.

BOOKS sold by D. Foul in Queen Street.
COLMAN'S Practical Discourses on the Parable of the Ten Virgins. COLMAN'S Life
and Character. Remarkable Passages in the Life of Col. GARDENER. WATTS'S
Sermons on various Subjects Divine and Moral. WATTS'S Discourses on the World
to come: WATTS'S Orthodoxy and Charity united, in several Essays. WATTS'S
Lyrick Poems, Sacred to Devotion, etc. WATTS'S Catechisms and Prayers: Or, some
Helps to Religion. WATTS on Prayer. BARNARD on the Imperfection of the
Creature. Mrs. ROW's Life, and Letters from the Dead to the Living. A Present
for an Apprentice. By a late Lord Mayor of LONDON. Present for a Servant Maid,
with Directions for dressing Victuals. DOUGLASS'S Summary, Historical and
Political of NORTH AMERICA. MALL'S HISTORY of the Martyrs, or the Sufferers
Mirror, etc. ERSKINE'S GOSPEL SONNETS. SHEPARD'S Meditations and Experiences,
Select Cases Resolved, etc. No CROSS, NO CROWN. A Discourse showing the Nature
and Discipline of the HOLY CROSS of CHRIST. By WILLIAM PENN.

