Dr. Watts ON Orthodoxy and Charity In several Reconciling Essays.

Books Sold by Rogers and Foul.
Mall's History of the Martyrs, or the Sufferers Mirror. Colman's Practical
Discourses on the Parable of the Ten Virgins. Colman's Life and Character.
Shepard's Meditations and Experiences, Select Cases resolved, etc. Watts's
Catechisms and Prayers: Or, some Helps to Religion. Mrs. Row's Life, and
Letters from the Dead to the Living. Watts's Sermons on various Subjects Divine
and Moral. Barnard on the Imperfection of the Creature. A Present for an
Apprentice. By a late Lord Mayor of London. Present for a Servant Maid, with
Directions for dressing Victuals. Douglass's Summary Historical and Political
of North America. Watts's Discourses on the World to come: Watts's Lyrick
Poems, Sacred to Devotion, etc. Beach's Reply to Dickinson's Second Vindication
of Free Grace. Remarks upon Mr. Mills's Vindication of Gospel Truth, etc.
Johnson's New System of Morality. Johnson Of loving and delighting in the
Public Worship of God. Hooper On the Truth and Reasonableness of the Christian
Religion. Chauncy On the various Gifts of Ministers. Wetmore's Vindication of
the Professors of the Church of England. The Art of Preaching, in Imitation of
Horace's Art of Poetry. Breck On the Duty of Ministers to exhort to Good Works.
Foster's Account of the Behavior of the Earl of Kilmarnock. Account of the
Apparition of the Earl of Kilmarnock to Foster. Mather's Two Witnesses to
produce a well established Assurance. Willard's Peril of the Times displayed.
Watt's on Prayer. Guthery's Trial of a saving Interest in Christ. Fox on Time.
Dickinson's Second Vindication of Sovereign Free Grace. Mills's Vindication of
Gospel Truth, and Refutation of Errors. The Dissenting Gentleman's Answer to
White's Three Letters. Croswell's Defense of the Doctrine of Justifying Faith.
William's Answer to Croswell on Justifying Faith. Croswell's second Defense of
Justifying Faith. Bunyan's Grace abounding. The Englishman directed in the
Choice of his Religion. Remarkable Passages in the Life of Col. Gardener.
Orthodoxy and Charity united: In several Reconciling ESSAYS ON THE Law and
Gospel, Faith and Works; VIZ. ESSAY I. The Substance or Matter of the Gospel.
II. The Form of the Gospel. III. The Use of the Law under the Gospel. IV.
Mistaken Ways of coming to God without Christ. V. A plain and easy Account of
Saving Faith, or coming to God by Jesus Christ. VI. A Reconciling Thought on
various Controversies about Faith and Salvation. VII. Against Uncharitableness.
VIII. The Difficulties in Scripture, and the different Opinions of Christians.
IX. An Apology for Christians of different Sentiments.


Speaking the Truth in Love. Ephesians. iv. 15. The Second Edition.

BOSTON, N. E. Re printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street.
MDCCXLIX.

THE PREFACE.
ALMOST every one of these Essays was written above twenty Years ago, and some
of them more than thirty. The Author finds Reason to offer his sincere
Acknowledgments and Thanks to Almighty God, who has preserved him, even to this
Day, in the same Sentiments and Principles of Christian Faith and Love, amidst
the numerous Follies and Errors of the Times.

One of these Papers indeed, found its way into the World the very Year in
which it was written; the very Design of it was to exemplify the Title of this
Book, and it has been often since solicited to be printed again: But it was
delayed for many Years, till the Author had formed a Collection of Papers of
this Sort large enough to compose a moderate Volume; and the Reader will be
sufficiently informed of the present Reason of this Publication, by a mere
explaining of the Words of the Title, Orthodoxy and Charity united.

By the Word Orthodoxy, the Author means all those Christian Doctrines which
were generally approved in the last Age, so far as he knows at least, by almost
all the Protestant Dissenters in the Nation; even those great Doctrines on
which the Reformation from the Church of Rome was built; and they continued so
all the time these Essays were writing, and long before, in the general good
Esteem of the Churches, as being conformable to the Ins^^uctions of Christ and
his Apostles. It is needless in this Place to reckon them all up particularly,
but in general they were such as these.

1. By the Fall of the first Man, he, together with his Posterity, lost their
Innocence and their Immortality, their Bodies were subjected to Diseases and
Death, their natural Inclinations were perverted from that which is good, and
there was a strange prevailing Biass in human Nature, even from its Infancy, to
that which in Evil.

2. In order to their Recovery from this Ruin, there is not only a Necessity of
the Pardon of their Sins, and Reconciliation of their Persons to God, but there
is need also that their sinful Natures be healed, and renewed by sanctifying
Grace, in order to restore Men to Virtue and Piety, i. e. to the Love of God
and their Fellow Creatures.

3. The Son of God, who in the Language of Scripture is one with the Father,
came down from Heaven to take Flesh, and therein to fulfill the Duties of the
Law, and give an Example of perfect Holiness: And then he was appointed to
suffer Death as a Sacrifice and Atonement for the Sins of Men, that Mankind
might thereby obtain Pardon and the Favor of God.

4. There is a Necessity also that Sinners should heartily repent of their
Sins, return to God, and be renewed to the Principles and Temper of Holiness,
in order to their complete Recovery to Eternal Life and Happiness.

5. Besides this Repentance and Returning to God, it is also required that they
believe in the Name of Jesus Christ their Savior, or trust in him with a
humble Expectation of the Favor of God through him: And it is through this
Faith they are to be justified and accepted of God.

6. They are also obliged to obey the Law of God, as far as this feeble and
Imperfect State admits of, during their whole Life, and still to grow up
toward Perfection therein.

7. When such Persons die, their Souls are conveyed to a State of Peace and
Rest in the Presence of God, till the great Day of the Resurrection, when their
Bodies shall rise again from the Dead, and the whole Person, Body and Soul, be
made happy for ever in the Favor and Presence of God their Maker.

These Doctrines were generally professed at the time of the Reformation, by
Protestants abroad and at home, and these are the Set of Principles which have
been usually called Orthodoxy or right Sentiments.

Now it has unhappily fallen out, that many of those who have received and
professed these important Doctrines, have differed also in many lesser Points,
such as the Logical Relations of some of these Doctrines to one another, that
is, Whether Faith or Works be Conditions or Consequents of their Justification
and Acceptance; what is the essential Difference between the Covenant of Works
and the Covenant of Grace, or the Law and the Gospel, etc. as well as in
several particular Practices of divine Worship, such as Ceremonies, Vestures,
imposed Forms of Prayer, etc. and they have so far quarrelled about these
Things as too much to neglect and abandon that Christian Love and Charity they
ought to have maintained, according to their general Acknowledgement of the
great and necessary Truths and Rules of Christianity, and hereby they have in
many Instances lost that Duty and Character of good Christians, (viz.) to Love
one another.

Now since these unhappy and uncharitable Practices, even amongst some good
Men, have prevailed even to this Day, it is the Design of these Essays to
endeavor the Recovery of these Persons, who unite in these Principles, to
charitable Sentiments and Practices toward one another.

Here it will be very natural to enquire, Where is there found amongst all
these Essays, any Attempt to reconcile those to the Christian Love and Charity
of others, who while they profess the Christian Religion, yet oppose, renounce
or deny the great Doctrines of the atoning Sacrifice of Christ, or his
Propitiation for Sin by his Death?

All the Answer that can be given is this: The Author would gladly have done
it, that the whole Book might be of a Piece, and every Page might overflow with
Love, if he could, after the turning over his New Testament, have met with any
evident Instances, or Examples, any plain Rules or Requirements of such
Christian Charity expressed toward Persons of this Character in all the sacred
Writings.

But the Language of Scripture gives no Encouragement to such a Charity; for
this Doctrine is not any where numbered among the doubtful Disputables of our
Religion, the lesser Things of Christianity, such as Meats and Drinks, and
Observation of Days, and outward Forms of Worship; but it is spoken of as a
matter of far higher Importance, and I think seems to be necessary to
constitute Christianity itself.

This Doctrine contains in it the highest and the kindest Design toward Men,
for which our blessed Savior came down from Heaven; 'twas for this very Reason
he came into this World, ( viz.) to give his Life a Ransom for Sinners, Matthew.
xx. 28. and it is repeated in Mark x. 45. So that those who depart from and
renounce this Article, renounce the kindest Design of the Coming and the Death
of Christ, and they seem, by the Words of the holy Writings, to be exposed to
another sort of Sentence, from which may the Grace of God recover and preserve
them!

In the mean time, I hope those who heartily unite in their Sentiments of these
great Doctrines which I have mentioned, and maintain a correspondent Practice
of strict Holiness and Dependence upon Jesus Christ our great High Priest, and
our Sacrifice, will be taught by some of these Papers, to learn the Duties of
Christian Love more perfectly, agreeable to the original Design of the holy
Founder of our Religion.

It should be observed here, that though the chief part of these Essays were
written at the time which is mentioned, yet there happen to be now and then a
few Lines or Pages, and some few Citations from elder or later Authors, which
were not all written or inserted at that time.

Let it be observed also, that all the Characters here mentioned are general
and indefinite; and there is not one Character or Name, that is now written in
these Papers, or ever was, that was designed to be applied to any particular
Person: For the Author avoided it with Care in all these Writings, and in all
his Reviews of them, that no single Person whatsoever should be so particularly
described, as to imagine himself to be intended, and much less to be
distinguished by any Reader. May the divine Blessing attend every humble
Attempt to establish the Christian Faith, and to confirm and enlarge our Love.
Amen.

THE CONTENTS.
ESSAY I. THE Substance or Matter of the Gospel. Page 1 Sect. 1. The Sense of
the Word Gospel. Page 1 Sect. 2. The Substance of the Gospel argued and proved.
Page 8 Sect. 3. Answers to Objections. Page 20
ESSAY II. The Form of the Gospel. Page 25 Sect. 1. Is the Gospel a Conditional
Promise? Page 25 Sect. 2. Is the Gospel a New Law? Page 32 Sect. 3. Objections
answered. Page 44 Sect. 4. Reconciling Sentiments. Page 52 Sect. 5. Advices or
Requests. Page 65
ESSAY III. The True Use of the Moral Law under the Gospel, from Matt. xix. 17.
Page 73 Sect. 1. The Introduction. Page 73 Sect. 2. The Sense of Christ's
Answer to the Inquirer. Page 80 Sect 3. An Answer to some Objections. Page 90
Sect. 4. Of what Use is it to keep the Law? Page 103 Sect. 5. Reflections drawn
from th^^ Discourse. Page 111
ESSAY IV. The Mistaken Ways of coming to God without Christ, from John xiv. 6.
Page 125 ESSAY V. A plain and easy Account of a Sinner's coming to God by Jesus
Christ, from John xiv. 6. Page 140 ESSAY VI. A View of the Manifold Salvation
of Man by Jesus Christ, represented in order to reconcile Christians of
different Sentiments. Page 166 Sect. 1. The Characters of Christ as our
Deliverer from the Sinfulness of our Natures. Page 167 Sect. 2. The Characters
of Christ as our Deliverer from the Guilt and Punishment of Sin. Page 169 Sect.
3. The Reasons why Christ and his Salvation may be represented to us under
these various Characters. Page 179 Sect. 4. The Difficulties which are relieved
by this various Representation of the Salvation of Christ. Page 183
ESSAY VII. Against Uncharitableness. Page 192 Sect. 1. The Causes of
Uncharitableness. Page 194 Sect. 2. An occasional Vindication of the Apostles
from the Charge of Uncharitableness. Page 214 Sect. 3. The mischievous Effects
of Uncharitableness. Page 219 Appendix to the first Edition. Page 235
ESSAY VIII. Of the Difficulties of Scripture, and different Opinions in Things
less necessary. Page 239 Sect. 1. A short Account of these Difficulties. Page
239 Sect. 2. An Insurrection of contending Christians. Page 253 Sect. 3. Some
Reasons why these Differences are permitted to arise among Christians. Page 260
ESSAY IX. An Apology for Christians of different Sentiments. In a Letter to a
Friend. Page 270
ESSAY I. The SUBSTANCE or MATTER of the GOSPEL.
SECTION I.
THE Word, Gospel, is used in more Senses than one. Sometimes it signifies the
History of the Life and Doctrine, the Death and Resurrection of Christ. So Mark
i. 1. The Beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God. And so it is
used in common Speech, when we call the Writings of the four Evangelists the
four Gospels. But in the most proper and usual Sense of it in Scripture, it
signifies a Discovery of Divine Mercy, through a Mediator, to Mankind fallen
into Sin and Misery; therefore in Greek it is called Evaggelion, or Glad
Tidings.

The English Name indeed, as derived from its Saxon Original, signifies only
the Word of God: Yet it is now peculiarly applied to the Word of his Grace,
which reveals Salvation to sinful and miserable Man, and therefore it is often
called the Covenant of Grace.

This Salvation is made up of many Benefits or Blessings, Part of which are
bestowed in this World, and the rest in the World that is to come. The
Revelation of these Benefits, and of the Foundation on which they stand, and of
the Way whereby we come to be Partakers of them, is the Matter, Sum and
Substance of the Gospel, in its most general Notion among Christians.

This Gospel was not revealed all at once in its full Glory to Mankind. There
have been several Editions of it, or gradual Discoveries of this Grace in all
the former Ages of the World.

As soon as ever Adam had sinned, and ruined himself and his Posterity too, by
laying the Foundation of their Sin and Misery, it pleased God to publish this
Gospel by the Promise of a Savior, when he told our Mother Eve, that her Seed
should bruise the Head of the Serpent that had deceived her, Genesis iii. 15.
This, by our Divines, is usually called the first Gospel; for, in the modern
Language of the New Testament it signifies, that Jesus Christ should come into
this World to destroy the Works of the Devil, 1 John iii. 8.

Doubtless Noah, the second Father of Mankind, had some farther Discoveries
made to him, when the Rainbow was appointed as the Seal of a gracious Covenant
betwixt God and Man: For the very Promise of the Continuance of the comfortable
Seasons of the Year, being given to Man in a Way of Mercy, do imply that God
would not be irreconcilable to his fallen Creatures. Nor can we reasonably
suppose but that Adam and Noah, and all those most ancient Patriarchs, had
larger Explications and Comments of the first Promise given them than Moses has
recorded.

This Gospel was renewed by Revelations made to Abraham, when the Messiah, the
Savior, was pro^^^^d to spring out of his Family; in thy Seed shall all
Nations of the Earth be blessed. Which Promise is expressly called the Gospel,
Gal. iii. 8. There was also a Type or Pattern of our Justification by Faith in
the Way of the Gospel, when Abraham believed God in his Promises, and it was
imputed to him for Righteousness, Romans v. 3.

Moses had a much larger Discovery of the Grace and Mercy of God toward sinful
Man made to him, and to the Jews by him, than all the Patriarchs put together:
And this was not only done in the Types, and Figures, and Ceremonies, not only
in Altars, Sacrifices, Washings, Sprinklings, Purifications, and in their
Redemption from Egypt, their miraculous Salvations in the Wilderness, and their
safe Conduct to Canaan, the Land of promised Rest; but he had many literal and
express Revelations of pardoning and sanctifying Grace, which are scattered up
and down in the five Books which he wrote, and which he gave to the Children of
Israel to direct their Religion. This is also called the Gospel, Heb. iv. 2. To
them was the Gospel preached as well as unto us, as those Words ought to be
translated. This same Gospel was afterward confirmed, illustrated and enlarged
by succeeding Prophets in the several Ages of the Jewish Church.

But God, who at sundry Times and in diverse Manners spoke this Gospel to our
Fathers by the Prophets, has in these later Days published the same to us in a
brighter Manner, by his Son Jesus, the promised Savior, Heb. i. 1 And since
the Death and Resurrection of Christ, the Apostles being sent by their exalted
Lord, have given yet plainer and fuller Declarations of this Gospel to the
Children of Men.

And upon this Account it is several Times called the Gospel of Christ, not
only because the Offices and Grace of Christ run through the whole of it, but
also because the clearest Discoveries of it are made to the World by Christ,
and by his Messengers the Apostles.

Now, from this last and fullest Revelation of it in the New Testament, we may
derive a fuller and more perfect Knowledge of the Gospel than all the former
Ages could attain. Hereby we learn, that the Gospel is a Promise of Salvation
from Sin and Hell, by the Death, Righteousness and Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to every one that is sincerely willing to accept of it by coming to
Christ, or trusting in him; and it includes also the promised Aid of the Holy
Spirit to those who seek it, to enable them to receive this Salvation, and to
fit them for the final Possession of the promised Glory. It includes also the
Revelation of the future Resurrection, the last Judgment and eternal Life. To
this End did the Son of God come into the World, that whosoever ^elieves on him
should not perish, but have everlasting Life, John iii. 16.

This may be made out and explained more at large in the following Manner.

The Salvation which the Gospel proposes, is exactly answerable to our present
State of Sin and Wretchedness, and fully supplies all the Necessities of fallen
Man, his Guilt and deserved Misery, his sinful and corrupted Nature, and his
utter Inability to help himself; and therefore it must contain in it Holiness
and Happiness, with divine Directions and divine Aids in order to attain them.
The Happiness of it is a Freedom from that Death and Punishment which we had
incurred by Sin, and a Recovery to the Favor of God which we had lost, and
everlasting Joy therein. The Holiness of it is the Image of God in which we
were at first created, which Image was defaced and ruined by Man's first
Transgression.

The Foundation of this Salvation is the eternal Mercy and Goodwill of God the
Father, to his poor, perishing, sinful Creatures, by the glorious Undertaking
and various Transactions and Offices of our Lord Jesus Christ as Mediator, and
the several Operations of the Blessed Spirit.

This Salvation, in the whole of it, is contrived and appointed by the various
Attributes of God, especially his Wisdom, Power and Goodness, exerting
themselves for this Purpose: It Is purchased or procured for us by the Death and
Sufferings of Jesus Christ: It Is applied to us by the Work of the Holy Spirit.

We are chosen to partake of all this Salvation, both the Holiness and
Happiness of it, by the eternal Goodwill of the Father. We are recovered to the
Favor of God, and Happiness, by the Obedience or Righteousness, the Death and
Intercession of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Son of God in our Nature. We
are restored to the Image of God and Holiness by the Spirit of Christ, that is
promised and sent down into this World, to change our Hearts and reform our
Lives, and thereby fit us for the heavenly Happiness.

But what are we to do that we may become Partakers of this Salvation? For it
is not every Son and Daughter of Adam who are Possessors of it. Now it is the
Gospel that reveals this to us, and also directs us in it. The appointed Way to
partake of this Salvation is by Believing or Trusting in Christ; that is, when
from a deep Sense of the Evil of Sin, and our Guilt and Danger on that Account,
we grow weary and heavy laden with the Burden of our Sins, and surrender or
betrust ourselves to the Lord Jesus Christ, that by his Death and Obedience we
may be saved from Hell, and be accepted unto eternal Life, and that by the
divine Aid of his Spirit, we may have all the sinful Powers of our Natures
renewed and sanctified, and fitted for that Life eternal which Christ has
purchased. Thus you see this Grace of Faith necessarily draws along with it
sincere Repentance for Sin, and Desires after true Holiness.

When we consider that we are by Nature afar off from God, ignorant and averse
to all that is holy, we shall find that we are not more able to believe unto
Salvation, nor to repent of Sin, at first, than we are to perform Works of
Holiness afterward. Therefore this Gospel provides us with divine Strength to
fulfill these Duties; Christ is our Strength, as well as our Righteousness. He
is exalted to bestow Repentance as well as Forgiveness; and Faith is the Gift
of God, who creates us anew in Christ Jesus unto good Works, Isa. xlv. Acts v.
Ephesians. ii. and makes us holy by his Spirit, as is before expressed. It Is by the
Holy Spirit considered eminently as the Spirit of Christ, that we are enabled
to receive this Salvation at first, and trained up and prepared for the full
Possession of it.

It is further also comprehended in this Gospel, and promised in this gracious
Constitution of God, that when we have finished our State of Trial on Earth,
our Souls shall be received at Death into the Presence and Enjoyment of God;
and our Bodies also shall be raised from the Grave in the great Resurrection
Day, and thus our whole Natures shall be made happy together to all Eternity.

This is the Matter and Subject of the gracious Revelation of God, this the
Method of Salvation, and the Manner of our partaking of it, which is appointed
by God himself, and this is what I call the Substance of the Gospel. There are
some other Points of Importance that belong to it, but this is the Foundation
of all, and comprehensive of the rest.

To sum up the several Parts of it in as few Words as I can, the Gospel of
Christ is a gracious Constitution of God for the Recovery of sinful Man, by
sending his own Son in the Flesh to obey his Law, which Man had broken, to make
a proper Atonement for Sin by his Death, and to procure the Favor of God, and
eternal Happiness for all that believe and repent and receive this offered
Salvation, together with a Promise of the Holy Spirit to work this Faith and
Repentance in the Hearts of Men, to renew their sinful Natures unto Holiness,
to form them fit for this Happiness on Earth, and to bring them to the full
Possession of it in Heaven.

All this is so evident from a Variety of Scriptures that might be cited here,
that one would think there should be no need to prove it. But there have been
some Persons in the last and in the prefect Age (I chiefly intend the Socinian
Writers, and those nominal Christians who are leaning toward Deism) who would
impoverish and curtail the Gospel of Christ, and make it to consist in little
more than mere natural Religion. Some of these Persons just make a Shift to
persuade themselves to believe the Bible, or at least they profess to believe
it, because it is the Religion of their Country, but they explain it in so
poor, so narrow, so dry, and insipid a Manner as raises it very little above
the Light of Nature, viz. That if we follow the Dictates of our inward Reason
and our Conscience, in worshipping God, and in loving our Neighbors, according
to the Rules which Scripture has given us to explain and confirm the Light of
Nature, and herein imitate the holy Example of our Lord Jesus Christ, then our
Sins shall be forgiven us by the mere Mercy of God, through the Supplication
and Intercession of so good a Man as Jesus Christ, and we shall be accepted to
eternal Life; and this without any Dependence on the Death of Christ as a
proper Atonement or Satisfaction for Sin, or any Regard to him as a true and
real Sacrifice. And as for the Spirit of God, and his Almighty Operation on the
Souls of Men, to enlighten and sanctify them, at least in our Age, this is
almost banished out of their Gospel, and finds but little room in their
Religion.

I think it necessary therefore to prove, that the Gospel of Christ is such a
Doctrine as I have described; and that I shall do by these five Reasons.

SECT. II.
I. This Doctrine, which I have now mentioned, of the Restoration of Believers
in Jesus Christ to the Favor of God, by the atoning Sacrifice and Obedience of
Christ, and the renewing of sinful Men to God's Image by the Work of the Holy
Spirit, and thereby bringing them to eternal Life, is the very Gospel of
Christ, because it is the very Labor and Business, the chief Scope, Aim and
Design of the great Apostle of the Gentiles, in those of his Epistles where he
sets himself professedly to explain the Gospel; and this is what he takes
frequent Occasion also to bring into all his Writings. It is his perpetual
Labor to instruct the Jews and Gentiles in these glorious and unknown Truths:
He uses various Forms of Speech to explain them to their Understandings; for I
desire, says he, and determine to know nothing among you but Jesus Christ, and
him crucified, i. e. nothing like it; nothing in Comparison with it. It is the
Cross of Christ, that is and must be the great Subject of my Ministry; this is
what I am sent to preach, for it is the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God,
for the Salvation of Men. Romans i. 16. 1 Cor. i. 24. and ii. 2.

You find his Letters to the Churches full of such Expressions as these, Christ
died for our Sins. He gave himself for us to redeem us from all Iniquity. We
have Redemption through his Blood. God was in Christ reconciling the World to
himself, not imputing their Trespasses to them. He was made Sin, and a Curse
for us. He is our Propitiation, and Atonement. He appeared to put away Sin by
the Sacrifice of himself. When we were Enemies we were reconciled to God by his
Death. He made Peace by the Blood of his Cross. He was delivered for our
Offenses, and raised again for our Justification. By the Righteousness of one
Man the free Gift came upon all Men to Justification of Life. By the Obedience
of one, shall many be made Righteous; and we are justified by Faith in him. He
teaches us also the Offices of the Holy Spirit. We have Access to God through his
Spirit. We are purified and sanctified by the Spirit. It Is by the Spirit of
Christ that we are to mortify the Deeds of the Flesh. We are led by the Spirit;
and we are taught to understand this Gospel by the Spirit which he has given
us. We are sealed by this Spirit unto the Day of Redemption. The Spirit
dwelling in us is a Pledge and Earnest of our Inheritance in Heaven. Romans viii.
13. Ephesians. ii. 18. and iii. 16. and iv. 23. 2 These. ii. 13, etc.

Now these Expressions of his are to be understood in the common Sense and
Meaning of the Words, and not as far-fetched Metaphors; for it is evident, that
in all this he does not affect the Arts of Oratory, nor assume a magnificent
Air, of Writing, nor does he raise himself into Sublimities of Style, nor rove
in an Enthusiastic Way, when he treats of these Subjects; but while he is
explaining to us these great Things of the Gospel, he avoids the Wisdom of
Words and Oratory, and he talks in a plain rational, and argumentative Method
to inform the Minds of Men, and give them the clearest Knowledge of the Truth.

Surely a Person that was sent of God to preach and write the Gospel for the
Use of all Nations and future Ages, and even for the ignorant and uninstructed
Barbarians, would not have expressed himself in this sort of Language, if he
meant no more by it than the Socinians do by the Gospel of Christ; that is,
that the Lord Jesus Christ was a very great Man, but a mere Man still; he was a
Prophet ordained of God to preach up Holiness in greater Degrees than it had
been before preached, to settle some Points which were left a little doubtful
by the Light of Nature, to assure us that God would be reconciled to Man, and
forgive him, if Man repented and was sorry for his Sins, and lived as well as
he could for time to come; and that for the Sake of the Prayers of Christ, who
was so very pious, so very religious and so very heavenly a Person, and so
submissive in his Sufferings to the Will of God, he would favor the Penitent
among Mankind with some Blessings and Comforts in this World, and eternal Life
in the World above. Then when he had preached this Doctrine to the World, he
suffered the Death of the Cross, to bear witness to the Truth of it, and sealed
it with his Blood, and rose again for a further Confirmation of the same
Doctrine. Now if this were all the meaning of the Gospel of Christ, St. Paul
would never have preached it in such Language as he did. We must suppose him to
be a very unaccurate Writer, a most unintelligible Preacher and a most unfit
Man to be made an Apostle, and be sent to instruct the ignorant World, if he
had expressed himself in such mysterious, figurative, and strange Phrases, and
all this while had meant no more by them than what the Socinians mean by their
Gospel.

Can we think God would have employed such an Instrument as this was, whose Way
of Talking would have rather deceived Multitudes than informed them of the
Truth, would have led them into the Dark rather than have given them Light,
would have filled their Heads with mysterious Words without Ideas, and instead
of leading them into the Way of Salvation, would have left them in bewildered
Thoughts about the Doctrines and Duties of it with so much Entanglement and
Confusion?

Here I might add also, that the holy Apostle not only instructs his own
Countrymen the Jews, and the Gentile Strangers in this divine Doctrine, and
teaches them to build their Hopes of Salvation upon it; but he ventures his own
Soul, his immortal Concernments, and his everlasting Hopes upon the same
Foundation. He glories in the Cross of Christ, he has committed his All into
his Hands till the great Judgment Day; he lives by the Faith of the Son of God,
who loved me, says he, and gave himself for me, Gal. vi. 14. 2 Timothy i. 12.
Gal. ii. 20. It Is the Pleasure of his Tongue, it is the Joy of his Pen, it is the
Delight and the Life of his Spirit to talk of those Things: He hangs upon this
Subject, and knows not how to leave it; his very Heart and Soul is in it, and
he abandons all Things for the Sake of this Knowledge. He despises the former
Privileges of his Birth, of his Learning, of the Jewish Prerogatives and Rites.
He renounces all his Legal and Ceremonial Perfection, and all his Honor
amongst the Priests and the Pharisees in Comparison of this. What Things were
Gain to me, says he, those I count Loss for Christ: Yea, doubtless, and I count
all Things but Loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my
Lord, for whom I have suffered the Loss of all Things, and do count them but
Dung that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own
Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith; that I may know him and the
Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of his Sufferings, being made
conformable unto his Death, Philip. iii. 7, etc.

Nor is the Apostle Paul singular in this Respect, or different in his
Sentiments from the other Apostles. You find Peter and John saying the same
Things in their Epistles; and they take every Occasion to publish the same
Gospel and the same Promises and Hopes of Salvation by the Death and Sacrifice
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the enlightening and sanctifying Operations of
the same Spirit. It would be endless to cite all the Proofs of this. Now, it is
not to be supposed that the three chief Writers among the Apostles should all
conspire to talk in the same mysterious and unintelligible Language, so widely
different from the common and obvious Sense and Meaning of their Words, if they
intended no more by them than the Socinians mean by their Gospel, which is very
little different from the Way of Salvation that the Deist proposes, while they
deny the Satisfaction of Christ, and his real and proper Atonement for Sin, and
the powerful sanctifying Influences of the Holy Spirit.

II. As this Gospel of Christ which we have described, was the Labor of the
Apostle's Ministry, and the Design of the Revelation of the New Testament, so
it is this Gospel which is often hinted and prophesied in the Old Testament
also, and typified by the Ceremonies of the Jewish Religion. Now these
Prophecies could not have been fulfilled, nor these Types answered and
accomplished without such a Gospel as I have explained.

The Prophecies of the Old Testament are various and many: Some of the clearest
of those which relate to the Sufferings and Atonement of Christ, and to our
Justification by him, are expressed by Daniel, Isaiah and Jeremiah. By Daniel we
are told that the Messiah shall he cut off, but not for himself, and the Design
of this is to finish Transgression, to make an End of Sin, to make
Reconciliation for Iniquities, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness,
Daniel ix. 24, 26. Isaiah speaks the same thing more largely, Christ was
wounded for our Transgressions. He was bruised for our Iniquities. The
Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and by his Stripes we are healed. We
like Sheep have gone astray, and the Lord has laid on him the Iniquity of us
all. It pleased the Lord to bruise him and put him to Grief, and to make his
Soul an Offering for Sin. By the Knowledge of him shall he justify many, for he
shall bear their Iniquities. How exceeding plain and strong is this Language to
support this Doctrine. Isaiah liii. 5, 6, 10, 11. In the Lord shall we have
Righteousness and Strength: In the Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be
justified and shall glory, Isaiah xlv. 24, 25. And the Prophet Jeremy expressly
calls Christ the Lord our Righteousness, Jerem. xxiii. 6.

The Promise of Sanctification by the Spirit of God, is given us in Ezekiel.
xxxvi. 26, 27. A new Heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within
you; I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and
ye shall be my People and I will be your God.

This sort of Language is repeated Chap. xi. 19. and Jerem. xxxii. 39, 40.
Jerem. xxxi. 31, 32, etc. which is cited by the Apostle Paul in his Epistles to
the Hebrews, and to the Corinthians, as the Language of the Gospel, or the new
Covenant. Now it is manifest enough, that all these Expressions of glorious
Grace, and of the Method of our Reconciliation to God, our Sanctification and
Salvation could never be answered and accomplished without such a Gospel of
Christ as we have described.

The Rights and Ceremonies of the Jewish Church speak the same thing, if we
consider them as Types and Figures of the Gospel-state. I will grant indeed
that many of those Ceremonies had also some other Intendments ( viz.) to
distinguish the Nation of Israel and their Religion, from the Gentile World,
and the fantastical Inventions of Pagan Worship: To keep them in Subjection to
God as their political Head or King: Several of their Sacrifices and Methods of
Purification were appointed to cleanse them from ceremonial Defilements, and to
atone for Civil or Political Crimes, whereby they were admitted to their Civil
Rights again, and their Place in the Congregation, when they had done any thing
to forfeit them.

But it is evident by the Writings of the Apostle Paul, in 2 Cor. Chap. iii.
Gal. Chap. iv. Coloss. Chap. ii. Heb. Chap. vii, viii, ix, x. that the great
End of these Jewish ceremonial Appointments was to stand as Types and Figures
of things under the Gospel, and Emblems of the various Offices and Benefits of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Now in this figurative or Emblematical Sense, what did
all the Sacrifices and the Blood mean, the burning Beasts and the smoking
Altars, whereby the Jews made a typical Atonement for their Sins? What were
they Ties of, what did they represent, if not the Sacrifice of Christ? And what
means the sprinkling all the People with the Blood of Animals, if these things
did not typify and represent our being cleansed by the Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which is therefore called the Blood of sprinkling, and which is the
only real and substantial Atonement for Sin? What meant their laying the Hand
upon the Goat that was to bear their Iniquities, and the Confession of the Sins
of all Israel over his Head, if they did not design to foretell the transferring
of the Sins of Men upon the Head of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Surety and the
Sacrifice for Sinners? What did the Washings of Water imply, but the pouring
out of the Holy Spirit upon sinful Men, and the Purification of their Natures
by Divine Grace? Why did that glorious and divine Light dwell in the Tabernacle
and in the Temple, and between the Cherubims in the Holy of Holies, if it were
not an Emblem of the Fullness of the Godhead dwelling bodily in the Man Christ
Jesus, in and by whom God was to converse visibly with the Children of Men? Can
any Man be so absurd as to believe, in Opposition to so many Expressions of the
Apostle in his Letters, that these Sprinklings of Water and of Blood, these
bleeding Lambs and burning Goats and Bullocks, these Vails, Curtains and
Tabernacles served for nothing else but to wrap up the Duties of the Light of
Nature in them, and to explain (or rather to darken) the common Truths of
natural Religion? And yet the Apostle tells us in several Places, that these
were Types or Figures of the Gospel of Christ. Surely every Shadow bore the
Shape and Figure of the Substance: Every Vail and Covering was fitted to the
Body. All these were but Shadows, but Christ is the Substance or the Body, and
the Shape of the Body appeared therein to those that had divine Light to
discern it, and especially to us, whom St. Paul has taught to understand many
of these Mysteries.

Those therefore who impoverish the Gospel of Christ, as some Writers have
done, and deny those glorious Doctrines that are included in it, they deny that
Gospel which was foretold by the Prophets, that Gospel which was hidden in the
Jewish Shadows, and they refuse to see it, though it be now broken forth into
open Light.

III. The Gospel of Christ must needs be such a Doctrine as we have before
described, it must needs be so far superior to all the Dictates of the Light of
Nature, and to deserve those glorious Characters which the Apostle frequently
gives it, ( viz.) That it is the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, 1 Cor. ii. 7. The
great Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy iii. 16. Col. i. 26. A Mystery hidden from
Ages and Generations, Ephesians. iii. 3, 5. The Mystery which in other Ages was not
made known unto the Sons of Men. Romans xvi. 25. The Mystery that was kept secret
since the World began, hidden in God himself, Ephesians. iii. 9. And is hid from the
Wise and Prudent of this World, Matt. xi. 25. It Is made up of the deep things
of God, 1 Cor. 2. ult. And derived from the Depths of his Wisdom and Knowledge,
Romans xi. 33. It Is the manifold Wisdom of God, which was made known to
Principalities and Powers by the Church, Ephesians. iii. 10. which things the Angels
desire to pry into, 1 Pet. i. 12. In this he has abounded toward us in all
Wisdom and Prudence, Ephesians. i. 8. And it contains the unsearchable Riches of
Christ, Ephesians. iii. 8. And Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. ii. 3.

Now such sort of Descriptions as these are very applicable to the Doctrine of
the Son of God, who is also one with the Father, and who is God blessed for
evermore, coming down to join himself to Flesh and Blood that he might be able
to die in the room and stead of sinful Men, and that this glorious Person, by
whom the Worlds were made, and all the Hosts of Men and Angels, Col. i. 15.
that he should be made a Sacrifice for our Sins, that God might declare his
unspotted Holiness, or Righteousness, his terrible Justice, and his
unchangeable hatred of Sin, even while he forgives Sinners, and justifies those
that believe in Jesus, Romans iii. 24, 25. and that this Lord Jesus in human
Nature should rise from the Dead, ascend to Heaven, be exalted to the
Government of all things visible and invisible, Ephesians. i. 22, 23. should send his
Spirit down to work Faith, Repentance and Holiness in all his chosen and
redeemed ones, and carry them through a thousand Temptations and Difficulties,
and through Death itself to Heaven and Glory. This is the Doctrine that human
Reason could never have found out, and has much ado to be persuaded to receive
it now it is manifested in the New Testament. These are Wonders of unsearchable
Wisdom, and an Entertainment for prying Angels.

But if the Gospel of Christ signify no more than the mere Promise of Pardon to
those that Repent of their Sins, and believe Jesus Christ to be a true Prophet,
and follow the Example and Commands of Christ, who has explained and confirmed
the Light of Nature, what is there in this that deserves such a Catalogue of
glorious Titles as the Apostle bestows upon this Gospel? There Is no such great
and deep Contrivance, such astonishing Wisdom in such a Covenant of Grace, as
does nothing else but abate the severe and rigid Terms of the Covenant of
Works, and make Repentance and imperfect Obedience to serve instead of perfect
Obedience, in order to obtain Pardon and Happiness.

I confess there was need of some divine Revelation to assure us that God would
accept of our Repentances and our honest Endeavors, when in his Law he demands
Perfection. But this any common Prophet might have done, being sent of God and
supported by Miracles, as Elijah and Elisha were. And when once this Doctrine
was thus plainly revealed, there would be no great Difficulty to persuade Men
to receive it, there are no such sublime Mysteries and Depths of Wisdom and
Knowledge contained in it; nor does it need any extraordinary Genius, much less
Divine Wisdom itself, to have been the Inventor of it.

But far be it from us to have such a diminishing Thought of the glorious
Gospel of Christ.

IV. Another Reason that I shall give to prove that the Gospel of Christ is
such a Doctrine as I have before described, is the Opinion both of the Jews and
Gentiles concerning it, and the Treatment that it met with both in Judea and
amongst the Nations.

'Twas counted Foolishness by the Greeks, or the learned Heathens, and it was a
Stone of stumbling to the Jews. We preach Christ crucified to the Jews a
stumbling Block, and to the Greeks Foolishness, 1 Cor. i. 23. Whereas if the
Doctrine of Christ crucified had implied no more in it than this, that Jesus by
his Death and Martyrdom on the Cross, bore a Testimony to the Truth of the
Doctrine which he preached, and that Doctrine was nothing else but a Discovery
of God's Readiness to accept of Sinners that repented and obeyed him, as well
as they could, out of his mere Mercy; the Jews could never have been so much
shocked or offended at it, for they believed as much as this long before St.
Paul ever preached: Nor could the learned Greeks have counted that Doctrine
Folly which the wisest of their Philosophers seemed to understand and teach.
This sort of Gospel would have been so little different from what the Light of
Nature might lead them probably to expect and hope for, that surely they would
not have endeavored to expose it and ridicule it, but rather they would have
fallen in with St. Paul's Sermons, as being agreeable to many of their
Sentiments. That Gospel therefore which both the Jews and the Greeks were so
much offended with, that they reproached it as Madness and Folly, must be
something strange to their Ears, and exceedingly different from their own
Opinions.

V. I may add also at last, that if St. Paul had meant no more by the Gospel of
Christ than this, that God was willing to be reconciled to Mankind, if they
would repent of their Sins, and be sorry for them, and lived as well as they
could for Time to come, there had been very little Reason for him to speak of
his Courage in preaching it so often as he does, and that with such an
Emphasis, Romans i. 16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the
Power of God unto Salvation; and he repeats it again. 2 Timothy i. 12. and
encourages young Timothy to preach the same Gospel, with Boldness, and not be
ashamed of Christ, nor his Ministers. He counts it a great thing, that he could
glory in the Cross of Christ, Gal. vi. 14. and in his Doctrine of Christ
crucified, and is resolved to spread the Savor of it round the World. I am not
ashamed of this Gospel, I am ready to preach it among the Jews or the
Barbarians, or in the City of Rome itself. Romans i. 15. Now if he had preached
nothing but the Socinian Gospel, there was nothing in it that would have
exposed him to much Shame and Reproach for the Hopes of Forgiveness, upon mere
Repentance; and the Enforcement of the Duties of Natural Religion, with a
little Illustration and Advance upon them, was much like the Gospel or Doctrine
of the wisest of the Heathen Philosophers, that he had almost been esteemed one
of those wise Men, and rather treated with Honor amongst them at Athens, and
in other Gentile Cities, and not been reproached as a setter forth of strange
Gods, and called a Babbler for his Preaching of such sort of Doctrines.

But when the Apostle preaches the Son of God in the Likeness of Man, that came
down from Heaven, not to set up a Throne in the World, and rule personally over
the Nations, but to be exposed to Shame and Pain, to be nailed to a Cross, and
have a Crown of Thorns put upon him, and endure all these Sufferings for the
Sins of Mankind: When he tells the Heathen World of a Man that was hanged upon
a Tree at Jerusalem, and assures them, that his Death is the Foundation and
Spring of Eternal Life, to all that believe on him; when he preaches, that the
Lord of Glory was crucified, 1 Cor. ii. 8. that so the worst sort of Sinners
might be saved, and that he who knew no Sin was made a Sacrifice for our Sins,
that we might stand Righteous in the Sight of God through his Righteousness, 2
Cor. v. 21. This was something that sounded so strange in the Ears of the
Heathens, and the blinded Jews too, that they multiplied Reproaches upon the
Sermons and the Preacher. And St. Paul thought it a considerable Point gained,
when he could assume such a Degree of Courage as to be able to say, I dare
preach amongst the Gentiles, the Jews, the Pharisees and the Philosophers at
Jerusalem, and at Rome such a Gospel as this is; for I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ. This is an Argument which, in my Opinion, carries much
Evidence with it, that the Gospel of Christ is such a Doctrine as I have before
described.

But here is a considerable Objection arises against this Description of the
Gospel. How can the Atonement for Sin by the Death of Christ be so considerable
a Part of the Gospel, when Christ himself, the great Prophet of his Church
spoke so seldom and so very little of it during the whole Course of his
Ministry. Surely one would think so important a Part of the Christian Doctrine
should not have been neglected by Christ himself. See a large and full Answer
to this Objection in Dr. Watts's Sermon on the Atonement of Christ. Vol. II.


SECT. III. Answers to Objections.
Though there be a very large and particular Answer given to all the Parts of
this Objection in those Sermons; particularly, Sermon the 35th, yet since it
seems to carry some considerable Force in it, I would mention some Hints of
Reply in this Place.

I. The great Design of our Savior in his public Appearance and Ministry on
Earth, was to prove himself to wear the true Characters of the Messiah, to
deliver the Jews from many false Expositions and Glosses which the Scribes and
Pharisees of that Day had given to several Parts of Scripture, to lead the
World to a Conviction of their Sins, and thereby prepare them to receive the
Doctrine of Salvation with more Zeal and Desire; whereas the Salvation itself,
and the Manner whereby it was accomplished, was but briefly mentioned in some
few Texts, and the rest was left to be explained by his Apostles.

II. The Doctrine of Christ's Atonement for Sin is, indeed, intimated in
several Places of his own Ministrations ( viz.) Matt. xx. 28. The Son of Man
came not to be minister'd unto, but to minister, and give his Life a Ransom for
many. John x. 15. I lay down my Life for the Sheep. John vi. 51. The Bread
which I will give is my Flesh, which I will give for the Life of the World. And
when he instituted the Holy Supper, Luke xxii. 19. He took Bread and brake it,
saying, This is my Body which is given for you. And as in St. Matthew's Gospel,
This Cup is my Blood of the New Testament which is shed for many for the
Remission of Sins.

III. This Doctrine of Atonement for Sin by his Death, as a Sacrifice, and the
Acceptance of it with God the Father, could not be so well preached in Public,
before those very Facts were fulfilled, upon which this Doctrine is founded;
for his Death was the Foundation of this Atonement; his Resurrection and
Ascension to Heaven, were the Proofs of its being accepted with God: Now it
might have appeared preposterous to our Savior, who was divinely wise, to
^^each these Doctrines freely in Public to the Multitude, before these Events
appeared in the World.

And even to his own Disciples he was not too free in the Communication of
them, because, as John xvi. 12. He told them, he had many Things to teach them,
but they could not bear them yet: It might have been the Means of raising some
Prejudices in the Minds of his own Disciples; whereas he reserved some of these
Things to be taught in those forty Days, while he continued with them after his
Resurrection, and spoke with them of the Things pertaining to the Kingdom of
God. Acts i. 3.

And thence we may infer, that if we would learn the plainest and fullest
Account of the Gospel of Christ, it is not enough for us to consult merely his
public Sermons, or the Histories of his Life, which are called the Four
Gospels, but we must read carefully the Writings of the Apostles, after he went
to Heaven; in which they taught these Doctrines more completely, which they had
learnt from the Converse of Christ, after his Resurrection, as well as by the
pouring out of his own Spirit upon them in great Abundance, as he had promised.

But there is another Objection, which is borrowed from the Socinian Writings,
which it may be proper to give some Reply to ( viz.) That it does not agree to
the moral Perfections of God to punish Sin in a Surety; nor does it become the
great God who is a Being of infinite Wisdom and Goodness and Equity, to appoint
such a Way of Salvation for Men, as would necessitate an innocent Creature to
be exposed to so many sharp Sufferings as Christ underwent, while the guilty
Sinner suffers nothing of all these Terrors, but is delivered from the severest
of them by the Death of Christ.

In Answer to this, I desire it may be considered, that this Doctrine of the
Expiation and Atonement for Sin by Christ, is so plainly and expressly revealed
and declared in the New Testament, by the Apostles Paul, Peter, and John, as
has been already shown, and is so frequently repeated in many Forms of Speech
in the Sacred Writings, that it seems a very bold Imagination to suppose, that
that could not be agreeable to the moral Perfections of God, or that it could
not become God to appoint that, which in so many repeated Scriptures, is
expressly asserted to be done by Jesus Christ, and by the Appointment of the
Father. Can it be ever imagined, that the Great God did not know what would
become every one of his Perfections better than we little Insects, just crept
out of the Earth, and returning thither again, could teach him? Can it be ever
thought, that the Eternal Mind did not know what was decent for a just and a
wise God to do, better than we can conceive or suggest?

I answer, in the second Place, that some of the very Expressions wherein this
Doctrine is represented in Scripture are such as seem to be designed on purpose
to obviate this very Objection, particularly 2 Cor. v. 21. God has made him to
be Sin for us who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God
in him, i.e. he made him to be a Sacrifice for Sin for us, that we might be
delivered from the Guilt of Sin, and accepted as righteous in the Sight of God.
Again, 1 Pet. iii. 18. Christ also has once suffered for Sins, the Just for
the Unjust, that he might bring us to God. Again, 1 Pet. ii. 21, 22. Christ
suffered for us, who did no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth, who his
own self bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree. Again, 1 John ii. 1, 2.
Jesus Christ the Righteous: He is the Propitiation for our Sins. Thus you see
all these Texts declare expressly the Innocence of Jesus Christ who suffered,
and the Iniquities of those for whom he suffered: It is evident enough that a
righteous Person died for the Guilty, and the Guilty were saved.

Answ. III. Let it be yet further considered, that the Man Christ Jesus, who
had a natural Will which was distinct from the supreme Will of the Godhead,
gave up himself to those Sufferings, and consented to it fully, Heb. x. 5, --
10. In Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices of Beasts thou had no Pleasure; but a
Body have thou prepared me: Then I said, Lo, I come to do thy Will, O God. He
had a Right given him by the Father to lay down his Life, and a Right to take
it up again. John x. 18. And he had an additional Exaltation promised him on
this Account, Heb. xii. 2. and actually bestowed on him for this Service: Phil.
ii. 9. Wherefore God has highly exalted him, besides several other Events in
the Divine Scheme of God's Government, for the Glory of God, and the Happiness
of Men. All which are sufficient to make the Sufferings of Christ very
consistent with the Equity and Justice of God, though the innocent Creature
suffered and the Guilty was set free. So that I see no manner of inconsistency
between this Transaction, and any of God's Moral Perfections; and therefore I
can see nothing in it which was unbecoming for God to appoint, or for Christ to
submit to.

To confirm this, let it be remembered, that it is expressly said, Heb. ii. 10.
It became him for whom are all Things, and by whom are all Things, in bringing
many Sons unto Glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation perfect through
Sufferings, Teleiosai, which signifies to consecrate Jesus Christ to be an
High Priest by this Blood of Atonement, which Dr. Whitby proves at large in his
Comment on this Text.

Nor is it at all strange, that those who borrow from the Socinian At the Time
when this Essay was written, it was the common Custom of Writers to denominate
Parties of Men, by the Name which belonged (...) one of the chief Leaders of
that Party, as Dr. Whitby speaks of the Socinians, the Arians, and others, in
the same manner.

This Practice is not quite so Customary nowadays, because the same Errors
are not always joined in the same Person, and therefore it may be proper to
describe Opinions, Errors or Parties in general by such Names, but not
particular Persons. As for Instance: The Socinians in the last Age, generally
believed Christ to be a mere Man, and denied his Satisfaction or proper
Atonement for Sin; whereas-in the present Age, most Followers of that Party
believe Jesus Christ to be as glorious a Person as the Arians make him (viz.)
more ancient than any of the Works of God, and his Agent in creating the World,
and at the same time they deny his proper Atonement for Sin.

You see then a plain Reason why Errors may have the Names of their Leaders
applied to them; but it is not proper to give the same Denomination to all those
particular Persons who hold some of their Errors, but who deny the others.


Writers may raise such Objections against the Atonement or Satisfaction of
Christ for Sin: Since Socinus himself says, Should there be found some Places
of Scripture, where it should be expressly written, that God was made Man, or
did assume human Flesh; they should not presently be taken according as the
Words sound, since that is altogether repugnant to the Divine Majesty. So
Socinus in his Disputations of Jesus Christ. And again: If not once only, but
often it should be written in the sacred Scriptures, that Christ made
Satisfaction to God for Sins; I would not therefore believe, that the Matter is
so as you imagine. So Socinus on the Satisfaction. And again: Any, even the
greatest Force is to be used with Words, rather than take them in the obvious
Sense. So his Second Epistle to Balcerimicius.

ESSAY II. The FORM of the GOSPEL. An Enquiry, Whether it be a New Law with
Commands, Threatenings and Conditions in it? and, Whether the Duties of the
Gospel are our justifying Righteousness? A Reconciling Discourse.
SECT. I. Is the Gospel a Conditional Promise?
THE general Nature and Substance of the Gospel is agreed on all Hands to be a
Discovery of Divine Grace to sinful Man through a Mediator: But several Parties
of Christians have raised endless Debates about the particular Form of it (
viz.) Whether it be a mere absolute Promise, or a Conditional Covenant: Whether
it contain in it Commands and Threatenings or no: Or whether it be a New Law.

It is my Opinion concerning many of the Debates about our Religion, that they
may be sufficiently determined for the Peace and Practice of Christians, by
finding out the various Use of Words in common Language, and especially the
Sense of them in the holy Scriptures, and submitting our Judgments and
Consciences to this Sense of them, with a little reconciling Explication. And
this noisy Controversy may, perhaps, come nearer to a Decision, if we will but
honestly consult the Ways of speaking, that the Scripture uses in solving
these three following Questions.

But before I propose them, I would beg one Favor of my Readers, and that is,
as they run over these Pages, they would so far deny themselves of a common
Custom, as not to examine and judge of this little Essay by any Systems or
Orthodoxy in their Closet, or in their Head, but by the only System, out of
which I have drawn it, the Holy Bible; for in the whole Composure of this
Discourse, I have not consulted one Author besides; and I would choose to be
read just in the same way in which I write, and to be judged by the same Rule.
I proceed now to name the three following Questions.

QUESTION I. Whether the Gospel be an Absolute or a Conditional Promise?

Ans. The Gospel in its most general Sense may be described as a Declaration of
the free Mercy of God, for the Salvation of fallen Man by a Mediator.

As Man by his Fall has lost the Image of God and his Favor, Salvation
includes the Recovery of both these: It implies therefore Repentance,
Regeneration, Holiness and Perseverance, as well as Justification, Adoption and
Glorification; we must be saved from our Sins, as well as from the Wrath of
God, if we are made truly happy. Jesus the Mediator saves his People from their
Sins. Matt. i. 21. as well as delivers from the Wrath to come. 1 These. i. ult.

These several Blessings included in Salvation, though they are all bestowed
freely by Grace, yet have a Connection one with another, and Dependence on each
other; therefore some of them are represented as foregoing, others as
following; some as Means, the others as the End. Faith, Repentance,
Regeneration, Pardon, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, Obedience, the
Assistance of the Holy Spirit, and Perseverance, may all be esteemed as Means,
with regard to the great and final Blessing of Glorification, which is the End;
and indeed, every foregoing Blessing may be reckoned in some Sense, as a Means
with regard to that which follows.

Again, some of the Blessings included in Salvation, are to be wrought in us,
as Repentance, Sanctification, etc. Others to be only bestowed upon us, as
Pardon of Sin, Adoption, Eternal Glory, etc. Those that are to be wrought in
us, are sometimes set forth in Scripture, as Duties to be performed by us, to
stir us up in a rational way to seek them; and those that are only to be
bestowed upon us, are set forth as Blessings to be conferred in consequence upon
such Duties performed; for God will save us still as intellectual Creatures,
under a moral Government, and will have our rational Powers used in obtaining
and possessing this Salvation; and therefore it is sometimes set forth as a
proposed Agreement between two intelligent Beings, God and Man, and is called
the New Covenant, a better Covenant, and the Word of Reconciliation. Heb. viii.
8. and viii. 6. 2 Cor. v. 19.

Upon these Considerations the Gospel or Covenant of Grace is sometimes
represented as a mere Declaration of Grace, or an absolute Promise in
Scripture, and sometimes as a conditional one. It is represented Absolutely in
these Texts, Gal. iii. 8. The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the
Heathen through Faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee
shall all Nations be blessed. Heb. x. 16, 17. This is the Covenant that I will
make with them after those Days, says the Lord; I will put my Laws into their
Hearts, and in their Minds will I write them: And their Sins and Iniquities
will I remember no more. Though the Word Covenant does usually signify an
Engagement on both sides, yet it is sufficiently evident, that in the Language
of Scripture it does not always imply Restipulation or mutual Agreement; for
it is applied to the Day and the Night, and their stated Courses, to the Beasts
of the Field, as Inhabitants of this Earth, Jer. xxxiii. 20, 25. Genesis ix. 9, 10.

All the Blessings of the Gospel, both the Means and the End, are represented
in a way of free or absolute Donation by the Apostle Paul frequently. So Ephesians.
ii. 8, 9. By Grace ye are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it
is the Gift of God, not of Works, -- for we are his Workmanship, etc. In other
places of Scripture the Gospel is represented in a Conditional way, as Mark
xvi. 15, 16. Preach the Gospel to every Creature, he that believes shall be
saved. Matt. xi. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you Rest, John vii. 37. If any Man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink, 1 John i. 9. If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive
us our Sins, etc. These are properly called conditional Propositions in a
logical or rational View of the Relations of things.

And it may be observed, that those very parts of our Salvation which in one
Scripture are commanded as Duties, in another are promised as Blessings. So
Faith* and Repentance are Duties required. Mark i. 15. Repent and believe the
Gospel: They are Blessings bestowed, Phil. i. 29. To you it is given to
believe, Acts v. 3. God has exalted him -- to give Repentance: And it is easy
to bring instances of the like Nature concerning several other parts of our
Salvation.

Now according to the Distinctions I have laid down, the foregoing Blessings
which are as Means, may be esteemed Conditions with regard to others which are
as the End of them: So Justification and Adoption, as well as Faith and
Repentance, and Perseverance, all which are as Means, may be called Conditions
in regard of Glorification which is the last End. In that golden Chain of
Salvation, Romans viii. 30. Calling, Justification, and Glorification are three
great Links. Whom he called, them he also justified: And whom he justified,
them he also glorified. But all agree if we are not called, we shall not be
justified: If we are not justified, we shall not be glorified. Thus every
Blessing of Salvation that in the necessary order of Nature follows another,
may be said to be suspended on that other, as a Condition without which it
shall not be bestowed.

Again, those Blessings that are represented as our Duties, and are to be
wrought in us, may be said to be Conditions with regard to consequent Blessings
that are only conferred upon us: (for the word Condition, in its most common
Sense, does by no means imply that it must be performed by our own Power, not
does it include any thing of a valuable Consideration or Merit in it.) And
therefore in this Sense, Faith may be called a Condition of Justification,
because Faith and Justification are connected together in Scripture, and Faith
is represented as a foregoing Blessing, and as a Duty, Justification as a
consequent Blessing, and a Privilege which is suspended upon it. Gal. ii. 16.
Knowing that a Man is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith
of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be
justified. So the Use of Water is a Condition of being made clean, so coming to
the Fire is a Condition of being warmed, so the putting on a Garment is a
Condition of being clothed, receiving a sealed Pardon is the Condition of a
Prisoner's Release, committing the Body to a Physician is the Condition of a
sick or dying Man's being healed: And in this Sense Faith is called a Condition
of our Interest in Christ, by the Assembly of Divines in their larger Catechism
under the Question, How is the Grace of God manifested in the second Covenant?
Answ. The Grace of God is manifested in the second Covenant, in that he freely
provideth and offers to Sinners a Mediator, and Life and Salvation by him,
and requiring Faith as the Condition to interest them in him, promises and
gives his Holy Spirit to all his Elect, to work in them that Faith with all
other saving Graces, and to enable them unto all holy Obedience, as the
Evidence of the Truth of their Faith and Thankfulness to God, and as the way
which he has appointed to Salvation.

Nor can I see any sufficient Reason why the Grace of Faith, as a Blessing
conferred, may be called the Condition of a following Blessing, and yet Faith,
considered as a Duty, may not be called a Condition of the same Blessing, since
both the Habit and the Act of Faith are the Effects of Divine Grace working in
us and by us; and where Faith is proposed as a Duty, it is represented more
evidently in a conditional way than where it is mentioned as a mere Blessing.

And upon the same account, Holiness and Perseverance may be called the
Conditions of our complete Salvation in Heaven, because Holliness and
Perseverance are foregoing Blessings and Duties, and complete Salvation in
Heaven is the final Privilege, Heb. xii. 14. Without Holiness no Man shall see
the Lord. Matt. xxiv. 13. He that endures to the End shall be saved. Nor does
Dr. Owen, nor other moderate Writers in this Controversy, refuse the use of the
word Condition in such a Sense.

What I have said concerning the various Blessings of the Gospel or new
Covenant, may be applied also to the Seals or Symbols of it, Baptism and the
Lord's Supper. These are Seals on God's part, which he has appointed for the
Confirmation of our Faith, by the Help of our Senses, and that he might give
us, as it were, a real Pledge of the Performance of his Promises. Thus Abraham
received Circumcision a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans iv. 11. Thus
we receive Baptism as a Seal of our Regeneration by the Holy Spirit: Thus the
Lord's Supper as a Seal of our Pardon and Life by the Crucifixion and Death of
Christ. But as great Privileges as they are, thus granted to us, we must
remember they are also Duties to be performed by us, and are Seals on our part
of our Engagement to be the Lord's. Nor have we any Reason to expect the
Comforts that arise from these sealed Blessings of the Gospel if we wilfully
despise and neglect the use of the Seals: And in this Sense they may be called
Conditions of the Privileges, and Comforts that are annexed to them.

I desire it here to be noted, that I speak not this to encourage and promote
the common use of the word Condition in these Cases; for it is not used in
Scripture, except once in a Parable; and that not in the Original, but only in
our Translation. The Text is Luke xiv. 33. where it is not at all to the purpose
of the present Controversy: The Conditions there mentioned are not the
Conditions of our Salvation, but quite another thing: The Design of the Parable
is to show that those who have not Courage to fight with their spiritual
Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, must even make Conditions of
Peace with them, that is, sit still and neglect Christ and Religion.

Besides the Word Condition, (though it be an innocent and an useful and
expressive Word in the matter of Duty and Privilege) yet it has been ill
explained by some Preachers, and worse understood by some Hearers, and thereby
it has given great Offense: I say this therefore only to show that there is
not so much Heresy and Poison in those four Syllables as some learned Men
pretend, and some unlearned believe and fear. If any Man will fix such a rigid
Sense on the word Condition as is inconsistent with the Grace of the Gospel;
and then say, the Gospel has no Conditions in it, I will not contend with him;
for he speaks consistently with himself, and with Scripture too; because
Scripture does not use the Word: But if Condition be taken in a very plain and
common Sense for any one thing upon which another is suspended, I do not know
any Scripture that forbids the use of it, but such Texts as these, 1 Cor. x.
32. Give no Offense to -- the Church of God. Romans xv. 2. Please your Neighbor
for his Good to Edification.

SECT. II.
Quest. Is the Gospel a new Law?

Whether Commands and Threatenings belong to the Gospel?

Answ. The word Gospel or euaggelion though it signifies Glad Tidings in its
original Derivation, yet it is used in Scripture sometimes in a larger Sense,
as well as sometimes in a more proper and limited one.

When it is used in its proper and limited Sense it denotes a mere Declaration
of the good Will of God for the Recovery of fallen Man: So the Texts before
cited Gal. iii. 8. Heb. x. 16, 17. And so 2 Cor. v. 19. where the Gospel is
called the Word of Reconciliation, the Substance of it is, that God was in
Christ, reconciling the World to himself, not imputing their Trespasses to
them. So the first Gospel that ever was preached to Adam, after the Fall, was a
free Discovery of Mercy, Genesis iii. 15. The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the
Serpent's Head.

When the Word Gospel is used in its larger Sense, it includes Predictions,
Commands, Promises, Threatenings, Histories, Examples, and almost whatever is
necessary to enforce those Duties upon the Consciences of Men, which are as
Means appointed, in order to partake of the Privileges.

So the Gospel contains in it Narratives of Matters of Fact, or Histories, Mark
i. 1. The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which seems to refer to all
the following History of his Life and Death; and the four Histories of the
Evangelists are called Gospels, which Title (if not Divine originally, yet) has
been the Language of the Church, through so many Ages of Christianity.

The Word Gospel contains, also, some Doctrines, Col. i. 5. The Hope which is
laid up for you in Heaven, whereof ye heard before in the Word of Truth of the
Gospel. The Gospel reveals Truths before unknown to Men. So Life and
Immortality are brought to Light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy i. 10. i. e. Doctrines
of the heavenly State.

Commands, 2 Cor. ix. 13. By the Experiment of this Ministration they glorify
God for your professed Subjection to the Gospel of Christ. This Subjection to
the Gospel, implies, that Liberality is commanded in it. Acts xvi. 21. Believe
in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved. This is the Command given to
the convinced Jailor.

Promises and Threatenings, Mark xvi. 16. Preach the Gospel to every Creature;
he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, he that believes not shall
be damned.

Predictions, particularly of the final Judgment. Romans ii. 16. God shall judge
the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel. That is, according
as I have preached.

It is plain, that sometimes the Gospel is said to be the Object of Belief, as
Mark i. 15. Believe the Gospel; and there it signifies a Declaration of Grace
to Sinners. Sometimes it is said to be the Object of Obedience. Romans x. 16. All
have not obeyed the Gospel: there it must include Duties and Commands.

It is also evident, that in many Places of the New Testament, the Gospel is
used to signify the who^^ Ministry of the Apostles, and all the Subjects of
their preaching, as Romans i. 9. Whom I serve in the Gospel. 1 Cor. ix. 14. They
that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, (viz.) be maintained, not
merely for preaching a Promise, but for the whole of their Ministration; and
therefore the Apostle sometimes calls it my Gospel, and our Gospel, to signify
his whole Ministry.

Nor do I think there is any great Difference, whether we include Commands,
Threatenings, etc. in the Word Gospel, taken in a large Sense, or call them
Appendices and Attendants of the Gospel, taking the Word in a Sense more proper
and limited: For the Language of Scripture seems to favor the one as well as
the other.

But this is the Mischief that arises between Christians that differ in their
Sentiments or Expression of Things, they imagine that while one is true, the
other must needs be false; and then they brand each other with Error and
Heresy; whereas if they would but attend to Scripture, that would show them to
be both in the Right, by its different Explication of their own Forms of
speaking. The Gospel has, or has not Commands and Conditions in it, according
to the various Senses in which it is used.

And in this way of Reconciliation I cannot but hope for some Success, because
it falls in with the universal fond Esteem that each Man has of his own
Understanding; it proves that two warm Disputers may both have Truth on their
Side: Now if ten Persons differ in their Sentiments, it is much easier to
persuade all of them that they may be all in the Right, than it is to convince
one that he is in the wrong.

QUESTION. Whether the Gospel be a New Law?

Ans. A Law in the proper and full Meaning of the Word, includes these three
Things in it.

I. That there be some Command given out, wherein some Duty is required, or Sin
forbidden by the just Authority of a Superior.

II. That there be a Sanction, or Penalty annexed to the Neglect of that Duty
required, or the Commission of that Sin forbidden: This Sanction is not always
expressed, but it is always implied; for the Authority that is sufficient to
impose a Command on any Person, must also be sufficient to punish the Breach of
this Command, and the Offender is liable to bear it; otherwise the Command
would be a mere Advice, and not a Law.

III. That the Performance of this Duty or Duties required, and Abstinence from
these Sins forbidden, is our proper Righteousness, or Matter upon which we are
justified in the Court of this Law.

These three Things are implied in every strict and proper Law: And I might
prove it by Instances of the chief Laws that Scripture speaks of ( viz.) The
Law of Innocence, the Law of Nature, and the Jewish Law.

Thus it was in the Law of Innocence or Covenant of Works with Adam; the Duties
required, were all that the Light of Nature and Reason enjoined to Adam in such
Circumstances, to which there was one positive Prohibition added, Thou shall
not eat of the Tree of Knowledge, etc. and the Sanction and Penalty is
expressed; In the Day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die, Genesis ii. 17.
and Adam's Observance of this Law would have been his Righteousness in the
Sight of God, and justified him before God, according to the general Language
of this, and all Laws. The Man that does them shall live in them, Gal. iii. 12.
And it is generally agreed, that the Tree of Life was a Symbol or Seal of
Immortal Life to Adam, if he obeyed the Law.

Thus it was also in the Law of Nature, or moral Law, which is very little
different from the Law of Innocence, and this Law is plainly described by the
Apostle, Romans ii. 12, 13, 14, 15. The Work of the Law is written in the Hearts
of the Heathens, i. e. The general Commands and Penalties may be found by the
Light of Nature, and the Doers of this Law shall be justified. Not that St.
Paul means, that any Person shall actually be justified by his Doing, but that
this is the way of Justification, according to the Law of Nature.

Thus it was, also, in the Jewish Law or Sinai Covenant, which was not the
Gospel, but an additional Constitution, relating only to the Jewish Nation, to
be governed by God as their peculiar King. And it was really distinct from the
Covenant of Grace or Gospel of Salvation, whereby Adam, Noah, Abraham, and the
Israelites themselves were to be saved. Some Persons, indeed, call it a legal
Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace (with whom I will not contend) but it is
more agreeable to the Language of Scripture, to call it a distinct Covenant, or
a Covenant or Law of Works, as a Jewish Appendix to the Gospel.

It is true, indeed, the Jewish Law had much of Grace in it as well as much of
Terror, and in many Parts of it, it represented, typify'd, witnessed and held
forth the Gospel or Covenant of Grace, whereby all Believers in all Ages are to
be saved, as well as the original Law of Nature, or the general Covenant of
Works, whereby all Men are cursed and condemned; and the Apostle makes use of
it in all these Views in his Epistles to the Romans, Galatians and Hebrews: But
the Jewish Law in its own proper Nature and Design, was a special or particular
Covenant of Works with temporal Promises and temporal Threatenings.

The Duties enjoined were chiefly contained in the four last Books of Moses,
and commonly called the Moral, the Ceremonial, and the Judicial or Political
Law: The Sanction is written in many Parts of those Books; some of the
Threatenings or Penalties were to be inflicted on particular Offenders by the
Magistrate, such as, beating with Rods, stoning to Death, Fines and Amercements
of Money or Goods, etc. Some were to be inflicted on the whole Nation by God
himself, if they transgressed this Law, such as Plagues, Famine, Banishment
from the Land of Canaan, etc. Deuteronomy. xxviii. and the justifying Righteousness
according to this Law, was their Obedience to the Precepts and Ordinances of
it. Deuteronomy. vi. 25. And it shall be our Righteousness if we observe to do all
these Commandments before the Lord our God, as he has commanded us. So Deuteronomy.
xxiv. 13. so Romans x. 5. Moses describes the Righteousness which is of the Law,
That the Man which does those Things shall live by them.

Now let us consider how far the Gospel partakes of the Nature of a Law, and
may be so called.

I. The Gospel taken in a large Sense, has so much of the Nature of a Law in
it, that there are Commands given, Duties enjoined, Sins forbidden; and it has
a Sanction also, for there are terrible Penalties annexed to the Contempt or
Rejection of it, even a much sorer Punishment than was threatened for the
Breach of the Law of Moses, Heb. x. 28, 29. And because it partakes so much of
the Nature of a Law, and has such Resemblance to it, it is in a few Places of
Scripture called a Law, without Dispute. Isa. ii. 3. The Law shall go forth
from Zion. Romans iii. 27. The Law of Faith.

II. The Gospel is not a Law in the full Sense of the Word, for it wants the
third requisite of a Law. Whatsoever Duties are required in the Gospel, the
Performance of those Duties by us is not described in Scripture as the Matter
of our Righteousness before God. There are many Blessings promised, and
Blessednesses pronounced in the Gospel upon the Discharge of various Duties of
Holiness, which are prescribed in the New Testament; but in the Court of God
and his Word, a Sinner is not justified by any, or all these Duties. Faith
itself, which is the first and great Requirement of the Gospel, is not our
justifying Righteousness, but is the Way and Means to obtain, or be possessed
of a justifying Righteousness. The Righteousness by which we are justified
under the Gospel does not use to be represented as a Righteousness wrought in
us, or by us, or as a Righteousness of Works, or a Righteousness of Man; but it
is mentioned as a Righteousness from without us, a given Righteousness, Romans v.
27. a Righteousness imputed without Works, Romans iv. 6. And it is commonly
called by St. Paul, the Righteousness of God; it is a Rectitude in the Court of
God including or inferring an Absolution from Guilt, and a Right to Heaven
appointed, prepared and bestowed by God himself upon all them that believe; and
it is received by our Faith or trusting in Christ. The Righteousness of God is
by the Faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that believe, Romans iii.
22. And it is called the Gift of Righteousness, in Romans v. 17. as a very
distinct Thing from the Gift of Faith. Ephesians. ii. 8.

And here we may do well to take Notice that though there are a great many
Differences between the Gospel, which St. Paul preached, and the Jewish Law,
such as the Multitude of arbitrary Commands in the natural and civil Life, the
Burden of many Ceremonies, the Temporal Promises and Threatenings, etc. yet the
grand Point ot Difference, which he frequently insisted on, is the different
way of Justification ( viz.) That the one is by Works, the other not. (Always
remembering that before God as the great Lord of Conscience, and with Regard to
eternal Life, the Jews were to be justified and saved by the same Gospel, and
by Faith, even as Abraham of old, and Christians now. But with regard to God,
considered as their Political Governor or King by the Sinai Covenant, they were
to be justified by Works.) The Blessed Apostle therefore treating accurately of
these Matters ever distinguishes the Gospel from the Law, whether it be the Law
of Nature, the Law of Innocence, the Jewish Law, and indeed, from every thing
that has the full Nature and Form of a Law, by this particular Mark ( viz.)
that our Obedience to the Law would be our justifying Righteousness if we
performed it; but Obedience to the Gospel is not our Justifying Righteousness.
So Romans 2d and 3d Chap. See this more enlarged and explained in the Harmony of
all Religions Chap. v. and vi.


The Jewish Law (considered as a special Covenant, or as it includes or
represents the general Law of Nature) says, Peace to every Man that works
Good, to the Jew, and the Gentile: and the Doers of the Law shall be justified;
Romans ii. 10, 13. But the Righteousness of God, i. e. that Righteousness whereby
we are justified according to the Gospel, is a Righteousness without the Law, a
different thing from a Law-Righteousness, and is now manifested by the Gospel,
and comes upon every Believer, Romans iii. 21, 22, etc. So Romans x. 5, 6. The
Righteousness of the Law says, The Man that does those things shall live by
them: But the Righteousness of Faith says, v. 9. If thou shall confess with
thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe with thy Heart -- thou shall be saved. So
Gal. iii. 11, 12, etc. The Law is not of Faith, for this very Reason, because
the Law says, Do this and live, or Obey and be justified. But the Gospel says,
The Just shall live by Faith. Believe and thou shall be saved. And in the
following Verses, the Gospel is represented under the Term and Title of a
Promise to distinguish it more evidently from a Law: for if there had been a
Law which could have given Life, verily Righteousness should have been by the
Law. Gal. iii. 21. But Scripture has concluded all under Sin, that the Promise
by the Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. This is the
common Language of Scripture.

And therefore instead of representing the several Duties enjoined in the
Gospel, as the Matter of our Righteousness before God, the New Testament sends
us expressly to Jesus Christ for Righteousness. So St. Paul tells us, Romans iii.
2, 5. Christ is set forth as a Propitiation -- that God might justify them that
believe, and yet be a just and righteous God, Romans v. 17, 18, 19. They that
receive -- the Gift of Righteousness shall reign in Life by one Jesus Christ.
-- So by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all Men to
Justification of Life. -- By the Obedience of one, i. e. Christ, shall many be
made righteous. God will have a Righteousness in his Gospel whereby Grace shall
reign to eternal Life, Romans v. ult. though it is not a Righteousness of our own
Works, as the Objection in the very next Verse, Romans vi. 1. evidently proves,
and so Romans x. 3. Christ is the End of the Law for Righteousness to all that
believe, 1 Cor. i. 30. Christ is made of God Righteousness to us; and 2 Cor. v.
20, etc. where the Gospel is particularly described as the Word of
Reconciliation, we are told that Christ was made Sin for us, that we might be
made the Righteousness of God in him, and this Righteousness is expressly called
the Righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. i. 1. because it
is the immediate Result of his Obedience and Death. And it is upon this account
in the Old Testament, he is more than once called the Lord our Righteousness.
But when I explain in what Sense Christ is our Righteousness, I would take more
time and room, lest if I should not keep exactly to the common Forms of
Expression, I should want a larger Vindication.

Now though our Obedience to the first and great Command of the Gospel ( viz.)
Believing in Christ, is not our Righteousness, (lest it exclude Christ and the
Righteousness of God) yet it is the way of our partaking of this Righteousness;
and therefore our Justification or Justifying Righteousness is so often called
the Righteousness of God by Faith, and the Righteousness of Faith; e ek pisteos
dikaiosune. Romans ix. 30. Romans x. 6. dikaiosune dia pisteos, and epi te pistei.
Phil. iii. 9. all which are more properly rendered, The Righteousness that is
by or through Faith, or, that comes upon our believing. In other Places it is
expressed, that we are justified by Faith; but still in Opposition to the Works
of any true and proper Law. And it is in this Sense that Faith is said to be
imputed or accounted for Righteousness. Romans iv. 5. it is not said, Faith is
our Righteousness, or instead of a perfect Righteousness, but logizetai eis
dikaiosunen, i. e. in order to our Justification; meaning, that of all the
Graces wrought in us, or Actions done by us, Faith is the only thing that God
makes account of or reckons to our Advantage, in order to our Justification, or
our obtaining a justifying Righteousness; and that not as a Work or Duty
performed, as is proved by the Context, but chiefly for this very Reason,
because it renounceth every thing of Works, and goes out of Self to depend
entirely on Grace, which is the Design of all that 4th Chapter, by a parallel
Instance of Abraham's not depending on his own Sufficiency of Nature, but on
God's Power to fulfill the Promise.

Nor is this Exposition of the Words eis dikaiosunen forced or strange, for
they are used exactly in the same Sense in other places, even when it is joined
with pisteuo, Romans x. 10. With the Heart Man believes unto Righteousness, i.
e. in order to his obtaining a justifying Righteousness, or in order to
Justification; so v. 4. Christ is the End of the Law for Righteousness to every
one who believes.

This Account of things gives a plain Reason why the Gospel justifies and
accepts those Persons who perform an honest and sincere, but a very poor,
inconstant and imperfect Obedience to the Commands contained in it, although
those Duties are there commanded in Perfection, ( viz.) because it is not our
Obedience to those Commands that is the justifying Righteousness of the Gospel,
but another Righteousness that is given us, i. e. a Freedom from Guilt, and a
Right to Life, when we obey the first great Command ( viz.) Believing or
trusting in Christ.

Whereas a proper Law requires perfect Obedince for Justification: The Language
of every proper Law is this; Cursed or condemned is every one that continues
not in all things that are written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. iii.
10. and Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one Point, he is
guilty of all. James ii. 10. That can be no justifying Righteousness according
to a Law which does not arise to the Perfection of the Command, both for Kind,
for Degree, for Continuance, and for every Circumstance. But the Gospel
proposing another justifying Righteousness to be received only by our Faith,
whether this Faith be strong and perfect or no, yet (if it be true) it receives
the Righteousness, and the Believer is justified. If a Criminal lay hold on a
Pardon with a trembling paralytick Hand, he is as safe from Condemnation, as he
that with Courage and Strength reaches out his Arm to seize it; because it is
not his Hand, but the Pardon secures him. If an Israelite stung by a fiery
Serpent, could but just look with half an Eye to the brazen Serpent, he was
healed, as well as another that beheld it with strong and steady Eyes. If the
Manslayer was never so lame and feeble, yet if he could but reach the City of
Refuge, he was as secure from the Avenger, as he that fled to it with the
swiftest Feet. So he that commits his guilty sinful Soul to Christ for
Salvation, though with a feeble Faith, and far short of Perfection, yet a
Righteousness is given him; the Righteousness of God is unto and upon all that
believe, for there is no difference; and a weak Believer is as secure from Hell
as a stronger, though he cannot have so much present Evidence or Comfort: And
the Reason of his Safety is because his believing is not his justifying
Righteousness, but is only a means to attain it.

This is my present best Set of Thoughts upon this Subject; and though I have
copied them all from the Word of God, so far as I have been able to understand
the Meaning of it, yet some subtle Disputer may arise and tell me, he could
embarrass my Scheme with so many Objections, and press it with such powerful
Difficulties as are far above my Skill to solve, and so constrain me to
renounce it.

If this Disputer can show me that any part of it is contrary to Scripture, I
renounce it freely; but though he might perplex it with Difficulties which I
could not easily answer, yet I would not merely for that Reason be bound
immediately to renounce it: For there are many Texts of Scripture itself which
are so embarrassed and perplexed by the cavelling Wit of the Deists, or
Socinians, that it may be exceeding hard to give a fair and satisfactory
Account of them; yet none of us, who are Christians, dare to renounce the
Scripture, nor those very Texts that have so much Darkness about them; because
we have so much stronger Proof of the Truth of Scripture. How many Difficulties
are there in the Chronological and Historical parts, that seem scarce
reconcilable by all the Learning and Reason of Men; and perhaps that Spirit
only can reconcile them who knows what were his own Designs in writing, what
the Idea that the first Writers fixed to each Word, what the Sense which they
intended to convey to the first Readers, and what accidental Variations may
have crept into the Text by the Ignorance or Negligence, the Bigotry or
Sacrilege of the Transcribers. I have learnt from my youngest Years of
Philosophy, not to renounce any Proposition, for which I see plain and
sufficient Evidence from Reason and Revelation, though many Difficulties may
attend it which I am not at present able to solve. I know the Weakness of human
Nature.

SECT. III.
Yet that I may make a clearer way for this Discourse, to the Assent of my
Readers, I would give a Hint or two how the chief Objections that I can think
of, may be removed.

Object. I. Some may oppose me by Scripture, and say, Among all the Texts that
call the Gospel a Law, there is one that makes our Blessedness evidently to
depend on our doing the Work commanded therein. James i. 25. Whosoever looks into
the perfect Law of Liberty, and continues therein, he being not a forgetful
Hearer, but a Doer of the Work, this Man shall be blessed in his Deed. Now this
looks like Justification by Obedience to the Commands of the Gospel, which is
the proper Nature of a Law.

Ans. I. That the Gospel which has Advices, Commands and Threatenings belonging
to it should be sometimes called a Law in Scripture is no Wonder, for the Word
Law among the Jews, was in so frequent Use upon all Occasions, that not only
Doctrines, Rules and Constitutions were called Laws, but even the natural and
supernatural Principles of human Actions. So the Law of Kindness, Prove. xxxi.
26. for good Humor, or a Principle of Love and Civility. So the Law of Sin,
Romans vii. 25. for the Principles of corrupt Nature and evil Inclinations. So
the Law of the Spirit of Life, for a Principle of Holiness, Romans viii. 2. And
yet if all the Places where some suppose the Gospel to be called a Law, were
well examined, we should find them reduced to a very few in reality: Whence it
will appear that this is not the common Language of Scripture. The Text cited
in the Objection seems rather to refer to the moral Law, which is called a Law
of Liberty, because it is freed from its cursing and condemning Power by the
Gospel, and made easy to Believers by their new Nature: Now, surely, no
Christian will say that we are to be justified by doing the Works of the moral
Law.

Ans. II. In those Places of the New Testament where the Gospel is, or is
supposed to be called a Law, there is generally some qualifying Word added, as,
the Law of Faith, the Law of Liberty, etc. that it may seem to stand in
Opposition to a Law of Works, and appear distinct from a strict and proper Law.

Ans. III. There may be (as I have before hinted) many Blessings promised, and
Blessednesses pronounced upon Obedience to any of the Commands of God, whether
in the moral Law or Gospel; so Psalm i. 1. and cxix. 1, 2. so Matthew. v. 3 --
11. But every such Blessing does not signify the Justification of a Sinner in
the Sight of God, his Release from the Guilt or Obligation to Hell, and his
first Right to Heaven. He that obeys the Duties of the Law or Gospel in any
Measure or Degree, has some Sort of Blessedness pronounced on him by the Favor
and Condescension of God, for in keeping any of his Commands there is great
Reward, Psalm. xix. 11. especially to a Soul in a State of Grace, and already
justified by Faith.

Object. II. Another may draw an Argument from Reason, and say, Whatsoever
Duties of Righteousness are required in any Constitution or Covenant, the
fulfilling those Duties must in the very Nature and Reason of Things be
esteemed that Righteousness upon which that Constitution pronounces a Man just
or right in Court; so Faith justifies us against the Charge of Unbelief, so
Repentance and sincere Obedience justify us against the Charge of Impenitency
and Hypocrisy, and so Perseverance justifies us against the Charge of Apostasy,
because it is a Conformity to that Rule of Constitution which requires Faith,
Repentance, Perseverance, etc.

Ans. It must be granted indeed, that in the very Nature of Things our Faith
justifies us against the Charge of Unbelief, so far as our Faith goes; and our
Repentance and our Love to God justify us against the Charge of Impenitence,
and hating God so far as we do repent and love him; and our Meekness and
Humility and Sincerity, justify us against the Charge of Pride and Passion, and
Hypocrisy, so far as we are meek, humble and sincere: And in this Sense the
Apostle John might say, John iii. 7. He that does Righteousness is righteous,
as God is righteous, (where Righteousness is evidently used for Holiness, and
not in a forensick Sense, to signify Justification.) But all our Virtues and
Graces of Faith, Love, Repentance, etc. are so very far from Perfection, and so
much below what the Holiness of God and his Commands require, that the Spirit
of God in his Word, has not thought fit to honor these our Works with the
Name of Righteousness, when he is describing the Way how a Sinner is justified;
nor has he applied the Term of Justification to these Performances in those
Places of Scripture where with a plain Design and Exactness of Expression he
has treated of the Righteousness that justifies a Sinner before God. And the
holy Apostle seems cautious of using the Word Justification, when he is
speaking of his own sincere Obedience, 1 Cor. iv. 4. I know nothing by myself,
yet am I not hereby justified; though this Justification refers only to the
Charge of any Negligence in the Discharge of his Apostolical Office.

Object. III. Yet it is evident that there are several Texts which speak of our
Justification by Works, as James ii. our Justification by our Words, Matthew.
xii. 37. and our Right to Heaven by doing the Command^* Rev. xxii. 14. Blessed
are they that do his Commandment^* that they may have a Right to the Tree of
Life, etc.

Ans. In those Places of Scripture where the Word Justification is used and
attributed to our Duties or Graces, we must consider in what Sense
Justification is taken.

1. There is a Justification before Men, and a Justification in our own
Consciences; and in both these Respects our Repentance, our Love to God, our
Good Works, all justify us against the Charges of wicked Men, and against the
Charges of Satan's Temptations, or our own doubting Consciences, i. e. our
Repentance shows we are not impenitent, and our Good Works show that we are not
full of wicked Works; and Good Works may be said to justify us also against the
Charge of a false and hypocritical dead Faith, for they prove that our Faith is
lively and true; and this is that Justification St. James intends, Chap. ii.
for ver. 18. he says, I will show thee my Faith by my Works; and it is in this
Sense that he speaks of Justification by Works. So Abraham was justified from
the Charge of a dead Faith, by his Zeal for God in offering up his Son, Jam.
ii. 21, 23. Thus was the Scripture fulfilled, i. e. thus was the Truth and
Honor of the Scripture maintained and cleared, which declares Abraham to be
justified by Faith. Now though this Act of Abraham's Faith here mentioned, and
Genesis xv. 6. exercised on the express Promise of the Messiah, be not the first
Act of Faith that ever he put forth, and though he might be in a justified State
long before, yet every repeated Act of true Faith confirms the justifying
Sentence, and shows the Way of his first Justification: And so every good Work
he performed may be said in another Sense to confirm his Justification too, as
it proves the Truth of his Faith, and evidences him to be justified.

2. There is a Justification at the Day of Judgment, which is only declarative,
and designed to publish and declare to all the World the Equitableness of God's
final Sentence, adjudging some to Heaven and some to Hell: And there our own
Holiness, imperfect as it is, may justify us against the Charge of being
utterly wicked; what good Words we have spoken may justify us against the
Charge of being always guilty of evil or idle Words: They serve to distinguish
the Character of Saints and Sinners, and to make it appear there is a
Difference in their Practice, as well as in their Recompenses, as the Process
of that awful Day is represented, Matthew. xxv. And it is in this Sense that our
Savior says concerning the Day of Judgment, Matthew. xii. 37. By thy Words thou
shall be justified, and by thy Words thou shall be condemned; that is, your
Words as well as your Actions shall have a Share in determining your Character
before Men and Angels in that Day. And that Text also in the Rev. xxii. 12, 14.
refers evidently to the last Judgment, where it is said, Behold I come quickly
and my Reward is with me, to give to every Man according as his Work shall be;
blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right to the Tree
of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City. The Sense of it is,
that those who persevere to the End, in a sincere Obedience to the Commands of
Christ, in all the Duties of Holiness, shall have a public, adjudged and
declared Right to the immediate Possession of Heaven; which is a very different
Thing from the Justification of a Sinner in the Sight of God, by his believing
or trusting in Christ, which gives him the first Right; and which is the
precise Subject of St. Paul's Discourse, Romans Chap. ii. iii. iv. and v. and
Gal. Chap. ii. and iii.

It Is on this Matter that our Divines are wont to make a Distinction between
the Jus haereditarium, or the Right of Heirship which a Son has to his Father's
Estate as soon as he is born, (supposing his Father to be dead) and the Jus
aptitudinarium, which is a Right of Fitness, and a Right to the immediate
Possession, and this he has not till the Age of Manhood. Nor is this
Distinction ill-framed, nor unaptly applied to the present Case; for Scripture
gives a plain Foundation for it, viz. that we have the Right of Heirship at our
first believing, and the Right of actual Fitness, when we have fulfilled all
the Services God has appointed us in this Life. The Scriptures that naturally
lead to this Distinction are these: The Right of Heirship by Faith is very
plain, Romans iv. 11, 13, 16. Gal. iii. 26, 29. For ye are all the Children of
God by Faith in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ 's, then are ye Abraham 's
Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise. (Nor does the Apostle make much
Distinction between our Right to Heaven by Justification, and that by Adoption
or Inheritance, for both Justification and Adoption come by Faith; and he
intermingles both, as they most fitly answer his present Design; which is
evident by comparing the Process of his Discourse from Romans iv. 1 -- 16. and
Romans v. 17, 18, 21.) And then there is the Right of Fitness for immediate
Possession, Heb. x. 36. For ye have Need of Patience, that after ye have done
the Will of God, ye might receive the Promise; and this is the Right intended,
Rev. xxii. 14. Now we may suppose both the Right of Heirship and of Fitness to
be joined in that Text, Heb. vi. 12. Who through Faith and Patience inherit the
Promises. Through Faith they are made Heirs at first, and through Continuance
in Faith and Patience they are become actual Inheritors. Nor is that Text in
Romans x. 10. much unlike, With the Heart Man believes unto Righteousness, and
with the Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation. Here Justification is
attributed to Faith, and Salvation to the outward Profession of Christianity,
including all the proper Effects and Evidences of Faith in a holy Life. And
though Salvation in many Places of Scripture is put for Justification, because
Justification is Salvation begun, yet when they are more accurately
distinguished, the one is attributed to Faith, the other to Works, or to Faith
and Works together.

Now, whatever other Sorts of Justification may be mentioned in Scripture, yet
this Justification of a Sinner through Faith requires such a Righteousness as
must secure us from all the Charges and Penalties of all the Guilt of every Sin
both original and actual, from all the Charges of God's most holy and broken
Law, from all the Charges of the Imperfection of our Faith, Repentance, and our
best Works, and must set a Sinner right and make him righteous, and give him a
Right to Life in the Court of that God who justified Abraham and David without
Works, by imputing Righteousness to them, and continues under the Gospel the
same Way to justify the Ungodly, Romans iv. 5, 6. i. e. all that we do in a way
of Duty or Godliness, is not respected in this Court, but we are looked upon as
ungodly, and without all Righteousness in ourselves, and as such have a
Righteousness, or a Right to Life bestowed on us, or are justified of mere
Grace.

And though here and there, for wise Purposes, an Expression may be dropped
occasionally in Scripture, that may favor another Way of speaking, yet in the
Descriptions of the Gospel, the Way of a Sinner's Justification in the Sight of
God at his Conversion, is never put upon fulfilling of the Gospel-duties, as
the Matter of his Justifying Righteousness; and therefore the Gospel is not a
proper Law: And whatsoever Forms of Speech some Persons may fancy agreeable to
the Nature and Reason of Things, yet this which I have described is the most
common Way wherein the Penmen of Scripture represent those Things, when they
seem to aim at an accurate and distinct Description of the Law and Gospel: Now
Scripture is our surest Rule of speaking in Matters of pure Revelation.

To sum up all in short: The Word Law is taken in various Senses in the Bible:
In some Places it means inward Principles of Action, as the Law of Kindness,
the Law of Sin; sometimes it signifies only Directions and Rules of Life, as
Prove. xiii. 14. the Law of the Wise, i. e. Rule of Wisdom. In other Places it
includes all the Orders and Injunctions that relate to one Subject; as the Law
of the Nazarite, Numb. vi. 13. the Law of the Burnt-Offering, Lev. vi. 9.
Sometimes it is taken in so large a Latitude as to take in all Doctrines,
Counsels and Advices, Commands, Promises, Threatenings, including Prophecies,
Histories and Examples also; so the Law frequently signifies all the five Books
of Moses. And in these Senses the Gospel in its largest Signification has
several Laws belonging to it, and itself may be called a Law. The Scripture
indulges a sparing Use of it in such a Sense. But the Word Law in its most
proper and strict Sense signifies a Constitution where Duties are required,
which if neglected, subject the Offender to a Penalty, and if performed, they
are his Justifying Righteousness; and in this Sense Scripture does not at all
favor the Application of this Name to the Gospel: For it is abundantly
evident, that the Words Law and Gospel taken in their most proper and limited
Senses, are constantly distinguished from each other, and set in direct
Opposition in the New Testament.

Thus have I thrown into some Order those few, plain, reconciling Thoughts
between the contending Parties of Christians, and am already almost in Pain to
think that I shall a little displease all Parties, because all these Thoughts
will hardly square and adjust themselves exactly to any of the popular and
settled Schemes of Orthodoxy; or at least, they will never agree with the
Extremes on either hand: Yet if they appear to be drawn merely from the
Scripture, and to speak the Language of the Holy Writers, then this Discourse
will approve itself to those who maintain the most sacred Regard to the Bible;
and those Schemes should be a little molded and bent, to adjust them to the
Language of Scripture, even when it uses different Forms of Speech. But I shall
not enter farther into this Controversy, because my Design is to soften the
angry Tempers of Men, that they may not rage against each other when they use
different Forms of speaking, as the Scripture itself does, and make an Apology
for both Sides, while they agree in the Things that are most substantial and
necessary.

SECT. IV. Reconciling Sentiments.
Now that I may proceed in this reconciling Work, I shall follow this Method.

I. Represent the different Apprehensions and different Language of Men in
Preaching the Gospel.

II. Mention some of the Causes or Occasions of these different Apprehensions.

III. Give a Hint or two of the Conveniences and Inconveniences of each of
these Ways of Preaching.

IV. Show the Safety and Sufficiency of each, with regard to Salvation.

V. Conclude with a Word or two of Request or humble Advice.

First, Let me represent the various Apprehensions of Men in those Matters: But
here I would be understood to describe only the moderate Men among those who
are called Calvinists, and those that are named New-Methodists; as for the
High-Flyers, or extreme and rigid Party-Men of either Side, I leave them out in
my present Account, while I mention the little Differences among the Men of
Moderation, among whom I reckon far the greatest part of the Protestant
Dissenters in England, to be at this time, and I hope I am not mistaken in this
Opinion.

Some when they read or pronounce the Words Law or Gospel, take them generally
in their loosest and largest Sense, and so they unite their Names, and make
them consistent together; others are ready to take those Words in their limited
and proper Sense, and then they divide them into very distinct Things, and will
not allow their Names so promiscuous a Use.

Some Ministers love to explain the Gospel in a more legal way, and describe it
as a conditional Covenant that requires Agreements and Restipulation from Men;
they insist much on vowing and resolving to submit to the Commands of Christ,
and with a lively Zeal and powerful Eloquence, they enforce the Duties of
Repentance, sincere Obedience, Watchfulness and Perseverance; and show how much
the Promises of Life, Heaven and Glory, Peace and daily Pardon depend on these
Qualifications and Performances, pronouncing the terrible Threatenings of
Damnation on the Impenitent, the Unbelieving, and the Disobedient, to awaken
the secure Sinner, and stir up the slothful Christian. Others delight more in
representing the Gospel as a Declaration of Grace and free Promise of Salvation
to Sinners; a Promise of pardoning Mercy, Sanctifying Grace, and everlasting
Glory to sinful and perishing Criminals, and invite Sinners to receive all this
Grace, to accept of this Salvation, and to trust in this Savior, according to
the Offers of the Gospel: When its Truths are revealed, the first Sort choose to
say, that the Moral Law of Nature in the Hand of Christ, commands us to believe
them; when its Duties are mentioned, they rather say, the Law of Nature in the
Hand of Christ requires Obedience to them; and that while the Gospel in its
proper Language promises Salvation to Believers, the Moral Law, or Law of
Nature, binds Condemnation on the Unbeliever, and the Impenitent; but the pure
Gospel is all Grace and Mercy: And they preach the Law of Works in the
Perfection of its Demands and Terror of its Penalties, to drive Sinners for
Refuge to the Gospel: And they press the Duties of Holiness on their Hearers
from a comfortable Sense of their Deliverance from Hell, and from Gratitude to
Christ, as Evidences of their Faith, as Preparatives for Heaven, and as
necessary, both in the Nature of Things, and by divine Appointment in order to
our final Happiness.

Those that follow the conditional Way of preaching the Gospel, describe the
chief Act of Faith, as a Consent of Will to submit themselves to him in all his
Offices; a Consent to take him for their Prophet, and Resolution to make all
his Instructions their Rule and Guide; a Consent to take him for their Priest,
to make their Peace with God, and obtain their Pardon; a Consent to own him for
their King, and promise sincere Obedience to him as their Lord in all his
Commands; but still with an humble Dependence on his Spirit and Grace, to
enable them to fulfill these Resolutions.

Those that preach the Gospel in its more free and absolute Form describe Faith
in Christ as the Flight of a poor, guilty, perishing Sinner to an only Refuge;
and they make its chief Act to consist in a trusting or committing the Soul,
ignorant, guilty, hard-hearted and sinful as it is, into the Hand of Christ,
with a sincere Desire to have it enlightened by him as their Prophet, pardoned
and reconciled to God through him as their Priest, and subdued to all willing
Obedience to him, and by him, as their Lord and King; humbly expecting that he
will do all this for them; and this is in their Opinion the best way of
addressing themselves to poor Sinners, who find themselves so dark, so sinful,
so feeble and inconstant in their best Obedience and Purposes, that they dare
not resolve upon any thing, and can hardly say, they heartily vow and promise a
Submission to Christ in all Things; but that they can better apply to him in a
way of Trust and Dependence, humbly desiring and hoping he will work all this
in them by his free Grace, while they wait upon him in his appointed Means.

The one are ever persuading their Hearers to bind their Souls to God, by
solemn Vows and Covenants, even in particular Duties, believing this to be the
most effectual Way to guard against every Sin, and best secure their Obedience
and Constancy under every Temptation: The other are afraid to urge so much
vowing and resolving on the Consciences of Men, lest they thereby lead them
into a legal Frame, under a Spirit of Bondage, and lest their Consciences be
more troublesomely entangled and ensnared after every broken Vow, and their
Faith and Hope be too much discouraged; that Faith and Hope which ought to be
the constant Springs of their Obedience. They advise their People, therefore,
rather to commit their Souls afresh continually to the Care of Christ, as 2 Timothy i. to believe he accepts them, and to walk watchfully, without any
particular, formal, and explicit Vows. Though it must be confessed, that with
regard to Christians of different Tempers and Temptations, both these Methods
have had very good Success.

Some are Sons of Thunder, Boanerges, and frighten the Profane out of their
Security, by many Terrors that are written against those who obey not the
Gospel; and they enforce Obedience on the Consciences of Believers, chiefly by
way of Rewards and Punishments: The other are like Barnabas's, Sons of
Consolation, and persuade Sinners to accept of the offered Grace, by all the
Allurements of the Compassion of God, and by the dying Love of a Redeemer,
beseeching them to be reconciled: And they draw out the Hearts of Believers to
Repentance, and lead them with the Spirit of Power and Love to an easy and
connatural Obedience by the Constraints of the Love of Christ, and by a humble
Persuasion of their Acceptance in him unto eternal Life.

In short, the one dwell most upon the Duties of the Gospel in their Sermons,
in order to qualify their Hearers for the Privileges; the other insist most on
the Privileges and Comforts of the Gospel, in order to invite and allure them
to fulfill the Duties, and to give their Hearers Strength and Delight in the
Discharge of these Duties.

I would not here be understood, as though I supposed either of those Ministers
never to mingle Mercy and Terror, Precepts, Penalties, and Promises; for it
must be acknowledged, there are some Persons of each Opinion, in whom all the
Talents of a Preacher happily unite, and they honorably sustain both
Characters, the Sons of Thunder, and the Sons of Consolation; and all of them
make Conscience of publishing to Men both Divine Grace and their Duty, all of
them preach Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ; but
those who have chosen one Scheme of Divinity for their own, more generally bend
their Ministry the one way, and those who have chosen the other preach more
usually in the other way.

All our Protestant Confessions of Faith, and I would persuade myself that our
Ministers, at least among the Nonconformists, agree that, though Duties are
required to be performed by us, yet the Grace that is necessary to perform them
is given freely to us; that though Faith and Repentance, and sincere Obedience,
are indispensably necessary, in order to our final Salvation, yet they are not
the justifying Righteousness upon account of which our Sins are pardoned, and
eternal Life is bestowed upon us: That the Obedience and Death, and
Intercession of Christ, as a proper High Priest and Sacrifice, are the only
Foundation of our Acceptance with God, and ground of all our Hopes; and that
from him, as a Head of Influence, we must receive all Grace, whereby we are
conducted safe to Glory.

Both Sides agree that we are to work out our Salvation with Fear and
Trembling, but that it is God who works in us to will and to do, Phil. ii.
12, 13. That we are saved by the Faith of the Son of God, and not by Works,
lest any should boast; yet that we must also be created in Christ Jesus unto
good Works, for God has appointed that we should walk in them, Ephesians. ii. 8, 9,
10.

II. In the next place, that I may make a little further Apology for those that
are humble, honest and sincere on both Sides, I would consider the various
Causes or Occasions, whence different Apprehensions of Men about these things
may arise: And here we shall find poor frail Mankind, almost universally born
and brought up in Prejudices to some Party or other, encompassed with thousand
things that tend to influence the Judgment, and incline it insensibly toward
some particular Opinion; so that a whole Scheme of Doctrines built upon a pure
and zealous and laborious Search after Truth, without any manner of Bias or
Corruption on any Side, is scarce to be found in human Nature. There is no Man
alive free from these Weaknesses. Happy the Mind that has the fewest of them.

Nam vitiis nemo sine nascitur, optimus ille est
Qui minimis urgetur.
Horace. It may be these Ministers themselves, who differ in Opinion, are of
very different natural Complexions and Tempers, and this has a secret
Influence in swaying their Mind, their Studies, their Judgment and Ministry one
way or the other; though all those who agree in natural Temper, are not always
of the same Opinion.

Or it may be, they had an Education under Teachers and Tutors of different
Sentiments, or have met with Books of different Principles and Opinions, which
have made a strong and lasting Impression upon their Minds, and engaged them
betimes into one Party, before they had Strength of Judgment to determine their
Opinions upon just Arguments.

Some Persons in order to settle their Judgments in these Points, have studied
more and prayed less, and some have prayed more and studied too little; and
some on both Sides have studied hard, and prayed much, and sought earnestly the
Instructions of the blessed Spirit, and yet have fallen into different ways of
thinking in those parts of Christianity which are not of Necessity to
Salvation, and have been suffered to follow different Forms of Speech for wise
Purposes in the Providence of God.

Some little Accident or Occurrence of Life, or some sudden start of Thought,
while the Balance of the Judgment was in Suspense, has perhaps given it a turn
to one Side or the other, and perhaps determined it for their whole Lives.

Some have happened to form their Set of Doctrines at first more by their own
reasoning Powers, and drawn their Schemes of Religion from what they imagine
the most natural Connection, the Necessity or Congruity of things, and they
call the Bible only to their Assistance, and seek proper Texts to confirm their
own System: Others draw the whole Scheme of Doctrines from a constant and
intent Application to the holy Scripture, and ^^ll in Reason to their
Assistance, only in order to understand and methodize those Doctrines: And
though the first way of Study in Matters of the Christian Religion, is by no
means to be justified, yet too many have unhappily practiced it; and though the
latter way is much to be preferred, and most likely to come near the Truth, yet
it is not followed by all who preach the Gospel; and no wonder then that
Ministers may differ in their Thoughts.

Such is the Weakness of human Nature, that as some of us form and build up our
first Opinions upon very slight and insufficient grounds, and there are many
who persist in them, and strongly maintain them without an honest
Re-examination, so others of us change our Opinions upon Reasons as slight and
feeble and insufficient. Some Persons having been perplexed with one or two
great Difficulties in that Scheme of Sentiments which they have professed, and
being unable to grapple with them, have by swift or slow Degrees, abandoned
that whole Scheme, and fell in with another, which perhaps has equal or
greater Difficulties in it; never considering that the whole System of
Christianity, with all its Appendices, is so vast, and our View of things is so
narrow, and our Knowledge so imperfect, that a sharp Disputant may push some
parts of all our human Schemes into great Perplexities, even such as human
Reason can hardly solve; and perhaps God alone knows how to reconcile them, in
whose single View all things lie for ever fair and open, perfectly consistent,
and are comprehended at once.

Or it may be the Way and Method of Divine Grace in the first Conversion of the
one and the other was very different. Some were wrought upon at first more by
legal Methods, and the Terrors of the Law of God, and they find them still to
have the greatest and most powerful Influence on their Consciences; others from
their wild Wanderings were brought home to Christ by gentle Discoveries of
Divine Love in the Death of a Savior: Some, like the Jailer, Acts xvi. 26, --
30. have had their Consciences shaken as with an Earthquake, they came in
trembling and crying out, What must I do to be saved? Others had their Hearts
softly opened, as was the Heart of Lydia, 14th ver. of the same Chapter, and
they received the Word of Grace and the Gospel; and they find the Work of God
carried on upon their own Souls, still by the most evangelical Methods. Now a
Man's own early Experiences in the things of Religion, will naturally have a
great Influence on his Opinions; and God in his infinite Wisdom has ordered it
should be so, that Persons of every Sort and Temper, and Humor, Young and Old,
Sinners and Saints, under every kind of Temptation, might meet with some
Ministers of the Gospel, and some Sermons and Writings to suit their Taste, to
hit their Case, and be the most effectual Means of their Salvation.

The Third thing I proposed here was to show briefly, that as each of these
ways of preaching have their several Advantages, so each of them have their
special Inconveniences too, if they are perpetually and only insisted on,
unless well managed by the extraordinary Prudence of the Preacher.

The one aims most at the Glory of Divine Equity, in Rewards and Punishments,
and contends much for the Sincerity of God in all his Transactions with Men:
The other seems to look most at honoring the Sovereignty, the Riches and
Freedom of Divine Grace, and God's infinite Condescension and Compassion to
sinful Creatures.

One seems to lead Christians more to a strict Scrupulosity in every Action, in
order to make up the undoubted Evidences of a Gospel-Perfection, which they
call Sincerity, and thereby to raise their Hopes of escaping Hell and obtaining
Heaven; it drives the Soul to Duties, and maintains a trembling Watchfulness;
but is in Danger of governing it by a Spirit of Bondage, and of keeping our
Faith and Comfort very low. The other leads to equal Holiness, or perhaps to
higher Degrees of it by the delightful Constraints of a filial Love, by the
sweet Influences of Divine Consolation; but there may be some Danger of
encouraging Negligence and Presumption, and that not only in Sinners, but even
sometimes in Believers themselves, if not wisely managed and guarded.

Upon this Subject I might here give my Pen into the Hand of some sprightly
Advocate of each Party, and have forty more Pages written for me speedily,
without any Thought or Labor of mine; this would swell my Essay up finely, and
enlarge it to a Volume, with many a Name of Arminian and Antinomian dealt about
freely on the opposite Opinions: For the supposed Advantages and Disadvantages
on both Sides, are frequently mentioned as Arguments of each Party against the
other; but I shall not think necessary to insist longer on them here for that
very Reason: And though these sort of moral Arguments drawn from the Design and
Tendency of things, may be justly used on both Sides, and on both Sides have
some Degree of Truth and Force in them, yet both may not have equal Force: Nor
do I think it inconsistent with my Design in this reconciling Discourse, to
declare my own Sentiments: For a Man may be very happy in making Peace between
two quarrelling Neighbors, though he is well persuaded that one has the
better Side of the Cause, and in a friendly manner expresses it too.

I will not be ashamed then to declare, that in my Opinion, one Method of
preaching the Gospel has greater Advantages in it, and fewer Inconveniences
than the other; supposing still that we guard against Extremes: that one seems
more connatural to the Genius of the Gospel, as it is distinct from a Covenant
of Works, and seems to suit better with the most glorious Designs of Divine
Grace. My own Experience in the Things of Religion, my Observations of some
others, and my diligent Search of the holy Scriptures (I hope not without
Divine Aid) has led my Thoughts rather to favor and practice the more
Evangelical Method of preaching most frequently: But another Person who follows
a different way may tell me, he came by his Turn of Thoughts the same way as I
did by mine, and my Charity demands that I believe it. Yet while both Sides
maintain those great Truths, wherein I mentioned the general Agreement of our
Protestant Confessions of Faith, I cannot conceive that either of them can lead
Sinners astray from Salvation.

And that is the Fourth Proposal I made, ( viz.) to show the real Safety of
each of these Methods in ministering the Gospel both to Saints and Sinners, and
that is evident, because they agree in the most necessary and essential Parts
of it. Both of them preach Grace and Duty, Justification by Christ, and
Sanctification by the Holy Spirit, and teach Men all that is of Necessity to be
believed and practiced in order to Salvation.

If two Men sitting under a different Ministry are brought sincerely to repent
of all Sin, and to love God with all their Heart, can I imagine that one shall
be damned, because he tells me he repents in Obedience to the Commands of the
Gospel? Or the other, because he does it in Obedience to the moral Law in the
(...) of Christ, supposing the pure Gospel to have no Commands in it? If two
Sinners are persuaded to accept of Christ Jesus for their Lord and Savior, can
I ever believe, that God will condemn one of them, because he first resolved to
obey Christ as his Lord, and thereby took Encouragement to trust in him as a
Savior? or that God will punish the other for ever, because he first trusted
in Christ as a Savior, and thereby found his Will sweetly inclined to submit
to him as his Lord? Where all Duties required in the Gospel are sincerely
performed, can I ever be persuaded Men shall be ever sent to Hell, merely
because they do not agree about the logical Relations that these Duties have to
one another, or to their Salvation, while both agree to lay the Lord Jesus
Christ, and his Righteousness, or his Obedience and Death, as the only
Foundation of all their Hopes?

If either of these Ways of preaching the Gospel were so contrary to Scripture,
and such abominable and pernicious Errors in the Sight of God as angry and
quarreling Men of both Sides represent them, I cannot persuade myself that God
would so far have favored both, in these Instances following. ( viz.)

I. If either of these Ways of preaching were so criminal and dangerous as some
have supposed, I cannot think the Spirit of God would have used those
Expressions in Scripture, which sometimes seem to represent the Covenant of
Grace in one Form, and sometimes in another; nor that he would have suffered
the Penmen of his holy Word to have given Occasion to such different Sentiments
on this Subject among his Favorites, his holy Worshippers, and those who have
sought his Directions and his Grace with much Importunity and Perseverance.

II. If either of these Ways of preaching were so dangerous as some have
imagined, I cannot believe that the blessed God would ever have attended both
these Ways of preaching with his Blessing, so far as to convert great Numbers
of Sinners by them, and edify his Saints; but it is sufficiently evident that
Ministers of very different Apprehensions in these Points have been owned and
blessed of God to the Conversion, Comfort and Salvation of many Souls.

III. If either of these Representations of the Gospel were so very dangerous,
I cannot imagine, that Persons of good Understanding, of deep Learning, of
large Knowledge in Religion, of long Experience, and of great Holiness, should
maintain their Opinions in these Things so very different to their Lives End,
if their Salvation were in such extreme Hazard thereby, however in the Infancy
of their Christianity they might have received and embraced these different
Apprehensions. Surely if these Points had been of so dreadful and dangerous
Importance on either Side, God would have granted a greater Union in Sentiment
to so great a Number of his Children, who labored in sincere Inquiry after
Truth, constant and fervent Prayer for the Teaching of the blessed Spirit, and
were truly zealous for his Honor. Divine Goodness surely would not have
suffered such Multitudes of holy Souls on either Side to continue always in
Mistakes of so terrible Consequence as some Disputers have represented them.

SECT. V. Advices or Requests.
May I be permitted at the End of this Discourse to drop a Word or two of
general Advice, or rather of humble Request to all, but especially to my
younger Brethren in the Ministry.

I. Request. Pay a constant and sacred Reverence to the Language of Scripture,
and let it appear in these following Instances.

1 st. Let the Forms of Speech that are used in those Scriptures where the
Doctrines of the Gospel are expressly laid down and proved, be the Speech in
which you commonly teach those Doctrines; and let the Language wherein warm and
pathetical Exhortations are given in Scripture, be the Language which you
generally imitate in your affectionate Addresses to the Consciences of Saints
and Sinners; the one as well as the other are given for our Example. Whereas if
we should preach and explain the deepest Truths in all the affectionate Forms
and Flourishes of Speech and Metaphor, it is the Way to lead the Judgments of
Hearers astray; but while we submit ourselves to the Words which the Holy
Spirit uses as our Pattern, both in teaching, and also in exhorting, we may
humbly expect his inward Teachings to enlighten our own Understandings, and
make our Labors in the Gospel powerful to the Salvation of them that hear us.

2 dly, Let those Words which are not used in Scripture never be zealously
maintained and insisted on as necessary to Salvation, and especially where they
give great Offense: Nor let those Terms and Ways of Expression which Scripture
uses but very seldom, and upon particular Occasions, be the perpetual or
constant Language of your Ministry, in Opposition to those Expressions and Ways
of Representation which Scripture most frequently delights to use; and let no
authentic Systems of Divinity, to which you are most inclined, nor the Names of
great Men ever prevail with you to break this Rule.

3 dly, Dare not indulge yourself in a Disgust to any Scripture Language, or an
Aversion to those Scriptures which seem to run in a Style and Expression
different from the Language which you generally choose; for even those
Expressions were designed for useful Purposes by the Holy Spirit, and doubtless
have attained some happy End in the Providence of God, in particular Cases and
Persons: If you should once encourage such a vicious Humor, it might proceed
so far at last, as to render a great Part of the Bible the Object of your
Disgust. Be sure therefore always to maintain upon your Spirit such a
reverential Tenderness for the Holy Scripture, that you may never dare to rail
against any Expressions that Scripture uses, nor oppose them with Violence,
without a modest Distinction in what Sense they are proper, and in what Sense
they are to be avoided. And this leads me to the Second Request.

II. Request. When you hear any Ministers, in preaching the Gospel, use the
Words Free and absolute, Conditional, Unconditional, Promises, Laws,
Threatenings, Commands, etc. Exercise so much Charity as to believe they use
them in such a Sense as the Scripture approves of, and as secures the Salvation
of Men, according to their sincerest Apprehensions.

If the Preacher speak of the Gospel, as a free and absolute Promise, always
suppose he intends also, that all the Duties of Repentance and Holiness are
necessary, in order to Salvation, though he does not like to call them
Conditions. If another should insist much on Conditions in the Gospel, suppose
he means none of them to be performed merely by your own Strength, nor to
include any Thing of Merit in them. If he speak of the Laws of Christ,
understand him concerning all those Rules and Directions, and Commands, which
Christ has given to his Followers, but not in the strict and perfect Notion of
a Law. Even if he calls the Gospel a Law, believe that he intends it only in
the largest Sense, and does not mean that we are justified in the Sight of God,
by our Performance of the Duties of this Law as the proper Matter of our
Righteousness before God: Or if he should happen to mention any such Thing as
Justification by our good Works of Holiness, etc. take due Heed to the
Connection, and let Charity persuade you that he is speaking concerning
Justification before Men, or Justification in our own Consciences, or in the
Day of Judgment, and not of a Sinner's Justifying Righteousness in the Sight of
God, when he is first converted and accepted of him through Faith in Jesus
Christ.

Suffer not your Disgust and Anger immediately to be kindled at the Sound of
any of these Words, as though they were at once undermining and perverting the
Gospel of Christ. Nor ever give your self leave to reproach Ministers, as no
Preachers of the Gospel, merely because they choose other Modes of Expression
than those which you most esteem, and frequently use, for such a Conduct will
warp and bind down the Consciences and Spirits of Men to a narrow and an
uncharitable Partiality. This will render every Sermon offensive to them that
is not conceived just in their beloved Language, and will utterly prevent their
Profit by the various Gifts Christ has bestowed on his Ministers. There are
some common Christians in our Age, who are most unhappy Instances of this
unchristian Temper; and it is to these Persons chiefly, that I give his second
Advice.

III. Request. Avoid all the high Flights and Extremes of zealous Party Men,
and which Way of Preaching soever you approve and pursue, be sure to guard
against all Extremes, both of Notion and Language. Let the Hopes of exalting
Free Grace never persuade you to neglect to enforce the Duties of the Gospel,
and to press them with Zeal on the Consciences of all Men: Nor let the Fear of
encouraging Licentiousness ever tempt you to turn the Gospel of Grace into a
Covenant of Works: For God in his Gospel of Free Grace has sufficiently
provided for the Honor of his Holiness, and the Sanctification of his own
Children.

You will tell me here perhaps, that Scripture itself uses Expressions as high
upon particular Occasions, and as much leaning to Extremes as any Men of Party
among us. But remember then, that the Scripture uses such strong and high
Expressions not on one Side only, but on both Sides, and infinite Wisdom has
done this more forcibly to argue and impress some present Truth or Duty: But
while it is evident the holy Writers have used high Expressions, strong Figures
of Speech, and vehement Turns on both Sides, this sufficiently instructs us
that we should be moderate in our Censures of either Side, and that the calm
doctrinal Truth, stripped of all Rhetoric and Figures, lies nearer to the middle,
or at least that some of these appearing Extremes, are more reconcilable than
angry Men will generally allow. If the Apostle charges the Corinthians, So run
that ye may obtain, 1 Cor. ix. 24. and tells the Romans, it is not of him that
wills or of him that runs, but of God who shows Mercy, Romans ix. 16. we
may plainly infer that our Running and his Mercy, our Diligence and Divine
Grace, are both necessary to our Salvation.

IV. Request. Let the particular Tempers, Temptations and Dangers of Persons
with whom you converse, or with whom you preach, together with the growing
Errors of the Times, have always some Weight with you, to bend your Ministry a
little more the one way or the other: And never affect to preach these Matters
in a disputative and controversial Way, but rather in a plain and practical
Form, except the Temptations of the Age and Nation, or of particular Churches
or Christians seem to demand it. And indeed this seems to be one great Reason,
why Scripture itself in different Parts of it sometimes manages the Argument in
a way of Dispute, and at other times gives a different practical Turn to the
same Truth, and uses so different Language in the Representation of the same
Doctrines. For the several Books of Scripture were written according to the
various Necessities of the Church of God, and to obviate Temptations of
contrary Kinds, and to prevent the Danger of Errors arising, by running to
Extremes on either Side.

In the last Age, in the Times of the Civil Wars, Antinomianism and Errors of
that Nature, were very common in the Nation: This turned the Labors and Study
of many pious Men to vindicate and preach up the Duties of the Gospel, and
Works of Holiness, as the proper Business of the Day. In this present Age, the
Popish and Pelagian Doctrines of Justification by Works, and Salvation by the
Power of our own Freewill, are publicly maintained and preached abundantly
through the Land: The Socinian and the Arminian Errors are revived and spread
exceedingly, whereby Jesus Christ is robbed of his Godhead, or his
Satisfaction, or both, and the blessed Spirit denied in the Glory of his
Offices: For Deism and Natural Religion, in Opposition to Christianity, daily
prevail.

Now, perhaps, some may think it the Duty and Business of the Day to temporize,
and by preaching the Gospel a little more conformably to Natural Religion, in a
mere rational or legal Form, to bring it down as near as may be to their
Scheme, that we may gain them to hear and approve it, or at least, that we may
not offend them. But I am rather of Opinion, that we should in such a Day stand
up for the Defense of the Gospel in the full Glory of its most important
Doctrines, and in the full Freedom of its Grace; that we should preach it in
its divinest and most Evangelical Form, that the Cross of Christ, by the
promised Power of the Spirit, may vanquish the vain Reasonings of Men, and that
this despised Doctrine triumphing in the Conversion of Souls, may confound the
Wise and the Mighty, and silence the Disputers of this World. This was the bold
and glorious Method St. Paul took at Corinth, where Learning and Reason and
Philosophy flourished in Pride; but they yielded several Trophies of Victory to
the preaching of the Cross. Paul could use the Wisdom of Words whenever he
had occasion for it, and had the Excellency of Speech at command when he
pleased: this appears in several Parts of his Writings; yet in his Sermons at
Corinth, he disclaimed it all, and determined to know nothing among them but
Christ, and him crucified. 1 Cor. ii. 2.

Happy that Man who has attained the holy Skill of joining Promises and
Commands, Duties and Privileges, Authority, Terror and Grace; and who mingles
them all wisely in his Ministry; who has learnt of St. Paul the Divine Art of
addressing himself to the Reason, the Consciences, and the Passions of Men in
such variety of Expressions, of Power, Terror and Love, as may most effectually
answer the Ends of his Office. Happy is he that knows how to display the Gospel
in all Forms under which Scripture represents it, to preach to the Jews, and to
teach the Gentiles; to talk to the Righteous and the Wicked in proper Language,
to the obstinate Rebel, to the trembling Sinner, and to the mourning Saint.
Happy is he that becomes all to all that he may gain the more Souls, 1 Cor. ix.
19, etc. sometimes as without the Law, yet under a Law to Christ; sometimes as
with the Law, yet free from the Bondage of it; that never strives about Words
to no Profit, but knows how to divide the Word of Truth aright, and to give
every one their Portion: This is the Workman that needs not to be ashamed, and
has most reason to hope for Success. 2 Timothy ii. 14, 15.

To conclude, Let us all apply ourselves with unbiased Minds, with new
Diligence and fervent Prayers, to search the Word of God, and draw all our
Notions of the Gospel thence: Let us enquire into the spiritual State, the
Dangers and Necessities of the People to whom we minister, and this will be of
great Use to guide us to proper Subjects and Methods of Discourse.

Let our Conversation be such, as becomes the Gospel in every Form of it,
whether absolute or conditional. Let our close walking with God be exemplary
and instructive, that Men may see our Religion as well as hear it, and all may
confess, that while we preach the Gospel, we are zealous Observers of the Law.
Let us maintain upon our own Hearts a sweet and honorable Sense of the Riches
of Free Grace in Christ, together with a tender Sense of the Evil of Sin, and a
lively Delight in Holiness, that the daily Experience of our own Souls, and our
inward Christianity which is taught us, and wrought in us by the Spirit of God,
may instruct us how to preach to others.

Let that Gospel which is written in the fleshly Tables of our Hearts, i. e. in
our very Souls, by the Finger of God, be manifested in every Part of our
Ministrations for the Good of Men. Thus we shall obtain the Approbation of
Jesus our Judge, in preaching his Gospel of Faith and Love, and thus shall we
have the Pleasure of this Testimony in our own Consciences, that in the general
Course of our Ministry we have sought to save the Souls of others in the same
way as we ourselves have sought to be saved: And that we have proposed the same
Truths to them, and recommended the same Duties, which we ourselves believe and
practice, in order to our own Salvation. Amen.

ESSAY III. The True Use of the MORAL LAW under the GOSPEL.
Exemplified in the Conference of CHRIST with a young Pharisee, explained in a
SERMON, May 1711.
Matt. xix. 17. -- If thou will inter into Life, keep the Commandments.
SECT. I. The INTRODUCTION.
HERE it will be necessary to run over the short Conference between Christ and
this young Man, which is recorded by several of the Evangelists, because it
will give us a plainer Account how these Words are introduced, and lead us into
the Knowledge of the true Design of them.

Read from the 16th to the 23d Verse. And behold one came and said unto him,
good Master, What good thing shall I do that I may have Eternal Life? 17. And
he said unto him, why call thou me Good? there is none Good but one, that
is God. But if thou will enter into Life; keep the Commandments. 18. He says
unto him, Which? Jesus said, Thou shall do no Murder, Thou shall not commit
Adultery, Thou shall not Steal, Thou shall not bear false Witness. 19. Honor
thy Father and thy Mother, and thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. 20.
The young Man says unto him, all these have I kept from my Youth up: what lack
I yet? 21. Jesus said unto him, if thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou
have and give to the Poor, and thou shall have Treasure in Heaven; and come and
follow me. 22. But when the young Man heard that Saying, he went away
sorrowful, for he had great Possessions. 23. Then said Jesus unto his
Disciples, Verily I say unto you, that a Rich Man shall hardly enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. This is the History.

The Person who addressed the Lord Jesus Christ here, was a young Man, and
wealthy, as this sacred Writer informs us; and that he was a Ruler among the
Jews, St. Luke gives us notice, Luke xviii. 18. That he was either a Pharisee,
or at least one of the stricter sort of the Jews, seems evident, because he
sought after Eternal Life, whereas the Sadducees denied a future State, many of
the higher as well as the looser Part of the Nation disregarded it. He appears
leavened with the common Pharisaical Doctrine, ( viz.) that the way to procure
Eternal Life was by his own good Works, by doing some good Thing.

It Is probable he had heard of the Miracles and the Fame of our Blessed Lord,
and believed him to be a Teacher sent from God, for he comes in an humble
manner as to a divine Prophet, he seems to be in good earnest in the Question
which he puts to Christ, and seriously concerned about the Welfare of his Soul.
He did not come with a Design to ensnare Christ in his Words, as that sort of
Men ( viz.) the Pharisees often did: Nor did he come with useless perplexing
Questions, as the Scribes and Sadducees and Lawyers sometimes had done: But, as
St. Mark relates the History, he showed some Tokens of Sincerity. Mark x. 17.
for He came running to Jesus with Diligence and Speed, longing to have the
Opinion of a new Prophet about a Matter of such Importance, as the obtaining of
Eternal Life: He kneeled down to him, and paid our Savior much civil Respect:
He received the Directions of Christ with Attention, and when he found in his
Heart that his Love to his Riches would not let him comply with the Terms
proposed, he went away sorrowful. There was something in his Design and in his
Deportment, that was lovely and amiable, and we find that our Savior (as a
Man) looked on him with a Love of Complacency, Mark x. 21. But he was not so
zealous a Lover of God to part with Earth for Heaven.

We may suppose this young Gentleman, who seems to be a Follower or Disciple of
the Pharisees, might probably have one or more of these three Designs in his
Question. ( viz.)

I. Whereas the Law of Moses promises long Life in the Land of Canaan, and the
Blessings of this World to those that are obedient to the Statutes and
Ordinances which God enjoined to Israel; but it scarce ever mentions, plainly
and expressly, any Promises of Eternal Life in another World, nor the Methods to
attain it; and whereas this Youth was fully convinced from several of the
Writings of the Prophets, that there was a future State and eternal Happiness
in another World to be obtained, he comes now to Jesus, as a new and divine
Teacher, to seek an Answer to this Question about Eternal Life, which he could
not find an express Answer to in the Law of Moses; and he would fain know
whether he must obtain Eternal Life the same way that he was to seek for a long
Life on Earth, and Temporal Blessings, namely, by an outward Obedience to the
Laws already given to the Jews.

II. We may suppose him enquiring after some shorter and more compendious way
to Eternal Life, by pract^sing some one or two extraordinary Instances of Duty,
and thereby to atone for the neglect of the rest. This was an Error that
prevailed among the Pharisees in our Savior's Time, as seems to be
sufficiently evident from their Doctrine, as it is represented, Matt. xv. 5, 6.
Whosoever shall make a great Present to God and his Temple (as some interpret
the Word Corban, or a Gift) he shall be free from all relative Duties to
Parents, etc. So Matt. xxiii. 23. if they did but pay Tithes duly to the Priest
they might be saved, though they neglected the weighty Matters of the Law,
Justice, Judgment and Mercy, and the Love of God. So the Pharisee that went
into the Temple to pray, he fasted twice a-week, and gave Tithes of all that he
possessed, and he accounted himself Righteous. Luke xviii. 12.

And upon this account you find the Question proposed elsewhere to our Savior,
Matt. xxii. 36. Which is the great Commandment of the Law? Some were for
Circumcision, as a most ancient Precept, and therefore of the most general
Obligation: Some for the Sabbath, because it was so strictly enjoined to the
Jews: And some for Sacrifice, as being in their Opinion a sufficient Expiation
and Atonement for any other Defects whatsoever. They thought one or other of
these to be the critical Points on which Salvation depended.

And generally we find that the Commands of God, of an external or Ceremonial
Nature, or the mere Inventions and Traditions of Men, were thus aggrandized by
the Teachers of the Jews, as though Heaven might be obtained in a short way, by
practicing those Formalities, without the long Labors of Watchfulness and
Abstinence from Sin, and Obedience to every moral Command of the Law. Yet we
must suppose this Person to be one of the better sort of them too, for he had
endeavored to keep the Moral Law, (at least in the outward and visible Duties
of it) as well as Ceremonial, even from his Youth up, as he tells our Savior.

III. Or we may suppose this young Man hearing the Fame of Christ, as the great
Prophet that was to come into the World, might expect some new and unheard of
Doctrines, some new and unknown way to Heaven, which the Law and the Old
Prophets had never spoken of; especially since he thought he had already
fulfilled all that they had required: And therefore he came running to Christ,
kneeling down with earnest Desire to be taught this new Revelation, this Method
of obtaining Heaven and eternal Life, which the new Prophet was sent to teach:
And perhaps he might imagine Jesus to be the Messiah: And they knew that when
the Messiah came he would teach them all things, which all the former Prophets*
and Moses himself had not fully acquainted them with, John iv. 25.

Or may we not suppose all these three Designs together, to be in the Heart of
this young Querist? As if he should say, Good Master, Moses in his five Books,
has spoken much of Life, long Life in the Land of Promise, but has not given
us an express Account of Life Eternal in the other World, nor prescribed the
special Methods to attain it; I would therefore fain learn that of thee. And
whereas the Statutes and Ceremonies, and Commands and Judgments, and Duties of
the Law, are very numerous and difficult, is there no one good thing that may
be as acceptable to God as all the rest, and give me a Title to eternal
Happiness, in a short and compendious manner? Or is there any new way to Heaven
which thou discoverest to Men? As thou seem to preach up a future State, a
Heaven and a Hell in the other World, do thou come to give any new Directions
how to avoid this Hell, and obtain this Heaven?

Our Lord, before he answered his Question, takes Occasion to ask him, why he
called him Good, which was a Title that eminently belonged to God only: The
best conjecture that Interpreters can make of this Query, is this, ( viz.)
Jesus searched into his Opinion concerning himself, whether he knew or believed
that he was the Messiah or the Son of God, who was one with the Father, and
thereby had a Right to Divine Titles and Characters, and might justly be called
Good in a Divine Sense. Perhaps Jesus might have, before this time, manifested
this his own Oneness with God; but if he had not, yet there were several
Descriptions of the Messiah in the Old Testament, wherein the Names and Titles
of the true God are given to the Messiah, which could not be given him without
such a Oneness with God, and therefore he might justly take Occasion to
catechize such a forward young Man who seemed to be conceited of his own
Righteousness, etc. It Is as if Jesus had said, Thou call me Good: There is
none originally, eternally and perfectly good but God himself; none good as God
is; none has right to the Title in the most absolute and exalted Sense of it
but God: Why then do thou use this Salutation to me, and give me this Title?
Do thou think any thing more than Human dwells in me? Have thou known or
observed any of those Speeches or those Miracles of mine, whereby I have
asserted and proved that I am in the Father and the Father in me, or, that I am
one with the Father, and so partake with him in the Title of Good? See John x.
30, 37, 38. and xiv, 8, 9, 10.

Here it may be remarked, that our Savior did not use to publish his own
Divinity or Oneness with God, in plain and express Terms to the People, but
generally by such Methods of Enquiry and Insinuation. See Mark ii. 5. -- 11.
where he had forgiven the Sins of a Man that was sick of the Palsy before he
healed him; and then he proves by the Miracle of healing, that he had a Right
to forgive Sin, while the Jews acknowledge that none could forgive Sins but God
alone. So John x. 30, -- 36. after he had given a hint of his Deity, by saying,
I and my father are one, the Jews would have stoned him for pretending to be
God; which he answers by such an Enquiry; Since those are called Gods in
Scripture, to whom the Word of God came, say ye of him whom the Father has
sanctified and sent into the World, he blasphemeth, because I said I am the Son
of God? Such a sort of oblique Insinuation, or Enquiry concerning the Divinity
of his Person, seems to be our Lord's Design in this Text. If this be not the
Purport and Intention of this Question, I must confess I am ignorant of the
Design of it. But this seems to me the most probable Conjecture.

Then immediately he proceeds to give our young Querist an Answer to his
Question, If thou will enter into Life keep the Commandments.

The young Man again seems to have his former Designs in his Eye, when he asks
which Commandment he should keep? As if he should say, Is it any one particular
Commandment or Commandments of Moses that I must keep? and if I have kept them,
is there any new Commandment thou will give me, whereby eternal Life will be
insured to me?

Our Lord replies, Keep the common Commandments of the Law, Thou know them,
as Mark x. 17. It Is not by observing any one Command and neglecting the rest,
but the way to enter into Life is Obedience to all the old Commandments, for I
am not come to break or dissolve the Law of God, but to confirm or fulfill it,
Matt. v. 17, 19. And though our Lord Jesus* mentions only those of the second
Table, and the Duties toward Men, yet we must suppose he means inclusively all
the rest; for he says in Matt. v. 19. Whosoever shall teach Men to break the
least of the Commandments of the Law, shall be the least in the Kingdom of
Heaven, i. e. shall have no Place there. Our Savior does not give a
Dispensation to neglect Duties toward God, by mentioning only the Duties toward
our Neighbor; but the Reason why he mentions them seem chiefly these two.

1. Because these Duties to their Neighbors were those which the Pharisees,
who boasted of their own Righteousness, more particularly neglected, while they
pretended to much Devotion and Worship of God in all the Forms of his
Appointment; And therefore our Lord insists particularly upon these Commands
that relate to our Fellow Creatures, to show him that these were as necessary a
Part of his Duty, as all the more pompous Services of God in his Temple.

2. Because it might be more easy for his own Conscience to convince him of the
Neglect of these moral and relative Duties toward his Fellow Creatures, than
of his Neglect of religious Duties toward God: And our Savior thought when he
had named these, he had named Commandments enough to show him the Imperfection
of his Righteousness: Therefore he don't proceed to mention them all.

And it may be noted, that our Lord reckons up these Commands not in their
exact Order, nor exactly in the Words of the Old Testament, but with a more
loose and negligent way of repeating them, because he spoke to a Man that was
supposed to know them already: Thou know all the Commandments which I refer
to, even the Commands of the moral Law, Do not kill, do not steal, etc.

SECT. II. The Sense of Christ's Answer.
Now the great and important Question comes naturally into Sight: In what Sense
did our Savior speak these Words to the young Enquirer, If thou will enter
into Life keep the Commandments? Did he design to give him a plain and direct
Answer how he might obtain Eternal Life and Salvation, according to the Gospel?
or did he design only to convince him of Sin, by preaching the Law to him, in
order to make him see his Guilt and Misery, that he might seek after a better
Righteousness than that of the Works of the Law, another way of obtaining
Acceptance with God and Eternal Life, than merely by his Doings?

I answer, the last of these seems to be the Design of Christ. He did not
intend in these Words to give him immediate and direct Instruction, how he
might actually obtain Salvation, but rather first to convince him of Sin, etc.
and I would offer these following Reasons for it.

1. Reason. The Answer of Christ is exactly suited to his Question. Now his
Question was about Eternal Life to be obtained by Works, and not about the
Salvation of a Sinner by the Mercy of God. He did not ask, as the convinced
Jailer, Acts xvi. 30. What shall I do to be saved, or to obtain Salvation? But
What g^^^ Work must I do to obtain Eternal Life by it?

It is granted that Eternal Life is sometimes put for the final Happiness of
Believers under the Gospel, because it is included in the Salvation of Christ;
yet Life and Eternal Life are peculiarly and properly the Blessings promised in
the Law of Works, in which Sense the Word Salvation is never used; and the
Scripture in some Places by this way of Expression makes this Distinction
evident. See the Terms of the Law or Covenant of Works, both in its Command and
its Reward, as it is described in direct opposition to the Gospel, and Method
of Salvation, in Romans x. 5, 6. Moses describes the Righteousness which is of
the Law, that the Man who does these Things shall live by them; whereas the
Righteousness of Faith (i. e. the way of Justification and Acceptance with God
by the Gospel) says quite other things, If thou shall believe and confess
Christ, etc. So St. Paul describes the promised Blessings of the Law of Works
in the same manner in his Epistle to the Galatians, Gal. iii. 12. The Law is
not of Faith, but the Man who does them shall live in them. Life is still the
Word of the Promise. And in Romans ii. 6, 7. where the Apostle is properly
preaching the Law of Works with the Terms of it, it is called Immortality,
Eternal Life, to be obtained by continuance in good Works or well-doing.

It Is this Eternal Life and Immortality which was implied in the Covenant of
Works which God made with Adam. If he eat the forbidden Fruit he should die;
but if he observed the Commands of God, he should live; and the Tree of Life in
the midst of the Garden was a Symbol or Sacrament of Life and Immortality to
seal this Promise to Man, if he continued in his Obedience to God.

Our Lord therefore gives an Answer exactly according to the Question, What
good Thing shall I do for Eternal Life? says the Enquirer. Keep the
Commandments, says our Lord. When the young Man proposes his Question about
final Happiness in the Terms and Language of the Covenant of Works, our Lord
gives an Answer in the same Language. If thou will obtain Life by doing Works,
these are the Works which thou must do, even the Works of the moral Law.

2. Reason. I suppose Jesus Christ the chief Minister of the Covenant of Grace
would not give this Direction to obtain the Salvation and Benefits thereof,
because it is the most direct Answer which a Preacher of the Covenant of Works
could give to this same Enquiry; If thou will enter into Life keep the
Commandments. And this is very different from the Terms of Justification and
Salvation by the Gospel, which exclude the Works of the Law, as the way to
Pardon and Justification, and refer us to Faith in Jesus Christ. See Gal. iii.
11, 12. Romans x. 5, 6. already cited. Is it not most expressly asserted, that by
the Works of the Law no Flesh shall be justified? Romans iii. 19, 20. Are not
these Works perpetually excluded by the blessed Apostle, whenever he is
describing the mere Method of Grace and Salvation, or the Means for a Sinner to
obtain his Acceptance with God unto Eternal Life? See Romans iv. 4. To him that
works the Reward is not reckoned of Grace but of Debt: But to him that
works not believes on him that justifies the ungodly (i. e. the Man who has
no Works of Righteousness answerable to any Law) his Faith is counted for
Righteousness. Gal. ii. 16. Knowing that a Man is not justified by the Works of
the Law, but by the Faith of Christ, etc. See Gal. iii. 8, 12.

And it is plain, that it is not merely the Law of Levitical Ceremonies that
the Apostle speaks of, when he excludes the Works of it from our Justification,
for it is also that Law which is written by Nature in the Hearts and
Consciences of the Gentiles, Romans ii. 14, 15. It is the Law that forbids
Stealing and Adultery, Romans ii. 21, 22. The Law that forbids Coveting, Romans
vii. 6, 7. even this very Law, and those Commandments which our Savior makes
mention of in my Text. It Is by the Works of this Law no Flesh shall be
justified, no Man shall be saved, or obtain Eternal Happiness, Romans iii. 20.
Now can we suppose that Christ, the great Messenger of God to sinful Man, and
the Prophet of the Gospel or Covenant of Grace, would give the very same advice
and Direction to a Sinner how to obtain Salvation, which a Preacher of the Law,
or a Zealot for the Covenant of Works, would give to one who thought himself
righteous, and never confessed himself a Sinner, but enquired about obtaining
Life by his good Works?

3. Reason. It Is hardly to be thought that Christ should direct a Man to fulfill
the Commands of the Moral Law as the proper way for him to obtain Eternal Life,
when through the Weakness of our sinful Nature, he knew the Law could not give
Life to Men in their fallen Estate, and he himself was sent to provide another
way for them to obtain Life. Romans viii. 3. What the Law could not do in that it
was weak through the Flesh, God sent his own Son to do for us. Romans iii. 20. By
the Deeds of the Law there shall no Flesh be justified in his Sight. This does
not arise from any Weakness or Insufficiency of the Law itself, for it still
promises Life, and would secure it to any Man who was perfect without Sin. But
as the Apostle says, It Is become weak through the Flesh, i. e. because Man is so
much immersed in Flesh and Sin, that he cannot perfectly fulfill it. The Law
cannot give the Favor of God and Eternal Life, because Man cannot obey it.

And upon this Account the Law of ten Commands which was engraven in Stones is
called the Ministration of Condemnati^n and Death, 2 Cor. iii. 7, 9. and not
the Ministration of Life and Righteousness; that is the peculiar Glory of the
Gospel. The Law indeed is holy and just and good, and it was originally
ordained for Life to innocent Man: But when the Apostle Paul came to have his
Conscience awakened to a Sense of Sin by the Law, he found it to be unto Death,
Romans vii. 10. partly by showing him his Imperfection of Obedience, as well as
by irritating his indwelling sinful Inclinations. So far is the Law from giving
Life to Sinners.

God honors his Laws so much that the Scripture assures us, If there had been
a Law which could have given Life, Eternal Life, verily Righteousness,
Justification and Happiness should have come by the Law. Gal. iii. 21, 22. But
the Scripture has concluded all under Sin, and condemned them by the Law, and
has shown the Insufficiency of the Law to save, that the Promise of Eternal
Life by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. It Is not to
be supposed therefore, that Jesus Christ the Son of God, who was sent into this
World to give or further reveal this Promise of Eternal Life by Faith, and to
provide another way to Salvation and Eternal Life for fallen Man, because the
Law was unable to give it; I say, it is not to be supposed that this very Son of
God should preach Obedience to the Commands of this Law, as the proper and
direct way for a Sinner to obtain Salvation of Eternal Life. This would be like
building up again the Hopes of Sinners to obtain Salvation by the Law, which
Hopes he came to destroy, and to provide a much surer Foundation for Hope.

4. Reason. It Is much more probable that Christ in these Words designed to lead
this young Man to a Sense of Sin and Guilt, and Self-Condemnation, by preaching
to him the Law of God, rather than to give him immediately the direct and plain
Advice how a Sinner might obtain Eternal Happiness; for this is a Work which
the Law can do, even in our fallen State: For by the Law is the Knowledge of
Sin, Romans iii. 20, and vii. 7. The Law can convince and condemn, though it
cannot justify and save. Our Savior knew the Hearts of Men; he knew this young
Man was conceited of his own Righteousness, and he had a mind to lead his
Conscience to a Sight and Sense of the Imperfection of his Obedience, and
therefore he preaches the Law to him in many of the express Commands of it, for
that very End which the Law might attain, i. e. Conviction of Sin and
Self-Condemnation. This is the first thing necessary in order to the Salvation
of Men, and therefore our Savior begins with it.

And it is well worthy our Notice, that the public Promulgation of the ten
Commandments, with such solemn Terrors at Mount Sinai, was designed, in the
spiritual Intention of it, to lay the Consciences of Men under Guilt, rather
than to make them partakers of Righteousness and Life, Romans v. 20. The Law
entered that the Offense might abound, i. e. that the Sins of Men might appear
to be great and numerous, beyond what their carnal Imaginations would have
supposed, without the express Letter of the Law, which forbids coveting, etc.
The Apostle Paul tells us, Romans vii. 7. He had not known this Concupiscence to
be Sin but by the Law; and that useful Expositor of Scripture, Mr. Samuel
Clark, (who is not wont to be too Evangelical in his Expositions) remarks on
Exodus xix. 24. That the Charge of forbidding the People to come near Mount
Sinai, is often repeated, lest God break forth upon them, to show that the End
of the Law is rather to exclude Men from God, by reason of their Sins, than to
justify or to give Life; for which he cites, 2 Cor. iii. 7. Gal. iii. 10 -- 24.

And indeed this was one considerable part of the Design and Business of our
Savior's personal Ministry here upon Earth, ( viz.) to preach the Law of God
in its Perfection, and convince Men of Sin, to let them see that they were
condemned and exposed to the Wrath of God, that they might learn the Necessity
of a Savior to atone for Sin, and of the Mercy of God to pardon it. He
described the Purity and Exactness of the Law, not only to teach his Disciples
and all succeeding Christians, that their Obedience to the Law of God ought to
be more exact and pure, more inward and spiritual, than what the Pharisees
required or practiced, but also to show Men the Imperfection of their best
Righteousness, and that they were all guilty before God, that he might prepare
them to receive the Gospel, partly by his own preaching it, and especially when
it should be published in greater Brightness and Clearness, and in its full
Glory, after his Resurrection.

Was not this one great Design of his Sermon upon the Mount, where he explains
the Law of God in its Lengths and Breadths, and shows that it reaches to the
Thoughts of Men as well as their Actions? Did he not begin this Sermon with,
Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, Matt. v. 3. that he might show the way to
Blessedness was not a Self-Sufficience of Soul, and a Trust in our own
Righteousness, but a spiritual Poverty, i. e. a humble Sense of our own
Weakness and Sinfulness? What mean many of his Parables, particularly that of
the prodigal Son returning in Rags and Sorrow to his Father's House? Does it
not teach us that the way to be accepted of our heavenly Father is to return to
him with a deep Sense of our Disobedience, Sin and Misery, with a humble
Repentance, and asking Forgiveness? What is the Intent of the Parable of the
Pharisee and Publican going up to pray? Is it not to show us that a humble,
confessing, repenting Sinner seeking for Mercy, is much nearer to Justification
and the Favor of God, than a Man who spreads abroad his own Righteousness and
justifies himself? What means our Blessed Lord in his perpetual Reproofs of the
Pharisees who trusted in themselves that they were righteous? Did he not
frequently talk thus to convince Men of Sin, and show them how imperfect their
Obedience was, and how insufficient to procure Acceptance with God, and to let
them see that Repentance and Confession of Sin, and Trust in Divine Mercy, were
the only way to Salvation.

It Is no wonder then if our Savior had the same Design in his Eye when he saw
a rich young Man of a Pharisaical Spirit, come to enquire the way to Heaven by
doing some good Work; it is no wonder that he begun to talk to him of Obedience
to the Law, in order to convince him of Sin, and show him that he was not
sufficiently righteous to obtain Eternal Life by his Righteousness.

It Is most likely that our Blessed Lord had a special Intention in this Place
to try the young Man, whether he knew his own State and Case as a Sinner who
wanted Pardon, and whether he was prepared for the Gospel or no: Whether he
stood convinced of Sin, and desirous of true Salvation, such as Christ came to
procure for those who were sensible of their Guilt and Danger. I have before
showed that the first Sentence that Christ spoke to him was with design to try
his Opinion about himself, the Messiah, when he called him Good, whether he was
one with God or no: And now he tries his Opinion about the inward and spiritual
Perfection of the Law, and about his own Power to keep it, and about his own
Hope of Justification thereby: And therefore he at first gives him such an
Answer as should make him bethink himself, whether he had obeyed the Law of God
perfectly or no.

If he had found him sensible of his Guilt and his Imperfections, then most
probably the compassionate Jesus would have preached to him the pardoning Grace
of the Gospel, which he came to offer to those who repent of Sin, and believe
in the Savior. But when he heard the vain Enquirer justify himself as a
righteous Man, and say, All these Commands have I kept from my Youth, then our
Savior put him to a fresh and more painful Trial of his Sincerity and
Obedience to God, and that partly for his Conviction, instead of saying, Repent
and believe; he did not proceed so far as to preach Repentance to him, because
he saw him so much unconvinced of Sin; and he tells us that he came not to call
these righteous Men but Sinners to Repen^ance, Matt. ix. 13. i. e. those who
own themselves to be Sinners.

This leads me to the fifth or last Reason, to prove that this Answer was not
designed by Christ as a Direction of the Querist how to obtain Salvation, (
viz.) It is a quite different Answer to the like Questions that is given by
Christ, and by the Apostles, when they designed to preach the Gospel in plain,
direct and express Language, Mark i. 15. Christ says Repent and believe the
Gospel. John vi. 40. This is the Will of him that sent me, that every one that
sees the Son and believes on him, has everlasting Life. And again, This is
the Work of God, i. e. the great Work which God now requires, that ye believe
on him whom he has sent, John vi. 28, 29. So preaches St. Peter, Acts ii. 38.
Repent and be baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ: So Paul, Acts xvi. 31.
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved: And so John speaks,
This is his Commandment that ye believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, 1
John iii. 23. These are the plain and direct Advices of Christ and his Apostles
to sinful Men, in order to obtain the Favor of God and Eternal Life.

To suppose therefore that Christ did in this Place, and in these Words, direct
the Enquirer into the proper way of Salvation by the Gospel, is to suppose that
Christ differed greatly from himself, in the Directions he gave, how Men might
be saved; and that he and his Apostles, and particularly St. Paul, taught very
different Doctrines; that Christ taught the Way to Salvation by the Works of
the Law, and the Gospel taught it by Faith and Repentance, without the Works of
the Law. But this would set Christ and his Apostles so much at Variance with
themselves, that it is not to be admitted.

SECT. III. An Answer to some Objections.
I come now to answer some Objections against my Sense of this Text, and the
chief of them are taken from Dr. Whitby, a most ingenious Writer on that Side.

Object. 1. Does not Christ say, that to love the Lord our God is the Way to
Life, Luke x. 27, 28? Is not this the same thing in effect, as when he directs
the young Man to Eternal Life, by keeping the Commandments, and that in the
same Language? For when the Lawyer enquires, What shall I do to inherit Eternal
Life? Jesus gives him this Advice, Love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart,
and thy Neighbor as thy self: This do and thou shall live. Thus Eternal Life
is promised by Christ himself, to our loving God and Man, which is the Epitome
or Abstract of all the moral Commands in one, for Love is the fulfilling of the
Law, Romans xiii. 8, 10.

Answ. 1. It is very plain that in that Place our Savior is preaching the
Covenant of Works, as well as in my Text, and that for the same Purpose too, (
viz.) for the Conviction of Sin. This Lawyer was not a humble and sincere
Enquirer, but one who came to tempt and ensnare him; and then it is no wonder if
Jesus did not give him a plain and direct Answer according to the Method of
Salvation by the Gospel. And though he directed others to believe and repent,
yet he did not treat a vain young Pharisee, who thought himself righteous, and
a cunning Lawyer who designed to ensnare him, in the same manner that he would
treat Persons who were sensible of their Sins, and sought the way to obtain
Pardon and Happiness, nor did he give them the same Directions.

Answ. 2. Let it be further considered, that the Lifetime of Christ was not
the appointed Season to speak the Glories of the Gospel in the fullest and
plainest Language, as I hinted before. His frequent Business and Practice was
to preach the Law, to reprove Sin, and prepare Men for the fuller and more
complete Ministry of the Gospel, which after his Death he sent his Apostles to
preach by the Power of his own Spirit: And they published the Gospel of
Salvation by Repentance and Faith in the Blood of Christ, and Forgiveness
through his Atonement, much plainer and clearer, and fuller than Christ himself
did in his Lifetime among the Multitudes. That Gospel which he taught them
secretly, they proclaimed as it were upon the House Tops, according to his
Order, Matt. x. 27.

Though Christ himself gave such Hints of this Gospel in his preaching, as were
sufficient for Salvation to those that would receive them, yet he might be said
to be sent rather with this dreadful Commission to the Generality of the Jews,
Matt. xiii. 13. Isa. vi. 10. Make the Heart of this People fat and their Ears
heavy, and shut their Eyes, etc. They were such a stubborn and self-conceited
and disobedient People, that God justly gave them up to their own Blindness and
Hardness: And for this Reason our Savior spoke often the great things of the
Gospel to them in Parables See Sect. 5. Reflection. 1.
. He was ordained to be a stumbling Stone and Rock of Offense to the House of
Israel and Judah, Isa. viii. 14. 1 Pet. ii. 8. and this by the just Judgment of
God, for their stoning the Prophets, and murdering the former Messengers of
Heaven, for their forsaking the Law of God, and making it void by their
Traditions, and for their violent Opposition to Christ his Son. Christ was not
always bound to speak the Gospel to this People in as plain Words as he could,
for Reasons that the Wisdom of God was well acquainted with, Reasons that the
Justice of God righteously determined, and the Goodness of God did not think
fit to oppose. And it is no wonder at all that he does speak in this way to
those Men who came with curious Questions and with evil Purposes to ensnare
him, as the Lawyer did in this Account of St. Luke.

Obj. 2. But can we suppose that Christ would deceive a young Man, who came
seriously to enquire the Way to Eternal Life? Can we imagine that Christ, in
whom dwells all Wisdom, Truth and Love, should give such Directions as could
never bring a Man to Heaven, and especially considering that he came into the
World on purpose to bring Life and Immortality to Light among Men, and to show
them the true Way to Heaven?

Ans. 1. That we may secure the Goodness of God and the Mercy of Christ from
any Reproach in this Case, I say further, that Christ did take a very wise and
regular Method with this young Man to bring him to Salvation, if he would have
stayed to attend to it, and had not been full of evil Prejudices, of Self
Righteousness, and the Love of this World. For the first thing to be done in
order to bring Sinners to Heaven (as I hinted before) is to convince them of
Sin, and this is done by the Law. This the Apostle Paul shows at large in his
Epistle to the Romans, that Men by beholding the Perfection of the Law, and
their Inability to perform it, might become Dead to all Hope from the Law, as
he was when he says, Gal. ii. 19. I by the Law am dead to the Law; and that
they might not expect Life by the Law, but that they might seek for Salvation
by the Way of Repentance and Faith, or Trust in Christ, and obtain Forgiveness
of Sins through the free Grace of God in the Gospel.

Ans. 2. Though this young Man had a vain Conceit of his own Righteousness, yet
there was something in him naturally pleasing, agreeable and engaging, so that
Christ as Man looked upon him and loved him, Mark x. 21. He had some liking to
such a towardly and hopeful Youth, and preached the Law to him, to convince him
of Sin, in order to his Salvation: But when he professed himself to be so
righteous in his own Eyes, as to have kept all the Commands of the Law, his
divine Wisdom then saw it proper to put a harder Trial upon him ( viz.) to sell
all that he had and give to the Poor, and to become a Follower of Christ. Now
if this young Man had loved God so well as he pretended, and believed Christ to
be a Prophet come from God, he ought to have obeyed him, even in this difficult
and self-denying Command; which Command was put upon him, partly to convince
him that he did not love God so well as he imagined, and which hard Trial
probably would never have been put upon him, if he had not been so conceited of
his own Righteousness.

It must be observed also, to vindicate the Honor, Faithfulness and Goodness
of Christ, that if the young Man had followed these Directions of Christ at the
End of the Conference, he had been saved: Our Blessed Lord gave him sufficient
Advice for Eternal Life, if he would have taken it. Come, sell what thou have,
and give it to the Poor, and follow me, and be my Disciple; and then it would
follow, Thou shall learn of me the Way to Heaven more perfectly, and I will
teach thee the Way of Repentance, and Faith, and Holiness unto complete
Salvation. But the young Man loved his Money, and went away sorrowful, that he
could not keep all his Riches and obtain Eternal Life too.

Obj. 3. Does not God all along in the Writings of the Old Testament, in
successive Ages, promise Life in this same sort of Language to those that
observe and do his Commandments, and that, both by Moses and by the Prophets?
And did not the Saints, under the Old Testament, obtain Life this Way? Lev.
xviii. 5. He that does them (that is the Commands of God) shall live in them,
Ezekiel. xx. 11. this Promise is repeated: And in Ezekiel. xxx. 15. If the Wicked
walk in the Statutes of Life, without committing Iniquity, he shall surely
live, he shall not die: Now this dying cannot mean a natural Death, for they
knew they must die Naturally; therefore it must mean a Deliverance from Eternal
Death, and Assurance of Eternal Life. It Is therefore certain, that all pious
Persons, under the Old Testament, obtained a Right to Life eternal, by this
Observance of the moral Precepts of the Law. These are Dr. Whitby's own Words.

Ans. 1. This Life which is here promised in these Texts to the Jews, in a
literal Sense, chiefly means long Life in their own Land, and Peace and Freedom
from Sorrows and Miseries in this World: And though the Freedom or Preservation
from Death (which is promised by Moses to those who keep the Statutes, Laws and
Ordinances enjoined to Israel) does not mean an entire Preservation from
Temporal Death; so neither in the obvious and literal Sense does it mean a
Security from Eternal Death, but rather a Freedom from Death, as it is a
general Term used to include all temporal and painful Evils, and particularly
from sudden and violent Death, from cruel, lingering and shameful Death, from
Death in foreign Countries, and untimely Death in the midst of their Years.
This is very evident, if you read those Expressions of Moses, Deuteronomy. vi. 24, 25.
and Deuteronomy. xxx. 15 -- 30. Ezekiel. xxxiii. 10, 15. So Solomon, in his Prayer, 1
Kings viii. 31, -- 50. Nehemiah, in his Prayer, Neh. ix. 29 -- 31. teach us to
explain it. Life is put for all that is good, and Death for all that is Evil.

It Is evident that God governed the Jews with regard to temporal Blessings and
temporal Curses, in the Way of a Covenant of Works. As to the external and
temporal State of their Persons, their Church, and their Nation, they were
under a Covenant of Works; and God, who was their King or political Head, dealt
with them from time to time in saving them, or in punishing them according to
their Works: And it is very observable, that it is this very Promise of Life,
upon condition of doing the Works of the Law which the Apostle takes to
describe that Covenant of Works, by which the Jews could not be saved as to
their eternal State, see Romans x. 3, 5. and ix. 31. The Man that does them shall
live in them.

If it be objected, that God allowed of their Repentance for Sin in this his
Law or Covenant as their King, and sometimes he saved the Nation upon their
Repentance, and therefore it must include the Gospel or Covenant of Grace; yet
I answer, it may still be called a Covenant of Works, because a mere external
visible Humiliation and Reformation, without a real Penitence at Heart, was
accepted by God as their King, as sufficient to divert Divine Judgments from
the Nation, and sometimes from particular Persons, who had provoked God's Anger
by external and visible Iniquities. 1 Kings xxi. 2. See thou how Ahab
humbles himself? I will not bring this Evil in his Days; whereas all his
Humiliation was his rending his Clothes, wearing of Sackcloth and Fasting, and
a little outward Appearance of Reformation, but it is evident that his Heart was
not changed. See 1 King. xxii. 27.

It may be granted, indeed, there was much Grace and Mercy mingled in this
Political Law or Covenant of Life, between God as a Civil King, and Israel as
his Subjects in this World; but still this was not the Gospel or Covenant of
Grace and Salvation, whereby the pious Jews were saved from the Wrath of God,
as their spiritual Lord and Ruler in the other World, and whereby they had
their Sins pardoned, and were made Partakers of Eternal Life; for the Rites of
the Law could not cleanse the Conscience from Sin in the Sight of God. Heb. ix.
9. and this leads me to the next Answer.

Ans. 2. Besides the frequent Charges which are given to the Jews to keep the
Commandments of God, in order to obtain Life, we find also frequent Calls to
inward and hearty Repentance of Sin, to make their Hearts clean, to forsake
their evil Thoughts, to rend their Hearts and not their Garments, and so trust
in the pardoning Mercy of God; and there are many Promises of Pardon to the
Penitent, and the Favor of God to those that fear him and hope in his Mercy,
in order to lead them to obtain the Happiness of the other World and Eternal
Life. See Isai. lv. 7, 8. Let the Wicked forsake his Way, and the unrighteous
Man his Thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon
him, and to our God, and he will abundantly pardon. Psalm. cxxx. 4, etc. There
is Forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared. Let Israel hope in the
Lord; with the Lord is plenteous Redemption. He shall redeem Israel from all
his Iniquities. One might transcribe many Pages to this Purpose out of Isaiah,
Jeremiah and David. This is more Evangelical Language, showing the Way for
Sinners to obtain Salvation: This is the Gospel that was preached to them as
well as to us. Heb. iv. 2. And even to them was preached also the Gospel of the
Messiah, and the Salvation of Men by the Messiah the Seed of Abraham, Gal. iii.
8. Isa. liii. 5, 6, 11. He was wounded for our Iniquities: The Lord has laid
on him the Iniquities of us all. And it is said, Acts x. 43. To him give all the
Prophets witness, that whosoever believes in him shall receive Forgiveness of
Sins through his Name. Thus it plainly appears, that the mere keeping of the
Commands, as written in the moral Law, was not the proper Term or Rule of their
Acceptance with God unto Eternal Life, under the Old Testament: For there is
nothing of this Doctrine of Repentance and Forgiveness, nor of the Messiah,
contained in the Ten Commands.

Let it be observed also, that even in those legal Promises, which ensure Life
to those who kept the Commands of God, there is a more spiritual and
Evangelical Sense sometimes implied: For under this Word Life, and these
temporal Blessings which were promised, Eternal Life and eternal Blessings were
typify'd and held forth to those that looked through the Veil, and that
fulfilled the Will of God in spiritual and sincere Obedience, with an humble
Sense of their Sins, and Trust in divine Forgiveness. But the Ground of their
Acceptance with God unto Eternal Life, or their Right to Heaven and Salvation,
was not this their Performance of the Works of the Law; for their best Works
were all imperfect, and they were saved by Faith even as we. Gal. iii. 6 -- 9.
i. e. by trusting to pardoning Mercy, so far as it was revealed under that
Dispensation.

And as the Salvation itself was typify'd by temporal Blessings, so the Way to
this Salvation, which was Repentance and Trust in the Mercy of God through the
Messiah, was typify'd by offering Sacrifices of Blood, and by many Washings and
Purifyings, both by Blood and Water, which implied a Confession of their
Defilement: And the Saints or righteous Men of that Day, hoped for the Mercy of
God, as discovered more plainly in the Promises, and perhaps also, some might
understand it as hinted in these Types and Figures. They knew that Blessedness
was to come upon Men to whom God imputed not their Sins, or to whom the Lord
imputed Righteousness, or accounted them as righteous in his Sight by his
Mercy, though they were very imperfect, and far from Righteousness, i. e. a
perfect justifying Righteousness, even if they put together all their Works of
Obedience to the Commands of God. David often speaks of the Impossibility of
our attaining the Acceptance of God by our Works, Psalm. cxxx. and cxliii. 14
and 19. If thou should mark Iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? Enter not
into Judgment with thy Servant, for in thy Sight shall no Man living be
justified. There is none Righteous; no, not one. Who can understand his Errors?
He seeks for Pardon of Sin by Repentance and Trust in the Mercy of God, Psalm.
li. and cxliii. etc. And he pronounces the Blessedness of those to whom God
forgives their Iniquities, Psalm. xxxii. or to whom he imputes Righteousness
without Works, as St. Paul explains him. Romans iv. 6. and And here, by the way,
I would take Occasion to relieve or explain one great Difficulty, which occurs
in the reading of St. Paul's Epistles; especially those to the Romans and the
Galatians. It Is evident that when St. Paul designs to represent the Terms of
the Covenant of Works, (viz.) Do this and live, and Cursed is every one that
continues not in all Things written in the Book of the Law to do them, Romans x.
5. Gal. iii. 10, 12. he does it by Citations out of the Old Testament, or the
Jewish Scriptures, because the Language of the Political Covenant which God
made with the Jews, (as he was their King, and they were his Nation or People)
was the Language of the Covenant of Works, and God governed them very much in
that way with regard to their temporal Rewards and Punishments.

On the other Hand, when St. Paul gives as the Terms of the Covenant of Grace,
or the Gospel, ( viz.) Faith in the Grace of God through a Savior, he also cites
the Old Testament, or the Jewish Scriptures. So Romans iii. 21. Romans iv, 3, 6, 7.
Romans x. 6 -- 11. Gal. iii. 8, 11. Because the Covenant of Grace, or the way of
Salvation and Eternal Life, was also prescribed, though in a more obscure manner,
in the Old Testament, partly by Promises made to Repentance and Trust in the
Mercy of God, and a Messiah that was to come, and partly by Sacrifices and
Washings, which were Types and Figures of Repentance and Pardon, through the
Blood of Christ, and Sanctification of the Spirit. Thus the Righteousness of
God was witnessed by the Law and the Prophets. Romans iii. 21. I think without
this Clue it is impossible to read and understand the great Apostle's Way of
arguing in those Epistles. See more in the Harmony of all the Religions that
God ever prescribed. Chap. v. and vi.


this encouraged him to confess his Sins, and repent of them, as in Psalm.
xxxii. and li. and cxxx.

Thus it appears, that the bare keeping the Commandments of the Law was neither
under the Old Testament nor the New, the Way to Salvation and Eternal Life for
Sinners: But since the Law was weak, and unable to save, by reason of the
weakness of our Flesh or sinful Nature, Romans viii. 3. that is, since the Law
promises Life only to those who obey the Commands perfectly, and Men could not
obtain Life this Way by reason of the Imperfection of their Obedience, there
were many Calls to Repentance, and to trust in the Mercy of God, given to the
Jews, in the Old Testament, as the prescribed Way for Sinners to obtain
Salvation; which Duties, together with the Grounds of them, and the Blessings
promised to them, are much more clearly revealed in the New Testament.

I might confirm these Answers to Dr. Whitby, out of his own Exposition on Romans
x. 9. Justification (says he) is here expressly ascribed to Faith; and that not
as including Works, but only as being that Principle which, when it is cordial
and sincere, will certainly produce them: I say, not as including all those
Works which by the Gospel are required to Salvation, for then the Righteousness
of Faith must be described as the Righteousness of the Law (viz.) that the Man
who does these things shall live in them, which is contrary to the Words of the
Apostle, ver. 5, 6. So far does the Force of Truth, in some Places, constrain
honest Minds to admit and confess what in other Places they are very unwilling
to allow, and which they almost contradict: But this must be charged on the
common or universal Influence of human Frailty and mistaken Prejudices, and for
want of an equal, uniform, simultaneous and comprehensive View of all the Parts
of Religion together, which no human Mind perhaps in the present State can
arrive at.

Object. 4. There is another Objection which may be started against my
Exposition of this Text, that is drawn from Rev. ii. 2, 14. Blessed are they
that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of Life, and may
enter through the Gates into the City, i. e. into Heaven, and enjoy Eternal
Life. Surely, say some, these Words must be acknowledged to be the Language of
the Gospel, or the Covenant of Grace, and not of the Law or the Covenant of
Works: For they are the Words of Christ himself, after his Ascension to Heaven,
and yet it is plain that doing the Commandments is here represented as the Way
to obtain Eternal Life in Heaven.

Answ. But it is as plain that Doing the ten Commandments of the moral Law, are
not the only things that are meant here in this Text: But these Commandments
which give a right to the Tree of Life, etc. include at least, if not chiefly
design, the peculiar Commands of God in the Gospel, ( viz.) Repentance for Sin,
Faith in the pardoning Mercy of God through a Redeemer, which is productive of
Love to God and Man. To prove this, read Matt. iv. 17. Repent for the Kingdom
of Heaven is at Hand, Mark i. 15. Repent and believe the Gospel, Mark xvi. 16.
He that believes shall be saved. John iii. 22, 23. And whatsoever we ask we
receive of him, because we keep his Commandments, and do those things that are
pleasing in his Sight: And this is his Commandment, that we should believe on
the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave us
Commandment.

Now as Adam by doing the peculiar Commands which God gave to him, might have
obtained a Right to the Benefits of the literal Tree of Life in the Garden of
Eden, (i. e. Immortality) So Christians by doing the peculiar Commandments of
the Gospel, may be said, in some Sense, to obtain a Right to the Benefits of
the spiritual Tree of Life (i. e. Christ Jesus) and may enter into Heaven: But
a mere Obedience to the Commandments of the moral Law is never prescribed as
the Way to obtain a Right to the Benefits of Christ, but rather an Obedience to
the Commands of the Gospel, which are peculiarly Repentance and Faith in Christ.

It may be yet further observed, that the Commands to which Christ directed the
young Man in my Text, in order to enter into Life, were not Faith and
Repentance, but only the ten Commands of the moral Law: for he directs the
young Man precisely to the Commands of the moral Law, and tells him, thou
know what these Commands are. Now this young Man was so full of his own
Obedience to that Law, and so confident of it, that he seems not to know the
Commands of Confession of Sin and Repentance for it; much less did he think of
the other Command of Faith in the Mercy of God through a Mediator. So that if
it be never so much allowed, that Obedience to these humbling and self-abasing
Commands of the Gospel, Faith and Repentance, may give a Right to the Benefits
of Christ, and to an Entrance into Heaven, yet an Obedience to the ten Commands
of the moral Law could not make a Sinner's Way to Heaven and Eternal Life: But
these ten Commands are those which Christ points out to the young Pharisaical
Inquirer.

Upon the whole it appears, that when our Savior says to the young Man in my
Text, If thou will enter into Life keep the Commandments, he did not mean to
give him the plain and direct Prescription of the Gospel in order to the
Salvation of a Sinner, but rather began with him in preaching the Law, in order
to show him his Duty by the Law, and to convince him of Sin.

And from this View of things, I think we may draw this plain Observation (
viz.) That wheresoever the keeping the Commands of God is proposed to Men in
Scripture as the Way to Life, it either means that the Way to obtain long
temporal Life and temporal Blessings, was to observe the Jewish Laws, according
to the political Covenant of God made with the Jewish Nation at Sinai; or it
means that perfect Obedience of Thought, Word, and Action to all these Commands
which God gives us, is the Way to obtain Life Eternal by the Covenant of Works
and Law of Innocence: Or if at any time the Context plainly determines this
Phrase, keeping the Commandments, to signify the Way to obtain Salvation under
the Gospel, then the Word Commands must extend to include the Evangelical
Commands of Repentance for Sin, and Trust in the pardoning Mercy of God through
a Mediator.

And the Reason is plain; for this is the great Difference always observed
between the Law and Gospel, or between the Covenant of Works and the Covenant
of Grace, ( viz.) that the Covenant of Works or the Law, teaches us to claim
Life as a Debt by our own exact Obedience to the Commands of the Law; but the
Covenant of Grace or the Gospel, teaches us humbly to seek for Life or
Salvation by Confession of Sin and Repentance, and by depending on the free
Mercy of God, through a Mediator, for the Forgiveness of Sin and Acceptance
with God Here I would caution my Readers to take notice, that I am not now
debating that Point, In what manner the Righteousness, Atonement or Death of
Christ is applied to us in order to our Interest in Forgiveness of Sins, the
Justification of our Persons, or our Right to final Happiness: That is an
Argument of a different Consideration from the present Debate. All that I
propose here to treat of is to determine that obvious Question, whether Christ
is plainly and directly showing a conceited young Man the way of obtaining
Salvation according to the Gospel or Covenant of Grace, when he says to him, If
thou will enter into Life keep the Commandments of the moral Law; or whether he
is not rather leading him to Convinction of Sin, by preaching the Law to him,
that he may be better prepared and inclined to receive the Salvation of the
Gospel.
.

SECT. IV. Of what Use is it to keep the Law then?
Before I proceed I would answer another Objection or Query or two, upon this
Subject, ( viz.) Of what Use is the Law of God in a Christian Country? Or what
Use is there of keeping the Commandments of the moral Law, if we are not to
obtain Eternal Life by them?

Let the first Enquiry be answered first. Of what Use is the Law of God in a
Christian Country, where the Gospel of Christ is preached?

Answ. It is to be feared there are several thousand Souls in a Christian
Nation, who make a general Profession of the Religion of the blessed Jesus, and
yet have no serious Sense of the things of God and Religion in their Hearts:
And it is evident to daily Observation, that in a Land professing the Gospel of
Christ, there are Multitudes who have abandoned all Piety even in the Form of
it, as well as the Practice and Power thereof, and there are some who have lost
even Morality itself; now the Law of God is needful to be maintained, and
published in such a Nation as this, to keep the sinful World in awe, and to
preserve even wicked Men from running to all excess of Riot and Iniquity, by
pressing the Commands of God always upon their Consciences, and by setting
before them the Vengeance and Curses of the Law of God, which are due to
Sinners, to preserve the World from universal Disorder and Wickedness. If there
were no such Representations of the Holiness and Justice of God in the World,
what shameful Impieties against God, and most outrageous Iniquities and
Villainies would be spread among the Children of Men: So that there would be no
such thing as Peace, and Civility and Honesty to be found in several Places.
The Apostle Paul tells us, 1 Timothy i. 9, 10. Knowing this, that the Law is not
made for a righteous Man, but for the Lawless and Disobedient, for the Ungodly
and for Sinners, for Unholy and Profane, for Murderers of Fathers and
Murderers of Mothers, for Manslayers, for Whoremongers, for them that defile
themselves with Mankind, for Menstealers, for Liars, for perjured Persons, and
if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound Doctrine.

The holy Apostle acknowledges, where the Law of God is originally written in
the Heart, and a Man is made righteous by a thorough Sanctification of all the
Powers of Nature as it is in Heaven, there is no such need of the Commands,
Threatenings, and Terrors of a penal Law, to keep Men in the practice of
Obedience; their own innocent or renewed Nature, their sincere and universal
Love to God, and to his Law, will powerfully incline them to the Practice of
Holiness, without the Terrors and Punishments from the Hand of the blessed God,
being always kept before their Eyes.

It is true, there are some Cases wherein the Law of God may not be well known,
even to good Men, or may be mistaken by them, and there may be need of special
Commands to discover what is our Duty, and what is Sin: But where the Law is
well known, the inward Power of universal Goodness in the Soul, without these
outward Terrors, is made effectual to preserve Holiness and Obedience in the
Life.

But perhaps you will then reply, Where there are true Christians found, of
what Use is it for them to keep the Law of God? This is the second Enquiry, and
to this I would give several particular Answers, besides the first and general
one. In general I say then, it must be acknowledged, that there are so many
Remains of indwelling Sin in the best of Men, that Fears and Terrors of the
Punishments of God, have their Use in this imperfect State, to prevent the Soul
from warping aside to sinful Practices, under strong and special Temptations.
Such frail and imperfect Creatures are we in this present State.

I proceed now to give some particular Answers to this Question, Of what Use is
it to keep the Law? and they are such as these.

Answ. 1 st. Though we are not saved from the Punishment of Hell, nor pardoned
and accepted to Eternal Life and Happiness in Heaven, by virtue of our poor
imperfect Obedience, and keeping the Commands of the moral Law, yet we can
never be saved without it: For our Love to the Law of God and a hearty
Inclination to keep it, is a great Pa^^ of the very Salvation which the Gospel
provides for sinful Men. Jesus Christ the Son of God is become our Savior, not
only to save us from God's Wrath, 1 These. i. 10. but also to save us from our
Sins. Matt. i. 21. and Tit. ii. 14. He gave himself for us that he might redeem
us from all Iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar People zealous of good
Works. We must be restored to the Image of God as well as to his Favor; now
his Image is all Holiness.

Mankind by the Fall have not only lost their Original State of Innocence and
Happiness, but their natural Powers are corrupted, the Mind, Will and Passions
are perverted, and defiled, and turned away from God, and from their Duty to
his Law. Now it is one great Design of the Gospel to rectify these Disorders in
the Nature of Man: It Is one of the Promises of the Gospel that the Law of God
shall be written in our Hearts, Heb. x. 16. and one of the great Offices and
Businesses of Christ, as a Savior, is by all the Methods of his Grace and
Power, to reduce our Hearts to the Love of God and his Law: He is made
Sanctification to us as well as Redemption, 1 Cor. i. 30. So that for Men to
talk of being saved without Love and Obedience to the moral Law of God, is to
talk plain Inconsistencies, or to affirm what natural Reason can never allow,
and what Scripture and the Gospel never designed; in short, it is to talk of
being saved without Salvation.

The moral Law of God is of Eternal Obligation upon Creatures: And it would be
our constant Duty to obey it, even if we could suppose there were no such
future State, no such Eternal Life provided for Men as the Gospel reveals. It
arises from the Relation between God and his Creatures. We can never be
disingaged or released from this Duty by the Gospel, which brings in Pardon and
Mercy to save us from the Punishment due ^o our Defects or Transgressions of
the Law; but not to release us from Obedience to it.

A holy God will not save Sinners from Hell, and forgive them their Sins,
without making them holy. Christ in all his abounding Love to Sinners, will not
become a Minister of Sin, Gal. ii. 17, 19, 20. The Design of God in his Grace
to Sinners, by Jesus Christ, is that they might be holy and without Blame
before him in Love, Ephesians. i. 4. And hereby we show that the Grace of God, in the
Forgiveness of Sin, is not lost upon us, but obtains the End for which it was
designed, ( viz.) to bring us back to God and Holiness.

Answ. 2. Good Works are necessary to manifest our Gratitude to God for his
pardoning Mercy: These are our Returns of Love to the blessed Jesus for his
dying Love manifested to us, 2 Cor. v. 15. He died for all Ranks and Characters
of Men, Jews and Gentiles, that they who live should not henceforth live to
themselves, but is him who died for them, and rose again. 1 John iv. 19. We are
bound to love him, and we do love him because he first loved us. 1 Cor. vi. 20.
Ye are bought with a Price, therefore glorify God with your Body and Spirit,
which are God's.

Answ. 3. Good Works are also necessary to render us useful to Men our fellow
Creatures, and to make our Profession honorable in their Sight. Good Works are
recommended by St. Paul for this Purpose, Tit. iii. 8. This is a faithful
Saying, and I will that thou constantly affirm, that they who have believed in
God might be careful to maintain good Works. These things are good and
profitable to Men. It Is necessary to convince the World that our Gospel is all
holy, and that it indulges and allows of no known Sin: That this Gospel is a
divine Blessing to Mankind, that it carries Blessings with it wheresoever it
comes, that it cures the Vices of the Mind, and the sinful Passions of the
Heart, that it suppresses all Injustice and Cruelty, Fraud and Malice, Envy and
Oppression, and every evil Work which Sin and Satan have introduced into this
World. A Christian must preach and prove the Purity and Power of his Gospel in
his whole Conversation, that it changes a Lion into a Lamb, an Earth-Worm into
an Angel, and a Son of Adam into a Child of God. This is the Way to adorn the
Doctrine of God our Savior, as St. Paul expresses it, Tit. ii. 10. This must
force a Conviction upon the Eyes and Ears, and Consciences of Men, that there
is something Divine and Heavenly in our Religion.

Answ. 4. Without Holiness and Good Works we are not, nor can be conformable to
our Lord Jesus Christ: And yet all the Members must be conformed to their Head,
when they are presented by him before the Father. Romans viii. 29. God has
predestined all his Children to be conformable to the Image of his Son, that
he may appear to be the Firstborn, and in all things may have the
Pre-eminence. He must present them without Spot and Blemish, like himself, in
the other World, that they may dwell with him for ever. And in this World the
Disciples must resemble their Lord; Christians should be public Blessings to
the World, as their Master was, who went about doing good, Acts x. 38. and they
should be known to be his Followers by this blessed Character.

Answ. 5. Another Use of Good Works is to evidence the Truth of our Faith, and
our Interest in this Salvation, James ii. 20, 24. For Faith which does not
produce good Works is dead, and cannot save us. Our Faith in Christ is made
known to ourselves, as well as to the World, by our Works, Romans viii. 1. They
who are in Christ Jesus, and are free from the Condemnation of the Law, must
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, 1 John ii. 2, 3, 5. Christ is
the Propitiation for our Sins, and hereby we know that we know him, if we keep
his Commandments: And it is by keeping or obeying his Word, that we know we are
in him.

Answ. 6. Works of Holiness, a new Heart and new Obedience, are needful to fit
and prepare us for the actual Possession and Blessedness of Heaven, for without
Holiness no Man shall see God. Note, when I speak of Good Works, or Works of
Holiness, as necessary toward our final Salvation, or our complete Possession
of heavenly Blessedness, I mean all the inward Exercises of holy Fear, and
Love, and Hope, and Obedience, and Dependence, and Patience in the Heart, etc.
as well as the outward Performances of the Acts of Religion and Righteousness
in the Life: But it must still be understood with this Limitation, viz. They
are necessary where there is Time and Room, Opportunity and Capacity for the
Performance of them; so that this does not exclude Infants from Salvation, who
are not capable of exercising the Principles of Grace: Nor does it exclude
dying Penitents who have no space of Time allowed them for living a Life of
Holiness.
And in this View a sincere Return to God with Obedience to his Commands, is a
necessary Requisite, in order to our final Salvation, Heb. xii. 14. This
blissful Vision of God is reserved only for the pure in Heart, Matt. v. 8.
Sanctification is the beginning of our Salvation, and it is eternally necessary
to continue it. We can never be happy in the Presence of God till we are like
him in Holiness. Nor can we be fit Company for the holy Angels, or the Spirits
of the Just made perfect, unless we are conformable to their Temper.

And it should be observed also, that this Preparation or Fitness for Heaven,
may be sometimes represented as a Right to the Blessedness of it, because the
Promises of Heaven are sometimes made to those who are thus qualified and
prepared, and these Promises give them a Right to it Some Divines have here
distinguished (as I have elsewhere shown) between a Jus haereditatis, or a
Right of Heirship through Faith in Christ, whereby we become the Sons of God,
and have a Title to Heaven, and a Jus aptitudinis, that is, a Right of Fitness,
whereby we are actually prepared, by Sanctification and Holiness, for the
Possession of this Heavenly Inheritance. He that is an Heir by Birth or by
Adoption, has a Title to an Estate or a Crown; but he acquires a Right to the
actual Possession, by being trained up to a Fitness for it, at the time
appointed, by him who is his natural Father, or his Adopter.
. Matt. v. 3, 5, 6, 8, etc. Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they shall see
God, etc. Rev. xxii. 14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they
may have Right to the Tree of Life, and may enter through the Gates into the
City. Yet it may be remembered what I said before, that these Commandments do
not signify directly the ten Commandments of the Law, but rather the Commands
of Jesus Christ, or of God in the Gospel, which indeed include a sincere
Obedience to the moral Law, and something more ( viz.) Repentance and Faith in
Christ.

Answ. 7. I might add, in the last place, that Holiness of Life or Obedience to
the Commands of God, is necessary in order to make the Process of the last
Judgment appear equitable and righteous in the Eyes of all Mankind; for Christ
the Judge shall render to every one according to their Works, Rev. xxii. 12.
Romans ii. 5, 6. 1 Cor. xv. 58. And indeed this is one chief Design of God's
appointing such a solemn and public Transaction as the last Judgment, that all
the Creation may see the Equity or Righteousness of the Dealings of God with
Men, that he awards the eternal Recompense to Saints and Sinners, according to
their different Characters of Vice and Virtue, Sin and Holiness. The Vessels of
Wrath are by their own Rebellion and Impenitence fitted to Destruction, and the
Vessels of Mercy are by sanctifying Grace and Holiness before prepared unto
Glory, Romans ix. 22, 23.

Though our own Works are by no means sufficient to atone for Sin, or to
procure the Favor of God or Eternal Life, for such guilty Creatures as we are,
yet there is (as Dr. Owen, I think in his Book of Justification, calls it) a
rewardable Condecency in the Works of Holiness, and there is many a Promise of
heavenly Rewards made to them in the New Testament: Now when Christ shall
adjudge the Wicked to Hell, and the Saints to Heaven, the whole Creation must
approve the Equity of his Dealings with Men. In the mean time the Saints shall
admire the Grace of God, and the Mediation of Christ, while they see how
unworthy they and their Works are of such a glorious Reward.

Thus we find there is abundant Reason for our Obedience to the Commands of the
moral Law though it is not made the proper Condition, or prescribed Term of our
Acceptance with God, and of obtaining Happiness by the Gospel; for it is only
perfect Obedience to these Commands in Thought, Word and Deed, can give us a
Right to Eternal Life, according to the Law. And yet a sincere Endeavor after
universal Obedience to them, is one necessary Requisite of our being approved
by Christ at last, and our actual Entrance into Heaven, according to the
Gospel: Hereupon I am bold to affirm, that those Persons whom all these Reasons
cannot draw to the sincere Practice of Holiness, may be sure they never
believed in Christ, and are not Partakers of the Salvation of the Gospel; for
the great and necessary Duty of Christianity is Faith which works by Love, Gal.
v. 6. The Heart is purified by true Faith, Acts xv. 9. And Faith without Works
is dead, and is unable to save us, Jam. ii. 20, 26.

SECT. V. REFLECTIONS.
1. Reflection. It is a dangerous thing to mistake the great Design of Christ's
Ministry here on Earth. Let us learn from this Discourse, that our Savior
often preached to Sinners the Gospel of Grace and Forgiveness, of Repentance
and Faith in himself; yet that his chief Business here, was not to preach the
Gospel constantly, nor to preach it in its full Light, Perfection and Glory;
but rather to prepare the Way for it when he had laid the Foundation in his own
Death and Resurrection, and when his Kingdom should be set up in the World in
his Apostles, and by his Spirit, and built upon this Foundation. He prepared
the Way for his Spirit, and his Apostles, even as John the Baptist prepared the
Way for him.

The great Business of Christ in this Life on Earth, was to appear with the
Characters of the Messiah on him; to answer the Types and Prophesies that went
before concerning him; to pass through the Stages of Life without Sin as our
Example; to yield a perfect Obedience to the Law, and fulfill all those Precepts
in Perfection which we could never fulfill; to preach the Law in the
Spirituality and Perfection of its Demands, and begin to open the Gospel; to
resign and submit himself to Death, as a Sacrifice for Sin, accursed by the
Law, and devoted to the punishing Justice of God: And hereby he laid a
Foundation for clearer preaching the Gospel of Forgiveness of Sins through his
Blood, which Doctrine he just mentions to his Disciples at the last Supper.

As for his own public Preaching, it chiefly consisted in clear and full
Explications of the Law of God in its Spirituality, which had been shamefully
obscured and curtailed by the Jewish Doctors; in bringing the invisible Worlds
of Heaven and Hell into a nearer and brighter View; in vindicating his own
Conduct against the Accusations of Men; in maintaining his own Character, as
one sent of God; in reproving the Jews for their corrupt Traditions, for their
Hypocrisy, for their Self-Righteousness, for their Uncharitableness to the
Gentiles, and thus calling the World to Conviction of Sin and Repentance, and
preparing the Way by his Parables for the Reception of the Gentiles into the
Church. When he preached the Gospel of his Atonement for Sin and Faith in his
Blood, it was rather in secret to his Disciples; or if in public, 'twas
generally in dark Sayings and Parables, and mystical Expressions, such as, The
Son of Man being lifted up and drawing all Men to him, giving his Flesh for
Meat to the People, and his Blood for Drink, etc. The plainest Intimations,
which (I think) Christ ever gave of the Salvation of Sinners by his own Death
as a Sacrifice, to People who were not his Disciples, was in those metaphorical
Words two or three times repeated in the Tenth Chapter of John, I am the good
Shepherd, who gives his Life for the Sheep. But when his Death and
Resurrection had laid a fairer Foundation for the Gospel, then he taught it his
Disciples much more plainly after his Resurrection, both by his Conversation
and by his Spirit, and sent them to publish it to the whole World more
gloriously than ever he himself taught it to the Jews. See this explained more
at large in Dr. Watts's second Sermon on the Atonement of Christ.

Now, I say, a Mistake in the Design of Christ's public Preaching, may lead
many People into some unhappy Mis-apprehensions about several Things, and
particularly about the Way of Salvation by the Gospel. For,

1. When we hear Christ preach the Law so much, and speak of entering into Life
by keeping the Commandments, if we imagine all this to be the clear Gospel, we
shall seek to be saved as it were by the Works of the Law, which the Apostle so
severely reproves the Galatians for, and the Jews or Jewish Christians, who
dwelt among the Romans. Romans ix. 31, 32. Gal. iii. 1, etc. and iv. 21. and v.
4. And if our Opinions and Conduct be the same, we shall expose ourselves to
the same sacred Reproof of the Apostle, and be greatly bewildered in the Way to
Heaven.

2. Such a Mistake in the Design of Christ's preaching the Law, as though he
taught it as the Way for the Salvation of Sinners, will incline us to expound
the Law in so gross and defective a Sense, as the Pharisees did of old, that so
expounded, Sinners may be able to keep it, and obey the Commands of it
sufficient to gain Salvation thereby. It will tempt us to retrench and diminish
the Perfection of its Demands of universal Holiness in Thought, Word and Deed;
because otherwise we cannot yield a perfect Obedience. Whereas it is much more
glorious to God, the Governor of the World, to suppose his holy Law still
maintains its own perfect Purity, and its original Demands of constant
universal Obedience; and it is more glorious to God our Savior, to suppose that
he has provided an effectual Way for the Salvation of sinful Creatures, who
trust in divine Mercy, and who love the Law of God, though their best Obedience
to it be very defective.

3. Such a Mistake will lead Ministers to neglect the mention of the Death and
Sufferings of Christ as a Sacrifice for Sin, and as the Foundation of our
Pardon and our Hope; it will lead them to omit these important Points in their
Descriptions of the Gospel, and in their Accounts of Faith in Christ; because
Christ never spoke so publicly and plainly to the People, of making Atonement
for Sin by his Death, etc. And upon this Account we shall be in danger of
leaving this Doctrine out of our Directions of Sinners when they seek the Way
to Salvation, which is now made plainer and more necessary since the Death and
Resurrection of Christ are accomplished, since the Apostles have particularly
explained this Doctrine, and the New Testament is complete.

4. This Mistake will tempt us to set Christ and his Apostles at variance about
the Way of Salvation. Christ says, If thou will enter into Life, keep the
Commandments; and the Apostles say, The Law is the Ministration of Death, but
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved; and we are justified
by Faith without the Works of the Law, etc. And thus we shall make the Holy
Scripture contradict itself: Or if we endeavor to accommodate and reconcile
these seeming Oppositions, upon a Supposition that Christ in the Language of my
Text preached the Gospel, it can never be done, with Fairness and Justness of
Thought, without straining the Words of Scripture from their natural Sense; and
it will ever bring a Darkness upon the Distinction between the Law and Gospel,
and leave the Way of Salvation by the Gospel under much Confusion.

5. This will tempt and incline us to expound the clear Gospel, which we find
in the Writings and Preaching of St. Paul, St. Peter, and St. John, after the
Death and Resurrection of Christ, by one of the legal Expressions of our
Savior, when in his own Lifetime he preached the Law for the Conviction of
Sinners: We shall interpret the Words and Language of the Gospel into the Sense
of the Law of Works: We shall almost explain away the Covenant of Grace, and
make a Covenant of Works of it: And thus, perhaps, expose ourselves to the
Danger of St. Paul's Censure and Anathema, by preaching another Gospel, or
perverting the Gospel of Christ, Gal. i. 8.

6. This Mistake will lead us to slight and despise the Writings of the
Apostles, as though they never did nor could preach the Gospel so clearly as
Christ himself; whereas they were really designed and sent forth after the
Death and Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, to preach the full Gospel to
the Nations in clearer and stronger Language than Jesus himself ever did to the
Multitude; they were instructed and commissioned to publish the Way to
Salvation by Christ, in a brighter and more explicit Manner and Expression,
than his Divine Wisdom thought proper to do before he had actually died and
rose again, by which Transactions he laid the Foundation for preaching the
Gospel more clearly and perfectly.

A Mistake about the personal Ministry of Christ, in such Passages as this in
my Text, will make us look upon the glorious and evangelical Paragraphs in the
Sermons and the Epistles of Peter, Paul and John, as mere affectionate and
fervent Pieces of Discourse, according to the warm Temper and lively Fancies of
those honest and zealous Men, who in the Heat of their Spirits spoke many
Things mystically and unintelligibly. This has been the professed Opinion of
some who are called Christians concerning the great Apostle; and upon this
Account they think none of his Writings are to be read without great Caution:
But if you will seek the Way of Salvation aright (say they) you must go to the
Mount, and hear our Savior's Sermon there, in the v. vi. and vii. Chapters of
the Gospel of St. Matthew, while they neglect the more evangelical Speeches
even of Christ himself. This has been the Language of some Men, the Leaders of
the Consciences of the ignorant Multitude, who are by Nature inclined enough to
a Covenant of Works, and need not be taught and persuaded to build all their
Hopes of Heaven upon the Works of the Law, which Christ never designed in that
noble and admirable Sermon of his on the Mountain.

But now if we suppose Christ frequently preaching the Law, on purpose to show
the Jews the grossest Defects and Imperfection of their Obedience, and their
Need of a Savior, and giving such Hints of the Gospel as were suited to that
Dispensation of his Life and personal Ministry; and if we suppose the Apostles
more fully preaching this Gospel (which our Savior just opened and begun in
his Lifetime) and publishing it in all its Glory of Righteousness and Grace,
after the Death and Reserrection of Christ, because it was not proper to be
thus clearly preached before, then we may well reconcile the different Language
of St. Paul and of Christ, when one says, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and
thou shall be saved, and the other, If thou will enter into Life keep the ten
Commandments. It Is certain that the Law is not against the Promises, Gal. iii.
21. but the Law is our Schoolmaster, and Leader of us as Children to Christ; so
the Greek Word Paidagogos means, Gal. iii. 24. Conviction of Sin by Christ's
preaching of the Law, leads Men, as in a lower School, as yet, to proceed
farther, and to seek for and embrace the Grace of Christ in the Gospel, as it is
preached more fully and clearly by his Apostles under the Teachings of his
Spirit.

This Scheme and View of Things being well adjusted in the Mind, will help us
to understand many of those legal Expressions in the New Testament, which might
seem to lead us to the Covenant of Works again, or which seem to mingle the Law
and Gospel for Salvation, if we will but remember that the Holy Ghost in the
New Testament sometimes discovers the Law in its Severity and Perfection of
Demands for the Conviction of Sin, as well as for the Discovery of our Duty,
and sometimes reveals the Gospel in the Riches of its Grace, for the Faith and
Salvation of awakened Sinners.

REFLECTION II.
How firm and durable is the ancient and perfect Law of God, which requires
perfect, constant and persevering Obedience? It is an eternal Law: It is not
yet abolished, though the Gospel be introduced, nor shall it be through all the
Ages of Mankind, and the several Dispensations of God toward Men. The moral Law
is sometimes said to be a Transcript or Copy from the Nature and Attributes of
God; the Duties there required bear the more perfect Stamp and Signature of his
essential Perfections, and therefore the Law must be unchangeable.

And not only the Requirements of Duty, but I think the Sanctions of the Law
also in its promised Rewards and threatened Penalties are everlasting. He that
does these Commands perfectly shall live in, or by them: But Cursed is he that
continues not in all the Commands of the Law to do them, and he must die, Gal.
iii. 10, 12. I do not find any Scripture that tells me, that the Commands, or
the Sanctions are repealed, If it should be said, that the Apostle in Heb. vii.
18. says, There is verily a disannulling of the Commandments for the Weakness
and Unprofitableness thereof, for the Law made nothing perfect, etc. I answer,
that the Context plainly shows that the Words Law and Commandment here, do not
mean the Moral Law, but refer either to the Sinai Covenant, or the whole Scheme
of the Jewish Economy, and particularly to the Levitical Priesthood which is
abrogated, because it could not make a proper Atonement for Sin.

If it should be objected yet again, that the same Apostle in Romans vii. 6.
declares, that we are now delivered from the Law, that being dead in which we
were held; and that the Law in this Place means the Ten Commandments, because
the Apostle argues from the Tenth Command, Thou shall not Covet: I answer, that
the Apostle there plainly means, that now under the Gospel we who are true
Christians, and are entered into the Covenant of Grace by Faith, are delivered
from the Bondage and Chains of the Law as a Covenant of Works, whereby our
indwelling Sins were rather irritated and provoked than subdued: It is dead, i.
e. it has lost its unhappy Influences on true Believers: But not that the Law
itself is abolished, either as a Rule of Life to Christians, or as a condemning
Covenant of Works to those who are not entered into the New Covenant or a State
of Grace, by Faith and Repentance: For he adds, v. 12. that even now the Law is
holy, and the Commandment holy, and just, and good.

If this might be explained by a Similitude, I think it is much in the same
manner as the Penal Laws against the Protestant Dissenters in England, are not
abolished, but stand in Force still: Yet they have no Power to hurt any Person
who accepts of the Act of Toleration, and qualifies himself accordingly: Though
indeed there is this Difference, that it can never be said, that those Penal
Laws are now, or ever were either Holy, Just or Good, as the Law of God is.


though God has provided a Way to deliver Men who receive the Gospel and enter
into God's new Covenant from the Bondage of the Law as a Covenant of Works, and
to release and free repenting Sinners from this cursed Death, to deliver them
from this Sentence of Condemnation, and to bestow on them the Blessings of
Eternal Life.

It is granted indeed, as the Apostle confesses, Romans viii. 3. That through the
Weakness of our Flesh the Law is become weak and unable to save Sinners;
because their corrupt Nature and fleshly Inclinations render them unable to
keep it perfectly; but, as I intimated before, it is not weak in its own Nature
to give Life. Christ in my Text preaches the Law, and says, If thou keep the
Commandments. (i. e. with a persevering Constancy, and a sinless Perfection)
thou shall enter into Life: What Christ speaks is true. If any Man appear who
has been guilty of no Sin, and has fulfilled the Law of God in every tittle
of it in Thought, Word and Deed, he shall have eternal Happiness. Romans ii. 7.
They who seek for Glory, Honor and Immortality, by patient continuance in well
doing (en ergo agatho, in one good Work, without intermission or interruption
by any Sin) they shall have Eternal Life. This is the Language of the Law of
Works. But our Incapacity to fulfill this Law in our fallen State, has awakened
the Compassion of God to provide a Gospel of Grace and Pardon, and to send his
Son Jesus Christ down from Heaven to Earth for this very Purpose, that humble,
repenting, returning Sinners, who trust in the Mercy of God through a Mediator,
might be saved, even while they cannot fulfill the perfect Demands of his pure
and holy Law, though they sincerely endeavor it.

The Great and Blessed God maintains his holy Law still in its own Perfection
and Glory, though we have lost our practical or moral Power of obeying it
perfectly: I say, we have lost, by our Fall in Adam, our moral or practical
Power of perfect Obedience to the Law; but our natural Powers of Understanding,
Will and Affections remain, and there is no other natural Power or Faculty
required, in order to obey it. And since our natural Powers remain, the Great
God requires perfect Obedience of us, and all Men, to his holy Law, and yet he
assures us by his Gospel, that he will not inflict the Curse of the Law on
those who heartily repent of their Sins, and trust in Christ, though they do
not or cannot yield perfect Obedience to this Law.

He does not lessen or diminish the Demands of his Law, which requires
Perfection still; for his Nature is too pure to require only an imperfect
Obedience. If God under the Gospel, had quite laid aside, or abolished his Law,
and required or commanded no more than such a sincere imperfect Obedience, or
such good Works which converted and pious Men perform, then they would fulfill
the Requirements or Commands of God, and would have no Sin, and such Persons
would need no Pardon. But this is contrary to the whole Tenor of the New
Testament. If we say we have no Sin, we make God a Liar, we deceive ourselves,
and the Truth is not in us, 1 John i. 10. The Law of God is Eternal, and
demands perfect Obedience of every Creature: But his Grace pardons those who
cannot come up to the perfect Demands of this Law, by reason of the moral
Impotence contracted by the Fall, if they apply themselves to Jesus Christ his
Son, according to the Rules of the Gospel.

The Law therefore is Holy, and Just, and Good, and will be so to all
Generations, Romans vii. 12. and when our Savior was beginning his divine and
admirable Exposition of it on the Mount, he warns us in Matt. v. 17, 18. Think
not I am come to destroy the Law and the Prophets: I am not come to destroy but
to fulfill: for verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot or
one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law till all be fulfilled; and our
Lord Jesus Christ has put Honor upon his Father's Law several ways.

1. He preached and explained it in the glorious Purity and Perfection of it.

2. He fulfilled it all himself in most exact Obedience, and thereby set all
his Followers an admirable Example how to fulfill it.

3. He suffered Death for the Dishonor we had cast upon it by our Sins, not to
destroy the Sanction of it, but to free us from the Curse.

4. He has taken all the Rules or Commandments of it into the Scheme of his
Gospel, as divine Rules and Directions for the constant Practice of Believers,
and obliges them to obey it with their utmost Care and Endeavor, though he
has taken away from them that Curse and Condemnation, which originally belongs
to every degree of Disobedience.

5. He sends his own Holy Spirit continually to write this Law in the Hearts of
his People, and to form and mould their Souls to a delightful Conformity to the
Rules of it.

Thus it appears, that Christ Jesus himself and the very Scheme of the Gospel
does confirm and not abolish the Law. Romans iii. 31. The Law is everlasting, and
the Gospel does not destroy it, while yet it relieves guilty Creatures from the
deserved Penalties.

REFLECTION III.
How useful is it to meditate and study, to preach and explain the Law of God,
and that not only for the Direction of our Life and Actions, but also for the
same End that our Savior preached it in my Text to this young Man, (viz.) to
convince of Sin. So Romans iii. 20. By the Law is the Knowledge of Sin, Romans iv.
15. The Law works Wrath; it shows to the Consciences of Men the Wrath of
God, which is due to Sin, and therefore says the Apostle, I by the Law am dead
to the Law. Gal. ii. 1, 19. By considering and studying the Purity, the Extent,
and Perfection of the Law of God, I am dead to all Expectation of Righteousness
and Life by it, for I see I cannot fulfill its pure and perfect Demands, and
therefore I fly to the Gospel as my only Refuge and Hope.

We must be made sensible of our Guilt of Sin, our Liableness to Death and
Misery, and our Incapacity to save ourselves by the Law, that we may fly to the
Gospel of Grace. We must be wounded by the Law that we may seek and find
healing by the Gospel. The Law impressed on the Conscience is an excellent
Preparative for the Gospel of Forgiveness; for Sinners that are not awakened to
a Sense of Sin and Danger, will nor hear the sweet Invitations of the Savior.
Dare not charge and censure those as legal Preachers, who frequently preach the
Law of God in its Demands and in its Curses: There is abundant Use of preaching
the Law, for many excellent Purposes under the Dispensation of the Gospel:
Jesus himself is our Pattern.

REFLECTION IV.
How happy are we who live under the clear and complete Light of the Gospel, as
it is explained and illustrated by the inspired Apostles, since the Death and
Resurrection of our blessed Savior. We are happier in several Respects, than
those that lived even in the Lifetime of our Lord Jesus Christ. We are ready
to say within ourselves, Surely if I had seen Christ in the Flesh, I must have
loved him: If I had beheld his pure and perfect Example of Holiness, I could
not help imitating: If I had heard him speak as never Man spoke, I must have
embraced his Doctrine, and submitted to his Instrctions: But we are much
mistaken in this Thought, for we might have been carried away from Christ by
the common national Prejudices against him, we might have been among the proud
Pharisees, building up a Righteousness of our own, and refusing the Gospel,
while we heard Jesus himself preach it. Multitudes who heard this glorious
Preacher rejected his Divine Counsels, and perished in their Unbelief and
Disobedience, though they had as good an Opinion of themselves as we have.

Besides many other Advantages that we have now, beyond what they had in the
Days of Christ; besides the many Predictions and Promises that are since
accomplished, which confirm his Mission; besides the Explication of a greater
part of the old Testament, by the Apostles, than could have been done before
the Death of Christ; besides the many Proofs of the Christian Religion, which
we derive from the Resurrction and Ascension of Christ, and the Arguments drawn
from the miraculous Gifts of the Spirit, which could never have been brought in
our Savior's Lifetime, we have this Advantage also among others, that we have
the Gospel set in a clearer Light by his Apostles, in their Sermons and
Epistles, than our Savior himself set it in, by his own personal Ministry.

That Divine Teacher explained the Law clearly, and set the Commands of it in
their full Light and Beauty, partly to lead us to a more spiritual Practice man
the Pharisees, and the Jewish Doctors of the Law were acquainted with, and
partly to show our utter Incapacity of keeping the Law, or obtaining Eternal
Life by it: He also began to publish the Gospel of Grace, Repentance and
Forgiveness; but (as was declared before) his sovereign Wisdom did not think
proper publicly to explain and illustrate this Gospel of Forgiveness with the
Doctrine of his own Sacrifice, his Death, his Atonement for our Sins, his
Resurrection for our Justification, his Intercession for us in Heaven, and his
ruling the World for the Good of his People: He left all this to be done by his
Apostles, when the Spirit should come down upon them and teach them many things
which they could not bear in his Lifetime, and which therefore he did not
clearly teach them. John xvi. 12.

Value therefore and love the Gospel, and return not to the Law of Works, as
the Means or Rule of your Justification, Gal. iv. 21. Tell me ye that desire to
be under the Law, do ye not hear the Law, how it curses every Sinner, and
condemns them all without Remedy and without Hope? It Is the Business of Sinners
to fly to and live upon this Gospel of Forgiveness, and not seek to establish
their own imperfect Righteousness before God. Rejoice in the Way of
Justification by the Obedience, Death and Resurrection of the Son of God in
Flesh. Never hope to obtain Pardon of Sin, and to secure the Salvation which
Christ has revealed, by your own keeping the Commandments of the Law, for your
best Righteousnesses are all very defective and insufficient: But repent of
Sin, trust in Christ, and live upon atoning Blood and pardoning Grace, while
you humbly seek after the highest Degrees of Holiness and Conformity to the
Commands of the Law. By this means you shall magnify the Law of God, and make
it honorable in the Sight of Men, even while your Hope of Salvation and
Eternal Life is entirely owing to the rich Grace of God in the Gospel of his
Son Jesus: To him that has loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his Blood,
to him that has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, by being made a Curse
and a Sacrifice for us, be Glory, Honor and Dominon for ever and ever. Amen.

It is proper to put in a Remark here, which perhaps would have been better
placed at the End of the first Essay, viz.

That that ingenious Commentator Dr. Whitby, was well known to the learned
World, when he wrote his Comment on the New Testament, to be a pretty warm
Defender of the Ariminian Doctrines concerning the Will of Man and Divine
Grace, etc. though at the same time he was a zealous Opposer of the Socinian
Sentiments concerning the Person of Christ, and a strict and zealous asserter
of the Doctrine of his Satisfaction and Atonement for Sin, and probably he
borrowed (...) of his Sentiments on that Point from Dr. Owen, on the Epistle to
the Hebrews. In his latter Days, a little before his Death, he seemed to raise
the Character of the human Nature of Christ as high as the Arians do, but
supposed it still below Divinity.

ESSAY IV. The Mistaken Ways of coming to GOD without CHRIST.
JOHN xiv. 6. No Man comes to the Father but by me.
IF the Race of Man were immortal on Earth, and Sinners were never summoned to
die, or if they could put an eternal End to their Souls when the Body lies down
in the Dust, there would be little Concern among us, How shall I come and
appear before God? or What shall I do to obtain his Favor? Sinful Creatures
seem to live well enough among the Cares or Amusements of this Life, though
they are without God in the World; and if they could live for ever without
seeing him, or could plunge into Death and the unseen World, and not meet him
there, they would take no Thought about that grand Enquiry, which Balak the
King of Moab thought to be of such Importance, Wherewith shall I come before
the Lord, or how my self before the high God?

But when the Consciences of Men begin to be convinced that they are
Transgressors against the Law of their Maker, and that they must one Day appear
before him, as their Governor and their Judge, and answer for their Conduct,
then they inquire in good earnest, What they shall do to stand in his Sight
with Acceptance, or to draw near his Majesty without Terror? Then Reason and
Nature exert all their Forces to find an Answer to this grand Question.

But Nature and Reason darkened and weakened by the Fall of Man, and unassisted
by Revelation and divine Grace, lead them into many mistaken Ways, such as will
never bring them into the Favor of him who made them, nor obtain true
Happiness. Poor foolish and fallen Mankind is ready to try many means of
procuring Eternal Life for themselves, before they will betake themselves to
the one only Way which God has appointed by his Gospel, and that is, Faith in
Jesus Christ.

Of the several mistaken Ways that Sinners are ready to choose in this Case,
these three are the chief, ( viz.) The Way of supposed Innocence, The Way of
Dependence on God's general Goodness, and the Way of their own Repentence and
Self-Righteousness. Let us consider each of these, and enquire into the
Justness of their Pretensions.

First, The Way of Innocence. How many Souls are there in such a Land as this,
who come to God with a thoughtless Confidence, and expect to find Mercy at his
Hands, though they are conscious they have not done so much Good as they ought,
nor have been so religious as they should be? yet they think they are harmless
and have done no Wrong, and therefore they are safe for Eternity. Perhaps, by
Education and other Methods of restraining Grace, they have escaped the viler
Pollutions of the Age, and been preserved from gross Impieties: Then they hope
and believe all shall go well with them, and dream of nothing but the Favor of
God, and Happiness after Death, because their Life has been outwardly
unblameable in the World. Thus they live, and thus they die.

Ask these Persons when they lie languishing on a dying Pillow, How they can
venture to appear before the great the just and the holy God, in the World of
Spirits? They will readily return this Answer, They have done no Harm, and they
hope God will do them none; they have wronged no Man, and they know not why
they should not be accepted of God. Poor ignorant, unthinking Creatures! One
would wonder that so gross Blindness and Stupidity should remain on the Minds
of any who sit under the preaching of the Law and Gospel. Let me endeavor to
convince such Sinners here, and prove that this Hope is a false and dangerous
one.

1. If it were possible that they should be found such as they suppose
themselves, that is, innocent in their outward Carriages and Actions toward
their fellow Creatures, yet have their Language and their Lips been always
innocent too? Or if they have in the main learnt to bridle their Tongues from
gross Falsehood, and Wrath, and Slander, yet have they never indulged evil
Imaginations against their Neighbor, and the working of evil Passions? Sirs,
if we construe the Law of Duty to extend to our Hearts, as well as to our Lips
and our Lives, as our Savior has construed it in his Sermon on the Mount,
Matt. v. and vi. and vii. who is there can ever plead Innocence?

You have kept your Actions to all Appearance tolerably blameless, with regard
to Men, but have you never broken the last Command of the second Table, never
desirous or covetous of another's Possessions in Thought, never been guilty of
Immorality's in Heart? Can such Souls plead at the Bar of God, that they never
allowed one envious Thought against their Neighbor, and never let loose a
malicious Word? That they never coveted that which belonged to another, nor
wilfully lessened their Neighbor's good Name or Reputation? Did they never
find Wrath or Revenge kindling and burning within them without Resistance? Did
they never indulge the Motions of Lust or Intemperance, or any sinful Desire
stirring in their Hearts? When the great Apostle, in the second and third
Chapters to the Romans, is convincing all the World of Sin, and laying Mankind
under a Sense of Guilt, he convinces them effectually by their Breach of the
second Table, that all have sinned and come short of the Glory of God. Romans ii.
21. and iii. 10, 12 -- 14, etc.

Where Is the Son or Daughter of Adam that can stand forth and say, I never
dishonored Father or Mother, nor ever disobeyed the just Commands of my
Superiors; I never was unreasonably angry against another; I never encouraged a
wanton Thought within me, nor indulged any covetous and sinful Wish; I never
broke the Rule of Temperance in eating and drinking, nor ever gave way to an
irregular Passion. I never was guilty of known Falsehood in Design or in Word.
Let Mankind take but these Laws of God, which regard themselves and their
Neighbors, and make a sincere Examination of themselves thereby, and their own
Consciences will soon condemn the very best of them in the Sight of God. They
are all condemned by the Law of Innocence, and if they have no better Plea,
they will meet with an offended and angry God, in whose Sight no Sinner can
stand and find Acceptance. His Law is wise and righteous, and every Violation
of it deserves a Proportion of Punishment.

Perhaps they will plead after such a strict Enquiry, that though they have not
been perfectly innocent, yet their Offenses have not been gross and constant;
but only of the smaller kind and few in Number, and therefore they hope for
Excuse: But the Apostle James takes away this Hope also, when he tells us,
James ii. 8, 10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law and yet offend in one
Point, he is guilty of all, for by one wilful Sin he abuses that Governor and
affronts that Authority by which all the Commands are enjoined. Nor is any
wilful Sin small in the Sight of Divine Justice, for it is the Fruit of a
presumptuous Heart, and is therefore highly criminal.

But suppose after their own Review of their Behavior, they should pronounce
themselves quite innocent, and say boldly, They knew nothing by themselves; yet
they are not sufficiently justified hereby, for God sees the Heart, and he
knows us better than we know ourselves. 1 Cor. vii. 2. and 1 Cor. iv. 4.
Receive us, says St. Paul, we have wronged no Man, we have corrupted no Man,
we have defrauded no Man; for though I know nothing by my self, i. e. nothing
of Fraud or Deceit, on wilful Injury, yet am I not hereby justified, but he
that judges me is the Lord. The Eyes of God are a Flame of Fire, and will find
Iniquity where I can find none, for he sees all the Disguises and Veils of
Self-Love and Self-Flattery, whereby every Man is naturally prone to cover his
Sins, and to impose upon himself. He beholds those secret Ferments, those
hidden Operations and Motions of Sin in the Soul, which pass by unnoticed to
ourselves, and escape the Ac^usation and Charge of our Consciences. He knows so
perfectly all the just Demands of his own Law, in the Lengths and the Breadths
thereof, and is so perfectly acquainted with all the Motions of our Hearts, all
their Follies and Passions, and sinful Byasses, that he can find in us a
thousand Contrarieties to his Law, where we are fondly ready to presume upon
our own Innocence. Should I say with Joh, Chap. ix. ver. 30. If I should wash
myself in Snow-Water, and make my Hands never so clean, thou will plunge me in
the Ditch, and my own Clothes would abhor me. i. e. If I should use all my own
Purifications, thou will discover me to be still as greatly defiled with Sin,
as one who is plunged into a Ditch, and is unfit to put on his common Raiment,
lest he defile that and every thing about him.

Alas, how little do Men believe this? How little do they know and think of
their own Guilt in the Sight of God, and the Depth of their own Misery! How are
they led by their own Thoughtlesness and shameful Ignorance of themselves to
build their Hopes for Eternity on a very sandy Foundation, which will never
stand in the Day of that Divine Tempest, which shall try every Man's Work?

You imagine, God will not be so strict a Judge, and so severe, as Preachers
represent him; but how do you know that he will not be thus severe in his
Enquiries and his Judgment? I Am well assured the mere Light of Nature can never
assure you of it, nor secure you against this Severity: And the Scripture often
represents him thus severe in his Judgment, formed by the Rules of his own Law,
and abstracted from the Gospel of his Grace. David knew this in ancient times,
Psalm. cxxx. 3. and cxliii. If thou, Lord, should mark Iniquities; O Lord,
who can stand? No Man living shall be justified in thy Sight. All Mankind are
Sinners; There is none righteous; no, not one: Every Mouth is stopped, and the
whole World lies guilty before God. Romans iii. 19.

2. If we were entirely innocent as to Man, would that be sufficient to answer
for all our Injuries and Dishonours done to God? Would this honest and
blameless Conduct among your Neighbors, atone for all your Neglects of
Religion, and your shameful Forgetfulness of God your Maker? What? Did God send
you into this World among sensible things, and give you leave to neglect him,
who is the Eternal and Almighty Spirit? Did he form your Spirits within you,
and give you Understanding and Reason, and noble Powers to know the God that
made you, and never require or expect that you should use them to obtain this
Knowledge? Have you a Tongue to speak, and yet never speak to him in Petition
or Praise? It Is not only Cruelty, or Falsehood, or Injustice to our Neighbors,
which the holy Apostle charges Mankind with, in order to lay their Consciences
under Guilt and Condemnation, but their Neglects of God and Religion are
brought in as a heavy part of the Charge. Romans iii. 11, 17, 18. There is none
that understands, there is none that seeks after God; there is no Fear of
God before their Eyes. You hear the Accusations of this Apostle, speaking in
the Name of God to Men, to make them sensible of their Guilt and Misery; you
have defrauded the great God of his due Glory; you have done him much Injury in
withholding from him Worship and Reverence, Fear and Love, Prayer and Praise;
and you fall under the Sentence of his broken Law for ever, if you have no
better Plea than this.

Under such a Charge Multitudes would be ready to rise up, and with a
thoughtless and inconsiderate Pertness would say, Far be it from us to injure
our Maker when we would not injure or wrong a Worm: And this is the common
Sentiment and Language of Neighbors and Friends when a Man dies, even though
he were a Drunkard or a Man of Irreligion. Alas, for him! Poor Man! he has been
honest and just; his Soul is at rest, he never did any body an Injury but
himself When such Sinners are charged with Neglect of Religion, they cry out as
though they were falsely accused, as those Jews do in Mal. iii. 8. When God
complains of them, Ye have robbed me, says the Lord; but they replied with
Impudence and Ignorance, Wherein have we robbed or wronged thee?

Alas, Sirs, you are far from Innocence in this Respect; for you have robbed
God of your Hearts and best Affections; you have robbed him of your Thoughts
and serious Meditations; you have robbed him of your highest Love and chief
Delight. Were all the Passions of your Souls and Powers of Nature given you to
be employed about the Trifles of this World? Does not God, in the Person of
Divine Wisdom, call to Men in the Book of Proverbs, My Son, give me thy Heart?
And has not the World had these Hearts of yours given up to it entirely? Does
not the Light of Nature, as well as our Savior, say, Love the Lord your God
with your whole Heart, and your whole Soul, with all your Mind, and all your
Strength? And has God had all this share of Love from you?

What time have you ever spent in his Service, in secret Transactions between
God and your own Souls? What Seasons have you taken for Prayer to him, or for
speaking his Honors? And yet our time is all his: And though he gives us
sufficient Portions of time for all our Necessaries and Conveniences of Life,
yet have you not robbed God of much of your time in neglecting Religion so
entirely as you have done? Have you lived upon the Lord as your Delight and
your Life? Have you made him your Hope and your All? Have you daily expected
all your Comforts and Blessings from him, and have you returned all the Fruits
of your Blessings back again to him in a way of Thankfulness and Obedience?
Surely your Consciences must answer, No: Then believe it and be afraid; you
have robbed God, you have injured the Almighty, you are far from Innocence, and
you must expect to perish with Malefactors, if you have no better Plea than
this.

O dismal Change of Apprehensions, when God shall make Creatures, who thought
they were innocent, appear abominable in his Sight, guilty of Atheism and
Irreligion and high Ungodliness, and shall judge and sentence and punish them
as Criminals of a deep Dye, for God was not in all their Thoughts, they lived
without God in the World.

Dare not therefore, O Sinners, dare not continue one Day longer in this
Practice: Renounce and abandon your false and foolish Hopes: Walk no longer in
this vain, this dangerous, this supposed Way of Innocence, for it will never
bring you to God and his Favor. Nor go on to think yourself fit for Heaven,
because you imagined you had done no wrong on Earth, for upon a serious Search
you must be convinced in your Consciences, that you have been evident
Transgressors against the Law of God, both in regard of the Duties of Religion
and Morality, in what you owe both to God and Man; and Innocence will be found
a false and vain Plea at the Bar of God.

But I will go one Step further in making it appear with abundant Evidence,
that the Way of pretended Innocence can never bring such Creatures as we are
into the Favor of God; and that is, by enquiring of such as call themselves
Christians; what is the Use of Christianity, and why was it brought into the
World? Surely, if Innocence had been the Way to Heaven, Christ Jesus the Son of
God would never have come into Flesh and Blood, that he might die for us; God
would never have sent so glorious and divine a Person to have exposed himself
to so many Infirmities and Sorrows, Fatigues and Sufferings among the wretched
Inhabitants of this our Globe, if we could have been saved in the Way of
Innocence. Never would the Son of God have entered our World to have been
driven out of this mortal Life again by cruel and bloody Men; nor sustained the
Shame, the Pangs and Agonies of the Cross, and a cursed Death. There would have
been no new Religion introduced by him; there would have been no Gospel, for
there needed none if we are saved by Innocence. The Coming of the Son of God
into our World, his painful Circumstances of Life, and his atoning Death at the
End of them, sufficiently prove, that the Law of Innocence can never save
Mankind.

The Covenant or Law of Innocence was broken by our first Parents; our Natures
are corrupted, and this Law or Covenant is for ever weak, and unable to bring
us to God again. Romans viii. 3. What the Law was not able to do in that it was
weak through the Flesh, Jesus Christ came to do for us, by coming in the Flesh,
and making his Soul an Offering for Sin.

If after all this Representation of Things you are resolved to continue in
this way, and seek eternal Life in the way of Innocence, you give a sensible
Affront to the Son of God, who came down from Heaven to bring Sinners near to
God, and you say in effect, he might have spared his Journey to Earth to show
us the Way to Heaven, or to provide a new Way for us, for we have done no Harm
to God or Man here in this World, and therefore God will not condemn or hurt us
in the other. O my Friends, beg of God to convince you deeply of Sin, and that
there is no Hope by all your Pretenses of this Kind.

The second mistaken Way of coming to God is by a mere Dependence on the
absolute and sovereign Goodness of his Nature, while you neglect the particular
Methods of Salvation which you hear and read he has appointed in the Book of
his Grace. It Is true, his tender Mercies are over all his Works, and Men
imagine this eternal Love to his Creatures will not suffer him to make any of
them miserable hereafter, for what they call a little Misconduct here: And
while they lessen their own Sins, and enlarge upon his Goodness, they venture
their Souls upon an unsafe Foundation, and build up a dangerous and ungrounded
Hope. Fancy his Goodness, O Sinners, as large and glorious as you will, and I
may venture to affirm it yet larger and more glorious than your Fancy; but if
all your Hopes rest here, and you walk onward in this Confidence, you will
never see the Face of God with Comfort; nor arrive at his Favor. Remember this
is spoken particularly, and only, to those who have known and heard the Gospel
of Christ, and yet have neglected to receive it.

Yet how common a Mistake is this, even among those who are called by the
Christian Name? Many will confess, We are Sinners indeed, and so are all Men;
but God is infinitely merciful, and he will not damn us: Surely he will never
condemn so many Millions of Souls; he did not make Mankind to destroy them; his
Goodness will not bear to see us eternally miserable, and therefore though we do
indulge a little Sin here, we shall not perish for ever. Thus that very Sin is
committed, which the Apostle warns Men of, Romans ii. 4. The Riches of the
Goodness and Forbearance and Long-suffering of God which should lead Men to
Repentance are abused to indulge and uphold them in Sin. It Is a shamefui
Indignity and Dishonor done to the Goodness of God, to pretend to trust to it
for Salvation from Punishment, and yet neglect the Means this very Goodness
has appointed to obtain it. But I will endeavor to convince you here, that
this is not a sufficient or a safe Way.

1. Infinite Goodness does not save sinning Angels, and why should it save
sinning Men? Those noble Creatures, who sinned again God, and left their first
Station, are for ever damned and miserable, and yet God is for ever Good: How
largely is his Goodness diffused through all the Heavenly World, and he
receives endless Hallelujahs for it; how largely on this Earth, though we often
overlook it, and neglect his Praise: But he is not bound to exercise Goodness
in Hell too; nor is his Heart to be charged with Hardness, nor his Hand with
Shortness, because he will not save those who deserve Destruction.

2. Though the Goodness of God be infinite in its Nature, yet its Exercises are
all regulated and limited by Wisdom and Justice; and these are also infinite.
Wisdom has joined with Divine Goodness, and saved a Multitude of Sinners; but
is it bound to save them all? Or is it obliged to save you? Terrible Majesty,
Holiness and consuming Fire are with our God; and among rebellious Creatures,
his Wisdom finds proper Seasons and Objects where these must have their
Exercise: And if you are Sinners, why should not his just Vengeance be let out
upon you? It is a dreadful Word which is written, Isa. xxvii. 11. This is a
People of no Understanding: therefore he that made them will not have Mercy on
them, and he that formed them will show them no Favor. Those who are so
ignorant of God and his Way of Salvation in the midst of the brightest Means of
Knowledge, deserve Destruction from the Almighty, as the Fool who says in his
Heart There is no God.

3. There is no Promise in the Gospel made to those that rest on Infinite
Goodness, and refuse the Means God has ordained to Salvation, i. e. Repentance
toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. Goodness, when it is not bound
by a Promise, is perfectly free: And, indeed, if it were confined always to act
to the utmost of its reach, it were not free, nor divine, nor worthy of God.
And where there is no divine Faithfulness engaged to support you by a Promise,
a Sinner's Hope in Goodness itself will not be a sufficient and effectual
Security.

4. Though the Goodness of God is infinite, yet it does not express itself in
all the Ways that it can do in temporal Things, and why must it then he
exercised in so unbounded a Manner in Things eternal? If Divine Goodness
exerted itself to the utmost in this Life, there would be no Pain, there would
be no Sickness among Men, no Heart-ake, no Sorrow: But you see there is much
Sickness, Sorrow and Pain among us, notwithstanding the boundless Goodness of
God. There are ten thousand ways for Infinite Goodness to express itself in,
besides in Forgiveness of the Sins of Men.

How do you know that God will forgive any one Sinner, or bestow upon him
eternal Life? The Light of Nature cannot assure us of it, much less can the
Light of Nature inform us, that a God of Infinite Goodness will pardon every
Sinner, or save them from the Punishment which is due by his righteous Law. And
I am well assured the Scripture gives us no such general Hope: Thousands and
Millions will be punished with everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the
Lord Jesus, and from the Glory of his Power, notwithstanding his own and his
Father's unsearchable Treasures of Grace and Goodness. The Lord is abundant in
Goodness, and yet Earth and Hell abound in miserable Creatures.

5. Although you could prove that the Mercy of God will pardon some Sinners,
yet how can you be sure it will pardon you? If you were told, that it will save
a Million of Transgressors, yet can you ever prove that it will save you? Nay,
as highly sovereign as you fancy it to be, you may be still excluded from the
Exercise of it; for you may as well imagine this to be one Instance of
Sovereignty, to forgive thousands, and yet punish you, if you have nothing else
to plead but his mere Goodness. Now it is not wise to venture so important an
Interest as that of an Immortal Soul upon any Uncertainty whatsoever, if it can
be avoided; and according to your own Principle of Dependence on Sovereign
Mercy, you are left at a dreadful Uncertainty, if you have nothing else to
trust to but the mere Sovereignty of Divine Goodness.

6. You have over and over again, by repeated Sins, forfeited all Pretenses to
the Favor and Mercy of God: Whatsoever Ground you have had to hope in his
Goodness, yet you have cut off all those Grounds by your frequent actual
Iniquities. Let us enter into Particulars, and survey a little what Claims,
what Pretenses you have to trust in this absolute Goodness of God.

(1.) Will you say, You are his Creature, and he is your Maker and Owner,
therefore you trust him to save what is his own? But remember that every Sin of
yours has disowned his Dominion, violated his Authority, and forfeited his Love
and all his kind Regards, as a Creator and Proprietor.

(2.) Will you plead, You have obeyed him, and done much Service for him, and
therefore you hope his Goodness will reward you? But have you not done more
against him? Surely your Sins are more than your Acts of Piety, and they cancel
all pretended Obligations you could hope to lay upon a God: I fear, should all
our Virtues and Devotions be put into the Scale against our Vices and Sins,
they would be found greatly wanting in the Weight.

(3.) Will you add this Plea, You are in a miserable State, and you trust in
his Compassion that he will not leave poor sinful wretched Beings in a State of
Misery? But have you not affronted him since your Miseries began, and sinned
against him, even in your Bonds? And is not his Compassion thereby utterly
forfeited? Besides, might not fallen Angels make the same Plea as you do? Are
they not in great Misery? And yet are they not bound in Chains of Darkness,
because of their Sins, and shut up to further Vengeance.

O see what an uncertain Foundation your Souls lean upon, when you venture to
trust in the mere absolute Mercy of God, and his Goodness, without his, Gospel.
It Is a Goodness sovereign and absolutely free, and therefore not bound to save
such Wretches as you from Misery: It Is a Goodness that can see sinning Angels
perish for ever, and not help them: It Is a Goodness that is regulated in its
Exercises, by infinite Wisdom and Righteousness, and the Authority and Justice
of a divine Governor, and these must have their proper Exercises too: It is
absolute Goodness without a Promise, without Engagement; Goodness that has ten
thousand ways to exercise itself besides in forgiving Criminals: It is a
Goodness that may forgive ten thousand Sinners, and not forgive you; and it is
a Goodness too, that you have so often dishonored, whose Favors you have so
shamefully forfeited and abused. Stand and wonder then that it is not turned
into Fury against you long ago without Change and without Hope.

Surely since I have a Soul of Immortal Duration, I Will strive to have better
Rest and Support for it than this is, and never venture it here, since there is
a stronger and better Hope. Ye holy and happy Souls that have learnt the new
and living Way of coming to the Father, bless him, that he has not left you to
seek all your Salvation from absolute and unpromised Goodness: Bless him that
has bound his Goodness by many a kind Promise to you in his Gospel, and sealed
it with the Blood of his own Son.

We proceed now to consider the third false or mistaken Way of coming into the
Favor of God, and that is by Self-Righteousness: For when we are made sensible
that none is innocent, and the Goodness of God in general is not sufficient
Ground enough to raise and support a solid and assured Hope, then we are ready
to offer something of our own to God, to engage this general Goodness of his on
our Side, and make our Righteousness the way to procure divine Favor,
expecting that God should exercise and express his Goodness toward us, in the
Blessings of Pardon and Salvation This Self-Righteousness may be divided into
four Sorts.

1. Penances and Mortifications, Sorrow and Regret of Soul, with all our own
fancied Atonements for Sin.

2. Works of Charity to the Poor.

3. Forms of Religious Worship.

4. Outward Reformation with Vows and Labor after better Obedience.

Let us examine each of these briefly.

1. Penances and Mortifications, and our own Remorse of Conscience and Regret
of Soul, together with many fancied Atonements for Sin: Thus the Heathens,
ancient and modern. What Tortures have some of them inflicted on themselves for
the Expiation of their own Sins, or the Sins of their Country? So great and
powerful has been their Sense of the Guilt of Sin, that large Sacrifices, and
dreadful ones too, have been proposed by some of them for this Purpose, Micah.
vi. 6, 7. Thousands of Rams, and ten thousand Rivers of Oil, and some of them
have actually offered their Firstborn for their Transgression, the Fruit of
their Body for the Sin of their Souls.

The Gentiles, when they are a little considerate, one would think, must
acknowledge God to be the Governor of the World, and that he is a great and
dreadful God, who has, in very visible Instances, sometimes manifested his
Displeasure against the Sins of Men, and revealed his Wrath from Heaven against
their Unrighteousness and Ungodliness: And under the Fear and Terror of his
Vengeance they have sometimes put on Sackcloth and lived in Ashes: They have
denied themselves the common Food of Nature, and half famished their Bodies
with Abstinence. So the Ninevites did at the Threatening of the Lord by Jonah
the Prophet. Sometimes they have banished themselves from Towns and Cities, and
all Converse with Men, into mere Deserts and Caves of the Earth, and strained
their Limbs in painful Postures, for Years together, to make Atonement for the
Sins of the People; so some of the pretended Saints in the East Indies have
done. They have put themselves in Iron Cages, with sharp Spikes, to be carried
about and wounded from Head to Foot, as some of the Bonzes in China; they have
thrown themselves under a heavy laden Chariot of their huge Images and Idols,
and been crushed to Death, as some of their holy Men in Malabar. But what has
all this availed to obtain the Favor of that God whom they have offended? Who
has required this at their Hands? And what Ground have they to think God will
accept it?

So also those of the Roman Church, who are fallen from the Doctrine that St.
Paul once wrote to the Romans, have invented various Penances, and endeavored
to come into the Favor of God by them: As though lashing themselves with
Cords, could satisfy infinite Justice for their Crimes, and wearing Sackcloth
on their Flesh could make their polluted Souls pure and acceptable to God. In
following Ages when the Priests were grown more crafty and covetous, they
taught them to come to God by Money, and to buy Pardons for Sin and Titles to
Heaven of the Pope. This was called a Commutation of Penance, and making their
Purse suffer instead of their Flesh; and thus they compounded with the Justice
of God for the Sins of their Souls. They lavish away much Silver and Gold, to
make Atonement before God for breaking his Law. Poor Attempts and hopeless
Pretenses, to remove the Displeasure of a God, and make a Way for their
favorable Access to him! There have been some austere Persons that have
separated themselves from the lawful Customs of the World, and common Comforts
of Life, in order to appease their Consciences for past Indulgence and
Sensuality, as though God and his Holiness, and his governing Wisdom and
Majesty, would be as easily satisfied as their blinded Consciences.

Others again after Sin are terrified with Fears of Death and Destruction; and
under these Impressions they seem to mourn for their Sins, and then fly to
their Repentances and Tears to save them; though perhaps their Repentance and
Regret of Conscience carries no more Hatred of Sin in it than Judas had who
hanged himself for inward Vexation and Anguish of Soul.

But if this Repentance were never so sincere, is the great God obliged to
pardon such repeated Crimes and Iniquities as ours are, merely because the
Criminal repents? Do the Princes of the Earth think it necessary to forgive
every Rebel and Traitor, because he is sorry he has been guilty of Treason and
exposed himself to Punishment? Why then should the King of Kings be bound to
let every Criminal pass without being punished, merely because he repents of
his Wickedness? It will be said perhaps, we have nothing better to offer than
our Repentance. And what then? Must a poor Rebel be always pardoned because he
has nothing to make Satisfaction to his injured Sovereign, besides his own
Tears? And yet there are too many who still will hope that their Sins are
washed away, and their Guilt atoned for, by their Sorrows and Repentances; and
some Christian Divines have expressed themselves a little too grossly and
unwarily on this Point.

O let us have a Care of such Mistakes, and bless the Lord, that he has taught
us a better Laver than our own Tears, a more powerful Atonement than any of our
Sorrows or Terrors. The Pollutions of the Soul by Sin require a better
cleansing, and Affronts to the Majesty of Heaven demand a higher Satisfaction
or Recompense, than any that we can make with our utmost Efforts of this kind.

2. Others fly to Works of Charity to the Poor, or of supposed Piety toward
God, performed either in Life or at Death. Hence arise some extraordinary
Appearances of Liberality in the World: This Hope of making some Compensation
for Sin, lays the Foundation of Churches and Hospitals: And magnificent
Structures arise upon the Earth to gain the Favor of the God of Heaven, who
has been provoked by former Iniquities. Whole Estates are sometimes given away
by old Sinners, and alienated from their natural Heirs and Possessors, even
from needy Friends and Kindred, and are devoted to religious and charitable
Uses, in order to purchase Salvation for their Souls.

If they are Protestants indeed, we can hardly suppose they have these actual
Reasonings within themselves, as to infer, that God will be so much pleased
with these Legacies, as to pardon their Sins for the sake of such a Liberality
to the Church or the Poor; this is the Popish Doctrine of Merit, which as
Protestants we all renounce. But still there is a secret working of this
Self-Righteousness in the Hearts of Multitudes: And when upon a Deathbed they
bequeath large Legacies to the Service of God, or the Relief of the Poor, they
hope to breathe out their Spirit comfortably into the Hand of God the Father,
with some Dependence on these Legacies, at least as sufficient Evidences of
their Love to God, and with confident Expectations of obtaining his Salvation.

But alas! what can a little Charity to the Poor do toward the Reconciliation
of a God to an offending Creature. Is there any Force in this Reasoning,
because I do a Kindness for a Fellow-Worm, therefore my Maker must love me, and
forgive me all Affronts against him? Or because I have given to the Service of
God, some of those worldly good things which he first bestowed upon me,
therefore he must pardon all my former Iniquities, he must receive me for ever
into his Favor, and confer upon me the Riches of Glory and the Inheritance of
the Saints in Light? How weak and ignorant are these Reasonings? And yet how
many have been ready to lay the Stress of their Hopes upon them, having nothing
else within their View to trust in?

3. Forms and Observances of religious Worship, are another vain Pillar upon
which Sinners lean and support themselves. This is a most common and powerful
Deceit. How many thousands are there, that by daily Attendance upon Solemnities
of Worship and coming up to the House of God, hope at last to come to the Arms
of the Father with Acceptance? And especially if they have practiced secret
Devotion too, in the common Rounds and Forms of it, and have frequently bowed
their Knees to God in their Retirements, their Hope has risen high; and though
they have not arrived at a thorough change of Heart, and sincere Love to God,
yet they will presume upon his Acceptance without any great Concern about the
Salvation of Jesus Christ.

But let me ask such sort of Candidates for Heaven and Happiness, whether a
formal Round of Duties and Services, without the Heart and Soul in them,
without sincere Love to God and Delight in him, can so far please the blessed
God, as to persuade him to neglect all the righteous Demands of his governing
Justice for past Crimes? Or if your Hearts are sometimes engaged in these
Solemnities, is this sufficient to cancel all former Transgressions?

Besides, if you have no Mediator, who shall introduce such a Sinner, or his
Duties, into the Presence of God with Acceptance? May he not justly drive us
with all our solemn Formalities, afar from his Seat, since we neglect the only
Hope set before us, i. e. the Name of his Son, without which no Man shall come
to be accepted of the Father. John xiv. 6. No Man comes to the Father but by
me.

4. The last thing I mention, on which some Persons are prone to depend, in
order to obtain divine Favor and Forgiveness, is a Course of outward
Reformation, and some Vows and some Endeavors after better Obedience: But I
would endeavor in these few Particulars, to discover the Vanity of all Hopes
of this kind.

(1.) Our Duties of Obedience are very imperfect: They do not in any Degree
answer the strict Demands of the Law and Justice of God; and the best of them
are so defective that they can never claim or pretend to any Merit in them,
since they do not come up to answer the Requirements of God in his general Rule
of Government.

(2.) Our Obedience of to day cannot wipe away or cancel the Crimes of
yesterday or our past Life: These Crimes stand like high and unpassable
Mountains in the way betwixt God and us: Paying a new Debt never wipes off old
Scores among Men, and why should we imagine it will do so before the Throne of
God?

(3.) Were our Duties perfect, yet it is not only a guilty, but a worthless
Creature, a mere polluted Worm performs them; and the eternal Favor of an
offended God is not to be purchased for Rebels at so cheap a rate.

(4.) It is true, it is by Duties of Worship we must draw near unto God, and by
the Acts of our Mind and Will, by Knowledge, Assent, Faith, Trust, Hope, Prayer
and Repentance, we must come to God; but it is still by and through the
Mediation and Interest of Jesus the Son, that these Acts of the Soul must be
addressed to the Father. These considered alone in themselves, are not
prescribed in my Text as the Way itself, for Christ is the Way, the Truth and
the Life: He is the only true and living Way to God: These Actions performed
with a due regard to Christ, are properly our walking in the way which God has
appointed; but if we have no regard to Christ in these Actions, we are not
walking in God's Way, nor can we raise any solid Hope that we shall arrive at
his gracious Presence, while we neglect or refuse the only Way which God has
ordained.

Perhaps some more intelligent or more conceited Hearers, may cry out here, why
are these Rudiments and plain Principles of Christianity preached to us? Surely
we know better, and understand more of the Gospel of Christ, than to make such
Discourses necessary for us to attend them.

I answer, 1. However learned some may be in these Truths, yet perhaps there
may be others coming continually into our Assemblies, who know little enough
either of the Law or Gospel; and they had need of the Doctrines of their own
Guilt, and Misery, and Danger, to be spoken in very plain and clear Language to
them, before they will hearken and stand still, and consider their own
Circumstances, and their Peril: And the Nature of Man when under the Awakenings
of Conscience, is so prone to take hold of every false and feeb^^ Refuge, and
to venture their Eternal Hopes upon them, that it is very necessary to speak
these things often, and to represent them in the clearest Light, in order to
caution Sinners against building their Hopes on the Sand, and resting all their
Expectation of the Favor of God and Happiness, upon some feeble Foundation
which will not bear them. It Is not the Wise and the Learned that I pretend to
instruct; but it is pity any poor Soul, even of the lowest Ranks of Mankind,
should abide ignorant of these important Concerns, and should perish in such a
Land of Light, and for want of Christian Knowledge.

Answ. 2. Let us search diligently our own Hearts. Have we all attained and
kept up such a due Sense of our Danger without Christ as we should have? Are we
never inclined to depend on Self-Righteousness at all? Are we never under any
Temptation to indulge this false Hope? Some pious Souls have complained of this
Temptation, and corrupt Nature is very ready in the best of Christians, to
build up some Parts of their own Righteousness as their sufficient Refuge, and
sometimes to put it in place of the perfect Mediation and Atonement of the
Blessed Jesus.

Ans. 3. However the Case be now with us, and if we have truly got the Victory
over all Temptations of this Kind, yet it is very proper to remember what once
we were, and reflect upon what false Hopes we once were ready to build on, and
to bless the Holy Spirit of Light and Grace, that has discovered our Mistakes
unto us, that has turned our Feet from every dangerous Hope, and led us to the
Father by the true and living way Christ Jesus.

Let this Thought also call us to mourn over the Souls of Men, even the
greatest Part of our Fellow Creatures, Inhabitants of this World, who are made
of the same Flesh and Blood as we are, and who, through gross Ignorance, are
ever practicing some foolish Methods of pacifying God for past Sins, and aiming
at his Favor and Happiness in such Ways as will never attain their End. O
Come, Lord Jesus, and spread thy Light and thy Truth through the dark Nations,
and scatter all the remaining Mists and Darknesses that lie upon Countries
which have only the Name of Christ, and some of the Forms of his Religion among
them. Thousands there are, even in Europe, who neither know the Gospel in
Truth, nor come to God by this Mediator: They live not by the Faith of the Son
of God, nor have just Reason, according to the Gospel, to expect divine Favor
and Forgiveness. Blessed God, enlighten the Thousands of dark and wretched
Mankind, and lead them in thine appointed Way to Happiness.

The next Essay will show us a plain and easy Account of Faith in Christ, or of
coming to God by Christ: I acknowledge, I have been sometimes uneasy and
ashamed to hear a Divine of the Protestant Church tell his People, that Faith
in Christ is a mysterious Thing, and it is not to be well known, or clearly
conceived in itself, but it may be much better conceived by its Effects,
therefore, says he, I proceed, instead of speaking of Faith itself, to give
you an Account of the Fruits and Effects of it.

As though there was any thing in the Affairs of human Life, in Reason, or in
Religion, clearer than this Notion, ( viz.) Upon a Sight and Sense of our Sins
and Dangers, and our Weakness to help ourselves, to commit ourselves into the
Hands of Christ, by an humble Act of Trust or Dependence on him, complying with
his appointed Methods of Relief in the Gospel.

It Is but as a Man sensible of his Sickness applies himself to a wise and
knowing Physician, and gives himself up to him, and trusts himself in his Hands
to relieve him, complying with the Remedies appointed in order to his Cure:
which I hope will appear very plain in the following Essay.

ESSAY V. A plain and easy Account of a Sinner's coming to GOD by JESUS CHRIST,
or of saving Faith in CHRIST JESUS.
John xiv. 6. No Man comes to the Father but by me.
INNOCENT Man in the Day of his Creation had a Liberty of drawing near to God
his Maker, and of delightful Converse with him in a more immediate manner; but
Man having fallen from God, and becoming guilty in his Person, and sinful in
his Nature, dwells in this World afar off from God; and yet sometimes would
attempt to approach him, and obtain his Favor again merely by his own Powers
and Performances; as though the Goodness of God would receive him again into
his Presence, and into his Love in the same manner as before. Sinful Mankind
have been often trying to make their way to God in and of themselves: Thence
arise those various mistaken Grounds of Hope, of which we have given an Account
in the former Discourse: But the Blessed God has sufficiently informed us in
the Word of his Gospel, that it is in vain for us to hope to draw near to God,
our offended Sovereign, without a Mediator; and there is but one Mediator of
God's Appointment between God and Man, and that is the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy
ii. 5. and No Man comes to the Father but by him, John xiv. 6.

Now in order to explain what it is for Sinners to come to God the Father by
Jesus Christ, let us consider that all saving Approaches of the Creature unto
God, depend on God's Approaches to the Creature: He first draws us by his
Grace, and then we follow. Jer. xxxi. 3. I have loved thee with an everlasting
Love, therefore with Lovingkindness have I drawn thee. 1 John iv. 19. If we
love him it is because he loved us first. If our Souls are set a moving toward
him, it is because his Heart, his Pity and his Love moved first toward us.

In the Reconciliation of God and his sinful Creatures, there must be a mutual
Approach, and a mutual Nearness; but it must be remembered, that the Sinners
coming nigh to God, is but an Echo or Answer to the merciful Voice of God
coming nigh to him: And the same Method in which we may suppose the great God
to draw near to Sinners, the same Steps should we take in drawing near to God.

It must be granted, indeed, that all the Acts of God are eternal, and his
Decrees have no Order of Succession as they are in him: The eternal Mind
conceives the Ends and Beginnings of all things at once; but there are many
Expressions in Scripture which condescend to our Frailty, and teach us to
conceive of the infinite and eternal Things of God by way of Time and
Succession, that we may obtain a fuller and clearer Understanding of them; for
no created Mind is capacious enough to grasp all the divine Decrees in one
single Thought, as that God does who formed them.

It should be observed also, that though the Actions of the Soul of Man are
generally produced in a successive Way, yet sometimes two or three of these
Acts are so swift in their Succession, and so nearly simultaneous, or at the
same Moment that they are blended together, or are so interwoven in many Cases,
that it is hard to say, which is first, and which is last: And many times also,
in one and the same Act of the Soul, there are such different Views and Designs
concurring, as may make it look like two or three distinct Actions: So
returning to God by Jesus Christ includes in it both Repentance, with all the
Acts contained therein, as well as Faith, with all its subordinate Motions: It
is Repentance as it is a Return to God; it is Faith as Jesus Christ is the
Medium of this Return. I put in this Caution here, only to show, that we are
not to expect every single Sinner that returns to God by Jesus Christ, must
have all these particular Motions of the Soul, or all these Transactions
sensibly passing through his Mind, and that in the same Order as is here
represented; yet the Representation of these Things in some rational Order, may
greatly help the Conception of the whole, and give Persons somewhat of a more
clear and more distinct Idea of it.

Let us then here take a Survey of those several Steps, whereby God may be
supposed to draw near to fallen Man, in order to his Recovery, and thereby we
shall learn what correspondent Steps Sinners must take, in order to their
coming to God.

1. The Blessed God surveying his lower Creation, beheld all Mankind as
Creatures in general fallen from his Image and his Love, and at a wide and
dreadful Distance from their Creator. Compare the XIVth Psalm 2, 3. Verses with
Romans iii. 9, 10, etc. The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the Children of
Men, to see if there were any that did understand and seek God: they are all
gone aside, they are altogether become filthy; there is none that does Good,
no, not one. This Text of the Psalmist is cited by the Apostle in Romans iii. 9,
10, etc. to prove that all Mankind is afar off from God by Nature; and
therefore I may jus^^^ use this Scripture, to prove that God beheld us in this
fallen Estate; he saw us lie under the righteous Condemnation of his broken
Law, justly exposed to Misery, and deserving his Indignation and Wrath, under a
Sentence of Death, and yet still going farther from him without his Fear or his
Love.

Now in correspondence with this View, which God has taken of the Children of
Men, in their Guilt and Misery in general; we also, in order to our Recovery,
must be brought to see ourselves guilty and miserable, we must see ourselves
destitute of the Image and the Love of God in our fallen State of Nature, if
ever we would return to him by Christ and Grace.

God, who is essentially happy in being for ever near himself, and one with
himself, has made the Happiness of his Creatures to depend on their being near
to him, and their Union with him; and he knows it is Misery enough to be afar
off from God: So must we be made deeply sensible of our Wretchedness and Misery
in the Loss of the Favor and Image of God, and in our dreadful State of
Distance and Estrangedness from him. We must behold ourselves exposed to the
Wrath of God, and under Sentence of just Condemnation and Death, because of
Sin. We must see it so as to feel it, and be affected with it at our Heart; we
must have such an Impression of it made upon our Souls, so as never to be
satisfied to continue in such a State, and be restless in seeking some way of
Recovery, as I shall show more particularly afterward.

2. The great God surveying his own glorious Perfections in himself, and the
just Rights of his Government, taking a View also of the Holiness, Justice and
Wisdom of his Law, which sinful Man had grievously dishonored and affronted by
Disobedience; he did not think it proper for himself as the Supreme Governor of
the World, to receive sinful Creatures into his Favor again, without some
signal Honor done to his broken Law and his Authority; as a sort of righteous
Recompense for the Affront and Dishonours done thereto by the Offense of his
Creatures. It became the great God to make his Law appear wise and just, by
demanding such a Reparation of the Dishonor done to it.

But he found all Mankind utterly incapable of making any such Recompense,
since all that they could do for time to come was but their known Duty to their
Creator, and none of their Sufferings short of Destruction and eternal Death
could make Atonement or Satisfaction for the Sins that were past: And in this
View of things the great God did, as it were, pronounce the Recovery of his
Creature Man, by all his own Powers and Capacities, altogether hopeless, and
that his Recovery must arise only from divine Grace.

In correspondence to this View of Things in the Eye of God, we should also set
before our own Eyes the Holiness, Justice and Wisdom of the Law of our Creator,
in order to make ourselves deeply sensible of our great Guilt, in breaking his
Law, and our Desert of Death by the Transgression of it: We should also be made
sensible in some measure of the Right of his divine Authority and Government to
demand some Satisfaction for our Offenses, before we be received into his
Favor again. The very Workings of natural Conscience under a Sense of Guilt,
seem to be an Impression from the God of Nature on the Mind of Man, that Sin
deserves Punishment, because the Law of a God broken, requires some Reparation
of Honor This is so universal in all Ages among the considerate Part of
Mankind, that the Heathens themselves, in their own Circumstances, though it a
Nemesis or vindictive Indignation of God would attend on Sinners. Acts xxviii.
4. They though it St. Paul was a Murderer, and therefore Vengeance followed him.
And this set them upon various and foolish Inventions, to make Atonement for
Sin: Nor is it to be supposed, that the Craft of Priests alone, could so easily
and so universally have imposed on the Nations their Self Punishments, and
their expensive Sacrifices of Atonement, if there had not been something in the
natural Consciences of Mankind, which told them they wanted an Atonement for
Sin. And in this Respect the Workings of natural Conscience should be
encouraged, and kept awake, and sensible of the Wrath of God, which Sin
deserves, and that God will require some Satisfaction to his injured Law and
Government.
.

On this Account we ought to reflect on ourselves as the more miserable and
helpless in our guilty State, because we are utterly incapable to make any
Atonement for our own Sins, or to repair the Dishonor that has been done to
God's holy Law and his Authority thereby. We must look upon our Circumstances
therefore as hopeless in ourselves, and acknowledge that all our Hope is in the
free Grace and Mercy of God. Every Mouth must be stopped on this Account, and
all the World lie at the Foot of God, as guilty before him, as justly exposed
to his Indignation, and unable to procure his Favor.

3. The great God saw it also impossible to bring Sinners near to himself, and
make them Partakers of his Favor and Happiness, without a Change of their
corrupt Natures, an entire Alteration of their vicious Affections, and an
universal Turn of Heart from Sin to God. In our present fallen and sinful
State, God beheld our Hearts so averse to all that is holy and divine, that we
could never be fit for Converse with him, or the Enjoyment of him as a God of
Holiness, without being renewed after his Image and Likeness, and possessed of
a sincere Love to him.

And he also beheld these guilty sinful Creatures utterly incapable of
recovering themselves to his Image by a Change of their Natures, and by a
thorough Conversion of their Hearts from Sin, and the Creature to God and
Holiness: So that this is another Obstacle in the Sight of God to our
Reconciliation, and which we of ourselves cannot surmount.

In the same manner, in order to our Recovery, we must look upon ourselves in
our fallen State, as unfit for Correspondence with God, incapable of enjoying
Happiness in his Presence, by reason of the Opposition of our Will to his
Holiness, and to our Duty, we must be sensible of the great Carnality of our
Affections cleaving to earthly Things, and to the tempting Vanities of this
Life, choosing them for our Portion and our Happiness instead of God.

And we must be acquainted also how weak and feeble all our Own Efforts are to
work this mighty and universal change of Nature in us, to form our Spirits
anew, and to rectify all the Moral Disorders in them: We must be made sensible
how incapable we are of giving our Souls a new Bent and Biass toward things
divine and heavenly, instead of that sinful Propensity which works in our
Natures, and is ever leading us astray from God and true Happiness; so that if
ever we are recovered, we must depend entirely upon the free Grace and Mercy of
God for our whole Recovery; not only to provide a Satisfaction for his own
injured Law and Authority, but also to take away the Perverseness and Obstinacy
of our Wills, and to change our vile Affections into holy and heavenly.

This is that Poverty of Spirit, that Sensibility of our own helpless State,
which is the first Foundation of the Kingdom of God within us. So our Savior
teaches, Matt. v. 3. Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom
of God. This is that Humility of Soul which the Men of Laodicea wanted, Rev.
iii. 17. When they were really great Sinners before God, they supposed
themselves rich, and increased in Goods, and wanting nothing: But before they
were recovered it was necessary they should see they were Poor and Blind, and
Wretched and Naked.

4. Though God beheld Mankind in these deplorable and helpless Circumstances,
yet he was pleased, out of his free Grace, to decree and determine, that they
should not all perish. He resolved to bring some off at least, out of their
State of Distance from him, and to restore them to his Favor, his Image, to
Holiness and Happiness. Whether this gracious Will and Design of God, be so
clearly and sufficiently discovered, to the Light of Nature, in his
providential Goodness to all the World, I will not now debate: But it is
sufficiently discovered in the Gospel, or the Book of Grace.

In correspondence with this gracious Design and Determination of the blessed
God, it is necessary that we also should have some Hope and Belief of God's
Willingness to be reconciled, or that there is Grace and Compassion with him
for returning Sinners. Heb. xi. 6. He that comes to God must believe that he
is a Rewarder of those that diligently seek him: And in this View, Belief and
Hope, we should resolve never to rest and continue in such deplorable
Circumstances: But desire and strive with all our Powers to return to God, and
never be content without obtaining his Favor and his Image, we should humbly
resolve and determine that we will not perish, but that we will return to the
great God, through the Aids and Encouragements of his Grace, in what way and
manner soever he is pleased to return unto us. In this Sense we may say that
the Kingdom of Heaven, or the Blessings of Salvation suffer Violence, as our
Savior expresses it, Matt. xi. 12. And the Violent take it by Force.

This holy Desire with some Degree of Resolution, seems to be the first Step or
Motion of the Will toward God; these are the Beginnings of true Repentance
flowing from Faith or Hope in divine Mercy; this is the first Work of a saving
Conversion, even a Restlesness of Soul in this State of Distance from God, and
under the Hope of his Mercy, a sincere Desire and holy Resolution of Heart to
return toward him, as our Portion and our everlasting Happiness. This is that
Repentance toward God, and Faith in his Mercy, which was necessary in all
Ages, and in all Nations, and under every Dispensation, in order to the
Salvation of sinful Mankind from their State of Misery, and in order to return
to God.

5. When God designed to recover Man to himself, and restore him to his Favor,
he designed also to secure a due Honor to his Government for all times to
come, and Obedience to his Authority in all his future Demands: And for this
End Man must be made, in some measure, to feel the Evil of Sin by the painful
Consequences of it, viz. Shame and Remorse of Conscience, and holy Sorrow for
his past Transgressions: And God designed that these Actings of the Soul should
have a powerful and a lasting Influence, through his Grace, to make Man hate
every Sin, and fear and avoid it, and awaken him to constant sincere Endeavors
of universal Obedience to a forgiving God for time to come.

Agreeably to this Design of God, the sinful Creature must seek to have his
Heart in some Measure, painfully affected with Shame and Sorrow, for his past
Folly and Disobedience to his Creator; and must learn hereby to hate every Sin,
and constantly avoid it, and he must endeavor after universal Compliance with
the Will of God in all future Instances of Duty. These are the natural and
necessary Operations and Attendants of all true Repentance wheresoever it is
found, and will be in greater or less Degrees, working in the Heart of every
Sinner that truly returns to God: For the great Design of God in all his
Transactions of Grace toward toward fallen Man, is to recover to himself a
peculiar People, averse to Sin and zealous of Good Works, and that under the
Motives of his pardoning Love, and the Aids of his sanctifying Grace, they walk
before him in all Holiness.

This also belongs to all the several Dispensations of the Grace of God ever
since the Fall of Man, and is required of every Creature who should return to
God.

6. In the New Testament the great God has made much plainer Discoveries of
the particular way of his return to sinful Man ( viz.) that he did not think
fit to be reconciled to Men, or bring them back again to himself, without a
Mediator There may be several Reasons why the blessed God thought fit to save
Mankind by a Mediator, and not without one, as (1) To maintain his own Honor
and the Dignity of his Majesty; for it does not seem so proper for a God of
such supreme Glory, to admit such Criminals immediately into his Favor, and
his Presence, and his Embraces, without some honorable Mediator to introduce
them. (2) To do sublime Honor to his Son Jesus Christ, who is the express
Image of his Person and his first Favorite, that as by him God made the World,
so by him Mankind should be recovered, new-created, and restored to God's
Favor and Image again. (3) To secure the Salvation of Man more effectually,
uniting all the saved Number in one unfailing and all-sufficient Head: And
therefore his own Son was chosen for this Office, as being able to undertake
all that was necessary completely to bring back Man to God.
. This was intimated in God's earliest Revelations of his Grace, when he spoke
of the Seed of the Woman, which should break the Head of the Serpent, and
destroy the Designs of the Tempter to ruin Mankind: But under the Christian
Dispensation it is much more abundantly manifested: And finding no other Person
sufficient for this Work, God chose his own Son to become a Mediator between
God and Man; even that Son of his Love, who was one with the Father, and lay in
his Bosom and had Glory with him there, before the Foundation of the World,
that Son in whom dwelt all the Fullness of the Godhead, even that Son by whom he
created the World and Mankind at first; it was by him, as a Mediator, that he
designed to recover Man from his Ruins, his Guilt and his Wretchedness.

This was the Messiah whom God promised to Abraham, who should be one of his
Posterity, and in whom all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed. This was
be whom God spoke of, and recommended by many of the Prophets, and described
under several Types and Figures in ancient Ages, that when he came he might be
better known and accepted by the World. This was he who in the Fullness of Time,
was sent to take Flesh and Blood upon him, and to become a complete Man. This
is the one and only Mediator between God and Man, even the Man Christ Jesus,
who was also one with God.

For this End it pleased the Father to furnish him with every necessary Talent
and Qualification: He anointed him with his Holy Spirit to dwell in him without
Measure; he appointed him to be born of a Woman in low Circumstances of Life,
and to grow up through all the Stages of Infancy, Childhood, and Youth, to the
Manly Age of Thirty; then he called and commissioned him to be a public
Prophet and Teacher of the Gospel, or the Way of Salvation: He set him up also
for an Example of Humility and Love toward God and Man, and of Holiness,
Submission and Patience, and universal Obedience through the Course of his Life,
and then appointed him to die as an atoneing Sacrifice for the Sins of Men: God
laid our Sins upon him, and set him forth, or fore-determin'd him to be a
Propitiation for Sin through Faith or Trust in his Blood.

This is he whom God raised from the Dead and exalted him at his right Hand, to
be an Intercessor for sinful Man there, in the Virtue of his Sacrifice, and to
be the Head of vital Influence to Men, to work Repentance and Holiness in their
Hearts, as well as to be a Prince, or Lord and Savior, to bestow Forgiveness
of Sins.

God gave him also Power to Rule and Govern all things for the Good of his
People, and ordained him to be Judge of the World at the great Day. And all
this was designed of God, that his Son, Jesus the Mediator, might answer every
Necessity, and be able to supply every Want of sinful Man, in order to his
complete Salvation.

Now in Correspondence with these Counsels of God the Father, in order to bring
fallen Man near to himself, Sinners must believe the Truth and Certainty of
God's Appointment, that they shall not come to him again without a Mediator;
and they must have a certain and well-settled Persuasion of this Divine
Constitution.

It is granted that there have been some such Thoughts among Mankind, in all
Ages: They have had some Notion of coming to God by a Mediator, from an awful
Sense of the Majesty and Holiness of God, and of their own Vileness and
Unworthiness, and their Desert of his Displeasure because of Sin. So Job, when
he had described his own Sinfulness, in the Sight of a pure and holy God, Chap.
ix. ver. 30, 31. he adds, God is not a Man as I am, that I should answer him,
and we should come together in Judgment; neither is there any Days-man betwixt
us, that might lay his Hand upon both; for Job had not a clear Light at this
time, of the great Mediator who was appointed, though it is plain he saw that he
wanted one.

So again the Israelites at mount Sinai, when they saw God in his terrible
Appearances of Thunder and Lightning, and a Voice came from the Fire, they
said, Let not God speak to us lest we die, but let Moses speak to us and we
will hear. Exodus xx. 19. they declare they wanted a Mediator.

The Heathens had their lower Deities who were supposed, even by the
Philosophers, to be Mediators between them and the supreme God.

Besides, God transacts his great Affairs with Mankind, oftentimes according to
the Language, Customs, and Manners of Men. Now it is the natural and common way
of Offenders, against a Superior, to get some Mediator to speak for them, and
bring them into Favor again.

Mankind also, in order to this Reconciliation, must have some Knowledge of
this Mediator: They must be acquainted with the most important Articles which
God has revealed concerning this great Mediator Christ Jesus.

We are called to behold him and to survey him in the Glory of his Personal
Excellencies, in his original Fitness for this Work of a Reconciler, and in the
several Offices which God has commissioned him to sustain, as just before
described. We must be made to see the blessed Jesus in the Riches of his Grace,
and his large and various Furniture for this great Undertaking: We must believe
what God has pronounced concerning him, and from the bottom of our Hearts
humbly approve of these Counsels for our Salvation. It must be the Language of
our Hearts in a way of Echo to the Appointment of God, There is none like him,
there is none like Christ, for a Reconciler of the offended God and offending
Man; he is every way a suitable Relief to our Wants, and all-sufficient to save.

We must see him as one that has made full Atonement or Satisfaction to the
Justice and Majesty of God, for the Sins of Men by his own Sufferings and Death
Though it is not necessary for every Person among the fallen Race of Adam, to
find out the real and eternal Necessity of his coming to God by a Mediator, or
that such an Atonement must needs be made for the Sins of Men, yet since God
saw it most proper to appoint this way, and to ordain his Son Jesus to be this
Mediator and this Atonement, and to reveal it in so many plain and express
Declarations of his Word, I think it may be readily agreed, that it is our
evident Duty, now we know this Gospel, to approve of this Atonement so plainly
revealed, and this Mediator, as a most reasonable Appointment, and to come near
to God by him, even by Faith in his Blood, if we would find certain Acceptance
with God.
: We must approve of him as our great Teacher, and our glorious Example; as our
High Priest to reconcile us to God by his Blood, and to make Intercession for
us at the Mercy-Seat in Heaven; as one that is able to save to the uttermost,
because he lives forever to fulfill all his Offices. We must behold him as a
Lord and Governor appointed to rule over us, and to give us Laws, and to defend
us from our Enemies: We must see him as the most proper Person to be our Head
of vital Influence, for the Communication of all Grace and Holiness to us, for
the changing of our Natures into his Father's Image and his own; and as one
that is able and willing to take Care of us through this World, and bring us
safe into the Father's Presence at last with exceeding Joy. Thus the Faith of
the Sinner eccho's to the Voice of God concerning Jesus the Savior, in a way
of Assent to what God has revealed, and in a way of humble Approbation of what
God has appointed.

7. The Great God foreseeing the Obstinacy, Corruption and Wickedness of the
Heart of Man, well knew that all this Preparation to restore Mankind to
Holiness and Happiness, might at last be ineffectual, and might all be
performed in vain, unless he took one Step further; and therefore to secure
this Salvation to many he gave them into the Hands of his Son Jesus Christ, and
committed the Care of their Salvation to him; he gave them to Christ, or
entrusted him with the Care of them, that he might fulfill his whole Commission,
and all his various Offices, in a most effectual and powerful manner with
regard to them; appointing also that this same Gospel should be preached to the
rest of Mankind, and the Offers of this Salvation should be made to them some
way or other, in various Seasons, in plainer or darker Discoveries thereof.
Therefore though the Gospel be sent to be preached to all the World in general,
and Salvation to be offered them through Jesus Christ, yet we are told often by
the Evangelist John, of those particular Persons whom the Father had given unto
Christ, that they might be his, i. e. his Seed, his Subjects, and his willing
People.

In Conformity to this great Act of the Father in committing the Souls of Men
into the Hands of Christ, we also having seen him all-sufficient for this Work,
must commit our Souls into his Hand, as one able to keep what we commit to him
until the last Day: We must resign ourselves unto him, as a glorious Undertaker
for our Salvation: We must receive him, or be willing to submit to him, in all
his appointed Offices of Prophet, Priest, King, Example, Head of Influence,
etc. that we may receive from him every thing that we stand in need of, in
order to our being brought home to God in Heaven. We must trust in him as a
Prince and Savior, exalted to give Repentance to Sinners, and Forgiveness of
Sins. We must trust in him as the great Propitiation for our Sins, our
Peacemaker, and the Procurer of our Pardon; we must live upon him as our Head
of vital Influence, to change our sinful Natures, and to work the Principles of
all Grace in us by his Holy Spirit, and to preserve them in opposition to all
our Corruptions: We must depend on what he has done and suffered for us, as
the ground of our Acceptance with God, and we must seek to him to form our
Natures so far in the Likeness of God, as to fit us for Happiness in the
Enjoyment of God for ever. We must commit the important Affairs of our Souls to
him, as one that is able to take care of them, and to carry them safely through
all the Temptations and Dangers of the present Life; and we must trust in him
to receive our departing Spirits at Death, to raise our Bodies from the Dust at
the last Day, and to make our whole Natures completely holy and happy, in the
Favor and Image of God for ever: All this belongs to his Commission which he
received from the Father.

This is that great Act of Christian Faith, Trust, Hope or Dependence, which we
are so often called to perform in the New Testament, which is foretold by the
Prophets of old, and upon which our Salvation is so much represented to depend,
in the Writings of the Evangelists and the Apostles.

8. If I were to add any thing to what has been already said, it should be
this, ( viz.) that as God the Father has appointed his Son Jesus Christ to be
the great and general Medium of our Restoration and Return to his Favor, Image
and Happiness, so he has appointed that in all our particular Addresses, and
Applications to himself, in a way of Prayer or Trust, Thanksgiving or Praise,
we should make use of the Name of his Son Jesus, as the only valuable and
worthy Foundation for our Hope of Acceptance; that so Jesus Christ the Son, as
well as the Father, may be honored and glorified throughout the whole Course
of our Religion in our way to Heaven.

And since this is the constant Design, and the express Appointment of the
Father, it is necessary that we comply therewith, in all our Addresses to God:
We must come unto the Father by him in every part of Worship: By him we must
believe, or trust in God; we must pray to the Father in his Name, we must ask
Forgiveness of our Sins for his Sake: It is by him we must offer up our
Sacrifices of Thanksgiving and Praise; and by him we must present all our
Services of Obedience, and whatsoever we do in Word or Deed, must be all in the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we may be accepted of the Father, and that
the Father may be glorified in his Son.

This is the Appointment of the blessed God, and this must be our Practice till
we come to the Fullness of this Salvation in Heaven, where we shall dwell for
ever in the Presence of God, and where we shall join with all the holy and
happy Tribes of Mankind, of every Age and Nation, in ascribing Blessing, and
Honor, and Glory, and Praise, to him that sits upon the Throne, as our
reconciled God, and to the Lamb for ever, as our glorious and successful
Mediator. Amen.

ESSAY VI. A View of the manifold Salvation of Man by JESUS CHRIST, represented
in order to reconcile Christians of different Sentiments.
INTRODUCTION.
MAnkind by Nature lies under the Ruins of the Fall; both as Guilty and as
Sinful. We are guilty in our Persons, and exposed to the divine Anger, as well
as sinful in our Natures, and ever ready to break his holy Law. Whosoever
therefore becomes our complete Savior must relieve us under both these
Distresses.

As we are guilty in the Sight of God, we are condemned in the Court of his Law
and Justice, we are liable to bear the Punishment due to our Sins, and we have
lost all Pretense of Right to the Favor of God and Eternal Life. Now our
blessed Lord Jesus Christ, who has undertaken the Work of our Salvation, is an
all-sufficient Savior in every Respect; by his Obedience, Death and
Intercession, he relieves us from the Guilt of Sin, and so delivers us from all
Obligations to the Punishments of Hell: He reconciles us to God, and gives us a
Right to Life and Salvation in the heavenly World.

As we are sinful Creatures we are ever ready to offend God afresh, and are
utterly unfit for his heavenly Presence: And Christ saves us in this Respect,
by changing our vicious Nature and Temper, sanctifying us by his Grace or Holy
Spirit, so that we may be prepared for the Enjoyment of God in heavenly Places.

In these two things the Substance of our Salvation chiefly consists: And since
these divine Affairs could not be so well understood by us, according to those
sublime Ideas by which God the Father and his Son transact them in their
Eternal Counsels and their subsequent Dispensations, therefore God has been
pleased to reveal them to us under such Ideas or Representations, and in such
Forms of Language, as are borrowed from our common Affairs in human Life; and
that not only by one Figure or Emblem, but by many Representations thereof,
that we might view them on all Sides, and have a fuller Knowledge of them, so
far as is sufficient for our present State, or necessary to our Salvation.

SECT. I. The Characters of Christ as our Deliverer from the Sinfulness of our
Natures.
First, Let us take a very brief Survey of this Matter, as our Lord Jesus
Christ delivers us from our sinful Natures, or the Power of Sin that works in
us, for he is our Sanctification as well as our Righteousness. 1 Cor. i. 30.

Our blessed Savior in this Respect, is sometimes represented as our almighty
Redeemer, who rescues us from the Power of Satan, and of our own Lusts, by the
more powerful Influences of his Spirit: He is our Sanctifier, who renews the
Image of God in us, which was lost by our first Apostasy, and this he does by
his sovereign creating Power, for we are created anew to good Works, in or by
Christ Jesus. He is sometimes set forth as our Prophet, to give us Light and
the Knowledge of God, and of the way of Salvation, by the divine Instructions
of his Gospel. He is our Example to go before us, and to mark out for us the
Path of Duty and Holiness by his own Footsteps, and to encourage our walking
therein by his Precedence, and so he is also our Forerunner to Heaven. Christ
is also our King to give us Laws and Rules of Life, and to rule in our Hearts
by giving us an Inclination to obey his Laws: By his royal Power also in his
exalted State, he subdues Sin in us, he mortifies our unruly Appetites and
Passions which are his Enemies, he brings every Power of our Nature into
Obedience and Subjection to himself. He fits us for the heavenly Kingdom, and
actually bestows upon us this final Happiness. He is also represented in
Scripture as our Vital Head, or Head of spiritual Life, and Believers are his
Members; and so his Spirit becomes the Spring of spiritual Life in us, renews
our sinful Nature, raises us from Death in Trespasses and Sins, conveys a new
and divine Life to us, and will at last, by the same Spirit, raise our Bodies
from the Dead to live forever with him.

Thus much concerning one Branch of our Salvation, ( viz.) the Recovery of our
Nature from the Sinfulness thereof, which I shall no longer insist upon here.

SECT. II. The Characters of Christ as our Deliverer from the Guilt and
Punishment of Sin.
The other Branch of our Salvation is, that which I chiefly have in View at
present, ( viz.) that which consists in the Deliverance of our Persons from the
Guilt of Sin, from Condemnation and Punishment, and in that Right to Eternal
Life which is provided and given us by our Lord Jesus Christ. There are many
Representations thereof in Scripture, borrowed from the Affairs of Men; and the
Characters which our blessed Lord sustains, together with the Respects that our
Faith and our Salvation bear to him, under these Characters, are chiefly such
as these.

I. The first and most general Character which our Lord Jesus Christ assumes,
is that of a Savior, by which Name he is most frequently called in the New
Testament. This is the very Signification of his proper Name Jesus, in the
Hebrew, Matt. i. 21. Thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his
People from their Sins. He saves or delivers us from Sin, and from all the
painful or criminal Effects and Consequences thereof: He delivers us from the
Wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. i. ult. he saves us by withholding the divine Anger
from us, and taking away every thing that provoked it, or might provoke it.

Salvation is the natural Word to express the Blessings we receive from Christ,
as he is our Savior, i. e. Salvation from the Guilt of Sin and Punishment
thereof, partly in this World, and chiefly in the World to come.

Faith It Is granted that the Word Faith in Christ, in its most strict and
proper Sense, signifies a Trust in him, according to the several Discoveries
made of him in hte Gospel: But if taken in its most large and general Sense, as
it implies the Address or Application of a Sinner to Jesus Christ for
Salvation, it includes in it those various Actions of the Soul which are
Attendants on this Trusting, either with it, before it, or after it, as many
Scriptures sufficiently manifest.
gives us a special Interest in these Blessings, by choosing him or receiving
him as our Savior, by looking to him from the Ends of the Earth, from the
Borders of Hell, that we may be saved, Isa. xlv. by calling upon the Name of
the Lord, that we may be saved, Romans x. and by yielding Obedience to him; So
Faith in a large Sense may be represented, for Heb. v. 9. He is the Author of
Eternal Salvation to them that obey him, or accept of all the Blessings of
Salvation in his own appointed way.

II. the next Title which is given to our Lord Jesus, on this Account, is a
Mediator, to make Peace between an offended God and offending Man, 1 Timothy ii.
5. There is one God and one Mediator between God and Man, even the Man Christ
Jesus. He is that Days-Man as Job speaks, Chap. ix. 33. that great Reconciler,
that Umpire or Person who can argue for us with the blessed God, who is able to
lay his Hand upon both, to come between God and Man, and to remove this
dreadful difference betwixt them. And this he did by all those Methods which
God has appointed in the Covenant of Redemption made with his Son Jesus Christ,
i. e. by his Incarnation, his Obedience, his Sufferings, his Death, his
Intercession, etc.

Our Salvation under this Character is called Peace, Romans v. 1. Jesus Christ
himself, for this Reason, is called our Peace or Peacemaker, Ephesians. ii. 24. and
Isai. xxvii. 5. where a Sinner is represented as taking hold of the Strength or
Arm of the Lord, in order to make Peace with him. It is called Reconciliation
to God, 2 Cor. v. 18. and the Gospel is called the Word of Reconciliation: And
let it be observed, that our Mediator not only takes away the Difference
between God and Man, but has also proceeded so far as to obtain an Interest in
the Love and Favor of God forever, instead of his former Wrath, and
Displeasure, and Condemnation.

Faith applies this Salvation to us, or secures to us an Interest therein, by
our humble Acceptance of Jesus Christ for such a Mediator as God has proposed
him in his Word. Now this Acceptance of him as our Mediator, implies in it an
earnest Desire of Reconciliation to God by him, as St. Paul beseeches the
Corinthians to be willing to be reconciled: It is an inward and hearty
Approbation of what Christ has done, and what he does for our Reconciliation in
his mediatorial Offices, attended with sincere Repentance for past Offenses,
and a Submission to God for Time to come, which is necessarily, and in the very
Nature of Things required of all that would be reconciled to God, by the
Mediation of Christ, The personal Ministry of our Lord Jesus Christ, was Repent
and believe the Gospel, Mark i. 5. The Message with which he sent his Apostles
to the Jews was the same, Mark vi. 12. Luke ix. 6. and the Business of St. Paul
among the Gentiles, was to testify to them Repentance toward God, and Faith in
our Lord Jesus. Acts xx. 21.
and hereby we become Partakers of those Blessings of Pardon, Peace and Grace,
which are procured by our great Mediator.

III. Christ is set forth as our High Priest in the New Testament, as he was
typified under that Character in the Old Testament; and especially in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. iv. viii. and ix. Now in fulfilling this Office,
he offered a Sacrifice acceptable to God upon Earth, even a Sacrifice of
Atonement, or Propitiation by his own Blood, and he ascended to Heaven to
present it there before the Throne of God, Heb. viii. 3. and ix. 12, 22, 24. He
went thither, not without Blood, to appear for us in the Presence of God, and
to intercede for us in the Virtue of his Sacrifice, Chap. vii. 25. which, in
the Language of Scripture, is represented as carrying his Blood into Heaven,
and as it were appearing with it there before the Throne of God: all which was
shadowed out by the High Priest carrying the Blood of the Sacrifice into the
Holy of Holies, and sprinkling it there at the Mercy-^eat.

Our Salvation under this Character is called also Peace, Pardon or Remission
of Sins, Reconciliation and eternal Redemption, and the Promise of the eternal
Inheritance. Heb. ix. 12, 15.

Faith in^itles us to the saving Benefits of the Priesthood of Christ by the
Acceptance of him, as our high Pr^^st and Intercessor, to make our Peace with
God, by appearing before God for us in the Virtue of his Sacrifice, and making
Intercession for us there. Or Faith may be represented as our coming to God the
Father by Jesus Christ, as our high Priest, or applying to the Throne of Grace
for Mercy under the Umbrage and Encouragement of Jesus our High Priest, who is
gone thither for us, Heb. iv. 14 -- 16.

IV. Our Lord Jesus Christ is described not only as our High Priest, but he
himself was also the very Sacrifice of Propitiation or A^^^^ment, to take away
our Sins, Heb. ix. 12, 26. He offered himself up to God for us as a Sacrifice,
Ephesians. v. 2. and his Blood was shed for the Remission of our Sins, as in the
Words of the Institution of the Lord's Supper, recited by the several
Evangelists, and by St. Paul, 1 Cor. xi. Isa. liii. 16. God the Father was
pleased to make his Soul an Offering for Sin.

Our Salvation this way has the same Names as under the former Head, viz. the
washing away our Sins by his Blood, Rev. i. 5. The Forgiveness of Sin,
Reconciliation to God, etc.

Our Faith is called Faith or Trust in his Blood as our Propitiation, Romans iii.
24. It is a Dependence on the Virtue and Efficacy of this Blood of Christ, for
the procuring our Pardon: It is a sort of Confession of our Sins over the Head
of the Sacrifice which was an ancient Ceremony in the Levitical Law, sometimes
performed by the Offender, and sometimes by the Priest, whereby Sins were
transferred to the Sacrifice who was to suffer for them, either by being slain,
or by being sent into the Land of Separation and Destruction, Lev. i. 4. and
iii. 13. and v. 6. and xvi. 21. It is as it were a putting our guilty Souls
under the sprinkling of this atoning Blood, that we may be cleansed from every
Defilement; and it does, as it were, present to God the Father, that Blood on
which our Hope is placed.

V. Christ is yet farther represented to us as an Advocate, which Idea is a
very different thing from his Intercession as a High Priest. 1 John ii. 2. If
any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous.
The proper Design of an High Priest is to transact Affairs between God and Man,
for Reconciliation and Divine Favor, etc. An Advocate is a Person appointed
and chosen to plead before a Court of Justice against a Charge or Accusation,
and by his Pleading to bring off his Client with Honor, or to defend one who
is charged with a Crime, from the Condemnation and Death which might be due to
it. So our Lord Jesus Christ, our Advocate, pleads against the Charges which
the Law of God, or which Satan, our Adversary, may bring against us; not by
pretending that we are not guilty, but by pleading the Atonement made by his
Blood for our Sins, by pleading our Pardon in the Court of Heaven, and by
pleading his own Righteousness, as the Foundation of our Hope; and therefore as
the Apostle in this very Text calls him Jesus Christ the Righteous, in Rev.
xii. 10, 11. Satan is represented as accusing the Saints Day and Night before
God. Jesus Christ is their Advocate, representing his own Blood, and in this
Sense they are said to cast down the Accuser by the Blood of the Lamb, which
pleads and speaks better Things than the Blood of Abel. i. e. it pleads for
Mercy, whereas the Blood of Abel pleaded for Vengeance.

Our Salvation, in this Sense, is called Freedom from Guilt, Absolution or
Acquitment from the Penalty, and a Vindication of Christians from the Charge of
Sin, and the Condemnation thereof, which is obtained by the prevailing Power
and Interest which Jesus Christ our Advocate has at the Court of Heaven, and by
representing before the Throne of God our Pardon purchased by his Blood, so
that Satan has no further Charge against us.

By Faith we commit our Case and Circumstances to this great Advocate, and we
become his Clients, Dependants upon him; and in this Sense Faith may be said to
cast down our Accuser by the Blood of the Lamb, by trusting in this great and
blessed Advocate, or resigning the important Concerns of our Souls to his Care
and Faithfulness, to be transacted by him before the Bar of God in Heaven.

VI. Our Lord Jesus Christ is set forth as our Sponsor or Surety, Heb. vii. 22.
Jesus was made a Surety of a better Testament, i. e. the new Covenant of Grace,
as manifested in the Gospel. A Surety is properly one, who undertakes for
another to do or suffer something for him, or who undertakes that this other
Person shall do such Services, or suffer such Penalties, or enjoy such
Privileges. So our Lord Jesus Christ has undertaken to answer the Demands of
the Law of God for us who had broken it, to pay a Compensation for our
Violations of the Law, and to make Peace betwixt God and us. He has also
undertaken, that all his People shall be sanctified and brought safely to the
heavenly World. So Judah became a Surety to his Father Jacob for his Brother
Benjamin, whom he took with him into Egypt. Genesis xliii. 9. I will be Surety for
him; of mine Hands shall thou require him. Reuben in the foregoing Chapter was
in like manner a Sponsor for him, v. 37. Deliver him into my Hands, and I will
bring him to thee again: and Joseph bound Simeon in Egypt as a Surety for the
Return of his Brethren, and Benjamin with them, v. 19, 36.

Now as Christ was our Surety, so our Salvation may be called a Freedom from
our Obligation to the Penal Law of God, which our Lord Jesus took upon himself
to answer, Romans vii. 6. We are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein
we were held: Gal. iii. 13. Christ has redeemed us, or freed us from the Curse
of the Law, being made a Curse for us. Nor is this Obligation of Christ as a
Sponsor, quite fulfilled till he has brought us all to Heaven, and can say to
his Father, Lord, here am I, and the Children which thou have given me, as Heb.
ii. 13. and shall present us before the Throne without Spot or Blemish, Jude
24, etc. and Ephesians. v. 25, 26, 27.

Now Faith gives us an Interest in all that Jesus Christ has done as our
Sponsor by trusting ourselves with him entirely under that Character, and
accepting him as the Surety of this everlasting Covenant.

VII. Christ is exhibited in Scripture as the second Adam, as a common Head of
his People, as a public Person, and their Representative. This has some
Difference in it from the former Character, though in many respects they agree
and coincide. Adam was the Head of all his Offspring, a common Person and
Representative for them, but not so properly their Surety in every Sense.
Christ is what Adam was, Romans v. 14. 1 Cor. xv. 47. Christ is not a common
Person or Representative in his Intercession or his Advocateship, though he is
properly a Surety therein, for he has undertaken as a Surety for us, to Plead
in the Court of Heaven, and to bring us off with Safety and Honor: But in his
Obedience, in his Death, and his Appearance for us in Heaven, he is our common
Head and Representative.

Our Salvation in this Sense, may be called the Glory of God. Romans v. 2. We
rejoice in hope of the Glory of God: And it may be called Eternal Life. Both
these describe the Happiness which was promised to Man upon his perfect
Obedience to the Law at first. Romans ii. 10. and iii. 23. By Sin we are fallen
short of the Glory of God; but we obtain by Jesus Christ Salvation with eternal
Glory. In this Sense Christ is our Forerunner into Heaven, and he, as our
public Representative, appears there for us, and has taken up Places or
Mansions in our Name, Heb. vi. last. We shall sit on his Thrones. Rev. iii. 21.
It Is also called an Inheritance, and we are Heirs of God and joint Heirs with
Christ, Romans viii. 17. as we are one with him.

Faith accepts of Christ as our common Head, or great Representative, and gives
us an Interest in this Salvation, by uniting us to Christ, and making us one
with him. Christ is the Original Son of God, and we are also the Sons of God by
Faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. iii. 26. and thus we are Coheirs with Christ, he as
the Head, and we as the Members; and Faith saves us as it has been called the
Bond of Union between Christ and us. When we become Believers in Christ,
whatever was done to Christ as a Head or a common Person, is then applied to
us, either in the Right to it, or in the Possession of it. Christ was justified
from Sin, i. e. from all imputed Sin, at his Resurrection, and when we become
the Seed of Christ by Regeneration through Faith, we are justified in him, much
in the same manner as we were condemned in Adam, i. e. as soon as we become the
Sons of Adam by a natural Birth: As there is no new actual and particular
Sentence of Condemnation past upon us at our Birth, but we fall under the
general Condemnation, when we become the Sons of Adam; so there is no new Act
of Justification passed by God upon the Creature at his Regeneration or
Believing, but the Word of God, which is his Sentence, pronounces us justified
at our Faith, or our New Birth; and our Condemnation is taken away as soon as
we are in Christ. Romans viii. 1. There is no Condemnation now to them that are
in Christ Jesus.

VIII. Another Character which Christ sustains, is that of a Redeemer, and it
is generally represented, both in the Scripture and by our Divines, as one who
redeems us both by Power and by Price. Now the Redemption of us by his powerful
Grace out of the Slavery of Satan, and our own Lusts, and our Rescue from the
Temptations of this World, belong rather to the other Part of this Salvation,
wherein his sanctifying Influences are necessary and requisite: But when Christ
is considered as a Redeemer by Price, he frees us by the Price of his own Blood
as a Ransom, chiefly from the Hands of the vindictive Justice of God, and from
the Bonds of the Guilt of Sin and Condemnation, whereby we are held as Breakers
of the Law of God. Yet our Redemption from the Slavery of Sin and Satan may be
also attributed to the Blood of Christ which purchased sanctifying Grace for
us. The Name of a Redeemer is very applicable to both Parts of our Salvation.
So he gave his Life a Ransom for many. Matthew. xx. 28. He redeemed us from the
Curse of the law, by being made a Curse for us, Gal. iii. 13. He redeemed us
also by his precious Blood as of a Lamb without Blemish or Spot from our vain
Conversation or Slavery to Sin, 1 Pet. i. 18, 19. and Thou art worthy, for thou
^^st slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy Blood, Rev. v. 9.

Salvation in this Respect is called Redemption, Romans iii. 24. Eternal
Redemption, Heb. ix. 12. and we are said to be bought with a Price, 1 Cor. vi.
20. and therefore we are the Lord's and not our own.

Faith applies this Benefit to us by our accepting the Lord Jesus Christ under
this Character as a Redeems of our Persons from this Condemnation, or as our
great Friend who ransomed our Souls from Imprisonment under the Bonds of the
condemning Law and Justice of God, who purchased and ransomed us from our
Captivity, Bonds and Miseries in every Sense.

IX. To sum up all other Characters, I add in the last Place, Christ is
represented as our great Friend and Benefactor, one who came down from Heaven
to seek and to save lost Sinners here on Earth: He made a visit to our World to
take special Notice of all our Wants, in order to relieve them all, and to do,
and to procure for us whatsoever we stood in need of, in order to our Eternal
Happiness. Under this Character he first instructed or taught us the Doctrine
of our lost Estate, and acquainted us with the Methods of his Salvation; he
procured or purchased for us, by his Death, not only pardon of Sin and future
Blessedness, but every Grace and every Blessing which was necessary, in order
to our full Possession of Heaven, and no greater Friendship can any Man show to
another, than to lay down his Life for him, John xv. 13.

Under this View Salvation or Eternal Life is called the Gift of God by Jesus
Christ, Romans vi. 23. Abundance of Grace and the Gift of Righteousness in order
to reign in Life, Romans v. 17. He bought again for us our forfeited Inheritance
in Heaven.

Observe this Notion of Christ as a Benefactor respects his doing every
Kindness, and procuring or purchasing every Blessing for us, and bestowing it
upon us; whereas in the Character of a Redeemer he bought or purchased our
Persons from Imprisonment and Condemnation.

Faith gives us an Interest in these Blessings of Christ as a Benefactor, when
it comes to him, and seeks them at his Hand, when it humbly depends upon Christ
for them, and trusts in him to bestow them. Thus our Faith is like a Hand,
whereby we receive these Blessings which Christ has to bestow, or like the Feet
whereby we come or fly to Christ to partake of them; or it may be liken'd to
the Voice of Petition, whereby we seek them at his Hands, and call upon the
Lord to bestow them.

Thus I have briefly run through many of the Scriptural Characters or Offices,
whereby our Lord Jesus Christ is represented to us, whereby our Salvation is
set forth, and whereby our Faith is described as the appointed Means of our
Interest in them. It Is evident enough they often run into one another, nor did
the Gospel ever design that these several Representations of Christ, of his
Salvation and of our Faith, should be kept so separate by exact logical Forms
of Expression, as to please Scholastic Readers only; but that plain sincere
Souls under a Sense of Guilt and Condemnation, might see and view them on every
Side, and might find something in Christ, suited to their Sensation of their
own Wants and Miseries, and apply themselves to him for Relief; but this shall
be the Subject of the next Section.

SECT. III. The Reasons why Christ and his Salvation may be represented to us
under these various Characters.
The Great God was pleased to send his own Son Jesus Christ to save us by these
various Characters or Offices, and to represent him to us under so many
Relations, Emblems or Figures borrowed from the Things of Men, perhaps for such
Reasons as these.

Reason 1. That those Attributes of the Divine Nature, viz. his Wisdom, his
Power, his Justice, his Mercy, his Faithfulness, etc. which could not have so
full an Illustration one way, or under one Expression or Metaphor, might have
another. God is said to be just and kind, and faithful in the Forgiveness of
our Sins through the Blood of Christ. He is just in bestowing this Blessing
upon us, since Christ has become our Sacrifice of Atonement, and made full
Satisfaction for our Offenses: He is kind or merciful in appointing such a
Forgiveness for us, and sending his own Son to purchase or procure it: He is
faithful in fulfilling his Promise made to Jesus Christ, in the Covenant of
Redemption, and bestowing upon us what Christ our Benefactor has purchased for
us. His Wisdom also and his Goodness are rendered more conspicuous to us in
contriving and effecting our Salvation, in assuring it to us, and bestowing it
upon us in so many different ways and manners.

Reason 2. That our Lord Jesus Christ might be the better known by us, and the
more endeared to us, by sustaining these various Offices and Relations; and
that we might be able to borrow some further Ideas, and some clearer Knowledge
of these divine and important things of our Salvation, from many of the common
Affairs and Occurrences of Life. When the blessed God has taken so much care to
provide such a Savior for us, and such as illustrious Salvation, he is very
desirous that we should view it on all Sides, and be more thoroughly acquainted
with it, as well as with that blessed Person by whom he prepares and bestows it.

Reason 3. That all sorts of Persons, of whatsoever Temper or Capacity,
whatsoever Want or Difficulty, they are in, might have wherewith to suit them
and their Circumstances; that every Son and Daughter of Adam, in their various
Ranks of Life, might all learn the way to receive this Savior, and lay hold on
this Salvation of Christ, and that he might render it easy and familiar to us
by so many common Similitudes, or Parallels drawn from the things of common
Life: And thus those who know not how to apply themselves to Christ one way,
might do it another.

As for Instance, some poor feeble Creatures who are convinced of Sin, and
ready to perish, perhaps may not know how to apply or address themselves to
Christ, as a Surety or as a Sacrifice, or as a Redeemer, etc. for these things
are done already, and in a great measure were finished long ago; but the
meanest and poorest Creatures can easily learn how to apply to Christ as a
Mediator, to do something for them that is yet to be done, to reconcile them to
God, and to bring them into his Presence with Comfort; or as an High Priest of
Intercession, or as an Advocate to plead for them before the Throne of God, and
their Faith can wait on Christ, can call upon him, and trust in him to make
Intercession for them in the Virtue of his Blood, or to present his Blood
before the Father as an Atonement for their Sins, to appear before God for them
as their great Friend in Heaven, to become their Mediator, Peacemaker or
Reconciler, to bring them into the Favor of God.

Those who are Infants, or Babes in Christ, may thus be nourished by the
sincere Milk of the Word, and with Diet fitted for their feeble Capacity, when
they are not sufficiently grown to bear strong Meat, as the Apostle expresses
himself, Heb. v. 12, -- 14. whereas those who are well grown Christians, and,
in the Sense of the Apostle, may be called perfect, may know better how to
converse with Christ as their great Representative, they may know and rejoice
in him, and in the Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of his
Suffering, and be made conformable unto his Death; but those that are in a
lower Form may not have their Apprehensions so well cleared, and so much raised
at present, although afterward God may reveal also these things unto them,
Phil. iii. 10, 15.

Reason 4. Christ is set forth under these various Characters, that as our
Understanding in the Things of Religion, and in the Graces and Glories of
Christ increases, we might take the faster hold of Christ, if I might so
express it, and that we might have more various Exercises of our Faith, and
more numerous Evidences of the Truth of our Faith, and secure to ourselves more
solid ground of Hope, when we can view him in all these Relations, and our
Faith can receive or lay hold of him under all these Forms. Thus we may hereby
obtain double and treble Confirmation of our Faith and Comfort, Heb. vi. 17,
18. God gives us both his Promise and his Oath, to secure Salvation to us; he
swears, in order to confirm what he had promised, that by several immutable
things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we might have strong
Consolation, who have fled to lay hold of the Hope set before us.

Thus has God been pleased also to do in the various Representations he has
made of Christ Jesus our Savior, that our Meditations and Prayers, our Hopes
and Dependencies, and indeed all the pious Exercises of our Souls toward
Christ, might have a rich Variety for our Entertainment, Support and Joy; and
therefore the Apostles have written these things unto the Disciples of Christ,
that their Joy might be full. 1 John i. 4.

I add 5thly, another Reason is, that God our Father and Jesus Christ out
Savior might have the larger Revenues of Glory from us, and receive Honor
from our Hands in a rich Variety; that we might have our Thank-Offerings rising
up to God and the Lamb, in many Forms of Adoration and Expression; that we
might bless our dear Redeemer, rejoice in him, and do Honor to his Name under
all those happy Representations of his Grace and Glory, in which he has set
himself before us in the Gospel.

The last Reason I will add, shall be this: That in all Ages the Followers of
Christ might have a more clear and easy Relief, from those Difficulties and
Controversies which may attend these great Doctrines of our Salvation, and
which might darken and perplex the Way whereby God has appointed us to be made
Partakers of this Blessing.

SECT. IV. The Difficulties which are relieved by this various Representation
of the Salvation of Christ.
Since God has set forth our blessed Savior with his Salvation, and our Faith
which interests us therein, under so many various Characters and Expressions,
the following Difficulties will be very much relieved hereby, and several
Controversies abolished.

1. A Christian who reads these things in his Bible, cannot say that Christ has
saved us in this particular manner, and therefore he did not save us in the
other; as for Instance,

When we read or assert that Christ was put to Death for us, as a Sacrifice for
our Sins, we cannot say, therefore he did not save us as a High Priest: Or when
we read or assert that he saved us as our High Priest, we cannot say, therefore
he was not a Sacrifice; for the Scriptures assure us, Christ himself is both
the High Priest and the Sacrifice also, Ephesians. v. 2. Christ has given himself
for us as an Offering and Sacrifice to God.

Again, One Christian will perhaps be ready to maintain, that Christ saves us
as a great Friend and Benefactor, who has, by the Price of his Blood, purchased
the Blessings of Grace and Glory for us, and bestows them upon us; another may
choose to fix his Eye more upon Christ as a Redeemer, and say he has bought or
purchased our Persons from the Hands of divine Justice, or he has redeemed us
from the Curse of the Law, and from the Bonds wherein we, as Criminals, were
held by the Law of God: But neither of them should dare to say, he bought or
purchased these Blessings for us, and therefore he did not purchase our
Persons; for he has done both these under different Characters.

Yet further, one Christian may delight more to fix his Eye and Hope on Christ,
as a Surety or Representative of his Elect, or of those whom he certainly and
finally saves, and on that account he suffered Death particularly in their room
and stead, and secured to them certain Deliverance and Salvation; yet he cannot
therefore affirm, that Christ did not, in any Sense, die for all Men, as a
general Friend of Man, or suffer Death for their Good; nor can he say, that the
Benefits of his Death do not any way reach to all Mankind. Another perhaps will
say, since all are dead, he died for all as a common Mediator betwixt God and
Man, or as a general Benefactor to procure conditional Salvation for all Men,
and offer it to them if they are willing to come to him and receive it; but he
cannot say, that he was not a proper Surety, or Representative of his Elect,
vhereby he has secured certain Salvation to them only: For as I have shown in
former Papers, that he by his Righteousness and Death has directly and
absolutely procured this Salvation for his Elect, as their Head and
Representative, but yet he has also procured Salvation, with all the Glories of
it, conditionally, for the rest of Mankind, upon which Foundation these
Blessings are offered to all Men in the Gospel.

2. There is another sort of Difficulty from which these various
Representations of the Salvation of Christ may deliver and relieve us, ( viz.)
The Actions or the Sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, have not precisely the
same Relation, Character or Effect, with regard to one of his Offices, as they
have with regard to another; and therefore what is pronounced safely, with
regard to the Death of Christ under one Character, cannot be with Safety
pronounced concerning it under another. As for Example,

When so glorious and illustrious a Person as Jesus Christ appears as our
Friend and Benefactor, he paid so sublime a Price by his Death and Sufferings,
as in a strict Sense to satisfy or make full Recompense for all our Violations
of the Law of God, and to merit Pardon and Eternal Life at the Hand of God for
us: But when we consider him merely as our Representative, or our Surety, and
to answer what the Law demanded of us, he cannot be so properly said to merit
our Pardon, or to make full and abundant Recompense to the Justice of God for
our Offenses; for this might lead or encourage Persons to infer, that we
ourselves have satisfied God, or made Recompense to him in the Person of
Christ, or that we have merited our Pardon and our Salvation, because what he
did entirely as our Representative, we may in some sort be esteemed to have
done in and by him.

Again, the Death of Christ as a Surety and the second Adam was his suffering
of the Curse of the Law, and the Penalty thereof in our stead, which we had
incurred; and in this View his Death and his Dereliction, or being forsaken of
the Father, was the Idem, or Same, which Sinners should have suffered; though in
other Respects, and when we consider him as a glorious Mediator, or
super-eminent Benefactor, then he appears with all the Dignity of his
indwelling Godhead, and in this Sense he paid a Price of superior Value, his
Death is the Tantundem; and more, he makes an abundant Compensation for Sin,
and a Satisfaction to the Demands of the Law, and honors the Justice of God
more than our everlasting Punishment could do, and hereby he merits for us
those Blessings which are above all our Reach, or Pretenses, or Obligations to
procure or merit for ourselves.

Again, as he was a Redeemer, his Death is a Price paid for our Souls to Divine
Justice, in order to release us from the Bonds of Condemnation: But his Death
as a Benefactor, may be rather considered as a Price for the Blessings which he
purchased for us, and of which we are made Partakers through him.

3. There are other Difficulties which are started among the several
Controversies of Christians with regard to our Faith, and the way and manner
whereby this Faith interests us in Christ and his Salvation: And since Christ
has sustained so many Characters and Offices, and stands in so many Relations
to us, our Faith is exercised toward him in a Correspondency to each of these
Relations and Characters; and therefore when we read or assert that our Faith
saves us in this way, or under this Logical Relation, we dare not therefore
assert, that it cannot save us in any other way, or under another Logical
Relation. I would endeavor to make this thing a little more clear, because
there have many Controversies arisen upon this Head.

Let us then briefly recollect or take a short Survey of the several
Representations which are given us of Faith in Christ, according to these
different Characters of our blessed Savior.

Faith in its most general Sense, Nature and Design, as it refers to Jesus
Christ, is the Application or Address of the Soul to Christ, or to God by him,
under any or all these Characters, whereby he and his Salvation are set forth
in Scripture. Now these Characters being so very different and various, require
different manners of Address to him, which are represented in Scripture, which
perhaps may be all included in Faith taken in its largest Sense, together with
those necessary Acts of the Soul which must accompany, attend, or follow it.

Particularly then Faith is sometimes represented by believing his Gospel, Mark
i. 15. Repent and believe the Gospel: But here it is to be supposed, that all
the proper and sanctifying Effects of this Faith must attend it, and it must
not rest in a mere Assent.

It Is a Knowledge of Christ, John xvii. 3. This is Life Eternal, that they
might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Isai.
liii. 11. By his Knowledge, or the Knowledge of him, shall he justify many: And
here I might add, that this our Knowledge requires a correspondent Practice,
otherwise it will be of no more avail toward Salvation, than the Knowledge of
Devils, who believe and tremble.

It Is a Believing in Christ, which perhaps ought rather to be rendered Trusting
in Christ. Isai. ii. 10. compared with Romans xv. 12. In him shall the Gentiles
trust, 2 Timothy i. 12. I know whom I have believed, or trusted, Ephesians. i. 12, 13.
who first trusted in Christ, or hoped in him, as in the Original.

Believing in his Name, John i. 12. To them gave he Power to become the Sons of
God, even to as many as believed on his Name.

Seeking to him, Isai. xi. 10. To him shall the Gentiles seek.

Receiving Christ, John i. 12. To as many as received him, etc. Coloss. ii. 6.
As you have received Christ, so walk in him.

Laying hold of Christ, Isai. xxvii. 5. Let him take hold of my Strength that
he may make Peace with me. Heb. vi. 18. Those who have fled for Refuge to lay
hold of the Hope set before them.

Hearing of Christ or hearkening to him, Luke ix. 35. This is my beloved Son,
hear ye him, or hearken unto him.

Calling upon Christ, Romans x. 12, 13. Whosoever shall call on the Name of the
Lord shall be saved.

Coming unto Christ, Matt. xi. 28. Come unto me all ye that Labor, etc. John
v. 40. Ye will not come unto me that ye may have Life.

Flying to him for Refuge, Heb. vi. 18. as before.

Looking unto Christ, or beholding him, Isai. xiv. 25. Look unto me all ye Ends
of the Earth and be saved. Isai. lxv. 1. I said, behold me, behold me, to a
Nation not called by my Name.

Obeying Christ, Heb. v. 9. He became the Author of Eternal Salvation to them
that obey him.

Believing in God through Christ, 1 Pet. i. 21. Who by him do believe in God.

Coming to God by Christ, John xiv. 6. No Man comes to the Father but by me.

Thus you see Faith, together with its various Concomitants, or consequent
Exercises of Soul, is represented as our Address or Application to Christ for
Salvation by and with almost all the Senses or Powers of Nature: It Is looking
to him with the Eye, it is hearkening to him with the Ear, it is receiving or
laying hold of him with the Hand, it is coming to him with the Feet, it is
Knowledge of him in the Head, trust in him with the Heart, calling upon him
with the Tongue, and obeying him with all the Powers of Soul and Body.

Now it is well known, that there have been great Disputes about the particular
Influence which this Acts of Faith has, in order to interest us in the
Salvation of Christ: And here I will readily grant, that the Word Faith
primarily and chiefly implies such a Knowledge of Christ, such a Belief of his
Gospel, such a Sense of our Wants, and his Sufficiency to supply them, as leads
the Soul to receive him under any of those Characters in which the Gospel sets
him forth, and more particularly to trust in him for this Salvation It may be
observed here, that almost every Character or Action, whereby Faith in Christ
is represented in Scripture, carries in it the Notion of Trust, Hope or
Dependence, so that the original and most proper Sense of the Word Faith is
still maintained, and every Sinner who sincerely applies himself to Christ for
Salvation, does certainly put forth an Act of Trust or Hope in him, though he
may not always so evidently and distinctly apprehend and judge of the inward
Acts of his own Soul, or distinguish them so exactly.
: But there are many poor Souls who have learnt sincerely to address themselves
to our Lord Jesus Christ, by one or two of these Characters and Representations
of Faith, but were never carried on so far as explicitly to make an Address to
Christ under all his distinct Relations, or to perform every one of these
Actions in their Addresses to Christ: And can I suppose where the Soul is very
sincere in its Desires of the whole Salvation of Christ, both in the Holiness
and the Happiness of it, and seeks it from him, that such Souls shall be
excluded, because they have not well learnt all the Metaphors and Figures under
which these sacred Things are exhibited in the Gospel?

Again, on the other hand, if one should say, Faith saves us as it is an Eye to
look to Christ that we may be saved, he cannot thence infer it does not save us
as an Ear to hearken to him, as an Hand to lay hold of him, or as a Tongue to
call upon him, or a Heart to trust in him.

Again, if another should say, Faith saves us as an Instrument Perhaps there
have been no greater Quarrels upon this Subject than amongst those who have
maintained that Faith saves us as it is an Instrument, whereby we receive
Christ and his Righteousness, and those who assert it is a Condition upon which
Christ has appointed us to be interested in his Blessings: And though I think
they may both be true, according to the Representation I have made in this and
other of these Essays; yet we have no great Reason to be fond of either of
these Terms, especially when they are made a Matter of Controversy, because
they are neither of them the Expressions of Scripture, which is our supreme
Rule of Instruction in the Matters of our Salvation.
to receive Christ, and his Righteousness and Grace, he cannot argue that it
does not save us, as it is a Condition, or a Term of our being accepted of God
through him; or if another should say, Faith saves us, as it is a laying hold of
his Person, or as a Bond of Union between Christ and us, yet he cannot argue,
therefore Faith does not save us, as it is a Looking or Seeking to him from
afar off, or as it is a Calling upon the Name of the Lord.

God has been pleased in many Ways to manifest these most important Things of
our Salvation, and revealed them to us in a variety of human Expressions,
Similitudes, Actions and Relations, that the poorest and the weakest Christian
might have Support and Encouragement for his Hope.

Conclusion: It Is confessed, that these Thoughts are not sufficiently digested
into perfect Form, nor put together with all that Accuracy as Theological
Controversies require; but my Sense and Meaning in them is pretty obvious and
evident: Perhaps this Design might be more improved and promoted much farther
by a wiser Head, and a better Pen; and it might assist the Solution of many
Difficulties, and relieve the Quarrels and Contentions of different Parties to
a greater degree; for it is evident, that the Characters which our Blessed Lord
sustains, and the Exercises of our Faith on him are very various, and we are
made Partakers of this Salvation, perhaps as many ways as our Acts of Faith
bear different Respects to the several blessed Characters and Offices which
Christ sustains, in order to our Salvation. Now, to him who has redeemed us by
Power and by Price; to him who has saved us by his Blood and his Spirit; to him
who has purchased our Souls from the Bondage of the Law, and from Death and
Hell, and has purchased for us the Blessings of Grace, the Pardon of our Sins,
and an Inheritance in Heaven, be Glory and Honor in endless Varieties, and
eternal Praises from all the Redeemed. Amen.

ESSAY VII. Against UNCHARITABLENESS. Wherein the secret Springs of that Vice
are traced, and the Mischievous Effects of it briefly surveyed.
Written to expose that most Unchristian Iniquity of Censures, Revilings and
Church-Anathemas, on the Account of smaller Disputables in Christianity.
ROMANS xiv. 3. Let not him which eats not judge him that eats, for God has
received him. LUKE ix. 54, 55. His Disciples said, Lord, will thou that we
command Fire to come down from Heaven and consume them? But he turned and
rebuked them, and said, Ye know not who manner of Spirit ye are of. -- Tantaene
animis caelestibus irae?
Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum?

INTRODUCTION.
CHARITY in the Soul of Man is the very Picture of the Godhead, taken as it
stands in the fairest Light. Wisdom and Holiness, Power, Sovereignty and
Justice are various Features of the Deity: They are indeed his very Nature and
Essence; yet the Scripture rather chooses to express, that God is Love, and that
twice in one Chapter, 1 John iv. 8, and 16. The beloved Disciple that leaned on
the Bosom of Jesus, took peculiar Delight in the Contemplation of God, under
this Character. This appears in his Gospel as well as in his Epistle. The other
Glories of that infinite Beauty shine with awful Beams, and command my
Reverence: But methinks, I love to look upon so glorious a Being in his most
condescending Air, and to converse with him in his mildest and most inviting
Aspect.

Charity in Man is a Grace of that alluring Sweetness, that my Pen would fain
be attempting to say something in Favor of it: I find a strange Pleasure in
discoursing of this Virtue, hoping that my very Soul may be molded into its
Divine Likeness. I would always feel i^ inwardly warming my Heart. I would have
it look through my Eyes continually, and it should be ever ready upon my Lips to
soften every Expression of my Tongue. I would dress my self in it as my best
Raiment, I would put it on upon my Faith and Hope, not so as entirely to hide
them, but as an upper and more visible Vesture, constantly to appear in among
Men. For our Christian Charity, is to evidence our other Virtues.

Uncharitableness is a loathsome Part of the Image of the fallen Angel: It is
akin to the Hatred of God. For he that loves not his Brother whom he has
seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? 1 John iv. 20. He that hates
his Fellow-Christian, and brings railing Accusations against him for a
Difference in little Qpinions, how can he expect to be beloved of God, who
beholds in the best of us so many monstrous Follies, and Guilt of a more
aggravated Nature? By the Word Uncharitableness here, I would not include our
Neglect of Charity to the Poor and Hungry, nor our Aversion to Errors of the
grosser kind, but I mean our Aversion to such Persons who not only profess to
be Christians, but who also agree with us in the chief Doctrines of
Christianity, (viz.) the Pardon of our Sins by the atoning Sacrifice of Christ,
and the Sanctification of Men by the powerful Operations of the Holy Spirit,
and the Necessity of Faith in Christ, and Good Works, etc. I mean our Aversion
to those who differ from us in little Punctilios of Doctrine or Duty which are
not expressly and plainly written in the New Testament; those who maintain such
an Aversion to their fellow Christians, as to pronounce Damnation upon them, or
some terrible and unchristian Censures, because they do not come up to our
Sentiments and Practices in things which are of little Moment, while we agree
in all fundamental Points, and such as are of most Importance.

This Uncharitableness is a Vice attended with such a Train of Mischiefs, that
I would set all my biggest Powers in Array to fight against it. It Is a Fountain
of such bitter Waters, that I would fain damm up the Spring. It Is a Plant of so
poisonous a Product, that I would dig deep and search for the Roots, and tear
up all the Fibers of it, though they twined about my Heart Strings.

SECT. I. The Causes of Uncharitableness.
An Uncharitable Humor springs generally from some of these following Causes.

I. First, From a malicious Constitution of Nature, a^ acrimonious or a
choleric Temper of Blood. There are some Animal Engines of human Flesh, that
have their Juices all sour'd in their very Formation; and there is an ill
Ferment raised in such Persons at the Perception of every Object, that is not
just suited to their present Fancy and Inclination: And by the hard Laws of
Union between Soul and Body in this our fallen State, the Spirit too often
complies with the fretful Distempers of the Flesh. There are but few that
attempt to suppress the Ferment, and to resist the angry Motions of the Animal;
and of those few that attempt it, scarce one in ten is very successful: For
it is a Work of Toil, and Difficulty, perpetual Watchfulness and unceasing
Prayer.

This ill Humor mixes itself with Religion, as well as with Civil Affairs. It
diffuses its Malignity through all the Studies and the Manners of the Man, and
gives a visible Tincture to his Notions and his Practices. Furio can never
converse about the calmest and most speculative Points of Divinity, but his
Indignation kindles against every different Opinion, his fiery Temper breaks
out and blazes, and he bestows on his own Deportment the honorable Names of
shining Light and burning Zeal. His peevish and angry Passions are so blended
with his Understanding, that hard Names are his best Arguments; most convincing
to himself, though they are the just Scorn of the wise. He stabs his Brethren
that differ from him to the Heart, with pointed Railing; and from an Aversion
to an Opinion rises to an immortal Hatred of the Person. If our great Creator
has untied any of our Souls to Bodies that are less infected with this vicious
Juice, we have Reason to adore his Sovereign Goodness.

II. Self-Love and Pride, and a vain Conceit of our own Opinions, is another
Spring of uncharitable Carriages. Did you ever see a weak and humble Soul
sensible of its own Poverty and Ignorance, and ready to esteem others above
himself, easily indulge this uncharitable Humor? Alas! poor foolish Mankind is
very prone to esteem itself Wise and Knowing. Little Laudillus, who is almost
always in the wrong, has much ado to persuade himself, that he was ever capable
of mistaking. He secretly thinks all his Opinions to be divine Truths, and
therefore he is very lavish in pronouncing Error and Heresy upon every Notion
and Practice that differs from his own. He takes the Freedom to choose a
Religion for himself, but he allows no Man besides the same Liberty. He is sure
that he has Reason to dissent from others, but no Man has Reason to dissent
from him. He sets up for Infallibility without a Triple Crown, and fixes a See
of Ecclesiastical Sovereignty on this Side the Water. He awes some slavish
Spirits into Submission, and they become treacherous to their own Souls and to
the Rights of Human Nature, by delivering up their Faith and Consciences to his
imperious Dictates: Then the Man grows haughty, surly and severe, especially if
he be advanced to any degree of Honor and Authority in the Church: Then in his
inflexible Justice he delivers up the humble and inquisitive Christian unto
Satan, because he cannot assent and consent to all and every thing contained in
his Scheme; and he teaches perhaps his elder Brethren the Doctrines and
Discipline of the Gospel, as Gideon did the Elders of Succoth, with the Briars
and Thorns of the Wilderness.

III. This hateful Vice may be derived from a third Original; and that is a
constant and friendly Acquaintance with the Men and Books of our own Opinion,
and an Avoidence of all the Writers and Persons that differ from us: This has a
mighty Influence to beget and maintain uncharitable Notions; yet this is the
constant Practice, not only of the unlearned, but of too many of the learned
World. Hermes sits all the Year in his own Cell, and never looks abroad beyond
the Clan of his own Fraternity: Hermes reads the Controversies as they are
described only by one Party, and disputes them over only in the Books that are
written on one Side. He finds a great Appearance of Argument and Scripture
there, and then proclaims it impossible that the adverse Party should show
equal Reason or Revelation: And thus he proceeds to censure them as Men of
corrupt Minds, reprobate concerning the Faith, and twisting the Scriptures to
their own Damnation. Cicero in his Treatise De natura Deorum, marks this
Humor, and brands it, Vestra solum legitis, vestra amatis, caeteros causa
incognita condemnatis Y^^ read only your own Books, ^^u love only your own,
(...) condemn others before you know any sufficient Reason, for want of knowing
their Opinions.
.

But let you and I, my Friend, who delight in Charity, let us converse a little
with Authors that differ from our present Opinions, and we shall see their
Sentiments dressed up so plausibly, and set in so fair a Light, that might easily
persuade Men of sincere Consciences to embrace them; and this will prevent us
from censorious Thoughts concerning our candid Adversaries, and their
Disciples. There is scarce any thing that enlarges the Mind more, and more
disengages it from narrow and selfish Principles, than a free Converse with the
Virtuous and Ingenious of all Parties.

There is a memorable Story to this Purpose, concerning two Neighbors in an
unsociable Town, who were always quarrelling about the private Meeting and the
Parish Church: Both Places of Worship in that Town were well supplied with
Preachers of good Sense and serious Religion; but each of them was the Subject
of unmerciful Reproach between these two Neighbors, whenever they met, and
their different Methods of Worship were mutually reviled; the one as formal and
spiritless, the other as enthusiastical and indecent: At last Pacifico their
common Friend persuaded them to hear each others Minister, and accompanied them
both one Day to their different Assemblies; and they were both surprised to
hear the Gospel preached with ^ due Degree of Decency and Fervor, both at
Meeting and at Church: And though they continued still to adhere to their own
Party, as judging it, in some Respects, suited best to their Edification; yet
they maintained hearty Friendship with each other, and delightful Society in
religious Conference: Thus the quarrelsom Mistake was rectified by better
Acquaintance: They lived many Years together in Peace; they composed the
Animosities of different Parties, that dwelt in the Town; they died in perfect
Charity, and left a sweet Influence behind them, and an honorable Example.

IV. A Fourth Spring of Uncharitableness is, our reading the Word of God with a
whole Set of Notions established beforehand: And yet how common a Method, and
how constant is this? Diaecion has long ago determined, that Bishops must be
superior to Presbyters; he has received Ordination from Episcopal Hands; and
hopes one Day himself to be capable of ordaining others. Thus while he is
growing up toward the Mitre, he reads the Scriptures only to confirm his own
determined Opinions. He stretches and torments many an unwilling Text, to make
it speak the Language of his own Thoughts. He neglects the Passages that favor
all other Forms of Government and Methods of Ministration; or else he
constrains them to mean Episcopacy too: Every Word that he reads, has a
Diocesan Aspect; and the first Verse of Genesis can prove Prelacy (for ought I
know) as it has been able heretofore to demonstrate Papacy, when In principio
creavit Deus coelum and terram, decided the Controversy, and set the Pope above
the Emperor: For God made all things from one Beginning, and not from two.

Synodias reads the Bible with a Presbyterian Glass, and Fratrio with a
Congregational Optic: They can find nothing there but their own Opinions, and
both of them wonder that Diaecion should not see them too. Fratrio turns over
the Scriptures with great Diligence and Meditation, and as often as he finds
the Word Church there, he thinks of nothing but a Congregation of faithful Men;
as the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch are so many single
Congregations. When Synodias meets the same Word in his Bible, he is often in
the midst of an Assembly of Divines; and especially when any Power is
attributed to the Church, he is sure it must intend a Classis of Presbyters, or
Consistory of Elders. When the same Word falls under the Eye of Diaecion in his
Course of reading the New Testament, he cannot imagine any thing is meant short
of a Diocese: All his Churches are or should be as big as Counties or Shires.
And I might add, that when poor Parochianus the Mason finds Leisure to read a
Chapter, and lights upon the mention of a Church in it, he thinks immediately
of a tall Stone-Building with a Steeple upon it, a Bell or two, and a
Weathercock.

I might give the like Instances of many other Terms and Expressions in
Scripture, to which Men have unalterably fixed their several different Ideas,
and raised Consequences from them, and interpret the Word of God by them,
without enquiring whether their Ideas are conformable to the Sense in which the
Scripture uses those Expressions: and then it is no Wonder that their Schemes of
Ecclesiastical Government are so different: And yet each of these prepossessed
Opiniators think their own Exposition of the Text so evident, that they chide
the Perverseness of all other Men, as though they were resolved to wink against
the Light. It Is like a Person of a fretful Constitution, whose Eyes are also
tinged with the Jaundice, he quarrels with every Man that he meets, because he
will not consent to call all things yellow. Thus by the false Light of
Affection in which they behold some beloved Texts, and their Negligence of all
others, or at least by the Colors of Prejudice that they throw upon them, each
triumphs in his own Sentiments, and pronounces the Apostles and Prophets of his
Side. Then he lets fly many a sharp Invective against all the Men that presume
to oppose him; for in his Sense they oppose the Apostles themselves, and fight
against the Authority of God.

But when a Man takes a Bible into his Hand without a pre-conceived Scheme in
his Head, and though he may make use of Systems to secure himself from
Inconsistencies, yet he puts them not in the Place of the Holy Scriptures, but
resolves to form his Body of Divinity by the New Testament, and derive all his
Opinions and Practices thence; he will then find so many Expressions that seem
to favor the several contending Parties of Christians, that in some Points he
will perhaps be tempted to doubt of all Opinions, and sometimes have much ado
to secure himself from the Danger of Eternal Skepticism: When in any doubtful
Point his Judgment is led to a Determination, it is always with great Caution,
and by slow Degrees: He is not carried by Violence to any Dogmatical
Conclusion; he is modest in his Assertions, and gentle toward all whose
Judgment and Conscience have determined them another Way, because he met with
so many probable Arguments on their Side, in the Time of his Dubitation and
Inquiry, that had almost fixed his Opinion the same Way too.

If I may be permitted to speak of myself, I might acquaint the World with my
own Experience. After some Years spent in the Perusal of Controversial Authors,
and finding them insufficient to settle my Judgment and Conscience in some
great Points of Religion, I resolved to seek a Determination of my Thoughts
from the Epistles of Sr. Paul, and especially in that weighty Doctrine of
Justification: I perused his Letter to the Romans in the Original, with the
most fixed Meditation, laborious Study, and importunate Requests to God, for
several Months together: First without consulting any Commentator, and
afterward called in the Assistance of the best Critics and Interpreters. I
very narrowly observed the daily Motions of my own Mind: I found it very hard
to root out old Prejudices, and to escape the Danger of new ones: I met with
some Expressions of the Apostle that swayed me toward one Opinion, and others
that inclined the Balance of my Thoughts another way; and 'twas no easy Matter
to maintain my Judgment in an equal Poise, 'till some just and weighty Argument
gave the Determination; so many crossing Notions, perplexing Difficulties and
seeming Repugnances lay in my Way, that I most heartily bless the divine
Goodness that enabled me at last to surmount them all, and established my
Judgment and Conscience in that glorious and forsaken Doctrine of the
Justification of a Sinner in the Sight of God, by the Imputation of a perfect
Righteousness which is not originally his own.

From my own Experiment I can easily guess what confounding Intricacies of
Thought others pass through in their honest Searches after Truth. These
Conflicts did exceedingly enlarge my Soul, and stretched my Charity to a vast
Extent. I see, I feel, and am assured that several Men may be very sincere, and
yet entertain Notions in Divinity, all widely different. I confess now and then
some Opinions, or some unhappy Occurrences are ready to narrow and confine my
Affections again, if I am not watchful over myself; but I pray God to preserve
upon my Heart a strong and lasting Remembrance of those Days and those Studies,
whereby he laid within me the Foundation of so broad a Charity.

V. Fifthly. Another Cause of Uncharitableness is a Want of Reflection on the
Grounds of our own Opinions. We should be more just to ourselves, and more
gentle to others, if we did but impartially review the Reasons why we first
embraced our several Principles and Practices.

Perhaps 'twas Education determined most of them, then let us chide ourselves
severely for building upon so careless and slight a Bottom: Or let us be civil
to the greatest part of Mankind, who came by all their Principles the same Way.
Perhaps we were led into particular Notions by the Authority of Persons whom we
reverence or love; then we should not upbraid our Neighbors that have been
influenced into different Sentiments by the same Springs. Perhaps we have felt
Interest sometimes ready to bias our Thoughts, and give us a secret
Inclination or Aversion to a Party; let us then pity the Frailty of Human
Nature, and have Compassion upon Men whose Judgments are exposed to so mean a
Bribery, and sometimes have been warped aside from the Truth. Or finally,
perhaps it was deep Meditation, a daily Search into Scripture, and fervent
Prayer were the Methods by which we pursued Knowledge, and established our
Principles upon solid Reason. Let us then be so charitable to those whom we
contend with, as to suppose they sought after Truth the same Way, and then our
Contentions will have less Fire and Spleen in them, less of Clamor and
Indignation against those that differ from us.

The true Reason why we kindle our Anger against our Christian Brethren that
are not entirely of our Party is, because we not only have the Vanity to fancy
ourselves always in the Right, and them in the Wrong; but we judge their
Consciences and their Sincerity too, that they did not come honestly and fairly
by their Principles, while we never consider how we ourselves came by our own.

VI. But there are still more Ways to arrive at this Uncharitable Temper: I
must proceed to Sixthly; which is a common Method, and thus to be performed. If
we will but trace the Principles of those that dissent from us through all the
Length of remote and feeble Consequences, and be sure to find some terrible
Absurdity at the End of them, we shall not easily maintain our Charity. O how
often do we put their Opinions upon the Rack! we torture every Joint and
Article of them, 'till we have forced them to confess some formidable Errors
which their Authors never knew or dreamed of: Thus the Original Notions appear
with a frightful Aspect, and the Sectators of them grow to be the Object of our
Abhorrence, and have forfeited their Right to every Grain of our Charity.

Evangillo believes that Christ Jesus has completely answered the Demands of
the Law in order to our Justification, and that in the room and stead of all
Believers. Nomineus hears this Doctrine, and thus begins his Chain of severe
and false Deductions; then (says he) the Law has no Power to demand Obedience
of us; then we are not to be charged with Sin, though we break the Law hourly
and profanely; then we may contemn all the Commands, sport with the
Threatenings, and defy God the Lawgiver and the Avenger. He proceeds then to
pronounce Evangillo a wicked Antinomian, and in the Name of the Lord delivers
him up to Satan, that he may learn not to blaspheme. Evangillo, on the other
Hand, (who has been well instructed in the Way of Salvation, and has learned
the Duties of Faith and Hope, but is not yet so well improved in the Charity of
the Gospel) hears Nomineus preaching up Repentance and sincere Obedience, as
the Conditions of our Justification and Acceptance with God to Eternal Life: He
smites his Breast with his Hand, and cries, Surely this Man knows no Use of
Christ in our Religion, he makes void his Righteousness and his Death, he is a
mere Legalist, a Papist, a rank Socinian, he preaches another Gospel, and
though he were an Angel from Heaven let him be accursed. Thus when Men dress up
their Neighbors in all the strained Consequences of their Opinions, with a
malicious Pleasure they pursue this Thread of Argument, they impose horrid
Conclusions which can never be drawn from their Doctrines, and never leave the
Pursuit till they have pushed each other to Blasphemy and Damnation.

Whereas if the Doctrines and the Persons now mentioned were put into the
Balances of Truth and Charity, perhaps the Principles of Evangillo would be
found to have most Weight of Scripture on their Side, and Nemineus more of the
fair Shows of Reasoning; But neither the one would be found to throw Christ out
of his Religion, nor the other to make void the Law: And both of their Lives
would appear shining in Holiness, but that they want the bright Garments of
Charity.

VII. Let me name a Seventh Spring of this uncharitable Humor; and that is,
when we magnify circumstantial Differences into substantial ones, and make
every Punctilio of our own Scheme a fundamental Point, as though all the Law
and the Prophets hung upon it, as though it were the Ground and Pillar of all
the Truth in the Gospel. Crucius will not allow his dissenting Neighbor to be
a Member of the Christian Church, because he separates from the Modes of
Worship in the Church of England; he cannot believe him to be a Friend to Christ
crucified, because he refuses to have his Child baptized with the airy Sign of
the Cross. Again the dissenting Neighbor pronounces Crucius to be a mere
Formalist, and to have nothing of the Spirit of God in him, because he seeks
not much to obtain the Gifts of the Spirit, and scarce ever addresses himself
to God in Prayer without the Assistance of a Form.

Sabbaptes that lives within two Doors of them, will not believe either of his
Neighbors to be a Christian, because they have never been plunged under Water,
( i. e.) in his Sense they were never baptized: And both of them in Requital
agree to call Sabbaptes a Jew, because he worships only on a Saturday. Whereas
the All-knowing God looks down into all their Hearts, beholds the Graces that
his Spirit has wrought there, owns them a^^ for his Children and the Disciples
of his Son, though they are not yet perfect in Love. They have all one common
God and Father, one Lord Jesus, one Faith, one Spirit of Prayer, one Baptism,
though they quarrel so bitterly about Times, and Modes, and Forms.

It Is a very uncharitable Practice to think that a Man can never journey safely
to Heaven unless his Hat and Shoes be of the same Color with ours, unless he
tread the very Tract of our Feet, and his Footsteps too be of the same Size.
It Is a censorious and perverse Fancy to pronounce a Man no Christian because
every Thought of his Soul, and all the Atoms of his Brain are not just ranged
in the same Posture with mine. How ridiculously unreasonable is it for a Man of
brown Hair to shut his Brother out from the Rank and Species of Men, and call
him an Ox or a Lion because his Locks are black or yellow. I am persuaded there
is a Breadth in the narrow Road to Heaven, and Persons may travel more than
seven a Breast in it: And though they do not trace precisely the same Track,
yet all look to the same Savior Jesus, and all arrive at the same common
Salvation: And though their Names may be crossed out of the Records of a
particular Church on Earth, where Charity fails, yet they will be found written
in the Lamb's Book of Life, which is a Record of Eternal Love, and shall for
ever be joined to the Fellowship of the Catholic Church in Heaven.

VIII. This Iniquity of Uncharitableness has more Springs than there are
Streams or Branches belonging to the great River of Egypt; and it is as fruitful
of Serpents and Monsters too: Itself is a Hydra of many Heads; I have drawn
seven of them out at Length into open Light, that they may be cut off for ever:
But there are others still remain as full of Fire and Infection. Shall I
mention an Eighth here, The Applause of a Party, and the Advance of
Self-^^terest? Have we never observed what a mighty Prevalence this has over
the Hearts and Tongues of Men, and inflames them with Malice against their
Neighbors? They assault every different Opinion with Rage and Clamor: They
rail at the Persons of all other Parties to ingratiate themselves with their
own; and when they find their Account in it, their Tongues are sharpened as
drawn Swords; they fight for Honor like young Volunteers, or like the Switzers
for Pay. When they tear away Men from their Habitations, cast them into noisome
Prisons, and put to Death the Ministers of the Gospel, they boast, like Jehu
when he slew the Priests of Baal, Come and see my Zeal for the Lord: And as he
designed hereby to establish the Kingdom in his own Hands, so they to maintain
the Preferments and Possessions, as well as the Reputation they had acquired
among their own Sect. But ah! How little do they think of the Wounds that Jesus
the Lord receives by every bitter Reproach they cast on his Followers! Nor will
it be found a sufficient Reason for the Persecution of them one Day, that they
did not conform to human Inventions.

The Janscnists in France have made some Reformation in the Doctrines of
Popery, and they have been sometimes traduced for approaching the Tents of
Calvin: They have been in Danger of being degraded and losing their spiritual
Dignities, and they are pushed on by this Fear and Ambition, to write at every
Turn some severe Invectives against the Calvinists, to show that themselves are
true Sons of that uncharitable Church of Rome.

Sicco has lately departed from a Baptist Society, and he hardly thinks himself
sufficiently come out of the Water, 'till he is kindled into a Flame against
all those that baptize by Immersion; he rails at his former Brethren, to make
the Presbyterian and Independent Churches believe that he is a true Convert:
How art thou mistaken, poor Sicco, to attempt this Method of caressing thy new
Acquaintance? For they had rather receive a Baptist into their Fellowship,
whose Faith and Holiness are conspicuous in his Life, than open their Doors to
an uncharitable Wretch that proves his Conversion only by the Change of an
Opinion, and placing his Religion in Railing.

Acerbion has left the Communion of his Father, and is become an Ecclesiastic
of high Note in a more powerful and splendid Church: He seldom puts a Volume
into the Press without Sowerness and hard Words in it, against the Society
which he has forsaken: His Pen is dipped in Gall daily, and ^e grows old in
Malice and Censure: It Is Pity he should so far expose the Church to which he
now belongs, as to think that she will esteem him a more dutiful Son, by how
much the less Charity he has for his dissenting Brethren.

And I am sorry also, that there should be a Church in Great Britain which has
devoted Christians to the Devil for little Differences, and has exposed them to
tedious and sharp Sufferings for refusing to submit to particular Gestures in
Worship and airy Signs, for wearing a short Garment in Prayer in the Place of a
long one, or black instead of white; and some of her Sons have delighted to
execute these Censures, when they have found much Gain arising from this severe
Godliness. I could wish she had always exercised the same Charity to weak
Consciences that she does to slender Purses; for she allows a Christian Liberty
to poor Beneficed Men and Curates, nor being able to provide themselves long
Gowns, that they may go in short ones.

IX. A Ninth Spring of this Uncharitable Practice is fixing upon some necessary
and special Point in Christianity, and setting it up in Opposition to the rest,
or at best in Opposition to some one of the rest.

I have long observed, says an ingenious Writer, that Christians of different
Parties have been eagerly laying hold on particular Parts of the System of
divine Truths, and have been contending about them as if each had been all; or
as if the Separation of the Members from each other, and from the Head, were
the Preservation of the Body, instead of its Destruction. They have been
zealous to espouse the Defense, and to maintain the Honor and Usefulness of
each apart; whereas their Honor as well as Usefulness, seems to me to lie much
in their Connection: And Suspicions have often arisen betwixt the respective
Defenders of each, which have appeared as unreasonable and absurd, as if all
the Preparations for securing one part of a Ship in a Storm were to be censured
as a Contrivance to sink the rest. Thus far Dr. Doddridge in a late Preface.

And I think we may as well borrow the Similitude expressly from the Scripture
itself, 1 Cor. xii. 14. etc. The Body if not one Member, but many. If the Foot
shall say, because I am not the Hand, is it therefore not of the Body? And how
ridiculous would it be if we should suppose the Ear shall say, because I am not
the Eye, I am not of the Body. If the whole Body were an Eye, where were the
Hearing? If the whole were Hearing where were the Smelling? And if they were
all one Member, where were the Body? The Eye cannot say unto the Hand, I have
no need of thee; nor again, the Head to the Feet, I have no need of you: Now ye
are the Body of Christ, and Members in particular.

In the same manner, Repentance, Faith and Love are three necessary Graces or
Virtues that go to make up a Christian; and I might cite several Texts of
Scripture, where each of these three are made necessary to Christianity. Is it
not therefore a most unreasonable thing to set up either Repentance, Faith or
Love so high, as though the whole of Christianity was contained in it, when it is
evident that nothing else can make a Christian but such a Faith as brings with
it Repentance and Good Works, or Holiness of Life, or such a Love as produces
Obedience and Good Works, which must be the Effect of this Faith?

In Christianity nothing avails but such a Faith as works by Love unto all
Holiness, Gal. v. 6. Repent and believe the Gospel, was the first preaching of
Christ and his Apostles, Mark i. 15. And in other Places, Faith is
indispensably coupled with Repentance, Acts iii. 19. xx. 21. Without Repentance
our Sins will not be forgiven us. Without Faith in Jesus Christ we have no
Interest in his Salvation. True Faith must be such as purifies the Heart, Acts
xv. 9. And produces Good Works as the necessary Evidences to prove our Faith
true, James ii. 17, 18.

What a strange sort of monstrous Christian would this be, who pretended to
much Faith, but had no Love nor Repentance? And as monstrous would that
Pretender be, who had Love or Repentance without Faith. As God has set the
Members of the Body, every one of them as it has pleased him, so has he
appointed Faith, Repentance and Love to fulfill their several Offices in the
Christian Life. What a Piece of Madness therefore is it, and high Inconsistency
to separate those Things which God has joined in his Gospel? or to preach or
paraphrase very long and talk very much upon ever a one of these, so as to
hinder that due Respect that is to be paid to the other two? There is no Man is
or can be a true Believer in Christ, if he has not Repentance and Love,
producing good Works, as well as that Faith which is necessary to make a
Christian. Let us take heed therefore, lest we give Occasion by any of our
Discourses to exalt one of these Virtues or Graces to the Prejudice of the
rest, for the utter Loss of either of them will destroy all our Pretenses to
Christianity.

When Solfido has formed one of his Christians exactly agreeable to the Shape
and Humor of his own Imagination, and dressed him up in all the Feathers of
strict Orthodoxy that he can find in the severest Writers, and by a Motto
written upon his Forehead has called him the Man of Faith, I am at a Loss to
know what Christian Church would receive him into their Communion, when he
neither professes Repentance, nor Holiness, nor true Love to God or Man. It has
indeed some of the Appearances of a Christian Statue, but it is a Man without
Feet or Hands for walking or moving, a Man without Life or Activity to run the
Christian Race, or to do any thing for God in the World. What Glory can our
Lord Jesus Christ receive from such a useless Figure? What Honor can such an
imperfect Image possibly bring to the Gospel; Or what Service can he be of in
the World or in the Church?

X. The most common Cause of Uncharitableness, and the last I shall mention,
is, that a great Part of the Professor of our holy Religion, make their Heads
the chief Seat of it, and scarce ever suffer it to descend and warm their
Hearts. Jesus the Savior has been discovered to them in a good degree of
outward Light, but has never been revealed in them with Power, nor their Souls
changed by Divine Grace into the Image of the Gospel. While they boast of their
Orthodox Faith they forget their Christian Love.

Stellino has stuck his Brain all over with Notions, and fancies his higher
Sphere sufficiently illuminated for the Conduct of Mankind, that is round about
him, and beneath him: But this Set of Notions is like a Winter-night overhung
with Stars; bright and shining, but very cold. Natural Affections have no room
in his Soul, it is too much Spiritualized with Opinions and Doctrines. His
Divinity lies all in his Understanding, and the common Duties of Humanity
scarce ever employ his Tongue or his Hands.

If a Man does but profess every Tittle of his Creed, and believe just as
Stellino believes, he is declared fit for Holy Communion; and if he will but
dispute warmly for the hard Words that distinguish his Scheme, and can
pronounce Shibboleth well, he shall not be adjudged to Death or Damnation, but
joined heartily to the Fellowship of the Saints, though his flaming Immoralities
proclaim him a Son of Satan: Satan himself has perhaps a more accurate and nice
Skill of the Controversies of Divinity, than the best of our Professors and
Doctors have arrived at; but his Pride and Malice are Chains of Darkness, and
make a Devil of him in spite of all his Knowledge: Yet Stellino affects too
near a Resemblance to Lucifer, that fallen Son of the Morning.

Vices that are odious to human Nature, and wild Licentiousnesses of a bitter
Tongue which destroy all civil Society, are very little Faults in his Opinion,
when put into the Balance with Orthodoxy and Zeal. If my Conversation among Men
be blameless and honorable; if my Practice consist of Virtue and Piety; if I
profess a solemn Faith in Christ the eternal Word, the only begotten Son of
God, who came into the Flesh, who died to make a true Atonement for the Sins of
Men, and testify my unfeigned Subjection to him, and declare the Grounds of my
Hope; yet I must not be admitted to the special Parts of Worship where Stellino
presides, because I am not arrived at his degree of Light, and differ from his
Expressions a little, when I explain the Words Justification and the Covenant
of Grace. His Lips are ever full of Declamation and Controversy, and he
harangues copiously upon the most affecting Points of our Religion; he talks
much of the amazing Condescentions of Divine Mercy, and of the Kindness and
Love of God our Savior toward Man; but it has not yet taught him Love to his
Fellow Creatures, nor Kindness toward his Brethren.

Such another Christian is Misander; he reverses the Duties of Christianity
which St. Paul describes, he speaks Evil of all Men but his own Party, he is a
Brawler and ungentle, showing Meekness unto none; and while he pretends that
the Grace of God which brings Salvation has appeared unto him, he lives still
in Malice and Envy, and wears the visible Characters of the Men of Heathenism,
hateful and hating one another, Tit. ii. 11, 12. Tit. iii. 2, 3, 4. He
flourishes and enlarges upon the gracious Qualities of our Redeemer, our great
High Priest, who is touched with the Feeling of our Infirmities; yet himself
has not learnt from to glorious an Example to have Compassion on them that are
ignorant and out of the way; but rather being exalted in his own Knowledge, he
condemns his weak Brother to perish, for whom Christ died. Take thy Bible, O
vain Man, and read a few Lines in the 8th Chapter of St. Paul's first Epistle
to Corinth. Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth; and if any Man think
that he knows anything, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know; but if
any Man love God, the same is known of him. And Sr. John will assure thee, that
he that loves not his Brother knows not God, and if a Man say, I love God,
and hates his Brother, he is a Liar, 1 John iv. 8, 20.

Yet let not any think that I advance Charity so high, as to place it in the
room of Knowledge and Faith, or to make it a self-sufficient Ground for our
Admittance into Heaven at last: Nor can I suppose it alone to be a sufficient
Plea for a Reception into any visible Church of Christ on Earth. A Confession
of the Name of Jesus, with the most important and most necessary Articles of
his blessed Religion, a Declaration of my personal Faith or Trust in him,
together with a solemn Dedication of myself unto the Lord, may be justly
required of me by that Christian Society into which I desire Admittance. In
default of these the biggest Instances of Charity will never constitute me a
Christian: Except ye believe that I am he, says our Savior, ye shall die in
your Sins, John viii. 24. If a Man strive for a Prize, yet is he not crowned
unless he strive lawfully; (i. e.) according to the Methods prescribed in the
Gospel, the Knowledge and the Faith of the Son of God, 2 Timothy ii. 5. and the
Sentence of our Lord is dreadful and peremptory. He that believes not shall be
damned, Mark xvi. 16. With the Heart Man believes unto Righteousness, and with
the Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation, Romans x. 10. But without Charity my
Faith can never be true, for it must be such a Faith as works by Love, and
discovers itself by all the Fruits of the Spirit, Love-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Meekness, Temperance, Gal. v. 6, 22.

Thus far have we traced the Vice of Uncharitableness in many of the Properties
that belong to it, and the Causes of it, and many Instances in which it
discovers itself in the World, and in the Church; and it appears a very
shameful Vice, and opposite to the Religion of the Blessed Jesus.

SECT. II. An Occasional Vindication of the Apostles from the Charge of
Uncharitableness.
But what shall we say to those who take the venerable Names of the sacred
Writers, and charge them with the same scandalous Practice?

There is one Momus, who is well known in the World for a Person that is ready
to find fault with the best of Men, and the best of Things, if he can suspect
any thing which he imagines worthy of Blame in them. This Man rather than not
vindicate himself from the Charge of Uncharitableness, he will bring even the
Apostles themselves into the Accusation, particularly St. Paul and St. John.

Paul, says he, must be a very uncharitable Man, for Heb. x. 25, 26. He tells
us, that if we Sin wilfully after we have received the Knowledge of the Truth,
there remains no more Sacrifice for Sins. Thus it is plain, he will not
suffer a Man to be guilty of any wilful Sin, after his Profession of
Christianity, but he damns him for it without Hope.

Ans. But I would have Momus consider that these are the very Words of
Scripture and Inspiration, and not merely St. Paul's Opinion. Nor is the Sense
true which he puts upon these Words: it is by no means every wilful Sin after we
have received and professed Christianity, that will bring us under such an
irreversible Condemnation; but this wilful Sin, as stands in the Context,
plainly refers to our entire quitting the Profession of our Christian Faith, v.
23. and forsaking all Christian Assemblies, without Repentance or returning to
them, as v. 25. And it is no wonder if a Man who roundly renounces Christianity
wilfully, and without Persecution, or any Compulsion, should be laid under this
dreadful Sentence.

Let it be also particularly remarked, that as these Verses come in just after
the Apostle had been speaking of the atoning Sacrifice for Sin, which Christ
himself offered, as a fulfilling of all typical Sacrifices and Atonements of
the Jewish Law, c. ix. 10. he expresses this condemning Sentence in this
Language, there is no more Sacrifice for Sin, i. e. if a Man renounces the
Sacrifice of Atonement which Christ has made for Sin, there remains no more
Sacrifice for him to trust in, or to hope for, but a certain fearful looking
for of Judgment and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries. Thus
it appears, that this wilful Sinner is condemned for renouncing the only Method
of Atonement provided for the Pardon of Sins, which it was one of the chief
Glories of the Christian Religion to reveal and establish.

St. Paul also is charged with high Uncharitableness by this Momus for what he
says, Gal. i. 8, 9. If any Man preach any other Gospel to you than that ye have
received, let him be accursed, and yet he owns v. 7. that it is not another
Gospel, but merely a Perversion of the Gospel of Christ; and is this enough to
be accursed for?

Answ. Let Momus consider how grossly the Gospel must be perverted, when it is
turned into such a Sense as the Galatians seem to have been taught by these
Troublers of their Church, v 7. it is such an Error as would have carried them
again into Judaism with all is Yokes of Bondage, would have obliged them to be
Circumcised and to observe the Jewish Festival Days, Months and Years, Gal. v.
2. Such an Error as shows them to have run back to the Ceremonies of the Jewish
Law for Justification and Acceptance with God, v. 4. Such an Error as gave
occasion to the Apostle to charge them, if ye pursue it ye are fallen from
Grace, i. e. from the Gospel of Grace: And that Christ would profit them
nothing, would become of no Effect to them. v. 2, and 4.

And after all it must be said these are the Words of Scripture, and of the
Spirit of God, and not merely of St. Paul himself as a private Writer; and will
the Man deal thus with Scripture? You see to what Lengths this Temper will
carry a Man.

But still he pursues his Accusation against the Apostles, and makes St. John
to be grossly guilty of want of Charity in his 2d Epistle v. 9, 10. If there
come any unto you and bring not this Doctrine, i. e. The Doctrine of Christ
mentioned in the foregoing Verse, receive him not into your House, nor bid him
God Speed; for he that hiddeth him God speed, if Partaker of his evil Deeds.

Now to answer the unreasonable Censure of this Momus, let us enquire what this
Doctrine of Christ is; and where should we find the most important Parts of it
but in the same Writer? Chap. i. v. 7. The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us
from all Sin. Chap. ii. v. 2. Jesus Christ the Righteous is not only our
Advocate with the Father, but he is also the Propitiation for our Sins, Chap.
iv. 10. God loved us and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our Sins, and
that every true Christian is born of God, Chap. v. 1, 4. i. e. as other Verses
of this holy Writer in his Gospel explain it, he is born of the Spirit of God,
John i. 13, and iii. 5, 6.

It appears then that the Errors of such whom the Apostle would here exclude
from our Friendship, are such as do not acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the
Messiah, or not to be a propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of Men, nor allow
that every true Christian is regenerated and born of God, or of his Spirits, i.
e. by the powerful, renewing and sanctifying Influences thereof as other
Scriptures explain it, particularly John i. 12, 13. John iii. 3, 5. and as St.
Paul expresses it, Ephesians. i. 19, 20. By such a mighty Power which he wrought in
Christ when he raised him from the Dead.

Again, I would ask Momus, why are the Names of Christ and the Holy Spirit
appointed so generally to be used in Baptism, which is the Ordinance which
initiates us into Christianity? Is it not to put us in Mind that when we
profess Christianity we profess the chief Articles that relate to him as our
Savior, ( viz.) Jesus Christ to be the Propitiation for our Sins, we profess
to be born of the Spirit, or regenerated and renewed to Holiness by the Spirit
of God? Now if a Man asserts himself to be a Christian, when he believes and
professes neither of these Doctrines, then St. John may be to blame indeed in
denying the Benefit of common Christian Friendship to such a Man.

But whither would this Momus lead us? What? would he make a Christian out of
such Adversaries to the Name and Gospel of Christ, as neither trust in him as a
Propitiation for their Sins, nor hope to be renewed and made holy by the Holy
Spirit of God?

Let us learn of the Heathen Poet, Est modus in rebus, sunt certi denique fines.

There must be some Measures and Bounds set to every general Virtue, and even
to Christian Charity itself. This does not extend to Infidels in the same
Sense. Surely, there must be due Limits set to every thing of this kind: They
can scarce be justly called Christians, and treated as such, let their
Profession be what it will, who renounce Jesus Christ in his chief Design of
coming into the World, as a Propitiation for Sin, and who renounce the Spirit
of God as the effectual Spring of our Regeneration and Holiness. If all Deists
and Infidels may be received into the Christian Church, into our good Esteem
and Friendship, those may also be our fellow Christians who deny the most
important Principles of Christianity: But let us take heed that we do not give
that which is holy to such who have no claim to it, and give Charity and
Christian Friendship to those, who seem, according to the Word of God, to have
no Pretense to it.

It has been objected indeed against this second as well as against the third
Epistle of St. John, that they have not sufficient Proof of their divine
Original: Now it would be too large in this Place to enter into a discussion of
that Question: But there is nothing said in this Epistle that is disagreeable
to the Sense of other holy Writers in other parts of Scripture; and by our
Protestant Writers these Epistles have been generally represented as part of
the Word of God in the New Testament: Nor can I find sufficient Reason to
reject it, merely because some Persons that need a more abundant Measure of
Indulgence and of Charity than the Scripture seems to allow, will not allow it
this post of Honor, and that is because it excludes them from our Good Esteem,
from Christian Communion and Friendship.

Yet after all this Censure of Momus and his Followers, if any such there be, I
would still hope and persuade myself, there are some serious and pious Souls
who have been honestly seeking after the Truths of Religion, and searching the
Word of God to find them, who may have indulged some uncautious and unhappy
Hour, wherein they have suffered themselves to be led away into this great
Snare and Temptation of the evil One; so that they have begun to doubt of this
blessed Doctrine of the atoning Sacrifice for Sin by the Blood of Jesus Christ,
though it is so strongly, so expressly, and so often asserted by several of the
Apostles in their Writings.

It Is my sincere and earnest Desire, that God would speedily break these
unhappy Snares, whatsoever they are, by which their Thoughts have been
captivated into so dangerous a Mistake, 2 Timothy ii. 25, 26. that he would please
to open the Eyes of their Mind by his inlightening Grace, that they may not run
on so far in this way as to be exposed to the Loss of the Benefit of this only
Propitiation for Sin, and lay themselves open to that severe Sentence of the
Word of God, that there remains no further propitiatory Sacrifice for them, but
a certain fearful Expectation, etc. Heb. x. 26, 27. Forgive me, blessed Jesus,
if any of the softer Influences of animal Nature have warped me aside, while I
am treating of this glorious Virtue of Charity, to indulge these milder
Sentiments, and depart in any Measure from the stricter Sense and Sentence of
thy holy Word.

SECT. III. The mischievous Effects of Uncharitableness.
Now if we have not dwelt too long on this Subject, ( viz.) in tracing out this
Mischief through its several Springs and Properties, and if my Reader be not
quite out of Breath, I would ask him to take another Turn with me and walk down
to a short Survey of the same Vice in its mischievous Effects; that we may be
more warmly animated to pursue this Iniquity to the Death: If it were possible,
we would leave it neither Root nor Branch, Name or Memory in the Christian
World.

I. The first and most obvious Mischiefs I meet with among Christians of an
uncharitable Humor, are the constant Disquiet of their own Spirits, the
Vexation they give their Neighbors, the Injury they do to their own
Edification, and to the Edification of all that converse with them.

Singulario has a Set of Notions and Rules whereby he adjusts his own Creed
and his Practice; and whatsoever he hears in Religious Conference, or in
public Duty, that does not precisely square to his Model, disquiets his Ears,
disrelishes with his Taste, disturbs his Conscience, and thus prevents all the
Benefit that his Soul should receive from the Discourse, or Worship.

I grant it very lawful for a Man to be disgusted with a Sermon, where the
greatest part is spent in Notions contrary to his Judgment, and dressed up in
Language very foreign to his usual way of Converse about divine Things; this is
shocking to the Spirit of the best Christians, and the Conscience is so
nauseated with the largest part of the Entertainment that his Soul cannot be
nourished, and it is proper for him to forbear Attendance upon such a Preacher,
and choose one more suited to the Temper of his own Spirit. But Singulario has
an Aversion to a whole Hour's Discourse, because there were three Sentences of
a Strain different from his Opinion. He reaps no Blessing from a Sermon of
excellent Composure, of divine Materials, of an evangelick Frame and just
Method, because there is one Expression in it that is the Characteristick of
another Sect. He sits uneasy under a noble Discourse of Justification or of
Faith, because (it may be) the Minister does avoid the Terms Imputed,
Meritorious, Condition, and Instrument; and mentions none of the tortured Words
of Noise and Party.

I will not indeed commend a Preacher that is always affecting to disguise his
own Opinions, and for ever hiding himself in ambiguous Language, and that in
Points of Moment, thereby to maintain the everlasting Applause of all Sides.
But I must chide Singulario for the wry Faces he makes at Church when he hears
but a Word or two of contrary Sound, or when his Ears miss and long for a Set
of darling Phrases.

Three Years ago I was in Company with Acharissa, a sour old Christian of a
very narrow Spirit, and gave her a gentle Admonition for the frequent
Reproaches she cast on the Ministers of Christ, that did not preach exactly
according to her Humor; I blamed that petulant Liberty which she took with all
her Neighbors and Acquaintance, to censure them severely for every lesser
Difference of Practice or Worship: I recommended to her reading that valuable
Sermon of the Reverend Dr. Tillotson against Evil-speaking; but I could not
persuade her to peruse those few Pages, not only because of that strong
Propensity she had to speak Evil of others, but because 'twas the Work of an
Archbishop; which sort of Office, said she, is a mere Human Invention, and the
Scripture knows it not. I know another Name which has the same narrow Spirit.
Sequilla has ever given up the Conduct of her Soul to the Curate of her
Parish, and after many Years Attendance on his Ministry, in great Security of
Conscience, is well assured that she shall go to Heaven at last. Perhaps by
some terrible Providence, or by some plain Word of Scripture, she is awakened
to a deep and frightful Sense of Sin, and Danger of Eternal Death. She is
visited by the Curate, and though he says some good things to her, yet she
finds not the Way of Peace. A kind Neighbor recommends to her some Book of
Consolation written by a Dissenter, but she refuses the Book and the Comfort at
once, lest she should be guilty of that damnable Sin of Separation from the
Church. How can I ever, said she, expect the Peace of God from the Pen of a
Schismatic? And thus endures the Racks of Conscience rather than she will
indulge Charity enough to hear of to read what a Nonconformist has written.

Presbycolo a Christian of the same Stamp, heard a Sermon lately and commended
it above measure, confessed how much Light and Love was kindled in ^is Heart by
it, and bestowed unusual Strains of Respect upon the Minister: But Presbycolo
(said I) This Man never had the Hands of a Bishop, or preaching Elder, laid
upon his Head to ordain him. At once I saw his Color change, his Spirits sink,
and he concluded that all the divine Affections in his Soul under that Sermon
must needs be counterfeit, because now I know (said he) the Preacher is no
Minister of Christ. O the wretched Influence of this Vice of Uncharitableness
upon feeble and deluded Souls! It proceeds so far at last as to make Persons
scrupulous of attending upon any Ordinance, lest the Administrator should not
be a Man exactly of their Stamp. Thus their Hearts are vexed with everlasting
Disquiet, for they can hardly hear a Prayer, or an Exhortation, but they find
some Offense in it; like a Man with a Thorn in his Hand, whatsoever he takes
hold of gives him Pain, but the Cause lies in his own Flesh.

There are other Instances of this Kind to be met with in the World. Nitidelli
wears his Hair three Inches below his Shoulders, and it is ever well beautified
with Powder: He frequently eats of a Dish of Food where Blood is one of the
Ingredients, and he often takes half a Pint of red Wine to his own Share: He
maintains serious Religion at Home and abroad: But Censorina cannot join with
him in the special Ordinances of Worship. It is a shame for him (she cries) to
wear long Hair; he is a Wine-bibber, and he abstains not from Blood; nor can I
be reconciled to him upon any Terms, unless he retrench these horrible
Excesses. But he still goes on careless and regardless of the Peace of his
Fellow-Christian, and scorns her little Clamours, rather than endeavors, by
Gentleness and Compliance, to satisfy or remove them. Now walk thou not
charitably, O Nitidelli, for thou grievest thy Sister with thy Meat and
Garments, for whom Christ died. But I would fain have Censorina learn also that
the Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and Joy
in the Holy Ghost. Both of you therefore ought to follow after things which
make for Peace, and things wherewith one may edify another. Romans xiv. 15, 17,
19.

Nor is this Mischief confined to single Persons: It makes a farther Progress
still, and infects the Neighbor and Acquaintance. Every Monday in the Evening
Crites sits at the Head of a Club that meet together to arraign and sentence
the Sermons of the foregoing Day. Did you mark, my Friends, such an Expression
under the fourth Head? It sounded harsh in my Ears. Surely the Man is not
Orthodox; pray acquaint your Families of the Danger of his Opinions, and forbid
their Attendance. Truly, replies Momion, he insisted so much on the Grace of
God, that he left but one quarter of his Hourglass for the Duties of the
Gospel; I fear he is a Supralapsarian, my Spirit rises against him, and I must
warn my Acquaintance of his Doctrine. A third Person in the Company begins to
surmise that his Morals are not good: I have heard an ill Story of a Preacher
not long since, says he, and surely this must be the Man? And then he proceeds
in a direct Opposition to the Grace of Charity, as it is described by St. Paul,
1 Cor. xii. 5. Tit. iii. 3. I easily believe all that is evil of him; I am
provoked at him; I hope no Good from him; I cannot bear his Principles; I
cannot endure his Person; and I should rejoice in the seasonable Death of such
an Antinomian as this is. Thus does the Root of Bitterness spring up into wide
Branches, it bears poisonous Fruit, and many Souls are troubled. Blessed be God
who of late Years begins to purge out this sour Leaven from amongst us.

II. The next pernicious Effect I take Notice of, is, that an uncharitable
Carriage brings a Disgrace and Blemish upon Christianity, beyond the Guilt and
Scandal of Heathenism: It Is the Character of the Gentiles indeed, that they
were hateful and hating one another; but not for different Principles of
Philosophy which they professed, nor different Methods of Worship, which they
paid to their Gods. There were no Civil Wars proclaimed, nor Courts of
Inquisition erected amongst them upon this Account, though their Controversies
about divine Things were not trivial, and they differed widely in the very
Foundations of Religion; and, as (...) ingenious Author expresses himself on
this Subject, Though Poets have made the Gods enter into Factions and (...) for
Commonwealths, yet Commonwealths never did the same for their Gods.

But if the Heathens had been never so much enraged, and quarrelled never so
fiercely for the sake of Opinions, and Formalities; still they were almost
infinitely more excusable than Christians can pretend to be: For the very
Doctrines of most of their Sects permit Revenge; and they have many a bloody
Principle amongst them. But Christianity is the most mild, the most gentle, and
the most peaceable Religion: Never a Doctrine was taught amongst Mankind, that
has so much of Love and Sweetness in it: Never a System, or Rule of Duties,
wherein Meekness and Candor, Charity and Compassion are so prescribed, and
enforced.

Never was there a Religion instituted by God or invented by Men, with so much
Goodness in the Heart and Soul of it, or so many Charms and Amiablenesses in
the Face. It Is built upon the Foundation of God's Eternal and Unchangeable
Love. 'Twas Love that assumed Human Nature, and became the great Prophet and
Teacher of it, and the Spirit of Love in our Hearts is its Vital Spring within
us: It Is divine Love dwelling in Flesh, hanging upon a Cross, bleeding, and
dying for Enemies and Rebels, that has purchased all the promised Blessings of
our Religion; and it is the same Love arising from the Grave, and reigning in
Glory, that distributes these Blessings to Men: And in all the melting Language
of Compassion and Tenderness invites us to receive them: 'Twas this Love
dwelling personally amongst Men, calls himself our Brother, and charges us to
love all the Professors of the same Faith as Brethren: He requires that we
should be ready to lay down our Lives for one another, as he did for us all:
And orders it to be the distinguishing Character of all his Followers, Hereby
shall all Men know, that ye are my Disciple, if ye love one another, John xiii.
34, 35.

God himself is infinite and unseen Love, Christ is Love incarnate and visible:
And a Christian is or should be an Effigy of that Love graven to the Life, by
the Finger of the divine Spirit. Now, for the Professors of such a Doctrine to
quarrel about Trifles, and grow malicious upon every Punctilio of different
Sentiments, how grossly do they abuse the Christian Name? They rob their own
Religion of its due Honor amongst Men, and bring infinite Shame and Discredit
upon Christianity in the Face of Infidel Nations. It Is for the sake of this
Madness which is found amongst the pretended Followers of our blessed Lord, his
Name is blasphemed among the Heathens; and the Conversion of the Kingdoms of
this World to the Faith of Christ, rendered almost rationally impossible.

III. Thirdly, This uncharitable Temper rages even to Wars and Blood; has laid
the Churches of Christ desolate, and dispeopled many Countries in Christendom.
It does not spend itself in secret like a sullen Humor, or a Vapor of
Melancholy, but breaks out into public Violence and Disorder, and all that is
near it feels the Indignation. It sits brooding over the Eggs of a Cockatrice,
and daily sends forth a fiery flying Serpent, Instruments of Cruelty are in its
Habitation, and all its Children are Sons of Blood and Rapine.

O my Soul, come thou not into their Counsel; unto their Assembly mine Honor
be not thou united; for in their Anger they have slain Millions of Men, and in
their Self-will they have dug up the Foundations of a Thousand Churches.
Cursed be their Anger for it is fierce, and their Wrath for it is cruel. These
Men of Division at the last Judgment Day, may justly expect to be divided from
Jacob, and to be scattered far away from the Israel of God. For God will render
to every one according to their Works. And surely these bloody Persecutions are
such Works as demand like Revenges from a God of Justice; if such as practice
them die without Repentance.

If you ask me the Method whereby this uncharitable Temper has advanced to such
a Degree of Rage and Barbarity, it is very obvious and easy to be explained. At
first these Men assume to themselves the Name of the Church, and lodge in
themselves a Sort of Infallibility, or at least pretend to a divine Authority
to determine finally all doubtful Cases of Religion, and to rule over the
Consciences of Men. They set up the wretched Trade of Creed-making, and demand
the Belief of Mankind: Then they give out Decrees, such as Christ and his
Apostles never gave, and pronounce Damnation against all that doubt or
disbelieve them; though their Fables are not cunningly devised, because they
are made too big for Belief. Some of them contradict the most substantial
Principles of Sense, Reason and Christianity.

You will see this plainly exemplified in a few Instances I shall give of their
Decrees and Canons. As, Whosoever shall affirm that there are more or less than
seven Sacraments, let him be anathematized, excommunicated, or accursed:
Whosoever shall affirm that the Substance of Bread and Wine remains in the
Eucharist, together with the Body and Blood of Christ, or shall deny the
wonderful Change of the whole Substance of Bread into Body, and Wine into
Blood, which the Catholic Church calls Transubstantiation, let him be
excommunicated: Whosoever shall say, that extreme Unction does not confer
Grace, nor remit Sin, nor ease the Sick, let him be excommunicated. Canons of
the Church of Rome in the Council of Trent.
Thus oftentimes the same Anathema and eternal Death is denounced against such
as disobey their Decrees about Matters of trifling Importance; Matters which
they themselves can never pretend to be, in their own Nature, necessary to
Salvation. He that shall say a common Minister can confirm as well as a Bishop,
let him be excommunicated: He that shall say, the Ceremonies, the Vestments,
etc. in the Celebration of the Mass, are Incentives to Sin, rather than Duties
of Piety, let him be excommunicated: He that shall say, a Priest may become a
Layman again, let him be excommunicated: And whosoever shall say that the
Hierarchy of Bishops, Presbyters, and Ministers or Deacons is not of Divine
Ordination, let him be excommunicated.

When this Church has thus excommunicated and cursed Christians better than her
self, and cast them out of her Arms, she gives them up to the secular Power,
See the History of the Inquisition.
with an awful and deceitful Charge, that the obstinate Heretic shall not be
hurt in Life or Limb; but with a full Design that they should be tortured, and
destroyed. Having solemnly delivered them to the Devil in their Spiritual
Courts, the temporal Executioner sends them out of the World; not that their
Souls may be saved in the Day of the Lord, but that they may be plunged
immediately into utter Darkness, where Satan dwells.

It Is the Command of Christ to the Roman Church, by Paul the great Apostle,
Romans xiv. 1. That such as were weak in the Faith should be received to their
Fellowship, and not troubled with doubtful Disputations, such as the Observance
of Meats and Days, and Things of like Moment: But the Romans have now so far
rebel'd against this Rule, as to admit Persons into their Communion upon no
other Terms than a blind Submission to all the doubtful Disputables which that
Church imposes. They had an Order from St. Paul. Romans xv. 7. to receive all
such as Christ had received; and consequently to reject no others but those
whom Christ rejects; but they forgot this charitable Canon of our Lord, while
they receive Thousands to their Communion which have no visible Marks of the
Image of Christ, and reject Thousands, and curse them to Hell, whom the Lord
Christ will acknowledge for his, and pronounce them blessed of his Father at
the last Day.

When they first begin to assume this Sovereignty over Faith and Conscience,
they use a Show of Argument, and pretend to instruct and enlighten the Weak and
the Ignorant. They admonish them to hearken to the Church; but if the Ignorant
are still weak in Belief, and cannot be convinced of the Lawfulness of their
Ceremonies, then they send the Sheriff and the Jailor to carry on the Dispute;
a Prison and the Gibbet are the next Arguments; and when Reason and Scripture
will not assist them, they employ Fire and Sword to contend earnestly for the
Fables that were never delivered to the Saints.

To draw up an Account of the horrible Effects of Uncharitableness would be to
transcribe the Ecclesiastical History of many Ages: Whole Churches and Quarters
of the World, the Eastern and Western, have damned one another plentifully upon
the Account of imposed Days, and Trifles which the Gospel leaves indifferent or
rather forbids. How many of the Canons of ancient Councils have been influenced
in their Formation by this assuming Spirit, and as terribly enforced in their
Execution to the Reproach and Devastation of Christendom?

But it moves my Grief and Wonder, that a modern Church that pretends not to
Infallibility should assume a strange Dominion over our Faith and Practice. It
asserts its own Power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in
Controversies of Faith; when in the very proceeding Words it confesses, that
the Churches of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch have erred, so also the
Church of Rome has erred, not only in their Living and Manner of Ceremonies,
but also in Matters of Faith. It demands my Admiration, that such a Church
should canonically denounce her Excommunications in abundance, against those
that dissent from her in some disputable Things, while they retain all her
professed Doctrines of the Christian Faith.

And it is a Pain and a Shame to our Eyes to look backward upon other Times, and
to behold Pamphlets written against Toleration by such as are Ministers of the
Gospel of Peace, that perfect Law of Liberty. 'Twas their Opinion then, (and
they told the World so in Print) that Sectaries ought to the silenced by the
Civil Power: Now Sectary is a Name of broad Dimensions, and has a terrible
Stretch with it; the long Scourge would in Time reach all those who differ from
the Hand that manages that Weapon of Chastisement: None must be authorized to
preach in any Form, but by the Solemnity of imposing Hands, by a Company of
authorized Men. Because some subjected themselves to the Determination of a
Synod, they would make it the Duty of all their Neighbors to wear the same
Yoke; and thought others were bound to become Slaves to the same Dictates. But
I forbear this Charge, and almost wish it cancelled: For as the Magistrate did
not put in practice the uncharitable Pamphlets, so those Reverend and
Honorable Writers have been taught to acknowledge the Mistake of their Zeal,
when their own verbal Rods have been turned against them, and became real
Scorpions with Stings and Scourges a thousand-fold. The Fathers have been
dearly instructed in the Value of Toleration and Liberty by most abundant
Retaliations. The Children have learned to preach this Part of the Gospel well,
and I Am persuaded they will never forget it again.

If we turn over more ancient Annals, the Marian Days give us horrible Examples
of fiery Zeal in the Clergy, and the glorious Reign of the succeeding
Virgin-Princess is hardly to be purged from the Stain of Blood. Blessed be God
who has put into the Heart of our Civil Governors to restrain the Fury of all
Spiritual Administrators. The long and dreadful Train of Capias's and Goalers,
Prisons and Plunderings, Ruin and Banishment, Silencings and violent
Suppressions are no longer the Attendants of the Anathemas of any Church among
us. And I hope no Church mourns the Loss of them; though there are some Anathemas
that abide still as Terrors to those that are weak in Faith, and not very
honorable Monuments of that Church's Charity.

In these late Years the Scene of Great Britain was a little Shadow of Spain
and France, where Dragoons and the Inquisition manage Ecclesiastical
Discipline. We were brought to the very Gates of Aceldama. The Agents of Rome
were ready with their Instruments of Death. Adored be the Divine Spirit that
awakened the Rulers of the Church to behold the common Danger, and raised in
them generous Resolutions and Promises to exercise Charity and Temper toward
their Brethren. Glory to that God whose kind Providence sent us a Deliverer,
and forbid England to become a Field of Blood and Matyrdom: And new Songs of
Praise are still due unto Divine Mercy, for establishing the Person and Heart
of our Queen in the Throne and the Principles of so glorious an Example and
Predecessor. Her gentle Government subdues the Hearts of all her People to
herself; her Charity joins their Affections to one another; her parental Care
and Love reconciles Christian Parties, and her Wisdom unites Christian Nations.

IV. The last Mischief I shall mention, and which should fright us terribly
from the Peril of it, is, that an uncharitable Man wounds the very Vitals of
that Religion, by which be hopes for Eternal Life: And whilst his Fury rages
against his Brother for accidental Differences, he shakes the very Foundations
of his own Christianity, and endangers or prevents his own Salvation; his
boasted Orthodoxy in Opinion is made vain, while his practical Ungodlinesses
are so real; and his Faith appears to be little better than that of Devils,
when he mingles so much of their Malice with it. In vain does he glory in the
Brightness of his Notions; in vain does he presume Darkness is past, and the
true Light now shines: For he that saves he is in the Light and hates his
Brother, he abides in Darkness, even till now, 1 John ii. 8, 9.

Such a Wisdom composed of mere Opinion and Wrath can never lead aright up to
Heaven, for it did not descend from thence: The Wisdom that is from above is
first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and
good Fruits, without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy, and the Fruit of
Righteousness is sown in Peace of them that make Peace: But if ye have bitter
Envying and Strife in your Hearts, glory not. Whatever your Pretenses of Truth
be, this is but lying against the Truth: This Wisdom descends not from above,
but is earthly, sensual, carnal, devilish, Jam. iii. 14, etc. It Is impossible
there should be true Faith without sincere Love: If I understand all Mysteries,
and have all Knowledge, if I speak with the Tongues of Men and Angels, and have
all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and mere destitute of Charity, my
Pretensions to Religion are the mere Sound of noisy Brass, or a tinkling
Cymbal, 1 Cor. xiii. 1, 2. It Is such a Charity that suffers long, that is not
easily provoked, that bears all things, and believes all things, that takes
all Things in the best Sense, and thinks no Evil: It Is such a Charity as this
that is a substantial Part of our Religion. Charity in the Heart, is absolutely
required to make up inward Christianity; and the Appearance of it in the Life
is a most necessary Part of Godliness.

It Is true indeed, that all Graces and Virtues are very imperfect in this
present State, and there is much of Uncharitableness remaining in many a good
Man: But that Man can never be good that has no Charity. Zelotus has spend his
Life in declaiming against some little Modes and Gestures used in Worship by
his Fellow Christians, or in imposing some uninstituted Ceremonies on the
Consciences of his Brethren. He has stirred up the Magistrate to persecute some
of them to Prisons, and almost to Death. He flattered his Conscience with Hopes
that his Zeal for the Church should not only render him acceptable at the last
Day, but provide him a large Reward: He lies now languishing upon a Bed of
Sickness, on the very Borders of Eternity, and is terribly awakened to behold
his own Mistake; while he stands within Sight of the Tribunal of Christ, and
the Face of the Judge, his former Practice appears to his Conscience in its
true and frightful Shape; the Fire that has animated him against his Brethren,
now flashes in his Soul, and discovers its infernal Source; now he dreads to be
made an Example of the same Vengeance among Devils, with which he has pursued
his Fellow Mortals; he groans out his last Breath in bitter Agonies; cries to
the God of Love for Mercy upon his departing Spirit; and expires almost without
Hope. He is gone. But we leave his Soul to the Compassions of a God who can
better pardon his mighty Errors, than he would forgive others in their little
Mistakes.

Thus dreadfully has this Vice of Uncharitableness prevailed against the
Honor of Christianity, and the Peace of Mankind. Thus sacrilegiously has it
taken away one of the brightest Marks of the best Religion, and that is Love.
It has defaced the Beauty of our holy Profession, scandalized the sacred Name
that we bear, made a Slaughterhouse of the Church of Christ, and deceived the
Souls of Men to their own eternal Ruin.

Just as I had finished this Essay, Pharisaino happened to come into my Study,
and taking up the first Leaf, read the Title, and was persuaded this Discourse
must be written against himself.

No (said I) there is not any Man alive personally intended in these Papers,
but if you please to peruse them, and shall apply the Characters to yourself, I
hope you will confess Divine Providence has led you into a Conviction of your
false Zeal. Pharisaino sat him down immediately, and with a running Eye passed
through every-Page. And though the frequent Wrinkle of his Brow discovered his
inward Chagrin and Disgust, yet he paid me many a Ceremony; and behold (said
he) how Language and Fancy will dress up Zeal like a Monster to fright Men out
of their Fervor of Spirit.

I have heard, added he, that you have some Skill in Painting, pray draw me the
Figure of this Uncharitableness in just and proper Colors; this Monster which
you complain has so narrow'd and disgraced, and murdered Christianity. I will
attempt it, Pharisaino, if you will furnish me with a Sheet of large Paper, and
that of the fairest Kind, to represent the Christian Church in this World.
First, I will pare it round, and reduce it to a very small compass; then with
much Ink will I slain the Whiteness of it, and deform it with many a Blot; at
the next sitting I will stab it through rudely with an Iron Pen; and when I put
the last Hand to complete the Likeness, it shall be smeared over with Blood.

APPENDIX to the first Edition.
IF the Scandal and Cruelty of an uncharitable Temper have not been described
in Characters sufficiently frightful, it must be imputed to a Want of Skill in
the Hand that attempted it, for there is no Want of formidable Features in the
Vice itself. Perhaps a little and unknown Pen has not Force enough to wage
successful War against this mighty Iniquity; and the Printer, in two or three
vacant Pages, permits me to call in the Aid of some great and well known Names:
Names who fought against it in their Lives, who being dead, yet speak, and
plead heartily that it may be destroyed. They espoused the Cause of Charity
with a warm Zeal, being persuaded that it made a considerable Part of our
Religion, and that the contrary Humor was destructive to all that is called
Christian.

Since this Infection is not confined to one Party of Men, but has spread
itself wide through all Christian Societies among us, I have taken the Liberty
in the foregoing Leaves to strike at it wheresoever I found it; and those who
hide this Venom in their Heart still, to whatsoever Tribe they belong, let them
hear the Words of their dead Fathers: Let them blush at their own Folly, and no
longer refuse to be healed.

Archbishop Tillotson in his Works in Folio, Page 217, acquaints us that other
Sects were distinguished by little Opinions, or by some external Rites and
Observances in Religion; but our Savior pitches upon that which is the most
substantial, the most large and extensive, the most useful and beneficial, the
most human, and the most divine Quality of which we are capable, and that is
Love. And P. 126. He declares that Uncharitableness is as bad an Evidence,
either of a true Christian or a true Church, as a Man would wish. Damning of
Men is a very hard Thing, and therefore whenever we do it, the Case must be
wonderfully plain. And P. 364, We should rather be contented to err a little on
the favorable and charitable Part, than to be mistaken on the censorious and
damning Side. Our blessed Savior frames his Parables with a remarkable Biass
to the charitable Side, to reprove the Uncharitableness of the Jews, who
positively excluded all the rest of Mankind besides themselves, from all Hopes
of Salvation. An odious Temper, which to the infinite Scandal of the Christian
Name and Profession has prevailed upon some Christians to a notorious Degree.

Dr. Owen in his Discourse of the Person of Christ, P. 222, says, One
Christian who is meek, humble, kind, patient and useful unto all, that
condescends to the Ignorance, Weaknesses, and Infirmities of others, that
passes by Pro vocations, Injuries and Contempt with Patience and with Silence,
(unless where the Glory and Truth of God call for a just Vindication) that
pitieth all Sorts of Men in their Failings and Miscarriages, who is free from
Jealousies and evil Surmises, that loves what is good in all Men; and all Men,
even wherein they are not good, nor do good, does more express the Virtues and
Excellencies of Christ, than Thousands can do with the most magnificent Works
of Piety or Charity (i. e. Liberality) where this Frame is wanting in them. For
Men to pretend to follow the Example of Christ, and in the mean time to be
proud, wrathful, envious, bitterly zealous, calling for Fire from Heaven to
destroy Men, or fetching it themselves from Hell, is to cry, Hail unto him, and
to crucify him afresh unto their Power.

Mr. Baxter in his Christian Directory, Part 1. p. 40. writes thus: Surely if
the very Life of Godliness lay not much in Unity and Love, we should never have
had such Words spoken of it as you find in Scripture. Love is to the Soul as
our natural Heat is to the Body; whatever destroys it, destroys Life; and
therefore cannot be for our Good. Be certain, that Opinion, Course or Motion
tends to Death that tends to abate your Love to your Brethren, much more, which
under Pretense of Zeal, provokes you to hate and hurt them. And a little
after, To limit all the Church to your Party, and deny all or any of the rest
to be Christians and Parts of the universal Church, is Schism by a dangerous
Breach of Charity. And P. 41. he asserts it a most dangerous thing to a young
Convert to be ensnared in a Sect: It will, before you are aware, possess you
with a fevourish sinful Zeal for the Opinions and Interest of that Sect. It
will make you bold in bitter Invectives and Censures against those that differ
from them. It will corrupt your Church Communion, and fill your very Prayers
with Partiality and human Passions: It will secretly bring Malice under the
Name of Zeal into your Minds and Words: In a Word, it is a secret but deadly
Enemy to Christian Love and Peace. Let them that are wiser and more Orthodox
and godly than others, show it as the Holy Ghost directs them, Jam. iii. 13,
etc.

The Baptists in their Appendix to their Confession of Faith, 1677, say, The
Discharge of our own Consciences, in point of Baptism, does not any Ways
disoblige or alienate our Affections or Conversation from any others that fear
the Lord; but that we may and do (as we have Opportunity) participate of the
Labors of those whom God has endued with Abilities above ourselves, and
qualified and called to the Ministry of the Word; earnestly desiring to approve
ourselves to be such as follow after Peace with Holiness; and therefore we
always keep that blessed Irenicum or healing Word of the Apostle before our
Eyes, Phil. iii. 15, 16. And at the End of the Appendix they declare, that in
as much as these things (viz.) Modes of Baptism, etc. are not of the Essence of
Christianity, but that we agree in the Fundamental Doctrines thereof, we do
apprehend there is sufficient Ground to lay aside all Bitterness and Prejudice,
and in the Spirit of Love and Meekness to embrace and own each other therein;
leaving each other at Liberty to perform such other Services (wherein we cannot
concur) apart unto God, according to the best of our Understanding.

ESSAY VIII. Of the Difficulties in Scripture, and the Different Opinions of
Christians in Things less necessary.
SECT. I. A Short Account of these Difficulties.
COncerning the Doctrines and Duties which peculiarly belong to the New
Testament, I have generally concluded this to be a good Rule of Judgment, that
according to the Degree of their Importance or Necessity to Salvation, such is
commonly the Degree of their Evidence; and the Frequency of their Repetition
is, for the most part, proportionable to their Usefulness. Those great Truths
of our Religion, and those Practices of Christianity, without which we cannot be
saved, are described in the Word of God in large and fair Characters, so that
he who runs may read them. These Visions and Revelations of the Mind and Will
of God our Sovereign, are written and made plain upon the Tables of the
Evangelists, or of the Apostles, Heb. ii. 2. they are not mentioned once and
briefly, but many Pages explain and repeat them; they stand in a divine and
convincing Light, and may easily be understood by those who with a humble and
teachable Spirit, inquire what they must believe and do, in order to please God.

This Remark is much confirmed by that Promise which assures us that it should
be so in Gospel Times. The High way to Heaven is so plain, that the wayfaring
Men, or Strangers, though they be Fools in Understanding, shall not err
therein, Isai. xxxv. 8. A Man that labors in his daily Calling, in the City or
the Field, or a Servant in the lowest Rank of Life, may, with due Application
in their vacant Moments, be acquainted with the necessary Truths and Duties of
our Religion; besides that the Spirit of God is promised to sincere and
diligent Seekers, to faithful and humble Inquirers, and shall be bestowed
sufficiently to inform them of the sure way to eternal Life, Prove. ii. 1.6. If
thou criest after Knowledge, and liftest up thy Voice for Understanding, if
thou seek her as Silver, and searchest for her as for hid Treasures, then
shall thou understand the Fear of the Lord, and find the Knowledge of God. Luke
xi. 13. Your heavenly Father shall give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him.
And the Spirit is sent to guide the Faithful into all Truth, John xvi. 13.

The Wisdom, the Equity and the Goodness of God seem all to concur in fixing
Matters of necessary Belief and Practice in this Situation, i. e. That they
should be often and plainly expressed. If there be any particular Doctrine or
Duty which I find written but in one single Text of Scripture, or expressed but
darkly, I should reasonably conclude the Great God never designed that
Doctrine, or that Duty to be of very great Importance in the Christian Life:
For a dark Expression is much more easily mistaken, as to the true Sense of it;
and a single Text is more liable to be miscopied, or dropped by a Transcriber, or
be misconstrued by a Translator, or overseen and neglected by a common Reader
or Hearer; and the Great God would not put Matters of high Importance on so
doubtful and dangerous a Foot, and leave Things necessary at such
Uncertainties, lest honest and humble Enquirers should, after all their Pains,
mistake their Way to Heaven.

A sudden Thought of the Form and Order of Baptism, prescribed to us, Matthew.
xxviii. 18. made me at first suspect, that there must be one Exception made to
this Rule, about the frequent Repetition of any Doctrine or Duty necessary to
Salvation; but upon a further Consideration and Review of Things it appears
evident to me now, that though this Appointment of the Form of Baptism was
prescribed to be done in the Name of the Holy Spirit, as well as of the Father
and the Son, yet it was by no means necessary to the Salvation of any Man, and
therefore there was no necessity of having it often repeated. Let us consider

1st, That the Appointment of it is but once expressed, and that by one holy
Writer, and there is never an actual Example or Instance of this complete Form
of Baptism practiced in any place of Scripture. Observe that remarkable Text,
Acts xix. 2. where St. Paul inquired of the young Converts that were baptized
at Ephesus, Have you received the Holy Ghost since you believed? and they said
unto him, we have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost. He then
inquired, unto what were ye baptized? and they said, Unto John's Baptism; and
Paul had told them that John taught them, that they should believe on him that
should come after him, that is, in Christ Jesus: when they heard this, they
were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus. Whether they were baptized in the
Name of the Holy Spirit, or no, is not actually expressed; which is something
strange, when that was the chief Point of Enquiry concerning their Baptism into
the Holy Ghost.

Here also it may be observed, that those who were here baptized, Acts xix. 5,
6. immediately received the Holy Ghost; whence it may be very probably
inferred, that some Persons were baptized with the Holy Ghost itself, who were
not actually baptized into the Name of the Holy Ghost.

Consider 2dly, When the Business of Baptism is mentioned in several Places in
the Epistles, it is generally declared that Baptism was performed in the Name
of the Lord Jesus, Romans vi. 3. so many of you as were baptized into Jesus
Christ were baptized into his Death, Gal. iii. 27. As many of you as have been
baptized into Christ, 1 Cor. xii. 13. By one Spirit we are baptized into one
Body, i. e. Christ as in the foregoing Verse, but I can find no mention of the
Disciples being baptized into the Holy Ghost.

3dly, Though I am ready to believe from many Expressions in the Primitive
History of the Church, that the Baptisers did usually keep to this Form of
Words, I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, yet it is evident from a long Account which Grotius gives us upon this
Text, Matt. xxviii. 18. that they used diverse Forms, that is, they sometimes
expressed the Father by a Periphrasis, The God of all, or the God of the whole,
the God and Father of the whole, sometimes the Son was expressed by the Word,
or the only begotten Son of God: Sometimes the Holy Ghost was expressed by the
Spirit who inspired the Prophets.

I might add, that upon their Profession of the Christian Religion, sometimes
it is called the Profession of the Remission of Sins, or the Catholic Church,
or Everlasting Life, but they never made a Scruple of their being rightly
baptized into Salvation upon any of these Accounts; and I am persuaded that had
the Apostles themselves, or the primitive Christians, thought it necessary to
Salvation, the Form of Baptism would have been more express in the History of
it, and been more particularly repeated.

I think therefore the Rule may stand good still, that where a Doctrine or a
Duty is mentioned but in one single Place of the Scripture, it cannot be of
absolute Necessity to Salvation. I hope the Reader will forgive this long
Digression, and then proceed.

On the other hand, where particular Truths or Duties are often repeated in
Scripture, and very plainly expressed in several Places, it is hardly possible
that they should be subject to these Inconveniences. It is not to be supposed
that the Transcribers of the New Testament should make the same Mistake in
every Place, where these Propositions are mentioned; that they should drop them
out of every Chapter; that the Traslator should misconstrue them in every Text;
or that their Misconstruction should always seem to make good Sense in every
Context where they stand; or finally that the Hearer or Reader should always
overlook them when they are found in so many passages, and so often occur to
his Ear or Eye.

But it is very apparent, and all Men must acknowledge that Matters of less
Moment, and things not necessary, are not mentioned so often: And when they are
mentioned, the Scripture sometimes gives no Determination or positive
Injunctions about them; nor do the Apostles determine the smaller Controversies
with that plain, exact and positive Method of Speech, which you find them use
in the most substantial Truths and Duties. If we read the 14th Chap. to the
Romans, it must convince us of this Assertion. St. Paul does not there decide
the little Controversies about Observations of Meats and Days, but seems to
leave them to Charity. Nor are the lesser Points of Christianity half so often
mentioned, or urged with half so much Vehemence, as the grand Duties of Faith
and Love, Repentance and Holiness. In matters of lower Concernment among the
Formalities and Modes of Religion, or even in some higher Articles, whose
Circumstances and logical Relations are not necessary to Salvation, the
Scripture has its dusnoeta et fere aluta, as Divines call them, i. e. almost
insolvable Difficulties and Things, very hard to be understood by Men in this
State, at least by common Readers.

Sometimes the Matter is so sublime, so unlike all mortal Affairs, and so
divinely superior to every thing here below, that perhaps 'twas not possible to
describe it fully and plainly in human Words: And the more enlightened the
Writer or Speaker was, the deeper and more inexpressible might some of the
Truths be which he reveals. Our Savior has made some such Discoveries at the
latter end of his Prayer in the 17th of St. John's Gospel. Such are the
Doctrines of the Union or Oneness of Christ with God his Father, and the
Oneness or Union of the Saints with God and Christ. Some things are constrained
to be expressed in a human way less suitable to their own Dignity, and yet even
then they are not perfectly easy to be understood, for earthly Metaphors will
not convey to our Thoughts a full Idea of things divine and heavenly. When
Christ had been teaching Nicodemus the Doctrine of Regeneration, John iii. 12.
he adds, If I have told you earthly things and ye believe not, how shall ye
believe if I tell you of heavenly things? The Apostle Paul, the most enlightened
of all mere Men, saw and heard some things among his Visions and Revelations,
that were unutterable, 2 Cor. xii. And some things which he has published for
the Use of the Church, according to the Wisdom given to him, are hard to be
understood, as St. Peter himself assures us, 2 Peter iii. 16.

Again, I might take Notice that in Matters which are Prophetical, both in the
Old Testament and in the New, there are many dark Expressions, many Parables
and hard Figures of Speech, which are made use of to express and convey some
general and indistinct Ideas of future Events, which were not fit to be more
fully revealed in that Day, and which only the Accomplishment was designed to
explain the future Days or Ages. When these things are come to pass, then shall
ye know that I have foretold them, John xiii. 19. and xiv. 29. and xvi. 4.

The Spirit of God, for wise Ends, has expressed some Things in particular
Seasons, whether Doctrinal or Prophetical, in obscure Phrases, capable of a
double Interpretation. Other things are very briefly hinted, and the holy
Writer does but just glance at them in passing, and does not dwell upon them
long enough to explain them, that being not his present chief Design.

Some Words are so ambiguous and of various Meaning in the same Chapter, that
it is not easy to determine their precise Sense in each Verse; and these Words
also transferred into our Language may not have the same different Meanings as
the Original, and perhaps too, may be determined to the wrong Sense by the
Translators; but the Vulgar can read only their own Language, and their
Judgments are determined by the Translators Opinion. The various Meanings put
on the Words Nomos the Law, ekklesia the Church, cheirot^neo to ordain,
episkopos a Bishop or Overseer, etc. sufficiently prove this.

Besides, the Sense of many a Scripture depends not merely on the literal
Construction of the Words, but on the Knowledge of the Context, and on the
Consideration of the Scope and Design of the Writer, and perhaps the deeper
Design of the Spirit of God that inspired him: It depends on the Character of
the Person that writes, and on the Character and Condition of the Persons to
whom he writes, into what Errors or evil Practices they were fallen, at what
Time, and under what Circumstances these Things fell out: All which it is
impossible every Mechanic should know, and but few Scholars are well acquainted
with: These Difficulties in Scripture occasion different Opinions among the
Readers; and because each would impose his Sense upon all the rest of
Christians, a thousand quarrelling Folios have sprung.

There is another Difficulty and Shade of Darkness which falls upon many Texts
of Scripture, and particularly in the New Testament, from the extraordinary
Actions and Modes of Action in the primitive and inspired Times. It Is certain
that some things recorded in the Acts of the Apostles, and occasionally spoken
of in the Epistles, refer only to the extraordinary and inspired Transactions
of those miraculous Times, and cannot be imitated by us: Such are the
Communication of Gifts by the Imposition of Hands, the healing the Sick by
anointing with Oil, the multitude of useful Speakers in one Assembly, the
talking various Languages in public Worship if an Interpreter were present,
etc. It is as certain also, that some things are recorded in some of those
Scriptures, as Patterns and Directions for our Imitation in all Ages. Such are
the Ordinances of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, the Choice of Deacons, the
Ordination of Overseers or Bishops, the Practice of occasional Communion, etc.
But there are some Circumstances relating to these Actions, concerning winch it
is hard to determine how far they belong to the extraordinary Affairs of that
Day, and how far they are Rules for our Conduct in ordinary Cases.

Now from all these Differences have arisen many laborious and angry Volumes of
Noise and Wrangle about the Mint, the Annise, and the Cummin, about the Dress
and the Fringes of Religion, which have vexed the learned World, and disquieted
and divided the Church of Christ.

Notwithstanding all these Difficulties in Scripture, and the divided
Sentiments of Men about them; yet there is no room for the Popish Doctrine of
the Insufficiency of the Holy Scriptutes; no need of any living Judge of
Controversies, or a Seat of Infallibility on Earth; for the grand Doctrines and
Duties which are necessary to Salvation, such as Repentance toward God, Faith
in the Lord Jesus Christ, as a Prophet, a High Priest and a King, the Necessity
of universal Holiness, Pardon of Sin through the Blood of Christ, the
Resurrection of the Dead, and eternal Rewards and Punishments in the World to
come; all these, I say, are written down in Scripture, in as plain and express
a manner as the Nature and Importance of them required; and about these things
Persons of a sober, humble and honest Mind cannot well mistake, if they are
diligent in their Enquiry, and seek Wisdom of that God who gives liberally, and
upbraids us not with our own Folly.

Not only are all Matters necessary to Salvation written plain enough for every
Reader, but we have also, as I hinted before, the Promise of the Assistance of
the Holy Spirit to teach us to understand all such Revelations, that sincere
and diligent Men may not be suffered to fall into such a Mistake as to fail of
Acceptance with God. Nay, further, we have good Encouragement to hope, that
even in some things on which Salvation does not necessarily depend, but are
only designed to promote the farther Sanctification and Comfort, Peace and Hope
of the Church, the Spirit of God will often assist the upright and humble
Seeker, yet still there will remain Difficulties enough to exercise inquisitive
Souls, for I find no certain Promise, that God will always satisfy every
sincere Inquirer in the full Meaning of all difficult Texts.

I glorify thee, O my God, that thou have not confined the Knowledge of thyself
to the wise and the learned World, but have written down the Way of Salvation
so plain, that a Child may read and attain it. Let the Scribes and Doctors and
Critics of the Age wrangle about the Pins of the Tabernacle, and the Seats in
the Synagogue, let them contend, even to Blood, about the Ofs, the Ands, and
the Moreovers of the Bible, my Soul shall dwell in Peace, and rest on these
Pillars of Safety, even the great and evident Doctrines of the Christian Faith.
I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have revealed thy
self and thy Son unto Babes, and have not made it a Matter of Wit and Criticism
to be a Christian. The Foolish and the Base, and the weak Things of this World
are chosen to Salvation, and they understand, and believe, and practice all the
necessary Articles, while they may differ from each other in some lesser Forms
of Worship and Discipline, and are not able to maintain an Argument on either
Side.

What is here asserted concerning the Substance of some of the less necessary
Articles of our Religion ( viz.) that they are somewhat obscurely expressed in
Scripture; the same may be applied also to the circumstantial Topics, to the
Appendices, and the Logical Relations even of the greatest and most necessary
Points of Christianity, as I hinted before. Though the Practice of Repentance,
and the Promises of Pardon; though Justification by Faith, and the Death of
Christ as a Ransom for Sinners, are so often and so plainly affirmed, yet it is
not affirmed so often, nor so plain in Scripture; what Logical Relation Faith
bears to our Justification; whether it is a Condition as some make it, or a
receiving Instrument as others suppose: Nor is it so indisputably and so
evidently written in the Word of God, whether Christ died as a conditional
Atonement for all Sin, and a Purchaser of Salvation in general for all that are
willing to accept it, or whether as a strict Representative only of the Elect,
and to procure neither absolute nor conditional Pardon for any Sins but theirs.

It Is evident beyond all doubt, that where the Gospel comes, he that believes
shall be saved: But whether Faith saves us as it is a mere Dependence on divine
Grace, or on the Priesthood of Christ, or whether it saves us rather as a
hearty Belief of the Gospel and the Grace of it, even such a Belief as comes to
be the Spring of our Repentance and our Holiness, this is not so exceeding
evident as to leave no room for Controversy.

It is abundantly revealed in Holy Scripture, that without Repentance of our
Sins we can never be saved, nor shall any of our Inquities be forgiven without
a sincere Conversion to God; but to declare with utmost Exactness and full
Assurance what Logical Relation our Repentance bears to our Pardon, Scripture
has not taught us quite so fully, nor so clearly described it.

It is sufficiently plain to every Reader of the Bible, that Holiness of Heart
and Life is of absolute Necessity to our Entrance into Heaven, for without
Holiness no Man can see God: But how far, and in what precise Sense this
Holiness and Obedience to the Commands of God can give a Right to enter into
the Gates of the City is something harder to determine; or what is that sort of
Right or Title which our own sincere Obedience gives us to the immediate
Possession of Blessedness, though we are fully assured from several Places in the
Word of God, it is very different from the Right which we obtain by the
Obedience and Sufferings of Christ.

In some Places the sacred Writer seems to mention one Doctrine, while he is
pursuing some one Subject with Warmth and Zeal; in other Places of Scripture
the contrary seems to be signified or hinted; now both these in the literal
Sense, and without Limitation, cannot be true: And which of these two Texts
must be reduced to the other, by certain Distinctions and Limitations in order
to a Reconciliation, is not so easy always to determine: For in some Instances
it may happen, that the Propositon which is but implied in one Text, is nearer
the Truth than another Proposition which seems to be expressed in another
Place; which can only be decided by a due Survey of the Context, and the
different Designs of the Writer, and a Comparison of other Scriptures.

Therefore if we will dispute about these solemn Subjects, let our warmest Zeal
and our sharpest Weapons be engaged against those Adversaries of the Gospel,
who attempt to ruin the Foundations of it; let us contend most earnestly for
the Defense of what God most obviously and incontestably reveals; but our
coolest Debates, our Candor and Charity, rather than Fierceness, should be
employed about the Points of more dubious Discovery: At best we should maintain
great Moderation so long, till we find the lesser Errors spreading like a
secret Gangrene, and drawing along with them dismal Consequences, till they are
observed to infect the more substantial parts of Godliness, and endanger the
Vitals and very Essence of Christianity.

If our Reverend Fathers and Brethren have shown a fiery Zeal about these
lesser Errors, I would persuade myself their chief Motive was a Suspicion of
Danger and Ruin to the Gospel itself, in the Liberty, in the Purity, and in the
Glory of it, if they should have connived at these lesser Mistakes, or treated
them with a cold Indifference: And it is possible that sometimes they might have
Reason for their Suspicion and their Zeal, though it may be confessed they were
but Men, and their Fervor might sometimes exceed due Bounds.

But, in general, as to these meaner Point, Moderation is our Duty: Whereto we
have attained, let us walk by the same Rule, and if any be otherwise minded,
God in his most proper Season will reveal it also to them, Phil. iii. 15, 16.
It Is as if the blessed Apostle had said, that those who trust only in Christ
and his Righteousness, as the ground of their Acceptance before God, shall be
joyfully received to join their right Hand of Fellowship with mine; and if they
do but pursue Holiness sincerely from the plainer Motives of Christianity,
though they are not well acquainted with those most noble Principles of it (
viz.) Communion with a suffering, dying and rising Savior as a Representative,
Pledge and Pattern of spiritual dying to Sin, and Resurrection into Holiness,
which are contained in v. 10. yet I will not disturb them about it, but hope
God will discover it to them in his Time.

Yet further, as the great Doctrines of Christianity and the necessary Duties
of it, are very much distinguished from the less necessary Points, and the
Circumstantials of those Duties, by their greater Evidence and Clearness of
Revelation; so the more substantial Parts of the Worship appointed in the
Gospel, may be distinguished from the less Important Modes and Circumstances.
Solemn Prayer unto God, preaching of the Word, Administration of the
Ordinances, Baptism and the Lord's Supper, and a due Attendance thereon, are
plainly and certainly required of us that assume the Name of Christians in our
sacred Assemblies. But whether we may borrow Assistance from composed Forms in
preaching, praying and other Administrations; or whether we must renounce all
Use of Forms, Books and Notes to aid our Invention, Memory and Expression in
Prayers and Sermons, are mere accidental Matters, and not written in Scripture
with so express a Pen. So whether the Person baptized must be sprinkled or
immersed, and whether the Communicants at the Lord's Table must sit, or lean,
stand, or kneel, are less-essential Considerations, and have been the Subjects
of dubious Inquiry.

Again, in the Constitution, Order and Government of a Church, the same
Distinctions may be made also. That Persons professing the Name of Christ
should agree to walk and worship together at stated Seasons in the Fellowship
of the Gospel, seems to be a Demand of the Law of Nature, and sufficiently
confirmed by many Directions or Examples in positive Expressions of Scripture
too; That every such Congregation of faithful People, or voluntary Society of
Christians, is a Church of Christ; That they ought to seclude or put away from
their Number, the grossly ignorant, the scandalous and the profane, and to
withdraw from those that walk disorderly; That there should be Persons
appointed to minister to them in holy things, and that the Society should
honor and maintain them; All these seem to be plain and undoubted Duty.

But whether this Society may receive and exclude Members without or against
the Consent of their Pastor; Whether there must be any Elders in a Church
distinct from and inferior to the Pastor or Bishop; Whether the Minister needs
the Imposition of the Hands of several Presbyters, or the superior episcopal
Consecration; or whether he be sufficiently ordained by the Choice of the
Society, his solemn Acceptance, and his own and their devoting him to God in
that Office by Fasting and Prayer; these things are not quite so evident in the
Writings of the New Testament. And while we are required to have no Fellowship
with the openly Wicked, though they are pretended Professors of Religion, yet
we are commanded to receive the Weak in the Faith, and to hold Communion with
them in Common Christianity, though we may all differ in doubtful Disputations.

SECT. II. An Insurrection of contending Christians.
I am easily aware that the Men of Heat and Party, will lift up their Hands in
Wonder, when they read this Catalogue and Distinction of the Affairs of
Christianity. I see them already kindling into Rage against me; they incompass
my Tent and proclaim War. And upon a Review of their Numbers, their
Insurrection and their Zeal, I cannot find an Advocate wanting for any one Sect
or Party, among the common Professors of the Religion of Christ in England. I
see there Merges and his Neighbor Aspergio; I find Sedentius and Genicola both
there; Piscopion, Classicus and Antipas are come thither also. Each of them a
Prince of their Tribe, and either a Head or a very forward Member of the Family
of their Fathers. Just so the Children of Israel began to denounce War against
their Brethren Gad and Reuben, when they built an Altar of Witness to maintain
their Communion with the rest of their Tribes, while they were Dissenters only
in point of Habitation, and dwelt beyond Jordan: These Party-Men are full of
Faith and Certainty in every Opinion; they embrace none as Brethren in Christ
who do not wear their Garb and Livery, and talk not exactly in their Language
and Phrases, nor will they hold Communion with those that dissent from them in
the least Punctilio's of the Form or Worship of Christians. If Men depart from
the Truth, say they, they are in the Way of Error; and it is all one whether
they depart little or much, since they have forsaken the Truth we ought to
forsake them.

These warm Zealots are not used to admit of any Doubt in the smallest
Circumstantials of Religion, and because they have learnt of their Teachers to
affirm all their Tenets with equal Confidence, they believe that the Scripture
reveals them all with equal Evidence. A Metaphor smiling upon their Practice,
is an express Command. They can read their indispensable Duty in a single and
dubious Example. A remote Conclusion of their own drawing, at the End of a long
Chain of Consequences, gives them resistless Conviction, and appears in their
Eye as bright, though distant, as the Morning Star. A Circumstance or two of
matter of Fact determines their Judgment unchangeably, for or against an
Opinion, which at most is but feebly favored by those very Circumstances; a
little Criticism on a single Greek Word in some single Text of Scripture,
becomes a firm Foundation for their Faith: They force some Text or other to
prove every thing which they say, and when they have imposed their Sense on the
Words of the holy Writers, they are sure the Evangelists and the Apostles are
of their Mind. Each of them have picked up some Scraps of the Arguments of their
Party, and they fancy themselves well equiped and furnish for the Defense of
the Truth.

Merges, a very honest Man in the main, is newly come out of the Water, and
glows all over with Zeal and Assurance, that there can be no Baptism without
plunging: He makes a mere Jest of Baby-Sprinkling, and declares that if we are
not covered with Water, we are not buried with Christ: No honest Man, says he,
could ever doubt that John's Disciples were immerst at Enon, for the Scriptures
say, there was much Water there, John iii. 23.

Aspergio, a bold Talker, is as confident that sprinkling, or pouring Water on
the Head, is a true Method of Baptism, and is ready to say severe things
against the Practice of Immersion, as if it were not only needless, but, as
they are ready to call it, foolish and sinful.

It Is plain, says he, in the Word of God, that he Apostles were baptized with
the Spirit, which can never mean that they were dipped or plunged into the
Spirit, but only that the Spirit was poured out upon them: And when the
Israelites were baptized into Moses, it is plain they were only sprinkled with
the Cloud and the Sea, Matt. iii. 11. compared with Acts ii. 3, 17. and 1 Cor.
x. 2. and therefore, says he, I wonder that any Man should be so weak as to
give himself the trouble of Dipping when he has such Texts as these to prove
Sprinkling.

Sedentius, a weak and warm Dissenter, is just come from St. Paul's Cathedral:
Being urged by great Curiosity, with much ado he obtained Leave of his
Conscience to go thither and see Men receive the Lord's Supper kneeling: As he
returns he is almost ready to pronounce Damnation against the Organs and
Singing-Men, for they are all, says he, the Limbs of Antichrist: He whispers
Damnation against these Idolaters that bow before a Piece of Bread; for they
look as though they worshipped the Host, and belonged to Rome. He is very
positive that sitting is a Posture of absolute Necessity in that Ordinance, for
Jesus and his Disciples did sit and eat, Mark xiv. 8. 1 Cor. xi. 20. and since
it is called the Supper of the Lord, we must sit down while we partake of it,
for every Child knows that Men are never wont to kneel at Supper.

On the other hand, Genicola hates the Presbyterians for their scandalous
Irreverence at the Sacrament: What, says he, dare any Man use to clownish and
so rude a Gesture as sitting, when he receives the Seal of the Pardon of his
Sins, and the Emblems of the Body and Blood of Christ? and he forbids all such
Worshippers from his Communion with this Sentence, Procul, O procul este,
profani; i. e. hence ye profane Creatures, though he can hardly pretend to
bring one Text of Scripture for his own Practice: He is sure also that the
Surplice, a Sign or Token of Purity, and as our Reformers teach, ought to be
worn at Prayer, for we must lift up Hands of Purity and Innocence when we come
before God; and he finds the long white Garment in these Words, Let all things
be done decently and in order, 1 Cor. xiv. 40.

To me, says Piscopion, it is as clear as the Light, that no Man can be a
Minister of Christ unless the Hands of a superior Man, even a Diocesan Bishop,
have been upon his Head; and all the Preachings and Ministrings of such a
presumptuous Wretch, who was not thus ordained, are but vain Babblings, empty
Trifles, and impudent Usurpations in the Name of the Lord: For thus says the
Common Prayer Book, which was made by Saints and Martyrs, It is evident unto
all Men, diligently reading holy Scripture and ancient Authors, that from the
Apostles time there have been these Orders of Ministers in Christ's Church;
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Thus he proceeds triumphant where the Civil
Government is on his Side, and will yield to no Man in Argument or Dispute.

Classicus arises in warm Opposition to Prelacy, and asserts it an indisputable
Truth, that no Minister of Christ is superior to another: I read, says he, in
my Bible, no Distinction between Bishops and Presbyters; they are the same
Officers in Scripture; And the Power of Synods is so plainly instituted at the
Council of Jerusalem, Acts xv. that I am amazed this should be esteemed a
matter of Doubt or Difficulty; and I am well assured of this, because Timothy
had the Hands of the Presbytery laid upon him, 1 Timothy iv. 14. there is no Man
above or below a Presbyter has any thing to do in ordaining Ministers since the
Apostles are dead.

Antipas grows impatient at these bold Assertions, and asserts with as much
Boldness, that the Power of ordaining all Sorts of Officers in the Church
belongs properly to the Brethren of a single Congregation, and none besides
have any Authority to meddle with it, since the Race of inspired Men are dead
and gone: The Brethren have all the Power in their Hands, and it is the Church
or Congregation alone that has any Manner of Right to choose and approve and
establish its own Pastors, Elders, Overseers and Deacons: For is it not said,
Acts vi. 3. Look you out among you seven Men, etc. And if this be done at the
Choice of Deacons, why not of Elders too? The Learned say, that the Word in
Greek, which is used for ordaining of Elders, signifies the Choice or lifting
up the Hands of the Brethren to vote for them. Whatsoever Particulars are
disputed in Church Government, the Power of the People must be ever
acknowledged and received as a fundamental and immovable Truth.

Among all these Combatants there is not one but is so positive in his own
Sentiments, that one would think they had received all their Opinions by
Inspiration, or that Christ and his Apostles had been precisely of their Party,
and had written their Opinions down in express Letters and Syllables. And not
only are they so assured of the Truth of their Tenets, but the vast Importance
of them too: And each of them grows angry that his own particular Opinion
should be reckoned among the less-evident or the less-important Points of
Religion: Their Fury boils high, and their mistaken Zeal and warm Ferment of
their Passion swells every Punctilio to a Mountain, and makes every Particle of
their Opinions fundamental: They don't observe how their swift Career and
Violence carries each of them besides or beyond their Text, and thus they are
sometimes hurried on beside the Goal of Truth, and I am persuaded their
Assurance always runs too fast for their Evidence, and reaches far beyond it.

They commend and practice Vehemence as a Virtue, and so far forget their Bible
as to believe all Moderation to be a mere Spirit of Indifference, and unworthy
of a good Christian. They all maintain opposite Notions, yet by their Temper
and Conduct they all seem to approve each other's Zeal for his own Party, and
with one Consent they vote me a mere Latitudinarian, a lukewarm Professor, a
Citizen of Laodicea, who has not a Spark of Zeal for the Gospel of Christ, the
Worship or the Discipline of his Church.

My dear zealous Friends, be calm a little, and let me speak before I Am
condemned. I do not deny many of these Things which I call less-important to be
some Way discovered in the New Testament, though not in so express and plain
Language as you suppose. The chief Concerns of the Christian Church are so far
prescribed by positive Rules, by Examples or just Inferences, that a serious
Reader, who is attentive and unbyassed, and who will exercise his reasoning
Powers, may find sufficient Notices of all necessary Truth and Duty: According
to my Measure of Light I humbly hope I have found it, and thereby regulate my
Practice.

But still it must be granted, that Things less necessary are not so plainly
described as the bigger and more substantial Parts of Religion, nor graven in
Characters so large and obvious that every one must needs discern them. Christ
Jesus has been as faithful in his House as Moses was, and has delineated the
Form, Pattern and Order of it, so far as infinite Wisdom thought necessary to
carry on the grand Designs of Grace and the Gospel: But some of the lesser Pins
in this spiritual Tabernacle are not so graphically decyphered, as that every
Child may tell whether they must be round or square. There is nothing of so
much Weight depends upon them, and therefore there was no need for them to be
so expressly described under the New Testament, wherein bodily Exercise profits
little, but Worship and Religion consist more in what is spiritual and
invisible. See the Essay on the Reasons why the Worship of Christian Churches
is not so particularly prescribed as the Jewish, which you may find in the
Treatise about the Holiness of Times, Places and Persons.


Upon the whole then, since there are different Degrees of Evidence and
Clearness, wherewith some of the Doctrines of Faith, and the Rules of Worship
and Order in the New Testament are expressed, there ought also to be found in us
different Degrees of Assent or Assurance, wherewith we should receive these
Doctrines or these Rules of Duty: For it is a certain and eternal Rule of Logic
or Reason, that our Assent to any Proposition ought to be firm or feeble, just
in Proportion to the different Degrees of Evidence, whether they be brighter or
more obscure.

Here then is a plain and pretty general Rule given us, whereby we may judge
whether any particular Opinion or Practice be more or less important, and
consequently whether our Zeal for it should be warmer or cooler, viz. Is the
Evidence of this Practice, or this Truth in Scripture more bright or cloudy?
According to the Light of Evidence, such generally should our Zeal be. Violence
and fierce Contention among Christians, especially about Matters of lesser
Moment, or of doubtful Dispute, are infinitely scandalous to the Christian
Name; and as they tend to ruin and destroy the Churches of Christ, so in all
Ages they have greatly grieved the Souls of those who love the Interests of
Christianity, and wish well to Sion.

SECT. III. Some Reasons why these Differences are permitted to arise among
Christians.
If it would not offend my Readers, I would here come to an ingenuous
Confession, that the different Sentiments and dreadful Quarrels of Christians
about some of the lesser Things of Religion, and the dark and dubious
Expressions in Scripture, wherein some Parts of our Religion are revealed, have
sometimes been a sore Temptation and Sorrow to my Heart, so that I have wished
these doubtful Disputables had been more clearly determined there. I have been
plunged into the Briars of this Perplexity, when I have seen Persons of devout
Soul, serious and humble, dissent so widely from each other, both in Opinion
and Practice, and that in Matters of some Moment too, and even after long and
honest Enquiries into the Meaning of God in his Word.

Under these Difficulties I have said in my Heart, Why did not the God of
Wisdom and of Love express every Article of Belief and Duty in Words of
plainest Revelation and Precept, that we might have all read the same Sense,
and been all of one Mind? Why did he leave the least Point of our Religion
dubious or obscure, when, with a long Foresight, he surveyed all the Quarrels
and Rage, the infinite Scandal, the Cruelty and the Blood that in future Ages
would be the Consequences of Religious Disputes?

I have been pained at my Soul, and felt an inward afflicting Heaviness in such
a Meditation as this; nor could I ever satisfy myself with that profane Answer
which some witty Men have given, viz. That God, who might have made the Rules
of our Duty plain and undisputed, chose to express them in Words capable of
several Interpretations, that Christians might be liable to be led into many
different Opinions, that hereby God might please himself with the Variety of
Devotions that were paid him; and that how different soever their Sentiments
and Practices might be, yet that his Commands are equally obeyed by all the
various Kinds of Worship and Service, which the Consciences of Men sincerely
conceive themselves bound to offer. This Notion inclines to that wild Opinion,
which supposes that any Forms or Methods of Worship are all equally acceptable
to God, and that there are more true Religions than one: This savours so much
of the Deist and the Libertine, and the Disciples of the Leviathan, that I
could never admit it into my Assent.

Yet it must be granted that his Wisdom had some very valuable Ends to attain
in the Way of Providence, by permitting so many Differences amongst Christians;
and if we had been Secretaries to the King of Heaven when he formed his
Decrees, we might have known perhaps some of these awful Arcana of his
Government; but who has been his Counselor, or to whom has he given an Account
of these Matters? His Paths are in the great Deep, and his Providence are
trackless through the mighty Waters; how unsearchable are his Ways, and his
Judgments past finding out! I dare not pretend to write a complete Rationale on
all his infinite and impenetrable Designs; yet my Faith assures me that they
have all the highest and divine Reason in them. And I will take the Freedom
here to mention some of those Considerations that have silenced my clamorous
Thoughts, pleased my Enquiry, satisfied my Conscience, and vanquished the dark
Temptation.

First, By these doubtful Disputables among the accidental Things of Religion,
God tries our Sincerity, whether we will hold fast the Substantials. The
Constancy and Courage of a Soul devoted to God is exercised and proved amidst
the Clamours and noisy Contests of the Men of Party and angry Zeal; and when it
persevereth in a Course of Christianity, notwithstanding all these Stumbling
Blocks, it approves itself to God, its Judge and Rewarder. The Differences of
true Christians in some Parts of their Faith and Worship, have frighted and
scandalized the Hypocrite and the giddy Professor; their Heads have been turned
round with every Wind of Doctrine, because their Hearts have not been
established in the Way of Holiness; they have cast off all the Articles and
Practices of Religion, because they find so many Sects divided by their little
Particularities, and cannot precisely determine every Circumstance of Truth and
Duty.

There were Divisions and Parties, Schisms and Sects in the Corinthian Church,
and they must be, says the Apostle, that they that are approved may be made
manifest among you, 1 Cor. xi. 19. Our Lord Jesus forewarns his Disciples, that
Offenses will come, and it is not possible that it should be otherwise; there
shall be Variance and Strife in a Man's own Household: But blessed is he
whosoever shall not be offended in me; he that persevereth to the end the same
shall be saved, Luke xvii. 1. Matt. xi. 6. There are many things in the
Christian Religion that become Stones of stumbling, and Rocks of Offense;
blessed are the upright that hold on their Course and Resolution for Heaven,
and whose Feet stumble not upon these dark Mountains, because of their Neglect
to search out the Truth, or their wilful Obstinacy in dangerous Errors.

Secondly, Not only our Sincerity toward God, but our Charity toward
Fellow Christians is hereby put to the Trial, and Charity is the very Livery of
the Disciples of Christ. Hereby shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples if
ye love one another, John xiii. 35. The Lord has commanded all his Sheep to
wear this Mark of Distinction from the World, how different soever their lesser
Opinions are among themselves. Where I behold the Image of Christ my Lord
stamped in legible Characters upon my Neighbor, can I love him with warm
Affection, though he never frequents the same Place of Worship with me, though
he wears a Garment of another Shape and Color, prays in a set Form of Words
which I cannot perfectly approve, and subscribes a Creed of different
Expressions, though the same in Sense and Meaning? Can I receive this good Man
into my very Soul, who eats nothing but Herbs, and will not sit down at my
Table because Flesh is eaten there? Can I love him at my Heart that loves Jesus
the Lord, though he will not religiously observe the Festival of his Birth or
Ascension? Or do those little Words Christmas and Holy Thursday set my Heart at
a Distance from him, and make him forfeit all my Charity? Such Queries as these
may be a Touchstone of our Graces, and the Test of true Love to Christ and his
Saints.

There seems to be something of this Design in our Lord Jesus Christ, when he
ordered his Servant Paul to write the fourteenth Chapter to the Romans, where
the Apostle, though he gives a Hint of his own Opinion and Liberty in the
Gospel, with regard to Meats and Days, yet he does not impose the same
Observations and Abstinences on other Christians; and though he was inspired,
yet he leaves these things still indifferent, and calls them doubtful
Disputations. Now as the Trial of our Faith, through manifold Temptations, is
much more precious than that of Gold that perishes, so the Trial of our Love
passing through the smoaky Fires of Contention and Dispute, and not mingling
therewith, is discovered to be a pure divine Flame, and shall be found to
Praise, Honor and Glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ, whom having not seen
we love, 1 Pet. i. 7.

Thirdly, Perhaps our Lord might leave some lesser Points of Religion more
obscurely expressed in his Word, because he designed to continue a Ministry in
his Church to the End of the World, or till he came again. While other
Christians have their Hours and Thoughts engrossed by the Cares of this Life,
and want Leisure and Skill and Means to acquaint themselves with all the
difficult and more abstruse Parts of Religion, it is the Business of the Men
that are honored and employed in the sacred Office to give themselves to
Reading, to search into the hidden Things of God, and explain the more doubtful
Paragraphs of his Word unto Men.

I grant that the first and grand Design of their Studies and public Labors
should be to preach the Gospel of the Grace of God and Reconciliation by Jesus
Christ, and to make the necessary Articles of Faith and Practice plain to the
meanest Soul: But a Minister is also required to converse not only with those
Scriptures which will make him wise to final Salvation, but with those also
which may thoroughly furnish him to every good Word and Work, 2 Timothy iii. 17.
that he may know how to speak a Word in Season to every weary Soul, and to draw
Consciences out of Perplexity which are vexed with Scruples of less important
Things; to instruct them in the Mind and Will of Christ about the Methods of
his Worship, and the Order of his Church, to show them the Pattern and Fashion
of the House of God, and all the Ordinances, and the Forms and the Laws
thereof: And that is a Part of his Duty, at proper Seasons, in some of his
public Ministrations; for he must conceal nothing of the Counsel of God from
them, that may be useful or profitable to Men: The Methods of his Worship, and
Institutions of his Gospel, should be treasured up in his Heart; and upon
proper Occasions, of private Visit and Conference, the Lips of the Priest
should make it appear that they keep Knowledge, that the Law may be sought at
his Mouth, for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. ii. 7.

Not that every Man is bound to pay an implicit Faith and blind Obedience to
the Opinions and Dictates of his Bishop or Presbyter. This is Popish Slavery
wheresoever it is practiced, and Popish Tyranny where it is commanded: But
Christians ought to give due Attention to the Advice and Counsel of such as are
set over them in the Lord, Heb. xiii. 17. 1 Cor. xvi. 15, 16. Such as are
solemnly devoted to the Ministry of the Gospel, and have addicted themselves to
the Study and Search of the Scriptures, and are chosen by the People to be
their Teachers, and set apart for that Office in the Way they best approve; and
so far as their Advice is conformable to the written Word, they are to receive
it as from some of the Messengers of Christ.

We may humbly suppose a fourth Design which God had in his Eye when the sacred
Penmen wrote so many Verses of Holy Scripture, which God knew were so difficult
to be interpreted; and that is, that no Christian might put the Bible out of
his own Hands, or neglect to read and meditate and study the Word of God; and
that together with their Reading they might constantly implore the Presence of
the Spirit, the Enlightner and the Comforter, to lead them into all Truth. It
is the Duty of every Man, so far as his Capacity and Opportunities of Life will
admit, to study the holy Scriptures himself, and to see with his own Eyes what
he must believe, and what he must practice.

We should imitate the Example of the noble Bereans, Acts xvii. 11. who
searched the Scriptures with Diligence, and brought the Sermons of Paul himself
unto that sacred Touchstone, to see if the Things which he spoke were true or
no: And after all our Study, we shall find such Difficulties that will convince
us of the Necessity of depending upon a higher Teacher, even the Holy Spirit.
Our blessed Savior commands that we search the Scriptures, and pray for the
Spirit too, John v. 39. Luke xi. 9, 13. And St. Paul prays unto God that he
would give to the Saints which were at Ephesus, that Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation to enlighten the Eyes of their Understanding, Ephesians. i. 17. this
Unction which true Believers have from the Holy One, makes known to them all
Things necessary to Salvation, 1 John ii. 20. And though we have no Ground to
expect that he will unfold to us every lesser Difficulty, while we live in this
World; yet we may humbly hope that in those Things which regard the Forms of
his own Worship, and the Means of his own visible Glory amongst Men, he will by
Degrees let some divine Rays of Light into the Mind of him that seeks after
Truth with great Diligence, fervent Prayer, and more sincere Designs. There are
many Instances to be given of plain Christians that have been made the
Favorites of the enlightening Spirit, and have arrived at uncommon Knowledge in
Christianity by these Methods.

A Fifth blessed End, and which is certainly attained in the Providence of God,
by leaving so many Disputables in Religion, is, that our Souls are hereby drawn
out to long for Heaven, and pant after the State where there is no Contention,
no Dispute. This Prospect renders those happy Regions more desirable whilst we
are here, and more abundantly welcome hereafter.

It is impossible that any Controversy should there arise to interrupt the
Worship of the Church triumphant. It is eternally impossible to divide them
into Parties, or to disturb their Repose. The Doctrines of their Profession are
all written as with Sunbeams, they are no longer the Articles of Faith, but
the Objects of Sight: We shall be all taught of God, we shall see Face to Face,
and know as we are known. So much of the Holy Spirit dwells in all the Saints,
as a perpetual Spring of Revelation and Wisdom. The Discipline of that Church
can occasion no Disputes, for the Son of God, in our Nature, is the Pastor or
Bishop, he keeps the Keys of Heaven in his own Hands, and the Keys of Hell and
Death. The Soul that is once admitted into that Fellowship shall abide like a
Pillar in the Temple of his God, and shall go no more out; but the Hypocrite
and the Unclean shall never enter there. The Worship that is paid there is with
perfect Uniformity of Mind and Affection amongst all the happy Spirits; an
unanimous Consent in Self-abasement, divine Honor and Love; and perhaps when
our Bodies shall be raised again to make a visible Church in Heaven, Worship
may be performed with a glorious Liberty, and with such a pleasing Variety of
Form as glorified Nature shall dictate, and our exalted Reason approve; but
still with the Exercise of the same perfect Love and Delight among the
Worshippers, and under the Influence of the same Spirit.

O the Happiness of that upper Region, where all the Inhabitants are of one
Mind and one Heart! Every Doubt shall for ever vanish, for we shall behold all
Things without a Cloud. In thy Light, O Lord, we shall see Light and enjoy it.
Every Quarrel shall for ever cease, for we shall dwell in the Land of Harmony
and Love. Though our Capacities, perhaps, may be of different Sizes, yet we
shall see all divine Truths in the same Light, and therefore our Sentiments, at
least in Things of Importance, shall differ no more; we shall be united to each
other in the same Band of Love, nor can our Affections be separated any more
for ever: That Light and that Love springs from the ever-blessed God; God the
Creator communicating himself to all his holy and happy Creation, and holding
them fast to himself for ever, in and by that glorious Person Christ Jesus his
Son and Image; for in him must all Things be gathered together in one, and all
Things reconciled unto God in him, whether they be Things in Earth or Things in
Heaven; then shall the Prophecy of Zechariah be fulfilled, The Lord shall be
King over all the Earth, there shall be one Lord, and his Name one, in the
fullest Meaning of that Expression; nor shall the Saints be distinguished by
different Parties or Denominations, but their Hearts and their Names shall be
all one; according to those Expressions of unconceivable Glory, wherein our
Lord describes the things which are truly unspeakable, all the Saints shall be
one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us,
John xvii. 21.

O with what Pleasure have I often read, and methinks would be always reading,
those Words of a Mr. Howe's Funeral Sermon for Dr. Bates.
great Man spoken on the Funeral of his fellow-Saint. When Death shall have
discumber'd and set us free from all sorts of Distempers, and brought us into
the State of perfect and perfected Spirits, how delectable will the Society be,
when all shall be full of divine Life, Light, Love and Joy, and all freely
communicate as they have received freely! But above all that is conceivable in
that other State, how delectable will their Society be in Worship, in the
unanimous Adoration of the ever blessed God, Father, Son and Spirit! O the
inexpressible Pleasure of this Consociation in Worship perpetually tendered
with so absolute a Plenitude of Satisfaction in the Dueness of it, and the
Gustful Apprehension of what those Words import, Worthy art thou, O Lord: Each
one relishing his own Act with just Self Approbation and high Delight,
heightened by their apprehended perfect Unanimity, and that there is among them
no dissenting Vote. Whence it cannot be but to worship God in Spirit and in
Truth, must be to enjoy him, and that he is not under any other Notion, a
satisfying Object of our Enjoyment, more than he is the Object of our Worship.

These are Beams of Celestial Light for Souls to drink in, and to live upon
them while we are passing onward to these fair Mansions through a Wilderness of
Doubts and Darknesses. These are Words of Harmony and Love to entertain our
Ears, and make us deaf to the Noise of a wrangling and disputing World. This is
a Heaven worth wishing for, while we are traveling to it through this tiresome
Earth, this unhappy Stage of Vexation and Controversy: To this let us look with
Eyes of ardent Expectation, and the devoutest Wishes of Souls: To this let us
all aspire and hasten, who have groaned long under our own Ignorance, and been
burdened and grieved with the Quarrels of the Christian Churches; and
whatsoever Name or Party we have chosen in our divided Opinions, let us unite
our Hearts and Voices in this loud Request, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly. Amen.

ESSAY IX. An Apology for the different Judgments and Practices of sincere
Christians that are weak in Knowledge.
In a Letter to a Friend.
GIVE me Leave, my dear Friend, to make a charitable Apology for honest and
upright Souls, who maintain a strict Course of Piety and Virtue, and yet appear
to be unalterably determined for or against the Communion of the Church of
England, upon very slight and feeble Grounds: Perhaps we shall learn Compassion
to the Weaknesses of our fellow Christians, if you and I together meditate on
these following Considerations.

Let us take a Survey how many are the Circumstances and various Occurrences of
human Life, which do sometimes powerfully determine the Opinions even of good
and sober Men, to one or the other side of this Controversy, whether they shall
fix their Communion in the Church of England, or amongst those who separate
from it.

Here the first thing that naturally occurs, is the Education of different
Persons, which has a mighty Influence to form their Opinions, and to fix their
Practice; and this, it must be confessed, is not in a Man's own Choice: the
Providence of the great and blessed God, the Over-ruler of all things,
determines this Affair in a wise and holy manner, whatever the final Event may
be.

Jonathan goes to worship every Lord's Day where his Father goes, and as the
Child was never led to hear a Sermon at a public Church, so the Youth grows up
in a groundless Aversion to it, and the Man stands at a wider Distance, and can
hardly be persuaded to venture in.

By Use and Custom from his very Childhood, he understands the Methods of the
Dissenters Worship, and the Terms that are used in their Sermons; and if by any
strange Occasion he is led to the Church of England, he finds no Profit by
hearing a Clergyman preach, for he does not clearly take in the Expressions and
the Meaning; and it must be acknowledged, many of them have a different way of
managing the Word of God in their Explications of it, different Phrases and
Modes of Expression, and too many of them preach Doctrines different from their
own Articles and our common Faith; these things are shocking and offensive to
the Ear, rather than instructive or edifying to a new Hearer.

Besides, Jonathan has imbibed long Prejudices against the Modes of Worship and
Ceremonies of the Church, the Forms, the Gestures, the Vestments, the
Responses, etc. and his Soul is thereby mightily unfitted for Edification by
the Prayers of the Church of England, that are mingled and interwoven with
them; his Palate is so much disgusted with this sort of Entertainment before
hand, that he either disrelishes or neglects whatever solid and wholesome Food
is set before him in the Sermon that follows: I will not say, there is nothing
of this Folly owing to the Influences of his Education; but it is hard, if not
impossible, to amend or prevent all the Faults of this kind in the Education of
Children, by the best and wisest of Parents. Since I have Occasion, in this
Place, to mention the Education of Children, amongst Persons of the Established
Church, and those that have separated from it, I could scarce excuse it to my
own Conscience, if I should neglect to make this solemn Remark on both ( viz.)
that there is something very dangerous that is early impressed on the Minds of
Children of the one Party and the other, and they unhappily learn it from the
different respective Catechisms in which they are instructed.

The Children who are educated in the Church of England, as soon as they have
learnt to answer what is their Name? they are immediately told in the next
Answer, that in their Baptism, They are made the Members of Christ, the
Children of God, and inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven. This arises from the
Doctrine they are generally taught, that Baptism and Regeneration are much the
same thing, or that all Men are regenerated by being baptized; whereas in
Scripture, Baptism is but an Emblem and Representation of such a Change of the
Heart, as Regeneration requires and implies; and for want of this Distinction,
the Children usually grow up through all their Stations in Life, without
enquiring whether they have had any such real Change in their Souls, as
includes in it Repentance for Sin, and a turn of Soul toward God and
Godliness, whereby a Man is born again and becomes a new Creature.

And this necessary Change, upon which the Favor of God, and an Interest in
the Salvation of Christ, and the Kingdom of Heaven depend, is very grossly and
shamefully neglected by them through their whole Lives, they always supposing,
as they have been taught, that all this Work is done in Baptism.

And for this Reason many Divines of the Church of England have heartily wished
that either these Words in the Catechism were a little altered, or that this
Answer should never be taught to Children without explaining the Meaning of it.

Among the Dissenters, one Part of the Education is usually learning the
Catechism written by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster. Now in the 19th
Answer it is said, That all Mankind by their Fall, are under the Wrath and
Curse of God, and so made liable to all the Miseries in this Life, to Death
itself, and to the Pains of Hell for ever: And some Persons have been so grossly
unwise, as to assert under this Influence, that there are Children of a Span
long suffering the Vengeance of God in Hell, for their Interest in the Sin of
Adam. Now the very Hint of such a Notion frights Children terribly, and while
they are required to love God with all their Hearts, it gives them a very
terrible and cruel Notion of the great and blessed God, who has ordained young
Children to these everlasting Torments for the Sin of Adam.

There are some that deny this Answer, and renounce this Doctrine roundly.

Indeed there is one Author that has endeavored to explain it in a moderate
way, and to make a just Distinction upon this Subject, and that is in the last
Question of a Book called the Ruin and Recovery of Mankind. There it is shown
that all good Christians by their Faith in Christ, are become the Children of
Abraham, and that they and their infant Children have an Interest in the
Promise made to Abraham, Gal. iii. 26.29. ( viz.) that God would be their God,
and the God of their Seed, which gives abundant Hope for the Children of good
Parents dying in Infancy, that they are translated to the Blessedness of
Heaven, and the Hope of a joyful Resurrection by the Covenant of Abraham. And
it is the Children of the Wicked, who have never accepted of the Covenant of
Grace, are left under the Curse, i. e. of temporal Death, which Adam had
incurred for himself and his Posterity, and that without any Prediction or
Promise of any Resurrection at all. Now I speak of those who never sinned
actually, nor enjoyed a State of personal Trial for themselves in this World.
See the original Writer.

When these things will be corrected in the Education of Children, of the one
Side or the other, it is only the Providence of God can determine.




These Things joined together, put a strong Biass upon the Judgment of the Man,
and it is exceeding difficult to be removed; and it is evident that his Prayers,
his Practice in Religion, his secret Acts of Devotion, are all regulated by the
Instructions he has received from his Parents or some of his Teachers: This
makes his Spirit grow uneasy under ceremonious Forms, and he is quite untuned
for Devotion by the very Sound of the Organ. These Things must needs have a
mighty Force on the Minds of young sincere Creatures beginning their Course of
Religion and Christianity, to establish them in the Nonconformist Way.

And I might also add, how rude and indecent a Thing the plain and natural
Worship of the Dissenters appears to one, that has been bred up to Ornament and
Ceremony in the several Parts of Worship in the established Church.

By Education and Custom, a particular Form of Religion is so mingled with
their Nature, and wrought into their Constitution, that you might as soon alter
their Palate, and change their Taste of Meats, as you can persuade their Souls
to dislike the Ministry under which they have been brought up, and to forsake
the Mode of Worship to which they have been trained. They are so positive they
are in the right, that they never had any Thought of calling these Things to a
new Examination.

Secondly, The Prejudice of the Mind in favor of the Dissenters grows yet
stronger, if Jonathan has found his Soul awakened to a Fear of Hell, and been
effectually convinced of Sin by the Terrors of the Law under the Preaching of
some Boanerges, some Son of Thunder in a Meeting House; and has been afterward
led gently into the Knowledge of Jesus Christ the Savior, and has been taught
to apply himself unto him for Salvation by humble Faith.

If the Spirit of God has made the Preaching of Pardon and Grace, by a
Dissenting Minister, effectual to claim the Surges of his troubled Conscience,
and to lead him the Way of Peace and Holiness toward Heaven, perhaps he feels
his Passions refined, his sinful Appetites mortified, his Temper changed from
earthly and carnal, to spiritual and heavenly, how naturally will his whole
Soul be carried out to love this Ministry? and he would not willingly absent
himself one Day from the Teachings of this Barnabas, this Son of Consolation;
he despises all the finer Flourishes of Eloquence, he can take no Pleasure in
the more polite, and perhaps more argumentative Discourse of a Doctor or a
Bishop in the Church of England; but where he has found Light and Food, and
Rest for his dark and distressed and hungry Soul, thither he will go constantly
to Worship, and he calls that the Sanctuary of the Lord, without once enquiring
whether a Parish Church may not be the Sanctuary of the Lord too; nay perhaps
his Passion for the Dissenters may rise so high as to deny the Presence of God
in the Assemblies of the established Church, or to allow very little of it
there.

And by the same false Method of Reasoning may a Churchman, whose Soul has been
brought to Repentance and Holiness by the Ministry of the public Church, on
which he has attended, almost hate the Name of a Nonconformist, and severely
inveigh against them all as Scismatics and foolish Teachers, when perhaps he
never ventured into a Meeting House, nor heard one Sermon in any of their
Assemblies.

So far is it possible for Piety, Ignorance and Prejudice to meet in the same
Mind: But our God, who knows the Frame of human Nature, looks down and pities
and forgives. A hearty Tendency toward God, and a Pursuit of Heaven is
well-pleasing in his Sight; though perhaps the Traveller, through Ignorance,
takes many a wrong Step, and performs many a Duty not exactly conformable to
the Directions of the Word.

Now, though this Argument be sufficient to determine him to be a Christian, in
Opposition to other Religions, because other Religions have not this Power to
sanctify him, yet it ought not to be sufficient for ever to determine him to a
particular Party of Christians, because it was not the particular Opinions of
that Party, but the substantial and great Doctrines of Christianity or the
Gospel, which are professed and pretended to by both Parties, that were so
powerful to the turning of his Heart toward God.

After all this Discourse, I would not be understood as though I encouraged
this Laziness of Men, and Neglect of due and just Reasoning; no, for Reason is
the Talent that God has given to be used in the Affairs of Religion, and he
has given us the Rule of his own Word for our Determination, by which all our
Worship ought to be regulated, and not by human Inventions; and Men are highly
guilty in their Neglect hereof: But a gracious God will forgive, for he knows
our Frame and our Frailty.

I believe God does accept of such inward, sincere and experimental Arguments
as vulgar Christians use to make or keep themselves Churchmen or Dissenters,
Calvinists or Arminians. If they feel their Souls raised to a more heavenly
Frame, and effectually engaged to the Love of God, Religion and Justice, by
attending occasionally on a Ministry different from their Education, sometimes
they will be ready to separate even from a true Church to which they belonged,
for want of knowing the Guilt and Terrors and Damnation that some Men include
in that hard Word, Schism; and I persuade myself that a gracious God will
accept of their upright Designs and their honest Motives, will pardon their
Separation, though it should prove unwarrantable, and bless their new Communion
to the Advantage of their Souls.

Thirdly. But suppose a Man should forcibly divest himself of all former
Aversions and Inclinations to the separate or the established Churches, and
enter into a sober Search, and solemn Debate with himself about the Merits of
the Cause; how few are there, whose necessary Affairs of Life a low them Time
enough to go through the Study of these laborious and entangled Controversies?
How small a Part of Mankind that are born to secular Affairs, can, in their few
Hours of Leisure, find out the Depth of some of these Difficulties? Who is
sharp enough on the Sudden to distinguish Truth in the Midst of the Clouds of
Dust that are cast on it by the litigious Wrangle of all Parties?

The Soul of many a Tradesman is but just of a Size with his Shop and Business,
and has not Strength of Parts or Improvement to attain great and accurate
Knowledge in any Thing besides; and those whose Ingenuity is greater, may
easily waste all the spare Hours of their Life in treading the Mazes of Dispute
about Forms and Ceremonies, and at last find themselves bewildered: Now I
question whether such a Man's Head would lie easy upon a dying Pillow, who had
spent his Time among Briars and Thorns, and neglected the Fruit of the Tree of
Life, or tasted but very little of it; he has been dwelling upon the Moss and
the Ivy, and not gathered the Product of those eminent Branches of our holy
Religion, whence he might have extracted sweet Cordials for a languishing and
fainting Hour.

Fourthly. Again, how very few are there amongst the giddy Race of Men that can
so far annihilate their old Opinions, and refrain so long from embracing new
ones, till they have made a thorough Scrutiny into the Arguments and
Pretensions on both Sides? Who can dwell for Months together in the uneasy
State of Dubitation? Who is there that has Power enough over his own Thoughts,
as to hold his Judgment in Suspense for a considerable Season, till the Matter
in question be fairly debated, and brought to an Issue in the Court of Reason
and Scripture? How ready are we to incline our Assent one Way or another, as
the various Occurrences of Life present Shadows of Argument for either Opinion?
A Story of a wicked Clergyman of the Church will warp the enquiring Soul of a
Plebeian toward a Meeting House; and an old Song of Charles the Martyr will
determine another's Judgment against the cruel Dissenters, and make him a
complete Churchman. A Flash of Rhetoric, a Show of Reason, a warm Sermon, and
Affections raised by a Tillotson at Westminster, or a Mead at Pinners-Hall,
will immediately turn the Mind from its Equilibrium; and you know when a
Balance is just turned, though it be but by a Grain of Weight, it falls
effectually on that Side, and sometimes almost irrecoverably too.

When we have thrown off all old Prejudices, it is not easy to secure one's self
from new ones. When we have so far gained the Victory over Education and Custom
as to retain none of our ancient Opinions, we are apt to fall insensibly under
the Power of the opposite Doctrines, and become Captives and Slaves to new
Notions, merely because they are new. Novelty is as great a Prejudice to fair
Reasoning as Antiquity; though perhaps not so universally prevailing. And
there is many a giddy and headstrong Youth that has hastily embraced Maxims and
Practices contrary to those of his Parents, to show how bravely he has broke
all the Fetters of Education, and to make it appear that he thinks freely. When
we push the Boat off from the Shore where it has long stuck in the Mud, it is
hard to prevent its being stranded on the adverse Side. It Is exceeding
difficult to keep the Mind in this Medium of Suspense till right Reason
determine it; it is very troublesome to maintain the Judgment in a Poise till
some weighty and solid Argument sink one of the Scales downward, and equitably
decide the depending Strife of Opinions; there is Need of continual caution and
wary Motions of Thought: A doubting Spirit is in Pain, and willing to be
released. We are very desirous to believe somewhat, though upon slight Grounds,
that our Souls may be at Ease, and fall to Practice.

Fifthly. But suppose Men should have Leisure, and Books and other Advantages,
joined with Resolution and Patience enough to endure the Pain of Dubitation,
and the long Fatigue of deep Study and Thoughtfulness; yet how small is the
Number of those that are capable to distinguish betwixt real and apparent
Reason; especially in Subjects where the Differences are of so nice and
intricate a Kind? How few Understandings are so acute, how few Judgments so
solid and just, so well formed and well-improv'd, as to determine Controversies
so long and so much darkened? Who can see through all the false Shows and
Pretensions of Argument, and discern the true Gold from that which only
glisters?

Turn your Eyes inward, my Friend, and behold a Soul there that has more
Knowledge and Judgment than Hundreds of the Animals that are round about you,
and that you are forced to converse with; and yet after all your unbiassed
Searches and Labors, and earnest Prayers, how hard a Thing you find it to
resolve the Point, whether you ought to remain in the Communion of a Dissenting
Church, or become a Separatist from them, and unite yourself to the Church of
England. Now, if all your Leisure, your Advantages, and your Application,
cannot fix your Assent and Practice, infer then how vain a Thing it is to
expect that Reason and Argument should constantly determine and govern a blind,
a rash, a ruined, and a wretched World.

I confess, in Things of greater Importance, and Necessity to Salvation, our
Directions lie so plain, as to lead the most stupid Souls that are honest and
sincere, to the Knowledge of Truth and Duty, unless it be here and there a Man
who violently breaks through the very Language of Scripture, and runs into
great Errors or Irregularity of Practice: But in Things of loss Moment, how
impossible is it that the generally of Mortals should build every lesser
Opinion of them upon solid Foundations and unshaken Grounds? Or how can we
expect they should be able to defend every smaller Circumstance of their
Practice by just Reasonings?

If I were to recapitulate these Things in short, I would draw up my charitable
Conclusion thus:

Since our first Apostasy from God has so perverted and spoiled our rational
Powers, and enslaved our Minds to so many Prejudices and Passions; since the
Impressions of Education and Custom are unavoidable and necessary, deep and
strong; since the Affairs of the World that is under a divine Curse, are so
justly and unhappily ill constituted; since Capacity, Leisure, Application,
Humility, and Prayer, are all found together but in very few Persons; and since
the divine Oracles, in Matters less necessary, have so much Obscurity in
themselves, and so much thicker Darkness cast upon them by contending Parties,
why should we be so much amazed or so angry, to see so many different
Sentitiments and Practices amongst Men of honest Piety, and desirous of Truth?

Farewell, thou dear Companion of my Studies, and if your Light and Knowledge
should be so far improved by your further Enquiries, as to lead you away from
that Communion, and those Methods of Worship wherein we have so often and so
delightfully joined; yet I hope that upon the Review of this Letter, you will
maintain a very charitable Opinion of

Your uninlightened Friend, etc.

FINIS.

