Mr. Briant's LETTER TO Mr. Porter, etc.

SOME Friendly Remarks ON A SERMON Lately Preached at Braintree, 3 d. Parish,
and now Published to the World by the Revd. Mr. Porter of Bridgwater; from
those Words in ISAIAH, 64. 6. -- All our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags.

In a LETTER to the Author, To be Communicated to his Attestators.

By Lemuel Briant, A. M. And Pastor of the first Church in Braintree.

-- Turning the Grace of GOD into Lasciviousness. -- St. JUDE. -- Of this Sort
are they which creep into Houses, and lead captive silly Women laden with Sins,
led away with diverse Lusts, Whose Mouths must be stopped. -- St. PAUL. BOSTON:
Printed by J. Green, for D. Gookin, in Marlborough-Street, opposite to Dr.
SEWALL's Meeting House, 1750.

A LETTER, etc.
Rev. Sir,
YOUR Sermon on Isaiah 64. 6. preached at the 3 d. Parish in Braintree the 25
th. of last December, and since published to the World under the Patronage of
five worthy Divines, has put me upon writing the following Letter, which I
venture abroad without taking the Trouble to ride after Attestators; being
fully persuaded of the Truth of what a venerable Father in these Churches
observed to you, when solicited to usher your Performance into the World with
a recommendatory Preface, That it will carry it is own Force with it. And I
trust you will not think it impertinent in me to undertake the Office of a
Remarker on your Elaborate, Orthodox, well attested Preachment, since it is so
expressly levelled against a late printed Discourse of mine on the same Text,
and delivered as near my Parish as perhaps you could readily find a Pulpit open
for you.

WHAT your design was in favoring Braintree with this Specimen of the good old
Calvinistical Way of Preaching, (though, as I shall show in the Sequel, not
altogether so Calvinistical as perhaps you imagined) your design in it, I say,
I pretend not to determine, having not as yet arrived to the Gift of Discerning
Spirits. I charitably hope it was well meant, to confirm that good People to
whom it was preached, in Soul humbling and Christ exalting Doctrines. But since
you yourself acknowledge there is a great deal of Wickedness cleaving to the
best performances of the very best Men on Earth, you will forgive me if I
should say it is not impossible that there might be some little Design in the
Time of it springing from the old and not from the new Man in you, to make an
impression on my People to the disadvantage of their unworthy Pastor. And if
there was, (which I am so far from determining, that I only suppose it
possible) it will be but a friendly Office in me to inform you what success
your Labors have met with.

AND truly, (Mr. Porter,) I rejoice that I can tell you -- Neither the Force of
your reasoning, nor the Fervency of your Brother Eaton's Prayers; nor yet (I
would further add if I though it my Boldness could hope for Pardon;) the Character
and Influence which your Attestators have this Way: Neither of these, I say,
has as yet procured my Dismission. But notwithstanding all you have said, (or I
believe can say,) notwithstanding the assiduous Endeavors of several warm
Gentlemen to sow Discord among Brethren, which the Scripture says is an
Abomination to the Lord: We have as yet a pretty considerable Degree of what we
call Christian Love and Union amongst us. You and some others perhaps will give
it no better a Name than that of cursed Peace; which dreadful Curse these
Churches have of late years bid fair to be delivered from.

I acknowledge I should not have the greatest Opinion of the Union that at
present subsists amongst us, and which this little Flock committed to my Care
(to their eternal Honor be it spoken) have been so remarkable for all along
these divided distracted Times, had we any better Reason than the rash Censures
of others, to conclude it was founded only in Ignorance and Carnal Security.

BUT if we are as ignorant, blind and stupid a People as some are pleased to
represent us, (who perhaps would be full as well employed in mending themselves
as in speaking Evil of their Neighbors) yet I desire to bless God, we have
this hopeful symptom still left upon us, that we are desirous to know the
Truth. And not only so, but it is the Disposition of my Charge to seek for it in
the holy Scriptures without any slavish attachment to humane Schemes.

INDEED it must be acknowledged with all Gratitude, that there has of late
Years been a remarkable Out-pouring of the good old Berean Spirit; and the
Perils, that in Times of Ignorance and implicit believing have attended Freedom
and Plainness of Speech (which is an essential Branch of that Holiness that
becomes God's House forever) are very considerably abated.

FIRMLY believing this, and that no Truth can ever suffer by Examination, I
venture ( Dear Sir) to Oppose so mighty, so well attested an Author. And what I
have to say to yourself I shall digest into the following order.

1st. I will show how far in fact you Oppose me in your Sermon, whatever you
aimed to do in the Time of preaching and publishing it.

2ly. I will particularly consider the several Arguments you use to Support
this your Opposition, and point out to you the weakness and insufficiency of
them to this Purpose.

3ly. I will show that so far as you have any Controversy with me, you equally
oppose Calvin himself. Upon the Truth of which, you will allow me the Liberty
to expostulate a little with yourself, and Rev. Attestators, as to the Cry you
have raised from the supposed Abuse of this Text, about the Growth of Arminiasm.

1st. I am to show how far in Fact you oppose me in your Sermon, etc. -- And
here, One would be apt to think by your running Title, and by the doleful (though
I hope groundless) Cry you make about Religion's dying with the Fathers for
want of proper Persons to supply their Places, as well as innumerable other
broad Hints in your Sermon, that it was the Bible itself that was struck at by
some unsound and unserious; by some bold, graceless young Heretic. But upon
comparing Notes, I believe it will be found that you have in fact no
Controversy with me, only as to the Sense and Design of One single Passage in
this Book: And that is those Words, in Isaiah 64. 6. -- All our Righteousnesses
are as filthy Rags. -- I endeavor to show that the Prophet is not speaking of
the Virtues of real good Men, and branding true Righteousness with the odious
Character of filthy Rags; but only describing and lamenting the general want of
it. Mr. Porter says nay; This is not the Sense and Design of the Prophet in the
Passage under Consideration, but that the Text is racked, and a Sense extorted
from it that it was never wiling to speak; that it intends not the Hypocritical
Performances of wicked Men, but the best Virtues of the best Men, of which
filthy Rags is a very fit Resemblance.

THIS I take to be the true state of the Point in Dispute. And consequently all
your after-Discourse, every Thing you have advanced relating to some other
controverted Points in Divinity which you take occasion to speak of in the
prosecution of this Subject, I have at present nothing to do with, nor could
you from any Thing delivered in my Sermon with the least Color of reason
pretend to level your spiritual Artillery against me. If you aimed at me, in
that Fire of Zeal about substituting our personal, in the Room of Christ's
surety, Righteousness, you have certainly missed your Mark, and must charge
again if you design to do Execution. If you though it I had taught that we are
perfectly Righteous; that we are as Righteous as the Angels in Heaven; or what
is worse still, that our Righteousness deserves to be compared with the
Infinite Purity of the divine Nature, or finally that we can merit Heaven by
it; If these were your Tho'ts, I say, you have mistaken the Man, and are
fighting only with your own Shadow.

I challenge you, or any one, or all of your Attestators, to point out a single
Passage in my Sermon where the Doctrine of Justification by the merit of Man's
personal Righteousness is asserted, or from whence it can by good and necessary
Consequence be inserred. All I contend for, the whole Point I have in View
throughout my whole Discourse (I say again) is only to show that the Prophet
did not design to brand the Virtues of real good Men with this odious Character
of filthy Rags, but is speaking in the Text, of the Performances of quite a
different set of People. So far am I from teaching any thing about the merit of
them, that I say expressly, (Page 29th.) Forgiveness of Sin and final
Acceptance with the Father is through the Merits of the Son. And is there any
thing contradictory and inconsistent in all this? Can there be no Degree of
Purity in Men, and this Purity held not to be filthiness, without supposing
personal Righteousness (...)

BUT all this will not do, you still insist upon it, that those Divine Virtues
which constitute the Image of God, are in his sight no better than filthy Rags,
and that it was the Design of the Prophet in particular, in the Passage under
Consideration to represent them as such. But as saying and proving differ as
much as saying and doing, I will presume as was proposed, ( 2ly.) To Examine
the several Arguments you use to support your opposite Sense of the Text, and
point out to you the weakness and insufficiency of them to this Purpose.

You say you could easily make out what you advance relating to the Sense and
Design of the Prophet in the Text, by Arguments drawn from the Context and
other Parts of Isaiah's Prophecy. Strange to me! when 'twas so easy, you had
not tried what you could do this way; especially when you yourself say ( Page
3.) "Some in the Explication of this professed Rule (meaning the Bible) don't
duly consider the Text and Context, the Scope and Design of the inspired
Penman, to find the genuine meaning of the Passage under Consideration, etc."
Pray Sir, how can you tell who the Prophet is here speaking of, and what
Character he is drawing, unless you consider the whole run of his Discourse.
You will not, I trust, pretend that by your inward Illumination you can certainly
tell the meaning of an Author in any broken Sentence picked out of his
Writings, without taking into Consideration other parts of his Discourse, upon
which the right understanding of it essentially depends. Truly, Mr. Porter,
your passing over the Context and other parts of this Book so slightily, when
you were professedly settling the Sense of a few dependant Words in it, and
when this was the only possible way to cast a true Light upon your Subject, is
not with me the most indubitable Evidence that you though it the Consideration of
these Things would serve your present turn.

BUT you say there is no need of this, since "the Text it self without going
any further, furnishes you with Arguments sufficient for your purpose." It may
be so. But you wont take it amiss if I presume to examine your Arguments a
little before I believe it. Your

1st Argument is taken from the Word Righteousnesses. And what you say here may
be thrown into this Form. If the Word Righteousness or Righteousnesses is never
in Scripture used for the Hypocritical Performances of wicked Men, but to
denote something truly good and excellent; then we may infer that the latter
and not the former is intended in the Text -- I acknowledge there would be
something of an Argument here, if your Hypothesis could be maintained. But that
it cannot is no hard Task to prove. The Case in short is so plain that I have
been astonished (as well as many others) that your Supervisor, or some of your
Reverend Attestators had not councelled you better, (as young Men I know need
Advice) than to let such an Argument as this appear in Public. What! is there
no Place, from the Beginning of Genesis to the End of Revelation where the Term
Righteousness is applied to the Hypocritical Performances of wicked Men?
Strange you should not know better than this! Don't we read in this Book, of
Men that trust to their own Righteousness; that go about to establish a
Righteousness of their own; that turn away from their Righteousness; that only
appear Righteous before Men? And Mr. Porter I hope don't think that they are
truly Righteous who trust to and go about to establish a Righteousness of their
own -- You cannot be so Heritical as to think when a Man is truly Righteous, he
can ever turn from it -- You will not I am persuaded, when you think upon it,
pretend to prove that one who only appears Righteous before Men, is really so
in the sight of God. But not to multiply Instances, What think you ( good Sir)
of the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees? Was it Hypocritical, or was
it true and sincere? You cannot affirm the latter, because Christ himself says,
unless ours exceed it we shall in no Case enter into the Kingdom of God. Upon
Supposition it was true and genuine, if our Righteousness equalled theirs, we
might hope to see the Kingdom of God: So that this necessity of exceeding it,
plainly demonstrates some essential defect in it. Besides, it is evident from
their whole History in the Gospel, that though they had a Righteousness, (such a
one as it was) though they made a great show of Devotion, and were infinitely
nice and precise in their Way, yet that in common Life and Conversation they
were Arrant Rogues and Hypocrites; that it was not only an Imputed
Righteousness that they wanted, but a great deal more Personal Goodness than at
present they were possessed of. It cannot be though it they were such perfect
Moralists as some have represented them, when our Savior himself says, they
neglected the weightier Matters of the Law, such as Judgment, Mercy and
Fidelity. They were indeed very famous for cutting up and tything their Herbs,
and for a pretense made many and long Prayers: But at the same Time as infamous
for devouring Widows Houses. In short, their whole Religion was turned into an
Engine of Knavery -- All their sanctified Grimace was only a plausible Covert
for their spiritual Roguery. And it was undoubtedly upon this account that our
Savior thus disparages their Righteousness, and recommends a much better to
his Followers. And why may not we suppose the Prophet Isaiah for the same Reason
speaks of the Righteousness of their Predecessors ( who were very much like
them) in the diminitive Language of our Text. Thus much besure may be fairly
gathered from this Passage in our Savior's Sermon, that there is at least one
Place in Scripture where the Term Righteousness is applied to the Hypocritical
Performances of wicked Men. And this alone (since you say there is none) is
sufficient to overthrow your first Argument. And so let us go on to your second
and see if that has any Thing more solid in it. This is taken from the Word
All, in the Text. And for Substance (if I rightly understand you) may be fairly
and fully expressed in this Form. If the Prophet speaks of all, i. e. of every
individual in the Jewish Church, and there were some real good Men in it, then
in this Character he must include their Righteousness: But the Term all is here
to be understood in this unlimited Sense, etc.

HERE again I am afraid your Hypothesis will fail you, relating to the strict
and literal universality of the Term all. In the 1st Place ( Dear Sir) suffer
me to query with you a little, how you come to fix such an unlimited Sense of
the Term all in this Text, when you yourself will acknowledge, that in many
other Places of holy Scripture it is so far from intending Universality, that it
does not comprehend even the Majority, only a few particular Persons. Thus when
we read of Christ's dying, of his giving his Life a Ransom for all, of his
tasting of Death for every Man, (which Language is at least as universal as
this in our Text) you know very well that all and every Man does not intend
(according to the Letter) all and every Man: But must be construed agreeable to
the Analogy of Faith, as meaning only a few.

I know it will not follow from hence that it is to be taken so in this Place,
in particular. But from the abovementioned Examples it appears, to you I hope
at least, that it may be upon Occasion thus Restrained. And there is this
further Consideration that will perhaps render it not only possible, but also
pretty probable, that it was not (strictly speaking) a universal, but only a
general Character the Prophet is here drawing; that this is perfectly agreeable
to the prophetic Style, and many Instances of the same Nature may easily be
produced from the Writings of these holy Men of old. Thus Moses discribing the
Wickedness of the old World, says in Genesis 6. 12. ALL Flesh had corrupted his
Way on Earth. But this Account cannot strictly speaking comprehend all the Men
that were then on the Earth, for there is at the same Time an express Exemption
of Noah, who is said to be a Just Man, perfect in his Generation, and one that
walked with God. And therefore we read of his finding Grace in the Eyes of the
Lord, and being with his House saved from the fatal Deluge. And so again; In
the Prophet Jeremiah's Day on Earth, the Almighty challenges them to find so
much as a Man that was truly good in Jerusalem. And yet we cannot suppose they
were all to a Man, Vicious and Ungodly; but that they were generally so, and
considered in a National View verily Guilty before God. But not to enlarge in
so plain a Case; much to the same Purpose are those Words in the 14th Psalm 3d
Ver. They are ALL gone aside, they are altogether become filthy, there is NONE
that does good, no not ONE. Whatever Time of prevailing Corruption the sacred
Writer here alludes to, no doubt there was then a Remnant according to the
Election of Grace, that truly feared God. All therefore that can be intended in
the Passage is, that Vice was Rampant and nearly Epidemical. And why might we
not (if Mr. Porter had not forbid it) thus have understood the Prophet in our
Text? And what if we should after all, thus understand him, since there are so
many particular Places in Scripture to countenance the Construction.

ONE thing further I will mention while I think of it; and that is, if it was
every individual in the Jewish Church to whom the Prophet applies the Character
in the Text, his Confession I humbly apprehend would not be very consistent in
Mr. Porter's Sense of it. You suppose he is confessing the insufficiency of
Man's best personal Righteousness to Justification. This I grant would found
very well; it would be a great Expression of Humility and Self-Abasement as to
the Godly Part of them, to acknowledge that after all their Virtuous
Seize, they could not stand Trial by the Law of perfect Obedience, but
must have Recourse to the free unbo't Grace of God for Pardon and Acceptance.
But pray, what propriety could there be in acknowledging that the Righteousness
of the rest (which was by far the major Part) could not Justify them? It would
be only to say, that those Things could not procure Justification, which
deserve the highest Damnation. Certain it is our Understanding the Prophet in
this unlimited Sense necessarily runs us into a strange Mixture and Confusion
of Characters, putting the most Vicious upon a Parr with the most Holy in Point
of Acceptance with their Maker; whereas (Mr. Porter) I trust will allow that
the latter (the Merit of their Goodness being entirely excluded) have better
Grounds to hope in God than the former, from the merciful Tenor of the Gospel.
Though I know of some warm Folks that have preached it up as a fundamental
Doctrine of Grace, that the most vicious Livers stand fairest for the special
Grace of God. And when they design to give a Man the worst of Characters, to
represent his Case as very Bad and Dangerous, they will call him a moral Man.
This in their Esteem places him ten Degrees below a Heathen. But shall we
continue in Sin that Grace may abound? The Apostle rejects this Antinomian
notion with a most vehement GOD FORBID. But it is high Time that we proceed to
say something to your 3d. And last Argument; which is taken from the Term our in
the Text. And which as you humbly apprehend, and as your Attestators have
settled the Point, must include the Prophet himself in the Character here
drawn; And consequently the personal Righteousness of One real good Man at
least is styled filthy Rags. One Instance I acknowledge, especially of so good
a Man as we all believe the Prophet Isaiah was, would be quite sufficient in
this Case: And the Point must be given up without any more ado, if it did
appear that he here styles his own personal Righteousness filthy Rags. The
Charge moreover of abuse in changing our into their would be very just. But
pray Gentlemen, is not it as rational (if you will allow Reason to have any Hand
in settling the sense of Scripture) to suppose the Prophet is here Speaking in
a public Capacity; and that he was (as we commonly phraze it) the Peoples
Mouth to God in this humble Confession?

IT will be granted I believe that there is such a Thing as National Guilt, and
that when a Person in speaking in this Latitude, and as a public
Representative of the rest in any humble Confession to Almighty God, then I
say, he cannot word himself better than to say, Our Sin, and Our Guilt is so and
so. And if a very righteous holy Minister should thus confess the Sins of this
Land, or of old England at this Day, could any one rationally infer, that he
designed to include himself, and was speaking of his own personal Guilt of
every crying Abomination among them? I trow not. Indeed what is more common
among some of the most Pious and Zealous of Christ's Ambassadors, when they are
publicly confessing the Sins of this Land, to express themselves to this
Purpose, O Lord, we acknowledge OUR grievous Apostasy from the Principles as
well as Practices of our pious Forefathers, who for the Purity of Gospel Truth
ventured their Lives into this then howling Wilderness -- Now when such
Gentlemen say OUR Apostasy from their Principles, etc. they would not I trust
be understood to include themselves as being personally guilty of departing
from the Faith, which was then Imported. For this is the very Thing, even their
Zeal for the Faith of the Fathers, that is the ground of their bitter Cry about
the present decay of it. And no doubt the Prophet made this Confession in our
Text, because he was grieved for Transgressors. In the foregoing Words he says,
We are all as an unclean Thing, (or as some modestly express it, Sicut Pannus
Mulieris Menstruatae) But is this the common Character of good Men in
Scripture? Of many others vastly less holy than the Prophet it is said, Ye are
washed, ye are sanctified. The Prophet must (unless you would confound all
Characters) here personate the Jewish Chruch and People, and speak in their
Names -- Take an Instance or two parallel with this in our Text. In the
preceding Chapter 17th Verse, he makes this Confession, -- Thou have hardened
our (mark OUR) Heart from thy Fear -- The Question then is, if the Term Our in
this Place includes the Prophet himself in common with the rest of that wicked
People? If you say Yes; I say you fix the worst of Characters that is any were
given of the most abandoned Men on Earth, on one of the best of Men then alive.
If you say, Nay; then I beg to know what Reasons you can give why the Term Our
should not be equally extensive in both these Passages.

Again,

IN the 59th Chap. 12th Verse, the Prophet introduces the abandoned Character
of this People with that general Confession, -- OUR Transgressions are
multiplied -- What these were he presently enumerates, such as Lying,
Oppression, Revolt, uttering from the Heart Words of Falsehood, etc. These the
Prophet styles our Transgressions; but surely you and all the World, must have
a much better Opinion of this Heavenly good Man than to think he was such a
Lying, Dishonest Fellow as he must be, if he is here included in the Term Our.
Nor will it sound very well, to say, his Heart was hardened from the fear of God
in point of Justification. But it must, I think, be quite plain to impartial
Inquirers, that he calls these Villainies Our Transgressions in a National and
not in a Personal Sense; and thus Confesses them to God, as the Head and
Representative of the People. For it is worthy of our Observation, that in a few
Words after he speaks of some, whose Names were not to be put into this black
Catalogue of Vices; (which yet he calls Our Transgressions) of some who
departed from Evil, and thereby made themselves a Prey, i. e. become exposed to
the Aspersions and Clamours of the aforementioned Sinners.

IT would be quite endless as well as needless to produce every Instance in the
Sacred Writings, where the Person speaking uses the Term Our in drawing of
Characters, that it is impossible should be applicable to himself without
confounding all Distinctions between Good and Evil, between the Saint and the
Sinner. I will therefore only add, that for the same Reason the Prophet is here
supposed to include himself in the Terms all and our, he must likewise be
supposed to include himself in the following Character -- There is none that
calls upon thy Name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee. The Text
says NONE. But was not that Prophet a Man of Prayer? We must therefore
understand the Term None, under the same Restriction in which we find it
necessary to understand a thousand like forms of Speech, if we would make any
Sense of Scripture.

THE Apology that is made for the Prophet, who was a very consistent Man, by a
late Verbose, Dark, Jesuitical Writer, (whose Patience always holds out much
longer than that of his Readers) will not be accepted any better than his
Former, for a Person of a very different Character. For allowing (as we all
must) that the Righteous are liable to "a sad Decay of Faith and Prayer," What
is this to the present purpose? Was the Prophet Isaiah at this Time under any
such Decays? I trow not. He appears all along to be in the full exercise of
both; confessing their National Guilt; earnestly interceeding for this poor
abandoned People, and Resolving that for Zions sake he would not hold his
Peace, and for Jerusalems sake take no rest, 'till the Righteousness thereof
went forth as Brightness, etc. -- What more pathetick Prayer could the best
Saint on Earth make, (and that in the highest Exercise of GRACE) than that in
the 1st Verse of this 64th Chap. Oh that thou would rent the Heavens, that
thou would come down, that the Mountains might flow down at thy presence,
etc. If I mistake not, there is here something like the actings of Grace in the
Duty of Prayer, and something of a stiring up (in this holy Man) to take hold
of God.

AFTER all, though we should grant that the Prophet includes himself in all these
Characters; we have this Refuge still in Reserve; that what he says is to be
confined to the Place where he Delivered it; and the Doctrines of Palestine are
no more to be received by us here, (though Delivered by the Inspiration of God)
than Oaths taken in Old England, are to be kept in America. --

BUT to return; (Mr. Porter) I have given your several Arguments a Distinct and
Impartial Consideration. And if there is any Thing of Weight in what has been
observed, let it have its Effect; If not, let it receive its just Contempt.

I have only to add,

3dly. THAT so far as you have any Controversy with me, you equally Oppose
Calvin himself. And upon the Truth of this you will allow me the Liberty to
expostulate a little with yourself, and Reverend Attestators, as to the Cry you
have raised from the Abuse of the Text, about the Growth of Arminianism amongst
us.

IT will take up too much Room to recite all that CALVIN says in his Commentary
on this Text. I will therefore only turn you to one or two short Sentences full
to the present Point -- To prevent all Disquietudes in pious Minds from this
seeming Disparagement of true Righteousness, he says, Hic se nonnulli torquent
quod Propheta de scelerum inquinamentis loquens sine exceptione Judoeos omnes
exprimat, in quibus tamen restabant puri Dei cultores; sed frustra. Quia non
loquitur de fingulis, sed de universo corpore, -- In English thus -- Here,
there be some that Torment themselves because the Prophet speaking of the
defilement of Sin takes in and represents the Case of all the Jews without
exception, amongst whom there nevertheless remained some pure Worshipers of
God; but in vain and without cause (i. e. they are disquieted in vain upon the
Account of the Prophet's expressing himself so universally) because he does not
here Speak of every Individual, but of the whole Body, or considered as a
Society and Community of Men. -- Presently after he opens more fully still;
Says he -- Hic Locus citari a quibusdam solet ut probent adeo nihil esse meriti
in Operibus nostris, ut coram Deo putidoe and foetidoe sint. Sed hoc mihi
videtur alienum a Prophetoe sententia, etc. etc. As if he had said; This Place
(meaning the 64th. Isaiah 6th.) is wont to be cited by some, that they may
prove there is so far from being any thing good and valuable in our Works, that
they are in God's Sight noisome and filthy Things. But this appears to me to be
very foreign from the Sense of the Prophet, etc. -- Thus speaks Mr. Calvin.
And if these (Mr. Porter,) were Calvin's Sentiments with Respect to the Text
under Consideration, might not both you and your Attestators very lawfully have
spared your Cries and Groans about the Abuse of it. Nay, Sir, how could you
with any face upon Calvinistick Principles disclaim Calvin's own Interpretation
of the Words? If I have done him Justice in these Quotations, I have certainly
in settling the Sense of the Text (which is all the present Controversy) been
quite Calvinistical; unless you will suppose that Calvin himself was not a
Calvinist. Surely you had much more Reason to have Charged me with Stealing my
Interpretation from Calvin than in the least contradicting of him. How shall we
account for this enormous Blunder in you? I have had various Conjectures in my
own Mind about the Matter. Sometimes I have Charitably hoped that you were not
acquainted with Calvin's Writings; that you had never Consulted him upon the
Text, but took for grant that he understood all Scripture just in the same
Sense in which his professed Followers now do. And then again (to be honest
with you) I confess I have not sometimes been without my Doubts whether or no
the Language in which Calvin wrote might not a little startle you. There being
some in all Ages, like those in Dr. South's, whom he says, always looked upon
Latin to be the Language of the Beast.

SIR, what your Sentiments are in this Respect or the Grounds of your thus
turning an Opposer of Calvin, I pretend not to determine. Your Excuse perhaps
may be, I wot not what I did. If so, I shall Rejoice for your Sake. But
however, whether, Ignorance or Design was at the Bottom of it (I hope the
former,) certain it is that it is matter of Lamentation, and shall be for a
Lamentation, that the good old Calvinistical way of opening Texts is so little
Regarded by his professed Disciples. Alas! Alas! that one of his youngest
Children should rise up at this Day against him, and find so many elder
Brethren to Countenance, Attest, and Support this his Disobedience and
Rebellion against him; that the Cause of good old Mr. Calvin should be so
wounded in the House of so many of his best Friends.

AFTER all that I have here very openly (and I trust very honestly) observed
relating to Calvinism, I beg both you and your Attestators to spare me a Word
relating to the Cry you have raised about the Growth of Arminianism amongst us.
How far this is true, you are (or ought to be) the best Judges, who have
publicly Asserted it. But to fix this Character on any Man, only from his
Interpretation of one single Text, and which at the same Time he proves to be
Calvinistical, is I think, as Injurious to him as it is inconsistent with
yourselves. Gentlemen, you know very well that many Sounds operate like a Charm
on many Minds. "They confound their Judgment, they inflame their Passions." And
this cannot by any sober Men be judged the best Method to make them either sound
Believers or good Livers. What Wonders have the Terms, Infidel, Papist,
Arminian, etc. wro't on Vulgar Minds, when artfully played against an
Antagonist? How often has Truth been suppressed and Nonsense established only
by the Magic of Sounds? It never did nor never will answer any good End in the
propagation of Truth, to load our Opposers with Terms of Reproach, and to
endeavor by calling them hard Names to lessen their Reputation and Usefulness,
under a blind Notion of their being Heretics. Errors when Apparent ought
undoubtedly to be Opposed by all that are set for the defense of the Gospel;
But then how is this to be managed? Surely not by fixing the Populace with
blind Prejudices against them; but by endeavoring a solid Confutation of these
Heresies by bringing Rational and Scriptural Arguments against them. But if
instead of this, Men think to carry their Cause merely by the Application of a
few odious (...).

As we are all agreed in the divine Right of private Judgment, so ought we to
exercise all possible Caution least we enslave our own Minds or the Minds of
our People to any humane Schemes and Authorities; for to teach them to
substitute the Writings of weak fallible Man, in the Room of Christ and his
Gospel, may perhaps in the End turn out as fatal as substituting our personal
in the Room of Christ's surety Righteousness.

But it is Time to have done; having already vastly exceeded the length I at
first proposed in this Letter -- Mr. Porter, I have stated (as well as I could)
the Point in Controversy. I have particularly considered your Arguments and
endeavored to Point out the weakness of them. I have entered and prosecuted my
Complaint against you and your Attestators, for raising a Cry about the Growth
of Arminianism, when I have proved my self entirely Calvinistical in my Sense
of this Text; which as I observed before, is the whole of the present
Controversy. As for your after-Discourse about the Merit of our Goodness or
Righteousness, I say again, what I intimated before, that I never though it,
believed or preached any Thing of this, but always the direct contrary
Doctrine. And if you bring the Charge I shall expect you Support it with good
Arguments; if not with good Attestators.

WHATEVER your Apprehensions or the Sentiments of others may be relating to the
Doctrine of Merit, Justification, etc. I assure you, I always preach up (what I
firmly believe) that the Grace of God is the Original Spring of all his
Creatures Happiness, and that there is no such Thing as Buying, Purchasing or
Meriting this Grace at his Hands. But that it is Free and Rich Grace. By Free I
mean, it is the Essential Disposition of the Deity to be good. By Rich I mean,
the same with the Sacred Writer; that he is good to All, and that his tender
Mercies are over All his Works. I tell my People indeed, that they must do all
those things that are commanded in the Gospel; which is the Law of Life to us.
But am careful at the same time to add -- that when they have done all they are
to look for Eternal Life as the GIFT of GOD, through Jesus Christ.

SUFFER me now to Conclude all with a few short Extracts from the Writings of a
precious Minister of Jesus Christ, now with the Lord. Some Men ( says he) seem
to be so afraid of the Merit of Obedience and good Works, that they loath to
Assert the Necessity of them, and do it with so much Caution as if they were
not tho'roly persuaded of it, or did apprehend some dangerous Consequence from
it. But this Fear is perfectly groundless; as if Merit could not be excluded,
without casting off our Duty, and reclaiming our selves from any necessary
Obligations to be good. --

In another Place he says;

I have been more careful to express these Things (i. e. such as Relate to
Grace, Faith and personal Obedience) more fully and distinctly, that no Man may
imagine, that whilst we assert the necessity of Obedience and a holy Life we
have any design in the least to derogate from the Faith and Grace of God, but
only to engage and encourage Men to Holiness and a good Life, by convincing
them of the absolute indispensible Necessity of it, in order to Eternal
Salvation. For all that I have said is in plain English no more than this, that
its necessary for a Man to be a good Man that he may get to Heaven. And whoever
finds fault with this Doctrine, finds fault with the Gospel it self, and the
main End and Design of the Grace of God therein revealed to Mankind, which
offers Salvation upon no other Terms -- And to preach and press this Doctrine
is certainly, if any thing in the World can be so, to pursue the great End and
Design of the Christian Religion --

In another Place he says;

I know it has been the great End and Design of the Devil and his Instruments
in all Ages to undermine Religion, by making an unhappy Separation and Divorce
between Godliness and Morality, between Faith, and the Virtues; of a good Life,
and by this means not only to weaken and abase, but even wholly to destroy the
Force and Efficacy of the Christian Religion, and to leave Men as much under
the Power of the Devil and their Lust, as if there was no such thing as
Christianity in the World. But let us not deceive ourselves; this always was
Religion, and the Condition of our Acceptance with God, to endeavor to be like
God in Purity and Holiness, in Justice and Righteousness, in Mercy and
Goodness, to cease to do evil, and to learn to do well --

In another Place he says;

There are many Persons in the World very Sollicitous about an Orthodox Belief,
and mightily concerned to know what the Scriptures, but especially what the
Councils and Fathers have declared in such a Matter; and they are nice and
scrupulous in these Things even to the utmost Punctilio's, and will with a most
unchristian Passion contend for the Christian Faith --

But as he observes in another Place still;

When all is done and said, there is no such Error and Heresy, nothing so
fundamentally Opposite to Religion as a Wicked Life.

Thus he.

Dear Sir, I presume not to Subscribe my self (according to Old Style) your
Brother in the Faith and Fellowship of the Gospel; for fear you should imagine
I have not Faith eno' for any Fellowship. But you will allow me, I trust, the
Privilege of a Heathen, (if found and serious) to declare, that,

I am Your fellow Creature, And Hearty Well-Wisher, Lemuel Briant.
Braintree, May 22. 1750.

