GOD's Wonders in the Great Deep: OR, A NARRATIVE OF The Shipwreck of the
Brig^ntine Alida and Catharine, JOSEPH BAILEY, (...), On the ^7th of December,
1749. Bound from New York for Antig^^^.

WHEREIN, The wonderful Me^cy of the Divine (...) displayed, in the
Preservation of the (...) with all his M^n, from the Time of the (...)
over-setting, to the (...) of their (...) a Ves^^l (...) from Boston to
S^r^anam, (...) of January following* all which Time, being (...) Nights, (...)
were in the most imminent (...) Distress.

Writ^en by the Master himself.

NEW YORK* (...) James P^rker, at the New (...) Str^^^* 1750.

TO THE Christian READER.
ITS not with a View or Design to move any One'^ Pity or Compassion toward the
Unfortunate and Distressed* neither is it out of vain Os^entation that my Name
may be recorded, that moves me to write the following Narrative; but it is, as
I conceive, my bounde^ Duty toward the Supreme Being, to declare his wonderful
Acts of Providence, and tender Mercies toward the most undeserving of Mankind*
that he never leaves not (...) them that sincerely humble themselves before
him, and (...) their Trust in him through Jesus Christ: I (...) upon all
sincere Christians to whom this Memorial shall come* to rejoice with me and
render Praise unto the Most Holy, High, and Mighty JEHOVAH, the Lord and Giver
of Life, who has redeemed my Soul out of All its Troubles, and brought me up
as it (...) from the bottomless Pit, from the (...) of Death, and the very
Gates of H^ll! and made me to ^word* when I had Nothing but Death before my
E^i^, for his wonderful Providence, throug^^ut the whol^ (...) and terrible
Catastrophe of ou^ Shipwreck, being over-set in a dismal dark Night, in (...)
t^rribl^ (...) Gale of ^ind* and great Sea; our People ^^ing dispers^d all over
the Vessel, and some of them below when the over-let: She ^ighted and overs^t
three Times before the Mast^ went away, and yet not one Man (...)* Every Thing
was swept away in ^n Instant, by the Violence of the Weather* and N^t^ing le^t
to support us! Our People b^ing mostly n^ked, without either Shoe or Stocking,
and some of them not a Iack^t to their Back, in this terrible Season of the
Year, that the Sea seemed to be the only Shelter from the cold and piercing
Wind: And above all for our wonderful D^liverance, when all our Hopes of
Assistance failed, the Vessel having passed by us the Evening before* not
discovering our Distress, and was insensibly brought back in the Night and
Calm; so that they discovered our Distress and took us off, after we had been
seven Nights and six Days on the Wreck, and consequently in a perishing
Condition! O that Men would praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his
wonderful Works to the Children of Men. Likewise desire your Prayers that God
would send down the healthful Spirit of his Grace into our Hearts; that we may
make a right Improvement of these his Judgments and tender Mercies; that we may
be enabled to pay our Vows made in our Distress* and hereafter live a sober,
righteous and godly Life, to the Honor and Glory of his great Name, and to the
Saving of our precious and immortal Souls, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

Which is the humble Desire and Request of JOSEPH BAILEY.

A NARRATIVE, etc.
I Joseph Bailey, being Master of the Brigantine A^id^ and Catharine, of the
Island of Antigua, and consigned to Mr. Peter Van Brugh Livingston, Merchant in
New York, I arrived there about the ^1st Day of November, 1749; and meeting
with such Dispatch as the Season of the Year would (...), about the (...) Day
of December was ready to sail, except some few Tri^les; however they were
sufficient to (...), till such Time as we had lost our Wind, which th^^
presented; the Weather looking very d^^ious* kept us till Wednesday the 20th of
December, when the Wind being notherly, was willing to embr^^^ the (...)
Opportunity; the Pilot came on board, and we (...) under sail; we ran down to
the Hook: But before I got there I repented I had left York; however the Wind
being notherly, there was no going back, nor (...) safety riding in the Hook,
so that I ^^ood out to (...). (Our Vessel's Company consisting of myself,
Master, Edward Vaughan, Mate, Samuel Parsons and Matthew Finn, Mariners, John
Baxter and Lawrence Ma^^^, ^oy^, and Anthony Suga, a Negro Man belonging to
myself.) Before we had lost Sight of the Land, it beg^n to look very dismal,
and lightened all round. (...) Night it bl^w very fre^^, cold (...) had (...) to
have l^^t our Main-Boom, and (...)* the Toping-Lift getting off the Boom, and
the Boom falling unhook'd in the Goose-Ne^k, we had much ^do to save the Boom
and Sail, in doing which some of our People froze themselves, in particular the
Negro Man had all his Fingers froze. Our Vessel being very deep in the Water,
and deep wasted, we were continually full on our main Deck, and our People very
much exposed at the Pump: The Weather continued so bad that we had little or no
Use of our Main-Sail afterward, and for some Time lay by; after which scudded
under bare Po^es, the Wind veering round the Compass once in twenty-four Hours,
and always blowing hard.

On Saturday the 23d of December we had a violent Gale at S.E. which obliged us
to feud under bare Poles, till we run on Soundings, and got into cold Water
again, which proved very bad to our People, as they were obliged to keep the
Pump continually working, and being likewise up to the Knees in Water; but as
the Wind ^eer^d round to the Southward and Westward, and we continually
scudding before the Wind* we run often Soundings again: It continued one constant
Series of bad Weather; sometimes both Pumps were at Work, oc^^sioned by ^er
being constantly under Water; and the Deck being Prime out, the backs of the
Timber were all open, and no coming at them to make them tight.

On S^nday the 2^th of Dec^mber, the Sea hove our (...) out of (...) Chocks,
and we had like to have lost her, (...) her again. The badness of the Weather
drowned (...) upon Deck; and the Weather continued with (...) little
Alteration, ^^ll (...) in (...) is* till Wednesday the (...) reest o^r (...)
and (...) Yard, but the bad Weather (...) on, (...) hand and scud a (...)
before (...) A terrible (...) G^le ensued, that (...) ou^ (...)* every thing
that was moveable, Lumber, Coop^, and Water-Casks; and for some Time the People
were up to their Necks in Water a^ the Pump. Night came on and the Weather
increased; and about 8 Clock in the Evening a Sea poopt us, and drove in our
two Larboard Lights in the Cabin, which almost filled it and the Steerage,
putting out all our Lights below, and spoiled our Tinder; but by the Help of a
Pistol with some Powder I got Light again. I found the Sea had carried away one
dead Light, so that to supply the De^cency, was obliged to put my Bed into one
of the Windows, and secured it in the best Manner I was capable. I then set the
Boys to bailing the Water out of the Steerage with Buckets as fast as they
could, and called for the Broad-Ax and placed it at the Cabbin-Door, so that I
might readily find it in Case she broached too, to have cut away her Mainmast.

After Things were in this Posture, I went up on the Quarter Deck, the Weather
appeared with a terrible Aspect, and a monstrous Sea followed us; but the
Vessel steering exceeding well, and the Mat^ and Sam. Parsons both at the Helm,
I was in Hopes that we should have done well: I stood over the Scuttl^ on the
Quarter Deck for some Time and observed the Sea; at length it struck her on the
Starboard-Quarter and hove her something too, although the Helm was h^rd a
Starboard: the Wind being about four Points on the Quarter, she immediately
overset; and by the Time I could get hold of the Weather Gunnel, her Mast was
^lat in the Water, and there she lay! Sam. Pa^sons and my Self recovered the
Weather Side near upon the Instant she overset Providence so ordered it that I
had two Knives in my Pocket, I gave Parsons one, and employed the other with
all Speed in order to cut the Lanyards of the Main-Shrouds, which we
immediately did* and then made the best of our Way to the (...)* and cut them
likewise; The Foremast immediately broke off close by the Deck, and by that
Time the Vessel had winded so that her Deck came to the Wind, which taking in
her Gunnel she immediately righted, and soon fell down on her Starboard
Broadside. We immediately got on board as she righted, and fell on our Knees,
desiring God to spare us: But as she fell down again we were obliged to shift
for our selves, to get on the Weather Bow, where the Foremast Yard and Rigging
prevented my getting up for some Time, so that the Sea struck me back several
Times, that I could scarce recover to secure my self from being drowned, till
at length I got hold. In the mean Time Sam. Parsons got ^ft on the Larboard
Gunnel, and with the Assistance of the Mate cut the Lanyards of the
Main-Shroud, and came forward. By that Time she righted the second Time, and
immediately fell over again on her Larboard Side, and in my getting over I
found the Fore Scuttle to blow up under my Feet, and the Vessel to be full of
Water.

I expected nothing less than that she would immediately sink under us, knowing
that we had considerable of Shingle Ballast under our Cargo, and our lading of
heavy Flour, which I thought impossible to support the Weight But some s^all
Time after she had fell over the third Time, Matthew Finn recovered the Bow
where (...) and my Self were; soon after Lawrence M^^on called out for help,
and we helped him up along Side; after which John B^^ter came swimming al^^g
amongst the Rubbish of Boat and other Things, they being both in the St^erage
when she overset* and with much Difficulty got out: The Mate and Negro were all
this Time (...), and I know not in what Manner Providence secured them; for
every Thing was swept cle^n off the Qu^rter ^eck with the (...), at which Time
I h^ld myself f^st by the Fluke of the Sheet Anchor* which was (...) on the Bow.

By (...) Tim^ we we^e in thi^ Situation. I perceived the (...) to be going,
and the Vessel begin to right* on which I called out with a good (...) a strong
Confidence in God, seeing she did not (...) after she was f^ll of Water, Have
Courage, my dear (...)* her Masts are (...), she rights, and will not sink; for
God will deliver us yet* he is All^sufficient, if (...) ^ur Trust in him, (or
to that Effect:) By this Time she was got pretty Up-right, and we all got into
the (...) on the S^arboard Side, when the Negro came to (...), but no News of
the Mate; we lamented him, as we still thought to the Eye of Reason he was gone
but a few Minutes before, and we should soon, follow. The Negro informed us
that both the Pumps were (...), it being so dark we could not perfectly d^scern
any Thing five Foot from us, nor know one another only but by our Voices. The
Gale continued, and the Sea made fair Breaches over us, insomuch that we were
obliged to hold for our Lives, l^st we should wash away. Our People sheltered
themselves under the (...), and though the Sea washed continually amongst
(...), it was more tolerable than the Sharpness of the Air, which was attended
with prodigious hard Rain and Hail, that as I stood and watched the Sea, and
held fast, my Hands were so numbed with the Cold, I was glad to dip them into
the Sea to warm them, and keep me from quite losing the Use of them.

Some considerable Time after we heard the (...) ^^lloe, which we answered, and
it was something of a Surprise to us, not doubting but that he was drowned; but
upon our Answers he came to us, which was a great Joy to us, to think God was
so wonderfully kind and merciful to preserve us all in this terrible Overthrow:
We blessed God, and put up our earnest Prayer to Him in the best Manner we were
capable, and waited patiently for the Return of the Day; at which Time the
Weather was something abated, and presented to our View the most terrible Sight
that any Mortal can imagine, or Tongue can express* The Stern Lights were beat
in, and the Bulk-Heads, and the Cabin were all blown up, and every Thing
washed out that was necessary for the Support of Life: We were naked and cold,
no Clothes to put on, nor Victuals to satisfy our craving and hungry Appetites:
Our Water that was lashed on Deck in the best Manner, was gone: O^r Boat, that
might have been of some Help to us in Case we discovered a Vessel, was likewise
gone: In short every Thing that was above our Main Deck was gone, only-our
Quarter Deck remained, and the Main-^oo^ over it, which was confined by the
Main-Sheet.

But one Thing I am short in, that was, that toward Day, after the Weather
moderated, our People went aft on the Quarter Deck, where they thought to be
more out of the Sea* being almost drowned, and where they secured an old
Stay-Sail, and wrapped themselves up as well as they could under the Starboard
netting Rail. I could not trust the Quarter Deck for fear it should blow up,
but stood forward till almost Day, and then went aft, holding by the Starboard
Gunnel in the Waist, where the Sea made a constant Breach. On my coming aft* I
perceived the Helm was lashed hard a Starboard, which I imagined made her lay
broad off the Wind, and caused the Sea to break more upon us; I* endeavored to
remove the Helm to Lewa^d but in getting a Rope to secure it* a Sea came in
over the Boom, and washed me from the Windward Part of the Stern quite forward
to the Wai^t, and in my Passage struc^ one of my ^lip^ against one of the
Stanchions of the Barr^cado, as I imagine; for I was entirely washed from the
feeling of any Part of the Vessel, and under Water, when I felt the (...)
Gunnel near the Main Chains with my Foot, with which I gave my self a Send-up,
and pad^l'd with my Hands till my Head came out of Water, when I ^ound my Face
toward the Bow of the (...)* and with the Send of the Sea (...) the Main (...)
partly bare: I struggled for (...) recovered the (...), and from thence to one
of the Top Sail-(...) Bitts that appeared, (the Windless and (...) being gone
before.) I (...) my old Station in the Bow, where I hold (...) Daylight, still
begging of God to deliver me, or (...) me for his good Will and Pleasure. After
this Sam. Parsons, endeavoring to cut the Clew of the Main-(...) from the
Boom, in order to cover them the better on the Quarter Deck to keep them from
the Cold, was struck overboard from the Vessel, but happened to hang by some
Part of his Coat, which split the (...) up the Back, and gave him an
Opportunity to recover himself.

Soon after, as the Morning came on, they (...) forward, and discovering the
old Fore-Sail (...) between Deck, not washed over, they ventured (...) hold and
draw it forward to cover themselves, ((...) it was), where with much Difficulty
they kept it from washing from them. Some of the People (...) into the Cabin,
where they found ^ Bottle of (...) whole, the others were all washed out of the
(...) or broke.

We spent the Remainder of the Day without any Thing remarkable, except the
removing some Wood out of the Fore-Scuttle, where the Negro had a Bundle of
Fish, ^^ich being secured was very welcome to us, and as thankfully received.
We then spent our Time in reflecting on our mis^^^ble State, being the 28th Day
of December, in the Lat. of *34 40 N. nearest, and the Long. 65 30 W. Bermudas
being the neare^^ Land, and which I judged to be 70 or 80 Leagu^^ Distance; no
Hopes of Assistance from any Human Creature, and an Impossibility of our
subsisting long in that miserable Condition. And although we had two Hogsheads
of Water in the Hold* we could not come a^ either without breaking up the
Decks; and then our (...) Apprehensions were such, that if once the Hold who
^roke up, and the Goods came out, that the Ballast in her would immediately
sink her* besides, we had Nothing to do it withal. Under those and such like
terrible Apprehensions we passed the Day, (...) up our most humble and ^ervent
Desires to God to pardon our Sins, and deliver us, or at least to ^it and
prepare us for his Holy Will and (...), for Jesus Christ's Sake.

Thus the Day was spent in almost a profound Fast, not having any Thing (...)
subsist upon only as I mentioned before* Though (...) moderated, yet a long and
tedious Night (...), and the refreshing Heat of the Sun (...), we being
constantly in the Water, were almost perished. That Night Sam. Parsons, my
self, and Negro I^ny, fixed ourselves on the Windward Side of the Quarter Deck,
having stretched some Ropes along the same in Case the Sea should wash us away,
that we might catch by* We lay up close under the Rails, and covered our Heads
as well as we could with an old Stay-Sail we had, the Water continually washing
over and under us: But we knew no better Place, the Bow being taken up with the
^est, who had the old Fore-Sail to cover them; and it was terrible to hear the
Lamentations and Mo^n^ that they made.

In this Manner we passed the second Night; and on Friday Morning the 29th Day
of December, the Weather had moderated very much, we began to exe^^ ourselves
to see what we could save; we found the P^mp Hook twisted with some Oznabrigs
and Clothes, Ropes and Part of an old Sail; we cleared it* The Mate and Sam.
Parsons went into the Cabin, and with the Hook got up a Hogshead, and several
Pieces of Beef out of the Run of the after Scuttle; a Box with Six Caggs of
Oysters, marked B. S. and a ^arrel of Apples, which (...) open had like to have
swam away from us* our Broad-Ax, Iron Crow and Hand-Saw, which (...) useful to
us* an old Cutl^ss, Bayonet, and sundry (...) Things we might have got, but
thought it (...) Madness and ^olly for Men under our (...) to save and incum^er
ourselves with unnecessary Things, though never so valuable.

After our People had fatigue^ themselves, and saved what is above mentioned,
together with two large Silver Spoons belonging to me, one of the Boys began to
make heavy Complaints for want of Drink, notwithstanding the Apples we had just
got were very refreshing to us: This put us upon Thoughts how to come at our
Water, and having recovered our Saw and Broad-Ax. Sam. Parsons went to work,
and cut off the Beams of the fore Part of the fore Scuttle, in order to make
room, if possible, to get the Cask out; which to our great Comfort he soon
effected, and then secured it in the Bow, on the Starboard Side of the
Bowsprit; we likewise got up the best Part of the Bundle of Fish before
mentioned* We then seemed to be, through God's good Providence, enabled to
continue some considerable Time, if it pleased God to continue the Weather
moderate. We broached the Water, and found it to be very brackish, the Bung not
being very tight* however we were heartily thankful for that Mercy, as bad as
it was, and were as well satisfied as People could possibly be in such
miserable Circumstances. After which the People wrapped themselves in the old
Fore-Sail, as being very much fatigued* and I went to work with my small Knife
with a Piece of Oznabrigs and a Rope-yarn, and few'd up a Bag in the best
Manner I could, and counted two hundred and twenty eight fine large Apples into
it, putting my two Silver Spoons in the Middle thereof, thinking it to be the
most safest Place, and th^n lashed it well fall to the Starboard Crotch on the
Quarter Deck; and after having secured what Meat and Fish we had, in the best
Manner possible, I continued to return Thanks to God for his Mercies, and
endeavored to compose my self as well as I could. Toward the Afternoon I
observed the Winds begin to rise again, and the Sea ran very high, that it had
like to have taken the Sail from the People forward, several Times washing them
from the Bows, so that ^t was with Difficulty they recovered* at length were
obliged to remove aft, and hale the Sail after them, and with Difficulty got it
on the Quarter Deck. We divided the Sail as well as we could, and stretched a
Loof-Tackle fore and aft the Quarter Deck to prevent our washing over board,
and then placed ourselves in the best Manner possible, my self being next to
the Stern. The Sea presently came near us, and soon roused me up, when to my
great Grief I perceived a very hard Gale near at Hand, the Wind as I imagined
being at S.E. I stood some Time and considered, then looked at the Bowsprit;
our Flying-J^b. Fore stay-Sail and Spritsail being tangled with the Rigging and
Boom, lay under our Bowsprit ever since we had been wrecked; and our Foremast
and Fore-top-Masts, with the Yards and all the Sails thereto belonging* was
hanging under our Starboard-Bow, held by the Fore-^^ay and some of the Rigging
belonging to it: We cut neither the Sails away that hung at the Bowsprit, nor
the Wreck under our Bows, by reason the Sail was the only Thing we had left
that could show us at a Distance, and the Wreck was very necessary to keep our
Vessel to the Wind, and was a Means of securing us. I now went forward and
considered some Time, at length concluded to go out on the Bowsprit, the Sail
being dry, and if possible to secure myself out of the Way of the Sea;
accordingly went ou^* and hung myself under the Bowsprit in the best Mann^r I
could. I had not been there long before a (...) Gal^ came on; and, together
with the ^lying of (...) of the (...), and the sudd^n Twinges of the (...)
hanging by our Fore-^lay, I imagined the (...) might go away* having Nothing to
secure it but the Strap at the Heel. I frequently looked to see how they fared
a-baft, at length a Sea struck them and carried them all to Leward, and like to
have carried them all over board; it took the Fore-Sail quite from them, but
happily lodged about the Leward Stanchu^^ of the Quarter Deck, the Rails being
before gone* They recovered themselves, and some of them (...) forward; at the
same Time I endeavored to stop the troublesome Part of the Spritsail which was
^lying, but could not, although the Negro came to my Help: I therefore tried to
split the S^il with my Knife, which when done, stopped it in some Measure: The
Negro remained on the Bowsprit with me some Time, but with much Difficulty, by
reason of the sudden Jerks the Wreck gave; so that he left me and went in. I
(...) Parsons bring the Bag of Apples forward, expecting the Quarter Deck would
go every Minute; but they still continued on it: The Storm increased
exceedingly, and prodigious Rains; I expected every Moment to hear them cry out
from a-baft for being w^^^'d overboard* the dismal Night ^^me on, and the (...)
continued; the Vessel labored much, and dip^ (...) several Times into the Sea;
but still could not be wor^ed, although I was just perished with the cold Rain
and Wind* By frequent looking aft, I discovered the main (...) to be burst
open, and the Bread and Flour floating out, which put me under terrible
Apprehens^^^^ of our ^mmediate sinking; though I cannot say I ever (...)
despaired of God's Mercy, or was quite void of (...) At length, after some
sharp Thunder and Lightning, the Weather began to abate the latter Part of the
Night* and I, being chilled and benumbed with cold Rain and Wind, crawled in,
and stood some Time in the (...), which warmed me; then I crawled aft to see
how they did there, where I found them in a miserable Condition, and could find
no Place to set or lay down with them: I stood a while and bemoaned our
lamentable Circumstance; my Heart was ready to burst: I begged (...) of God to
deliver us, if it was his blessed Will, and (...) as much as possible to resign
my self to his Providence. I went forward again, and there stood in the Water
as much as I could, out of the Wind, to keep my self warm: I was so worn out
for Want of Rest and ^^eep, I was obliged to hold my self up by my Hands (or I
should have fell into the (...)) till they were so cold that I was obliged to
put them into the Water to warm them.

At length the Day came on, being Saturday the 30th of December: The Sun being
above the Horizon, warmed the Air; though it did not shine upon us, it was very
comfortable: We blessed God for the Mercies of the Night past, and sincerely
prayed for Deliverance, though nothing appeared to our Relief, yet we had great
Hope^, being so plentifully supplied with what was necessary for Life, as long
as the Weather lasted moderate. This Day the Hatch being open, the People went
to work, and got a Cask of Gammons out of the ^^ld, and secured them; likewise
a Barrel of Flour (...), and set it up forward, together with a Cask (...)
seventy Gallons of Water, and our other Provisions, which we had secured the
last Storm (although to our Sorrow we lost the Bag of Apples the last Night.)
We had sufficient to have lasted us three Weeks* should it please God to
continue the Weath^r (...)* and not to let the Vessel sink under us; which
(...) us in great Hopes that God would perfect our (...), who had hitherto so
wonderfully preserved us, and so plentifully provided for us, contrary to the
Eye of Reason and our Deserts. This Day we had a comfortable One, and some
Rest; we got our Sal^ up again that the Sea took from us last Night; we still
continued our Addresses to God for his Assistance, and possessed a more
comfortable Night than any we had had, with some Rest; and in the Morning, being

Sabbath Day, the 31st of December, a fine smooth (...) and (...) pleasant
Morning, I got up; and after addressing my self to God, I crawled forward on
our Starboard Gu^nel, being dry, and got a Rope, and stretched it from the
Cat-head to to the Quarter Deck Rail, so that we could walk forward for Water
without wetting up to our Necks. This Day to our great Grief found ourselves
begin to swell, and the Wound^ and Bruis^^ we got in the Wreck became very sore
and troublesome. Yesterday I contrived a Method whereby we could make Use of
our Flour; I took a^ Oyster-K^g that we had emptied, and mixed the Flour with
fresh Water, so that we could eat it off a Stick; We ^^ved a Pitcher that I had
Pickles in which held three Quarts, and as there was Seven of us, he that went
for Water drank at the Cask: I then cut another Oyster-Barrel to the Bigness of
a Pint: The Pitcher holding three Quarts, being filled with Water, and
thickened up with Flour so that we could drink it, served us for both Victuals
and Drink, the Flour taking away the Saltness of the Water, and made it of a
pleasant Taste; so that three of them Pitchers of Water in a Day, satisfied us
very well, and enabled us to eat our Meat (raw as it was) with a good Stomach.
We robbed our Wounds and Sores with some of the Fat of the Bacon, and ripp'd
the thin Lining of the Sails and ^^und them up in the best M^nner we could.
This Day dried ourselves, the Sun shining out, began to feel comfortable,
though very sore and worn out with Watching and Fatigue. I began to think it
impossible we should continue long in that Condition, our Hands and Feet being
so swelled they became almost useless to us, and with much Difficulty got
forward for Water. I thought it would be a terrible Thing should we all perish
in that miserable Condition, and no Soul be able to give an Account of us;
especially considering that my Father was lost, with the only Brother I had*
within a Day or two of 31 Years before, being bound from Piscataqu^ to Madeira,
and never heard of after; consequently they suffered much in that Condition;
the Storm, as near as I can remember, happening about the 2d or 3d Day of
January, 1718* 19: I was therefore strongly possessed, that about that Time my
Dissolution or Deliverance would be fixed: I likewise considered my poor
Mother* who I expect is now living, I being her only Son; and upon
Consideration of the Whole, resolved (lame as I was in my Right Hand) to cut
out in the best Manner I could, on a Barrel Stave, with my Knife, an Account of
the Name of the Brigantine, whereunto she belonged, from whence she came, and
when and where she over-set, together with my own Name, as being Master; which
I was resolved to keep secure, and fallen it to some Part of the Vessel where
it might be found, in Case we should all perish, and the Vessel afterward^
taken up. Accordingly this Day I began, although it was Sabbath Day, my Hands
being very much swelled, and particularly my Right-One, having a Wound on the
Inside, occasioned by the Prick of a Nail the Day before we overset: I finished
two Lines, but my Hand failing me very much I could do no more, without great
Pain^ However it being fair pleasant Weather, we kept a wishful sharp Look-out;
but Nothing appeared. Toward Evening we contrived to fix our Lodging in a more
commodious Way than we had before, making a Sort of Tent and W^^ther Cloth,
tacking the Sail out-s^ide with some Nails we had got from wherever we could
pull them out, and bringing the other Part over the Rail, stretching a Rope
along the Deck fore and aft, so that we could set pretty Up-right when the
Water came in, or we were tired with laying down. Thus passed the Day, and
likewise Monday the first Day of January, nothing remarkable happened, but that
a few Barrels of Flour worked themselves loose and came out; we saved what
Nails we could out of the Hoops, to secure our Tent and keep ourselves as dry
as we could; for as we had recovered our natural Health, and constantly soaking
in the Water, our Flesh became very sore, and our Feet swelled* not one of us
having any Shoes* we could do Nothing but implore the Assistance of Almighty
God, beg his Mercy, and recommend ourselves to his kind Providence, which had
protected us hitherto. Toward Evening, considering our deplorable Condition, I
proposed to the People, to keep the next Day as a Day of Fasting and Prayers,
to humble ourselves before the Lord, and beg his divine Assistance; which was
consented to by most of the People. This Afternoon I perceived the Wind to
freshen, and look squally to the Eastward; the Water began to come over our
Quarter, and I perceived the Fashion-Piece on our Quarter threw the Sea with a
Re-bound over the Deck* I went to work with the Broad-Ax and Crow, and got it
off, drawing two large Bolts and several Nails that held it; We then placed
ourselves, and after recommending ourselves to the Almighty, endeavored to
rest; but the Water coming in* soon disconcerted me, and made me get up and try
to wipe up the Water, but to no Purpose, it constantly coming in, so that it
obliged me to get the Piece I had pulled off our Quarter into my Birth, to sit
on and keep me out of the Water; (...) which I sat and leaned all Night. The
Morning came on, being Tuesday the second Day of January, I being f^^^gued did
not rise as soon as some of our People, who to my great Grief I found had began
to (...)* Whether they heard me when I proposed the Fast, or whether it was
Forgetfulness, I cannot t^ll; however I reprimanded them, and desired they
would keep the Day as we proposed; accordingly we fasted and (...) our (...)
before the Lord, and humbled ourselves; But toward Noon some of the young L^d^
desired I would let them have Water, I upbraided them, giving (...) a sharp
Reprimand, charging them not to (...) any Thing till the Evening, but beg God
for his Mercy* Some of them began to draw forward near the Water Cask; but as I
could see it from (...) Quarter Deck* I was very jealous, and kept a sharp
^^ok-out on the^, and promised them, if I caught any of them meddli^^ with
Water until Night, I would take Care they should have none all the next Day.
Soon after I found myself much affected, so that I poured out my Soul to God in
a public Manner, for the general Cause, and was so overcome that I could
scarce utter myself for Sob^ and Tears: begging of the Almighty he would (...)
us immediate Deliverance in his own Way that would ^end most to his Honor and
Glory; and (...) would enlarge our Hearts to call upon and praise his holy Name
for the Mercies he had been (...) to favor us with hitherto; and that he would
(...) to continue the moderate Weather that he was (...) to bless us with; and
in all Things submitting ourselves to his divine Providence. I this Fore-noon
had (...) my third Line on my Stave, with a Design not to ^^ddle with it any
more till such Time (...) we were (...) last Extrem^ty, and not able to help
ourselves any more, and then to set down the Time we had been o^ the Wreck;
after which to secure myself, and that on (...) Wreck in the best Manner I
could, so that I might (...) wash from her. Soon after I found my Mind to ^e
v^^y (...), and was ^itting with the Ma^^ on the (...), discoursing, when on a
sudden he starts up and (...), a Sail! Joyful News! We were ready (...) for
Joy, and was ^nspir'd (...) it (...) with new Li^e; immediately it cast in our
Mind which way the (...) bound, and how we ho^ld (...) ourselves to them; I
remembered I had saved (...) old white Shirt, which I had secured on the (...)
since the Night we rode out the Storm; I (...) (being a Mop-handle we had
lashed (...) which we made a Hook of to hale up Things after the the Loss of
our Pump-hook) and spread the (...) thereon, and set on the End of the Bowsp^i^
and (...) it in the best Manner I could to show us, (...) the Tall of the Shirt
in my Hand that the ^un might (...) on it, being white, could be discovered a
long Way off: We perceived the Vessel to draw (...). Our People ^ell to and eat
and dr^nk (...) considering that though we s^w the Vessel, ^he might (...) us,
or at least not discover our Distress. and (...) by; especially Night coming on
and little Wind. (...) ^ll I was tired; the Mate got the Till^^ (...), and
(...) a Piece of Canvas and lashed it to the Windward Crotch* and then came and
gave me a Spell* We would fain persuade ourselves that she made the best of her
Way toward us, she being to Leward of us, and little Wind, though at the same
Time it seemed to me that she made the best of her Way to the Southward without
regarding us, as she never showed us any Colors, nor ever attempted to tack
while Daylight lasted. We began again to be under sensible Apprehensions of
being left* and some of the People began to bemoan themselv^s* I still retained
a strong Confidence in the Almighty that he would deliver us by this Vessel,
and therefore answered to this Purpose. My dear Souls, never distrust the
Providence of the Almighty, who is able to save to the last Moment them that
put their Trust in him; and as he has been so wonderfully kind to us, and has
preserved us all hitherto, I do not doubt but that he will complete his Mercies
by our Deliverance, and in particular by this (...). They objected, the Vessel
was gone by and took no Notice of us, and a long Night coming on: I
acknowledged it; but at the same Time insisted, if it was the Pleasure of the
Almighty (as I was strongly of the Belief it was) that they could not leave us
were they ever so much a Mind to; and that God would in his Providence send
them back (though unwilling) and they would be obliged to take us off: With
this and such like Discourses I comforted them as well as I could. We made up
our Lodging, and every Man placed himself in his Station; after which we sung
the Hundredth Psalm, all but the four last Lines, which I could not remember;
and then put up our hearty Prayers to God for his Mercy. that he would complete
our Deliverance, as he had given us a Glimpse of Hopes* and that he would not
suffer us to be deceived; and that (...) particular he would send us
Deliverance by that (...) we had seen this Day, although ^he had passed us* (...)
he would be pleased in his Providence to send (...) to our Relief: Then after
recommending ourselves to his kind Providence, and begging Protection for the
Night, we endeavored to repose ourselves as well as we could. Soon after we
discovered it to be a flat Calm, and toward Midnight a small Breeze
southerly, which gave us great Hopes that the Vessel would be in Sight* in the
Morning, whether they endeavored or not: We had the comfortablest Night of any
we had whilst on the Wreck, considering the different Motions in our Hearts of
Hope and Despair.

At Length the Morning came on, when I, being awake very much in the Night, did
not (...) as soon as some of the Rest of the People, who, between sleeping and
waking, I heard bemoaning their woeful Condition, the Vessel not appearing: B^t
(...) the Daylight came on, to our great Joy we espied her laying under her
Jib* right to Windward of us, the Wind being then S.W. or thereabouts: We
imagined (...) had discovered our Condition over Night, (...) lying too,
expec^in^ to relieve us in the Morning* though we were much deceived. However,
in (...) Sense of God's divine Providence, we fell on our Knees all of us, and
with the utmost Sincerity of Heart and Humility* returning humble and hearty
Thanks to Almighty God, for all the Acts of his kind Providence toward us, and
that he then gave us so lively Hopes of a speedy De^iverance; still begging he
would complete it, and give us a due Sense of all the Merci^^ he had bestowed
upon us; and that he would give us Grace to make a right Improvement thereof*
that we might amend our Lives, and live to show forth his wonderful Acts of
Providence, and loving Kindness to us the sinful Children of Men* We the^
waited with great Impatience, and wondered the Reason she did not bear down
upon us, which was above an Hour (...) we saw them* we was so near them ^e
could (...) see their Hall. At length to our great Joy and Satisfaction, we see
her bearing away for us, and (...) (...) they could make, and came down to us.
No (...) express or imagine the Joy and Satisfaction (...), only them that felt
it. They came under (...) and spoke with us* and immediately hoisted (...)
Boat, and took us off. It proved to be the (...) love, from Boston, Capt. David
Ford, bound to (...), who never discovered our Distress till the (...) they
bore away to take us off, taking (...) for (...) at a great Distance, and had
no Thoug^^ of (...) in Distress, so that their being staid all Night was a pure
Act of Providence! The Wind soon bree^'d up, and the Night following had a
strong Gale of Wind* and great Sea, that according to the Eye of Re^^^n it
would have been impossible for us to have secu^'d ourselves on the Wreck, (if
she had ^ot s^nk (...) us) in the Condition we then were reduced (...) being
seven Nights and six Days on the Wreck in (...) miserable Condition; in all
which Time I cannot (...), I once despaired of God's Mercy and Providence
toward me; for which I desire fo^ever to bless and praise his glorious Name.

^. ^* When we overset we were by our Acc^unt in the Latt. 34 40 N. and Lon. 65
30 W. And when taken off were in Latt. 35 52 Lon. 6^ 2 W. they having a good
Observation the Day they took us off, which made us (by Reason of the Gulf
Stream (...) Winds) to have drove about 85 Leagues to the (...) N.E. while we
were on the Wreck.

Written on board the Sloop Dove, of Charlestown, Ne England, David Ford,
Commander, at Sea, after our Deliverance.
FINIS.

