A Companion for PRAYER In Times of extraordinary Danger.

By Richard Alleine, Author of Vinditiae Pietatis.

Reprinted at the Desire of the late Rev. Mr. Webb.

To which is added, by Way of Appendix, from Dr. Increase Mather's Discourse on
the Prevalency of Prayer; Sundry remarkable Instances of a gracious Answer of
Prayer in N. E. and elsewhere.

Printed and Sold by S. Kneeland, opposite the Prison, in Queen Street. 1750.

Reverend (...),
THE Me^^^^ made in yours, concerning P^a^^^ (...) much affected me, and has
occasi^ned some workings of my Thoughts, which though (in a Conscience of mine
own Weakness) (...) more than once laid aside, yet they still returned upon me;
and I do now here offer the Result of them it your Consideration.

We all knew an^ teach, that they are only returning and reforming Prayers that
will prevail with God; and it is to be doubted, that, in this dead and decayed
Age, there are too many Prof^ssors who will join in the Design of Prayer, whom
this must serve instead of Reformation; it is to such especially that the
Directions on the enclosed Paper are intended. I send them to you, desiring you
to read them, and then do what you please with them; beseeching you, and
trusting upon your friendly Faithfulness herein, that you would take your full
Freedom, either to keep them in Silence to your self, or else to communicate
and make them Public. I should thankly accept of any Expungings, Alterations
or Additions that you shall think needful. The Lord pardon the Failings, and
accept the sincere Aims of my Soul herein. To his Grace I commend you, and in
him I rest,

Dear Sir, Your unworthy Friend and Servant, RICHARD ALLEINE.

A COMPANION FOR PRAYER.
TO make Way for, and to press to the diligent observing the following
Directions, let these three Things be premised.

1. That the Power of Religion is much fallen, at least, is at a stand, among
Multitudes of Professors of the present Day. Sure this needs no Proof, when we
have so many sad ocular Demonstrations hereof before us.

2. That for this, the Lord has a Controversy with us at this Day, Rev. 2.4.
Whatever Controversy the Lord has with the Belials amongst us, who^e h^^
(...) We^kedness has even ripened them for V^ngo^^ce, his special Quarrels
seems to be (...) ^^ple. We may (...) whom the soe^^^^. An^^er is, (...)
^bserving at whose Faces (...) are ^^^ve^ed. A^^ (...) whom do our Enemies, the
R^d (...) Anger make a w^ce (...) and draw ^or^n the Tongue, and attempt their
fiercest Hands?

3. No Prayers will avail, nor have the least Help in them, but the Prayers of
such, with whom the Lord's Controversy is taken up and composed; those with
whom he has a particular Quarrel, are like to be unhappy Mediators for others.
We choose the Favorites of Princes to be our Intercessors with them.

4. There can be no taking up GOD's Controversy, unless the Matter fit here
noved, by Repentance and Reformation, Rev. 2.5. Isa. 1.15, 16, 18. When ye make
many Prayers. I will not hear, your Hands are full of Blood; wash ye, make you
clean, etc. Come now and let us Reason together. Josh. 7.10. Get thee up;
wherefore lie thou thus upon thy Face? Israel has sinned -- they have taken
the accursed Thing; and v. 12. I will not be with you any more, except the
accursed Thing be destroyed from amongst you. Is there no accursed Thing
amongst, even the Professors of Religion? Behold the Wedg of Gold, and the
Babylonish Garment, their Pride and their Covetousness, hid in their Hearts for
a Tent. God search out these, and every other accursed Thing within you, let
them be destroyed, if ye would have the Lord to be at Peace.

5. If there may be such a Spirit of Prayer stirred up among us, as may have its
Fruit unto Holiness, and real Reformation of the Evils of our Ways; this would
Comfort us, and give us great Hopes in the hardest Cases.

6. Therefore, in all our crying to God for his Help, in Case of public Fears,
Dangers or Distresses, our Eye should be firstly upon, and we should wrestle
with the Lord for the pardoning, purging, and Sanctification of our own Hearts
and Lives; wherein if we prevail not, we shall be as a rotten Tooth, or a Bone
out of joint, for any Help there is in us, or in any Thing we do; unless we can
pray up a Spirit of Holiness in our selves, a Spirit of Love, and of Power, and
of a sound Mind, we are not like to do any Thing to Purpose, in praying down
Mercy for the People; the Devil will give us leave to visit the Throne of
Grace, so we will but carry our hard and uncircumcised Hearts with us; if we
cannot get to be of the Lord's holy Ones, though we make many Prayers, he will
not hear; here the Interest and the Hopes of the People of God lie, in the
shedding abroad of the sanctifying and quickening Spirit upon them; for this
therefore should we firstly pray.

7. It Is not praying alone that will do: to the bringing on our Reformation,
there must be also a constant and sedulous Use of all God's other Means, in our
whole Course of Life.

8. Some of these Means are presented in the following Directions.

1. General Directions.

Direct. 1. Take up a deep and serious Design of making an advance in serious
Religion. Set not down by, take not up with, what you have already attained,
but resolve for reaching forward, and following after, toward that which you
have not attained; content not your selves to drive gently on, as your Flesh
will bear, but stir ^pvour selves to follow hard after the Lord; and let this
be the deliberated cree and intent of your Hearts. Say to thine Heart, How is
it with me? Does my Sold prosper? Are my Ways such as please and Lord? What is
mine Expectation and mine Hope? What is the Aim and Business of my Life? is it
that Christ may be magnified by me, and that I may be made Partaker of his
Holiness, and show forth his Virtues in my Generation? Can I say with the
Apostle, To me to live is Christ? Ah Wretch that I am! How deeply has this
Self and this World gone shares with my Lord! O! How little of my Time, my
Parts, my Strength, yea, and of my very Heart also have been enclosed and
consecrated as Holiness to the Lord? How much of me has been left out in
common for the World? Well, but what meanest thou for the future? Will thou
henceforth change the purpose and intent of thine Heart? Come Man, wilt take up
a Design for, and henceforth centermine, and set thine Heart upon a more
watchful, fruitful and heavenly Life? If thou will not be brought to decree,
and resolve upon a better Life, much less will thou be persuaded actually to
it. What Is begun well, is half done; and an holy Design deeply laid, is a good
beginning.

Direct. 2. Let God's Calls to extraordinary prayer, and a Sense of the
necessity of your Recovery and Reformation, to year prevailing in Prayer,
quicken you on in the vigorous pursuance of your holy Design. Now is a Time,
wherein you have your Hearts at the Advantage, having such weighty Arguments
before you, and the Opportunity of doing two such great Things more, as the
saving of your selves and also o^ the People, both from Iniquity and Calamity.

Direct. 3. Do all you do, in pursuance hereof, in the Name of the Lord Jesus.
Be not discouraged at any prospect of Difficulty, trust in him for his Help.
Encourage your Hearts with the Words of the Apostle. Phil. 4.13. I shall be
able to do all Things through Christ that strengthens me.

Direct. 4. Keep your Eye and your Heart much upon God and the other World. Be
able to say with the Apostle, Phil. 3.20. Our Conversation is in Heaven; that
is, there the Business of our Life lies; and that not only above spiritual and
heavenly T^^gs, but with God himself. Live at the ^^^^^t tain and Springhead;
thence all ^our l^ght, and Life, and Holiness, and Si^on^^th must flow down. Be
much in to king upwards; and beholding in ^a G^^'s the Glory of the Lord, you
will be changed from Glory to Glory, into the same Image, 2 Cor. 3.18. Look
much and often upon the Things that are not seen, if ye would be delivered from
the Power and ma^ign Influence of the Things that are seen; let your Eye be
upon the Sun, and you will see a dimness and darkness upon the Earth; get you
clothed with the Sun, and you will get the Moon under your Feet.

Direct. 5. See that there be no allowed Sin in your Heart or Practice. Psalm.
66.18. If I rega^d Iniquity in mine Heart, God wi^^ not hear my Prayer, nor
help me. An allowed Sin is as the dead Flesh in the Wound; whatever Methods or
Medicines be taken, there will be no healing till the de^d Flesh be eaten off;
you may profess, and pray, and hear all your Life long, and yet will never
prosper whilst you are privy to any one indulged Sin.

Direct. 6. B^ ^^^^ant and in ^ant in day^y, secret and family Prayer. Let not
extraordinary Prayer excuse your ordinary; and let not your neglect of ordinary
Prayer unfit you or extraoordinary: Let not your Way to your Closet be untrod.
He thath bolds h^ 3 Acquaintance in Heaven, by being often with God, w^li^ ^o
the most like to prevail with God in the most pressing and difficult Cases;
those that are much in Prayer, those are the Men that use to be mighty in
Prayer.

Direct. 7. In all your Praying, both ordinary and extraordinary, let your Eye
be (I say not chiefly, but) firstly upon the Case of your own Souls. What
Improvement you obtain here will be of this double Advantage; 1. There will be
the more hope of your being heard for the Public. 2. If the Lord be not
prevailed with for public Mercies and Deliverances, yet you will be the better
prepared for Sufferings. If God should show Mercy as to the Public, should
scatter our Clouds, and blow over our Scorms, should cause our Light to break
forth as the Morning, and our Righteousness also as the Noonday; yet what
would all this be to thee, who are unrighteous? What would it be to thee, if in
all the Land of Gos^en there should be Light, and thou in the midst thereof
should be covered over with the Darkness of Egypt? If there should be Dew on
all the Grass of the Field, and thy Fleece only should be dry? If thou
should live to see thy People a saved People, and an holy and fruitful
Nation, and thou should stand as a withered and dry Tree amongst all the
flourishing Cedars? Get up thine own Heart into good Proof, or whatever
spiritual Plenty thou mayft see in Israel, yet thou will not eat thereof. Talk
no more of thine Hopes of seeing good Days, how little would that be to thee,
unless thou get thee a better Heart?

Direct. 8. Let your Prayers be followed with a constant Care of your Ways. Let
not your praying serve you instead of repenting and reforming, but let it
quicken you to your whole Duty; let your entering into your Closet be your
ascending heavenwards; and let not your returns thence be the falling down of
your Souls from Heaven to Earth. Let your Duties and Ways be all of a Piece;
live l^ke praying Children. Let not the Spirituality or your Mornings and
Evenings, countenance or encourage you in your all (...) Carna^^ry. (...) in
the Fear of the Lord (...) the Da^^ings, Prove. 23.17.

Direct. ^. Whatever Incomes you rec^ive from G^^ into your o^n Souls, be free
in (...) to o^^ers: In mean in a Way of holy Discourse and Conterence. (...)
sing and Commun^cating is the (...) Way to thriving. Prove. 11.24. There is that
^^atte^eth, and set (...) ^^seth, the^e is that wi^^ ^^^^^th, and it tend^th is
Poverty. It Is tr^e with respect to Spirituals as well as Temporals. There are
none that grow more rich toward God, than those, who by bringing forth what
(...) ^ave received, labor to make others (...) also. Give the holy Fire
within you a vent, and it will burn the clearer. Keep not your Religion to your
selves; let your ^ull Cup run over, let your Lips drop as the Honeycomb, let
your Mouth be a Well o^ Life, and your Lips feed many, Prove. 10.11. B^ild up
one another in the most Holy Faith: provoke one another to Love and to good
Works; let your Families, your Wives and Children, your Neighbors and
Acquaintance, have ^ight from your Candle, and be warmed by your Fire.
Doubtless its one special Part of God's Quarrel with Christians, that they are,
so very many of them, of such carnal and unsavory Converses. Is it [thy] Case?
Haft thou this to charge upon thy self? O! amend, amend, and see that thou
continue not such a barren Soul; as low as it is with thee in Grace, think not
to rise high, unless thou will make better Use of what thou have.

2. Particular Directions.

Direct. 1. Consider what it is whereto you have ^^^eady uti^ined, and be
thankful; and thence be encouraged to press on and Hope for more. Have thou
abtained Grace from the Lord? And has he caused his Grace to abound toward
thee and in thee? And have thou a witness within thee that thou have not
received the Grace of God in vain? But do thou study to walk worthy of that
Grace wherein thou stand? O rejoice in the Lord, and let all within thee
bless his Holy Name; and take what thou have thus received as an earnest of
more. Set thy Foot upon the Neck of every morified Lust, take the more Heart to
thee to go on in the Fight, and rejoice in Hope of a total and final Victory.
The Soldier, when one Wing of his Enemies Army is routed, or they do but give
Ground, and begin to fall, this raises his Courage, and he falls more smartly
on. Go thou and do likewise; and let thy beginning, much more thy growth in
Grace, and thy Experiences hereof, be the oiling of thy Wheels, for thy more
vigorous following on after yet a greater increase.

Direct. 2. Consider what your special Corruptions, Infirmities, Want^,
Neglects, Temptations, or your most ^rainary Falls are. 1. What your special
Corruptions are, how far forth you have conquered them, and where you stick. In
some Professors, Pride, in others Cove^eousness, in others Sensuality, in
others Slothfulness, in others Peevishness or Frowardness, or the like, may
have gotten such head in them, that these Weeds overtop, and even choke up all
their Flowers. 2. What your special Wants or Weaknesses are in Point of Grace;
what Graces the^ are, whether Faith or Love, of Peace ^u^nes^, or Meekness, or
Humility, or Patience, etc. wherein you are most ef^c^ent or weak. 3. What
Duties the^ are, as either Prayer, Meditation, C^nmuning with your own Hearts,
etc. ^^ich you are most apt to neglect, or and most difficult to go comfortably
through. 4. What Temptations they are, by which you are most commonly assaulted
or foiled. 5. What your most ordinary Falls are in point of Practice. And here
let Professors of Religion be warned to consider, if they be not overtaken
(besides many others) by some of these three Evils. 1. An over-eager and greedy
following after the World: The Zeal of some Men's Spirits after Riches, has
eaten up all their Zeal of God. O! Into what Poverty has thy Soul fallen,
whilst thou have been so bus^e in the World, and have selt the P^ospe^ities
thereof come ^rouding upon thee! Some rich Professors may remember the Days of
old, and be troubled. This Thought, When I was but a little one in this World,
then was it better with me than now; this Thought may be an Arrow in their
Hearts, and kill the Joy, and let out the Juice an^ Sweetness of their greatest
Abundance I remember the Kindness of my Youth, and the Love of mine Espousals;
but O where I now! My very rising has given me the fall. 2. A Liberty for
carnal Jolli^, a jovial and vainly merry Life, such the^ are, who have left off
to walk mournfully before the Lord of Hosts, and have given themselves to live
merrily with the World; who have given over to weep with them that weep, and
are fallen in to a laugh with them that laugh, to jest and sport and be vain
with the vain ones, yea, and it may be to drink and to sit by it with those
that drink. It Is now grown too creditable to frequent drinking Houses:
Tradesmen that are Professors, especially in Cities or great Towns, how
ordinarily do they, upon Pretense of Dispatch of Busness, sit many Hours over a
Dish of Coffee, or a Cup of Ale, or a Glass of Sack; and carry it so, that they
can hardly be distinguished from the good Fellows of the World; but perhaps by
this only, That they are now downright drunken into Breasts. If there be a
Liberty of such Houses, and meetings in them sometimes necessary (as perhaps it
may) yet let not this Liberty be used as an occasion to the Flesh. 3. Gaudiness
or over-costliness in Apparel, wherein some of them glitter and shine amongst
the greatest Gallants of the Earth. Some amongst Professors do not only shun
but disdam and despise the old Self-denial that was wont to be among Christians
in these and the like Particulars, as if they were set at Liberty by the Gospel
from the Laws of Christ, as well as from the Law of Moses. To these three let
me add one Evil more: 4. A neglect of your Families; of the Instructing,
Catechizing, and due Disciplining them; the Consequents of which Neglect are
very sadly to be seen in the Ignorance, Errors, Rudeness and Disorderliness
abounding amongst many of them: there are not a few, who take some Care of
themselves, but leave the Bridle on the Necks of theirs, and reap many Heart
breaking Crops in them, as the Fruits o^ their own Negligence. O let holy
Jeshua's Resolution be yours: As for me and mine House, we will s^rve the Lord,
Josh. 24.15.

Now diligently search and consider thy self in all these Things; and when thou
have faithfully studied thy self and Ways, and have found what it is that thou
art most peccant or wanting in, and most prejudiced and hindered by; then
conclude, here my great Difficulty lies, and therefore here my great Work lies,
if ever I would prosper, to get this or that Corruption to be mortified, this
or that Grace strengthened, such and such Temptations to be shunned or provided
against, and such and such Faults to be amended; now I have found what hinders
me; and that which does hinder will hinder, till it be taken out of the Way.

Direct. 3. Bend the main Fores of all your Religion upon these very Points
wherein you are most failing or foulty. The Devil will allow us to be busy in
other Matters of Religion, so he can but keep us off from those Things where
our great Stresses lies: And the deceitful Heart will take up with that which
is most easy and pleasant, that thereby it may the better shift it self of that
which is more hard, and would go to the quick with it. We never purge or bleed
to any Purpose, till we hit upon the right Humor, and strike the right Vein.

This is to act rationally and in Judgment; to bend our great Strength there,
where our great Difficulty and Weakness lies. When you have by searching found
out what you mostly stick at, let it be your first grand Errand in every
Prayer, whether ordinary or extraordinary, to beg special Help in this
particular Case: your weakness in any particular Grace or Duty, the Power of
any particular Lust, Corruption or Temptation, your most ordinary and common
Falls in Point of Conversation; let these have a special Place in every Prayer
you make: And also let them be most heedfully watched and labored against in
your Lives. Turn in the Strength of Prayer and Watchfulness upon the Strength
of Sin; let your main Batteries be against the strongholds, and where your
Walls are weakened, there set the strongest Guard and Watch.

Direct. 4. Measure your proficiency in Religion, by the Power you get in those
Particulars, wherein you have been most deficient or foulty. Judge not your
selves by those Things which are most easy in Religion, but by your coming off
in your most difficult Case.

Some Professors may at Times seem to be full of good Affections, strangely
elevated and enlarged in their Prayers, yea, and to live in so great Peace, as
to take themselves to have attained to the riches of full Assurance, and yet
for all this may be but very poor Christians all the while. Let them be asked:
How is it with your Soul? O! ^^bless the Lord, I find it very comfortable: I
have sweet Communion with God in Prayer, and I live in the sweet and refreshing
Light of his Countenance; he washes my Steps with Batter, and has Sun shines
upon my Paths; I thank the Lord I go comfortably on. But stay Man. How is it
with thine old Corruptions? Thou were once in o^e^ably proud, or froward, or
earthly, or a joly and vainly merry Soul; what Ground has thou gotten of those
very Corruptions ^^^er which thou must gro^n^^t? How is it with thee with
Respect to Temptation? Do thou fear (...) Temptation, and do what thou cannot
to keep thy self out of H^^^^^ Wa^ (...) And when thou fall est into Temptation,
when thou art actually tempted to Pride or Covetousness, when thou art provoked
to Passion or Impatience, how goes it with thee then? How stand thou in the
Day of Temptation? How is it with thee it Regard of thy wonted Evils in the
Conversation? Have thou founded a Retreat from thy eager chase after the geat
Things of the World? Thou have leen a Zealot for increasing thine earthly
Substance, art thou now become more moderate? Thou were once a sl^thful, lazy
Soul in the Matters of God, art thou now more diligent and industrious? Art
thou servent in Spirit serving the Lord? Thou once lived a jolly, frothy and
merry Life, do thou not carry it with more Seriousness? Have thou left thy
lying and deceitful Dealing? Thou have been a Self seeker and a Flesh-pleaser,
but cannot say, through the Grace of God, I have now betaken my self to a
self-denying Life; and do thou deny thy self in those very Things wherein
thou were used most to seek thy Self? Put thy self upon a close and severe
Trial here, and know that if the strong hold be not battered and broken, it
thine old Lusts do still hold their Power in thee, if the old Sore be still
issuing out, the old Stream be still running its Course: If thou can not say,
I have kept me from [mine] Iniquity, or at least am fighting more resolvedly
against it; if thou still st^keft where thou were wont to stick, (whatsoever
flash thou seem to have of good Affections, whatsoever Confidence thou have
of thy good Condition) it is a sure sign it is not so well with thee. Look to
what degree of Success thou have attained in those Things wherein thy great
Difficulty lay; to such a degree of Soul Prosperity thou have attained, and no
more.

Direct. 5. Measure your Hopes of the answer of your Prayers for the Public,
by your Experiences of their speeding in your ^^^n particular Cases. If thy Sin
can stand before all thy Prayers, thine Enemies, and Fears, and Dangers are not
like to fall ever the sooner for such praying; what God may do upon the Prayers
of others, thou know not; but nothing is like to go the better for thee. If
thou have run with the Footmen (within thee) and these have been too hard for
thee, how will thou contend with them that ride upon Horses? If thou can not
stop the muddy Streams of thine own Cistern, how will thou stand before the
swelling of Jordan? If thy Prayers prevail so little to the seting thine own
Heart, or thine own House in order, how can thou think they they will do any
Thing against the Hosts of the Uncircumcised? God hears not Sinners; not only
such Sinners as are in a State of Sin, and totally alienated from the Life of
God, but even such also, who though for the main, they have been once washed in
the Blood of Christ, are again fallen into, and wallowing in the Mud and Mire
of any one allowed Sir; they are all like to be but miserable Comforters in the
Day of Distress. Remember that Scripture mentioned before. Psalm. 66.18. If I
regard Iniquity in my Heart, God will not hear my Prayer.

But on the other Side, if thou do obtain, if thou do prevail in thine own
personal Case, this has good Hope in it. It Is an Argument that thy Prayers are
accepted with God; and if the Lord accept thee when thou prayest for thy self,
or for thine House, thence the greater Hope will spring that he will accept
thee when thou prayest for his own House and People. And if he does accept thee
for them, he will either deliver them out of their Distress, and thou shall
have the honor to be one of those for whose sake Deliverance comes; or if he
should not grant thy Requests as to the Public, yet he will not fail to give
thee thine own Soul for a Prey, though he do not give thee the Lives of them that
sail with thee in the Ship.

And now you see the best Way that is open to you, to help at a Pinch, to save
the poor distressed Churches of God in this Time of their Need, such praying as
may have its Fruit unto Holiness in your selves; by this you may do much to
promote the Holiness and Happiness of the People; if any Thing, this will do it.

Wherefore gird up your Loins, and set in in good earnest upon this seasonable
and mighty Duty. Go into your Closets, lift up your Hearts, draw forth your
Souls, pour out your Tears, weep in your Prayer, weep over your own and the
Peoples Sins and Fears, and bow your selves with your might before the Lord;
this once try what you can do, try the Strength of Prayer. Pray all to rights
within you and at home, and then seek and cry, and wrestle, and trust, and wait
for the Salvation of God to be revealed in due Time upon his People.

Let us at length hear the Conclusion of the whole Matter, What shall be the
Fruit of all this: what will you now do? If I should only ask, Who among you
will join in and pray pray ^or the Peace of Jer^sal^m, the Church (...) the
living God? every one would readily answer, I will be for one, I (...) another,
God forbid I should hold my Pe^ce, I will pray for the Peace of Jerusa^em: Let
them prosper that love thee: Peace is within thy Walls, and Prosperity within
thy Palaces. For my Brethren and Companions sake I will pray, Peace be within
thee because of the House of the Lord our God, I will seek thy Good.

If it be asked fur^her, and who will pray for the Destruction of Babylon? O,
every one of us who have an Heart for the Peace of Jerusalem. Down with it,
down with it, even to the Ground. Remember, O Lord, the Children of E^om, in
the Day of Jerusalem, who said, Raze it, raze it even to the very Foundation. O
Daughter of Babylon, that art to be destroyed, happy let him, be that rewards
thee as thou have served us.

But w^^^^ ^ou that your Prayers should b^^ (...) Then arise out of your
Places, and (...) every Man on a personal Reform ^^^n. Down with your ^^m and
^ut with the Word; ^^t up Christ in ^^^^earts of you would have A^^^christ ^^ll
in the E^^th; let Christ have a Name within you above every Name, and let every
one that names the Name, of Christ depart from Iniquity, from his own Iniquity;
seek not for Corn, and for Wine, or for Freedom to sit down every Man under his
own Vine, and under his own Fig Tree, where none shall make them afraid; but
seek the Lord, that the Lord God may dwell among you, may delight in you, and
be exalted by you, that you may indeed become the People of his Holiness, and
the People of his Prayer; seek to be made Partakers of his Holiness, and so
follow after it, that ye may ob^^^. Let there be such an Heart in you S^^^^ an
^oly Design heartly taken up, and zeal^ sly pursued by you, and the ^^rd w^ll
certa^nly ^ccept you, and answer you ^rayers; and your profane Enemies w^^ then
le^rn to take heed how ^^ey again mock or boult themselves again the Prayers of
the Saints. It was (...) eat Church man that wh^^^ (...) turned out (...) N^^^
^^^mity, he (...), W^^^ turn them out, (...) them in (...) [holy] Hands ^o
(...) gave such M^^^^ (...) will take heed of boast^^^ (...) Prayer. And if yet
(...) take unto them the h^^^ness (...) your God? Doubt not (...) F^ime you
shall have this (...) Mouths. Le this is (...) for him, and he (...) this is
the Lord, we have (...) we will be g^^ and rejoice in (...) Sa^^^^.

(...) f^t must suffice you to pray, and y^u w^^^ (...) go on to traverse your
old Wave suffering your Sins and the World to h^^^ the Head of you, let not
such Men think they shall receive any Thing o^ the (...).

Wherefore once again be exhorted to come to a Point in this Matter, and
determine what ye will do; If ye will not heartily come in, in this necessary
Design of advancing in Holiness, you may even stand aside, and sit out from
that of Praver, for any Good we can expect from you: But if you are resolved on
the former, and that with all imazinable seriousness, you will the more prosper
in the latter; let both go together in one, and thenceforth lock for good speed
in either.

Well, shall this Decree immediately go forth? Say the Word once, but let it be
with an unalterable Resolation; at lea^^, be advised to this (which I pray
forget not) from the Day of your next solemn appear^ing be^^^e God in this Duty
of Prayer for the Public, let your Decree he da^ed; and it need be, let the
very Day he written down, and so go, and let if be heedfully prosecuted; and
upon each return of this solemn Service, let it be actually and expressly
renewed. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Israel, keep this for ever in the
Imagination of the Thoughts of the Heart of thy People, and prepare their
Hearts unto thee.

THE END.
APPENDIX from Dr. Increase Mather's Discourse on the Prevalency of Prayer.
IT was a great Word which Luther spoke, when he said, ' There is a Kind of
Omnipotency in Preyer. -- Where do we find in all the Book of God a more
wonderful Expression, than that of the Lord to praying Meses, Now let me alone?
-- Prayer is stronger than Iron Gates. At the Prayers of the Church the iron
Gates fly open, and the Apostles Fetters fall off. Sometimes the Prayers of one
Man that has an eminent Interest in God, are a Means to preserve a whole Town,
yea a whole Land from Destruction. --

The Emperor Ma^cus Aurelius going to War against his Enemies, who were nine
Hundred seventy five thousand Mer. The Emperor's Army were so cooped up by
their numerous Enemies, in strait, dry and hot Places, and being destitute of
Water for five Days together, were all like to have perished for thirst. In
this Extremity a Number of Christian Soldiers being in the Army, withdrew from
the rest and ^illing prostrate on the Earth, by a^^ent Prayers prevailed with
God, that he immediately sent a most plentisul Ram, whereby the Army that
otherw^^^ had perished, was refreshed, and dread u^ hightnings flashed in the
Faces of their Enemies, so as that they were ^iscomfitted and put to flight.

-- At one time five Hundred praying Saints overthrew two Thousand and five
Hundred of their Enemies. --

-- What a black Appearance of Death and Ruin was upon the poor People at
Quabrog in this Province, when they were all cooped up in one unfortified
House, and surrounded by a barbarous Multitude of cruel Indians, who thirsted
after their Blood? But God by a strange Providence, sent Major Willard, who
with a small Party of Soldiers, came a few Hours or Minutes before it was too
late, by which the remaining Inhabitants of that Place had their Lives given
them for Prey. After that, the western Plantations, Nerth Hampton, Had^^y,
Hatfield etc. were in the most eminent Danger, by Reason of the Enemy taking up
their Rendezvous in those Parts, but God preserved and delivered them, in
Answer to Prayer.

-- An Englishman mortally wounded by an Indian, the Indian upbra^ded him with
his Prayers, saving to him, You were wont to prey to J^^^us Christ, new pray to
him, he connet h^^^^ you: -- immediately upon which, a Bullet took him in the
Head, and ea^h^d out his Brains.

I have heard a worthy Divine in Dublin, speak of a Man, that being under
bodily Possession by an evil Spirit, a Company of praying Christians met
together to seek the Lord on his Behalf; amongst them there was a precious holy
Woman, who kneeled behind the Door in the Room where they were praying
together, and there were strong Actings of Faith in her Soul; at last the Devil
was forced to depark; only as he was going out of the possessed Party, he cried
out, O the Woman, the Woman behind the Dear!

That Moses of his Time, Dr. Dod (concerning whom Mr. Buroughs gives this
Testimony, that he was the meekest Man upon the Face of the Earth) had a godly
Sen, whom it pleased the most High to leave unto sorel) straction to his Mind,
where upon M^. D^d called some of his p^^dly praying Friends together, who set
a Day apart solemnly to seek the Lord about that Matter, and wh^st they were
yet speaking in Prayer, God heard them, so as that the distracted Person was
not only restored to his right Mind again, but did himself conclude that Day of
Prayer with solemn Thanksgiving unto God. This Information I received from
Reverend Minister, who was present in Mr. Dea's House, when that Day of Fasting
and Prayers was there observed, upon the Occasion mentioned.

Mr. Simp^^^'s Wife (a gracious Woman) falling sick, was sorely assaulted by
Satan, who told her, that she should be given over into his Hand; The
Temptation and Affrightment preva^ed so ^ar as to resolve in a visible
Distraction, that the good Woman, most unlike her former Wa^, whilst she was
her self, would break forth sometimes with dreadful and ^^rid Ex^^essions; Th^s
was and could not be otherwise ^a m^st bitter Affliction to her precious
Husband, who told those about her, that he was assured, that Satan's Malice
should at last receive a shameful F^i^^; wherefore he retired himself into his
G^r^en, and shutting the Door, betook himself to Fasting and Prayer. O^e He^^^
Ga^^er (a godly Woman) being ^ollicitous for Mr. Si^^son as fearing that his
Labors, (...) and Fasting, might be too hard (...) him, used some Means to get
over into the (...), where Mr. Simpson was alone w^ching with God. -- After
going forward, she found Mr. Simpson lying on the Ground, nor would he reveal
to her what he had met with, until Promise was made, not to speak of it whilst
he was alive in this World. Upon this he said, O wh^^^^ I being Dust and A^^es,
that the (...) ^^nistring Spirits should be^s^nt by the Lord to deliver a
Missage to not, and showed, that Angele from. Heaven had (...) to ^^^^lible
Voice given him Answer conceiting that which he had been pr^^^ing about. [This
was a Thing extraordinary, and in^^o wise to be expected by Christians
^^^^rily^^^ And returning into his (...), he but those that were in the R^om
with his Wife, be of good Comfort; not be was assured that within ten Hours she
should be delivered from m^^^ Distraction. After this he went to Pro^et by the
Bed^si^e: and as he was in Prayer, mentioning Jacob's wresting with God, his
W^^e sat upon the Bed, and casting aside the Curt^^^, said, Thou art this Day
Jacob, thou have wre^led, and have privailed, and n^w God has made good his
Word which he spoke to you this Morning, for I am plucked out of the Hands of
Satan, and he shall have no more Par^er ever me. This Interruption made him
ste^tior while, but after in great Meltings of Heart be procceeded in Prayer,
magnifying the Riches of divine Grace and Love, and from that H^^ar his Wise
co^^^ (...) discease christian's and comfo^t^bly, even to her ^dving Hour.

I have read of one who having another that treat his T^^ne in Hanking,
Drinking and other p^^p^^r^e Van^^^es; upon a (...) ^^^^ther ^ he set that very
Day ^part (...) and P^^^e. to be (...) God that (...) ^^^ther might be
con^^^ted. And the Lord answered his Prayers wonderfuls; for within a Week
after, his Brother was stranged engaged, and (...) himself (instead of spending
his Time in Hawking and Drinking observe man. Days of secret Humilitition
between the Lord and his own Sou^, on the Account of the Sins he had been
guilty of is the Days o^ his Vanity, and made a very godly End at last.

That precious and famous Minister of Christ, Mr. Welid, being in a Journey,
his Entertainment came to more than he expected, so that the next Morning he
had not wherewith to pay for his Horse Meat: The Holster swore and raild
exceedingly for his Money: Mr. We^th shut his Chamber Door and went to Prayer,
and the Holster standing at the Door overheard him, and was converted by that
Prayer; ever after that Time, highly respecting Mr. W^^th, and refusing to
accept of any Thing for his Entertainment, either then or at any other Times
afterward, when Occasion was offered.

I knew one, the Son of an holy, and eminently faithful Minister, who in some
of the Days of his Youth, had been wild and vain, but was (through the Grace of
Christ) converted in his young Years, and after his Father's Death, perusing
his private Papers, he perceived, that not many Days before he was in the Pangs
of the new Birth, his Father had been by secret Fasting and Prayer seeking unto
the Lord that converting sanctifying Grace might be bestowed upon that Son of
his.

That notable Israel i. e, Mr. Hugh Kennedy. Provest of Mr in Scotland, one Day
being long alone ^n Prayer, while some of his intimate Friends stayed a great
while to ^^^^k with him, upon their enquity into the Reason why he made them
wait so long; he told them it was no Wonder, for (said he) I have this Day
obtained Mercy for me and all mine. And so indeed it came to pass; for not so
much as one of his Children, but evident Signs of Conversion and true Godliness
were observed in them. This was that Kennedy, who when he was a dying could
say, If the Walls of this House could speak, they could tell here many sweet
Days I have had in secret Fellowship with God, and how familiar he has been
with my Soul. This is he, concerning whom Mr. Welsh once said, Happy is that
City, yea happy is that Nation that has an Hugh Kennedy in it.

The D^^in the Conclusion says thus, I shall finish this Discourse with the
solemn Expressions of my blessed Brother and Predecessor in this Place. I had
rather (says he) be invirened with Armies of armed Men, and compassed round
with drawn Swords and Instruments of Death, than that the have praying Saint
should head the edge of his Prayers against me; for there is not st^naing
before the Prayers of Saints especially it they unite their Force and join
together in the same Requests.

FINIS.

