Mr. Foxcroft's SERMON ON The Saints united Confession, In Disparagement of
their own Righteousness.

HUMILIS CONFESSIO: The Saints united Confession, in Disparagement of their own
Righteousness.

A SERMON Preached (summarily) at the Tuesday-Evening Lecture in
Brattle-Street, Boston, Jan. 30. 1749, 50. REPRESENTING The commonly received
PROTESTANT Sense and Use of two Scripture-Passages, which depreciate all our
personal Righteousnesses, under the Comparison of filthy Rags, and of
despicable Dung. IN Opposition to POPISH Abuse and Calumny.

By Thomas Foxcroft, M.A. One of the Pastors of the Old Church in Boston.

Haec est Hominis vera Sapientia, IMPERFECTUM esse Se nosse. --

HIERON. adv. Pelag. Ad VIRTUTIS Perfectionem pertinent etiam ipsius
IMPERFECTIONIS and in veritate Agnitio and in humilitate Confessio.

AUGUST. Our very Virtues may be a Snare to us. -- No Man's Case so dangerous,
as his, whom Satan has persuaded, that his own Righteousness shall present him
pure and blameless in the Sight of God. -- We acknowledge a dutiful Necessity
of doing well; but the meritorious Dignity of doing well we utterly renounce.

R. HOOKER, Eccl. Pol. BOSTON: Printed and Sold opposite the Prison in
Queen Street. MDCCL.

The Saints united Confession, In Disparagement of their own Righteousness.
ISAI. LXIV. 6. -- All our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags. --

Compared with

PHIL. III. 8, 9. -- And do count them but Dung, that I may win Christ, and be
found in him, not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law. --


THOUGH it be a little uncommon, to bring two Portions of Scripture, situated at
such a Distance in the Bible, for the Text or Argument of one Discourse; yet as
these Passages, not only have something of a similar Sound, but have generally
been judged to have very much the same Meaning; and as Expositors, however
varying in their Comments on the one and the other, in Correspondence to their
differing Views of the Context, and their differing Schemes in Divinity, have
nevertheless considered them as nearly parallel Scriptures, of much the same
Import, and capable of the same Application and Use in Religion: therefore I
have though it it no Impropriety, to place them in Connection at the head of this
Discourse, in Order to compare them together, and discover the true Sense of
the one by that Light the other reflects upon it; by which Means we shall see
how the Prophet and the Apostle, and so how both the Old Testament and the New,
concur in pouring Contempt on the personal Righteousness of Man, and
disparaging all the moral Seize, even of the Best, as well as Worst of
Mankind, under some limited Notions and Respects.

Both of these Scriptures seem to have been miserably tortured by Papistical
and other Writers, to pervert 'em to a false Sense, and a wrong and dangerous
Use: while yet, in a fair and equitable Construction, they appear subservient
to some of the most excellent Purposes in Religion; to humble the fallen
Creature, and exalt the blessed Redeemer; to rout all the vain Pretenses of
self-righteous Mortals; to conduct Sinners to Christ, as the End of the Law for
Righteousness unto every one that believes; and to excite the Just to live by
Faith, doing all in the Name of Christ, while careful to maintain good Works.

The Prophet ISAIAH (as Protestants in general have understood and applied his
Words) by the Spirit foreseeing some future great Revolution in the Church,
composes a prophetical Prayer, wherein this holy Man in the Name of the
Converts of Zion makes that lowly Confession, All our Righteousnesses are as
filthy Rags. And the Apostle PAUL, for himself (but therein exhibiting the
communis Sensus Fidelium, the genuine Sentiment and Spirit of every true
Christian) after having confessed in relation to Time past, that he had counted
all Things but Loss, for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ, subjoins
this further Confession referring to the Time present, And I do count them but
Dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own
Righteousness, which is of the Law. --

It appears to me the principal Scope, as well of the Prophet, as the Apostle,
to renounce all Pretensions to Justification by Works, and disavow every Plea
from righteous Self in point of reconciling or ingratiating Worthiness before
the Sovereign Lawgiver; to disclaim Self-Righteousness in every Shape, and
reject all Tho'ts of standing in the Judgment, upon the foot of personal
Obedience to God's Law, the everlasting Rule of Righteousness. -- They both use
strong and emphatical Language, that discovers a profound Sense of the absolute
Insufficiency of the best Righteousness of Men, for the purpose of intitling
them to the special Mercy of God. It seems, taking their Words in such a
Reference, they both with equal Expressions of a just Contempt and generous
Disdain explode their own Righteousness, as altogether inadequate and
unavailable to so great a Design: the one resembling it to filthy Rags, and the
other to loathsome Dung. (I stay not to criticize on the Translation, nor
mention the Variety of supposed Allusions in the Original.) Self-Righteousness
in all it is Forms and Appearances stands condemned and vilify'd here. Even the
Saints most perfect Works of Righteousness as respected under certain
restrictive Considerations, are all thus depreciated by the inspired Prophet
and Apostle, yea, have a deep Disgrace thrown upon them by these homely and
contemptuous Simile's. -- We have exemplified here the agreeing humble
Confessions both of the Jewish Church and Christian, and the Harmony of the
Saints of every Age in acknowledging the Truth which is after Godliness. --
This is the View I have of these Scriptures, after diligent and impartial
Inquiry into their true Meaning: and in this, I think, I have the concurrent
Suffrage of the Body of reformed Churches and Divines. -- However, let us now
recollect the varying Glosses of Commentators and Preachers upon these Words,
and a little examine into their several Grounds and Reasons.

I. I observe, some interpret both the Prophet and the Apostle as speaking only
of a Pharisaical or mere external Righteousness: and according to them, it is at
most but a Form of Godliness without the Power, or some Show of moral Virtue
without the Reality, that is here represented in such Terms of Reproach. --
Yet, as there are different Degrees of Pharisaism, and Hypocrisy appears in a
Variety of Figures, these Interpreters, tho agreeing in the general Sentiment,
are divided about the particular Application of it, and go into a various
Latitude of Thought.

1. There are those who so restrain the Meaning of these Scriptures, as to
suppose them applicable only to the Case of grosser Hypocrites: whose feigned
Righteousness, they willingly grant, deserves no better Name than that of Dung,
or filthy Rags. -- They own, the Scriptures every where paint the conscious and
designing Hypocrite in Characters of Ignominy; and pronounce the Sacrifices of
the Wicked, tho pretending to be Sacrifices of Righteousness, an Abomination to
the Lord. To this Purpose they apply those Divine Passages, -- Bring no more
vain Oblations; -- I hate, I despise your Feast-Days; -- Is it such a Fast that
I have chosen? -- I will declare thy Righteousness, and thy Works; for they
shall not profit thee. -- Your Webs shall not become Garments, neither shall
you cover yourselves with your Works: Your Works are Works of Iniquity, etc. --
They own, the most specious Profession and Appearance of Religion, with the
Show of Virtue in some Instances, which Men put on for a Cloak of Covetousness,
for a Mask to cover their wicked Lusts, and recommend themselves to the good
Opiion of the World, if not also to ingratiate themselves with the blessed God,
and as it were compound with him for their Sins; all such pretended
Righteousnsses, I say, they own to be wretchedly defective, corrupt and
polluted, worthy of the most inglorious Names, in the View of the
Heart-searching Judge, and of enlightened Conscience in reflecting Penitents.
This is what some contend to be the whole Amount (particularly) of the
Prophet's Confession in our Text; as if he only had in his Eye the
Righteousnesses (falsely so called) of the vilest Hypocrites, who feign
themselves to be just Men, while yet in Truth (and for that Reason) they are to
be ranked among the very worst of wicked Men.

In this very confined Sense, the Church of Rome in particular understands the
Prophet's Words, rejecting the Protestant Sense with deep Indignation; and
that, as they think, upon sufficient Grounds in Scripture and Reason, the most
plausible of which I will now produce and endeavor to refute. Thus Dr. BISHOP
a popish Priest (in his Answer to Mr. PERKYNS'S Reformed Catholic) shows his
Opinion, See Dr. ABBOT'S Des. of Reform. Cath. p. 388.
That the holy Prophet speaks those Words in the Person of the Wicked; and
therefore (says he) they are madly applied unto the Righteous. So Cardinal
BELLARMINE, the Flower of the popish School and Champion of the Church of Rome,
when he comes to answer what the old Protestants used to argue from this
Passage in Isaiah, premises this Observation. BELLARM. Controv. de Justif. p.
381.
Hic plane triumphare sibi videntur Haeretici: hunc enim Locum semper in Ore
habent; cum tamen ad Rem nihil pertineat, etc. Here the Heretics [so he styles
the Protestants] look upon themselves certainly triumphant: for they have this
Text always in their Mouths; while yet it is entirely foreign to the Purpose. --
Where, by the Way I observe, we have an ample Attestation to the Reformers
laying a peculiar Stress on this Scripture, as affording a most irresistible
Argument against the Popish Doctrine of Justification by Works: and tho I would
call no Man upon Earth Master, nor set up the Judgment even of the old
Protestants for an infallible Standard of Orthodoxy; yet, without more
convincing Reasons than any their Opponents have ever offered, I should be loath
so much as to seem to betray their Cause or to reflect on their Memory, by
giving up so notable a Text, which they triumphed in and always had in their
Mouths, into the Hands of their Popish Adversaries. However, it may not be
amiss, to hear the Grounds of the PAPIST'S judging this Text impertinently
alleged, and what the Reformers say in their own Defense.

The Romish Champion assigns three Reasons, (1.) Because undoubtedly Isaiah
does not speak of righteous Men, but (de insignibus Peccatoribus) of remarkably
wicked Men. -- To invalidate which, the PROTESTANT replies; Certainly this
Prophet Isaiah was no such wicked Man, and he includes himself, together with
other pious Persons in Israel, when in the Name of the Church he presents this
humble Confession to God, All OUR Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags. Nor is
there any Thing here confessed, more than is implied in this same Prophet's
humble Words on a former Occasion, (Chap. 6.) I am a Man of unclean Lips, and
dwell in the midst of a People of unclean Lips. And the PROTESTANT further
argues, they cannot be profligate Sinners, who are personated by the Prophet in
this Confession, because none such can truly (in the Sense intended) plead as
in the Context, Doubtless thou art our Father; -- Thou, O Lord, art our Father,
our Redeemer, -- Return for thy Servants sake -- We are thine -- We shall he
saved -- Now, O Lord, thou art our Father -- We are the Work of thy Hand, etc.
Nevertheless the PAPIST attempts by several Considerations, to support and
strengthen this his first Reason why the Prophet should be thought to speak in
the Person of very wicked Men. As, "(1.) Because in the preceding Context he
had said, Behold thou art wroth, and we have sinned." But the PROTESTANT sees
no Force of Argument in this. For no Man lives and sins not; and God is
angry at Sin, wherever he sees it: He keeps his own Children under a holy
Discipline, while in this World, and often chastises the Righteous for their
sinful Failings, with a fatherly Displeasure.

The PAPIST adds, (2.) It is plain that the Prophet speaks in the Person of the
Wicked, from those Words in the following Context, There is none that calls
upon thy Name, There is none that rises up and takes Hold on Thee. But the
PROTESTANT reply's, The Righteous are liable to a sad Decay of Faith and
Prayer; and indeed in the Prayers of the Saints, at best, there is always too
little of Love and Zeal to the Name of the Lord, and too little of a stirring
up themselves to take hold on God: So that in the Account of God's Law and
strict rectoral Holiness, their Prayers are as it were no Prayers, and at least
very frequently are such as scarce deserve the Name even in the Account of
Gospel Grace: Yea, for a Season there may be so much of Formality and Deadness
in their praying, as that God interprets it a not calling on his Name, a not
taking Hold of him; and when Conscience is awakened in his backsliding
Children, they charge themselves with vile Deficiency in the Duties of Faith
and Prayer, they censure and humble themselves for the Iniquity of their holy
Things, as the Root of all their Defection, and a just Reason of their heavenly
Father's correcting them. -- The PAPIST subjoins,

(3) The Scripture every where speaks honorably of the Works of righteous Men,
and asserts their being well pleasing to God, as a sweet smelling Savor: and
in this very Chapter Isaiah says, Thou meetest him that rejoices and works
Righteousness, etc. Hence (the Jesuit concludes) none can suppose him to call
the Righteousnesses of Saints filthy Rags; unless any one be so doting as to
imagine that nasty Things are pleasing to God, and that filthy Rags are a sweet
Odor to him who is the Fountain of Purity. But to this the PROTESTANT reply's,
that the Saints Works of Righteousness are not considered absolutely, when
honored with these Eulogies, nor are accepted for their own intrinsic
Dignity, Purity and Perfection: But they have their Estimate, in the Court of
governing Grace, from the pleasing Principle of Faith, which is the spring of
them, and are valued for the sake of the pleasing Mediator, in whose Name they
are performed, with whose Blood they are sprinkled and cleansed, and with the
sweet Incense of whose Merits they are perfumed. Whereas, strictly in
themselves considered and viewed in the Glass of the Law, they are full of
Imperfection and moral Pollution; insomuch that they cannot be called good
Works, but in very lax Language, and in a comparative Sense. To this purpose,
that celebrated Note of ORIGIN See Dr. WILLET'S Synop. Pap. 1210. and Bp
JEWEL'S Def. of Apol. p. 3^5.
upon Luke 17.10. Etsi omnia fecerimus, etc. i. e. Notwithstanding we have done
all Things that are commanded, yet have we done no good Thing. For if our
Doings were truly good, then were we not unprofitable Servants. But any good
Deed of ours is called good (non proprie, sed abusive) not of Right, but by
Abuse of Speech. In Comparison of other Men's Works, they are called good: but
(quantum ad Veritatem, bonum nostrum non est bonum) in respect of the Verity
itself, our good Works are not good. Agreably St. AUGUSTINE says well, If God
would deal with us according to our good Deservings, he would find in us
Nothing but what he might condemn. So again he says, Our Righteousness in this
Life consists rather in the Remission of Sins, than in the Perfection of
Virtues. -- Indeed the Saints best moral Ornaments, that in the Account of
Gospel Grace are of great Price in the Sight of God, nevertheless in the Eye of
the Law have so much of real Deformity and Impurity attending them, as might
justly make them an ungrateful Spectacle to a holy God, and a very Stench in
his Nostrils; yea, that would actually be the Case, were it not for the Blood
of Sprinkling and the Robe of imputed Righteousness, that cleanses and covers
all. Hence, as the Persons of the Saints are said to be made accepted in the
Beloved, so their spiritual Sacrifices to be acceptable to God through Jesus
Christ. It is not any Virtue or Value in their Persons or Services, absolutely
considered, that commends them to God and makes them delectable in his Sight:
but it is the Mediation of Christ, in whom they have believed and in whom they
are viewed as clothed with his Righteousness, that procures them all their
Acceptance and Approbation in the Eyes of God. Hence that Speech of BASIL, a
primitive Father, This is our whole and full rejoicing in God, while we confess
our selves destitute of all Righteousness of our own, that we are justified by
only Faith in Christ. And that saying of JEROME, another of the Fathers, In
Christ Jesus our Lord, in whom we have Boldness, and Access (to God) and
Confidence through the Faith of him: not through our Righteousness, but through Him
in whose Name our Sins be forgiven. Cited by Bp JEWEL, ubi supra.
So then, although the Prophet had just before said in his Prayer, Thou meetest
him that rejoices and works Righteousness, this carries in it nothing at all
of real Inconsistency with the Protestant Gloss on his following Confession,
All our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags: Nor does it afford Papists the
least Shadow of an Argument in favor of their Hypothesis, that the Prophet
makes this humble Confession in the Person of the Wicked. Indeed, the rejoicing
spoken of, is a rejoicing in GOD our Savior, saying (as in Context) Thou art
our Redeemer: Or a glorying in the Lord, after that Manner in which this
Prophet describes it (Chap. 45.17.) Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I
Righteousness and Strength. It Is the Language of Faith: and this is an
operative obedientia Principle. Faith works by Love; and by Faith, the Saints
of every Age have wrought Righteousness. Yet it is equally a Principle of
Humility, laying the Saint low in his own Eyes, and teaching him to entertain
low Tho'ts of his own Works of Righteousness.

But let the POPISH Disputant go on. Nor ought it to move us (says he) though
Isaiah seems to speak to generally, as to comprehend all Men: because this is
the Manner of Scripture, to speak of many, as if it were all. -- However, to
this the PROTESTANT has an easy Reply to make. Neither the Analogy of Faith,
nor any Thing in the Context, obliges us to construe the Term of Universality
here in a limited Sense, as extending only to the Wicked, in Exclusion of the
Righteous. But on the contrary, as there are very apparent Grounds in the
Context, to suppose the Prophet's making this Prayer in the Person of the
Righteous, and consequently their making the Confession, in Dispute; so our
Imputation of it to them is justifiable, by the Scripture-Representations of
the Saints present State of moral Imperfection, and by a Variety of parallel
Examples both in the Old and New Testament. For we often find the Righteous
lamenting the Defects and Defilements of their Works of Righteousness, as well
as deploring the Interruption of their Obedience by Works of Wickedness: and
accordingly crying to God for pardoning and sparing Mercy, with earnest
Deprecations of a judicial proceeding against them. I might instance in Job,
that perfect and upright Man, and refer you to many Passages of his, to this
purpose. So in David, the Man after God's own Heart, who abounds with
Expressions, of this Import, in his Psalms. And in Nehemiah, in Paul, with many
other Saints on Scripture-Record. But the Time would fail me. There are a
Multitude of the Saints Confessions, whose Language implies nothing short of
this in the Text, All our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags.

But to proceed, says the PAPIST, Another Reason is, because though Isaiah should
speak of all, i. e. of that whole People, yet he did not speak of all for every
Time, but only for that Time when for their consummate Wickedness they were
doomed to Captivity in Babylon. -- To which the PROTESTANT answers: This Prayer
of inspired Isaiah is indeed prophetical, and respects a future Time, perhaps
in particular that of the Babylonish Captivity, or as some think, the Times of
the Messiah. But still it contains many Things of a common Reference, or
general Aspect; and the Confession in our Text is accommodable to all Times of
the Church indifferently. For it is founded on a melancholy Truth, equally
applicable to every Age, as to that in which Solomon lived, There is not a just
Man upon Earth, who does Good, and sins not, even in his good Deeds
themselves, as to the Manner of doing them. Nor it there any Time but the
Challenge which he makes in his Day, may on the same Grounds be repeated; Who
can say, I have made my Heart clean; I am pure from my Sin! So the Challenge
may be applied to the Men of every Generation, as well as of that to which
David belonged; Who can understand his Errors? Nor are there any but what at
all Times have Occasion to pray with him, Cleanse me from secret Faults.

The PAPIST adds, A third Reason is, because Isaiah does not speak of all the
Works even of the Wicked, but only of those which they imagined to be
Righteousnesses; such as their Sacrifices, New Mons, and Rituals of Worship,
wherein they especially placed Righteousness: which Observances indeed, for
want of being done with a right Intention and in due Manner, are deservedly
compared to filthy Rags. -- But to this the PROTESTANT replies; that there is
no Color for such a Limitation; for the Prophet speaks in indefinite Language,
his Confession is of universal Extent, without any Exception or Reserve, ALL
our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags. Agreably I find that Note made upon
these Words by Bp JEWEL, an eminent old Reformer: Ser. at the End of his Works,
Page 215.
Our Virtue, our Holiness, our Fastings, our Prayers, are filthy, when they
come to GOD'S Sight. And it is the famous Dr. WILLET'S Observation on the Text:
Synop. Pap. p. 1028, and 1210.
The best Works we do are somewhat defiled with our own Corruption. -- The
Prophet's Words are general; ALL, i. e. whether the Righteousness of the moral
or the ceremonial Law. The most righteous Men in the Earth (says he) have not
only their Infirmities, and are in Danger to sin daily, but even their best and
most holy Works are blemished with some Infirmity, and have a Smack of Sin. --
Thus the old Protestants applied our Text to the Saints themselves, and to all
their Works, their very purest Works, even of Morality, as well as Ceremony. --
However, should we grant what is contended for, that they at most concern only
unregenerate Sinners, it does not appear, that such have always been wont to
place Righteousness in Rituals, more than in Morals. We find, in that Parable,
intended for the Conviction of certain which trusted in themselves that they
were righteous, our LORD who knows the Hearts of all Men, describes the
Pharisee boasting of his moral Seize, as well as ceremonial Observances,
and placing them to the Account of his Righteousness. Yea, it is observable, our
Popish Adversary himself elsewhere BELLARM. de Justif. p. 90, 91.
has in Effect, by large Concessions, given up the Plea he makes here. Thus, in
explaining that Righteousness of the Law which the Scriptures shut out of
Justification, he produces several Texts, where he tells us, " Works are
excluded simply, without any Mention of the Mosaic Law." And, however
inconsistently with his Argument before us, he expressly makes the following
remarkable Concession. The Apostle having to do (says he) not only with Jews,
but also with Gentiles, that boasted of their Philosophy, no less than the Jews
did of their Law, We [of the Church of Rome] therefore understand him
absolutely to exclude all Works, antecedent to Faith, as well the Observation
of Morals, as of Ceremonies. -- By the Cardinal's Leave then, interpreting the
Prophet's Confession by the Apostle's allowed Doctrine, we may fairly extend
the Comparison of filthy Rags to all Righteousnesses, of a moral Complexion, as
well as ritual. And it follows too, by the same Rule of judging, that since he
grants all Works indifferently (previous to Faith) are rejected, he ought not
to have confined the Prophet's Idea in the Text to the Works of very wicked
Men, or gross Hypocrites, that did but practice a little Religion merely in
Pretense, in wilful Disguise and with conscious Dissimulation; all Hypocrites
and Sinners in Zion not being of so abandoned a Character.

Nor surely may this be allowed to have been the Apostle's View and Meaning in
his part of our Text. For it cannot with the least Color of Reason be
pretended, that he is personating the worst of wicked Men; since he is here in
the directest Language speaking of himself singly: and he never confessed
himself such a foul Dissembler with God or Man, as the vicious and designing
Hypocrite; no, but on the contrary, we find him almost on all Occasions
vindicating his moral Character from so black a Slur, and even in our Context
claiming to have been always an unspotted Example of human Sincerity in his
Jewish Profession and Practice: nevertheless even this honest moral Jew here
reports of himself, that when commencing a christian Convert, he counted all
his Pharisaical Righteousness, though so untainted, so exemplary and respectable,
but as Loss and Dung, for Christ's Sake. Now doubtless, as there were some
other Pharisees in his Day alike undissembling as he, to all whose
Righteousnesses the same Characters of Disgrace were equally due: so there
might be several like Instances of Pharisaical Morality, in the Jewish Church,
at the Time Isaiah refers to in his prophetical Prayer, which contains this
humble Confession, All our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags: a Confession
surely no less suitable for the most moral Hypocrite among them, than was that
of Saul the Pharisee, for himself. It appears quite unreasonable then, to
understand the Prophet as only speaking in the Person of the grossly wicked;
since his Words are as well applicable to others, of a fairer Carriage and even
the most unblemished Appearance.

Upon such Considerations, I observe,

2. The Generality of Protestant Interpreters have extended these degrading
Comparisons in our Text to all the Righteousnesses of the most refined
Hypocrites (at least) without excepting the Case of any the exactest Moralist,
or most raised Devotionist, still unregenerate.

As to the Prophet's Confession, it is commonly judged by PROTESTANT Writers,
that he is here prophetically addressing the Throne of Grace in the Church's
Name, at some Season of special Awakning and Reformation. And if they be
considered as now reflecting on their former Doings in Religion, previous to
their Conversion, it is acknowledged, the Language of their Confession here is
but what became self-judging Penitents, and indeed is usual with such. For true
Gospel-Penitents are wont to blush and even loath themselves at the Remembrance
of those very Devotions and Virtues of theirs, which they once prided
themselves in; vainly Dreaming they would make their Persons beauteous and
amiable in the Sight of God, as well as Man, and would serve for a complete
Robe of Righteousness, in which they might stand with Safety before the King of
Glory: but now, convinced of their manifold Imperfections and Pollutions, their
Contrariety to the Rule of Duty in many Regards, and their Shortness of it in
all, they lament them as formally evil, however good materially, and even
despise and renounce them in Relation to any such Purpose as that of a
justifying Righteousness. In this Light, they can now look upon their
once-boasted Robe of Righteousness no otherwise indeed than as filthy Rags:
defective as Rags, or like some torn and scanty Garment, insufficient to cover
their moral Nakedness; and corrupt as filthy Rags, like a sordid dirty
besmeared (as well as tattered) Garment, rather polluting to them, than
beautifying and recommending in the Eyes of their Heart-searching and
Sin-hating Sovereign, while viewing them in the Glass of his holy Law.

Certainly our Apostle, in his Confession before us, must be owned an Example
of this self-condemning and self-abhorring Frame of Mind; if we only consider
him as therein respecting his former unregenerate Life. For, after the
straitest Sect of the Jews Religion he had lived a Pharisee, and his Manner of
Life from his Youth, as touching the Righteousness which is in the Law,
blameless; yea, exhibiting a notable Zeal toward God (tho not according to
Knowledge) and much of Care to keep a Conscience void of Offense toward Men.
-- However, afterward upon Reflection being convinced that he all this While
had not the Faith of God's Elect, that Faith without which it is impossible to
please God, he therefore now, since his having it given him to believe in God
with a Faith unfeigned, revokes his Pharisaical Pretension to being justified
by Works, and censures all his old Righteousnesses as deeply deficient,
depraved, and even detestable in the Sight of God that justifies; however
inculpable in the View of short-sighted Men, and in the Eye of his own
misguided Conscience. He now sees and confesses, that notwithstanding the
laudable Consistence of his visible Actions and the uniform Tenor of his
Behavior in the World, under the Influences of natural Conscience, excited and
improved by a religious Education, his past Life had been polluted with
Abundance of moral Evils, tho of a more refined Sort; and that his very best
Duties (whether of the ceremonial, or moral Kind) had all been vitiated by
Unbelief and secret Hypocrisy, wretchedly defective and corrupt therefore in a
just Theological View, and now appearing to his inlighten'd Eyes worthy the
Name of Loss and Dung it self. He now own's that he had all the Days of his
Pharisee-Life been, as it were, but patching up filthy Rags for a Coat of
Armor against the fiery Law, or (to keep to his own Metaphor) but heaping up
Dung for a Defense against the Justice of the divine Lawgiver; and that a holy
God might justly have spread Dung upon his Face (as the Prophet speaks) even
the Dung of his solemn Feasts and Fasts, of his heartless Devotions and
lifeless Virtues: All which he now renounces with a deserved Contempt and no
longer places his Righ^^ousness in them. -- Thus some understand and apply the
Words of the Apostle in our Text.

Indeed, there are Interpreters, that from such a View as they have taken of the
preceding Context, do suppose him in our Text but to renounce Judaism, as
such; to disclaim that Righteousness which was his own as under the Levitical
Law; his Righteousness, which he had as a Jew and a Pharisee, or a strict
Conformist to the Rituals of the Mosaic Dispensation. They think, now he was
become a Christian, he might very well undervalue this as Loss, yea, despise it
as Dung, in Compare with that more excellent Gospel-Righteousness, which he had
since arrived to by the Knowledge of Christ and Obedience to the Faith. -- But
it is a Difficulty with them, to conceive how the Apostle should count that
Degree of moral Righteousness he had attained, while a Jew, to be any Loss or
Prejudice and Damage to him: much less can they suppose his Renunciation of
ritual Observances under the Law, fairly to be translated to moral Seize
under the Gospel, or justly to be considered as instructing the Christian
Professor to count his Duties of Morality no better than Loss and Dung. But
this Difficulty seems to vanish, when we reflect, that these derogatory Names
regard moral Works, not as absolutely considered, but under the relative Notion
of a justifying Righteousness, and as a Man's trusting in them for
Righteousness hinders him from submitting to the Righteousness of God by Faith,
without doing which he hazards the Salvation of his Soul.

However, there are others who judge the Apostle's Example a proper Object of
the Christian's Imitation; and suppose those Characters, odious as they are,
which he apply's to his own Righteousness, whether in one View or another,
justly transferrible to the moral Virtues of Men under a Christian Profession,
though the most substantial and sublime, consistent with an unregenerate State.
They conclude the Text truly accommodable to the Case of a Gospel-Pharisee; and
scruple not applying to the most refined Hypocrite's external Righteousness
(ritual, or moral) these depreciating Names of Loss and Dung. For to this Case
they think those Sayings of CHRIST justly referrible, which shut all such out
of the heavenly Kingdom, whose Righteousness exceeds not the Righteousness of
the Jewish Pharisees; and which characterise these as but whited Sepulchers,
while outwardly appearing righteous unto Men; yea, pronounce that which is
highly esteemed among Men even an Abomination in the Sight of God. -- But then,
of those in this Way of thinking, there are some who can by no Means consent to
have such a Stigma, as that in the Prophet's Confession, applied to the real
Righteousnesses of Saints, to inward vital Religion or true Holiness, however
imperfect. And be sure they think it quite unlikely, that the Apostle, though
justly counting his Pharisaical Virtues, before Conversion, but Loss or
Detriment for Christ, should now after Conversion and when in Christ account
his Evangelical Graces likewise still but Detriment or Loss, and very Dung:
especially as they don't observe, that the Writings of this Apostle, or other
Parts of Scripture, any where else, represent true Gospel-Holiness under these
debasing Appellations, or any the like Characters of Discredit and Diminution;
but rather every where asserting its Utility, its Excellency, its Importance,
yea, its absolute Necessity and indispensable Obligation, and constantly
speaking of the Believer's Works of Righteousness in all the Language of Regard
and Applause.

Nevertheless, there are other Divines, of equal Reputation for Piety, Learning
and Judgment, who think they may consistently carry the Sense of the Text even
to that Length; and supposing all Objections fairly answerable, do maintain,
that both the Prophet and Apostle, when speaking of such Righteousnesses as
were but like Dung and filthy Rags, did verily design their own real
Righteousnesses, as sincerely obedient Believers; and by Parity of Reason, the
inherent Righteousnesses of all other Saints; so reflecting a Sort of Odium on
all the personal Righteousness of Man, -- but this only under some particular
Respects and with special Limitations, that they had in View.

Which brings me to observe, under the other general Head,

II. Many pious judicious Expositors and Preachers, especially in the first
Times of the Reformation from Popery, have interpreted both the Prophet and the
Apostle, in our Text, as having their Eye more immediately to the personal
Righteousnesses of real Saints, tho only under certain determinate Ideas and
restraining Considerations; and in those particular limited Views, applying to
true Holiness itself, as subsisting in and exerted by imperfect Men, the
ignominious Names of Dung and filthy Rags.

Indeed I cannot find that any of them do ( as they be slanderously reported,
and as some affirm that we say is the meaning) understand our Text, in one or
other of it is Parts, to deny either the actual Existence of all true Holiness
in Believers, or all Use and Advantage of it to them, or it is Necessity, or
it is Obligation: And therefore don't understand them to stigmatize the Saints
personal Righteousness unlimitedly, under every Consideration of it.
Accordingly when Protestants apply these Names of Reproach in our Text to true
inherent Righteousness, they never mean to disparage it absolutely and
irrespectively: No verily, but always in a restrained qualified Sense only, as
viewing it under certain Comparisons, or under certain special Relations, and
having a Place falsely assigned it in some particular Account, from which the
Scripture exempts and entirely excludes it. It Is a known and approved
Distinction, applicable in the present Case, that of dictum simpliciter and
secundum quid; and to argue from the latter to the former, tho too common in
ill-natured Wranglings, is a Fallacy and Abuse, which every fair Reasoner will
avoid with Scorn: Yet this is very much the Manner of arguing our Popish
Adversaries use with us, in their angry Debates upon the Meaning of our Text.
Because PROTESTANTS, in Confutation of the ROMISH Error concerning
Justification by Works, have alleged the Passages before us as asserting the
Saints Works of Righteousness to be all imperfect and polluted, tinctured with
the Remains of innate Corruption, as well as interrupted with frequent
Commissions of Sin, all which defile the Man and debase his moral Character;
from whence they judge it a necessary Consequence, that such Works can have no
intrinsic Worth any Way equal to the Design of Men's Justification before God:
therefore Papistical Writers, I find, make hideous Exclamations against them,
as abominably wresting these Parts of Scripture, and indeed contradicting the
whole Tenor of the holy Bible: And these Writers having first misrepresented
that as spoken simply and absolutely, which Protestants say but comparatively,
or respectively to a particular Case, they then proceed to Charge the
Protestant Doctrine with many odious Absurdities, and excuse it not from
Blasphemy it self. Vid. BELLARM. de Justif. Page 369, Page 90. and alibi. So
Dr. BISHOP'S Epis. to K. JAMES. Vid. Bp ABBOT'S Ans. p. 38, and 134.
They make loud Remonstrances against it, as equally ridiculous, pernicious,
and impious. They anathematize it as one of the worst Heresies, the Christian
Church was ever infested with. They represent it as horridly derogating from
the Honor of God's moral Government, from the Perfection of Christ's Work of
Redemption, from the Glory of the Spirit's Work of Sanctification, and so from
the Credit of the whole Christian Revelation; as tending to undermine all
Religion, to evacuate the Law and subvert the Gospel; by debauching Men's
Principles and Manners, by confirming Infidels in their Aversion to
Christianity, by hardening hypocritical Professors in their guilty Neglects of
moral Duty, and by stumbling sincere, but weak, Believers; discouraging their
Pursuits of Virtue, shaking their Hopes, and disturbing the Comforts they feel
in themselves from a Consciousness of their so walking as to please God and
secure their own Happiness. -- In all the Language of Severity and Scorn
therefore, yea, with railing Accusation, I find these Popish Writers rejecting
and inveighing against the Protestant Construction and Application of these
Passages in our Text: while what we produce them for Proof of, is only the
Necessity of an imputed Righteousness, grounded on the Impossibility of
Justification by any Righteousness of our own, which we apprehend fairly
deducible from these Scriptures; for as much as we are here assured, all
personal Righteousnesses of Men are so very imperfect, and so debased by
polluting Mixtures of moral Infirmity and Corruption, that these
Righteousnesses themselves need the Blood of Christ to wash away their
Defilements, and the Mantle of his Righteousness to cover their Failures: so
far are they from absolutely pleasing God (expropria Dignitate) by any Worth of
their own, and consequently from being qualified to be justifying
Righteousnesses in his Sight. -- This, This is the heinous Doctrine, which
awakened the Vengeance of ROME against the Reformers, and bro't such a Flood of
Obloquy upon them, as wicked Slanderers of Religion and virtual Murderers of
all Morality, as grossly Ignorant in the Scriptures, or perversely abusing the
sacred Text, and venting even Blasphemy against it.

But to support these invidious and defamatory Charges, the very Champion of
the Romish Cause, with all his Powers of Reason and Treasures of Learning,
could only produce the most impotent Pleas (and none since seem to have
produced any better) nor could offer so much as any Show of Argument, that I
can observe, besides what is grounded on a palpably forced Sense of the Text,
and an evidently false Representation of Fact, in Relation to the Protestant
Construction and Use of it. -- Neither have Protestants been wanting in the
just Vindication of themselves against this disingenuous and abusive Treatment
from the Romish Adversary: but have often appeared in their own Defense, have
stated and defended their Opinion without Disguise and with superior Strength
of Reasoning, solved all the Difficulties and Objections thrown in their Way,
and said abundantly enough for ever to silence the unreasonable Clamor against
them. I have thought therefore, it might answer a valuable End, that would
richly compensate the Labor, to review the Popish Controversies on this
Occasion, and collect some Things (for a Specimen) out of those large and
excellent Defenses, which Protestants have made long ago, of their
Interpretation and Use of these Passages in our Text, against the Cavils and
Criminations of Jesuitical Sophisters; that if any under a Protestant
Profession should be found siding with the Church of Rome and pleading a Popish
Cause, in censuring and opposing (on no better than Popish Principles and
Reasons) the Protestant Notion of our Text commonly received among us, such may
be put to the Blush and others put on their Guard, by discerning whence the
Opposition takes it is Rise and whither it leads. For at Rome it commenced, and
for ought I can foresee, there it must terminate.

In the first Place then,

As to that Part of our Text, All our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags, I
find the PROTESTANT Application of this to the real Righteousnesses and moral
Virtues of good Men exploded by PAPISTICAL Writers in general, and by some of
'em both ridiculed as absurd and cursed as blasphemous. -- But the feigned
Blasphemy vanishes and the pretended Absurdity disappears, when Protestants
come to make their Defense (as is commonly the Manner with them) by stating
truly their Construction and Use of the Text, by examining the Context, and
comparing spiritual Things with spiritual.

According to the current Sense of the Reformers (as already observed) the
Prophet in our Text represents the Church of the living God (not the Wicked, as
Papists imagine, but the Godly) making this humble Confession, All our
Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags. And the Doctrine they found upon it, is
principally this: That the Saints, conscious of remaining Corruption in
themselves, of many Sins staining their Lives, and much moral Imperfection
polluting and blemishing their very best Works, do therefore renounce all
Dependence on their own personal Righteousnesses, for a Title to special Mercy
and Justification before GOD; and in Relation to such a Purpose, do indeed
account them but as filthy Rags. -- The PROTESTANT Opinion is, that this
undervaluing Resemblance, in the Prophet's Intention, reaches to all Works, as
well of a moral, as a ritual Aspect, and as well subsequent, as antecedent to
Faith. For since the fairest Duties of Morality, even after Conversion, are not
so pure and perfect, as to be entirely faultless before God, nor can atone for
their own Faults or at all excuse them, much less merit a Reward, but even need
a Pardon of their immoral Defects, and leave us absolutely dependent on the
meritorious Obedience and propitiating Blood of the Mediator, for their Title
to Acceptance and Approbation with God; therefore PROTESTANTS in old Time used
to conclude, we may with the utmost Propriety and Pertinence extend this
Character of filthy Rags further than to Works (ritual or moral) done before
Conversion, and apply it to the very best Works of real Christians, as
considered under the formal Notion and Design of Righteousnesses, to justify
them in the Sight of God, against the Accusations of his violated Law and the
Challenges of his offended Justice.

However, to obviate a vulgar Prejudice, let it be noted here; while they
thought the Saints moral Righteousnesses shut out of the Office of justifying
(as they were wont to speak) and as well from the Exigence of the Case, as in
Honor to the Priestly Office of the Mediator, pleaded strenuously for an
imputed Righteousness, even that which is of GOD through Faith only, as the sole
Ground, Matter, or objective Reason of Justification before God; yet still
(whatever their POPISH Adversaries insinuated, to blacken their Reputation and
raise a Cloud on their Doctrine) the Reformers were as far as any in the World
from casting the least Slight on the blessed SPIRIT in his Office as
Sanctifier; but ever asserted the absolute Necessity of subjective Grace
(without which they deemed Religion, in its most plausible Appearances, but an
empty Name) ever proclaimed the Righteous more excellent than his Neighbor;
and ever pronounced inherent Righteousness greatly beneficial, in its due
Place, and in Relation to those special Ends, for which the Gospel requires it.
They highly honored real Holiness, as the Result of Divine Election, the
Purchase of Christ, the Product of the Spirit, the Image of God, and the moral
Glory of human Nature, the Evidence of a pardoned State and the Earnest of
eternal Life, the Beginning of Heaven upon Earth, a sure Principle of Happiness
to the Subjects of it, and a singular Blessing to the World. Nevertheless, in
perfect Consistency (as they thought) with all due Honors to it in every such
View, they constantly affirmed this inherent Righteousness to be universally so
imperfect in its Degree, attended with so many sinful Failings in its daily
Exertments, and allayed with such frequent grosser Pollutions of Life, even in
the perfectest Saint here below, that it can by no Means sufficiently answer
the End of a reconciling and justifying Righteousness, nor safely be confided
in for a Title to God's special Mercy, or for Security against the Arrests of
his Law and Justice. Pursuant to this, they thought, that although as a
Characteristick of the pardoned and justified Man, and in point of
Qualification or capacitating Disposition for enjoying the Privileges of such,
as well as in regard of its Subserviency to the Redeemer's Kingdom and Glory,
moral Righteousness be an Ornament of great Price in the Sight of God; yet
still, consid^^^^ ^^der the formal Notion of a justifying Righteousness, or
under any Notion of a procuring Cause, effective Means or objective Reason of
Peace with God, it is really of no Price at all in his Sight, but useless and
worthless as filthy Rags. -- Now it is only in this limited respective Notion,
or else in a mere comparative View, that Protestants have suppus'd the Saints
Righteousnesses disparaged by the Prophet under this Name of Reproach.

Indeed I find some later Protestant Expositors, for the sake of obviating
Prejudices and avoiding Difficulties, have chosen to put a personal Sense on
the Word Righteousnesses (supposing, by a Figure in Speech, the Abstract put
for the Concrete) and understanding the Prophet to intend righteous Men, they
think that by filthy Rags is only suggested the forlorn and abject Condition of
God's People, at the Time this prophetical Prayer refers to. -- But, reserving
all due Respects to the Inventors of this Construction, I may modestly say, it
seems rather ingenious, than solid and judicious: Nor see I the Necessity or
Expediency of departing from the commonly received Notion of the Text, which
our Protestant Fathers, reforming from Popery, laid such extraordinary Weight
upon, and made such perpetual Use of (triumphing in this Text, and having it
ever in their Mouths) as furnishing them with a very powerful Plea in
Opposition to the PAPAL Doctrine of Justification by Works.

However, it may not be improper to observe here, I find the PROTESTANT Writers
commonly defending their general Construction of this Scripture by explaining
it in sundry particular Senses; and these are reducible to two, the one
Comparative, and the other relative to Justification: which I shall now take
some Notice of distinctly.

1. They vindicate their applying the Character of filthy Rags to the moral
Righteousnesses of Saints themselves, by pleading that none will deny their
deserving this disgraceful Name, if viewed in a comparative Light. -- And it is
certainly not unusual in Scripture Language, to call Things, in their Nature
valuable, by diminutive Names, or put detracting Characters upon 'em,
comparatively speaking. Thus, the Jewish Rituals are entitled weak and
beggarly Elements, perhaps in Comparison with the superior Institutions of the
Gospel. Besure, when the Apostle was running down the Dispensation of Moses,
and applying to it some Terms of great Disparagement, he explains himself by
saying, Even that which was made glorious, had NO Glory in this Respect, by
Reason of the Glory that excels. -- So here, the Prophet's Confession, I
suppose, will by universal Consent admit of a comparative Sense.

Even Papists, as well as Protestants, agree, that the most exalted moral
Righteousness in the World must appear but as impure Rags, if viewed in the
infinitely transcendent Light of GOD'S holy Face, or compared with the supreme
Standard and Origin of all Perfection and Purity. This perhaps might in Part be
Bp JEWEL'S View, in that Passage of his before recited. For having occasionally
made the Remark, that "in God's Sight the Stars are unclean," he brings in the
Words of our Text, with this Gloss upon it Our Virtue, out Holiness, etc. are
filthy, when they come to GOD'S Sight. And I find the great Cardinal of Rome
himself expressly making this Concession. BELLARM. de Justif. p. 381, 389.
So great (says he) is the Purity, and Sublimity of GOD'S Righteousness, that
all the Righteousness of Men and Angels, compared with that, appears but
UNRIGHTEOUSNESS. Just as a Candle, tho discernibly shining in the dark, yet
placed in the Rays of the Sun is extinguished, or as the brightest Stars
disappear in the Daylight: So in Comparison with GOD, all human Purity is as
it were IMPURITY, and all our Beauty but Deformity. Accordingly he quotes with
Approbation that Saying of AUSTIN, Cujus Participatione justi sunt, ejus
Comparatione nee justi sunt. That is, The Righteous lose their Character, and
appear UNRIGHTEOUS, upon a Comparison with the divine Fountain, from whence
they derive their Righteousness. Agreably, I find the Cardinal applying in this
Light several Passages in the Book of JOB. I know, it is so of a Truth: but
shall Man be righteous in Comparison of GOD! -- Shall mortal Man be just
compared with GOD! -- So then, by the Adversary's own free Concessions here
(whatever he has elsewhere pretended to the contrary) there is no Need of
supposing, that the Prophet's Confession respects only the Wicked; but may
properly enough be referred to the Righteous, in a comparative Sense. And surely
there is none will deny, that all our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags, when
bro't into Comparison with the Righteousness of GOD. Verily one such Glimpse as
holy Job saw of God's tremendous Holiness, might well make any Man cry out as
he did, Behold, I am VILE! I abhor my self. So the holy Prophet Isaiah, when a
Beam of the divine Glory flashed in his Eyes, instantly losing Sight of all his
own Righteousness, he broke out in that Language (equivalent to his Words in
our Text) Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a Man of UNCLEAN Lips. -- Now
after this, where is the Blasphemy, or where the Absurdity, of ascribing to the
Saints themselves that humble Confession, All our Righteousnesses are as filthy
Rags!

And viewed in other comparative Lights, Protestants have pleaded, that the
Saints personal Righteousness loses all its Purity and Glory. Thus, compared
with that shining Array of habitual Rectitude and Innocence, which adorned Adam
originally in Paradise, what is the most complete and glistering Garb of moral
Righteousness now on Earth, but as broken Shreds of Righteousness, and these
defiled and blackened with Sin? -- Or compared with the Law of our Nature, the
primitive Standard of actual Righteousness, what is the most consummate
Righteousness of imperfect Saints, but as filthy Rags? Verily it is at best as
Rags; or as a Garment, not only short of the true Measure, but full of shameful
Scissures, its several Parts scarce hanging together; and this inconsistent
ragged Garment, not only blemished by its own Defects and Rents, but foul'd too
by attendant Lusts and Corruptions. -- Or compared with the revealed Rule of
our Obedience, the Law of the Lord which is perfect, his written Word which is
very pure, is not the compleatest Righteousness of the most improved Saint upon
Earth, but scanty and imperfect, yea, even as filthy Rags? -- Or compared with
the Purity and Perfection of the Saints themselves in their heavenly State,
what is the highest Perfection and Purity of Saints in this their Earthly
Condition, but Imperfection and Impurity? The Righteousness of some real Saints
loses its Brightness, when only compared to that of others, even now in this
evil World, who shine with superior moral Seize: but what is the
Righteousness of the most finished Staints on the Earth to that of glorified
Saints in the World of spotless Purity and Perfection? In this comparative
View, surely all our Righteousnesses appear as filthy Rags.

In a Word, at least, this is their due Character, if compared with the
Righteousness of CHRIST, the admirable Pattern and Source of all our
Righteousnesses. In Comparison with that Righteousness, which he exemplified in
our Nature and Stead, and which is graciously imputed to Believers (called in
Scripture the Righteousness of GOD, from its Divine Author and immediate
Subject, God incarnate, as well as from its Divine Institution and Acceptance)
in this Light surely the Saints own personal Righteousness at best appears full
of uncomely Defects and with an ugly Hue: not as the other, a fine Linen Robe
white and clean, but rather like a dark, coarse, rotten, leprous Garment.
Verily there is an inconceivable Disproportion between the Saints own inherent
Righteousness, and that of Christ imputed to them. -- I will briefly state the
Resemblance and Disparity between them, in the agreeable Words of the excellent
Bp BARLOW, LETTERS concerning Justification by Faith only. p. 165, 166.
who understands the Prophet in our Text as speaking, not absolutely, but
comparatively, and in Relation to the excelling Righteousness of God our
Savior. His Words are; Isaiah (confessing his own and his People's Sins)
says, All our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags. So he calls even his own
inherent Righteousness, if compared with the absolute and perfect Righteousness
of CHRIST, by which all his Saints are justified. For this Righteousness of our
blessed Savior, imputed to his Saints, is in Scripture ( Rev. 19.8.) called a
complete and entire Linen-Garment, white and clean, which (according to Rev.
3.18. and 6.11.) they have of CHRIST, to cover their Nakedness. (It is not an
inherent, but an imputed and external Righteousness, which as a Robe or Garment
covers their Sins and moral Nakedness. ( Romans 4.7.) -- When Saint John says,
imputed Righteousness is a Linen-Robe, white and clean, and Isaiah says, our
inherent Righteousness is filthy Rags, the Comparison may stand thus; the
Analogy and Difference thus appear. (1) Our blessed Savior's imputed
Righteousness is an entire Robe, or Linen-Garment (as the Apostle calls it)
perfectly white and clean, which covers all our Sins and moral Nakedness. But
(2.) our own inherent Righteousness is as filthy Rags. (1.) Rags only, or
broken Fragments (as it were) and little Pieces of Righteousness, and no entire
Robe: for our many intervening Sins divide and rent it into Rags. And (2.)
those Rags too are not perfectly white and clean, but are filthy. Either (1.)
in Respect of their Defects, which stain them: for, if God should examine them
according to the Severity of the moral Law, they would be found defective (at
least) in Degree, and be unable to abide the Trial, so as to justify us before
God. Or (2.) they are filthy Rags, at least comparatively, in Relation to the
more excellent Righteousness of CHRIST.

But I proceed now to the other particular Sense, in which Protestants have
usually explained and defended their general Construction and Application of
the Text. According to them,

2. This Character of Reproach is due to all Righteousnesses of Saints
themselves, if considered under the Notion of justifying Righteousnesses,
serving to make our Peace with GOD, and by their Worth and Virtue securing us
against the Challenges of his Law and Justice: Hence believing Penitents though
laudably zealous of good Works, as excellent in other Views, do renounce all
Trust in them, and at it were lose all Value for them, under this Notion of
their pacifying the Anger, and winning the Favor of the Divine Lawgiver and
Judge. -- Here good Works (which spring only from justifying Faith, and so
follow Justification) appear quite out of Place and out of Character. Put to
this Account, they stand for a Cipher, for Nothing, or worse than Nothing.
Being thus misplaced, the Excellency that is in them, as it were, goes away;
and here they fall under a just Disparagement. -- This was the Opinion of those
who have been wont so strenuously to urge this Text in Opposition to Popery.

PROTESTANTS have from the Beginning had warm Contests with the Romish
Adversary, on that important Question, What is the MATTER of justifying
Righteousness? (as Mr. Richard Hooker, a celebrated old Protestant expresses
it) Or, What is that Righteousness, by which a Man is justified in the Sight of
God? -- Whether his own inherent Righteousness, or that of Christ imputed to
him? -- The PAPISTS hold for the former, in Opposition to the latter. Vid.
BELLARM. de Justif. p. 125, etc.
One main Ground of their Opinion is a supposed Perfection in the Saints Works
of Righteousness. These they define to be Works good in Kind, or in Respect of
God's Command, and done with a right Intention: And such Works they call
perfect, in Contradistinction to all faulty and defiling Imperfection. For they
maintain, that neither mere innate Concupiscence, nor doing these Works with a
defective Love, nor the Intermixture of venial Sins (as they speak) can
possibly pollute the Saints good Works. JD. ibid. p. 368. etc.
They observe, The Scripture in absolute Terms denominates some Men, just,
holy, undefiled, perfect: and in such Men they assert, there is such true and
absolute Righteousness, that in the just Judgment of GOD, not Punishment, but
Glory is due to it. Ibid. p. 174.
However, at the same Time, to put a fair Gloss on their Opinion, they confess,
that the Reason of this Worthiness in good Works turns wholly upon Grace,
results from Christ's Merits, and hither all the Praise is ultimately to be
referred. Page 413, 414.
They distinguish, and say, That FOR which we are justified, is the Merit of
CHRIST, as the meritorious Cause; although it be BY our inherent Righteousness,
as the formal Cause. Ib. p. 127, 128.
And I observe, our great Antagonist, in considering it as a Case of
Conscience, makes several modest Concessions. He grants it a Point of PRUDENCE,
not to confide in our own good Deservings, but in the alone Mercy of GOD. p.
419.
Yea, he has delivered it in the Form of a Thesis, or solemn Position,
importing his deliberate Judgment: By Reason of the Uncertainty of our own
Righteousness, and the Hazard of Vainglory (TUTISSIMUM est) it is acting the
SAFEST Part, to repose our whole Confidence in the alone Mercy of God: -- Eying
this only, and in a Manner forgetting our own good Deservings. p. 424.
-- Thus, the Adversary himself, after his long and passionate Pleadings for
Justification by Works, has in Effect (by his Tutissimum est) retracted all,
and given up the Favorite-Article of Popery. For, as a learned Man PRIDEAUX
Lectiones, Page 73.
observes upon it, This his Assertion is directly the Reverse to his whole
Doctrine of Justification. And in this great Point truly lay the very Heart and
Center of all the chief Controversies between the Church of Rome and the
Reformers.

According to the old PROTESTANTS, there is no safe Approach to God, but in the
Righteousness of CHRIST imputed and received by Faith. The absolute Necessity
of this They though it rationally grounded on the Impossibility of Justification by
our own inherent Righteousness: for a convincing Proof of which, they
constantly pleaded the Imperfection of our best moral Seize: and for the
Evidence of this, they appealed to the whole Tenor of the sacred Scriptures,
to universal Experience and Observation, and to the constant Confessions of
good Men from Age to Age. The Confession in our Text they particularly set an
Asterism upon, and made much Use of it to establish their Doctrine, in
Opposition to Popery. For, while the Papists dreamt of the Prophet's speaking
here in the Person of the Wicked, these old Protestants constantly asserted his
doing it in the Name of the Righteous; and they considered the Church of God as
by this Confession expressing a humble Sense of their own Unworthiness,
acknowledging their absolute Dependence on God's free Mercy in Christ to pardon
and save them; and, from a Consciousness of the faulty Defects of their own
Righteousnesses, disclaiming all Pretensions, in Consideration of any Worth in
them, to Justification of Life, yea, in Relation to this End, even rejecting
and despising them as filthy Rags. Hence that eminent old Reformer, Bp JEWEL,
thus speaks in one of his Sermons At the End of his Works. p. 215.
: If we appear in our own Apparel, we must despair. -- Let us therefore put on
us Jesus Christ. Let us cover us under his Apparel, as Jacob covered himself
under the Coat of his Brother Esau; and so let us present ourselves before our
heavenly Father. -- Analogous to which are those Observations and Reasonings of
another excellent old Protestant Bp HALL. In his Book, entitled, The old
Religion. Chap. 5.
We are all as an unclean Thing (WE, says the Prophet, including even himself)
and all our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags. -- That there is an inherent
Justice in us, is no less certain, than that it is wro't in us by the Holy
Ghost. -- But this being wro't by him according to the Model of our weak
Receipt, and not to the full Power of the infinite Agent, is not so perfect, as
that it can bear us out before the Tribunal of GOD. -- Nothing can formally
make us just, but that which is perfect in it self. How should it give what it
has not? Now our inherent Righteousness, at the best, is in this Life
defective. -- Though true, how should it be pure, where we cannot but be faulty?
-- Surely that which is less than it ought, is faulty. -- To say, that our
actual Justice, which is imperfect through the Admixtion of venial Sins, cease
not to be both true and (in a sort) perfect Justice, is to say, there may be an
unjust Justice, or a just Injustice; that even muddy Water is clear, or a
leprous Face beautiful. -- It must be only under the Garment of our Elder
Brother, that we dare come in for a Blessing: his Righteousness made ours by
Faith, is that we are justified by in the Sight of God. This Doctrine is that
which is blasted with a Tridentine Curse. -- It is not the Logic of this
Point, we contend for; it is not the Grammar; but it is the Divinity: What is
that whereby we stand acquitted before the righteous Judge? Whether our
inherent Justice, or Christ's imputed Justice apprehended by Faith? The Divines
of Trent are for the former: All Antiquity with us for the latter. -- The sweet
and passionate Speeches of St. Austin and St. Bernard alone would fill a Book:
neither can any reformed Divine either more disparage our inherent
Righteousness, or more magnify and challenge the Imputed. --

And says the famous Episcopal HOOKER, in his Discourse of Justification. At
the End of his Eccl. Pol. page 495, 496. 509.
Concerning the Righteousness of Sanctification, we deny it not to be inherent;
-- only we distinguish it, as a Thing different in Nature, from the
Righteousness of Justification. We are righteous, the one Way, by the FAITH of
Abraham; the other Way, except we do the WORKS of Abraham, we are not
righteous. -- We see how far we are from the perfect Righteousness of the Law:
the little Fruit which we have in Holiness, it is (God knows) CORRUPT and
UNSOUND; we put no Confidence at all in it. -- The Apostle says, God made him
to be Sin for us, who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of
God in Him. -- Let it be counted our Folly, or Frenzy, or Fury, whatsoever, it
is our Comfort and our Wisdom, we care for no Knowledge in the World, but this,
That Man has sinned and God has suffered, That God has made himself the Son
of Man and Men are made the Righteousness of God. You see therefore that the
Church of ROME, in teaching Justification by inherent Grace, does PERVERT the
TRUTH of CHRIST. -- It is a childish Cavil, our Adversaries do so greatly
please themselves with, exclaiming that we tread all Christian Virtues under
our Feet, because we teach that Faith alone justifies: whereas as by this
Speech we never meant to exclude either Hope or Charity from being always
joined, as inseparable Mates, with Faith, in the Man that is justified, or
Works from being added, as necessary Duties, required of every justified Man;
but to show, that FAITH is the only Hand which puts on Christ unto
Justification, and CHRIST the only Garment, which, being so put on, covers
the Shame of our defiled Natures, hides the Imperfection of our Works, and
preserves us blameless in the Sight of God; before whom, otherwise, the
Weakness of our Faith were Cause sufficient to make us culpable, yea, to shut
us out of the Kingdom of Heaven, where nothing that is not absolute can enter!
-- If any Man had a perfect Faith (as the same Author argues in another Place
Sermon. of Cert. and Perpet. of Faith in God's Elect. ECCL. POL. page 528.
) what does let why that Man should not be justified by his own inherent
Righteousness? For Righteousness inherent, being perfect, will justify. -- And
Faith being perfect, -- what is there to exclude other Christian Virtues from
the like Perfection? And then what Need have we of the Righteousness of CHRIST!
His Garment is superfluous: we may be honorably clothed with our own Robes,
if it be thus.

According to the old Religion of PROTESTANTS, it appears, the Righteousness of
CHRIST imputed, and received by Faith, is eminently (though not exclusively of
habitual Righteousness, as its inseparable Attendant, or of actual
Righteousness, as its necessary Consequent) the Righteousness of the Saints,
represented in Scripture under the Emblem of white Raiment, a white and clean
Robe, and called the Wedding Garment, the Robe of Righteousness, the Garment of
Salvation: which the God of all Grace has provided for Sinners (such as we all
are by Nature, and such as the Saints themselves must appear, when viewed by
the Eye of rectoral Holiness, in the Glass of the Law) to cover their moral
Nakedness, and screen them from the Revenges of Justice and the Lashes of
Conscience. Those old Protestants though it, "that unless we put on Christ, and
cover us with his Body and Blood as with a Garment, our filthy Nakedness must
appear, and nothing remain for us but Despair. They judged this clearly implied
in the Prophet's Confession, that all our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags.
And they judged that in the Prophet DANIEL'S Prayer equivalent to this: We do
not present our Supplications before Thee for our own Righteousnesses, but for
thy great Mercies. (Dan. 9.18.) Yea, they thought Isaiah's Confession to have
been but the Language, constructively at least, of all other eminent Saints on
Scripture-Record. They were wont to instance in some corresponding Speeches of
Abraham, of Jacob, of Job and his Friends, of David, and Asaph, and Ezra, and
Nehemiah, with others in the Old Testament; so of Peter, of Paul, of James, of
John, and others in the New. [For Brevity, I omit the particular Passages
referred to: Some of 'em have already been cited; and the most of 'em are
obvious, to those acquainted with their Bibles.] And when consulting their own
Experience, with that of other the People of God in their own Times, these old
Protestants found this bearing Testimony to the Imperfection of their personal
Righteousnesses, whether habitual or actual; so obliging them to make Isaiah's
Confession their own. By melancholy Experience, they perceived their Obedience
daily interrupted and impeded, by the resisting Principle of indwelling Sin.
They saw deplorable Flaws, and Spots of Filth, in their purest and most
indefective Works of Righteousness. Nor only in their most perfect Duties of
Morality saw they Occasion to lament very faulty Imperfections; but complained
too of a censurable Weakness even in their most vigorous Exercises of Faith
itself. Which Failures of theirs appeared, in the impartial Judgment of
Conscience, sufficient Matter of just Condemnation to them, should a righteous
God enter into Judgment with his Servants, and be strict to mark Iniquity. So
that they dared not venture upon in Inquisition by the inflexible Rule of
Righteousness, and stand a Trial at the Bar of Justice, under the Shelter of
any Righteousness of their own. They saw and confessed this Covering too
contracted, too deformed and too defiled, to serve (by any Beauty or Virtue in
it self) either to attract the Favor of an offended Lawgiver, or to protect
them from the Wrath of Him who is a consuming Fire. In regard to any such
Purpose, they saw and confessed all their Righteousnesses to be but as filthy
Rags, which the fiery Law and incensed Justice of God would burn up in its
destroying Flames; had they Nothing more effectual, than their own purest
Religion, to cover their Sins, and make their Persons acceptable in the Sight
of Him, whose Eyes are as a Flame of Fire, and who is of purer Eyes than to
behold Inquity, in whatever Instance or Degree, without infinite Displeasure
and Detestation. Upon such Views of the Case, it was the Manner with these old
Protestants, to strip themselves, as it were, of their own filthy Garments,
laying them at the Feet of Jesus, and to put on Christ by Faith, so clothing
themselves with Change of Raiment, when they bowed their Knees before a holy
God, And transacted with him in relation to the momentous Concerns of Pardon
and Justification.

Truly they confessed themselves afraid of going about to establish their own
Righteousness, or even seeming to seek Righteousness as it were by the Works of
the Law. They saw that the Law is holy, and just, and spiritual, the
Commandment exceeding broad, and the Demands of Divine Justice (whether in
moral or penal Respects) transcending all Possibility of a perfect personal
Fulfillment and Satisfaction by them. They saw it above their Power, either to
atone for their past Sins, or to obey without Sin for the future. And hence,
although they knew that if there had been a Law which could have given Life,
verily Righteousness should have been by the Law, yet as they by Experience
found the Law weak through the Flesh, and seeking to be justified by the Law but
a vain Pursuit, they therefore sought to be justified by Christ through Faith in
his Blood, and looked unto Jesus, as the Lord their Righteousness, as well as
Strength; abjuring Self, in every View, not only vicious Self, nor only civil
Self, but righteous Self too, in this Affair of Justification before God. They
abjured every Thing of their own in Competition with CHRIST, particularly as
considered in his reconciling Office: utterly foregoing all their
Righteousnesses, as viewed under the Notion of pacifying and recommending
Righteousnesses in the Eyes of an affronted Lawgiver and just Judge. -- Indeed
I cannot find by any Hint in their Writings, that these old Protestants allowed
a Place, in this Business of Justification, for the Distinction some of late
have so warmly espoused, between a Law-Righteousness and a Gospel-Righteousness
of the moral Kind. Besure* since a perfect immaculate Obedience to the Law, in
its Rigor, is impracticable in this fallen State of Mankind, they saw no
Color for any Hope of Justification by a (strictly) Legal Righteousness of our
own: which, if it be not more than the very Papists pretend to, yet perhaps is
all that some modern Protestants, in orthodox Language, appear to renounce. And
for ought I can observe, neither did these old Protestants see any Room left,
even in the mediatorial and infinitely condescending Scheme of redeeming Grace,
for a Claim to Justification (properly speaking) by an Evangelical
Righteousness of our own, or Works of Righteousness done in Obedience to the
Gospel; considering the Saints moral Imperfection in their present State. For
they saw the whole Duty of Man according to the moral Law, taken into the
System of Divine Precepts in the Gospel, without the Abrogation of any one
moral Command, yea, without any Relaxation of the Severity of the moral Rule,
or the least Abatement of Obedience in Point of Degree; but the universal and
entire Law, (without Exception of an Iota) as a Rule of right Action, abiding
in full Force and perpetual Obligation; not at all made void by Faith, but
rather established and enforced by it. And in Consequence of this, they
concluded the Defects in the Saints Obedience to have the Nature of Sin; not
only as being against the original Law of Morality, but against the Injunctions
of the very Gospel itself; and being thus sinful, therefore needing Divine
Forgiveness. In which State of the Case, they saw their own Righteousness, in
every View of it, absolutely insufficient, by any Worth or Excellency in it
self, to ingratiate them with an infinitely holy and omniscient Lawgiver; and
altogether unfit to be considered as a justifying Righteousness before God,
even in the compassionate and gracious Plan of the Gospel. -- But the exceeding
Riches of the Grace of God in his Kindness toward us by Jesus Christ, the very
Mercy of Mercies in the infinitely merciful Scheme of Man's Salvation, these
old Protestants saw, lay in the Provision of a better Righteousness than their
own inherent, to answer the End of Justification, and Intitlement to God's
special Favor, that is, the Righteousness of CHRIST, imputed to Believers, and
covering their Sins from the Eye of vindictive Justice. Even as David also
describes the Blessedness of the Man, to whom GOD imputes Righteousness
without Works; saying, Blessed are they whose Iniquities are forgiven, and
whose Sins are covered. This imputed Righteousness they held to be the most
essential Recommendation to Heaven; the only justifying Righteousness before
God, against the Challenges of his Law and Justice, affronted by their Sins and
Imperfections; and this they held to be received only by Faith, a true and
lively Faith. They held it for Gospel-Doctrine, that although Faith does not shut
out Repentance, Hope, Love, Dread and Fear of God, to be joined with Faith in
every Man that is justified; yet it shuts them out from the Office of
justifying, and so from being joined with CHRIST'S Righteousness to that End:
they observed, that Man cannot make himself righteous by his own Works, neither
in Part nor in the Whole; for that were the greatest Arrogance and Presumption
of Man, that Antichrist could set up against God, to affirm, that Man might by
his own Works take away and purge his own Sins, and so justify himself. Church
of E. Hom. of Sal.
-- While therefore they honored inherent Righteousness in its Place and in
Relation to its proper Ends, they dared not exalt that (under any Consideration
of it, whether as a Legal or Evangelical Righteousness) to a Rivalship with
CHRITS'S Righteousness imputed, or to a Co-partnership with this, as the Matter
or Ground and objective Reason of Justification before God. They considered
this Righteousness, which is upon them that believe, as a complete Robe of
Righteousness, perfectly sufficient to secure its End, in point of
Justification and Peace with God; not needing the moral Righteousnesses of Men
to be tacked to it for its greater Sufficiency, which are neither fitted to
enlarge, nor strengthen, nor beautify it; but rather, as thus advanced out of
their due Place and applied to a wrong Use, they put on the Character of filthy
Rags. In reference to Justification, these old Protestants infinitely preferred
the Righteousness which is of God by Faith; and in this most beauteous white
Raiment, the Wedding Garment, they desired to be found; as knowing, that so
they should be found of their Judge in Peace, without Spot and blameless.

I think I Have now said enough to show, that the commonly received Notion of the
Prophet's Words in our Text, as it is agreeable to the Judgment of PROTESTANTS,
in Opposition to the POPISH Opinion upon it, so likewise agreeable to the Scope
of the Context, justifiable by the general Tenor of Scripture-Doctrine, and
applicable to excellent Uses in the Christian Life.

Nevertheless, after all, it may perhaps contribute to your further
Satisfaction and Establishment in the genuine Protestant Construction of this
Passage in ISAIAH, if I rehearse to you something of that excellent Defense of
it, which was made by an old Protestant, the learned Bp ROBERT ABBOT, in Answer
to one Dr. BISHOP, a Popish Priest, and in Vindication of the celebrated Mr.
PERKINS. DEF. of the Ref. Cath. p. 387, etc. With p. 597, 598.


Mr. PERKINS (in his Book, called The Reformed Catholic) had advanced, among
others, this Argument for the Necessity of imputed Righteousness; That which
must be our Righteousness before GOD, must satisfy the Justice of the LAW,
which says, Do these Things and live. But there is Nothing that can satisfy
that Justice of the Law, but the Righteousness and Obedience of JESUS CHRIST.
Ergo. -- Now under this Argument, to prove that the Righteousness of the
Regenerate and Faithful is not such as that it can answer the Justice and
Righteousness required in the Law, Mr. PERKINS alleges the common Confession
of all, indicted by the Prophet ISAIAH, All our Righteousness is a menstruous or
defiled Cloth. For if the Righteousness commanded by the Law be most exact and
perfect, and no Righteousness is performed by us, but what is by our Weakness
and Corruption blemished and stained, then can no Righteousness of ours satisfy
the Commandment of the Law. -- To which Dr. BISHOP [the Romish Priest]
answers, that the Prophet speaks these Words in the Person of the WICKED of
that Nation and that Time; and therefore that they are madly applied unto the
RIGHTEOUS. -- [Dr. ABBOT replies] Where a Man would wonder, that he should be
so mad, as to imagine that Prayer to be made in the Person of wicked Men, or
that wicked Men should make Mention of any their Righteousness unto GOD! And as
for the Time, it fitteth not the Age wherein the Prophet himself lived; but was
prophetically written in Respect of a Time long after succeeding. He foresaw in
the Spirit the Desolation of Jerusalem and the Temple and that whole Land; and
thereupon puts himself in the Person of the FAITHFUL, and makes himself as
one of them that should live at that Time. This is very apparent by the
Prophet's Words (v. 10.) Thine holy Cities lie Waste, etc -- This Prayer was to
serve for a Direction to the FAITHFUL that then should be, to make their Moan
unto GOD, and to entreat Mercy at his Hands. And very answerable to this
prophetical Prayer is the Prayer of the Prophet DANIEL, made presently at that
Time [the Time of Jerusalem's actual Desolation.] For whereas Mr. BISHOP, to
prove that the Prophet speaks in the Person of the Wicked, alleges those
Words (v. 5) Lo, thou have been angry, for we have offended, and have ever been
in Sin: the Prophet DANIEL likewise says (Chap. 5, 7, 10) WE have sinned and
committed Iniquity, and done wickedly: O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto
Thee, and unto US open Shame: WE have not obeyed the Voice of the Lord our God,
to walk in his Ways, etc. And whereas he alleges the other Words (Isai.
64.7.) There is no Man that calls upon thy Name, and stands up to take hold
of Thee; the Prophet DANIEL in like Manner says (Chap. 9 13.) WE have not made
our Prayer before the Lord our God. Both of them [ Isaiah and Daniel] say, WE
have offended, WE have sinned, WE have not prayed, as showing plainly that they
so spoke of other Men as that they implied Themselves also. The Prophet DANIEL
says of himself (Chap. 9.20.) that in that Prayer he confessed his own Sins,
and the Sins of the People. And why should the Prophet DANIEL be said to
confess his own Sins, and not the Prophet ISAIAH, or those Just and Faithful in
whose Person Isaiah spoke? Nay, both the one and the other spoke out of the
true Affection of the Faithful at all Times, who always find in themselves
Defects and Defaults, whereby they find just Cause in Confession of Sins to
join themselves with other Men; even as the Prophet ISAIAH elsewhere does
(Chap. 6.5.) Woe is me; I am a Man of polluted Lips, and I dwell in the midst of
a People of polluted Lips. -- We cannot doubt but that there were many faithful
and godly among the Jews at that Time of their Desolation: Yet in those
faithful and godly there was that Default, as that God said of them (Isa.
51.18.) There is NONE to guide her, among all the Sons that she has brought
forth. -- The Prophet could not say, WE have sinned, WE have all been as an
unclean Thing, without Intendment of himself. -- And that which the Prophet
spoke, did so concern the Faithful of that Time and Place whereof he spoke, as
that the same has true Application to the Faithful in all Times and in all
Places; because no Reason can be given, why the Faithful of one Time should so
speak, but by (...) it is enforced upon the Faithful of all Times.

Thus, Dr. ABBOT has showed, "That the Prophet by Way of Prophecy indicted this
Prayer in the Name of the Faithful, who were to live in the Desolation of
Jerusalem; that the Prayer of the Prophet Daniel, at that Time, fully
expresses the Effect of the same Prayer of Isaiah; and therefore that it is
the Confession of the Faithful and Godly, that their Righteousness is as a
stained Cloth." But further, he shows "that the ancient Fathers have used the
Place for the Proof thereof:" hereby effectually removing the Prejudice against
this Construction of the Text, as if it were only of modern Date, a novel
Conceit of the Reformers. With this View, he recites that Speech of ORIGIN. Who
will glory concerning his Righteousness, seeing he hears GOD saying by the
Prophet, All your Righteousness is (sicut Pannus Mulieris menstruatae") as
filthy Rags. He observes also, HIEROM says thus, By thy Mercy we shall be
saved, who by ourselves are unclean, and whatsoever Righteousness we seem to
have, it is compared (Panno menstruatae Mulieris") to filthy Rags. St. AUSTIN,
alluding to the same Place, says, 'Whatsoever he touches that is unclean, by
the Law it shall be unclean. But we all, quasi Pannus menstruatae, being come
of an unclean and corrupt Mass, do carry in our Foreheads the Blot of our
Uncleanness, which from God that sees all Things, we cannot hide; thereby
acknowledging that Blot remaining in us, which must needs stain whatsoever
proceeds from us.' But St. BERNARD is most frequent both in affirming this
Stain of all our Righteousness, and in applying this Place to the Proof
thereof. 'What can all our Righteousness be (says he) in the Sight of GOD?
Shall it not, as the Prophet says, be reputed as a defiled Cloth; and shall
not our Justice, if it be strictly judged, be found unjust and scant?' And in
another Place, ' Our base Righteousness (if it be any) is right perhaps, but
not pure; unless happily we think our selves better than our Fathers, who no less
truly than humbly said, All our Righteousnesses are as a defiled Cloth.' And in
another Place he says likewise, ' All our very Righteousnesses being looked
upon by the Light of Truth, are found as a defiled Cloth.' Again, 'Our perfect
and secure Rejoicing is, when we are afraid of all our Works, as holy Job
witnesses of himself, and with the Prophet Isaiah do know that all our
Righteousnesses are to be reputed no otherwise but as a defiled Cloth.

This Reply of Dr. ABBOT is sufficient, I think, to vindicate the Protestant
Interpretation of the Prophet's Words against the Charge of Novelty, as well as
Perversion and Abuse. -- Ad hujusmodi Dicta explicanda, Interpret benigno Opus
est, non maligno Calumniatore. -- Episc. DAVENANT in Loc.


But now in the second Place,

It remains, to say something on the other Part of my Text, the Apostle's
Words, in the same View and Application wherein we have last been considering
the Words of the Prophet, as referring to the Righteousness of real Saints.

The Apostle is in the Text and Context giving a Reason of the Hope that is in
him, exhibiting the Ground of his present Confidence toward God, and declaring
the Foundation on which he desired to be finally standing, when he should
appear before the Judge of all. For those Expressions, That I may win Christ
and be found in him, Expositors in general suppose, have a tacit Relation to
the Judgment of GOD. -- And they are agreed, I think, that the Apostle
declares, not only that he formerly had renounced his Pharisaical Gains, as
Loss for CHRIST, but that he now undervalues all Things (whether worldly
Advantages, Church-Privileges, or personal Accomplishments, even all that is
valued among Men) in Comparison with CHRIST, and renounces every Thing
whatsoever in Competition with Him: yea, that he now counts them but Loss and
Dung, comparatively to CHRIST, who was precious to him above all, whom he would
suffer nothing to rival, and whom he superlatively desires to win, to gain the
full Possession of him, and to be found in him, at last, not having his own
Righteousness, etc.

But the Dispute is, What Righteousness the Apostle here intends; and in what
Respect he so undervalues this, counting it even as Dung. -- Now the commonly
received Opinion among PROTESTANTS has been, that the Apostle includes in his
Idea all his own personal Righteousness, of whatever Kind, Degree, or Date of
Attainment: and as to the Notion under which he so depreciates his own
Righteousness, that it is not as considered simply and absolutely, but only
comparatively to the more excellent Righteousness of CHRIST, and relatively to
the important Concern of being found of his Judge in Peace.

The PAPISTS indeed are of Opinion, that the Apostle in our Text renounces
nothing more than what he had in the preceding Context already expressed his
Renunciation of, that is, his old Pharisaical Righteousness, that external
Righteousness which he had while continuing in the Jews Religion: and so they
think, his Example can only teach us to renounce a merely external
Righteousness, of Works without Faith, the Righteousness of the Proud and
Self-confident; a Righteousness which cannot please God, and which the Church
of Rome holds Contempt. BELLARM. de Justif. p. 90. 96. 412.


But the Reformers maintained, that the Apostle in our Text extends his View
further, even to his Christian Righteousness, or Evangelical Obedience.
BELLARMINE himself is a Witness to this Fact, when he passes that confident
Censure, Ibid. p. 412.
Our Adversaries [meaning the Protestants] do most impudently refer several
Texts and especially this in Phil. 3. to good Works, that are done by the
Saints from Faith and the Grace of God. Accordingly I find many noted old
Protestant Writers so applying this Passage in our Text. Mr. HOOKER SER. At the
End of his Eccl. Pol. p 494, 495. and 528.
(the famous Defender of the English Hierarchy) understands the Apostle as
speaking here of his Righteousness of Sanctification; of that which he had by
inherent Grace; of his Christian Righteousness, whereof Faith itself is a Part,
and the leading Part, being the Root of all Christian Virtues. And he remarks,
that the Papists are for Justification by a Righteousness which is in us. If it
be in us (says he) then it is ours: -- but the Righteousness wherein we must be
found, if we will be justified, is not our own: therefore we cannot be
justified by any inherent Quality. -- Dr. WILLET observes on our Text, Synop.
Pap. p. 986.1000.1046.
St. Paul speaks of those Works which he did even since he was an Apostle. --
St. Paul here denies his own Righteousness inherent, and commends the
Righteousness which is of God through Faith, i. e. apprehended by Faith, not
consisting in the Act of Faith. -- Paul trusts not in his own Works (but counts
them Loss and Dung in Repect of Christ) he will put no Confidence in Dung. --
So Bp HALL upon it observes, The old Religion, p. 38, 39.
Saint Paul was a great Saint; he had a Righteousness of his own (not as a
Pharisee only, but an Apostle) yet that which he dares not trust to, but
forsakes, and cleaves to God's. -- It is the main Care of our Lives and Deaths
(says he As cited by Mr. ROLLS in his Answer to Dr. Sherlock, p. 165.
) what shall give us Peace and Acceptance before the dreadful Tribunal of GOD.
What but Righteousness? What Righteousness, or whose? Ours, or CHRIST'S? Ours,
in the inherent Graces wrought in us, in the holy Works wro't by us; or
CHRIST'S, in his most perfect Obedience and meritorious Satisfaction wro't for
us and applied to us? The Tridentine [Popish] Faction is for the former: We
[Protestants] for the latter. GOD is as direct on our Side, as his Word can
make him; every where blazoning the Defects of our own Righteousness, -- every
where extolling the perfect Obedience of our Redee^^^ -- Woe were to us, if not
more just in that, than sanctified in (...) selves. We are sanctified in part,
according to the Weakness of our Receipt, etc. -- Agreably Bp BALLOW LET. of
Justif. p. 126, 156, -- 163.
has these Remarks. Saint Paul himself desires, when he should appear at God's
Tribunal, to be found in CHRIST, not having his own Righteousness which is of
the Law, his inherent Righteousness of Works. -- The Quaere is, what Law he
means here? -- I think it manifest, he means the moral Law. -- If we consider
him before his Conversion, it is evident he then had no Righteousness of his
own: and therefore to say, he means his Righteousness acquired by his natural
Abilities before his Conversion [as Papists do] is evidently irrational; seeing
Saint Paul well knew (and has taught the World that Truth) that he neither had
nor could have, before his Conversion, so much as one good Work, much less a
Righteousness in Relation to the moral Law. -- After his Conversion he had
indeed a Righteousness of his own; but this imperfect, and mixed with sinful
Failings, as he sadly complains, Romans 7.14, etc. This Righteousness of
Sanctification is that inherent Righteousness which he calls his own. -- His
Righteousness of Works is meant, which was his own Righteousness (1.) Ratione
Principii, it was wro't by him. (2.) Ratione Subjecti, it was in him. This the
Apostle opposes to an external imputed Righteousness: -- Declaring that he
relied only on the Righteousness of God through Faith in Christ; which, to be
sure, was not any Righteousness of his own Works. -- And Bp Barlow further
observes, Ibid. p. 116, 135.
concerning the Reformers in England, that in their Homily of Salvation, they
cite this Text, and have the following Note upon it, Saint Paul does glory in
the Contempt of his own Righteousness, and that he looked for the Righteousness
of God by Faith. -- They also remark, As great and godly a Virtue as Faith is,
yet it puts us from itself, and remits us to Christ, to have Forgiveness of
Sins and Justification by him only.

Others moreover have observed See Mr. ALSOP'S Antisozzo; p. 547, etc. and Mr.
ROWLIN'S 7 Ser on Isa. 45.24. -- page 218.
by Way of Criticism on the Text; that the Apostle's Words in the Original are,
My own Righteousness which is (...) (without the prepositive Article, usually
met with in other Places) and may truly be read, My own Righteousness which is
of Law; not of [the] Law, as if it pointed particularly to the Law of Moses,
which is sometimes called the Law, in Contradistinction to that Grace and Truth
which came by Jesus Christ: but only of Law, indefinitely and in general; or '
from Law, from a Law, from any Law,' that God has given Men for a Rule, or
established Measure of right Action. Righteousness indeed is a practical
Conformity to the Law or Rule one is under: and so the Apostle by his own
Righteousness intends his Actions of Conformity to God's Law, the Rule of his
Obedience, whatever it was. Now, it could not be the Levitical Law; for that
was abolished by the Death of Christ, and the Apostle had long lived in the
entire Neglect of that, nor ever expected to be recalled to the Observance of
that. It must therefore mean the Gospel-Law, in its moral Precepts and positive
Institutions, the only standing revealed Rule, and the Law which he was now
under a professed Subjection to. Consequently, when he here speaks of his own
Righteousness of Law, he intends his personal Gospel-Righteousness, or his
Works of Righteousness in Obedience to the Gospel-Rule, as well internal, as
external. Surely he cannot mean any bare external Righteousness of his own, as
the Papists pretend. For as he now had an inward Principle of Righteousness,
which he infinitely preferred to any mere outward Practice; so he well knew,
that God's Law was a Rule to his inward, as well as outward Man; prescribing to
the Heart and Conscience within, the Secrets of which God only is privy to, and
not only to the visible Conversation and Action among Men. He knew therefore,
that only an outward Appearance of Righteousness in the Sight of Men was not
the Righteousness of Law, which properly is a Righteousness in the Sight of
GOD. The Apostle must then, in the Renunciation which he now made of his own
Righteousness, have Respect to a Righteousness which was in some Measure
conformable to Law, internal and real, not merely external and apparent.
Whatever Righteousness was now (subjectively) his own, whether inward or
outward, he sacrifices all, that he might win Christ; he repudiates the whole
from being the Matter of his Justification, and trusts in nothing that is his
own to recommend him to the Divine Mercy.

And this Construction of the Text has sometimes been defended by alleging
parallel Scriptures, where the Expression, my or our Righteousness, must
necessarily design a real Righteousness; not consisting barely in Externals,
but including a Degree of inward Conformity and sincere Obedience to the Law of
God. Here Protestants have generally instanced in Daniel's Prayer (Chap. 9.18.)
and in Isaiah's Prayer (Chap. 64.6.) in particular, as parallel Places; where
the Servants of God, in like Language of Renunciation with that of the Apostle
Paul, use the Expression, Our Righteousnesses, and most evidently intend real
Righteousnesses, and not the outward Superficies or Semblance only of
Obedience, a mere Sceleton of Righteousness, without any Thing of inward
Substance and Vitality. But it means some Degree of that which is elsewhere
described the Righteousness of God's Testimonies, and is sometimes called true
Holiness; which ever implies inward, as well as outward, Conformity to the
Divine Rule of Obedience.

The PAPIST BELLARM. de Justif. p. 90 96, and p. 176, 177.
indeed thinks personal Holiness to be intended by the Righteousness of Faith;
which he supposes to mean, not any extrinsick, relative, imputed Righteousness
of another, but an intrinsic, qualitative, and moral Righteousness of our own;
called the Righteousness of Faith, because Faith is the vital Root or
Principle, from whence our sincere Obedience springs: and this he imagines to
be called the Righteousness of GOD, because God is the prime Efficient of it,
because it is an Image of his Righteousness, and because he accepts it for our
Justification -- But PROTESTANTS answer to this, that the Manner of Expression
used by the Apostle here, necessarily carry's it to a different Sense. He does
not say, the Righteousness which IS Faith, or which is the Obedience of Faith;
but that which is THROUGH Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God BY
Faith. Phrases never made Use of by this Apostle in his Writings, nor any where
else in Scripture, to describe our own inherent Righteousness; as if Faith
itself, or the Fruits of Faith produced in us, were the very Righteousness,
that is the Matter or objective Reason of our Justification before God: but
always to point out the Righteousness of CHRIST (not his absolute, but his
respective, dispensative Righteousness) as the Object which Faith eyes and
receives, and centres its Expectations in, for obtaining Mercy. The Scriptures
frequently mention the Righteousness which is of God, the Righteousness which
is through Faith, but ever with a plain Reference to a Righteousness foreign or
extrinsecal to us; the Righteousness of another, and not that which is in our
selves; an imputed, and not an inherent Righteousness: which two
Righteousnesses the Apostle puts in Contradistinction to one another here and
often elsewhere. Whereas, the Popish Gloss on the Text destroys one of his
Ideas, and confounds Justification with Sanctification, which are two Things
very different in their Nature, have a very distant Situation in the Scheme of
Redemption, and between which accordingly the Apostle always preserves a wide
Distinction, in his Discourses upon them.

It has been further remarked by Protestant Writers, that there is a beautiful
Gradation in the Apostle's Speech, of which our Text is a Part; that it is
evidently progressive, not in the Tenses only, but the Contents of it. None
will deny, he advances from the past Time to the present: and PROTESTANTS hold,
that his own Righteousness of Law, which he renounces in our Text, means that
which he had at the Time of his writing this Epistle; a Christian therefore,
and not a Jewish Righteousness; and in the Renunciation he here makes, they
suppose him, as by the whole Tenor of his Language he manifestly respects a
future Time, to have a tacit Reference to the Day of Judgment.

To this the PAPIST answers Ibid. p. 96, and 413.
, That it is but puerile, or weak and impertinent, to argue from the Apostle's
varying the Tense; as if he must needs speak of diverse Things, because he
speaks in diverse Tenses! When the Truth is, that Word (ARBITROR, or I account)
respects not his present Works, but only his present Judgment concerning Works
past, and done by him while of the Jews Religion. It Is strange, how ready these
Heretics [meaning the Reformers] are with their Blasphemies, on the slightest
or no Occasion.

To which the PROTESTANT replies, that it is puerile Weakness indeed, to mistake
the main Drift of an Argument, or to answer it with mere Quibble and Evasion,
or with Calumny, as is done here. For the Force of our Argument does not lie so
much in the Apostle's changing the Tense, in our Text, when renouncing his own
Righteousness, but in his changing the whole Form of Expression, and speaking
here at the present Time in Relation to some future Time; which evidently
imports a Renunciation of his present Righteousness. -- For, not contenting
himself with having before said (ver. 7.) What Things were Gain to me, those I
HAVE counted Loss for Christ, he proceeds from the past to the present Time,
and rising in his Views, he expresses more than he had already, saying (ver. 8,
and 9.) Yea doubtless and I DO count ALL Things (whether past, or present) but
Loss, -- and DO count them but Dung, THAT I MAY (hereafter) win Christ and he
found in him, not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law; or, as I
think (the like Phrase being so used elsewhere) it might be read, not having
for my Righteousness that which is of Law. -- Now to suppose, as the PAPIST
does, that the Apostle is here only asserting his resolute Adherence to a
former Judgment he had made, at his Conversion from Judaism to Christianity,
and so but repeating in the present Tense that very same Declaration which he
had already expressed sufficiently in the past Tense; This, says the
PROTESTANT, is very much to lessen, if not destroy the Beauty and Energy of his
Speech, to detract from the Propriety and Emphasis of his Terms of
Amplification, to confound his manifestly different Ideas, to sink the Meaning
and deaden the Spirit of the whole, and turn the Passage in our Text
particularly into little better than an empty and trifling Tautology; when yet,
in the Protestant View and Application of it, if appears very animated and
striking, truly rich in Sense and new in its Contents. -- Besides, as the
Apostle here, by the whole Aspect of his Language, undoubtedly had in his Eye
the future eternal Judgment and final Result of Things, it carry's the Face of
extreme Absurdity, to suppose him, after so long a Course of Works of
Righteousness, in Character of a Christian and in Quality of an Apostle of
Christ, expressing now with so much Solemnity his Desire that he might not go
out of the World a mere Jew, and renouncing only the Hope of his being found at
last in his Pharisaical Righteousness! After so many Years of Gospel-Profession
and Ministry, how unreasonable does it look, to suppose, that when he is
representing to his Christian Friends the present Ground of his Trust for
Justification before God, what Righteousness it now is or is not bottomed upon,
he should in the renunciative Part of his Declaration recur to an antiquated
Pretension, a mere imaginary Jewish Righteousness, which he had long ago
relinquished; or at most, only speak of a mere external Righteousness under the
Gospel? Truly, if it be not a Gospel-Righteousness, inherent and real, that he
means here by his Righteousness of Law, it seems, he can have no rational
consistent Meaning whatever. If this be not what he now calls his own, then we
must suppose him here only to renounce that which is (...) ^^ghteousness at
all, but is at best only a lifeless Image, falsely ^^^^^ing the Name. For, if
he had now had nothing beyond a (...) external Conformity to the Christian
Institution, his Religion (...) still as vain, as when a Jewish Zealot; his
Righteousness had scarce exceeded the Righteousness of Saul the Pharisee, and
all his seeming Righteousness had indeed been but a plausible Cover of real
Unrighteousness. Whereas, in Fact, he now was and for a great while had been a
sincere Christian and a distinguished Minister of JESUS: yet nevertheless he
even now declares, after a long Series of upright and eminent Profession and
Practice, as well as when he first commenced a Believer, that he utterly
distrusts every Thing of his own, in point of Worthiness therein, to procure
him Favor with his righteous Judge; that he still renounces all Pretension to
any such inherent Righteousness, as might embolden him to present himself, with
a Claim on that Score alone to be reputed just and unblameable in Holiness,
before the Judgment Seat of God, which now he has in Prospect. But going out of
himself, and looking beyond his own Righteousness, he casts his Eye to JESUS,
and asserts his Dependence on him to secure his final Happiness: declaring he
desires to be found in Him, that God might view him in and through the blessed
Mediator, the Lord his Righteousness, and not view him as he is in himself, at
present an imperfect, impotent, wretched Man (as he elsewhere describes his
Case) by reason of Sin dwelling in him, and to continue such till the Period of
his disciplinary State; nor consider him merely in Character of a moral Agent
and accountable Creature, to be dealt with on the Foot of his own Obedience,
and judged in Strictness according to Law, to be tried according to the
Exactness of the moral Precepts even of the Gospel-Revelation, and to have his
own inherent Righteousness, that which is of Law (and not that which is of God
by Imputation) regarded as the Rule and Reason of the Judgment to be passed
upon him. No, he would not for a World, for a thousand Worlds, have the just
and almighty Judge descend from Heaven, in flaming Fire, to take Vengeance on
them that obey not the Gospel, and find him with no better Righteousness upon
him, than his own sublimest moral Righteousness, to recommend him to Mercy in
that tremendous Day. For, as he was now conscious of his being not already
perfect, nor indeed expected ever to attain it while in this mortal State, so
he well knew that an imperfect Righteousness, such as his own, could never
abide the Test of severe Law, could never bear a critical Scrutiny by the exact
Rule of Morality laid down in the Gospel; and therefore that he could not stand
in the Judgment, if tried according to the Strictness of his moral Obligations,
as a Man (...) Christian. Now, says the Protestant, if this was the Case (...)
great (...) Paul himself, what Presumption and Folly m^^^ ^t be in any of
inferior moral Seize, to look for Justification before God in Virtue of
their own Righteousness?

Let vainglorious PAPISTS delude and flatter themselves with the pleasing Idea
of a present Perfection in their own Righteousness, an absolute Justice in
themselves (as they speak) free from all Infection of Sin, clear of all
polluting Defects, constituting them sufficiently righteous before God, in the
judiciary Sense, making them amiable and acceptable in his Sight, and leaving
no Occasion for a superadded imputed Righteousness.! -- This imaginary
Perfection and Sufficiency of inherent Righteousness the REFORMERS and their
Followers have ever exploded, as an idle Dream, a Pelagian Whimsy, a drunken
Fancy (as Bp ABBOT speaks Answ. to Dr. BISHOP'S Epis. p. 138, 139. and Def.
Ref. Cath. p. 418, 583, 585, 622.
) contrary to Experience, contrary to Conscience, contrary to our own
Confessions to God, and contrary to the Word of God. -- There Is none but
unperfect Perfection here (says he; meaning an Universality of Graces, but all
delinquent in their Degree of Vigor and Activity, and Manner of Expression)
None but what leaves us in Case to be called evil: of common and original
Uncleanness there is That yet sticking, for which Christ may say to us, as he
did to his Apostles, YE being EVIL. To affirm Man now to be in himself just and
clean in the Sight of God, is to justle CHRIST out of his Place, who is the
Lord our Righteousness. It is to defeat the Work of GOD, by whom he is made
unto us Righteousness. -- Not but that we also by him do work Righteousness,
according to the Grace given us; but this Righteousness is, through our
Corruption and Frailty, too weak and base, to stand before God, for us to be
saved thereby. -- But Faith is our Comfort; -- that as Jacob received the
Blessing and Inheritance in the Apparel of Esau, his elder Brother, to whom the
same did properly belong, so we receive the Blessing of God, and are accepted
unto eternal Life, in the Garment of the Righteousness of CHRIST, by Faith in
him. -- It Is our Safety, that this overshadoweth the Error of our Works, that
this covers our Imperfections, which disgrace and blemish all our
Righteousness. What have we to cover and hide the same, but the Fleece of the
Merit of Jesus Christ?

Well therefore might the Apostle (and Protestants after his Example) so
ardently breathe after CHRIST, and express his earnest Expectation and Desire
to be found in Him, united to him, interested in him, possessed of him, covered
with him, hid in his Wounds, invested with the "Purple Garment of Redemption by
his Blood," and enwrapped in that long, large and rich Cloak of the Redeemer's
Righteousness, through Faith in him. -- In Consequence, well might the Apostle
(and we after him) comparatively despise all his own best Attire of inherent
Righteousness, in Respect of that superlatively excellent Robe of imputed
Righteousness, and with Relation to that great Concern of his obtaining Mercy
in the great Day. Well might he desire to be found, at that Day, not having for
his Righteousness that which is of Law; this being in strict Law-Consideration
but imperfect, and on a Trial by Law utterly insufficient to justify him.
Though truly valuable in the Apostle's (and so in the Protestant's) Judgment,
for it is Divine Original, for its excellent Nature, and for its Usefulness to
its proper Ends, and although highly esteemed as a Part of the Salvation which is
by Christ, as one of the precious Benefits of his Purchase, and an essential
Requisite to future Happiness in the actual Possession and full Enjoyment of
him; yet this personal Righteousness being at present but imperfectly attained
by the inspired Apostle himself, he dares not confide in it for a safe
Appearing before the dread Tribunal of infinite Justice, but desires and hopes
to be found under a more sure and effectual Covert. Not that he wished to be
uncloathed, in point of Sanctification; but only to be found clothed upon, with
a superior and more effectual Righteousness than his own, in Point of
Justification.

He well knew both sanctifying Righteousness and justifying Righteousness to be
in their several Places, and for their several Purposes, of infinite
Importance; the former to give him a Meetness, and the latter, to give him a
Title to be a Partaker of the heavenly Inheritance. While therefore he follows
after Holiness, as of fundamental moral Obligation, and in the Nature of Things
a requisite Preparative for possessing and enjoying the Inheritance; yet
nevertheless, as knowing his present Seize to be very defective, and
consequently in the Reason of Things impossible to be his justifying
Righteousness before God, he founds no Claim of Right upon it, in Virtue of
it is own Worth, but in this View renounces it altogether. He desires, he may not
be found having for his Righteousness that which is of Law, his own moral
Righteousness only, to guard and recommend him at the awful Day he has in
Prospect; but that he might be found having on him a more sufficient and
complete Armor of Righteousness, even that which is by Faith, the only
effectual Cover to his Sins, and the only sure Defensative from the Wrath to
come. To this final Issue of Things, the Apostle is generally though it to have
pointed his Eye, in the Words before us. And under such a Prospect, he has been
though it by Protestants to speak so distrustfully and disparagingly of his own
imperfect Righteousness; applying to it even the depreciating Name of Dung, as
being unworthy the Character of a justifying Righteousness, and of no
Sufficiency in it self to entitle him to the special Mercy of God.

Tho indeed his thus under-valuing it has also been sometimes accounted for in
another Way; by supposing, he might reasonably disparage it as viewed in a
comparative Light. He might deservedly reproach his own Righteousness, as being
but Dung and Filth, in Comparison of the supreme and infinite Righteousness of
GOD: since we read, There is none holy as the Lord; yea it is written, There is
none good, but one, that is GOD. Behold, the Heavens are not clean in his
Sight: the brightest Star above is eclipsed by his superior Glory, and appears
but as a Lump of Dung and Impurity. -- So be might justly call it by this
disgracing Name, in Compare with the immaculate and indefective Obedience of
the Man JESUS, that holy and just One. -- In a Word, (to omit other
Comparisons) he might, by Reason of the Pollutions cleaving to his purest
Gospel-Righteousness, while in this World of Imperfection, represent it under
so derogatory an Emblem, in Respect of the Glory to be revealed in him, and in
Compare with the supereminent Holiness and sinless Perfection of Saints in the
Resurrection-State. Hence that Observation of AUSTIN, a celebrated Father Cited
by Bp ABBOT, ubi supra, p. 584, 585.
( In Comparatione Resurrectionis illius, Stercus est tota ista Vita quam
gerimus, etc.) That all the Life which we live here, i. e. all the
Righteousness of this Life, is but Dung in Comparison of the Resurrection; that
if a Man measure himself, what he is now and what he shall be then, he will
find This which now is, to be but Loss and Dung in Comparison of That. I
suppose, as Austin here plainly alludes to our Text, he might naturally enough
be led into this Illustration upon it by some remarkable Passages in the
following Context; where the Apostle throws a comparative Slight on all his
past and present moral Seize, and declares, that forgetting every Thing
behind, he only looks forward, pressing toward the Mark and breathing after
the Perfection and Glory he hoped for at the Resurrection of the Just. -- Now,
taking the Text in any such comparative Light, where is the Impudence of
Protestants, where the Blasphemy, or where the Absurdity they are taxed with by
their Adversaries, for understanding and applying the Apostle's Words as spoken
of his real Christian Righteousness!

But still the POPISH Writers, I find, renew the Charge upon us, prosecute it
in sundry Particulars, and urge it with some new Enforcements: which it may be
worth while to take a distinct Consideration of, tho as briefly as I well can.
-- Let it be observed,

(1.) The forementioned Popish Priest Dr. BISHOP'S most plausible Plea is,
Cited by Bp ABBOT, Def. Ref. Cath. p. 400.
That inherent Righteousness, being GOD'S Gift, is of it self pure, and has
sufficient Virtue in it self to the End for which it is given, the making a Man
righteous. -- However, to this the PROTESTANT makes Reply; that this End, taken
in its moral View, is but imperfectly attained at present, by the largest
Partaker of the Gift of sanctifying Grace: and for that Reason, it is
impossible, inherent Righteousness should reach this End, taken in it is
forensick or relative Notion; but in this View it is secured to us only by an
imputed Righteousness, even that which is of GOD through Faith. It is this, that
the Apostle intends in the Place alluded to, where he mentions the Gift of
Righteousness; and he describes it, the Gift by Grace, which is by one Man,
Jesus Christ. (Romans 5.) He calls it the Righteousness of ONE, the Obedience of
ONE: and informs us, that it is by this we obtain Justification of Life, by this
we are made righteous, i. e. in the forensick or relative Sense. In this
Law-Sense our own Obedience can never constitute us righteous before God;
because it is in it self at best but an imperfect Conformity to the Rule of
Righteousness, and is attended with a depraving Mixture of Unrighteousness, and
positive Transgressions of the Law. Bp ABBOT observes, concerning inherent
Righteousness, Ubi supra, p. 403, 404.
Though it be pure, of it self, and in the Work of GOD, yet it is soiled in the
Puddles of our Corruption, and receives a Blemish by our crooked and untoward
using of it; and is neither given to that End, nor is sufficient, to yield us
Justification in the Sight of GOD. -- And to mention some correspondent
Observations of another excellent Divine, Mr. A. BURGESS, on Original Sin, p.
11, 495.499. and on Justification, Part 2d. p. 233, 234* and p. 172.
By Reason of the Law of Sin, which is always moving anddefiling, Evil is mixed
with all the Good we do, insomuch that there would be a Woe and a Curse to all
our gracious Acts, if strictly examined. -- There Is Dross and Sin in every holy
Duty, insomuch that the Apostle cries out of himself, O wretched Man that I am!
-- The Flesh soils and debases our holiest Duties: it is as Mud cast into a pure
Stream, or Poison mingled with Wine. -- Every Duty of ours needs the Mercy of
God to forgive it is Imperfections. -- God is not only angry with gross Sins,
but displeased at the imperfect [Exercise of the] Graces of his People. (Rev.
3.2.) -- For this they are subject to diverse Chastisements. And hence they
groan under their Imperfections. -- Hereby the godly Man is made to go out of
all his Graces and his Duties [in Point of Dependence upon 'em for
Justification] and calls his very Righteousness a menstruous Rag. -- So the
Prophet Isaiah of old complained (Chap. 64.6.) All our Righteousnesses are as
filthy Rags. Not only their Unrighteousnesses, but their very Righteousnesses
were as filthy Rags. -- Because of the Pollution cleaving to our best Duties it
is, that Paul judges them Dung and Dross, comparatively to Christ's
Righteousness, and in Reference to Justification. Phil. 3.8. -- This may
suffice for Answer to the first Objection.

Cardinal BELLARMINE advance some others more directly levelled against the
Protestant Opinion upon our Text; and repeatedly charging it with Blasphemy, as
well as Absurdity and incredible Pride, he urges the Accusation with Vehemence
and expostulates the Case, in a Variety of plausible, but weak Pleadings and
abusive Insinuations; which I shall now consider. The Objection he begins with
is indeed something coincident with that already replied to: yet being set in a
little different Light, I shall not pass it, but allow it a distinct
Consideration.

Let it then be observed,

(2.) It Is objected, that this very Apostle, who is supposed in our Text to
renounce his evangelical Works of Righteousness, does elsewhere dignify and
applaud such Works, by intitling them the Fruit of the SPIRIT: and therefore he
cannot rationally be supposed to stigmatize the very same Works with the
dishonorable Name of Dung; but it must be blasphemous, to make such a
Supposition. The CARDINAL'S own Words are, Quanta, quoeso, Blasphemia, etc. i.
e. How great, I beseech you, is the Blasphemy, to call by the Name of DUNG,
those very Works, springing from Faith and the Grace of God, which this same
Apostle himself ( Gal. 5.) calls the Fruits of the SPIRIT! Are then the Fruits
of the Spirit indeed DUNG! ( de Justif. p. 96.)

To this the Protestant makes Answer; It Is a vain and impotent Insult, that has
no Foundation to support it, but mere Mistake or wilful Misrepresentation of
our Opinion. For as a worthy Writer, of the Church of Scotland BROUN, Life of
Justif. p 460, 461.
, has noted, what we hold is only to this Purpose: Tho our personal
Righteousness be good, yet in the Matter of Justification before God we must
lay it aside, and betake our selves solely to the Righteousness of CHRIST, and
seek to be found in him alone. To account our own Righteousness, consisting in
our Obedience to the Law, to be DUNG, as Paul did, in the Business of
Justification, is all that we plead for. And as a judicious Divine of our own
observes WILLARD, Brief Disc. of Justif. p. 15, 66. 68.
; Every true Believer does sincerely desire to be found in a Righteousness
which is according to the Law of GOD, and to be full of good Works; he would be
sanctified throughout, perfectly conformed to God's Holy Will, he makes it his
Study every Day to live to God, and desires to (...) found so doing when he
shall be summoned to appear before h^^ Judge: But he has no Mind to be found
in it as his Trust, his Reliance, that which he would be tried by, and stand or
fall according as it shall be found. Christ does by his Spirit infuse an
Holiness and Righteousness into his People, yet this is not the Thing we are
justified by or for: for that which is imperfect, tho it may be acceptable in a
Way of Grace and Pity, yet it cannot justify in a Way of Law and Equity. The
Sentence therefore of Justification must needs proceed from a Righteousness
which we never performed. -- The Apostle in our Text and Context is treating of
Justification; and in Respect of that, he resolutely despises every Thing of
his own. -- From that (says a valuable Lay-Writer E. POLHILL, Esquire Answ. to Dr.
Sherlock. p. 360, -- 363.
) he removes all Things, but CHRIST and his Righteousness, not admitting his
own Graces to be the Matter of it. Even our inherent Graces (how precious
soever in Sanctification) must not assume the royal Seat of CHRIST and his
Righteousness: They must not be our very Righteousness in Justification.
BELLARMINE indeed here cries out, Quanta, quoeso, Blasphemia est! How great is
this Blasphemy, to call good Works, done from the Faith and Grace of Christ, no
better than Dung! But PARAEUS answers him very well, that they are not so
called absolutely in themselves, but comparatively to the Righteousness of
CHRIST: Nefas enim ducit in ullis Operibus Fiduciam Justificationis ponere
coram Deo. In the Matter of Justification the whole Church call her
Righteousness a filthy Rag: St. Paul will not there know his own inherent
Graces, no more than Job would know his own Soul. -- (Job 9.21,) -- Further,
says Dr. BARLOW, a Bishop of the Church of England LET. of Justif. p 164, 167.
When it is objected, that St. Paul would not (nor truly could) call his own
inherent Righteousness, or evangelical Obedience, Loss and Dung; the Answer is
easy and evident. For, 1. That his own Righteousness (of which he speaks)
considered absolutely, and in it self, neither truly could nor was (by him) so
called. But, 2. As the Greek Scholiasts observe (and it is evident by the Text)
he counts those Things he speaks of, Loss and Dung, (...) and comparatively; in
Relation and Comparison to our blessed Savior and his Righteousness. His
Meaning is not, that he desired to want or lose his inherent Righteousness; but
only not to have it, to that End and Purpose, to trust in it, and rely upon it,
for his Justification before God.

Thus, it appears, that it is only in some such limited Sense, the Protestants
suppose the ignominious Name of Dung applied by the Apostle to his own
Gospel-Righteousness: and not simply, or in an absolute and indefinite Manner,
as our Popish Adversaries abusively represent our Construction of the Text, in
order to fasten upon us the Imputation of Blasphemy. But surely it cannot be
blaspheming the HOLY SPIRIT, to follow his own Dictates in the inspired
Scriptures, which every where teach us the Imperfection of the Saint's Graces
and Works, exclude them from being the Matter of our justifying Righteousness,
and proclaim it the sole ^^^rogative of CHRIST'S Righteousness, by Grace
imputed and by Faith received, to effect Justification of Life. What Blasphemy
can it be, to say, that the Graces of the SPIRIT are ineffectual to an End,
which he himself declares them never designed for? Or, Where is the Blasphemy
of saying, that the Wisdom of God having seen fit, the Sanctification of the
Spirit should be incomplete in the present Life, therefore No mere Man since
the Fall is able in this Life perfectly to keep the Commandments of God, but
daily does break them in Though It, Word, and Deed? That our very Exercises of
Grace are tinctured by the remaining Corruption of our Nature, and all our
Works carry the debasing Mark of human Frailty and Imperfection? "For (as Bp
ABBOT well observes DEF. Ref. Cath. p. 706.
) although in their Original, which is the SPIRIT of GOD, they be pure and clean,
yet as Water, though clear in the Fountain, gathers Uncleanness from the
Channel wherein it runs, so the Works of Grace wrought in us" [not the
immediate Infusions of the Spirit, or the seminal Principles of Grace
themselves, considered abstractly, but only taken together with their recipient
Subject, and considered as existing and operating within us] "do receive some
Taint of the Corruption of our Nature, through which they pass."

Our Graces and Virtues are indeed the FRUIT of the Spirit: but then it is to
be observed, neither are they the very SPIRIT himself; nor is his Influence, in
the Production and Actuation of them, at all derogated from, by applying this
Name of Reproach in our Text to the inherent Righteousness of Saints. See Mr.
BURGESS of Justif. Part II. p. 172.
For, though he is the prime Efficient, by implanting, preserving, exciting and
assisting the Principles of Grace and Virtue in us; yet he is not the immediate
formal Agent, in the Exertment and Exercise of them. Though we are called the
Temple of the Holy Ghost, and it is he gives us to believe, to repent, and
obey; nevertheless there being no such Unity of Persons between Him and us, as
that He should be said to perform these very Actions himself, it must therefore
be only We that do them, under his special Influence. And however pure, however
perfect the Principles of Operation, as infused by the Divine Sanctifier, yet
as they actually exist and exert themselves in the human Subject, they are but
imperfect in their Degree of Vigor, and defective in their Manner of acting,
through the Resistance of the Flesh; and this "breathes some distasteful Quality
upon our very best and purest Works, for which we have Need to ask Pardon at
God's Hands." It Is a known and approved Maxim in the Schools, Quicquid
recipitur, recipitur ad Modum Recipientis. So the Grace of the Spirit received
by us, is only (as Bp HALL has expressed it) according to the Model of our weak
Receipt; and our Exertments of Grace are but according to the inferior Manner
of human Action, in this imperfect State of our lapsed Nature: so that "all our
Works savor of our earthly Vessels." But we look for Perfection in the coming
World. -- These Considerations, I think, sufficiently vindicate the Protestant
Sense and Improvement of our Text, from the Imputation of Blasphemy.

I shall but add here: as unwilling as I am to make Use of Retorsion in an
Argument of this Nature, yet I cannot forbear mentioning how free some of the
old Reformers were to return this odious Crimination, in their Controversies
with the PAPISTS: whose Doctrine of Justification by inherent Grace, they
charge with Blasphemy, as it strikes at the sacred Prerogative of CHRIST to be
our Righteousness, and thrusts him out of one of the most eminent Characters of
Honor he sustains, in the Gospel-Plan of Redemption. Thus, Dr. WILLET, that
ancient and famous Defender of the Reformation, didn't scruple to drop such
Reflections as these. Synop. Pap. p. 580, and 1273.
Bellarmine (says he) denies, that we are justified formally by the
Righteousness of CHRIST, but asserts it to be by our own Righteousness inherent
in us. This is a great Blasphemy, and contrary to the Apostle, Phil. 3.9. --
And again, To say, that a Man by working well, even of the Grace and Gift of
God, is justified, is to make the Death of CHRIST needless and in vain. What
greater Blasphemy, than this!

(3.) The PAPIST BELL de Just. p. ^^.
still prosecuting his Argument, objects; How does the blessed Apostle glory,
saying (2 Timothy 4.) I have fought the good Fight, I have finished the Course, I
have kept the Faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown, etc. But ought
so great an Apostle to glory thus of that which is DUNG!

True, replies the PROTESTANT, he reflects with a sacred Pleasure on these
Things in his past Experience and Practice: but we must expound what he says
here, in a just Consistence with what he has said elsewhere; particularly in
Gal. 2.20, 21. I am crucified with Christ: Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but
Christ lives in me; and the Life which I now live in the Flesh, I live by the
Faith of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. I do not
frustrate the Grace of God: for if Righteousness come by the Law, then Christ
is dead in vain. From this we learn, that as Faith in CHRIST was his governing
Principle, so the Hope of Righteousness, now in his View, was from CHRIST, and
not from the Law. Had he fought the good Fight? It must be remembered, it was
the good Fight of FAITH. Had he finished the Course? It must also be
remembered, he ran the Race set before him, looking unto JESUS, the Author and
Finisher of his FAITH. Had he kept the Faith? This may intend the internal
Principle, as well as the external Doctrine, so denominated. Had he a Crown in
View? He expected it as the End of his FAITH, whereby he had believed unto
Righteousness, and so to everlasting Life. -- The Apostle was now in the high
Exercise of that Faith, by which the Just do live, both in a relative and
qualitative Respect, and which God has appointed the special Medium in the Hand
of the Spirit for the Application of Redemption, that no Flesh should glory in
his Presence. As it is written, That God might be just, and the Justifier of
him which believes in Jesus. Where is Boasting then? It is excluded. By what
Law? That of Works? Nay, but by the Law of Faith. The Christian therefore is to
know none but the Triumphs of Faith: and these are but humble and self-abasing
Triumphs, Triumphs in CHRIST, and not in our selves. Faith is in its Nature a
self-denying Grace, powerfully counter-acting a self-righteous Spirit in every
Form of its Appearance, suppressing every self-applauding Thought, and
disposing us to have our Eyes ever toward the Lord, beholding the Lamb of God.
looking for the Mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal Life: -- This very
Apostle, though so vastly excelling in Gifts, Graces, and holy Services, yet was
sensible he had not whereof to glory before God, any more than Abraham: and
under the Influence of Faith, he did but glory in the Lord; not in himself, not
in his intellectual Endowments, not in his moral Seize. God forbid (says
he) that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ! Christ and
his Obedience unto the Death was the Object of his Dependence and the Matter of
his Glorying. In respect of this, he undervalu'd and renounced every Thing of
his own. Such was his Humility, he named himself LESS than the LEAST of all
Saints. Could he reduce himself lower! Nay, he expressly denominates himself
NOTHING! But how is this? It cannot be understood, he is so simply and
absolutely; but comparatively and in some respective Sense. It must mean, he is
NOTHING in point of righteous Self, NOTHING in point of Rivalship with Christ,
NOTHING in Comparison of Christ, NOTHING in himself abstractedly from Christ,
who is his Righteousness and Strength and Life and All. -- Now might he not as
consistently account his own Righteousness, that which is of Law, to be Dung,
as account himself to be Nothing? For was he not in Fact Something, in the
Sense of the Word as he uses it sometimes? Was he not indeed a Man in Christ,
an Apostle of Christ, an eminent Image of the Son of God, filled with the
Spirit, enriched with Divine Knowledge, and abounding in every good Work? How
then could he pronounce himself NOTHING? Why, just in the same Sense, with the
same View, and from the same Spirit and Principle, as he calls his own
Righteousness by the Name of Dung. Both Expressions conspire to illustrate and
verify his chosen Motto, By GRACE through FAITH.

But now,

(4.) The PAPIST (alluding still to 2 Timothy 4.12.) further expostulates, What
Crown of Righteousness is owing to that which is DUNG! Or who is that righteous
Judge, which condescends to Crown that which is DUNG!

Upon this the PROTESTANT observes, that eternal Life is called a Crown,
perhaps chiefly in Allusion to the ancient Custom of crowning Victors with
Garlands at the End of a Race, or Encounter: and it is called a Crown of
Righteousness, not primarily in Respect of our own Righteousness of Law, but of
that which is of God by Faith. Vid. ABBOT'S Def. Ref. Cath. p. 716.
In a Sense indeed Men's personal Righteousness is crowned; but herein God only
crowns his own Gift: and in Opposition to all Desert on Man's Part, it is
absolutely a Crown of sovereign Grace and Mercy; not of Righteousness, as due
to the Creature for his Service, which is always defective, and at best is but
his Duty, in Virtue whereof therefore he can challenge no Reward at the Hands
of his righteous Judge. Nevertheless God crowns the Believer, in Consideration
of CHRIST'S Righteousness upon him, and with a View to the gracious Promise,
founded on that Righteousness and embraced by Faith. God is a Debtor to no Man,
but the Man JESUS (God incarnate) and to Nothing but his own free Promise made
for his Sake. In Respect of Him and the Promise in Him, God is just and
faithful, while yet he freely by his Grace pardons, justifies and saves the Man
to whom he imputes Righteousness without Works. He preserves unspotted the
Character of a righteous Judge, while in his Loving Kindness and Mercy he
stoops to crown such as have no Demand upon him on the Score of their personal
Worthiness, or in Virtue of their own Works of Righteousness, as justifying
them in his Sight. But while they renounce their own Righteousness as Dung, in
Point of Justification or a Title to saving Mercy, he makes them accepted in
the Beloved; and in Justice to his Merits on their Behalf, he vouchsafes to
them the Crown of Life. -- I must here again remind you, that when the Apostle
represents his own Righteousness as Dung, he does not call it such absolutely
and simply, but only comparatively to Christ's Righteousness, and respectively
to the Case of Justification before God, which is the Source of all Right and
Title to eternal Salvation. He does but give it this Name in some such View as
he styles himself Nothing: And it might as reasonably be objected, Who is that
righteous or that wise Judge, which deigns to crown that which is NOTHING.! --
Truly it is Christ-exalting Grace which bestows, and Self-annihilating Faith
which receives the Crown of Righteousness. -- However the Saint's inherent
Righteousness may be the Evidence of his Right, and the Measure of his Reward;
yet the Reason of the Reward and the Foundation of the Right is CHRIST'S
Righteousness, divinely imputed and by Faith received. God is the righteous
Judge, and he will assert his Character, will display the Glory of his Name,
both in real Justification here, and in declarative Justification hereafter;
both in pardoning now, and crowning in the End, such as only deserve Punishment
at the Hand of his Justice. In doing both, he still magnifies his Law,
preserves it is Authority and Dignity, secures it is Design, and lets not an Iota
of it fall to the Ground. But how can this be, unless he acts with a View to an
absolute Law-fulfilling Righteousness? Hence Dr. WILLET observes, Synops. p.
986.
God crowns the Works of his Saints, not for the Worthiness of them, which
indeed are but Dung, in Respect of the excellent Reward: but we, with our
Works, are crowned for the Worthiness of CHRIST. Romans 6.23. -- Can that which
in Comparison is but Dross and Dung (says Bp ABBOT Def. R. C. p. 585.
) be truly said to deserve the Righteousness of Heaven?" -- But says Bp HALL
His Works, p. 807.
, If our heavenly Father smell upon our Backs the Savor of our elder Brother's
Robes, we cannot depart from him unblessed. -- The humble Protestant agreably
expects the heavenly Crown as a Crown of Righteousness, with Respect to the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith; but as a mere Gift of sovereign Mercy,
in Relation to his own Deserts. Hence that humble Speech of the last mentioned
Divine, His Old Religion, p. 50.
We are not so Proud, that we should scorn (with the Papist) to expect Heaven
as a poor Man does an Alms: Rather, according to St. Austin's Charge, Non sit
Caput turgidum, etc. (Let not the Head be swelled with Pride, that it may
receive a Crown) we do with all Humility and Self dejection look up to the
bountiful Hand of that GOD, who crowns in Mercy.

(5.) The PAPIST yet further objects, And then what Thanks do we owe to GOD,
for creating us in Christ Jesus unto good Works, if these are nothing else but
DUNG?

To which the PROTESTANT replies: Truly infinite Thanks are due to the blessed
God for his renewing Grace, from such as are the happy Subjects of it: and yet,
in perfect Consistency with this, such ought to and will preserve a humble
Opinion both of themselves and their Works. -- However, we demand; Who are they
that ever said, the good Works of the Regenerate are " Nothing else but DUNG?"
Did ever any Protestant drop such an Expression, at least without some proper
Guard or Limitation, to point out an honest and consistent Meaning? Or is this
any just Consequence of the Protestant Opinion, we are debating upon! No, the
Insinuation is abusive, and a wicked Calumny. For we do not say, we do not
think, nor does our Opinion at all infer, that good Works are to be so called
absolutely, in universal and indefinite Terms; but only in a comparative Sense,
and in Respect of a particular End and Use of them. We confess them good and
profitable to Men, and gratefully acknowledge the Grace of God in Christ
toward us in forming and furnishing us to good Works: But still we suppose 'em
not designed of God, nor suited in their own Nature, to answer every valuable
Purpose; and viewed in some certain Positions, we suppose them to have no
Glory, by Reason of the Glory that excels. Being in themselves imperfect,
and intermingled with Sin, we maintain that they are as Dung, in Comparison
with CHRIST'S Righteousness, and in Relation to the noble End This is designed
and adapted for, the recovery of the divine Favor to a perishing Sinner,
setting him right in the Court of Heaven, and securing him against all the
Challenges of God's Law and Justice, to which any the least Sin must otherwise
inevitably expose him. -- We maintain the Necessity and Advantage both of
imputed and inherent Righteousness; and think them both of such Consequence and
Use to us, in their respective Places, as highly to deserve our Esteem, and our
Thanksgivings to God: the latter as constituting our Meetness, the former as
founding our Right, to inherit the Kingdom of God. But now shall it be said, we
despise the one or other of these, the Meetness or the Right to inherit,
because we don't jumble and blend them together in our Doctrine, without
Distinction? Shall it be said, we despise Sanctification, because we don't
confound it with Justification? Or with what Truth can it be said, that we
account inherent Righteousness good for Nothing at all, and of no Importance to
us in the least, merely because we don't own it good for every Purpose, and in
particular deny it is Fitness to the End of our Justification? With what Face of
Truth or Honesty, can it be pretended, that we absolutely despise moral Virtue
as mere Dung, because we say that we are justified by Faith, and not by Works?
Does this annul the Necessity, or destroy all Use and Benefit of real Virtue?
The Eye is not the Hand, nor is fitted to do the Office of the Hand, and
therefore cannot say to it, I have no Need of thee: The Head is not the Foot,
nor is fitted to it is Design, and so cannot say to the Foot, I have no Need of
thee: but yet are they not all of the Body and all of Use? Shall it be said
that, we affirm, The Ear is not of the Body, or is of no Service, because we
say, It is not the Eye, and cannot see? Or that we hold, the smelling Faculty
is of no Benefit, because we say, It is not the Hearing? Or, if we distinguish
between these Things, so different in their Nature and End, and refer each to
its proper Place and Use, shall it be said that we despise or are unthankful
for the one or the other? No, we notwithstanding value both, and are thankful
for both, in each of the Comparisons. So in the present Case, though we
distinguish between Faith and Works, between Justification and Sanctification,
and between Righteousness imputed and inherent; yet we preserve a Value for
both, and are thankful for both, in Respect of their several Ends and Uses. And
hence, although we rate our own defective Obedience as Dung, in Comparison with
the vicarious and meritorious Obedience of CHRIST, and as considered under the
Notion of a justifying Righteousness, which is the whole of our Meaning, and we
suppose was the Apostle's real Meaning; yet this is not in the least
inconsistent with our being truly thankful to God for his Mercy in renewing and
purifying our Hearts by Faith, whereby we are disposed and capacitated to work
Righteousness. No, there is a palpable Agreement between Humility and Gratitude
in this Case; the former by no Means excludes the latter; both these gracious
Tempers of Mind subsist and act with the greatest Harmony and mutual
Subserviency, in the same Subject: and both are the Property and
Characteristics of the regenerate Soul. Where the one or other is wanting, it is
a dark Symptom. In particular without Thankfulness for the Provision of a
better Righteousness than our own, for our Justification, or without that
Humility toward God, which excludes Self-Confidence and Boasting in our own
Righteousness, there is but little Sign of our being the Workmanship of God
created in Christ Jesus unto good Works. -- I call to Mind those apposite
Sayings of a late excellent Divine of our own Dr. C. MATHER, Everl. Gosp. p.
30, 34.
; There Is no regenerate Man, that makes to himself a Righteousness by any
Doings of his own: Regeneration cures him of this Folly, and makes a Man afraid
and ashamed of such foolish Attempts. -- Man (says he) if thou do not count
Loss and Dung to be a Name good enough for the best Thing that ever thou did,
thou art in thy own Righteousness to this Day.

But the PAPIST adds one Reflection more;

(6) In fine, if the good Works of the Faithful are Loss and Dung, then
certainly they ought not to be practiced and adhered to, but shook off and
thrown away.

No, says the PROTESTANT, not by any Means. This is no just Consequence from
our Doctrine: there is no Appearance of Reason for such an Inference. What we
plead for, is their being excluded from all Concernment in Justification of
Life: with regard to this indeed let 'em be put away out of Sight, and treated
with Neglect, in point of Dependence or pleasing Reflection upon them; nay, let
'em be even contemned, as worthless Dung, in Comparison with the Righteousness
of CHRIST, the only reconciling and justifying Righteousness. In respect of
this, the Apostle despised and repudiated every Thing of his own; All went,
that he might win Christ, and be found in Him, not having for his Righteousness
that which is of Law: for he knew, there was no Law in Being, whose
Righteousness could justify a morally imperfect Creature. Indeed the Law Man
was originally placed under, had a Reference and Aptitude to the Design of
Justification: but then it was the Justification of a righteous and innocent,
not an apostate sinful Man; so that upon the Loss of his Innocence, there was a
Change of his Case, in point of Capacity to reach Justification by the Deeds of
the Law. And whatever Degree of moral Righteousness, habitual or actual, any
may recover by the Grace of God, yet it being ever defective, while in this
World, and unequal to the Demands of the Law moral, it is consequently unequal
to the Design of justifying him in the Eye of the Law. Only the Righteousness
of Christ is adequate to the Law-Demand, and satisfactory to Divine Justice:
therefore only this, imputed and received by Faith, is sufficient to justify
the Ungodly. In point of Justification then good Works are by no Means to be
the Object of our Confidence; but the Righteousness of CHRIST alone is to
engross our whole Trust and Regard: Yet this does not in the least argue, that
good Works must be of no Account at all with us, in point of Sanctification.
Though contemptible in one View, may not they be respectable in another? Though not
at all influential to effect one Design, may not they be subservient to another
End? It Is truly absurd to a high Degree, only because we maintain, that our
Righteousness inherent, under the Respect of a justifying Righteousness (a
Respect which it neither is calculated nor intended for) and in Competition
with Righteousness imputed, must have no Consideration with us, to infer, that
therefore moral Virtue is under every other Respect to be of no Value with us,
that good Works are not worthy of our Practice or Pursuit in any Regard: but
only fit Objects of our Contempt, and deserving entirely to be cast out of our
Care and Esteem. No, this is as far from being a genuine Consequence of our
Doctrine, as it is distant from the Spirit and Disposition of a genuine
Protestant. We are not for abandoning, but for cherishing the Love and Practice
of good Works; though we decline trusting in them to recommend us to God, and
entitle us to his saving Mercy. Nor did the Apostle, while disparaging his own
Righteousness under the Name of Loss and Dung, mean to undervalue it in all
Respects; and when he desires to be found in Christ, not having his own
Righteousness, he does not intend to suggest as if he were desirous to part
with it, or willing to be dispossessed of it, to lose what he had gained in
point of Sanctification, and in that Respect to be found without it; no, by no
Means: he only designs to express his Desire that he might be found at last not
having this for his justifying Righteousness, but having a better Righteousness
than his own, that would effectually answer this blessed Purpose. Otherwise,
for various excellent Purposes, he was bent upon diligently following every
good Work, endeavoring that he might perfect Holiness in the Fear of God, and
seeking after a Righteousness according to Law, as fully conformable to the
moral Rule as possible in this imperfect State; and he longed for Heaven with a
View as much to the perfect Purity, as the perfect Rest and Happiness of that
better Country. And this is the Principle, this the Spirit of the real
Protestant. He loves the Law of God, and is alive to it as the Rule of moral
Duty; while yet as a Covenant of Works, he is dead to it. And while making the
Obedience of Christ his Trust, he also considers it as an Example for his
Imitation, and desires to have the Image, as well as the Righteousness of
Christ upon him: nor can content himself with an idle Profession of justifying
Faith, but studies to show his Faith by his Works; and the more strong in
Faith, the more zealous of good Works; the more CHRIST is precious to them that
believe, the more hateful will Sin appear, and Holiness the more amiable in
their Eyes; which Views will by a natural Efficacy put them upon shunning the
one and following the other. Hence that Observation of the judicious Mr.
WILLARD Pref. to Dr. MATHER'S Everl. Gosp.
I am satisfied, if the Righteousness of CHRIST were more prized by us, there
would be more of real Holiness among us.

Upon the Whole, what little Ground then had the CARDINAL, whose Reasonings
we have been examining, to conclude them with that insulting Reflection; "Let
[the Protestant] now go his Way and complain that we call him an Enemy to good
Works!"

No, says the Protestant in Return, we detest the vile Character; and conscious
of Innocence, we confront our injurious Accusers. We claim to be the truest
Friends, and not at all Enemies to good Works, whether in point of Doctrine, or
Disposition, Principle or Fact. Religiously we teach the Necessity, the
Excellency, and the Usefulness of good Works; nor hold any Opinion, but what in
its true Construction is friendly, not inimical to them. Indeed we renounce the
undue Honors which our Adversaries claim for them, and are careful to have the
Respects paid 'em duly regulated, conformably to the Scripture-Rule:
Accordingly we consider good Works as the Fruit or Consequent of Justification,
and don't set them up as the Cause, the Reason or antecedent Condition of it;
we don't exalt 'em to a Rivalship with CHRIST'S Righteousness; we don't set
them in Competition with Faith: but still we value them in their proper Place
and Order, and with Reference to their genuine Ends. We think it our bounden
Duty, and an Ingredient of our Happiness, as well as becoming our
Gospel-Profession, to be the genuine Lovers and Practisers of good Works. We
recommend the Love and Practice of them to others. In Conformity to
Scripture-Doctrine, we inculcate upon them that have believed, a Care to
exhibit and evidence their Faith, by a good Conversation in Christ. Nor dare we
flatter any in their Pretension to justifying Faith, while we see it
contradicted by their habitual Neglect of holy Behavior: for according to our
Doctrine, the Faith which receives CHRIST for Justification, does also receive
him for Sanctification; and not only apply's his Righteousness, to cover our
Sins, but his Strength to excite and enable us to work Righteousness our
selves, to mortify our Lusts, to cleanse our Hands, and purify our Hearts, that
we may glorify God in this World, and be prepared to enjoy Him in a better. How
then can we justly be uncharacterized Enemies to good Works! Nay, but in Truth
the foul Character belongs to those who are Enemies of the Cross of Christ and
to Faith in his Blood; the one being the procuring Cause, and the other the
producing Principle of good Works. -- We close with the Words of Bp HALL His
WORKS, p. 316, 677. and his Old Religion, p. 40.
What is Faith (says he) but the Hand of the Soul? What is the Duty of the
Hand, but either to hold or work? This Hand then holds Christ, and works
Obedience and Holiness. -- Let me sling this Stone into the brazen Forheads of
our Adversaries, which in their shameless Challenges of our Religion dare tell
the World, that we are all for Faith, nothing for Works, and that we hold Works
to Salvation as a Parenthesis to a Clause, that it may be perfect without them:
Heaven and Earth shall witness to the Injustice of this Calumniation, and your
Consciences shall be our Compurgators this Day, which shall testify to you,
both now and on your Deathbeds, that we have taught you, there is no less
Necessity of good Works, than if you should be saved by them; and that although
you cannot be saved by them, as the meritorious Causes of your Glory, yet you
cannot be saved without them, as the necessary Effects of that Grace which
brings Glory. -- Let the vain Sophistry of carnal Minds deceive it self with
idle Subtilties, and seek to elude the plain Truth of God, with Shifts of Wit:
We bless God for so clear a Light, and dare cast our Souls upon this sure
Evidence of God.

The APPLICATION of what has been said now remains. The Weight and Usefulness
of the Subject would invite us to dwell still longer on it, by way of
Reflection and Inference, in a Variety of Particulars, that might profitably be
enlarged upon. But I must only suggest the following Hints; which may the
rather suffice, as I Have endeavored to throw a practical Light on the Argument
all along through the Discourse.

First, No Wonder then, that Ministers of more mature Judgment and Experience
in Religion, have commonly laid out so much of their Labors in the Word upon
that great Evangelical Subject, the Righteousness of CHRIST, made ours by the
Donation of God and the Application of Faith; and when on any moral Subject,
that they have studied discreetly to assign it is due Place in Christian
Divinity, and to point out the true Principles of acceptable Obedience, refer
it to it is genuine Ends, and inculcate a humble Dependence on CHRIST both for
Righteousness and Strength, while they urged the Pursuit of personal Holiness.
-- It has risen from a Consciousness of their own Imperfection and
Insufficiency, from a dutiful Regard for the Honor of the Redeemer, and a
tender Care for the Salvation of Souls.

Again, How solicitous should all Ministers (pretending to the Character of
Protestant) be, that in preaching on moral Themes they well regulate, methodize
and guard their Discourses, lest any Hearer should through their Heterodoxy or
Carelessness get a Snare to his Soul? Here, omitting all that my own Tho'ts
might suggest, I shall only ask your Attention to what that venerable Father in
our Israel, the late Mr. WILLARD, says in his judicious and faithful Sermon,
entitled, Morality not to be relied on for Life; where having among other
Things observed, touching the Influence Faith has into our moral Obedience,
That it makes us apprehensive we can be accepted only in the BELOVED, That it
makes us confess with the Church (Isa. 64.6.) All our Righteousnesses are as
filthy Rags, and to profess with Paul (Phil 3.8.) I count all Things but Loss
and Dung that I may win Christ; He begins the Application of his excellent
Discourse with this Inference, which I shall repeat entire as worthy of our
solemn Consideration, and what may be, if I mistake not, a Word in Season.
Hence (says he) what Caution had Gospel Ministers need to use in their
preaching up of moral Duties? That it is their Duty to preach them and press
them upon their Hearers, is certain; otherwise they cannot be faithful in
declaring the whole Counsel of God: And yet, if they so preach them as to
revive the Covenant of Works, to advance the Righteousness of Man, and
depreciate the Righteousness of CHRIST, they are far from being the Ministers
of CHRIST, and are indeed the Betrayers of Souls, as far as in them lies. Nor
indeed (says he) do I know of any Thing which does more threaten the
Undermining of true Christianity and the bringing in of another Gospel, than
the putting of moral Virtues into a Legal Dress, and without any more Ado to
commend them to us as the Graces of our Christian Religion. He who when he has
told Men all the moral Duties required in the Law of God, and laid them out
according to their Nature, as they were enjoined on them in the First Covenant,
says to them, This do and live; and does not endeavor to show them that there
is something more wanting, without which they are undone, will be found an
Enemy of Grace and a Murderer of Souls: Nor would I have such a Minister's
Account to give in the last Day, for a Thousand Worlds.

Further, From what has been discoursed, we learn our Obligations of Gratitude
to the God of all Grace for his infinite Compassion toward us, in providing so
happily for our Justification before him, by sending his dear Son to bring in
everlasting Righteousness, the grand Relief of a guilty World. -- And what has
been said, teaches us to admire the Wisdom of God, in not completing the
Sanctification of his People at present; that so the Righteousness which is of
God by Faith, might have its due Honors reserved to it, and the Riches of
Divine Grace appear the more conspicuous in the Saint's eternal Salvation. --
Hereby also we learn the Importance of yielding a firm Credit and serious
Attention to those peculiar Doctrines of Revelation, concerning Original Sin,
imputed Righteousness, Justification by Faith only, the Sovereignty of God in
Salvation, etc. Doctrines so clearly exhibited in the Scriptures, and striking
directly at that Self-Righteousness, Self-Confidence, and spiritual Pride, so
hazardous and so natural to vain Man. -- We learn likewise the Necessity there
was of the Protestant Reformation; the Unreasonableness and Dangerousness of
the present Defection from it (in Point both of Opinion and Practice) so
visibly prevalent in many Parts of the World called Reformed; and the
Improbability of a general Revival of the Protestant Interest, without a
general Revival of the true Protestant Spirit and Principles. -- We moreover
learn the pitiable Case of Multitudes of Souls in the Christian World, that are
under the Disadvantage of having no other or little better than Popish Guides;
who by their corrupt, unfaithful, or unskilful Ministry sooth and flatter them
in a Way of Self-Righteousness, cherishing the Spirit of the Old Covenant and
thwarting that of the New, to the no little Hazard of their eternal Interests.

Again, We have awful Ground from what has been said, to fear, that the Number
of true Believers in the professing World, is comparatively very small; in that
Multitudes discover a prevalent Spirit and Principle the Reverse of that of the
Prophet and Apostle, whose Examples were recorded for our Admonition; and so
few appear heartily concurring to the Saints united Confession in Disparagement
of their own Righteousness. -- We shall do wisely to examine into our own
Sentiment and Disposition of Heart concerning our own Righteousness, and very
seriously inquire whether we have the same Mind in us, as was in these humble
Saints, whose Renunciations of their own Righteousness we have been reflecting
upon. -- And such as are conscious they were never bro't to look upon their own
Righteousness as filthy Rags or as Dung, and accordingly to renounce it in
Point of Dependence upon it for Justification of Life, may by the Light of
those Examples in our Text see their Pride and Self-Confidence detected and
condemned. -- These Examples read Lessons of Reproof to the Children of God,
who are often too indulgent to Unbelief and spiritual Pride, sad Remains
whereof in various Degrees are found even in the Regenerate; but much more to
self-deluding Hypocrites, who (notwithstanding all their seeming Experiences
and moral Refinements) are still unhappy Strangers to that Faith and
Self-denial required in the Gospel, and are under the full Dominion of
spiritual Pride and Unbelief; and most of all to those gross Dissemblers in
Religion, who consciously live in the habitual Practice of Sin, but for a
Disguise put on a Profession of Godliness and make a Show of virtuous Action,
in some particular Instances. If the real Righteousnesses of truly good Men, by
Reason of their Imperfections, are comparatively but as Dung or filthy Rags,
much more so are the heartless Duties of unregenerate Moralists, and still more
so the feigned Righteousnesses of designing Hypocrites. Prove. 21.27. The
Sacrifice of the Wicked is Abomination: How much more when he brings it with
a wicked Mind? -- But still how much more abominable and filthy is
Unrighteousness or Wickedness itself! How malignant an Evil is Sin, that stains
and blemishes the very Righteousnesses of Saints! How odious and pernicious
then is reigning Sin! more so than the Poison of Asps, which can but kill the
Body, when Sin destroys the precious Soul! But above all, what a dreadful Sin
is habitual and final Unbelief, which binds on the Guilt of other Sins and the
Curse of the Law, and consigns the Sinner over to eternal Damnation, without a
Remedy! The Sting of Death is Sin, and the Strength of Sin is the Law. How vile
the Character, how miserable the State, of the unrenew'd and unpardoned Sinner!

But to conclude,

Let what has been said awaken us all to a just Concern, that we may win
Christ, and be found in him; not having for our Righteousness that which is of
Law (inherent in our selves and imperfect) but that which is of God by Faith.
Let us often review the Examples of the Prophet and Apostle, and learn of them
to renounce our own defective Righteousnesses, as filthy Rags and as Dung,
comparatively to CHRIST'S spotless perfect Righteousness, and relatively to
Justification of Life. A deep abiding Conviction of this great Truth will have
a happy Tendency, to make Christ precious to us, and excite us to live by the
Faith of the Son of God; to raise our Admiration of the Love of God in Christ,
and inspire us with humble Gratitude; to fill us with self-abasing Thoughts,
and make us humble in all our Approaches to the Throne of Grace; to put us upon
justifying God in his afflictive Dispensations, and being contented with all
the Allotments of his holy Providence; to teach us Charity, Meekness and
Forbearance toward our Fellow Christians; and in a Word, to inflame our
Desires after another and better Country, even an heavenly, where our personal
Righteousness shall no more be polluted and disgraced by the Remains of Sin,
but be perfect and immaculate as that of the Angels of God, and we shall shine
forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of our heavenly Father. -- Let us therefore be
much in studying this profitable Subject, and much in Prayer to God, that he
would open our Understandings to understand the Scriptures referring to this
important Point of Truth, and give us, of his Grace, to feel the Force and
experience the Benefit of an effectual Persuasion: that a self-righteous Spirit
may be subdued in us, and a humble Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ may be
ingenerated, invigorated, and actuated in us by the Power of the Holy Ghost,
and made to exert its Influence upon us, for the daily increasing Mortification
of Sin and Self, and for the promoting a Life of Communion with Christ and
Devotedness to him, as well as Dependence upon him. -- For we should always be
mindful, that Christ is the Object of our Obedience, as well as of our Faith;
and that he is of God made unto us, not only Righteousness, but Sanctification.
While therefore, in Comparison of imputed Righteousness and in Reference to
Justification before God, we renounce all our own imperfect Righteousness as
Dung and as filthy Rags, yet nevertheless let us at the same Time be careful to
preserve and express a due Honor and Regard for personal Holiness, as valuable
on other Accounts and useful for other Ends. Let us not fail to realize the
Stability of the moral Law as a Rule of humane Life, our indispensable
Obligation to Obedience, and the absolute Necessity of practical Godliness and
Honesty; though not with any View to our acquiring a Right to Pardon and Peace
with God, yet with a View to the Glory of God concerned therein, with a View to
our being meet for the Master's Use here and for his blissful Presence
hereafter, and with a View to evidencing the Sincerity of our Faith, and so the
Truth of our Pretension to be at Peace with God: Because, as it is the Office
of Faith to apply Christ's Righteousness for Justification, so it is the Nature
of Faith to rely on his Strength and Grace for Sanctification, and by Motives
from the Love of Christ to constrain us to Obedience. So that if our Faith be
not such as purifies the Heart and works by Love, it wants the essential
Characters of a true justifying Faith. -- As therefore we would follow Holiness
to any Purpose, let us in the first Place be solicitous to obtain like precious
Faith with that of the Apostles and Prophets and other Scripture-Saints, who of
old through Faith wrought Righteousness, while yet at the same Time they through
Faith sought Justification by CHRIST'S Righteousness only, and renounced all
Hope of Acceptance and Reward merely on Account of their own Righteousness. --
As a Means to strengthen our Faith, and so to promote our Obedience, by
invigorating it is most effectual Principle, let us with a Dependence on the
Spirit of Holiness for his necessary Influence, be much in meditating and
applying the Truth which is after Godliness, one Article whereof is that which
has been employing our Tho'ts.

It is a remarkable Passage, to our Purpose, that in TIT. 3.8. These Things I
will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God, might
be careful to maintain good Works: these Things are good and profitable unto
Men. The Apostle had just before been opening the Doctrine of Grace, in some of
its most important Branches, and these Things which he had now been saying, he
would have Titus to confirm and inculcate in his Ministry, to the End that
Believers might by these Truths be put upon a Care to excel in good Works. --
With this View then, let us be much in meditating upon this Doctrine, firmly
believe, and wisely apply it. Let us pursue it to its genuine Purposes, to
establish our Faith in Christ, and thereby to promote our Obedience; which
indeed, if it be not the Obedience of Faith, will neither be pleasing to God
nor profitable to us. Faith must be the Principle of all our Duties: Faith must
begin and carry them on: and when we have done our best, "we must carry them to
Christ (as Mr. WILLARD expresses it) that they may be offered up with his sweet
Incense, and that so the Dung of them may not procure them to be rejected."

Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant,
Make you perfect in every good Work, to do his Will, working in you that which
is well-pleasing in his Sight through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever
and ever.

AMEN.

