True RELIGION delineated; OR, EXPERIMENTAL RELIGION, As distinguished from
FORMALITY on the one Hand, and ENTHUSIASM on the other, set in a Scriptural and
Rational Light.

In Two DISCOURSES.

In which some of the principal Errors both of the ARMINIANS and ANTINOMIANS
are confuted, the Foundation and Superstructure of their different Schemes
demolished, and the Truth as it is in JESUS, explained and proved.

The whole adapted to the weakest Capacities, and designed for the
Establishment, Comfort and Quickening of the People of GOD, in these Evil Times.

By Joseph Bellamy, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Bethlem in Connecticut.

With a Preface by the Rev. Mr. EDWARDS.

Isai. xxx.21. And thine Ears shall hear a Word behind thee, saying, This is
the Way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right Hand, and when ye turn to the
left.

Matthew. vii.13, 14. Enter ye in at the strait Gate; for wide is the Gate, and
broad is the Way that leads to Destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat: Because strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way which leads unto
Life, and few there be that find it.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, in Queen Street 1750.

PREFACE.
THE Being of GOD is reckoned the first, greatest and most fundamental of all
Things that are the Objects of Knowledge or Belief. And next to that must be
reckoned the Nature of that Religion, which God requires of us, and must be
found in us, in order to our enjoying the Benefits of God's Favor: Or rather
this may be esteemed of like Importance with the other; for it in like Manner
concerns us to know how we may honor and please God, and be accepted of Him,
as it concerns us to know that he has a Being. This is a Point of infinite
Consequence to every single Person; each one having to do with God as his
supreme Judge, who will fix his eternal State, according as he finds him to be
with or without true Religion. And this is also a Point that vastly concerns
the public Interests of the Church of God.

It is very apparent, that the Want of thoro' Distinction in this Matter, through
the Defect either of sufficient Discerning or Care, has been the chief Thing
that has obscured, obstructed and brought to a Stand all remarkable Revivals of
Religion, which have been since the Beginning of the Reformation; the very
chief Reason why the most hopeful and promising Beginnings have never come to
any more than Beginnings; being nipt in the Bud, and soon followed with a great
Increase of Stupidity, corrupt Principles, a profane and atheistical Spirit,
and the Triumph of the open Enemies of Religion. And from hence, and from what
has been so evident from Time to Time in these latter Ages of the Church, and
from the small Acquaintance I have with the History of preceding Times; I cannot
but think, that if the Events which have appeared from Age to Age, should be
carefully examined and considered, it would appear that it has been thus in all
Ages of the Christian Church from the Beginning.

They therefore who bring any Addition of Light to this great Subject, The
Nature of true Religion, and it is Distinction from all Counterfeits, should be
accepted as doing the greatest possible Service to the Church of God. And
Attempts to this End ought not to be despised and discouraged, under a Notion
that it is but Vanity and Arrogance in such as are lately sprung up in an
obscure Part of the World, to pretend to add any Thing on this Subject, to the
Informations we have long since received from their Fathers, who have lived in
former Times, in NEW ENGLAND, and more noted Countries. We cannot suppose, that
the Church of God is already possessed of all that Light, in Things of this
Nature, that ever God intends to give it; nor that all Satan's Lurking-Places
have already been found out. And must we let that grand Adversary alone in his
Devices, to ensnare and ruin the Souls of Men, and confound the Interest of
Religion amongst us; without attempting to know any Thing further of his Wiles,
than others have told us; though we see every Day the most fatal Effects of his
hitherto unobserved Snares; for Fear we shall be guilty of Vanity or Want of
Modesty, in attempting to discern any Thing that was not fully observed by our
Betters in former Times? And that, whatever peculiar Opportunities God gives
us, by special Dispensations of his Providence, to see some Things that were
overlooked by them?

The remarkable Things that have come to pass in late Times, respecting the
State of Religion, I think, will give every wise Observer great Reason to
determine that the Counterfeits of the Grace of God's Spirit, are many more
than have been generally taken Notice of heretofore; and that therefore we
stand in great Need of having the certain and distinguishing Nature and Marks
of genuine Religion more clearly and distinctly set forth than has been usual;
so that the Difference between that and every Thing that is spurious may be
more plainly and surely discerned, and safely determined.

As Enquiries of this Nature are very important and necessary in Themselves, so
they are what the present State of Religion in NEW ENGLAND, and other Parts of
the British Dominions, do in a peculiar Manner render necessary at this Season;
and also do give peculiar Opportunity for Discoveries beyond what has been for
a long Time. Satan transforming himself into an Angel of Light, has shown
himself in many of his Artifices more plainly than ordinary; and given us
Opportunity to see more clearly and exactly the Difference between his
Operations, and the saving Operations and Fruits of the Spirit of Christ: And
we should be much to Blame, if we did not improve such an Advantage.

The Author of the ensuing Treatise has not been negligent of these
Opportunities. He has not been an unwary or undiscerning Observer of Events
that have occurred, these ten Years past. From the intimate Acquaintance with
him, which I have been favored with for many Years, I have abundant Reason to
be satisfied that what has governed him in this Publication, is no Vanity of
Mind, no Affectation to appear in the World as an Author, nor any Desire of
Applause; but a hearty Concern for the Glory of GOD, and the Kingdom and
Interest of his Lord and Master JESUS CHRIST; And, that as to the main Things
he here insists on, as belonging to the distinguishing Nature and Essence of
true Religion, he declares them, not only as being satisfied of them from a
careful Consideration of important Facts (which he has had great Opportunity to
observe) and very clear Experience in his own Soul; but the most diligent
Search of the holy Scriptures, and strict Examination of the Nature of Things;
and that his Determinations concerning the Nature of genuine Religion, here
exhibited to the World, have not been settled and published by him without long
Consideration, and maturely weighing all Objections which could be thought of,
taking all Opportunities to hear what could be said by all Sorts of Persons
against the Principles here laid down, from Time to Time conversing freely and
friendly with Gentlemen in the Arminian Scheme, having also had much
Acquaintance, and frequent long Conversation with many of the People called
Separatists, their Preachers and others.

And I cannot but express my sincere Wishes, that what is here written by this
reverend and pious Author, may be taken Notice of, read without Prejudice, and
thoroughly considered: As I verily believe, from my own Perusal, it will be
found a Discourse wherein the proper Essence and distinguishing Nature of
saving Religion is deduced from the first Principles of the Oracles of God, in
a Manner tending to a great Increase of Light in this infinitely important
Subject; discovering Truth, and at the same Time showing the Grounds of it; or
showing what Things are true, and also why they are true; manifesting the
mutual Dependence of the various Parts of the true Scheme of Religion, and also
the Foundation of the Whole; Things being reduced to their first Principles in
such a ^anner, that the Connection and Reason of Things, as well as their
Agreement with the Word of God, may be easily seen; and the true Source of the
dangerous Errors concerning the Terms of God's Favor and Qualifications for
Heaven, which are prevailing at this Day, is plainly discovered; showing their
Falsehood at the very Foundation, and their Inconsistence with the very first
Principles of the Religion of the Bible.

Such a Discourse as this is very seasonable at this Day. And although the Author
(as he declares) has aimed especially at the Benefit of Persons of vulgar
Capacity; and so has not labored for such Ornaments of Style and Language as
might best suit the Gust of Men of polite Literature; yet the Matter or
Substance that is to be found in this Discourse, is what, I trust, will be very
entertaining and profitable to every serious and impartial Reader, whether
learned or unlearned.

NORTHAMPTON, August 4. 1750. JONATHAN EDWARDS.

The AUTHOR'S PREFACE.
WE are designed, by GOD our Maker, for an endless Existence. In this present
Life we just enter upon Being, and are in a State introducing to a never-ending
Duration in another World, where we are to be for ever unspeakably happy, or
miserable, according to our present Conduct. This is designed for a State of
Probation; and that, for a State of Rewards and Punishments. We are now upon
Trial, and God's Eye is upon us every Moment; and that Picture of our Selves,
which we exhibit in our Conduct, the whole of it taken together, will give our
proper Character, and determine our State for ever. This being designed for a
State of Trial, God now means to try us, that our Conduct under all the Trials
of Life, may discover what we be, and ripen us for the Day of Judgment; when
God will judge every Man according to his Works, and render to every one
according to his Doings. He does not intend, in the Dispensations of his
Providence, to suit Things to a State of Ease and Enjoyment, which is what this
Life is not designed for; but to a State of Trial. He puts Men into trying
Circumstances of set Purpose, and as it were, contrives Methods to try them.
One great End he has in View, is, that he may prove them, and know what is in
their Hearts.

He did not lead the Children of Israel directly from Egypt to Canaan, but
first through the Red Sea, and then out into a Wilderness, where there was
neither Water, nor Bread nor Flesh; and made them wander there forty Years,
that he might try them, and prove them, and know what was in their Hearts.
Deuteronomy. 8.2. So when the Christian Religion was introduced into the World, it was
not in such a Way as Men would have chosen, but in a Manner suited to a State
of Trial. The SON OF GOD did not come in outward Glory, but in the Form of a
Servant; not to reign as an earthly Prince, but to die upon the Cross: and his
Apostles made but a mean Appearance in the Eyes of the World: and that Sect was
every where spoken against, and persecuted: and many were the Stumbling Blocks
of the Times. And these Things were to try the Temper of Mankind. -- And when
Christian Churches were erected by the indefatigable Labors of St. Paul and
others, that God might thoroughly try every Heart, he not only suffered the
wicked World to rise in Arms against them, but also let Satan loose, to
transform himself into an Angel of Light, and, as it were, to inspire, and send
forth his Ministers, transformed into the Apostles of Christ, to vent heretical
Doctrines, and foment Strife and Division. In the mean while, the secure and
wicked World looked on, pleased, no doubt, to see their Debates and Divisions,
and glad they could have such a Handle against Christianity, and so good a Plea
to justify their Infidelity. And God delighted to have Things under
Circumstances so perfectly well adapted to a State of Trial. -- He loved to try
the Apostles, to see how they would be affected and act; when not only the
World was in Arms against them, but many of their own Converts turned to be
their Enemies too, by the Influence of false Teachers. He loved to try private
Christians, to see how their Hearts would be affected toward the Truths of the
Gospel, and the true Ministers of Christ, and toward their temporal Interest;
while the Truths of the Gospel were denied or perverted, and the true Ministers
of Christ despised and stigmatized, by Heretics, and their temporal Interest
exposed to the Rage of a wicked merciless World. And he loved to try
Hypocrites, to see whether they would not renounce the Truth they pretended so
highly to value, and become disaffected toward the Ministers of Christ they
seemed so dearly to love, and follow false Teachers, or fall off to the World.

It is reasonable and fit, and a Thing becoming and beautiful, that Beings in a
State of Probation should be tried: and God looks upon the present outward Ease
and Comfort even of his own People, as a Matter of no Importance, compared with
Things spiritual and eternal. Eternity, with all it is Importance, lies open to
his View; and Time appears as a Point, and all it is Concerns as Things
comparatively of no Worth. If the Wicked are in Prosperity, and the Righteous
in Adversity, or all Things come alike to all, God is well-pleased; because
Things of Time are of so little Importance, and because such an Administration
of Things is suited to a State of Trial. There will be Time enough hereafter,
for the Righteous to be rewarded, and the Wicked punished. In this View of
Things, we may, in a Measure, understand the darkest, and account for the most
mysterious, Dispensations of divine Providence, and discern the Wisdom of the
divine Government.

It has doubtless appeared as a Thing strange and dark to many pious Persons,
and occasioned not a little Perplexity of Mind, to observe what has come to
pass in New England since the Year 1740. That there should be so general an
Out-pouring of the Spirit, so many Hundreds and Thousands awakened all over the
Country, and such an almost universal external Reformation, and so many receive
the Word with Joy; and yet, after all, Things come to be as they now are: so
many fallen away to carnal Security, and so many turned Enthusiasts and
Heretics, and the Country so generally settled in their Prejudices against
experimental Religion and the Doctrines of the Gospel, and a Flood of
Arminianism and Immorality, ready to deluge the Land. But as strange and dark
as it may have seemed, yet doubtless if any of us had lived with the Israelites
in the Wilderness, or in the three first Ages after Christ, or in the Time of
the Reformation from Popery, the Dispensations of divine Providence would upon
the whole have appeared much more mysterious than they do now. And yet those
were Times when God was doing glorious Things for his Church. -- And indeed, it
has happened in our Day, however strange it may seem to us, no otherwise than
our Savior foretold it commonly would under the Gospel Dispensation, at least
'till Satan is bound, that he may deceive the Nations no more. The Sower goes
forth to sow, and some Seed falls by the Way-Side, and some on stony, and some
on thorny, and some on good Ground; and while he is sowing good Seed, an Enemy
in the Night, the Devil unobserved, sows Tares: Now when the Sun is up, i. e.
when new Times come on, and Trials approach, the main of the Seed is lost; not
only what fell by the Way-Side, but also what fell on the stony and thorny
Ground. And when the good Ground is about to bring forth Fruit, the Tares begin
to appear too. Mat. 13. Thus it has always been. -- This is a State of Trial,
and God has permitted so many sad and awful Things to happen in Times of
Reformation, with Design to prove the Children of Men, and know what is in
their Hearts.

The Young People almost all over New England professed, they would for ever
r^nounce youthful Vanities, and seek the Lord. " Well", God, in the Course of
his Providence, as it were, says, "I will try you." Seeming Converts expressed
great Love to Christ, his Truths, and Ministers, and Ways; "Well," says God, "I
will try you." Multitudes, being Enemies to all true Religion, longed to see
the whole Reformation fall into Disgrace, and Things return to their own
Channel; and they sought for Objections and Stumbling Blocks: "Well," says God,
You may have them, and I will try and see how you will be affected, and what
you will say, and whether you will be as glad when the Cause of my SON is
betrayed by the Miscarriages of those that profess to be his Friends, as the
Jews of old were, when my SON himself was betrayed into their Hands by Judas.
Thus God means to try every one.

A compassionate Sense of the Exercises, which godly Persons, especially among
common People, might be under in these evil Days, while some are fallen away,
and others are clapping their Hands and rejoicing with all their Hearts to see
Zion laid waste; while Arminians are glossing their Scheme, and appealing to
Reason and common Sense, as though their Principles were near or quite
self-evident to all Men of Thought and Candor; and while Enthusiasts are going
about as Men inspired and immediately sent by the Almighty, pretending to
extraordinary Sanctity, and hold in it that they are so holy in themselves, and
so entirely on the Lord's Side, that all godly People must, and cannot but, see
as they do, and fall in with them, unless they are become blind, dead and
carnal, and got back into the World; A compassionate Sense, I say, of the
Exercises of Mind, which pious Persons among common People might have, in such
a trying Situation of Things, was the first Motive, which excited me to enter
upon this Work, which I now offer to the Public. And to make divine Truths
plain to such, and to strip Error naked before their Eyes, that they might be
established and comforted and quickened in their Way Heavenward, was the End I
had in View. And accordingly I have labored very much to adapt my self to the
lowest Capacities, not meaning to write a Book for the Learned and Polite, but
for common People, and especially for those that are godly among them.

To these therefore, that they may read what I have written with the greater
Profit, I will offer these two Directions.

(1.) Labor after determinate Ideas of God, and a Sense of his infinite Glory.
This will spread a Light over all the Duties and Doctrines of Religion, and
help you to understand the Law and the Gospel, and to pry into the Mysteries,
and discern the Beauties, of the divine Government. By much the greatest Part
of what I have written, besides showing what GOD is, consists in but so many
Propositions deduced from the divine Perfections. Begin here therefore, and
learn what GOD is, and then what the moral Law is; and this will help you to
understand what our Ruin is, and what the Way of our Recovery by free Grace
through JESUS CHRIST. The Bible is designed for ratio^al Creatures, and has God
for it is Author; and you may therefore depend upon it, that it contains a
Scheme perfectly rational, divine and glorious. And the Pleasure of divine
Knowledge will a thousand Times more than recompense all your Reading, Study
and Pains: Only content not your selves with a general superficial Knowledge,
but enter thoroughly into Things.

(2.) Practice, as well as read. The End of Reading and Knowledge is Practice.
And holy Practice will help you to understand what you read. Love GOD with all
your Heart, and your Neighbor as your self; and you cannot but understand me,
while in the first Discourse I show what is implied in these two great
Commands. And practice Repentance toward God and Faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ; and the second Discourse, which treats of the Nature of the Gospel and
a genuine Compliance therewith, will naturally become plain and easy. And while
you daily study divine Truths in your Heads, and digest them well in your
Hearts, and practice them in your Lives, your Knowledge and Holiness will
increase, and God's Word and Providence be better understood, your perplexing
Difficulties will be more solved, and you be established, strengthened and
comforted, in your Way Heavenward; and your Light shining before Men, they
will see your good Works, and your Father which is in Heaven will be glorified.
-- All which are the hearty Desire and Prayer of,

Your Servant in JESUS CHRIST, Joseph Bellamy.
BETHLEM, April (...)
True Religion delineated.
DISCOURSE I. Showing the Nature of the Divine LAW, and wherein consists a real
Conformity to it.
MATTHEW. xxii.37, 38, 39, 40. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love ^he Lord thy
God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind. This is
the first and great Commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self. On these two Commandments hang all the Law and
the Prophets.


The INTRODUCTION.
TRUE Religion consists in a Conformity to the Law of God, and in a Compliance
with the Gospel of Christ. The Religion of innocent Man consisted only in a
Conformity to the Law; the Law of Nature, with the Addition of one positive
Precept: he had no need of Gospel Grace. But when Man lost his Innocen^^ and
became guilty and depraved, when he fell under the Wrath of God and Power of
Sin; he needed a Redeemer and a Sanctifier: and in the Gospel a Redeemer and a
Sanctifier are provided, and a Way for our obtaining pardoning Mercy and
sanctifying Grace is opened; a Compliance, with which, does now therefore
become Part of the Religion of a fallen Creature. Now if we can but rightly
understand the Law, and rightly understand the Gospel, we may easily see
wherein a Conformity to the one, and a Compliance with the other, does consist;
and so what true Religion is. -- For the present, let us take the Law under
Consideration. And it will be proper to inquire into these following
Particulars. -- 1. What Duty does God require of us in his Law? -- 2. From what
Motives must that Duty be done? -- 3. What is that precise Measure of Duty
which God requires in his Law? -- And a short, but very clear and plain Answer
to all these Questions we have before us in our Text; which is the Words of our
blessed Savior, and in which he does upon Design declare what the Sum and
Substance of the Law is. -- He had a Question put to him in these Words;
Master, which is the great Commandment in the Law? To which he answers -- Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart etc. this is the first. -- The
second is like unto it etc. The ten Commandments are sum'd up in these two, and
every Duty enjoined in the Law, and inculcated in the Prophets, are but so many
Deductions from these two, in which all are radically contained. A thoro
understanding of these two will therefore give us an Insight into all. -- Let
us now therefore begin with taking the first of these into particular
Consideration. -- Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart etc. --
Here is -- 1. The Duty required, viz. Love to God. -- 2. The Grounds and
Reasons of the Duty intimated. Because he is the Lord our God. -- 3. The
Measure of Duty required. With all thy Heart etc*

In discoursing upon these Words, I will therefore endeavor to show, I. What
is implied in Love to God. II. From what Motives we are required to love Him.
III. What is that Measure of Love which (...).


SECTION I. Showing what is implied in Love to GOD.
I. I am to show what is implied in Love to GOD.

And

1. A true Knowledge of God is implied. For this lays the Foundation for Love.
A spiritual Sight of God, and a Sense of his Glory and Beauty, begets Love.
When He that commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, shines in our
Hearts, and gives us the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God; and when
we with open Face behold as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, then we are
changed into the same Image: The Temper and Frame of our Hearts become like
God's: (To speak after the Manner of Men) we begin to feel toward God, in a
Measure as he does toward himself; i. e. to love him with all our Hearts. 2
Cor. 3.18. and 4.6. For now we begin to perceive the Grounds and Reasons of
that infinite Esteem he has of Himself, and infinite Complacency in Himself,
and why he commands all the World to love and adore him. And the same Grounds
and Reasons which move him thus to love Himself, and command all the World to
do so too, do enkindle the divine Flame in our Hearts. When we see God, in a
Measure, such as he sees Himself to be, and have a Sense of his Glory and
Beauty in being what he is, in a Measure, as he Himself has, then we begin to
love him with the same Kind of Love, and from the same Motives, as he Himself
does: only in an infinitely inferior Degree. This Sight and Sense of God,
discovers the Grounds of Love to him: We see why he requires us to love him,
and why we ought to love him, how right and fit it is; and so we cannot but
love him.

This true Knowledge of God supposes, that in a Measure, we see God to be just
such a One as he is; and, in a Measure, have a Sense of his infinite Glory and
Beauty in being such. For if our Apprehensions of God are not right, it is not
God we love, but only a false Image of him framed in our own Fancy. How false
and dangerous therefore is that Principle, That it is no Matter what Men's
Principles be, if their Lives be but good. -- Just as if that external
Conformity to the Law, might be called a good Life, which does not proceed from
a genuine Love to God in the Heart: -- or just as if a Man might have a genuine
Love to God in his Heart, without having right Apprehensions of Him! -- or just
as if a Man might have right Apprehensions of God, let his Apprehensions be
what they will! Upon this Principle, Heathens, Jews, and Mahometans, may be
saved as well as Christians. And upon this Principle, the Heathen Nations need
not much trouble themselves to know which is the right God among all the Gods
that are worshipped in the World* for it is no Matter which God they think is
the true, if their Lives are but good. -- But -- why has God revealed himself
in his Word, if right Apprehensions of God be a Matter of such Indifferency in
Religion? -- And why did St. Paul take such Pains to convert the heathen
Nations to Christianity, and so much fill up his Epistles to them afterward
with doctrinal Points, and be so strenuous as to say, If an Angel from Heaven
should preach any other Gospel, LET HIM BE ACCURSED, if right Apprehensions of
God, and right Principles of Religion be a Matter of such Indifferency! -- It Is
strange that such a Notion should be ever once mentioned by any that pretend to
be Christians, since it is subversive of the whole Christian Religion: making
Christianity no safer a Way to Heaven than Paganism. Yea, such a Principle
naturally tends to make all those who imbibe it, leave Love to God, and Faith
in Christ, out of their Religion, and quiet themselves with a mere empty Form
of external Duties. Or in other Words, it tends to make them leave the Law and
the Gospel out of their Religion, and quiet themselves with m^re Heathen
Morality. For a Man cannot attain to Love to God and Faith in Christ, without
right Apprehensions of God and Christ. Or in other Words, a Man cannot attain
to a real Conformity to the Law, and to a genuine Compliance with the Gospel,
unless his Principles respecting the Law and Gospel are right: But a Man may
attain to a good Life, externally, let his Apprehensions of God and Christ, of
Law and Gospel, and all his Principles of Religion, be what they will. Let him
be a Heathen, or Jew, a Mohammedan, or Christian; yea, if a Man be an Atheist,
he may live a good Life externally; for any Man has sufficient Power to do
every external Duty; and it is many times much for Men's Honor and worldly
Interest to appear righteous (...) Men. Matthew. 23.28.

N. B. What is here said, may with a little Alteration, be as well applied to
some other Sorts of Men. So the Moravians say They care not what Men's
Principles be, if they do but love the Savior. So in New England, there are
Multitudes who care little or nothing what Doctrines Men believe, if they are
but full of FLAMING ZEAL Just as if it were no Matter what a Kind of Savior we
frame (...) Idea of, if we do but love him; nor what we are zealous (...) we
are but FLAMING HOT


And if we have not a Sense of his Glory and Beauty in being what he is, it ^s
impossible we should genuinely love and esteem him for being such. To love God
for being what he is, and yet not to have any Sense of his Glory and Beauty in
being such, implies a Contradiction. For it supposes, we have a Sense of his
Glory and Beauty when we have not: a Sense of the Beauty and Amiableness of any
Object being always necessarily implied in Love to it. Where no Beauty or
Amiableness is seen, there can be no Love. Love cannot be forced. Forced Love
is no Love. If we are obliged to try to force our selves to love any Body, it
is a Sign they are very odious in our Eyes, or at least that we see no Beauty
nor Amiableness in them, no Form or Comeliness, wherefore we should desire or
delight in them. ( Cant. 8.7.) In all Cases, so far as we see Beauty, so far we
l^ve, and no farther.

Most certainly, that Knowledge of God which is necessary to lay a Foundation
of a genuine Love to him, implies not only right Apprehensions of what He is,
but also a Sense of his Glory and Beauty in being such; for such a Knowledge of
God as consists merely in Speculation, let it rise ever so high, and be ever so
clear, will never move us to love Him. Mere Speculation, where there is no
Sense of Beauty, will no sooner fill the Heart with Love, than a Looking-Glass
will be filled with Love by the Image of a beautiful Countenance, which looks
into it. And a mere speculative Knowledge of God, will not, cannot, beget a
Sense of his Beauty in being what he is, whenas there is naturally no
Disposition in our Hearts to account Him glorious in being such, but wholly to
the contrary. Romans 8.7. The carnal Mind is Enmity against God. When Natures are
in perfect Contrariety, (the one sinful, and the other holy,) the more they are
known to each other, the more is mutual Hatred stirred up, and their entire
Aversion to each other becomes more sensible. The more they know of one
another, the greater is their Dislike, and the plainer do they feel it. --
Doubtless the fallen Angels have a great Degree of speculative Knowledge, they
have a very clear Sight and great Sense of what God is: but the more they know
of God, the more they hate him. i. e. their Hatred and Aversion is stirred up
the more, and they feel it plainer. So awakened Sinners, when under deep and
thoro Conviction, have comparatively a very clear Sight and great Sense of God;
but it only makes them see and feel their native Enmity, which before lay hid.
A Sight and Sense of what God is, makes them see and feel what his Law is, and
so what their Duty is, and so what their Sinfulness is, and so what their
Danger is: It makes the Commandment come, and so Sin revives, and they die.
Romans 7.7, 8, 9. The clearer Sight and the greater Sense they have of what God
is, the more plainly do they perceive that perfect Contrariety there is between
his Nature and their's. Their Aversion to God becomes discernible. They begin
to see what Enemies they be to him: And so the secret Hypocrisy there has been
in all their Pretenses of Love, is discovered: And so their high Conceit of
their Goodness, and all their Hopes of finding Favor in the Sight of God upon
the Account of it, cease, die away, and come to nothing. Sin revived, and I
died. The greater Sight and Sense they have of what God is, the plainer do they
feel that they have no Love to him; but the greatest Aversion. For the more
they know of God, the more their native Enmity is stirred up. So again, as soon
as ever an unregenerate Sinner enters into the World of Spirits, where he has a
much clearer Sight and greater Sense of what God is; immediately his native
Enmity works to Perfection, and he blasphemes like a very Devil: And that although
perhaps he died full of seeming Love and Joy. As the Galatians, who once loved
Paul, so as that they could even have plucked out their Eyes and given him; yet
when afterward they came to know more clearly what Kind of a Man he was, then
they turned his Enemies. And so finally, all the Wicked at the Day of Judgment,
when they shall see very clearly what God is, will thereby only have all the
Enmity of their Hearts stirred to Perfection. -- From all which it is exceeding
manifest that the clearest speculative Knowledge of God, is so far from
bringing an unholy Heart to love God, that it will only stir up the more
Aversion. And therefore that Knowled^e of God which lays the Foundation for
Love, must imply not only right Apprehensions of what God is, but also a Sense
of his Glory and Beauty in being such. I grant, that if all our Enmity against
God arises merely from our conceiving him to be our Enemy, then a Manifestation
of his Love to our Souls will cause our Enmity to cease, and bring us to love
him; nor will there be any need of a Sense of the moral Excellency of his
Nature to produce it; and so there will be no Need of the sanctifying
Influences of the holy Spirit. A Manifestation of the Love of God to our Souls
will effectually change us. -- And thus a Man may be under great Terrors from a
Sense of the Wrath of God, and may see the Enmity of his Heart in this Sense:
and may afterward have, as he thinks, great Manifestations of the Love of God,
and be filled with Love and Joy: and after all, never truly see the Plague of
his own Heart, nor have his Nature renewed. And a Man's having experienced such
a false Conversion, naturally leads him to frame wrong Notions of Religion, and
blinds his Mind against the Truth. Many of the Antinomian Principles take Rise
from this Quarter.


Wicked Men and Devils may know what God is, but none but holy Beings have any
Sense of his infinite Glory and Beauty in being such; which Sense in
Scripture Language is called seeing and knowing. 1 John 3.6. Whosoever sins,
has not seen him, neither known him. iii Joh. ver. 11. He that does Evil has
not seen God. 1 John 2.4. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him. Because wicked Men have
no Sense of his Glory and Beauty, therefore they are said not to know God. For
all Knowledge without this is vain, it is but the Form of Knowledge. Romans 2.20.
It will never inkindle divine Love. And in Scripture Sinners are said to be
blind, because after all their Light and Knowledge, they have no Sense of God's
Glory in being what he is, and so have no Heart to love him. And hence also
they are said to be dead. They know nothing of the ineffable Glory of the
divine Nature, and the Love of God is not in them. Ioh. 5.42. and 8.19, 55.

2. Another Thing implied in Love to God is Esteem. Esteem, strictly speaking,
is that high and exalted Thought of, and Value for, any thing; which arises
from a Sight and Sense of its own intrinsic Worth, Excellency and Beauty. So a
Sense of the infinite Dignity, Greatness, Glory, Excellency and Beauty of the
most high God, begets in us high and exalted Thoughts of him, and makes us
admire, wonder and adore. Hence, the heavenly Hosts fall down before the
Throne, and under a Sense of his ineffable Glory, continually cry, Holy, holy,
holy lord God Almighty, the whole Earth is full of thy Glory. And Saints here
below, while they behold as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are ravished;
they esteem, they admire, they wonder and adore; and under some feebler Sense
of the ineffable Glory of the divine Nature, they begin to feel as they do in
Heaven, and to speak their Language, and say, Who is a God like unto thee! Thy
Name alone is excellent, and thy Glory is exalted above the Heavens.

This high Esteem of God, disposes and inclines the Heart to acquiesce, yea, to
exult, in all the high Prerogatives God assumes to himself.

God from a Consciou^ness of his own infinite Excellency, his entire Right to
and absolute Authority over all Things, is disposed to take State to himself,
and Honor and Majesty, the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory; and he sets up
himself as the most high God, supreme Lord and sovereign Governor of the whole
World, and bids all Worlds adore him, and be in a most perfect Subjection to
him, and that with all their Hearts; and esteems the Wretch, who does not
account this his highest Happiness, worthy of eternal Damnation. God thinks it
infinitely becomes him to set up himself for a GOD, and to command all the
World to adore him, upon Pain of eternal Damnation. He thinks himself fit to
govern the World, and that the Throne is his proper Place, and that all Love,
Honor and Obedience are his Due. I am the Lord, (says he,) and besides me
there is no God. I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory will I not give
to another. And thus and thus shall ye do, for I am the Lord. And cursed be
every one that continues not in all Things written in the Book of the Law to do
them. Now it would be infinitely wicked for the highest Angel in Heaven ^o
assume any of this Honor to himself; but it infinitely becomes the most high
God thus to do. And when we see his infinite Dignity, Greatness, Glory and
Excellency, and begin rightly to esteem him; then his Conduct in all this will
begin to appear infinitely right and fit, and so infinitely beautiful and
ravishing, and worthy to be rejoiced and exulted in. Psalm. 91.1. The Lord
reigns, let the Earth rejoice: Let the Multitude of the Isles be glad thereof.

And a Sight and Sense of the supreme, infinite Glory and Excellency of the
divine Nature, will not only make us glad that he is GOD and KING and
GOVERNOR; but also exceeding glad that we live under his Government, and are
to be his Subjects and Servants, and to be at his Dispose. -- It will show us
the Grounds and Reasons of his Law, how infinitely right and fit it is that we
should love him with all our Hearts, and obey him in every Thing: How
infinitely unfit and wrong the least Sin is: And how just the threatened
Punishment. And at the same Time it will help us to see, that all the Nations
of the Earth are as a Drop of the Bucket, or small Dust of the Balance, before
him; and that we our selves are nothing and less than nothing in his Sight. So
that a right Sight and Sense of the supreme, infinite Glory of God, will make
us esteem him, so as to be glad that he is on the Throne, and we at his
Footstool; that he is King, and we his Subjects; that he rules and reigns, and
that we are absolutely in Subjection, and absolutely at his Dispose. In a Word,
we shall be glad to see him take all that Honor to himself which he does, and
shall be heartily reconciled to his Government, and cordially willing to take
our own proper Places; and hereby a Foundation will begin to be laid in our
Hearts for all Things to come to rights. Job 42.5, 6. I have heard of thee by
the hearing of the Ear: But now mine Eye sees thee. Wherefore I abhor my self
and repent in Dust and Ashes. Isa. 2.11. The lofty Looks of Man shall be
humbled, and the Haughtiness of Man shall be brought down, and the Lord alone
shall be exalted. -- And that all this is implied in a genuine Love to God, not
only the Reason of the Thing and the plain Tenor of Scripture manifest, but it
is even self-evident; for if we do not so esteem God as to be thus glad to have
him take his Place and we ours, it argues secret Dislike, and proves that there
is secret Rebellion in our Hearts. Thus therefore must we esteem the glorious
God, or be reputed Rebels in his Sight.

3. Another Thing implied in Love to God may be called Benevolence. When we are
acquainted with any Person, and he appears very excellent in our Eyes, and we
highly esteem him, it is natural now heartily to wish him well; we are
concerned for his Interest, we are glad to see it go well with him, and sorry
to see it go ill with him; and ready at all Times cheerfully to do what we can
to promote his Welfare. Thus Jonathan felt toward David. And thus Love to God
will make us feel toward him, his Honor and Interest in the World. When God
is seen in his infinite Dignity, Greatness, Glory and Excellency, as the most
high God, supreme Lord, and sovereign Governor of the whole World; and a Sense
of his infinite Worthiness is hereby raised in our Hearts; this enkindles a
holy Benevolence, the native Language whereof is, Let God be glorified, Psalm.
96.7, 8. And be thou exalted, O God, above the Heavens: Let thy Glory be above
all the Earth, Psalm. 57.5, 11.

This holy Disposition sometimes expresses it self in earnest Longings that God
would glorify himself, and honor his great Name; and bring all the World into
an entire Subjection to him. And hence this is the native Language of true
Love, Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come,
thy Will be done, on Earth as it is in Heaven. Mat. 6.9, 10. -- And hence, when
God is about to bring to pass great and glorious Things to the Honor of his
great Name, it causes great Joy and Rejoicing. Psalm. 96.11, 12, 13. Let the
Heavens rejoice, and let the Earth be glad: Let the Sea rore, and the fullness
thereof, let the Field be joyful, and all that is therein: Then shall the Trees
of the Wood rejoice, before the Lord; for he comes, for he comes to judge the
Earth, he shall judge the World with Righteousness, and the People with his
Truth.

And hence again, when God seems to be about to do, or permit, any Thing,
which, as it seems to us, tends most certainly to bring Reproach and Dishonor
upon his great Name, it occasions the greatest Anguish and Distress. Thus says
God to Moses, This is a stiff-necked People, let me alone that I may destroy
them in a Moment, and I will make of thee a great Nation. But says Moses, What
will become of thy great Name? What will the Egyptians say? And what will the
Nations all round about say? And he mourns and wrestles, cries and prays, begs
and pleads, as if his Heart would break. And says he, If I may not be heard,
but this Dishonor and Reproach must come upon thy great Name; it cannot comfort
me, to tell me, of making of me a great Nation: Pray let me rather die and be
forgotten for ever, and let not my Name be numbered among the living, but let
it be blotted out of thy Book. Well, says God, I will hear thee. But as truly
as I live, I will never put up these Affronts; but the whole World shall know
what a holy and Sin-hating God I am, and be filled with my Glory: For the
Carcases of all those, who have treated me thus, shall fall in the Wilderness;
and here they shall wander 'till forty Years are accomplished, and then I will
do so and so to their Children, and so secure the Honor of my Power, Truth and
Faithfulness. And now Moses is content to live in the Wilderness, and do and
suffer and undergo any Thing, if God will but take Care of his great Name.
Exodus 32. Numb. 14. -- And as it is distressing to a true Lover of God, to see
God's Name and Works and Ways fall into Reproach and Contempt; and as on the
other Hand there is no greater Joy then to see God glorify himself; ( Exodus
15.) Hence, this World, even on this Account, may be fitly called a Vale of
Tears to the People of God, because here they are always seeing Reproach and
Contempt cast upon God, his Name, his Works and his Ways. And hence, at the Day
of Judgment, all these Tears shall be wiped away from their Eyes, because then
they shall see all Things turned to the Advancement of the Glory of his great
Name, throughout the endless Ages of Eternity. Rev. 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Again, this divine Benevolence or wishing that God may be glorified, sometimes
expresses it self in earnest Longings that all Worlds might join together to
bless and praise the Name of the Lord: And i^ appears infinitely fit and right,
and so infinitely beautiful an^ ravishing, that the whole intelligent Creation
should for ^ver join in the most solemn Adoration. Yea, and that Sun, Moon,
Stars; Earth, Air, Sea; Birds, Beasts, Fishes; Mountains and Hills, and all
Things should in their Way, display the divine Perfections, and praise the Name
of the Lord, because his Name alone is excellent and his Glory is exalted above
the Heavens. And hence the pious Psalmist so often breathes this divine
Language. Psalm. 103.20, 21, 22. Bless the Lord, ye his Angels, that excel in
Strength, that do his Commandments; harkening unto the Voice of his Word. Bless
ye the Lord, all ye his Hosts, ye Ministers of his that do his Pleasure. Bless
the Lord all his Works, in all Places of his Dominion: Bless the Lord, O my
Soul. Psalm. 148.1, -- 13. Praise ye the Lord. Praise ye the Lord from the
Heavens: Praise him in the Heights. Praise him, all ye his Angels: Praise him,
all his Hosts. Praise him, Sun and Moon, etc. Let them praise the Name of the
Lord; for his Name alone is excellent, etc. See also the 95, 96, 97, and 98th
Psalms, etc. etc.

Lastly, From this divine Benevolence, arises a free and genuine Disposition to
dedicate, consecrate, devote and give up our selves entirely to the Lord for
ever; to walk in all his Ways, and keep all his Commands, seeking his Glory.
For if we desire that God may be glorified, we shall naturally be disposed to
seek his Glory. A Sight and Sense of the infinite Dignity, Greatness, Glory and
Excellency of God, the great Creator, Preserver and Governor of the World, who
has an entire Right unto, and an absolute Authority over all Things, makes it
appear infinitely fit that all Things should be for him, and him alone; and
that we should be entirely for him, and wholly devoted to him; and that it is
infinitely wrong to live to ourselves, and make our own Interest our last End.
The same Views which make the Godly earnestly long to have God glorify himself,
and to have all the World join to give him Glory, thoroughly engage them for
their Parts to live to God. After David had called upon all others to bless the
Lord, he concludes with, Bless the Lord, O my Soul. And this is the Language of
Heaven, Rev. 4.11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and
Power: For thou have created all Things, and for thy Pleasure they are, and
were created. And it was their Maxim in the Apostles Days, Whether they eat or
drank, or whatever they did, all must be done to the Glory of God, 1 Cor.
10.31. And it was their Way, not to live to themselves, but to the Lord; (2
Cor. 5.15.) Yea, Whether they lived, to live to the Lord; or whether they died,
to die to the Lord. Romans 14.7, 8. This was what they commended. Phil. 2.20, 21.
And this was what they enjoined, as that, in which the very Spirit of true
Religion consisted. Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7. 1 Cor. 6, 20. Romans 12.1. and 7.4.

All rational Creatures, acting as such, are always influenced by Motives in
their whole Conduct. -- Those Things are always the most powerful Motives,
which appear to us most worthy of our Choice. -- The principal Motive to an
Action, is always the ultimate End of the Action. Hence, if God, his Honor and
Interest, appear to us as the supreme Good, and most worthy of our Choice, then
God, his Honor and Interest, will be the principal Motive and ultimate End of
all we do. If we love God supreamly, we shall live to him ultimately. If we
love him with all our Hearts, we shall serve him with all our Souls. -- Just as
on the other Hand, if we love our selves above all, then Self-Love will
absolutely govern us in all Things. If Self-Interest be the principal Motives,
then Self-Interest will be the last End, in our whole Conduct. -- Thus then we
see, that if GOD be highest in Esteem, then God's Interest will be the
principal Motive and the last End of the whole Conduct of rational Creatures:
And if SELF be highest in Esteem, then Self-Interest will be the principal
Motive and last End. And hence we may observe, that where Self-Interest governs
Men, they are considered in Scripture, as serving themselves. (Hos. 10.1. Zec.
7.5, 6.) And where God's Interest governs, they are considered as serving the
Lord. 2 Cor. 5.15. Gal. 1.10. Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7. compared with Tit. 2.9, 10. To
love God so as to serve him, is what the Law requires; To love Self so as to
serve Self, is Rebellion against the Majesty of Heaven. And the same infinite
Obligations which we are under to love God above our selves; even the same
infinite Obligations are we under, to live to God ultimately, and not to our
selves. And therefore it is as great a Sin to live to our selves ultimately; as
it is to love our selves supremely.

4. and lastly. Delight in God, is also implied in Love to him. By Delight we
commonly mean, that Pleasure, Sweetness and Satisfaction, which we take in any
Thing that is very dear to us. When a Man appears very excellent to us, and we
esteem him, and wish him all Good; we also at the same Time, feel a Delight in
him, and a Sweetness in his Company and Conversation. We long to see him when
absent; we rejoice in his Presence; the Enjoyment of him tends to make us
happy. So when a holy Soul beholds God in the infinite moral Excellency and
Beauty of his Nature, and loves him supreamly, and is devoted to him entirely,
now also he delights in him superlatively. His Delight and Complacency is as
great as his Esteem, and arises from a Sense of the same moral Excellency and
Beauty. -- From this Delight in God arise Longings after further Acquaintance
with him, and greater Nearness to him. Job 23.3. O that I knew where I might
find him, that I might come even to his Seat! -- Longings after Communion with
him. Psalm. 63.1, 2. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: My Soul
thirsts for thee, my Flesh longs for thee in a dry and thirsty Land, where
no Water is: To see thy Power and thy Glory, so as I have seen thee in the
Sanctuary. v. 8. My Soul follows hard after thee. -- A holy Rejoicing in God.
Hab. 3.17, 18. Although the Figtree shall not Blossom, neither shall Fruit be in
the Vine: The Labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Field shall yield no
Meat, the Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in
the Stall: Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the Rock of my
Salvation. -- Finally, from this Delight in God arises a holy Disposition to
renounce all other Things, and live wholly upon him, and take up everlasting
Content in him, and in him alone. Psalm. 73.25, 26. Whom have I in Heaven but
thee? and there is none upon Earth I desire besides thee. My Flesh and my Heart
fails, but God is the Strength of my Heart and my Portion for ever. -- The
vain Man takes Content in vain Company; the worldly Man takes Content in
Riches; the ambitious Man in Honor and Applause; the Philosopher in
Philosophical Speculations; the legal Hypocrite in his Round of Duties; the
evangelical Hypocrite in his Experiences, his Discoveries, his Joys, his
Raptures, and confident Expectation of Heaven: but the true Lover of God takes
his Content in God himself. Psalm. 4.6, 7. And thus we see what is implied in
Love to God.

And now that this is a right Representation of the Nature of that Love, which
is required in the first and great Commandment of the Law upon which chiefly
all the Law and the Prophets hang, is manifest, not only from the Reason of the
Thing, and from what has been already said; but also from this, that such a
Love to God as this, lays a sure and firm Foundation for all holy Obedience.
That Love to God is of the right Kind which will effectually influence us to
keep his Commands. Ioh. 15.14. 1 Ioh. 2.3, 4, 5. But it is evident from the
Nature of Things, that such a Love as this will effectually influence us to do
so. As Self-love naturally causes us to set up Self and seek Self-Interest: So
this Love to God will naturally influence us to set up God and seek his
Interest. As delight in the World naturally makes us seek after the Enjoyment
of the World, so this delight in God will naturally influence us to seek after
the Enjoyment of God. And while we love God primarily for being what he is, we
cannot but for the same Reason, love his Law, which is a Transcript of his
Nature, and love to conform to it. If we loved him only from Self-love, from
the fear of Hell, or from the hopes of Heaven; we might at the same time hate
his Law: but if we love him for being what he is, we cannot but love to be like
him: which is what his Law requires. To suppose that a Man loves God supremely
for what he is; and yet don't love to be like him; is an evident Contradiction.
It is to suppose a Thing supremely loved; and yet at the same time not loved at
all. So that to a Demonstration, this is the very Kind of Love which the Lord
our God requires of us. So Saints in Heaven love God perfectly, and so the good
Man on Earth begins in a weak and feeble Manner to love God: for there is but
one Kind of Love required in the Law; and so but one Kind of Love which is of
the right Sort: for no Kind of Love can be of the right Sort, but that very
Kind of Love which the Law requires. There is therefore no difference between
their Love in Heaven, and our's here upon Earth, but only in Degree.

SECTION II. Showing from what Motives true Love to GOD takes its Rise.
II. I now proceed to show more particularly, from what Motives we are required
thus to love God. Indeed I have done this in Part already. For I have been
obliged all along, in showing what is implied in Love to God, to keep my Eye
upon the first and chief Ground and Reason of Love, namely what God is in
himself. But there are other Considerations, which increase our Obligations to
love him and live to him; which ought therefore to come into the Account. And I
design here to take a general View of all the Reasons and Motives which ought
to influence us to love the Lord our God; all which are implied in those Words,
The Lord thy God. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, i. e.
because he is THE LORD and OUR GOD.

1. The first and chief Motive which is to influence us to love God with all
our Hearts, is His infinite Dignity and Greatness, Glory and Excellency: Or in
one Word, His infinite Amiableness. We are to love him with all our Hearts,
because he is THE LORD, because he is what he is, and just such a Being as he
is. On this Account primarily, and antecedent to all other Considerations, he
is infinitely amiable; and therefore on this Account primarily and antecedent
to all other Considerations, ought he to appear infinitely amiable in our Eyes.
This is the first and chief Reason and Ground upon which his Law is founded, I
AM THE LORD: ( Exodus 20.2. Levit. 19.) This therefore ought to be the first and
chief Motive to influence us to obey. The principal Reason which moves him to
require us to love him, ought to be the principal Motive of our Love. If the
fundamental Reason of his requiring us to love him with all our Hearts, is,
because he is what he is; and yet the Bottom of our Love be something else;
then our Love is not what his Law requires, but a Thing of quite another
Nature. Yea if the Foundation of our Love to God, is not because he is what he
is, in Truth we love him not at all. If I feel a Sort of Respect to one of my
Neighbors who is very kind to me, and either do not know what a Sort of Man he
is, or i^ I do, yet do not like him; it is plain, it is his Kindnesses I love,
and not his Person; and all my seeming Love to him, is nothing but Self-Love in
another Shape. And let him cease being kind to me, and my Love will cease. Let
him cross me, and I shall hate him. Put forth thine Hand now, and touch all
that he has, and he will curse thee to thy (...) (Job 1.11.) as the Devil said
concerning Job. And indeed so he would, had not his Love to God taken its rise
from another Motive, than God's Kindnesses to him. But why need I multiply
Words? For it seems even self-evident, that God's Loveliness ought to be the
first and chief Thing for which we love him.

Now, God is infinitely lovely, because he is what he is. Or in other Words,
his infinite Dignity and Greatness, Glory and Excellency, are the Result of his
natural and moral Perfections. So that it is a clear Sight and realizing Sense
of his natural and moral Perfections, as they are revealed in his Works and in
his Word, that makes him appear to a HOLY Soul as a Being of infinite Dignity
and Greatness, Glory and Excellency. Thus the Queen of Sheba, seeing and
conversing with Solomon, and viewing his Works, under a Sense of the large and
noble Endowments of his Mind, was even ravished; and cried out, The one Half
was not told me! And thus the holy and divinely enlightened Soul, upon seeing
God, reading his Word, and meditating on his wonderful Works; under a Sense of
his divine and incomprehensible Perfections, is ravished with his infinite
Dignity, Majesty, Greatness, Glory and Excellency; and loves, admires, and
adores; and says, Who is a God like unto thee!

His natural Perfections are,

(1.) His infinite Understanding; whereby he knows himself, and all Things
possible; and beholds all Things past, present and to come, at one
All-comprehensive View. So that from Everlasting to Everlasting, his Knowledge
can neither increase nor diminish, or his Views of Things suffer the least
Variation; being always absolutely complete, and consequently necessarily
always the same.

(2.) His Almighty Power; whereby he is able, with infinite Ease, to do any
Thing that he pleases.

And his moral Perfections are,

(1.) His infinite Wisdom; whereby he is able, and is inclined, to contrive and
order all Things in all Worlds for the best Ends, and after the best Manner.

(2.) His perfect Holiness; whereby he is inclined, infinitely to love Right,
and hate Wrong: Or according to Scripture Phrase, to love Righteousness and
hate Iniquity.

(3.) His impartial Justice; whereby he is unchangeably inclined, to render to
every one according to his Deserts.

(4.) His infinite Goodness; whereby he can find in his Heart to bestow the
greatest Favors upon his Creatures, if he pleases; and is inclined to bestow
all that is best; all Things considered.

(5.) His Truth and Faithfulness; whereby he is inclined to fulfill all his
Will, according to his Word: So that there is an everlasting Harmony between
his Will, his Word, and his Performance.

And his Being, and all his natural and moral Perfections, and his Glory and
Blessedness, which results from them, he has in himself, and of himself,
underived; and is necessarily infinite, eternal, unchangeable, in all; and so
absolutely Independent, Self-sufficient and All-sufficient.

"This is the God, whom we do love!
"This is the God, whom we adore!
"In him we trust, to him we live;
"He is our All, for evermore."
Now there are three Ways by which these his Perfections are discovered to the
Children of Men: By his Works, by his Word, and by his Spirit. By the two
first, we see him to be what he is: By the last, we behold his infinite Glory
in being such. The two first, produce a speculative Knowledge: The last, a
Sense of moral Beauty.

First, He discovers these his Perfections by his Works. i. e. by his creating,
preserving, and governing the World; and by his redeeming, sanctifying and
saving his People.

1. By his creating the World. He it is, who has stretched abroad the Heavens
as a Curtain, and spread them out as a Tent to dwell in: who has created the
Sun, Moon and Stars; and appointed them their Courses: who has hung the Earth
upon nothing: who has fixed the Mountains, and bounded and the Seas, and formed
every living Creature. All the heavenly Hosts he has made, and created all the
Nations that dwell upon the Earth: and the Birds of the Air, and the Beasts of
the Field, and the Fishes of the Sea, and every creeping Thing, are the Works
of his Hands: and the meanest of his Works are full of unsearchable Wonders,
far surpassing our Undarstanding. So that the invisible Things of God, from the
Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the Things that
are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead. As St. Paul observes, in Romans
1.20.

2. By his preserving the World. His Eyes run to and fro throughout all the
World, beholding every Thing. His Eyes are upon all his Works, so that even the
Sparrows are not forgotten by him, and the very Hairs of our Heads are all
numbered. And he holds all Things in being; and the opening of his Hand fills
the Desires of every living Creature: even the whole Family of Heaven and Earth
live upon his Goodness, and are maintained by his Bounty. In a Word, his
infinite Understanding sees all, his infinite Power upholds all, his infinite
Wisdom takes care of all, and his infinite Goodness provides for all; and that
every Moment. So that the invisible Things of God are discovered in preserving,
as well as in creating the World. And hence when the pious Psalmist meditates
on the Works of Creation and Preservation, he sees God in them, and views his
Perfections, and is touched at Heart with a Sense of his Glory, and is filled
with high and exalted, and with admiring and adoring Thoughts of God. So Psalm.
19.1. The Heavens declare the Glory of the Lord, etc. And Psalm. 95.1. O come
let us sing unto the Lord, etc. -- But why? -- v. 3. For the Lord is a great
God, and a great King, above all Gods. -- But how does this appear? Why, ver.
4, 5. In his Hand are the deep Places of the Earth; the Strength of the Hills
is his also. The Sea is his, and he made it: and his Hands formed the dry Land,
v. 6. O therefore come let us worship and bow down, let us kneel before the
Lord our Maker. -- And again in Psalm. 96.1. O sing unto the Lord a new Song:
Sing unto the Lord, all the Earth. -- But why? -- v. 4. For the Lord is great,
and greatly to be praised: He is to be feared above all Gods. -- But wherein
does this appear? -- Why -- v. 5. All the Gods of the Nations are Idols: but
the LORD m^de the Heavens. -- And once more in Psalm. 104.1, 2, etc. Bless the
Lord, O my Soul. -- But why? -- Thou art very great, thou art clothed with
Honor and M^jes^y. -- But how does this appear? -- Why? -- Thou have stretched
out the Heavens as a Cu^tain. And v. 5. And laid the Foundations of the Earth,
that it cannot be removed for ever. And v. 27. A^l wait upon thee, that thou
may give them their Meat in due Season. v. 28. That thou give them, they
gather; thou openest thy Hand, they are filled with Good. And throughout the
whole Psalm he is me^itating on the Creation and Preservation of the World; and
viewing the divine Perfections therein discovered, and admiring the divine
Glory, and wondering and adoring: And finally concludes with, Bless the Lord, O
my Soul: Praise ye the Lord. But,

3. His Perfections are still much more eminent^y displayed, in tha^ moral
Government, which he maintains over the intelligent Part of the Creation:
especially his moral Perfections. In the Works of Nature his natural
Perfections are to be seen: But in his moral Government of the World, he acts
out his Heart, and shows the Temper of his Mind. Indeed all the Perfections of
God are to be seen in the Work of Creation: If we view Angels and Men, and
consider wh^t they were, as they came first out of his Hands; holy and pure.
But still God's Conduct toward them under the Character of their King and
Governor, more evidently discovers the very Temper of his Heart. As the Tree
is known by the Fruit; so God's moral Perfections may be known by his moral
Government of the World. The whole World was created for a Stage, on which a
variety of Scenes were to be opened; in and by all which, God designed to
exhibit a most exact Image of himself. For as God loves himself infinitely, for
being what he is; so h^ ^akes infinite Delight, in acting forth and expressing
all his Heart. He loves to see his Nature and Image shine in all his Works, and
to behold the whole World filled with his Glory. And he perfectly loves to have
all his Conduct (the whole of it taken together) an exact Resemblance of
himself; and infinitely abhors in his public Conduct, in the least to
counter-act the Temper of his Heart; so as by his public Conduct, to seem to
be, what indeed he is not. So that, in his moral Government of the World we may
see his inward Disposition, and discern the true nature of his moral
Perfections. And indeed all his Perfections are herein discovered. Particularly,

(1.) His infinite Understanding. High on his Throne in Heaven he sits, and all
his vast Dominions lie open to his View. His All-seeing Eye views all his
Courts above, and sees under the whole Heavens, looks through the Earth, and
pierces all the dark Caverns of Hell. So that his Acquaintance with all Worlds
and all Things is absolutely perfect and complete. He can behold all the solemn
Worship of Heaven, and the inmost Thoughts of all that great Assembly; he can
behold all the Sin, Misery and Confusion that overspread the whole Earth, and
the inmost Temper of every Mortal; and look through Hell and see all the Rebellion
and Blasphemy and cunning Devices of those infernal Fiends: And all this at one
All-Comprehending View. And thus, as high Governor of the whole World, he
continually beholds all Things; whereby a Foundation is laid, for the Exercise
of all his other Perfections in his Government over all. See the Omniscience of
God elegantly described in Psalm. 139.1, -- 12. And being perfectly acquainted
with himself, as well as with all his Creatures; hence, he cannot but see what
a Conduct from him toward them, will, all Things considered, be most right and
fit and amiable, and most becoming, such an One, as he is; and also, what a
Conduct from them to him, is his Due; and their Duty. By his infinite
Understanding he is perfectly acquainted with Right and Wrong, with what is fit
and what unfit: And by the moral Rectitude of his Nature, he infinitely loves
the one and hates the other, and is disposed to conduct accordingly; of which
more presently. Psalm. 147.1. Praise ye the Lord, for it is good to sing Praises
unto our God; for it is pleasant, and Praise is comely. -- But why? -- v* 5.
Great is our Lord and of great Power, HIS UNDERSTANDING IS INFINITE. -- But
wherein does that appear? -- Why, v. 4. He tells the Number of the Stars: He
calls them ALL by their Names. Now if the infinite Understanding of God may
be seen in this one Particular; much more, in the ^^gular ordering and
disposing of all Things, throughout (...) whole Universe: And that, not only in
the natural, but also, in the moral World.

(2.) His infinite Power, is diplayed in the Government of the World. For he
does according to his Pleasure in the Armies of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants of the Earth: so that none can stay his Hand, or hinder the
Execution of his Designs. -- Have Rebellions broke out in any Part of his
Dominions? He has manifestly had the Rebels entirely in his Hands; they have
lain absolutely at his Mercy; and he has dealt with them according to his
sovereign Pleasure; and none has been able to make any Resistance; nor has
there been any to deliver them out of his Hands. -- When Rebellion broke out in
Heaven, he crushed the Rebels in a Moment: They fell beneath the Weight of his
Hand; they felt his Power, they despaired, they sunk to Hell. And there he
reserves them in Chains, nor can they stir from their dark Abode, but by his
special Permission. -- And when Rebellion broke out upon Earth, the Rebels were
equally in his Hands, and at his Mercy: unable to make any Resistance: although
he was pleased, in his infinite Wisdom, to take another Method with them. But
he has since discovered his Power, in treading down his implacable Enemies,
under Foot, many a time. He destroyed the old World, burned Sodom, drowned
Pharaoh and his Hosts, and turned Nebuchadnezzar into a Beast. If his Enemies
have exalted themselves, yet he has been above them, brought them down; and
discovered to all the World, that they are in his Hands, and without Strength,
at his Disposal. Or if he has suffered them to go on and prosper, and exalt
themselves greatly, yet still he has been above them, and has accomplished his
Designs by them, and at last has brought them down. Haughty Nebuchadnezzar when
he had broken the Nations to Pieces, as if he had been the Hammer of the whole
Earth, now though it himself somebody. And Alexander the Great, when conquering
the World, aspired to be thought the Son of Jupiter. But the most high God, the
Great and Almighty Governor of the World, always had such Scourges of Mankind
only as a Rod in his Hand, with which he has executed Judgment upon a wicked
World. Howbeit they meant not so, neith^^ did their Hearts think so. But it was
in their Hearts to gratify their Ambition, Avarice and Revenge. However, he was
above them; and always such have been in his Hands as the Ax is in the Hands of
him that heweth therewith, or as the Saw is in the Hands of him that shakes
it; or as the Rod is in the Hand of him that lifts it up. And when he has
done with the Rod, he always breaks it and burns it. See Isai. 10.5 -- 19.

And as this great King has discovered his Almighty Power by crushing
Rebellions in his Kingdom, and subduing Rebels; so he has also, in protecting
his Friends, and working Deliverance for his People. He made a Path for his
People through the Sea; he led them through the Wilderness. He gave them Water to
drink out of the Rock; and fed them with Angels Food. In the Day time he led
them by a Cloud; and all the Night with the Light of Fire. He brought them to
the promised Land, and drove out the Heathen before them: and in all their
Distresses, whenever they cried unto him, he delivered them. And as the supreme
Governor of the World, did thus in the Days of old discover his Almighty Power
in governing among his intelligent Creatures; so he is still in various Ways
and Manners, in his Providential Dispensations, evidently discovering that he
can do all Things. And his People see it, and be^^eve it; and admire, and
adore. Read Psalm. 105.

(3.) Again, His infinite Wisdom, is discovered in an endless Variety of
Instances, in all his Government throughout all his Dominions; in his managing
all Things to the Glory of his Majesty, to the Good of his loyal Subjects, and
to the Confusion of his Foes. There has never any Thing happened in all his
Dominions, and never will; but has been and shall be, made entirely subservient
to his Honor and Glory. Even the Contempt cast upon him by his rebellious
Subjects, he turns to his greater Glory. As in the Case of Pharaoh, who set up
himself against God, and said, Who is the Lord that I should obey him? I know
not the Lord, nor will I let Israel go. And he exalted himself and dealt
proudly and haughtily; and hardened his Heart, and was resolved he would not
regard God, nor be bowed nor conquered by him: for he despised him in his
Heart. But the more he carried himself, as if there were no God; the more were
the Being and Perfections of God made manifest. For the more h^ hardened his
Heart, the more stout and stubborn he was, the more God honored himself in
subduing him. Yea, God in his infinite Wisdom suffered him to be as high and
haughty, as stout and stubborn as he pleased; he took off all Restraints from
him, permitted the Magicians to imitate the Miracles of Moses, so that Pharaoh
in seeing might not see, nor be convinced: and he ordered that the Plagues
should last but for a short Season, that Pharaoh might have Respite; and thus
it was that God hardened his Heart. And God in his infinite Wisdom did all this
with a View to his own Glory. As he tells Pharaoh by the Hand of Moses. -- Such
and such Plagues I design to bring upon you, and to do so, and so, with you.
And indeed for this Cause have I raised thee up, for to show in thee, my Power,
and that my Name may be declared, throughout all the Earth, Exodus 9.16. And
accordingly God was illustriously honored at last upon Pharaoh, and upon all
his Host, at the Red Sea. And the Egyptians, and all the neighboring Nations,
were made to know that he was the LORD: and his Name became dreadful among the
Heathen. And we find that in three or four Hundred Years after, the Philistines
had not forgotten it. For when the Ark in the Days of Eli, was carried into the
Camp of Israel; the Philistines were sore afraid; and said, God is come into
the Camp; Woe unto us. Who shall deliver us out of the Hands of these mighty
Gods? These are the Gods that smote the Egyptians, with all the Plagues in the
Wilderness etc. 1 Samuel 4.

So God wisely ordered and overruled all Things, that befell the Children of
Israel in the Wilderness, to accomplish the Ends he had in View. His Designs
were to get himself a great Name, and fill the whole Earth with his Glory (
Number. 14.21.) and to try and humble his People, and make them know, that it was
not for their Righteousness, that he brought them into the Land of Canaan
(Deuteronomy. 9.) And every Thing that came to pass, for those forty Years, was
admirably calculated to attain these Ends. The News of Pharaoh's Overthrow, of
God's coming down upon Mount Sinai, and abiding there for so long a Time, with
such awful Majesty; and of the Pillar of Cloud by Day, and of Fire by Night; of
the Manna, of the Water flowing out of a Rock and following them, of their
Murmurings and Insurrections, and God's Judgments upon them; I say, the News of
these, and of other Things of this Nature, that happened to them for those
forty Years, flew all the World over, and filled all the Nations of the Earth
with the greatest Astonishment; and made them think there was no God, like the
God of Israel. (Numb. 14.13, 14, 15.) By all these Things; and by God's
bringing his People at last to the Possession of the Land of Canaan, according
to his Promise; there was exhibited a Specimen of God's infinite Knowledge,
Power, Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, Goodness and Truth: and that before the Eyes
of all the Nations. And so the whole Earth was filled with his Glory: i. e.
with the clear Manifestations of those Perfections in which his Glory consists.
And thus his great End was obtained. -- And in the mean time, all the
Wanderings, and Trials, and Sins and Sorrows of the Children of Israel, together
with all the wonderful Works which their Eyes beheld, and wherein God
discovered himself, for those forty Years; had a natural Tendency to try them,
to humble them, and break their Hearts, and make them know, that not for their
Righteousness, nor for the Uprightness of their Hearts, did God at last show
them that great Mercy: and to convince them of the exceeding great Obligations
they were under to love, and fear, and serve the Lord for ever. And so the
other great End which God had in View was accomplished. Deuteronomy. 8. and 9, and 10.
Chap. -- And now, all these Things were by God wisely done; and in this his
Conduct, his infinite Wisdom is to be seen. If God had so ordered, that Abraham
had been born in the Land of Canaan, and his Posterity had multiplied greatly,
and the other Nations gradually by Sicknesses and Wars had wasted away and come
to nothing, until there were none but the Posterity of Abraham left, and they
had filled the Land; God's Hand then would not have been seen: none of these
excellent Ends attained: all would have been resolved into natural Causes. --
Therefore God contrived where Abraham should be born; how he should leave his
own Country; have a Promise of the Land of Canaan; and how his Seed should come
to be in Egypt, come to be in great Bondage and Distress; how he would send,
and how he would deliver them, and how they should carry themselves, and what
should happen; and how every Thing should turn out at last: He laid the whole
Plan, with a View to those excellent Ends his Eye was upon. It was wisely
contrived: and when it came to be acted over, his infinite Wisdom was
discovered.
-- And thus it is in all God's Dispensations, throughout all his Dominions, with
Regard to the whole Universe in general, and to every intelligent Creature in
particular. His Works are all done in Wisdom; and so his infinite Wisdom is
discovered in all. And hence God appears infinitely glorious in the Eyes of his
People. Deuteronomy. 32.3, 4 Psalm. 104.24. and 105.1 -- 45. 1 Cor. 1.24 -- 31.

(4.) Again, His infinite Purity and Holiness, is also discovered in his
Government of the World: in all that he has done, to establish Right, and
discountenance Wrong, throughout all his Dominions. His creating Angels and Me^
in his own Image, with his Law written on their Hearts, manifested his
Disposition, and showed what he was pleased with: But his public Conduct as
moral Governor of the World, has more evidently discovered, the very Temper of
his Heart; and shown how he loves Right and hates Wrong, to an infinite Degree.
Governors among Men discover much of their Disposition, and show what they
love and what they hate, by their Laws: and they show how fervent their Love
and Hatred is, by all the Methods they take to enforce them: And so does the
great Governor of the World. By his Laws, by his Promises and Threatenings; by
his past Conduct, and declared Designs for the future, he manifests how he
loves moral Good and hates moral Evil.

By his infinite Understanding, he is perfectly acquainted with Himself, and
with all his intelligent Creatures: and so perfectly knows what a Conduct in
him toward them is right, fit and beautiful, and such as becomes such a One as
he is. And also, perfectly knows what a Conduct in his Creatures toward him,
and toward each other, is fit and amiable, and so their Duty. He sees what is
right, and infinitely loves it, because it is right. He sees what is wrong, and
infinitely hates it, because it is wrong. And in his whole Conduct as Governor
of the World, he appears to be just what he is at Heart; an infinite Friend to
Right, and an infinite Enemy to Wrong.

He takes State, sets up Himself as a GOD, bids all the World adore him, love
and obey him, with all their Hearts; and that upon Pain of eternal Damnation,
in Case of the least Defect: and promises eternal Life and Glory, in Case of
perfect Obedience. This is the Language of his Law, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy Heart, and thy Neighbor as thy self. Do this and live.
Disobey and die. -- And now all that infinite Esteem for himself, and infinite
Regard for his own Honor, which he herein does manifest, does not result from
a proud or a selfish Spirit: for there is no such Thing in his Nature. Nor does
he threaten Damnation for Sin, because it hurts him; or promise eternal Life to
Obedience, because it does him any good: For he is infinitely above us, and
absolutely independent on us, and cannot receive Advantage, or Disadvantage
from us. Job 22.2, 3. and 35.6, 7. But it results from the infinite Holiness of
his Nature. -- He loves and honors himself as he does; because, since he is
what he is, it is right and fit he should. He bids the World adore, love and
obey him with all their Hearts, because considering what he is, and what they
be, it is infinitely fit and right. He commands us to love our Neighbor as our
selves, because this also in the Nature of Things is right. And while he
promises eternal Life to the obedient, and threatens eternal Damnation to the
disobedient, he shows how infinitely he loves Righteousness, and hates
Iniquity. His promising eternal Life and Glory to perfect Obedience, does
indeed manifest the infinite Goodness and Bountifulness of his Nature: but then
his promising all under the Notion of a Reward, discovers this Temper of his
Heart, his infinite love to Right.

As to all his positive Injunctions, they are evidently designed to promote a
Conformity to the moral Law. And as to the moral Law, it is originally founded
upon the very Reason and Nature of Things. The Duties required therein, are
required originally because they are right in themselves. And the Sins
forbidden, are forbidden originally, because they are unfit and wrong in
themselves. The intrinsic fitness of the Things required, and the intrinsic
unfitness of the Things forbidden, was the original Ground, Reason and
Foundation of his Law. Thus he bids all the World love him with all their
Hearts; because he is the Lord their God: and love one another as Brethren,
because they are all Children of the same common Father, having the same
Nature. He requires this supreme Love to himself, and this mutual Love among
his Subjects, because it is right that so it should be; and because he
perfectly loves that the Thing that is right should be done; and not from any
Advantage that can possibly accrue unto him from the Behavior of his
Creatures. And he forbids the contrary, because it is wrong, and therefore
infinitely hateful in his Sight, and not because it could be any Disadvantage
to him. -- All the Glory and Blessedness which he bestows upon the Angels in
Heaven under the Notion of a Reward to their Obedience, is not because their
Obedience does him any Good; for it does not: nor because they deserve any
Thing from his Hands; for they do not: ( Romans 11.35, 36.) but merely because it
is RIGHT, that they should in all Things obey him. This is what he loves, and
what he delights to honor. And all the infinite, eternal Glories of Heaven can
but just serve as a sufficient Testimony of his Approbation. -- So on the other
Hand, it was not in a Passion, or from suddden rash Revenge, (which many Times
influences sinful Men to cruel and barbarous Deeds,) that he turned those that
sinned down into Hell; and for their first Offense doomed them to everlasting
Woe, without the least Hope. For there is no such Thing in his Nature. As he is
not capable of being injured as we be, so neither is he capable of such Anger
as we feel. No: the Thing they did, was in itself infinitely wrong, and that
was the true and only Cause of his infinite Displeasure; which infinite
Displeasure, he meant to declare and make known, in the Sight of all Worlds,
throughout the endless Ages of Eternity, by rend'ring to them according to
their Deserts. For he loves to appear as great an Enemy to Sin, in his Conduct,
as he is in his Heart. He loves to act out his Heart, and exhibit a true Image
of himself. -- His infinite Love to Righteousness and hatred of Iniquity, is
also displayed in his promising eternal Life and Blessedness to Adam and to all
his Race, a whole World of Beings, as a Reward to the Obedience of Adam; by him
constituted public Head and Representative; on the one Hand: and threatening
eternal Destruction to him and all his Race, a whole World of Beings, in Case
of the least Transgression; on the other Hand. -- But his infinite love to
Righteousness, and hatred of Iniquity, is manifested in the greatest
Perfection, in the Death of Jesus Christ, his only begotten Son. -- But of this
more afterward. -- In a Word, all the Blessings which he has granted to the
godly in this World; as Rewards of their Virtue; to Abel, Enoch, and Noah; to
Lot, to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob etc: and all the Judgments which he has
executed upon the Wicked, his turning Adam out of Paradise, drowning the old
World, burning Sodom, etc. together with all the Evils which befell the
Children of Israel, in the Wilderness, in the Time of the Judges, in the Reigns
of their Kings; and their long Captivity in Babylon etc. have all been public
Testimonies that the righteous Lord loves Righteousness, and hates Iniquity.
-- And in Heaven and in Hell, he designs to display to all Eternity, in the
most glorious and dreadful Manner, how infinitely he loves Righteousness and
hates Iniquity.

Now when true Believers, who are divinely enlightened, meditate on and view the
Laws, the Conduct, and the declared Designs, of the great Governor of the
World; they love, admire and adore; and say, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of
Hosts, the whole World is full of thy Glory. This divine Disposition, to love
Righteousness and hate Iniquity, which the great Governor of the World thus
discovers in all his Government, appears infinitely beautiful and glorious,
excellent and amiable, in their Eyes: Whence they are ready to say, Who is like
unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods? Who is like unto thee? Glorious in Holiness.
As they in Exodus 15.11. If we should suppose (as some do) that there is nothing
right or wrong antecedent to a Consideration of the positive Will and Law of
God, the great Governor of the World; And that Right and Wrong result
originally from his sovereign Will and absolute Authority entirely; then these
manifest Absurdities would unavoidably follow,

1. That the moral Perfections of God are empty Names, without any
Sig^ification at all. For if there be no intrinsic moral fitness and unfitness
in Things, no Right nor Wrong, then there is no such Thing as moral Beauty or
moral Deformity; and so no Foundat^on in the Nature of Things for any moral
Propensity; i. e. there is nothing for God to love or hate, considered as a
moral Agent. There can be no Inclination or Disposition in him to love Right
and hate Wrong, if there be no such Thing as Right or Wrong. So that the only
Idea we could frame of God, would be that of an Almighty despotic Sovereign,
who makes his own Will his only Rule, without any Regard to right or wrong,
good or evil, just or unjust. An Idea of the infinitely glorious and
ever-blessed God, evidently as contrary to Truth, as can be devised.

2. That in the Nature of Things there is no more Reason to love and obey God,
than there is to hate and disobey him: There being in the Nature of Things no
right nor wrong. Just as if God was not infinitely worthy of our highest Esteem
and most perfect Obedience! And just as if in the Nature of Things there was no
Reason why we should love and obey Him, but merely because he is the greatest
and strongest, and says we must! Than which nothing can be more evidently
absurd. But if these Things be so, then it will follow,

3. That there is no Reason why he should require his Creatures to love and
obey him, or forbid the contrary: or why he should reward the one, or punish
the other: There being in the Nature of Things no Right nor Wrong. And so the
Foundation of God's Law and Government is overturned, and all Religion torn up
by the Roots. And nothing is left but arbitrary Tyranny and servile Subjection.
All expressly contrary to Genesis 18.25. Heb. 1.9. Ephesians. 6.1. Romans 12.1. Rev. 4.11.
Romans 7.12. Romans 2.4, 5, 6. Rev. 19.1 -- 6. Ezekiel. 18.25.

Or again, if we should suppose (as others do) that there is nothing right or
wrong, antecedent to a Consideration of the general Good of the whole System of
intelligent created Beings; And that Right and Wrong result originally and
entirely from the natural Tendency of Things to promote, or hinder the general
Good of the whole: Then also these manifest Absurdities will unavoidably follow,

1. That the moral Perfections of God entirely consist in, or result from a
Disposition to love his Creatures supremely, and seek their Happiness as his
only End. Just as if it became the most High, to make a God of his Creatures;
and Himself their Servant! Expressly contrary to Romans 11.36. Numb. 14. Rev. 4.11.

2. That God loves Virtue and rewards it, merely because it tends to make his
Creatures happy: and hates Vice and punishes it, merely because it tends to
make his Creatures miserable. Just as if he had no Regard to the Rights of the
Godhead, nor cared how much Contempt was cast upon the glorious Majesty of
Heaven! Expressly contrary to Exodus 32. Numb. 14. 1 Samuel 2.29, 30. 2 Samuel 12.10,
14. Psalm. 51.4.

3. That he requires us to love and obey him, merely because it tends to make
us happy, and forbids the contrary merely because it tends to make us
miserable. Just as if he had no Sense of the infinite Glory and Excellency of
his Nature, and our infinite Obligations to love and obey him thence arising!
And just as if he thought it no Crime in us, to treat him with the greatest
Contempt! And just as if nothing could raise his Resentment but merely the
Injury done to our selves! Expressly contrary to Numb. 14. 2 Samuel 12.10, 14. etc.

4. That we are under no Obligations to love God, but merely because it tends
to make us happy; and that it is no Crime to hate, and blaspheme God, but
merely because it tends to make us miserable. But if so, then the Misery which
naturally results from hating and blaspheming God, is exactly equal to the
Crime: And therefore no positive inflicted Punishment is deserved in this
World, or in that which is to come. And therefore all the Punishments, which
God does inflict upon Sinners in this World, and for ever in Hell, are entirely
undeserved. And so his Law and Government, instead of being holy just and good,
are infinitely unreasonable, tyrannical and cruel. -- To say, that God punishes
some of his sinful Creatures, merely to keep others in Awe, whenas they do not
in the least deserve any Punishment, is to suppose the great Governor of the
World to do Evil that Good may come, and yet at the same Time to take the most
direct Course to render himself odious throughout all his Dominions. It is
impossible to account for the Punishments which God has inflicted upon Sinners
in this World, and designs to inflict upon them for ever in Hell, without
supposing that there is an infinite Evil in Sin, over and above what results
from its natural tendency to make us miserable: and that therefore we are under
infinite Obligations to love and obey God antecedent to any Consideration of
it is tendency to make us happy.

From all which it is evident to Demonstration, that Right and Wrong, do
neither result from the mere Will and Law of God, nor from any tendency of
Things to promote or hinder the Happiness of God's Creatures. It remains
therefore, that there is an intrinsic moral Fitness and Unfitness absolutely in
Things themselves: As that we should love the infinitely glorious God, is in
the Nature of Things infinitely fit and right* and to hate and blaspheme him,
is in the Nature of Things infinitely unfit and wrong: And that antecedent to
any Consideration of Advantage or Disadvantage, Reward or Punishment, or even
of the Will or Law of God. And hence it is, that God infinitely loves Right and
hates Wrong, and appears so infinitely engaged to reward the one, and punish
the other. And hence his Law and Government are holy, just and good. They are
glorious; and in and by them the infinite Glory of the divine Nature shines
forth. Isai. 6.3. Rev. 4.8. Rev. 19.1 -- 6.




(5.) His impartial Justice, is also discovered in his moral Government of the
World. He appears in his public Conduct, as One infinitely engaged to giv^ to
ev^ry one their Due: and as One absolutely governed by a Spirit of the most
perfectly disinterested Impartiality. -- He appears as One infinitely engaged
to maintain the Rights of the Godhead, and to secure that Glory to the divine
Being that is his proper Due; and that by the Law which he has established, in
Heaven and on Earth, binding all to love, worship and obey him, as GOD, upon
Pain of eternal Damnation. And so again, he appears as One infinitely engaged
to secure all his Subjects here upon Earth in a quiet and peaceable Possession
every one of their own proper Rights. And that by strictly enjoining every one
to love his Neighbor as himself, and always do as he would be done by, and
that upon Pain of eternal Damnation. ( Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26.) -- And he
appears as One governed by a Spirit of the most perfectly disinterested
Impartiality, in that he spared not the Angels that sinned, who were some of
the noblest of all his Creatures: and in that he is determined not to spare
impenitent Sinners at the Day of Judgment, though they cry ever so earnestly for
Mercy: But above all, in that he spared not his only begotten Son, when he
stood in the Room of Sinners. -- If ever any poor guilty Wretch, round the
World, ^eels tempted to think that God is cruel for d^mning Sinners, and does
not do as he would be done by, i^ ^e was in their Case, and they in his: Let
him come away to the Cross of Christ, and see God's own Son, his second Self,
there nailed up, naked, bleeding, groaning, dying, in the greatest possible
Contempt, Ignominy and Shame, before ten Thousand insulting, blood-thirsty
Spectators. And let him know that this Jesus is GOD: A Person of infinitely
greater Dignity and Worth, than all Creatures in Heaven and Earth put together;
and infinitely dear to the great Governor of the World, even just as dear as
his own Self, and upon whom he would not lay these Sufferings any sooner than
upon himself: I say, let him stand and look and gaze, and learn, that God does
exactly as he would be done by, when he damns Sinners to all Eternity, were he
in their Case, and they in his (if I may so say, when speaking of the most high
God) since that for his own Son, a Person of infinite Dignity, to suffer all
these Things, is equivalent to the eternal Torments of finite Creatures. --
Indeed, it was not because he was not a Being of infinite Goodness, that he
treated his own Son so; nor is it because he has no Regard to his Creatures
Happiness, that he designs to damn the finally Impenitent: but it is merely
because Sin is an infinite Evil, and according to strict Justice worthy of an
infinite Punishment: it is right and fit that he should do as he does, and
therefore his Conduct will for ever appear infinitely glorious and beautiful in
the Eyes of all holy Beings. Psalm. 96.11, 12, 13. Let the Heavens rejoice, and
let the Earth be glad: Let the Sea rore and the fullness thereof. Let the Field
be joyful, and all that is therein: Then shall all the Trees of the Wood
rejoice. Before the Lord; for he comes, for he comes, to judge the Earth: He
shall judge the World with Righteousness, and the People with his Truth. See
also Rev. 19.1, -- 6.

(6.) His infinite Goodness, is also discovered in his Government of the World.
For all the Laws of this great and good Governor are suited in their own
Nature to advance all his Subjects to the highest Perfection they are capable
of. His Law teaches us to view all Things just as they be, and to have our Will
and Affections entirely governed by the Truth, by the very Reason and Nature of
Things. And so to be according to the Measure of such finite Creatures, in our
Wills and in the Temper of our Minds, after the Image of the blessed and
glorious God, which is the highest Dignity and Perfection, we are possibly
capable of. When God commands us to be holy as he is holy, he enjoins that as
our Duty, which at the same Time is our highest possible Privilege. He bids us
be like the Angels, and begin our Heaven upon Earth; yea, even to participate
of a Glory and Blessedness, of the ^^me Nature with that, which he himself
enjoys. To behold his Glory, to be ^avished with his Beauty, to esteem him
supremely, live to him entirely, and delight in him superlatively, and to
become like him in our Views of Things, and in the Temper of our Minds, is our
highest Dignity, Glory and Excellency, and our highest Blessedness. -- And
besides, his Laws are still further calculated to promote the Welfare of his
Subjects, in that they are suited to establish a universal Love, Peace and
Harmony, throughout all his Dominions. Love thy Neighbor as thy self, is one
of the fundamental Laws of his Kingdom. And were his Authority duly regarded,
and his Laws obeyed, Love and Peace and Harmony, with all their happy and
blessed Effects, would reign through all the Earth, as they do in Heaven: And
Paradise would not be confined to Eden, nor to Heaven, but be all over the
World.

And the Wrath of this good Governor is only revealed against all Ungodliness
and Unrighteousness of Men, which are the Ruin and Debasemen^ of our Nature,
and the Destruction of our Peace and Happiness. He threatens Damnation to his
Subjects, to keep them from destroying themselves, as well as to deter them
from affronting his Majesty. All the dreadful Threatenings of his Law result not
only from his Holiness and Justice, but also even from the infinite Goodness of
his Nature: in that hereby his Subjects are mercifully forewarned of the evil
and bitter Consequences of Sin, to the End they may avoid it. -- He is a
perfect Enemy to Hatred and Revenge, to Cruelty and Injustice. He cannot bear to
see the Widow or Fatherless oppressed, or the Poor despised, or the Miserable
insulted, or any evil Thing done among his Subjects. And therefore this good
Governor has threatened Tribulation and Anguish, Indignation and Wrath, against
every Soul that does Evil* and with all his Authority has commanded his
Subjects through all this World, upon Pain of eternal Damnation, to do as they
would be done by.

And then still further to engage his Subjects to that, in which their greatest
Glory and Blessedness consists, he in hi^ Law promises eternal Life to the
obedient. Wherein the infinite Bountifulness of his Nature, as well as his
unspeakable Concern for his Creatures Welfare, is discovered.

And if we survey his Conduct toward Mankind from the Beginning, we may in ten
Thousand Instances, see the infinite Goodness of his Nature displayed. If we
consider what his Ways have been toward an apostate World, how he has given
his Son to be a Redeemer, and his Spirit to be a Sanctifier, how he has sent
all his Servants the Prophets, rising early and sending; and that
notwithstanding he knew beforehand what Treatment he should meet with from a
guilty, ungrateful, God-hating World, how they would murder his Son, resist his
Spirit, and kill his Messengers: if we consider how patient and forbearing and
long-suffering he has been toward obstinate Sinners, how loath to give them
over, swearing by himself that he delights not in their Death, but rather that
they turn and live; even while they have contemned and affronted him in the
vilest Manner: and if we consider his distinguishing Favors toward his Elect,
and the mavelous Things which he has wrought for his Church and People; I
say, if we consider these Things, and at the same Time, look round the World
and behold the innumerable common Favors strewed abroad among guilty,
Hell-deserving Rebels, we must be forced to own, that he is good to all, and
that his tender Mercies are over all his Works. And the great Governor of the
World evidently appears to be a Being of infinite Goodness.

His Goodness is as unbounded as his Power. There is no Act of Kindness, which
his Omnipotency is able to do, but that there is Goodness enough in his Heart,
to prompt him to do it, if all Things considered, it be best to be done. His
Propensity to do Good is fully equal to his Ability. All the Treasures and good
Things of this lower World are his, and he gives all to the Children of Men,
and we should have enjoyed all without the least Sorrow intermixed, had not our
Sin and Apostasy made it necessary for him to give some Testimony of his
Displeasure: and yet even the Calamities of Life are well adapted in our
present State to do us Good. -- All the Treasures and Glories of Heaven are
his, and he offers all to a guilty World, and actually gives all to such as are
willing to accept of all, through the Mediator, in the Way prescribed. -- And
what can he give more? Can he give his only begotten Son to die for Sinners?
Behold he has a Heart to do it* Can he give his holy Spirit to recover poor
Sinners to God? Behold he has a Heart to do it! is as ready to give his holy
Spirit to them that ask, as Parents be to give Bread to their Children! And
finally, can he in any Sense give Himself to his Creatures? Behold he is
willing to do so, to be their God and Father and Portion, and be all Things to
them, and do all Things for them, if they will but accept of him through Jesus
Christ! So that, as I said, his Propensity to do Good is fully equal to his
Ability. And there is no doubt, but that he does show all those Kindnesses to
his intelligent Creatures, which, all Things considered, are best should be
shown. And his Understanding is infinite, whereby he is able to determine
exactly what is best in the whole. Thy Mercy, O Lord, is in the Heavens; and
thy Faithfulness reaches unto the Clouds. How excellent is thy loving
Kindness, O God! Therefore the Children of Men put their Trust under the Shadow
of thy Wings. Psalm. 36.5, 7.

And such is the Goodness of his Nature, and so much Goodness has he in his
Heart, that he needs no Motive to excite him to do Good: i. e. Nothing from
without. Thus unmoved and unexcited by any Thing from without himself, of his
own mere Goodness, he did, in the Days of Eternity, determine to do all that
Good, which ever will by him be done, to all Eternity, when there was nothing
existing but himself, and so nothing to move him but his own good Pleasure. --
Yea, such is the Goodness of his Nature, that he not only needs no Motive from
without to excite him to do Good; but even then, when there are all Things to
the contrary, even every Thing in his Creatures to render them ill-deserving,
and to discourage and hinder his showing Mercy, and to provoke him to Wrath;
even then, when Discouragements are infinitely great, and Provocations are
innumerable; yea, when there is nothing in his Creature but what is of the
Nature of a Provocation: even, in such a Case, he can show Mercy; yea, the
greatest of Mercies. He can give his Son to die for such, and his holy Spirit
to sanctify them, and himself at last to be their God and Father and
everlasting Portion. Such is the incomparable Goodness of his Nature. Who is a
God like unto Thee! etc. Mic. 7.18, 19. -- But then he is at his Liberty, in
such Cases, and may act according to his own Discretion, and have Mercy on whom
he will have Mercy, and have Compassion on whom he will have Compassion. And
truly it is infinitely fit he should. To act sovereignly, in such Cases, is
infinitely becoming. -- And indeed, it is fit he should dispense all his
Favors according to his sovereign Pleasure. It is fit he should do what he
will with his own. He knows best how to exercise his own Goodness, and it is
perfectly fit that he should be at Liberty, and act according to his own
Discretion, according to the Counsel of his own Will. And because it is
infinitely fit, therefore he actually does so, Ephesians. 1.11. He passed by the
Angels that sinned, and pitied sinful Men; he passed by the rest of the World,
and chose the Seed of Abraham; he suffers Thousands of Sinners to go on in
their Sins and perish, and in the mean Time, seizes here and there one, by his
All-conquering Grace, and effectually saves them: and all according to his
sovereign Pleasure, because it seems good in his Sight so to do. And the Reason
why he acts sovereignly, is because in the Nature of Things it is fit he
should. Therefore his Sovereignty is a holy, and so a glorious Sovereignty.
Hence when Moses desired to see his Glory, he discovered this unto him, Exodus
33.12. And because our Savior saw how fit and becoming it was for God to act
as a Sovereign in bestowing his Favors, therefore he saw a Glory in his
Sovereignty, and so rejoiced in it. Mat. 11.25, 26. And sovereign Grace is
glorious Grace in the Eyes of every one, who views Things aright, and have
right Frames of Heart. -- Considering that all God has is his own, that he
knows infinitely the best what to do with what he has, that there can be no
Motive from without to excite him to act, it is infinitely fit he should be
left to himself, to act according to his own Discretion; and it is infinite
Impudence for a Worm of the Dust to intermeddle, or go about to direct the
almighty and infinitely wise God. And it is infinite Wickedness to dislike his
Conduct, and find Fault with his Dispensations.

Indeed, if there was nothing of greater Worth and Importance than the
Happiness of his Creatures and Subjects* and so nothing that he ought to have a
greater Regard to and Concern for, then it is not to be supposed that any o^
his Creatures and Subjects would be finally miserable. -- The infinitely good
Governor of the World has a great Regard to the Happiness of his Subjects,
their Welfare is very dear to him, and their Misery, in it self, or for it is
own Sake, very undesireable in his Sight; yet he has so much greater Regard to
something else, that in some Instances he actually does suffer Sinners to go on
in their Sins and perish for ever; yea, and he will inflict the eternal
Torments of Hell upon them. -- The Goodness of God is a holy, wise and rational
Goodness, and not an unreasonable Fondness. He will never do a wrong Thing, to
oblige any of his Creatures: No, he had rather the whole World should be
damned; yea, that even his own Son should die. Nor will he ever communicate
Good to any one, when all Things considered, it is not best and wisest. When he
first designed to create the World, and first laid out his whole Scheme of
Government, as it was easy for him to have determined, that neither Angels nor
Men should ever sin, and that Misery should never be heard of in all his
Dominions; so he could easily have prevented both Sin and Misery. Why didn't
he? Surely, not for want of Goodness in his Nature; for that is infinite: Not
from any Thing like Cruelty; for there is no such Thing in him: Not for want of
a suitable Regard to the Happiness of his Creatures; for that he always has:
But it was, because in his infinite Wisdom he did not think it best in the
whole. It was not because he had not sufficient Power to preserve Angels and
Men all holy and happy; for it is certain he had. It was not because preventing
Grace would have been inconsistent with their being free Agents; for it would
not. It was not because he did not thoroughly consider and weigh the Thing with
all its Consequences; for it is certain he did. But upon the whole, all Things
considered, he judged it best, to permit the Angels to sin and Man to fall; and
so let Misery enter into his Dominions. It did not come to pass accidentally
and unawares, and contrary to what God had ever thought of, or intended;
because it is certain, that he knew all Things from the Beginning: and it is
certain, that in an Affair of such a Nature and of such Consequence, he could
not stand by (...) an idle, unconcerned Spectator, that cares not which Way
Things go. There is no doubt therefore, but that all Things considered, he
thought it best to permit Things to come to pass just as they did. And if he
thought it best, it was best; for his Understanding is infinite; ^his Wisdom
unerring, and so he can never be mistaken. -- But why was it best? What could
he have in View, preferable to the Happiness of his Creatures? And if their
Happiness was to him above all Things most dear; how could he bear the Thoughts
of their ever (any of them) being miserable? -- Why, -- it is certain he
thought it best, and therefore it is certain he had a View to something else
besides merely the Happiness of his Creatures, to something of greater
Importance, and more worthy to bear a governing Sway in his Mind, by which it
became him to be above all Things influenced, in laying out and contriving, how
Things should proceed and be disposed in the World he designed to create. --
But what was that Thing, which was of greater Worth and Importance, and so more
worthy to bear a governing Sway in his Mind, and to which he had the greatest
Regard, making all other Things give Way to this? What was his grand End in
creating and governing the World? Why, look -- what End he is at last like to
obtain, when the whole Scheme is finished, and the Day of Judgment past, and
Heaven and Hell filled with all (...) proper Inhabitants. And what will be the
final (...). What will he get by all? -- Why, in all he will exert and display
every one of his Perfections to the Life, and so by all will exhibit a most
perfect and exact Image of himself. And now, as he is infinitely glorious in
being what he is, therefore that Scheme of Conduct which is perfectly suited,
to exhibit the most lively and exact Image of him, must be infinitely glorious
too. And therefore this is the greatest and best Thing he can aim at in all his
Works: and this therefore ought to be his last End. Now it is evident, that the
Fall of the Angels and of Man, together with all those Things which have and
will come to pass in Consequence thereof, and occasioned thereby, from the
beginning of the World to the Day of Judgment, and throughout Eternity, will
serve to give a much more lively and perfect Representation of God, than could
possibly have been exhibited, had there never been any Sin or Misery. The
Holiness and Justice, the Goodness, Mercy and Grace of God shine much more
bright. They have been with an astonishing Luster and Glory, displayed in the
Death of Christ, and will be displayed forever in Heaven and in Hell, as they
could not have been, had not Sin and Misery ever been permitted to enter into
God's World. -- Indeed, if in the Nature of Things, it had been wrong for God
to have permitted any of his Creatures to sin, and then to punish them for it;
if God had been bound in Duty, or in Goodness, to keep them from Sin or to save
them when they had sinned; then the Case had been otherwise. But since, in the
Nature of Things, it was fit he should be at Liberty, and act according to his
own Discretion; and since the End he had in View, was so noble and God-like;
therefore his Conduct in this Affair was infinitely right, fit and becoming,
and so infinitely glorious. Certainly, God thought it was so, or he would not
have done as he did. And therefore if we view Things as God did, and have a
Temper and Frame of Heart like unto his, we shall think so too. And, as I said
before, it is horrid Pride and Impudence for us to pretend to know better than
the infinitely wise God, and infinite Wickedness for us to pretend to find
Fault with his Conduct. Romans 9.19 -- 23. OBJECT. But surely it could not be
consistent with the divine Goodness, from all Eternity, to decree the
everlasting Misery of his Creatures.

ANSW. God has in Fact permitted S^n to enter into the World, does in Fact
permit many to die in their Sin^, will in Fact punish them for ever; and all
consistent with the infinite Goodness of his Nature, as every one must
acknowledge. And since it is consistent with his Goodness to do as he does, it
was consistent with his Goodness to determine with himself beforehand to do
so: -- What God, from Eternity, decreed to do; that God, in Time, will do:
therefore if all God's Conduct be holy, just, and good, so also are all his
Decrees. Unless we can suppose it to be wrong, for the infinitely wise God*
from all Eternity, to determine upon a Conduct in all Respects right: than
which nothing can be more absurd.


Thus, if he had aimed merely at the Happiness of his Creatures, he could
easily have so ordered, that Pharaoh should willingly have let Israel go, and
he could have led Israel in less than forty Days to the promised Land, and put
them in an immediate Possession. But there was something else which he had a
greater Regard to: And therefore Pharaoh's Heart is hardened, and all his
Wonders are wrought in the Land of Egypt. The Tribes of Israel march to the
Borders of the Red Sea, the Sea parts, Israel goes through, but the Egyptians are
drowned. And now Israel is tempted and tried, and they sin and rebel, and so
are doomed to wander forty Years in the Wilderness, and to have their Carcases
fall there. And why was all this? Why -- because his Design was to display all
his Perfections, and fill the whole Earth with his Glory. Exodus 9.16. Numb.
14.21. And now, because it is the most noble Thing that God can have in View,
to act forth all his Perfections to the Life, and so exhibit the most exact
Representation of himself in his Works; therefore it is infinitely fit he
should make this his last End, and all other Things subservient; and his
Conduct in so doing is infinitely beautiful and glorious. -- Thus we see how
the Goodness of God is displayed in his Government of the World; and see that
it is an unbounded, rich, free Goodness; and that all the Exercises of it are
sovereign, and under the Direction of his infinite Wisdom: so that God is
infinitely glorious on the Account of this Perfection of his Nature. Exodus
33.19. and 34.5, 6, 7. Romans 9. Ephesians. 1.1 -- 12.

(7.) His unchangeable Truth and Faithfulness, is also discovered in his
Government of the World; and that in the Fulfillment of his Promises, and the
Execution of his Threatenings. Did he promise to be Abraham's God? So he was.
Did he promise to give the Land of Canaan to his Seed for an Inheritance? So he
did. Did he promise to send his Son into the World, and to set him up a Kingdom
upon Earth? Even so he has done. And he is in like Manner true and faithful to
all his Promises, which he has made to his People. -- And did he threaten to
drown the old World, to make Israel wander forty Years in the Wilderness, to
deliver them into the Hands of their Enemies, at what Time soever they should
forsake him, and go and serve other Gods, and finally to send them Captives
into Babylon for seventy Years? Even so he has done* God's Word may always be
depended upon: for what he designs, that he says; and what he says, that he
will do. And this is another of the glorious Perfections of his Nature.

Thus all the Perfections of God are discovered in his Government of the World.
By his Conduct we may see what he is, and learn the very Temper of his Heart.
-- And now, I might go through his other Works, His redeeming, justifying,
sanctifying Sinners, and bringing them to eternal Glory at last, and show how
his glorious Perfections shine forth in them. But I have already hinted at some
of these Things, and shall have Occasion afterward to view the divine
Perfections shining forth in these Works of God, when I come to consider the
Nature of the Gospel. Sufficient has been said to answer my present Purpose;
and therefore for Brevity's Sake, I will proceed no further here. -- Thus then
we see, how the Perfections of God are manifested in his Works.

Secondly. The same Representation is made of God in his WORD. For these great
Works of God, his creating, preserving and governing the World, his redeeming,
sanctifying and saving of Sinners, are the Subject Matter of all the Bible. God
in his Works acts out his Perfections, and in his Word lays the whole before
our Eyes in Writing. Therein he has told us what he has done, and what he
intends to do; and so has delineated his glorious Perfections in the plainest
Manner. -- In his Word, God has revealed himself to the Children of Men, has
manifested and shown what he is. But how? Why, by declaring and holding forth
his Works, as that, in which he has exhibited the Image of himself. Thus, the
Scriptures begin with an Account of God's creating the World, and goes on
throughout all the old Testament informing, how he preserves and governs it.
And then in the New Testament we are informed more particularly how he redeems,
justifies, sanctifies, and saves Sinners. And now, as the Actions of a Man
discover the Temper and Disposition of his Heart, and show what he is; so the
Works of God from first to last, all taken together, hold forth an exact
Representation of himself. If we will begin with God's creating the World, and
survey all his Conduct in the Light of Scripture; his Conduct toward Man
before the Fall, and after the Fall, his Conduct toward Abel and Cain, Enoch
and Noah, and all the old World, his Conduct toward Lot and Sodom, toward
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and Joseph, toward the Children of Israel, in Egypt,
at the Red Sea, in the Wilderness, at Sinai, at Massah, at Taberah, etc. and in
the Times of Joshua, of their Judges, of their Kings, etc. And then come into
the New Testament, and survey his Conduct with Relation to the Redemption and
Salvation of Sinners, and then look forward to the great Judgment-Day, and see
his whole Scheme finished, see the Result, the Conclusion and End of all; look
up to Heaven and take a View of that World, and look down to Hell and survey
the State of Things there; from the whole we may see WHAT GOD IS: for in the
whole, God exerts his Nature, and by the whole God designs to exhibit an exact
Representation of Himself. And then are our Apprehensions of God right and
according to Truth, when we take in that very Representation which he has made
of himself. And now to account him infinitely glorious in being wh^t he is, and
to love him with all our Hearts, because he is what he is, is the very Thing
which the Law of God requires.

And indeed, so plain is that Representation which God has made of himself by
his Works and in his Word; and he is really so infinitely glorious in being
what he is, that were not Mankind, through their exceeding great Depravity,
entirely void of a right Taste and Relish for true Bo^nty, they could not but
be even ravished with the divine Being. They would naturally feel as they do in
Heaven, and naturally speak their Language, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of
Hosts; the whole Earth is full of his Glory! (Isai. 6.3.) But such is the vile
Temper of sinful apostate Creatures, that they are not only blind to the moral
Excellency of the divine Nature, but are even in a stated, habitual Contrariety
to God in the Frame of their Hearts. ( Romans 8.7.) And hence, the Manifestation
which God has made of Himself, can find no Place in their Hearts. ( Io^. 8.37.)
They cannot attend to Things of such a Nature ( ver. 43.) because so
disagreable to their Taste. For ( ver. 47.) He that is of God, hears God's
Words: ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. It Is hard, to
bring unregenerate Men so much as to have right Notions of what God is, because
he is a Being in his Nature so contrary and disagreable to them. They do not
like to retain God in their Knowledge. (Romans 1.28.) Men had rather that God was
another Kind of a Being, different from what he really is, and more like
themselves, one that would suit their Temper, and serve their Interest; and
therefore they frame such a one in their own Fancy, and then fall down and
worship the false Image which they have set up. From hence it is, that all
those false Notions of God have taken their Rise, which have always filled the
World. -- But were Men brought to have right Notions of what God is, and to
take in that very Representation, which he has made of Himself, by his Works
and in his Word; yet they would be so far from accounting him infinitely
glorious in being what he is, that they would see no Form or Comeliness in him
wherefore they should desire him: But would feel the like malignant Spirit
toward him, as the Jews did toward their Prophets, and toward Christ and his
Apostles; only in a worse Degree. The same Temper which caused the Exercise of
such Enmity toward their Prophets, and toward Christ and his Apostles, would
have caused as great or greater toward God himself, had they but had right
Notions of him. And the clearer Apprehension^ a Sinner has of God, the more
will his Enmity exert itself; because a sinful Nature and a holy Nature are
diametrically opposite to each other. And therefore the clearest external
Revelation of God cannot bring Sinners to love him. All the World will see just
what a Kind of a Being he is at the Day of Judgment, and that in a very plain
and clear manner: But yet they whose Nature it is to hate him for being what he
is, will hate him still; yea, hate him more than ever. And therefore, besides
the external Revelation which God has made of himself by his Works and in his
Word, there is an absolute Necessity that he should intern^lly reveal himself
in his Glory to the Heart of a Sinner, in order to beget divine Love there.
Which brings me to add,

Thirdly, God reveals his infinite Glory, in being what he is, in the Hearts of
Sinners, by his holy SPIRIT. Mat. 11.25, -- 27. -- By his Works and in his Word
he has revealed what he is, and that in a Manner sufficiently plain, even so
plainly; that there is no Need at all of any further objective Revelation: and
he is really infinitely glorious in being what he is. Now therefore if we would
rightly attend to that Revelation which God has made of Himself, we could not
but have right Apprehensions of Him; and if we had a good Taste for true
Beauty, we could not but be ravished with his Glory: but we are naturally
disinclined to right Apprehensions of God, and are entirely destitute of a true
Taste for moral Beauty. And hence we may learn what Kind of inward Illumination
we stand in Need of from the Spirit of God. -- We do not need the holy Spirit
to reveal any new Truths concerning God, not already revealed; for the external
Revelation which he has made of himself, is sufficiently full. -- We do not
need to have the holy Spirit immediately reveal all these Truths concerning God
over again to us, by Way of objective Revelation, or immediate Inspiration;
because the external Revelation already made is sufficiently plain. -- We only
need (1.) to be effectually awakened, to attend to those Manifestations which
he has made of himself in his Works and Word, that we may see what he is: And
(2.) to have a spiritual Taste imparted to us, by the immediate Influence of
the Holy Ghost, that we may have a Sense of his infinite Glory in being such:
For these two will lay an effectual Foundation in our Hearts for that Love,
which the Law requires. -- By the common Influences of the Spirit, we may be
awakened to a realizing Sight and Sense of what GOD is; and by the special and
sanctifying Influences of the Spirit, we may receive a Sense of his infinite
Glory in being such. And also the Sense of his Glory will naturally cause us to
see more clearly what God is: for a Sense of the moral Excellency of the divine
Nature fixes our Thoughts on God, and the more our Thoughts are fixed, the more
distinctly we see what he is. And while we see him to be what he is* and see
his infinite Glory in being such, hereby a divine Love is naturally enkindled
in our Hearts. And thus, He that commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness,
shines in our Hearts, and gives us the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of
God: And so we all with open Face, behold as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord,
and are changed into the same Image. (2. Cor. 3.18. and 4.6.) -- A Sight of the
moral Excellency of the divine Nature makes God appear infinitely glorious in
every Respect. Those Things in God, which before appeared exceeding dreadful,
now appear unspeakably glorious. His Sovereignty appears glorious, because now
we see he is fit to be a Sovereign, and that it is fit and right he should do
what he will with his own. His Justice appears glorious, because now we see the
infinite Evil of Sin. And a Consideration of his infinite Understanding and
almighty Power, enhances his Glory. And while we view what he is, and see his
Greatness and Glory, and consider his original, entire* underived Right to all
Things, we begin to see why he assumes the Character of most high God, supreme
Lord, and sovereign Governor of the whole World; and we resign the Throne to
him, and take our Places, and become his willing Subjects, and our Hearts are
framed to love him and fear him and trust in him through Jesus Christ, and we
give up our selves to him, to walk in all his Ways and keep all his Commands,
seeking his Glory. And thus a Sight and Sense of the infinite Dignity,
Greatness, Glory and Excellency of the most high God, lays the first Foundation
for a divine Love. God's being what he is, is the primary Reason that he
requires us to love him with all our Hearts; and it is the first Motive of a
genuine Love.

I might now pass on to consider the additional Obligations we are under to
love God; but that it may be profitable to stop a while, and a little consider
the Nature and Properties of this first and greatest and most fundamental
Obligation; and take a View of some important Consequences necessarily
following therefrom. And here,

1. This Obligation is binding antecedently to any Consideration of Advantage
or Disadvantage, of Rewards or Punishments; and even prior to any Consideration
of the positive Will and Law of God himself.

2. It is infinitely binding.

3. It is eternally binding.

4. It is unchangeably binding.

5. It is that from which all other Obligations originally derive their binding
Nature.

1. This Obligation, which we are under to love God with all our Hearts,
resulting from the infinite Excellency of the divine Nature, is binding
antecedently to any Consideration of Advantage or Disadvantage, of Rewards or
Punishments, or even of the positive Will and Law of God himself. -- To love
God with all our Hearts naturally tends to make us happy; and the contrary, to
make us miserable* and there are glorious Rewards promised on the one Hand, and
dreadful Punishments threatened on the other; and God, as Governor of the
World, has with all his Authority by his Law expressly required us to love him
with all our Hearts, and forbidden the contrary: and all these Things are
binding: but yet the infinite Excellency of the divine Nature lays us under
Bonds prior to any Consideration of these Things. So that if our Interest did
not at all lie at Stake, and if there had never been any express Law in the
Case, yet it would be right, and our indispensable Duty, to love God with all
our Hearts. His being infinitely lovely in Himself, makes it our Duty to love
Him. For he is in himself worthy of our highest Esteem; he deserves it; it is
in the Nature of Things his Due: and that antecedent to any selfish
Consideration, or any express Law in the Case. To suppose the contrary, is to
deny the infinite Amiableness of the divine Nature, and to take away the very
Foundation of the Law it self, and the very Reason of all Rewards and
Punishments. For if our supreme Love is not due to God, then he is not
infinitely lovely* and if he does not deserve to be loved with all our Hearts,
why does he require it? And if in the Nature of Things it is not right and fit
that we should love Him, and the contrary unfit and wrong, what Grounds are
there for Rewards or Punishments? So that it is evident, the infinite
Excellency of the divine Nature binds us, and makes it our Duty, antecedent to
any Consideration of Advantage or Disadvantage, Rewards or Punishments, or even
of the positive Will and Law of God, to love God with all our Hearts; and
therefore our Love must primarily take its Rise from a Sense of this infinite
Excellency of the divine Nature, as has been before observed; and that seeming
Love, which arises merely from selfish Considerations, from the Fear of
Punishment or Hope of Reward, or because the Law requires it, and so it is a
Duty and must be done, is not genuine: But is a selfish, a mercenary, and a
forced Thing. How evidently therefore do those discover their Hypocrisy, who
are wont to talk after the following Manner? If I am elected, I shall be saved,
let me do what I will; and if I am not elected, I shall be damned, let me do
what I can: And therefore it is no Matter how I live. And again after this Sort
If I knew certainly that God had made no Promises to the Duties of the
Unregenerate, as some pretend, I would never do any more in Religion. Surely
they had as good say, that they have no Regard at all to the infinite
Excellency of the divine Nature, but are entirely influenced by selfish and
mercenary Motives in all they do. They don't seem to understand that they are
under infinite Obligations to love God with all their Hearts and obey him in
every Thing, resulting from God's being what he is, and that antecedent to all
selfish Considerations. Such know not God. (1 Ioh. 3.6)

2. This Obligation resulting from the intrinsic Excellency and Amiableness of
the divine Nature, is infinitely binding: Because this Excellency and
Amiableness is in itself infinite. Our Obligation arises from his Desert; but
he infinitely deserves our Love, because he is infinitely lovely. When any
Person is lovely and honorable, Reason teaches us, that we ought to love and
honor Him; and that it is wrong, to dislike and despise Him. And the more
lovely and honorable, the greater is our Obligation to love and honor him;
and the more aggravatedly vile is it, to treat him with Contempt. Since
therefore God is a Being of infinite Dignity, Greatness, Glory and Excellency,
hence we are under an infinite Obligation to love him with all our Hearts; and
it is infinitely wrong, not to do so. Since he is infinitely worthy to be
honored and obeyed by us, therefore we are under an infinite Obligation to
honor and obey Him: And that with all our Heart and Soul, and Mind and
Strength. Hence,

[1] Perfect Love and perfect Obedience deserve no Thanks at his Hands. If we
perfectly love him, even with all our Hearts; and give up our selves entirely
and for ever to him, to do his Will and seek his Glory; and so cordially
delight in him, as to take up our full and everlasting Contentment in him; yet
in all this, we do but our Duty: and we do no more than what we are under an
infinite Obligation to do. And therefore we deserve no Thanks. ( Luke 17.9,
10.) Yea, we do nothing but that in which consists our highest Perfection,
Glory and Blessedness; and therefore instead of deserving Thanks, we ought to
account it an exceeding great Privilege, that we may thus love the Lord, live
to him, and live upon him. ( Psalm. 19.10.)

When therefore eternal Life was promised in the first Covenant, as the Reward
of perfect Obedience, it was not under the Notion of any Thing being merited;
nor did it ever enter into the Hearts of the Angels in Heaven to imagine, they
merited any Thing by all their Love and Service: for from their very Hearts
they all join to say, Worthy art thou, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor,
and Praise for ever. And they dese^ve no Thanks for their doing so; for they
but own the very Truth.

When therefore sinful Men, poor Hell-deserving Creatures, think it MUCH, that
they should love and serve God so well, and take so great Pains in Religion;
and are ready to think, that God and Man ought highly to value them for their
so doing, and are always telling God and Man how MIGHTY Good they are; as he,
Luke 18.11, 12. God, I thank thee, I am not as other Men are, Extortioners,
Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican; -- No, far from this, I am one of
the best Men in all the World, -- I fast twice in the Week, I give Tithes of
all that I possess -- This appeared to him such a MIGHTY Thing, that he thought
it quite worth while to tell God himself of it: -- Now, I say, when this is
Men's Temper, it is a Sign they neither know God, nor love him: for if they
did, they could not set so high a Price upon their Duties, since he is so
infinitely deserving. -- The plain Truth is, such have intolerable mean
Thoughts of God, and intolerable high Thoughts of themselves; they are
brim-full of spiritual Pride and Self-Righteousness: and such are exceeding
hateful in the Sight of God. They implicitly say, that God is not infinitely
glorious, and infinitely worthy of all Love and Honor; he does not deserve it,
it is not his Due; but rather he is beholden to his Creatures for it, and ought
to render them many Thanks for their Love and Service. The Language of their
Hearts is, God has so little Loveliness, that it is MUCH to love him. -- Like a
bad Mother-in-Law, who thinks it nothing to do all Things for her own Children,
because she loves them; but grudges every Step she takes for the rest, and
thinks every little a great deal, because she cares not for them: So such Men
think it nothing to rise early and sit up late, to get the World, to get
Riches, Honor and Pleasure; for they love themselves: but think it MUCH to
take the tenth Part of the Pains in Religion; because they don't love God.
Their whole Frame of Mind casts infinite Contempt upon the glorious Majesty of
Heaven, to whom all Honor is infinitely due, and in whose Service all the
Hosts of Heaven account themselves perfectly blessed: for they, vile Wretches!
(...) as if they deserved to be paid for all.

True, there are glorious Rewards promised in the Law and in the Gospel. But
why? and upon what Grounds? -- A Man may be said to be rewarded in three
different Senses. -- (1.) When he receives what he strictly deserves, as an
Hireling receives his Wages at Night. But in this Sense the Angels in Heaven
are not capable of a Reward: for in strict Justice they deserve nothing. ( Luke
17.9, 10. Romans 11.35.) -- They are no Hirelings, for God has a natural
original, underived, entire Right to them; as much as he has to the Sun, Moon
and Stars: and these therefore deserve to be paid for their shining, as much as
the Angels do for their working. -- Besides, if the Angels do love God, it is
no more than he infinitely deserves. -- And farther, the Services of Angels do
not profit God, and so lay him under no Obligations; any more than the Birds
profit the rising Sun by their Morning-Songs, and so lay the Sun under
Obligations to shine all Day. Job 22.2, 3. Can a Man be profitable unto God, as
he that is wise may be profitable unto himself? Is it any Pleasure to the
Almighty, that thou art Righteous? or is it Gain to him, that thou make thy
Ways perfect? And yet even in this gross Sense, Self-righteous Persons feel at
Heart, as if they deserved a Reward for their good Duties; though perhaps they
are not willing to own it. Hence they are so apt to think it would be very
hard, unjust and cruel, if God should damn them for their past Sins,
notwithstanding all their good Duties. Isai. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted,
say they, and thou see not? -- But, (2.) A Man may be said to be rewarded,
when, although in strict Justice he deserves nothing, yet he receives great
Favors at the Hands of God in Testimony of the divine Approbation of his
Person and Services. And thus the Angels in Heaven, though they deserve nothing,
yet have eternal Life bestowed upon them, as a Reward to their perfect
Obedience, in Testimony of the divine Approbation. God rewards them, not
because they do him any Good, nor because they deserve any Thing at his Hands;
but because he infinitely loves Righteousness, and to appear as an infinite
Friend to this, in his public Conduct, as moral Governor of the World. The
most that can be said of the holiest Angel in Heaven, is, that he is fit to be
approved in the Sight of God, because he is perfectly such as God requires him
to be. And now, because God loves to put Honor upon Virtue, and to exercise
the infinite Bountifulness of his Nature, therefore he gives them the Reward of
eternal Life. And thus God promised us eternal Life, upon Condition of perfect
Obedience, in the first Covenant: as if God had said, If you will love me with
all your Heart, and obey me in every Thing, as you are bound in Duty to do;
then, although you will deserve nothing, yet as becomes a holy and good God, a
kind and bountiful Governor, I will make you everlastingly blessed in the
Enjoyment of myself; and that in Testimony of my Approbation of your perfect
and steady Fidelity. And so by Covenant and Promise this Reward would have been
due, had the Condition been performed. Hence that in Romans 4.4. Now to him that
works, is the Reward not reckoned of Grace, but of DEBT. And now here
Self-righteous Persons are wont to come in with their Works, and insist upon
their Right, and plead the Reason of Things, as well as the Promise. If we do
(say they) as well as we can, which is all that God does or can in Justice
require of us, surely he will accept of us: it would be cruel, to cast us off:
his Goodness and Faithfulness are engaged for us. Just as if they had now made
full Amends for all their past Sins by their Repentance and Reformation; and
grown to be as good as Angels, by taking some little Pains in Religion! For the
best Angel in Heaven does not pretend to any other Title to Blessedness than
this; namely, that he has done as well as he can, and that this is all that God
has required, and although he is an unprofitable Servant, yet he depends upon the
Promise, the Goodness and Faithfulness of his Bountiful Creator. -- Indeed,
Self-righteous Persons may pretend to expect all for Christ's Sake; and say,
that what they do, only entitles them to an Interest in him: But it is all mere
Pretense; for still they think, that God is bound to give them an Interest in
Christ and eternal Life, if they do as well as they can; and would think God
dealt very hardly with them, if he did not. So that their real Dependence, at
Bottom, is upon their own Goodness, their own Worth or Worthiness, to make
Amends for past Sins, and recommend them to God, and entitle them to all
Things; the infinite Absurdity of which will be evident presently. -- Again,
(3.) A Man may be said to be rewarded, when he neither deserves any Thing, nor
is it fitting that his Person and Conduct, considered merely as they be in
themselves, should be approved; but ought to be condemned, according to Reason,
and according to God's righteous Law, they being so sinfully defective;
nevertheless such a Man may be said to be rewarded, when merely on the Account
of his Interest in the Righteousness and Worthiness of CHRIST, his Person and
Performances are accepted, and peculiar Favors shown him. And in this Way are
Believers accepted, according to the Covenant of Grace, and entitled to the
Reward of eternal Life. ( Phil. 3.8, 9. Ephesians. 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.5.) Now those who
look for a Reward in this Way, will be so far from thinking it MUCH, which they
have done for God, that they will for ever set all down for Nothing and worse
than Nothing, Worse than nothing. -- Note. I do not mean, that an imperfect and
very defective Conformity to the Law is worse and more odious in God's Sight,
than no Conformity at all: but only, that there is more Odiousness than
Amiableness in such defective Services. And that therefore, we are, in the
Sight of God, on their Account, more proper Objects of Hatred and Punishment,
than of Love and Reward; if considered merely as in our selves, without any
Respect to our Relation to Christ: So that in Point of recommending our selves
to God, we do, by our best Duties, thus considered, rather discommend ourselves
in his Sight. And in this Sense they are Worse than Nothing: They are even so
far from paying our constant Dues, that, in the Sight of God, they constantly
run us into Debt. We are infinitely to blame in our best Frames and best
Duties, and have not any Thing in them, which tends, in God's Sight, in the
least Degree, to Counterbalance our Blame. -- But if any are desirous to see
this Point fully explained and proved, and all Objections answered, I refer
them to Mr. Edwards's excellent Discourse on Iustif^^^tion by Faith alone.
their best Duties being so sinfully defective; and judge themselves worthy of
Hell every Day, and every Moment: And all their Dependence will be on Christ's
Worthiness, and the free Grace of God through Him. ( Luke 18.13. Romans 3.24.) And
all that is said in the New Testament about God's rewarding the Believers good
Works, being viewed in this Light, gives not the least Countenance to a
Self-righteous Spirit, but militates directly against it. -- And indeed, if we
were as perfect as the Angels in Heaven, it appears from what has been said,
that we should deserve no Thanks. It is impudent therefore, and wicked, it is
contemptuous, and in a Sort blasphemous, and most God-provoking, for a proud
conceited Pharisee, to feel as he does in his Self-righteous Frames. And God
might expostulate with such a one in this Manner; What, is there so little
Loveliness in me! And is it so great, so hard, so self-denying, to love me,
that you think it such a mighty Thing! and expect now, that all past Sins shall
be forgiven, and my Favor secured, for this good Frame! Yea, and that I shall
give you Heaven into the Bargain! What, are your Obligations to me so small,
that I must be so much beholden to you for your Love! What, did you never hear
that I was the LORD! And that it was I that stretched abroad the Heavens! And
that you are my Clay, whom I formed and fashioned for my Self! Be gone, thou
impudent Wretch, to Hell, thy proper Place: thou art a Despiser of my glorious
Majesty, and your Frame of Spirit savours of Blasphemy. Know it, I am not so
mean, as you imagine, nor at all beholden to you for your Love. 'And this i^
one Reason that the Sacrifice of the Wicked is such an Abomination to the Lord;
not only when they pray with a View to recommend themselves to their
Fellow-Men; but also when in doing their best, they only design to ingratiate
themselves with God. Prove. 21.27. The Sacrifice of the Wicked is Abomination
(even his very best) How much more when he brings it with a wicked Mind? The
infinite Greatness, Glory and Excellency of God, and the infinite Obligation
thence resulting which we are under to love him with all our Hearts and obey
him in every Thing, renders a Self-righteous Spirit, unspeakably odious and
infinitely provoking in the Eyes of a holy God. But this will appear still
plainer under the next particular. To proceed therefore,

[2.] If we are under an infinite Obligation to love God sup^emely, live to him
ultimately, and take everlasting Delight in him, because of his infinite Glory
and Excellency, then the least Disposition to disesteem him, to be indifferent
about his Interest and Honor, or to disre^ish Communion with him; or the least
Disposition to love our selves more than God, and be more concerned about our
Interest and Honor, than about his, and to be pleased and delighted in the
Things of the World, more than in him, must consequently be infinitely sinful,
The least Sin may be an infinite Evil, because of the infinite Obligation we
are under to do otherwise; and yet all Sins not be equally heinous: For there
is as great a Difference among Infinites, as among Finites; I mean, among
Things that are infinite only in one Respect. For Instance, to be for ever in
Hell is an infinite Evil, in Respect of the Duration; but yet the Damned are
not all equally miserable. Some may be an hundred Times as miserable as others,
in Degre^; although the Misery of all is equal in Point of Duration.
as is self-evident.

When therefore the great Governor of the World threatens eternal Damnation
for the least Sin, (as in Gal. 3.10.) he does the Thing that is perfectly
Right: for an infinite Evil deserves an infinite Punishment.

Hence also, it is no Wonder that the holiest Saint on Earth mourns so
bitterly, and loathes and abhors himself so exceedingly, for the remaining
Corruptions of his Heart. For if the least Disposition to depart from God and
disrelish Communion with him, and to be careless about his Honor and Interest,
is infinitely sinful; then the best Men that ever lived, have infinite Reason
always to lie as in the Dust, and have their Hearts broken. Although it be so
with them, that all which the World calls good and great, appears as Dross to
them; and it is nothing to them, to part with Friends and Estate, Honor and
Ease, and all, for Christ; and although they have actually suffered the Loss of
all Things, and do count them but Dung, not worth mourning about, or repining
after: Yet notwithstanding all these Seize, attended with the fullest
Assurance of eternal Glory in the World to come, they have infinite Reason to
do as they do, to dislike themselves, to hate themselves, and lie down in the
Dust all in Tears; because still there is such a remaining Disposition in their
Hearts to disesteem the Lord of Glory, to neglect his Interest, and depart from
him; and because they are so far from being what they ought to be,
notwithstanding the Obligations lying upon them are infinite. -- Oh, this is
infinitely vile and abominable, and they have Reason indeed therefore always to
loath and abhor themselves, and repent in Dust and Ashes: Yea, they are
infinitely to blame for not being more humble and penitent. -- A Sight and
Sense of these Things made Io^ lie down in the Dust, and mourn so bitterly for
his Impatience under his past Afflictions, though he had been the most patient
Man in the World. ( Job 42.5, 6.) This made the Psalmist call himself a Beast.
(Psalm. 73.22.) And hence Paul called himself the chief of Sinners; and cried
out, I am carnal, sold under Sin* O wretched Man that I am! And hated to
commend himself when the Corinthians drove him to it, and seemed to Blush at
every Sentence, and in a Sort recalled his Words, -- I am not a whit behind the
very chief of the Apostles, yet I am nothing; I labored more abundantly than
they all, yet not I. -- Such a Sight of Things kills a Self-righteous Spirit at
Root, in the most exalted Saint: for he has nothing (all Things considered) to
make a Righteousness of, but in strict Justice merits eternal Damnation ^^ery
Hour, and does nothing to make the least Amends.

For, if perfect Obedience merits no thanks, as was before observed; and if the
least Sin is an infinite Evil, and deserves an infinite Punishment, as we have
now seen; then a whole Eternity of perfect Obedience would do just nothing
toward making the least Amends for the smallest Sin; much less will the best
Services of the highest Saint on Earth. And consequently when Paul came to die,
he deserved to be damned (considered merely as in himself) as much as when he
was a bloody Persecutor, breathing out Threatenings and Slaughter, yea, and a
great deal more too. For all his Diligence and Zeal in the Service of Christ,
did just nothing toward making the least Amends for what was past; and his
daily Short-comings and sinful Defects run him daily infinitely more and more
into Debt; which he did nothing to Counterbalance. And hence Paul accounts
himself to be Nothing, (2 Cor. 12.11.) as well he might; and all his*
Seize to be in a Sense not worth remembering, ( Phil. 3.13.) and looks
upon himself the chief of Sinners, (1 Timothy 1.15.) and less than the least of
all Saints (Ephesians. 3.8.) and durst venture his Soul upon nothing but mere free
Grace through Jesus Christ. ( Phil. 3.8, 9.) And hence, thus it is with every
Believer, even the most holy; although he daily sees what a God he has sinned
against, how he has sinned against him, and does from a gracious Respect to God
mourn for Sin, for all Sin, as the greatest Evil, and sincerely turns from all
to the Lord, and gives up himself to God, to love him and live to him for ever;
yet he feels that all this makes no Amends at all for his Sins, but that he
really deserves to be damned for them as much as ever: Yea, he feels that he is
infinitely blameworthy for not being more humble and penitent and
self-abhorring, and that so his Desert of Damnation is infinitely increasing
continually. And hence he looks upon the Grace that saves him as absolutely and
divinely free, and infinitely great; and always derives all his Hopes of
Happiness from the free Grace of God through Jesus Christ. And this is what the
Apostle means, when he speaks of his living by the Faith of the Son of God,
(Gal. 2.20.) of his rejoicing in Christ Jesus, and having no Confidence in the
Flesh. (Phil. 3.3.) And this was the Cause of his so earnestly longing to be
found, not in himself, but in Christ; not having on his own Righteousness, but
the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. (Phil. 3.8, 9.) -- How directly
contrary to all this, is the Temper of the blind conceited Pharisee, as
expressed by Maimonides, the Jew, who was professedly one of that Sect? Every
Man (says he) has his Sins, and every Man his Merits: And he that has more
Merits than Sins, is a just Man; but he that has more Sins than Merits, is a
wicked Man. And this is the Way of such Men: They put their Sins, as it were,
into one Scale, and their good Duties into the other; and when they fancy their
Goodness out-weighs their Badness, then they look upon themselves in the Favor
of God. --

But to return,

From what has been said we may learn, that the more sensible any Man is of the
infinite Glory and Excellency of God, and of his infinite Obligations thence
resulting to love God with all his Heart, and obey him in every Thing, the
clearer will he see that perfect Obedience deserves no Thanks, and that the
least Sin is an infinite Evil and deserves an infinite Punishment; and so he
will renounce his own Righteousness, die to himself, and come down to nothing,
more and more: And so will be proportionably more and more sensible of his
absolute Need of Christ and free Grace: And hence the more holy a Man grows,
the more humble will he be. -- And on the contrary, the more insensible a Man
is of God's infinite Glory and Excellency, and of his Obligations thence
resulting, the more will he value his Duties, and the less Evil will he see in
Sin, and the less sensible will he be of his ill Desert, and of his Need of
Christ and free Grace. And hence a self-righteous, impenitent, Christ-despising
Spirit reigns in all who know not God. -- And thus we see some of the
Consequences necessarily following from that infinite Obligation to love God
with all our Hearts, which we are under, resulting from the infinite Glory and
Excellency of the divine Nature. -- But to pass on,

3. This Obligation we are under to love God with all our Hearts, arising from
his infinite Glory and Excellency, is in the Nature of Things eternally
binding. God, his Being, Perfections, and Glory will be eternal; God will
always be infinitely amiable; always as amiable as he is now. And there will be
always therefore the same Reason that he should be loved, for being what he is;
even the very same Reason that there is now. -- This Obligation is therefore
perpetually binding amidst all the Changes of this Life. Whether we are sick or
well, in Prosperity or in Adversity; whether we are raised to Honor with
David, or live in Affluence with Solomon; or whether we are in Prison with
Joseph, or on the Dunghill with Job, or wandering about in Sheepskins and
Goat Skins, destitute, afflicted, tormented, with those mentioned in the
Eleventh to the Hebrews; still this Obligation upon us to love God is
invariably the same. For God is always infinitely amiable in himself; yea and
always will be so, whether we are in the Earth, or in Heaven, or in Hell. And
therefore it always is and always will be our indispensable Duty to love him
with all our Hearts, let what will become of us; and let our Circumstances, as
to Happiness and Misery, be what they will.

Did our Obligations to love God, arise merely from a Consideration of
something else besides the eternal Excellency of the divine Nature, from
something which might altogether cease in Time, then might it possibly some
Time or other cease to be our Duty to love God with all our Hearts: But
assuredly it can never cease, until God ceases to be what he is. The infinite
Obligation hence arising will be eternally Binding. -- Indeed if all our
Obligations to love God did arise merely from some selfish Considerations, then
in Hell, where these selfish Considerations will cease, it would cease to be a
Duty to love God. If I were obliged to love God, only because he loves me, is
kind to me, and designs to make me happy; then when he ceases to love me, to be
kind to me, and to intend my Happiness, all my Obligations to him would cease;
and it would be no Sin, not to love him. But now, since our Obligations to love
God, arise originally from his being what he is in himself, antecedent to all
selfish Considerations; therefore it will for ever remain our Duty to love him,
let our Circumstances, as to Happiness o^ Misery, be what they will: And not to
love him with all our Hearts, will for ever be infinitely Wrong. Hence the
Guilt of the fallen Angels has been increasing ever since their first Apostasy;
and the Guilt of all the Damned will be increasing to all Eternity: And no
Doubt their Punishment will increase in the same Proportion. How inconceivably
and infinitely dreadful, therefore, will be their Case, who are thus
continually sinking deeper and deeper in that bottomless Pit of Woe and Misery!
And indeed, if this be the Case, Hell may well be compared, as it is in
Scripture, to a Bottomless Pit. Rev. 9.1. and 20.1.

4. This Obligation which we are under to love God with all our Hearts,
resulting from the infinite Excellency of the divine Nature, is also
unchangeably binding. As unchangeable as the divine Nature is, as unalterable
as the divine Beauty is, even so unchangeable, so unalterable, in the very
Nature of Things, is this our infinite Obligation, to love him supremely, live
to him ultimately, and delight in him superlatively. As God is infinitely
lovely in himself, and unchangeably so, so it is self-evident we are under an
infinite and invariable Obligation to love him with all our Hearts. This cannot
but be always our Duty. So long as God remains what he is, this will remain our
Duty. It will in the Nature of Things be unalterably right and fit to love him,
and not to do so, unalterably unfit and wrong. -- Our sinking down into ever so
bad a Temper, and getting to be ever so remote from a Disposition to love him,
can no more free us from the Obligation, than it can cause him to cease being
amiable. He must cease to be amiable, before our Obligation thence arising can
possibly cease to be binding. If there be no Alteration in his infinite Beauty,
there can possibly be no Alteration in the infinite Obligation thence arising.
While God remains what he is, and while our natural Powers and Faculties are
maintained in Being, it must continue our Duty to love God with all our Hearts,
and it cannot but be our Duty. In the Nature of Things it is right; and the
Obligation is just as incapable of any Alteration, as is the Equality between
twice two and four. -- The fallen Angels are of so bad a Temper, that the very
Thoughts of God will, doubtless, sooner than any Thing, stir up all their
Hatred: But God deserves to be perfectly loved by them, as much as he did
before their Apostasy. There is a great Alteration in the Temper of their
Minds; but not the least Shadow of Change in the divine Beauty. Their having
contracted so bad and wicked a Temper, cannot surely make it right and lawful
for them to indulge it, and continue in it. Their impious Revolt surely cannot
free them from the Authority and Government of Almighty God. He deserves their
Homage and Subjection, as much as ever he did. The original Ground of all still
remains; he is still THE LORD. -- The same may be said of fallen Man. It is
impossible, that our bad Temper should free us from our Obligation to love God
with all our Hearts. It is still, in the Nature of Things, as wrong, not to
love God with all our Hearts, as ever it was, or as it would have been, had we
not joined with the fallen Angels, and turned Apostates. It must be so, unless
our being of so bad and wicked a Temper makes it right for us to continue of
such a Temper, and we not at all blameworthy for acting agreeable thereto;
that is, unless our being so very bad and wicked, makes us not at all to blame
for our Badness and Wickedness. And so according to this Rule, the viler any
Creature grows, and the more averse to God and to all Good, the less he is to
blame: Which is one of the grossest Absurdities in the World.

Therefore,

(1.) The divine Law which requires us to love God with all our Hearts,
considered as a Rule of Duty, is in the Nature of Things unalterable, and
absolutely incapable of any Abatement, more or less. -- The Thing required, is,
in the Nature of Things, our Duty, antecedent to any Consideration of an
express Law in the Case. As that Children ought to honor their Parents, and
Neighbors do as they would be done by, are Things in themselves Right, and
Duties antecedent to any Consideration of an express Law in the Case. ( Ephesians.
6.1.) These Things would have been Duties, if there had never been any Laws
made concerning them by God or Man. Yea, they are in their own Nature so Right,
that they cannot but be our Duty, and to dishonor our Parents, and Cheat and
Defraud and Injure our Neighbor, cannot but be Wrong. -- So to love God with
all our Hearts is originally right and fit and our Duty; and would have been
so, had there never have been any positive, express Law in the Case.

Now the grand Reason why God the great Governor of the World ever made a Law
requiring of us to love him with all our Hearts, was because it was thus in its
own Nature so infinitely fit. And now to suppose, that he would repeal, or
alter, or abate this Law, when the Grounds and Reasons of his first making of
it remain, as forceable as ever* when the Thing required is as right and fit as
ever; and when it becomes him, as Governor of the World, still to require i^,
as much as ever; I say, to suppose such a Thing, casts the highest Reproach
upon all his glorious Perfections. -- It casts the highest Reflection upon his
infinite Holiness, whereby he is infinitely inclined to love Right and hate
Wrong; for it supposes him to release his Creatures from doing Right, and to
allow them to do Wrong; a little at least. -- It casts the highest Reflection
upon his impartial Justice, whereby he is infinitely inclined to give every one
their Due; for it supposes him to release his Creatures from giving unto God
the Glory which is his Due, and to allow them to keep back Part at least. -- It
casts the highest Reflection upon his Stability and Truth: For it supposes him
to alter his Law, when there is no Reason for it. -- Yea, it reflects even upon
his Goodness it self: For it is so far from being a Benefit to his Creatures to
have this excellent Law alter^d, which is so completely suited to the
Perfection and Happiness of their Nature, that it would be one of the greatest
and forest Calamities which could happen. Like the altering all the good Laws
and Rules in a Family, merely to humor and gratify a rebellious Child, who
will not be governed. Such a Child should be made to conform to the wholesome
Laws of the Family, and not the Laws be abated and bro't down to a Level with
his bad Temper and perverse Humor. -- And finally, it casts the highest
Reflection upon the infinite Wisdom of the great Governor of the World: For it
supposes him to go counter to his own Honor and to the Good of his Creatures,
to counteract all his Perfections, and contradict the Reason and Nature of
Things; and that merely in Condescension unto, and in Compliance with, the
sinful corrupt Taste and Inclinations of an apostate, rebellious, God-hating
World.

And now, how could the great Governor of the World clear and vindicate the
Honor of his great Name, in making any Abatements in this Law, which requires
us to love him with all our Hearts? Would he say, that he had before required
more Love than was his Due? Surely, nothing can be much more blasphemous, than
to suppose this. -- Would he say, that he does not deserve so much as he did?
Still it is equally blasphemous, to suppose this. -- Would he say, that less
than is his Due, is ALL that is his Due? But this would be to contradict
himself, in express Terms. -- Or would he openly profess to quit his Right and
freely allow his Creatures to despise him a little, and sin sometimes, in
Condescension unto and Compliance with the corrupt Inclinations of their sinful
Hearts? But this, in the Nature of Things, would be infinitely Wrong and
Dishonorable. -- Upon what Grounds then could the supreme Governor of the
World go about to make Abatements in a Law so holy, just and good, that only
requires us to love him with all our Hearts; which in the Nature of Things, is
so infinitely right and suitable? Or upon what Grounds can we possibly desire
any Abatements to be made, unless we even profess, that we do not like the Law,
that we are averse to loving God with all our Hearts, that it is a very
tedious, self-denying Thing to us, and what we can by no Means freely come
into; and so upon this Foot desire some Abatements! Or which is the same Thing;
honestly own, that we love Sin so dearly, that God must tolerate us in it, or
we cannot approve of his Government. --

But indeed, God can as easily cease to be, as go about to license and tolerate
the least Sin: And he had rather Heaven and Earth should pass away, than that
the least Jot or Tittle of his Law should fail. Mat. 5.18.

How can any Body therefore once imagine, that Christ came down from Heaven and
died, to purchase this Abatement of the Law of God, and procure this lawless
Liberty for his rebellion Subjects! What! Did he desert his Father's Interest
and Honor, and the Honor of his Law and Government, and spill his precious
Blood, that he might persuade the great Governor of the World, to slacken the
Reins of Government, and give out this impious License to Iniquity? -- Surely
to suppose this, is to make Christ a Friend to Sin, and an Enemy to God.

What then do they mean, who in their Prayers presume to thank God for the
gracious Abatements, which he has made in his Law? And what do Ministers mean
by telling their People from the Pulpit, that the Law is abated, and that
sincere Obedience is ALL that is now required of us? -- Indeed, if poor secure
Sinners are made to believe, that this was the great Business Christ came into
the World upon, no wonder if their impious Hearts are pleased, and if they seem
to love Christ, and prize the Gospel, and give Thanks to God for this great
Goodness and Condescension; for hereby they are delivered from that Strictness
in Religion which they hate, and a wide Door is opened for them to sin without
Blame: Yea, they have the Comfort to think, that it is no Sin, not to love God
with all their Heart, with all their Soul, and with all their Strength. And
generally a very little Matter of Religion they think will serve. And now it is
good Times, and they bless themselves. But alas! They seed upon the Wind: A
deceived Heart has turned them aside.

But by the Way, -- To what Purpose was it for Christ to die to purchase this
Abateme^^ What Need was there of it? Or what Good could it do? -- For if the
Law really required too much, the Governor of the World was obliged in Justice
to make some Abatements: And so the Death of Christ in the Case was perfectly
Needless. -- And if the Law required but just enough, the Governor of the
World could not in Justice make any Abatements: And so Christ must have died in
vain, and totally lost his End.

But indeed Christ never came into the World upon this Design: as he expressly
declares in Mat. 5.17, 18. Think not, that I am come to destroy the Law or the
Prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you,
'till Heaven and Earth pass, one Jot or one Tittle shall in no wise pass from
the Law, 'till all be fulfilled. And this is the very Thing he condemns the
Pharisees for through all this Chapter, that they in Effect taught this Doctrine,
that the Law was abated; that they taught, that although the Law did forbid
some external and more gross Acts of Sin, yet it did not the first stirring of
Corruption at Heart, and some lesser Iniquities. For Instance, that they must
not commit Murder; but that it was no Harm to be angry without Cause, and speak
reproachfully, and keep a secret Grudge at Heart. (v. 21, -- 26.) That they
must not commit Adultery; but that it was no Harm to have secret lascivious
Thoughts. (v. 27, -- 30.) That they must not be guilty of Perjury; but that
there was no Harm in little petty Oaths in common Conversation. (v. 33, -- 37.)
That they must not hate their Friends, but there was no Harm in hating their
Enemies. (v. 43, -- 47.) These and such like Allowances they taught, were made
in the Law; and so, that such Things were not sinful. But our Savior condemns
their Doctrine, as false and damning; and insists upon it, that the Law is not
abated, and never shall be; but says, it still requires us to be perfect, as
our heavenly Father is perfect. (v. 48.) And declares, that if our
Righteousness exceeds not the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees (who
were so much for abating the Law,) we shall never enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. (v. 20.) So far was our blessed Savior from any Design to abate the
holy Law of God, or lessen our Obligations to a perfect Conformity to it. --
And indeed, if Christ had died, and should die a Thousand Times, to purchase an
Abatement of the Law, (if it be lawful to make such a Supposition) it would be
to no Purpose: For it cannot be abated, unless God ceases to be what he is. For
so long as God is infinitely lovely, we shall necessarily be under an infinite
Obligation to love him with all our Heart, and with all our Strength; and it
will necessarily be infinitely Wrong, not to do so. -- The Truth is, that God's
sending his Son into the World to die for the Redemption of Sinners, instead of
freeing us from our original natural Obligations to keep the Law, binds us more
strongly so to do; as we shall afterward see. -- Psalm. 119.160. Thy Word is
true from the Beginning: And every one of thy righteous Judgments endures for
ever. (v. 128.) I esteem all thy Precepts concerning all Things to be Right.
(v. 144.) The Righteousness of thy Testimonies is everlasting. (v. 152.) Thou
have found^^ them for ever. And therefore (v, 160.) Every one of them will
endure for ever. As if the Psalmist had said, The Thing required in thy Law is
in it is own Nature Right, everlastingly Right; and therefore, as Governor of
the World, thou have by Law for ever settled and established it as Duty, by a
Law never to be altered, but to endure for ever: and for ever therefore will it
endure.

OBJECT. But is it fair and just for God to require more of his Creatures, than
they can do?

ANSWER. What are we come to, in this apostate World, that we cannot see it to
be just and fair, in the great Governor of Heaven and Earth, the infinitely
glorious God, to require us his Creatures, so much as to love him, with all our
Hearts? What! Is this too much? Is this more than he deserves from us? -- Or
does the Truth lie here, that we hate him so, that we cannot find in our Hearts
to love him; and therefore cry, He must not insist upon it, or if he does, he
deals unjustly and is very hard with us? -- But is not this the very Thing
those Citizens did, who hated their Prince, and sent after him, saying, We will
not have this Man to reign over us? Luke 19.14. -- These Hints may serve as an
Answer for the present: But of this more hereafter.

But while some are pleading, that Christ died to purchase an Abatement of the
Law, others carry the Point still further, and say that Christ died entirely to
disannul it; and so, that now it wholly ceases to be a Rule of Life to
Believers. When as one great and declared Design of Christ's coming into the
World was, to recover his People to a Conformity thereto. ( Tit. 2.11, 12, 13.)
-- Oh how Men do love their Corruptions, and hate God and his holy Law, and
long to have it cashiered and removed out of the World, that so they may live
as they list, and yet escape the Reproaches of their Consciences here, and
eternal Punishment hereafter! -- But GOD sits King for ever, and will assert
the Rights of his Crown, and maintain the Honor of his Majesty, and the Glory
of his great Name, and vindicate his injured Law; although it be in the eternal
Damnation of Millions of his rebellious Subjects. Luke 19.27. But those mine
Enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay
them before me. -- And here by the Way, we may see what an aversion Men have to
right Thoughts of God and divine Things; and may be convinced of the absolute
Necessity of a supernatural all-conquering Light, to remove these Prejudices,
and make Men see and believe the Truth, and love and cordially embrace it. (
Job. 8.47. -- 1 Cor. 2.14.) -- A holy God does not appear infinitely glorious
and amiable to an unholy Heart: and Sinners not seeing the Grounds of loving
God with all their Hearts, hence do not see the Reason of the Law; hence do not
see how holy, just and good the Law is, and the carnal Mind being Enmity
against God, is at the same Time Enmity against the Law, which is a Transcript
of the divine Nature ( Romans 8.7.) And hence Sinners do not love to believe
either God or his Law to be what they really are. And this Temper makes them
blind to what the Scripture says, and leads them to frame a false Image of God,
and entertain false Notions of his Law, that they may have a God and a Law both
to their own Minds.

And now, as are Men's Notions of the Law, such are their Notions of Religion;
the Essence of which principally consists in a Conformity to the Law.

Hence, here is one, he pleads for great Abatements in the Law, and he contents
himself with the mere Form of Religion. He is not Unjust, nor an Extortioner,
nor an Adulterer; but much better than some of his Neighbors: He prays in his
Family, goes to public Worship, and attends the Sacrament, and thinks himself
a very good Man; like him in Luke 18.9, 10, etc. But as for the Doctrines
relating to our natural Depravity, Regeneration, Conversion, Faith, Communion
with God, and all the inside of Religion, he understands nothing about them;
they seem as strange as it did to Nicodemus to hear Christ discourse about the
New Birth. (Ioh. 3.) And all the Talk about the inward Influences of the holy
Spirit, in awakening, convincing, humbling and converting a Sinner, and in
enlightening, teaching, quickening, comforting and sanctifying a Believer, is
quite unintelligible: for these Things don't come into his Notions of Religion.
-- According to his Opinion, the Law is brought down so low, that it is an easy
Thing to become a good Man: the Change is but small, and there is scarce any
Need of the Spirit's Help; much less any Room for the Exercise of Sovereign
Grace; for he is so good-natured, that he can become Good of his own free Will,
(i. e. according to his Notions of Goodness,) and do that which shall
effectually entitle him to the Promises: And thus he has the Staff in his own
Hand. And now here is a charming Religion, perfectly suited to the Taste of an
apostate World; for it is calculated to quiet the Conscience, while the Heart
lies out estranged from God and dead in Sin. ( Romans 7.8, 9.) Especially, so
much of it, as is for their Credit and apparently serves their worldly
Interest, will pretty readily and heartily be fallen in with; and the best have
their Failings, no Man is perfect, and I endeavor to be sincere, and the best
have their Doubts, Assurance is not to be attained, and such like Pleas help to
keep their Consciences secure. And now, O how they love those Ministers, that
cry, Peace, Peace! But hate those that would search Things to the Bottom, and
sound an Alarm to secure Sinners, and deluded Hypocrites. -- The same Temper
that makes them hate God and his Law, makes them hate his Ministers too. And
they are for another Kind of a God, and for another Kind of a Law, another Kind
of a Religion, and another Kind of Ministers, that they may have all to their
Mind. And when all is done, they are confident they are now in the Right,
because they are suited. They love to have it so; and therefore firmly believe
it is so.

Hence, again, here is another, who has been mightily terrified and in great
Distress under a Sense of the Wrath of God and the Dreadfulness of Damnation;
but in the distressing Hour he has had it revealed to him (by the Spirit of
God, he thinks) that his Sins are forgiven; and now he is sure of Heaven, and
is ravished at the Thoughts of eternal Glory: he holds it a great Sin to doubt;
and all his Religion consists in Faith and Joy, i. e. in believing that his
Sins are forgiven, and rejoicing in his blessed and happy and safe Estate, and
in the Expectation of future Glory. -- But as for a real Conformity to the Law,
it makes up no Part of his Religion. He understands rightly nothing what the
Law requires; he is neither sensible of his Duty to God, or to his Fellow-Men:
Yea, he hates ^o hear any Thing about Law, or Duty. -- It is all Legal, he
cries, and tends to kill Religion, and to wound weak Christians, and grieve and
drive away the Spirit of Grace: and no preaching suits his Taste, but what
consists in telling over and commending such Experiences as his, and in setting
forth the Love of God and Christ to such, and calling upon such to believe, and
rejoice, and never doubt their State again. And in general those Things which
tend to strengthen his Confidence and increase his Joy, he esteems right and
good; and all Things of a contrary Tendency he esteems wrong and bad. This
seems to be his only Criterion of Right and Wrong, and the only Rule he makes
Use of in drawing up a Judgment: But as for the Law, it is of no Use with him.
-- There is doubtless many a Man that feels and acts and lives, as if the Law
was abated, who yet will not plead for that Doctrine. -- So doubtless there is
many a Man that feels and acts and lives, as if the Law wholly ceased to be a
Rule of Life, who yet will not venture to say so. The Force of Education and
their worldly Interest and Credit keeps Men many Times from showing what they
be, by an open Profession. However, secretly this Temper reigns within them;
yea, sometimes it breaks out into open Light, in their visible Conduct. -- But,
as strange as it may seem, there are Multitudes that not only have the Root of
these Things in their Hearts, but really believe them and openly profess and
plead for them. Hence it is on the one Hand, that the Arminian, Neono^ian, and
Pelagiam Errors have taken their Rise, and the Antinomian, on the other. Wrong
Notions of God lie at the Bottom; and then wrong Notions of the Law; and then
wrong Notions of Religion in gene^^l: and all originally proceed and g^ow up
out of the wrong Temper of Men's Minds. For all unregenerate Men would fain
have a God and a Law and a Religion to suit the Temper of their Hearts* Micah
4.5. For all People will walk every one in the Name of (...) God.

In the mean Time, the truly godly Man, who sees that the Obligation, which he
is under to love God with all his Heart, resulting from the Excellency of the
divine Nature, is unchangeable; and that the Law, which requires this, is
unaltera^le* instead of going about to contrive a Religion that may suit the
natural Temper of his Heart, is convinced that the Temper of his Heart is the
very Thing that must be changed. -- He is convinced of his infinite Obligation
to be altogether such as the Law requires him to be, and that he is infinitely
blameable for the least Defect. -- Hence, those Words, The Law is holy, just,
and good, the Law is spiritual; but I am carnal, sold under Sin. O wretched Man
that I am! do exactly express the Thoughts of the most exalted Saint on Earth,
yea, even of the great Saint Paul himself, Romans 7.12, 14, 24. -- Indeed, had
St. Paul thought that the Law was wholly disannulled, or much abated, he might
then have imagined that he was so good, as to be quite free from Sin, or pretty
near being so, and been ready to speak the Language of the Pharisee; God, I
thank thee, I am not as other Men. But now, notwithstanding all his high and
wonderful Seize, yet, when he considered what the Law was, which he was
under, and how very far he was from being exactly what that required, the
native Language of his humble Heart is, I am carnal, sold under Sin! O wretched
Man that I am! Some have thought, that St. Paul had arrived so nigh to
Perfection, th^^ he could not spe^k th^se Words of himself. Their Mistake seems
to arise from their wrong Notions of the Law, to which St. Paul compared
himself, and according to which he drew up his Judgment. And from the same
Source it seems to be, that they can think those (...)* ver. 22. applicable to
the Unregenerate. I delight in the Law of G^d after the inward Man. When in
Truth the Unregenerate are in their Temper, diametrically opposite to the Law.
Romans 8.7.
-- And now the Apostle, from a Sense of his infinite Obligations to be what
the Law requires, and of his great Distance from this, forgets the Things which
are behind; and he runs, he wrestles, he fights, he strives, he keeps under his
Body, he lays aside every Weight; in short, he appears like a Man in a perfect
Agony: So great was his Sense of Duty, and so much had he to do. -- And at the
same Time, from a Sense of his Impotency and of his Unworthiness, of his Need
of the Redeemer and the Sanctifier, it is his Maxim, to pray always, and to ask
all Things in the Name of Christ. -- Now in his Example we have the Temper,
which prevails more or less in every godly Man, exactly painted. -- And thus we
have had pictured in Miniature three different Sorts of Religion, arising from
three different Notions of the Law. The Picture is b^gun; and in the sequel, I
purpose to paint all three, as nea^ to the Life as I can; that we may see what
they be, and wherein they differ; which is Right, and which is Wrong. But so
much for the first Inference, that the Law as a Rule of Duty, cannot be
repealed or abated.

And now to proceed,

2. From what has been said it is evident, that the Law in its Threatenings of
eternal Damnation for the least Sin, is equally incapable of any Repeal or
Abatement. -- For if our Obligation, to love God with all our Hearts and obey
him in every Thing, resulting from the divine Perfections, is infinite,
eternal, and unchangeable; and if therefore the least Sin necessarily be
infinitely Evil, and deserving of an infinite Punishment, and unalterably so;
then the Law considered as threatening eternal Damnation for the least Sin, is
in its own Nature unalterably holy and just: And consequently it cannot be
repealed, consistently with the Holiness, Justice, and Honor of the great
Governor of the World. If the Governor of the World had, in a mere arbitrary
Manner, made a Law, that Sin should be punished with eternal Damnation; then he
might, in a mere arbitrary Manner, have repealed it: But since, in the Nature
of Things, Justice called for it, that such a Law should be made, therefore so
long as the Grounds and Reasons of the Law remain, the Law cannot, in Justice,
be repealed.

None can deny, but that the great Governor of the World has actually made a
Law, that Sin shall be punished with eternal Damnation: And none can deny, but
that this Law is to be put in Execution, to the full, at and after the great
Judgment-Day. But if Justice had not called for it, surely the infinitely good
Governor of the World would never have made such a Law; much less would he
ever put it in Execution. For to make and execute such a Law, in a merely
arbitrary sovereign Manner, when in the Nature of Things Justice does not call
for it, would be infinitely cruel and tyrannical, and perfectly inconsistent
with the divine Perfections; as is self-evident. See Genesis 18.25. and Ezekiel.
18.25.

But then, if the great Governor of the World made this Law not arbitrarily,
but because in the Nature of Things Justice called for it; then so long as the
Reason and Ground of the Law remains, the Law it self cannot in Justice ever be
repealed. If Justice called for its being made, then it cannot be un-made
consistently with Justice, so long as the Ground and Reason of it remains; as
is self-evident. -- But the Reason of the Law is, in the Nature of Things,
unalterable. For the Reason of the Law was the infinite Evil of Sin, whereby it
deserved an infinite Punishment. As long therefore as Sin remains an infinite
Evil, so long must the Law stand unrepealed: But Sin will always be an infinite
Evil, so long as we are under infinite Obligations to love God with all our
Hearts and obey him in every Thing; which we shall always be, so long as God
remains infinitely glorious and amiable, and this will be for ever. Therefore
this Law can never possibly, consistent with divine Justice, be repealed.

For any, therefore, to desire to have it repealed, is to turn Enemy to the
Holiness and Justice and Honor of the supreme Ruler of the World, as well as
to his Law and Government: And argues, that they have no Regard to the
Rectitude and Fitness of Things, but only to Self-Interest: as those among Men
are real Enemies to the civil Government, who desire the good and wholesome
Laws thereof to be repealed. And it is upon this Ground, that St. Paul
concludes carnal Men to be at Enmity against GOD, because they are Enemies to
his LAW. ( Romans 8.7.) For if Men loved God, they would be disposed to love his
Law and Government, which express his Nature.

To suppose therefore, that the Son of God came into the World and died, that
the Law in its Threatenings might be repealed, is to suppose that he also is
turned an Enemy to God, to his Holiness and Justice, to his Law and Government;
and that he is properly gone over to be on the Side of his Father's rebellious
Subjects.

Besides, to what Purpose would it have been (on the Hypothesis of these Men)
for Christ to have died, that the Law in its Threatenings might be repealed?
What Need was there of it? or what Good would it have done? For if in Justice
it ought to have been repealed, there was no Need of his dying to procure this:
Or, if in Justice it ought not to be repealed, then his dying could not procure
it, and so would do no Good. The righteous Governor of the World would have
repealed it of his own Accord, if it had been right and fit so to do: and if in
the Nature of Things it was not right, then not any Thing whatever could
persuade him to do it.

But the Truth is, Christ came into the World and died to answer all the
Demands of the Law; that so although the Sinner be saved, yet the Law might*
never be repealed, but be firmly established. For the Governor of Heaven and
Earth was utterly against the Law's being repealed, as a Thing in itself
infinitely unreasonable. And therefore the Apostle says, Do we make void the
Law through Faith? God forbid! Yea, we establish the Law. (Romans 3.31.) And indeed
it was nothing but God's infinite Aversion to repeal the Law, as a Thing in it
self infinitely unfit and wrong, that was the Thing which made the Death of
Christ needful. For, if the Law might have been repealed, Sinners might have
been saved without any more ado: but if it could not, and must not be repealed,
then the Demands of it must be answered by some Means or other, or every Sinner
damned. And now Christ stepped in and did this; and so secured the Honor of
God's Holiness and Justice, Law and Government, and opened a Way for the
Sinner's Salvation. And this Account of the Reason of Christ's Death the
Scriptures plainly give us. Gal. 3.10, 13, 14. Cursed is every one that
continues not in all Things written in the Book of the Law to do them. --
Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us.
-- That the Blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ.
For (Heb. 9.22.) without shedding of Blood there is no Remission. Therefore (
Romans 3.25, 26.) Christ was set forth to be a Propitiation for Sin, -- to
declare his Righteousness, -- that he might be just, and the Iustifier of him
which believes in Jesus. And hence (v. 31.) Do we make void the Law through
Faith? God forbid! Yea, we establish the Law.

Yea, the Apostle evidently sets out upon this Hypothesis, that the Law is not
repealed, but stands in full Force. He lays this down as a first Principle, in
that argumentative Discourse which we have in the three first Chapters of his
Epistle to the Romans. Chap. 1. v 18. The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven
against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men. And taking this for
granted, he goes on to prove, that both Jews and Greeks are all under Sin, and
so the whole World guilty before God; to the 19th ver. of the 3d Chap. And
hence he argues, that by the Deeds of the Law no Flesh could be justified. But
now, if the Law was repealed, the whole World was not Guilty before God, nor
any one in the World: For Sin is not imputed, where there is no Law. (Romans
5.13) -- And if the Law was repealed, what Need was there of such a long Train
of Arguments, to prove, that no Flesh could be justified by the Law? For it
would have been enough to have said, that a repealed Law could neither justify
nor condemn any Body. -- And why does he use such Arguments as he does? For
thus he reasons, The Law requires perfect Obedience as a Condition of Life, and
threatens Tribulation and Wrath against every Soul of Man that does Evil: But
Jews and Gentiles have all sinned: Therefore are all guilty and condemned
according to Law* and consequently cannot be cleared and justified by Law. For
all this Reasoning supposes, that the Law is as much in Force as ever it was.
And accordingly he goes on to show, that the Design of Christ's Death was to
answer the Demands of the Law, that there might be a Way opened for the
Salvation of Sinners, consistent with divine Justice, and at the same Time the
Law not be made void, but established; As was before observed.

And now this being the Case,

Hence, we find the Scriptures every where look upon those that have not a
special Interest in the Righteousness of Christ by Faith, as being as much
under the Wrath of God and Curse of the Law, as if Christ had never died. Ioh.
3.18. He that believes not is condemned already. v 36. The Wrath of God
abides upon him. And, Gal. 3.10. As many as are of the Works of the Law are
under the Curse. And, Romans 1.18. The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven,
against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men* who hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness. -- Thus the Wrath of God is revealed against the Unbeliever;
yea, abides upon him; yea, the Law condemns and curses him. But if the Law had
been repealed by the Death of Christ, all the World would have been freed from
the Curse. For a repealed Law, can neither bless the righteous, nor curse the
wicked; but stands for nothing.

And hence also, we find that Christless Sinners, when awakened by the Holy
Spirit to see and feel what a State they are in, are always convinced that they
are under the Wrath of God and Curse of the Law; and hereby are made to
understand their Need of a Savior. ( Romans 3.19, 20.) But if the Law had been
repealed by the Death of Christ, this could not be; for they would then have
been under no Wrath, nor Curse. Nor would any have ever felt a Spirit of
Bondage, as they do in every Age of the World, and as they used to do in St.
Paul's Day. ( Romans 8.15.) For it is the Law only, that works Wrath. Romans 4.15.

And hence we shall find, even all the World shall find, and Thousands and
Thousands to their everlasting Sorrow, that when the Day of Judgment comes, the
Law shall be executed with the utmost Severity, upon all that know not God, and
obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ. (2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8.) And God's Justice in
so doing will shine bright in the Sight of all Worlds: For he designs on that
Day to reveal the Righteousness of his Judgments. And hence it is called, the
Day of the Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. (Romans 2.5.) But if the
Law is repealed by the Death of Christ, and if God has told the World that he
has repealed it; for him now to revive it, and judge and condemn the World by
it; would be to cast Contempt upon the Death of Christ, and deceive his poor
Creatures, and unmercifully and unrighteously judge and condemn them, by a Law
that was repealed, a Law they never were under, and so ought never to have been
judged by. From the whole therefore, it is evident that the Law, that threatens
eternal Damnation for the least Sin, never has been, nor ever will be repealed.

Well then (if this be the Case) may Ministers thunder Hell and Damnation
against a secure, wicked World. And well may poor Sinners tremble under a Sense
of divine Wrath, when their Eyes begin to be opened to see where they be. For
all those Comforts that the Formalist gets by thinking the Law is abated or
disannulled, and so hi^ State safe, are but the Result of an erroneous Head and
a (...) secure in Sin. And what has been said under this Particular, will
rationally account for all the Agony and Distress of an awakened Sinner. --
When God, the great Governor of the World, the Revenger of Sin, begins to make
the poor Sinner remember his Ways and his Doings which have not been right, and
see what a Creature he is, and what a Condition he is in, and be sensible of
what he deserves; and when he comes to understand that his Soul is forfeited,
and that it is right that Justice should take Place, and that God is at Liberty
to do as he pleases: Surely this must be Heart-rending, Soul-distressing to a
poor, sinful, guilty, Hell-deserving Creature.

And if God* will not repeal the Law, but still insist upon it, that it is holy
and just; no wonder the Sinner is made to own it too, before ever he is
pardoned. For it would be unbecoming the supreme Lord of the Universe, to grant
a Pardon to a guilty Rebel, that is too high-hearted to own, that the Law by
which he stands condemned, is holy and just. -- O how right it is, that the
Sinner should come down, and see and know and own for ever, that he is justly
condemned, and as such apply himself to the Sovereign Grace of God through Jesus
Christ for a Pardon! And O how sovereign and free and divine, is that Grace,
that pardons and ^aves the poor, sinful, guilty, Hell-deserving Wretch through
Jesus Christ! ( Romans 3.19, 27.) -- And thus as God the Father honors the Law,
by refusing to repeal it; and God the Son, by answering it is Demands; so does
God the Holy Ghost, by making the poor Sinner, see and feel and own, that it is
holy and just, before ever he internally reveals the Mercy of God through Jesus
Christ unto him. So that the Law (...), and Sin is imbittered, and the Sinner
humbl^ (...) Grace glorified, all at once. -- As in the external Revelation God
has made in his Word, the Law is before the Gospel; so it is in internal
Influences and Operations of the holy Spirit upon the Elect; and that for the
same Reason, that the Law might be a Schoolmaster, to bring Men to Christ.

To conclude, from all that has been said, we may learn what to think of the
Religion and of the Hopes of these two Sorts of Men. -- (1.) The legal
Hypocrite: who supposing, that the good old Law is repealed and laid aside, and
that a new Law, only requiring sincere Obedience, is established in its Room;
hence merely from Self-love, and for Self Ends, sets about Duty and endeavors
to be sincere; and here on this Foundation builds all his Hopes of Acceptance
in the Sight of God. For since the Law is not repealed, but stands in full
Force; therefore the Religion of such, is not that Thing which God requires or
will accept; and their new Law is a Whim, and their Hopes are all built on the
Sand. Their whole Scheme results from a total Ignorance of God, and his Law,
and the present State of Mankind; and is entirely built on Falsehood. -- (2.)
The Evangelical Hypocrite: All whose Faith and Joy originally result from a
supposed Discovery, of the Love of God, or Love of Christ, or that his Sins are
pardoned. This Discovery is the Foundation of his Faith, and his Faith is the
Foundation of his Joy and of all his Religion. And yet the Thing discovered is
a Lie. For, as has been proved, every one until he is a Believer, until he has
acted Faith, is not pardoned, but condemned; is not beloved of God, but under
his Wrath; and therefore to have Pardon of Sin and the Love of God discovered
before the first act of Faith, and to have such a Discovery lay the Foundation
for the first act of Faith, and a Foundation for all Religion, is to be imposed
upon with a Lie, and to have a gross Falsehood lie at the Foundation of their
Faith, their Religion and of all their Hopes. -- The legal Hypocrite may be
convinced by such Scriptures as these, Luke 18.9 -- 13. Romans 3.20 -- 31. and
Chap. 4. v. 5. Which prove that a Man cannot find Acceptance with God by his
own Righteousness. -- And the evangelical Hypocrite may be convinced by such
Scriptures as these, Ioh. 3.18, 36. Act. 3.19. Which prove that a Sinner is not
pardoned till after Faith. -- A true Sight and Sense of the Law, would
effectually convince the one, and the other, that all their Hopes are built on
wrong Apprehensions of Things; and that all their Religion is Counterfeit; and
that they are yet in the Gall of Bitterness and Bonds of Iniquity: And the one
would no longer venture his Soul on his own Righteousness, nor the other on his
Discovery. The Law's insisting upon perfect, sinless Obedience, would convince
the one, that his own Righteousness might not be depended upon: and the Law's
cursing every Unbeliever, would convince the other, that his Discovery was
false. And the Law's requiring us to love God primarily for his own Beauty,
would convince both of their graceless Estates, in as much as the Religion of
both primarily takes its Rise from Self-love. -- It is from the want of a
realizing Sight and Sense of the Nature and Extent of the Law, and that out of
Christ we are exposed to all the Curses thereof, that a sinful, guilty World
are so insensible of their graceless, and their wretched and miserable
Condition, and so apt to flatter themselves that they are rich, and increased
in Goods, and stand in Need of Nothing. Romans 7.8, 9. Without the Law Sin was
dead. -- I was alive without the Law once.

Thus we see that the Obligation which we were under, to love God with all our
Hearts, resulting from the infinite Excellency of the divine Nature, antecedent
to all selfish Considerations, is infinitely, eternally and unchangeably
binding. And thus we see a Variety of important Consequences necessarily
following therefrom. And I have insisted the longer upon the Nature of this
Obligation, not only because it is the first and greatest; but because it has a
mighty Influence into all our additional Obligations. -- For,

5. and lastly. It is from the infinite Excellency of the divine Nature, that
all our additional Obligations originally derive their Strength, their Energy,
their binding Power. The infinite Excellency of the divine Nature so entirely
lays the Foundation of it is being our Duty to love God with all our Hearts,
that were it not for this, it would cease to be our Duty, notwithstanding all
other Considerations. If he were not by Nature GOD, it would not be fit, that
we should love and worship him as GOD, upon any Account whatsoever. He could
have no such Right to us; or Authority over us, as to make it our Duty; nor
could he render it our Duty by showing of us any Kindness whatsoever. Yea, if
he were not by Nature GOD, it would be wrong for us to pay him divine
Adoration. It would be Idolatry. It would be a worshipping of one as God, who by
Nature is not God. And by the same Argument which the Orthodox have been wont
to use against the Arians, who deny the Divinity of Christ; If he be not a
divine Person, he ought not to have divine Worship paid him: I say, by the same
Argument, if God were not by Nature GOD, it could not upon any Account be Right
and our Duty, to love and worship him as God. It is his being by Nature God,
his being what he is, and his infinite Excellency in being such, which
therefore lays the original Foundation of all our Obligations, and which gives
Life and Energy to all. And accordingly we may observe, that the original
Ground and Reason upon which God, as Governor of the World, acts, in making a
Law that we should love him with all our Hearts, is, because he is the Lord. As
is evident from the Tenor of the Law it self. Thou shall love the LORD etc. i.
e. Because he is the LORD, etc. Yea, it is upon this Ground originally that God
takes it upon him to give all his Laws to us; for this is the constant Style,
Thus and thus shall ye do, FOR I AM THE LORD.

Those therefore, who are influenced to love and worship God, not at all
because he is God, but altogether from other Considerations; not at all from a
Sense of his infinite Excellency, but altogether on other Accounts; are so far
from being truly religious, that they are indeed guilty of great Wickedness in
all they do. For although they pretend to love and worship God, yet it is not at
all because he is God: though they pretend to pay divine Adoration to him, yet it
is not at all because he is a divine Being. So that when they pretend to pay
divine Worship and Adoration to God, it is merely from some selfish
Consideration, from Self-love and for Self Ends; there is no true Regard to
God, but all centers in Self. So that Self indeed is their Idol, and the only
God they serve. And their pretending to love and worship God is mere Mockery.
-- When they pretend to love and worship God, it is not at all because he is
God, not at all from a Sense of his divine Glory; but only to appease his Anger
and obtain his Favor, or because they consider him as their Friend and
Benefactor. And now to come to God and pretend to worship him as if he was God,
and yet not to do it at all because he is God, but for mean and mercenary and
selfish Ends, is a very complicated Wickedness: and to think to please God in
this Way, and get into Favor by this Means, discovers such Ignorance and
Contempt of God, and a Frame of Heart so full of secret Blasphemy, spiritual
Idolatry, Pride, and Hypocrisy, as cannot easily be expressed. -- They
practically deny his Divinity: yet pretend to pay him divine Worship. -- They
pretend to serve God: yet really intend only to serve themselves. -- They make
as if they loved God: But only love themselves. -- Yet so intolerably mean are
their Thoughts of God, that they expect to please him by all this. -- To make
the best of it, all that Religion is mere Hypocrisy, which does not primarily
take its Rise from a Sense of the infinite Excellency of the divine Nature.

Thus then we see what is the first and chief Motive of a genuine Love to God.
-- He is a Being of infinite Understanding, and of almighty Power, infinite in
Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, Goodnes^, and Truth; and so a Being of infinite
Glory and Excellency; and so infinitely amiable, and infinitely worthy to be
loved with all our Hearts. -- And this Obligation is binding originally in
itself, antecedent to a Consideration of any other Motive whatsoever: and it is
infinitely, eternally and unchangeably binding, and gives Life and Energy and
Strength to all other Obligations. -- And hence if we do love God with all our
Hearts, we do but our Duty and deserve no Thanks: But we are infinitely to
blame for the least Defect, and can never do any Thing to atone for it, but
deserve everlasting Damnation. And it will always be our Duty thus to love God,
and the least Defect will be always thus blameworthy, let our Circumstances as
to Happiness or Misery be what they will. All our Hearts will be always due to
God, and we shall always stand bound to pay this Debt, whether we have any
Heart for it or no. And God will always appear such an infinite Enemy to the
least Defect, as in his Law he has declared himself to be; nor is there any
Hopes of our finding Acceptance in his Sight, unless it be by a Union to and
Interest in Him, who has answered all the Demands of the Law in the Room of
those who believe in Him. And all Pretense of Love to God which does not take
its Rise from this Foundation, is but mere Hypocrisy. -- All these Consequences
so necessarily follow, from a Supposition of the infinite Excellency and
Amiableness of the divine Nature, and so evidently, as that if God be but seen
aright; a Sense of his infinite Beauty will immediately assure the Heart, that
these Things are so. A Sense of his infinite Glory will make us see and feel
that we are under infinite Obligations to love him with all our Hearts, and
that we could deserve no Thanks for doing so, but that the least Defect is
infinitely Wrong, etc. A Sense of the infinite Glory of God will effectually
establish the Heart in these Things against all the subtle Arguments and fair
Pretenses of Heretics. A Sense of the infinite Glory of God immediately
imparted to the Soul by the Spirit of God, whereby the Heart is thus divinely
established in the Belief of the Truth, is therefore that Unction from the holy
One, which all the Saints have, whereby they are effectually secured from being
finally led away by false Teachers. At least that Unction consists partly in
this. 1 Ioh. 2.20. -- 27. -- And at the same Time, that the People of God are
thus established in the Belief of these Truths, relating to Law and Duty, from
a Sense of the infinite Glory of God; I say, at the same Time this Sense of the
infinite Glory of God, begets a Disposition in the Heart to conform to this Law
and do this Duty. And thus it is that God writes his Law in our Hearts and puts
it in our inward Parts, when he intends to become our God and to make us his
People. (Heb. 8.10, 11.) And hence it begins to be the Nature of the People of
God, to love him with all their Hearts. And their Views and their Temper and
every Thing else being thus entirely new, hence they are called new Creatures.
Old Things are past away, and all Things are become new. -- But now this Sense
of the infinite Glory of God, which thus lays the very lowest Foundation of
true Religion, is entirely left out of all false Religions. And by this, true
Religion stands distinguished, as something specifically different from all the
false Religions in the World. And hence we may observe, that it is spoken of in
Scripture, as something peculiar to true Saints, that they see God, and know
God. Joh. 8.19, 55. Ye neither know me, nor my Father. Joh. 14.19 The World
sees me no more, but ye see me. 1 John 3.6. Whosoever sins, has not seen
him, neither known him. 1 John 2.3. Hereby we do know, that we know him, if we
keep his Commandments. 1 John 4.7, 8. Every one that loves, knows God. He
that loves not, knows not God. -- And the unregenerate not knowing God, not
having a Sense of his infinite Glory to lay the Foundation of their Love and o^
their Religion; hence all their Love and all their Religion entirely take their
Rise from mere selfish Considerations, and nothing but Self-love lies at
Bottom. And hence it is natural ^or unregenerate Men to think they deserve
something for their Duties, and as natural to be insensible of the infinite
Evil of their Sins. And so it is their Nature, to magnify and be proud of their
own Goodness, and to ex^enuate and be unhumbled for their Badness. And from
hence results our native Aversion to Faith and Repentance, and Contrariety to
the Gospel-Way of Salvation. And now NEW Gospels, new Sorts of Faith and
Repentance are coined, new Notions of Religion contrived, to suit the depraved
Temper and Vitiated Taste of unhumbled, impenitent Sinners, who are concerned
to secure their own Interest, but care not what becomes of God's Honor. Hence
Errors take their Rise, and professing Christians are divided into Parties, and
one runs this Way, and another that, and all hope to get to Heaven at last. --
And now at length after so great a variety of Inferences and Remarks, and so
large a Consideration of the first and chief Motive of a genuine Love to God; I
proceed,

2. To take a short View of the additional Obligations which we lie under, to
love God with all our Hearts. I AM THE LORD, (this lays the first Foundation,
and leads the Way, when from Mount Sinai, the Almighty proclaims his Law, but
then he immediately goes on to add,) THY GOD, which brought thee out of the
Land of Egypt and out of the House of Bondage. Exodus 20. -- God has such a
Right to us, and such an Authority over us, and has done so many Things for us,
and promised so many Things to us, that our additional Obligations to be the
Lord's, to love him and live to him, are exceeding great.

Particularly,

Nothing is more reasonable than that we should be entirely dedicated to that
God, whose we be, originally, and by an entire, underived and unalienable
Right. Especially considering what he is in himself, and that he is Lord of all
Things, and by Nature God most high. -- Indeed, if our Creator was not by
Nature the most high God, then he could not be the supreme Lord of all Things;
for there would be one above him; and so we should not be his, entirely and
absolutely; for he himself and we his Creatures, would belong originally to
another, even to him that by Nature would be the most high God; and him we
ought to love and worship. -- But our Creator himself, being absolutely the
first, and absolutely supreme, Self-existent and independent, the sole Author
and Lord of all Things, as well as infinitely glorious in himself, his Right to
us is original, underived and most a^solute and entire. And therefore it is
infinitely fit and suitable, that we should be, in the constant Frame and
Disposition of our Hearts, absolutely, entitely and wholly the Lord's, and that
we should for ever exert all our Powers, to the very utmost, to promote his
Honor and Interest. And it is infinitely unreasonable that we should ever set
up ourselves, and be attached to any Interest of our own, separate from his. --
And inasmuch as he is infinitely better than we be, (Yea all the Nations of the
Earth, are less than nothing before him,) and has such an entire Right unto us,
his Interest therefore should be regarded as more valuable than our own, yea,
infinitely more. For if our own Interest appears as valuable to us, as his; we
set our selves upon a level with him, and claim as great a Right to our selves,
as he has; and if his Interest does not appear as being of infinitely greater
Value to us, than our own, we do not esteem him as being infinitely better,
than we be ourselves, and his Right to us infinitely greater, than our own
Right to our selves is. -- It is therefore infinitely reasonable, since God is
what he is, and has such a Right to us as he has, that we should be constantly
from the very bottom of our Hearts wholly his, and every Moment live wholly to
him, and always have his Interest lie most near our Hearts, as being of
infinitely more Worth Value and Importance than our own. As Moses, who in a
Measure was made Partaker of this divine Nature* in the Anguish of his Heart
cries, when God tells him he will cut off Israel, and make of him a great
Nation, Lord, let my Name be blotted out of thy Book, let it be forgotten from
among the living, and b^ never heard of again in the World that ever I was in
Being: But what will become of thy great Name! God's Honor and Interest was
dear to him; but he, comparatively, cared not for his own, at all. Exodus 32.
Number. 14.

But this our Obligation to be entirely the Lord's, is still infinitely
increased, if we consider the Authority of the supreme Governor of the World,
which, by his express Law, has enjoined this upon us. It is not only infinitely
fit in its own Nature, that we should love God with all our Hearts, considering
what he is in himself, and that we should be entirely for him, in the Temper of
our Minds, considering what an entire Right he has to us as his Creatures, who
have received all we have from him, and are absolutely dependent on him for all
we want; but God has, by Law, as Governor of the World, enjoined this upon us
as our Duty, and that with all his Authority. -- And now considering what he is
in himself, and the natural Right he has to all Things, and how entirely we are
his, and absolutely under his Government, his AUTHORITY is infinitely binding.
-- Especially considering, how infinitely engaged, he appears to be, to see
that his Law be exactly obeyed, in promising eternal Life on the one Hand, and
threatening eternal Damnation on the other. This his infinite Engagedness, lays
us under infinite Bonds, to be and do, exactly what he requires.

But still, our Obligation to love him with all our Hearts, and be wholly the
Lord's, is yet infinitely more increased, if we consider what Ways the Lord has
taken with us in this apostate World, since our Rebellion against him, since we
have lost all Esteem of him, turned Enemies to him, cast off his Authority, and
practically bid Defiance to his Power and Justice. -- For instead of
immediately do^ming all this lower World to blackness of Darkness for ever, he
has sent his Son, his only begotten Son, from Heaven, to bring us the News of
Pardon and Peace, and by his own Death to open a Way for our Return unto him,
and to call and invite us to return. -- And now with a liberal Hand he strews
common Mercies all round the World, among evil, unthankful, guilty,
Hell-deserving Rebels, and fills the Hearts of all with Food and Gladness; and
sends forth his Messengers to proclaim it to the Ends of the Earth, that it is
his Will, that all his rebellious Creatures lay down their Weapons of
Rebellion, acknowledge the Law by which they stand condemned, to be holy, just
and good, and look to him through Jesus Christ for Pardon as a free Gift, and
through Jesus Christ return unto him, and give up themselves to him entirely, to
love him and live to him, and delight in him for ever.

And while the World in general make light of all this, and go to their Farms,
and to their Merchandise, and many are enraged and cry out against the
Messengers of Peace, and stone some and kill others; ( Matt. 22.) that now he
should of his own sovereign good Pleasure, according to his eternal Purpose,
seize here and there one, by his All-conquering Grace, and stop them in their
Career to Hell, and make them see and feel their Sin and Guilt, and own the
Sentence just by which they stand condemned, and bring them as upon their Knees
to look to free Grace through Jesus Christ for a Pardon, and through Jesus Christ
to give up themselves for ever to him: that now he should receive them to
Favor, and put them among his Children, and become their Father, and their
God, in an everlasting Covenant, and undertake to teach and lead, to quicken
and strengthen, to correct and comfort, and so to hu^b^e and purify and
sanctify, and fit them for his heavenly Kingdom; and while they are in this
World, to give them all Things that are best for them, and make all Things work
together for their Good, and finally bring them unto, and possess them of
eternal Glory and Blessedness in the full Enjoyment of himself for ever: -- For
a God of infinite Greatness and Glory, to deal just so, with just such
Creatures, is the most amazing and astonishing Grace; and lays infinite Bonds
upon Believers to love the Lord their God wi^h all their Hearts, and to live to
him for ever; and has the greatest Tendency to animate them so to do. -- And
thus by these brief Hints we have a general View of the additional Motives of a
true and genuine Love to God.

As God's bringing up the Children of Israel out of Egypt, leading them through
the Wilderness, driving out the Heathen from before them, and giving them that
good Land which flowed with Milk and Honey, and covenanting to be their God, is
used so frequently, by Moses and the Prophets, throughout all the old
Testament, as a Motive to engage them to cleave to the Lord, and to him only
and entirely and for ever: So God's sending his Son into the World, to save h^s
People from their Sins, their spiritual Bondage, together with all the
spiritual and everlasting Blessings of the Covenant of Grace, are continually
used in the new Testament, as Arguments to engage Believers not to live to
themselves, but to him that died for them. -- Only here let these Things be
remembered,

(1.) That a Sight and Sense of the infinite Greatness and Glory of GOD, from
whom all Good comes, and a Sense of their own infinite Meanness and
Unworthiness, makes all the Mercies they receive infinitely the more endearing
and engaging. For the Mercies themselves now appear unspeakably the greater, in
that they come from such a God and to such Creatures; and the infinite Goodness
of God shines the brighter in every Me^cy, and the Freeness of his Grace is the
more conspicuous, on account of which he is infinitely amiable. The infinite
Greatness and Glory of God in general ravishes the Heart, the infinite moral
Beauty of the divine Goodness and Grace in particular ravishes the Heart, and
now that such a God should show such Kindnesses to such a Creature is very
affecting. Who am I, O Lord God? And what is my House, that thou have brought
me hitherto? Says holy David -- And is this the Manner of Men, O Lord God! --
No surely. -- Wherefore thou art great, O Lord God: For there is none like
thee, neither is there any God besides thee. 2 Samuel 7.18 -- 22. -- God is loved
for the Kindnesses bestowed; but he is more loved for the infinite Beauty of
that Goodness which is displayed in the bestowment of them, and for his being
altogether such a one as he is* So the Queen of Sheba esteemed Solomon for the
Kindnesses he showed her, but primarily and much more for his own personal
Excellencies. And his personal Excellencies made her esteem his Favors to her
of much greater Worth. -- That a glorious and ever-blessed GOD should treat
Sinners so, is infinitely endearing. -- Now these Sensations which a true
Believer has, and his Love to God arising therefrom* must be vastly different
from every Thing which natural Men experience, who know not God, and have no
higher Principle in them than Self-love.

(2.) Let it also be remembered, that God designs, by all his Dealings and
Kindnesses to his People, to bring them (...) to himself in this World, and to
the everlasting Enjoyment of himself in the World to come. He means for the
present to humble them, and wean them from the World, to make them more
spiritually-minded and heavenly-minded, to bring them to be more acquainted
with God and more entirely to take up their Rest and Contentment in Him; and
therefore all Things are calculated by his infinite Wisdom and Goodness to
attain this End. And this causes all the wise and kind Dealings of God,
outwardly in his Providence and inwardly by his Spirit, and that both by Way of
Correction as well as by Way of Consolation, to appear in a very affecting and
engaging Light to true Believers. -- While they see what God is in himself, and
his infinite Beauty in being such; while they see how infinitely sufficient he
is to be all Things to them, and to do all Things for them, and the Blessedness
of living wholly upon him and trusting wholly in him; while they see God
calculating all Things to bring them to him, and actually find all Things
working this Way; their Obligations to love him and live to him appear
infinitely binding, and their Hearts are mightily engaged and animated. -- This
View of Things make all their Afflictions appear as great Mercies; because they
are so wisely calculated to bring them near to God. Psalm. 119.71. This View of
Things adds an infinite Value to all the Kindnesses of God, over and above what
they are worth merely in themselves, because they are all so wisely calculated
to bring them near to God. This is the Kernel of all that tender-Mercy and
Loving Kindness which they see in all their Afflictions, and in all their
Comforts. Heb. 12.10, 11. Romans 8.28. -- To be brought near to God, is worth
more than all the World; there is no Portion like God, no Comfort like that
which is to be taken in him: He is the godly Man's ALL. Psalm. 73.25. Whom have
I in Heaven but thee? And there is nothing on Earth I desire besides thee. --
And now that such a God should take such Methods, with just such a Creature, to
bring him to the Possession of such a Good, is the most amazing Goodness and
the most astonishing Grace. -- Now here is a Sense of the Excellency of the
divine Nature in general, and a Sense of the moral Beauty of the divine
Goodness in particular, and of the unspeakable Mercy God shows to them, which
Mercy, is infinitely magnified in their Account, from the Value they have for
God, as the Portion of their Souls, from all which, their Love to God takes its
Rise: Whereby their Love appears to be exceeding different from any Thing which
natural Men experience, who neither know God, nor relish Communion with him,
but are contrary to Him in all Things: And only from Self-love are glad of the
good Things they receive from God, which good Things they live upon and make a
God of: Whether they be worldly good Things, or great Light and Comfort and Joy
of a religious Nature.

(3.) Let it also be remembered, that all God's Gifts to his People are so many
Talents bestowed upon them ultimately to be improved for God, whereby they are
put under Advantages to glorify God and do Good in the World. And the more they
have of worldly Substance, of natural Powers, of acquired Accomplishments, and
of the gracious Influences of the holy Spirit, etc. the greater are their
Advantages to act for God, to promote his Honor and Interest, and to do Good.
-- Now in Proportion as they love God, in the same Proportion is his Honor and
Interest, and the Good and Welfare of his Creatures and Subjects, dear unto
them. -- The Interest and Honor of God lies nearer to the Hearts of his
People, than their Parents, or Consorts, or Children, or Houses and Lands, yea,
than their own Lives. ( Luke 14.26.) -- To be under Advantages therefore to
promote his Honor and Interest, must, in their Account, be esteemed an
inestimable Privilege. -- Hence they love God for all Things they receive from
Him, because by all they are put under such Advantages to live to him and serve
him, seeking his Interest and Honor and Glory. A remarkable Instance of which
we have in Ezra, that hearty Friend to God, and to his Honor and Interest. See
Ezr. 7. v. 27, 28. compared with the rest of the Chapter. -- Now herein again
their Love to God for his Benefits is evidently different from any Thing which
(...) Men experience, who have ^o higher Principle than Self-love, and are
entirely (...) by it.

And as the Love of the Saint and of the Hypocrite thus greatly differ in their
Nature, so do they also (...) a^ greatly in their Fruits and Effects. (...)
loved God greatly for his Kindnesses to him, because thereby he was put under
Advantages to do so much for God's Glory and for the Good of his People. And
now see how active he is for God, and how he (...) himself to do Good, and to
reform every Thing that was amiss among the Jews; from the eighth Chapter and
on. While the hypocritical Jews, who, no doubt, were also greatly affected with
the Mercy of God in their Deliverance from their long Captivity, were so far
from being active for God, that they, not caring for his Honor or his Laws,
committed great Abominations. Ezr. 9.1. So the Children of Israel at the
Red Sea seemed to be full of Love to God, as well as Moses; but as they had
different Sorts of Love, so their Carriage did as greatly differ afterward,
for the Course of forty Years. And no wonder, for the hypocritical Israelites
only loved themselves, and cared only for their own Interest; but Moses lo^ed
God, and cared above all Things for his Honor.

Thus we see, not only what additional Obligations Believers are under to love
God with all their Hearts, but also how, and in what Manner, they influence and
excite them so to do. -- And what I have offered effectually obviates the
common Plea of Formalists and all Self-seekers, That all the Saints in
Scripture are represented as loving God for his Benefits; whence they argue,
that they are right, and their Religion genuine, which results merely from
Self-love, and the fear of Hell and hope of Heaven, or from a confident
Persuasion that their Sins are pardoned. -- For it is evident, that true Saints
do not love God for his Benefits, nor eye their own Happiness, in the same
Manner that such Men do, but in a Manner altogether different. -- Saints know
the God they love, and love him primarily for what he is in himself, and
because he is just what he i^: But Hypocrites know not God, nor love him, but
are in all things contrary to him, and are only pleased wi^^ the false Image of
God they have framed in their Fancies, merely because they think that he loves
them, and (...), and will do, great Things for them. -- Saints are (...) with
the divine Goodness it self for the moral Beauty there is in it* But Hypocrites
are affected only with the Fruits and Effects o^ divine Goodness to them, as
tending to make (...) happy. -- Saints love God for his Benefits, under a (...)
Sense of their infinite Unworthiness of the least of them: But so it is not
with the Hypocrites. -- Saints love God for all the Streams of divine Goodness,
because they are designed and actually do lead them up to God the Fountain, who
is the Portion of their Souls: But Hypocrites live upon the Streams,
disrelishing the Fountain. -- Saints love God dearly for all his Gifts, because
by them they are put under such Advantages to live to God, to promote his
Interest and Honor, and to do good in the World: But Hypocrites are confined
within the narrow Circle Self. -- Saints Love to God animates them to live to
God, and to exert themselves to promote his Honor and Interest, and to do all
the Good they can: but the Hypocrite after all his pretended Love to God, cares
not what becomes of his Interest and Honor, if it may but go well with him,
his Friends and Party. -- So that while true Saints love God for his Benefits,
they act in a gracious Manner, conformable to the Law of God, and to the Reason
and Nature of Things; whereas all the Love of the most refined Hypocrite is
merely the workings of a natural Self-love, in a Manner directly contrary to
the Law of God, and to the Reason and Nature of Things; and is nothing but mere
Mockery. Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36, 37. Zech. 7.5, 6.

Thus we have gone through the two first general Heads, and see what is implied
in Love to God, and from what Motives we ought to love him. And from the whole
we may learn so much of the Nature of true Religion, as that with much Evidence
and Certainty we may conclude,

FIRST, That all that (...) Love to God is Counterfeit* which arises merely
from Men's Corruptions being gratified. As when ambitious Men are by God's
Providence raised to high Degrees of Honor, and worldly Men are prospered in
all which they put their Hands unto; and herefrom the one and the other rejoice
and bless God, and seem to love him, and verily think they are sincere. -- This
is all Hypocrisy. For in truth they only love their Corruptions, and are glad
they are gratified. And accordingly instead of improving all their Riches and
Honor for God, to advance his Interest and Honor in the World, they improve
all only for themselves, to promote their own Ends; and care not what becomes
of God's Honor and Interest and Kingdom; and commonly such Men show themselves
the greatest Enemies to the Cause of God and to the Religion of Christ. And
should God but touch all they have, they would curse him to his Face.

SECONDLY, We may be equally certain, that all that seeming Love to God is
Counterfeit, that arises merely from a ^^gal, Self-righteous Spirit. As when a
Man, only because he is afraid of Hell and has a Mind to be saved, sets himself
to repent and reform and do Duties, and tries to love God and aim at his Glory,
to the Intent that he may make some Amends for past Sins and recommend himself
to the divine Favor, and so to escape Hell and obtain Heaven. -- And when he
has grown so good, as to have raised Hopes of attaining his End, he is ravished
at the Thoughts, and rejoices, and blesses the Lord, and loves him. -- It is
plain, all this is Hypocrisy. For the Man in truth only loves himself, and is
concerned merely for his own Interest; but does not care at all for God, his
Glory or Honor. For if there were no Heaven nor Hell, such would serve God no
more. Children will work for their Parents without b^ing hired, because they
love them; but Hirelings will not strike a Stroke, if there is no Money to be
got; because they care for nothing but their own Interest. Hence this Sort of
Hypocrites are wont to say, that if they once believed that God had made no
Promises to the best they can do, they would never do more. -- And farther,
it is plainly all Hypocrisy, for if their Consciences but fall asleep* so that
they are troubled no more with the Thoughts of another World, they will leave
off their Duties, let down their Watch, break all their Resolutions, and be as
bad as ever: and hence their Doctrine of falling from Grace probably took its
Rise. -- And their Hypocrisy is still more evident, in that they are commonly
so much concerned to find out what the least Measure of saving Grace is, and so
strenuous in pleading for great Abatements in the L^w. For from hence it is
plain, that all they are after is only to get just Grace enough to carry them
to Heaven; as a lazy Hireling that is for doing but only just Work enough to
pass for a Day's Work, that he may get his Wages at Night, which is all he
wants.

THIRDLY, We may be as certain, That all that seeming Love is Counterfeit,
which arises merely from a strong Confidence which a Man has, that his Sins are
pardoned, and that Christ loves him, and will save him. As when ^ Man is under
great Terrors, and has fearful Apprehension^ of Hell and Damnation, and is
ready even to give up himself for lost; but suddenly great Light breaks into
his Mind, he s^es Christ with his Arms open and smiling, and it may be his
Blood running, and hears him as it were say, Be of good Cheer, thy Sins are
forgiven thee, -- (...) loved thee with an everlasting Love, -- Come thou
blessed of my Father, inh^ri^ the Kingdom; -- And now he is certain that his
Sins are pardoned, and that Heaven is his, and he is even ravished with Joy,
and calls upon all to praise the Lord. -- For all this proceeds merely from
Self-love, and there is no Love to God in it. For all this Love arises from his
false Confidence, and not from any true Knowledge of God. And commonly such
turn out as the Israelites did, who sang God's Praise at the Red Sea, when
Pharaoh and his Hosts were drowned, and they delivered, and their Hopes of
getting to Canaan highly raised; but they soon forgot his Works, and rebelled
against him, and their Carcases fell in the Wilderness. They loved themselves,
and therefore they rejoiced at their wonderful Deliverance; and they loved
themselves, and therefore they murmured three Days after, when they came to the
bitter Waters. Their Joys and their Murmurings proceeded from the very same
Principle, under different Circumstances; but the Love of God was not in them.
And just this is the Case h^re. -- And this is commonly the Event, that the
Fears of Hell being n^w over, their Joys gradually abate, and they grow more
and more secure, till after a while they return to Folly, as the Dog to his
Vomit, and as the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the Mire: and so are
as bad and sometimes worse than ever. (2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.) -- And now they
plead, that the best are dead sometimes, and that David and Peter had their
Falls, and so keep their Consciences as quiet as they can: and thus they live
along whole Months and Years together.

FOURTHLY, and lastly, We may also be certain, That all that seeming Love to
God, which arises merely from the gratification of spiritual Pride, is
Counterfeit. As when Men dream Dreams, see Visions, and hear Voices, and have
Impressions and Revelations, whereby they are set up in their own Esteem, and
in the Opinion of others, for some of the most peculiar Favorites of Heaven,
and very best Men in all the World; and hence they rejoice and bless God and
mightily love him. But in Truth they are only ravished with Self-conceit, and
feel blessedly to think themselves some of the best Men in the World, and to
think they shall shortly sit at the right Hand of Christ in Heaven among the
Apostles and Martyrs, while their Pe^secutors and Haters will be burning in
Hell. But they neither know God nor love him; and for the most Part, by
heretical Doctrines, or wicked Lives, or both, are a scandal to Religion. --
These are so far from being truly religious, that they are the very Tares which
the Devil sows. Matt. 13.39.

In each of these Sorts of Love there are these three Defects or Faults. (1.)
They have no true Know^edge of GOD. And so (2.) They only love themselves. And
(3.) Their seem^ng Love to God arises from a Mistake. -- The ambitious and
worldly Man thinks himself very happy, because he rises in Honor and Estate.
-- The Legalist thinks, that God loves him and will save him for his Duties* --
The next firmly believes, that his Sins are pardoned. -- And the last, that God
looks upon him one of the best Men in the World. But all are woefully mistaken:
and when at the Day of Judgment they come to see their Mistake, their Love to
God will vanish away, and they turn everlasting Haters and Blasphemers of the
most High. -- And another Defect in these and all other Sorts of counterfeit
Love, is, that they none of them will ever make Men truly obedient. For when
Men's seeming Love to God is nothing but Self-love in another Shape, all their
seeming Obedience will in reality be nothing but Self-seeking. They may pretend
to be the Servants o^ God, but will only mean ultimately to serve themselves.

SECTION III. Concerning the Measure of Love to God required in the divine Law.
I proceed now to the next Thing proposed, which was,

III. To show, what is that Measure of Love to God, which the Law requires of
all Mankind. -- And our blessed Savior clears up this Point in the most plain
and familiar Language. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart,
and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind; and it is added in Mark 12, 30.
With all thy Strength. i. e. in other Worlds, we ought to love God in a Measure
exactly proportionable to the Largeness of our natural Powers and Faculties.
Which to do, is all that Perfection which God ever required of any of his
Creatures. The Law runs thus, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with ALL thy
Heart, etc. and thy Neighbor AS thy self. God is to have the highest Degree of
Love we are capable of; but a much less Degree is due to to our selves and
Neighbors. So that according to the Tenor of the Law, our Love to God is to be
greater and more fervent, than our Love to our selves. And therefore the Law
does suppose that God is worthy of our supreme Love for what he is in himself,
antecedent to any selfish Consideration, from a Sight and Sense of which
Worthiness our Love to God is primarily to take its Rise. For in the Nature of
Things, it would be impossible for us, from Self-love, to love God more than
ourselves. -- Or thus, the Law requires us to love God more than ourselves; but
in the Nature of Things it is impossible that merely from Self-love we should
love God more than our selves: therefore the Law supposes that there is
something in God to excite our Love antecedent to any selfish Consideration,
and that our Love to him is not to proceed merely from Self-love. For otherwise
the Law requires us to do that which in its own Nature is absolutely
imposs^ble. -- And this by the Way, may serve still farther to confirm the
Truth of what has been before said.


When the Law requires us to love God with all our Hearts, it either means, to
the utmost extent of our natural Capacity, or else only to the utmost extent of
our moral Capacity. i. e. only so much as we are inclined to. And then the less
we are inclined to love God, the less Love is required; and so if we have no
Heart, no Inclination to love him, then no Love at all is required. And
according to this Rule, the carnal Mind which is Enmity against God, is not in
Duty bound to be subject to the Law, neither indeed can be. And where there is
no Law, there is no Transgression. Where there is no Duty required, there can
be no Sin committed. And so the vilest of Mortals are the freest from Sin, and
the least to blame; which is the grossest Absurdity. -- When therefore the Law
requires us to love God with all our Hearts, it has no Reference to our moral
Inclination, but only to our natural Capacity. And indeed nothing can be more
unreasonable, than to suppose, that the Law only requires us to love God, so
far as we have a Heart and Disposition to do so; for this would leave us
entirely at Liberty, to do otherwise, if we were so inclined, and in effect it
would make the Law say, If you feel inclined to love God, more or less, so far
it is your Duty, but farther you are not bound, but are at your Liberty. i. e.
the Law is not binding, any farther than you are inclined to obey it. i. e. in
reality it is no Law, but every Man is left to do as he pleases. -- The whole
Heart therefore does the Law mean to require, let our Temper, Inclination, or
Disposition be what it will.

God the great Author of all Things has been pleased to create intelligent
Beings of different Sizes, some of a higher Rank, and some of a lower, some of
greater Capacities and some of less. Some are Angels, and some are Me^* And
among the Angels some are of larger natural Powers, and some of smaller. So it
is among the good Angels, and so it is among the evil Angels. There are Angels
and (...)-angels, that is, Beings of various natural Powers and Capacities,
among the good and bad. And so it is among Men, among good and bad, there is a
very great Variety, some have larger Souls than others.

Intelligent Beings are capable of a Degree of Knowledge and Love exactly
proportionable to their natural Powers. Angels are capable of a Degree of
Knowledge and Love greater than Men: And one Man of a greater Degree than
another. As they are of different Sizes, of larger and smaller natural Powers,
so their Capacities to know and love are some greater, and some less. So it is
among good and bad.

All that Perfection, which God requires of any of his Creatures, is a Measure
of Knowledge and Love bearing an exact Proportion to their natural Abilities.
Since God has manifested what he is, in his Works and Ways, and since he is
infinitely glorious in being what he is, and has an original and entire Right
to his intelligent Creatures; therefore he requires all Angels and Men to
attend diligently to the Discoveries which he has made of himself, and learn
what he is, and behold his Glory, and love him with all their Hearts. This is
the Extent of what God requires of the highest Angel in Heaven, and this is
exactly what he requires of all the Children of Men upon Earth.

The Law requires no more than this of Mankind under a Notion that their
natural Powers are lessened by the Fall. Whether we are Beings of as large
natural Powers as we should have been, had we never apostatized from God, or
so, yet this is plain, we are no where in Scripture blamed for having no larger
natural Powers, nor is any more ever required than all the Heart and all the
Soul and all the Mind and all the Strength. This is evident through the whole
Bible.

And the Law requires no less of Mankind under a Notion that they are turned
Enemies to God and have no Heart or Incli^ation to love him. Be it so, that
Mankind are ^ver so averse to attend to those Manifestations, which God (...)
made of himself, and ever so averse to take in right Notions of God, and ever
so far from a Disposition to account him infinitely glorious in being what he
is, and from an In^li^^tion to love him with all their Hearts; yet the divine
Law makes no Allowances, no Abatements, but insists upon the same, the very
same it ever did. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart.

(...) do dream, that the Law is very much abated. -- (...) what s^ith the
Scriptures as to this Point? Does the Word of God teach us that there is any
Abatement made? Where do we read of it? Where is it plainly asserted, or in
what Texts is it implied* Truly I know nothing like it in all Bible, nor what
Text of Scripture this Notion can be built upon. -- And besides, if the Law is
abated, when was it abated? -- Was it abated immediately upon Adam's Fall?
Surely no. For, above two Thousand Years after from Mount Sinai God declared,
that he required sinless Perfection, and threatened a Curse against the Man that
should fail in the least Point. Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 27.26. -- Was it abated upon
Christ's coming into the World* Surely no. For he in the strongest Terms taught
his Disciples that it was in full Force, and that it was their Duty to be
perfectly holy, and that in designed Opposition to the Doctrine of the
Pharisees, who in effect held that the Law was abated. Matt. 5.17 -- 48. -- Was
it abated after Christ's Death and Resurrection? Surely no. For St. Paul always
taught that the Christian Scheme of Religion, which he preached, did not make
void, but rather establish the Law. Romans 3.31. and St. James insisted upon it,
that it must not be broke in any one Point. Iam. 2.10. -- When was it abated
therefore? Why, says Christ, Till Heaven and Earth shall pass away, one Jot or
Tittle of the Law shall in no wise fail. Mat. 5.18. -- And besides, if the Law
i^ abated, in what Particular, is it abated? And how (...) are the Abatements?
-- Are there any Abatements made (...) our Duty to God? Surely no; for we are
still required to love him with all our Hearts, and more than this never was
demanded. -- Or are any Abatements made in our Duty to our fellow Men? Surely
no. For we are still required to love our Neighbor as our selves, and more
than (...) was enjoined. -- Or is there any Abatement made in the internal Part
of our Duty? Surely no. For the whole (...) is still required, and more than
this never was (...) upon. -- Or finally, is there any Abatement made in the
(...) Part of our Duty? Surely no. For we are still (...) to be holy in all
Manner of Conversation, as he that (...) us is Holy. (1 Pet. 1.15.) And more
than this was never required. So that from the whole* we have truth (...) to
think, that the Law require^ (...) Perfection n^w, (...) that ever it did. Yea,
th^^ Point cannot be plain^^ than it is; for the Law, in fact, is the very same
it was from the Beginning, Word for Word, without the least Alteration. Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, etc. And thy Neighbor as thy
self. So that if it ever did require sinless Perfection, it does now.

The highest Pitch of Holiness, the Saints in Heaven will ever arrive to, will
only be to love God with all their Hearts; and exactly the very same is
required of every Man upon Earth. And it was because St. Paul understood the
Law in this Sense, that he had always such a mean and low Opinion of all his
Seize: for while he compared what he was, with what he ought to be, he
plainly saw how the Case stood: And therefore he says, The Law is spiritual,
but I am carnal, sold under Sin. O wretched Man that I am! Romans 7.14, 24.

So that upon the whole, this seems to be the true State of the Case: As there
are various Capacities among all intelligent Creatures in general, so there are
among Men in particular, Souls of various Sizes, some of larger natural
Capacities, and some of smaller. But Souls of different Capacities, are capable
of different Degrees of Love. A Degree of Love exactly equal to the natural
Capacity of the Soul, is Perfection: And this is what the Law requires, nor
more, nor less: all the Heart, all the Soul, all the Mind, all the Strength.
The Saints and Angels in Heaven do love God thus, and hence they are perfect in
Holiness; and so far as we fall short of this, we are sinful. This is the exact
Rule of Duty.

And now, this Law is holy, just, and good. The Thing required is in its own
Nature right and fit and suitable. God is worthy to be loved with our whole
Hearts, and this is just what is required. It Is right we should have a Degree
of Love to our selves, and it is right we should love our Neighbors as our
selves, but it is fit we should love God with all our Hearts. Considering what
he is, and what we be, it is in its own Nature infinitely fit and right* and
not to do so, infinitely unfit and wrong. -- Indeed, God is worthy of an
inf^^itely greater Degree of Love than we or any of his Creatures are capable
of. He only is capable of a complete View of his own infinite Glory, and of a
full Sense of his own infinite Be^uty, and of a Love perfectly adequate to his
own Loveliness. And he does not require or expect any of his Creatures to love
him, to that Degre^ he love^ himself. Only as he loves himself with all his
Heart, so he requires and expects that they love him with all their Hearts. And
there being the same Reason for one as for the other, the Law is therefore in
its own Nature perfectly right and just and equal. -- Indeed, had God required
the most exalted of his intelligent Creatures to have loved him in the same
Degree that he himself does, then the Thing required would in its own Nature
have been absolutely impossible, and what he could have no Reason to expect. Or
if he had required the meanest of his intelligent Creatures to have loved him
in the same Degree that Gabriel does, it would have been a Thing naturally
impossible. But now he only requires every one to love him with all their
Hearts, this is right, perfectly right, just and equal. Less than this could
not, in Justice, have been required of each one; in Justice, I mean, to the
Deity, who ought to have his Due from each one, and whose proper Right, the
Governor of the World, ought to assert and maintain.

Thus we see the Law is exactly upon a Level with our natural Capacities; it
only requires us to love God with all our Hearts: and thus we see, that the Law
is therefore perfectly reasonable, just and equal. Deuteronomy. 10.12. And now,
Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, (...) to fear the Lord thy
God, to walk in all his Ways, and to love Him, and to serve the Lord thy God
with ALL thy (...)* and with ALL thy Soul?

Hence, (...) to a natural Capacity, all Mankind are capable of a perfect
Conformity to this Law. For the Law requires of no Man any more than to love
God with all his Heart. The sinning Angels have the same natural Capacities now
as they had before they fell* they have (...) same Faculties, called the
Understanding and Will* they (...) still the same Being (...) to their natural
Powers* (...) they loved God with all their Hearts* and now they hate him with
all their Hearts* Once they had a (...) Degree of Love* now they have (...)
great a Degree of Hatred. So that they have the same natural Capacities now as
ever. Their Temper indeed is different; but (...) Capacity is the same. And
therefore as to a natural ^ppacity, they are as capable of a perfect Conformity
to the Law of their Creator as ever they were. So Adam, after his Fall, had the
same Soul that he had before, as to its natural Capacities, though of a very
different Temper. And therefore in that Respect, was as capable of a perfect
Conformity to this Law, as ever. -- And it is plainly the Case, that all
Mankind, as to their natural Capacities, are capable of a perfect Conformity to
the Law, from this, that when Sinners are converted they have no new natural
Faculties, though they have a new Temper. And when they come to love God with all
their Hearts in Heaven, still they will have the same Hearts, as to their
natural Faculties, and may in this Respect be justly looked upon as the very
same Beings* In this Sense, Paul was the same Man when he hated and persecuted
Christ, as when he loved him and died for him: and that same Heart that was
once so full of Malice, is now as full of Love: So that, as to his natural
Capacities, he was as capable of a perfect Conformity to this Law, when he was
a Persecutor, as he is now in Heaven. -- When therefore Men cry out against the
holy Law of God, which requires us only to love him with all our Hearts, and
say, It is not just for God to require more than we can do, and then threaten
to damn us for not doing, they ought to stay a while and consider what they
say, and tell what they mean by their CAN DO; for it is plain, that the Law is
exactly upon a Level with our natural Capacities, and that in this Respect we
are fully capable of a perfect Conformity thereto. And it will be impossible
for us to excuse our selves by an Inability arising from any other Quarter; as
will presently appear. For to return,

From what has been said we may learn, that there can be nothing to render it,
in any Measure, a hard and difficult Thing, to love God with all our Hearts,
but our being destitute of a right Temper of Mind, and having a Temper that is
wrong: and that therefore we are perfectly inexcusable, and altogether and
wholly to blame, that we do not.

OBJ. But I do not know God; how therefore can I love him?

ANS. Were you of a right ^^^per, it would be your Nature, above all Things, to
attend to those Discoveries, which he has made of himself, in his Works and in
his Word; you would search for the Knowledge of him as Men search for Silver*
and as they dig for hid Treasure^* And were you of a right Temper, it would be
natural, to take in that very Representation which God has made of himself. --
And now was it but your Nature, to attend, with all your Heart, to the
Discoveries which God has made of himself; and your Nature, to take in right
Notions of him, it would be impossible, but that you should know what God is:
because he has acted out all his Perfections so much to the Life, and exhibited
such an exact Image of himself. The Works of Creation and Redemption, and all
his Conduct as moral Governor of the World, show just what a kind of Being he
is. He has discovered his infinite Understanding and almighty Power, and he has
shown the Temper of his Heart, and all in so plain a Manner, that were it your
Nature to attend and consider and take in right Notions, it is quite
impossible, but that you should know and see plainly what God is.

OBJ. But if I have right Notions of what God is, yet I cannot see his Glory
and Beauty, in being such; how therefore can I love him?

ANS. Were you of a right Temper, it would be your Nature to account him
infinitely glorious in being what he is. As it is the Nature of an ambitious
Man to see, a Glory in Applause, and of a worldly Man to see a Glory in the
Things of the World: So it would be your Nature, to see a Glory in God. For
what suits our Hearts, naturally appears excellent in our Eyes. ( Ioh. 8.42,
47.)

OBJ. But I feel that I cannot love him; how therefore am I wholly to Blame?

ANS. The Fault is in him, or in you. Either he is not lovely, or else you are
of a very bad Temper: but he is infinitely lovely; and therefore it is only
owing to the bad Temper of your Heart, and to your being destitute of a right
Temper, that you cannot ^^ve him; and you therefore are wholly to Blame. Indee^
^ou could not but love him, were you not a very sordid Wretch.

OBJ. But to love God (...) to (...) Disposition to love him, is a Thing
SUPERNATURAL (...) the Powers of Nature improved to the (...) I therefore be
wholly to Blame?

ANS. It is a Thing supernatural, you say; i. e. in other Words, you have no
Heart to it, nor the least Inclination that Way, nor is there any Thing in your
Temper to work upon by Motives to bring you to it: and now because you are so
very bad a Creature, therefore you are not at all to Blame. This is your
Argument. But can you think that there is any Force in it? What! Are moral
Agents, the less to blame, the worse they grow? And are God's Laws no longer
binding, than while his Subjects are disposed to obey them?

OBJ. But after all I must needs reply, as Nicodemus in another Case, How can
these Things be?

ANS. Why did not the Jews love their Prophets, and love Christ and his
Apostles? What was it owing to? And where did the Blame lie? They were
acquainted with them, heard them talk and preach, and saw their Conduct, and
could not but plainly perceive their Temper, and know what Sort of a
Disposition they were of, and what Sort of Men they were. And yet they did not
like them, but they hated them, they belied them, slandered and reproached
them, and put them to Death. And now what was the Matter? What was the Cause of
all this? -- Were not their Prophets, and Christ and his Apostles indeed lovely
and worthy of their hearty Esteem? Did not all that they said and did, manifest
them to be so? Why then did they not love them? Was it not wholly owing to
their not having a right Temper of Mind, and to their being of so bad a
Disposition? And were they not wholly to Blame? -- They might say of Christ,
That they could see no Form nor Comeliness in him wherefore they should desire
him: And where no Beauty is seen, it is impossible there should be any Love.
But why did not he appear most amiable in their Eyes? And why were their Hearts
not ravished with his Beauty? His Disciples loved him, and Martha and Mary and
Lazarus loved him, and why did not the Scribes and Pharisees love him as much?
Why, because his Person and Doctrines did not suit them, and were not agreeable
to the Temper of their Hearts. The bad Temper of their Hearts made him appear
odious in their Eyes, and was the Cause of all their Ill Will toward him. And
now, were they not to blame for this bad Temper, and for all this their bad
Feelings, and bad Carriage toward Christ thence arising? Yes, surely, if ever
any Men were to blame for any Thing. -- And now if God the Father had been in
the same Circumstances as God the Son was then in, he would not have been loved
a Jot more or treated any Whit better than he wa^. Indeed it was that Image and
Resemblance of the infinitely glorious and blessed God, which was to be seen in
their Prophets, in Christ and his Apostles, which was the very Thing they hated
them for. Therefore Christ says, He that hates me, hates my Father also. --
But now have they both seen and hated, both me and my Father. (Joh. 15.23, 24.)
And Christ attributes it entirely to their want of a right Temper, and to the
bad Disposition of their Hearts, that they did not love him and love his
Doctrines. If God were your Father, you would love me. (Joh. 8.42.) He that is
of God (of a God-like Temper) hears God's Words: ye therefore hear them not,
because ye are not of God. (v. 47.) In Truth, the Bottom of all your Enmity is,
that you are of your Father the Devil, i. e. of just such a Temper as he. (v.
44.) And now, what think you, when Christ comes in flaming Fire, to take
Vengeance on an ungodly World, will he blame the Scribes and Pharisees for not
loving him with all their Hearts, or no? Or will he excuse the Matter, and say
on their Behalf, They could see no Form nor Comeliness in me, I appeared very
odious to them, they could not love me, they could not but hate me, and no Man
is to blame for not doing more than he CAN? --

From the whole it is plain, that Mankind are to blame, wholly to blame, and
perfectly inexcusable, for their not having right Apprehensions of God, and for
their not having a Sense of his Glory in being what he is, and for their not
loving him with all their Hearts; because all is owing merely to their want of
a right Temper, and to the bad Disposition of their Hearts.

Indeed, if we were altogether of such a Temper, Frame and Disposition of Heart
as we ought to be, it would be altogether as easy and natural to love God with
all our Hearts, as it is for the most dutiful Child to love a tender and
valuable Parent. For God is really infinitely amiable; and were we of such a
Temper, he would appear so in our Eyes; and did he appear so in our Eyes, we
could not but love him with all our Hearts, and delight in him with all our
Souls; and it would be most easy and natural so to do. For no Man ever found
any Difficulty in loving that which appears very amiable in his Eyes. For the
Proof of which I appeal to the Experience of all Mankind. -- And now, why does
not God appear infinitely amiable in our Eyes? Is it because he has not clearly
revealed what he is, in his Works and in his Word? Surely no. For the
Revelation is plain enough. Is it because he is not infinitely amiable in being
what he is? Surely no. For all Heaven are ravished with his infinite Beauty.
What is it then that makes us blind to the infinite Excellency of the divine
Nature? Why, it can be owing to nothing, but to a bad Temper of Mind in us, and
to our not being of such a Disposition as we ought to be. For I appeal to the
Experience of all Mankind, whether those Persons and Things, which suit the
Temper of their Hearts, do not naturally appear amiable in their Eyes. -- And
certainly if God does not suit the Temper of our Hearts, it is not owing to any
Fault in him, but the Fault must be wholly in our selves. If the Temper and
Disposition of God ( i. e. his moral Perfections,) be not agreeable to our
Temper and Disposition, most certainly our Temper and Disposition is very
wrong. If God were your Father, ye would love me: but ye are of your Father the
Devil, therefore you hate me. ( Ioh. 8.42, 44.) i. e. If you were of a Temper
like God, ye would love me, but being of a contrary Temper, hence you hate me.
If you were of a right Temper, I should appear amiable unto you; and it is
wholly owing to your bad Temper, that I appear otherwise. If ye were Abraham 's
Children, ye would do the Works of Abraham. (v. 39.)

OBJ. But be it so, yet I cannot help being of such a Temper as I am of; how
therefore am I wholly to Blame?

ANS. You have as much Power to help being of such a Temper, as the Scribes and
Pharisees had; but Christ judged them to be wholly to Blame, and altogether
inexcusable. They could not like Christ or his Doctrine; Ye CANNOT hear my
Word, says Christ. (v. 43.) but their CANNOT, their Inability was no Excuse to
them in Christ* Account: Because all their Inability, he plainly saw, arose
from their bad Temper, and their want of a good Disposition. And although they
had no more Power to help being of such a Temper than you have, yet he judged
them wholly to blame, and altogether inexcusable. ( Ioh. 8.33 -- 47. Ioh. 15.22
-- 25.) And now we know, that his Judgment is according to Truth. -- But in
order to help you to see into the Reason of the Thing, I desire you seriously
and impartially to consider,

1. That Sinners are free and voluntary in their bad Temper. A wicked World
have discovered a very strong Disposition to hate God, even from the Beginning.
And the Jewish Nation, God's own peculiar People, of whom, if of any, we might
hope for better Things, were so averse to God and his Ways, that they hated and
murdered the Messengers which he sent to reclaim them, and at last even
murdered God's own Son. -- And now, whence was all this? Why, from the
exceeding bad and wicked Temper of their Hearts. They have hated me without a
Cause. Joh. 15.25. -- But did any Body force them to be of such a bad Temper?
Surely no; they were hearty in it. -- Were they of such a bad Temper against
(...) Wills? Surely no; Their Wills, their Hearts were in it. Yea, they loved
their bad Temper, and loved to gratify it; and hence were mightily pleased with
their false Prophets, because they always prophesied in their Favor, and
suited and gratified their Disposition. And they hated whatsoever was
disagreable to their bad Temper, and tended to cross it; and hence were they so
en^aged at the preaching and the Persons of their Prophets, of Christ and his
Apostles. So that they were manifestly voluntary and hearty in their bad
Temper. We have loved Strangers and after them we WILL go. Jer. 2.25. But as
for the Word which thou have spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord, we WILL
NOT hearken unto thee. Jer. 44.16. And the Lord God of their Fathers sent to
them by his Messengers, rising up betimes, and sending; because he had
Compassion on his People, and on his Dewlling Place: but they mocked the
Messengers of God, and despised his Words, and misused his Prophets, etc. 2
Cron. 36.15, 16. -- And so all wicked Men are as voluntary in their bad Temper
as they were. The Temper of the Mind is nothing but the habitual Inclination of
the Heart. But an involuntary Inclination of the Heart is a Contradiction. And
the stronger any Inclination is, the more full and free the Heart and Soul is
in the Thing. Hence the bad Temper or the habitual bad Inclination of the Devil
is at the farthest Distance from any Compulsion; he is most perfectly free and
hearty in it. And all sinful Creatures being thus voluntary, free and hearty in
the bad Temper of their Minds; or in other Words, the bad Temper of the Mind
being nothing but the habitual Inclination of the Heart, hence all must be to
Blame in a Degree equal to the Strength of their bad Inclination. -- In a Word,
if we were continually forced to be of such a bad Temper, entirely against our
Wills, then we should not be to Blame; for it would not ^e at all the Temper of
our Hearts: but so long as our bad Temper is nothing else but the habitual
Frame, Disposition and Inclination of our OWN HEARTS, without any Manner of
Compulsion, we are perfectly without Excuse, and that whether we can help being
of such a Temper, or no. For,

2. If a sinful Creature's not being able to help his being of a bad Temper,
does in the least free him from Blame; then the more vile and ^^nful any
Creature grows, the less to Blame will he be: Because the more vile and sinful
any Creature grows, the less able is he to help his being of so bad a Frame of
Heart. -- Thus, if a Man feels a bad Spirit toward one of his Neighbor's
creeping into his Heart, perhaps if he immediately resists it, he may be able
easily to overcome and suppress it; but if he gives Way to it, and suffers it
to take strong h^ld of his Heart; if he cherishes it until it grows up into a
settled Enmity, and keeps it in his Heart for twenty Years, seeking all
Opportunities to gratify it, by backbiting, defaming, etc. it will now,
perhaps, be clean out of his Power to get rid of it, and effectually root it
out of his Heart. It will at least be a very difficult Thing. -- Now the Man is
talked to, and blamed for backbiting and defaming his Neighbor, Time after
Time, and is urged to love his Neighbor as himself, but he says, he cannot
love him. -- But why cannot you? For other Men love him. -- Why he appears in my
Eyes the most odious and hateful Man in the World. -- Yes, but that is owing to
your own bad Temper. -- Well, but I cannot help my Temper, and therefore I am
not to Blame. -- Now, it is plain in this Case, ho^ weak the Man's Plea is; and
even common Sense will teach all Mankind to judge him the more vile and
blameworthy, by how much the more his Grudge is settled and rooted. And yet
the more settled and rooted it is, the more unable is he to get rid of it. --
And just so it is here. Suppose a Creature loved God with all his Heart, but
after a while begins to feel his Love abate, and an Aversion to God secretly
creeping into his Soul; now perhaps he might easily suppress and overcome it.
But if he gives Way to it, until he loses all Sense of God's Glory, and settles
into a State of Enmity against him, it may be quite impossible ever to recover
himself. And yet he is not the less, but the more vile, and so the more
blameworthy. -- If thee we are so averse to God, that we cannot love him; and
^f our bad Temper is so strong, so settled and rooted, that we cannot get rid
of it; this is so far from being Matter of Excuse for us, that it renders us so
much the more vile* guilty and Hell-deserving. For to suppose that our
Inability in this Case extenuates our Fault, our Inability which increases in
Proportion to our Badness, is to suppose that the worse any Sinner grows, the
less to Blame he is. That which, nothing can be more absurd.

OBJ. But I was brought into this State by Adam's Fall*

ANS. Let it be by Adam's Fall, or how it will; yet if you are an Enemy to the
infinitely glorious God your Maker, and that voluntarily; you are infinitely to
Blame* and without Excuse. For nothing can make it right for a Creature to be a
voluntary Enemy to his glorious Creator, or possibly excuse such a Crime. It is
in its own Nature infinitely Wrong; there is nothing therefore to be said; you
stand guilty before God. -- It is in vain to make this, or any other Pleas, so
long as we are, what we are not by Compulsion, but voluntarily. And it is in
vain to pretend that we are not voluntary in our Corruptions, when they are
nothing else, but the free, spontaneous Inclinations of our own Hearts. Since
this is the Case, every Mouth will be stopped, and all the World become guilty
before God, sooner or later. --

Thus we see, that as to a natural Capacity all Mankind are capable of a
perfect Conformity to God's Law, which requires us only to love God with all
our Hearts; and that all our Inability arises merely from the bad Temper of our
Hearts, and our want of a good Disposition; and that therefore we are wholly to
blame and altogether inexcusable. Our Impotency, in one Word, is not natural,
but moral, and therefore instead of extenuating, does magnify and inhance our
Fault. The more unable to love God we are, the more be we to Blame. Even as it
was with the Jews, the greater Contrariety there was in their Hearts, to their
Prophets, to Christ and his Apostles, the more vile and blameworthy were they.
OBJ. But says a secure Sinner, Surely there is no Contrariety in my Heart to
God, I never hated God* in my Life, I always loved him.

ANS. The Scribes and Pharisees verily thought that they loved God, and that if
they had lived in the Days of their Fathers, they would not have put the
Prophets to Death. They were altogether insensible of the perfect Contrariety
of their Hearts to the divine Nature. And whence was it? Why, they had wrong
Notions of the divine Being, and they loved that false Image which they had
framed in their own Fancies. And so they had wrong Notions of the Prophets
which their Fathers hated and murdered, and hence imagined that they should
have loved them. But they saw a little what a Temper and Disposition Christ was
of, and him they hated with a perfect Hatred. So there are Multitudes of secure
Sinners and self-deceived Hypocrites, who verily think they love God,
nevertheless as soon as ever they open their Eyes in Eternity, and see just
what God is, their Love will vanish, and their Enmity break out and exert it
self to Perfection. So that the Reason Sinners see not their Contrariety to the
divine Nature, is their not seeing what God is. -- It must be so. For a sinful
Nature and an holy Nature are diametrically opposite. So much as there is of a
sinful Disposition in the Heart, so much of Contrariety is there to the divine
Nature. If therefore we are not sensible of this Contrariety, it can be owing
to nothing but our Ignorance of God, or not believing him to be what he really
is. Romans 7.8, 9.


And in this Light do the Scriptures constantly view the Case. There is not one
Tittle in the Old Testament or in the New, in the Law or in the Gospel, that
gives the least Intimation of any Deficiency in our natural Faculties. The Law
requires no more than ALL our Hearts, and never blames us for not having larger
natural Capacities. The Gospel aims to recover us to love God ONLY with ALL our
Hearts, but makes no Provision for our having any new natural Capacity. As to
our natural Capacities, all is well. It is in our Temper, in the Frame and
Disposition of our Hearts, that the Seat of all our Sinfulness lies. Ezekiel.
12.2. Son of Man, thou dwell in the midst of a rebellious House, which have
Eyes to see, and see not, they have Ears to hear, and hear not: for they are a
REBELLIOUS House. This is the Bottom of the Business. We have Eyes to see, and
Ears to hear, and his Glory shines all around us, in the Heavens and in the
Earth, in his Word and in his Ways; and his Name is proclaimed in our Ears; and
there is nothing hinders our seeing and hearing, but that we are rebellious
Creatures. Our Contrariety to God makes us blind to the Beauty of the divine
Nature, and deaf to all his Commands, Counsels, Calls and Invitations. We might
know God, if we had a Heart to know him; and love God, if we had a Heart to
love him. It is nothing but our bad Temper and being destitute of a right
Disposition* that makes us spiritually blind and spiritually dead. If this
Heart of Stone was but away, and a Heart of Flesh was but in us, all would be
well. We should be able enough to see and hear and understand and know divine
Things; and should be ravished with their Beauty; and it would be most natural
and easy to love God with all our Hearts.

And hence it is most evident, that the supreme Governor of the World has not
the least Ground or Reason to abate his Law, or to reverse the Threatening; nor
have a rebellious World the least Ground or Reason to charge God with Cruelty,
and say, It is not just, that he should require more than we can do, and
threaten to damn us for not doing. For, from what has been said, it is manifest
that the Law is holy, just and good. And that there is nothing in the Way of
our perfect Conformity to it, but our own Wickedness, in which we are free and
hearty and voluntary; and for which, therefore, in strict Justice, we deserve
eternal Damnation. The Law is already exactly upon a Level with our natural
Capacities, and it need not therefore be brought any lower. And there is no
greater Punishment threatened than our Sin deserves, there is therefore no
Reason the Threatening should be reversed. As to the Law, all is well, and there
is no need of any Alteration. And there is nothing amiss, but in our selves. It
is impudent Wickedness therefore to fly in the Face of God and of his holy Law,
and charge him with Injustice and Cruelty; because, forsooth, we hate him so
bad, that we cannot find it in our Hearts to love him; and are so high-hearted
and stout, that we must not be blamed. No, we are too good to be blamed in the
Case, and all the Blame therefore must be cast upon God and his holy Law. --
Yea, we are come to that, in this rebellious World, that if God sends to us the
News of Pardon and Peace through Jesus Christ, and invites us to return unto him
and be reconciled, we are come to that, I say, as to take it as an high Affront
at the Hands of the Almighty. He pretends to offer us Mercy, (say God-hating,
God-provoking Sinners,) but he only mocks us. For he offers all upon
Conditions, which we cannot possibly perform. -- This is as if they should say,
We hate him so much, and are of so high a Spirit, that we cannot find in our
Hearts to return, and own the Law to be just, by which we stand condemned, and
look to his free Mercy through Jesus Christ for Pardon and eternal Life; and
therefore if he will offer Pardon and eternal Life upon no easier Terms, he
does but dissemble with us, and mock and deride us in our Misery. -- And since
this is the true State of the Case, therefore it is no wonder, that even
infinite Goodness it self, has fixed upon a Day, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, to take
Vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And then shall ungodly Sinners be convinced of all their hard
Speeches, which they have ungodlily spoken against the Lord. And then shall the
Righteousness of all God's Ways be made manifest before all the World.

To conclude, ^od, the great Lord of all, has threatened eternal Damnation
against all those, who do not perfectly keep the Law; ( Gal. 3.10.) even although
they live and die in the midst of the Heathen World. Romans 1.18, 19, 20. (of
which more afterward.) And at the Day of Judgment he will execute the
Threatening upon all, (those only excepted* that are by Faith interested in
Christ and in the New Covenant:) and his so doing will evidently be justifiable
in the Sight of all Worlds on this Ground, viz. That they were not under a
natural Necessity of Sinning, but were altogether voluntary in their
Disobedience. Luke 19.27. But those mine ENEMIES which WOULD NOT that I should
reign over them, bring hither and slay them before me.

And this, by the Way, is the very Thing, which stops the Mouth of an awakened,
convinced, humbled Sinner, and settles him down in it, that he deserves to be
damned, notwithstanding all his Doings; viz. that he is what he is, not by
Compulsion, or through a natural Necessity, but altogether voluntarily. -- There
is nothing more difficult in the whole Work preparatory to Conversion, than to
make the Sinner see and feel and own, that it is just, quite just, altogether
just and fair, for God to damn him. -- He pleads, that he is sorry for all his
Sins, and is willing to forsake them all for ever, and is resolved always to do
as well as he can. He pleads, that he cannot help his Heart's being so bad, that
he did not bring himself into that Condition, but that he was brought into it
by the Fall of Adam, which he could not possibly prevent, and which he had no
Hand in. -- But when he comes in a clear and realizing Manner to see and feel
the whole Truth; viz. That he does not care for God, nor desire to, but is
really an Enemy to him in his very Heart, and voluntarily so, and that all his
fair Pretenses, and Promises, Prayers, and Tears are but mere Hypocrisy,
arising only from Self-love, and guilty Fears, and mercenary Hopes, -- NOW the
Business is done. -- For says he, It matters not how I came into this
Condition, nor whether I can help ha^ing so bad a Heart, since I am voluntarily
just such a one as I am, and really love and choose to be what I be. Romans 7.8,
9. Sin revived and I died. He feels himself without Excuse, and that his Mouth
is stopped, and that he must be forced to own the Sentence just: for he feels
that it is not owing to any Compulsion or natural Necessity, but that he is
voluntarily and heartily such a one as he is. And now, and not till now, does
he feel himself to be a Sinner, completely so; for he, all along before,
fancied some Goodness to be in him, and thought himself in some Measure
excusable. And now, and not till now, is he prepared to attribute his Salvation
entirely to free and sovereign Grace. All along before he had something to say
for himself, like the Pharisee. But with the Publican, he now sees that he lies
at Mercy. Luke 18.13. -- This is the very Thing that makes all Mankind to
blame, altogether to blame, for being what they be, namely, that they are
voluntarily so; this is the Reason they deserve to be damned for being so, and
this when seen and felt by the awakened Sinner effectually stops his Mouth.

And this also is the very Thing that makes Believers see themselves wholly to
blame for not being perfectly holy* and lays a Foundation for their mourning
for their want of a perfect Conformity to the Law. They feel their Defects are
not the Result of a natural Necessity, but only of the Remains of their old
Aversion to God, which, so far as they are unsanctified, they are voluntary in.
OBJ. But does not St. Paul say in Romans 7.18. To will, is present with me; but
how to perform that which is good, I find not?

ANS. It Is true, he had a strong Disposition to be perfectly holy, but his
Disposition was not perfect. He had a strong Disposition to love God supremely,
live to him entirely, and delight in him wholly, but his whole Heart was not
perfectly disposed to do so. There was a Spirit of aversion to God and love to
Sin remaining in him. In me, that is, in my Flesh, dwells no good Thing. And
this was the Ground and Cause of all his Impotency. So that when he says, To
will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good I find not, he
^a^ans, To be in a Measure disposed to love God supremely, live to him entirely
and delight in him wholly, is natural and easy: but how to get my whole Heart
into the Disposition I find not, it is beyond me, through the Remains of the
Flesh, i. e. of my native Contrariety to God and love to Sin. Which remaining
Contrariety to God, and Propensity to Sin, so far as he was unsanctified, he
was voluntary in; but so far as he was sanctified, he perfectly hated. With my
Mind, I my self* serve the Law of God, but with my Flesh the Law of Sin. ver.
25. And so the Spirit lusted against the Flesh, and the Flesh against the
Spirit; and these two were contrary the one to the other; and hence he could
not do the Things that he would* Gal. 5.17.

OBJ. But does not St. Paul speak several Times in Romans 7. as if he was not
properly to blame for his remaining Corruptions, when he s^ys* It is not I* but
Sin that dwells in me!

ANS. He only means, by that Phrase, to let us know that his remaining
Corruption was not the governing Principle in him: according to what he had
said in Ro^. 6.14. Sin shall not have the Dominion ^ver you, for ye are not
under the La^ but under Grace: But does not at all design to insinuate that he
did not see himself to blame, yea wholly to blame, for his remaining
Corruption. -- For though he says sometimes, It is not I, but Sin that dwells
in me, yet at other Times, I am carnal, sold under Sin, ver. 14. O wretched Man
that I am, ver. 14. Like a brokenhearted Penitent. But he could not have (...)
for his remaining Corruption as being sinful, if he had not felt himself to
Blame for it.


And hence they cry out, I am carnal, sold under Sin, O wretched Man that I am!
Romans 7.14, 24. And set themselves down for Beasts and Fools. Psalm. 73.22.

And finally, this want of a good Temper, and voluntary and stubborn Aversion
to God, and love to themselves, the World and Sin, is ALL that renders the
immediate Influences of the holy Spirit, so absolutely necessary, or indeed at
all needful, to recover and bring them to love God with all their Hearts. A
bare Representation of what God is, were Men of a right Temper, would ravish
their Hearts; for his Beauty and Glory is infinite. It Is nothing therefore but
their Badness that makes it needful that there should be Line upon Line, and
Precept upon Precept. It Is their Aversion to God, that makes any Persuasions at
all needful; for were they of a right Temper, they would love God with all
their Hearts of their own Accord. And surely were not Men very bad indeed,
there would be no Occasion for his Ambassadors with such Earnestness to beseech
them. We pray you, says the Apostle, in Christ's Stead, be ye reconciled to
God. 2 Cor. 5.20. But now, that all external Means that can possibly be used,
all Arguments and Motives and Entreaties, urged in the most forceable Manner,
should not be able to recover Men to God, no not one, in all the World, without
the immediate Influences of the holy Spirit, can surely be attributed to
nothing short of this, that an apostate World are in very Deed at Enmity
against God, and their Contrariety to him is mightily settled and rooted in
their Hearts: mightily settled and rooted indeed, that Paul was nothing, and
Apollos nothing, and all their most vigorous Efforts nothing; so that without
the immediate Influences of the holy Spirit, not one, by them, although the best
Preachers, of mere Men, that ever lived, could be persuaded to turn to God. 1
Cor. 3.7. But that the World, should in Fact, rise in Arms, and put the
Messengers of Heaven to Death, seems to argue Enmity and Malice, even to
Perfection. -- It is Men's Badness, that keeps them from taking in right
Apprehensions of God, and that makes them blind to the Beauty of the divine
Nature, and that makes them hate God, instead of loving of him; but for this,
they would love God of their own Accord, without any more ado. If God were your
Father, (says Christ) ye would love me; ye are of your Father the Devil,
therefore ye hate me. Surely then all the World are inexcusable and wholl^ to
blame for their continuance in Sin, and justly deserve eternal Damnation at the
Hands of God, as was before said. Nor is it any Excuse, to say, God does not
give me sufficient Grace to make me better* whenas I might love God, with all
my Heart, of my own Accord, with all the Ease in the World, if I were but of a
right Temper. Yea, such is his Glory and Beauty, that I could not but be
ravished with it, were I such as I ought to be; and my needing any special
Grace to make me love God, argues that I am an Enemy to him, a vile abominable
Wretch, not fit to live. And to pretend to excuse my self, and say, I cannot,
and God will not make me, is just as bad as if a rebellious Child should go to his
good Father, and say, I hate you, and cannot love you, and God will not by his
almighty Power make me better; and therefore I be not to Blame. Whenas the
Wretch could not but love his good Father, were it not that he is so
exceedingly vitiated in his Temper. -- If our Impotency consisted in and
resulted from our want of natural Capacities, if it was the Business of the
holy Spirit to give us new natural Faculties, then we might plead our
Inability, and plead God's not giving of us sufficient Power, in Excuse for our
selves. But since all our Impotency takes it is Rise entirely from another
Quarter, and all our need of the Influences of the holy Spirit to bring us to
love God results from our Badness, therefore are we without Excuse, although God
leaves us entirely to our selves. -- And indeed nothing can be more absurd,
than to suppose the Governor of the World obliged to make his Creatures love
hi^, in spite of all their Aversion; or more wicked, than to lay the Blame, of
their not loving of him, upon him, in Case he does not. Ier. 7.8, 9, 10, -- 16.

OBJ. But if it be granted, that Men's natural Powers are adequate with the Law
of God, and so they, as to their natural Capacities, are capable of a perfect
Conformity to the Law; and if it be granted, that the outward Advantag^s, which
all have who live under the Gospel, are sufficient, were Men but of a right
Temper, to lead them to the true Knowledge of God; and so, that all such are
without Excuse: yet if any Part of Mankind do not enjoy sufficient outward
Advantages for the true Knowledge of God, without which it is impossible they
should either love or serve him, how can such justly and fairly be accounted
altogether to blame and wholly inexcusable? If the Heathen, who have no other
outward Advantages whereby to gain the true Knowledge of God, than the Works of
Creation and Providence, do but honestly improve what they have, shall not they
be accepted, although they fall short of sinless Perfection? or is it right and
fair, that they should be damned?

ANS. I suppose, that those Advantages, which all Mankind do actually enjoy,
would be sufficient to lead them to a true Knowledge of God, and so to love and
serve him, were they of a right Disposition, and were it not for the Prejudices
that blind and darken their Minds, which arise from their Enmity to God, and
Love to themselves, the World and Sin. Romans 1.20, 28. -- And I suppose, that
God, the wise, and holy, just and good Governor of the World, is under no
natural Obligation, to use any supernatural Means, for the removal of those
Prejudice* ( Romans 9.15.) especially considering that Men love them, and are
obstinate in them, and will not let them be removed if they can help it, as is
in Fact the Case. Romans 1.18, 28. I^h. 3.19. -- And I suppose, that since the
Law is holy, just and good, that nothing short of sinless Perfection can, or
ought to, pass with the supreme Lawgiver and Judge of the World, as a Condition
of Acceptance. Gal. 3.10. Romans 3.20. -- And I suppose, that God was under no
Obligations to provide a Savior to bear the Curse of the Law and answer its
Demands for any, since all are voluntarily at ^nmity against him and his Law.
Romans 5.8. -- Upon the who^e, I suppose, that all Mankind might have been lest
in their fallen State, without a Savior, or any offers o^ Pardon and Peace, or
any supernatural Advantages whatsoever; and that yet their natural Obligations
to love God with all their Hearts, would have by no Means ceased; and that it
would have been perfectly just and right with God, to have inflicted eternal
Damnation upon us, for our not doing so. Romans 1 18. and 3.19. -- And besides, I
suppose, that all the Nations of the Earth might have had the Gospel preached
to them, and to this Day enjoyed it, had not the World been in Arms against it,
and killed the Messengers of Peace, who were sent to carry the glad Tidings of
Pardon and Salvation round the World. Mat. 28.19. And I suppose, that still in
every Age of the Christian Church, there have been Ministers of Christ, who
would gladly go to the farthest Parts of the Earth, to carry the joyful News of
a Savior, were Men but willing to receive the News, and repent and convert and
return to God: I know, there are such in this Age. From all which, I suppose
that it is right, fair and just for God to execute the Threatening of his Law
according to his declared Design. Romans 2.5, 6. -- Thus much in general. But to
be more particular:

1. It is plain, that the Heathen, as well as the rest of Mankind, are under a
Law that forbids all Sin and requires perfect Holiness. For the Wrath of God is
revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men, let
them be Jews or Gentiles. Romans 1.18. And since God is what he is, and they his
Creatures, there is the same general Ground and Reason that they should love
him with all their Hearts, as that others should. And it is plain, St. Paul
looked upon the Heathen under Obligations to glorify God as God, and be
thankful, Romans 1.21. Which is the Sum of what is required in the first Table of
the Law. And none will pretend that the Heathen are not obliged to love their
Neighbors as themselves, and do as they would be done by: Which is the Sum of
what the second Table requires. So that it is a plain Case, that they are, by
the Law of Nature, obliged to the same perfect Holiness, which is required, in
God's written World, of the rest of Mankind.

2. It is plain, St. Paul looked upon them as enjoying sufficient Means of
Knowledge, and so to be without Excuse. Romans 1.18. For the Wrath of God is
revealed from Heaven, against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men, who
hold the Truth in Unrighteousness. Who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, i. e.
who, instead of heartily receiving and loving and conforming to the Truth, do
from Love to their Lusts, hate, and wickedly suppress, all right Notions of
God, of Truth and Duty, stifling their Consciences. -- But how do the Gentiles
discover this Aversion to the Truth, who are under no Advantages to know it? --
I answer, says the Apostle, their Advantages are sufficient. For (v. 19.) That
which may be known of God is manifest in them. i. e. The Perfections of God,
which is all that is knowable of God, are discovered to them: as he adds, For
God has showed it unto them. -- But were not the Perfections of God discovered
to them so darkly, as not to be sufficiently evident and perceivable? -- Surely
no, says he; for (v. 20.) The invisible Things of him, from the Creation of the
World, are CLEARLY SEEN, being understood by the Things that are made, even his
eternal Power and Godhead; so that they are without Excuse. i. e. Ever since
the Creation of the World, the Perfections of God are clearly to be seen in his
Works, the Things which he has made manifesting plainly what a God he is; so
that those, who see not his Perfections and are not sensible of his infinite
Glory, cannot plead their want of sufficient outward Advantages, in Excuse for
their Ignorance and Insensibility, and therefore the Heathen, who have this
Advantage, are without Excuse. If it should be objected, that St. Paul only
means, that their Advantages were so great, as to render them inexcusable in
their gross Idolatry and high-handed Wickedness; because they did, or might
have known better than to do so. -- It may be easily answered from the 18th
Verse, that he means to prove that they were altogether inexcusable, not only
in their gross Sins, but also in all their Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness. i.
e. plainly in all their want of a perfect Conformity to the moral Law, or Law
of Nature. For the least Degree of Nonconformity in Heart or Life to the first
Table of the Law, is so great a Degree of Ungodliness, and the very least
Degree of Nonconformity to the second Table of the Law, is so great a Degree
of Unrighteousness. And St. Paul is express in it, that the Wrath of God is
revealed from Heaven against ALL Ungodliness, etc. And in ver. 21. he is full
in it that the Heathen are wholly inexcusable for not glorifying God as God,
which is manifestly all that the Law ever required. -- So that it is plain, he
does not design, merely to prove that they were inexcusable in their Idolatry
and the gross Wickedness of their Lives; but also that they were inexcusable
in, and wholly to Blame for, their not being perfectly holy. For they did, or
might have known, that God deserved to be loved with all their Heart; and their
Neighbor, as themselves.
-- And still farther to clear up the Point, the Apostle seems to go on, as it
were, to say, -- Yea, it is evident that the present Ignorance of the Gentile
Nations is affected, and so inexcusable, not only from the sufficiency of their
present outward Advantages, but also from their former Misimprovement of the
Advantages which they heretofore did enjoy. Because (v. 21.) when they knew
God, i. e. when the Heathen Nations formerly had right Notions of God instilled
into them, being instructed in the Knowledge of the true God, by Noah and his
Sons, from whom they descended, yet then they glorified him not as God, neither
were thankful; their Instructions had no Influence upon them to make them holy.
But they became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish Heart was
darkened. i. e. They soon fell off to Idolatry, and lost that Knowledge of the
true God, in which they had been instructed and educated. For (v. 28.) They did
not like to retain God in their Knowledge. i. e. to remember those
Instructions, which had been given them, concerning the Nature and Perfections
of God: And I may add -- Concerning the Seed of the Woman, the promised
Messiah, and the Way of Salvation through him. -- For, no doubt, Noah and his
Sons had heard of this Promise, and told it to their Posterity; and if they had
handed it down safe, from Age to Age, the Heathen World might, throughout all
Generations, have been in a salvable State; for this Promise contained the Sum
and Substance of the Gospel. Methuselah lived two Hundred and forty Years in
the Days of Adam. Noah lived six Hundred, and his Sons about a Hundred Years in
the Days of Methuselah. And Isaac was fifty Years old before all Noah's Sons
were dead. So that this Promise might easily have been handed a long down by
Tradition, and doubtless would have been so, had it been precious in the Eyes
of the Children of Men. And afterward, farther Light might have been obtained
from Israel, God's peculiar People, by the Gentile Nations, had they really
been desirous of it.
But they abandoned themselves to Idolatry. (v. 23, 25.) For which Cause, (v.
24, 26.) for which Contempt cast on God, God gave them up to all Manner of
Wickedness. So that the present extreme Ignorance, Blindness and Wickedness of
the Gentile Nations, they have, through their Aversion to God and Love to Sin,
brought themselves into. So that it is manifest, they do not desire the
Knowledge of God, but evidently hate all right Notions of him; and so are,
beyond dispute, without Excuse. Which was the Point to be proved. Thus he
proves that they are without Excuse, because their present Advantages for the
Knowledge of God are sufficient; which Advantages ever since the Creation of
the World have been common to all: and because they had once superadded
Advantages from parental Instructions, which, instead of well improving, and of
carefully handing down from Generation to Generation, they hated to remember,
and so soon forgot.

And these Passages ought to be of more Weight to decide the Case, because they
are not merely occasional Strokes, but the Apostle is evidently upon the very
same Point that I am. For from the 18th. Verse of this first Chapter, to the
19th. Verse of the third, He is industriously laboring to prove, that both
Jews and Gentiles are all under Sin, and so the whole World guilty before
(...). And his Arguments are not fetched from Adam's first Sin, but from
comparing them with the Law of God, whereby he discovers their Wickedness; all
the Blame whereof, he entirely lays upon them: and because it might have been
objected, that the Heathen World had not sufficient Means of Knowledge, and so
were not wholly to blame and inexcusable in their Nonconformity to the Law, He
does here designedly obviate the Objection, and prove and declare them to be
without any Excuse from that Quarter. The Apostle evidently takes it for
granted, that they had sufficient natural Powers to capacitate them for the
Knowledge of God, and he proves that their outward Advantages were sufficient,
and so he lays the whole Blame of their Ignorance, Blindness and Wickedness
upon themselves; and finally sums them up, with the rest of Mankind, as having
their Mouths stopped, and standing guilty before God. Chapter, 3.19.

The Truth of the Case seems, in a few Words, to lie here; that if Adam had
never fell, the Works of Creation and Providence had been the Glass in which he
himself, and all his Posterity, would have beheld the Glory of the Lord, from
Age to Age; whereby, being naturally of a right Temper, they would have been
effectually influenced, to love him, live to him, delight in him, and praise
him for ever; or in St. Paul's Words, To glorify God as God, and be thankful.
-- And I suppose, that all Mankind, still having the same natural Powers, and
the same outward Advantages, are therefore entirely to Blame for, and wholly
inexcusable in, all their Ignorance, Blindness, and Wickedness; especially
considering they perfectly love to be what they be, and hate to be reclaimed,
and stand ready to resist the Light when offered, and shut their Eyes against
the Truth, from whatever Quarter it comes. -- The Heavens, still as clearly as
ever, do declare the Glory of the Lord, and the Firmament shows his handy
work; Day unto Day utters Speech, and Night unto Night shows Knowledge.
Psalm. 19.1. The natural Perfections of God are clearly to be seen in all his
Works at the first Glance, and his moral Perfections would be equally evident,
to an intelligent Creature of a right Temper, at the second Thought. And then
his Glory would immediately shine brighter than the Sun, and every Heart be
ravished with his infinite Beauty. But such is our Alienation from the Deity in
this apostate World, and such the vitiated Temper of our Minds, that while
Angels see the divine Glory in all his Works ( Rev. 4.11.) Men, sottish,
brutish Men, though they have Eyes to see, see not; but are blind to the
Manifestations which God makes of himself; because they do not like to have God
in their Knowledge.

And now,

3. As to the Heathens being accepted, for honestly improving their Powers and
Advantages; it is, in the first Place, most certain from St. Paul's Account,
that they were at the very greatest Distance from doing so. -- But secondly, if
they had done so, yea, if they had discovered so good a Temper of Mind, as
perfectly to have conformed to the divine Law, yet it is the very Scope of all
the Apostle's Reasoning, in the three first Chapters of his Epistle to the
Romans, to prove that by the Deeds of the Law no Flesh, neither Jew nor
Gentile, can be justified. And since the Law is holy, just and good, it is not
indeed reasonable, that any Thing short of sinless Perfection, from first to
last, should pass with the righteous Governor of the World, as a Condition of
Acceptance. Future Obedience, let it be ever so perfect, can do nothing to make
Amends for former Neglects: As has been already proved in another Place: -- But
that which of it self alone is entirely sufficient to say in this Matter, is,
that it is expressly declared in Romans 1.18. The Wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven against all Ungodliness (or every Breach of the first Table,) and
Unrighteousness (or every Breach of the second Table of the Law,) of Men who
hold the Truth in Unrighteousness. Which Words are evidently designed, by the
Apostle, to represent the Character and State of the Heathen World. For he
spends the rest of the Chapter in enlarging upon this Head, showing how the
Heathen held the Truth in Unrighteousness, and were exposed to the Wrath of God
for their Ungodliness and Unrighteousness; and he concludes them all under Sin
and guilty, and lost for ever, unless they obtain Justification by Faith in
Christ. See Chapter, 3.9, 19, 20, 30. Verses. -- And thus we see how all
Mankind have, not only sufficient natural Powers, but also sufficient outward
Advantages, to know God and perfectly conform to his Law, even the Heathen
themselves. And that the very Reason they do not, is their want of such a
Temper as they ought to have, and their voluntary rooted Enmity to God, and
love to Sin. OBJ. But it is impossible they should love God with all their
Hearts, if they have no Hopes of finding Favor in his Sight. For he that
comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a REWARD^ of them that
diligently seek him. Heb. 11.6.

ANSW. Coming to God, in Heb. 11.6. evidently implies, not only a Conformity to
the Law, but also a Compliance with the Gospel* i. e. it implies not only a
Disposition to love God with all our Hearts, but also a trusting in him for the
divine Favor and eternal Life upon Gospel-Encouragements; which
Gospel-Encouragements must therefore be understood and believed, or it will
indeed be impossible so to trust in him. But I did not say that the Heathen
were under sufficient outward Advantages for an evangelical returning to God,
which is what is intended in Heb. 11.6. but only for a Compliance with the Law
of Nature, which is what is intended in Romans 1.20, 21.

OBJ. But still, is it not, in the Nature of Things, impossible they should
love God, if they have no Hopes of finding Favor in his Sight?

ANSW. Let common Sense decide the Case. A Servant hates his Master (a very
good Man) without Cause, murders his only Son, steals a thousand Pounds of his
Money, runs away into a far Country, spends several Years in riotous Living; at
length he is caught, he is brought Home to his Master, who is a Man in
Authority, before him he has his Trial, is condemned, and has no hope of
Favor. -- But how does this render it impossible, in the Nature of Things,
that he should love his Master? Why cannot he love his Master now, as well as
ever he could? He has the same original Grounds of Love he used to have. He
used to love his Master: his Master is as wo^thy of his Esteem as ever: He has
no Cause to esteem his Master ever the less, because he himself has been such a
Villain, or because he is doomed to die for his Crimes; a Punishment justly
due. To dislike his Master for these Things, would be perfectly unreasonable.
Surely, were he but of a right Temper, he could not but take all the Blame to
himself, and justify his Master, and esteem and love him, and be heartily sorry
for all his Villianies. He can be under no Inability, but what must arise from
a bad Heart. The Application is easy


And now that they are wholly to blame and entirely inexcusable, appears still
in a clearer Light.

But before I leave this Point, I must make this Remark, viz. That if God looks
upon the Advantages of the Heathen sufficient, no Wonder that he so often
speaks of the Advantages of his own professing People, as being much more than
barely sufficient; even although they enjoy only the outward Means of Grace,
without the inward Influences of the Holy Spirit. For if the natural Advantages
of the Heathen are sufficient, surely the supernatural Advantages of those who
enjoy a divine Revelation, are much more than sufficient. And if the Advantages
of those who enjoy only a divine Revelation are much more than sufficient, no
wonder then that those who lived in the Days of Moses, Isaiah and Christ, are
represented as very Monsters of Wickedness, for remaining blind, senseless,
impenitent, and unholy, since they enjoyed such great, and so many super added
Advantages. No wonder therefore, that Moses every where represents the Children
of Israel, as such a stubborn, perverse, stiffnecked, rebellious People,
(particularly see Deuteronomy. 9.) and makes as if their Blindness, Senselesness and
Impenitency was the most unaccountable and inexcusable, since their Eyes had
seen, and their Ears had heard, such Things, and their Advantatages had been so
great. Deuteronomy. 29.2, 3, 4. And Moses called unto all Israel, and said unto them,
Ye have seen all that the Lord did before your Eyes, in the Land of Egypt, unto
Pharaoh, and unto all his Servants, and unto all his Land; (and that he might
set forth the Greatness of the Things which they had seen, he adds) The great
Temptations which thine Eyes have seen, the Signs, and those great Miracles,
(all which have been enough to melt the Heart of a Stone, and) yet (as he goes
on to say,) the Lord (by all these Things which have been so much more than
enough,) has not given you ^n Heart to perceive, and Eyes to see, and Ears to
hear, unto this Day: All these Means have not to this Day attained the End, and
made you see and feel and know what a God the Lord is, and bring you to love
him and fear him and walk in all his Ways. Moses evidently speaks of it as a
very strange Thing, that they should be blind, senseless, impenitent and
unholy, after such Means and Advantages, as if they were most inexcusable, yea,
under a very aggravated Guilt; whereby he plainly takes it for granted, that
their Advantages had been much more than sufficient, had it not been for their
Want of a right Temper, and their wicked Obstinacy and Perverseness. And yet he
mentions none but outward Means and outward Advantages, and does not give the
least Intimation that they had had any inward Assistance from the holy Spirit.
He does not bring any such Thing into the Account, but wholly aggravates their
Sin and their great Inexcusableness, from the Consideration of their outward
Helps. Ye have seen all that the Lord did before your Eyes in the Land of
Egypt, etc. -- And no wonder he though it them so very inexcusable, since God looks
upon the Heathen World without Excuse, in that while the Heavens declare the
Glory of the Lord, etc. they don't see with their Eyes, and perceive with their
Hearts, and from a Sense of his Glory, only thus discovered, love him, and live
to him. For if their Advantages are enough, surely the Advantages of the
Israelites were much, very much, more than enough.

And upon the same Hypothesis, it is no Wonder that God looked upon the Case of
the Children of Israel as he did, in the Time of Isaiah; who, from the Days of
Moses even to that Day, had from Age to Age enjoyed such outward Advantages as
they had, and had had such outward Means used with them; and in that Age
enjoyed so great an outward Privilege, as the daily Prophesying and Preaching
of Isaiah, Hosea, Amos, and Micah; who, some, if not all, of them prophesied,
as it is very probable, forty or fifty Years together at the same Time, as we
may learn from the first Verse in their several Books, which tell us when and
how long they prophesied, compared with the Account we have of those Kings
Reigns, in the Books of the Kings, in whose Reigns they prophesied. -- No
wonder, I say, God speaks as he does in Isa. 5.1, -- 7. My Beloved has a
V^^^yard in a very fruitful Hill. And he fenced it, and gathered out the Stones
thereof, and planted it with the choicest Vine, and built a Tower in the midst
of it, and also made a Wine Press therein. -- Here is represented the natural
Powers, and outward Advantages of God's People. -- And he looked that it should
bring forth Grapes, and it brought forth wild Grapes. And now, O Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and Men of Judah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my Vineyard.
What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it?
Wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth Grapes, brought it forth
wild Grapes? -- Here all the Blame is entirely laid on themselves, and their
Conduct is considered as being inexcusably, yea, unaccountably bad. -- And now
go to; I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard; I will take away the
Hedge thereof, etc. Where nothing can be plainer than that the Children of
Israel are represented, as enjoying sufficient Advantages for Fruitfulness,
yea, Advantages much more than barely sufficient, and that their proving as
they did, was unspeakably vile and God-provoking, and for which they deserved
utter Ruin; and for which indeed God did afterward, according to his declared
Design, bring utter Ruin upon them. But all those Advantages were outward; nor
is the inward Assistance of the holy Spirit any where brought into the Account,
whenever the Greatness of their Advantages is set forth, on Purpose to show how
aggravated their Wickedness was: but this is constantly the Charge, as in 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16, 17. And the Lord God of their Fathers sent unto them by his
Messengers, rising up betimes and sending; but they mocked the Messengers of
God, and despised his Words, and misused his Prophets, until the Wrath of God
arose against his People, 'till there was no Remedy. Therefore he brought upon
them the King of the Chaldees. Not because they did not improve the inward
Assistances of the holy Spirit, but because they did not improve their outward
Advantages, did not hearken to God's Messengers. -- And in this Strain their
Confessions ran, when God by his Grace had brought them to see what they had
done. As in Dan. 9.5, 6. etc. We have sinned, and committed Iniquity, and have
done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy Precepts, and from
thy Judgments: Neither have we HEARKENED UNTO THY SERVANTS THE PROPHETS, which
spoke in thy Name. The not harkening to them is mentioned as the great
Aggravation: but their not improving the inward Assistance of the Spirit is not
brought into the Account. See Neh. 9.30. -- It is evident, that the Children of
Israel, considered as a Nation, had not special Grace, or the renewing
sanctifying Influences of the holy Spirit, as one of their Advantages, from
Jer. 31.31, 32, 33. Behold the Days come, says the Lord, that I will make a
new Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah, not
according to the Covenant I made with their Fathers, in the Day I took them by
the Hand, to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, (which my (national) Covenant
they brake, although I was as an Husband unto them, says the Lord.) But this
shall be the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel, after those
Days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward Parts, and write it in
their Hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my People. Where the
renewing sanctifying Influences of the Holy Spirit, are mentioned, as a
peculiar Privilege the Jewish People, were not entitled unto as a Nation, by
that national Covenant which God entered into with them, as such, at Mount
Sinai. Exodus 19. Deuteronomy. 5. and which afterward, at the End of 40 Years, was
renewed at the Borders of Canaan. Deuteronomy. 29. Nor indeed were there any inward
Influences of the holy Spirit, at all, promised in that national Covenant, as a
common Privilege, to be by them in common enjoyed. And if they were not
entitled to this Privilege as a Nation by their national Covenant, then there
is no Evidence that they, as a Nation, did enjoy it. And therefore when God
speaks as if he had done all for that Nation that could be done, he plainly has
Respect only to outward Means, which were all that they as a Nation enjoyed:
And, as to them, he evidently had good Ground so to say; since he had done such
great Things for them, and sent such Prophets among them, and been continually
taking all Pains, from Age to Age, to make them a holy People. Even as we are
ready to say concerning the People of a particular Parish, where there is a
learned, godly, and so a plain, searching, powerful, enlightening, faithful
Minister, such as Mr. Shepard was in his Day, What more could be done for such
a People, that is not done? -- And therefore when Stephen charged the Jews,
that they always resisted the Holy Ghost, as their Fathers had done, (in Act.
7.51.) he means that they had always resisted the Holy Ghost, as speaking in
and by their Prophets, as now they did the same Spirit that spoke in and by
him: as is plain from v. 52. and as is also evident from Neh. 9.30. And besides
there is not the least Intimation, that those Jews to whom Stephen spoke, were
under any of the inward Influences of the holy Spirit, but they seem rather to
act like Creatures wholly left of God. And this Hint may help us to understand
that Phrase in Neh. 9.20. Compared with Number. 11.17. -- So that from the whole,
it is evident, that the Children of Israel, as a Nation, were in Isaiah's Time
looked upon as enjoying Advantages much more than sufficient for their being a
holy and fruitful People, had they been of a right Temper and not so wickedly
obstinate and perverse in their bad Disposition; and yet their Advantages were
only outward, and the inward Influences of the holy Spirit are not taken into
the Account. -- And well might their Advantages be thus esteemed upon the
forementioned Hypothesis. -- Yea, if all Mankind are able, in respect of their
natural Capacities to yield perfect Obedience, and if the Advantages of the
very Heathen were sufficient, had it not been for the want of a right Temper in
them and for their very bad Disposition, it is no wonder that God speaks here
concerning his peculiar People, whose outward Advantages were exceeding great,
as if he had had very raised Expectations of their being a holy People. --
Wherefore when I looked it should bring forth Grapes, brought it forth wild
Grapes? q.d. I have done all as to outward Means, that could be done, to make
you a holy People. Enough, and more than enough. And I looked and expected that
you should have been so. And whence is it that you be not? How unaccountable is
it? And how great is your Wickedness! And how great your Guilt! For it is God's
Way, in the holy Scriptures, to speak to Men, after the Manner of Men, who are
wont to have their Expectations of Fruitfulness raised, when they sow or plant
in a fertile Soil, well manured and cultivated. See Mat. 21.33, -- 41. -- Just
so a Master is wont to speak to his Servant, who is strong and able for
Business, I looked that you should have done such a Piece of Work, wherefore is
it not done? You had Time enough and Strength enough. And that although he knew
in all Reason before Hand, that his Servant would not do it, because of his
lazy, unfaithful Temper. The Design of such Speeches being to represent the
great Unreasonableness and Inexcusaness of such a Conduct.

And finally, upon the same Hypothesis, it is no wonder that Jesus Christ
represents the People of Chorazin and Bethsaida and Capernaum, as enjoying
Advantages sufficient to have brought even Tire and Sidon and Sodom to
Repentance, which in Scripture-Account are some of the most wicked Cities in
the World; and so consequently more than barely sufficient to have brought them
to Repentance, who were by Profession the People of God. For they had enjoyed
the Ministry of Christ himself, and seen very many of his mighty Works. Mat.
11.20 -- 24. If the Advantages of the Heathen World are sufficient, well might
Christ, speaking after the Manner of Men, seem to be so confident that Tire and
Sidon and Sodom would have repented, if they had seen his mighty Works: And
well might he speak as if the People of Ch^razin etc. had enjoyed Advantages
more than barely sufficient, and lay all the Blame of their Impenitency upon
them, yea, and look upon them as under an aggravated Guilt, and give them so
heavy a Doom. -- And yet nothing can be plainer, than that the Advantages which
they enjoyed were only outward, for no other are brought into the Account as
Aggravations of their Guilt. Woe unto thee, for if the mighty Works which were
done in you, etc. -- He does not in the least intimate as if they had any
inward Help from the holy Spirit, but only says he has done mighty Works among
them. Yea, in the 25th. Verse he plainly declares that they were left destitute
of special Grace.

And thus, while with St. Paul, we look upon the Advantages even of the Heathen
World, as sufficient to lead them to the true Knowledge of God and a perfect
Conformity to his Law, but for their Want of a good Temper, and their voluntary
Aversion to God and Love to Sin; we easily see whence it is, that the external
Advantages of those who enjoy the Benefit of a divine Revelation, together with
other outward Means of Grace, are represented, as being much more than barely
sufficient; and consequently their Guilt, in remaining Impenitent and Unholy,
as being doubly aggravated.

And before I leave this Point I must make one Remark more, namely, that if the
Advantages of the Heathen World were sufficient, but for their want of a good
Temper, their voluntary Aversion to God and Love to Sin, to lead them to the
true Knowledge of God, and a perfect Conformity to his Law, as has been proved;
then God was not under any natural Obligations to grant to any of Mankind any
supernatural Advantages, but still might justly have required sinless
Perfection of all, and threatened eternal Damnation for the least Defect. I say,
God was under no natural Obligations, i. e. any Obligations arising from his
Nature and Perfections: For he might, consistent with his Holiness, Justice and
Goodness, have le^t all Mankind to themselves, without any supernatural
Advantages; since their natural Advantages were sufficient, and they were
obstinate in their Ignorance, Blindness and Wickedness. Most certainly God was
not bound to have sent his Son, his Spirit, his Word, his Messengers, and
entreat and beseech those, who perfectly hated him, and hated to hear from him,
and were disposed to crucify his Son, resist his Spirit, pervert his Word, and
(...) Messengers, to turn and love him and serve him; b^t might, even
consistent with infinite Goodness it self, have let them take their Course, and
go on in the Way they were set in, and have damned them all at last.

All that the great and glorious Governor of the World requires of Mankind in
the Law of Nature, is, that they love him with all their Hearts and Souls, and
live as Brethren together in his World, which is infinitely reasonable in it
self, and which they have sufficient natural Powers to do. And he has stretched
abroad the Heavens as a Curtain over their Heads, which declare the Glory of
the Lord, and in the Earth and in all his Works, his Perfections are clearly to
be seen, so that all are under sufficient Advantages for the Knowledge of him;
but Mankind hate God, and say unto the Almighty, Depart from us, for we do not
desire the Knowledge of thy Ways: And hence they still remain Ignorant of God,
averse to him, and in love with Sin. And now, I say, it is as evident as the
Sun at Noon Day, that God might fairly have damned such Creatures, without
using any more Means with them. His Law being thus upon a perfect Level with
their natural Powers and natural Advantages, he was not obliged, as he was the
righteous and good Governor of the World, to grant them any supernatural
Assistance, either outward, by an external Revelation, or inward, by the
internal Influences of his holy Spirit. And therefore it is, that the great
Ruler of the World, has always acted Sovereignly and Arbitrarily in these
Matters, bestowing these supernatural Favors upon whom he pleases, as being
obliged to none. Thus he has done as to the external Revelation. Psalm. 147.19,
20. He shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel:
He has not dealt so with any Nation, and as for his Judgments they have not
known them. And thus he has done as to the internal Influences of his Spirit.
Mat. 11.25, 26. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou
have hid th^se Things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto
Babes. Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy Sight. And thus God even to
this Day, as to both outward and inward Helps, has Mercy on whom he will have
Mercy, and Compassion on whom he will have Compassion. He effectually sends the
Gospel to one Nation and not to another; and where the Gospel is preached, he
by his Spirit awakens, convinces, humbles, converts whom he pleases, and leaves
the rest.

And thus the Objection, from the Heathen's not having sufficient outward
Advantages, has been answered. And from the Answer, I have taken Occasion to
make these (I hope) not unprofitable Remarks; and may now return and repeat my
former Assertion, with still higher Degrees of Assurance, viz. that Mankind are
altogether to blame for, and entirely inexcusable in, their Nonconformity to
the holy Law of God, and therefore justly deserve Damnation; and that even the
Heathen, as well as others.

Thus have I endeavored, to show what is the exact Measure of Love and
Obedience that God requires of the Children of Men, and that all Mankind have
sufficient natural Powers and outward Advantages, and that all their Blindness,
Ignorance and Wickedness are voluntary, chosen and loved. And I have been the
larger upon these Things, in order to clear up the Justice of God and his Law,
and the Grace of God in his Gospel: Both which, have been sadly misrepresented,
by those who have not aright understood or well attended to these Things. They
have said, that it is not just in God to require sinless Perfection of Mankind,
or damn any for the want of it. They have said, that the Law is abated and
brought down to a level with, (I hardly know what, unless I call it,) the
vitiated depraved Temper of an apostate World, who both hate God and his holy
Law, and want an Act of Toleration and Indulgence to be past in Favor of their
Corruptions, that, at Heart, they may remain dead in Sin, and yet, by a Round
of external Duties, be secured from Damnation at last. And so they have, like
the Pharisees of old, ( Mat. 5.) destroyed the Law by their Abatements. And now
the Law, only by which is the Knowledge of Sin, being thus laid aside, they are
ignorant of their sinful, guilty, helpless, undone Estate; and so are
insensible of their Need of the sovereign Grace of God through Jesus Christ to
save them, and fancy they are good-natured enough to turn to God of their own
Accord. And having imbibed such Notions of Religion, they easily see that the
better Sort of Heathen have for Substance the same Religion with themselves,
and therefore have equal Charity for them. Not being really sensible of their
Need of Gospel Grace for themselves, they have full Charity for the Heathen,
who never so much as heard of it. But what I have said is sufficient, I think,
to clear the Justice of God in his Law, and the Grace of God in the Gospel, and
sweep away this Refuge of Lies, by which so many gladly quiet their
Consciences, and woefully deceive their own Souls. However, of these Things we
shall still have something more afterward.

Thus we have gone through what was proposed, have considered what was implied in
Love to God, and from what Motives we are to love him, and what Measure of Love
is required. And all that has been said cannot possibly be sum'd up in fewer or
plainer Words than these, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart,
and with all thy Soul, with all thy Mind, and with all thy Strength. This is
the first and great Commandment; in Conformity whereunto the first and great
Part of Religion does consist. And the second which is like unto it, being the
Foundation of the other half of (this Part of) Religion (now under
Consideration,) i^, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Which is what we
are, in the next Place, to proceed to a Consideration of.

SECTION IV. Of Love to our Neighbor.
II. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. -- In which Words we have, (1.)
the Duty required. Thou shall love. (2.) The original, natural Ground and
Reason of it intimated; Thy Neighbor. Which Name given to our Fellow-Men, may
lead us to consider them, as being what they are in themselves, and as
sustaining some Kind of Character and Relation, with Regard to us. (3.) The
Rule and Standard by which our Love to our Neighbor is to be regulated; As thy
self. Here therefore we may consider, what is implied in Love to our Neighbor,
from what Motives we are to love him, and by what Standard our Love is to be
regulated, as to its Nature and Measure.

FIRST, Let us consider what is implied in that Love to our Neighbor, which,
by the Law of God, is required of us. And in general, it is presupposed, or
implied, that we have a right Temper of Mind, an upright, impartial, candid,
benevolent Temper, even to Perfection, without the least Tincture of any Thing
to the contrary. For without this we shall not, we cannot, view our Neighbors
in a true Light, nor think of them, nor judge of them, nor feel toward them,
exactly as we ought. A wrong Temper, a selfish, partial, uncandid, censorious,
carping, bitter, stingy, proud Temper, will unavoidably give a wrong Turn to
all our Thoughts of, and Feeling toward, our Neighbors: as is manifest from
the Nature of the Thing, and from universal Experience. Solomon observes, that
as a Man thinks, so is he. And it is as true, that as a Man is, so he
thinks. For out of the Heart, the Temper and Disposition of the Man, proceed
his Thoughts of, and Feelings toward, both Persons and Things; according to
our Savior, Mat. 12.33, 34, 35. An upright therefore impartial, candid,
benevolent Temper, to Perfection, without the least Tincture of any Thing to
the contrary, is presupposed and implied in the Love required; as being, in the
Nature of Things, absolutely necessary thereto. We must have a right Temper,
and under the Influence thereof, be perfectly in a Disposition, to view our
Neighbors in a right Light, and think and judge of them, and be affected
toward them, as we ought. i. e. To love them as our selves.

Particularly,

1. There is a certain Esteem and Value for our Fellow-Men, which upon sundry
Accounts is their Due, that is implied in this Love. There are valuable Things
in Mankind. Some have one Thing, and some another. Some have Gifts, and some
have Grace. Some have five Talents, and some two, and some one. Some are worthy
of a greater Esteem, and some less, considered merely as they be in themselves.
And then some are by God set in a higher Station and some in a lower,
sustaining various Characters and standing in various Relations. As Magistrates
and Subjects, Ministers and People, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants,
etc. And there is a certain Esteem and Respect due to every one in all
Stations. Now, with a disinterested Impartiality, and with a perfect Candor
and a hearty Good Will, ought we to view the various Excellencies of our
Neighbors, and consider their various Stations, Characters and Relations, and
in our Hearts we ought to give every one their due Honor, and their proper
Place; being perfectly content, for our own Parts, to be and act in our own
Sphere, where God has placed us; and by our Fellow-Mortals to be considered, as
being just what we are. And indeed, this, for Substance, is the Duty of every
one in the whole System of intelligent Creatures. As for God most high, the
Throne is his proper Place, and all his intelligent Creatures have their proper
Places, both with Respect to God, and with Respect to one another, which Places
every one ought to take and to acquiesce in with all their Hearts. We have an
Instance of this Temper to a good Degree in David. He was sensible that Saul
was the Lord's Anointed, and that it became him to render Honor to whom Honor
is due, and Fear to whom Fear, and his Heart was tender. Hence David's Heart
smote him, because he had cut off Readiness Skirt. 1 Samuel 24.5. This Temper will
naturally dispose us to feel and conduct right, toward our Superiors,
Inferiors and Equals: And so lay a solid Foundation for the Performance of all
relative Duties. The contrary to all this, is a proud and conceited Temper,
attended with a Disposition to despise Superiors, scorn Equals, and trample
upon Inferiors: A Temper to overvalue themselves and their Friends and Party,
and to undervalue and despise all others. Such do not consider Persons and
Things as being what they are, and think and judge and be affected and act
accordingly. Nor do they consider, or regard the different Stations in which
Men are set by God, or the Characters they sustain by divine Appointment. They
are not governed by the Reason of Things, and a Sense of what is right and fit;
but by their own Corruptions. This was the Case with Korah and his Company,
when they rose up against Moses and Aaron, and said, Ye take too much upon you,
seeing all the Congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among
them. Number. 16.3. Pride makes Superiors scornful in their Temper, and tyrannical
in their Government; and Pride makes Inferiors envious in their Temper and
ungovernable in their Lives; and it makes Equals jealous, unfriendly,
contentious: In a Word, it lays a Foundation for the Neglect of all relative
Duties, and for a general Discord and Confusion among Mankind.

2. We ought not only to consider, esteem and respect our fellow-Men, as being
what they are, and with a perfect Impartiality give them their Due, in our very
Hearts, according to what they are, and to the Stations they stand in, being
perfectly content, for our own Parts, with the Place which God has allotted to
us in the System, and to be and act in our own proper Sphere, and willing to be
considered by others as being just what we are: but it is farther implied in
the Love required, that we be perfectly benevolent toward them, i. e. That we
consider their Welfare and Happiness, as to Body and Soul, as to Time and
Eternity, as being what it really is, and are (according to the Measure of our
natural Capacities) thoroughly sensible of its Value and Worth, and are
disposed to be affected and act accordingly, i. e. To be tender of it, value
and promote it, as being what it is; to long and labor and pray for it; and to
rejoice in their Prosperity, and be grieved for their Adversity; and all from a
cordial Love, and genuine Good Will. The contrary to which, is a selfish
Spirit; whereby we are inclined only to value, and seek, and rejoice in, our
own Welfare; and not care for our Neighbor's, any further than we are
influenced by Self-love and Self-Interest. Which selfish Spirit also lays a
Foundation for Envy at our Neighbor's Prosperity, and hard-heartedness in the
Time of his Adversity, and inclines us to hurt his Interest, to promote our
own. To love our Neighbor as our selves, makes it natural to do as we would be
done by; but a selfish Spirit, makes it unnatural. -- Malevolence, Malice and
Spite makes it even natural to delight in our Neighbor's Misery. And hence it
is that Revenge is so sweet, and Backbiting and Detraction so agreeable, in
this fallen, sinful World.

3. I may add, that so far as our Fellow-Men are proper Objects of Delight and
Complacency, so far ought we to take Delight and Complacency in them. And hence
it is that the godly Man feels such a peculiar Love to the Children of God, for
that Image of God which he sees in them. The Saints are, in his Account, the
Excellent of the Earth, in whom is all his Delight. Psalm. 16.3. The godly Man
is of Christ's Temper, who said, Whosoever shall do the Will of my Father which
is in Heaven, the same is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother. Mat. 12.50. But
wicked Men are of another Taste; and the Things, the Tempers and Disposititions
in their Neighbors, which to them appear excellent, and upon the Account of
which they delight in them, are odious in God's Sight. Luke 16.15. For that
which is highly esteemed amongst Men, is Abomination in the Sight of God. For
it is the Temper of wicked Men, not only to do wickedly themselves, but also to
have Pleasure in others that do so too. Romans 1.32. Those who are vain, or
unclean, or intemperate, suit each other, and take Delight in one another's
Company: while at the same Time they distaste and disrelish those Things among
Mankind, which are truly most worthy our Delight. -- In a Word, we ought so to
esteem others, as to be heartily disposed to treat them with all that Respect
which is their Due; and to have such a tender Regard for their Welfare, as to
be perfectly disposed, in every Instance, and in every Respect, to do as we
would be done by; and to take Notice of all their good Properties, with that
entire Friendliness and perfect Candor, as may dispose us to take all that
Delight and Complacency in them which is fit. In order unto all which, it is
requisite, that we be perfectly free from any Tincture of Pride, Selfishness,
etc. and have our Hearts full of Humility, Benevolence, Candor and Goodness.

And now,

SECONDLY. The Motives by which we are to be influenced, thus to love our
Neighbors as our selves, are such as these. -- 1. It is right and fit in it
self. As the Apostle exhorting Children to obey their Parents in the Lord, uses
this Motive, For this is right. Ephesians. 6.1. The Ground and Reason of God's
requiring of us to love our Neighbors as our selves, is because it is in its
own Nature right that we should; and this ought therefore to move and influence
us to do so. There is the same general Reason why I should love my Neighbor,
as why I should love my self. Lovely Things are as worthy of being loved in
him, as in me* and therefore by me ought in all Reason to be loved as much.
There is the same Reason why my Neighbor should be esteemed as being what he
is, and according to the Station he stands in, as that I should. To esteem my
self above my Neighbor, merely because I am my self, without any other Reason,
is unfit and wrong, at first Sight. So to admire my Children, my Friends, my
Party* as if there were none such, merely because they are ^ine, is
unreasonable and absurd. My very worst Enemy ought, by me, to be considered and
esteemed, as being what he is, with an Impartiality perfectly disinterested, as
well as my very best Friend. Good Properties are not at all the better, merely
for belonging to me, or to my Friends; or the worse, for belonging to my
Neighbor, or my Enemy. But it is right I should view Things as they be, and be
affected toward them accordingly. Indeed, I ought to be so far from a
Disposition to esteem my self above others, and to be prejudiced in my own
Favor (since I am capable of a much more full and intimate Acquaintance with
my own Sins and Follies than with the Sins and Follies of others,) that I ought
rather to be habitually disposed to prefer others in Honor above my self. Romans
12.10. Phil. 2.^. -- And so as to my Neighbor's Welfare and Happiness, there
is the same general Reason why it should be dear to me, as that my own should.
His Welfare is worth as much, in it self, as mine. It is as worthy therefore,
to be valued, esteemed, ^^^ght after and rejoiced in, as mine. It is true, my
Welfare is more immediately put under my Care by God Almighty, and so it is fit
it should, by me, be more especially taken Care of. Not that it is of greater
Worth, for being mine; for it is not: but only because it is more immediately
put under my Care by God Almighty. The same may be said of the Welfare of my
Family, etc. But still my Neighbor's Welfare is in it self as precious and
dear as mine, and he is my Neighbor, he is Flesh and Blood as well as I, and
wants to be happy as well as I, and is my Brother by Adam; we are all but one
great Family, the Offspring of the same common Parents; we should therefore all
be affected as Brethren toward one another, love as Brethren, and seek each
others Welfare most tenderly and affectionately, as being sensible how dear and
precious the Welfare of each other is. This is perfectly right. And so we
should bear one another's Burdens, mourn with them that mourn, and rejoice
with them that rejoice, as being tenderhearted, cordial Friends to every Body.
And this from a real Sight and Sense, that such a Temper and Conduct is
perfectly right and fit in the Nature of Things. -- And whereas there may be
several Things in my Neighbor truly agreeable, it is evidently Right I should
delight in those good Properties, according to their real Worth. It is a Duty I
owe to my Neighbor the Possessor, and to God the Giver, of those good Gifts.

2. But that I should thus love my Neighbor as my self, is not only in it is
own Nature right, but is also enjoined upon me by the Law and Authority of God,
the supreme Governor of the World. So that from Love to God, and from a Sense
of his Right to me, and Authority over me, I ought, out of Obedience to him, to
love my Neighbor as my self, and always, and in all Respects, to do, as I
would be done by. And not to do so, is not only to injure my Neighbor, but to
rebel against God, my King and Governor, and so becomes an infinite Evil.
Hence, it is charged upon David, that by his Conduct respecting Uriah, he had
despised the Lord, and despised the Commandment of the Lord; and this is
mentioned as the great Evil of his Sin. 2 Samuel 12.9, 10. For he had not merely
murdered one of his Fellow-Worms, but risen up in Rebellion against the most
high God: And practically said, I care not for God, nor his Authority, I love
my Lust, and will gratify it for all him. And therefore when David was bro't to
true Repentance, the native Language of his Soul, to God, was, Against thee,
thee only have I sinned, Psalm. 51.4. It Is Rebellion therefore, it is a despising
the Lord, it is an infinite Evil, not to love our Neighbors as our selves.

3. We have not only the Authority, but also the Example of God, to influence
us to this great Duty of Love and Benevolence. God is Love; he has an infinite
Propensity to do Good, and that in Cases where there is no Motive from without
to excite him; yea, where there is every Thing to the contrary. He loves to
make his Sun rise and Rain fall upon the Evil and Unthankful. He loves to fill
the Hearts of all with Food and Gladness; and to strew innumerable Blessings
round a guilty, God-hating World. Yea, out of his great Goodness he has given
his only Son to die for Sinners, and offers Grace and Glory and all good Things
through him: being ready to pardon and receive to Favor any poor guilty Wretch,
that will repent and return to him through Jesus Christ. And now for us, after
all this, not to love our Fellow-Men, yea, not to love our very worst Enemies,
is very vile. Since God has so loved us, we ought surely to love one another. 1 John 4.11. Since he has treated us his Enemies so kindly, we ought now as dear
Children to imitate him, and love our Enemies, and bless them that curse us,
and do Good to them that hate us, and pray for them which despitefully use us,
and persecute us, Mat. 5.44, 45. The infinite Beauty in the Goodness of the
divine Nature, lays us under infinite Obligations to imitate it, in the Temper
of our Minds, and in our daily Conduct. And it is Ingratitude, it is a Shame,
it is abominable W^^kedness, not to love our worst Enemies, and ^^rgive (...)
^^eatest Injuries. Since the great Governor of the World has treated us Worms
and Rebels as he has, one would think, that after all this, we should never be
able to find a Heart to hate or injure any Mortal. Surely we are under very
strong Obligations to accept that divine Exhortation, in Ephesians. 4.31, 32. Let all
Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and evil Speaking be put away
from among you, with all Malice: and be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. And
(Chap. 5. v. 1.) Be ye Followers of God as dear Children. -- Besides there are
many additional Obligations to Love and Benevolence, and to peculiar Respect
and Kindness between Husband and Wife, Parents and Children, Friend and Friend,
etc. arising from their mutual Relations, and Dependences, and from special
Kindnesses already received, or hoped for. And now,

THIRDLY, As to the Standard, by which our Love is to be regulated, viz. Thou
shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. In order righly to understand it, we
must, -- 1. Place ourselves, sensibly, as in the Presence of the infinitely
great and glorious God, before whom all the Nations of the Earth are nothing
and less than nothing and vanity, and in the Light of God's Greatness and
Glory, we must take a view of our own Littleness and Deformity, and so learn
how we ought to be affected toward our selves compared with God. And as we
ought to love our selves, so ought we to love our Neighbor. And now in
general, we ought to be disposed toward God, as being what he is, and toward
our Selves and Neighbors, as being what we and they be. Particularly, God's
Honor in the World ought to appear infinitely more valuable and precious than
our own, and therefore our own ought to seem as a Thing of no Worth compared
with his, and as such, to be freely parted with when God's Honor calls for it.
And as free should we be, to see the Reputation of our dearest Friends given up
for God's sake. The same may be said of our worldly Interest and of all our
worldly Comforts, when compared with God's Interest and the Interest of his
Son's Kingdom in the World, and of the worldly Interests and Comforts of our
dearest Friends. All, both ours, and their's, is comparatively nothing, and
ought to appear so to us. Yea, our Lives and their Lives, are just the same
Things, comparatively, of no Worth, and to be parted with in a Moment, without
the least Reluctance, when God's Honor, or Interest calls therefore. -- 2. In
order to a right understanding of this Standard, we must also observe, that our
Love to our selves is habitual, unfeigned, fervent, active and permanent. So
also must be our Love to our Neighbors. -- 3. A regular Self-love respects all
our Interests, but especially our spiritual and eternal Interest. So ought our
Love to our Neighbors. -- 4. A regular Self-love naturally prompts us to be
concerned for our Welfare tenderly, to seek it diligently and prudently, to
rejoice in it heartily, (...) to be grieved for our Calamities sincerely. So
ought our Love to our Neighbors to prompt us to feel and conduct with Regard
to their Welfare. -- 5. Self-love makes us take an unfeigned Pleasure in
promoting our own Welfare. We don't think it hard, to do so much for our
selves. The Pleasure we take in promoting our Welfare, rewards our Pains. The
same genuine kind of Love ought we to have to our Neighbor; and so to remember
the Words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to give than to
receive. -- 6. We ought never to speak of our Neighbor's Sins, or Weaknesses,
or any way expose him to Shame and Contempt in the World, in any Case
whatsoever, except such wherein it would be our Duty to be willing our selves
to be so exposed by him, were we in his Circumstances, and he in ours. And then
we are to do it, with that sensible Tenderness for him, that we could
reasonably desire from him, toward us, in a like Case.

Thus then we have briefly considered the second great Command of the Law, and
see what that means, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. -- To love
God with all our Heart, lays a Foundation, and prepares the Way, for us to love
our Neighbors as our selves. It removes and takes away those Things which are
contrary to this Love, such as Pride, Selfishness, Worldliness, a narrow,
stingy, envious, revengeful Temper. True Love to God mortifies and kills these
Things at Root. And secondly, True Love to God assimilates us to the divine
Nature, and makes us like God in the Temper of our Minds. But God is Love. And
the more we are like God, the more are our Hearts therefore framed to Love and
Benevolence. He that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. Love to
God sweetens the Soul, and enlarges our Hearts to love our Fellow-Men. And
thirdly, The more we love God, the more sacred is his Authority with us, and
the more glorious, amiable and animating does his Example appear, and the
greater Sense have we of our Obligations to Gratitude to him; all which tend
jointly to influence us to all Love and Goodness toward our Neighbors. So
that, he that knows God and loves him, will be full of Love to Mankind. And
therefore he that loves not, knows not God, 1 John 4.8. -- On the other
Hand, where there is no true Love to God, there is no true Love to Mankind; but
the Heart is under the Government of Pride, Selfishness, and other Corruptions,
which are contrary to Love. So that a genuine Love to Mankind is peculiar to
the godly. 1 Ioh. 4.7, 8.

And now from what has been said, we may evidently see, these following Sorts
of Love to our Neighbor, are neither of them the Love required, however nearly
they may sometimes seem to resemble it.

1. What is commonly called natural Compassion, is not the Love here required.
For the most wicked profane Man may be of a very compassionate Temper: So may
the proud, the selfish, the envious, the malicious and spightful Man: As
Experience plainly shows. And besides, natural Compassion does not take its
Rise from any Sense of the Rectitude and Fitness of Things, or any Regard to
the divine Authority, but merely from the animal Constitution: And Men seem to
be properly passive in it. It is much the same Thing in the humane, as in the
brutal Nature. It is therefore a different Thing from the Love here required.

2. The same may be said of what is called Goodnature. It arises merely from
animal Constitution, and is not the Love here required. For such a Man is not
influenced in his Love by the Reason and Nature of Things, or the Authority of
the great Governor of the World, or from a Consideration of the infinite
Goodness of the divine Nature, any more than the Beasts are, who are some of
them much better tempered than others. So that this Sort of Love has nothing of
the Nature of Religion in it. And it is evident that many wicked and ungodly
Men have much of this natural Good-temper, who yet have no Regard to God or
Duty. Yea, a secret Grudge against a Neighbor, reigning in the Heart, may be
in the good-natured Man, consistent with his Goodnature; but it is not
consistent with the Love here required. And therefore they are evidently two
Things.

3. That Love which is commonly called natural Affection, is not the Love here
required. It is true, that Man is worse than the Beasts, who is without natural
Affection^ for they evidently are not: but every Man is not a Saint, because he
has natural Affection. And it is true, we owe a peculiar Love, according to
God's Law, to our Relatives; but natural Affection is not it. For there are
many ungodly Wretches, who care neither for God nor his Law, who have as much
natural Affection as any in the World. Yea, it is a common Thing for ungodly
Parents to make very Idols of their Children: for them, they go and run and
work and toil, by Night and Day, to the utter neglect of God and their own
Souls. And surely this cannot be the very Love which God requires. And besides,
as natural Affection naturally prompts Parents to love their Children more than
God, and be more concerned for their Welfare than for his Glory, so it is
commonly a Bar in the Way of their loving others as they ought. They have
nothing to give to the Poor and Needy, to the Widow and Fatherless: they must
lay up all for their Children. Yea, many Times they rake and scrape, cheat and
defraud, and like mere Earthworms bury themselves in the World; and all this,
for the sake of their Children. And yet all this Love to their Children does
not prompt them to take Care of their Souls. They never teach their Children to
pray, nor instruct them to seek after God. They love their Bodies, but care
little for their Souls. Their Love to the one is beyond all Bounds, but to the
other is little or nothing. It Is an irrational Fondness, and not the Love
required. Indeed if Parents loved their Children as they ought to do, their
Love would effectually influence them to take Care of their Souls, and do all
their Duty to them; which natural Affection evidently does not. And therefore
it is not that Love, with which God in his Law requires Parents to love their
Children. Nor indeed does there seem to be any more of the Nature of true
Virtue or real Religion in the natural Affection of Men, than there is in the
natural Affection of Beasts: both resulting merely from animal Nature and a
natural Self-love, without any Regard to the Reason and Nature of Things.

4. Nor is that the Love here required, which arises merely from a
Party-Spirit. Because such a one is of their Party, and on their Side, and
loves those whom they love, and will plead, stand up, and contend for them, and
maintain their Cause. For such a Love is pregnant with Hatred and Ill Will to
every Body else. And nothing will humor and gratify it more than to see the
opposite Party hated, reviled and blackned. And besides, such a Love is nothing
but Self-love in another Shape. Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou
shall love thy Neighbor, and hate thine Enemy: But I say unto you, Love your
Enemies. Mat. 5.43, 44.

5. Nor is that the Love here required, which arises merely from others Love to
me. As if a rich Man is kind and bountiful to poor People all around him, and
appears to love and pity them; they, though almost ever so wicked, will feel a
Sort of Love to him. But if this rich Man happens to be a civil Magistrate, and
is called to sit as a Judge in their Case, and passes Judgment against them for
their Crimes, now their Love dies, and Enmity and Hatred and Revenge begin to
ferment in their Hearts. In this Case, it is not the Man they love, but rather
his Kindnesses. And their seeming Love, is nothing but a certain Operation of
Self-love. -- And indeed however full of Love Persons may seem to be to their
Neighbors, if all arises merely from Self-love, or is for Self Ends, nothing
is genuine: and that whether Things worldly, or Things religious, occasion
their Love. A poor Man will love and honor those that are rich; if he hopes to
get any Thing by it. A rich Man may be kind to the Poor, with an Eye to his
Credit. An awakened Sinner will love an awakening Preacher, in hopes he shall
be converted by his Ministry. A Minister may seem to show a World of Love to
the Souls of Sinners, and all with an Eye to Applause. Hypocrites will love a
godly Minister, so long as he thinks well of them, and happens not to detect
their hypocrisy in his public Preaching. Even the Galatians were very full of
Love to Paul for a while, so long as they thought he loved them, and had been
the Instrument of their Conversion; yet afterward they lost their Love, and
turned his Enemies, for his telling them the Truth. While others, who loved him
truly for what he was, were more and more knit unto him, for those very
Doctrines for which the Galatians hated him. If ye love them which love you,
what Reward have ye? Do not the Publicans the same? Mat. 5.46. There is no
Virtue no^ Religion in such a Kind of Love, and it is evidently not the Thing
required by the divine Law. And indeed it is a Thing as difficult and as
contrary to corrupt Nature, for us genuinely to love our Neighbors as our
selves, as it is to love God with all our Hearts. And there is as little true
Love between Man and Man, as there is between Men and God. It is for our
Interest to love God, and it is for our Interest to love our Neighbors, and
therefore Men make as if they did so, when really there is nothing genuine and
true. And at the Day of Judgment, when a wicked World comes to God's Bar, and
their past Conduct is all brought to Light, nothing will be more manifest than
that there never was a Spark of true Love to God or Man in their Hearts, but
that from first to last they were acted and governed either by their animal
Constitution, or else merely by Self-love.

6. I may add, nor is that the Love required, when M^n love others merely
because they are as bad, and so just like themselves. Nature and Self-Love will
prompt the worst of Men to do so. The vain and profligate love such as are as
bad as themselves. And from the same Principle erroneous Persons have a
peculiar Regard for one another. And the Enthusiast and blazing Hypocrite may
from the same Principle seem to be full of Love to their own Sort, though full of
Malice against all others. And they may think that it is the Image of God which
they love in their Brethren: when indeed it is only the Image of themselves.
Persons of a bad Taste may greatly delight in those Things in others, which are
very odious in the Sight of God. But surely this cannot be the Love required.
And yet by this very Thing many a Hypocrite thinks himself a true Saint.

Thus we see what it is to love God with all our Hearts, and our Neighbors as
our selves, and see these two distinguished from their Counterfeits. And so we
have gone through the two great Commands of the Law, in a Conformity to which, ^e
very Essence of Religion does much consist.

And now it is added by our Savior, Upon these two hang all the Law and the
Prophets. -- The Law and the Prophets, i. e. the inspired Writings of the
Old Testament consider these two Maxims, that we must love God with all our
Hearts, and our Neighbors as ourselves, as first and Foundation-Principles:
and all the various Duties which they urge, respecting God and our Fellow-Men,
are but so many Inferences and Deductions from them.

God must be loved with all the Heart. -- And therefore we must make him our
God and none else, according to the first Command. -- Worship him according to
his appointed Institutions, agreeable to the second Command. -- With becoming
Reverence and Devotion, according to the third. -- And that in all such set
Times as he has appointed in his Word* according to the fourth.

Our Neighbor must be loved as our selves. -- And therefore we must render
Honor to whom Honor is due, according to the fifth Command. And be tender of
our Neighbor's Life, Chastity, Estate and good Name, according to the sixth,
seventh, eighth and ninth Commands. And rejoice in his Welfare and Prosperity,
according to the tenth. And in all Things treat him as we could reasonably
desire him to treat us, according to that golden Rule of Jesus Christ, in
Matthew. 7.12.

And as all the Duties we owe to God and Man, are thus in the Theory, but so
many Deductions necessarily flowing from these two Maxims or first Principles;
so when the Law of God is written in the Heart of a Sinner by divine Grace, and
put in his inward Parts; there will, from these two Principles, naturally flow
all Duties to God and his Neighbor, in his daily Practice: i. e. from a
Disposition to love God supremely, live to him ultimately, and delight in him
superlatively, he will naturally be inclined and enabled sincerely to do all
his Will; to make him his GOD, according to the first Command, to worship him
according to his own Appointments, with becoming Reverence, and at all suitable
Times, according to the rest. It will be his Nature to do all this, his Meat
and his Drink* and so his greatest Delight. -- And so also, from a genuine
Disposition to love his Neighbor as himself, he will be naturally inclined and
enabled, in all Things, and at all Times, sincerely to do as he would be done
by. It will be his Nature to do so, his Meat and his Drink, and so his greatest
Delight. Heb. 8.10. Ioh. 15.14. 1 Ioh. 2.3, 4 Psalm. 19.10.

So that, as it is in Theory, so also it is in Practice; these two are like the
Seed that virtually contains the whole Plant, or like the Root from which the
whole Tree grows, with all its Branches and Fruit. And in Proportion as a Man
loves God and his Neighbor with a genuine Love, in the same Proportion, will
his Inclination and Ability thence arising be, to do all these Duties. And
consequently when his Love to God and his Neighbor arrives to Perfection, he
will be perfectly inclined and enabled to be perfect in Holiness and
Righteousness, and will actually, in all Things, perfectly conform to both
Tables of the Law. And it is equally evident, that until a Man has a genuine
Love to God and his Neighbor in his Heart, he will have neither Inclination
nor Ability (in a moral and spiritual Sense) to perform one Act of true
Obedience. For as all true Obedience, according to the Law and Prophets, is to
flow from these two Principles; so consequently, according to the Law and
Prophets, that is not true Obedience, which does not. And therefore when all a
Man's Religion, is merely from Self-love, and for Self Ends, he cannot be said,
strictly speaking, to do any Duty to God or his Neighbor, or obey one Command;
for he only serves himself, and that from a supreme Love to himself, which the
Law and the Prophets do not require, but strictly forbid, in that they enjoin
the direct contrary.

So that now, in a few Words, we may here see, wherein true Religion does
consist, as it stands distinguished from all the false Religion in the World.
The godly Man, from seeing God to be just such a One as he is, and from a real
Sense of his infinite Glory and Amiableness in being such, is thereby
influenced to love him supremely, live to him ultimately, and delight in him
superlatively: from which inward Frame of Heart, he freely runs the Way of
God's Commands, and is in his Element when doing God's Will. He eats, he
drinks, he works, he prays, and does all Things, with a single Eye for God; who
has placed him in this his World, allotted to him his peculiar Station, and
pointed out before him all the Business of Life: always looking to him for all
Things, and always giving Thanks unto his Name, for all his unspeakable
Goodness to a Wretch so infinitely unworthy. And, with a Spirit of
disinterested Impartiality and genuine Benevolence, he views his Fellow-Men,
gives them their Places, takes his own, and loves them as himself: Their
Welfare is dear to him; he is grieved at their Miseries, and rejoyce^ at their
Mercies, and delights to do all the Good he can, to every one, in the Place and
Station which God has set him in. And he finds and feels that this new and
divine Temper is inwrought in his very Nature; so that instead of a forced
Religion, or a Religion merely by Fits, his very Heart is habitually bent and
inclined to such Views and Apprehensions, to such an inward Temper, and to such
an outward Conduct.

This, this is the Religion of the Bible, the Religion which the Law and the
Prophets, and which Christ and his Apostles too, all join to teach! The
Religion, which Christ came into the World to recover Men unto, and to which
the Spirit of God does actually recover every Believer, in a greater or lesser
Degree. Thus those who are dead in Sin, are quickened, Ephesians. 2.1. Have the Law
written in their Hearts, Heb. 8.10. Are made new Creatures, all old Things
being done away, and all Things become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. And are effectually
taught to deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present World, Tit. 2.12. And so serve God
without fear, in (...) and Righteousness, all the Days of their Lives, Luke
1.74, 75.

And this is specifically different, from every Sort of false Religion in the
World. For all Kinds of false Religion, however different in other Things, yet
all agree in this, to result merely from a Principle of Self-love, whereby
fallen Men, being ignorant of God, are inclined to love themselves supremely,
and do all Things for themselves ultimately. All the idolatrous Religion of the
heathen World, in which some took much Pains, had its Rise from this Principle.
They had some Notion of a future State, of a Heaven and a Hell, as well as of
temporal Rewards and Punishments, and so were moved by Hope and Fear, from a
Principle of Self-love, to do something to pacify the Anger of the Gods, and
recommend themselves to the Favor of their Deities. And all the Superstitions
of the seemingly devout Papist, his Pater-nosters, his Ave maria's, his
Penances and Pilgrimages, and endless Toils, still arise from the same
Principle. So does all the Religion of Formalists and legal Hypocrites in the
reformed Nations; it is a slavish fear of Hell and mercenary hope of Heaven,
which, from a Principle of Self-love, sets all a going. Yea, the evangelical
Hypocrite, who mightily talks of supernatural divine Light, of the Spirit's
Operations, of Conversion, and a new Nature, still after all, has no higher
Principle in him than Self-love. His Conscience has been greatly enlightened,
and his Heart terrified, and his Corruptions stunned: and he has, by the
Delusions of Satan, obtained a strong Confidence of the Love of God and pardon
of his Sins; so that instead of being influenced chiefly by the fear of Hell,
as the legal Hypocrite is, he is ravished with Heaven; but still all is from
Self-love, and for Self Ends. And properly and scripturally speaking, he
neither knows God, nor cares at all for him. And this is the very Case with
every graceless Man living, of whatever Denomination; whether a Heathen or Jew
or Christian, whether Papist or Protestant, whether Churchman, Presbyterian,
Congregationalist or Separatist, whether a Pelagian, Arminian, Calvinist,
Antinomian, Baptist or Quaker. And this is the Case with every graceless Man
living, whatever his Seize may otherwise be; though he has all Knowledge
to understand all Mysteries, and can speak with the Tongues of Men and Angels,
and has Faith to remove Mountains, and Zeal enough to give all his Goods to
feed the Poor, and his Body to be burned; yet he has no Charity, he is
perfectly destitute of this genuine Love to God and his Neighbor, and has no
higher Principle in his Heart, from which all his Religion proceeds, but a
supreme Love to himself. For ever since our first Parents aspired to be as
Gods, it has been the Nature of all Mankind to love themselves supremely, and
to be blind to the infinite Beauty of the divine Nature; and it remains so to
be with all, until renewed by divine Grace. So that Self-love is the highest
Principle, from which, unregenerate Men do ever act, or can act.

Here therefore we have true Religion, a Religion specifically different from
all other Sorts of Religion in the World, standing in a clear View. Yea, and we
may be absolutely certain, that this is the very Thing which has been
described. For this Conformity to the moral Law, is throughout all the Bible,
by Moses and the Prophets, by Christ and his Apostles, represented to be the
very Thing in which the Essence of Religion originally consists. Blessed be the
Name of the Lord for ever, who has given us so clear a Revelation of his Will,
and so sure and certain a Guide as his Word. Come here, all you poor exercised
brokenhearted Saints, that live in this dark benighted World, where many run
to and fro, and where there are a thousand different Opinions, and every one
confident that he is right. Come here to the Law and to the Testimony; come
here to Christ himself, and learn what the Truth is, and be settled, be
confirmed, and be established for ever. And remember and practice upon those
Words of Jesus Christ, in Joh. 7.17. If any Man will do his Will, he shall know
of the Doctrine, whether it be of God. O, read the Bible, live Lives of Prayer
and Communion with God; yea, die to your selves, the World and Sin, and return
ho^^ to God through Jesus Christ, and love him and live to h^^, and delight in
him more and more; and be more and more disinterested and impartial, sincere
and fervent, in your Love to your Neighbors; do all the Good to every one that
you can. In a Word, be the Servants of God, and grow up into his Image, and
your Certainty of divine Truths will proportionably strengthen and increase.
For the more your Understandings are free from that Darkness and Prejudice that
Sin has introduced, the clearer will you view divine Truths, and the greater
Sense will you have of their inherent divine Glory; and so your Belief of their
Divinity will be the more unshaken.

Having thus gone through with what was proposed, a general Improvement of the
whole, is all that now remains. And indeed much Use may be made of these great
Truths, which have been thus explained and proved, for our Instruction in some
of the most controverted Points in Religion, and to clear up the Believer's
gracious State, and also to promote our Humiliation and Thankfulness and
universal Obedience.

SECTION V. Right Apprehensions of the Law, useful to clear up some of the most
controverted Points in Religion.
USE I. Of Instruction. We have seen what the Law of God requires, and the
infinite Obligations we are under perfectly to conform to it; we have seen
wherein a genuine Conformity to the Law consists, and how a genuine Conformity
to it differs from all Counterfeits; and what has been said may help us to
understand the following Particulars.

1. Wherein consisted the moral Image of God, in which Adam was created. That
Adam was created in the Image of God, is expressly affirmed, in Genesis 1.27. So
God created Man in his own Image, in the Image of God created be him. And from
these Words we have just the same Reason to believe that Adam was created in
the moral, as that he was in the natural, Image of God; because they tell us in
plain Terms, without any Distinction or Exception (nor is there any that can be
gathered from any other Text) that he was created in the Image of God; but the
moral as well as the natural Perfections of God are equally contained in his
Image. As to the political Image of God, Adam, strictly speaking, was not
created in that; because as the Scriptures inform us, it was after his Creation
that he was made Lord of this lower World. Genesis 1.28. And it is, I think, with
less Propriety, that this is by Divines called the Image of God; I do not know
that it is any where so called in Scripture; and God, was the same, he is now,
before he sustained the Character of supreme Lord and Governor of the World.
His natural and moral Perfections comprised his whole Image before the World
was created. And in this his Image was his Creature Man created. Not in Part of
his Image, for there is no such Intimation in all the Bible. But in his Image,
comprising his moral, as well, and as much, as his natural Perfections.

Now the moral Image of God does radically consist in a Temper of Mind or Frame
of Heart perfectly answerable to the moral Law: the moral Law being as it were
a Transcript of the moral Perfections of God. So that from what has been said
of the Nature of the moral Perfections of God and of the Nature of the moral
Law, we may learn wherein consisted that moral Image of God in which Adam was
created. He had a perfect moral Rectitude of Heart, a perfectly right Temper of
Mind; and so was perfectly disposed to love God with all his Heart, and his
Neighbors (if he had had any) as himself: Was perfectly disposed to give God
his Place, and take his own; and consider God as being what he was, and be
affected and act accordingly; and to consider his Fellow-Men (if he had had
any) as being what they were, and feel and act accordingly. And in this Image
of God was he created, as the Scriptures teach us; i. e. He was brought into
Existence with such a Temper connatural to him.

Now here is a new-made Creature in a new World, viewing God and wondering at
his infinite Glory, looking all round, astonished at the divine Perfections
shining forth in all his Works. He views the spacious Heavens, they declare to
him the Glory of the Lord: He sees his Wisdom and his Power, he wonders and
adores. He looks round upon all his Works, they clearly discover to him the
invisible Things of God, even his eternal Power and Godhead, and he stands
amazed. God makes him Lord of this lower World, appoints to him his daily
Employment, and puts him into a State of Trial, setting Life and Death before
him; and he sees the infinite Wisdom, Holiness, Justice and Goodness of God in
all, he falls down and worships, he exults in God* and, with all his Heart,
gives up himself to God with sweetest Delight. All is genuine, natural and
free, resulting from the native Temper of his Heart.

Here he beheld God in his infinite Glory, viewed his Works, contemplated his
Perfections, admired and adored him, with a Sweetness and Pleasure of Soul most
refined! Here he saw God in all the Trees Plants and Herbs in the Garden, his
happy Seat, while out of Love to God and Duty he attended his daily Business,
he eat and drank and blessed his great Benefactor! He saw that it was infinitely
reasonable, that he should love God with all his Heart, and obey him in every
Thing, if eternal Life had not at all been promised: both because God
infinitely deserved it at his Hand, and also in doing thereof there was the
greatest Satisfaction and Delight. And he saw that if he, in any Thing, should
disobey his sovereign Lord and rightful Governor, it would be right, infinite
right, that he should be miserable for ever, even if God had never so
threatened: because to disobey such a God appeared to him an infinite Evil. He
looked upon the Promise of eternal Life, as a mere free Bounty. He looked upon
the Threatening of Death, as impartial Justice. And while he considered eternal
Life under the Notion of a REWARD promised to perfect Obedience from God his
Governor, he saw his infinite Love to Righteousness therein, as well as his
infinite Bounty. And while he considered Death under the Notion of a PUNISHMENT
threatened against Sin, he saw God's infinite Hatred of Iniquity therein, as
well as his impartial Justice. And when he saw how God loved Righteousness and
hated Iniquity, and beheld his infinite Goodness on the one Hand and impartial
Justice on the other, he was ravished. Now he saw plainly what God was, and his
infinite Glory in being such, and loved him with all his Heart. It was natural
to account such a God infinitely amiable, and it was natural to love him with
all his Heart. All was genuine and free, resulting from the native Temper of
his Mind.

These being his Views and Apprehensions, and this his Nature; hence although he
was under a Covenant of Works, yet the Hopes of Happiness and the Fears of
Misery were not the original and first Spring of his Love to God: it was not
originally from Self-love and for Self Ends, but from a Sense of the Beauty of
the divine Nature; and so it was not forced and hypocritical, but free and
genuine: it did not feel like a Burden, but it was esteemed a Privilege: and
instead of being disposed to think it MUCH to love God with all his Heart and
obey him in every Thing, he rather thought it infinitely right and fit as being
God's due, and that he deserved no thanks from God, but rather was under
infinite Obligations to give thanks to God for ever, for such an infinite
Privilege. And thus we see wherein that moral Image of God consisted in which
Adam was created.

2. From all which, it is a plain Matter of Fact, that we are born into the
World entirely destitute of the moral Image of God. So certain as that the
moral Image of God radically consists in such a Temper, and makes it natural to
have such like Views and Dispositions; so certain we are in Fact born without
it. Look into Children, and there is nothing to be seen of these Things. And we
are all sure that such a Temper and suchlike Views and Dispositions are not
natural to us; yea, most Men are sure there is still no such Thing in them; and
very many believe there is no such Thing in the World. -- We are in Fact born
like the wild Asse's Colt, as senseless of God, and as void and destitute of
Grace. We have Nature, but no Grace: a (...) for natural Good, but no R^lish
for moral Beauty an Appetite for Happiness, but no Appetite for Holiness. A
Heart easily affected and governed by selfish Considerations, but blind to the
moral Rectitude and Fitness of Things. And so we have a Heart to love our
selves, but no Heart to love God; and may be moved to act by selfish Views, but
cannot be influenced by the infinite moral Beauty of the divine Nature. That
which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh: Joh. 3.6. And will only mind and relish
Things which suit its Nature; Romans 8.5. But is blind to spiritual Things. 1
Cor. 2.14 -- True indeed, in Children there are many natural Excellencies, many
Things pleasing and agreeable. They sometimes, in a good mood, appear loving
and kind, innocent and harmless, humble and meek; and so does a Lamb or young
Puppy. There is nothing but Nature in these Appearances. It Is owing to their
animal Constitution, and to their being pleased and humored. It is all from no
higher Principle than Self-love. Cross them, and they will presently feel and
act bad enough. They have in their Temper and most early Conduct no Regard to
God or Duty, or to the Reason and Nature of Things, but are moved and affected
merely as Things please or displease them, making their Happiness their last
End. And indeed, if the Image of God, Holiness, or Grace, or whatever we call
it, be really such a Thing as has been said, then nothing of such a Nature, can
possibly be more plain and evident than this universally is, that Mankind are
in Fact born into the World destitute, entirely destitute thereof. Job. 11.12.
And hence, we must be born again. Joh. 3.3, 6.

OBJ. But where then was the Propriety of Christ's saying in Matthew. 18.3.
Except ye be converted, and become as little Children, ye shall not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven? Is it not here supposed, that little Children are
Patterns of Humility and Goodness?

ANSW. And where was the Propriety of those Words in Isaiah 53.7. Where the
Prophet speaking of Christ's Meekness and Patience under his Sufferings, he
says, As a Sheep before her Shearers is dumb, so he opened not his Mouth* Is it
not here supposed, that Sheep are Patterns of Meekness and Patience? The Truth
is, that these Allusions do not prove, that either Sheep or little Children
naturally have any real Humility or Meekness, of a gracious Nature, but only an
Appearance of it. And just of the same Nature are those Phrases in Matthew.
10.16. As wise as Serpents, as harmless as Doves. But as these Scriptures do
not prove, that Sheep and Serpents, and Doves have Grace, so neither does that
other Text prove that little Children naturally have it.

3. By comparing our selves with the holy Law of God, as it has been already
explained, we may also learn, that we are born into the World not only
destitute of a Conformity to it, but are also natively diametrically contrary
thereto in the Temper of our Hearts. The Law requires us to love God supremely,
but the native Bent of our Hearts is to love our selves supremely. The Law
requires us to live to God ultimately, but the native Bent of our Hearts is to
love our selves ultimately. The Law requires us to delight in God
superlatively, but the native Bent of our Hearts is to delight in that which is
not God, wholly. And finally the Law requires us to love our Neighbors as our
selves, but the native Bent of our Hearts is to be inordinately selfish.

These are the earliest Dispositions that are discovered in our Nature. And
although I don't think that they are concreated by God together with the Essence
of our Souls, yet they seem to be the very first Propensities of the new-made
Soul. So that they are in a Sense connatural; our whole Hearts are perfectly
and entirely bent this Way, from their very first Motion. These Propensities
perhaps in some Sense may be said to be contracted, in Opposition to their
being strictly and philosophically natural; because they are not created by God
with the Essence of the Soul, but result from its native Choice, or rather more
strictly are themselves its native Choice. But most certainly these
Propensities are not contracted, in the Sense that many vicious Habits be,
namely, by long Use and Custom. In opposition to such vicious Habits, they may
be called connatural. Little Children do very early bad Things, and contract
bad Dispositions; but these Propensities are evidently antecedent to every bad
Thing infused or instilled by evil Examples, or gotten by Practice, or
occasioned by Temptations. And hence it is become customary to call them
natural, and to say that it is our very Nature to be so inclined. And to say
that these Propensities are natural, would to common People be the most apt Way
of expressing the Thing* but it ought to be remembered, that they are not
natural in the same Sense (...) the Faculties of our Souls be: for they are not
the Workmanship of God, but are our native Choice, and the voluntary, free,
spontaneous Bent of our Hearts. And to keep up this Distinction, I frequently
choose to use the Word native, instead of natural.

And now, that these Dispositions are, as it were, thus born with us, is as
evident from Experience as any Thing of such a Kind can be* for these are the
earliest Dispositions that Man's Nature discovers, and are evidently discovered
before little Children are capable of learning them from others; yea, it is
plainly the very native bent of their Hearts to love themselves above all, to
make their Ease Comfort and Happiness their last End and their All, and to seek
for all from the Creature; or in other Words, from that which is not God. This
is plain to every one's Observation, nor did I ever hear any one, as I
remember, venture to deny it.

And as Children grow up, and their natural Powers enlarge, so these
Propensities grow up, and strengthen, and become more active, and discover
themselves plainer; and from this Root, this evil Fountain, many bad Things
soon proceed. Observe Children through all the Days of Childhood, and this Nature
may be easily seen in them, they discover it in all their Conduct in ten
thousand Instances; and there it does and will remain. We may break them of
many bad Tricks which they learn, and bad Habits which they contract; but we
cannot change this their Nature. They are disposed to love themselves supremely,
seek their own Ends ultimately, and delight in that which is not God wholly:
nor can we turn this Bent of their Hearts. We can after a Sort instill good
Principles into them, learn them to read and pray; and after a Sort to honor
their Parents, and love their Neighbors; we can make them civil and sober and
humble and modest and religious in a Sor^, but still their old Nature remains
in its full Power. It is restrained, but not altered at all; yea, and after
all, these their native Dispositions have the entire Government of them. Their
whole Hearts are as much bent this Way as ever. And these Propensities govern
them in their inward Temper, and in all their Conduct. They do all from
Self-love and for Self Ends, and are seeking Happiness, not in God, but in
something else. These Things are plain to every impartial Observer, nor can
they be denied by any. Thus we are all shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin are we
conceived. And we are Transgressors from the Womb, and go astray as soon as we
are born.

And if we leave Children and look into our selves, we may easily observe that
we are naturally of the same Temper, inclined to love our selves supremely, and
do all from Self-love and for Self Ends, and seek for Happiness, not in God,
but in something else. We can remember when and how we contracted many other
vicious Habits, and feel some inward Power to get rid of them; but these
Propensities we have always had, and they are natural, and our whole Hearts are
so in them, that it is not in us so much as sincerely to desire to be
otherwise. It is true, we may, in a Sort, desire and try to alter this our
Nature, from Considerations of Duty, of Heaven and Hell; but it is all all
Hypocrisy: for we still act merely from Self-love and for Self Ends as much as
ever. We have naturally no Disposition to desire to love God, only for
Self Ends. All Men are conscious to themselves that this is true.

We are naturally entirely under the Government of these Dispositions, in all
Things, and under all Circumstances. -- IN ALL THINGS; In all our civil and
religious Concerns. It is merely from Self-love and for Self Ends, that natural
Men follow their worldly Business; and endeavor to live peaceably with their
Neighbors: and in these Things they are seeking Blessedness. And it is merely
from Self-love and for Self Ends they do any Thing in Religion; either they
mean to be seen of Men, or are moved from a slavish Fear of Hell and mercenary
Hope of Heaven, or from some other selfish Consideration. -- And UNDER ALL
CIRCUMSTANCES, we are naturally under the Government of these Dispositions. In
Prosperity; then from an Inclination to love our selves supremely, seek our own
Happiness ultimately, and delight in that which is not God, wholly: It is our
Nature to rejoice and be glad. And from the same Inclination we are disposed to
mourn and murmur and be discon^ented under Adversity. At the red Sea it was
natural for the Israelites to sing Praise: at the bitter Waters it was as
natural to murmur. When we are pleased, then we are glad; when we are crossed,
then we are sad; but naturally we don't care how it goes with God's Interest in
the World, what becomes of his great Name, or whether his Honor sinks or
swims. No, there is but here and th^re a Moses that cares any Thing about this:
but if they can have their own Wills, and secure their own Interests, they are
content. -- While the Spirit of God lets Sinners alone and they live secure and
unconcerned, then from the aforesaid Propensities they are after the World; one
after one Thing, and another after another: and although they may keep up a Form
of Religion for fashion sake, yet really they care nothing about God and Things
eternal. When they come to be awakened to a Concern for their Souls, though they
reform their Lives and take very different Courses from what they used to do,
yet still all is from the same Principle and for the same End. They have new
Lives, but the same Nature. They don't really care for God or his Glory any
more than they used to do, nor tal^^ any Content in him, but are only after
Pardon of Sin and Peace of Conscience, which according to their present
Sensations and Apprehensions, they think would make them happy. Sinners don't
really seek for Blessedness in God himself, but in something they hope to
receive from him. And hence when awakened Sinners come to get false Comfort,
think they are pardoned, and so have Peace; or think that Christ loves them,
and that they shall go to Heaven, and so are filled with Joy; as all their Joy
results from Self-love merely, so all they rejoice in, is what they think they
have received, and what they hope yet to receive* but they don't really care
for God himself, (whose Glory they never saw,) any more than they used to do,
nor rejoice in Him* and hence (ordinarily) having their Consciences qui^^^d,
they soon go back to the World again for real Comfort and Blessedness. Or if
after false Comfort they turn Enthusiasts, and get to blazing, and wax hotter
and hotter, and seem to be full of nothing but Love to God and Zeal for his
Glory; it is Visions and Dreams, Revelations and Impulses, a firm Persuasion
they are the peculiar Favorites of Heaven, and the Applause of their Party,
which they live upon and take Comfort in, and by which they are animated; and
all from Self-love and for Self Ends: but in Deed and in Truth, they neither
know God, nor regard him nor his Glory, nor live upon him, nor delight in him,
(...) more than they used to do: And thus in all Things, and under all
Circumstances, unregenerate Men are governed by a Disposition to love
themselves supremely, live (...) themselves ultimately, and delight in that
which is not God wholly. And whosoever is well acquainted with Mankind may
easily see that this is in Fact the very Case, and will naturally be led to
make the same Observation with the Apostle Paul, in Phil. 2.21. All seek their
own, and not the Things which are Jesus Christ's.

And now this Disposition, which is thus evidently natural to all Mankind, is
directly contrary to God's holy Law, is exceeding sinful, and is the Root of
all Wickedness. First, it is diametrically opposite to God's holy Law. For this
requires us to love God supremely and seek his Glory ultimately; in direct
Contrariety whereunto, we are naturally inclined to love our selves supremely
and live to our selves ultimately. Again, the Law requires us to delight in God
superlatively and choose him and live upon as the only Portion of our Souls; in
direct Contrariety whereunto, we are naturally inclined to place our whole
Hearts upon other Things, and live upon them and take Content in them. Finally,
the Law requires us to love our Neighbor as our selves and do as we would be
done by; in direct Contrariety whereunto, we are naturally inclined to be
inordinately selfish, and so not to do as we would be done by. And thus we are
all naturally gone out of the Way, and in the Temper of our own Minds become
corrupt, filthy and unprofitable, and there is none righteous; no, not one.
Psalm. 14. Romans 3.10. -- 19. We have lost the Image of God, we have lost a right
Temper of Mind, we have lost a governing Sense of the moral Fitness of Things,
have no Eyes to see moral Beauty, or Hearts to taste and relish the moral
Excellency of spiritual and divine Things. 1 Cor. 2.14. Hence, in God we can
see no Form nor Comeliness, nor in him at all delight; yea, it is natural for it
to seem to us as if there was no God. Psalm. 14.1. And now, as though in very Deed
there were no God for us to be in Subjection unto, we set up for our selves, to
make our own Interest our last End, and to seek Blessedness, not in God, but in
something else; and are naturally inclined, without any Regard to God's Law, to
make our own Wills our only Rule; and now, having cast off the Government of
God, and forsaken the Fountain of living Waters, we go every one his Way, one
to his Farm, another to his Merchandise, all serving diverse Lusts and
Pleasures. -- So that it might justly be wondered at, how any among Mankind
should ever have it enter into their Hearts, to imagine that we are not fallen
Creatures, universally depraved, when it is so evidently a plain Matter of
Fact. I think, it can be owing to nothing, but Men's Ignorance of the Law, in
it is spiritual Nature, Purity, Strictness and Extent, and their not comparing
themselves therewith. And indeed St. Paul tells us that this is the Case. Romans
7.8. For without the Law Sin was dead. For did Men but rightly apprehend that
God is such a one as the Law speaks him to be, and that he requires us to be
what really he does, they could not possibly but see their native Contrariety
to God and his holy Law. The Israelites of old felt their Contrariety to their
Prophets, and they hated them and put them to Death; and the Pharisees felt
their Contrariety to Christ and his Apostles, and hated them and put them to
Death; for they perceived what their Prophets, and what Christ and his Apostles
were driving at: but yet all the while they imagined they loved God and loved
his Law, because they neither knew God nor understood his Law. And even so it
is at this Day. If an Arminian or Pelagian (for after all their Pretenses, they
are, by (...)* just like the rest of Mankind) did but verily believe God just
such an One as the godly Man in fact sees him to be, he would feel as great a
Contrariety to him and Enmity against him as any Calvinist ever supposed there
was in natural Men. They frame a false Image of God in their own Fancies, to
suit the vitiated Taste of their corrupt Hearts, and then cry, We are not
Enemies to God; no, but it is natural for us to love him. When all the while,
their native Aversion to God, will not so much as suffer them to believe, that
there is any such Being, as really he is. But to proceed,

The aforesaid Disposition and Bent of Heart, which is thus directly contrary
to the Law, is exceeding sinful. For while we love our selves supremely and
live to our selves ultimately, we do really in our Hearts and by our Practice
prefer our selves above God, as if we were more excellent and worthy: in which
we cast infinite Contempt on the Lord of Glory, in as much as all the Nations
are in his Sight but as a Drop of the Bucket and small Dust of the Balance,
and we compared with him are less than Nothing and Vanity. He is of infinite
Majesty, Greatness, Glory and Excellency, and all Heaven adore him in the most
humble Prostrations; and yet we, mean Worms of the Dust, yea vile Worms of the
Dust, that deserve every Moment to be spurned to Hell; even we esteem and love
our selves more than we do him, and are more concerned for our Interest than
for his Honor; yea, care not at all for him or his Honor, nor would ever so
much as pretend to, if not excited thereto from the Expectation of
Self-advantage: And that even although we receive Life and Breath and all Things
from him, and his Right to us is original, underived, perfect and entire.
Surely this is infinite Wickedness! And besides, in being and doing so, we
affront his sacred Authority, whereby as Governor of the World he commands us
to love him with all our Hearts. -- And further, while we are inclined to take
our whole Delight in that which is not God, to forsake him the Fountain of
living Waters* the Ocean of all Good, and seek Comfort and Content elsewhere;
we hereby prefer the World above God, prefer (...) Wives and Children, our
Houses and Lands and Pleasures (...) God, or at best we prefer (an imaginary)
Heaven above God: to do either of which, casts infinite Contempt upon the Lord
of Glory, the Delight of Angels, the Joy of the heavenly World. The Psalmist
said, Whom have I^^ Heaven but thee? and there is nothing on Earth I desire
besides thee. Psalm. 73.25. And well might he say so. But to be inclined, when
we are secure in Sin and not terrified with Hell, to love and desire any Thing
upon Earth more than God; and when under Terrors and fearful Expectations of
Wrath, to desire Pardon, Peace, and (an imaginary) Heaven, and any Thing to
make us happy, but God himself; is surely infinitely vile. We do hereby prefer
that which is not God, above God himself; as if it was really of mo^e Worth;
and so cast infinite Contempt upon the Ocean of Blessedness and Fountain of all
Good. And besides in this, as well as the former Particular, we go directly
contrary to the express Command of the great Governor of the whole World.
Finally, to be disposed to an inordinate (an so to a groundless) Self-love, and
to be swallowed up in selfish Views and Designs, instead of a tender Love and
cordial Benevolence to all our Fellow-Men, loving them as our selves, is
evidently contrary to all the Reason and Nature of Things, and to the express
Command of God, which is infinitely binding; and so this also is infinitely
sinful. And thus these our native Propensities are directly contrary to the
holy Law of God, and exceeding sinful.

But here it may be inquired: If a Disposition to love our selves supremely,
live to our selves ultimately, and to delight in that which is not God wholly,
be so exceeding sinful, whence is it that Men's Consciences do not any more
accuse and condemn them therefore? To which the Answer is plain and easy; for
this is evidently owing to their intolerable mean Thoughts of God. Mal. 1.6, 7,
8. A Son honors his Father, and a Servant his Master: If then I be a Father,
where is mine Honor? And if I be a Master, where is my Fear? says the Lord of
Hosts unto you, O Priests, that despise my Name: and ye say, Wherein have we
despised thy Name? Ye offer polluted Bread upon mine Altar; (and so ye despise
me:) and (yet) ye say, Wherein have we polluted thee? (I answer) In that (in
doing so) ye (practically) say, The Table of the Lord is contemptible. (And so
you treat me with Contempt.) -- And yet their Consciences did not smite them,
and therefore the Lord adds -- And if ye offer the Blind for Sacrifice, is it
not Evil? and if ye offer the Lame and Sick, is it not Evil? (or am I so mean
and contemptible, that to do so ought not to be looked upon as an Affront? I
appeal to the common Sense of Mankind,) Offer it now unto thy Governor, will
he be pleased with thee, or accept thy Person? says the Lord of Hosts. (And if
your Governor will take it as an Affront, much more may I) for I am a GREAT
KING, says the LORD of Hosts, v. 14. Here it is plain, that it was their mean
and contemptuous Thoughts of God, which made them think it would do, to turn
him off any how, and with any Thing. And just so it is in the Case before us;
Men's Thoughts of God are infinitely mean; He is very contemptible in their
Sight: and hence although they love themselves, their own Honor and Interest,
above the Lord and his Glory, and prefer other Things, and take more delight in
that which is not God, than in God himself; yet they say, Wherein do we despise
the Lord* affront his Majesty, or cast Contempt upon him? We pray in secret and
in our Families, we go to Meeting and to Sacrament, and help to support the
Gospel; and is ^ot all this to honor the Lord? And wherein do we despise him?
-- Just as if going into your Closet twice a Day to quiet your Conscience, and
saying over the old Prayer by Rote in your Family, that you have repeated
Morning and Evening ever since you kept House; and in a customary Way going to
Meeting and to Sacrament, and paying your Minister's Rate, (and it may be not
without grudging;) just as if this was a honoring of God; when at Heart you do
not love him one Jot, nor care for his Honor and Interest at all, nor would do
any Thing in Religion but for the Influence of Education and common Custom, or
from legal Fears and mercenary Hopes, or merely from some other selfish
Consideration: yea, just as if this was an honoring of God, when all the Time
you cast such infinite Contempt upon him in your Heart, as to give your Heart
to another, to that which is not God, to your self and to the World! -- Let a
Woman treat her Husband so, will he be pleased with it, and will he accept her
Person? If she does not love her Husband at all, or delight in his Person, or
care for his Interest; if she loves another Man, has a separate Interest of her
own, and does nothing for her Husband but to serve her own Ends: will he now
think she is a good Wife, because Morning, Noon and Night, she prepares his
Food, though she does it carelessly, the Victuals always cold and poorly dressed,
hardly fit to eat; and he knows it is all from want of Love: And besides, she
thinks she does a great deal for him, and expects her Pay like a hired Maid! --
And she says to her Husband, Wherein do I despise you? Am not I always doing
for you? And she does not feel her self to Blame, because her Husband looks so
mean and contemptible in her Eyes: and she cares so little for him, that any
Thing seems good enough for him: while all the time her whorish Heart is
doting on her Lovers. -- Says her Husband, You do not love me, but other Men
have your Heart, and you are more a Wife to them than to me. -- But says she, I
cannot love you, and I cannot but love others. And now she seems to her self not
to blame. So a wicked World have such (...) Thoughts of God, that they cannot
love him at all, and have such high Thoughts of themselves, that they cannot but
love themselves supremely: they have such mean Thoughts of God, that they cannot
delight in him at all; but they see a Glory in other Things, and so in them
they cannot but delight wholly: And because they are habitually insensible of
God's infinite Glory, hence they are habitually insensible of the exceeding
Sinfulness of these native Propensities of their Hearts. So that we see, that
mean, contemptuous Thoughts of God are the very Foundation of the Peace and
Quiet and Security of Men in a mere Form of Religion. If they did but see who
the Lord is, they could not but judge themselves and all their Duties to be
infinitely odious in his Sight. Psalm. 51.21, 22. These Things have thou done,
and I kept Silence: thou thoughtest I was altogether such a one as thy self:
but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine Eyes. Now consider
this, ye that forget God. Men have such mean Thoughts of God and so little
regard him, that they are naturally inclined to forget that there is a God, and
to feel and act as if there were none. Hence ( Psalm. 14.1.) The Fool says in
his Heart, there is no God. i. e. he is inclined to feel and act as if there
was none. And therefore it is added in the next Words, Corrupt are they. So the
Children of Eli, who treated the Worship of God with great Contempt, are said
to despise the Lord and kick at his Sacrifice; and yet their Consciences did
not smite them: and the Ground of all was their mean contemptuous Thoughts of
God. 1 Samuel 2.12, 29, 30. The Sons of Eli were Sons of Belial, they knew not
the Lord. And thus we see that our native Disposition to love our selves
supremely, live to our selves ultimately, and delight wholly in that which is
not God, is (whether we are sensible of it, or no,) directly contrary to God's
holy Law, and exceeding sinful.

And I add,

This native Bent of our Hearts is the Root of all Sin, (the positive Root, I
mean, in opposition to a mere privative Cause) of all our inward Corruptions
and vicious Practices; both of those which are contrary to the (...) and to the
second Table of the Law, of those which more immediately (...) God, and of
those which more especially respect our Neighbor.

From this Root arises all our evil Carriage toward the Lord of Glory. This is
the Root of a Spirit of Self-supremacy; whereby we in our Hearts exalt our
selves and our Wills above the Lord and his Will, and refuse to be controuled
by him or be in Subjection unto him. Jehovah assumes the Character of most high
God, supreme Lord and sovereign Governor of the whole World, and commands all
the Earth to acknowledge and obey him as such; but we are all naturally
inclined Pharaoh-like to say, Who is the Lord, that we should obey him! we know
not the Lord, nor will we do his Will. And hence Mankind, all the World over,
break God's Law, every Day, before his Face; as if they despised his Authority
in their Hearts. And when he crosses them in his Providence, they, as though it
was not his Right to govern the World, quarrel with him; because they cannot
have their own Wills, and go in their own Ways. This was always the Way of the
Children of Israel those forty Years in the Wilderness, whose whole Conduct
exemplifies our Nature to the Life, and in which Glass we may behold our Faces,
and know what Manner of Persons we natively be. Men love themselves above God
and don't like his Law, and hence are inclined to set up their Wills above and
against his; and if they can, they will, have their Wills, and go in their
Ways, for all him; and if they cannot, they will quarrel with him. And hence the
Apostle says, The carnal Mind is Enmity against God, is not subject to his Law,
neither indeed can be. Romans 8.7.

And from this Root arises a Spirit of Self-sufficiency and Independency;
whereby we are lifted up in our own Hearts, and hate to be beholden to God; and
having different Interests and Ends from him, naturally think it not safe, and
so upon the whole not liking, to trust in him, choose to trust in our selves, or
any Thing rather than him. We have a better Thought of our selves than of God,
as knowing we are disposed to be true to our own Interests and Ends, and
therefore had rather trust in our selves than in him; and besides, we naturally
hate to come upon our Knees to him for every Thing. Hence, that in Ier. 2.31.
is the native Language of our Hearts, We are Lords, we (...) no more unto thee.
We love to have the Staff in our own Hands, for then we can do as we will; and
hate to lie at God's Mercy, for then we must be at his Control; yea, we had
rather trust in any Thing than in God, he being of all Things most contrary to
us. And hence the Israelites in their Distress, would one while make a Covenant
with Assyria, and then lean upon Egypt; yea, and rob the Treasures of the
Temple to hire their Aid, rather than be beholden to God. Yea, they would make
them Gods of Silver and Gold, of Wood and Stone, and then trust in such lying
Vanities, rather than in the Lord Jehovah. And as Face answers Face in the
Water, so does the Heart of Man to Man, Prove. 27.19. This is our very Nature.

Again, from the same Root arises a Disposition to depart from the Lord. For
other Things appear more glorious and excellent and Soul-satisfying than God.
Wherefore the Hearts of the Children of Men secretly loath the Lord, and hanker
after other Things, and so go away from God to them. Job 21.12, 14. They take
the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the Sound of the Organ. -- Therefore they
say unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the Knowledge of thy Ways. Mal.
3.14, 15. It is vain to serve God: and what profit is it, that we have kept his
Ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? -- We
call the Proud happy. Meditation and Prayer are a Burden to Men; they had
rather be almost any where than in their Closets; because they secretly loath
the Lord: but in other Things they find Comfort, one in his Farm and another in
his Merchandise, the young Man in his Frolicks and with his merry Companions,
the old Man in his Wife and Children, and Cattle and Swine, and House and
Lands, the rich Man in his Riches, the ambitious Man in his Honors, the
Scholar in his Books, the Man of Contemplation in his nice Speculations: and in
any Thing Men can take more Comfort than in God himself. That which Angels and
Saints in Heaven, and Believers on Earth, prize above all Things, Men have
naturally the least Account of. Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee?
and there is nothing on Earth I desire besides thee. Jer. 2.5, 11, 12, 13. Thus
says the Lord, What Iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone
far from me, and have walked after Vanity, and become vain? Has a Nation
changed their Gods, which are yet no Gods? But my People have changed their
Glory for that which does not profit. Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this. --
They have forsaken me the Fountain of living Waters, and hewed them out
Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no Water.

And from the whole, we may see there is the greatest Contrariety between the
Nature of God and the Nature of the Sinner. And hence God hates Sinners, ( Hab.
1.13.) and Sinners hate him ( Romans 8.7.) and when Sinners come to die and go
into the eternal World, they will feel then that they hate him, though their
Nature then will be just the same as it is now. And they will then know that
the great Reason they did not feel their Hatred of him in this World, was
because they did not think nor would believe that he was such an One.

And hence we may see whence it is, that we are so averse to right
Apprehensions of God, and whence it is that our Insensibility of his Glory in
being what he is, is so invincible, viz. because he is in his very Nature in
such perfect Contrariety to us, and we to him. For to account that infinitely
glorious in being what it is, which is of a Nature perfectly contrary to us, is
as unnatural as to account our selves infinitely hateful in being what we be;
for that necessarily implies this. So far therefore as Sinners love themselves
for being what they be, so far do they hate God for being what he is: And so
far as they hate God for being what he is, so far their Insensibility of his
infinite Glory in being just such a one is invincible. And now since Men
naturally perfectly love themselves for being what they be, and consequently
perfectly hate God for being what he is; hence their Minds are naturally
perfectly prejudiced against the true Knowledge of God, and perfectly averse to
and insusceptive of a Sense of his infinite Glory in being just what he is. And
hence it is, that neither God's Word nor Works, nor any thing but his almighty
Spirit, can make Men in their Hearts, both really give into it, that God is
just such a One as he is, and infinitely glorious in being such. The Heavens
may declare the Glory of the Lord, and make the invisible Things of God clearly
to be seen* and the Scriptures and Ministers may proclaim his Greatness and
Glory, and the Honor of his Majesty; but Sinne^s in seeing will not see, and
in hearing will not hear and understand: for they do not like to have God in
their Knowledge. They hate the Light, and love Darkness; they hate (...) think
that God should be such a One, can see no Glory in him in being such, secretly
wish he was another Kind of a Being, dread to think that he is what he is, and
will not, if they can help it. Ioh. 3.19, 20. Romans 1.28. Ioh. 8.43, 47. That
God should love Himself more than he does his sinful Creatures, and value his
own Honor and Interest more than he does our Happiness, and look upon it as an
infinite Affront that we are not exactly of the same Mind, and judge us worthy
of eternal Damnation therefore, and as high Governor of the World make such a
Law and bind us to it to do so; how can this suit a proud Rebel, that only
loves himself and his own Interest, and cares not for God at all? How can a
carnal, selfish Heart delight in such a God, and account him infinitely
glorious in being such? How can he rejoice to hear that he sits King for ever,
and does all Things according to the Counsel of his own Will, aiming ultimately
at his own Glory? Or how can he imagine that such a Conduct, so directly cross
to his Temper, is infinitely Right and becoming, glorious and excellent? The
Temper, the bad Temper of Sinners Hearts is it, that renders their
Insensibility of his Glory, in being what he is, so invincible. He does not
suit them, he does not look upon Things as they do, he is not disposed nor does
he act as they would have him, but all directly contrary: as contrary as Light
and Darkness, as Sin and Holiness, as Heaven and Hell. Therefore the carnal
Mind is Enmity against God. But to return,

From this same Root, this Disposition to love our selves supremely, live to
our selves ultimately, and delight in that which is not God wholly, proceeds
all our evil Carriage toward our Neighbor. Pride, Selfishness and
Worldliness, lay the Foundation for all that cheating, lying, backbiting,
quarrelling, there is among Neighbors; and for all the Feuds and bloody Wars
there ever (...) been among all the Nations of the Earth from the beginning of
the World. And Pride, Selfishness and Worldliness, together with that Enmity
against God and true Religion which is naturally concomitant, lay the
Foundation for all those bloody Persecutions, which have been in the several
Ages of the World, against the Church and People of God. If Men were not proud
nor selfish, they would have no Inclination to injure their Neighbors in Name
or Estate. If they took their supreme Delight in God as the Portion of their
Souls, they would not have any of their little petty Idols to quarrel and
contend about. If they loved their Neighbors (...) themselves, there would
never more be any Thing like Persecution; and all Injuries and Abuses would
cease from the Earth. -- So that, to conclude, as a Disposition to love God
with all our Hearts and our Neighbors as our selves, is an habitual Conformity
to the whole Law, and lays a solid Foundation for a right Carriage toward God
and our Neighbor in all Things; so a Disposition to love our selves supremely,
live to our selves ultimately, and delight in that which is not God wholly, is
an habitual Contrariety to the whole Law, and lays a sad Foundation for all
evil Carriage toward God and our Fellow-Men. And as I said, this Disposition
is natural to us, and we are naturally entirely under the Government of it: And
so the Seed and Root of all Sin is in us, even in the native Temper of our
Hearts. That which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh.

OBJ. But if Mankind neither love God nor their Neighbors with a genuine Love,
such as the Law requires, but naturally have, and are entirely under the
Government of, a Spirit of Contrariety to the whole Law; whence is it that all
Men don't blaspheme God, and do all the Mischief they can, and in Practice as
well as in Nature, be as bad as Devils?

ANS. Because of the Restraints, which God for wise Ends and Purposes, is
pleased to lay upon them; whereby their Nature is indeed not at all altered,
but only in a Measure kept from breaking out, as otherwise it would do. And
these Restraints, in ordinary, are such as arise from these Things. (1.) From
their animal Constitution: whereby many are inclined to be tenderhearted,
compassionate and kind, without any Regard to God or Duty, from a Sort of
natural Instinct, much of the same Nature, to all Appearance, as is to be found
in many in the brutal World. -- (2.) From natural Affection: whereby, partly
from animal Nature, and partly from Self-love, and from being brought up
together, Relatives have a certain Fondness for one another, and so are
disposed to be kind to one another, and that without any Regard to God or Duty;
much as it is with many in the brutal World. -- (3.) From a good Education;
whereby many are influenced to be civil in their Behavior, honest in their
Dealings, kind to the Poor, and to pray in their Families, and join with the
Church etc. though destitute of Grace in their Hearts. -- (4.) From worldly
Considerations: whereby, from Self-love, in order to avoid Punishment from Men,
or from fear of Disgrace and Reproach, or to get the Good Will of others, or
promote some worldly Interest, Men are influenced sometimes to carry themselves
externally, very well. -- (5.) From religious Considerations: whereby from
Self-love, the Fear of Hell, and the Hope of Heaven, many are influenced to do
much in Religion. -- (6.) Want of speculative Knowledge of GOD; Ignorance of
his Resolution to punish Sin, and of his Anger against them, is also an
Occasion of their not blaspheming his Name; as they will do, as soon as ever
they come into Eternity, and see how Things really be; though then their Nature
will be exactly the same that now it is. God gives Rain and fruitful Seasons,
and fills the Hearts of all with Food and Gladness; he makes his Sun rise and
Rain fall upon the Evil and Unthankful, and offers Salvation in Case they
repent and believe; whence Men are ready to think that God loves them, and this
restrains them. These, and such like Things, restrain Men's Corruptions; but
for which, they would be as bad in this World, as they will be in the next,
when these Restraints come to be taken off.

To what has been said, may also be added, that God by these three Methods,
does much to restrain many. (1.) By his Providence: Whereby he many Times
brings remarkable Judgments upon Men for their Sins; and remarkably prospers
Men, as to the Things of this World, who are true to their Word and honest in
their Dealings. And hereby Men are afraid to be and do as bad as otherwise they
would, lest some Judgment should come upon them; and others are influenced to
be honest, and to carry themselves externally well, in hopes of a worldly
Blessing. -- (2.) By his Word; his written Word, and his Word preached: whereby
Men are made more sensible that there is a Heaven and a Hell; and so are the
more restrained and kept in Awe. -- (3.) By his Spirit: whereby he does much to
make many a Man sensible of the Evil of Sin, the Dreadfulness of Damnation, and
the Glory of Heaven, whom he never sanctifies: whereby they are not only
restrained from vicious Practices, but their Corruptions also are greatly
stunned, and they made zealous Promoters of Religion. ( Heb. 6.4.) And thus the
supreme Governor of the World restrains Men's Corruptions, and maintains some
Degree of Order among his rebellious Subjects.

But yet all these Restraints notwithstanding, there is, and always has been,
abundance of Wickedness committed in this apostate World. They have murdered
God's Servants the Prophets, whom the Lord has sent unto them, rising early and
sending. And they have killed his Son, and his Apostles, and shed the Blood of
Thousands and Millions of his Saints. So great has been their Aversion to God!
And so great their Cruelty! And by the many Wars there have been among the
Nations from the Beginning, the whole Earth has been filled with Blood. And by
cheating and lying and backbiting and Contention etc. Hateful and hating one
another, innumerable Injuries have been done to, and unspeakable Miseries
brought upon, one another. And as soon as ever Mankind have their Restraints
taken ^ff at Death, without having any Sin infused into their Nature, they will
appear to be what they are, they will feel and act like very Devils.

But in the mean while, by Means of these Restraints many deceive themselves.
For our Corruptions, being thus capable of being restrained, and, as it were,
stunned, and our Lives of being pretty well regulated to Appearance, while our
Nature remains the sam^, and we feeling our selves able to do considerable
^owards this; hence many are deceived, and take this to be real Religion, and
think they did, and that others may, convert themselves, with but comparatively
little Assistance from God's Spirit. And truly so they might, if this was true
Religion, and Conversion consisted in thus reforming our Lives, and restraining
our Corruptions. But in Conversion our very Nature must be changed, (2 Cor.
5.17.) the native Bent of our Hearts must be turned; ( Ezekiel. 36.26.) and this
we are naturally wholly averse unto. And hence arises the absolute Necessity of
a supernatural, irresistible Grace, in order to our Conversion. Of which more
afterward.

But to return,

From what has been said we see, that we are natively disposed to love our
selves supremely, to live to our selves ultimately, and delight in that which
is not God, wholly: and that this Disposition, by which we are naturally
entirely governed, in all Things and under all Circumstances, is in direct
Contrariety to the holy Law of God, and is exceeding sinful, and is the Root of
all Sin, of all our evil Carriage toward God and Man, in Heart and Life. So
that, as to have a Disposition to love God with all our Hearts, and our
Neighbor as our selves, is a radical Conformity to the whole Law; so this
contrary Disposition is a radical Contrariety to the whole Law. Well therefore
may the holy Scriptures speak of Sinners, as being dead in Sin, and at Enmity
against God, and by Nature Children of Wrath, and represent them so frequently
as being Enemies to God. (Ephesians. 2.1, 3. Romans 8.7. and 5.10. 2 Cor. 5.18 -- 20.)
Since by comparing our selves with the holy Law of God, we are found to be, in
Fact, natively so, in the Temper of our Minds. And it will be for ever in vain,
for Mankind to plead not guilty, since the Law of God is what it is, and we are
what we be. For by the Law by which is the Knowledge of Sin, we evidently stand
condemned.

Here it may be objected, That we are natively no otherwise than God makes us;
and if therefore we are natively sinful, God made us so; and by Consequence is
the Author of Sin. But this Objection has been already obviated. For, as has
been observed, God only creates the naked Essence of our Souls, our natural
Faculties, a Power to think and will and to love and hate; and this evil Bent
of our Hearts is not of his making, but is the spontaneous Propensity of our
own Wills. For we, being born devoid of the divine Image, ignorant of God, and
insensible of his infinite Glory, do of our own Accord turn to our selves and
the Things of Time and Sense, and to any Thing that suits a graceless Heart,
and there all our Affections center; from whence we natively become averse to
God and to all that which is spiritually Good, and inclined to all Sin. So that
the positive Corruption of our Nature is not any Thing created by God; but
arises merely from a privative Cause.

Here it will be objected again, That it is not consistent with the divine
Perfections, to bring Mankind into the World under such sad and unhappy
Circumstances. -- But who art thou, O Man, that reply against God? Shall the
Thing formed say unto him that formed it, Why have thou formed me thus? It is
blasphemous, to say, that it is not consistent with the divine Perfections to
do, what God IN FACT does. It is a plain Matter of Fact, that we are born into
the World devoid of the divine Image, ignoran^ of God, insensible of his
infinite Glory. And it is a plain Matter of Fact, that in Consequence hereof we
are natively disposed to love our selves supremely, live to our selves
ultimately, and delight in that which is not God, wholly. And it is plain to a
Demonstration, that this Temper is in direct Contrariety to God's holy Law, is
exceeding sinful, and is the Root of all Wickedness. Now, to say, it is not
consistent with the divine Perfections, that Mankind should be brought into the
World, as in FACT they be, is wickedly to fly in the Face of our almighty
Creator, and expressly charge him with Unrighteousness; which, surely does not
become us. If we cannot see into this Dispensation of divine Providence, yet we
ought to remember, that God is holy in all his Ways, and righteous in all his
Works, and that the Judge of all the Earth always does right. I don't mean,
that Things are therefore right, merely because God does them; for if they were
not right to be done, antecedently to his doing of them, he would not, he could
not do them. But I mean, that when it is a plain Matter of Fact that God does
such a Thing, we may thence conclude that it is most certainly right for him to
do so, although we cannot understand how it is. We ought to remember that he is
infinite in his Understanding, and at one comprehensive View beholds all
Things, and so cannot but know what is right and what is wrong in all Cases:
and his Judgment is unbiassed, the Rectitude of his Nature is perfect, he
cannot therefore but do right always, and in all Instances govern the World in
Righteousness. But our Minds are narrow and contracted, we are but of Yesterday
and know Nothing: and besides, our Judgments are biassed through our mean
Thoughts of God and high Thoughts of our selves; and hence we may be easily
mistaken. Especially in this Case, our Minds are sadly biassed, and it is
almost impossible for us to consider the Matter with a Spirit of disinterested
Impartiality. And these Considerations ought to check our rising Thoughts, and
make us lie down in the Dust before the great and righteous and good Governor
of the World, with humble Silence, even although we cannot understand his Ways.
And I believe that a humble Disposition of Heart would lay an effectual
Foundation, for us to come to be satisfied in this Matter: it being our mean
Thoughts of God and high Thoughts of our selves, which blinds our our Minds,
that we cannot see; and disposes us to quarrel with our Creator, and find fault
with the Ruler and Disposer of the World. -- It is true, that the holy
Scriptures consider Mankind as being what they be, and says but little about
the Way in which they came to be in such a Condition. And there is good Reason
for it; for it is of infinitely greater Importance that we should know what a
Condition we are in, than how we came into it. And it is a foolish Thing for
us, and contrary to common Sense, to lay the Blame any where but upon our
selves, since we are voluntarily such as we be, and really love to be what we
be, do not sincerely desire to be otherwise, but are utterly averse to it. --
But yet the holy Scriptures say so much about the Way of our coming into our
present Condition, as might fully satisfy our Minds, were not our Judgments
biassed. For from them we learn, that Man was made upright, was created in
God's Image, and by rebelling against his Maker brought a Curse upon himself
and all his Race. Genesis 1.27. Eccl. 7.29. Romans 5.12 -- 19. There we read, that
by one Man, Sin entered into the World; that by one Man's Disobedience, many
were made Sinners; that by the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to
Condemnation. Adam was created in the Image of God, it was connatural to him to
love God with all his Heart, and this would have been our Case, had he not
rebelled against God; but now we are born devoid of the divine Image, have no
Heart for God, are Transgressors from the Womb, by nature Children of Wrath.

And if any should inquire, But can it b^ right, that Adam's Sin should have
any Influence upon us?

I Answer, It is a plain Case, that it actually has, and we may depend upon it,
that the Judge of all the Earth always does right. And besides, why might not
God make Adam our public Head and Representative to act in our Room, as he has
since for our Recovery made his own Son our public Head and Representative?
Romans 5.12 -- 21. He had as much Right, Power and Authority for one, as for the
other. And was not Adam as likely to remain obedient, as any of us should have
been, and in some Respects more likely? His natural Powers were ripe; he stood
not only for himself, but for all his Race; a whole World lay at Stake. And if
he had kept the Covenant of his God, and secured Happiness to all his Race,
should we not for ever have blessed God, for so good a Constitution? Never once
should we have questioned God's Right and Authority to make him our public
Head and Representative, or have thought that it did not become his Wisdom and
Goodness to trust our All in his Hands. And if we should th^s have approved
this Constitution, had Adam never sinned; why might we not as justly approve it
now, if we would be but disinterestedly impartial? It is the same in it self
now, that it would have been then, every way as holy, just and good. -- Oh but
for God to damn a whole World for one Sin! -- But stay; -- Does not this arise
from mean Thoughts of God, and high Thoughts of your self? O, think who the
Lord is! And what it is for a Worm to rise in Rebellion against him! And how he
treated whole Thousands of glorious Angels for their first Sin! And then, think
how God drowned the old World, burnt Sodom; and of the dreadful Things he
intends to do to the Impenitent at the Day of Judgment! And learn, and believe,
that Sin is an infinitely greater Evil (...) we naturally imagine.

But I must return to my Subject, for it is not my present Business so much to
show, how we came into this Condition, as plainly to point out what that
Condition is, which we are actually in. As to this, the whole Scriptures are
very plain, but especially the Law, by which is the Knowledge of Sin, clearly
discovers what our Case is, and beyond Dispute proves, that all are under Sin.
And having already, by comparing our selves with the Law, found out what our
Nature is, I proceed to make some further Observations; in which I design much
greater Brevity.

4. From what has been said, we may learn, that the very best religious
Performances of all unregenerate Man are, complexly considered, sinful, and so
odious in the Sight of God. They may do many Things materially Good, but the
Principle, End and Manner of them are such, as that, complexly considered, what
they do is Sin in the Sight of God. For Sin is a Transgression of the Law. --
But,

(1.) The Law requires all Mankind to do every Duty out of Love to God and for
his Glory: But all unregenerate Persons, directly contrary to Law, do every
Duty merely out of Love to themselves and for Self Ends: And so are guilty of
Rebellion.

(2.) The Law requires all Mankind to do every Duty out of Love to God and for
his Glory: But all unregenerate Persons do every Duty merely out of Love to
themselves and for Self Ends; whereby they prefer themselves and their
Interest, above God and his Glory: And so are guilty of spiritual Idolatry.

(3.) The Law requires all Mankind to do every Duty from Love to God and for
his Glory: But all unregenerate Persons do every Duty merely from Self-Love and
for Self Ends; and yet hypocritically pretend to God, that they love and obey
him: And so are guilty of mocking God.

(4.) The Law supposes that God infinitely deserves to be loved with all our
Hearts and obeyed in every Thing, and that our Neighbor deserves to be loved
as our selves; and that therefore if we should yield perfect Obedience in all
Things, yet we should deserve no Thanks: But all unregenerate Persons make MUCH
of their Duties, though such miserable poor Things: And so affront God to his
very Face.

Upon these four Accounts, their very best Performances are done in a Manner
directly contrary to the Law of God, and so are sinful, and therefore odious in
the Sight of God. ( Prove. 15.8. and 21.27. Romans 8.8. Psalm. 88.^6, 37.) As is
the Tree, so is the Fruit; as is the Fountain, so are the Streams; And as is
the Man, so are his Doings, in the Sight of God, who looks at the Heart ( Matt.
12.33, 34* 35.) and judges not according to Appearance, but judges righteous
Judgment: And, with whom, many Things, that are highly esteemed among Men, are
Abomination.

And if their best religious Performances are thus odious in the Sight of God,
it is certain that they cannot possibly, in the Nature of Things, have the
least Tendency to make Amends for their past Sins, or recommend them to the
divine Favor; but rather tend to provoke God still mo^e. So that it is not of
him that Wills, nor of him that Runs, but of God that shows Mercy. Nor is there
the least Hope in the Sinner's Case, but what arises from the sovereign Mercy
of God; whereby he can have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and have
Compassion on whom he will have Compassion. Romans 9.15, 18.

True, some being ignorant of the Law, and of our entire Contrariety to it,
have fancied a Goodness in the Sinner's Duties; and hence have persuaded
themselves that there are Promises of special Grace made to them. -- Not that
there are any Promises in Scripture, of that Nature; for the Scripture every
where considers us as being, while unregenerate, dead in Sin. Ephesians. 2.1. Enemies
to God. Romans 5.10. 2 Cor. 5.17 -- 20. Col. 1.21. Yea, Enmity against him. Romans
8.7. And so far from any true and acceptable Obedience to God, as that we are
not, nor can be subject to the Law, and so cannot please God. Romans 8.7, 8. And
every where represents such, as being under the Wrath of God, the Curse of the
Law, and a present Condemnation. Joh. 3.18, 36. Romans 1.18. Gal. 3.10. -- But
the real Ground of their Opinion is, their Ignorance of the Sinner's sinful,
guilty Circumstances, and their fond Conceit that there is some real Goodness
in what the Sinner does. Both which, are owing to their Ignorance of the Law,
It Is manifest, that this Notion of the Promises, of which Pelagius was the
Author, and which was condemned for Heresy above 1300 Years ago, did with him,
and does with his Followers, take its Rise originally from their Ignorance of
the Nature and Meaning of the moral Law. But yet some good Men may have been
inadvertently led into this Error by the Force of Education. I believe Men's
Hearts may be sometimes better than their Heads. But when a false Scheme of
Religion does perfectly suit a Man's Heart, and express the Temper of his Mind,
then no Doubt he is graceless. 2 Ioh. 9. and Ioh. 8.47. The above Not^on of the
Promises perfectly suits a self-righteous Heart.
and of the Nature of true Holiness. Romans 7.8, 9. Romans 10.3. All will own, that
if Sinners Duties, are such as I have represented, it is absurd, and even
inconsistent with the divine Perfections, that Promises of special Grace,
should be made to them.

It Is true, they refer to Matt. 25.29. To him that has, shall be given. But
that Text evidently speaks of the final Rewards which shall be given to the
Godly at the Day of Judgment; when all the Unregenerate shall, with the
slothful Servant, be cast into outer Darkness. -- They quote also Matt. 7.7.
Ask and you shall receive, etc. But the Condition of this Promise was never yet
performed by an unregenerate Sinner. For this asking is meant right asking, for
those who ask amiss receive nothing. Iam. 4.3. Right asking of Grace, supposes
right Desires of it; but the unregenerate are in the habitual Temper of their
Hearts directly contrary to Grace and all spiritual Good, and entirely so, as
has been proved. But to have genuine Desires after a Thing, and a perfect
Contrariety to it, in the whole Heart, at the same Time, is an express
Contradiction. The Reason that Sinners many Times think that they love
Holiness, and desire heartily and sincerely to be made holy, is, that they,
being ignorant of the Nature of true Holiness, have framed a false Image of it
in their own Fancies. Did they but distinctly know, the very Thing itself,
their native Contrariety to it could no longer be hid. Romans 7.8, 9. So the
Pharisees thought they loved God, and loved his Law; although at the same Time
they perfectly hated the Son of God, who was the express Image of his Father,
and came into the World to do Honor to his Father's Law. They had wrong
Notions of God and of his Law.

OBJ. But this tends to drive Sinners to Despair.

ANSW. Only to despair of being saved by their own Righteousness, which they
must be driven to, or they will never submit to be saved by free Grace through
Jesus Christ. Romans 7.8, 9. and 10.3.

OBJ. But if these Things be true, there is not any Motive to excite a poor
Sinner to reform, or pray, or read, or do any Thing.

ANSW. By which, it is plain, that a Sinner cares not a Jot for God, and will
not go one Step in Religion, only for what he can get. And if such a Sinner had
ever so many Motives, he would only serve himself, but not serve God at all.
And what Encouragement can God, consistent with his Honor, give to such a one,
since he merits Hell every Moment, even by his best Duties, but only that which
St* Peter gave to Simon Magus? Act. 8.22. Repent, and pray to God, if
PERADVENTURE the Wickedness of thy Heart (...) be forgiven thee.

OBJ. But this way of Reasoning will make Sinners leave (...) seeking and
striving, and sit down discouraged.

ANSW. Not if Sinners are but effectually awakened (...) see how dreadful
Damnation is; for a bare, Who can (...) will make such resolve to run, and
fight, and strive, (...) beg, and pray 'till they die; and if they perish, to
perish at God's Foot. And as for others, all their Courage (...) from their not
seeing what wretched, miserable, sinful* guilty Creatures they are; and so must
be dashed to Pieces sooner or later, in this World or the next, whenever (...)
Eyes come to be opened. And if God ever in this World shows them what they be,
they will thereby perceive (...) Danger they are in: And now a mere who can
te^l? (...) make them also resolve to run for eternal Salvation, (...) their
very last Breath. It Is best that false Confidence should be killed, and this
Way of Reasoning does not in the (...) ^end to hurt any other. It Is best that
Sinners should kno^* the worst of their Case, and this Way of Reasoning does
not tend to make it appear a Jot worse than it is.

OBJ. But what Good does it do, for Sinners to be in such earnest to reform,
read, watch, pray, run, fight, strive, as (...) for their Lives; since all they
do is Sin, and God will have Mercy, only on whom he will have Mercy.

ANSW. (1.) It is less Sin to do these Things, than not to do them.

(2.) Sinners never will be in such earnest, only when God comes to awaken and
convince, and so to make them effectually sensible of the dreadful State they
are in; and it is not any Discouragements that can keep them from being in such
earnest then, so long as the least Hope appears in their Case. Other People
care but little about eternal Things, and do but very little in Religion, but
what Education, Custom, the Fashion and their worldly Interest excites them
unto. Most People think it so easy a Thing to be saved, (...) that they look
upon such great Concern and Earnestness, as perfect Frenzy.

(3.) This great Earnestness of awakened Sinners makes them try their Strength
to Purpose; whereby they come to be experimentally convinced, that it is not in
their Hearts to love God, be sorry for Sin, or do any Thing that is Good;
whereby the high Conceit they used to have of their Ability and good Nature is
brought down, and they feel and find that they are Enemies to God and dead in
Sin. And hereby a Foundation is laid for them to see the Justice of God in
their Damnation, and so the Reasonableness of God's having Mercy, only on whom
he will have Mercy. And thus the Law, though it cannot give Life, yet is a
Schoolmaster to bring Men to Christ. And thus the main Good the awakened
Sinner gets, by going to this Schoolmaster, is effectually to learn his Need
of Christ, and of the free Grace of God through him. Romans 7.8, 9. Gal. 3.21 --
24. This is the great End God has in View, and this End all the Sinner's
earnest Strivings are well calculated to obtain.

5. From what has been said, we may learn the Nature of a saving Conversion,
and the Manner wherein it is wrought. Conversion consists in our being
recovered, from our present Sinfulness, to the moral Image of God: Or which is
the same Thing, to a real Conformity to the moral Law. But a Conformity to the
moral Law, consists in a Disposition to love God supremely, live to him
ultimately, and delight in him superlatively; and to love our Neighbor as our
selves: and a Practice agreeable thereto. And therefore Conversion consists in
our being recovered from what we are by Nature, to such a Disposition and
Practice.

And now in order to such a glorious Renovation and Recovery, God by his Spirit
sets home the Law upon the Sinner's Heart, causing him to see and feel, to
Purpose, just how he has lived, and what he is, and what he deserves, and how
he is in the Hands of a sovereign God, and at his Disposal: whereby the
Hindrances which were in the Way of his Conversion, are in a Sort removed. Romans
7.8, 9. (...) without the Law Sin was dead. For I was alive without the Law
once: but when the Commandment came, Sin revived, and I died. -- And then God
who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, shines in the Heart, and
gives the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. And now a Sense of the Glory of God and divine Things being
thus imparted to the Soul by the Spirit of God, and the Sinner being raised up
from spiritual Death to spiritual Life, does return ^ome to God through Jesus
Christ, venturing his Soul and immortal Concerns upon the free Grace of God,
and through him gives up himself to God to be his for ever; to love him
supremely, live to him entirely, and delight in him superlatively, and for ever
to walk in all his Ways. And hereby at the same Time the Man's Heart begins to
be habitually framed to love (...) Neighbor as himself, with a disinterested
Impartiality. And thus an effectual Foundation is laid, for universal external
Obedience, and that from genuine Principles.

And as the divine Life is thus begun, so it is carried on in the Soul much
after the same Manner. The Spirit of God shows the Believer more and more what
a poor, sinful, Hell-deserving Wretch he is in himself, and so makes him more
and more sensible of his absolute Need of free Grace through Jesus Christ, to
pardon and to sanctify him. He grows in a Sense of these Things all his Days;
whereby his Heart is kept humble, and Christ and free Grace made more precious.
The Spirit of God shows the Believer more and more of the infinite Glory and
Excellency of God, whereby he is more and more influenced to love him, live to
him, and delight in him, with all his Heart. And by the whole, his Heart is
framed more and more to love his Neighbor as himself. And thus the Path of the
Just is like a shining Light, that shines more and more, to the perfect Day.
Prove. 4.18. Only, it must be observed, that the Spirit's Operations after
Conversion, are attended with two Differences, arising from two Causes. -- (1.)
From the different State of the Subject wrought upon. The Believer not being
under the Law as a Covenant, is not by the Spirit filled with those legal
Terrors arising from the Fears of Hell, as heretofore he was. Romans 8.15. But
only is made sensible of his remaining Sinfulness, and the Sinfulness and
Desert of Sin, and of God's fatherly Displeasure. And hereby his Heart is
humbled and broken. Indeed hereby he is many Times filled with unspeakable
Anguish and Bitterness of Soul. His Sins are ever before his Eyes, and his
Bones wax old through his roaring all the Day long. Psalm. 23.3. and 51.3. He is
troubled, he is bowed down greatly, he goes mourning all the Day long. Psalm.
38.1 -- 6. But these awakening, convincing, humbling, mourning, purifying Times
always end in Peace and Joy and Rest in God; attended with a greater Degree of
Tenderness of Conscience and holy Watchfulness, and followed with bringing
forth more Fruit. Psalm. 97.11. and 126.5, 6. Psalm. 32.5. and 73.25 -- 28. Ioh.
15.2. 2 Cor. 7.10, 11. Heb. 12.11. Hos. 2.6, 7, 14, 15. -- (2.) From the
different Nature of the Subject wrought upon. The Believer not being under the
full Power of Sin and at perfect Enmity against God, as once he was, hence does
not resist the Spirit with the whole Heart, while he takes down the Power of
Sin, as heretofore he did; but has a genuine Disposition to join in on God's
Side, and say, Let me be effectually weaned from the World, and humbled, and
made holy and heavenly, and be brought into an entire Subjection to God in all
Things, though by Means and Methods ever so cross to Flesh and Blood. Let me be
stripped naked of all worldly Comforts, and let Shimei curse, and all outward
Evils and inward Anguish of Heart come upon me, if nothing else will do. Here
Lord, I be in thy Hands, chasten, correct, do what thou will with me; only let
Sin die: Sin thine Enemy, the worst Evil, and the greatest Burden of my Soul.
Romans 7.24. 2 Cor. 4.8, 9, 16. Iam. 1.2. Psalm. 119.71. Heb. 12.9. And he is not
only thus willing that God should by any Methods take down the Power of Sin in
his Heart, bu^ also joins in with the Methods of divine Grace, and by watching
and praying, and by fighting and striving, seeks the Death of every Corruption.
And from his thus joining in on God's Side against the Flesh, he is said in
Scripture to crucif^ (...) Gal. 5.24. And to work out his own Salvation. Phil.
2.13.

From what has been said under this Head, we may see that a saving Conversion
differs very much from the Conversion of these four Sorts of Men. -- (1.) The
worldly Hypocrite. Who makes a Profession of Religion, does many Things,
appears zealous, and pretends to be a good Man, merely from worldly
Considerations, and to be seen of Men. Mat. 23.5. -- (2.) The legal Hypocrite.
Whose Conversion is nothing else, but a leaving off his vicious Practices, and
turning to be strict and conscientious in e^ternal Duties, in Hopes thereby to
make Amends for his past Sins, and recommend himself to God; and so escape Hell
and get to Heaven. Romans 10.3. -- (3.) The evangelical Hypocrite. Whose
Converson was nothing else but this, he was awakened to see his Sins, and
terrified with Fear of Hell, and humbled in a Measure, but not thoro'ly, but
great Light broke into his Mind, and now he believe that Christ loves him, and
has pardoned all his Sins, and so is filled with Joy and Zeal, and is become
quite another Man: But still has no Grace. Mat. 13.20. Heb. 6.4. 2 Pet. 2.20.
These usually either fall away to carnal Security, or being puffed up with Pride
turn Enthusiasts. -- (4.) The wild, blazing Enthusiast. Whose Conversion all
arises from imaginary Notions. He has an imaginary Sight of his Sin, his Heart,
the Wrath of God, of Hell and the Devil, and is terribly distressed: And then
he sees Christ in a bodily Shape, it may be on the Cross with his Blood
running, or seated on a Throne of Glory at his Father's right Hand, he sees a
great Light shining all round him* hears the Angels sing, sees Visions, hears
Voices, has Revelations, and thinks himself one of the very best Saints in the
whole World, though in Truth he, by scandalous Practices, or heretical
Principles, or both, soon appears to be seven Times more a Child of the Devil
than he was before. However, in his own Conceit, he knows infallibly that he is
right, and all the World cannot convince him to the contrary. Yea he is fit at
once to be a Minister, though ignorant of the first Principles of Religion; he is
inspired by God, and whoever likes him not is an Enemy to Jesus Christ, he
doubts not at all. These are the Tares the Devil sows, by Means of whom the
Ways of God are evil spoken of. Mat. 13.39. 2 Cor. 11.14. 1 Timothy 1.7.

Now these several Sorts of Religion, the true and the false, growing up from
these several Roots, do all receive a different Nourishment, according to their
different Nature; through which Nourishment, they grow and increase; and through
the want of which they decay. The good Man, the greater Sense he has of God's
infinite Glory, as he has revealed himself in the Law and in the Gospel, so
proportionably does his Religion flourish and grow in all it is various
Branches, and shine with a heavenly Luster. The worldly Hypocrite lays out
himself most in Religion, when there are the most to observe and applaud him.
The legal Hypocrite, when his Conscience is most terrified, with the Thoughts
of Death; Judgment and Eternity. And the evangelical Hypocrite has his
Affections raised, his Love and Joy and Zeal, in Proportion to his supposed
Discoveries of the Love of Christ to him in particular, and Sense of the
Glories* of (a fancied) Heaven. And finally, the blazing Enthusiast is more or
less lively in Religion according as he has Dreams, hears Voices, has
Impressions and Revelations, and is applauded by his Party. -- And accordingly
those different Sorts of Religion, will grow and thrive the best, under such
different Sorts of Preaching, as suits their several Natures: And Men will cry
up those Ministers most, whose Preaching and Conduct agree with their Hearts
the best. Mic. 4.5. For all People will walk, every one in the Name of his God.
And true Believers will walk in the Name of the LORD their GOD. --

6. From all that has been said, we may learn that a Sinner is naturally
disposed to resist the Spirit of God, with all his Might, when he comes to
awaken, convince and humble him, to take down the Power of Sin in his Heart,
and turn him to God. Conversion consists in our being recovered from the sinful
State we are in by Nature, to a real Conformity to the divine Law. i. e. in our
being recovered from a Disposition to love our selves supremely, live to our
selves ultimately, and delight in that which is not God wholly, and a Practice
agreeable to this Disposition --; To a Disposition to love God supremely, live
to him (...), and delight in him superlatively, and to love our Neighbors as
our selves, and a Practice agreeable thereto. i. e. In other Words, in our
being recovered from one Disposition, to another directly contrary to it; even
so con^^ary, that the first must die, in order to the others (...) This
Disposition from which we are to be recovered, is no^ any Habit contracted
merely by Custom, which might more easily be parted with; but it is connatural
to us, a Disposition rooted as it were in our very Nature, and which has the
full Possession of our Souls, and the entire Government of our Hearts: In a
Word, a Disposition, which we in every Respect perfectly love, and which we
perfectly hate should be ever crossed, and which yet must be slain or w^ never
converted. Now if ever a Sinner be recovered from this Disposition, it is
evident it must be against the very Grain of his Heart: his Heart therefore
will make the utmost Resistance, it possibly can.

If we were entirely renewed in an Instant, without any previous Strivings of
the Spirit, then indeed there would be no Room nor Time for Resistance: but
otherwise the Heart will resist. If there were the least Disposition in our
Hearts, contrary to our natural Disposition to love our selves supremely, live
to our selves ultimately, and delight in that which is not God wholly, it might
join in on God's Side, be sincerely desirous that God would slay the Enmity of
our Hearts; but there is not. The carnal Mind is wholly Enmity against God, is
not subject to his Law, nor can be; and so the whole Heart will make
Resistance. If the Disposition to which we are recovered in Conversion, were
not so directly contrary to our natural Disposition, as that our natural
Disposition must be slain, in order to the very being of that, the Sinner's
Opposition might not be so great; but when all that is within him is directly
crossed and going to be killed, all that is within him will oppose and resist,
'till slain. We are by Nature wholly in the Flesh and after the Flesh;
according to Scripture Phrase, That which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh: and
by Conversion we are to become Spirit; That which is born of the Spirit, is
Spirit. But the Flesh and the Spirit are in Scripture represented as being
contrary the one to the other. Will Flesh then of it is own Accord become
Spirit? No surely. For the Flesh lusts against the Spirit. i. e. Is wholly
averse to it, and set against it. So that there is no other Way, but, according
to Scripture Phrase, the Flesh must be crucified, with the Affections and
Lusts. But the Flesh perfectly hates this Death, and therefore will resist with
all it is Might. Romans 8.7, 8. Ioh. 3.6. Gal. 5.17. Romans 6.6.

As the Truth of this Point is thus evident from the Reason and Nature of
Things, so it is farther confirmed from constant Experience. For let any Man
read the Bible with Attention, and he may plainly see, that the very Thing,
which God has always been driving at, in all the external Means, he has used
with his professing People, in every Age of the World, has been to recover them
to a Conformity to his holy Law in Heart and Life. i. e. To recover them from a
Disposition to love themselves supremely, live to themselves ultimately, and
delight in that which is not God wholly, and a Practice agreeable thereunto; To
a Disposition to love God supremely, live to him ultimately, and delight in him
superlatively, and to love their Neighbors as themselves, and to practice
accordingly: For on these two Commands hang all the Law and the Prophets. And
we may also plainly see, that God's professing People have always manifested
the greatest Aversion to hearken to the Law and to the Prophets; and so to die
to themselves, the World and Sin; and thus to give up themselves to God to love
him, live to him, delight in him, and walk in all his Ways. God sent all his
Servants, the Prophets, to the Children of Israel, rising early and sending;
but they always hated their Words, and so stopped their Ears, and refused to
obey: Yea, they fell into a Rage at them, and in their Rage, they mocked them,
they scourged them, they bound them, they imprisoned them, they stoned them,
they sawed them asunder, and made the rest wander about in Deserts and
Mountains, and in Dens and Caves of the Earth, in Sheepskins and Goat Skins,
destitute, afflicted, tormented. Heb. 11.35 -- 38. And when God sent his
well-beloved Son to call a wicked World to return home unto (...) him, they
said, Come, let us kill him. Mat. 21.33 -- 39. And when Christ sent his
Apostles to carry the glad Tidings of Pardon and Peace to the Ends of the
Earth, and call (...) Men to repent and be converted, to return and love and
serve the living God, both Jews and Gentiles conspired together against them,
and killed them; just as the (...) killed the Messenger, whom Rehoboam sent
unto them, to call and invite them to return to their former Allegiance. 1 Kin.
12.18. Therefore says our blessed Savior to the Jews who pretended great Love
to God and to the Law, and mightily to honor their Prophets, You are like
whited Sepulchers, you appear outwardly righteous, but inwardly are full of all
Hypocrisy and Wickedness. Your Fathers killed the Prophets, whom you pretend to
Honor, but you are full as bad as (...) were. Ye Serpents, ye Generation of
Vipers, etc. Wherefore, behold, I send unto you Prophets and wise Men and
Scribes; and some of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them ye shall
scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute them from (...) to City. -- O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are
sent unto thee! How (...) would I have gathered thy Children together, even as
the (...) gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye WOULD NOT! Mat. 23, 27
-- 37. From all which, nothing can be plainer, than that this rebellious
God-hating World always have been set against a Return to God, and been
disposed to do all they could, to render all Means ineffectual. Well might St.
Stephen therefore, say unto the Jews, as (...) did, in Acts, 7.51. Ye
stiff-necked and uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, ye do always resist the holy
Ghost: as your Fathers did, so do ye: Nor had they any Reason to be angry with
him therefore.

And as all, who have enjoyed the external Means of Grace, have thus been
disposed to hate the Light, shut their Eyes, stop their Ears and refuse to
hear, and been utterly averse to a return to God; so this is evidently the Case
with all whom God has inwardly wrought upon by his Spirit; (...) all know, who
have either had any Experience themselves, or have heartily observed the
Experience of others. And indeed it must be so; for the very same Temper, which
will make Men resist the outward, will also dispose them to resist the inward
Means of Grace. For the holy Spirit teaches and urges the very same Things,
that Moses and the Prophets, and Christ and his Apostles teach and urge, and
drives at the same End; and will therefore of Consequence meet with the same
Opposition and Resistance, from the very same Quarter. This is the
Condemnation, that Light is come into the World; and Men love Darkness rather
than Light, because their De^ds are Evil. He that does Evil, hates the Light.
Joh. 3.19, 20. That Light which will discover Men's evil Deeds, and show them
their fallen, sinful, guilty, helpless undone Condition; and so spoil all their
worldly, carnal Comforts, the very Idols of their Hearts; and also kill their
legal Self-righteous Hopes; which is all the awakened and concerned Sinner has,
to his own Sense and Apprehension, to depend upon; that Light which effects
Things, which are so directly cross to the inward Temper of the Sinner's Heart,
he will naturally be disposed to hate, shut his Eyes against, flee from and
resist with all his Might; and that whether it comes from the external
Teachings of the Word, or internal Teachings of the Spirit. Yea, so long as
there is the least remainder of Corruption left in Believers themselves, it
will hate to die, and struggle with all it is Might to keep it is Ground, yea,
and to recover it is former Dominion. Romans 7.23. I see another Law in my
Members, warring against the Law in my Mind, and bringing me into Captivity to
the Law of Sin, which is in my Members. Yea, it implies a Contradiction, to
suppose, Corruption can in any Case be willing to die: for every Temper in our
Hearts naturally loves to be gratified and pleased, and it is a Contradiction,
to suppose, it can at the same Time be willing to be crossed and killed. Gal.
5.17.

OBJ. But do not awakened Sinners earnestly desire to repent of and be humbled
for their Sins, and to mortify their Corruptions, and to give up themselves to
God, to love and live to him; and do they not earnestly pray for the divine
Spirit to assist them so to do? How can they then be disposed at the same Time
to make such mighty Resistance?

ANSW. (1.) Awakened Sinners see themselves in great Danger, and they therefore
earnestly desire and seek after Self-Preservation, and this is plainly owing to
Nature, and not to any Grace or Goodness in their Hearts. Psalm. 66.^. Through the
Greatness of thy Power thine Enemies submit themselves unto thee. i. e. they
feign a Submission, but they are thine Enemies. (2.) That which moves them to
desire to repent, be humbled, etc. is, they hope by these Means (...) make
Amends for their past Sins, and ingratiate themselves into the Favor of God.
Romans 10.3. i. e. merely from Self-love, with pure Hypocrisy, they would impo^^
upon God. For (3.) After all their Pretenses, Desires and Prayers, their Nature
and Temper is just what it used to be: and were they but delivered from the
Fears of Hell, and left at full Liberty to follow their own Inclinations, they
would live as viciously as ever they did. (4.) Yet they pretend to love God and
would fain have him believe them sincere, and are ready to expect Acceptance
for what they do, and to think it hard if God should not accept them. Now if it
was the Work of the Spirit of God, to build up such a Sinner in this
hypocritical, Self-righteous way, he might be disposed, while under his Fears
and Terrors, to concur and fall in with the Spirit's Influence: and all merely
from Self-love and for Self Ends. But if the Spirit of God goes about to bring
home the Law in its Strictness, and show such a Sinner the very Truth, that he
does not love God nor desire to, that his Desires and Prayers and Tears are all
hypocritical, that he is still dead in Sin and an Enemy to God, that he
deserves to be damned as much as ever he did; that God is at Liberty, all his
Duties notwithstanding, to reject him; that he lies absolutely at God's Mercy:
Now he will hate the Light, shut his Eyes against it, quarrel at it, and resist
it with all his Might. It is exceeding hard for the poor Sinner, when he begins
to be awakened, to part with a vain Life, and vain Companions, his carnal Ease
and Comfort, and all vicious Courses, to make Restitution to those he has
wronged in Name or Estate, and give himself to Reading, Meditation and Prayer,
and to a serious mortifying Way of living: he cannot bear the Thoughts, would
fain contrive an easier Way, or else delay for the present so mournful and
tedious a Work. But when, by the dreadful Fears of Hell and eternal Damnation,
he has been brought, after much Reluctance and Unwillingness, to a forced
Consent to all this, hoping thereby to appease the divine Wrath and procure the
divine Favor: Now to have all his self-righteous Hopes dashed and confounded,
by a Sight of the Badness of his Heart, by seeing he has no Love to God, no
Sorrow for Sin, no Inclination to be holy, but averse to God and all that is
Good, and that all his forced Goodness has no Virtue in it, that he is yet
under the whole Guilt of all his Sin, under Condemnation of the Law and the
Wrath of God, dead in Sin, an Enemy to God, absolutely at God's Mercy: This,
this, I say, is dreadful indeed, and far more cross to the very Grain of the
Sinner's Heart than all he ever met with before. Here therefore there will be
the greatest Struggle and strongest Resistance, before ever the Sinner can, by
the Spirit of God, be brought clearly to see and give into these Things. For
all these Things are directly cross to the Sinner's Disposition to love himself
supremely and live to himself ultimately, directly cross to a Spirit of
Self-supremacy and Independency. The Sinner cannot bear that God should be so
great and so sovereign, and himself so vile, so little, so absolutely at Mercy.
It Is a killing Thing. When the ^ommandment came, Sin revived, and I died. So
that it is plain, that notwithstanding all the awakened Sinner's selfish
Desires and Prayers, yet in the habitual Temper of his Heart, he stands
disposed to resist the Influences of the divine Spirit, with all his Might. He
is so far from being willing to repent of his Sins, that he is utterly
unwilling to see and own his Sinfulness; so far from desiring to be humbled,
that he is by no Means willing to see the Cause and Reason he has to be
humbled; so far from desiring to be made spiritually alive, that he will not so
much as own that he is spiritually dead; so far from desiring the gracious
Influences of the holy Spirit to reconcile him to God, that he will not own that
he is an Enemy to God, but would fain think, that he heartily desires to love
God, and stands ready to hate and resist that Light, which would discover the
Enmity of his Heart. He that does Evil, hates the Light and flees from it,
lest his evil Deeds be discovered; and for the same Reason, he that has an
evil Heart, hates the Light and resists it, lest the Badness of hi^ Heart be
discovered.

7. From all that has been said we may learn, that those Influences of the
Spirit which will be sufficient, effectually to awaken, convince and humble the
Sinner, and recover him to God, must be irresistible and supernatural. That
(...) internal Influences of the Holy Spirit are necessary to recover Sinn^rs
to God, is so plainly held forth every where in the Bible, that the Arminians
themselves do not deny it. But how much, and what Kind of Influences are
needful, is very much disputed. Now so much, and such Sort of Influences are
beyond dispute, needful, as will be sufficient effectually to answer the End,
and without which no Sinner will ever be converted. This is self-evident. If
Sinners were so good natured, as to see and feel and own their Sinfulness, and
the Justice of the Sentence whereby they stand condemned, and die to
themselves, the World and Sin, and return home to God through Jesus Christ, to
love him, live to him, and delight in him for ever, of their own Accord, merely
upon reading the Bible and hearing the Law and the Gospel preached, then there
would be no Need of any inward Influences of the Spirit at all. Or if they were
so good natured, as to be easily persuaded to do so, then some small Degree of
the inward Influences of the Spirit would do. But if, in the first Place, they
are altogether averse to see and feel and own their Sin and Guilt, and the
Justice of their Condemnation according to Law, and entirely disposed to hate
and resist the Light, as has but just now been proved, then they must be
brought to it by an all-conquering irresistible Grace, or not at all. And if,
in the second Place, the clearest Sight and greatest Sense a natural Man can
have of what God is, instead of making him appear infinitely glorious and
amiable, in the Eyes of one whose Heart is dead in Sin, and diametrically
opposite to the divine Nature, will rather irritate Corruption, (...) make the
native Enmity of the Heart ferment and rage, and become but the more apparent
and sensible, as has been heretofore proved, then there must be a supernatural,
spiritual and divine Change wrought in the Heart, by the immediate Influences
of the Spirit of God, whereby it shall become natural to look upon God as
infinitely glorious and amiable in being what he is, and so a Foundation hereby
laid, for us to love him with all our Hearts, and so genuinely to repent,
return and give up our selves to him, to live to him, and delight in him for
ever; I say, if these Things be so, there must be such a Change wrought by the
Spirit of God, or not one Sinner in the World will ever be converted to God.
And therefore, that there is an absolute Necessity of such Influences of the
Spirit of God, in order to a saving Conversion, is evident to a Demonstration,
from the very Reason and Nature of Things. God himself must take away the Heart
of Stone and give an Heart of Flesh, and write his Law on our Hearts, raise us
from the Dead, create us anew, open our Eyes, etc. etc. according to the
Language of Scripture. And these Things God does do, for all that are renewed,
and therefore they are said, to be born of God, to be born of the Spirit, to be
spiritual, to be made Partakers of the divine Nature, etc. And God is said to
give Faith, Repentance, and every divine Grace. Ezekiel. 36.26. Heb. 8.10. Ephesians.
2.1 -- 10. 1 Cor. 4.6. Ioh. 1.13. and 3.6. Romans 8.6, 9. 2 Pet. 1.4. Act. 5.31.
Iam. 1.17.

8. From what has been said we may learn to understand the Doctrine of divine
Sovereignty in the Bestowment of special Grace for the Regeneration and
Conversion of Sinners. The Scripture represents God as choosing some before the
Foundation of the World, to be holy and to be his Children. Ephesians. 1.4, 5. And
teaches us that whom he did predestinate, them he also calls, and whom he calls
them he also justifies, and whom he justifies them he also glorifies. Romans
8.30. And plainly intimates that such as are given to Christ and ordained to
eternal Life, believe, and none other. Joh. 6.37, 39. Act. 13.48. Romans 11.7.
And the Scriptures teach us that God has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and
Compassion on whom he will have Compassion. Rom: 9.18. And that for the most
Part, he passes by the rich and great and honorable, and chooses the meanest
and most ignoble, that no Flesh might glory in his Presence. 1 Cor. 1.26 -- 29.
He hides the Gospel from the wise and prudent, and reveals it to Babes, and
that because to pleases him so to do, and Christ rejoices in his sovereign
Pleasure herein, as displaying his infinite Wisdom. Mat. 11.25, 26.

And now what has been said may show us the infini^^ Reasonableness of such a
Procedure. For, God, whose Ey^^ run to and fro through all the Earth, seeing all
Things as being what they are, plainly beholds and views the State and Temper
of this apostate World; and let Men pretend what they will, he knows their
Hearts, he knows they don't love him nor care for him, he sees all their
Hypocrisy and their inward Contrariety to him and his Law, and how much they
are settled in their Temper; so far from Repentance, that they will not so much
as see their Sin, but stand to justify themselves, insensible of their Guilt
and insensible of their Desert, ha^ing the Light; he sees they hate to see
their Sin and Guilt and Desert, and to be humbled and lie down at his Foot, and
be absolutely beholde^ to him; and that they would make the utmost Resistance
if he should take them in Hand, and go about thorough^^ to convince them by his
Spirit how Things really be; th^^ he views his apostate, rebellious Creatures,
and sees how sinfu^ how dead in Sin, how contrary to all Good, and how
irreclaimable they be, and upon the whole how much they deserve eternal
Damnation. -- In the Days of Eternity he saw just how Things would be before
Hand, and now i^ Time he sees just how Things actually be. In the Days of
Eternity therefore he saw that there would not be any Thing in them to move him
to have Mercy on any, and now in Time he finds it to be the Case. And yet he
was pleased then of his mere sovereign Pleasure to determin^ not to cast off
all, but to save some; so now he is pleased to put his sovereign Pleasure in
Execution; and he (...) Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and Compassion (...)
whom he will have Compassion, and many Times takes (...) meanest and vilest,
that the Sovereignty of his Grace mig^^ be the more illustrious, and the Pride
of all Flesh might be brought low, and the Lord alone be exalted. And surely
such a Conduct infinitely well becomes the supreme Governor of the whole World.

Indeed, if any of Adam's Race were so well disposed, as, of their own Accord,
merely upon reading the Bible, hearing the Gospel preached, and enjoying the
common Means of Grace, to believe and repent and to return home to God through
Jesus Christ, they might be accepted, pardoned and saved, nor would there be
any Room for or Need of Sovereign Grace. But God who knows the Hearts of all,
sees that all the Pretenses of Sinners that Way are but mere Hypocrisy, and
that at Heart they are his Enemies, and utterly averse to a Return. -- Or if
there was any Virtue to be found among any of the fallen Race of Adam,
antecedent to God's Grace, this might move him to have Mercy upon one rather
than another. But he sees that all are entirely destitute of Love to him, and
entirely at Enmity against him, wholly void of real Goodness, and dead in Sin,
and that the only Reason why some are not so outwardly extravagant and vicious
as others, is, because he has by one Means and another restrained them, and not
because they are really better. -- And while God thus beholds all alike dead in
Sin, and in the Temper of their Hearts by Nature equally averse to a Return to
him, and views all as guilty and Hell-deserving, there is nothing, there can be
nothing, to move him to determine to show Mercy to one rather than another, but
his own good Pleasure. And therefore he has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy;
he awakens, convinces, humbles, converts whom he pleases, and leaves the rest
to follow their own Inclinations, and take their own Course, enduring with much
Long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath.

Let it be here noted, that many of those warm Disputes about the Doctrine of
divine Sovereignty, which have filled the Christian World, turn very much upon
this Point. All are agreed, that whosoever believes, repents and returns to God
through Jesus Christ, shall be saved. All will, therefore, yield that if Mankind
in general were so good natured, so well disposed, as to return to God through
Jesus Christ of their own Accord, upon the Calls and Invitations of the Gospel,
and only by the Influence and Help of those Advantages which are common, then
all might be saved, nor would there be any Need of, or Room for, this
sovereign, distinguishing Grace. But if Mankind have none of this good Nature,
but are every Way diametrically opposite thereto; if all the Calls of the
Gospel, and common Means and Methods of G^^ce, will have no effectual Influence
upon them; if nothing but an almighty, all-conquering Grace can stop them in
their Course of Rebellion, subdue their Lusts, and recover them to God; if this
be the Case of all Mankind, then it is plain, that nothing but the mere Mercy
of God, can interpose and prevent a universal Ruin. And it is plain that the
sovereign Governor of the whole World is, in the Nature of Things, at most
perfect Liberty to show this Mercy, to none, or to some few, or to all, just as
it seems good in his Sight. And since from Eternity he foresaw just how Things
would be, from Eternity he might determine what to do. So that the great
Question is, Whether Mankind are naturally so entirely averse to a true
Conversion? For if they be, the Reasonableness of the divine Sovereignty must
be admitted in this Case: and if they be not, none will any longer plead for
it. -- And what the natural Opposition of Mankind to Conversion i^, may be
easily seen, if we consider what the true Nature of Conversion is, and compare
their Temper herewith. -- And what the true Nature of Conversion is, may be
easily known by considering the true Nature of the moral Law. -- In a Word, if
the Law does only require what the Arminians and Pelagians suppose, and
Religion be just such a Thing, it is a plain Case, that Mankind are not so bad,
nor do they need such an irresistible Grace. But if the Law requires quite
another Sort of Holiness, and so true Religion be quite another Sort of Thing,
even such as I have described, which lies so diametrically opposite to the
natural Bent and Biass of our whole Souls, it is plain, it is a clear Case, that
Grace must be irresistible, and can proceed from nothing but mere free Mercy,
nor result from any Thing but the sovereign Pleasure of the most High. So that
in short, the whole Dispute is resolved into this Question, What does the Law
of God require, and wherein does a genuine Conformity thereto consist? But of
this more afterward.

And from what has been said we may easily gather a plain and short Answer to
all the mighty Cry about Promises, Promises to the Unconverted, if they will do
as well as they can. For it is plain, Heaven's Gates stand wide open to all that
believe and repent and return to God through Jesus Christ. Ioh. 3.16. And it is
plain, the Wrath of God i^ revealed against all that do not so. Ioh. 3.36. And
it is plain, that there is nothing but the want of a good Temper, together with
the obstinate Perverseness of Sinners, that hinders their Return to God; and
that therefore all their Pretenses of being willing to do as well they can, are
mere Hypocrisy. They are so unwilling to return to God, or take one Step that
Way, that they can be brought back by nothing short of an almighty Power; and
are so far, therefore, from being entitled to the Promises of the Gospel, that
they are actually, and that deservedly too, under Condemnation by the Gospel, (
Ioh. 3.18.) and under all the Curses of the Law, Gal. 3.10. Take heed
therefore, O Sinner, thou Enemy of God, when you pretend that you desire to
repent and do as well as you can, that you be not found quieting your self in a
State of Estrangement from God, hiding your natural Aversion to God and
Holiness under fair Pretenses. And know it if you do, though you may deceive your
self by the Means, yet it will appear another Day before all Worlds, and it
will be known that you were an Enemy to God, and would not be reconciled, and
did but flatter him with your Lips, and lie unto him with your Tongue, in all
your seemingly devout Pretenses. You think your self good enough to have an
Interest in the Promises, but infinite Goodness judges you deserve to be
numbered among the Children of Wrath and Heirs of Hell. Ioh. 3.18, 36. Your high
Conceit of your own Goodness i^ the Foundation of all your Confidence, and both
join to keep you secure in Sin and under Guilt, and insensible of your need of
Christ and sovereign Grace. Luke 5.31. Romans 10.3. Did Sinners but see the
Badness of their Hearts, they would be soon convinced that the Promises are not
theirs, but the Threatenings; and would feel and know that they have no Claims
to make, but lie absolutely at Mercy. Luke 18.13.

9. And if it is nothing but the mere Grace and sovereign good Pleasure of God,
which moves him to stop Sinners in their Career to Hell, and by his
irresistible and all-conquering Grace, and by the supernatural Influences of
his holy Spirit, subdue their Stubbornness, take down the Power of Sin in their
Hearts, and recover them to himself: And if he does this for them when they are
at Enmity against him, and are his open Enemies by wicked Works, and so are
altogether deserving his Wrath and Vengeance* I say, if this be the Case, there
is all Reason to think, that he, who thus begins, will carry on the Work to
Perfection. -- He knew how bad the Sinner was when he first took him in Hand,
how he hated to be converted, and how he would resist, and that his own
almighty Arm must bring Salvation; and yet this did not discourage his first
Undertaking. And he knew how the Sinner would prove after Conversion, just how
barren and unfruitful, just how perverse and rebellious, and just how apt to
forget God and turn away from him, and that his own almighty Grace must always
be working in him to will and to do. Phil. 2.13. -- He knew all the
discouraging Circumstances beforehand, and his infinite Goodness surmounted
them all, and he had Mercy on the poor Sinner because he would have Mercy on
him, of his mere good Pleasure, from his boundless Grace, aiming at the Glory
of his own great Name. Ephesians. 1.6. -- And now this being the Case, we have all
Reason to think, that God will never alter his Hand, or leave unfinished the
Work which he has begun. For there always will be the same Motive from which he
undertook the Work, to excite him to carry it on, even the infinite Goodness of
his Nature; and he will be always under the same Advantages, to answer the End
he at first proposed, namely, the Advancement of the Glory of his Grace. And he
will never meet with any unforeseen Difficulties or Discouragements in his Way.
We may therefore be pretty certain, if really God begins this Work, under such
Views and such Circumstances, that it is with Design to carry it on* As Samuel
reasons in a parallel Case. 1 Samuel 12.22. For the Lord will not forsake his
People for his great Name's sake: because it has pleased the Lord to make you
his People. So that if the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance were not
expressly taught in Scripture, yet on this Ground we might argue very strongly
for it. -- But that this is a Doctrine plainly revealed in the Gospel we may
learn, from Mat* 13.23. Ioh. 4.14. and 10.4, 5, 27, 28. 1 Ioh. 3.6, 9. Heb.
8.10. etc. etc. -- When St. Paul kept under his Body and brought it into
Subjection, LEST he should be a Castaway, (1 Cor. 9.27.) He did no otherwise
than he was wont to do in temporal Concerns, in Cases wherein he was beforehand
certain of the Event. So he sent Word to the chief Captain, of the Jews lying
in wait to kill him, lest he should be murdered by them; whenas it was revealed
to him from God, but the very Night before, that he should live to see Rome.
Act. 23.12 -- 21. So he would not allow the Sailors to leave the Ship in the
midst of the Storm, lest they should some of them be drowned for want of their
Help; whenas, but a little before it was revealed to him from God that not one
of them should be drowned. Act. 27.23 -- 31. And indeed, it was his Duty to do
as he did, as much as if he had been at the greatest Uncertainties about the
Event. So although Paul knew that never any Thing should separate him from the
Love of God, (Romans 8.38.) Yet he used all possible Endeavors to mortify his
Corruptions, lest he should be a Castaway. And indeed, it was his Duty to do
so, as much as if he had been at the greatest Uncertainties about the Event.
And what was his Duty, was also the Duty of all good Men; and therefore St.
Paul in his Epistles is frequently exhorting all, to do as he did: and that in
a perfect Consistency with the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, which he
also teaches. And as Paul's being certain of the Event, did not tend to make
him careless in the Use of proper Means to save his natural Life, but rather
tended to encourage and animate him, as knowing that he should finally succeed;
so his being certain of the Event, did not tend to make him careless, but to
animate him, with respect to his spiritual and eternal Life. And as it was with
him, so it is with all good Men. Romans 6.2. For this is always the Case, that
Certainty of Success, animates Men; if the Thing they are about, be what they
love and what their Hearts are engaged in; but to die to themselves, the World
and Sin, and love God, and live to him, and grow up into perfect Holiness, is
what all Believers love and have their Hearts ^^gaged after; an absolute
Certainty, therefore, of Perseverance has, in the Nature of Things, the
greatest Tendency to animate them to the most sprightly Activity. There are
none but graceless Hypocrites, that take Encouragement, from the Doctrines of
free Grace, to Carelessness and Sin. Romans 6.1, 2.

10. If this be the Nature of a saving Conversion, if this be the Nature of
true Holiness, if this be true Religion, so contrary to Flesh and Blood, and
all the habitual Propensities of Nature, then so long as there is the least
Corruption left in the Heart, there will, of Necessity, be a continual
Conflict. Grace will continually seek the Ruin of Sin, through it is Contrariety
to it and Hatred of it; and Sin will strive to maintain it is Ground, yea and to
regain it is former Dominion. The gracious Nature delights in the Law of God,
and aspires after sinless Perfection; the sinful Nature hates the Law of God,
and strives to lead the Man captive into Sin. The gracious Nature is a
Disposition to love God supremely, live to him ultimately, and delight in him
superlatively; and this sinful Nature is a Disposition to love Self supremely,
live to Self ultimately, and delight in that which is not God, wholly: and
because these two are contrary the one to the other, therefore the Flesh will
lust against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh. Gal. 5.17. The
gracious Nature joins in on God's Side against all Sin; and while God works in
the Man to will and to do, he works out his own Salvation with Fear and
Trembling, with Caution and Circumspection, with Watchfulness and holy Concern;
laboring to die to himself, the World and Sin, and be wholly the Lord's. Phil.
2.12, 13. While God is, by his Spirit, realising to his Heart the Being and
Perfections of God, the Existence and Importance of divine and eternal Things,
and is spreading divine Light over his Soul, and is banishing selfish and
worldly Views, and is drawing his Soul to holy and divine Contemplations; he
feels the divine Influence, he blesses the Lord, he summons all within him to
Engagedness, he pants after G^d. O that I might know him, that I might see
(...) in his infinite Glory! ( Psalm. 63.1, 2.) O God, thou (...) my God, early
will I seek thee: my Soul thirs^eth for (...) my Flesh longs for thee, in a
dry and thirsty Land, w^^re (...) Water is: To see thy Power and thy Glory, so
as I (...) thee in the Sanctuary. (v. 8.) My Soul (...) after thee. (Psalm.
73.25.) Whom have I (...) but thee? And there is none upon Earth I desire
besides thee. O that I could, with my whole Heart, love thee for ever, live to
thee for ever, live upon thee for ever, and never, never, depart from thee! O
that I could think for thee, and speak for thee, and act for thee; at Home and
Abroad, by Day and by Night, always live to thee and upon thee! Here, Lord, I
give my self to thee to be for ever thine, to love thee and to fear thee, and
to walk in all thy Ways and to keep all thy Commands; and O that my Heart might
never depart from thee! -- But alas, alas, to will is present with me, to have
a Disposition to all this, and long for all this, and seek and strive for all
this, is easy and natural, for I delight in the Law of God after the inward
Man; but how to perform I find not; how to get my whole Heart, so to fall in,
as that there shall not be the least contrary Temper, this is clean beyond me,
for I am still carnal, sold under Sin, have another Law in my Members, have
still the Remains (of the Flesh) of my native Contrariety to God and
Disposition to disrelish divine Things; and so am apt to forget God, to warp
off from him, and to have selfish and worldly Views and Designs secretly creep
into my Mind and steal away my Heart from God, and so am daily led into
Captivity. O that Sin was entirely dead, that a Disposition to disrelish God,
to forget him, to go away from him, to live without him, and to seek Content in
that which is not God, was entirely slain! O wretched Man that I am, who shall
deliver me? Romans 7.14 -- 24.

If Grace and Corruption were not so contrary the one to the other, so
diametrically opposite, there might possibly be an Accommodation between them,
and both quietly dwell together in the same Heart. But now they are set for
each other's Ruin, and seek each other's Destruction, and like Fire and Water
will never rest, till one or the other be entirely destroyed. Gal. 5.17.

If Grace could be wholly killed, or Corruption wholly slain, then the Conflict
of Believers might wholly cease in this Life; but Grace is immortal, like a
living Spring that shall never, dry, ( Ioh. 4.14.) like a Root that will ever
grow, ( Mat. 18.20 -- 23) and Christ is always purging B^lievers, that they may
bring forth more Fruit. (Ioh. 15.2.) So that he that is born of God cannot Sin
as others do, (1 Ioh. 3.9.) cannot Sin, but against the Grain of his Heart, the
gracious Nature continually resisting. ( Gal: 5.17.) So that it is certain,
from the Nature of Things, that David and Solomon, neither of them felt, in
their worst Frames, as graceless Men do. Grace resisted within, ( Gal. 5.17.)
hating their Proceedings, nor did it cease inwardly to struggle and torment
them, till the one cries out, My Bones wa^ old through my roaring all the Day
long. Psalm. 52.3. For his Sin was ever before his Eyes. Psalm. 31.3. And the
other, Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. Eccl. 1.2.

Many Stony-Ground-Hearers, who were once filled with Light and Joy, do when
their Religion is all worn out, and they lie dead and blind and stupid whole
Months and Years together, cry, The best are dead sometimes; and have Recourse
to David and Solomon: and many a Hypocrite, whose Religion is only by Fits and
Pangs, sometimes floated as the Streets be in Summer, by a sudden Shower, and
then in a few Days as dry as ever, deceive themselves here; and many take
natural Conscience to be a Principle of Grace, and the War between that and
their Corruptions to be a gracious Conflict: But as all counterfeit Religions
are specifically different from the true, as has been already shown, so by
Consequence their Conflict is different from that which Believers have, in it is
very Nature. They fight, from different Principles, and for different Ends, and
about different Things, and in a different Manner, just as their Religions
differ from one another.

11. If this be the Nature of Conversion and Holiness, and the Manner wherein
they are wrought, and if true Religion be thus specifically different from all
Counterfeits, then may Believers be infallibly certain that they have true
Grace. A Man cannot but perceive his own Thoughts, and know what Views he has,
and be intuitively acquainted with his own Designs and Aims; so every Man knows
it is wi^^ him, as to the Things of this World. Much less is it possible that
there should be so great a Change in a M^n's Heart and Life, Thoughts,
Affections and Actions, as (...) is made by Conversion, and yet he know nothing
about it. For a Man to be awakened, out of a State of Security in Sin, to see
what a sinful, guilty, helpless, lost, undone Estate he is in, and yet not to
perceive any Thing of it, evidently implies a Contradiction, and so is in the
Nature of Things impossible. For a Man to be brought to see God in his infinite
Glory, so as to be disposed to love him supremely, live to him ultimately, and
delight in him superlatively, and yet not to perceive it, i. e. not to be
conscious of his Views and Affections, also implies a Contradiction, and so is
impossible. For a Man to lose his selfish and worldly Views more and more, from
Year to Year, and die to himself, the World and Sin, and for a Man to live a
Life of Communion with God, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of the Lord, and
yet not at all to perceive it, is utterly impossible. For the Mind of Man is
naturally conscious to it is own Actings. So, from the Nature of Things, it is
evident that Grace is perceptible. Yea, in it is own Nature, it must be as
perceptible as Corruption, Love to God as Love to the World, Sorrow for Sin as
Sorrow for Affliction, aiming at God's Glory as aiming at our own Honor and
Interest. But if true Grace be in it is own Nature perceptible, and if it be
also specifically different from all Counterfeits, it is Self-evident that a
good Man may know that he has true Grace. I cannot see why, extraordinary Cases
excepted, a good Man, who lives a Life of Communion with and Devotedness to
God, and in the daily Exercise of every Grace, may not come to know that he has
Grace. Surely he must be conscious to the Actings of his own Mind; for this is
natural. And surely he may see the Difference between his Religion and all
Counterfeits, when the Difference is so great and plain. So that if the
Scriptures did not expressly teach us that Assurance is attainable, it is yet
evidently demonstrable from the Nature of Things.

But the Scriptures do plainly teach this Doctrine, in 2 Pet. 1.10. 1 Ioh.
5.13. 1 Ioh. 2.3. and 3.14. etc.etc. -- Besides, all those Promises, that are
made for the Comfort and Support of God's People in this World, suppose that
they may know that they are the People of God. For unless a M^n knows, that he
is a Child of God, he cannot rationally take Comfort in those Promises, which
are peculiar to such. It is true, brazen Hypocrites will do so, but they act
very presumptuously. It is Folly and Madness for me to flatter my self, that
God has promised to do so and so for me, unless I knew that I am one to whom
the Promises belong. For Instance, it is Folly and Madness for me to believe,
that God will make all Things work together for my Good, according to that
Promise in Romans 8.28. unless I know that I love God: For this Promise plainly
respects such, and no other. But there are very many precious Promises made to
Believers in the Word of God, which are evidently designed for their Comfort
and Support* It is certain therefore that God thinks that Believers may know
they are such, without which Knowledge, all these Promises cannot attain this
their End.

Besides, to suppose that to be a Servant of God and a Servant of the Devil, to
be going the Way to Heaven and the Way to Hell, to be traveling in the narrow
Way and to be traveling in the broad Way, are so near alike, as that even good
Men themselves cannot possibly know them asunder, and which Way they are going,
is on every Account intolerably absurd; nor could the Christian World have
possibly drunk in such a Notion but that true Grace is so very rare a Thing.

I may here by the Way just observe these three Things. 1. That the Way for a
Man to know that he has Grace, is not to try himself by fallible Signs, but
intuitively to look into himself and see Grace. A Thousand Signs of Grace will
not prove that a Man has Grace. There is no Sign of Grace to be depended upon,
but Grace it self: For every Thing, but Grace, a Hypocrite may have. And what
Grace, Holiness, or true Religion is, I have already endeavored to show. -- 2.
That the Way for a Man to know that he has Grace, is not to judge himself by
the Degree and Measure of his religious Frames and Affections, or the Height of
his Seize; but by the special Nature of them. For as there is not any one
Grace but a Hypocrite may have it is Counterfeit, so Hypocrites may rise as high
in their Religion as any true Believer does in his. Was Elijah the Prophet
jealous for the Name and Worship of the true God and against false Religion? So
was Iehu. And he appeared as full of Zeal, and more Courageous, and did greater
Exploits. There was scarce a more zealous Saint than Elijah, in all
Old Testament Times; but yet Iehu, that Hypocrite, made a much greater Show and
Noise, seemed to be fuller of Zeal, and Courage, and actually did greater
Exploits, setting aside the Miracles God wrought by Elijah. (1 Kings 1 and, and
19. Chap. -- 2 Kings 9, and 10. Chap.) And we don't read of one Saint, in all
the Bible, that fasted in a constant Way, twice every Week, as the Pharisee
did. ( Luke 18.) And there is not one Saint in all the Bible that ever did,
externally and visibly, any higher Acts of Self-denial, than to give all his
Goods to feed the Poor, and his Body to be burnt, and yet St. Paul intimates
that a Man may do so and still have no Grace in his Heart. 1 Cor. 13.3. It is
no certain Evidence therefore, that a Man is a good Man, because he has a great
deal of Religion, more than the most, and full as much as the best, yea more
than any in all the Country, yea, or in all the whole World. For in Iehu's
Time, there was not perhaps for a while one like him, upon the Face of the
whole Earth. A Man therefore cannot know that he is a good Man, by the Degree
of his Religion, but only from the special Nature of it. And wherein true
Religion specifically differs from all Counterfeits, I have already shown. --
3. Since Grace is in it is own Nature perceptible, and specifically different
from all Counterfeits, there is no Need of the immediate Witness of the Spirit,
in order to a full Assurance. If the Spirit of God does but give us a good
Degree of Grace, and enlighten our Minds to understand the Scriptures, and so
to know the Nature of true Grace, we may then perceive that we have Grace. And
the more Grace we have, the more perceptible will it be, and it is difference
from all Counterfeits will be the more plain. And if a Believer may know, and
be certain, that he has Grace, without the immediate Witness of the Spirit,
then such a Witness is altogether needless, and would be of no Advantage; but
God never grants his Spirit to Believers to do Things needless and to no
Advantage: and therefore there is no such Thing as the immediate Witness of the
Spirit in this Affair. And besides, it is plain, the Scriptures every where
direct us to look into our selves, to see whether we love God and keep his
Commands, to see whether Christ in his holy Nature be formed in us, to see
whether the Spirit as an enlightener and sanctifier dwells in us and influences
and governs us; but never once directs us to look for the immediate Witness of
the Spirit, in order to know whether we have Grace.

OBJ. But the Text says expressly, The Spirit it self bears Witness with our
Spirit, that we are the Children of God. Romans 8.16.

ANS. But the Text does not in the least intimate, that the Spirit witnesses
immediately. The Spirit bears witness; but how? The Spirit makes it evident,
that we are the Children of God; but in what Way? By immediate Revelation! No,
the Scripture no where tells us to look for such Revelations, or lays down any
Marks whereby we may know which come from God, and which from the Devil. How
then does the Spirit make it evident that we are the Children of God, and by
what Witness does he make it appear? Not by telling of us that we are Children;
the Devil may tell Hypocrites so; but by making of us Children in the very
Temper of our Hearts, by giving to us much of a Child-like Frame of Spirit
toward God, a Thing the Devil cannot do, and so a Thing by which we may
certainly know. This holy, divine, child-like Frame and Temper of Heart,
whereby we bear the very Image of our heavenly Father, is God's Mark, which,
more or less conspicuously, he sets upon all the Lambs of his Flock. This is
the Seal of the Spirit. (Ephesians. 1.13.) For this is the Earnest of our
Inheritance. (v. 14.) It Is eternal Life begun in the Soul. ( Ioh. 17.3.) This
is called the Witness of the Spirit, because it is what the Spirit works in our
Hearts, and that by which he makes it evident that we are the Children of God:
the Design of Witnesses being to make Things evident. And indeed this is the
only distinguishing Mark that God puts upon his Children, and the only Thing
wherein they differ from all Hypocrites, and is the only Evidence the Scripture
directs them to look for and expect, and without which all other Evidences are
just good for Nothing. Mat. 7.24 -- 27. Ioh. 15.2. 1 Ioh. 2.3, 4. and 3.6 -- 10.

And this being the Case, we may see how much out of the Way those be, who
think and say, that it is a Sin for them to doubt the Goodness of their State,
because of their Badness, and because they can see no Grace in their Hearts.
For, say they, that would be to call God's Truth and Faithfulness into
Question, who has by his Spirit immediately assured me of his Love and my
Salvation; just as if the Immutability of his Purpose depended upon my good
Frames. No, I must do as Abraham did, who against Hope, believed in Hope; so
though I see no Grace in my Heart or Signs of any, yet I must believe my State is
good, and that I shall be saved. It is not my Duty to look so much into my own
Heart, I shall never be the better for that; but I must look to Christ, and
believe, and never doubt. For the Spirit of God did at such a Time assure me of
Christ's Love to me, and I knew I was not deceived, and it would now be a great
Sin in me to doubt, it would be a giving the Lie to Christ and to the holy
Spirit.

How sad a Delusion are such poor Sinners under, who dare not believe the holy
Scriptures, for fear they shall Sin, which every where assure us, that unless
we are holy in Heart and Life, our Faith is vain and we in a State of
Condemnation; and teach us that we ought to be no more confident of our good
Estate, than in Proportion as our Sanctification is evident* How sad it is that
they should attribute all their Doubts to carnal Reason or the Devil, which
indeed are but the secret Dictates of their own Consciences, and are so
agreeable to the Word of God! What a dreadful Spirit is this, that thus leads
them off from the Word of God; and so blinds their Minds, that they cannot
understand it, nor dare believe it! Surely it can be no other than Satan
transformed into an Angel of Light. OBJ. But the Scripture forbids Doubting.
Mat. 14 31. O thou of little Faith, wherefore did thou doubt?

ANSW. In that Text Christ does not blame Peter for doubting his State, but for
doubting he sholud be drowned.

OBJ. But Christ upbraided them with their Unbelief* Mar. 16.14.

ANSW. He did not blame them for not believing they were in a good Estate, but
for not believing that he was risen from the Dead.

OBJ. But Abraham is commended, in that against Hope he believed in Hope, Romans
4.18.

ANSW. But the Thing to be believed, and hoped for, was, that he should have a
Son, which he had good Grounds to expect: So this is nothing to the Purpose.

OBJ. But St. Paul says, We walk by Faith, and not by Sight, 2 Cor. 5.7.

ANSW. That is, in all their Conduct they were governed by a realizing Belief
of unseen Things, and not by Things seen and temporal. 2 Cor. 4.18. It was not
Paul's Way to lie dead whole Months and Years together, nor was he ever drove
to such a Strait, as to be forced to believe himself to be in a good Estate,
without sufficient Evidence.

OBJ. But, what is not of Faith, is Sin, Romans 14.23. But Doubts arise from
Unbelief.

ANSW. 1. If any Man does not believe that it is lawful for him to do some
particular Act, and yet ventures to do it, he sins, he acts against his own
Conscience. This is the plain Sense of the Text. And so this Text is nothing to
the Purpose.

2. An Hypocrite's Doubts are wont to arise from Unbelief. i. e. from his not
steadfastly believing the immediate Revelations which he had from the Devil,
that his Sins are pardoned. The Devil trys to keep him quiet, but sometimes his
Conscience is a little awakened, and then he fears and doubts he is deluded;
and now the Devil tries to make him believe that it is a Sin to doubt. The
Devil would fain make him believe all is well, i. e. believe at a venture,
without a thoro' Search and Trial, and without sufficient Evidence.

3. It is a Sin for a true Believer to live so as not to have his Evidences
clear; but it is no Sin for him to be so honest and impartial, as to doubt,
when in Fact his Evidences are not clear. It is a Sin to darken his Evidences;
but it is no Sin to see that they are darkened. It is a Sin for a Man, by
Rioting and Drunkenness, to make himself sick; but it is no Sin to feel that he
is sick; or, if there be Grounds for it, to doubt he shall die. We may bring
Calamities upon our selves by our Sins, both outward and inward; and our
Calamities may arise from our Sins; and yet our Calamities have not the Nature
of Sins, but are rather of the Nature of Punishments. It Is Sin in Believers
which lays the Foundation for Doubts; it is Sin which is the Occasion of their
Doubts; but their Doubts are not Sins ever the more for this. Some seem to
suppose that every Thing which is occasioned by Sin, is Sin: but there is no
Truth in their Supposition. It Is not a Sin for unconverted People to think
themselves to be unconverted, and yet that Thought of th^^selves is occasioned
by Sin: for their being unconverted is their Si^*

OBJ. But Believers are exhorted to hold fast their Confidence. Heb. 3.6. And
it is said, ver. 14. For we are made Partakers of Christ, if we hold the
beginning of our Confidence steadfast unto the End.

ANSW. That is, their Confidence that Jesus is the Christ, together with a true
Faith in him, as is manifest from the whole Context. Nor is any Thing more
absurd than to say, that Men shall be made Partakers of Christ, if they hold
fast their Confidence of their good Estate, which is what many a Hypocrite
does, and that to the very last. Mat. 7.22. Luke 13.25, 26, 27.




Alas! Alas! How does the God of this World blind the Minds of them that
believe not! Some firmly believe that there is no such Thing, as a good Man's
knowing that he has Grace; and so they contentedly live along, not knowing what
World they are hastening unto, to Heaven or to Hell; but they hope their State
is good, and hope their Hope is well grounded, but know not but that their Hope
is that of the Hypocrite. Yea, they are not willing to believe there is any
such Thing as knowing, for that would make them suspect that they are wrong,
and that true Religion is something they never had: which if it be the Case,
yet they are not willing to know it. They hide themselves in the dark! They
say, There is no Light! And will not believe that a good Man may know that he
has passed from Death to Life. While others from the very same Principle, viz.
because they hate the Light, firmly believe that it is a Sin to doubt; and so
will never, dare never, call their State into Question, and thoro'ly look through
the Matter. Both are equally rotten at Heart, and so equally hate the Light,
although they take different Methods to keep from it. And the Devil does his
utmost, to keep both fast bound where they are.

Happy the true Believer, who is made impartial by divine Grace! It is a
Recovery to God and Holiness, that he is after; a Confidence that his Sins are
pardoned, without this, would be but a poor Thing. If he obtains this, he gets
what he wants: and if not, he feels himself undone; nor can he flatter himself
that he has obtained it, when he has not. And this he makes his only Evidence
of God's eternal Love, and of his Title to eternal Glory; and believes his
State to be good, no farther than this goes. Mat. 7.21 -- 27.

Thus I have gone through the first Use, the Use of Instruction. And thus we see
how a right understanding of the Law, will set many of the Important Doctrines
of Religion in a clear and easy, in a scriptural and rational Light. By the Law
we may learn the primitive State of Man, and how low we are fallen, and to what
we must be recovered; and so by Consequence how averse we are to a Recovery,
what Grace we need to recover us; and so by Consequence that we must be saved
by sovereign Grace, or not at all; whence the Reasonableness of the Saints
Perseverance appears; and from the whole, the Nature of the christian Conflict,
and the Attainableness of Assurance are discovered. And I will conclude this
Use with two Remarks.

Remark 1. If the Law requires what, I think, I have proved it does, and a
Conformity to it consists in what I have before described; then all the other
Particulars do necessarily and most inevitably follow: Such was the Image of
God in which Adam was created, and such is our natural Depravity, and such are
the best Duties of the Unregenerate, and such is the Nature of Conversion, and
our Aversion to it, etc. So that if my first Principles are true, then the
whole Scheme is beyond Dispute true also. -- And what are my first Principles?
Why, that to love God with all our Hearts, and our Neighbors as our selves, is
originally the very Essence of Religion: And that the Grounds upon which God
requires us so to do, are to be the Motives of our Obedience. He requires us to
love him supremely etc. because he is supremely glorious and amiable, and
because our additional Obligations to him are what they are. He requires us to
love our Neighbors as our selves, because they are what they are, and stand in
such Relations to us. With a perfect moral Rectitude of Temper, influenced and
governed by Truth, by the Reason and Fitness of Things, he would have us love
and glorify him as GOD, i. e. as being what he is; and love and treat our
Neighbors as being what they are. And is not this evidently the meaning of the
divine Law?

Remark 2. If the Law, as a Rule of Life, be so abated and altered, as that now
it only requires us merely from a Principle of Self-love and for Self Ends
sincerely to endeavor to love God and keep his Command^, and aim at his Glory:
and if the Law, as a Covenant, be disannulled, and such an Obedience be
substituted in the Room of Perfection, as a Condition of eternal Life, or as a
Condition of our Interest in Christ; then the contrary to all that I have laid
down is most true and certain. For let the primitive State of Man be what it
would, it is plain, we are not entirely destitute of a Conformity to this new
Law, much less diametrically opposite to it in the natural Temper of our Minds,
nor are our best Duties, while unregenerate, Sin; it is plain, Conversion is
another and a much easier Thing, and that we are not so entirely averse to it,
and do not need irresistible Grace, nor lie at God's sovereign Mercy, etc. All
these Things, and many more such like, are plain, if the good old Law is thus
altered and abated, and thus disannulled, if the new Law requires no more, and
this be the Condition of eternal Life, or of an Interest in Christ. -- So that
if any are disposed to disbelieve what have been laid down as Consequences, and
to build up another Fabric, if they will be consistent with themselves, they
can lay no other Foundation than this, viz. To destroy the Law* which I have
before proved to be as impossible as to destroy the Nature of God; because the
moral Law necessarily results from the divine Perfections, and our Obligations
to conform to it are infinite, eternal and unchangeable, as the Nature and
Perfections of God himself.

And therefore, I think, we may conclude with the greatest Certainty, that this
Foundation, viz. that the Law i^ thus abated and altered, is but Sand; and that
the Fabric built upon it will not stand. If the Law had required us to love
our selves supremely, and live to our selves ultimately, and to have
endeavored to love God and our Neighbors only to answer our own Ends; then
this Sort of Religion would have been right. Did I say, right? No, it would not
be right, being unalterably contrary to the very Reason and Nature of Things;
nor could such a Law have been possibly made by a God who loves Righteousness,
and hates Iniquity. -- But if this was right, if this was Religion, it is plain,
Mankind have the Root of the Matter in them; for they are all naturally
inclined to love themselves supremely, and live to themselves ultimately; and
so would not need to be born again, to have a new Nature; the old Nature would
be sufficient; they would only need to be convinced that it is for their
Interest to endeavor to love God and do their Duty, and merely Self-love would
make them religious, in order to answer their own Ends. But if the Law never
has been thus abated and altered, then this Religion is really no Religion at
all, nothing but mere Hypocrisy, and of a Nature diametrically opposite to true
Holiness. Only let it be clearly determined, What the Nature of the moral Law
is, and there will be a final End put to a hundred Controversies.

Here is a Man, he reforms his Life a little, and join^ with the Church, he
prays in his Family, and sometimes in his Closet, and for the most Part, it may
be, he is honest in his Dealings, and civil and sober in his Behavior; and
this is his Conversion, this is his Religion. And now he pleads, that
Conversion is a gradual Thing, because his was such; and that a Man cannot know
when he was converted, because that is the Case with him; that there is no Need
of irresistible Grace, because he knows that it is a pretty easy Thing to
convert as he has done; and he hates the Doctrine of divine Sovereignty,
because he never felt any Need of a sovereign Grace to save him; and he holds
falling from Grace, because his Religion is as easily lost as got. -- But does
he know that he has any Grace, after all? No, no, that is a Thing (says he)
none can know. He believes, the holy Spirit assists him; but he is not sensible
of his Influences or of any Help from him, any more than if he had none. He
believes, he loves God and is a true Saint at Heart; but he does not feel any
more Love to God, or Grace in his Heart, than as if there was none there* and
the Reason is, because there is none. But being secure in Sin, and it being for
his worldly Interest to make a Profession of Religion, he now sets up for a
good Man. For without the Law Sin is dead, and so he is alive without the Law.
Romans 7.8, 9. And now those Doctrines and that Preaching, which is calculated to
detect his Hypocrisy and awaken him out of his Security, he hates and crie^ out
against. And if any seem to experience any Thing Further in Religion than he
has, for that very Reason, he condemn^ it all for Delusion. But he pretends
mightily to plead up for Morality and good Works, though in Truth he is an Enemy
to all real Holiness. This is the Course of many, but some are more sincere and
strict and conscientious in their Way.

But let Men be ever so sincere, strict and conscientious in their Religion, if
all results merely from Self-love, the slavish Fears of Hell, and mercenary
Hopes of Heaven; there is not in all their Religion, the least real genuine
Conformity to the moral Law. It is all but an hypocritical, feigned Show of
Love and Obedience. It is not the Thing which the Law requires, but something
of a quite different Nature: unless we lay aside God's old and everlasting Law,
and invent a new, abated, altered Law, which shall declare that to be right,
which in the Nature of Things is unalterably wrong: and by such a Law, such a
Religion will pass for genuine. But it is sad, when we are drove to invent a
new Law, to vindicate our Religion and our Hopes of Heaven; since at the Day of
Judgment we shall find the old Law to be in full Force.

I am sensible, that old Objection will always be rising: But it is not just
that God should require of us more than we can do, and then threaten to damn us
for not doing of it. Just as if God may not require us to love him with all our
Hearts, merely because we are not suited with him: And just as if we were not
to Blame for being of such a bad Temper and Disposition, merely because we are
thoro'ly settled in it and have no Heart to be otherwise: Just as if the worse
any one is, the less he is to Blame; than which nothing can be more absurd.
Truly, I cannot but think, that by this, we are so far from being excused, that
even merely for this, we deserve eternal Damnation. For what can be much worse,
than be so thoro'ly settled and fixed in such a bad Temper of Mind? -- But
notwithstanding all that I have offered to clear this Point heretofore, I will
add, that if it is not just for God to require any more of us than we can do;
i. e. any more than we have, not only a natural, but a moral Power to perform;
th^n these Things will necessarily follow:

1. That there was not the least Need of Christ's dying for us as our Redeemer.
For, did we need him to make any Atonement or Satisfaction for our Sins? Surely
no. For God could not justly require of us more Satisfaction for our Sins, than
we were able to make; for that would be to require more than we can do. -- Did
we need him to purchase the divine Favor and eternal Life for us? Surely no.
For God could not justly require any more of us as a Condition of his Favor
and eternal Life, than we our selves were able to do. -- Did we need him to
purchase an Abatement of the Law? Surely no. For God could not in his Law
justly require of us more than we could do; and we did not need to have the Law
brought down lower than this. -- Well therefore might St. Paul tell the
Gal^tions, that if Righteousness came by the Law, then Christ i^ dead in vain.
Gal. 2.21. For if our doing as well as we can, in the Sense before explained,
is all that Righteousness that God can justly require; this alone most
certainly would be every Way sufficient for our Salvation; nor did we need a
Savior any more than the Angels in Heaven* for we have just as much Power to
do as well as we can* as they have to do as well as they can. To say the
contrary, is a Contradiction in express Terms.

2. Nor was there the least Need that the holy Spirit should be sent into the
World, to grant any inward Assistance, to ^^^ble us to do our Duty; for we had
a full and perfect Power to do all our Duty, without any such Assistance; for
God could not justly require of us, any more than we could do* and every one is
able to do what he can, without any Assistance.

So that if this Principle be true* that God cannot justly require of us any
more than we can do, it is plain we neither needed a Redeemer nor a Sanctifier;
So that all the infinite Pains which God has taken for our Redemption and
Salvation, has been unnecessary and fruitless. To do as well as we could, was
all that would have been needful; and this is still as much required as ever.
So that we are just where we should have been, if nothing had ever been done
for us. So that this Notion entirely undermines and subverts the whole
Christian Religion, in supposing that all the extraordinary and wonderful
Provision therein made for the Salvation of Sinners was needless. For if all
was needless, then the whole is perfectly incredible; for it is incredible to
suppose that God would do so much and such great Things, when there was no Need
of it. So that this Notion leads directly to Infidelity. Yea, if this Principle
be true, we may be certain that the Gospel is full of Deceit; for the Gospel
every where supposes Sinners to have been in a helpless, undone Estate, and
that they might justly have been left so, and perished for ever. And it every
where represents it as owing entirely to the free Grace and infinitely great
Goodness of God, that he sent his Son into the World to be a Savior, and the
holy Spirit to be a Sanctifier; all which, upon this Principle, is notoriously
false. For we were not in a helpless, undone Condition; being able, of our
selves, to do all that God could justly require of us, in order to eternal
Life. Nor did we need to be beholden to God for his Grace and Goodness, his Son
or his Spirit; being able, of our selves, to do all that which he could justly
require at our Hands. Yea, upon this Principle, the Gospel offers the highest
Affront to human Nature, in that it supposes (...) to be such vile, helpless,
undone, guilty Wretches, when, indeed, and in Truth, we be not. And therefore
so long as Men really believe this Notion, they cannot possibly but hate the
Doctrines of the Gospel, and oppose them. And so, in Fact, it has always been.

To conclude, therefore, since it is so evident from the L^w, and so evident
from the Gospel, that we are sinful, guilty, helpless, undone Creatures; had
not we better give into it, and come down, and lie in the Dust, before the
Lord, who knows what we be, whether we will own it or no? Had we not better own
his Law to be holy, just and good, and acknowledge that we lie at his sovereign
Mercy, and be willing to be beholden to free Grace through Jesus Christ for our
Salvation; since we must do so, or never be saved? What will it profit us to
fly in his Face, and say, It is not just for him to require more than we can
do, and then damn us for not doing? When all that he requires, is only that we
love God with all our Hearts, and our Neighbor as our selves; which, in the
Nature of Things is infinitely reasonable: and when all our Impotency arises
only from our Badness, and so, instead of extenuating our Fault, only discovers
how bad we be. Surely since all the World stand guilty before God, really
guilty, and are so accounted by him; we all had best stop our Mouths, and own
the Sentence just, by which we stand condemned; while it is a Time of Mercy:
for who can tell but God may pity us?

There is but one Way now left to evade the Force of what has been said. To a
strict Demonstration, the Law is not, and cannot be abated: there is now no Way
therefore but to deny that there ever was such a Law. But then, if God be what
I suppose him to be, to a Demonstration the Law must be such too. There is no
Way therefore, but to deny that there is any such GOD! Well, but if God be not
what I suppose; what is he? Why, we may see the whole Scheme, by the following
Objection, in a few Words.

OBJ. God is a Being of infinite Understanding and almighty Power, perfectly
disposed to seek the Good and Happiness of his Creatures, as his LAST END. He
loves Virtue and rewards it, merely because it tends to make them happy. He
hates Vice and punishes it, merely because it tends to make them miserable. All
he has in View, in his Commands and Prohibitions, in his Promises and
Threatenings, is the Good, and nothing but merely the Good, of his Creatures.
Yea, he esteems Things to be virtuous, merely because they tend to make us
happy, and vicious merely because they tend to make us miserable. And now
therefore, if we look upon Things as he does, and prosecute the same End; if we
love and practice Virtue with a sincere View to our own Happiness, as our LAST
END; we do all that God would have us do. And how can we, if we weigh Things,
but most heartily and sincerely love so good a God, so kind a Father, who so
dearly loves us, and so tenderly seeks our Good?

ANS. True, if God were verily such a one, the most wicked Man in the World
could not but love him. Self-love would make it natural. Even Publicans love
those, who love them; and are good to those, who are kind to them. Mat. 5. Did
Men firmly believe God to be such a one, they could not indeed possibly be at
Enmity against him. Self-love would not admit of it. Men would not need my
Grace to make them love God: Nature would make them love him. They could not
but love him, so long as they loved themselves. And now if God indeed be such a
one, I readily own, there is no Truth in my whole Scheme* but, from first to
last, it is all a Mistake. For it is altogether built upon a Supposition, that
there is a God, of a Temper essentially different.

But then I would Query, if God be such a one, if he aims only at his
Creature's Happiness, why does he ever inflict Misery upon them? If he means
only to make them happy, why does he ever make them miserable? Why did he drown
the old World, burn Sodom, and why does (...) damn Sinners to all Eternity?

It cannot be, because Justice requires it. For* (...) Scheme, Justice does not
require it. For upon th^^ ^^^eme Sin does, in strict Justice, deserve no
Punishment at all.

A Crime deserves no Punishment, any farther than it is blameworthy. A Crime
is blameworthy, no farther than we are under Obligations to do otherwise.
According to their Scheme, all our Obligations to be virtuous result merely
from its Tendency to make us happy. Upon their Scheme therefore, a Sinner is to
blame for his Sins, merely because Sin is cross to his own Happiness, and tends
to make him miserable. There is no other Evil in Sin but this. This is the only
Reason why God hates it, is set against it, and disposed to punish it. This is
the only Reason why he would have them avoid it. And this is the only Reason
they are to Blame for it. No Man is blameworthy for Sin, any farther than he
was under Obligations to the contrary. All our Obligations to Virtue, according
to them, arise from its natural Tendency to make us happy. And therefore all
the Evil of Sin must arise from it is natural Tendency to make us miserable.
This Misery, therefore, is exactly equal to the Evil of Sin. For all the Evil
of Sin arises from it, or rather consists in it. This Misery is all the Evil of
Sin; and this Misery is therefore all that renders Sin blameworthy. i. e. I am
to blame for taking a Course that tends to make me miserable. And why? Merely
because it tends to make me miserable. For that Reason, and for no other.
Therefore I am so much to Blame, and no more for what I do, than according to
the Degree of it is Tendency to make me miserable. This M^^ery therefore* which
naturally results from what I do, is equal to my (...). And (...) therefore the
worst, and all that I deserve. For no Crime deserves to be punished, any
farther than (...) is blameworthy. OBJ. But are we not, according to their
Scheme* under Obligations (...) res^^^ting from the Authority and Command of
God?

ANSW. We are, according to their Scheme, under no Obl^gations to regard the
Authority and Command of God at all* only, and merely* and purely, because it
is for our Interest so to do. A^ themselves acknowledge.

OBJ. But are we not, according to them obliged, to have regard to (...)
Neighbor's Welfare?

ANS. Only, merely, purely because it is for our own Interest to do so. For
according to them, all our Obligations to practice any Virtue, arise originally
only from it is being for our own Interest. The (...) o^ such a Practice plainly
is, that there is not one Being in the whole (...) regarding but my self* I am,
and besides me, there is (...)* I will regard none, but just to answer my own
Ends: And ^o really and strictly, regard none* but my self. This is a Religion
(...) will suit Nature* and in this Sense may justly (...).


And from the whole, to a Demonstration, it follows, that upon their Scheme,
Sin deserves no inflicted Pain or Misery, by Way of Punishment; over and above
the Pain or Misery which results necessarily from its own Nature. And now if
Sin does not deserve any such Punishment, then Justice does not require the
Governor of the World to inflict any such, upon any of his Creatures, though
ever so sinful. For Justice does not require him to inflict a Punishment that
is not at all deserved. Yea, rather it seems Cruelty so to do. If therefore
Justice did not require it, why did God drown the old World and burn Sodom, and
why does he damn Sinners to all Eternity?

Certainly, He did not aim at their Good, when he drowned the old World and
burnt Sodom. And certainly, he cannot aim at Sinners Good in their eternal
Damnation. There are some Calamities in this Life, which God might be supposed
to send upon his Creatures for their Good; and indeed, all Things considered,
they are well adapted to do them Good; yea, and are all made to work together
for Good to them that love God, and may be numbered among their Mercies. But
what shall we say, when God drowns a whole World, burns up several Cities, and
damns to all Eternity Millions of his Creatures: Yea, and all for nothing, when
they deserved no Ill at his Hands, not the least! Where is his Justice now!
Yea, Where is his Goodness! Or what does he mean! What does he intend!

Certainly, He cannot intend to deal so severely with some of his poor
Creatures, who never deserved any Ill at his Hands, merely for the Good of
others, to fright and warn and deter them from Vice. For this would be to do
Evil, that Good might come: Yea, this would be the Way rather that Good might
never come. For how could any of his Creatures or Subjects, heartily love him
or like his Conduct, while they behold Millions of their Fellow Creatures
suffering, for nothing at all, such infinite Pains, under his Hands! Where is
his Justice? would they all cry: And where is his Goodness? They would hate
him, and flee from him, and dread a Government so infinitely tyrannical.
Indeed, to inflict a proper Punishment, in Case of just Desert, is a good
Thing, tends to maintain Government, and make Men afraid of Sin, and stand in
Awe of the great Lawgiver and Judge of the World. Yea, it is a beautiful
Conduct, and tends to make God appear amiable in the Eyes of all holy Beings.
Rev. 19.1, -- 6. But to afflict and torment poor Creatures, who do not at all
deserve it, and that for ever, cannot possibly answer any good End; but, of
Necessity, must promote a Thousand bad ones, when all the Time the true State
of the Case is publicly known and understood throughout all God's Dominions.
It is just as if a Father, who has ten Children, should hang up five every
Monday-Morning, and whip them almost to Death, for nothing in the World, but to
make the rest love him, and be good and obedient Children. And would they love
him ever the more for this? Yea, they could not but hate so cruel a Tyrant.
Now, therefore, if their Scheme be true, why did God drown the old World, and
burn Sodom? And why does he damn Sinners to all Eternity?

Yea, if Sin deserves no inflicted Punishment, as upon their Scheme it does
not; why does God ever once inflict the least, the very least Punishment for
it, in all his Dominions? And that, which though not in its own Nature more
unaccountable, yet is more surprising* why has God, all along, from the
beginning of the World, been (...) such a dreadful Train of Punishments for
Sin? Why did God torn the Angels out of Heaven for their first Sin, and doom
them to an eternal Hell? when they did not at all deserve it* Why did God
threaten Adam with Death in Case of Disobedience? Why is Death said to be the
Wages of Sin? Why did God cause the Earth to open and swallow up Korah and his
Company? Why did God cause the Carcases of six Hundred Thousand to fall in the
Wilderness? Why did God strike Uzza dead? And why ^ Thousand more Things, which
have happened in the Sight of the World? Surely, it cannot be for our Good, to
be struck dead and sent to Hell. And surely, it cannot be for the Good of any in
all God's World, that shall see or ever hear of it: when, all the while it is
publicly known, that we deserve no Ill at God's Hands. No, not the least.

And now after all, to torment us in Hell for ever, for nothing in the World,
where the Fire shall never be quenched, and the Worm shall never die; yea, and
to appoint a Day of Judgment, under a Pretense of doing nothing but strict
Justice; and to summon all Worlds together, to see and hear, to ^he End that
his Impartiality and Justice might appear to all: When, all the while, he
knows, and all the World knows, that his poor Creatures deserve no Ill at his
Hands: No, not the least! (...) can he mean?

Yea, and that which is a great deal worse than all, that I even shudder to
think of it; he not only makes a Law, to punish Sinners eternally in Hell, when
there was no Grounds for it, and puts it in Execution upon his poor Creatures
who do not deserve it: But, having one only Son, of equal Glory with himself,
he delivers him to Death, in the Room and Stead of Sinners; pretending that Sin
was so bad a Thing, that without the shedding of Blood there co^^d be no
Remission, and therefore his own Son must die, to the End he might be just,
while he justified the Sinner that should believe in him: While, all the Time,
if their Scheme is true, (...) knew, and all the World will know, sooner or
later, that Sin never deserved the least Punishment at his Hands*

To conclude, therefore, If God be what they suppose, ^ grant, the Scheme I
have laid down is not right. And it is equally evident, that the Bible is not
right neither. For the Law and the Gospel, the old Testament and the n^w, every
where suppose, and take it for granted, that Sin is an infinite Evil, deserves
the Wrath and Curse of God, all the Miseries of this Life, and Death it self,
and the Pain^ of Hell for ever. The Law threatens all this. According to the
Gospel, Christ has died to redeem us from all this, as what we justly deserve.
The Bible therefore, in a Word, supposes we deserve it all; but their Scheme
supposes we do not. The God that made the Bible, has no Doubt of it; he made
his Law upon this Ground, and upon this Foot he gave his Son to die, has
appointed a Day of Judgment, and prepared a Place of Torment, a Lake of Fire
and Brimstone: But their God is of quite another Mind, can see no such infinite
Evil in Sin; yea, no Evil at all in it, but what results from it is Tendency to
make us miserable. Their God therefore, is not the God of Israel, not the God
that made the Bible; and therefore is no God, is nothing but an Image framed in
their own Fancy, suited to their own Hearts.

Besides, their Idea of God is contrary, not only thus to the general Tenor of
Scripture, but also to many plain and express Declarations. (1.) It Is manifest,
that God does not make the Happiness of his Creatures his last End, from Ex^^.
9.16. Number. 14.13. -- 21. Lev. 10.3. Psalm. 106.8. Ezekiel. 20. throughout. Ezekiel.
36.21, 22, 23. and 38.23. and 39.6, 7, 13, 21, 22. Romans 9.22, 23. Romans 1^.36.
Rev. 4.11. -- (2.) It Is manifest, that God does not require his Creatures to
love and obey him merely because it tends to make them happy so to do, from
Exodus 20.2. Lev. 19.2. Psalm. 29.2. and 96.4, 8. and 148.13. 1 Cor. 6.20. (3.)
It Is manifest, that God does not threaten and punish Sin merely because it
tends to make his Creatures miserable, from 1 Samuel 2.29, 30. 2 Samuel 12.7 -- 14.
Psalm. 51.4. Mal. 1.6, 7, 8, 14.

But to conclude. -- How sad and dreadful a Thing will it be, for poor Sinners,
when they come to die, and enter into the World of Spirits, there to find that
the God they once loved and trusted in, was nothing but an Image framed in
their own Fancy! They hated the God of Israel* and hated his Law, and therefore
would not believe that God or his Law were indeed what they were. They were
resolved to have a God and a Law more to their Minds. How dreadful will their
Disappointment be! How dreadful their surprise! They would never own they were
Enemies to God; now they see their Enmity was so great, as to make them
resolutely, notwithstanding the plainest Evidence, even ^o deny him to be what
he was. And how righteous will the Ways of the Lord appear to be, in that he
gave such over to strong Delusions to believe a Lie, who did not love, and
would not believe, the Truth; but had Pleasure in Unrighteousness? 2 These.
2.10, 11, 12. So the Gentile Nations not liking to retain God in their
Knowledge, were given over to reprobate Minds, and left, every Nation, to make
such a God, as best pleased themselves. Romans 1. -- But it is Time to proceed to
the next Use.

SECTION VI. Rules of Trial.
USE II. Which may be of Examination. What has been said may serve to clear up
to real Saints their gracious State, and may afford Matter of Conviction to
others.

And here I would take the humble Believer in his Element, that is, in his
Closet, where he retires from the Noise and Business of the World, where he
loves to be alone, to read the Bible, to meditate on the Perfections of God,
and think of his Works and Ways, where he mourns and pray* and loves God and
gives up himself to him. -- In a serious Hour of sweet Retirement, when you are
most your self, and your Thoughts most about you, I would enquire, What are
your Views? And what is the inward Temper of your Mind? And how do you live?
And what is it that habitually influences you in your daily Conduct?

Do you know God? Do you see him to be such a one as he really is? Even such a
one as the Scriptures represent him to be? And do you account him infinitely
glorious and amiable in being such a one? And do you begin to love him with all
your Heart? Do you esteem him so, as to exult in his Supremacy and absolute
Sovereignty? And so will his Glory and value his Honor and Interest, as to
give up your self to live to him? And so delight in him, as to choose him for
your present and everlasting Portion? -- True, your remaining Blindness and
Ignorance is very great: but do you not feel it, and groan under it as your
Burden, and hate your self for it as your Sin, lamenting the Sottishness of
your Heart, that you should be so senseless and brutish, after so many outward
Advantages and inward Helps, and amidst such clear Manifestations made of God
and of his infinite Glory in his Word and in all his Works and Ways; and feel
that you are wholly to Blame for the Stupidity and Unteachableness of your
Heart, ready to say with him of old, So foolish am I and ignorant, I am as a
Beast before thee? Psalm. 73.22. Your Disesteem of God, and Unconcernedness
about his Honor and Interest, is great, and you have still a Disposition to
hate to live upon God only, without any Thing else to take Comfort in, as the
Portion of your Soul; and so you are inclined to forget God, to forsake him, to
depart and go away and fall in Love with something else, and seek another
resting Place, and something else to take Comfort in: But do you not feel this
your remaining Want of Conformity to God's Law, and native Contrariety to it?
And do you not hate it, and hate your self for it? Do you not groan under it,
and lament it, and watch and pray and fight against it, feeling the infinite
Sinfulness of it? Saying, The Law is holy, just and good; but I am carnal sold
under Sin: -- O wretched Man that I am ^ Romans 7.14, 24.

And what are the Grounds of your Love to God, and from what Motives is it that
you are influenced to love him? Does God indeed appear infinitely great,
glorious, and amiable in being what he is? And do you love him because he is
just such a one? Do you love to meditate his incomprehensibly glorious
Perfections, and wonder and adore? Are you glad, that he knows all Things, and
can do every Thing? Are the various Manifestations of divine Wisdom, in the
moral Government of the World, glorious in your Eyes? Does it suit your Heart,
that God governs the World as he does? Do you love, that the Pride of all Flesh
should be bro't low, and the Lord alone be exalted? Are you glad, that God
loves Righteousness and hates Iniquity as he does; and do you heartily approve
the Strictness of his Law in the Ma^^er of your Duty, and the Severity thereof
against the least Sin? And are you sweetly sensible of the infinite Goodness of
God, and of his Truth and Faithfulness? And does God appear infinitely Glorious
because he is just what he is? And is this the primary Foundation of your Love?
In a Word, do you see him as the great Creator, Preserver and Governor of the
World, as the Redeemer, Sanctifier and Savior of his People, as he has thus
revealed himself by his Word and in his Works, and do you love him for being
what he is? And do you also feel the powerful Influence of those sup^^ added
Obligations you are under to love him? In other Cases, when we love any Thing,
we know why we love it: So also do Believers know why they love the Lord their
God.

And does it not appear to you infinitely reasonable, that you should love God
with all your Heart, that you should be wholly his, and wholly for him, and
make him your All, while you behold his infinite Glory, his complete
Alsufficiency, his original, entire Right to you, and absolute Authority over
you? And does not his Law in requiring you to do so, appear to be infinitely
right, perfectly holy, just and good, worthy to stand in full Force for ever,
unabated and unaltered? And do you not see, that the least Want of Conformity
to this Law, or Transgression of it, is infinitely Vile, and that a perfect
Conformity thereto deserves no Thanks: And do you not feel your self wholly to
Blame for your not being altogether such as the Law requires? Hypocrites are
generally very ignorant of the Law, in it is true Meaning and Strictness; and so
are ignorant of their Want of Conformity unto it, and of their inward
Contrariety to it. Romans 7.8, 9. For otherwise all Hypocrites would know
certainly that they have no Grace. But yet Hypocrites, at least many of them,
know something about the Law and their Want of Conformity to it, and something
about their inward Contrariety to it; and hence may complain of the Blindness
of their Minds, the Deadness of their Hearts, and of their Pride and
Worldliness: But no Hypocrite is heartily sensible that the Law is holy, just,
and good in requiring Perfection; and that he himself is entirely to Blame for
not being perfectly holy, and that the (...) is wholly his. Some will say, I
desire to love God, and to aim at his Glory, and do my Duty: but no Man is, or
can be perfect: And God does not require more of us (...) we can do. And so
they think themselves excusable, and are not sensible that it is infinitely
vile in them not to love God with all their Hearts. -- Others will say, I can
do Nothing of my self: it is Christ that must do all. I desire to love God; but
I cannot. It is the Spirit that must fill my Heart with Love, and God is the
sovereign Dispenser of his Grace; so that if I am dead and dull and senseless
and stupid, I cannot help it. And so they also think themselves excusable, and
are not sensible that it is infinitely vile in them not to love God with all
their Hearts. -- But now, how stands the Case with you? Have you any secret Way
of excusing your self? Or do you see that the Law is holy just and good, and
that you only are to Blame, wholly to Blame, and altogether without Excuse;
yea, and exceeding Vile, for all your Blindness and Deadness, and for every
Thing wherein you are not just what the Law requires you to be? It Is this which
makes Believers sensible of their Desert of Damnation, all their Lives long,
and lo^th and abhor themselves before the Lord. And it is this which causes them
more and more to see their Need of Christ and free Grace, and admire and prize
the glorious Gospel. O wretched Man that I am! Who shall deliver me? -- I thank
God through Jesus Christ our Lord. -- Romans 7.24, 25.

And do you begin to be of a Disposition really to love your Neighbor as your
Self? Be your Affections under the Government of a Spirit of disinterested
Impartiality, so that you are disposed to value your self only for those
Properties in you that are good and excellent, and only in Proportion to their
Worth and Excellency; and by this Rule to esteem your Neighbors, your Friends,
and your Foes, and all Men? And do you hate a contrary Disposition in you? And
is your Heart full of Love and Kindness and Benevolence, wishing well to all,
seeking the Good of all, and even grieved when your Enemies are in Adversity?

And to conclude, Does Love to God and to your Neighbor govern you in your
Thoughts, Affections and Actions, and daily influence you to live to God, and
do Good in the World* so that now you are not your own, but given up to God to
do his Will, seeking his Glory? -- A holy Life does as naturally proceed from a
holy Heart, as a Stream does from a living Fountain.

Once you was Darkness: But are you now Light in the Lord? Once, as to right
spiritual Views of God, your Neighbor, or your self, of this World or the
next, you had none* you was blind, your Understanding was darkened; and so your
Apprehensions were wrong, and you loved your wrong Apprehensions, and took
Pleasure in Error, Falsehood and Sin, and hated the Light, hated Truth and Duty:
once you was wholly devoid of the divine Image, and destitute of all Good; yea,
and you was wholly averse to God, and full of all Evil. And did you ever see
and feel this to be your State? and have you by divine Grace been recovered out
of it? -- Have you been effectually taught, that your Light was Darkness, and
your Knowledge Ignorance, and been made sensible of the Blindness of your Mind?
And have you learnt, that all your seeming Goodness was Counterfeit? and that
in you did dwell no good Thing? Yea, that your seeming Goodness was real
Wickedness, in that your Heart was in perfect Contr^riety to God and his Law?
Has divine Light shined in your Heart, and your native Darkness, as well as
contracted Blindness, been dispelled from your Soul; so that now your Views of
God, of your Neighbor and your Self, of this World and the next, are right,
and your Apprehensions according to Truth, and has the Truth made you free? Do
you now look upon God, in some Measure according to the Capacity of a Creature,
as he does upon himself, when he takes upon him the Character of most high GOD,
supreme LORD, and sovereign GOVERNOR of the whole World, and says, I am the
Lord, that is my Name, and besides me there is no other God? And do you see it
is infinitely fit that all the World should love, worship and adore him? Do you
now look upon your Neighbors, in some Measure as God does, when he commands
you to love them as your self; and so see that it is perfectly right that you
should? And do you look upon your self and every Thing in this World, in some
Measure as God does, when he commands you to deny your self, and forsake all
Things for his Sake; and see that it is most fit and reasonable to die to your
self and to this World, and give up your self to God, to love him and live to
him, and delight in him for ever? And do you understand, that the Things which
are seen are temporal, and that the Things which are unseen are eternal? And do
all possible Troubles in the Ways of God, in some Measure, appear only as light
Afflictions, which are but for a Moment, and not worthy to be compared with the
Glory that shall be revealed? Do you thus know the Truth, and has the Truth
made you free from your old Servitude; and are you effectually influenced and
governed by these Views and Apprehensions, and this Sense of Things, to bring
forth Fruit to God, an hundredfold, or sixty-fold, or at least thirty-fold?
For divine Knowledge is efficacious, and the holy and divine Effects and Fruits
are always equal to the Degree of Knowledge; (1 Ioh. 3.6.) And every Branch
which brings not forth Fruit, is cut off and cast into the Fire. Are you thus
born again, and become a new Creature, and learnt to live a new and divine Life?

And is it not now most manifest to you, that all this is so far from having
been the Product of Nature, that all that is in Nature, every natural
Propensity of the Heart, has from first to last been utterly against the
Change, and made a constant and mighty Resistance? And do you not plainly
perceive, that, from first to last, the Work has been begun and carried on by
God himself?

And does it not appear to you, as the most astonishing Goodness in God, and
owing to nothing but his sovereign free Grace, that you have thus been called
out of Darkness into mavelous Light, turned from the Power of Sin and Satan
to serve the living God? And do you not plainly see, there is nothing but the
same infinite Goodness and free Grace to move God to carry on and complete this
Work in your Heart, and that so, if ever you get to Heaven, the whole of your
Salvation, from first to last, will be absolutely and entirely to be attributed
to free Grace? And have you not hence learnt to live upon free Grace through
Jesus Christ for all Things?

And do you not perceive, that he, who has begun, does actually carry on the
Work of Grace in your Hearts? And that all the external Dispensations of
Providence and internal Influences of the Spirit concur in their Operation, to
humble you and wean you from the World and imbitter Sin, to bring you nearer to
God and to love him and to live to him and to live upon him, and to make you
more serious, more spiritually-minded and heavenly-minded, more watchful and
prayerful, and more loving and kind and tenderhearted and obliging to all
Mankind, both Friends and Foes; and to make you daily attend upon the Duties of
your particular Calling, and upon all the common Business of Life, as a Servant
of God, in Singleness of Heart, doing Service to the Lord?

And although you was once dead in Sin and wholly without Strength, yet do you
not now feel that you are spiritually alive, and so put into a Capacity for a
spiritual Activity, and that you are engaged to be active for God? Not that
your Sufficiency is of your self, as once you thought it was: For you are not
sufficient of your self, as of your self; but your Sufficiency is of God. Yet
do you not find that through Christ strengthening of you, you can do all Things?
And do you not from the Heart hate the Way of lazy, dead-hearted Hypocrites,
who sit still and carelessly cry, We can do nothing, it is Christ that must do
all, and under a Notion of not doing any Thing in their own Strength, gratify
their Laziness, and do nothing at alll! Accursed Laziness! Accursed Hypocrisy!
Do you not feel, I say, that you are put into a Capacity for spiritual
Activity? And are you not engaged to be active for God? For you are his
Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, that you might walk in
them. While the Spirit of God is taking down the Power of Sin in your Heart,
and slaying your Corruptions; are you not also crucifying the Flesh with the
Affections and Lusts? While God is working in you to will and to do, are you
not working out your Salvation with fear and trembling, with filial Fear and
holy Concern? While the Spirit of God gives you Might in the inner Man, do not
you put on the whole Armor of God, and fight with Flesh and (...), with
Principalities and Towers? This is the Way of Believers. And the Spirit does
not come upon them by Fits, as it did upon Balaam; but dwells in them and
abides in them for ever; to purify them from all Iniquity, and make them a
peculiar People, zealous of good Works.

Finally, Do you not experience that your Religion is something real and
perceptible, and see that it is specifically different from any Thing that
possibly can arise merely from a Principle of Self-love? You perceive your
Views of God, and Sense of his Greatness, Glory and Beauty; and you perceive
your Sense of the World's Emptiness, and of your own natural Vileness and
Wretchedness; and your Love to God, your Weanedness from the World, and your
Mourning for Sin are perceptible. And is it not easy to perceive why you love
God, are weaned from the World, and mourn for Sin; namely, because God is
infinitely lovely, the World empty and worthless, and Sin the greatest Evil?
And while these Views and Affections effectually influence you to all holy
living, their Genuineness is made still more evident and plain. And, from the
whole, you arise to a rational and scriptural Knowledge of your gracious State.

From what has been said upon this Subject, a great Variety of other Questions
might be put to the Believer; but the whole has been treated so plainly and
practically, that I need add no more. And if graceless Persons, had it in their
Hearts to be honest and impartial, they might easily know, that they are
Strangers to real Religion. But if they have not the Thing itself, they will
either work up something like it, or else deny that there is any such Thing:
for he that does Evil, hates the Light; and so does he who has a rotten Heart.
And hence some cry, The best have their Failings; and they watch and catch at
the Failings of such as are accounted godly, and dwell upon them, and magnify
them; and so quiet their Consciences, and go on in their Sins. Others cry, The
best are dead sometimes; and so maintain their Hopes, although they lie dead,
whole Months and Years together, and live in Sin, and never come to sound
Repentance. Others cry, You will discourage weak Christians; meaning
themselves. Just as if there were a Sort of Christians that cannot bear the
Light, nor stand a scriptural Trial. What will they do, when they come before
the awful Bar of the Heart-searching God! Others cry, But every Christian does
not experience alike; and so though they are destitute of the very Essence and
Life of Religion, yet they hope all is well. And many are confident that these
Things are not so, for, say they, If these Things are true, who then shall be
saved? I answer, Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way that leads to Life;
and few there be that find it: but wide is the Gate, and broad is the Way that
leads to Destruction, and many go in thereat. Mat. 7.13, 14. And mark what
follows in the next Verse, v. 15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you
in Sheeps-cloathing, but inwardly are ravening Wolves. v. 16. Ye shall know
them by their Fruits. -- By what Fruits? Why, this is the constant Character of
false Prophets throughout the Bible, that they cry, Peace and Safety, and heal
the Wound of poor Sinners slightily, and da^b with untempered Mortar, i. e.
They make Religion to be an easier Thing than it is, more agreeable to corru^^
Nature; and so encourage Sinners to rest in something ^hort of true Grace. So
the Pharisees did, notwithstanding all their pretended Strictness; and so the
Arminians do, notwithstanding all their seeming Zeal for good Works; and so the
Antinomians do, notwithstanding all their Pretenses to extraordinary Light and
Joy and Zeal and Purity and Holiness. And this is the common Character of all
false Prophets and false Teachers and Heretics, that, being Enemies to true
Religion, they cut out a false Scheme in their Heads, to suit their own Hearts;
and so, however greatly they may differ in many Things, yet herein all agree,
to make Religion an easier Thing than the Bible does, and to make the Gate
wider and the Way broader than Christ and his Apostles; and by this Mark the
difference between them and the true Prophets may always be certainly known.
And therefore Christ having just said, Strait is the Gate and narrow the Way
etc. immediately adds, Beware of false Prophets, by their Fruits ye shall know
them; for they all invent some easier Way to Heaven, th^' it may be in Sheeps
clothing, i. e. under a Show of great Strictness. And this their Invention
being false, they are thus denominated false Prophets. And thus what has been
said concerning the Nature of true Religion, may serve to clear up the
Believer's gracious State; and may afford Matter of Conviction to others.

SECTION VII. We have great Reason to be humble, and thankful, and live
entirely devoted to GOD.
USE III. Of Humiliation. What has been said may be improved by Sinners and
Saints to promote their Humiliation: For by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin;
and a Sight and Sense of our Sinfulness, tends to abase us before the Lord.

In this Glass of the Law, Sinners may see what they be in Heart and Life, and
by this Rule they may learn how God looks upon them. There is a Knowledge of
our selves, of our Hearts and Lives, that is natural to us. Men, by their Power
of Self-reflection, have a Sort of an Acquaintance with themselves: they know
their present Views and Designs, their present Inclinations and Way of Living;
and remember, more or less, how they have lived in Years past. But Men are
naturally very ignorant of the Nature of God and of his holy Law; and so are
very ignorant of themselves in a moral Sense, are very insensible how God looks
upon them, and what their Hearts and Lives be, compared with God and his holy
Law. Natural Conscience has some Notions about Right and Wrong, and so does
something toward accusing and condemning Men, especially for their grosser
Sins; but natural Conscience is for the most Part so blind and so much asleep,
and in most Men has been so much abused and brow-beat and kept under, that it
lets Men pretty much alone. Men hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, according to
the Apostle's Phrase, and keep their Consciences in Chains; and so are in a
great Measure without the Law; and hence Sin is dead: for where there is no
Law, there is no Transgression: and when Men know not the Law in it is true
Meaning and Extent, they are insensible how they swerve from it, and how
contrary they be to it, and how sinful Sin is: But when the Commandment comes,
Sin revives.

Think of this therefore, O Sinner, that the infinitely glorious God, your
Creator, Preserver and Governor, deserves to be loved and lived to and
delighted in with all your Heart; and that this is what he requires at your
Hands; and know it, he hates your hypocritical Shows and Pretenses, so long as
that in Heart, he sees, you are an Enemy to him. You may pretend, that you
cannot help your Hearts being so bad; but God knows, you love your Corruptions,
and hate to have them slain, and love to have them gratified. You love to be
proud, and hence you love to be applauded: and the Praise of Men is sweet, and
of greater Price with you than the Praise of God; you will do more to please
the World, than to please God; yea, will displease God, to keep in with a
wicked World, who hate God; and God knows it. You love to love the World; and
hence love to lay worldly Schemes, and are secretly ravished with worldly Hopes
when Things are likely to go well, and account no Pains too great in worldly
Pursuits; but you hate to pray in secret, have no Heart for God, can take no
Delight in him: and God knows it. And will you now pretend, for your Excuse,
that you cannot help your Heart's being so bad; whenas it is you your self that
are so bad, and love to be so bad, and hate to cease to be what you are. If God
has by his Spirit awakened your Conscience a little and terrified you with the
Fears of Hell and Wrath, it may be, your Corruptions are somewhat stunned, and
Honor and worldly Gains do not appear so tempting, and you are ready to say,
that you would willingly part with your Reputation and every Thing you have in
the World, for an Interest in Christ and the divine Favor; and now you think
you are sincere: But God knows, it is all Hypocrisy; for he sees, you do not
care for Him, but are only afraid of Damnation. And God knows, that if once you
should get a false Confidence of Pardon and the divine Favor, you would soon
return to Folly, as the Dog to his Vomit, and set out after the World as
eage^^^ as ever; or else vent your Corruptions in spiritual Pride, and in
ranting Enthusiastic Wildfire and Party selfish Zeal, as Thousands have done,
who once felt just as you do now. God therefore does not mind your Pretenses,
nor believe your Promises, for he knows what you are. You may deceive your
self, but cannot deceive him. He knows, your Corruptions are stunned, but not
mortified; and that your Nature is just what it was, and you, as really, an
Enemy to God as ever. And it may be, you may see it yet, when you come to find
out how God looks upon you, and upon your Prayers and Tears and Promises; for
it is commonly the Case with Sinners, when they perceive that God is not pleased
with their devout Pretenses, and does not design to save them for their
hypocritical Duties, by the secret workings of their Hearts to discover that
they care only for themselves, and are real Enemies to God and his Law. Love to
God, O Sinner, is not begotten by the Fears of Hell, nor by the Hopes of
Heaven. If you do not love God for what he is in himself, you do not love him
at all; but only flatter him with your Lips and lie unto him with your Tongue.
But it may be manifest to you, that you do not love him for what he is in
himself; because you do not love his Law which bears his Ima^^. You do not like
the Law as a Rule for you to live by, for it is too strict for you. And you do
not approve of the Law as a Rule for God to judge you by, for you think it hard
for God to damn Men for the least Sin. Know it, therefore, O Sinner, that there
is not any Good in you, or any Goodness in your Duties; but you are in a State
of Rebellion, an Enemy to God and to his holy Law: and come down and lie in the
Dust before the Lord, and own the Sentence just by which you stand condemned,
and be quiet at his Feet; and if ever he saves you, for ever attribute it
wholly to free and sovereign Grace. -- When the Commandment came, Sin revived,
and I died.

And such a one was you, O Believer; and in some Measure you are such a one
still: and in some Respects your Sins are a great deal more aggravated. Oh
never forget the Days, and Weeks, and Months, and Years you have formerly spent
in Sin! Once I was a Persecutor, and a Blasphemer, and Injurious, says St.
Paul; and his Heart bleeds afresh, and he sets himself down for the chief of
Sinners. 1 Timothy 1.13, 15.

But what be you now, after all the Grace of God, after all the kind Methods
Heaven has taken to reclaim you, and what are your Seize, if you compare
your Self and Seize with the holy Law of God in it is spiritual Nature and
divine Strictness? Do you feel such a Heart toward the great and glorious
Governor of the whole World, as becomes you? Think, what a God he is, and how
Angels and Saints on high love him. Think of his Majesty and Greatness and
Glory and Excellency, and how he is the Fear and Delight and Joy of all Heaven.
Think of his original and entire Right to you, and absolute Authority over you.
Think of the Vileness of your Apostasy, and of the Depth of your Ruin. Think of
redeeming Love. Think of converting Grace. Think of the many Means God has used
with you in his Providence and by his Spirit. Think of all his
Loving-kindnesses and tender Mercies. -- And, think, what a Beast be you before
the Lord! Lie down in the Dust, and cry and mourn and weep, and let your Heart
break! Oh, your wan^ of Love to God, of Zeal for his Glory, of Delight in his
Perfections, and of Gratitude for all his Kindness! Alas, how you disesteem the
God that Angels love, and comparatively despise the GOD that all Heaven adores!
Alas, how careless you be about his Honor and Interest, and how inactive in
his Service* Alas, how you disrelish the Fountain of all Goodness and the Ocean
of all Blessedness, and hanker after other Things, and go away from God to seek
Rest elsewhere, and thereby cast infinite Contempt upon the Delight of Heaven
and the Joy of Angels, the ever-blessed and alsufficient God! Think of the
peculiar Obligations, God has laid you under by all the secret Ways of his
Providence and Grace with you, and of all the infinite Pains he has taken with
you to make you humble, weaned from the World, devoted to God, loving, kind,
tenderhearted, friendly and obliging to all Mankind, and universally holy; and
see and say, Was ever Wretch so vile! Did ever Wretch treat such a God, in such
a Manner, under such Circumstances! Oh, how far, how infinitely far you are,
from being what you ought to be! This made St. Paul account himself less than
the least of all Saints, and forget the Things that are behind: his Seize
dwindled away, as it were to nothing, when he compared himself with God's holy
Law, and thought what he ought to be, and what Obligations he was under; and he
did therefore, as it were set down all that he had hitherto attained for
nothing, and feel and act as if he was but just now beginning to live to God.
Romans 7.14. The Law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under Sin. Ver. 24. O
wretched Man that I am! Phil. 3.13, 14. I forget the Things which are behind, I
reach forth toward those Things which are before, I press toward the Mark.
And, O Believer, go you, and do likewise.

Besides, remember, that it is no Thanks to you that you are not to this Day
secure in Sin: Yea, that you are not one of the vilest and profanest Creatures
in the World. Your Nature was bad enough; the Seeds of every Sin were in your
Heart; but for restraining or sanctifying Grace you might have been as bad as
any in Sodom. And what was it moved God to awaken you, and stop you in your
Career in Sin, and turn you to God? Was it for your Righteousness? Oh, be
ashamed and confounded for ever! For his own Sake he has done it, when you was
a stubborn, stiff-necked, rebellious Creature. And truly, what has been your
Carriage toward the Lord, compared with the exact Rule of Duty, the holy Law
of God, since the Day you have known him? O remember Massah and Taberah and
Kibroth-bataavah, and how you have been rebellious against the Lord, ever since
he has taken you in Hand to subdue you to himself. (Read Deuteronomy. 9. and see how
much your Temper has been like theirs.) And this notwithstanding all the Signs
and Wonders God has wrought before your Eyes: I mean, notwithstanding all the
sweet and awful Methods God has taken with you, to make you know him and love
him and fear him and live to him. There are Thousands and Thousands that God
never took any such special Pains with. Their Sins are not like yours. Come
down therefore, sit in the Dust, mourn and weep, and loath and abhor your self,
as long as you live; and ascribe all Praise to God, through whose Grace alone it
is, that you be what you be.

Let me here address you in the Words of the famous Mr. Hooker. That thou
may for ever, each Day that passes over thy Head, remember it to the Lord,
and leave it upon Record in thine own Connscience; say, Had thou (blessed
Lord) given me the Desires of my Heart, and left me to my own Will, it is
certain I had been in Hell long before this Day, when in the Days of my Folly
and Times of my Ignorance, when out of the desperate Wretchedness of my
rebellious Disposition, I was running Riot in the Ways of Wickedness, When I
said to the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets, prophesy not, to Christians,
to Acquaintance, to Governors, admonish not, counsel not, reprove not, stop me
not in the pursuit of Sin. The Time was, I took hold of Deceit and refused to
return; nay, resolved in the secret Purpose of my Heart, I would none of thee;
I would not have that Word of thine reveal or remove my Corruptions; I would
none of thy Grace that might humble me and purge me, none of that Mercy of
thine that might pardon me, none of that Redemption of thine that might save
me. Had thou then taken me at my Word, and given me what I wished, and sealed
my Destruction, saying, Be thou for ever filthy, for ever stubborn, and for
ever miserable; thou would neither be holy nor happy, thou shall have thy
Will, Sin with Devils and take thy Portion with Devils; Lord, it had been just
with thee, and I justly miserable. But to bear with all my Baseness, to put up
all those Wrongs and Provocations, to strive with me for my Good, when I took
up Arms against thee, and strove against my own Good; nay, when I resisted
Mercy; and then to take away that Resistance, and to cause me to take Mercy,
and make it mine, when I used all the Skill I could to hinder my own Salvation:
Oh! The Height, the Depth, the Length, the Breadth of this Mercy! -- When we
feel our Hearts to be puffed up with the vain Apprehension of our own Worth.
Parts or Performances, what we are, and what we do; look we back to our first
Beginnings and judge aright of our own Wretchedness and Nothingness, yea, worse
than Nothing, in that we not only wanted all Good, but we had it within us to
oppose all Good; and that will cause us to sit down in Silence abased for ever.
When empty Bladders are grown unto too great Bulk and Bigness, to prick them is
the readiest Way to lessen them; when our empty and vain Minds swell with high
Thoughts, and high overweening Conceit of our own Worth, learn we to stab and
pierce our Hearts with the righteous Judgment of our own natural Vileness,
which will (or at least may) let out that frothy Haughtiness that lifts us up
beyond our Measure: Tell thy Heart, and commune with thy Conscience, and say,
It is not my good Nature, that I am not roaring amongst the Wretches of the
World in the Road and broad Way of Ruin and Destruction, that I am not
wallowing in all Manner of Sin with the worst of Men. It is not my good Nature;
no thank to any Thing that I have, that I am not upon the Chain with
Malefactors, or in a Dungeon with Witches; for whatever Hell has, it is in
this Heart of mine naturally, a Cain here, a Judas here, nay a Devil here. The
Time was (O that with an abased Heart I may ever think of that Time) I never
looked after the spiritual Good of my Soul, or whether I had (...) or no; what
would become of me and i^, was the ^east of my Care, the furthest End of my
Thoughts; nay, loath was I to hear of, or know these Things; when they were
revealed, unwilling to receive them, or give Way to them when they were
offered: how did I stop mine Ears, shut mine Eyes, and harden my Heart? What
Ways, Means, and Devices did I use and invent, to shut out the Light of Truth,
to stop the Passage and Power of the Word, that it might not convince me, that
it might not reform me, might not recall me from my evil Ways? How often have I
secretly wished, that either the Word were taken out of the Place, or I from
it, that it might not trouble me in my sinful D^stempers, and when I had least
Good I had most Ease, and took the greatest Content. Oh that such a Wretch
should thus live, and yet live! To be thus sinful! O that I might be for ever
abased for it. Mr. Hooker's Application of Redemption* Vol. I. Page 97, -- 100.


Thus the Law, as a Rule of Life, may be improved to the Humiliation of the
People of God, in that it may serve to keep fresh in their Minds, their native
universal Depravity, their former Wickedness, and to discover their remaining
Sinfulness. And I may here observe, that it is Believers peculiar Acquaintance
with the Law in it is true Meaning* Strictness and Purity, that is the Occasion
of their peculiar Acquaintance with their own Hearts. And while the (...) daily
shows them what they be, it learns them more and more their Need of a Redeemer
and Sanctifier, and daily puts them upon going to God through Jesus Christ for
pardoning Mercy and sanctifying Grace. The Law makes Way for the Gospel; and a
Sense of Sin, Weakness and Unworthiness makes Christ and Gospel Grace precious,
and stirs up a Man to Repentance, Faith and Prayer. Deluded therefore, are
those poor Souls that say, We must not look into our Hearts, nor labor after a
Sense of our Sins and Sinfulness; for that is legal, and tends to
Discouragement: but we must look only to Christ and free Grace, and believe and
rejoice, and a Sense of the Love of Christ will humble us. Just as if the great
Business of Christ was, to keep Men from a Sight and Sense of their Sins; and
just as if a Man could be truly humbled, without seeing what he is, compared
with God and his holy Law. -- But poor Souls, they feel a legal, discouraged
Frame always, when they have any Sight and Sense of their Sinfulness, and it
damps their Faith (and if they were but thoro'ly sensible of their Sinfulness,
it would kill their Faith) and Joy; and therefore they conclude, it is not a
good Way to look into their Hearts, no Good can be got by it. But when they
don't mind their Hearts, but look steadily to Christ and free Grace, (a fancied
Christ!) firmly believing that all he has done and suffered is for them, and
realizing the Matter to themselves, now they feel sweetly and joyfully; and
therefore conclude, that this is the Way, the only Way, to get Good for their
Souls: And hence grow mighty Enemies to the Law, to Self-Examination, to Sense
of Sin, etc. This is the Door, by which if any Man enters in, he will soon
become an Antinomian and an Enthusiast.

But to proceed.

USE IV. Of Thankfulness. While the Law shows us what we be, it does at the
same Time make us sensible what we deserve; while it discovers to us our
Sinfulness, it makes us feel our Unworthiness of any Good, and Desert of all
Evil: and while we feel our Unworthiness and ill Deserts, our Afflictions
appear far less than we deserve, and our Mercies appear more in Number than the
Sands, and the Kindness and Bounty of our God appears exceeding great, and we
wonder at his Goodness and bless his holy Name. And thus the Law is of Use to
promote Thankfulness.

God the great Governor of the World, in Testimony of his high Displeasure
against Mankind for their Apostasy from him, has spread Miseries and Calamities
all round the Earth: from the King upon the Throne, to the Beggar on the
Dunghill, there is not one, but has a greater or lesser Share in the Troubles of
Life; and many have their Days filled up with Sorrows. And now Murmurings arise
all round this guilty World, and the general Cry is, No Body meets with such
Troubles as I do, I am very hardly dealt with. But the Law teaches us, that God
is holy in all these his Ways, and righteous in all these his Works; and that
we are all punished far less than we deserve; and so our Complaints are
silenced, and our Hearts quieted into a humble Submission, and it appears
infinitely fit, a rebellious World should be full of Woe, that we might learn
that it is an evil and bitter Thing to forsake the Lord.

But at the same Time, God the great Lord of all, out of his boundless Goodness
through Jesus Christ, reprieves Mankind from the threatened Ruin, strews common
Mercies with a liberal Hand all round the Earth, sends Rain and fruitful
Seasons, and fills the Hearts of all, more or less, with Food and Gladness; and
to some he grants his special Grace, makes them his Children, and intitles them
to eternal Life. And ^hus he is the Savior of all Men, but especially of those
that believe. 1 Timothy 4.10. Yet this Goodness of God is but little taken Notice
of in the World. But the Law, while it discovers what we be, and how unworthy
and Hell-deserving we are, makes us sensible of the Freeness and Riches of
God's Grace in these his Kindnesses. For while we feel that Hell is our proper
Due, every Thing that renders our Case better than that of the Damned, we shall
accept as a choice Mercy, and as an Effect of free Grace; and so instead of
being always in a murmuring and repining Disposition, we shall be always
wondering at the Goodness, admiring at the Kindness of the Lord; saying with
good Jacob, We are not worthy of the least of all the Mercies, and of all the
Truth, which thou have showed unto thy Servants. Genesis 32.10. And with the
Jewish Church, O give Thanks unto the Lord, for he is Good, for his Mercy
endures for ever. Psalm. 136. And we shall always find, that the more sensible
we be of our Unworthiness and ill Desert, the more Cause we shall see for
Thankfulness, let our outward Circumstances in this Life be what they will.

But,

USE V. In the last Place, Let all that has been said be improved by Way of
Exhortation, to excite and engage the People of God, more and more to renounce
themselves, the World and Sin, and give up themselves to God, to love him and
live to him and delight in him with all their Hearts for ever.

You have seen what Grounds you have to do so, arising from God's infinite
Greatness, Glory and Excellency; and you have been viewing your superadded
Obligations: And is the Lord such a God, and is he your God and Redeemer, O how
strongly are you bound to keep all his Commandments! And what is it, O
Believer, that the Lord thy God requires of thee, but to fear the Lord thy
God, to walk in all his Ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God
with all thy Heart and with all thy Soul? And is there not in keeping his
Commands a great Reward? Did you ever Taste such Sweetness, as in a Life of
Devotedness to God! And have not your Wanderings from him cost you many a bitter
and mournful Hour? O, how happy would you be, if once you could come to it, to
have done with every Thing else and to be wholly the Lord's! Seriously consider
these Things;

1. That you can come to it, to have done with every Thing else, and be wholly
the Lord's, at least in a vastly greater Degree, than ever yet you have. See
Phil. 3.13, 14. You actually already have God working in you to will and to do.
Phil. 2.13. He has always been, as it were, laboring to humble you, and wean
you from the World, and bring you nearer to himself, to love him, live to him,
and delight in him, ever since the Day you first came to know him, by the
outward Dispensations of his Providence, and by the inward Strivings of his
Spirit. He has always been purging you, that you might bring forth more Fruit.
Ioh. 15.2. Yea, this was the very Design of Christ's coming into the World,
that he might deliver you out of the Hands of all your Enemies, and bring you
to serve God, without Fear, in Holiness and Righteousness, all the Days of your
Life. Luke 1.74. And that he might redeem you from all Iniquity, and purify you
to himself, that you might be peculiarly his, and zealous of good Works, Tit.
2.14. And for this End, God has already taken, as it were, infinite Pains with
you, and this is what he is continually urging you unto, and he declares that
he is readier to give you his holy Spirit, than earthly Parents are to give
Bread to their Children, and invites and encourages and commands you to ask.
Matt. 7.7. etc. And will you not now therefore arise and put on the whole
Armor of God, and make your strongest Efforts to recover from Sin to God?

God the great King of Heaven and Earth commands you to do so; Jesus the kind
Mediator invites you to do so; and the holy Spirit the Sanctifier is ready to
help you. Arise therefore, and be of good Courage, for the Lord is with you.
Did you ever stir up your self to seek after God in vain, or set about a Life
of greater Seriousness, Watchfulness and Prayer, and find no Advantage by it?
Or have you not always said in the Conclusion, that it is good for me to draw
near to God; (Psalm. 73.28.) And condemned and hated your self for your former
Slackness, and been ready to resolve from your inmost Soul, that you would call
upon the Lord as long as you live? Psalm. 116.2.

And let me put it to your Conscience, do not you believe, that if now you
would gird up the Loins of your Mind, and quit your self like a Man, and be
strong, that through Christ strengthening of you, you may do all Things? And shall
Carelessness or Stupidity, shall Laziness and Sloth, shall the Allurements or
the Discouragements of the World or the Devil, now after all, hinder you? What!
When you have been redeemed, not with Silver and Gold, but with the precious
Blood of the Son of God, when your Prison-Door is flung open, and your Chains
knocked off, and you called and invited to come out into the glorious Liberty
of the Children of God, and when God is actually striving with you already, and
stands ready to afford you farther Help, what now be hindered! What! And be
hindered by Carelessness, Unwatchfulness, etc! What, shall the Savior groan in
the Garden, and die on the Cross, and yet you lie sleeping here! What, asleep!
What, content without God in the World! What, when the whole Army of Prophets,
Apostles and Martyrs have fasted and prayed all their Days, and waded through a
Sea of Blood at last! Methinks, you had better abandon every mortal Delight,
lay aside every Weight and the Sin that more easily besets you, and mourn and
weep, and watch and pray, and fight and strive, as long as you live, than act
so far beneath the Dignity and Character of a Christian.

It is but a few in the World, that truly know God and the Way of Access to him
through Jesus Christ, and are in a (spiritual) Capacity to live a Life of
Devotedness to God and Communion with him: most Men are dead in Sin. But you
has he quickened, and you are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good Works; and it is God's Design you should walk in them: you that were
without Christ and without God in the World, afar off, are now brought nigh;
and you are no more Strangers and Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens with the
Saints and of the Household of God: for this Cause I therefore beseech you, walk
worthy of the Vocation wherewith you are called. See this Argument enlarged
upon in the 2d, 3d and 4th Chapters of the Epistle to the Ephesians, and your
Duties still more particularly delineated in the 5th and 6th.

2. Consider, That as your Case is circumstanced, it is absolutely impossible
for you ever to find any other resting Place but God, or ever take any
sati^fying Comfort of your Life, but in a Way of Devotedness to God and
Communion with him. The Case is not with you, O Believer, as it is with other
Men. You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth; therefore will I
punish you for all your Iniquities, said God to his ancient People. Mic. 3.2.
But the other Nations of the Earth might worship Idols and serve Wood and
Stone, and go on and prosper, without being called to a present Account. And so
it is as to particular Persons. Bastards, who have no Parents to own them and
bring them up, may, as for any Restraints from parental Authority, do what they
will. They that don't belong to God's Family, may live from Home as long as
they please, and because they have no Interest in his House, may, in Respect of
divine Permission, go and live where they please, may continue to lie out from
God: But whom the Lord loves, he chastneth; and scourges every Son whom he
receives. Heb. 12.6. Hypocrites may lose their Religion, and lie dead whole
Months and Years together, and return with the Dog to his Vomit, and take as
much Comfort in the World and their Lusts as ever: But it is impossible that
you should: You can never get your Conscience asleep as other Men's are, or
your Heart content to lie out from God, or wring your self out of your Father's
Hand, or get out of the Reach of his Rod.

Solomon once seemed resolved to find another resting Place for his Heart
besides God, and something else to take Comfort in, and he was under the best
outward Advantages to make a thoro' Trial, that ever Man was; but he never did,
and never could: But was always like a Bone out of Joint, or like the Needle of
a Compass turned aside from its beloved Star. Vanity of Vanities, says the
Preacher, all is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. And poor David, how was he
pained with Anguish of Spirit, for the Sin whereby he provoked the Lord? Psalm.
32.3, etc. While I kept Silence (i. e. before Nathan came, who brought me to an
open Confession, see v. 5.) my Bones waxed old; through my roaring all the Day
long. For Day and Night thy Hand was heavy upon me: My Moisture is turned into
the Drought of Summer. And never did a Believer depart from God to seek another
resting Place, or go away from the Fountain of living Waters, to get something
else to take Comfort in; but God hedged up his Way with Thorns, and made a Wall
that* he could not find his Paths: So that although he followed after his Lovers,
he never overtook them, and though he sought them, he never found them: But at
last has been constrained to say, I will go and return to my first Husband; for
then was it better with me than now. Hos. 2.6, 7. His Backslidings have
reproved him, and his Wickedness has corrected him, and made him know, to the
breaking of his Heart, that it is an evil and bitter Thing to forsake the Lord.
Jer. 2.19. For as God thus dealt with the Jewish Church of old, so he does with
every Believer; for all God's Dealings with them were for Ensamples: And they
are written for our Admonition, upon whom the Ends of the World are come. 1 Cor
10.11.

And this now being the Case, O Believer, and you having always by your own
Experience sound it so, will you notwithstanding forsake the Lord? What Fault,
What Iniquity do you find in God, that you should forsake him? Has he been a
Wilderness unto you, or a Land of Darkness? Or has he not been your Father,
ever since the Day he took you by the Hand to lead you, even ever since the Day
you first knew him? Or be you weary of Lightsome, of sweet and happy Days, and
impatient to plunge your self into Darkness, Distress and Anguish? May you not
expect, if you forsake him and go away from him, to seek another resting Place,
and something else to take Comfort in as your Portion, that he will strip you
naked as in the Day that you was born, and make you desolate, and a Terror to
your self, and that his Anger will smoke against you, and his Hand lie heavy
upon you? And then will you mourn like the Dove in the Valley, and be troubled,
and go bowed down greatly, and rore by Reason of the Disquietness of your
Heart, and wish a Thousand and Thousand Times that you had never forsaken the
Lord. Read Psalm. 38. Ier. 2d and 3d Chapters. and Hos. 2. Will you not
therefore bid Adieu to all other Lords and Lovers, and cleave unto the Lord
with all your Heart for ever? for this is your Wisdom, and this is your Life.
Which brings me to add,

3. Consider, If you will have done with every Thing else, and give up your
self to the Lord, to love him and live to him and be wholly his, then God will
be your God sensibly, and you will* in spiritual Respects, be one of the
happiest Creatures in this World; a hundred Times happier than you could
possibly be in the Ways of Sin; you shall have an Hundred Fold in this present
World, besides eternal Life in the World to come. If any Man love me, says
Christ, and keep my Commandments, I will love him and manifest my self unto
him: And I and my Father will come and make our Abode with him. Joh. 14.21, 23.
He that dwells in the secret Place of the most High, shall abide under the
Shadow of the Almighty. Psalm. 91.1. And God will be your Dewlling Place for
ever. Psalm. 90.1. While the Nations dash themselves in Pieces, and all the
World is in Confusion, and while you pass through the Fire and through the Water,
God will be with you; and he will always be your Light, Life, Peace, Joy, Glory
and Blessedness; in this undone, dreadful World; and your Heart will be firm
and fixed like Mount Zion, that cannot be removed, but abides for ever; and
nothing shall ever separate you from the Love of God, neither Things present,
nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor Life, nor Death, nor any other
Thing. And God will certainly give you every Thing in this World that is best
for you and most for his Glory, and you will not desire any more; and all the
evil Things, you may pass through, will sensibly work together for your Good.
Matt. 6.33. Rom, 8.28, -- 39. Psalm. 73.25, 26.

And thus, you have, by Experience, always found, that God has dealt with you.
I appeal, O Believer, to your own Conscience, that thus it has always been,
whenever you have sensibly from the Heart renounced all other Things, and given
up your self to the Lord, to love him and to live to him and to take Content in
him, God has sensibly been a God and Father and Portion unto you, and has given
you all Things, which (every Thing considered) you could desire, and sensibly
made all Things work together for your Good; whence you have been many a Time
ready to say, That not a Word of all his Promises has ever fallen to the
Ground. And you have actually enjoyed a hundred Times more Comfort in the
Service of God, in Devotedness to God and Communion with him, than could have
been had in the Service of Sin. -- And will you not now therefore be entirely
and for ever the Lord's? O how happy you might be! And what blessed Days you
might enjoy!

4. And that which cannot but touch a filial Heart, consider, That if you will
thus be wholly the Lord's, to love him and live to him and delight in him and
to do his Will, God will be glorified thereby, it will be to his Honor in the
World. Joh. 15.8. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much Fruit. --
But ye are a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar
People; that ye should show forth the Praises of him, who has called you out
of Darkness into his mavelous Light. 1 Pet. 2.9. God has but a few Friends in
the World. Many that pretend to be his Friends, are a great dishonor to him
and disgrace to Religion. By their Means his Name is blasphemed, and his Ways
are evilly spoken of. And in general, his Honor is every where trodden down in
the Dust. And can you stand by unconcerned? Yea, can you look on without your
Heart bleeding within you? O therefore, be serious, be humble, be meek, holy
and heavenly, be Peacemakers and merciful, be kind and tenderhearted,
condescending and obliging, and abound in every good Work; for you are the Salt
of the Earth, and the Light of the World: O therefore live so, as that your
Father, which is in Heaven, may be glorified. Mat. 5.13 -- 16.

To conclude, Will you not now therefore determine, from this Day forward, to
be wholly the Lord's, and from this Day begin to live to God in better earnest
than ever? God is ready to help you. You will, as to present Comfort, be
undone, if you do not live to God; and Peace and Glory and Blessedness is
before you, if you do; and God, even your God, will be glorified. And if you
are now ready, by the Grace of God, to hearken unto this Advice, then take
these two Directions.

1. Lay aside every Weight, and the Sins which more easily beset you. Heb.
12.1. In a serious and sweet Hour, when you get alone and mourn and pray and
give up your self to God, and think and resolve you will now be for ever the
Lord's, you are wont, upon Self-Examination and a Review of past Times, to see
and say, This, that, and the other Thing, has been the sinful Occasion, Time
after Time, of my losing a serious gracious Frame of Heart, and by such and
such sinful Means I have gradually lost a Sense of divine and eternal Things,
and so have wandered from God, and laid a Foundation for Darkness and Sorrow. O
my Carelessness! O that I had prayed more in secret! O that I had spent precious
Time better, etc. etc. These now are the Weights, and these the Sins, which
easily beset you, and these you must lay aside for ever, if you design to be
the Lord's indeed, and to make a Business of Religion to Purpose. But perhaps
you will say, My worldly Business, my necessary Cares, and the common Duties of
Life, are sometimes the very Things, and these I ought not to lay aside, and
what shall I do in this Case? I answer, That at another Time, the necessary
Cares, Business and Duties of Life, you find to be no Hindrances at all; even
at such Times when you do all out of Love to God and for God, with Singleness
of Heart. If you will therefore but always go about the common Duties of Life
in such a Manner, they will never be any Clog to you. What you have therefore
to do in the Case, is not to lay aside that which is your Duty, but to lay
aside your wrong Ends and Aims. And thus you must lay aside every Weight. --
But,

2. If you design to be religious in good earnest, then be careful to use all
proper Means, and do every proper Thing, that has a Tendency to promote your
spiritual Life. Every proper Thing I say, to guard against those
anti-scriptural Methods which Enthusiasts are wont to take, and by which, above
all Things, their false Affections are promoted, but which have a direct
Tendency to kill the divine Life. In a serious Hour of sweet Retirement, and in
happy Days when you are nearest to God, and enjoy most Communion with him, and
have your Senses most accurate to discern between Good and Evil, you are wont
to see and say* O how blessed I might be, if I did always keep in this narrow
Way, which now lies open plain before me; if I were always serious, watchful,
prayerful, always reading, or meditating, and looking to God, and keeping my
Heart, and improving every precious Moment of my Time wisely for God, etc.
Well, well, O Believer, this is the Way, walk in it; and you shall be like a
Tree planted by the Rivers of Water, that brings forth his Fruit in his
Season, whose Leaf never withers, and whatsoever you do shall prosper. And
after a few more Days and Weeks and Months and Years spent in Prayer and Faith
and Holiness, in this your Pilgrimage-State, you shall come and sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, and dwell for ever with the
Lord. Amen.

Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, make
you perfect in every good Work, to do his Will, working in you that which is
well pleasing in his Sight, through Jesus Christ: to whom be glory for ever and
ever. AMEN.

True Religion delineated.
DISCOURSE II. Showing the Nature of the GOSPEL, and of a genuine Compliance
with it.
JOH. III.16. For GOD so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life.


The INTRODUCTION.
THE grand Question before us, is, What is true Religion? And this is the
general Answer, It consists in a real Conformity to the Law, and in a genuine
Compliance with the Gospel. What is implied in a real Conformity to the Law,
has been already shown in the former Discourse: and we come now to consider
wherein a genuine Compliance with the Gospel does consist. From our Savior's
Mouth we had before a brief Summary of the Law; and now from our Savior's
Mouth we have a brief Summary of the Gospel, in these comprehensive Words, God
so loved the World, etc.

Nicodemus came to him for Instruction, believing him to be a Teacher sent from
God. Our Savior begins immediately to inculcate upon him, the Necessity of
Regeneration and Faith. We are Sinners, are naturally dead in Sin; and
therefore must be born again, be recovered to the divine Image in the Temper of
our Minds, and so be made spiritually alive. We are guilty, we need pardoning
Mercy at the Hands o^ the great Governor of the World; but he will grant it
only through the Mediator he has appointed: in him therefore must we believe, on
his Merits and Mediation must we depend. -- Nicodemus could hardly understand
the Doctrine of the new Birth; and our Savior intimates that the Mysteries of
our Redemption by the Blood of Christ, were like to be still more difficult to
him. We can easily understand worldly Things, for they are agreeable to the
Temper of our Minds, and suit the Gust and Relish of our Hearts: but we are
blind to Things spiritual and divine, are fl^w of Heart to understand them,
they not suiting the Temper and Relish of our Hearts, and we being in a
Disposition to disrelish Things of such a Nature. Therefore our Savior
observes to Nicodemus, ver. 19. This is the Condemnation, that Light is come
into the World, but Men love Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds
are Evil. We are in a State of Rebellion, at Enmity against God, and under his
Wrath; and yet ready through our Darkness to flatter our selves that all is well;
and so are secure and at Ease: Light is come into the World, discovering our
Disease and our Remedy, but we love our Disease, and loath the Remedy; and
therefore hate the Light and will not come to it. And thus our Savior teaches
Nicodemus wherein true Religion consists, and points out the Aversion of
Mankind unto it. Nor is there any Thing that will discover our Aversion so
plainly, as to set true Religion in it is own Light; for when we see clearly
what it is, we may perceive how we stand affected toward it: but otherwise we
may be easily mistaken; may imagine that we love true Religion, when indeed we
only love the false Image we have framed in our own Fancy. -- Regeneration and
Faith, the^e two great Essentials, wherein all Religion radically (...), are
the Things our Savior inculcates upon his new Disciple. Christ loved to lay
the Foundation well. He was not fond of Converts, unless their Conversion was
found. And indeed, all our Religion is good for nothing, if our Nature be not
renewed; and all our Communion with God is but Fancy, if we are Strangers to
Christ; for he is the Way, the Truth and the Life, and no Man comes to the
Father but by him. -- But to proceed to the Words of the Text, God so loved the
World, etc.

GOD -- i. e. God the Father, the first Person in the ever-blessed Trinity, who
sustains the Dignity and Majesty of Godhead, and is eminently Lord of Heaven
and Earth, ( Mat. 11.25.) and prime Agent in the Works of Creation and
Providence, in governing the World, in redeeming, sanctifying and saving of
Sinners. Romans 11.36. -- That there are three Persons in the Godhead, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and that these Three are one God, the
Scriptures do abundantly teach. ( Mat. 28.19. 2 Cor. 13.13. 1 Ioh. 5.7.) And
this Doctrine we must believe, or we cannot understand the Gospel. -- How they
are Three, and how they are One, is not revealed, nor is it necessary for us to
know: but that there are three Persons in the Godhead and yet but one God, we
must believe; and what Characters they sustain, and what Parts they act in the
Affair of our Salvation, we must understand. -- The Gospel represents God the
Father, as sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, as righteous Governor of the
World, as giving Laws to his Creatures, as revealing his Wrath against all
Transgressions: He is represented as being injured and offended by our Sins,
and concerned to maintain the Honor of his Majesty, of his Law and Government
and sacred Authority: He is represented as having Designs of Mercy toward a
sinful, guilty, ruined World; and as contriving and proposing a Method of
Recovery: He is represented as one seated on a Throne of Grace, reconcilable
th^o' Jesus Christ, and seeking to reconcile the World to himself by Christ,
ordering Pardon and Peace to be proclaimed through a guilty World to any and all
who will return to him in the Way prescribed. -- The Gospel represen^^ God the
Son, as being constituted Mediator by his Father, that in and by him he might
open a Way to accomplish his Dessigns of Mercy toward a guilty World,
consistent with the Honor of his Majesty, of his Holiness and Justice, of his
Law and Government. His Father appointed him to the Office, and he freely
undertook it. His Father sent him into this World to enter upon the difficult
Work, and he willingly came. He was made Flesh, and dwelt among us. Here he
lived, and here he died, in the Capacity of a Mediator. He arose, he ascended
into Heaven, and sits now at his Father's right Hand, God-Man Mediator, exalted
to the highest Honor, made Lord of all Things, and Judge of the World. And now
we are to have Access to God by him, as our Mediator, high Priest, Intercessor
and Advocate, who has made complete Atonement for Sins in the Days of his
Abasement, and has now sufficient Interest in the Court of Heaven. -- The
Gospel represents God the Holy Ghost, as being sent of the Father as prime
Agent, and by the Son as Mediator, in the Character of an Enlightner and
Sanctifier: in order to bring Sinners effectually to see and be sensible of
their Sin, Guilt, and Ruin, to believe the Gospel, to trust in Christ, and to
return home to God through him. And it is his Office to dwell in Believers, to
teach and lead them, to sanctify, quicken, strengthen and comfort them, and to
keep them through Faith unto Salvation. -- The Father is God by Nature, and God
by Office: the Son is God by Nature, and Mediator by Office. The Spirit is God
by Nature, and Sanctifier by Office. The Father, as Governor, Lawgiver, Judge
and Avenger, has all Power in Heaven and Earth, in and of himself. Matthew.
11.25. The Son, as Mediator, derives all his Authority from the Father. Matthew.
11.27. The Holy Spirit acts as being sent by them both, by the Father as
supreme Governor dealing with a sinful, guilty World through a Mediator; by the
Son as Mediator negociating a Reconciliation between God and Man. Ioh. 14.16.
-- The Father maintains the Honor of the Godhead, and of his Government, and
displays his Grace, while he ordains that Sin shall be punished, the Sinner
humbled, and brought back to God, and into a Subjection to his Will, and in
that Way be pardoned and finally saved. Sin is punished in the Son as Mediator,
standing in the Room of the Guilty. And the Sinner is humbled, bro't back to
God, and into a Subjection to his Will, by the Holy Spirit; and in this Way is
pardoned and saved. And thus the Son and the Spirit honor the Father as
supreme Governor, and all join in the same Design to discountenance Sin,
humble the Sinner, and glorify Grace. Thus far briefly of the Doctrine of the
Trinity. -- Right Apprehensions of God help us to understand the Law, and right
Apprehensions of the Trinity will help us to understand the Gospel. Not how
they are three Persons and yet but one God, the Manner of which is not needful
to be known; but the Offices and Characters they sustain, and the different
Parts they act in the great Affair of saving Sinners. -- God (says the Text) so
loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son; that whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life. i. e. God the Father, the
great Governor of the World, whom we had offended by Sin --

So LOVED the World -- i. e. with a Love of Benevolence. Esteem us he could
not; for we were worthless and vile: To delight in us, it was impossible; for
we were altogether odious and abominable. But to have a Goodwill toward us, or
a Will to do us Good, this he might have, although we were sinful and guilty: Not
indeed from any Motive in us; for if we were viewed, and our Temper and
Circumstances considered, there was not to be seen one Motive to Pity, no, not
the least; but every Motive to Indignation and Wrath. However, from Motives
within himself, he might will to do us Good, notwithstanding our Sin and Guilt.
The self-moving Goodness of his Nature did excite him, from the good Pleasure
of his Will, to the Praise of the Glory of his Grace, to design Mercy toward a
sinful, guilty, ruined World. -- God so loved the World.

The WORLD -- i. e. all Mankind, all the Posterity of Adam. For what follows,
is evidently true, of every Individual: That he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life.

SO loved -- i. e. so inconceivably, so unspeakably.

That he GAVE his only begotten Son -- i. e. of his mere, pure Goodness
constituted him to be a Mediator, appointed him to be a Redeemer and Savior,
to make Atonement for Sin and purchase divine Favors, and so to open a Way for
Sinners to return to God with Safety, and for God to show Mercy to them with
Honor. God so loved the World, i. e. all the Race of Adam, that he gave his
only begotten Son, immediately upon the Apostasy of Mankind; for then was this
Seed of the Woman promised, ( Genesis 3.15.) that all, being by Nature Children of
Wrath, might be prevented by divine Goodness. God saw all involved in Sin and
Guilt and Ruin, by Adam's first Sin: And so he provided a Savior for all; that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life.

Should not PERISH. -- He viewed all Mankind as sinful and guilty, lost, undone
and perishing, i. e. exposed to the Wrath of God and Curse of the Law, to all
the Miseries of this Life, to Death it self, and to the Pains of Hell for ever.
And he gave his only begotten Son to be a Savior, --

That whosoever BELIEVES in him, -- i. e. that ventures upon his Atonement,
his Worth and Merits, his Mediation and Intercession, for divine Acceptance; so
as to be thence emboldened to return Home to God, upon the Invitation of the
Gospel. -- That all such should not perish, -- But

Have EVERLASTING LIFE -- i. e. the everlasting Indwelling of the holy Spirit
as a Sanctifier and Comforter, to be a never-failing Spring of a new, a
spiritual and divine Life; everlasting Union and Communion with Christ, and the
everlasting Favor and Enjoyment of God through him.

Thus we have in these Words a brief View of the glorious Gospel of the blessed
God. And from them we may learn, (1.) That God, the great Governor of the
World, considered Mankind, as being in a perishing Condition, i. e. sinful,
guilty, justly condemned, helpless and undone. (2.) That it was merely from
Motives within himself, that he has done, what he has, for their Recovery out
of this State. (3.) That he has constituted his Son a Mediator, Redeemer and
Savior, that through him Sinners might be saved. (4.) That he has appointed
Faith in Christ, to be the Condition of Salvation. -- Here therefore I will
endeavor to show,

I. Upon what Grounds it was, that God, the great Governor of the World, did
consider Mankind, as being in a perishing Condition, i. e. sinful, guilty,
justly condemned, helpless and undone.

II. What were the Motives, which excited him to do, what he has done, for
their Recovery.

III. What Necessity there was of a Mediator and Redeemer, and how the Way to
Life has been opened by him whom God has provided.

IV. What is the true Nature of saving Faith in Him. And so by the Whole, to
explain the Nature of the Gospel, and of a genuine Compliance therewith. -- And
in the last Place,

V. Will consider the Promise of everlasting Life to those who believe.

SECTION I. Showing the Reasons why God does in the Gospel consider Mankind as
being in a perishing Condition.
I. I am to show upon what Grounds it was, that God, the great Governor of the
World, did consider Mankind as being in a perishing Condition, i. e. sinful,
guilty, justly condemned, helpless and undone. -- That he did consider Mankind
as being in a perishing Condition, is evident, because he gave his only
begotten Son, that they might not perish who should believe in him. If we were
not in a perishing Condition, his giving his Son to save us from Perdition had
been needless: and his pretending great Love and Kindness in doing so, had been
to affront us; to make as if we were undone Creatures, when we were not; and as
if we were much beholden to him for his Goodness, when we could have done well
enough without it. And the more he pretends of his great Love and Kindness, the
greater must the Affront be. So that, however we look upon our selves, it is
certain that God, who sees all Things as being what they are, did actually look
upon us, as in a perishing, lost, undone Condition. -- And if he considered us
as being in such a Condition* it must have been because he looked upon us as
sinful, guilty, justly condemned and altogether helpless; for otherwise we were
not in a perishing Condition. If we could have helped our selves a little, we
should not have needed one to save us, but only to help us to save our selves:
but our Salvation in Scripture is always attributed wholly to God; and God
every where takes all the Glory to himself, as though in very Deed he had
deserved it all. ( Ephesians. 1.3 -- 6. and 2.1 -- 9.) So that it is certain, God did
look upon Mankind as being in a perishing Condition, sinful, guilty, justly
condemned, and altogether helpless: and considering us in such a Condition, he
entered upon his Designs of Mercy and Grace; and therefore he every where
magnifies his Love, and looks upon us as infinitely beholden to him, and under
infinite Obligations to ascribe to him all the Glory and Praise, even quite
all. That no Flesh should glory in his Presence. -- But he that glories, let
him glory in the Lord. 1 Cor. 1.29, 31.

It is of great Importance therefore, that we come to look upon our selves as
being in such a perishing Condition too; for otherwise it is impossible we
should ever be in a Disposition thankfully to accept Gospel Grace, as it is
offered unto us. We shall rather be offended, as thinking the Gospel casts
Reproach upon human Nature, in supposing us to be in such a forlorn Condition,
as to stand in a perishing Need of having so much done for us. As the Jews of
old scorned it, when Christ told them, If they would become his Disciples, they
should know the Truth, and the Truth should make them free. They took it as an
Affront, and were ready to say, What! Just as if we were in Bondage! Indeed no.
We were never in Bondage to any Man. We have Abraham to our Father, and God is
our Father; but thou have a Devil. Ioh. 8.31 -- 48. They would not understand
him, they were all in a Rage. And so it is like to be with us, with Regard to
the Methods, which God has taken with us in the Gospel, unless we look upon our
selves as he does, so wretched and miserable, so poor, blind and naked, so
helpless, lost and undone. It is the want of this Self-Acquaintance, together
with a fond Notion of our being in a much better Case than we be, that raises
such a mighty Cry against the Doctrines of Grace, through a proud, impenitent,
guilty World.

And since God does thus look upon us to be in such a perishing Condition, and
upon this Supposition enters on his Designs of Mercy and Grace, here now
therefore does the Question recur, -- Upon what Grounds is it, that he
considers us as being in such a perishing Condition? -- Grounds he must have,
and good Grounds too, or he would never thus look upon us. If we may rightly
understand what they be, perhaps we may come to look upon our selves as he
does; and the^ the Grace of the Gospel will begin to appear to us, in the same
Light it does to him. The Grounds then, are as follows.

1. God the great Governor of the World, does in the Gospel consider Mankind
as being guilty of Adam's first Sin, and on that Account to be in a perishing
Condition. In Adam all died* 1 Cor. 15.22.) But Death is the Wages of Sin:
(Romans ^.23.) Therefore in Adam all sinned. For by one Man Sin entered into the
World, and Death by Sin; and so Death pass^d upon all Men, for that all have
sinned. i. e. sinned in Adam. (Romans ^.12.) for (v. 19.) By one Man's
Disobedience many were made Sinners. And accordingly by the Offense of one,
Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation. And hence all are by Nature
Children of Wrath. (Ephesians. 2.3.)

OBJ. But how can we be guilty of Adam's first Sin? It was he committed it, and
not we; and that without our Consent, and a long Time before we were born.

ANS. Adam, by divine Appointment, stood and acted as our public Head. He
stood a Representative in the Room of all his Posterity; and accordingly acted
not only for himself, but for them. His sustaining this Character rendered him
a Type of Christ, the second Adam, who has laid down his Life in the Room and
Stead of Sinners. And his being spoken of in Scripture as a Type of Christ with
Respect to this Character of a public Head, proves that he did actually
sustain such a Character. ( Romans 5.14.) And therefore as by the Obedience of
Christ, many are made Righteous* so by the Disobedience of Adam, many are made
Sinner^* (v. 19.) i. e. by the Imputation of Christ's Obedience Believers
become legally righteous; righteous in the Sight of God by Virtue of an
established Constitution; and so have the Reward of eternal Life: So by the
Imputation of Adam's first Sin, his Posterity by ordinary Generation, became
legally Sinners, Sinners in the Sight of God by Virtue of an established
Constitution, and so are exposed to the Punishment of eternal Death, the proper
Wages of Sin. Now it is true, we did not PERSONALLY rise in Rebellion against
God in that first Transgression, but he who did do it was our Representative.
We are Members of the Community he acted for, and God considers us as such; and
therefore looks upon us as being legally guilty, and liable to be dealt with
accordingly: And so on this Account in a perishing Condition. But perhaps some
will still be ready to say, And where is the Justice of all this? Methinks the
following Considerations, if we will be disinterestedly impartial, may set the
Matter in a satisfying Light.

(1.) That the original Constitution made with Adam, as to himself personally
considered, was holy, just and good.

(2.) That if all his Posterity had been put under the same Constitution, one
by one, from Age to Age, as they came into Being, to act for themselves, it had
also been holy, just and good.

(3.) That it was, in the Nature of the Thing, in all Respects, as well for our
Interest, that Adam should be made our public Head and Representative, to act
not only for himself, but for all his Posterity, as that we should each stand
and act for himself singly; and in some Respects better.

(4.) That in such a Case, God, as supreme Lord and sovereign Governor of the
whole World, had full Power and rightful Authority to constitute Adam our
common Head and public Representative, to act in our Behalf. -- Let us
therefore distinctly consider these Particulars.

(1.) It is to be noted, the original Constitution made with Adam, (Genesis 2.17.)
as to himself personally considered, was holy, just and good, as will appear if
we consider the Circumstances he was under, antecedent to that Constitution or
Covenant. For,

In the first Place, Antecedent to that Covenant-Transaction, he was under
infinite Obligations from the Reason and Nature of Things, to love God with all
his Heart and obey him in every Thing. From the infinite Excellence and Beauty
of the divine Nature, and from God's original, entire Right to him* as his
Creature, and absolute Authority over him, as his Subject, did his infinite
Obligation so to do, necessarily arise. It was fit, it was infinitely fit and
right, that he should look upon the infinitely glorious God his Maker and
Governor, as being what he was, and as having such a Right to him and
Authority over him as he had, and that he should be affected and act
accordingly, antecedent to the Consideration of any Covenant-Transaction. And
no Doubt, this was actually the Case with him, before that Covenant was made;
for he was created in the Image of God, (Genesis 1.27.) And so his Heart was full
of a Sense of his Glory, and of admiring and adoring Tho'ts: He felt that he
was not his own, but the Lord's; and he loved him and was entirely devoted to
him, in the Temper of his Mind, conscious of the infinite Obligations he was
under thereto. -- And farther, it is certain that God was the sole Lord and
Owner of this lower World, and all Things in it; and that Adam had no Right to
any Thing but by a divine Grant. -- And it is certain, it was fit that Adam
should be put into a State of Trial, and that God had Authority to do it.

And now since he was naturally under such infinite Obligations to love and
obey God his Maker, God the supreme Lord and sovereign Governor of all Things;
since he had no Right to any of the Trees of the Garden, but by the free Grant
of God; and since it was fit he should be put into a State of Trial, and God
had Authority to do it: Since these Things were so, it is evident, that
Constitution was HOLY, In the Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.
God had a Right to make such a Law; for Adam was his, and all the Trees in the
Garden were his, and he was by Nature GOD, SUPREME LORD AND SOVEREIGN GOVERNOR
of the whole World, and it was fitting he should act as such: And it was
infinitely fit that Adam should have a sacred Regard to his Authority in all
Things, because he was such; and that his eternal Welfare should lie at Stake,
and be suspended upon his good Behavior. -- And no Doubt Adam, viewed Things
thus, and was thoro'ly sensible that God had a Right to prohibit that Tree upon
Pain of Death, and that he was under infinite Obligations to have a most sacred
Regard to his Will in that Matter. Thus that Constitution was Holy.

And if we consider, in the next Place, that, as has been observed, Adam was
under infinite Obligations to love God his Maker with all his Heart, and obey
him in every Thing, resulting from the very Reason and Nature of Things, it
will appear that the Threatening was just; and no more than what he must have
expected, had he fallen into any Sin whatsoever, antecedent to any Constitution
at all. -- Adam, in a State of pure Nature, i. e. prior to any
Covenant-Transaction, was under infinite Obligations to perfect Love and
perfect Obedience; the least Defect therefore must have been infinitely sinful;
and so by Consequence must have deserved an infinite Punishment. And it was
meet that God the Governor of the World should punish Sin according to it is
real Desert: in the Nature of Things it was meet, antecedent to any express
Declaration of his Design to do so. And Adam knew all this. He knew what
Obligations he was under to God, to love him with all his Heart and obey him in
every Thing; and by Consequence, he was conscious to himself that the least
Defect would be an infinite Evil, and so would deserve an infinite Punishment;
and he knew that it was the Nature of God to render to every one according to
their Deserts: he was certain therefore, from the Reason and Nature of Things,
antecedent to that Threatening, that the least Sin would expose him to an
infinite Punishment. -- From this View of the Case, it is plain, that that
Threatening was just, and Adam did most perfectly approve of it as such. -- It
was no more than it was reasonable for Adam to expect, and meet for God to
inflict, for any Transgression of the Law of Nature. And it was against the Law
of Nature, for Adam to eat the forbidden Fruit, when once God had said, he
should not. It was a practical denying of God's Supremacy, and casting off his
Authority, and an actually setting up of his Will against the Lord's If any Sin
therefore deserved an infinite (...), surely that did.

Remark. And here by the Way, from this View of the Case, we may gain a certain
Knowledge of what God meant by, Thou shall surely die; or as it is in the
Original, In dying thou shall die; and may be certain how Adam understood it.
-- He did not mean, that Adam should be annihilated; for such a Punishment was
not equal to the Crime. He might without Injustice have annihilated Adam, had
he remained innocent; for he that gives Being of his mere good Pleasure, may of
his mere good Pleasure take it away again. Nor could Adam have brought God into
Debt by a thousand Years perfect Obedience; for he owed himself and all he
could do, to God his Maker. Romans 11.35. -- God meant to punish Adam according
to his Deserts; but Annihilation would not have been such a Punishment: And
therefore it is curtain that this was not what God meant. Adam knew that Sin
was an infinite Evil, and so deserved an infinite Punishment, and that it was
meet it should be punished according to it is Deserts, and that it was the
Nature of God to do so; but Annihilation was not such a Punishment, and Adam
could not but know it: And therefore Adam could not understand Death in this
Sense. -- God meant to punish Adam according to his Deserts. And what did he
deserve? Why, an infinite Punishment, i. e. to have all Good taken away, and
all Kinds of Evil come upon him for ever. Well, what Good had Adam in
Possession! Why, he had a natural Life, resulting from the Union of his Soul
and Body, with all the Delights and Sweetnesses thereof: And he had a spiritual
Life, resulting from the gracious Influences of the holy Spirit, and consisting
in the Image of God and Sense of his Love, with all the Delights and
Sweetnesses thereof: And he was formed for Immortality, and so was in a
Capacity of eternal Life and Blessedness in glorifying God and enjoying of him.
Here therefore he was capable of a natural, a spiritual and an eternal Death;
to have Soul and Body rent asunder for ever, to be forsaken by the Spirit of
God and given up to the Power of Sin and Satan for ever, and to have God
Almighty become his everlasting Enemy. -- All this he deserved; and therefore
God meant all this. All this he knew he should deserve; and therefore he could
not but understand the Threatening to comprehend all this. -- Besides, that
which makes it still more certain, that this was the Meaning of that first
Threatening, is, that God has since very expressly threatened eternal Death as the
Wages of the least Sin. Rom 1.18. Gal. 3.10. Matt. 25.46. (And the Word DEATH
it self is plainly used to signify eternal Death and Misery. Romans 6.23. Romans
8.13.) So that either now he means to punish Sin more than it deserves, or he
intended then to punish Sin less than it deserved, or else eternal Death was
what he always meant, by threatening Death as the Wages of Sin. If he means to
punish Sin now more than he did then, it is too much now, or not enough then;
both which are equally contrary to the Reason and Nature of Things, and equally
inconsistent with the impartial Justice of the divine Nature, which always
inclines him to render to every one according to their Deserts, nor more, nor
less: And therefore eternal Death was intended in that first Threatening. But
this by the Way.

And, Lastly, as that Constitution was holy and just, so also it was Good.
Because it put Adam (personally considered) under better Circumstances than he
was before. For while in a State of pure Nature, perfect Obedience could not
have given him any Title to eternal Life; but, as was said before, God might
have annihilated him at Pleasure, after a Hundred, or a Thousand, or ten
Thousand Years, without any Injustice to him. ( Job 22.2. Romans 11.35.) But now
under this Constitution he had an Assurance of eternal Life upon perfect
Obedience. For inasmuch as God threatened Death in Case he should sin, it is
evidently implied that he should have lived for ever in Case he had been
obedient. So that there was infinite Goodness manifested to Adam (personally
considered) in this Constitution, eternal Life being thus promised of mere
unmerited Bounty. And besides, after a While his State of Trial would have been
at an End, and he confirmed in an immutable State of Holiness and Happiness; of
which Confirmation the Tree of Life seems to have been designed as a
sacramental Sign. Genesis 3.22. Rev. 2.7. and 22.14. Whereas had he remained in a
State of pure Nature, he must have been everlastingly in a State of Probation,
had (...) pleased his Maker to have continued him in Being. So that, upon the
Whole, it is plain, this Constitution, as to Adam personally considered, was
holy, just and good. And wdam had great Reason, with all his Heart to give
Thanks to God his Maker, for his Goodness and Condescension, that he would be
so kind and stoop so low, as to enter into such a Covenant with a Worm of the
Dust: And no Doubt, he did so with the sincerest Gratitude. We proceed
therefore to consider,

(2.) That if all his Posterity had been put under this same Constitution, one
by one, from Age to Age, as they came into Being, to act singly for themselves,
it had also, as to them* have been HOLY, JUST and GOOD. As it was better for
Adam than a State of pure Nature, so it would have been for the same Reason
better for us. We (had we remained in a State of pure Nature, i. e. without any
Constitution at all) should have been each one of us under the same infinite
Obligation to perfect Obedience to the Law of Nature, and equally exposed to
the same infinite Punishment for the least Sin, as he was, and as much without
a Title to Life upon perfect Obedience, and as liable to be everlastingly in a
State of Probation. And therefore such a Constitution would have been as great
a Favor to us, as it was to him; and we equally under Obligations to Gratitude
and Thankfulness to God therefore. But,

(3.) It was as well for our Interest, in the Nature of the Thing, in all
Respects, that Adam should be made a public Head and Representative, to act
not only for himself, but for all his Posterity, as if we had been put to act
singly for our selves; and in some Respects better. For, Adam was, in the
Nature of the Thing, in all Respects, as likely to stand, as any of us should
have been, and in some Respects more likely. For he had as good natural Powers,
as much of the Image of God, and as great a Sense of his Obligations, as any of
us should have had; and had in all Respects as many Motives to Watchfulness;
and in some Respects more, -- in that not only his own everlasting Welfare lay
at Stake, but also the everlasting Welfare of all his Posterity too. Besides,
he had just received the Law from God's own Mouth, and he was in a State of
perfect Manhood when his Trial began. So that upon the whole, in the Nature of
the Thing, it was more likely he should stand, than that any of us should; and
therefore it was more for our Interest, that he should act for us, than we for
ourselves. -- But if we had been put to act singly for our selves under such a
Constitution, it had been much better than to be left in a State of pure
Nature, and so we should have had great Cause of Thankfulness to God for his
Condescension and Goodness; but to have Adam appointed to act for us, was in
the Nature of the Thing, still more to our Advantage; on the Account of which,
we have therefore still greater Cause of Thankfulness to the good Governor of
the World. It is infinite Wickedness therefore, to fly in the Face of Almighty
God, and charge him with Unrighteousness, for appointing Adam our Head and
Representative. We ought rather to say, The Constitution was holy, just and
good, yea, very good; but to us belongs Shame and Confusion of Face, for that
we have sinned.

OBJ. But God knew how it would turn out, he knew Adam would fall and undo
himself and all his Race.

ANSW. When God called Abraham, and chose him and his Seed for his peculiar
People, to give them distinguishing Advantages and Privileges, and that
professedly under the Notion of great Kindness and unspeakable Goodness; yet at
the same Time he knew how they would turn out, how they would be a stiff-necked
People, and would kill his Prophets, his Son and Apostles, and so be cast off
from being his People. He knew all this beforehand; yet that altered not the
Nature of the Thing at all; did not diminish his Goodness, nor lessen his
Grace. And the Jewish Nation at this Day have Reason to say, The Lord's Ways
have been Ways of Goodness, and blessed be his Name; but to us belongs Shame
and Confusion of Face, for that we have sinned.

OBJ. Yes, but God decreed that Adam should fall.

ANSW. He did not decree that Adam should fall, any more than he did, that the
Seed of Abraham should turn out such a stiff-necked, rebellious Race. He
decreed to permit both to do as they did; but this neither lessens his
Goodness, nor their Sin: for God is not obliged to put ^is Creatures under such
Circumstances as that they shall never be tempted nor tried; and when they are
tried, he is not obliged to keep them from falling: it is enough, that they
have sufficient Power to stand if they will; which was the Case with Adam. --
Besides, God had wise Ends in permiting Adam to fall; for he designed to take
Occasion therefrom to display all his glorious Perfections in the most
illustrious Manner. So that we may say of it (and should, if we loved God above
our selves) as Joseph does of his Brethren's selling him, Ye meant it for Evil,
but the Lord meant it for Good: So here, Satan meant it for Evil, but God meant
it for Good; even to bring much Glory to his great Name. Therefore be still,
and adore his holy Sovereignty. And a^ the same time acknowledge, that the
Constitution, in its own Nature, was holy, just and good, -- Yea, very good. --
These Things being considered, I proceed to add,

(4.) That in such a Case, God, as supreme Lord and sovereign Governor of the
whole World, had full Power and rightful Authority to constitute Adam our
common Head and public Representative, to act in our Behalf. For, as the Case
stood, there could be no reasonable Objection against it. Adam was not held up
to hard Terms. The Threatening in Case of Disobedience was strictly just. The
Constitution in it is own Nature was vastly for the Interest of Adam and of all
his Race. Adam was already constituted the natural Head of all Mankind; for God
blessed him, saying, Be fruitful and multiply and replenish the Earth. Genesis
1.28. All his Race, had they then existed, would, if they had been wise for
themselves, readily have consented to such a Constitution, as being well
adapted to the general Good. (So Men are wont to do, when their Estates lie at
Stake, or their Lives; if they think that an Attorney is likely to manage the
Case for them better than they can for themselves, they will choose him, and
venture the Case with him, rather than with themselves.) So that the only
Question is, whether God had, in so unexceptionable a Case, full Power and
rightful Authority to constitute Adam a public Head, to stand as a moral
Representative for all his Race and act in their Behalf, so that they should
stand and fall with him? Or in other Words, (for it all comes to the same
Thing) whether in any Case whatsoever, God has full Pow^^ and rightful
Authority to appoint one to stand and act in the Room of another, so as to lay
a Foundation for the Conduct of the one to be so imputed to the other, as that
both shall stand and fall together? And so it is as much of a Question, whether
God had Power and Authority to constitute the second Adam a public Head, as
the first? if God had not full Power and rightful Authority, to appoint the
first Adam to be our public Head and moral Representative, to stand and act in
our Behalf, so as to lay a Foundation for his Conduct to be so imputed to us,
as that we should stand and fall with him: Then he had not full Power and
rightful Authority, to appoint the second Adam to be a public Head and moral
Representative, to stand and act in the Room of a guilty World, so as to lay a
Foundation for his Righteousness to be so imputed to them that believe in him,
as that they should be justified and saved through it. For if God has not Power
to constitute one to stand and act in the Room of another, in any Case
whatsoever; and if on this Foot, we say he had not Power to appoint the first
Adam, it is plain that on the same Foot, he had no Power to appoint the second.
I suppose it will be readily granted, that if God has Power, in any Case
whatso^ver, to constitute one to stand and act in the Room of another, in the
Manner aforesaid; then he had in these two Instances of Adam and Christ, which
are doubtless, on all Accounts, in themselves, most unexceptionable. But if
God, in no Case whatsoever, has Power to appoint one thus to stand and act in
the Room of another, then both these Constitutions are effectually undermined
and rendered null and void. We can neither be guilty of Adam's first Sin, so as
justly to be exposed to Condemnation and Ruin therefore; nor can the
Righteousness of Christ be so imputed to us, as to entitle us to Justification
and Life. One Man's Disobedience cannot constitute many to be Sinners, no^ the
Obedience of one constitute many to be righteous. We can neither be ruined by
the first Adam, nor redeemed by the second. Under the Jewish Dispensation it
was ordained ( Lev. 16.) that Aaron should lay both his Hands upon the Head of
the live-Goat, and confess over him a^l the Iniquities of the Children of
Israel, and all their Transgressions in all their Sins, putting them upon the
Head of the Goat, and send him away by the Hand of a fit Man into the
Wilderness. And (says God) the Goat shall bear upon him all their Iniquities,
unto a Land not inhabited. We used to to think, this Scapegoat was designed by
God to typify Christ. And the Scripture has taught us in express Language, that
the Iniquities of us all were laid on him, that he bare our Sins, that he was
made a Curse for us, that by his Obedience many are made righteous. (Isai.
53.6. Pet. 2.24. Gal. 3.13. Romans 5.19.) But if God has not Authority to
constitute one to stand and act in the Room of another, this must all be void
and of none Effect. And thus while Men are disputing against the original
Constitution with Adam, they unawares undermine this second Constitution, which
is the Foundation of all our Hopes. Eager to avoid Adam's first Sin, whereby
comes Condemnation; they render of none Effect Christ's Righteousness, whereby
comes Justification. And if Christ did not stand and act as a public Person,
if our Sins were not laid upon him, if he did not bare them on the Tree, if he
was not made a Curse for us, and if we are not to be pardoned through his
Atonement and justified through his Righteousness, then the Gospel is all a
Fable, and the whole Scheme of our Salvation therein revealed is wholly
overthrown. What remains therefore but Deism and Infidelity? But in as much as
we have full Evidence to the Truth of the Christian Revelation, and may be
assured that it is from God, we may therefore be confirmed in it, that Jesus
Christ has been by God the great Governor of the World appointed a public
Person, to stand and act, to obey and suffer in our Room, that through his
Obedience and Sufferings we might have Pardon and eternal Life. And from this
Fact we may be assured, that God has full Power and rightful Authority to
constitute one to stand and act in the Room of another. And if he has such
Authority, nothing hinders but that he might constitute Adam to be our public
Head, as has been said.

Besides, if we consider the Nature of the Thing it self, it is plain that God
had Power to constitute Adam our public Head. For God as moral Governor of
the World and sovereign Lord of all Things has Power to make any Constitution
whatsoever, which does in it is own Nature agree to the eternal Fitness of
Things, or in other Words, which is agreeable to his own Perfections. But all
will grant, that Constitution is agreeable to his own Perfections, which, in
its own Nature is suited to the Glory of God and Good of the Creatures. Now
this Constitution with Adam was in its own Nature suited to the general Good of
Mankind, because the Welfare of Mankind was in the Nature of the Thing safer
and better secured upon such a Foot, than if every single Child of Adam had
been left in a State of pure Nature without any Constitution at all, or than if
they had every one been put to act singly for himself: as has been before
proved. And it was well suited to the Glory of God, because in that
Constitution, considered in it is own Nature, God eminently appeared to be what
he was. For in it he appeared as the MOST HIGH GOD, the SUPREME LORD and
SOVEREIGN GOVERNOR of the whole World; for in it he acted as sovereign Lord of
his Creatures, as being by Nature God, and as having an absolute Right to and
Authority over the Works of his Hands. And when God acts so, as by his Conduct
to show what he is, then are his Doings suited to his own Glory; for nothing is
more to his Glory, than to appear to be what he is. And in as much as the
Constitution it self was well suited to the general Good of Mankind, God did,
in making of it, act a kind and tender Part toward the human Race, to the
Honor and Glory of his Goodness. And while eternal Life was promised to
perfect Obedience, and eternal Death threatened to Disobedience, God's infinite
Love to Virtue and infinite Hatred of Vice were manifested, to the Glory of his
Holiness and Justice. Since then that Constitution was thus, in it is own
Nature, suited to our Good and God's Glory; there is no doubt but the sovereign
Lord and Governor of all Things, had full Power and rightful Authority, so to
appoint: for in so doing, he would act agreeable to his own Perfections, and
the eternal Fitness of Things.

BUT TO CONCLUDE, We may be abundantly satisfied, not only from the Nature of
the Thing, but also from what God has in Fact done, that that Constitution was
holy, just and Good, and that he had full Power and rightful Authority to do as
he did, because otherwise he would never have done so; he would never have made
such a Constitution. It is plain and evident from Facts, that Adam was
considered and dealt with under the Capacity of a public Head, and that Death
natural, spiritual and eternal were included in the Threatening; for all his
Posterity are evidently dealt with just as if that had been the Case. They are
born spiritually dead, as has been proved in the former Discourse. They are
evidently liable to natural Death, as soon as they are born. And if they die
and go into Eternity with their native Temper, they must necessarily be
miserable, in being what they are, unlike to God and incapable of the Enjoyment
of him, and contrary to him. And God must necessarily look upon them with
everlasting Abhorrence; for he cannot but abhor Creatures whose Tempers are
contrary to him. So that here is eternal Death. And all in Consequence of
Adam's first Sin.

Now then, if indeed we are in Fact dealt with just as we should have been, had
Adam been our public Head, there can surely need no farther Evidence to prove
that this was the Case; for the Judge of all the Earth cannot but do Right: And
therefore he would not deal with us as being guilty of Adam's first Sin, were
not Adam our Representative. But had Adam been our Representative, and his
first Sin imputed to us; yet then we should have been dealt with no otherwise
than now we; are i. e. On Supposition of the Interposition of a Mediator, as is
now the Case. For that we are now born into the World subject to natural Death,
none can deny, and this by Virtue of Adam's first Sin: And if we are really
spiritually dead too, and so exposed to eternal Death, it is just what might
have been expected, had Adam stood for us; and so there is no more to be said.
And if God be such a Being, as I suppose he is, and the Law such, and the
Nature of true Holiness such; then, as has been shown in the first Discourse,
there is no doubt we are natively spiritually dead. So that the Force of this
Argument depends upon the Truth of those first Principles, which, I think, have
been sufficiently proved. Right Apprehensions of the moral Law will at once
convince us of our inherent natural Corruption, and make us feel that we are
fallen Creatures.

REMARK. Perhaps this is the Consideration, which most commonly first leads
poor Sinners to see, that they do actually lie under the Guilt of Adam's first
Sin; and that their Ruin thence took its Rise, viz. their finding by
Experience, when the Spirit of God brings home the Law and awakens Conscience,
that they are by Nature dead in Trespasses and Sins: for now no Conclusion can
be more natural, than that they are by Nature Children of Wrath. And this will
naturally lead them to enquire, Whence this has comes to pass? and they will
presently find the Scripture express and plain in it, that by one Man's
Disobedience, many were made Sinners; and by the Offense of one, Judgment came
upon all to Condemnation: and their own Experience will give them the most
natural Comment upon the Words, while they feel themselves to be by Nature dead
in Sin and exposed to eternal Ruin. But now, How could I justly have all this
come upon me for Adam's first Sin? will naturally be the next Thought. And an
awakened Conscience will perhaps first of all reply, How it is just and right I
cannot tell, but I am ^^^tain so it is, that I am by Nature dead in Sin, and by
Nature a Child of Wrath. This I see and feel. And the Scripture says, that by
one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners; and that for the Offense of one
Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation. And God's Ways must be righteous,
for the Judge of all the Earth always does right. And if I do finally perish, I
have nothing to say; for I have gone in Adam's Steps, I have been voluntary in
my Rebellion against God all my Life, and am at Heart an Enemy to him still,
and that voluntarily so. And this may in a Measure silence such a poor Sinner
for the present. But if ever he comes to be reconciled to the divine Nature,
and then impartially to look into the original Constitution, he may then see
that it was in it is own Nature, holy, just and good, and worthy of God the
great Governor of the World; and as such sweetly acquiesce in it: saying,
God's Ways were holy, just and good, and blessed be his Name; but to us (to all
the human Race) belongs Shame and Confusion of Face, for that we have sinned.
But until Men are awakened, at least to some Sense of their natural Corruption,
they are commonly very blind and deaf to all the Scripture says about this
Matter. It is hard to make Men believe contrary to their own Experience; to
make them believe that they fell in Adam, when they don't feel that they are by
Nature fallen Creatures. Let the Scripture speak ever so plain, yet they cannot
believe that it means as it says* It must mean, they think, something else. The
best Method therefore to convince Sinners of the Doctrine of original (imputed)
Sin, and to silence all their Cavils, is to open the true Meaning of the moral
Law, and show them their native Depravity. This is the Method which God takes
in the Bible. He says but little about Adam's first Sin, but says much to show
us what we really are, as knowing that if we are but once convinced of our
native Corruption, a few Words are sufficient to show us whence our Ruin
originally took it is Rise.

Thus, God the great Governor of the World, in the Gospel Dispensation,
considered Mankind as being in a perishing Condition, sinful, guilty, justly
condemned, helpless and undone; and one Ground and Reason of his looking upon
Mankind to be in such a Condition, was our original Apostasy from him in our
first Parents. And since that Constitution, whereby Adam was made our common
Head and public Representative, was holy, just and good in its own Nature; and
since God the supreme Lord of all Things had full Power and rightful Authority
so to ordain and appoint; hence therefore he has sufficient Reason to look upon
Mankind, on Account of this first Apostasy, as he does.

Therefore at the same Time he provided a Savior for Adam, at the same Time
did he also provide a Savior for his Posterity too; they being considered as
one with him and involved in the same Sin and Guilt and Ruin; and so standing
in equal Need of Relief. Hence Christ is called the Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the Word. Then was it said, that the Seed of the Woman shall
bruise the Serpent's Head. To which original Grant our Savior seems to have
Respect, when he says, God so loved the World, that he GAVE his only begotten
Son, etc. Whereas, had Adam acted in the Capacity of a private Person, and
sinned and fallen for himself alone, and his Posterity not been involved in the
same Ruin; Adam might have had a Savior provided for him: But his Posterity
would no more have needed one, than the Angels in Heaven, or than Adam before
his Fall.

OBJ. But those Words, In the Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die,
Genesis 2.17. were evidently spoken only to Adam, nor is there a Word said about
his Posterity having any Interest or Concern in the Affair.

ANS. So also were those Words in Genesis 3.19. Dust thou art, and unto Dust shall
thou return, spoken only to Adam without the least Intimation that his
Posterity were any of them included in the Sentence. And yet by Virtue of that
Sentence, all his Posterity are subject to Death. Romans 5.12, 13, 14. Do you
account for this, and you will at the same Time account for that: For the Truth
is, that in both Cases Adam was considered not merely as a single private
Person, but as a public Head and Representative, standing in the Room of all
his Posterity. And considered in this Capacity, was he threatened with Death in
Case he sinned; and considered in this Capacity, was natural Death denounced
upon him after his Fall. So that in both, his Posterity were equally included.
And therefore St. Paul calls Adam a Type of Christ. Romans 5.14. And calls Christ
the second Adam. 1 Cor. 15.45. Because both these, by the Authority of the
great Governor of the World, were constituted public Persons, to act in the
Behalf of Mankind. And all Mankind were so included in them, that St. Paul
speaks as if there had been but only these two Men, Adam and Christ. 1 Cor.
15.47* The first Man is of the Earth, earthy: The second Man is the Lord from
Heaven.

2. God the supreme Ruler of the World does in the Gospel consider Mankind as
being in a perishing Condition, not only on the Account of their original
Apostasy in Adam, their common Head and Representative; but also because they
are, what they are, in themselves. (1.) Destitute of the divine Image. (2.)
Contrary to God in the Temper of their Hearts. (3.) Utterly averse to a
Reconciliation. (4.) In a Disposition, if unrestrained, to live in all open
Rebellion against the Majesty of Heaven before his Face. (5.) And yet
insensible of their just Desert and of their Need of sovereign Grace; and ready
rather to think it a cruel Thing, if God should damn them.

(1.) God saw Mankind destitute of his moral Image. For being conscious of the
holy Temper of his own Heart, of the holy Propensity of his own Nature; and
being conscious to the Temper of their Hearts, to the Propensity of their
Nature; at first View, he saw what they were. God looked down from Heaven upon
the Children of Men, to see if there were any that did understand, that did
seek God. Every one of them is gone back, they are altogether become filthy;
there is none that does Good, no, not one. Psalm. 53.2.3. -- He saw Mankind
destitute of a Conformity to his holy Law. The Law requires Mankind to love God
supremely, live to him ultimately, and delight in him superlatively, and to
love one another as their own Souls: But he looked down from Heaven, he beheld,
and lo, all the human Race were entirely devoid of that Temper. None were in a
Disposition to account him infinitely glorious in being what he wa^* Not one
had the least Relish or Taste for the Beauty of his moral Perfections. Every
Heart empty of holy Love, and holy Delight, and devoid of any true Spirit or
Principle of Obedience. And all Mankind had lost that Frame of Spirit toward
one another, which they ought to have. The whole World lay in Ruin.

He kne^, his Law was holy, just and good, and that his Creature Man was under
infinite Obligations to a perfect ^^^formity thereto. He saw what Grounds there
were for the Law, and what Reasons for their Obedience. He saw his own infinite
Excellency, and his original, underived, entire Right to them, and was
conscious to his rightful Authority over them. He judged them infinitely to
Blame for their Nonconformity, and worthy of an infinite Punishment. Speaking
after the Manner of Men, he did, in the inward Temper of his Heart, perfectly
approve of those Words in Gal. 3.10. as being strictly just, Cursed is every
one, that continues not in all Things written in the Book of the Law, to do
them. -- Therefore he looked on Mankind in a perishing Condition. But,

(2.) He viewed Mankind not only destitute of Good, but full of Evil. Not only
void of true Love to God and to one another, but Enemies to God and living in
Malice and Envy among themselves. He looked down from Heaven and viewed a
guilty World, and saw their Contrariety to his Nature and to his Law. Conscious
of his own divine Temper, he saw every contrary Temper in them. What he
esteems, they despise. What he delights in, they loath. The End which he
prosecutes, they oppose. And they esteem and delight in that which is contrary
to him, and prosecute Ends and Designs contrary to his. He, saw their Views,
their Tempers, their Wills, their Ends, Designs and Ways, were all contrary to
him, and diametrically opposite to his Law. He considered them as his Enemies,
and their Tempers as perfect Enmity and Contrariety to the divine Nature. Romans
8.7.

(3.) And in as much as he thus saw them entirely destitute of Love to him, and
diametrically contrary to the divine Nature in the Temper of their Hearts, He
knew they would have no Inclination to a Reconciliation to God; but would be
naturally averse to it. He knew, their Aversion to a Reconciliation would be as
strong as their Contrariety to the divine Nature, from which it took it is Rise.
He saw that if he should attempt to reclaim them, he should only meet with
Resistance. That if he should spread the News of Pardon and Peace through a
guilty World, and invite them to return and be reconciled, that they would make
light of it and despise it. That if he should send Messengers after them, to
persuade them to return and beseech them to be reconciled, that they would put
many of them to Death. He saw just what Treatment, the Prophets, and Christ,
and his Apostles were like to meet with. He knew not one in all the World would
repent and convert, unless brought thereto by his own almighty Arm, and
all-conquering Grace. Mat. 21.33 -- 39. Romans 8.7. 1 Cor. 3.6.7.

(4.) Yea, so far from a Disposition to repent and convert, that, if left
wholly to themselves unrestrained, no Wickedness would be too bad for them. All
would act as bad as Cain, Manasseh, or Judas; and the whole human Race be like
so many incarnate Devils: they having the Seed of all Sin in their Hearts. Mar.
7.21, 22.

(5.) And yet insensible of their Sin and Guilt and just Desert, and that they
lie merely at the sovereign Mercy of God, and that he is at Liberty to show
Mercy, or not, as seems good in his Sight. Yea, so averse to the Knowledge of
this their true State, as to be disposed to hate the Light and shut their Eyes
against it, ready to resist all. Methods of Conviction. Yea, that some would be
even so perverse, as actually to rise in Arms against his Messengers, who
endeavored to show them their Ruin and the Way of their Recovery, and put them
to Death, as not fit to live: and yet so stupid, as to think, that in all they
did God good Service. And that in general, a great Outcry would be raised,
round a proud and guilty World, against the Lord, for supposing Mankind to be
in so bad, so very forlorn an Estate. God knew the Pride of Man, that he is
exceeding proud; and saw how great Offense would be given to a guilty World,
who would by no Means endure to be so affronted. Ioh. 3.19, 20. and 8.33.47.

Now, such were the Grounds upon which God looked upon the human Race in a
perishing Condition; sinful, guilty, justly condemned, helpless and undone. And
considering that the original Constitution with Adam, according to which he and
all his Posterity were doomed to Destruction, in Case he fell, was holy, just
and good; and considering that the Law of Nature, which all Mankind are
naturally under, and according to which the least Sin exposes to eternal
Damnation, is also holy, just and good; and considering our Apostasy in Adam,
and what we be in our selves* I say, considering all these Things, it is most
certain and evident, that the Judgment of God was according to Truth, while he
esteemed Mankind to be thus in a perishing Condition.

That Mankind are actually of such a Nature, has been demonstrated in the
former Discourse. That God, whose Understanding is infinite, and who sees all
Things as being what they really are, must therefore now see Mankind to be
such, is self-evident. And such as he now sees them to be, such he from the
Beginning knew they would be. It is evident therefore, a priori, that God must
have considered Mankind to be such, when he first entered upon his Designs of
Grace revealed in the Gospel. -- And if we consider the Nature of the Gospel,
and what Methods God has taken with a sinful, guilty World to reclaim and
recover them, and how they have behaved under all; it will be still more
evident that Mankind are verily in such a Case. The Law, the Gospel, and
Experience, all join to confirm it.

Had not the Gospel considered us, as being entirely devoid of the divine
Image, destitute of any spiritual good Thing, blind, dead, graceless; why
should it so much urge the Necessity of our being born again, made new
Creatures, having our Eyes opened, being raised from the Dead, being created
anew to good Works, and having the Law written in our Hearts, the Heart of
Stone took away, and an Heart of Flesh given? -- Had not the Gospel considered
us, as being Enemies to God; why should it invite us to be reconciled? -- Had
not the Gospel considered us as being very averse to a Reconciliation; why
should it pray and beseech us with so much Earnestness and Solemnity to be
reconciled, and use so many Arguments? -- Had not the Gospel considered our
Reconciliation, as unattainable by the most powerful Arguments, of themselves;
why should it declare that after all, neither Paul nor Apollos, nor Cephas, are
any Thing, or can do any Thing, unless God himself give the Increase? -- And
were we not Enemies to God, and Rebels, and inveterate haters of the Light, and
disposed to rise in Arms against it, why should Christ tell his Ministers, I
send you forth as Sheep among Wolves; if they have called the Master of the
House Beelzebub, no wonder they call you so; you shall be hated of all Men for
my Name's sake; they that kill you, will think they do God good Service? That
Generation though it as well of themselves as the present Generation now on Earth
does, and were ready to speak the same Language, and say, If we had lived in
the Days of our Fathers, we would not have killed the Prophets; but Christ knew
their Hearts. -- And had not Mankind, on these Accounts, been considered, as in
a perishing Condition; sinful, guilty, justly condemned, helpless and undone,
why was there provided such a Redeemer, and such a Sanctifier? And why was the
Salvation of Sinners every where represented, as being so entirely owing to the
Grace, the mere Grace, the free astonishing, wonderful Grace of God from first
to last? Surely from all this, most certain and evident it is, that God does in
the Gospel, upon these Grounds, consider Mankind, as being in a perishing
Condition: And upon these Grounds we must therefore come to consider our selves
so too, or we can never be in a Disposition, humbly and thankfully to accept
the Grace offered, and return home to God in the Way provided. We shall rather
be affronted, that the Gospel supposes us to be in so bad a Condition; or else
never so much as take Matters into serious Consideration, but do as those
invited to the Marriage of the King's Son in Mat. 22.5. They made light of it,
and went their Ways, one to his Farm, another to his Merchandise. -- I do but
just hint at these Things now, because they have been so largely insisted upon
heretofore. -- And thus we see upon what Grounds it is, that the great
Governor of the World, does in the Gospel, consider Mankind as being in a
perishing Condition.

SECTION II. Showing whence God' s Design of MERCY toward a perishing World
originally took it is RISE.
I proceed now,

II. To show, What were the Motives, which have excited God to do what he has
done, for the Recovery of Sinners, out of this their perishing Condition. And

1. It was not because the original Constitution with Adam our public Head and
Representative, was too severe: It was not because it would have been hard and
cruel, or in the least inconsistent with his infinite Goodness and tender
Mercies, to have left all Mankind in that State of total Ruin, they were
brought into by the Fall. For had not that Constitution been in it is own Nature
holy, just and good, and so most perfectly agreeable to his own Nature, to his
Holiness, Justice and Goodness, he would never have made it: For he necessarily
infinitely abhors, in his public Conduct, to act counter to the inward Temper
of his Heart. For the very Reason that he loves himself for being what he is,
for the same Reason he loves to act like himself and infinitely abhors the
contrary. -- And if that Constitution was holy, just and good in it is own
Nature originally, it must remain so still; for Adam's Apostasy, together with
all the dreadful Consequences thereof, could not alter its Nature. The
Constitution is perfectly as excellent as if Adam had never fallen; perfectly
as Good as if it had been the Means of laying a Foundation for the everlasting
Blessedness of all the human Race; for it is, what it was. It was excellently
well calculated for the Glory of God and the Welfare of Mankind in it is own
Nature; and therefore God made it, approved of it, was well pleased with it,
nor can he ever alter his Mind about it: for it is in it self just the same it
was at first -- And if it was holy, just and good in it is own Nature, and if it
remains so still; if the Holiness, Justice and Goodness of his Nature prompted
him at first to make it, and then to approve of it, and be perfectly well
pleased with it; it could not ('it is self-evident) possibly have been in the
least disagreeable to his Holiness, Justice or Goodness, to have dealt with all
Mankind since the Fall according to it. So that, to a Demonstration, God's
Thoughts of Mercy toward a guilty, undone World, did not in any Measure take
their Rise from any Notion that Mankind had been hardly dealt with, or that it
would be any Thing like Cruelty and Unmercifulness, to damn the whole World for
Adam's first Sin, according to the Tenor of the original Constitution. --
Indeed, to suppose such a Thing, highly reflects upon that Constitution, and
upon God for ever making of it. It supposes, the Constitution was never really
holy, just and good in it is own Nature, and that God did wrong in making of it.
-- And the Riches and Glory of Gospel Grace are wholly obscured; for God cannot
be considered as a sovereign Benefactor showing undeserved Mercy to a guilty,
Hell-deserving World; but rather as repenting for the Injury he has done to
Mankind, and as endeavoring to make amends for it by a better, a juster and
kinder Conduct for the Time to come. -- And if this were the Case, all his
Pretenses, his high Pretenses, to great Love and Goodness, to great Kindness
and Grace, are hypocritical and a mere mocking of us. He had abused and injured
us, and is now but repenting and making Restitution; and ought therefore to
have said so, and not pretended he did all from mere Grace, which is to affront
us, and make as if that Constitution was holy, just and good, and we
righteously condemned and justly miserable for ever. -- So that let us view the
Case in what Light we will, it is most evident and certain, that the great
Governor of the World considered Mankind as being righteously condemned and
liable to everlasting Destruction, consistent with the infinite Goodness of his
Nature; nor did a Thought of Pity ever enter into his Heart from the contrary
Supposition. -- Yea, it seems to have been his very Design to maintain the
Honor of that Constitution, while he shows Mercy to a guilty World, in as much
as he has appointed another public Person, his own dear Son, to make Atonement
for our original Apostasy, as well as our other Sins, that hereby a Way for his
Mercy might be opened. Romans 5.18, 19.

2. Nor did God's Designs of Mercy toward a guilty, undone World take their
Rise from a Supposition that the Law of Nature, which all Mankind are naturally
under, is too severe, in requiring perfect Obedience and threatening eternal
Damnation for the very least Defect; (Romans 1.18. Gal. 3.10.) or from any
Supposition, that it would have been any Thing like Cruelty or Unmercifulness,
to have dealt with all Mankind according to that Rule.

To explain my self, I may just observe, that the original Constitution with
Adam, as public Head, ( Genesis 2.17.) was a positive Appointment. After he was
turned out of the Garden he ceased to sustain the Character or Capacity of a
public Person, nor are his Posterity accountable for any but his first
Transgression. But the Law of Nature results from the Nature of Things, from
God's being what he is in himself and from our being what we are, and he our
Creator and we his Creatures. And it was binding in order of Nature antecedent
to any positive Constitution whatsoever: nor is it is binding Nature capable of
any Dissolution. We might have obtained Life, according to the Constitution
made with Adam, had he kept Covenant with God; and been confirmed in a State of
Holiness and Happiness; so now we may obtain Life by Jesus Christ, who has
fulfilled the Law of Nature and made Atonement for all Sin: But the Law of
Nature still remains an unalterable Rule of Righteousness between God and his
Creature Man. We owe perfect Obedience to God, and the least Sin deserves
eternal Damnation. And God might always have dealt with Mankind, simply
according to this Rule. The original Constitution with Adam had some Degree of
GRACE in it. The Constitution in the Gospel is altogether GRACE. God might have
held all Mankind bound by the Law of Nature simply* nor ever have appointed any
other Way to Happiness, tha^ a perfect and persevering Obedience: and Mankind
have been to all Eternity in a peccable State, liable to Sin and fall into
Ruin. Whatsoever Advantages Mankind have had over and above this, are, and have
been, of mere Grace. According to the Law of Nature we are under infinite
Obligations to perfect Holiness in the Temper of our Hearts, and to perfect
Obedience in the whole Course of our Lives, and that not only for a Day or a
Year or a Thousand Years, but so long as we continue in Being. And so long as
we are thus obedient, we shall be happy; but the least Defect at any Time
whatsoever will let in everlasting inevitable Ruin upon us. Adam in Innocence
was under the Law of Nature, as well as under that particular positive
Constitution in Genesis 2.17. So that any other Sin, as well as eating the
forbidden Fruit, must have exposed him to Ruin. But then by that Constitution
he had this peculiar Advantage, that if he persevered, his Time of Trial should
shortly be at an End, and himself and all his Race confirmed in a State of
Holiness and Happiness. An Advantage never to be obtained by any one merely
under the Law of Nature. For in the Nature of Things it is impossible, God
should ever be laid under any Obligations to his Creatures unless by Virtue of
his own free Promise, which does not belong to the Law of Nature, but is an Act
of Grace, which he may grant or withhold as seems good in his Sight. -- When
Adam broke Covenant with God, and when that positive Constitution was at ^n
End; yet still Adam remained under the Law of Nature, bound to perfect
Obedience, to love God with all his Heart, and his Neighbor as himself; yea,
under infinite Obligations, and every Defect was infinitely sinful, and so was
worthy of infinite Punishment. And as was the Case with him, so is the Case
with all his Posterity. Our Obligations are infinite, and so our
Nonperformance infinitely faulty, and worthy of an infinite Punishment. Though
indeed as the Case now stands, nor Adam, nor any of his Race can ever obtain
Life by the Law of Nature, because we are Sinners, and so by the Law of Nature
are condemned without Hope. Romans 3.20. By the Deeds of the Law no Flesh can be
justified; for by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin. And Chap. 4. v. 15. The Law
works Wrath. And thus as the Case now stands, we are under infinite
Obligations to perfect Obedience, and are liable to an infinite Punishment for
the least Defect: and yet, through the bad Temper of our Hearts, we are unable to
yield any Obedience, and are in a Disposition to be continually treasuring up
Wrath against the Day of Wrath.

Now, I say, the supreme King of Heaven and Earth was not moved to entertain
Designs of Mercy toward a sinful, guilty undone World, from a Supposition that
the Law of Nature was too severe, or that it would have been any Thing like
Unmercifulness to have dealt with all Mankind according to that Rule. For,

All that this Law requires, is, that since GOD is infinitely amiable in
himself, and has such an entire Right to us and absolute Authority over us as
his Creatures, we therefore love him with all our Hearts, and be entirely
devoted to him, to do his Will and keep his Commands, seeking his Glory: and
that, since our Neighbors are such as we, of the same Species and under the
same general Circumstances, we therefore love our Neighbor as our selves: both
which Things are in their own Nature right and fit and reasonable. So that the
Law is holy. -- And all that this Law threatens in Case of any Transgression,
is, that since our Obligations are infinite, and so the least Defect infinitely
wrong; therefore every such Defect should be punished with the everlasting
Pains of Hell; and that in exact Proportion to the several Aggravations
attending each Transgression. Which is also in it is own Nature right and (...)
and reasonable. So that the Law is just. -- And that perfect Holiness which
this Law requires, i. e. to love God with all our Hearts and our Neighbors as
our selves, is the highest Perfection our Nature is capable of, and altogether
suited to make us happy. So that the Law is good. But,

It is not severe, nor any Thing like Unmercifulness, to deal with Mankind
according to a Rule, which is, in it is own Nature, holy, just and good: but
rather, it must have been agreeable to the Holiness, Justice and Goodness of the
great Governor of the World so to do. And indeed, were not this the Case, it
would have been fit this Law should have been repealed. Mankind did not need to
be redeemed from the Curse of an unrighteous Law; for such a Law ought to be
laid aside, and it is Curses never executed. God would have been bound in
Justice to have abolished an unrighteous Law. There is no Need of Christ or
Gospel Grace in the Case. And so all the high Commendations of the Grace of God
in providing a Savior, as being rich free and wonderful, are groundless; and
cast much Reproach upon Mankind, as being a guilty Race, righteously condemned,
when in Truth it is no such Thing. God ought to have owned that the Law was
wrong, and to have repealed it, and not to have proceeded as if it was very
good, and Mankind altogether to blame, and worthy of eternal Damnation. And
mightily would this have pleased an apostate, proud and guilty World; and at
the same Time cast infinite Reproach upon God and his holy Law, and shut out
all the Grace of the Gospel.

God has therefore in the Gospel, not only supposed the Law to be holy, just
and good, and Mankind righteously condemned; but has taken all possible Care to
make it evident that he does so, and thereby to secure the Honor of his Law,
discountenance Sin, humble the Sinner, and exalt and magnify his Grace. Even
the whole Scheme of the Gospel is wisely calculated to attain these Ends, as we
shall see hereafter. So far was God from being moved to pity Mankind from a
Supposition that they had in this Respect been too severely dealt with, and so
Objects of Pi^y in that Sense; that on the contrary he most perfectly approved
of the Law as holy, just and good, and was altogether in it, that Mankind
deserved to be proceeded with according to it. Yea, so highly did he approve of
his holy Law, and so odious and ill-deserving did Mankind appear in his Eyes
for breaking of it, that their Sin cried aloud for Vengeance in his Ears. Yea,
cried so loud for Vengeance, that he judged it necessary that his own Son
should appear in their Stead and die in their Room, to the End he might be
just, might act consistently with the Holiness and Justice of his Nature, while
he showed Mercy to them. Romans 3.9 -- 26. -- In such a Light he viewed Things;
in such a Light must we therefore view them too, or we can never truly
understand our Need of Christ and Gospel Grace, or cordially acquiesce in the
Gospel-Way of Salvation: but rather shall be disposed to quarrel with the
Strictness of the Law, and think our selves abused, and imagine that God deals
hardly with us.

3. Nor was the supreme Being moved to entertain Designs of Mercy toward
Mankind, from a Supposition, that their Inability to yield perfect Obedience
made them the less to blame, and so the more proper Objects of Pity on that
Account. For Mankind are not the less to blame for their Inability; but the
more unable they are, the greater is their Blame; and so the more proper
Objects are they of the divine Wrath and Vengeance.

God is a most excellent and amiable Being. He infinitely deserves our highest
Love and Esteem and supreme Delight. It is perfectly fit, we should be of a
Disposition to say, Whom have we in Heaven but thee? and there is nothing on
Earth we desire besides thee. Psalm. 73.25. Now, not to love this God with all
our Hearts, must be infinitely wrong; and not to love him at all, must be worse
still; but to be habitually contrary to him in the Temper of our Hearts, yea,
so averse to him as that we CANNOT love him, must be in the very highest Degree
vile and sinful. And now to say, we CANNOT, by Way of Extenuation, as though we
were the less to blame for that, is intolerably God-provoking: whenas our CANNOT
arises only from the bad Temper of our Hearts, and because we be not what we
should be; and not at all from any Unloveliness in the divine Nature, or from
our Want of external Advantages for the Knowledge of God.

Put the Case to thy self, O Man. Were you as wise as Solomon, as holy as
David, as humble as Paul, and of as loving and kind a Temper as John; and had
you a Family of Children; and were all the Rules and Orders of your House, like
your self; and calculated to make all your Children just such as you be; and
did you perceive that your Children neither liked you, nor your Ways, nor the
Orders of your House; they show you much Disrespect in their Carriage,
disregard your Authority, complain, your Rules are too strict, and daily break
over all Orders: At length you call them to an Account, are about to convince
humble and reform them; they plead, they are not to blame, at least not so much
to blame, because they CANNOT love you, they CANNOT like your Ways, they CANNOT
but abhor such Rules and Orders; those very Properties, on Account of which,
you are indeed the most excellent Man in the World, these are the very Things
for which they dislike you, while in the mean Time they can most heartily love
their Companions in Vice and Debauchery: And now the Question is, Whether their
Inability to love you, renders 'em ever the less to blame? Or, whether it be
not very provoking in them, to plead in Excuse for themselves, that they cannot
love you? whenas this their cannot arises from their voluntary Contrariety to
all Good, and Love to Debauchery? and not at all from any Unloveliness of your
Person or Ways; or for want of Advantages to be acquainted with you, and with
the Beauty of your Temper and Conduct. The Application is easy. Was it any
Excuse for the Ill Will of the malicious Pharisees toward Christ, that they
could not love him, they could not but hate him? Did ever any Man look upon a
malicious spightful Neighbor, and think him ever the less to blame for his
abundant ill Carriage, for his being so exceeding ill-natured, that it was not
in his Heart to do otherwise? I appeal to the common Sense of all Mankind.

If such an Inability can excuse Mankind, then the Devils upon the same Foot
may be excused too. And the more any of God's Subjects hate him, the less will
they be to blame. For the more any do really hate God, the less able will they
be to love him. The more averse to his Law, the less able to keep it. And
therefore since our Inability arises from such a Root, the more unable we be to
love God with all our Hearts and yield a perfect Obedience to all his Laws, the
more vile, guilty, Hell-deserving we be, and the more unworthy of Pity. So that
this our moral Inability and Impotency, or rather Obstinacy, was in the Nature
of Things so far from extenuating our Guilt and moving the divine Pity, that it
was the strongest Evidence of our exceeding Vileness, and as it were a mighty
Bar and great Discouragement in the Way of God's ever entertaining any Designs
of Mercy toward us. It was like the great Mountains; so that nothing but an
infinite Goodness could have ever surmounted it. And in this Light must we view
our selves and our Inability, and become Self-condemned before God, or we shall
never like it that God looks upon us as he does, nor ever be able to look upon
his Grace in the Gospel in the same Light with him, nor can we ever heartily
approve of and fall in with that Way of Salvation.

When we are under sufficient outward Advantages to come to know what Kind of
Being God is, and yet after all see no Beauty in him, nor esteem him; it must
be either because we are intolerably bad in our Temper, or else because he is
not truly and ind^^d a lovely and amiable Being. -- When we say, we cannot love
him, under a fond Notion that we are hereby excused and are not to blame; we
implicitly say, that we are well enough disposed and are of a good Temper, but
God is such an hateful Being that we cannot love him. There is nothing in him
to be loved. So that to say, we CANNOT, under a Notion of extenuating our Guilt,
casts the highest Reflection upon God imaginable, and indeed is big with the
blackest Blasphemy. We had as good say, It is not owing to us that we don't
love God, but to him. We would readily love him, if there was any Thing in him
for us to love: but there is not, and so we cannot; and therefore be not to
blame.

To suppose therefore that God in the Gospel considers us as being the less to
Blame for this our Inability, and from thence is moved to pity us; is the very
same Thing in effect, as to suppose that God owns himself a hateful, unlovely
Being, and thinks it a great Hardship that his poor Creatures should be forced
to love him, or be damned; and therefore repents that ever he was so severe, or
ever made such a Law, and is sorry for them, and will do better by them for
Time to come. But how horrid a Thought is this! It casts the highest Reflection
upon God, and upon his holy Law, and quite destroys all the Grace of the
Gospel. No, no! God knew well enough how the Case stood. He was conscious to
his own infinite Excellency, and to the infinite Reasonableness of his Law. He
knew the hellish Temper of an apostate rebellious Race. And verily he was GOD
and not Man, or he would have doomed the whole World to Destruction without any
Pity or so much as one Thought of Mercy. Herein was Love, not that we loved
God; but that God loved us, and sent his Son to be a Propitiation for our Sins.
1 John 4.10. While we were Sinners and Enemies, Romans 5.8, 10. and most strongly
averse to a Reconciliation 2 Cor. 5.20.

4. Nor did his Designs of Mercy take their Rise from any Expectation that a
rebellious, guilty, perishing World would be so good, as of their Accord ever
heartily thank him for it. No, he knew well enough how it would be; that many
would make light of it, and go their Ways, one to his Farm, another to his
Merchandise; and that others would be affronted, and some so very angry that
they would take his Messengers, and stone one, and beat another, and kill
another, and finally would crucify his Son. And he expected that Mankind in
general would be disposed to hate his Law, and pervert his Gospel, and resist
his Spirit; and never one in all the World, repent and convert, and come and
humble himself before him, and bless his holy Name; unless brought thereto by
his own All-conquering Grace. Mat. 21.33 -- 39. and 22.1 -- 7. Luke 14.16 --
23. 1 Cor. 3.6, 7.

So that, from the whole, it is very plain, God was not moved to entertain
Thoughts of Mercy toward Mankind, neither under a Notion that they had been in
any Respect hardly dealt with, nor under a Notion that their Impotency rendered
them in any Measure excusable, nor under a Notion that there was any Good in
them or to be expected from them: but on the contrary, he looked upon the
original Constitution with Adam to be holy, just and good, and that upon that
Foot all Mankind deserved all Ruin; and he looked upon the Law of Nature also
holy, just and good, and that upon that Foot a wicked World deserved his
everlasting Wrath; and he looked upon them altogether criminal for their
Impotency. In a Word, he looked upon them voluntary in their Rebellion, and
obstinate in their Enmity, and infinitely unworthy of the least Pity; yea, so
unworthy of Pity, that to secure his own Honor, and to save himself from just
Reproach, while he pitied them and showed them Mercy, he thought it needful,
that his own Son should become a Mediator, and bear their Sin and suffer for
their Guilt, and so open a Way for the honorable Exercise of his Mercy.

To conclude therefore,

5. It is evident that his Designs of Mercy took their Rise merely, absolutely
and entirely from himself; from his own infinite Benevolence, from his
self-moving Goodness and sovereign Grace. GOD so loved the World --

As for us, we lay in the open Field of Perdition, polluted, perishing in our
Blood and Guilt: and it was perfectly right, that the righteous Sentence of the
Law should be executed upon us. And God had been for ever glorious in the
everlasting Ruin of a rebellious World. There was nothing in our Circumstances,
all Things considered, of the Nature of a Motive to Pity. We were too bad to
deserve any Pity or Relief. Yea, so bad, that the great Governor of the World
could not, without counteracting all good Rules of Government, show any Mercy
but by the Interposition of his own Son, to stand and die in our Room and
Stead. So that instead of any motive to Pity, there was every Thing to the
contrary. Our infinite ill Desert lay as an infinite Bar in the Way. -- Here
now was an Opportunity for infinite Goodness and Self-moving Mercy to exert it
self, in the most illustrious Manner; in designing Mercy, in providing a
Mediator, and in opening a Door for the exercise of much Grace to Mankind in
general, and of special saving Mercy in ten Thousand Thousand Instances. --
There was nothing, ab extra, from without God himself, to move and put him on
to such a wonderful and glorious Enterprise. The Motion was wholly from
himself, from his Self-moving Goodness, from his good Pleasure according to the
Counsel of his own Will. Ephesians. 1.3 -- 12. -- No wonder therefore, the Gospel
every where celebrates the Love and Goodness, Mercy and Grace of God, as being
rich and free, unparalled, unspeakable, inconceivable, infinitely great and
glorious, as discovered in this most wonderful of all God's Works. And to
suppose that God was under any Obligations to show these Favors, would be, to
undermine and overthrow the whole Gospel; and turn a Deed of the freest and
greatest Grace, into a Work of mere Justice. Thus we see whence God's Thoughts
of Mercy, toward a sinful, guilty World, had their Rise.

He had in View a great variety of glorious Designs, all infinitely wise, all
suited to display the glorious Perfections of his Nature, and bring everlasting
Honors to his great Name. He designed to destroy the Works of the Devil. Genesis
3.15. 1 Ioh. 3.8. Satan had induced Mankind to their Rebellion; and had perhaps
in his Conceit too, made himself strong against the Almighty. He first rebelled
himself, and now he had brought others to join with him, and in this World he
intended to rule and reign; and by the whole bring much Reproach upon the
rightful Lord of Heaven and Earth. God wrought therefore for his great Name's
sake, that it might not be polluted; and entered upon Methods to defeat his
Designs, and bring his Kingdom to naught, and crush the Rebellion, and put him
to open Shame; and at length bind him up in his Chains, that he should deceive
the Nations of the Earth no more; and give all Nations, Languages and Tongues,
to Jesus Christ, and bring the whole World into Subjection to him. Rev. 20.1 --
4. He designed to display his glorious Grace, in bringing Millions of this
seduced apostate Race, from the Jaws of eternal Destruction to eternal Glory.
Romans 9.23. Ephesians. 2.7. He designed to put all Mankind in a new State of
Probation, and to display his glorious Goodness, Patience, Forbearance and
Long-suffering in his Dealings with the obstinate and finally impenitent in
this World, and his glorious Holiness and Justice in their everlasting
Punishment in the World to come, in the same Lake of Fire and Brimstone, which
was prepared for the Devil and his Angels, with whom they had joined in their
Rebellion against the Majesty of Heaven. Act. 14.17. Romans 2.4. and 9.22. Mat.
25.41. In a Word, he designed to take Occasion from the Apostasy of Mankind, in
innumerable Instances, in this World, and throughout eternal Ages in the World
to come, to display all his glorious Perfections: And so by his whole Conduct,
to exhibit a most perfect and exact Image of himself.

Thus we see, that his Designs of Mercy, toward a rebellious, guilty, undone
World, took their Rise, not from any Motives in us, but altogether from Motives
in himself, from the infinite boundless Goodness of his Nature and his
sovereign good Pleasure. And in this Light must we view the Grace of the
Gospel, and all our Encouragements to hope in his Mercy through Jesus Christ,
must take their Rise, not from any Thing in our se^ves, but only from that
self-moving Goodness and free Grace which he has manifested through Jesus Christ.
Romans 3.19, 20, 24. Ephesians. 2.8.

And thus we see, that his End, as to the Elect, was to bring them back from
their Apostasy, their Rebellion and Wickedness and Ruin, to God their rightful
Lord and Sovereign, to become his Servants, to love him and live to him and
live upon him, and be blessed in him for ever. And in this Light must we view
the Gospel. And with this it is Design must we heartily fall in. And being
encouraged by the Grace of the Gospel, to hope for Acceptance in the Sight of
God through Jesus Christ, we must through Christ give up our selves to God, to be
his Servants for ever. Luke 1.74.75. 2 Cor. 5.20. Romans 12.1. Tit. 2.11 -- 14.

From what has been said, it will be very natural to make these following
Remarks.

REM. 1. If all God has done in the Gospel for our Recovery from Ruin, be of
mere free Grace, then it is Self-evident that God was under no Obligations to a
fallen, sinful, guilty, rebellious World; but, as for us, might have,
consistent with all his Perfections, left us in Ruin, to inherit the Fruit of
our Doings and the Punishment of our Sin. He was under no Obligation to provide
a Redeemer or a Sanctifier, to give the least Hint of a Pardon, or take any
Methods to recover us from the Power of Sin. He was under no Obligations to
deal any better by us, than would, in the whole, be no worse than Damnation. By
the Constitution with Adam, and by the Law of Nature, this would have been our
proper Due. Every thing therefore, whereby our Circumstances have been rendered
better than the Circumstances of the Damned, God was under no Obligations unto;
but all, over and above that, has been of free and sovereign Grace. God was at
Liberty, as to us, not to have done any of these Things for us. Yea, there were
on our Part mighty Hindrances to prevent the Mercy of God, and to put a Bar in
the Way of the free and honorable Exercise of his Grace. Even such Hindrances,
that nothing could remove them, but the Blood of Christ. Hence,

REM. 2. Mankind were, by their Fall, brought into a State of Being infinitely
worse than not to be. The Damned in Hell no doubt are in such a State, else
their Punishment would not be infinite; as Justice requires it should be. But
Mankind by the Fall were brought into a State, for Substance, For Substance, I
say, because it must be remembered that the (...) Punishment inflicted upon any
in Hell, for despising the Gospel* (...) be left out of the Account. For all
this, is over and above, (...), by the Constitution with Adam and the Law of
Nature, Mankind (...) or ever would have been exposed unto.
as bad as that which the Damned are in. For the Damned undergo nothing in
Hell, but what, by the Constitution with Adam and the Law of Nature, all
Mankind were and would have been, for Substance, exposed unto, if mere Grace
had not prevented. And according to what was but now observed, God was under no
more Obligati^^, to grant any Relief to Mankind, in this their fallen, sinful,
guilty, undone Condition, than he is now to the Damned in Hell; i. e. under no
Obligations at all: but the Way for Mercy to come to them was mightily (...)
and blocked up, by the infinite Reasonableness of their being punished, and
their infinite Unworthiness, in the very Nature of Things, as the Case then
stood, of ever being pitied. So that Mankind were by the Fall brought into a
State of Being, (in Scripture called Condemnation and Wrath, Romans 5.18. Ephesians.
2.3.) for Substance, as bad as that which the Damned are in; so that if the
Damned are in a State of Being, infinitely worse than not to be, as no Doubt
they are; then so also were Mankind. And Mankind being actually brought into
such a State by the Fall, is what renders the Grace of the Gospel, so
inconceivable, so unspeakable in it is Greatness, and so absolutely free. To
deny, that Mankind by the Fall were brought into such a State, is the same
Thing in Effect as to deny original Sin, and undermine the glorious Grace of
the Gospel.

OBJ. But how could God, consistent with his Perfections, put us into a State
of Being, worse than not to be? or how can we ever thank God for such a Being?

ANS. Our being brought into so bad an Estate was not owing to God, i. e. to
any Fault in him, but merely to our selves, to our Apostasy from God. It was
our Apostasy from God, that brought all this upon us, in Way of righteous
Judgment. Romans 5.18, 19. Our being in so bad a State is no more owing to God,
than theirs is who are now in Hell. They deserve to be in Hell, according to a
Law that is holy, just and good; and we deserve to be in such a State,
according to the Constitution made with Adam, which was also holy, just and
good: and therefore the one may be consistent with the divine Perfections, as
well as the other. It cannot be disagreeable to the Holiness, Justice, and
Goodness of the divine Nature, to deal with Mankind according to a
Constitution, in it is own Nature, holy, just, and good.

Now in as much as God did virtually give Being to all Mankind, when he blessed
our first Parents, and said, Be fruitful and multiply; and in as much as Being,
under the Circumstances that Man was then put in by God, was very desirable:
we ought therefore to thank God for our Being, considered in this Light, and
justify God in all the Evil that is come upon us for our Apostasy. For the Lord
is righteous, and we are a guilty Race.

Those in Hell are in a State of Being, infinitely worse than not to be; and
instead of thanking God for their (...), they blaspheme his Name: but still
there is no just G^ound for their Conduct. They have no Reason to think hard of
God for damning them: they have no Reason to blame him: they have no Reason to
esteem him ever the less for it: he does what is fit to be done: His Conduct is
amiable; and he is worthy of being esteemed for doing as he does; and all holy
Beings will always esteem him for it. ( Rev. 19.1, -- 6.) Therefore the Damned
ought to ascribe all their Evil to themselves, and justify God, and say, He
gave us Being, and it was a Mercy, and he deserves Thanks; but to us it is
owing, that we are now in a State infinitely worse than not to be: God is not
to blame for that; nor is he the less worthy of Thanks for giving us Being, and
for all past Advantages which we ever enjoyed: for the Law is holy, just and
good, by and according to which we suffer all these Things.

So here: Mankind by the Fall, were brought into a State of Being infinitely
worse than not to be; and were they but so far awake as to be sensible of it,
they would no doubt all over the Earth murmur and blaspheme the God of Heaven.
But what then? There would be no just Ground for such a Conduct. We have no
Reason to think hard of God, to blame him, or to esteem him ever the less. What
he has done, was fit and right; his Conduct was beautiful; and he is worthy to
be esteemed for it. For that Constitution was holy, just and good, as has been
proved. And therefore a fallen World ought to ascribe to themselves all their
Evil, and to justify God, and say, God gave us Being under a Constitution holy,
just and good; and it was a Mercy. We should have accounted it a great Mercy,
in case Adam had never fallen; but God was not to blame for this, nor therefore
is he the less worthy of Thanks. All that we suffer, is by and according to a
Constitution in it is own Nature holy, just and good. Thus Mankind ought to have
said, had God never provided a Savior, but left all the World in Ruin. And
thus ought they to have justified God's Conduct, laid all the Blame to
themselves, and acknowleged that God deserved Praise from all his Works; which,
as they came out of his Hands, were all very good. Genesis 1.31.

OBJ. But although we were by the Fall brought into such a State of Wrath and
Condemnation, yet now we are deliver^d out of it by Christ; for as in Adam all
die, so in CHRIST shall all be made alive.

ANS. Before Men believe in Christ, they are as justly exposed to divine
Vengeance, as if Christ had never died. Ioh. 3.18, 36. And there is nothing to
keep off Vengeance, one Moment, but sovereign Mercy; which yet they continually
affront and provoke. Romans 2.4, 5. And they are so far from an Inclination to
turn to God of their own Accord, that they are disposed to resist all the Means
used to reclaim them. Ioh. 3.19. It Is true, God is ready through Christ to
receive returning Sinners, and invites all to return through him. Thus God is
good and kind to an apostate World, and offers us Mercy. God is not to blame
that we are in so bad a Case (...) our Destruction is of our selves, and the
Lord is righteous. -- But still it is evident, we are in a perishing Condition,
and shall certainly perish notwithstanding all that we of our own mere Motion
shall ever do. If sovereign Grace don't prevent, there is no hope.

OBJ. But if Mankind are thus by Nature Children of Wrath, in a State of Being
worse than not to be, and even after all that Christ has done, are in
themselves thus utterly undone; how can Men have a Heart to propagate their
Kind? or account it a Blessing to have a numerous Posterity?

ANS. It Is manifest by their Conduct, by their neglecting their Children's
Souls, and caring only for their Bodies, that Parents in general do not
propagate with any Con^^^n about the spiritual and eternal Well-being of their
Posterity. It Is probable, in general they are influenced by the same Motive
that the brutal World be, together with a Desire to have Children under the
Notion of a worldly Comfort, without scarce a Thought of what will become of
their Posterity for Eternity.

As to godly Parents, they have such a Spirit of Love to God and Resignation to
his Will, and such an Approbation of his Dispensations toward Mankind, and such
a liking to his whole Scheme of Government, that they are content that God
should govern the World as he does, and that he should have Subjects to govern,
and that ^^emselves and their Posterity should be under him, and at his
dispose. Nor are they without hopes of Mercy for their Children, from sovereign
Grace through Christ, while they do through him devote and give them up to God, and
bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. And thus they quiet
themselves as to their Souls. And now considering Children merely as to this
Life, it is certain, that it is a great Comfort and Blessing to Parents, to have
a promising Offspring.

As to carnal Men, since they are Enemies to God and to his holy Law, it is no
wonder they are at Enmity against his whole Scheme of Conduct as Governor of
the World. Did they understand how God governs the World, and firmly believe
it, I doubt not, it would make all their native Enmity ferment to Perfection.
They would wish themselves to be from under God's Government, and hate that he
should ever have any Thing of theirs to govern. As soon as ever they enter into
the eternal World, and see how Things really be* this will no doubt actually be
their Case. -- In a Word if Men heartily like the original Constitution with
Adam, as being in it is own Nature holy, just and good, this Objection will,
upon mature Consideration, be no Difficulty with them; and if they do no^, it is
not any Thing that can be said, will satisfy them. But wicked Men's not liking
the Constitution, does not prove it to be bad.

OBJ. It cannot be thought a Blessing to have Children, if the most of them are
like finally to perish.

ANS. The most of Abraham's Posterity, no doubt, (...) above these three
Thousand Years, have been wicked and have perished; and God knew beforehand
how it would be; and yet he promised such a numerous Posterity under the Notion
of a great Blessing, Genesis 22. For considering Children merely as to this Life,
they may be a great Blessing and Comfort to Parents, and an Honor to them: but
it is very fitting, our Children should be God's Subjects, and under his
Government: nor be they ever the less Blessings to us as to this Life, because
they must be accountable to God in the Life to come. They may be a great
Comfort to (...) this Life; and we are certain, God will do them no Wrong in
the Life to come. All Men's murmuring Thoughts about this Matter arise from
their not liking God's Way of governing the World.

REM. ^. Then do we begin to make a just Estimate of the Grace, the free, rich
and glorious Grace of God, the great Governor of the World, displayed in the
Gospel, when we consider Mankind, by and according to a Constitution and a Law,
both of them holy, just and good, actually in such a ruined State. Now we may
begin a little to see the natural Import of those Words, God so loved the
World. Such a World was it, that he loved and pitied. A World in so bad a
State. A perishing World, sinful, guilty, justly condemned, altogether helpless
and undone. And to have a Door opened by the Blood of Christ, for us to be
raised from the Depth of such Ruin, is wonderful Grace indeed. -- And in this
Light does the Matter stand in Scripture-Account. For according to that, By the
Offense of one, Judgment came upon all to Condemnation, and by the Disobedience
of one, many were made (or constituted) Sinners, by Virtue of the original
Constitution with Adam. Constituted Sinners, it is in the Original; for it was
by Virtue of that primitive Constitution with Adam, that his first Sin laid all
his Posterity under Sin, Guilt and Ruin.
Romans 5.18, 19. And all the World stood guilty before God, by Virtue of their
want of Conformity unto and Transgression of the Law of Nature or moral Law.
Romans 3.9, -- 19. And hence Mankind were considered as being under Sin, and
under the Curse of the Law, and under the Wrath of God. Romans 3.9. Gal. 3.10.
Ioh. 3.16. Romans 1.18. And under this Notion Christ was appointed, to save his
People from their Sins, Mat. 1.21. to deliver them from the Wrath to come, 1
These. 1.10. and to bring it to pass that whereas by the Disobedience of one
many were made Sinners, so by the Obedience of one many might be made
righteous, Romans 5.19. And hence the Gospel so mightily magnifies the Grace of
God, his Love and Goodness, as being unparalled, unspeakable, inconceivable,
passing Knowledge. God so loved the World, says Christ. God commends his Love,
says Paul. Herein is Love, says John. It has Height and Length, Depth and
Breadth. It is rich Grace* and the exceeding Riches of Grace. And why? why is
it so magnified and extolled? why, for this, among other Reasons, because all
this was done while we did not love God, while we were Sinners, while we were
Ungodly, while we were Enemies, while we were exposed to Wrath, guilty before
God, perishing, lost, without Strength. Thus God has represented it in his
Word, his Word which is the Image of his Mind, and which shows us how he looks
upon Things, and how they really are. See Ioh. 3.16, 36. Romans 5.6, 7, 8. 1 Ioh.
4.10. Ephesians. 1.7. and 2.7, 8. and 3.19. Mat. 18.11. etc.

Never therefore can a Sinner rightly understand the Gospel of Christ, or see
his Need of the Provision therein made, or in any Measure make a just Estimate
of the Grace of God therein displayed, until he is in some Measure convinced
and made really sensible, by the Spirit of God, that he is actually in such a
sinful, guilty, helpless, undone Condition. This therefore is absolutely
necessary, in order to a genuine Compliance with the Gospel by Faith in Jesus
Christ. Luke 5.31. For the whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick.
-- And as this is requisite in order to the first Act of Faith; so for the same
Reason must we all our Days live under a realising Sense of this our sinful,
guilty, undone Estate, by Nature, and in our selves, in order to live by Faith.
And this will make Christ precious, and the Grace of the Gospel precious; and
effectually awaken us to Gratitude and Thankfulness; for now every Thing in our
Circumstances, wherein we are better of it than the Damned, will be accounted
so great a Mercy, and the Effect of mere Grace. And so far as we are from a
clear Sight and realising Sense of this our sinful, guilty, undone Estate; so
far shall we be insensible of the Preciousness of Christ, and the freeness of
Grace, and the greatness of God's Mercy toward us.

Thus, having considered the Grounds upon which the most high God did look upon
Mankind as being in a perishing Condition, and the Motives whereby he was
excited to enter upon any Methods for their Recovery; we proceed now more
particularly to consider the Ways and Means be has taken and used to bring it
about.

SECTION III. Concerning the Nature and Necessity of SATISFACTION for Sin.
I am now,

III. To show what Necessity there was for a Mediator, and how the Way to Life
has been opened by him whom God has provided. It is plainly supposed, that
there was a Necessity of a Mediator, and of such a one too as God has actually
provided, in order to our Salvation; for otherwise it had been no Love or
Goodness in God to have given his only begotten Son. For there can be no Love
or Goodness in his doing that for us which we do not need, and without which we
might have been saved as well. Nor is it to be supposed, that God would give
his Son, to die for a guilty World, without urgent Necessity. If some cheaper
and easier Way might have been found out, he would surely have spared his
beloved Son: he had no Inclination to make light of his Son's Blood: it was a
great Thing for a GOD to become incarnate, and die; and there must therefore
have been some very urgent Considerations, to induce the wise Governor of the
World to such an Expedient. And here then these Things may be particularly
inquired into.

1. What Necessity was there of Satisfaction for Sin?

2. What Satisfaction has there been made? And wherein does it is Sufficiency
consist?

3. How has the Way to Life been opened by the Means?

4. What Methods has the great Governor of the World entered upon, for the
actual Recovery of sinful Creatures?

1. We are to consider what Necessity there was of Satisfaction for Sin. It was
needful, or else no Satisfaction would have been ever required or made. And the
Necessity was certainly very great and urgent, or the Father would never have
been willing to have given his Son, or the Son to have undertaken the Work, a
Work attended with so much Labor and Suffering. But why was it necessary?
This, I think, will appear, if we deliberately and seriously weigh these Things.

(1.) That God the great Creator, Preserver, and absolute Lord of the whole
World, is, not only a Being of infinite Understanding and almighty Power, but
also a Being infinite and unchangeable in all moral Propensities: he loves
Right and hates Wrong to an infinite Degree, and unchangeably: or in
Scripture Language, he thus loves Righteousness and hates Iniquity. By his
infinite Understanding, he sees all Things, as being what they really are.
Whatsoever is fit and right, he beholds as being such: and whatsoever is unfit
and wrong, he also beholds as being such. And as are his Views, so i^ the
Temper of his Heart; he infinitely loves that which is fit and right, and
infinitely hates that which is unfit and wrong. Or in other Words, he has an
infinite Sense of the moral Fitness and Unfitness of Things, and an answerable
Frame of Heart. i. e. infinitely loves the one, and infinitely hates the other.
From Eternity God has had an All-comprehensive View of Things, of every Thing
that was possible to be or that actually would be, and of all the Relations one
Being would bear to another, and the Relation that all would bear to him, and
has seen what Conduct would be right and fit in him toward them, and in them
toward him and toward one another, and what would be wrong; and from Eternity
it has been his Nature, infinitely to love that which is right, and hate that
which is wrong. And this his Nature has influenced him in all his Conduct, as
moral Governor of the World; and he has given so bright a Representation of
it, that this seems to be the first and most natural Idea of God that we can
attain. It shines through all the Script^res, through the Law and the Gospel, and
through his whole Conduct in a thousand Instances.

God does not appear to be a Being influenced, acted, and governed by a
groundless arbitrary Self-Will, having no Regard to right Reason, to the moral
Fitness and Unfitness of Things: nor does he appear to be a Being governed and
acted by a groundless Fondnes^ to his Creatures. If a Thing is not right, he
will not on (...), merely because he is above Control, is the greatest (...)
s^rongest, and can bear down all before him. Genesis ^8.^5 And if a Thing is
wrong, he will not connive (...), because it was acted by his Creatures, although
(...) so dear to him, and although the most exalted in Dignity, Honor and
Privileges. For Instance, the sinning Angels, sinning Adam, the Israelites in
the Wilderness, his peculiar People. Moses, for speaking unadvisedly with his
Lips, shall not enter into Canaan. David, the Man after his own Heart, he
sinned; and the Sword, says God, shall not depart from thy House. Yea, he
spared not his own Son, when he stood in the Room of Sinners. If he had been
governed by any Thing like human Fondness, surely it would now have appeared.
And besides, if that were the Case, he could never bear to see the Damned lie
in the dreadful Torments of Hell to all Eternity. Indeed; by all he has said,
and by all he has done, he appears to have an infinite Sense of the moral
Fitness and Unfitness of Things, and an answerable Frame of Heart; and to be
governed and actuated by this Temper, under the Direction of infinite Wisdom.
Hence, as is his Nature, so is the Name which he has taken to himself* viz. The
HOLY ONE of Israel.

It is true, he is a Being of infinite Goodness and Mercy; yet that is not a
fond, but a holy Propensity, under the Government of infinite Wisdom: that is,
he considers the Happiness and Good of his Creatures, his intelligent
Creatures, as being what it is. He sees what it is worth, and of how great
Importance it is; and how much to be desired, in it self, and compared with
other Things: he sees it to be just what it really is, and has an answerable
Disposition of Heart. i. e. Is desirous of their Happiness, and averse to their
Misery, in an exact Proportion to the real Nature of the Things in themselves.
It is true, so great is his Benevolence, that there is not any Act of Kindness
or Grace so great, but that he can find in his Heart to do it, yea, has an
infinite Inclination to do it; if, all Things considered, in his unerring
Wisdom, he judges it fit and best. And yet at the same Time it is as true, such
is the perfect Rectitude and spotless Purity of his Nature, that there is not
any Act of Justice so tremendous, or any Misery so dreadful, but that he can
find in his Heart, his Creatures Happiness notwithstanding, to do that Act of
Justice, and inflict that Misery, if Need so require; yea, he has an infinite
Inclination thereto. He regards their Happiness and Misery as being what they
are, of very great Importance in themselves, but of little Importance compared
with something else. He had rather the whole System of intelligent Creatures
should lie in Hell to all Eternity, than do the very least Thing, that is in it
self unfit and wrong. Yea, if it was put to his own Case, if we could possibly
suppose such a Thing, he would make it appear, that he does as he would be done
by, when he punishes Sinners to all Eternity. It was in a Sort put to his own
Case once, when his Son, who was as himself, stood in the Room of a guilty
World; and his Heart did not fail him; but he appeared as great an Enemy to Sin
then, as ever he did or will do to all Eternity. His treating his Son as he did
in the Garden and upon the Cross, immediately himself and by his Instruments,
was as bright an Evidence of the Temper of his Heart, as if he had damned the
whole World. He appeared what he was then, as much as he will at the Day of
Judgment. He is infinite in Goodness; yet he is infinitely averse to do any Act
of Kindness, at the Expense of Justice, from mere Fondness to his Creatures.

And as his Goodness is not Fondness, so his Justice is not Cruelty. He
infinitely hates that which is unfit and wrong, and is disposed to testify that
his hatred in some visible public Manner, by inflicting some proportionable
Punishment. Not because Sinners hurt him, and so make him angry and revengeful;
for their Obedience can do him no good, nor their Disobedience any hurt. Job
35.6, 7. Nor indeed so much because they hurt themselves; for if they did wrong
in no other Respect, he would never treat them with such Severity. But this is
the Truth of the Case; the great Governor of the World has an infinite Sense
of the moral Fitness and Unfitness of Things, and an answerable Frame of Heart.
And so he infinitely loves that which is fit, and commands and rewards it; and
infinitely hates the contrary, and forbids and punishes it. -- Only it must be
remembered, that the Rewards he grants to the good, are of mere Bounty as to
them, because they can deserve nothing. Romans 11.35. But the Punishments he
inflicts on the Wicked, are pure Justice, because they deserve all. Romans 6.23.
For although Creatures cannot merit Good at the Hands of God, from whom they
receive all, and to whom they owe all; yet they can merit Evil. Nevertheless
Rewards and Punishments are both alike in this Respect, viz. that they are
visible public Testimonies born by the Governor of the World, to the moral
Amiableness of Virtue, on the one Hand, and to the moral Hatefulness of Vice,
on the other. The one is not the Effect of Fondness, nor the other of Cruelty:
but the one results from the Holiness and Goodness of the divine Nature, and
the other from his Holiness and Justice. By the one, it appears how he loves
Virtue, and how exceeding bountiful he is; and by the other, how he hates Sin,
and how much he is disposed to discountenance it, by treating it as being what
it is.

Thus, I say, in the first Place, we must consider God, the supreme Governor
of the World, as a Being, not only of infinite Understanding and almighty
Power, but also infinite and unchangeable in all moral Propensities: As one
having a perfect Sense of the moral Fitness and Unfitness of Things, and an
answerable Frame of Heart. Or in Scripture Language, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
Almighty; the holy one of Israel. The Lord God gracious and merciful, but by no
Means clearing the guilty. Of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity. Who loves
Righteousness and hates Iniquity. Who renders to every one according to their
Doings, etc. -- Without a right Idea of God the supreme Governor of the World,
and a realising living Sense of him on our Hearts, it is impossible we should
rightly understand the Methods he has taken to open a Way for his Mercy to come
out after a rebellious guilty World, or truly see into the Grounds of his
Conduct, the Reasons of his doing as he has done. If we know God, and have a
Taste for moral Beauty, we shall be in a Disposition to understand the Gospel;
but otherwise we shall not. Ioh. 7.17. and 8.47. For in the whole of this great
Affair of our Redemption, he has acted altogether like himself.

(2.) God is infinitely excellent, glorious and amiable, in being what he is.
His having such a Nature or Temper, and at the same Time being of infinite
Understanding and almighty Power, renders him infinitely excellent, glorious
and amiable, far beyond the Conceptions of any finite Mind. Isai. 6.3. Holy,
Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty, the whole Earth is full of thy Glory.

Hence, God loves, esteems and delights in himself infinitely. Not indeed from
what we call a selfish Spirit; for could we suppose there was another just what
he is, and himself an Inferior, he would love, esteem and delight in that
other, as entirely as he does now in himself. It is his being what is, that is
the Ground of his Self-Love, Esteem and Delight.

Hence again, He loves to act like himself, in all his Conduct as moral
Governor of the World, as entirely as he loves himself; and it is as much
contrary to his Nature, to counteract the Temper of his Heart, in his public
Conduct, as to cease to be what he is. And the plain Reason is, that there is
the same Ground for the one as for the other. He loves himself, because he is
most excellent, in being, what he is: And for the same Reason, he loves to act
like himself, because that is most excellent too. He cannot be willing to cease
to be of that Temper or Nature he is of, because it is most excellent; and for
the same Reason, he cannot be willing to counteract it, because it is most
excellent to act agreeably to it in all Things. He is under Necessity to love
himself; and he is under the same Necessity to act like himself. Genesis 18.25.
Hence it is a common Thing for God in great Earnestness to say in his Word, I
will do so and so, and they shall KNOW THAT I AM THE LORD. As if he should say,
A guilty rebellious Race may think and say what they will of me, yet I am what
I am, and I will act like my self, and all the World shall know that I am the
Lord, i. e. that I am what I pretend to be: They shall know it by my Conduct,
sooner or later.

(3). God cannot be said to act like himself, unless he appears, as great an
Enemy to Sin, in his public Government of the World, as he really is at Heart.
If his Conduct as moral Governor of the World, the whole being taken together,
should look with a more favorable Aspect toward Sin, or appear less severe,
than really he is; then it is self-evident that his Conduct would not be like
himself, nor would it tend to exhibit a true Idea of him to all attentive
Spectators in all his Dominions. If his Creatures and Subjects, in such a Case,
should judge of his Nature by his Conduct, they would necessarily frame wrong
Notions of the divine Being. And he himself must see and know, that he did not
act like himself; nor appear in his Conduct to be what he was in his Heart.

But God, the supreme Governor of the World, does at Heart look upon Sin as an
infinite Evil, and his Aversion and Enmity to it is infinite. He looks upon it,
and (to speak of him after the Manner of Men) is affected toward it, as being
what it really is. But it is infinitely wrong and wicked, for us not to love
him with all our Heart and obey him in every Thing: The least Sin is an
Infinite Evil; and such he sees it to be, and as such does he abhor it. -- The
infinite Evil of Sin does not consist in it is lessening God's essential Glory
or Blessedness; for they are both independent on us, and far out of our Reach:
nor does it consist merely in it is Tendency to make us miserable. But in it is
own Nature it is infinitely wrong, in as much as we are under infinite
Obligations to perfect Holiness. Our Obligations to love God with all our
Heart, are in Proportion to his Amiableness; but that is infinite: not to do so
therefore is infinitely wrong. But, as has been said, God has an infinite Sense
of the moral Fitness and Unfitness of Things, and an answerable Frame of Heart.
i. e. he infinitely loves that which is right, and infinitely hates that which
is wrong. And therefore he infinitely hates the least Sin.

If therefore he acts like himself, he must in his public Government of the
World, his whole Conduct being taken together, appear in the most evident
Manner to be an infinite Enemy to the least Sin. He must appear infinitely
severe against it; and never do any Thing, which, all Things considered, seems
to look at all with another Aspect.

(4.) God the supreme Governor of the World cannot be said to appear an
infinite Enemy to Sin, and to appear infinitely severe against it, and that
without the least Appearance of a favorable Aspect toward it, in his Conduct;
unless he does always throughout all his Dominions, not only in Word threaten,
but in Fact punish it, with infinite Severity, without the least Mitigation or
Abatement, in any one Instance whatsoever.

If he should never, in his Government of the World, say or do any Thing
against Sin, it would seem as if he was a Friend to it, or at least very
indifferent about it. If he should say and not do, threaten to punish, but
never inflict the Punishment, his Creatures and Subjects might be tempted to
say, He pretends to be a mighty Enemy to Sin, and that is all. If he should
generally punish Sin with infinite Severity, but not always; there would at
least be some favorable Aspect toward Sin, in his visible Conduct. And his
Subjects might be ready to say, If he can suffer Sin to go half unpunished, why
not altogether? and if altogether at one Time, why not at another? And if he
can abate the threatened Punishment in some Degree, in some Instances; why not
altogether, in all Instances? If there is no absolute Necessity that Sin should
be punished, why does he ever punish it? But if it be absolutely necessary, why
does he ever suffer it to go unpunished? It would seem at least, by such a
Conduct, as if Sin was not so exceeding bad a Thing, but that it might escape
Punishment sometimes: and as if God was not such an infinite unchangeable Enemy
to it, but that he might be disposed to treat it with a little Favor. In a
Word, if God should always punish Sins, not one excepted, and that throughout
all his Dominions, and yet not do it always with infinite Severity; but in some
Instances, one in a Million we'll say, should abate a little, and but a very
little; yet so much as he abates, be it more or less, so much does he treat Sin
in a favorable Manner, and so much does he fall short of treating it with due
Severity, and so far does he appear in his Conduct from being an infinite
unchangeable Enemy to it. So that it is very evident, that he cannot, in his
Conduct as moral Governor of the World, appear an infinite unchangeable Enemy
to Sin, without the least Appearance to the contrary, in any other possible Way
or Method, than by always punishing it with infinite Severity, without the
least Abatement, in any one Instance, in any Part of his Dominions, in Time or
Eternity. And this would be to act like himself; and in and by such a Conduct,
he would appear to be what he is. But to do otherwise, would be to counteract
his own Nature, and give a false Representation of his Heart, by a Conduct
unlike himself.

Thus, it is the Nature of God, the great Governor of the World, in all his
Conduct, to act like himself: But he cannot be said to act like himself, unless
he appears as great an Enemy to Sin and as severe against it, as he really is,
without the least Shadow of the contrary: but his Conduct cannot appear in this
Light, unless he does in Fact punish Sin with infinite Severity, throughout all
his Dominions, without the least Mitigation, in any one Instance, in Time or
Eternity: therefore, it is the Nature of God, the Governor of the World, to do
so: And therefore, he can no sooner, nor any easier, be willing, to let any Sin
go unpunished, than he can, to cease to be what he is. God's mild and kind
Conduct toward a guilty World at present, is nothing incons^^^^nt with this*
because Mankind are now dealt with in and through a Mediator, upon whom our Sins
have been laid, and who has been made a Curse for us. In him, our Sins have
been treated with infinite Severity, without the least Abatement. But for this,
God's Conduct, no doubt, would be very inconsistent with his Perfections.
For, as was before proved, it is as impossible for him to act contrary to his
own Nature, as it is to cease to be what he is: and he can consent to the one,
as easily, as to the other.

Hence, we may learn, this is really a Branch of the Law of Nature, That Sin
should be punished: it results from the Nature of God, the Governor of the
World: it was no arbitrary Constitution: it did not result from the divine
Sovereignty. It would, in the Nature of Things, have been no Evil, for Adam to
have eaten of the Tree of Knowledge, had not God forbidden it; herein God
exercised his sovereign Authority, as absolute Lord of all Things: But in
threatening Sin with eternal Death, he acted not as a sovereign, but as a
righteous Governor: his Nature prompted him to do so; he could not have done
otherwise. As it is said in another Case, It is impossible for God to lie; so
it may be said here, It is impossible for God to let Sin go unpunished. As he
cannot go counter to himself in speaking, so neither in acting. It Is as
contrary to his Nature, to let Sin go unpunished, as it is to lie; for his
Justice is as much himself, as his Truth; and it is therefore equally
impossible he should act contrary to either.

Hence, this Branch of the Law of Nature is not capable of any Repeal or
Abatement. For since it necessarily results from the Nature of God the
Governor of the World, it must necessarily remain in Force so long as God
continues to be what he is. Besides, if God should repeal it, he must not only
counteract his own Nature, but also give great Occasion to all his Subjects to
think, he was once too severe against Sin, and that now he had altered his
Mind, and was become more favorable toward it: Which he can no more be
willing to do, than he can be willing actually to cease to be what he is. For
as he loves himself perfectly for being what he is, so he perfectly loves to
act like himself, and to appear in his Conduct just as he is in his Heart.
Therefore our Savior expressly asserts, That Heaven and Earth shall pass away,
but not one I^t or Tittle of the Law shall fail. Matt. 5.18.

(5.) But all this notwithstanding, yet God did, of his infinite Goodness and
sovereign Grace, entertain Designs of Mercy toward a fallen World, a
rebellious, obstinate, stubborn, sinful, guilty, Hell-deserving Race, under the
righteous Condemnation of the Law, a Law like himself, holy, just and good.
Particularly, he designed to declare himself reconcilable to this sinful,
guilty World; to put Mankind into a new State of Probation; to try and see if
they would repent and return unto him, and to use a Variety of Methods for
their Recovery. -- And to make Way for this, he designed to reprieve a guilty
World, for a certain Space of Time, from that utter Ruin he had threatened; and
to grant a Sufficiency of the good Things of this Life for their Support, while
in a State of Probation: and he also purposed to grant a general Resurrection
from the Dead, that those who should return to him and be reconciled, might be
most completely happy in the World to come. -- And because he knew their
Aversion to a Reconciliation, therefore he designed to use a Variety of
external Means to bring them to it. -- And because he knew that Mankind would
be universally disposed to hate all such Means (not liking to have God in their
Knowledge) and cast them off and get from under them, therefore he designed in
his sovereign Grace to select some Part of Mankind, (the Jews for Instance)
with whom, by his special Providence, by the more open or secret Workings of
his almighty Power, such Means should be continued. -- And in the Fullness of
Time, he purposed also to use equal, yea, greater Means with various Nations of
the Gentiles. -- And because he knew that all external Means notwithstanding,
yet all with one Consent, would refuse to repent and convert and be reconciled,
therefore he designed by his Providence and by the more common Influences of
his Spirit, to take some farther Pains with many, and try them. -- And because
he knew that this would never effectually persuade them, through the great
Perverseness of Mankind; therefore he designed, by the special Influences of
his holy Spirit, through his almighty Power and all-conquering Grace, all their
Obstinacy notwithstanding, yet to reclaim and recover and bring Home to
himself, a certain Number in this World; and here train them up for eternal
Glory, and finally bring them thereunto: and all of his sovereign Goodness, and
all to the Praise of the Glory of his Grace. -- And toward the latter End of
that Space of Time, in which this World was to be reprieved, it was his Purpose
more eminently to destroy Satan's Kingdom on Earth and his Influence among
Mankind, and more generally recover the guilty Nations from his Thraldom, and
set up his own Kingdom on Earth, to flourish in great Glory and Prosperity a
Thousand Years. Such were his Designs, as is evident by the Event of Things,
and from the Revelation he has made in his Word of what is yet to come to pass.

(6.) But as the Case then stood, it was not fit, that any of these Favors
should be granted to a guilty World; no, not any Thing, that had so much as
(all Things considered,) the Nature of a Mercy, without some sufficient Salvo
to the divine Honor. OBJ. But if God could not, consistent with his
Perfections, show any Mercy to a guilty World without a sufficient Salvo to his
Honor; how could he, consistent with his Perfections, provide them a Mediator?
Was not this a great Mercy? And what Salvo had he for his Honor in doing of it?

ANS. The very doing of this Thing itself was to secure his own Honor. This
was the very End he had nextly in View. Were it not for this End, a Mediator
had not been needful; but a guilty World might have been pardoned by an Act of
absolute sovereign Grace. -- Now his taking such a glorious Method to secure
his Honor, and the Honor of his Law and Government and sacred Authority, had
no Tendency to misrepresent them. He acted in it just like himself. His
infinite Wisdom, Holiness, Justice and Goodness, are all at once most perfectly
displayed in this Conduct of the supreme Governor of the World. Particularly,
his infinite Hatred of Sin and Disposition to punish it, appeared in the very
Act of appointing his Son to be a Sacrifice for the Sins of the World. For in
this Act, it was manifest, that he did choose, his own dear Son should himself
bear the Punishment of Sin, rather than let it go unpunished.


Indeed some Kind of Reprieve, I presume, might have been granted to a guilty
World, so as to have suffered the human Race to have propagated, and the whole
designed Number to have been born; a Reprieve, all Things considered, not of
the Nature of a Mercy. So the fallen Angels seem to be under some Kind of a
Reprieve* for they are reserved in Chains, to the Judgment of the great Day, as
condemned Prisoners. 2 Pet. 2.4. And hence, a Number of them once cried out,
Art thou come to torment us before the Time? Matt. 8.29. Yet we are not taught
in Scripture to look upon this, as a Mercy to them. -- But the Scriptures teach
us to consider our Reprieve, our worldly Comforts, our Means of Grace, our
Space for Repentance, the Restraints of Providence and the common Influences of
the Spirit, as Mercies; yea, as great Mercies. Romans 2.4. Isai. 5.4. Deuteronomy.
10.18. Act. 14.17. Rev. 2.21. -- All these common Favors therefore, as well as
special and saving Mercies, were not proper to be granted to such a guilty,
Hell-deserving World, by a holy, sin-hating, sin-revenging God. This was not to
treat Mankind, as it was fit and meet they should be treated. It was contrary
to Law, that any Favor at all should without a Salvo to the divine Honor, be
granted them; for by Law they were all doomed to Destruction. And it was
contrary to the divine Nature, to do any Thing in the Case, that, all Things
considered, would have, in the least Measure, a favorable Aspect toward Sin;
or so much as in the least tend to make him seem less severe against it, than
if he had damned the whole World for their Apostasy and Rebellion.

If God had set aside his Law, which was the Image of his Heart, and undertaken
and shown all these Favors to a guilty World, without any Salvo to his Honor,
his visible Conduct would have been directly contrary to the inward Temper of
his Heart; and by it, he would have counteracted his Nature, and misrepresented
himself, dishonored his Law, rendered his Authority weak and contemptible, and
opened a wide Door for the Encouragement of Rebellion, throughout all his
Dominions; and in Effect gotten to himself the Character the Devil designed to
give of him to our first Parents, when he said, Ye shall not surely die. Genesis
3.4. i. e. God is not so severe against Sin, as he pretends to be, and as you
think for, nor does he hate it so much, nor will he do as he says in the Case.
It was therefore infinitely impossible.

(7.) To the End therefore, that a Way might be opened for him to put his
Designs of Mercy in Execution, consistent with himself, consistent with the
Honor of his Holiness and Justice, Law and Government and sacred Authority,
something must be done by him in a public Manner, as it were in the Sight of
all Worlds, whereby his infinite Hatred of Sin and unchangeable Resolution to
punish it, might be as effectually manifested as if he had damned the whole
World. MERELY his saying, that he infinitely hates Sin, and looks upon it
worthy of an infinite Punishment, would not have manifested the inward Temper
of his Heart in such a Meridian Brightness, as if he had damned the whole World
in very Deed. But rather, his saying one Thing, and doing another directly
contrary, would have been a going Counter to himself; especially, considering
him as acting in the Capacity of a Governor, to whom by Office it belongs to
put the Law in Execution and cause Justice to take Place. For him, first to
make a Law threatening eternal Death to the least Sin, makes him appear
infinitely just and holy; but then to have no Regard to that Law in his
Conduct, but go right contrary to it, without any Salvo to his Honor, is quite
inconsistent; and directly tends to bring Himself, his Law and Authority, into
the greatest Contempt. Something, I say, therefore must be DONE, to make his
Hatred of the Sin of Mankind and Disposition to punish it, as manifest as if he
had damned the whole World; to the End, the Honor of his Holiness and Justice,
of his Law and Government and sacred Authority, might be effectually secured.
To act contrary to his own Nature, was impossible; to have no Regard to the
Honor of his Law and Government, was unreasonable; a guilty World had better
all have been damned.

Thus from the Perfections of God, and from the Nature of the Thing, we see the
Necessity there was, that Satisfaction should be made for Sin, in order to open
an honorable Way in which divine Mercy might come out after a rebellious,
guilty, Hell-deserving World.

To conclude this Head, The Necessity of Satisfaction for Sin seems also to be
held forth in the Scriptures, and to be implied in God's Conduct in this
Affair. -- In the Old Testament, the Necessity of an Atonement for Sin was
taught in Types and Figures. The Man that sinned was to bring his Offering
before the Lord, and lay his Hands upon it, and confess his Sin over it; and
so, as it were, transfer his Sin and Guilt to it; then was it to be slain ( for
Death is the Wages of Sin) and burnt upon the Altar, (for the Sinner deserves
to be consumed in the Fire of God's Wrath) and the Blood thereof was to be
sprinkled round about; (for without shedding of Blood there is no Remission)
nor was there any other Way of obtaining Pardon prescribed, but this, which
naturally taught the Necessity of Satisfaction for Sin, and led the pious Jews
to some general Notion of the great Atonement which God would provide, and to a
cordial Reliance thereon for Acceptance in the Sight of God. Lev. 4. and 16.
Heb. 9. -- But in the New Testament, the Nature and Necessity of Satisfaction
for Sin, and the Impossibility of finding Acceptance with God, unless through the
Atonement of Christ, is taught in Language very plain and express: particularly
in the third Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. St. Paul having proved both
Jews and Greeks to be under Sin, and all the World to be guilty before God, and
that every Mouth must be stopped, in the first and second Chapters and in the
Beginning of the third, does, in the next Place, enter upon, and begin to
explain, the Way of Salvation by free Grace through Jesus Christ: We cannot, says
he, be justified by the Deeds of the Law; ( Chap. 3.20.) But it must be freely
by Grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. (v. 24.) -- But if we
are not justified by the Deeds of the Law, by our own Obedience, how will God
our Judge appear to be righteous? If the Law condemns us and yet he justifies
us, i. e. if he thus proceeds contrary to Law, to clear and approve, when that
condemns; how will he appear to be a just and upright Governor and Judge, who
loving Righteousness and hating Iniquity, is disposed always to render to every
one his Due? -- Why, -- there is a Way contrived, wherein the Righteousness of
God is manifested in our Justification without the Law's being obeyed by us, a
Way unto which the Types of the Law and Predictions of the Prophets did all
bear Witness, a Way in which the Righteousness of God is manifested in and by
Christ: (v. 21, 22.) -- But how? -- Why, God has set him forth to be a
Propitiation, to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins that are
past, through the Forbearance of God; to declare, I say, at this Time his
Righteousness: THAT HE MIGHT BE JUST, and the Iustifier of him which believes
in Jesus. The Apostle seems evidently to suppose, that God could not have been
just, had he not thus declared his Righteousness; and that he actually took
this Method to declare and manifest his Righteousness, to the End he might be
just, might act agreeable to his Nature, the original Standard of Justice, and
to his Law, which is the Transcript of his Nature, and the established Rule of
Righteousness, between him our Governor, and us his Subjects. He set forth his
Son to be a Propitiation, for the Remission of Sin, to declare his
Righteousness, that he might be just, and the Iustifier etc.

BESIDES, The Necessity of Satisfaction for Sin, and that even by the Death of
Christ, seems to be implied in our Savior's Prayer in the Garden, If it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will, Mat. 26.39. And again, v. 42. O my Father, if this Cup may not pass away
from me, except I drink it, thy Will be done. As if Christ had said, If it be
possible thy Designs of Mercy might be put into Execution, and poor Sinners
saved, consistent with thine Honor, without my drinking this Cup, O that it
might be: but if it is not possible it should be so, I consent. Satisfaction
for Sin being necessary, and there being no easier Wa^ in which Satisfaction
for Sin might be made, and a Door opened for Mercy to come to a guilty World
consistent with the divine Honor, seems to have been the very Ground, of the
Father's willing him, and of Christ's consenting, to drink that Cup. And
indeed, is it possible to conceive, why Christ should be willing to suffer what
he did, or why his Father should desire it, were it not an Expedient absolutely
necessary, and nothing else would do, so that, it must be, or not one of the
Race of Adam be ever saved, consistent with the divine Honor? If it was not so
absolutely necessary, if there was some cheaper and easier Way that would have
done, why did the Father will this? or how had Christ a sufficient Call to
undertake it? or indeed what Need was there for him to undertake? or what Good
would it do? If Sin was not in very Deed, so bad a Thing, that it could not be
pardoned without such a Satisfaction, why was such a Satisfaction insisted
upon? Why a greater Satisfaction than was needful? Could a holy and wise God
set so light by the Blood of his dear Son, as to desire it to be shed without
the most urgent Necessity? Or why should the Governor of the World make more
Ado than needs, and then magnify his Love in giving his Son, when Mankind
might have been saved without it? Did this become the great Governor of the
World? Or would God have us look upon his Conduct in such a Light? Surely no.
-- Verily therefore, such was the Case of a rebellious guilty World, that God
looked upon them too bad to be released, consistent with the divine Honor,
from the threatened Destruction, unless such a Mediator should interpose, and
such a Satisfaction for Sin be made; and therefore Christ acquiesced in his
Will, as being wise, holy, just and good. -- And this being supposed, the Love
of God in giving his Son appears even such as it is represented to be;
unparalled, unspeakable, inconceivable: so also does the Love of Christ in
undertaking. -- And thus from the Perfections of God, and from the Scriptures,
and from God's Conduct in this Affair, it appears that a full Satisfaction for
Sin was n^cessary, in order to it is being pardoned, or any Favor shown to a
guilty World, consistent with the divine Honor.

And if we, in very Deed, did stand in such Need, such an absolute perishing
Need of a Mediator, as this comes to; if God looked upon Things in such a
Light; then must we see this our Need of a Mediator, and look upon Things in
this Light too, and have a Sense of this great Truth upon our Hearts: for
otherwise we neither truly understand what a State we are in, nor what Need we
have of a Mediator. And if we do not truly understand what a State we are in,
nor our Need of the Mediator God has provided, how can we be in a Disposition
to receive him a^ he is offered in the Gospel, and truly and understandingly to
rely upon him, his Death and Sufferings, his Worth and Merits, his Mediation
and Intercession, as the Gospel invites us to do?

To see our Need of Christ to be our Atonement, to see our Need of his
propitiatory Sacrifice to open the Way for the Governor of the World to be
reconciled to us consistently with his Honor, is a very different Thing from
what many imagine. Some fancy, they want Christ to purchase an Abatement of the
Law, and satisfy for their Imperfections; and then they hope to procure the
divine Favor by their own Goodness. -- Some trust in Christ and the free Grace
of God through him, as they think, and yet at the same Time look upon God as
obliged in Justice to save them, if they do as well as they can. Some, who lay
not so high a Claim to the divine Favor, yet by their Tears and Prayers hope
to move the Compassions of God, and by their fair Promises to engage his
Favor, and would secretly think it hard, if after all, God should cast them
off; and yet they pretend to see their Need of Christ and to trust in him. But
these are all evidently so far from seeing their Need of Christ, that in the
Temper and Exercises of their Hearts, they implicitly and practically deny any
Need of him at all; to their own Sense, they are good enough to be accepted in
the Sight of God upon their own Account. Romans 10.3. -- Others, who have had
great Awakenings and Convictions, see much of their own Badness, and do in a
Sort renounce their own Righteousness, they look to be saved by free Grace; but
in all the Exercises of their Hearts, see no Need of a Mediator, and have
nothing to do with him: They see no Reason why they may not be pitied and saved
by free Grace, without any Respect to the Atonement of Christ. They don't
understand that they are so bad, that it would be a Reproach to the Governor
of the World, to show them Mercy otherwise than through a Mediator. -- Others
again, who talk much of Christ, and of Faith, and of living by Faith, and cry
down Works, and think themselves most evangelical; yet after all, only believe
that Christ died for them in particular, and that they shall be saved: this is
their Faith, and this their trusting in Christ* whereby it is evident, they
never truly saw their Need of Christ, nor have they any Respect to him under
the proper Character of a Mediator. But then do Persons see their Need of
Christ, when from a Sense of what they be, and of what God is* they are
convinced, that they are too bad to be pardoned (...) accepted, so bad that any
Thing short of Damnation is too good for them; so that it would be inconsistent
with the divine Perfections and to the Reproach of the great Governor of the
World, to show them any Favor, without some sufficient Salvo to his Honor.
Now they see their Need of Christ and are prepared to exercise Faith in his
Blood (to use the Apostle's Phrase, Romans 3.23.) and not 'till now. For Men
cannot be said to see their Need of Christ and his Atonement, unless they see
that in their Case, which renders his Atonement needful; but it is being
inconsistent with the divine Perfections, and to the Dishonor of God, to
pardon Sin without Satisfaction, was that which made an Atonement needful:
Therefore Sinners must see their Case to be such as that it would be
inconsistent with the divine Perfections and to the Dishonor of God, to grant
them Pardon without Satisfaction for their Sins; in order to see their Need of
Christ and of his Atonement. When they see their Case to be such, then they
begin to see Things as they are, to view them in the same Light that God does,
to perceive upon what Grounds and for what Reasons a Mediator was necessary,
and why and upon what Accounts they want one; and hereby a Foundation is laid
for them understandingly to have a fiducial Recourse to that Mediator which God
has provided, that through him, consistently with the divine Perfections, they
may be received to Favor. And so from Christ the Mediator, and from the free
Grace of God through him, do they take all their Encouragement to come to God in
hopes of Pardon and Acceptance and eternal Life. And thus they look to be
justified by free Grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, which is
what the Gospel intends and proposes. Romans 3.24. And from an increasing Sense
of their Unworthiness and ill Deserts, they, through the Course of their Lives,
more and more, grow up into a Disposition to live the Life they live in the
Flesh by Faith in the Son of God, always having Respect to him as their great
high Priest, in all their Approaches to the Mercy-Seat, having Access to God by
him, who has styled himself the Door of the Sheep, and the Way to the Father,
which is the very Thing the Gospel proposes, and invites and encourages us
unto. Heb. 9.12. By his own Blood he entered into the holy Place, having
obtained eternal Redemption for us. Ver. 24. Into Heaven it self, to appear in
the Presence of God for us. Heb. 10.19 -- 22. Having therefore, Brethren,
boldness to enter into the holiest by the Blood of Jesus, by a new and living
Way which he has consecrated for us; -- and having an high Priest over the
House of God: let us draw near with a true Heart, in full Assurance of Faith.
Romans 3.25. For him has God set forth to be a Propitiation for Sin, to declare
his Righteousness, that he might be just, etc.

And a clear realising Sense of these Things on our Hearts, will lay a
Foundation for us to see, how the Gospel-Way of Salvation is calculated to
bring much Glory to God, and abase Sinners in the very Dust, which is that
wherein the Glory of the Gospel very much consists. Romans 3.27. Ephesians. 1.3 -- 12.
And we shall learn to rejoice to see God alone exalted, and freely to take our
proper Place, and lie down in the Dust, abased before the Lord for ever. And
indeed it is perfectly fit in this Case, that the Rebel-Wretch should come
down, and be so far from finding Fault with the great Governor of the World,
and with his holy, just and good Law, that he should rejoice that God has taken
such an effectual Method to secure his own Honor, and the Honor of his Law.
We ought to be glad with all our Hearts, that the supreme Governor of the
World did put on State, and stand for his Honor, and the Honor of his Law,
without the least Abatement; and did insist upon it, that Sin should be
punished, the Sinner humbled, and Grace glorified: these were Things of the
greatest Importance. And we ought to choose to be saved in such a Way, to have
God honored, and our selves humbled. And it is evident, this must be the
Temper of every one that comes into a genuine Compliance with the Gospel. Thus
much concerning the Necessity of Satisfaction for Sin.

But here now some may be ready to inquire,

Was it not as necessary, that the Precepts of the Law should be obeyed, as
that the Penalty should be suffered; to make Way for the Sinner not only to be
pardoned, but also to be received to a State of Favor and entitled to eternal
Life?

To which I answer,

1. It is true, we need not only a Pardon from the Hands of God the supreme
Governor of the World, in whose Sight, and against whom we have sinned; we
need, I say, not only to be pardoned, delivered from Condemnation, freed from
the Curse of the Law, saved from Hell; but we want something further: We want
to be renewed to God's Image, taken into his Family, put among his Children,
and made Partakers of his everlasting Favor and Love. We need not only to be
delivered from all those Evils, which are come upon us and which we are exposed
unto, through our Apostasy from God; but we want to be restored to the Enjoyment
of all that Good, which we should have had, had we kept the Covenant of our God.

2. It is true also, that Mankind, according to the Tenor of the first
Covenant, were not to have been confirmed in a State of Holiness and Happiness,
were not to have had eternal Life, merely upon the Condition of being innocent,
(for such was Adam by Creation) but perfect Obedience to every Precept of the
divine Law was required. Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.10. The Performance of such an
Obedience, was that Righteousness, which was by Covenant to entitle him to Life.

3. Since the Fall, all Mankind, are destitute of that Righteousness, nor can
they attain unto it. Romans 3.9 -- 20.

4. But our natural Obligations, to love God with all our Hearts and obey him
in every Thing, still remain. For they are in their own Nature unalterable.
They will be for ever the same, so long as God remains what he is and we are
his Creatures. There was the same Reason, therefore, after the Fall, why we
should love and obey God, as ever there was. There was the same Reason,
therefore, that the Condition of the first Covenant, should be fulfilled, as
ever there was. It was reasonable, originally, or God would never have insisted
upon it. And therefore it is reasonable now since our Apostasy; and God has the
same Grounds to insist upon it as ever: but we cannot perform it our selves: it
was necessary, therefore, that it should be performed by Christ our Surety.

But perhaps some may still say,

When Christ had fully satisfied for all our Sins, and so opened a Way for
Believers to be considered as entirely free from any Guilt; why might not the
Governor of the World, now, of his sovereign Goodness and Bounty, have
bestowed eternal Life, without any more to do? What Need was there for Christ
to fulfill all Righteousness in our Room?

To which I answer,

When Adam was newly created, he was innoc^^^, free from any Guilt; and why
might not the supreme Governor of the World, now, without any more to do, have
bestowed upon him eternal Life and Blessedness, of his mere sovereign Goodness?
What need was there, that his everlasting Welfare should be entirely suspended
upon the uncertain Condition of his good Behavior? Had not God just seen how
it turned out with the Angels that sinned? Did he not know that Adam was liable
to Sin and undo himself too? And why would he run any venture a second Time?
Especially, since the Happiness, not only of Adam, but of all his Race, a whole
World of Beings, now lay at Stake? If he thinks, that if but one Man should
gain the whole World, and los^ his own Soul, his Loss would be infinitely
great; what must the everlasting Welfare of a whole Race be worth in his
Account? And would infinite Wisdom and infinite Goodness venture and hazard all
this needlessly? Yea, would such a Being have done so, had there not been
Reasons, of infinite Weight, to move him to it? something of greater
Importance, than the eternal Welfare of all Mankind? -- No doubt, there was
something, and something of very great Importance, that influenced the
infinitely wise and good Governor of the World to such a Conduct. Something,
so very great, as to render his Conduct in that Affair, perfectly holy and
wise, perfectly beautiful, excellent and glorious. -- It does not look like a
mere arbitrary Constitution It was doubtless ordered so, because God saw, it
was perfectly fit and right and best. -- But why was it fit and right and best?
-- Whatever the Reason was, doubtless for the same Reason, it was fit and right
and best, that the second Adam should perform the same Condition, fulfill all
Righteousness, to the End that by his Obedience we might be made righteous, and
so be entitled to Life in this Way.

It is certain, that eternal Life and Blessedness were not to have been given
absolutely, i. e. without any Condition at all, under the first Covenant.
Eternal Life was not to have been granted merely under the Notion of a Gift,
from a sovereign Benefactor; but also under the Notion of a Reward, from the
Hands of the moral Governor of the World. Perfect Obedience was the Condition.
Do and live. Romans 10.5. Disobey and die. Gal. 3.10. This was established by the
Law of the God of Heaven.

Now, the supreme Governor of the World did this for some End, or for no End.
Not for no and, for that would reflect upon his Wisdom. Was it for his own
Good, or his Creature's Good? Not for his own Good; for he is Self-sufficient
and Independent. Not for his Creature's Good; for it had been better for them,
their Interest simply considered, to have had eternal Life and Blessedness
given absolutely and unconditionally; for then, they would have been at no
Uncertainties, not liable to fall into Sin or Misery, but secure and safe
forever. -- It remains, therefore, that, as moral Governor of the World, he
had an Eye to the moral Fitness of Things, and so ordained, because in it self,
in it is own Nature, it was fit and right.

But why was it fit and right? i. e. What Grounds and Reasons were there in the
Nature of the Case, why the great Governor of the World should suspend the
everlasting Welfare of his Creature, Man, upon Condition of his being in most
perfect Subjection to himself? -- i. e. Why should he so much stand upon his
own Honor, as to insist upon this Homage, at the hazard of his Creature's
everlasting Welfare. -- i. e. Why did he look upon his own Honor as a Matter
of so great Importance? -- I answer, that, from the Rectitude of the divine
Nature, he is perfectly impartial in all his Conduct. -- It was not, therefore,
from any Thing like Pride, or a selfish Spirit, that he stood thus upon his
Honor; the Homage of a Worm of the Dust could do him no Good: nor for want of
Goodness, that he set so light by his Creature's Happiness: but it was fit he
should do as he did; the Rectitude of his Nature, as it were, obliged him to
it. For it becomes the Governor of the World, and it belongs to his Office as
such, to see to it, that every one has his proper Due; and therefore it
concerns him, first and above all Things, to assert and maintain the Rights of
the GODHEAD: and this Honor was due to God.

He was by Nature God, and Adam was by Nature Man; he was the Creator, and Adam
was his Creature; he was moral Governor of the World, and Adam was his
Subject: He was by Right Lawgiver, and Adam was a free Agent capable of and
obliged unto perfect Obedience: He was Judge, to whom it belonged to distribute
Rewards and Punishments, and Adam was an accountable Creature. Now he only
considered himself as being what he was, and his Creature Man as being what he
was; and he was affected and acted accordingly. He considered what Honor was
due to him from Man; what Obligations Man was under to give him his Due; that
he was capable of doing it voluntarily; that it was fit he should; that it
became the Governor of the World to insist upon it; that if he did not do it
with all his Heart, he could not be considered as a Subject fit for the divine
Favor, but fit only for divine Wrath. He thus viewed Things as they were, and
acted accordingly. What he did therefore was perfectly right and fit. To have
had no Regard to his Honor, but only to have consulted his Creature's Welfare,
would have been a Conduct like theirs in Romans 1.21, 25. They glorified him not
as God. -- They worshipped and served the Creature more than the Creator. How
God's putting Adam into a State of Trial, was consistent with his aiming merely
at his Happiness as his last End, I cannot understand. Sure I am, it must have
been better, unspeakably better for Adam, his Interest only considered, to have
been immediately confirmed in a State of perfect Holiness and Happiness,
without running such an awful Venture of eternal Ruin and Destruction. Nor is
there any Man on Earth, that would choose, merely out of Regard to his own
Welfare, to be put into a State of Trial, rather than into a State of confirmed
Holiness and Happiness, such as the Saints in Heaven are now in. And therefore
I cannot but think, that God had a greater Regard to something else, than to
Adam's Happiness. In this Instance, it seems plain from Fact, that God does not
make his Creature's Happiness, his last End. It is in vain to plead, That Adam
could not be a moral Agent, unless he was a free Agent, nor a free Agent
without being liable to Sin. -- For the Saints in Heaven are moral Agents and
free Agents too, and yet are not liable to Sin. -- And if God's putting his
Creatures into a State of Trial, is not consistent with his aiming merely at
their Happiness as his last End, then the whole Tenor of God's moral Government
is not consistent therewith: for, from first to last, it has been his Way to
put his Creatures into a State of Trial; even all his Creatures who were
capable of moral Government.


Now, since the second Adam becomes Surety and stands responsible to the
Governor of the World, it was fit he should not only suffer the Penalty of the
broken Law, but obey it is Precepts too, in order to open a Door for us not only
to be pardoned, but also received to Favor and entitled to eternal Life. There
was the same Reason, the second Adam should do it, as that the first should.
The Honor of God did as much require it. It was as needful in order to our
being considered as Subjects fit for the divine Favor and eternal Life. It
became the Governor of the World as much to stand for his Honor, with one, as
with the other; and he had as good Reason to suspend the everlasting Welfare of
Mankind upon this Condition, now, as ever. And to have shown no Concern for the
divine Honor, although God had been openly affronted and despised by Man's
Apostasy, but only to have regarded and consulted the Welfare of the Rebel
under righteous Condemnation, had been a Conduct evidently unbecoming the great
Governor of the World.

But again, we may view the Case in another Point of Light. -- According to the
first Covenant, eternal (...) and Blessedness were not to have been granted
merely under the Notion of a Gift, from a sovereign Benefactor; but also under
the Notion of a Reward, from God as moral Governor of the World: and perfect
Obedience was the Condition. Do and live. -- And while eternal Life and
Blessedness were thus promised, by Way of Reward to Virtue, God's infinite Love
thereto was hereby testified; and the Temper of his Heart acted out and
displayed. -- But God infinitely loves to act like himself. -- On this
Consideration, therefore, it was necessary, that the second Adam should fulfill
all Righteousness, in the Room of a guilty, unholy World; to the End, that the
Governor of the World might bestow Grace and Glory and all good Things upon
Sinners, as a Reward to Christ's Virtue; and so hereby testify his infinite
Love to Virtue. -- And so still act like himself. -- It was God's sovereign
Pleasure to exercise his infinite Goodness toward a ruined Race, and his holy
Nature prompted him to choose this Way; for he always takes infinite Delight in
showing Regard and Respect to Virtue, in his moral Government of the World. He
translated Enoch and Elijah, saved Noah from the general Deluge, delivered Lot
out of Sodom, promised Abraham a Posterity numerous as the Stars of Heaven, and
Phineas an everlasting Priesthood, and a Thousand Things more has he done; and
all, to bear a public Testimony of his Love to Virtue. This is the Thing which
the King delights to Honor. -- The very Ground of his Love to himself, is the
Virtue or Holiness of his Nature. In this, his divine Beauty and Glory
primarily consists. Isai. 6.3. He loves, therefore, to put Honor upon the
Image of himself. And in doing so, he still reflects Honor upon himself, the
original Fountain of moral Excellency. And, therefore, according to the first
Covenant and according to the second, it was equally fit, that eternal Life and
Blessedness should be given as a Reward to Virtue, in Testimony of his Regard
thereto.

Thus, from the Perfections of God, and the Reason and Nature of Things, the
Necessity of Christ's obeying the preceptive Part of the Law, as well as
suffering the Penalty, in order to our being not only pardoned, but received to
the everlasting Favor of God and entitled to eternal Life, seems evident.

But from Scripture, the Point may more easily be confirmed. For therein we are
taught, that he was appointed by the Governor of the World, not only to make
Reconciliation for Iniquity, but also to bring in everlasting Righteousness.
Dan. 9.24. And are assured, that he is become the End of the Law for
Righteousness to them that believe. Rom 10.4. And that by his Obedience many
are made Righteous. Romans 5.19. But this Work would not have been put upon him,
had it been needless; i. e. if God's Honor and our Salvation, could, both,
have been secured without it: for then it had been in vain: Which to suppose,
reflects much upon the divine Wisdom, and quite undermines and nullifies the
Love and Grace and Kindness of God herein to us: for we had been as well
without it. -- With much Evidence, therefore, may we conclude, that it was
necessary, that the second Adam, Christ our Surety, should obey, as well as
suffer in our Room; in order to open a Door for our Justification and eternal
Life. -- And accordingly we may observe, that the Favors shown to a sinful,
guilty World on Christ's Account, are in Scripture promised under the Notion of
a Reward to Christ's Virtue. For upon making his Soul an Offering for Sin,
which was the highest Act of Virtue, it was promised that he should see his
Seed, prolong his Days, have the Pleasure of the Lord prospering in his Hands;
and that he should see the Travel of his Soul, and justify many. Isai. 53.10,
11, 12.

Therefore, in order to a genuine Compliance with the Gospel by Faith in Jesus
Christ, we must see how far we be from Righteousness; that all our seeming
Righteousness is as filthy Rags; that we have nothing to recommend us to God;
that there is nothing in us rendering of us fit to be beloved by him, or meet to
receive any Favor at his Hands, but every Thing to the contrary; to the End,
we may see our Need of Christ: of Christ, to be made of God unto us,
Righteousness, (1 Cor. 1.30.) and our Necessity of being found in Him, having
on his Righteousness. (Phil. 3.9.) For this is the Design of the Gospel, to
bring us to look to be accepted with God only in his Beloved; (Ephesians. 1.6. 1 Pet.
2.5.) and to be justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in
Jesus Christ; (Romans 3.24.) without the Deeds of the Law; (v. 28.) our selves
being considered, as being in our selves, UNGODLY. (Chap. 4. v. 5.)

And under a Sense, how far we be from Righteousness; that we have, after all
the Seize of this Life, no Righteousness fit to be mentioned before God,
nothing fit to recommend us to his Favor, but are still in our selves
infinitely unworthy of his Love, or the least Favor from him; I say, under a
deep effectual Sense of this, we must live all our Days; to the End, we may
never venture to come before God, as the Pharisee did, emboldened by our own
Goodness, but always as the chief of Sinners, desiring to be found only in
Christ, not having on our own Righteousness, but the Righteousness which is of
God by Faith; and so hereby be influenced to live the Life we live in the
Flesh, by Faith on the Son of God, as St. Paul always did, and as the Gospel
would have all others do too. 1 Timothy 1.15. Phil. 3.9. Gal. 2.20. and 3.11.

To conclude. Thus, we see the Grounds of the Necessity there was, for a
Mediator and Redeemer, to make Satisfaction for Sin, and bring in eve^lasting
Righteousness; and so open an honorable Way, for Mercy to come out after a
rebellious, guilty World; and a Way, in which Sinners may with Safety return to
God.

SECTION IV. Concerning the SUFFICIENCY of Christ, and of his Satisfaction and
Merits.
I proceed now to consider,

2. What has been done to make Satisfaction for Sin, and to answer the Demands
of the preceptive Part of the Law; and wherein the Sufficiency of the same
consists. And

In the First Place, what has been done, has been already hinted; and it may be
summed up in a few Words. It comprehends all that Christ has done and suffered,
in his Life and at his Death. For us he was born; for us he lived; for us he
died: He did all on our Account, being thereunto appointed by his Father. But
because his Obedience and Sufferings were most eminent and remarkable, when,
according to the Command he had received of his Father, he laid down his Life
for us and offered himself a Sacrifice for our Sins; and because with a View to
this, he became Flesh, and dwelt among us; therefore, the Scriptures do more
frequently attribute our Redemption to what was done then. Hence, we are said
to be redeemed by his Blood. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. To be justified by his Blood.
Romans 5.9. And all spiritual Blessings are frequently represented as the Fruits
and Effects of his Death. Gal. 3.13, 14. The Sacrifices of the Old Testament
pointed out this, as the great Atonement. And to this the Penmen of the New
Testament seem in a special Manner to have their Eyes, as the great
Propitiation for Sin. -- Thus the first Adam was to have yielded a perfect
Obedience to the divine Law in every Thing; but that special Prohibition,
touching the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, was in a peculiar Manner to
try him, that it might be seen whether he would be in Subjection to God in
every Thing. So in the Garden and upon the Cross, our Savior's Spirit of
Obedience was tried and discovered, and his Obedience was perfected and his
Sufferings completed: and so here, in a more eminent Manner, the Law was
honored and Justice satisfied; and so the Door of Mercy opened for a sinful,
guilty World. But

Secondly. As to the Sufficiency of what has been done, to answer the Ends
proposed; Let these Things be considered,

(1.) That the Person undertaking, as Mediator and Redeemer, was of sufficient
Dignity and Worth.

(2.) That he was sufficiently authorized to act in such a Capacity.

(3.) That what he has done is perfectly suited, in it is own Nature, to answer
all the Ends proposed.

(1.) Jesus Christ the Mediator between God and Man, as to his Person, was FIT
for the mediatorial Office and Work. He was of sufficient Dignity and Worth;
being by Nature GOD, equal with the Father, the Brightness of his Glory, the
express Image of his Person. Phil. 2. Heb. 1. He was God, (Joh. 1.1.) as well
as Man. (v. 14.) And therefore his Blood was considered and valued, as being
the Blood of God. (Act. 20.28.) And hence it is called precious Blood. (1 Pet.
1.18, 19.) As to his Person, he was equal with God the Father in Point of Worth
and Dignity: And it was as much for him to obey and die in the Room of a guilty
World, as it would have been, for God the Father himself. In Point of Dignity
and Worth, there was none superior to him. He was upon a Level with God the
Father. He was his Equal and Fellow. Zech. 13.7. Awake, O Sword, -- against the
Man that is my FELLOW. He was as glorious, as honorable, as lovely. He was
therefore fit for the Office, able to answer all the Ends of God the Governor
of the World, of his Holiness and Justice, Law and Government, and perfectly to
secure the divine Honor, viewed in every Point of Light. The infinite Dignity
of his Nature as God, made him capable of an Obedience of infinite moral
Excellency; and capable of making a full Satisfaction for the infinite Evil of
Sin. He could magnify the Law and make it honorable, in a more illustrious
Manner, than all the Angels in Heaven and Men on Earth put together; by how
much he was more excellent than them all. If the Son of God obeys and dies, it
is enough: God and his Law are for ever secure. Thus, his being by Nature GOD,
rendered him of sufficient Dignity for the Office and Work of a Mediator. Heb.
9.14.

And this it was also, which made him capable of undertaking. As he was God, he
was under no Obligations, on his own Account, to obey a Law made for a
Creature; and he had an absolute Right to himself. Every Person, that is a mere
Creature, is under natural Obligations to perfect Obedience on his own Account;
nor is he his own to dispose of. But the Son of God was above a mere Creature,
he was a divine Person, and previous to his Undertaking was under no Obligation
to Obedience; he had an original Right to himself, and was not by Nature under
the Law; he was, therefore, at his own Disposal, and at full Liberty to
undertake in our Room. He had Power to assume human Nature, and be made under
the Law for us, and obey for us, and suffer for us; for he might do what he
would with his own. Ioh. 10.17, 18. -- The Sufficiency of Christ being thus
originally founded in his Divinity; Hence, this is the first Thing the Apostle
to the Hebrews insists upon, in order to explain, clear up and confirm the
Safety of the Way of Salvation through his Blood. Heb. 1. To clear up and confirm
the Safety of the Way of Salvation through the Blood of Christ, is evidently the
Scope and Design of that Epistle, as is manifest from the ten first Chapters.
Particularly see Chapter 10. v. 19 -- 22. And in order to show the Safety of
this Way, he insists upon the Excellency of his Person, and the Nature of his
Office, his being called, appointed and authorized, and his actually going
through the Work of our Redemption: which, together with some occasional
Exhortations, Digressions, etc. is the Substance of his Discourse, from Chap.
1. v. 1. to Chap. 10. v. 23.

Thus, as GOD, he was of infinite Dignity and Worth: as GOD, he was at Liberty
to undertake. He had an Estate (if I may so speak) of his own, and could pay
the Debt of another with what was his own, and purchase for us an Inheritance.
And I may add, that as he was the Son of God, the second Person in the Trinity,
there was a Suitableness, that he, rather than either of the other Persons,
should be appointed to this Work. The Father sustains the Character of supreme
Lord and Governor, asserts the Rights of the Godhead, maintains the Honor of
his Law and Government. The Son becomes Mediator between God and Man, to open a
Door for God to show Mercy to Man consistently with his Honor, and for Man to
return to God with Safety. The Holy Spirit is the Sanctifier, to work in
Sinners to will and to do, and recover and bring them to repent and return to
God through Jesus Christ. Thus the Gospel teaches us to believe. Ephesians. 2.18.

He also was made Flesh and dwelt among us, and for our sakes was made under
the Law; to the End, that in our Nature he might fulfill all Righteousness, and
bear the Curse. As he was one with the Father, he was fit to be betrusted with
his Father's Honor. As he was Immanuel, God with us, he was fit to be
betrusted with our Salvation. As he was God-Man, he was fit to be Mediator
between God and Man. His Humanity rendered him capable to appear in the Form of
a Servant, and to become obedient unto Death: and his Divinity rendered his
Obedience and Sufferings sufficient to answer the Ends designed. This is He of
whom the Text speaks, God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten
Son. He gave him, he appointed him to the Work, he put him into the Office, he
anointed him, and then he laid on him the Iniquities of us all, and set him
forth to be a Propitiation. Which brings me to consider,

(2.) That he was sufficiently authorized to be a Mediator between God and Man*
to take the Place of Sinners, and to obey and die in the Room of a guilty
World. -- God the supreme Governor of the World had sufficient Power and
Authority to appoint the first Adam to be a Representative for his Posterity,
to act in their Room: and by the same Authority he has appointed his Son, the
second Adam, to be a second public Head. Romans 5.12 -- 19. By divine
Constitution, the first Adam was made a public Person; and by divine
Constitution, the second Adam is made such too. Both receive all their
Authority to act in that Capacity from the Constitution of God. -- The calling,
appointing and authorizing of Christ, to take upon him this Office and Work of
a Mediator and high Priest, is particularly treated of in the fifth Chapter to
the Hebrews. He was called of God, as was Aaron, ver. 4. He took not this high
Office upon himself, but was invested with it by his Father, v. 5. He was
called of God an high Priest after the Order of Melchisedek, v. 10. His Father
proposed the Office and the Work; and he willingly undertook. Lo, I come to do
thy Will, O God. Heb. 10.7. God so loved the World, that he GAVE his only
begotten Son, Joh. 3.16. And hence Christ says, He did not come of himself, but
was sent of his Father, Joh. 7.28, 29. And that he did not come to do his own
Will, but the Will of him that sent him, Joh. 6.38. And his Father acknowledges
him as such by a Voice from Heaven. Mat. 17.5. This is my beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased; hear ye him.

Without such a divine Constitution, the Death of Christ could have been of no
Benefit to Mankind. As, if an innocent Man should offer to die in the Room of a
condemned Criminal, and should actually lay down his Life; yet it could be of
no Benefit to the poor Criminal, unless the civil Government had authorized him
so to do. i. e. unless, by some act, they had declared, that his Life should be
accepted, in the Eye of the Law, instead of the Criminal's. The Application is
easy. -- Thus Christ was called and put into his mediatoral Office and
authorized to the Work, by God the supreme Governor of the World. And hence in
Allusion to the Jewish Custom of anointing Men, when advanced to some high
Office and important Trust; (so Aaron was anointed Priest, and David was
anointed King:) in Allusion, I say, to this, he is called CHRIST, which is by
Interpretation, the ANOINTED. Thus, as to his Personal Dignity, he was
sufficient to undertake; and thus, was he authorized to do so. And

(3.) What he has done is perfectly suited, in its own Nature, to answer all
the Ends proposed. That is, to secure the Honor of God, the Honor of his
^oliness, Justice and Truth, his Law, Government and sacred Authority; and so
open a Door for the free and honorable Exercise of his Mercy and Grace toward
a sinful, guilty World, and a Way in which Sinners might return to God with
divine Acceptance. God the supreme Governor of the World knew upon what
Grounds there was Need of a Mediator, what Ends he had to answer, and how they
might be answered in the best Manner. According to the Counsel of his own Will,
in his infinite Wisdom, he laid the very Plan, which is now revealed to us in
the Gospel. He appointed one to be a Mediator whom he judged sit, put him into
the Office, and appointed him his Work. All this Work Jesus Christ has done. He
has finished the Work, which the Father gave him to do. Joh. 17.4. and 19.3^.
And so has been faithful to him that appointed him. Heb. 3.^. So that herefrom
we might be assured, that what he has done, is most perfectly suited in it is
own Nature to answer all the Ends proposed, although it were quite beyond us to
understand how. -- But, by the Help of the Word and Spirit ^f God, we may be
able to enter a little Way into this wonderful and glorious Mystery.

It was fit, the first Adam, as the Representative and public Head of Mankind,
should, as a Condition of the everlasting Love and Favor of God, have
continued in a most willing and perfect Subjection to God the Governor of the
World, valuing his Honor and Glory above all Things. This was God's Due. This
would have satisfied God's Holiness: for Holiness is satisfied, when the Thing
which is right and fit is done. Holiness wants no more; but is then content and
well-pleased. And upon this Condition, Mankind might have been considered, as
Subjects fit for the divine Favor; and might have received the promised
Reward, to the Honor of the divine Holiness and Goodness. -- Now Jesus Christ
the Son of God has, by his Father's Appointment and Approbation, assumed our
Nature, taken Adam's Place, done that which was Adam's Duty in our Room and
Stead, as another public Head, obeyed the Law God gave his Creature, a Law
which he was not under, but in Consequence of his undertaking to stand in our
Room and Stead. The Creature fails of paying that Honor to the Governor of
the World, which is his Due from the Creature. A GOD lays aside his Glory,
appears in the Form of a Servant, and becomes Obedient; and so, in the
Creature's Stead and Behalf, pays that Honor to the Governor of the World,
which was the Creature's Duty. And thus the Governor of the World is
considered, respected, treated and honored, as being what he is, by Man, i. e.
by their Representative Christ Jesus, God-Man-Mediator. And now, hereby God's
Right to the Obedience of his Creatures, and their Unworthiness of his Favor
upon any other Condition, are publicly owned and acknowledged: the Debt is
owned, and the Debt is paid by the Son of God; and so Holiness is satisfied:
for Holiness is satisfied, when the Thing that is right and fit is done. And
now this Door being opened, Mankind may through Christ be considered as Subjects
to whom God may show Favor consistent with his Honor. Yea, the divine
Holiness may be honored, by granting all Favors, as a Reward to Christ's
Virtue and Obedience.

Again, it was fit, if any intelligent Creature should at any Time swerve at
all from the perfect Will of God, that he should for ever lose his Favor, and
fall under his everlasting Displeasure, for a Thing so infinitely Wrong. And in
such a Case, it was fit the Governor of the World should be infinitely
displeased, and publicly testify his infinite Displeasure, by a Punishment
adequate thereto, inflicted on the sinning Creature. This would satisfy
Justice: for Justice is satisfied, when the Thing which is wrong, is punished
according to it is Desert. -- Hence, it was fit, when, by a Constitution holy,
just and good, Adam was made a public Head, to represent his Race, and act not
only for himself, but for all his Posterity; it was fit, I say, that he and all
his Race, for his first Transgression, should lose the Favor, and fall under
the everlasting Displeasure, of the Almighty. It was fit, that God should be
infinitely displeased at so abominable a Thing; and that as Governor of the
World he should publicly bear Testimony against it, as an infinite Evil, by
inflicting the infinite Punishment the Law threatened, i. e. by damning the
whole World. This would have satisfied Justice: for Justice is satisfied when
Justice takes Place, when the guilty are treated with that Severity they ought
to be, when Sin is punished, as being what it is. -- Now, Jesus Christ the Son
of God has, by his Father's Appointment and Approbation, assumed our Nature,
taken the Place of a guilty World; and had not only Adam's first Transgression,
but the Iniquities of us all laid upon him; and in our Room and Stead has
suffered the Wrath of God, the Curse of the Law, offering up himself a
Sacrifice to God for the Sins of Men. And hereby the infinite Evil of Sin, and
the Righteousness of the Law, are publicly owned and acknowledged, and the
deserved Punishment voluntarily submitted unto by Man, i e. by their
Representative. And thus Justice is satisfied: For Justice is satisfied, when
Justice takes Place. And Sin is now treated as being what it is, as much as if
God had damned the whole World; and God, as Governor, appears as severe
against it. And thus the Righteousness of God is declared and manifested, by
Christ's being set forth to be a Propitiation for Sin; and he may now be just,
and yet jus^^^y him that believes in Jesus.

By all this, the Law is magnified and made honorable. On the one Hand; were
any in all God's Dominions tempted to think, that the great Governor of the
World had dealt too severely with Man, in suspending his everlasting Welfare
upon the Condition of perfect Obedience? God practically answers, and says, I
did as well by Mankind, as I should desire to have been done by, my self; had I
been in their Case, and they in mine. For when my Son, who is as my self, came
to stand in their Stead, I required the same Condition of him. -- And what the
Father says, the Son confirms. He practically owns the Law to be holy, just and
good, and the Debt to be due, and pays it most willingly to the last Mite,
without any Objection. Which was as if he had said, There was all the Reason in
the World, that the everlasting Welfare of Mankind should be suspended on that
Condition; nor could I have desired it to have been otherwise, had I my self
been in their Case. -- On the other Hand; were any tempted to think, that God
had been too severe in threatening everlasting Damnation for Sin? Here this
Point is also cleared up. God the Father practically says, that he did, as he
would have been done by, had he been in their Case, and they in his. For when
his Son, his second Self, comes to stand in their Place; he abates nothing, but
appears as great an Enemy to Sin, in his Conduct, as if he had damned the whole
World. His Son also owns the Sentence just. He takes the Cup and drinks it off.
Considering the infinite Dignity of his Person, his Sufferings were equivalent,
to the eternal Damnation of such Worms as we.

Thus the Law is magnified and made honorable; and at the same Time the Honor
of God's Government and sacred Authority is secured. And I may add, so is also
the Honor of his Truth: for he has been true to his Threatening, In the Day
thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die: For on that very Day the second
Adam virtually laid down his Life in the Room and Stead of a guilty World. He
is the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World. -- So that now there is no
Room left, for those that will view Things impartially, to have undue Thoughts
of the Governor of the World; nor any Thing done to expose his Government to
Reproach, or his Authority to Contempt. The Honor of the divine Government and
Authority appears as sacred and tremendous, as if he had damned the whole
World. And although Sinners will take Occasion to sin and be encouraged in their
Ways, because Grace abounds; yet the Governor of the World has not given the
Occasion. In his Conduct, the whole of it considered, he appears as severe
against Sin, as if he had damned the whole World, without any Mixture of the
least Mercy. The infinite Dignity of his Son causes that those Sufferings he
bore in our Room, are as bright a Display of the divine Holiness and Justice,
as if all the human Race had for their Sin been cast into the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone; and the Smoke of their Torments ascended for ever and ever.

MOREOVER, By all this, a Way is opened for the free and honorable Exercise of
Mercy and Grace toward a sinful, guilty World. It may be done consistently
with the Honor of God, of his Holiness and Justice, his Law and Government,
his Truth and sacred Authority: for the Honor of all these is effectually
secured. -- It may be done to the Honor of divine Grace: for now it appears,
that God did not pity the World under a Notion that they had been by him
severely and hardly dealt with, nor under a Notion it would have been too
severe to have proceeded against them according to Law. The Law is not made
void, but established. No Reflections are cast upon the divine Government. And
Grace appears to be free, taking its Rise, not from any Thing in us, but merely
from self-moving Goodness and sovereign Mercy. -- This Way of Salvation is
suited to set off the Grace of God to Advantage, and make it appear to be what
it is.

Having thus finished the Work assigned him; he arose from the Dead, he
ascended on high, he entered into the Holy of Holies, into Heaven it self, to
appear in the Presence of God for us, as our great high Priest. Heb. 9. And
here as God-Man Mediator he is exalted to the highest Honor, has a Name above
every Name, sits on the right Hand of the Majesty on high, having all Power in
Heaven and Earth committed unto him, and ever lives to make Intercession, and
is able to save to the uttermost all that come to God through him, -- Such is the
Virtue of his Righteousness and Blood, and such is his Honor and Interest in
the Court of Heaven, and such is his Faithfulness to all that believe in him;
that now it is perfectly safe, to return to God through him, and venture our
everlasting ALL upon his Worth and Merits, Mediation and Intercession. Heb.
4.16. Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace.

Thus we see what Necessity there was of Satisfaction for Sin, and that the
Demands of the Law should be answered: And thus we see what has been done for
these Purposes, and it is Sufficiency to answer all the Ends proposed. The
Mediator was of sufficient Dignity as to his Person, he had sufficient
Authority as to his Office, and he has faithfully done his Work. And now the
Honor of God's Holiness and Justice, Law and Government and sacred Authority,
is secured; and a Way is opened in which he may honorably put his Designs of
Mercy into Execution, and Sinners safely return unto him. -- And now, before I
proceed to consider more particularly what a Way is opened, and what Methods
God has entered upon for the Recovery of sinful, guilty Creatures to himself, I
shall make a few Remarks upon what has been said.

REMARK 1. As the Law is a Transcript of the divine Nature, so also is the
Gospel. The Law is holy, just and good, and is as it were the Image of the
Holiness, Justice and Goodness of God; and so also is the Gospel. The Law
insists upon God's Honor from the Creature, and ordains that his everlasting
Welfare shall be suspended upon that Condition; and the Gospel says Amen to it.
The Law insists upon it, that it is an infinite Evil for the Creature to swerve
in the least from the most perfect Will of God, and that it deserves an
infinite Punishment; and the Gospel says Amen to it. The Law discovered also
the infinite Goodness of God, in it is being suited to make the obedient
Creature perfectly happy; but the Gospel still more abundantly displays the
infinite Goodness and wonderful free Grace of God. The Law was holy, just and
good, and the Image of God's Holiness, Justice and Goodness; but the Gospel is
more eminently so: In it the Holiness, Justice and Goodness of God are painted
more to the Life, in a Manner truly surprising, and beyond our Comprehension;
yea, to the Amazement of Angels, who desire to look and pry into this wonderful
Contrivance. 1 Pet. 1.12.

Here in this Glass the Glory of the Lord is to be beheld. 2 Cor. 3.18. The
Glory of God is to be seen in the Face of Christ. 2 Cor. 4.6. What has been by
him done in this Affair discovers the glorious moral Beauty of the divine
Nature. Much of God is to be seen in the moral Law, it is his Image; but more
of God is to be seen in the Gospel, for herein his Image is exhibited more to
the Life, more clearly and conspicuously.

The moral Excellency of the moral Law sufficiently evidences, that it is from
God; it is so much like God, that it is evident that it is from God: So the
moral Excellency of the Gospel sufficiently evidences that it is from God; it
is so much like him, that it is evident that it is from him: It is his very
Image: therefore it is his Offspring: it is a Copy of his moral Perfections,
and they are the Original. It is so much like God, that it is perfectly to his
Mind, he is pleased with it, he delights to save Sinners in this Way. And if
ever this Gospel becomes the Power of God to our Salvation, it will make us
like unto God, it will transform us into his Image, and we shall be pleased
with this Way of Salvation, and delight to be saved in such a Way; a Way
wherein God is honored, the Sinner humbled, the Law established, Sin
discountenanced, Boasting excluded, and Grace glorified.

If any Man has a Taste for moral Excellency, a Heart to account God glorious
for being what he is; he cannot but see the moral Excellency of the Law, and
love it, and conform to it; because it is the Image of God: and so he cannot
but see the moral Excellency of the Gospel, and believe it, and love it, and
comply with it; for it is also the Image of God. He that can see the moral
Beauty of the Original, cannot but see the moral Beauty of the Image drawn to
the Life. He therefore that despises the Gospel, and is an Enemy to the Law;
even he is at Enmity against God himself. Romans 8.7. Ignorance of the Glory of
God and Enmity against him, makes Men ignorant of the Glory of the Law and of
the Gospel, and Enemies to both. Did Men know and love him that begat, they
would love that which is begotten of him. 1 John 5.1. He that is of God,
hears God's Words; ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God.
Joh. 8.47.

And therefore a genuine Compliance with the Gospel supposes, that he, who
commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, shines in the Heart, to give the
Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor.
4.6. And a Sight and Sense of the moral Excellency of the Gospel-Way of
Salvation assures the Heart of it is Divinity; and hereby a supernatural and
divine Assent to the Truth of the Gospel is begotten in the Heart. And a Sense
of the infinite Dignity of the Mediator, and that he was sent of God, and that
he has finished the Work which was given him to do, and so opened and
consecrated a new and living Way of access to God; together with a Sense of the
full and free Invitation, to Sinners to return to God in this Way, given in the
Gospel, and the free Grace of God therein discovered, and his Readiness to be
reconciled; a spiritual Sight and Sense of those Things, I say, emboldens the
Heart of a humbled Sinner (...) in Christ, and to return to God through him.
Hence the Aposte to the Hebrews, having gone through this Subject in a doctrinal
Way, in the Conclusion makes this practical Inference. Having therefore,
Brethren, Boldness to enter into the Holiest by the Blood of Jesus, by a new
and living Way which he has consecrated for us, through the Vail, that is to
say, his Flesh; and having a high Priest over the House of God, let us draw
near with a true Heart and full Assurance of Faith. Heb. 10.19 -- 22.

REM. 2. From what has been said, we may observe, that the Necessity of
Satisfaction for Sin and of the preceptive Part of the Law being answered,
takes it is Rise from the moral Perfections of the divine Nature, and the moral
Fitness of Things; and therefore a true Idea of God and a just Sense of the
moral Fitness of Things will naturally lead us to see the Necessity of
Satisfaction for Sin, etc. and predispose us to understand and believe what is
held forth by divine Revelation to that Purpose. On the other Hand, where a
true Idea, of the moral Perfections of God and the moral Fitness of Things, is
not; but on the contrary, very wrong Notions of the divine Being and of the
true Nature of Things; there will naturally be an Indisposition and an Aversion
to such Principles, nor will what the Gospel teaches about them be readily
understood or believed. And doubtless it was this which originally led some to
deny the Necessity of Satisfaction for Sin, and others to go a Step farther, to
deny that Christ ever designed to make any. Joh. 8.47. He that is of God,
hears God's Words; ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God.

REM. 3. The Death of Christ was not designed at all to take away the evil
Nature of Sin, or it is ill Desert; for Sin is unalterably what it is, and
cannot be made a less Evil: But the Death of Christ was rather on the contrary,
to acknowledge and manifest the evil Nature and ill Desert of Sin, to the End
that pardoning Mercy might not make it seem to be a less Evil than it really
is. So that although God may freely pardon all our Sins and entitle us to eternal
Life for Christ's Sake; yet, he does look upon us, considered merely as in our
selves, to be as much to blame as ever, and to deserve Hell as much as ever;
and therefore we are always to look upon our selves so too. And hence we ought
always to live under a Sense of the Freeness and Riches of God's Grace in
pardoning our Sins; and under a Sense of our own Vileness and ill Desert, in
our selves, upon the Account of them, although pardoned. That thou may remember
and be confounded, and never open thy Mouth any more because of thy Shame, when
I am pacified toward thee for all that thou have done, says the Lord God.
Ezekiel. 16.63. But this is not the Way of Hypocrites: For being once confident
that their Sins are pardoned, their Shame, Sorrow and Abasement are soon at an
End. And having no Fear of Hell, they have but little Sense of Sin. And from
the Doctrine of free Grace, they are emboldened, as it were, to sin upon free
Cost. But thus says the Lord, When I shall say to the Righteous, that he shall
surely live: If he trust to his own Righteousness and commit Iniquity; all his
Righteousness shall not be remembered, but for his Iniquity that he has
committed, he shall die for it. Ezekiel. 33.13.

REM. 4. Nor was the Death of Christ designed to draw forth the Pity of God
toward a guilty World. For God could find it in his Heart, of his mere
Goodness, without any Motive from without, to give his only begotten Son to die
for Sinners. But this was greater Goodness, than it would have been to have
saved Mankind by an Act of sovereign Grace without any Mediator: it was a more
expensive Way. As, for an earthly Sovereign to give his only Son to die for a
Traitor, that the Traitor might live, would be a greater Act of Goodness, than
to pardon the Traitor, of mere Sovereignty. -- It was not therefore because the
Goodness of the divine Nature needed any Motive to draw it forth into Exercise,
that Jesus Christ obeyed and died in our Room: But it was to answer the Ends of
moral Government, and to secure the Honor of the moral Governor; and so open
a Way for the honorable Exercise of the divine Goodness, which, in its own
Nature, is infinite, free and self-moving, and wants no Motive from without to
draw it forth into Act. And the same, no doubt, may be said of Christ's
Intercession in Heaven. -- We are therefore, in our approaches to God, not to
look to Christ to persuade the Father to pity and pardon us, as though he was not
willing to show Mercy of his own Accord: but we are to look to Christ and go to
God through him for all we want, under a Sense that we are in our selves too bad
to be pitied without some sufficient Salvo to the divine Honor, or to have any
Mercy shown us. And therefore when we look to be justified by free Grace, it
must be only through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ; who has been set
forth to be a Propitiation for Sin, to declare God's Righteousness, that he
might be just, and the Iustifier of him that believes in Jesus. Romans 3.24, 25,
26.

REM. 5. Some of the peculiar Principles of the Antinomians, seem to take their
Rise from wrong Notions of the Nature of Satisfaction for Sin. They seem to
have no right Notions of the moral Perfections of God, and of the natural
Obligations we are under to him, nor any right Apprehensions of the Nature and
Ends of moral Government, nor any Ideas of the Grounds, Nature and Ends of
Satisfaction for Sin. (A right Sense of which Thing tends powerfully to promote
a holy Fear and reverential Awe of the dread Majesty of Heaven and Earth a
Sense of the infinite Evil of Sin, brokenness of Heart* tenderness of
Conscience, a humble, holy, watchful, prayerful Temper and Life, as well as to
prepare the Way for Faith in the Blood of Christ.) But they seem to have no
right Apprehensions of these Things. They seem to consider God merely under the
Notion of a Creditor, and us merely under the Notion of Debtors; and to
suppose, when Christ upon the Cross said, It is finished, he then paid the
whole Debt of the Elect, and saw the Book crossed, whereby all their Sins were
actually blotted out and forgiven: and now all that remains, is for the holy
Spirit immediately to reveal it to one and another, that he is elected, and so
for him Christ died, and so his Sins are all pardoned; which Revelation he is
firmly to believe, and never again to doubt of: and this they call Faith. From
which it seems they understand nothing rightly about God or Christ, the Law or
Gospel. For nothing is more evident than that God is in Scripture considered as
righteous Governor of the World, and we as Criminals guilty before him; and
the evident Design of Christ's Death was, to be a Propitiation for Sin, to
declare and manifest God's Righteousness, that he might be just, and the
Justifier of him that believes in Jesus. Romans 3.9 -- 26. And the Gospel knows
nothing about a Sinner's being justified in any other Way than by Faith, and by
Consequence in order of Nature not till after Faith. The Gospel knows nothing
about Satisfaction for Sin in their Sense; but every where teaches that the
Elect, as well as others, are equally under Condemnation and the Wrath of God,
yea, are Children of Wrath while Unbelievers. Ioh. 3.18, 36. Ephesians. 2.3. Act.
3.19.

Again, While they consider God merely under the Character of a Creditor, and
us merely as Debtors, and Christ as paying the whole Debt of the Elect; now
because Christ obeyed the Law, as well as suffered it is Penalty, therefore they
seem to think, that Christ has done all their Duty, so as that now they have
none to do, nothing to do but firmly to believe that Christ has done all. They
have nothing to do with the Law, no, not so much as to be their Rule to live
by; but are set at full Liberty from all Obligations to any Duty whatsoever. --
Not understanding, that Christ gave himself, to redeem his People from all
Iniquity, and purify them to himself, a peculiar People, zealous of good Works,
Tit. 2.14. And not understanding, that our natural Obligations to perfect
Obedience are not capable of being dissolved. Mat. 5.17. And not understanding,
that our Obligations to all holy living, are mightily increased by the Grace of
the Gospel. Romans 12.1. Indeed they seem to understand nothing rightly, but to
view every thing in a wrong Light. And instead of considering Christ as a
Friend to Holiness, as one that loves Righteousness and hates Iniquity, Heb.
1.9. they make him a Minister of Sin, Gal. 2.17. and turn the Grace of God into
Wantonness. All their Notions tend to render their Consciences insensible of
the Evil of Sin, to cherish spiritual Pride and carnal Security, and to open a
Door to all Ungodliness.

SECTION V. Showing, a Door of Mercy is opened by Jesus Christ for a guilty
WORLD.
I come now to another Thing proposed, viz.

III. To show more particularly what a Way to Life has been opened, by what
Christ our Mediator has done and suffered.

In general; from what has been said, we may see that the mighty Bar which lay
in the Way of Mercy, is removed by Jesus Christ: and now a Door is opened, and
a Way provided, wherein the great Governor of the World may, consistent with
the Honor of his Holiness and Justice, his Law and Government and sacred
Authority, and to the Glory of his Grace, put in Execution all his Designs of
Mercy toward a sinful, guilty, undone World. But to be more particular,

(1.) A Way is opened, wherein the great Governor of the World ^ay, consistent
with his Honor and to the Glory of his Grace ^^rdon and receive to Favor and
entitle to eternal Life, all (...) one of the human Race, who shall cordially
fall in (...) ^he Gospel-Design, believe in Christ, and return home to God
through him.

What Christ has done is in Fact sufficient, to open a Door for God through him
to become reconcilable to the whole World. The Sufferings of Christ, all Things
considered, have as much displayed God's hatred of Sin, and as much secured the
Honor of his Law, as if the whole World had been damned; as none will deny,
who believe the infinite Dignity of his divine Nature. God may now therefore
through Jesus Christ stand ready to pardon the whole World. There is nothing in
the Way. -- And the Obedience of Christ has brought as much Honor to God and
to his Law, as the perfect Obedience of Adam and of all his Race would have
done. The Rights of the Godhead are as much asserted and maintained. So that
there is nothing in the Way, but that Mankind may, through Christ, be received
into full Favor, and entitled to eternal Life. God may stand ready to do it,
consistent with his Honor. What Christ has done is every Way sufficient. Mat.
22.4. All Things are now ready.

And God has expressly declared, that it was the Design of Christ's Death, to
open this Door of Mercy to all. Joh. 3.16. God so loved the WORLD, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that WHOSOEVER believes in him should not perish, but
have everlasting Life. That whosoever of all Mankind, whether Jew or Greek,
Bond or Free, Rich or Poor, without any Exception, though the Chief of Sinners,
that believes, should be saved. For this End, God gave his only begotten Son.
He set him forth to be a Propitiation for Si^, that he might be just, and the
Iustifier of him (without any Exception, let him be who he will,) that
believes in Jesus. Romans 3.25, 26.

Hence, the Apostles received an universal Commission. Matt. 28.19. Go, teach
ALL NATIONS. Mar. 16.15, 16. Go ye into ALL the World, and preach the Gospel to
EVERY CREATURE. Accordingly, the Apostles proclaimed the News of Pardon and
Peace to every one, offered Mercy to all without Exception, and invited all
without Distinction. He that believes shall be saved: Repent and be Converted,
that your Sins may be blotted out: Were Declarations they made to all in
general. To the Jewish Nation they were sent to say, in the Name of the King of
Heaven, I have prepared my Dinner: My Oxen and my Fatlings are killed, and all
Things are ready: Come unto the Marriage. Matt. 22.4. And as to the Gentile
Nations, their Orders ran thus, Go ye therefore into the Highways, and as many
as ye find, bid to the Marriage. v. 9. To the Jewish Nation, God had been used
to send his Servants the Prophets, in the Days of Old, saying, Turn ye, turn
ye, why will ye die? Ezekiel. 33.11. Ho, every one that thirsts, come. Isai.
55.1. Incline your Ear, and come unto me: Hear, and your Soul shall live. v. 3.
And now Orders are given, that the whole World be invited to a Reconciliation
to God through Christ. Whosoever will let him come, and he that comes shall in
no wise be cast out. Thus, Christ has opened a Door; and thus, the Great
Governor of the World may, consistent with his Honor, be reconciled to any
that believe and repent: And thus he actually stands ready.

And now all Things being thus ready on God's Side, and the Offers, Invitations
and Calls of the Gospel being to every one without Exception; Hence, it is
attributed to Sinners themselves, that they perish at last, even, to their own
voluntary Conduct. Ye will not come to me, that ye might have Life. Joh. 5.40.
And they are considered as being perfectly inexcusable. Joh. 15.22. Now they
have no Cloak for their Sin. And all because a Way is opened, in which they
might be delivered from Condemnation, but they will not comply therewith. Joh.
3.19. This is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men
loved Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds were Evil. And therefore,
in Scripture-Account, they stand exposed to a more aggravated Punishment in the
World to come. Matt. 11.20 -- 24. Woe unto thee, Chorazin, Woe unto thee,
Bethsaida -- etc. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto Heaven, shall be
brought down to Hell: etc. It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon and
Sodom in the Day of Judgment, than for these Cities: Because they repented not.

And now because the Door of Mercy is thus opened to the whole World by the
Blood of Christ, therefore in Scripture he is called, the Savior of the WORLD,
1 John 4.14. The Lamb of God, which takes away the Sin of the WORLD* Joh. 1.29.
A Propitiation for the Sins of the WHOLE WORLD. 1 John 2.2. That gave himself a
Ransom for ALL. 1 Timothy 2.6. And tasted Death for EVERY MAN. Heb. 2.9. The plain
Sense of all which Expressions may, I think, without any Danger of Mistake, be
learnt from Joh. 3.16. God so loved the WORLD, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that WHOSOEVER believes in him, should not Perish, but have everlasting
Life. I am ready to profess, says the famous Doctor TWISSE, and that, I
suppose, as out of the Mouths of all our Divines, that every one who hears the
Gospel, (without Distinction between Elect or Reprobate) is bound to believe
that Christ died for him, so far as to procure both the Pardon of his Sins and
the Salvation of his Soul, in Case he believes and repents. Again, As Peter
could not have been saved, unless he had believed and repented: so Judas might
have been saved, if he had done so. Again, Ioh. 3.16. gives a fair Light of
Exposition to those Places where Christ is said to have died for the Sins of
the World, yea* of the whole World, to wit, in this Manner that whosoever
believes in him, should not Perish, but have everlasting Life -- Dr TWI^SE on
the (...) of G^ds Love to the Vessels of (...), etc
And indeed, was not the Door of Mercy opened to all indefinitely, how could
God sincerely offer Mercy to all? Or heartily invite all? Or justly blame those
who do not accept? Or righteously punish them for neglecting so great Salvation?

Besides, if Christ died merely for the Elect, that is, to the Intent, that
they only upon believing, might, consistent with the divine Honor, be received
to Favor; then God could not, consistent with his Justice, save any besides,
if they should believe. For without shedding of Blood, there can be no
Remission, Heb. 9.22. If Christ did not design by his Death to open a Door for
all to be saved conditionally, i. e. upon the Condition of Faith, then there is
no such Door opened. The Door is not opened wider than Christ designed it
should be. There is nothing more purchased by his Death, than he intended. If
this Benefit was not intended, then it is not procured. If it be not procured,
then the Non-Elect cannot any of them be saved, consistent with divine Justice.
And by Consequence, if this be the Case, then -- (1.) The Non-Elect have no
Right at all, to take any the least Encouragement, from the Death of Christ or
the Invitations of the Gospel, to return to God through Christ in Hopes of
Acceptance. For there are no Grounds of Encouragement given. Christ did not die
for them in any Sense. It is impossible, their Sins should be pardoned,
consistent with Justice: as much impossible as if there had never been a
Savior, as if Christ had never died. And so there is no Encouragement at all
for them. And therefore it would be Presumption in them to take any. All which
is apparently contrary to the whole Tenor of the Gospel, which every where
invites all, and gives equal Encouragement to all. Come, for all Things are
ready, said Christ to the reprobate Jews, Mat. 22.4. -- And if the Non-Elect
have no Right to take any Encouragement from the Death of Christ and the
Invitations of the Gospel, to return to God through him in Hopes of Acceptance,
then -- (2.) No Man at all, can rationally take any Encouragement, until he
knows that he is elected. Because, until then, he cannot know, that there is any
Ground of Encouragement. It is not rational to take Encouragement, before we
see sufficient Grounds for it: yea, it is Presumption to do so. But no Man can
see sufficient Grounds of Encouragement to trust in Christ, and to return to
God through him, in Hopes of Acceptance; unless he sees that God may, through
Christ, consistent with his Honor, accept and save him, and is willing so to
do. If God can, and is actually willing to save any that comes; then there is
no Objection. I may come, and any may come, all Things are ready, there is
Bread enough and to spare. But if God is reconcilable only to the Elect; then I
may not come, I dare not come, it would be Presumption to come, 'till I know
that I am elected. And how can I know that? Why, not by any Thing in all the
Bible. While an Unbeliever, it is impossible I should know it by any Thing in
Scripture: It is no where said in express Words, that I, by Name, am elected,
and there are no Rules of Trial laid down in such a Case, And how can I
therefore in this Case, ever know that I am elected, but by an immediate
Revelation from Heaven? And how shall I know, that this Revelation is true? How
shall I dare to venture my Soul upon it? The Gospel does not teach me to look
for any such Revelation, nor give any Marks whereby I may know when it is from
God, and when from the Devil. Thus, an invincible Bar is laid in my Way to
Life. I must know that I am one of the Elect, before I can see any
Encouragement to believe in Christ: because none but the Elect have any more
Business to do so, than the Devils. But, if I am one of the Elect, yet it is
impossible I should know it, 'till afterward. -- Besides, all this is contrary
to the whole Tenor of the Gospel; Whosoever will, let him come; Whosoever
comes, shall in no wise be cast out; Whosoever believes, shall be saved. -- And
contrary to the Experience of all true Believers, who in their first Return to
God through Christ, always take all their Encouragement from the Gospel, and lay
the Weight of their Souls upon the Truth of that, and venture their eternal All
upon this Bottom; and not upon the Truth of any new Revelation. They venture
their All upon the Truths already revealed in the Gospel, and not upon the
Truth of any Proposition not revealed there.

So that let us view this Point in what Light we will, nothing is more clear
and certain, than that Christ died, that WHOSOEVER believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting Life. And God may now be just, and yet justify any
of the Race of Adam, that believe in Jesus. And he stands ready so to do. --
And these Things being true, the Servants, upon good Grounds, might, in their
Master's Name, tell the obstinate Jews, who did not belong to the Election of
Grace, and who finally refused to hearken to the Calls of the Gospel, Behold, I
have prepared my Dinner: my Oxen and my Fatlings are killed, and all Things are
ready: Come unto the Marriage. Mat. 22.4. And if they had come, they would have
been heartily welcome: The Provision made was sufficient, and the Invitation
sincere: Jesus wept over them, saying, O that thou had known, in this thy
Day, the Things which belong to thy Peace! So that there was nothing to hinder,
had they but been willing. But it seems they were otherwise disposed; and
therefore they made light of it, and went their Ways, one to his Farm, another
to his Merchandise; and the Remnant took his Servants, and entreated them
spitefully, and slew them, (v. 5, 6.) And in this Glass we may see the very
Nature of all Mankind, and how all would actually do, if not prevented by
divine Grace. -- Justly, therefore, at the Day of Judgment, will this be the
Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, but Men loved Darkness rather
than Light. For certainly, if Mankind are so perversely bad, that,
notwithstanding their natural Obligations to God, and the Unreasonableness of
their original Apostasy, they will yet persist in their Rebellion; and after
all the glorious Provision, and kind Invitations of the Gospel, will not return
to God through Christ: I say, certainly, God is not obliged to come out after
them, and by his all-conquering Grace irresistibly reclaim them: but may justly
let every Man take his own Course, and run his own Ruin. And an aggravated
Damnation will every such Person deserve in the coming World, for neglecting so
great Salvation, Heb. 2.2, 3.

And now, if Christ's Atonement and Merits be thus sufficient for all, and if
God stands ready to be reconciled to all, and if all are invited to return and
come: Hence then we may learn, that it is safe for any of the poor, sinful,
guilty, lost, undone Race of Adam to return to God in this Way. They shall
surely find Acceptance with God. They may come without Money, and without
Price: and he that comes shall in no wise be cast out.

And hence we may see, upon what Grounds it is, that the poor, convinced,
humbled Sinner is encouraged and emboldened to venture his All upon Christ, and
return to God through him. It Is because any poor, sinful, guilty, Hell-deserving
Wretch may come; any in the World; the worst in the World; the vilest, and most
odious and despicable: For such he actually takes himself to be. And if he did
not see that there was an open Door for such, for any such, for all such, he
would doubt, and that with good Reason too, whether he might safely come. But
when he understands and believes the Gospel-Revelation, and so is assured that
it is safe for any, for all, the vilest and the worst; now the peculiar
Vileness and Unworthiness which he sees in himself, ceases to be an Objection.
He sees it safe for any, and therefore for him. And hence takes Courage, and is
emboldened to venture his All, upon the free Grace of God, through Jesus Christ;
and so returns in hopes of Acceptance. -- Now, does this poor Sinner venture
upon a safe Foundation? Or does he not? -- He takes it for granted, that the
supreme Governor of the World can, consistently with his Honor, show Mercy to
any that come to him through Christ; and he takes it for granted, that he stands
ready to do so, even to the vilest and worst; that the Door of Mercy stands
wide open; and whosoever will, may come: And upon these Principles, he takes
Encouragement to return to God in hopes of Acceptance: and from a Sense of his
own Wants, and of the Glory and All Sufficiency of the divine Nature, of the
Blessedness there is in being the Lord's, devoted to him and living upon him,
he does return with all his Heart; and to God he gives himself, to be for ever
his: and if the Gospel be true, surely he must be safe. The Truth of the Gospel
is the Foundation of all; for upon that, and that only he builds: not upon
Works of Righteousness which he has done, not upon any immediate Revelation of
Pardon or the Love of Christ to him in particular; but merely upon
Gospel-Principles. If they therefore prove true, in the coming World; then will
he receive the End of his Faith, the Salvation of his Soul. -- But to return,

Thus we see that by the Death of Christ, there is a wide Door opened for
divine Mercy to exercise and display it self: the supreme Governor of the
World may, consistently with his Honor, now seat himself upon a Throne of
Grace, and proclaim the News of Pardon and Peace through a guilty World; and it
is perfectly safe for any of the guilty Race of Adam, to return unto him through
Jesus Christ. -- And now, were Mankind in a Disposition to be heartily sorry
for their Apostasy from God, and disposed to esteem it their indispensable Duty
and highest Blessedness to return; were this the Case, the joyful News of a
Savior and of Pardon and Peace through him, would fly through the World like
Lightning, and every Heart would be melted with Love and Sorrow and Gratitude;
and all the Nations of the Earth would come, and fall down in the Dust before
the Lord, and bless his holy Name, and devote themselves to him for ever,
lamenting in the Bitterness of their Hearts that ever they did break away from
their Subjection to such a God. And were Mankind sensible of their sinful,
guilty, undone Estate by LAW, and disposed to justify the Law and condemn
themselves; and were they sensible of the Holiness and Justice of the great
Governor of the World; they would soon see their Need of such a Mediator as
Christ Jesus, and soon see the wonderful Grace of the Gospel, and soon see the
Glory of this Way of Salvation, and so know it to be from God, believe it, and
fall in with it, and all the World would repent and convert of their own
Accord, and so all the World might be saved without any more to do. -- But
instead of this, such is the Temper of Mankind, that there is not one in the
World, that, of his own Accord, is disposed to have any such Regard to God, or
Sorrow for his Apostasy, or Inclination to repent and return; nor do Men once
imagine, that they are in an Estate so wretched and undone, and stand in such a
perishing Need of Christ and free Grace; and therefore they are ready to make
light of the glad Tidings of the Gospel, and go their Ways, one to his Farm,
another to his Merchandise: nor is there one of all the human Race disposed, of
his own Accord, to lay down the Weapons of his Rebellion, and return to God by
Jesus Christ. So that all will come to nothing, and not one be ever brought
home to God, unless something farther be done; unless some Methods, and Methods
very effectual, be used.

But that God should come out after such an apostate Race, who without any
Grounds have turned Enemies to him, and without any Reason refuse to be
reconciled, and that after all the glorious Provision and kind Invitations of
the Gospel; that God, I say, should come out after such, and reclaim them by
his own sovereign and All-conquering Grace; might seem to be a going counter to
the Holiness and Justice of his Nature, and to tend to expose his Law and
Government and sacred Authority to Contempt; in as much as they so eminently
deserve to be consumed by the Fire of his Wrath. Therefore --

(2.) Jesus Christ did, by his Obedience and Death, open such a Door of Mercy,
as that the supreme Governor of the World might, consistently with his Honor,
take what Methods he pleased, in order to recover rebellious, guilty, stubborn
Sinners to himself.

That he might take what Methods he pleased, I say; for he knew from the Days
of Eternity, how Mankind would be disposed to treat him, his Son, and his
Grace; and he knew from Eternity, what Methods he intended to take to reclaim
them: and these are the Methods which he now pleases to take; and the Methods,
yea, the only Methods, which he actually does take. So that it is the same
Thing in Effect to say, that by what Christ has done and suffered, a Door is
opened, for the MOST HIGH, consistently with his Honor, to take -- 1. What
Methods he actually does take. Or -- 2. What Methods he pleases. Or -- 3. What
Methods he from Eternity intended. For all amount to just one and the same
Thing. For what pleased him from Eternity, the same pleases him now; and what
pleases him now, that he actually does. The infinite Perfection of his Nature
does not admit of any new Apprehension, or Alteration of Judgment. By his
infinite Understanding, he always had, and has, and will have, a complete View
of all Things past, present, and to come, at once. And by his infinite Wisdom
and the perfect Rectitude of his Nature, he unchangeably sees and determines
upon that Conduct which is right and fit and best. For with him there is no
Variableness, nor Shadow of Turning. Jam. 1.17.

Now, that what Christ has done and suffered, was sufficient to open a Way for
the honorable Exercise of his sovereign Grace, in recovering Sinners to
himself, is evident from what has been heretofore observed. And that it was
designed for this End, and has in Fact effectually answered it, is plain from
God's Conduct in the Affair. For otherwise he could not, consistent with his
Honor or the Honor of his Law, use those Means to reclaim Sinners which he
actually does. For all those Methods of Grace would else be contrary to LAW,
which does not allow the Sinner to have any Favor shown him without a
sufficient Security to the divine Honor, as has been before proved. The Law
therefore has been satisfied in this Respect, or these Favors could not be
shown. For Heaven and Earth shall sooner pass away, than the Law be disregarded
in any one Point. It follows therefore, that not only special and saving Grace,
but also that all the common Favors which Mankind in general enjoy, and that
a^^ the Means of Grace which are common to the Elect and Non-Elect, are the
Effects of Christ's Merits: All were purchased by him; none of these Things
could have been granted to Mankind, but for him. Christ has opened the Door,
and an infinite sovereign Goodness has strewed these common Mercies round the
World. All those Particulars wherein Mankind are treated better than the damned
in Hell, are over and above what mere LAW would allow of, and therefore are the
Effects of Christ's Merits and Gospel Grace. And for this, among other Reasons,
Christ is called the Savior of the World. And hence also God is said to be
reconciling the World to himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them, 2
Cor. 5.19. Because for the present their Punishment is suspended, and they are
treated in a Way of Mercy, are invited to Repentance, and have the Offers of
Pardon and Peace and eternal Life made unto them. Hence, I say, God is said not
to impute their Sins unto them: Agreeable with that parallel Place in Psalm.
78.38. where God is said to forgive the Iniquity of his People, because he
destroyed them not.

Upon the whole then, this seems to be the true State of the Case. God is through
Christ ready to be reconciled to all and every one, that will repent and return
unto him through Jesus Christ. He sends the News of Pardon and Peace around a
guilty World and invites every one to come, saying, He that believes, shall be
saved; and he that believes not, shall be damned. And on this Account it is
said, that He will have all Men to be saved, and is not willing that any should
perish: because he offers Salvation to all, and uses Arguments to dissuade them
from Perdition. -- But in as much as Mankind will not hearken, but are
obstinately set in their Way; therefore he takes State upon himself, and says,
I will have Mercy on whom I will have Mercy. And a sinful, guilty World are in
his Hands, and he may use what Methods of Grace with all that he pleases: Some,
he may suffer to take their own Way, and run their own Ruin, if he pleases; and
others, he may subdue and recover to himself, by his own all-conquering Grace.

And unto a certain Number, from Eternity, he intended to show this special
Mercy. And these are said to be given to Christ, Joh. 6.37. And with a special
Eye to these Sheep did he lay down his Life, Joh. 10.15. His Father intending,
and he intending, that they, in Spite of all Opposition, should be brought to
eternal Life at last. And hence the Elect do always obtain. Romans 11.7. compared
with Ioh. 6.37. -- And here we may learn how to understand those Places of
Scripture, which seem to limit Christ's Undertaking to a certain Number. Mat.
1.21. Thou shall call his Name Jesus; because he shall save HIS PEOPLE from
their Sins. Ephesians. 5.23. He is the Head of the CHURCH; and he is the Savior of
the BODY. Ver. 25. Christ loved the CHURCH, and gave himself FOR IT. Act.
20.28. He has purchased HIS CHURCH with his own Blood. Joh. 10.15. I lay down
my Life for the SHEEP. -- There were a certain Number, which the Father and the
Son from all Eternity designed for Vessels of Mercy, to bring to Glory, Romans
9.23. With a View to these it was promised in the Covenant of Redemption, that
Christ should see of the Travel of his Soul, Isai. 53.11. And Christ says in
Joh. 6.37, 38, 39. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; and him
that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. For I came down from Heaven, not
to do my own Will; but the Will of him that sent me. And this is the Father's
Will, which has sent me, that of all which he has given me I should lose
nothing, but should raise it up again at the last Day. See also Tit. 2.14. Rev.
5.9, 10. Ephesians, 1.4, 5, 6.

Thus Christ's Merits are sufficient for all the World, and the Door of Mercy
is opened wide enough for all the World, and God the supreme Governor has
proclaimed himself reconcilable to all the World, if they will believe and
repent. And if they will not believe and repent, he is at Liberty to have Mercy
on whom he will have Mercy, and to show Compassion to whom he will show
Compassion; according to the good Pleasure of his Will, to the Praise of the
Glory of his Grace. He sits SOVEREIGN, and a rebelli^us, guilty World are in
his Hands, and at his Dispose, and the Thing that seems good in his Sight, that
he will do. And it is infinitely fit, right, and best he should; that the Pride
of all Flesh may be brought low, and the Lord alone be exalted for ever.

And as this View of Things seems exactly to harmonize with the whole Tenor of
the Gospel in general, and to agree with the various particular Representations
of our Redemption by Christ; and to reconcile those Texts which seem to speak
of a universal Redemption, with those which seem to speak of a particular
Redemption; so it will naturally suggest an easy Answer to any Objections which
may be made against it.

OBJ. 1. If Christ has suffered the Penalty of the Law, not only for the Elect,
but also for the Non-Elect; how can it be just, that they themselves should be
made to suffer it over again for ever in Hell?

ANS. Because Christ did not die with a Design to release them from their
deserved Punishment, but only upon Condition of Faith. And so they have no
Right to the Release, but upon that Condition. It Is as just therefore they
should be punished, as if Christ had never died; since they continue obstinate
to the last. And it is just too they should have an aggravated Damnation, for
refusing to return to God, despising the Offers of Mercy, and neglecting so
great Salvation. John 16 -- 19.

OBJ. 2. If Christ obeyed the preceptive Part of the Law, not only for the
Elect, but also for the Non-Elect; why are not all brought to eternal Life,
since eternal Life is by Law promised ^o perfect Obedience?

ANS. Because Christ did not purchase eternal Life for them, but upon the
Condition of Faith: But they would not come to Christ, that they might have
Life: and therefore they justly perish. Ioh. 3.16 -- 19.

OBJ. 3. But for what Purpose did Christ die for those, who were in Hell a long
Time before his Death?

ANS. And to what Purpose did he die for those, who were in Heaven a long Time
before his Death? The Truth is, that when Christ laid down his Life, a Ransom
for all, he only accomplished what he undertook at the Beginning. Christ
actually interposed as Mediator immediately upon the Fall of Man, and undertook
to secure the divine Honor by obeying and suffering in the Room of a guilty
World: and therefore through him God did offer Mercy to Cain as well as to Abel,
and show common Favors to the World in general, as well as grant special Grace
to the Elect; and that before his Death, as well as since. Surely none will
deny, that all the Favors which Mankind did enjoy prior to Christ's Death,
were by Virtue of his Undertaking to be Mediator, and engaging to secure the
divine Honor; for upon any other Foot, the Governor of the World could not
have granted such Favors consistently with his Honor.

OBJ. 4. But if Christ died for all, then he died in vain, since all are not
saved.

ANS. The next and immediate End of Christ's Death was to answer the Ends of
moral Government, and so secure the Honor of the moral Governor, and open a
Way in which he might honorably declare himself reconcilable to a guilty World
upon their returning through Christ, and use Means to reclaim them; but this End
Christ did obtain: and so did not die in vain. Ioh. 3.16. Romans 3.24, 25, 26.
And the supreme Governor of the World will now through Christ accomplish all the
Designs of his Heart, to the everlasting Honor of his great Name.

OBJ. 5. But why would God have a Door opened, that he might, consistent with
his Honor, offer to be reconciled to all that will return to him through Christ,
when he knew that the Non-Elect would never return? And why would he have ^
Door opened that he might use Means with them, when he knew, all would be in
vain, unless he himself recovered them by his All-conquering Grace, which yet
he never designed to do?

ANS. God designed to put an apostate World into a new State of Probation.
Mankind were in a State of Probation in Adam their public Head, and we all
sinned in him and fell with him in his first Transgression. But God designed to
try the Posterity of Adam anew, and see whether they would be sorry for their
Apostasy, or choose to continue in their Rebellion. He would tender Mercy, and
offer to be reconciled, and call them to return, and use Arguments and Motives,
and promise and threaten; and try and see what they would do. He knew, Mankind
would be ready to deny their Apostasy, and plead that they were not Enemies to
God, and think themselves very good natured; and would take it exceeding hard
not to be believed: therefore he determined to try them, and see what they
would do; and make public Declaration through the World that finally he would
judge every Man according to his Works, and deal with them according to their
Conduct. And in the mean Time, that his Honor might be secured, he appoints
his Son to be Mediator; and so through him proclaims the News of Pardon and
Peace, and enters upon the use of Means. And now, if you ask me, Why does he do
all this, when he knows, it will be in vain as to the Non-Elect, who will never
come to Repentance?

I Answer, His knowing that all will in the Event prove ineffectual to bring
them to Repentance, is no Objection against his using the Means he does. For
God does not make his Foreknowledge of Events the Rule of his Conduct; but the
Reason and Fitness of Things. -- You may as well inquire, Why did God raise up
Noah to be a Preacher of Righteousness to the old World for the Space of an
Hundred and twenty Years, when he knew they would never come to Repentance? And
why did he send all his Servants the Prophets to the Children of Israel, rising
early and sending, and by them command and call, entreat and expostulate,
promise and threaten, and say, As I live, says the Lord God, I delight not in
the Death of the Sinner: turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die! when he knew, they
would never come to Repentance? And why did he afterward send his Son to the
same obstinate People, when he knew they would be so far from hearkening, as
that they would rather put him to Death? Now, if you ask me, why the great
Governor of the World uses such Means with the Non-Elect, and shows so much
Goodness, Patience, Forbearance and Long-suffering, instead of sending all
immediately to deserved Destruction?

I Answer, it is to try them; and to show, that he is the Lord God, gracious
and merciful, slow to Anger and abundant in Goodness. It Is fit, Creatures in a
State of Probation should be tried, and he loves to act like himself; and he
means in and by his Conduct to do both at once. And after obstinate Sinners
have long abused that Goodness and Forbearance, which should have led them to
Repentance; and have after their own hard and impenitent Hearts, been
treasuring up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, the Righteousness of God's
Judgment in their eternal Destruction will be most manifest. And what if God
was determined not to reclaim Rebels voluntarily so obstinate, by his
All-conquering Grace, but let them take their Course, seeing they were so set
in their Way? What then? Was he not at Liberty? Was he bound to save them all
by Ex^rtion of his Almightiness? Might he not have Mercy on whom he would? And
after such Long-suffering, might he not show his Wrath and make his Power known
in the eternal Destruction of those who so justly deserved it? God's last End,
no Doubt, is to manifest his Perfections: and in and by his whole Conduct
toward a fallen World, they will all be most illustriously displayed. Romans
11.36.

OBJ. 6. But considering that the Non-Elect are, after all, under an absolute
Impossibility to believe and repent, convert and be saved; and considering that
all common Mercies and Means of Grace will only render them the more
inexcusable in the End, and so aggravate their Guilt and Damnation: therefore
all Things considered, what seeming Good they enjoy in this World, is not of
the Nature of a MERCY: it would be better for them to be without it: Sodom and
Gomorrah will be better of it in the Day of Judgment than Chorazin and
Bethsaida: It may be proper just to hint the gross Absurdities implied in this
Objection. -- If the Non-Elect were under an absolute ( i. e. not only a moral,
but natural) Impossibility to turn to God, they would not be proper Subjects to
use any Means with. And if their common Favors and Means of Grace were not of
the Nature of Mercies, they could not aggravate their Guilt. And if it was not
their own Fault, that they did not repent under the Enjoyment of Means, they
would not be to Blame, nor deserve to be punished, for not repenting. -- Men
stumble into such Absurdities by using Words without determinate Ideas.
and therefore there is no Need to suppose, that any Thing which the Non-Elect
enjoy in this World, is the Effect of Christ's Merits, but only of divine
Sovereignty.

ANS. What do you mean by being under an absolute Impossibility to believe and
repent, convert and be saved? Using Words without determinate Ideas is one
principal Thing which bewilders the World about Matters of Religion. Now in
plain English, all Things are ready, and they are invited to come, and there is
nothing in the Way of their being saved* but -- they be not sorry for their
Apostasy from God, nor will be brought to it by all the Means God uses with
them: they have not a Mind to return to God, nor will they be persuaded by all
the most powerful Arguments that can be used: they are voluntary Enemies to
God, and will not be reconciled, unless by an almighty Power and All-conquering
Grace, which God is not obliged to give, and they are infinitely unworthy of,
and without which, they might return, were they but of such a Temper as they
ought to be: they are under no Inability, but what consists in and results from
their want of a good Temper of Mind, and their voluntary Obstinacy: Sin has no
Power over Men, but as they are inclined to it; and the Inclinations of the
Heart are always voluntary and unforced. Men love to be inclined as they are;
for otherwise their Inclinations would be so far from having any Power over
them, that they would even cease to be. -- Now certainly the bringing up of the
Children of Israel out of Egypt was of the Nature of a Mercy, and a great Mercy
too indeed it was, notwithstanding that through their Unbelief and Perverseness
they never got to Canaan. The Thing, in itself, was as great a Mercy to the
Body of that Generation, as it was to Caleb and Joshua. And their bad Temper
and bad Conduct, which prevented their ever coming to the promised Land, did
not alter the Nature of the Thing at all, nor lessen their Obligations to
Gratitude to God their mighty Deliverer. And yet, all Things considered, it had
been better for them to have died in their Egyptian Bondage, than to have had
their Carcases fall in the Wilderness in such an awful Manner. -- And besides,
it is evident, that the Scriptures do look upon the common Favors and Means of
Grace, which the Non-Elect enjo^, under the Notion of Mercies; and (which
otherwise (...) not be) on this very Ground their Guilt is aggravated, (...)
they rendered inexcusable, and worthy of a more sore Punishment in the World to
come. Ioh. 3.16 -- 19. And, 1^, 22, 24. Romans 2.4, 5. Heb. 2.2, 3. -- And if
they are of the Nature of Mercies, then they are the Effects of Christ's
Merits, as has been already proved.

And hence by the Way, we may see the Reason why the Love and Goodness of God
in bringing up the Children of Israel out of Egypt, is so mightily set forth in
the old Testament, notwithstanding the Body of that Generation perished in the
Wilderness: and why the Love and Goodness* of God in giving his Son to die for
the World, is so mightily set forth in the New Testament, notwithstanding
Multitudes of Mankind perish for ever: viz. It was the Israelites own Fault,
they perished in the Wilderness, and so it is Sinners own Fault that they
perish for ever. Ioh. 3.19. and 5, 40. And did they feel it at Heart, it would
effectually stop their Mouths. For this is an undoubted Maxim, that the
Kindnesses of God to a rebellious perverse World are not in themselves ever the
less Mercies, because Mankind abuse them to their greater Ruin. The Kindnesses
are in themselves the same, whether we make a good Improvement of them, or no.
They are just the same, and so just as great, let our Conduct be what it will.
It was a great Mercy to the Israelites to be delivered out of Egypt; it was a
wonderful Expression of divine Goodness: and hence it is said in Hos. 11. 1.
When Israel was a Child, then I LOVED him, and called my Son out of Egypt. (And
a like Expression we have in Deuteronomy. 10.18. God LOVES the Stranger, in giving
him Food and Raiment.) And on the same Ground it is said in Joh. 3.16. God so
LOVED the World etc. because the Gift of Christ to die for the World was an
infinite Expression of divine Goodness. And if Mankind do generally abuse this
Goodness, as the Israelites generally did all God's Kindnesses to them, yet
still the Goodness itself is just the same. A dreadful Thing therefore it is
for the Non-Elect, even as aggravated a Piece of Wickedness in them as it would
be in any Body else, to tread under Foot the Blood of the Son of God, and make
light of all the Offers of Mercy, and neglect so great Salvation. And this
above all other Things will be their Condemnation in the coming World. Ioh.
3.19. Never are the Jews at all excused, any where in the New Testament, in
their slighting the Offers of Mercy by Christ, on this Account, that they were
not of the Elect. And indeed the Offers were sincere, and it was entirely their
own Fault that they did not accept, and they deserved to be treated
accordingly: Mat. 22.1 -- 7.

OBJ. 7. But if God so loved the World, the WHOLE WORLD, as to give his only
begotten Son to die for them, in the Sense explained; why does he not go through,
and perfect the Work, and save the WHOLE WORLD? according to that in Romans 8.32.
He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall be
not with him also freely give us all Things?

ANS. 1. And why did not the King in Matthew. 22. who had made a Marriage for his
Son, and sent his Servants to say to them that were bidden, I have prepared my
Dinner; my Oxen and my Fatlings are killed, and all Things are ready: Come unto
the Marriage: Why did not the King, I say, when they refused, Compel them to
come in? Since he had done so much, why did not he go through, and finish the
Work? And this is directly to the Point in Hand, because this Parable is
designed to represent that full Provision which is made for the Salvation of
Sinners by the Death of Christ; and it proves that the Objection has no Force
in it.

But farther,

2. Take your Bible and read from the 28th Verse to the end of that 8th Chapter
of Romans, and you will see what the Apostle's Design is, through his whole
Discourse. We know, says he, that all Things work together for Good to them
that love God, to them who are called according to his Purpose. But how do we
know it? Why, because God is fully determined to bring them to Glory at last.
For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate; and whom he did
predestinate, them he also called, and them he justified, and them he
glorified. And God was so fully determined to bring them to Glory, and so much
engaged in the Thing, that he spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all* i. e. US, who love God and are his elect People. (For it is of these
and these only that he here is speaking.) And since he was so much engaged as
to do this, we may depend upon it that he will also freely give us all Things;
i. e. US, who love God and are his elect People. So that never any Thing shall
hinder our being finally brought to Glory, or separate us from the Love of God,
neither Tribulation, nor Persecution, nor Distress, nor any Thing else. So that
this is the Apostle's Argument: Since God was so much engaged to bring them to
Glory who loved God and were his elect People, as that he had given his own Son
to die for that End; they therefore might have the strongest Assurance, that he
would do every Thing else which would be needful effectually to bring it about.
If we leave God's Design out of the Apostle's Argument, I cannot see that his
Reasoning would be conclusive; any more than a like Argument would have been
conclusive, if we should suppose Moses to have used it with the Israelites at
the Side of the red Sea. Since God has now brought you all out of Egypt, and
thus divided the red Sea before you, and drowned your Enemies; therefore he
will now without fail bring you All to the promised Land. Which Re^soning would
not have been conclusive; for the Body of that Generation died in the
Wildernes^* and that in a very awful Manner, notwi^^standing this (...)


But God never designed to bring the Non-Elect to Glory, when he gave his Son
to die for the World. He designed to declare himself reconcilable to them through
Christ, to offer Mercy, to invite them in common with others to return, and to
assure all that he that believes shall be saved, and to use Means with them
more or less according to his Pleasure; but finally, they being obstinate, he
designed to leave them to themselves, to take their own Course; and in the End
to deal with them according to their Deserts. Mat. 23.37, 38. and 22.1 -- 7.
And this being the Case, the Objection from the Apostle's Words is evidently
groundless.

As to the Opinion of the Arminians, that God equally designed Salvation for
all Men, purposing to offer Salvation to all, and use Means with all, and leave
all to their own Free Will, and save those and those only, who of their own
Accord will become good Men; as for this Opinion, I say, I think they never
learnt it from the Bible: But rather, they seem to have been led into it, from
a Notion that Mankind are so good natured, that all might, and that at least
some actually would, under the Enjoyment of the common Means of Grace, become
good Men, of their own Accord, i. e. without any such Thing as special Grace.
Convince them that this is an Error, and they will soon give up their Scheme,
and acknowledge the Need of sovereign Grace, and see the Reasonableness and
Truth of the Doctrine of Election. -- Or rather, I may say, convince them first
of all, what God is, and what the Law is, and what the Nature of true Religion
is; that they may know, what Conversion means, and what it means to be a good
Man: and there will be no Difficulty then to convince them of the Depravity of
Mankind. For what leads them to think it so easy a Thing to become a good Man,
and that Men may be brought to it merely by the force of moral Suasion, is,
their wrong Idea of the Nature of true Religion. If Religion be what they
suppose, then no Doubt any Body may easily become good, for corrupt Nature can
bear with such a Religion. But if Religion, or a Conformity to God's Law, be,
what I have endeavored to prove it to be in the former Discourse, then no
Doubt Mankind are naturally diametrically opposite thereto in the Temper of
their Minds: even all Mankind, Arminians as well as others. And all do, or
might know it, if they would seriously and honestly weigh the Matter; for it is
plain Fact. The Arminians are wont mightily to cry up Works, and plead for the
moral Law, as though they were great Friends to it: but if their Mistakes about
the moral Law might once be rectified, and they be brought really and heartily
to approve it, as holy, just and good; one principal Source of all their Errors
would be dried up: and particularly, their wrong Notions about Election and
universal Redemption.

But where was there any Love, (will the Objector say) in God's giving his Son
to die for the Non-Elect, or Sincerity in his offering them Mercy; if he never
designed to bring them to Glory, but from Eternity intended to leave them to
perish in their Sins?

And where was there any Love ( I answer) in God's bringing the Israelites out
of Egypt, or Sincerity in his offering to bring them to Canaan; if he never
designed eventually to bring them there, but from Eternity intended to leave
them to murmur and rebel, and to have their (...) cases fall in the Wilderness?
-- The Solution in both (...) is the same, and is plainly this; as it was the
Israelites (...) Fault that they did not come to Canaan at last, so it is the
Sinner's own Fault that he finally falls short of Glory: However, the
Israelites were often in a Rage, and ready to say, The Lord has brought us
into the Wilderness to kill us here, and they murmured against God and against
Moses, for which they were struck dead by Hundreds and Thousands: and just so
Sinners do, and the same Punishment do they deserve. But had the Israelites
felt at Heart, that it was their own voluntary Wickedness which was the sole
Cause of their Ruin, and did Sinners feel it at Heart too, there would be no
murmuring in one Case or the other, but every Mouth would be stopped. But I have
spoken to this before.

To Conclude, If this Representation of Things which I have given, be according
to Truth, hence then we may learn these two Things, which indeed were what I
had principally in View in dwelling so long upon this Subject and laboring to
answer Objections: I say, we may learn -- 1. That any poor Sinner, all the
World over, who hears the Gospel and believes it, has sufficient Grounds of
Encouragement, from the Freeness of God's Grace and the Sufficiency of Christ
and the universal Calls of the Gospel, to venture his eternal ALL in this Way
of Salvation, and may safely return to God through Christ in Hopes of Acceptance:
And that without any particular Revelation, that he is elected or that Christ
died for him in particular. Any may come, the vilest and the worst; and
therefore I may come. And therefore such a particular Revelation, is perfectly
needless: Nor could it do any Good; for the Truth of the Gospel may be depended
upon, but the Truth of such a particular Revelation cannot. -- 2. That any
poor, sinful, guilty, brokenhearted Backslider, who groans under the Burden
of Sin as the greatest Evil, and longs to have the Power of Sin taken down, and
his Corruptions slain, and himself thoro'ly subdued to God, may look up to the
infinite free Grace of God through Jesus Christ, and pray, Lord, take away this
Heart of Stone, and give me a Heart of Flesh: Turn me, and I shall be turned:
Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean: O create in me a clean Heart, and
renew in me a right Spirit, and restore to me the Joy of thy Salvation! To thy
sovereign Grace and self-moving Goodness I apply my self through Jesus Christ*
God be merciful to me a Sinner. And that whether he knows himself to be a Child
of God, or no: and so whether he knows that he belongs to the Number of the
Elect, or not: Nor does he need any particular Revelation, that Christ died for
him in particular, or that he is elected, or that he is beloved of God: Nor
would these Things do any Good to clear up his Warrant to come for Mercy;
because God may through Christ give his holy Spirit to any that ask him: All that
are athirst, are invited to come and take of the Waters of Life freely. Any may
come, and therefore I may come, although the vilest Creature in the World. -- And
I appeal to all the Generation of God's Children, whether this has not been
their Way of coming to God through Christ, ever since the Day they first came to
know the Lord. -- Sure I am, this is the Scripture-Way. God has sent out a
Proclamation through a sinful, guilty World, inviting all to come to him through
Jesus Christ for all Things: and given many Encouragements, by representing how
free his Grace is, how sufficient Christ is, and how faithful his Promises, and
that whosoever will, may come, etc. But no where in all the Bible, has he
revealed it, that such and such in particular by Name among Mankind are
elected, and that for these Individuals Christ died in particular, by Way of
Encouragement to those particular Persons, in order to let them know that they
might safely trust in Christ, and come to God through him. -- But then must we be
right, when we understand the Gospel and believe it, and upon the very
Encouragements which God has given, are emboldened to return in Hopes of
Acceptance: And this must be agreeable to God's Will: And to this must the
Influences of the true Spirit tend. But to venture to return and look to God
for Mercy merely upon any other Ground, is anti-scriptural: And whatsoever
Spirit influences thereunto, cannot therefore be from God.

And thus we see how the Door of Life is opened by Christ, our great Mediator
and high Priest. And hence, Christ calls himself the Door. Joh. 10.9. I am the
Door: By me if any Man enter in, he shall be saved. And hence also, he calls
himself the Way to the Father* Joh^ 14.6. I am the Way, the Truth, and the
Life: No Man comes to the Father but by me. For through him (says the Apostle;
Ephesians. 2.18.) we both have an Access by one Spirit unto the Father. And also
through him God is reconciling the World to himself, sending Ambassadors and
beseeching them to be reconciled. 2 Cor. ^.19, 20. -- Which leads me to the
next Thing proposed.

SECTION VI. A View of the METHODS of divine Grace with Mankind from the
Beginning of the World.
4. I am to show what Methods the great Governor of the World has entered
upon, in Order to put in Execution those Designs of Mercy, which he had in
View, when he contrived to open this DOOR, in such a wonderful and glorious
Manner, by the Interposition of his own dear Son.

The most high God is conscious of his own infinite Excellency, his Right to,
and his Authority over the Children of Men; He sees Mankind as being under
infinite Obligations to love and obey him, and that the least Defect is a^
infinite Evil: He judges the Law to be holy, just and good, and Mankind wholly
to blame for their Nonconformity thereto, and worthy to be dealt with
according to it. He knows their Contrariety to him, to his Law, and to his
Gospel: He sees all these Things as they really are. -- His infinite Wisdom
sees how it is fit for such a one as he is, now through a Mediator, to conduct
toward such a World as this is: He sees what a Conduct is most becoming, and,
all Things considered, most meet and suitable: And to this Conduct, the perfect
Rectitude of his Nature prompts and inclines him. -- Upon the whole, he
necessarily and freely determines to act like himself, i. e. like an absolute
Sovereign, infinite in Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, Goodness and Truth. -- This
was his Determination from Eternity, this is his Determination in Time, and
according to this Rule he actually proceeds, in all his Methods with a sinful,
guilty, obstinate World: Working all Things according to the Counsel of his own
Will. Ephesians. 1.11. Sovereignly, and yet wisely* holily and justly, and yet as the
Lord God gracious and merciful, slow to Anger and abundant in Goodness and
Truth. As is his Nature, such is his Conduct; and hence his Conduct exhibits to
us the very Image of his Heart. Thus it is in the Impetration, and thus it is
in the Application of our Redemption, and in all the Methods he taken with a
guilty World in general. And hence, all his Ways are calculated to exalt God
and humble the Sinner, to honor the Law and discountenance Sin, to exclude
Boasting and to glorify Grace. As we shall more fully see in what follows.

(1.) As being the supreme Lord and sovereign Ruler of the whole World, he does
through Jesus Christ the great Mediator, the Lamb slain from the Foundation of
the World, by whom his Honor has been secured, he does (I say) through him
grant, and by an Act of Grace confirm, to the World of Mankind, a general
Reprieve from that utter Ruin, which by Law was threatened, and which an
apostate World were exposed unto. Total Destruction was threatened in Case of
Disobedience. Genesis 2.17. In dying thou shall die. i. e. Thou shall die with a
witness, thy Ruin shall be complete. And now nothing could be expected but a
dreadful Doom, and to be sealed down under everlasting Despair* But instead of
this, the great God dooms the Tempter, and threatens utter Ruin to his
new-erected Kingdom. Genesis 3.14, 15. Because thou have done this, thou art
cursed -- And thy Head shall be bruised. But guilty Man is reprieved from a
total Ruin, and allowed a Space for Repentance. And the World has now stood,
almost six Thousand Years, reprieved by the tender Mercy of God through Jesus
Christ.

Indeed, certain Evils were denounced by the Majesty of Heaven as standing
Monuments of his Displeasure, always to attend a guilty Race while in this
World. Peculiar Sorrows were appointed to Women, and hard Labor and Toil to
Men, and Sickness and Pain to both, till Death should put an End to their
Reprieve and to their Space for Repentance. v. 16 -- 19. -- And when our Day to
die shall come, we are not to know: we lie at Mercy: and God acts sovereignly:
so long as he pleases, so long shall we be reprieved, and no longer. And thus
while tender Mercy appears in the general Reprieve, the Holiness and Justice
and Sovereignty of God appear in the Manner of it. God is exalted, a guilty
World lies at his Mercy, they are in a Sense continually under his Rod, and
every Moment liable to drop into an eternal Hell. They are held up in his Hand,
Hell gapes to receive them, and now he lets one fall and then another, now this
and then that, just as it seems good in his Sight. Surely, this is awful!
Surely, Mankind are in very humbling Circumstances, and in Circumstances
wonderfully calculated to awaken them to repent and pray to God, if
peradventure their Wickedness may be forgiven.

When the general Reprieve, granted to this lower World, shall come to a
Period, then will the great Judge of the World proceed, with all who shall be
found impenitent, according to Law, without any mixture of Mercy. The present
Reprieve, granted as a Space for Repentance, is not of the Law, but of mere
Grace through Jesus Christ. Now Grace takes Place, and Patience, Forbearance and
Long-Suffering sit on the Throne: but then Law shall take Place, and strict
Justice reign. The Mediation of Christ at present secures the Honor of Law and
Justice, and opens the Door for Grace; but then the Day of Grace will be at an
End. A guilty World shall no longer be treated in a Way of Mercy, and favored
on Christ's Account; but be proceeded against in flaming Fire and terrible
Vengeance, and every one be punished according to his Deserts. -- How long the
Day of God's Patience with a guilty World is to last, we know not. A guilty
World lies at his Mercy, and may be all summoned to the Bar when he pleases.
Surely, this is awful and awakening! But this is the State in which God means
to show all Long-Suffering, and to exercise and display the infinite Patience
of his Nature. And surely, th^s should lead us to Repentance! -- Thus, this is
one Step in a Way of Mercy, which God in his infinite Grace through Christ has
taken with a guilty World. And what is the Improvement which Mankind ^re
disposed to make of it? Why, because Sentence against their Evil Works is not
executed speedily* therefore the Heart of the Sons of Men is fully set in them
to do Evil. Eccl. 8.11.

(2.) Another Favor granted ^o Mankind in g^neral by the great Governor of
the World through Jesus Christ, (...), a Competency of the good Things of this
Life for their comfortable Support, while under this Reprieve and in this new
State of Probation. By Law Mankind for their Apostasy stood disinherited of
every good Thing, doomed to a complete Destruction. Genesis 2.17. But now through a
Mediator, they are dealt with in a Way of Mercy. -- It Is true, in (...) of the
divine Displeasure God turned Man out of (...) and cursed the Ground, and
subjected Man to hard Labo^^* Genesis 3. But then at the same Time, for Christ's
sake, a general Grant of many good Things is made to a guilty World. They are
allowed to live on God's Earth, breathe in his Air, see by the Light of his
Sun, to eat of the Her^ of the Field, and to eat Bread in the Sweat of their
Face, to cloth themselves with the Skins of slain Beasts. Genesis 3. They are
allowed Summer and Winter, Seed-Time and Harvest, and the Beasts of the Field
are given to them* Genesis 8.22. and 9.1, 2, 3. Yea, it has been God's Way
abundantly to do Good to a guilty World, to send Rain and grant fruitful
Seasons, and fill the Hearts of Men with Food and Gladness. Act. 14.17. So that
considering we are an apostate, guilty World, we may well say with the
Psalmist, The Earth is full of the Goodness of the Lord: Psalm. 33.5. And this
notwithstanding all the Calamities which overspread the whole Earth. For we are
now to attribute every Thing in our Circumstances, whereby we are better of it
than the Damned in Hell be, to the m^re Mercy and Goodness of God through Jesus
Christ. Thus God reprieves a guilty World, and grants them Food and Raiment* to
the Intent they may have a Space for Repentance* Surely now it is vile,
infinitely vile, to despise the Riches of his Goodness and Forbearance and
Long-Suffering, and not to take it in and understand it, that the Goodness of
God should lead us to Repentance: And it is great Madness, after our hard and
impenitent Hearts to go on in our Rebellion, and treasure up Wrath against the
Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. Romans 2.4, 5. And
yet, this is the general Temper, and common Way of the World.

(3.) Another common Favor granted to Mankind upon Christ's Account, is, a
general Resurrection from the Dead. (1 Cor. 15.21.) to the Intent that all, who
believe, repent and return to God through Jesus Christ, may be completely happy
in Soul and Body for ever. It is certain, the Law threatened Death, but made no
Provision for a Resurrection. And if the Law had been executed and no Mediator
provided, we have no Reason to think there ever would have been any
Resurrection. And I cannot see why a general Resurrection may not be considered
under the Notion of a Mercy in it self, notwithstanding many by their final
Impenitency lay a Foundation for their being raised up to everlasting Shame and
Confusion. I am ready to think, that to be raised from the Dead, must surely be
of the Nature of a Mercy, and so be the Effect of Christ's Merits; but the
particular Manner in which the Wicked shall be raised, may nevertheless be
considered as a Punishment, and so be the Effect of their Sin and final
Impenitency. Christ's Merit lays the Foundation for a general Resurrection, and
all that believe and repent shall be raised up to Glory and complete
Blessedness, and all that die in their Sins shall be raised up to Shame and
complete Misery.

(4.) There are also diverse other Things granted to Mankind in general, which
seem pretty evidently to be of the Nature of Mercies, and so to be owing to the
Interposition and Merits of our glorious Mediator Christ Jesus, the only
Mediator between God and a sinful, guilty World: to whose Merits and Mediation,
every Thing which Mankind enjoy, which is of the Nature of a Mercy, (...) to be
attributed. Diverse Things, I say, whereby much is done toward putting such an
apostate Race of Beings into a Capacity of comfortably living together in this
World, while they are in their new State of Probation. Diverse Things in our
Temper, which seem originally to take their Rise very much from that
Temperament of Body and animal Constitution, which God our Former gives us.
There is a natural good Humor, a natural Compassion* a natural Modesty, and
natural Affections. These Things, in a greater or less Degree, we find to be
natural to Men, and to have a very great Influence to keep under and restrain
their Corruptions, and to incline and prompt to many Actions materially Good,
and greatly for the Comfort of human Society and Benefit of Mankind in general.
These Things do evidently keep Mankind from Abundance of Wickedness, which
otherwise they would commit: They have a Heart for a Thousand Abominations, but
these Things restrain them. And these Things do evidently put Mankind on to a
Thousand Actions materially good, which otherwise they would never do: They
have a Heart bad enough to neglect them, but these Things excite them to do
them. -- Were it not for these and other Restraints, I see not why Mankind
should not be as bad in this World, as they will be in the next. Wicked Men
have no Wickedness infused into them at Death; and therefore they have no other
Nature, no other Principle of Sin in their Hearts, after they are dead, than
they had before: But as soon as they are dead, they are evidently no Doubt as
universally contrary to God and all that is Good, as the Devils themselves. As
soon as ever those Things which now restrain them, are all removed, their true
Temper appears without any Disguise. -- It Is no Doubt therefore a great Mercy,
for Mankind to be thus restrained. They enjoy more Comfort, they commit less
Sin, they merit less Punishment, they are under better Advantages to live
together, to enjoy the Means of Grace and attend to the Offers of Mercy by
Jesus Christ. And therefore it seems that all these Things ought to be
attributed to the tender Mercy of God through Jesus Christ, who is the Savior of
all Men, but especially of them that believe. 1 Timothy 4.10.

Thus, the great God, instead of executing the Sentence of the Law in all it is
Severity upon a guilty World, does; through the Mediation of Jesus Christ, grant
to Mankind in general these common Favors -- They are reprieved from a total
Ruin -- have a comfortable Maintenance in this World allowed them -- a general
Resurrection is decreed -- several natural Endowments are granted, to restrain
from bad Actions and to prompt to Actions materially good. And hereby the
Governor of the World has laid the Foundation* and prepared the Way to go on
to use the Methods he designed* more immediately tending to reclaim and recover
a sinful, guilty World to himself; for now Mankind are put into a Sort of a
Capacity of being treated with in such a Way.

These Things ought deeply to affect Mankind. We li^ under many Calamities, and
yet enjoy* many Mercies in this our natural State of Guilt and Condemnation;
all which ought to be improved to awaken, convince and humble us, and lead us
to repent and cry to God for pardoning Mercy and sanctifying Grace, and
predispose us cordially to receive and embrace that Revelation, which God has
made in his Word, of our Ruin and the Way of our Recovery.

But, through the great Blindness and Corruption of Mankind, these Things have
had a very contrary Effect. Mankind, finding themselves thus reprieved, and
thus kindly treated by God, have many of them hereby been led to think, they
are in pretty good Standing, not by Nature Children of Wrath, and under
Condemnation. The Devil ^old Eve, they should not surely die; so many are now
ready to think, that the old Law, which threatened the least Sin with Death, is
repealed; and that we are now born into the World free from any Guilt. And
Mankind, finding themselves endowed with natural Modesty, good Humor,
Compassion etc. are ready to dream, that they are born into the World without
any sinful Corruption of Nature, but rather as holy as Adam in Innocence. And
hence are very insensible of any Need of such a Redeemer and Sanctifier as are
provided. And so they are predisposed to dislike that Revelation which God has
made in his Word concerning our Ruin and the Way o^ our Recovery. And hence
Mankind are strongly bent to misunderstand and misinterpret and disbelieve the
Law and the Gospel. And besides, by this Goodness and Forbearance of God, Men
are emboldened in Sin, as if (...) were not a very great Evil, nor God very
much set against it. They begin to think, God is all made up of Mercy, and that
they are in no great Danger. And so after their hard and impenitent Hearts,
they go on to treasure up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the
righteous Judgment of God. Thus God and his Goodness is abused by this vile
wicked Race of apostate, rebellious Creatures. -- And indeed, all this is no
more than was expected. -- Great Reason therefore was there for him so
effectually to secure his own Honor and the Honor of his holy Law, by the
Interposition of his own dear Son as Mediator. -- And now, let Mankind be ever
so bad, he can go on with his Methods of Mercy, to accomplish all his Designs
of Grace, and all consistent with the Honor of his Holiness and Justice, Law
and Government and sacred Authority.

(5.) Mankind being naturally very insensible of their sinful, guilty, ruined
Estate, and totally ignorant of, and unable to find out, any Way of obtaining
the divine Favor, and wholly averse in the Temper of their Hearts to a genuine
Return to God; therefore God of his infinite Grace through Jesus Christ, has, in
various Ways and diverse Manners, according to the good Pleasure of his Will,
by immediate Revelation from Heaven, set before Mankind their Ruin and the Way
of their Recovery, offered many Arguments, Motives and Encouragements to
persuade them to return, and denounced terrible Threatenings to deter them from
going on in their Rebellion, and directed them, in the use of certain Means of
Grace, to seek for the inward Influences of the holy Spirit, to awaken and
convince, to humble and convert and effectually recover them to God through the
great Mediator.

(6.) And, because the most High sees* that through the very bad Temper of
Mankind, this external Revelation, although most excellently adapted thereto,
yet, if left to themselves, would finally prove altogether ineffectual to
recover any of Mankind; yea, so very far from it, that Mankind would not so
much as rightly understand or believe it, or seriously take Matters into
Consideration, but would misunderstand and pervert it, and finally universally
disbelieve and renounce and forget it, and not suffer it to have any Room in
the World: therefore he has from the Beginning of the World and does still and
will to the End of the World, by the inward Influences of his Spirit and by the
outward Dispensations of his Providence, carry on, according to his sovereign
Pleasure, the Work of his Grace, accomplish his eternal Purposes of Mercy,
recover Sinners to himself, maintain true Religion in the World, preserve his
Church, gather in all the Elect, display all his glorious Perfections in his
Dealings with Mankind, and get to himself a great Name in the End: Exhibiting
in his whole Conduct from first to last the most lively Image of himself.

In these two last Particulars, we have a general Account of those Methods,
which God does take with a sinful, guilty Race, more immediately tending to
their Recovery: which we may see exemplified, in his Dealings with Mankind,
from the Beginning.

1. In the earliest Ages of the World, immediately after the Fall, he began to
enter upon these Methods of Grace. He taught our first Parents their Ruin and
the Way of their Recovery by the promised Seed; and instituted Sacrifices to
typify the great Atonement, which should afterward be made for the Sins of the
World. Genesis 3. And what he taught our first Parents, they taught their
Children. And hence Cain and Abel and after-Generations learnt to worship God
by Sacrifice. Genesis 4.3 -- 8. Now Adam lived until Methuselah was two Hundred
and forty six Years old, and Methuselah lived until Shem was an Hundred Years
old, and Shem lived until the Time of Abraham and Isaac, yea 'till Isaac was
fifty Years old; so that the News of Adam's Fall, of the Ruin of Mankind, and
of Salvation by the Seed of the Woman, might easily have been handed down by
Tradition from one to another, and all Mankind might have been fully acquainted
with these Things. -- And besides these external Teachings and Means of Grace,
God granted the inward Influences of his Spirit, whereby some were effectually
recovered to God, of whom were Abel, Enoch and Noah, who were also signalized
by divine Providence. Genesis 4.4. and 5.22. and 6.9. Compared with Heb. 11.4, --
7.

But while God thus early began to use Methods for the recovery of a sinful,
guilty World to himself, they began early to show their Avers^on to God and
Unwillingness to return. Cain seems, by the Sacrifice which he offered, quite
insensible, that he was a fallen Creature, and that he needed an Atonement for
Sin. He brought only of the Fruit of the Ground for a Thank-Offering, (like the
Pharisee in Luke 18. Whose Prayer consisted only in Thanksgiving, without any
Faith or Repentance) but brought none of the Flock for a Sin-Offering, ( Genesis
4.) although without shedding of Blood there could be no Remission. Heb. 9.22. He
was a formal impenitent Hypocrite, nor would God accept him; but Abel found
Favor in the Sight of the Lord by Faith. Heb. 11.4. And therefore Cain was
angry at God, and enraged at his Brother, and murdered him, and cast off all
Religion, and gave himself up to serve his Lusts. Yea, he forsook the visible
Church of God, and departed and went into the Land of Nod. And thus he, and
afterward his Posterity after him, join to renounce true Religion, and openly
distinguish themselves from God's visible People on Earth. G^n. 4.16. And it
seems Good to the supreme Governor of the World, even to let them all take
their Way, and act their own Nature.

For a While, true Religion was maintained in the Family of Seth. Genesis 4.26.
And to put Honor upon the Practice thereof, Enoch was translated to Heaven.
Genesis 5.24. But yet, in Process of Time, they degenerated, and became so much
like the Rest of the World, like the Posterity of Cain, that they were disposed
to relish their Company, and marry their Daughters. Genesis 6.2. And then
presently the Contagion spread, The Wickedness of Mankind in general was great
upon the Earth, (v. 5.) All Flesh corrupted their Ways, and the Earth was
filled with Violence. (v. 11, 12.) And now the great Governor of the World
raises up Noah, and makes him a Preacher of Righteousness; and Noah preaches,
and God waits an Hundred and Twenty Years, but Mankind will not be reformed,
and therefore God gives over that Generation, and drowns the World by a
universal Deluge. -- First, Mankind break through all the Restraints lying upon
them, discover the very Temper of their Hearts, publicly show their Aversion
to God, their Disregard of his Grace, their utter Unwillingness to return, and
their perverse Propensity to go on in their Rebellion. -- Secondly, God, through
the Mediator, uses Means to reclaim them, and shows all Long-suffering, and so
tries them. -- Thirdly, They, remaining obstinate, trampling under Foot his
Authority, and despising his Goodness, he at last in a most public Manner
executes righteous Vengeance upon them. -- He displays his infinite Goodness
and Patience, in waiting so long and using so many Means for their Recovery: He
displays his Sovereignty, in waiting but just so long, and in taking but just
so much Pains with them; He displays his Holiness, Justice and Truth, in
bringing that Destruction upon them at the very Time before threatened: and in
the whole, he displays his infinite Wisdom; his whole Conduct, being
excellently well calculated, to make all succeeding Generations know that he is
the LORD, and suited to maintain the Honor of his Holiness, Justice, Goodness
and Truth, of his Law and Government and sacred Authority. And thus we see what
Methods God took with the old World, together with the Result of all.

And now,

2. We come to take a brief View of his Ways with Mankind since the Flood, and
of their Carriage toward him. There is no Doubt but that Noah had received by
Tradition and well understood the Fall of Adam, the Ruin of Mankind, the Way of
Recovery by the Seed of the Woman, the Institution, End and Design of
Sacrifices. And there is no Doubt but that he faithfully instructed his
Children, in what he himself knew. And they might have taught their Children,
and they the Generation following, and so all the World might have known the
Way of Salvation through a Mediator. And it is certain, that this would have been
the Case, had Mankind been in a Disposition sufficiently to have prized the
Knowledge of these Things. But when they knew God, by parental Instruction,
they did not glorify him as God, neither were they thankful for these
Advantages which infinite Goodness had granted them. Romans 1.21. But became vain
in their Imaginations, and their foolish Heart was darkened. And they soon lost
the Knowledge of true Religion, and fell off to Idolatry, and changed the Glory
of the incorruptible God, into an Image made like unto corruptible Man, and to
Birds and four-footed Beasts and creeping Things, Ver. 23. For they did not
like to retain God in their Knowledge, Ver. 28. And when Mankind, presently
after the Flood, did thus publicly discover the Temper of their Hearts, by
renouncing the true God and true Religion, and falling away to Idolatry and
Superstition and all Manner of Wickedness: I say, when Mankind, notwithstanding
the late awful Warning they had had by the universal Deluge; did thus quickly
show themselves so entirely disposed to their sinful and rebellious Courses:
For this Cause God gave them up. v. 24, 26, 28. even suffered them to take
their own Way and run their own Ruin. -- The whole Earth might all have been
God's People and his visible Family, but they would not. They might all have
retained the Knowledge of the true God and of the Way to Life, but they did not
like to; and God was not obliged to make them, and therefore he even let them
take their own Course: and yet took Care, in after Ages, not to leave himself
without Witness, but by many wonderful Works to let all the Nations of the
Earth know that he was the LORD. And if any would repent and return, he made
Provision for their Reception as Proselytes into the Jewish Church. And
doubtless here and there one, from Age to Age, by the inward Influences of his
blessed Spirit, were brought so to do; and the rest were blinded; as is said in
a parallel Case, Romans 11.7.

And now the Knowledge of the true God and of true Religion must presently have
been lost from off the Face of the whole Earth, and never have been recovered,
and Satan had the most full Possession of the whole World to the latest
Posterity, had not free and sovereign Grace interposed in a most wonderful
Manner in this dark and awful Juncture. But in this very Season, God was
pleased of his own mere Goodness and sovereign Pleasure, still through the
appointed Mediator, by the gracious Influences of his Spirit, and by immediate
Revelations, and by the special Dispensations of his Providence, to preserve to
himself a Seed to serve him. -- He called Abram alone, as it were, from the
rest of the World, and blessed him; he made farther Revelations to him touching
the promised Seed, and entered into a Covenant to be his God and the God of his
Children after him. And now, a new World of Wonders begin to open to our View,
in the divine Dispensations toward Abraham and his Seed. Genesis 12. etc.

Note, While God was doing these Things with Abraham, the rest of the World
grew Wicked apace. And therefore God thought fit, to give a Specimen of the
Temper of his Heart, and let the Nations know that he was the LORD, by raining
Fire and Brimstone out of Heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah, who were remarkably
Wicked; and at the same Time delivering righteous Lot. Genesis 19. -- A
Dispensation so remarkable, and never the like before heard of, that no doubt
it flew like Lightning all the World over, and spread Terror and Surprise through
the guilty Nations. Howsoever, for all this, they turned not to the Lord.

Well, Abraham is circumcised with all his Household, and true Religion is
taught and maintained in his Family, and Isaac his Son, and Eleazer his
Servant, seem to have been savingly wrought upon by divine Grace. And God
blesses Abraham, and he becomes very great; and God protects him wherever he
goes, to the Honor of his great Name, in the midst of an idolatrous World.
Nevertheless, the World instead of growing wiser and better by all this, which
doubtless was heard of and much wondered at among the Nations, they grew worse
and worse. -- Yea, Wickedness appears openly in Abraham's Family it self.
Ishmael discovers a bad Spirit; He mocks at Isaac, Genesis 21.9. And he that was
born after the Flesh, persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, Gal. 4.29.
So that he was, in a Sort, excommunicated and cast out of God's visible Family.
And it is not long before true Religion is a Thing unknown among his numerous
Posterity. And they who were of the Seed of Abraham according to the Flesh,
were now numbered with the Heathen. Thus, after this Sort it fared with Cain the
first Persecutor, and thus it fares with Ishmael, for the warning of all
godless and carnal Professors. And yet from Age to Age this same Temper has
appeared, and yet still does appear, although perhaps this Sin, from the
beginning of the World to this Day, has never yet gone unpunished.

Now, it was said, In Isaac shall thy Seed be called. And with him God renewed
the Covenant, and to him the Promises were repeated, and God blessed him, and
he became very great; and he also was under a special divine Protection. Yet
there was a profane Esau in his Family, who made so light of the spiritual
Blessings of Abraham, as, for a mere Trifle, to sell his Birthright. And he
afterward became a Persecutor of his Brother Jacob, and his Posterity soon
lost the Knowledge of the true God and of the true Religion, and degenerated
into a State of Heathenism.

Nor can it be attributed to any Thing but the free and sovereign Grace of God,
that Jacob and his Seed did not do so too. But so it was; for so it seemed Good
in the Eyes of him, who has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and whose Purpose
according to Election always stands independent on Works. Romans 9.11. I say, so
it was, through the Power of him, who works all Things according to the Counsel
of his own Will, that when all the other Nations of the Earth were suffered to
renounce the true God and the true Religion, that in Jacob God was known, and
his Name was great in Israel. -- Never was there a Nation, which discovered a
stronger Propensity to Idolatry and all Manner of Wickedness than they. And
notwithstanding all the mighty Restraints, by God laid upon them, they were
almost perpetually breaking through all, and rushing on like the Horse into the
Battle. Neither Warnings, nor Threatenings, nor the Authority of God, nor the
Tears of their Prophets, nor the most terrible Judgments, were ever able
effectually to restrain that People and turn them to God. And had not God
always by his special Grace, kept a Remnant for himself, they would have been
like Sodom and like to Gomorrah. Isai. 1.2 -- 9. Romans 11.2 -- 7.

Now the divine Perfections were most illustriously displayed, in the divine
Conduct toward this People, from Age to Age; and that not only before their
Faces, but also in the Eyes of all the Nations round about them. Mavelous
Things were wrought in Egypt, and Wonders at the Red Sea, and forty Years in
the Wilderness, which no Doubt did ring through the World, and were enough to
have made all the Earth know that he was the LORD, and, but for their perverse
Stubbornness, to have brought them all to worship him and him only. But all
this was so far from reclaiming the Heathen Nations, that it hardly tamed the
Israelites themselves. But they rebelled at Tiberah, and at Massah, and at
Kibroth-Hattaavah, and were perpetually provoking the Lord to Wrath. Deuteronomy. 9.
When he slew them, then they sought him: And returned and enquired early after
God. Nevertheless, they did flatter him with their Mouth, and lied unto him
with their Tongues. For their Heart was not right with him, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant, Psalm. 78.34 -- 37. And many a Time were they within a
Hair's Breadth of Destruction, and would surely have been utterly destroyed,
but that he wrought for his great Name's sake. Exodus 32. Number. 14. Ezekiel. 20.

So again, in the Days of Joshua, he divided Jordan, and drove out the Heathen
before them, and gave them their Land in Possession, and made the Tribes of
Israel dwell in their Tents. Yet they afterward tempted and provoked the most
high God, and kept not his Testimonies, but turned back and dealt unfaithfully
like their Fathers: they provoked him to Anger with their high Places, and
moved him to jealousy with their graven Images. Psalm. 78.54 -- 58. Judge. 2.6 --
20. And now for the Space of many Years, God, by raising up Judges and by
sending Prophets and executing Judgments, did labor to reform them; but all in
vain: For they quickly turned aside like a deceitful Bow. However in the mean
while, the Goodness and Patience of God on the one Hand, and his Holiness and
Justice on the other, were illustriously displayed by his wonderful Works in
the midst of the Earth, to be sounded out among all Nations; that all the Earth
might know that he was the LORD.

In the Days of David and Solomon, God wrought for his great Name's sake, and
exalted his People, and made Israel honorable in the Sight of all Nations; yet
were they not sincere in his Sight: and when outward Restraints were afterward
taken off, they soon discovered the hidden Temper of their Hearts, that they
did not care for God or his Worship, but liked Dan and Bethel, as well as the
Temple at Jerusalem. Thus did the ten Tribes; nor was their treacherous Sister
Judah more sincere. When a good King reigned, they would pretend to be good;
and when a bad King reigned, they stood ready for Idols. And now God sent
Judgment upon them Time after Time, and sent all his Servants the Prophets,
saying, O do not this abominable Thing which my Soul hates: but they would not
hearken. The Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his Messengers, rising
up betimes and sending; because he had Compassion on his People and on his
Dewlling Place: but they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his Words,
and misused his Prophets, until the Wrath of God arose against his People, till
there was no Remedy. Therefore he brought upon them the King of the Chaldees,
and gave them all into his Hand. ^ Chron. 36 15, 16, 1^*

However, God was tenderly touched at the public Reproach and Dishonor, to
which his great Name was exposed in the Eyes of insulting Nations all around,
who claped their Hands, and stamped with their Feet, and rejoiced with all
their Heart, for what was done to the People called by his Name, glorying that
their GOD was no better than the dumb Idols which they served. Wherefore God
raised up the Prophet Ezekiel, who clears up God's Conduct toward his People,
in Chapters 16th and 18th and on. And dooms the neighboring Nations in the
Name of God, declaring what Judgment should come upon them from the Hand of God
for their insulting, whereby they should be made to know that He was the LORD,
as in the 25th to Chap. 31. -- And now also Daniel and his Companions were by
God raised up, that by them his Name might become great in the Eyes of all
Nations. And for them he works such Deliverances as to constrain the haughty
Monarchs of the Earth to issue out their Decrees through all the World, that none
should speak any Thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshack and Abednego,
upon Pain of being cut in Pieces, and their Houses made a Dunghill. -- And that
in all their Dominions Men should fear and tremble before the God of Daniel.
Dan. 3.29, and 6.26. Surely the infinite Wisdom of God appears most
wonderfully, in all the astonishing Methods which he has taken to make himself
known, and to keep up the Honor of his great Name among such a wicked,
God-hating Race of Beings!

And now all this while, there was nothing but the infinite Goodness, and free
and sovereign Grace of God, together with his Covenant Faithfulness, to move
him, not to cast off and utterly reject his People, and let them be scattered
among the Heathen, and their Name perish from off the Earth. It was for his
great Name's sake that he wrought Salvation for them from Time to Time. Ezekiel.
20. When there was no Motive in them, but every Thing to the contrary; then for
his own Sake he undertook to write his Law in their Hearts and put it in their
inward Parts, to be their God and make them his People, and to remember their
Iniquities no more against them, and to bring them back to their own Land, and
plant them and build them up. Ezekiel. 36.16 -- 34.

And however, by the Babylonish Captivity the Jewish People were pretty
thoro'ly cured of their idolatrous Disposition; yet after their Return, and
after the godly Men of that Generation were dead, they soon began to show that
they were as averse to God and the Life of Religion as ever. And yet all these
Things notwithstanding, God is determined to make one Trial more. He had sent
one Servant after another, and they had been beaten, and stoned, and put to
Shame, and sent away empty. Now therefore he sends his only Son, to see if they
will hear him: and behold they say, Come let us kill him. Mat. 21.33 -- 39.
Wherefore at last, God determines to cast off that Nation. ver. 41. And to go
and try the Heathen, whom, for a long Time, he had suffered to take their own
Ways.

And now, to his Apostles Christ gives Commission, to go into all the Earth,
and preach the Gospel to every Creature, and he that believes, says he, shall
be saved; and he that believes not shall be damned. And they run, and preach,
and cry, Repent and turn from your dumb Idols to serve the living God. And had
not they been stopped, they would soon have carried the News all round the
World. But Jews and Gentiles combine together, and Earth and Hell are in Arms
to defeat the Design. Nevertheless, as many as were ordained to eternal Life
believed. And God carried on his Work through a Sea of Blood, and in about three
Hundred Years conquered the Roman Empire.

No sooner is this done, but the Mystery of Iniquity begins to work, and the
Man of Sin to be revealed. The Devil and his Servants turn their Coat, and
under the Cloak of Religion and good Order, establish the Kingdom of Satan in a
new Form: For it is the Nature of Mankind to hate true Religion. And now
Antichrist reigns, and scatters the holy People, and wears out the Saints of
the most High, for a Time, and Times, and half a Time. In the mean while, The
Woman flies into the Wilderness, the Witnesses prophesy in Sackcloth, until at
last the Witnesses themselves are slain. And now Religion is driven even just
out of the World, and there had been no Hope, but that God awoke as one out of
Sleep, like a mighty Man that shouteth by Reason of Wine And behold the Spirit
of Life from God enters into the two Witnesses, that is, Luther and Calvin, and
others their Contemporaries; and they stood upon their Feet, and great Fear
fell upon them which saw them. And God put them out of their Enemies Reach. And
there was a great Earthquake, and a tenth Part of the City fell. Rev. 9. And a
glorious Day began to dawn.

But now, it is not long, before many turn Heretics and Enthusiasts, and the
World rises in Arms, and by Fire and Sword endeavor to demolish the Redeemer's
Kingdom. However, God wrought for his great Name's sake, and has ever since
been working, and will go on conquering and to conquer, until all the Nations
of the Earth are brought into Subjection to his Son.

Thus we have taken a brief View of the Methods which God has taken to recover
a sinful, guilty World, to himself: The external Means we have chiefly dwelt
upon. Upon the internal, something farther shall be added presently. But let us
first make a few Remarks.

REMARK 1. Had not Mankind been wholly to Blame, they might all of them from
the Beginning have enjoyed the Benefit of divine Revelation. Nothing secluded
them therefrom, but their own bad Temper and bad Conduct. -- And had not
Mankind been wholly to Blame, they might all of them have enjoyed the Gospel,
and had it preached all over the World to this Day. Nothing has hindered it but
their own perverse Obstinacy, their hating the Light, and hating the Truth. --
Strange it is therefore, that some Men of Learning should be so full of Charity
for the Heathen, who thus hate God, despise Christ, and reject the Gospel. But
perhaps some will be ready to say, that there may be many honest Persons among
the Heathen, who never heard of the Gospel, and never rejected it, who may
stand fair for Heaven.

Answ. There is a Number of such honest Sort of Persons among Christians, but
their natural Enmity to God and Christ and Gospel Grace is found to be as great
as others. And sometimes Publicans and Harlots enter into Heaven before them.
-- Surely none of them more honest than the young Man in the Gospel, nor ever
arrived to greater Seize; and therefore all of them might do as he did,
if under the same Circumstances. That natural Kind of Honesty, many Times is an
Occasion of Men's being hardened against Christianity; for they are very ready
to say, God, I thank thee, I am not as other Men. Like him in Luke 18.
Doubtless these honest Heathen would do as their Fathers did, had they the
Opportunity. So the honest Jews did. See Matt. 23.28 -- 33.




REM. 2. Mankind have manifested the highest Degree of Aversion to God and true
Religion from the Beginning of the World, and that almost in all possible Ways.
Hundreds, and Thousands, and Millions, have they in their Rage put to Death,
and that in the most barbarous and cruel Manner. -- Strange it is therefore,
that so many Matters of Fact have not to this Day convinced Mankind, that they
are are truly Enemies to God. -- Strange, that they can have the Face to make
the old Pretense, and say, If we had been in the Days of our Fathers, we would
not have been Partakers with them, in the Blood of the Prophets. Mat. 23.30.
When all the Time, from Age to Age, they have been acting over the old Scene.

REM. 3. It has been owing wholly and entirely to the free Grace and almighty
Power of God, that the Church has been preserved, and true Religion not driven
clean out of the World: It is one of the greatest Miracles that ever was
wrought.

REM. 4. God has always acted sovereignly in choosing what Family, Nation or
Nations he would preserve true Religion among; all being by Nature equally
averse to God, and equally unworthy: and has always acted justly in giving over
other Families and Nations for their Sin and Apostasy.

REM. 5. The whole Scheme of the divine Conduct has been most excellently
calculated to display all the divine Perfections to the best Advantage: And it
does exhibit to us the very Image of his Heart in strong and lively Colors.

But to proceed,

Although the external Means of Grace and remarkable Dispensations of Providence
perhaps may in a Measure sometimes restrain Mankind, and bring them to a
feigned Submission to God and his Laws; yet such is their rooted Enmity and
entire Aversion to God and true Religion, that not one will hereby be brought
to repent and sincerely turn to God. Psalm. 78.34 -- 37. and 81.8 -- 12. Isai.
5.1 -- 7. Nothing short of those inward Influences of the SPIRIT, which are
Almighty and All-conquering, will effectually attain the End. M^t. 11.20 -- 27.
Ephesians. 1.19. -- And therefore besides the external Means of Grace, God has as it
were taken a World of Pains with one and another of Mankind by the inward
Influences of his SPIRIT. -- The external Means indeed, which have been used,
are more open to Observation; and so also is that external Opposition which
Mankind have made; but the same Ends which God has been pursuing by the
external Means, viz. to convince Mankind of their sinful, guilty, ruined State,
and bring them to return to God through a Mediator; the same has he been
pursuing, by the inward Influences of his Spirit: and the same Opposition which
has openly appeared against the Means of Grace, has also secretly wrought
mightily in the Hearts of Men against the inward Influences of the Spirit.
Mankind are as much inclined to resist the SPIRIT, as they be the Word of God,
and that for the same Reason and from the same Temper; because both drive at
the same Thing, a Thing most contrary to their Corruptions.

Perhaps there are some whom God never vouchsafes at all to strive with by his
Spirit, and these are ready to think there is no such Thing. -- Others, are a
little awakened, and from Self-Love, the Fears of Hell, and the Hopes of
Heaven, they reform their Lives a little, and set about some external Duties,
and so think to make Amends for their past Sins, and recommend themselves to
the divine Favor; but are as great Enemies as ever to the Power of Religion:
and here God leaves them to perish. -- Others are carried farther, and become
more strict and painful, but still from the same Principles; and there they are
left to perish. -- Not one takes one Step in earnest, unless he is driven to
it; nor goes one Step farther than he is driven: and therefore God leaves one
here, and another there, as seems good in his Sight. They do not like to retain
God in their Knowledge, and therefore he gives them over to a reprobate Mind,
as those spoken of in Romans 1.28. -- Some indeed are carried very far by the
common Influences of the holy Spirit, they are enlightened, they taste of the
heavenly Gift, and of the Powers of the World to come, and are made Partakers
of the holy Ghost; and yet after all fall away, and perish. Heb. 6. They have a
great Sense of their sinful, guilty, undone Estate, of the Wrath of God, and
Dreadfulness of Damnation, and are mightily brought down; and then have a great
Sense of the Mercy of God, the dying Love of Christ, and the Glory of Heaven:
and they think they are converted, and they are ravished with the Thought.
However, in the End, all is turned to feed their Pride and their Presumption,
and to harden and embolden them in Sin. They are not so much afraid of Sin now,
because they are confident they shall never go to Hell. And many Times this
Sort of People, through the great swelling of spiritual Pride and the immediate
Influences of Satan, come to have strange Experiences, and turn to be strange
Creatures, and broach strange Errors, and seem to be near entirely forsaken by
God and Reason and Conscience: and yet, (yea, and by the same Means) get to be
the holiest Creatures in the World, in their own Account. -- But while the
Sinners with whom the holy Spirit strives, do many of them turn out after this
Sort; some in one Way, and some in another; there are others with whom God
makes thoro' Work; that is, makes them thoro'ly understand and feel their
sinful, guilty, helpless, undone Estate, and see into and believe the Gospel
Way of Salvation through Jesus Christ, and return home to God in that Way. And
now they are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5.
And here God has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy. -- And even so it has been
as to the external Means of Grace from the beginning of the World. With some,
God has taken more Pains and longer; and with others, less Pains and shorter:
but when all the rest of the World degenerated to Heathenism, God took
effectual Methods with the Israelites to keep them from doing so too. -- And
thus, in a resembling Manner, he does with all the spiritual Seed of Abraham,
with his Elect; whereby in Spite of all Opposition, they are brought to Glory
at last: they are fed with Manna every Day: the Pillar of Cloud by Day, and of
Fire by Night, is their continual Guide: and the Rock which follows them is
Christ: i. e. They are fed and are guided, they live and are refreshed, and are
helped to hold on their Way, by continual Influences from on high, by constant
Communications of divine Grace. And so the Path of the Just is like the shining
Light, which shines more and more to the perfect Day.

REMARKS. Never is any poor Sinner under the Light of the Gospel, by God passed
by, without ever being awakened by the Holy Spirit, but God sees he is deaf to
the Voice of his Word, and hates to be awakened, and loves to go on secure. --
Never is any awakened Sinner forsaken by the Spirit of God, and left to take
his own Way, and run his own Ruin, but that first he resisted and grieved the
holy Spirit, and stifled Conviction, and rent away, as it were, out of God's
Hands -- And never is a poor Sinner savingly bro't home to God, and trained up
for Heaven; but that, from first to last, it was absolutely and entirely owing
to the infinite Goodness, free Grace, and almighty Power of God. And indeed,
thus will (...) appear at the great Day of Judgment, that all who perish are
wholly to blame, and all that are saved will have none to glory in but the
Lord. -- But I have elsewhere so much insisted upon the Nature of the
Influences of the holy Spirit, that I must not here enlarge.

Thus the Way to Life is opened by Christ Jesus, and all are invited to return
and be saved. And thus we see the Methods which God takes for the Recovery of a
sinful, guilty World. And from all that has been said we may draw these
INFERENCES.

1. It is* undoubtedly the Duty of poor Sinners to be deeply affected with all
these wonderful Methods of divine Grace, and to Strive and Labor with the
greatest Painfulness and Diligence to fall in with the Design of the Gospel, to
be sensible of their sinful, guilty, undone Estate, and to look to the free
Grace of God through Jesus Christ for Relief, and to repent and return to God
through him, Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate. Some are of the
Opinion, that because the best Sinners can do, while Enemies to God in their
Hearts, is, as to the Manner of it, sinful and odious in the Eyes of the divine
Holines^* that therefore their best Way is to do nothing, but to sit still and
wait for the Spirit. But nothing is more contrary to Scripture or Reason. The
Scripture says, * Strive to enter: And Reason teaches, that when the God of
Heaven, the great Governor of the World, is thus coming out after guilty
Rebels in a Way of Mercy, it becomes them to be deeply affected thereat, and to
exert all their rational Powers in Opposition to their Sloth and Corruptions,
laboring to lie open to the Means of Conviction, avoiding every Thing that
tends to promote Security, and to render ineffectual the Methods of divine
Grace, and practicing every Thing that tends to their farther Awakening. And O
let this be remembered, that it is Sinners resisting the Methods of Grace, which
causes God to give them over. Psalm. 81.11, 12, 13. But my People would not
hearken to my Voice: and Israel would none of me. So I gave them up to their
own Hearts Lust: and they walked in their own Counsels. O that my People had
hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my Ways!

2. From what has been said we may learn, that it is Madness and Folly for poor
Sinners to use the Means of Grace under a Notion of doing their whole Duty, and
so pacify their Conscience. The Means of Grace are designed in the first Place
to convince Sinners of their sinful, guilty, ruined State; and for them to
forget, totally forget, this their End, and to go about to attend upon them
under a Notion of doing that Duty which they owe to God, as something in Lieu
of that perfect Obedience which the Law requires, is quite to lose the Benefit
of the Means of Grace; yea, to thwart their very Design: and tends to keep Men
from Conviction and Conversion, and seal them down in spiritual Security. --
That which God directs them to do, to the End their Consciences might be more
awakened, they do, that their Consciences might be more quieted. The Means
which were appointed to make them more sensible of their Need of Christ and
Grace, they use to make themselves the more insensible thereof.

3. Sinners are not to use the Means of Grace under a Notion of making Amends
for their past Sins, and recommending themselves to God: Romans 10.3. Nor under a
Notion that by their strongest Efforts they shall be ever able to renew their
own Nature: Ephesians. 2.1. Nor under a Notion they can do any Thing at all to
prevail with God to renew them. Romans 11.35, 36. -- But on the contrary, in the
Use of the Means of Grace, they are to seek for and labor after a thorough
Conviction, that they can neither make any Amends for their past Sins, nor in
the least recommend themselves to God, that they cannot renew their own Nature,
nor in the least move God to show them this Mercy: to the intent, that being
thus convinced of their ruined, helpless State, they may be prepared to look to
the free Mercy and sovereign Grace of God through Christ for all Things: which is
the very Thing that the Gospel aims at. Romans 3.9. -- 26. and which the Means of
Grace are designed to promote, and bring them to: and to which the Spirit of
God, by his inward Influences, does in the Use of Means, finally bring all who
are saved. Romans 7.8, 9. Gal. 3.24.

For Sinners to use the Means of Grace under the other Notions aforesaid, is
practically to say, We are not fallen, sinful, guilty, helpless, undone
Creatures, nor do we need the Redeemer or the Sanctifier, which God has
provided, nor do we lie at his Mercy, or intend to be beholden to his mere
sovereign Grace. If we have sinned, we can make Amends for it: if we have
displeased God, we can pacify him again. If we are Wicked, we can become Good:
or if we do as well as we can, and then want any further Help, God is obliged
to help us.

If therefore Sinners would take the wisest Course to be the better for the Use
of the Means of Grace, they must try to fall in with God's Design, and with the
Spirit's Influences, and labor to see and feel their sinful, guilty,
condemned, helpless, undone Estate. For this End, they must forsake vain
Company, leave their Quarelling and Contention, drop their inordinate worldly
Pursuits, and abandon every Thing which tends to keep them secure in Sin and
quench the Motions of the Spirit; and for this End must they read, hear,
meditate and pray, compare themselves with God's holy Law, try to view
themselves in the same Light that God does, and pass the same Judgment upon
themselves: that so they may be in a Way to approve of the Law, and to admire
the Grace of the Gospel, to judge and condemn themselves, and humbly to apply
to the free Grace of God through Jesus Christ for all Things, and through Him to
return to God.

Thus we have gone through what was proposed under this third general Head: We
have considered the Necessity there was of Satisfaction for Sin, and of a
perfect Righteousness: We have considered what Satisfaction for Sin has been
made, and what a Righteousness wrought out, and wherein their Sufficiency
consists: We have considered how the Way of Life has been opened by the Means:
and we have considered what Methods God has actually entered upon, for the
Recovery of lost Sinners to himself. -- And thus now upon the whole we see,
upon what Grounds the great Governor of the World considered Mankind as being
in a perishing Condition, and whence his Designs of Mercy originally took their
Rise, and what Necessity there was for a Mediator and Redeemer, and how the Way
to Life has been opened by Him whom God has provided: and so may now pass to
the next Thing proposed.

SECTION VII. Showing the Nature of a genuine COMPLIANCE with the GOSPEL.
IV. To show the true Nature of a saving Faith in Christ. And because by the
Whole, I am to explain the Nature of the Gospel, and of a genuine Compliance
therewith, therefore I will begin with a more general View of Things, and
afterward proceed to a more distinct Survey of Faith in particular.

NOW, a genuine Compliance with the Gospel, in general, consists in a spiritual
and divine Sight and Sense of the great Truths therein presupposed and
revealed; and in a firm Belief of those Truths, and an answerable F^ame of
Heart. As is evident from 2 Cor. 4.3, 4, 6. 1 These. 2.13. Mat. 13.23. Ioh. 8.32.

It Is divine Light imparted by the Spirit of God to the Soul, which lays the
Foundation of all. Mat. 11.25. Gal. 1.16. 2 Cor. 3.18. This spiritual and
divine Light according to the Language of St. Paul, shines in the Heart, and
consists in the Knowledge of GLORY, 2 Cor. 4.6. That is, in a Sense of MORAL
BEAUTY, a Sense of that Beauty there is in the MORAL PERFECTIONS of GOD, and in
all spiritual and divine Things, that HOLY BEAUTY which is peculiar to
spiritual and divine and holy Things, of which every unholy Heart is perfectly
insensible. 1 Ioh. 1.3.6. And by it, Things are made to appear to us in a
Measure as they do to God himself, and to the Angels and Saints in Heaven. And
so by it, we are made to change our Minds, and are brought to be of God's Mind
concerning Things. And so we are hereby disposed to understan^* ^elieve,
entertain and embrace the Gospel. Ioh. 8.47.

GOD the great Governor of the World, who sees all Things as being what they
are, does in the Gospel consider Mankind as perishing, as fallen, sinful,
guilty, justly condemned, helpless and undone. He looks upon the original
Constitution with Adam as holy, just and good; and that by and according to
that Constitution, he might have damned the whole human Race, consistent with
his Goodness, and to the Honor of his Holiness and Justice: He looks upon the
Law of Nature as holy, just and good; and that by and according to that, he
might damn a guilty World, consistent with his Goodness, and to the Honor of
his Holiness and Justice. Now by this divine Light we are brought to look upon
Things as God does, and to have an answerable Frame of Heart.

Again, GOD the great Governor of the World, who sees all Things as being what
they are, ^oes in the Gospel consider a guilty World as lying at his Mercy. He
saw that he was under no Obliga^ions to pity them in the least, or in the least
to mitigate their Punishment: much less under any Obligations to give his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting Life: and still much less under any Obligations, by his holy Spirit
to subdue and recover such obstinate Rebels, who hate him and his Son, his Law
and his Gospel, and are perfectly averse to a Return. He saw a guilty World lie
at his Mercy; and that he was at Liberty to have Mercy or not to have Mercy,
according to his sovereign Pleasure; and that it was fit and becoming his
glorious Majesty to act as a Sovereign in this Affair. And now by this divine
Light we are brought to look upon Things as God does, and to have an answerable
Frame of Heart.

Again, GOD the great Governor of the World, who sees all Things as being what
they are, at the same Time that he designs Mercy for a guilty World, does
consider a Mediator as being necessary to answer the Demands of the broken Law,
and secure the divine Honor. In such a perishing Condition he sees Mankind; so
guilty, so justly condemned, that it would be inconsistent with the divine
Perfections, and contrary to all good Rules of Government, to pardon and save
such wicked Hell-deserving Rebels, without some proper Atonement for their Sin
and suitable Honor done to his Law. But the Honor of his Holiness and
Justice, Law and Government is sacred in his Eyes, and of infinite Importance,
and must be maintained: better the whole World be damned than they in the least
be sullied. And now by this divine Light we are brought to look upon Things as
God does, and to have an answerable Frame of Heart.

Moreover, GOD the great Governor of the World, who sees all Things as being
what they are, views his only begotten Son as a meet Person for a Mediator, and
himself as having sufficient Power to authorize him to the Work. Of his
sovereign Self-moving Goodness, he, in his infinite Wisdom, contrives the whole
Scheme, lays the whole Plan, and puts his Design in Execution; the Door of
Mercy is opened, the News of Pardon and Peace is sent through a guilty World, and
all are invited to return home to God through Jesus Christ: and God looks upon
this Way of Salvation as being glorious for God, and safe for the poor Sinner.
And now by this divine Light we are brought rightly to understand these Things,
and look upon them as God does, and believe them, and to have an answerable
Frame of Heart.

Lastly, GOD the great Governor of the World does, in the Gospel, consider our
return unto him through Jesus Christ, not only as a Duty to which we are under
infinite Obligations, but also as a Privilege of infinite Value, and in this
View of the Case, he commands and invites us to return. And now by this divine
Light we are brought to look upon this also as God does, and to judge it the
fittest and happiest Thing in the World to return unto him through Jesus Christ,
and to have an answerable Frame of Heart. For,

By this Light we come to have a right View of the most high GOD, to see him in
a Measure as the Angels and Saints in Heaven do, to see him in his infinite
Greatness and Majesty, and in the infinite Glory and Beauty of his Nature. And
hence we are made sensible that he is infinitely worthy of the highest Esteem,
Reverence, Love, Delight, and of universal Obedience. And hence we see that we
in particular are under infinite Obligations to love him with all our Hearts,
and obey him in every Thing -- and that to do so, is the happiest Thing in the
World -- that not to do so, is infinitely wrong -- and deserves an infinite
Punishment. And thus we see the Grounds of the Law of Nature, the Reasons from
whence it results, and with all our Hearts consent to it and approve of it as
holy, just and good. And this naturally lays the Foundation for us rightly to
understand and heartily to approve of the original Constitution with Adam. --
And while we behold God in his infinite Glory, and view the Law as holy, just
and good, and see our infinite Obligations perfectly to conform unto it: now
our universal Depravity and infinite ill Desert appears in a clear and divine
Light. Hence it appears, we lie at Mercy, and that it is fit he should have
Mercy on whom he will, that it becomes the Majesty of Heaven to act as a
Sover^^gn in this Affair. And it appears, that there is no Motive in us to
excite his Compassions; but infinitely to the contrary: and hence the Heart is
prepared to discern the Freeness of divine Grace, and to perceive that the
Goodness of the divine Nature must be self-moving; and also to understand the
Need there is of a Mediator to secure the divine Honor: for Creatures so bad
appear too vile to be relieved, unless Justice may first be satisfied; it is
contrary to Law, and contrary to Reason that they should. -- And while we view
these Things, and have a divine Sense of them on our Hearts, we are hereby
prepared to understand the Way of Salvation by free Grace through Jesus Christ,
as revealed in the Gospel. And now a Sense of the glorious Freeness of divine
Grace, the Excellency and Sufficiency of Christ, and the readiness of God to be
reconciled to returning Sinners through him, lays the Foundation for Faith and
Hope. All these Things (although it takes considerable Time to express them in
order) may, for Substance, instantly open to View, and the Soul immediately
acquiesce in the Gospel Scheme and close with Christ; instantly, I say, upon
DIVINE LIGHT's being imparted to the Soul. But the Mind, in that solemn and
awful Hour, may especially fix only upon some Particulars; and so a Remembrance
of these may remain, while other Particulars, which were then in View, cannot
afterward be recollected. Hence, some may doubt whether their first Act of
Faith was right. The best Way, to remove such Fears, is to live in the Exercise
of Faith every Day. For when these Views, and a consciousness of them, become
habitual, our Scruples will cease of Course. The special Nature of our Faith
may be learnt from the after Acts, as well as by the first Act; for the after
Acts will be of the same Nature with the (...) be true or false.
-- And all this while, there is secretly enkindling in the Heart, a most
genuine Disposition to return home to God, to love him and live to him, arising
from a Sense of the ineffable Glory and Beauty of the divine Nature: for he
appears glorious in Holiness, Justice, Goodness and Grace; and glorious in his
Sovereignty and in his Majesty, as supreme Lord and high Governor of the whole
World. -- Upon the whole, with utmost Solemnity, as being in our selves
infinitely unfit for the divine Favor, we venture our eternal All upon Jesus
Christ as Mediator, relying on his Worth and Merits, and trusting to the mere
free Mercy of God through him for Pardon and Grace and Glory, and hence are
encouraged and emboldened with our whole Hearts to return home to God through
him, and give up our selves to God for ever, to love him and live to him, and
live upon him for ever, lamenting that ever we sinned against him, resolving to
cleave to him with all our Hearts, and never, never to depart from him. Heb.
4.16. and 10.19 -- 22. Ephesians. 2.18. Ioh. 14.6. Romans 3.24, 25, 26. -- And thus, by
this divine Light, imparted by the Spirit of God, is the Soul finally brought
to unite to Christ by Faith, and to return home to God through him. Joh. 6.44,
45. No Man can come to me, except the Father draw him. -- They shall be all
taught of God. Every Man therefore that has heard and learned of the Father,
comes unto me. And from what has been said concerning the Nature of the
Gospel, it is Self-evident, that herein consists a genuine Compliance
therewith. For all this is only to see Things as being what they are, and to be
affected and act accordingly.

REMARK 1. This is peculiar to a genuine Compliance with the Gospel, and that
whereby it is specifically different from all Counterfeits, namely, it is being
sounded in, and resulting from, this divine Light; whereby we are brought, not
merely in Speculation, but in Heart, to look upon Things as God does. He sees
all Things as they are; and therefore when any poor Sinner is brought to a
right View of Things, i. e. to see them as they are, he must by Consequence
look upon them as God does. Now all others being blind and ignorant in
Scripture Account, hence this true Sight and Sense of Things is very peculiar
and distinguishing. And hence we may observe, that it is mentioned as being
peculiar to the Good-Ground-Hearers, in Mat. 13.25. That they heard the Word
and UNDERSTOOD it. And Christ intimates that none but his true Disciples KNOW
THE TRUTH. Ioh. 8.31, 32. And the Gospel is again and again said to be hid from
all others. Mat. 11.25. 2 Cor. 4.3. And they only have it REVEALED unto them.
Mat. 11.25. They only have the Vail taken off from their Hearts. 2 Cor. 3.14 --
17. And they only behold with OPEN FACE. Ver. 18.

2. This spiritual and divine Light lays the Foundation for a new Kind of
Belief of the Gospel. A Sight of the divine Beauty and Glory of the Gospel
Scheme, convinces and assures the Heart that it is divine, and indeed from God,
and not a cunningly devised Fable. This is an Evidence peculiar to the
Regenerate, and of all others it is unspeakably the most satisfactory. See this
largely explained and proved in Mr. Edwards's Treatise on religious Affections.
Page, 182 -- 199.

3. Regeneration, Faith, Repentance and Conversion are in their own Nature
connected together, and so they are in this Representation. In Regeneration we
receive this divine Light, this new spiritual Sense of Things. Our Eyes are
opened, and we are brought out of Darkness into this mavelous Light; and so
come to have a right View of God, of our Selves, of Christ, and of the Gospel
Way of Salvation by free Grace through him. -- This spiritual Illumination lays
the Foundation for Faith, Repentance and Conversion. It discovers the Grounds
of Faith, of Repentance and Conversion; and we believe, we repent and convert.
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, always go
together. Act. 20.21. And the Gospel calls Sinners to repent and be converted,
as well as to believe in Christ. Act. 3.19. Those therefore who seem to have
much Light and Faith and Joy, but have no Repentance, nor do turn to God with
all their Hearts, are deluded.

4. Spiritual Light and true Faith are always in Proportion. A spiritual Sense
of God, of our Selves, of Christ, and of the Gospel Way of Salvation by free
Grace through him, lays the Foundation for Faith; and Faith naturally results
therefrom; as has been observed, and as is evident from Ioh. 6.45. And
therefore from the Nature of the Case, they must be in equal Degree in the
Heart. And therefore those who pretend to live by Faith, when they are
spiritually blind and dead, do but deceive themselves. Nor is what they plead
from Isai. 50 10. at all to the Purpose: Who is among you that fears the
Lord, that obeys the Voice of his Servant, that walks in Darkness and has
no Light? Let him trust in the Lord, and stay upon his God. Because. 1. The
Persons here spoken of were not spiritually blind and dead, but had a spiritual
Sense of God and divine Things on their Hearts; for they feared the Lord and
obeyed his Voice; so that they lived in the Exercise of Grace, and walked in
the Ways of Holiness, which without spiritual Light had been impossible. And --
2. What they were in the Dark about, was, how or by what Means the Children of
Israel should ever be brought out of the Babylonish Captivity, back again to
Zion; which they knew God had promised, but they could see no Way wherein it
could be brought about. In this Respect they walked in Darkness and could see
no Light, and therefore they are exhorted to put their Trust in the Lord, whose
Wisdom, Power and Faithfulness are infinite. This is evidently the meaning of
the Words, as is manifest from the Scope and Tenor of the Prophet's Discourse
through all the ten preceding Chapters, which was calculated for the Support and
Comfort of the Godly in the Babylonish Captivity, by assuring them of a Return.
The three first Verses of the next Chapter, ( Isai. 51.1, 2, 3.) do, I think,
confirm the above Interpretation of Isai. 50.10. Although I Doubt not, the
Prophet's Discourse, through the abovesaid ten Chapters, has a farther Look to
the Messiah's Kingdom, and our Redemption out of mystical Babylon. But let the
Words be considered in either View, or only considered in themselves
absolutely, it is plain, they never were designed to comfort Stony-Ground
Hearers, when their Religion is all worn out, and they become dead, blind and
carnal; and so full of Doubts and Fears: Nor do they mean to embolden such
firmly to believe they are in a good Estate, though ever so much in the Dark. i
e. Though they see no Grace in their Hearts, nor Signs of any: For the Words are
directed only to those who fear the Lord, and obey the Voice of his Servant.
Nor what is said about Abraham, that against Hepe, he believed in Hope. -- Nor
what is said by St. Paul, We walk by Faith and not by Sight, -- any Thing to
their Purpose: unless they suppose, that Abraham and Paul, and the primitive
Christians in general, were as dead and blind and carnal as themselves. -- The
Truth is, that this blind Faith is the very same Thing, which the Apostle James
calls a dead Faith.

5. Evangelical Humiliation and true Faith are likewise always in Proportion.
Evangelical Humiliation consists in a Sense of our own Sinfulness, Vileness,
Odiousness and Ill-Desert, and in a Disposition thence resulting to lie down in
the Dust full of Self-loathing and Self-abhorrence, abased before the Lord,
really accounting our selves infinitely too bad ever to venture to come into
the divine Presence in our own Names, or to have a Thought of Mercy from God on
the Account of our own Goodness. And it is this which makes us sensible of our
Need of a Mediator, and makes us desire to be found not in our selves but in
Christ, not having on our own Righteousness but his. No farther therefore (...)
these Views and this Temper prevails in us, shall we truly discern any Need of
Christ, or be heartily inclined to have any Respect to him as a Mediator
between God and ^s. There can therefore be no more of true Faith in Exercise
than there is of this true Humility. When Men therefore appear righteous in
their own Eyes, and look upon themselves as deserving well at the Hands of God
on the Account of their own Goodness, they can feel no Need of a Mediator, nor
at Heart have any Respect to Christ under that Character. Luke 5.31. -- This
condemns the Faith of the Self-righteous Formalist, who depends upon his being
conscientious in his Ways, and upon his sincerely endeavoring to do as well as
he can, to recommend him to God. And this condemns also the Faith of the proud
Enthusiast, who appears so Good in his own Eyes, so far from a legal Spirit, so
purely Evangelical, so full of Light and Knowledge, Humility and Love, Zeal and
Devotion, as that from a Sense of his own Goodness, and how greatly beloved he
is in the Sight of God, he is encouraged, and elevated, and feels greatly
emboldned to come into the Presence of God, and draw near, and come even to his
Seat, and use Familiarity and Boldness with God, as though he was almost an
Equal. Such are so far from any true Sense of their Need of Christ, as that
they rather feel more fit to be Mediators and Intercessors in Behalf of others,
than to want one for themselves. And it is the Way of such, from that great
Sense they have of their own Goodness, to make bold with God, and to make bold
with Christ, in their Prayers, as if they felt themselves pretty nigh upon a
Level. -- Of all Men in the World, I am ready to think, that God looks upon
these the worst, and hates them the most. Luke 18.9 -- 14. Isai. 65.5. Bu^ did
they know it, they would hate him as entirely as he does them. -- Hypocrites of
all Sorts fail in this Point; they see no real Need of Christ; they are not so
bad, but that to their own Sense and Feeling, they might be pardoned and saved
by the free Mercy of God, without any Mediator. Hence they do not understand
the Gospel, it is all Foolishness to them. 1 Cor. 2.14.

6. It is a spiritual Sense and firm Belief of the Truths of the Gospel, which
encourages the Heart to trust in Christ. Ioh. 6.4^. That the Goodness of God is
infinite, and self-moving^ that Christ, as Mediator, has secured the Honor of
God the moral Governor of the World, and opened a Way for the free and
honorable Exercise of his (...)* that through Christ, God the supreme Governor
of the World is actually ready to be reconciled, and invites all, the vilest
not excepted, to return to him in (...) These Truths, being spiritually
understood and (...), convince the Heart of the Safety of trusting (...)
Christ, and encourage it so to do. Heb. 10.19. Mat. 22.4.

7. Saving Faith consists in that entire Trust, Reliance, or Dependence on
Jesus Christ the great Mediator, his Satisfaction and Merits, Mediation and
Intercession, which the humbled Sinner has, whereby he is emboldened to return
home to God in Hopes of Acceptance, and is encouraged to look to and trust in
God through him for that complete Salvation which is offered in the Gospel. --
The opposite to justifying Faith, is a self-righteous Spirit and Temper,
whereby a Man, from a Conceit of and Reliance upon his own Goodness, is
emboldened and encouraged to trust and hope in the Mercy of God. Heb. 10.19.23.
Luke 18.9 -- 14. And accordingly, when such see how bad they really are, their
Faith fails, they naturally ^hink that God cannot find in his Heart to show
Mercy to such.

8. Faith emboldens the Heart. In a legal Humiliation, which is antecedent to
spiritual Light, the Sinner is brought to a Kind of Despair: The Things, which
used to embolden him, do now entirely fail: He finds no Good in himself; yea,
he feels himself dead in Sin; and upon this, his Heart dies within him. I was
alive without the Law once; but when the Commandment came, Sin revived, and I
died, Romans 7.9. And by spiritual Light, in evangelical Humiliation, his undone
Estate in and of himself is made still more plain. -- But now Faith emboldens
the Heart, begets new Courage, lays the Foundation for a new Kind of Hope, a
Hope springing entirely from a new Foundation. Heb. 10.19. Having therefore
Brethren, BOLDNESS to enter into the Holiest, by the Blood of Jesus. -- Let us
draw near with a true Heart in full Assurance of Faith. -- By Faith the Heart
is emboldened -- 1. To return home to God in Hopes of Acceptance. A spiritual
Sight and Sense of the ineffable Beauty of the divine Nature, begets a
Disposition to look upon it the fittest and happiest Thing in the World, to
love God with all the Heart, and be entirely devoted to him for ever; and (...)
an Inclination to return and everlastingly give up and consecrate our selves
unto him. But may such a Wretch as I be the Lord's? Will he accept me? Now the
Believer, understanding the Way of Acceptance by Christ, and seeing the Safety
of it, ventures his All upon this sure Foundation, and hereby is emboldened to
return. Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he
is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. i. e. first, He must see what
God is, behold him in his Glory, or he cannot in a genuine Manner desire to come
to him: and secondly, He must see that he is ready to be reconciled unto and to
save those, that from a genuine Desire to be his, do heartily return to him
through the Mediator he has appointed; or else he will not dare to come. But when
both these are seen and believed, now the Soul will return and come, and give
up it self to God, to be the Lord's for ever. -- 2. Faith in Christ emboldens
the Heart to look to and trust in the free Grace of God through him, for all
Things that just such a poor Creature wants, even for all Things offered in the
Gospel to poor Sinners. Heb. 4.16. Let us therefore come BOLDLY to the Throne
of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy and find Grace. Pardoning Mercy and
sanctifying Grace are the two great Benefits of the new Covenant: and these are
the two great Things which an enlightened Soul fe^^s the want of, and for which
he is emboldened to come to God by Jesus Christ. -- I will be to them a God,
and they shall be to me a People, says the Lord in the new Covenant: and this
is all my Salvation, and all my Desire, says the Believer.

9. The Word FAITH in Scripture is evidently used in various Senses. Or thus,
th^^e are various different Exercises of a godly Soul, all which in Scripture
are called FAITH. For I mean here to leav^ out all those Sorts of Faith spoken
of in Scripture, (...) the unregenerate Man is capable of. -- 1. It is the Wa^
o^ godly Men to live under a spiritual Sense of God, his Being and Perfections,
and Government of the World, and the Glory, Reality and Importance of divine
and eternal Things: even under such a living Sense of these Things, as that
they are firmly believed, and are made to influence them as though they were
seen. Hence they are said to look at Things which are unseen. 2 Cor. 4.18. To
see him who is invisible. Heb. 11.27. And are said to walk by FAITH. 2 Cor.
5.7. And this seems to be the Meaning of the Word FAITH, as it is used in Heb.
11. where we read of what Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Moses,
did by FAITH. Their Faith was the Substance of Things hoped for, and Evidence
of Things not seen. i. e. It made divine and eternal Things as it were subsist
in all their Glory and Importance before their Minds, and appear as evident as
though they were seen. v. 1. -- 2. It is the Way of godly Men to live under a
spiritual Sense of the divine All Sufficiency, whereby they are influenced
firmly to believe that God is able to do all Things for them, and be all to
them, which they can possibly Need in Time and to Eternity; by all which, they
are influenced to live in a Way of continual Dependence upon him for all
Things. And this is what, in the Book of Psalms and elsewhere, is called
trusting in the Lord, waiting and leaning upon the Lord, making him our Refuge.
This Temper is expressed in Psalm. 73.25, 26. Whom have I in Heaven but thee?
And there is none upon Earth that I desire beside thee. My Flesh and my Heart
saileth: But God is the Strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ever. And v.
28. It is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my Trust in the Lord. --
3. It is the Way of godly Men to live under a spiritual Sense of God as the
great GOVERNOR of the World, to whom it belongs to maintain the Rights of the
Godhead, and the Honor of the Law; and under a Sense of themselves as poor
Sinners, worthy only of Destruction according to Law and Justice, and too bad
to be pitied or to have any Mercy shown them without some sufficient Salvo to
the divine Honor; and under a Sense of Christ as a MEDIATOR appointed to be a
Propitiation for Sin, to declare God's Righteousness and secure the divine
Honor, and so open a Way wherein God might be just and yet justify the Sinner
that believes in Jesus: even under such a living Sense of these Things, as that
they are firmly believed; whereby they are influenced not to draw nigh to God
(...) their own Names, emboldened by their own Goodness; but only in the Name
of Christ, DEPENDING ENTIRELY upon him, and EMBOLDENED ONLY by his Worth and
Merits, Mediation and Intercession, to look for Acceptance in the Sigh^ of God.
Hence, because of this Dependence, they are said to pray in Christ's Name. Joh.
16.23. To have access to God by him. Ephesians. 2.18. To come to God through him. Heb.
7.25. To believe in God by him. 1 Pet. 1.21. And are represented as being
EMBOLDENED by his Worth and Merits, Mediation and Intercession, to approach the
Majesty of Heaven. Heb. 4.16. and 10.19. And now this is called a coming to
Christ. Joh. 7.37. A receiving him. Joh. 1.12. A believing in Christ. Joh.
3.15, 16. A believing ON Christ. Joh. 3.18, 36. A believing in HIS NAME. Joh.
1.12. And a TRUSTING in Christ. Ephesians. 1.12, 13. And this is that Act of Faith by
which we are justified and entitled to Life, as is evident from Romans 3.24, 25,
26. Where it is, by the Apostle, called, Faith in Christ's Blood. -- The
Apostle considers God as the righteous Governor of the World. ( Chap. 1.18.)
All Mankind as being guilty before God. (Chap. 3.9 -- 19.) Christ as being set
forth to be a Propitiation for Sin. (v. 25.) That God might be just and yet
justify etc. (v. 26.) And affirms that we are justified by free Grace through the
REDEMPTION that is in Jesus Christ. (v. 24.) By Faith without the Deeds of the
Law. (v. 28.) Being considered in our selves as UNGODLY. ( Chap. 4.5.) And this
justifying Faith he calls Faith in Christ's Blood; because it was principally
by the Death of Christ, that the Ends of moral Government were answered, and so
Law and Justice satisfied, and a Way opened for the honorable Exercise of
divine Grace. -- But although the Word Faith be thus used in Scripture in these
different Senses, yet we are to remember that these various Exercises of a
godly Soul are connected together, and always concommitant with one another;
yea, and in some Respects implied in each other, and perhaps sometimes all
these Actings of Soul are designed by the Word Faith; nevertheless they are
evidently in their own Nature so distinct, as that they may be conceived of as
distinct Acts of the Soul. -- And it may also be noted, that the two first of
these, viz. a firm Belief of divine Truths, and a hearty Reliance on the divine
All Sufficiency, are Acts of Faith common to Angels as well as Saints; but the
last, which immediately respects Christ as Mediator, is peculiar to penitent,
returning Sinners. The two first are common to every holy Creature; for all
such do, in a firm Belief of divine Truths, live in an entire Dependence upon
God the infinite Fountain of all Good: But the last is peculiar to sinful
Creatures, who, because they are sinful, need a Mediator to make Way for the
honorable Exercise of the divine Goodness toward them. Those, that never were
Sinners, may receive all Things, from the free Grace and Self-moving Goodness
of the divine Nature, without a Mediator. But those, that have been Sinners,
perhaps will receive all through a Mediator, to Eternity.

10. A Heart to love God supremely, live to him ultimately, and delight in him
superlatively, to love our Neighbors as our selves, to hate every false Way;
to be humble, meek, weaned from the World, heavenly-minded; to be thankful for
Mercies, patient under Afflictions, to love Enemies, to forgive Injuries; and
in all Things to do as we would be done by: A Heart for all this, I say, is
always in exact Proportion to the Degree of true Faith. For the same Views of
our own Wretchedness, of God, of Christ, of the Way of Salvation by free Grace
through him, of the Glory, Reality and Importance of divine and eternal Things,
which lay the Foundation for true Faith, and always accompany the Exercise of
Faith, do at the same Time lay the Foundation for this divine Temper. And
besides, this divine Temper is what every true Believer feels to be the fittest
and happiest Thing in the World, and as such longs for it, and goes to God to
have it increased and strengthened; and being unworthy to go in his own Name,
Unworthy to go in his own Name. As thus, if in Prayer I offer up this Petition,
Lord, enable me to love thee with all my Heart: It implies, (1) That I don't
love God with all my Heart, notwithstanding the infinite Obligations I am under
to do so; for which Defect I am infinitely to Blame, and deserve an infinite
Punishment, to be instantly driven from God's Presence for ever, and spurned to
Hell as a Creature fit only for Destruction. (2.) It implies that all the
external Manifestations which God has made of himself to me in his Works and
Word* and all the external Means he h^s used with me, are not able to win my
Heart wholly to God, so great i^ my Sottishness and Alienation from the Deity,
and love to the World and Sin. And now surely such a vile Wretch cannot have a
Thought of any Mercy from God on the Account of any Goodness in me; yea, rather
I am too bad to be pitied, unless there be some sufficient Salvo ^o the divine
Honor. How therefore can God give me the greatest of Gifts, even the
sanctifying Influences of his holy Spirit, but through the great Mediator,
consistent with his Honor as moral Governor (...) the World. Now therefore
being thus unworthy to go to God in ^y own Name, I go in Christ's Name; as
knowing that through him God can exercise his infinite, self-moving Goodness to
the vilest of Creatures* consistent with his Honor: although Law and Justice
call for their immediate Destruction, considered as in themselves.
he goes in Christ's Name: So that the obtaining more and more o^ this divine
Temper is one main End of his exercising Faith in Christ. And whatsoever he
asks the Father in Christ's Name, he receives; God is readier to give his holy
spirit to such a one, than Parents be to give Bread to their Children. Ioh.
16.23. Mat. 7.11. And therefore every true Believer does obtain the End of his
Faith; and not only has, but grows in this divine Temper, and is governed by
it, and brings forth Fruit according to it: and thus shows his Faith by his
Works, according to St. James's Doctrine. Iam. 2. And herein true Faith stands
distinguished from all Counterfeits. Never had a Hypocrite a spiritual Sense of
that ineffable Beauty of the divine Nature, which lies at the Foundation of all
the Experiences of the true Saint, and from whence all true Holiness originally
springs. The Formalist may, from legal Fears and mercenary Hopes, be so strict
and conscientious in his Ways, as to think himself a choice good Man: and the
Enthusiast, from a firm Persuasion of the Pardon of his Sins and the Love of
Christ, may be so full of Joy and Love, Zeal and Devotion, as to think himself
a most eminent Saint: but there is nothing of the Nature of true Holiness in
either; for it is Self and nothing but Self, that is the Principle, Center and
End of all their Religion. They do not believe in Christ, that through him they
may return Home to God, and be consecrated to him for ever, and obtain Grace to
do all his Will. They don't know God, or care for him, but are wholly taken up
about their own Interest. That Moravian Maxim, That Salvation consists in the
Forgiveness of Sins, exhibits the true Picture of the Heart of the best
Hypocrite in the World; while that in 2 Cor. 3.18. is peculiar to the Godly. We
all with open Face beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same Image, from Glory to Glory.

11. and lastly, In true Believers there is a Principle of Faith, which abides
and grows and perseveres to the End. That spiritual Sense of God, of
themselves, of Christ, and of the Gospel-Way of Salvation through him, which lays
the Foundation for the first Act of Faith, becomes habitual. They have a
spiritual Understanding to discern spiritual Things. 1 Cor. 2.12. They were
once Darkness, but are now Light in the Lord: And hence they are called
Children of the Light and of the Day. Ephesians. ^.8. 1 These. 5.5. Spiritual Light
does not come upon Believers like Flashes of Lightning at Midnight, now and
then a Flash, and then as dark as ever again: But their Light is habitual, like
Day Light. And from the first Dawning of divine Light at the Hour of
Conversion, that Daybreak of Heaven, their Light shines more and more, Year
after Year, to the perfect Day. Prove. 4.18. The flying Clouds in the Day Time,
although they may ^ide the clear shining of the Sun for a While, yet they don't
make it dark as in the Night; yea, the thickest, darkest Clouds are not able to
do it. Believers are never destitute of a spiritual Sense of God and Christ and
divine Things, as other Men be. They are Children of the Light and of the Day,
and not of the Night and of Darkness. The Spirit of God does not come upon them
by Fits, as it did upon Balaam; but dwells in them. Romans 8.9. And they grow in
Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 3.18.
If at any Time they should have no more Sense of divine Things than the
Unregenerate, they would be as much without Grace: They would not differ from
the Stony-Ground-Hearers, who fell away. -- And ^ow their divine Light being
thus habitual, growing and persevering; hence their Faith is so too. Through the
Course of their Lives, it is their Way, to grow more and more sensible of their
Sinfulness, the Sinfulness of Sin, their Unworthiness, Ill desert, Poverty, and
absolute Need of free Grace and of Jesus Christ. And they also see more and
more into the Gospel Way of Salvation, the Glory and Safety of it, its
Sui^ableness to exalt God, magnify the Law, discountenance Sin, humble the
Sinner, and glorify Grace; and more and more come off from all Self-Dependance,
to an entire Reliance upon Jesus Christ and the free Grace of God through him:
Seeking to be found not (...) ^^^mselves, but in Christ; not as having on their
(...) Righteousness, but his* Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. They more fully approve of the
Law o^ Nature and of the original Constitution with Adam, as being holy, just
and good: They more fully get into a Way of looking upon themselves as God
does; as being naturally and in themselves fallen, sinful, guilty, justly
condemned, helpless and undone. They see more and more of their infinite
Obligation to perfect Holiness, and of the Reasonableness of eternal Damnation
being threatened for the least Sin, and of the Insufficiency of all their best
Doings to make any Satisfaction for Sin. The Grace of God as revealed in the
Gospel, appears more rich and free and wonderful. They feel more and more of
their Need of Christ, his Worth and Merits, Mediation and Intercession; and of
their utter Unfitness to approach the Majesty of Heaven any other Way but by
him. They feel themselves more full of Wants, and farther off from any
Worthiness to receive, and yet more and more into the Temper of humble Beggars,
and into a Way of coming to God more entirely in Christ's Name. -- At first
Conversion such a Temper begins, and this Temper grows like the Mustard Seed,
and spreads like the Leaven, and is like a Well of living Water, which is never
dry, but is springing up into everlasting Life. Mat. 13.31 -- 33. Joh. 4.14, --
And thus the true Believer abides in Christ, as a living Branch does in the
Vine. Joh. 15. And lives the Life he lives in the Flesh, by Faith on the Son of
God, Gal. 2.20. Being kept by the Power of God, through Faith unto Salvation* 1
Pet. 1.5.

And this is the Thing (I may observe by the Way) which makes Grace in the
Heart more plainly discernable, and it is Difference from all Counterfeits more
clearly manifest, and which therefore clears up to Believers the spiritual
State of their Souls, answers all Doubts, removes all Difficulties, and brings
them to be set led and satisfied as to their good Estate. Many spend their
Lives in searching whether their Law-work was right, whether their first (...)
of Faith was right, etc. But there is nothing like growing in Grace, to put it
out of Doubt that we have Grace, and to keep our Evidences clear. And indeed
this is the only Way. 2 Pet. 1.5 -- 10.

And thus we see in general wherein a genuine Compliance with the Gospel does
consist, and particularly what is the Nature of a saving Faith. And from what
has been said, we may be able to distinguish true Faith from every Counterfeit.
Particularly, from what has been said, we may easily see the Falseness of these
two Sorts of Faith, whereby Thousands are deceived and ruined.

1. The legal Hypocri^e's Faith; who being entirely devoid of the divine Life,
and of those spiritual Views of God, of himself, of Christ, and of the Way of
Salvation, which the true Believer has* is only animated by Self-love, the Fear
of Hell and the Hope of Heaven, to attend upon the external Duties of Religion,
and to try to love God and be sincere, in Hopes of Acceptance in the Sight of
God, if he endeavors to do as well as he can. He thinks, God has promised to
accept such, and that it would not be just for God to require more of him than
he can do. He does not see how bad he is, he hates to think of lying at the
mere Mercy of God, and cannot endure the Doctrine of divine Sovereignty; he is
quite insensible of his Need of free Grace and of Jesus Christ: However, he
says, he trusts wholly in the Merits of Christ for eternal Life, and does not
pretend to merit any Thing by all his Doings. And thus being quieted with the
Hopes of Heaven, he goes on in the Rounds of Duty, a Stranger to real Communion
with God, and to all the Exercises of the divine Life. He does Duties enough
just to keep his Conscience quiet, and has Faith enough just to keep him from
seeing that he rests entirely upon his own Righteousness: and by the Means his
Duties and his Faith serve only to keep him secure in Sin, and insensible of
his perishing Need of Jesus Christ and of converting Grace.

Let me expostulate the Case a little with such a one. And First, Can a Man
sincerely comply with the Gospel, when at the same Time he does not cordially
approve of the Law as holy, just and good, seeing the Gospel in its whole
Constitution is evidently founded upon that Supposition? You don't like the
Law; you think, it is unjust. The Law requires you to love God with all your
Heart, ( Mat. 22.37.) and threatens Damnation for the least Sin: ( Gal. 3.10.)
But you say, it is not just for God to require more than you can do, and then
damn you for not doing. But now the Gospel does not mean to make void this Law,
but to establish it. Romans 3.31. It would be impossible therefore, if you did
but rightly understand the Case, that you should like the Gospel any better
than you do the Law. -- And secondly, Do you think that God will pardon you,
when at the same Time you will not acknowledge the Law to be holy, just and
good, by which you stand condemned? What, pardon you, when you justify
yourself, and condemn his Law! What, pardon you, when you will not own you need a
Pardon! Yea, when you stand to it, it would not be fair to punish you! Yea,
when you are ready to fly in the very Face of the Law and of the Lawgiver, and
to cry out, Injustice, Injustice! No, no, proud, stubborn, guilty Wretch, you
must come down first, and lie in the Dust before the Lord, and approve the Law
in the very Bottom of your Heart, and own the Sentence just, by which you stand
condemned. Luke 18.13. Romans 3.19. You must come down and own the Law to be
good, or else God must come down and own the Law to be bad. Or if God insists
upon it that the Law is holy, just and good, and you still insist upon it that
it is not; it is impossible that God should pardon you, or that there should be
any Reconciliation. God must of Necessity hate you, because you hate his Law;
and you will for ever hate God, for making such a Law. -- And thirdly, How can
you pretend all this while, to trust only in Christ for Pardon and eternal
Life; when as it is plain, from your own Words, you see no Need of Christ? For
if, as you say, God cannot justly require any more of you than you can do; what
do you want Christ for? You can do enough your self. Do you want Christ to make
Satisfaction for your Short-comings and Imperfections? But, according to your
Scheme, God cannot require any more Satisfaction than you can make your self:
for this would be to require more than you can do, and to damn you for not
doing. Do you want him to purchase the Favor of God and eternal Life? But you
can do all that God can require: for you can do, what you can do, and that,
according to your Scheme, is all that God can require. Or do you want Christ to
purchase an Abatement of the Law? But if Christ had never died, you don't
think, that God could in Justice require more of you than you can do. What Need
therefore, upon your Scheme, was there of Christ? And did he not die in vain?
For if Righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. Gal. 2.21.
Now, can your Faith in Christ be any more than a mere Fancy, when as it is
evident you see no Need of him? -- And besides, fourthly, What Good does your
Faith do you? Does it work by Love? Does it purify your Heart? Does it overcome
the World? Why, nothing less. It only serves to keep you secure and quiet in an
unrenewed State, and to make you hope all is well, while you keep on in a Round
of external Duties, Strangers to God and the divine Life. In a Word, your
Duties and your Faith join together to keep Conscience asleep, and to render
you insensible of your Need of Christ and of converting Grace. Romans 9.30, 31,
32. Oh, how sad it is, so many Thousands should be deceived in so plain a Case!
It can surely be attributed to nothing short of this, that Men love Darkness
rather than Light; they love to frame such a Scheme of Religion in their Heads,
as suits the Temper of their Hearts. And because their Scheme suits them,
therefore they firmly believe it to be divine. (...) to proceed,

2. From what ^as been said, we may easily see the Falseness of the evangelical
Hypocrite's Faith; who, although he makes a much greater Show, and is more
confident, yet has not a Jot better Foundation. -- He has been greatly awakened
perhaps, and terrified, and seemingly brought off from his own Righteousness
and humbled, and then has received great Light and Comfort, and has had many an
Hour of Joy and Ravishment. -- For thus was the Case; In the Depth of his
Darkness and Sorrow, Light shined all around him; and to his thinking, he saw
Heaven opened, and the Lord sitting upon his Throne, and Christ at his right
Hand, and heard those Words, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the Foundation of the World: Be of good Cheer, thy Sins
are forgiven: Fear not, little Flock, it is my Father's good Pleasure to give
you the Kingdom. Oh thou afflicted, tossed with Tempests, and not comforted,
behold, I will lay thy Stones with fair Colors, etc. -- Or, it may be, he saw
Christ on the Cross, with his Blood running from his Side and Hands and Feet.
Or, perhaps he saw a Light in his Chamber. -- It may be, he had one Scripture,
and it may be ten or twenty going, until he was as full as he could hold, and
even ready to cry, Lord, stay thy Hand. As to all these Things, there is an
endless Variety. But in the following Particulars there is a greater Agreement.
(1.) They have a Discovery of Christ's Love to them in particular, that he died
for them in particular, that their Sins are pardoned, etc. (2.) The Essence of
their first Act of Faith consists in a firm Persuasion, that their Sins are
forgiven, that Christ died for them in particular, or the like. (3.) All their
after-Discoveries and after-Acts of Faith are of the same Nature with the
first. (4.) This Faith, from a Principle of Self-love, naturally fills them
full of Joy and Love and Zeal, and lays the Foundation of all their good
Frames, and of all their Religion. (5.) Doubting the Goodness of their State,
when they are dead and carnal, is in their Account Unbelief, and a great Sin,
and to be watched and prayed against, as a Thing of the most destructive
Tendency. -- Now, some who have a few Discoveries, do in a few Months lose all
their Religion, and come to feel and live much like the rest of the World. --
Others hold out longer. -- Some, after they have lain dead one, two, three,
five or ten Years, just as it happens, will have what they call a new
Discovery, and be as full as ever. -- While others continue in their
irreligious Courses.

And here I may observe, (1.) That the greater Discoveries (as they call them)
they have, the more proud and conceited they be, and the more do they want to
have all the Town admire them. -- (2.) The longer they continue to be lively,
the more do they grow in Pride and Self-Righteousness; and feeling themselves
to be exceeding Good, they are emboldened to make very free with the Almighty,
as being his peculiar Favorites, and the best of Men. God, I thank thee, I am
not as other Men. -- (3.) And yet it is natural to esteem themselves some of the
most humble Creatures in the World. -- (4.) It is impossible to convince them
of their Error. Because the immediate Witness of the Spirit of God, as they
think, assures them that they are right: And therefore all that don't look upon
Things and feel just as they do, are certainly blind and carnal; and so not to
be regarded: They are bound to believe God before Man. Urge Scripture against
them, and they are unmoved; because the Spirit does not tell them that it means
so: The plainest Texts are not regarded, if contrary to their Spirit. Urge
Reason against them, and demonstrate a Point ever so clearly, and they are
unmoved; because that is all carnal Reason. Take much Pains with them, and be
ever so kind and friendly, and they are the more established; because they
think they are persecuted. Or, if they are sometimes shocked and almost
convinced, yet they are in a few Days more settled than ever, by a new
Discovery and a Multitude of Scriptures, misapplied by the Prince of Darkness,
assuring them that they are right. And now they resolve never to doubt again,
and get invincibly set in their Way. (5.) If after a While they lose all their
Religion, and are dead, and lie dead for whole Months and Years together, yet
still they are as confident as ever. For, say they, David and Solomon and Peter
fell, and the best are dead sometimes, and how long a good Man may lie dead
none can tell; God may leave his Children out of Sovereignty, and without
Christ we can do Nothing; we must wait for the Spirit, and not call God's
Faithfulness into Question because of our Deadness, as if his Faithfulness
depended upon our good Frames. And so now having, as they suppose, Christ to
pardon their Sins and save their Souls, and some Lust to content their Hearts,
they sleep on secure and quiet. Or, if they are terrified at any Time and begin
to Doubt, O thou of little Faith, wherefore do thou Doubt? Or some such
Scripture, will quiet and hush all to sleep again. And thus, and after this
Sort, Things go with them. And now out of such rotten Hearts grow up all the
Antinomian, Familistic and Quakerish Errors which have troubled the Christian
Church. For they get their Principles of Religion, not out of the Bible, but
out of their Experiences: and are careful to cut out a Scheme, in their Heads,
to suit the Religion of their Hearts: And because it suits them, therefore they
firmly believe it. And because their Scheme is not rational, and cannot bear to
be examined by Reason; therefore they cry down Reason, and say it is carnal:
And they cry down human Learning; and the more ignorant, the more devout. And
because their Scheme is not contained in the Scriptures, therefore they have no
Regard to the plain Meaning of Scripture, but turn all into Allegories, and
what they call the spiritual Meaning; and so run into a Hundred Whims, such as
best suits with the Temper of their Hearts.

Now the great Misery of this Sort of Hypocrites is, that notwithstanding all
their Terrors; yet they were never thoro'ly convinced of their fallen, sinful,
guilty, undone Estate by Nature. And notwithstanding all their Discoveries; yet
they are still spiritually blind, and neither know God, nor Themselves, nor
Christ, nor the Gospel-Way of Salvation by free Grace through him. And
notwithstanding all their Confidence and Joy and high religious Frames; yet
they are as destitute of Faith, Repentance and Holiness, as ever they were. And
it is a LIE, which the Father of Lies has made them believe, which lies at the
Bottom of all their Religion, and is the very Foundation of it all. All their
purest Joy and Love and Zeal arise from their Faith. All their Faith consists
in believing that their Sins are forgiven. And all the Foundation which their
Faith is originally built upon, is an immediate Revelation: The Truth of which,
they dare not call in Question, for fear of giving the Lie to the Holy Spirit,
from whom, they say, they know it came. -- But how could the Spirit of God
reveal it to them, that Christ loved them, and that their Sins were forgiven,
and hereby lay the Foundation for their first Act of Faith, when as before the
first Act of Faith, they were actually under Condemnation, the Wrath of God,
and the Curse of the Law? Joh. 3.18, 36. Gal. 3.10. The Thing revealed to them
was not true; and therefore was not from God, but from the Devil. -- Now this
false Revelation laid the Foundation for their Faith, and their Faith laid the
Foundation for their Joy, and for all their Religion. -- A spiritual Sight and
divine Sense of the great Truths presupposed and revealed in the Gospel, is the
Foundation of the godly Man's Faith and Holiness; but a particular Thing no
where revealed in the Bible is their Foundation: Yea, a Falsehood that is
directly contrary to what the Scriptures plainly teach. -- And yet alas, they
know they are right; they are, they say, as certain of it as they be of their
own Existence. How great is the Power of Delusion! How awful is the Case of a
poor Creature forsaken of God! 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. They received not the Love
of the Truth, that they might be saved. And for ^his Cause God shall send them
strong Delusion, that they should believe a LIE: That they all might be damned,
who believed not the Truth, but had Pleasure in Unrighteousness.

But to conclude,

From what has been said concerning the Nature of a true Faith and a genuine
Compliance with the Gospel, we may not only see the Falseness of these two
Sorts of Faith, but also of all other Counterfeits, which are almost in an
endless Variety. For between these two Extremes of a legal and evangelical
Hypocrite, there lies a Thousand Bye-Paths, in which poor Sinners wander to
everlasting Perdition; in the mean while blessing themselves, that they are
neither Arminians nor Antinomians; nor deluded as such and su^^ be: Although they
neither know God, nor Themselves, nor Christ, nor the Way of Salvation through
him; and really are as destitute of Faith, Repentance and Holiness, as the most
deluded Creature in the World.

SECTION VIII. Showing what is implied in the EVERLASTING LIFE promised to
Believers, and how Faith interests us in CHRIST.
I am now in the last Place,

V. To consider the Promise of Everlasting Life, which is in the Gospel made to
true Believers. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever (...) in him should not PERISH, but ^ave EVERLASTING LIFE. -- In
this everlasting Life is implied,

1. The everlasting Love and Favor of God. Whereas by the Disobedience of One
many were made Sinners, and Judgment came upon all to Condemnation, by Virtue
of the original Constitution with Adam. Romans 5.18, 19. And whereas by and
according to the Law of Nature the whole World stands Guilty before God. Romans
3.19. Now, by Virtue of a new Constitution, established by the God of Heaven,
the great Governor of the World, called the Gospel or Covenant of Grace, it is
appointed and as it were confirmed by the broad Seal of Heaven, that any,
whosoever they be, among all the guilty Race of Adam, who fall in with this
Gospel-Proposal, and venture their All upon this new Plan, this new Foundation,
this precious Cornerstone Jesus Christ, the great Mediator between God and
Man, shall thence for^h stand free from that double Condemnation, and be
entitled unto the everlasting Love and Favor of God, the great Governor of
the World. Joh. 3.18. Romans 5.1, 2. Therefore being justified by Faith we have
Peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. By whom also we have Access by
Faith into this Grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in Hope of the Glory of God.

2. The other Part of this everlasting Life consists in and results from the
everlasting Indwelling of the holy Spirit as a Sanctifier. This, which Adam
lost by the Fall, is, upon our Union with Christ the second Adam, by Virtue of
this new Constitution, restored, never to be lost any more. Joh. 7.38. He that
believes on me, as the Scripture says; out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of
living Water. v. 39. This spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on
him should receive. And therefore the Gift of the Holy Ghost, is, by the
Apostles, ( Act. 2.38.) promised upon the Condition of Faith. From the Nature
of justifying Faith, it is evident, that Regeneration must be prior to the
first Act of it; but although the Sinner be regenerated by the gracious
Influences of the holy Spirit before Faith, yet it is after Faith and Union
with Christ that the Soul has a Covenant-Right to the Indwelling of the holy
Spirit; which Covenant-Right lays a Foundation for the Indwelling of the holy
Spirit to be constant and everlasting; and this lays a Foundation for an
abiding Principle and proper Habit of Grace. So that although Regeneration be
before Faith, yet a confirmed Habit of Grace is after. It results from our
Union with Christ. Ioh. 15.1 -- 5. And is in Scripture promised upon the
Condition of Faith. Ioh. 5.24. and 7.38.
And therefore as God did of old dwell in the Holy of Holies in the Jewish
Temple, in the Cloud of Glory; so now henceforth does he dwell in the
Believer's Heart by his holy Spirit, as a vital Principle and Spring of divine
Life there. Ioh. 15.1 -- 5. And hence Believers are called the Temple of God. 1
Cor. 3.17. The Spirit of God is said to dwell in them. Romans 8.9. to lead them.
v. 14. to give them an everlasting Freedom from the Power of Sin. v. 2. So that
Sin shall not have Dominion over them. Romans 6.14. And the Water (says Christ)
which I will give you, shall be in you a Well of Water springing up into
everlasting Life. Joh. 4.14.

It is plain from the whole Tenor of the Gospel, that the everlasting Love and
Favor of God, together with the everlasting Indwelling of the holy Spirit as a
Sanctifier, which are the two great Things which a poor Sinner wants, are the
two great Things promised in the Covenant of Grace. St. Paul having explained
the Nature of the Gospel-Way of Salvation by free Grace through Jesus Christ, and
shown that Faith is the only Condition of the new Covenant, in the four first
Chapters of his Epistle to the Romans; proceeds to show the Benefits accruing
to Believers. And first, they are justified, and have Peace with God. Chap. 5.
Secondly, they are delivered from the Power of Sin. Chap. 6. And although they
are in this Life continually in a State of spiritual Conflict and Warfare.
Chap. 7. Yet they are influenced and led and governed by the Spirit of God
which dwells in them. Chap. 8. And now all Things shall work for their Good,
and they shall be brought to Glory at last. v. 28 -- 39. So again, see both
these summed up in Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. For this is the Covenant that I will make
with the House of Israel after those Days, says the Lord; I will put my Laws
into their Mind, and write them in their Hearts: And I will be to them a God,
and they shall be to me a People. And they shall not teach every Man his
Neighbor, and every Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know
me, from the least to the greatest. -- Here is the everlasting Indwelling of
the holy Spirit, together with what results therefrom. -- v. 12. For I will be
merciful unto their Unrighteousness, and their Sins and their Iniquities will I
remember no more. -- And here is the everlasting Love and Favor of God.

And now seeing by this new Constitution, this Covenant of Grace, true
Believers are thus entitled to the everlasting Love and Favor of God, and to
the everlasting Indwelling of the holy Spirit as Sanctifier, in the perfect
Enjoyment of both which, eternal Life, in Heaven, will consist: Hence therefore
they are said to have Life, yea, to to have eternal Life, immediately upon
their believing in Christ. 1 Ioh. 5.12. He that has the Son, has LIFE. Joh.
3.36. He that believes on the Son, has EVERLASTING LIFE. Joh. 5.24. Has
EVERLASTING LIFE, and shall not come into Condemnation; but is passed from
DEATH unto LIFE. Joh. 17.3. This is LIFE ETERNAL, that they might know thee,
the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Eternal Life is begun
in them, and Heaven begins to dawn in their Souls.

And Believers being thus made the Subjects of the everlasting Love and Favor
of God, and of the everlasting Indwelling of the holy Spirit, they are hence
called the Children of God. Joh. 1.12. For God loves them as Children, and they
love him as a Father. And this filial Frame of Spirit, whereby they are
disposed to reverence, fear, love, trust in and obey God as a Father, live upon
him and live to him as a Father; I say, this filial Frame of Spirit is called
the Spirit of Adoption, in Opposition to that servile Frame of Spirit they used
to be under the Bondage of, before Faith, and before they had received the holy
Ghost. Romans 8.15. For ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to fear;
but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.

And this filial Frame of Spirit being peculiar to Believers, that which none
but Believers have, and which yet is common to all Believers; and this filial
Frame of Spirit being that wherein Believers bear the Image of their heavenly
Father, each one resembling the Children of a King: For they view Things
according to their Measure, as God does, and love what he loves, and make his
Interest their Interest, and are taken up with the same Designs: I say, this
filial Frame of Spirit being such a peculiar and remarkable Thing, and that
wherein they so nearly resemble God, and being also the immediate Product of
the Indwelling and Influence of the holy Spirit, therefore in Scripture it is
spoken of as the distinguishing Badge of a true Believer, as a Mark whereby
God's Children and Christ's Sheep are to be known. This is what is called the
Seal of the Spirit, in Ephesians. 1.13. And this Seal is the Witness, Evidence and
Proof which the holy Spirit gives to our Consciences, that we are the Children
of God. Romans 8.16. This filial Frame of Spirit is what satisfies and assures
the Children of God. They feel the very Temper of Children toward God. They
feel a Heart to reverence and fear, love and honor him as a Father; a Heart to
go to him, to trust in him, to be in Subjection to him and obey him, as a
Father. And by this they know they are his Children.

Mavelous is the Change, which the poor Sinner passes through, in that awful
Hour of inexpressible Solemnity, when he first comes into the awful Presence of
the dread Majesty of Heaven and Earth, through Jesus Christ, the glorious
Mediator, venturing his ALL for ETERNITY upon this sure Foundation. And now
from this Time forward, he is quite another Creature, under quite new
Circumstances. As when Orphan Children, left without a Guardian or a Guide,
from running Riot and indulging themselves in all Extravagances, are taken and
brought into the Family of a wise and good Man, and are made his Children: he
instills new Principles and a new Temper into them, and puts them under a new
Discipline, and all Things are new to them. So, here, from being without God
and without Hope in the World, and from running to eternal Ruin, we are taken
and are brought into God's Family, have a new Temper given to us, have a new
Father, and are under a new Government. God's fatherly Eye is upon us every
Hour, and he is daily laboring to bring us up to his Hand, to train us up to
his Mind, to make us such as he would have us be. He contrives and takes all
Manner of Ways, by his Spirit, and by his Providence, and by his Word, to make
us more serious, spiritual and heavenly, more humble, weaned from the World and
devoted to God. And thus He purges us, that we may bring forth more Fruit.
Joh. 15.2. He enlightens, he leads, he teaches, he quickens, he strengthens, he
comforts us. Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. Isai. 40.31. When we want it, he instructs us.
1 Ioh. 2.27. Iam 1.5. When we want it, he corrects us. Heb. 12.6. And when we
need it, he encourages and comforts us. 2 Cor. 12.9. When we love him and keep
his Commands, he manifests himself unto us. Ioh. 14.21. And when our spiritual
Enemies are too strong for us, and our Heart and our Strength fails, our Steps
are slipping, our Feet just gone; in the distressing Juncture he puts
underneath his everlasting Arms, he takes us by the right Hand, he prevents us
by his Grace; and ever we are aware, we have gotten the Victory, and begin to
say, Whom have we in Heaven but thee? And there is none on Earth we desire
besides thee. Our Flesh and our Heart fails, but God is the Strength of our
Heart, and our Portion for ever: And O, It is good for us to draw near to God.
Psalm. 73. And if at any Time we forsake him, he follows after us, and visits
our Transgressions with the Rod, and our Iniquities with Stripes; but never
breaks his Covenant with us. Psalm. 89.30 -- 34. He hedges up our Way with
Thorns, and brings us to a hearty Return. Hos. 2.6, 7. And thus we are kept by
the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5. And finally are
brought to the full Vision and perfect Fruition of God to all Eternity. Romans
8.30.

Now Faith in Christ ^^titles us to all this, by Virtue of that divine
Constitution, which we call the Gospel or Covenant of Grace; by Virtue of that
new and living Way of Salvation, which God the great Governor of the World has
contrived and provided, ratified and confirmed, the Sum of which is contained
in Ioh. 3.16. Which Constitution God has been pleased to confirm by an Oath, to
the Intent we might have strong Consolation, who have fled for Refuge, to lay
hold on the Hope set before us. He has said, He that believes shall be saved,
and he has confirmed it by an Oath, to remove all Doubt, and to give the
highest possible Assurance. Heb. 6.17, 18. And now being assured that this Way
of Salvation may be depended upon, as being contrived and confirmed by God
himself; hence, here we rest secure and safe. -- We know that this new
Constitution must be from God, because the whole Plan is altogether divine: It
is just like God: God cannot but be pleased with it: It is perfectly suited to
exalt God, to magnify the Law, to discountenance Sin, to humble the Sinner and
to glorify Grace: and if Sinners are ever saved, it is infinitely fit that they
should be saved in such a Way, and in no other. There is such an apparent
Resemblance of the divine Nature and Perfections in this whole Plan, as is
sufficient to assure the Heart that it is from God. None but God could be the
Author of it. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4, 6. -- And being in the first Place, assured that
it is from God: We have, in the second Place, the highest Assurance that God
will abide by it and act according to it. For first, we have his Promise; and
secondly, we have his Oath: So that there can be no reasonable Doubt remaining.
-- And now upon this Foundation does the true Believer build all his Hopes and
Expectations, here is the Bottom of all. For if I am assured, that, by divine
Grace, I do rightly understand the Gospel, and am brought to a genuine
Compliance therewith; now then I am safe, if the Gospel be TRUE, and if that
Way of Salvation may CERTAINLY be depended on, if it be no cunningly devised
Fable, but a Way of God's own Contrivance, and which he will CERTAINLY abide
by. A clear, rational, spiritual Conviction and Assurance of this, is the very
Anchor of the Soul, sure and steadfast. Heb. 6.19.

If Mankind had remained in a State of pure Nature, i. e. under no Constitution
at all, under nothing but merely the Law of Nature, i. e. To have been guided
and directed to their Duty, and to have been rewarded or punished by God, only
and merely by and according to the Reason and Nature of Things: If this had
been the Case, then so long as every Individual should be continued in Being by
God, and should continue to love God with all his Heart, and obey him in every
Thing; so long every Individual would be perfectly happy. But then, God might
without Injustice let one or all drop into Nonexistence, if he pleased, and
when he pleased, although perfectly holy. Job 22.2. and 35.7. Or, if he was
pleased to continue one and all in Being for ever; yet at what Time soever any
should commit the least Sin, that Soul should immediately sink down into an
eternal Hell. Romans 6.23. A Thousand Years of perfect Obedience, by the mere Law
of Nature, not intitling to any Promise for the Time to come. God's giving and
continuing Being to us, and granting us Advantages to know and love and serve
him, would render us infinitely indebted to God; but our knowing, loving and
serving God could not bring him at all into Debt to us. Romans 11.35, 36. Our
doing so would naturally render us happy, so long as we should continue to do
so; but if, at any Time, we should be guilty of the least Defect, all would be
lost, and we undone for ever.

But then, by and according to the Constitution with Adam, Things were placed
upon another Foot. The eternal Welfare of Mankind was suspended upon another
Condition. For according to this Constitution, if Adam the public Head and
Representative of Mankind, had remained obedient for some certain Period of
Time, he and all his Posterity would, by the free and gracious Promise of God,
have been entitled to everlasting Life: as on the other Hand, if he sinned, all
would be exposed to eternal Death.

But now, FAITH in Christ intitles us to eternal Life, by Virtue of a new
Constitution, called the Gospel or Covenant of Grace, made and confirmed by the
God of Heaven.

The perfect Obedience of Adam, had he stood, would not have entitled us to
eternal Life, notwithstanding he was our natural Head, if he had not been made
our Representative by a divine Constitution: So the perfect Obedience and
Sufferings of Christ would not have freed us from Condemnation and entitled us
to eternal Life, whatever Dependence we might have had upon him; if by a divine
Constitution it had not been appointed and confirmed, that he that believes
shall be saved.

By and according to the Law of Nature, our own personal Obedience would have
recommended us to the Favor of God, and laid the Foundation of our Happiness,
so long as we should have continued in a State of sinless Perfection. -- By the
first Covenant, the Constitution with Adam, his perfect Obedience, through his
appointed Time of Trial, would, by Virtue of that Constitution or Covenant,
have entitled us to everlasting Life. -- By the second Covenant, the perfect
Righteousness of Christ the second Adam, entitles all true Believers to
everlasting Life, by and according to this new and living Way.

A perfect Righteousness was necessary according to the Law of Nature. And a
perfect Righteousness is insisted upon in both Covenants. According to the Law
of Nature, it was to be performed personally: But according to both Covenants,
it is appointed to be performed by a public Head. -- According to the first
Covenant, we were to have been interested in the Righteousness of our public
Head, by Virtue of our Union to him as his Posterity for whom he was appointed
to act. -- According to the second Covenant, we are interested in the
Righteousness of Christ our public Head, by Virtue of our Union to him by Faith.

Our Faith is that whereby we unite to Christ. The Act is a uniting Act. We
disunite, separate from and renounce, that, to which, we before were united and
did close with and placed our Hopes upon, viz. our own Righteousness; and are
no more emboldened by that to come into the Presence of God: And we unite to
Christ, desiring to be found, not in our selves, but in him; not in our own
Righteousness, but in his. Phil. 3.8, 9. And from him we take Encouragement to
draw nigh to God; we come in HIS NAME. Heb. 4.16. And now, by Virtue of a
divine Constitution established by the Governor of the World, all, who thus
unite to Christ by Faith, are considered as being one with him, so as to have
an Interest in what he has done and suffered in the Character of a Mediator as
a public Person, so as upon the Account thereof to be pardoned and received to
Favor, and entitled to eternal Life. Romans 5.18, 19. Ephesians. 1.6. Romans 3.24, 25.

And now, this Faith, this uniting Act, being the Condition, the only
Condition, required on our Part, by the Covenant of Grace, we being justified
by Faith without the Deeds of the Law; Hence, Faith is said to be imputed to us
for Righteousness. Romans 4. For Righteousness, i. e. for that whereby we stand
Right according to the Tenor of the new Covenant, i. e. for a full Compliance
with the Condition of the new Covenant. As perfect Obedience was a Compliance
with the Covenant of Works; so Faith is a Compliance with the Covenant of
Grace. Now as perfect Obedience, through his whole Time of Trial, would have been
imputed to Adam for Righteousness, i. e. for a full Compliance with the
Condition of that Covenant: So now Faith is imputed for Righteousness, i. e.
for a full Compliance with the Condition of this Covenant. For St. Paul had but
just been proving, that we are justified by Faith ALONE, without the Deeds of
the Law; and now this being the ONLY Condition required, therefore he says, it
is accounted as a full Compliance with the new Covenant, i. e. it is imputed
for Righteousness. It being the only Thing required as a Condition of Life, by
the Covenant of Grace, hence it is looked upon in the Sight of God accordingly,
as being a full Compliance with that Covenant. -- The Covenant of Works
insisted upon perfect Obedience, because Adam was to have been justified,
merely by, and wholly upon the Account of, his own Virtue and Goodness: And the
Covenant of Grace insists upon Faith alone without the Deeds of the Law,
because now we are justified, merely by, and wholly upon the Account of,
Christ's Virtue or Righteousness, without Regard to any Goodness in us. But to
him that WORKS NOT, but believes on him that justifies the UNGODLY, his
Faith is counted for Righteousness. Romans 4.5. i. e. for a FULL Compliance with
the new Covenant, without the Deeds of the Law. For as to a legal
Righteousness, Christ is the End of the Law for Righteousness to them that
believe. Romans 10.5. And in that Sense, we are not to be found in our own
Righteousness, but in his. Phil. 3.8.

Thus, according to the Law of Nature, every Man would have been justified by
his own personal Righteousness. And according to the first Covenant, every
Child of Adam would have been justified by Adam's Righteousness as public
Head. And according to the second Covenant, every Believer is to be justified
by Christ's Righteousness as another public Head. The first of these Ways
takes it is Rise from the Reason and Nature of Things; but the second and third
from the positive Appointment of God. The Angels, it seems, were dealt with
according to the first of these Ways, only their State of Probation, through
Grace, not to be perpetual; for, no Doubt, those that stood, are now in a
confirmed State: but Mankind are dealt with according to the second and third.

The first of these Ways a fallen World pretend some liking to, but the other
two have given great Offense. How is it right we should be condemned for Adam's
Sin? Or with what Propriety can we be justified on the Account of Christ's
Righteousness? is the Language of very many. It is unjust to condemn me for the
Sin of another, and absurd to justify me for another's Righteousness, say they.
And as to the first of these Ways, they would have the Law abated in what it
requires, and quite disannul'd as to it is threatening Death for the least Sin.
They would have what they call sincere Obedience admitted as a Condition of
Life, and Repentance to be accepted in Case of Sin. So that an apostate World
are naturally equally at Enmity against the first, second and third, rightly
understood. For they think it full as unjust that God should damn us for the
least Defect of perfect Obedience, as for Adam's first Sin. And it is nothing
but divine Light can bring the Heart of a Sinner sincerely to approve of the
Law of Nature, of the Constitution with Adam, and of the Gospel of Christ. For
(1 Cor. 2.14.) the natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God:
for they are Foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. He does not discern the Ground and Reason of the Law of
Nature, being blind to the infinite Beauty of the divine Perfections: and so is
incapacitated to have a right View and Sense of the Nature of the first
Covenant or the second. And being a Stranger and an Enemy to God, he also
naturally doubts, whether he has full Power and rightful Authority to make such
Constitutions; he dislikes the Constitutions; he questions God's Authority to
make such; their being so plainly held forth in the Bible, tempts many to call
even the Truth of that into Question; and some are driven quite to open
Infidelity.

There is a secret Infidelity in the Hearts of unregenerate Men. They do not
love that divine Scheme of Truths revealed in the Bible, nor cordially receive
it for true. Men love to cut out a Scheme of Religion in their Heads, to suit
the Temper of their Hearts. And from this Root do all the false and erroneous
Principles, which fill the Christian World, originally take their Rise. 2 These.
2.10, 11, 12. But when he that commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness,
shines in the Heart and gives spiritual Light; then the Reasonableness, Beauty
and Glory of the whole Scheme appear, and the very Resemblance of the divine
Perfections is to be seen in every Branch of it. And now it is cordially
believed. Ioh. 8.47. And hereby a solid Foundation is laid for a real
Conformity to the Law, and a genuine Compliance with the Gospel; in both which
true Religion does consist.

Thus we have gone through what was proposed. And we see why God the great
Governor of the World did consider Mankind as perishing, fallen, sinful,
guilty, justly condemned, helpless and undone: and we see that his Design of
Mercy originally took it is Rise from the mere self-moving Goodness of his
Nature, and sovereign good Pleasure: and we see the Necessity there was of a
Mediator, and how the Way of Life has been opened by him whom God has provided:
And we see wherein a genuine Compliance with the Gospel does consist, and the
Nature of a true Faith in Christ: And we see what is implied in the everlasting
Life that is promised to Believers, and how Faith interests us in the Promise,
and how that the Covenant is in all Things well ordered and sure. -- And now
there is a wide Field opened for a large Improvement, in many doctrinal and
practical Inferences and Remarks. -- For,

1. It is very natural to make the same Observations here with Regard to a
genuine Compliance with the Gospel, as were before made with Respect to a real
Conformity to the Law. For, from what has been said, we may easily see, wherein
consists that Life of Faith in Christ, which true Believers live; -- That all
unregenerate Men are entirely destitute of this true Faith in Christ; -- Yea,
diametrically opposite thereunto in the Temper of their Minds; -- And therefore
^an't be brought to it but by the almighty Power and all-conquering Grace of
God; -- That there is nothing in them to move God to do this for them, but
every Thing to the contrary -- That God is at perfect Liberty to have Mercy on
whom he will according to his sovereign Pleasure -- That it is reasonable to
think, that the same ^^vereign good Pleasure, which moves him to be the Author,
will move him to be the Finisher of our Faith -- That true Faith, being thus
specifically different from every Counterfeit, may therefore be discerned and
known, etc. But because I have already been Larger than at first I designed,
therefore I will omit these, and all other Remarks which might be made; and
will conclude,

2. With only this one Observation, viz. That if these Things be true, which
have been said concerning the Nature of Faith and the Way of Salvation by free
Grace through Christ, and concerning that View of Things which the true Believer
has; then nothing is more plain and (...), than that the true Believer must
needs feel himself to be under the strongest Obligations possible, to an entire
Devotedness to GOD and a Life of universal Holiness. Every Thing meets, in that
View of Things which he has, to bind his Soul for ever to the Lord. One main
Design of the Gospel was to make Men holy; and it is in it is Nature perfectly
well adapted to answer the End.

For now all the natural Obligations, we are under to love God and live to him,
are seen in a divine Light; such as arise from the infinite Excellency of the
divine Nature, God's entire Right ^o us and Authority over us: And their
binding Nature is exhibited in a more striking and affecting Manner in the
Gospel, than in the Law; the Cross of Christ gives a more lively Representation
of the infinite Evil of Sin, than all the Thunders of Mount Sinai. And a Sight
of our natural Obligations are attended with a Sense of all the additional
sacred Ties, arising from the infinite ^^odness of God to a guilty ruined World
in providing a Savior, and from the dying Love of Christ, and from the free
Gift of converting Grace, and from pardoning Mercy, and from God's
Covenant-Love and Faithfulness, and from the raised Expectations of eternal
Glory: All which must join to beget a right Sense of Sin, as being a Thing, in
it self, the most unfit, unreasonable and wicked, as well as infinitely
disingenuous and ungrateful to God, and concur to make it appear as the worst
of Evils, the most to be hated, dreaded, watched and prayed against. And a
humble Heart, full of Self-Diffidence, and under a Sense of the divine
All-sufficience, and in a firm Belief of the Truth of the Gospel, will most
naturally, and as it were continually, apply it self, by Faith and Prayer, to
God through Christ, to be kept from all Sin, and to be preserved to the heavenly
Kingdom. So that those Views, which the true Believer has, have the strongest
Tendency to universal Holiness, and do naturally lay a solid Foundation for it.
And those Views are not only maintained in a greater or less Degree from Day to
Day, by the gracious Influence of the holy Spirit, which dwells in them; but
are increasing and brightening through the Course of their Lives. So that as the
grand Design of the Gospel is to make Men holy, so it is perfectly well adapted
in it is Nature to answer the End. And therefore he that is born of God, sins
not; and how shall we that are dead to Sin, live any longer therein? And such
like Scriptures, must, in the Nature of Things, be found to be true, in the
Experience of every real Believer. Nor can any but graceless Hypocrites be
emboldened, by the Doctrines of free Grace, to sin, as it were upon free Cost:
and a double Vengeance will they pull down upon their guilty Heads.

Particularly, the whole Frame and Tenor of the Gospel naturally tends to
excite us to a universal Benevolence to Mankind in Imitation of the infinite
Goodness of the divine Nature; and even to be benevolent and kind to the Evil
and Unthankful, and to those in whom there is no Motive to excite our good
Will, but much to the contrary; and to love our Enemies, and bless them that
curse us, and do Good to them that hate us, and pray for them that despitefully
use us and persecute us. It is impossible when we see the infinite Beauty of
the self-moving Goodness of the divine Nature as exercised in the whole Affair
of our Redemption and Salvation, toward Creatures so infinitely vile, unworthy
and ill-deserving, but that we should love that glorious Goodness, and be
changed into the same Image, and have it become natural to us to love Enemies,
and forgive Injuries, and be like God. A malicious Christian, a spightful
Believer, is the greatest Contradiction, and the most unnatural Thing.

That which has had no small Hand in bringing the Doctrines of Grace into
Contempt in the World, as tending to Licentiousness, is partly because they
have not been rightly understood, and partly through the wicked Lives of
graceless Hypocrites, who have made a high Profession. What remains now
therefore but that the People of God, by holy and exemplary Lives, should
convince the World, that these are Doctrines according to Godliness.

I beseech you therefore by the Mercies of God, that ye present your Selves a
living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, which is your reasonable Service.
For you are not your own, but bought with a Price: And that not of Silver and
Gold, but of the precious Blood of the Son of God; and therefore live no more
to your Selves, but to him that died for you. And be ye Followers of God as
dear Children. Blessed be God, for the unspeakable Gift of his Son. AMEN.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS of the first Discourse.
TRue Religion consists in a Conformity to the Law and Compliance with the
Gospel. Page 1 The Law requires us to Love God with all our Hearts, and our
Neighbor as our selves. 2 Love to God implies right Apprehensions of him, and
a Sense of his Amiableness. 3 That we esteem him, so as to exult in his
Supremacy. 7 So value his Honor and Interest, as to be devoted to him. 9 So
delight in him, as to live upon him as the Portion of our Souls. 12 Love to God
tak^s its Rise originally, from a Sense of his infinite Glory and Amiableness.
16 His infinite Glory results from all his Perfections. 17 All his Perfections
are manifested in his Works. 18 And in his Word. 42 A Sense of his Glory is
imparted to the Soul by the immediate Influence of the Holy Spirit. 45 The
infinite Glory and Amiableness of God lays us under such an Obligation to love
God, as is binding, antecedently to any selfish Consideration. 46 Infinitely.
48 Eternally. 57 And unchangeably. 59 And from hence all our other Obligations
to love and worship him as GOD, originally derive their binding Nature. 77 -- A
short View of our additional Obligations to love God. 81 How they influence a
true Saint. 85 True Love distinguished from all Counterfeits. 89 The Law
requires us to love God with all our Hearts. 93 Making no Allowances because of
our Disinclination. 9^ But since it requires no more than all the Heart, it is
just and equal. 97 It being upon a Level with our natural Capacities. 98 And
our Inability to perfect Holiness arises only from our Badness. 99 Which
Badness we are voluntary in. 104 There is no Reason why the Law should be
abated. 108 We are wholly to blame for not perfectly conforming to it. 110 Even
the Heathen are without Excuse. 114 Much more inexcusable are those who enjoy
the Benefit of divine Revelation. 121 GOD is nuder no natural Obligations, to
grant supernatural Advantages to any of the Children of Men. 127 And may
therefore act sovereignly in doing so. 128 -- Love to our Neighbor implies
Esteem. 131 Benevolence. 133 And Delight. ibid. And is in it is own Nature right
and fit. 134 And enjoined by the Authority of God. 136 And recommended by the
Example of God, in the Exercises of his infinite Goodness toward the Children
of Men. ibid. And ought to be regulated agreably to a true Self-love. 137 And
is always attended with true Love to God. 139 It is a Thing different from
natural Compassion. 140 From good Humor. ibid. From natural Affection. ibid.
From Party spirited Love. 141 From any Love whatsoever, that arises merely from
Self-love. 142 And from the Love which Enthusiasts and Heretics have to one
another. 143 -- Love to God and our Neighbor is a radical Conformity to the
whole Law. 143 And lays the Foundation for all true Obedience. 144 And is that
whereby true Religions is distinguished from all Counterfeits. 145 Which all
arise from Self-love. 146 -- From the whole we may learn, What that Image of
GOD was, in which Adam was created. 149 That we are born destitute thereof. 152
And natively have a Temper contrary thereto. 153 Which Temper has the entire
Government of us. 156 So that all we do* while unregenerate, is Sin. 175 An^
therefore our best Doings cannot entitle us to any Promise of special Grace. 176
-- Conversion consists in our Recovery from this sinful Temper, to the moral
Image of God, by the Influences of the Holy Spirit. 179 And because we are
naturally inclined to resist his Influences with all our Might, 183 Therefore
they must be such as we cannot resist, or we shall never be re^^vered. 190 Which
effectual Grace is dispensed according to God's sovereign good Pleasure, and
flows from his Self-moving Goodness. 191 And it is natural to suppose, that he
who in such wise begins this Work, will carry it on, and so all true Saints
persevere to the End. 195 That they must expect spiritual Conflicts from
remaining Corruption. 198 Yet Assurance may be obtained. 200 These Consequences
are undeniable* if the Pr^mises, touching the Nature of the Law, are true. 208
But if the Law is abated and altered, the whole Scheme is undermined. ibid. And
so is the whole Gospel-Revelation as much. 211 Or, if the Law means something
else than what is supposed. 214 But if the Idea, which the Pelagians and
Arminians have of God and the Law, is right, Sin can deserve no Punishment, in
this World, or the next. 215 Nor can the Scriptures then be the Word of GOD.
218 -- Rules of Trial. 220 The Cause we have to be humble, -- and thankful, --
and live entirely devoted to GOD. 229, 237, 238. The Happiness of so doing. 242
Various QUESTIONS occasionally considered in the first Discourse.
IS it any Matter what Men's Principles be, if their Lives are but good? Page 4
Will speculative Ideas of God beget a Sense of his Amiableness, in a Heart that
has no Taste for moral Beauty? ibid. Does all our Enmity against GOD arise
merely from our conceiving him to be our Enemy? 7 Are all Things right, or
wrong, merely because GOD wills them so to be? 29 Or merely because they do or
do not tend to make us happy? 30 How was it consistent with God's Goodness to
permit Sin? 40 Does perfect Obedience deserve any Thanks at the Hands of God?
49 In what Sense are our good Works rewardable? 50 Is Sin an infinite Evil? and
does it deserve an infinite Punishment? 54 Can future Obedience make the least
Amends for past Sins? 56 Will the Sinfulness and Misery of the Damned be for
ever increasing. 58 Is the Law abated? 60, 95, 211 Or wholly repealed? 65 What
Influence have false Notions of the Law on M^n's Religion? 66 What do
Antinomians make their Rule of Duty? 67 Are the Threatenings of the Law in
Force? 70 Can a Man, merely from Self-love, love God more than himself? 93 Is
our Impotency only moral? 94 Are we to Blame for our spiritual Blindness? 99 Or
for our corrupt Nature? 103 What is it that brings awakened Sinners to take all
the Blame to themselves, and justify GOD? 110 Do true Believers feel themselves
wholly to Blame for not being perfectly holy? 111 Does God's witholding the
sanctifying Influences of his holy Spirit lessen our Blame? 113 Why does the
Scripture, in some Places, speak of the external Advantages of God's visible
People, as being more than barely sufficient for their becoming good Men, and
as though their Power was sufficient, although the sanctifying Influences of the
Holy Spirit were witheld from them? 121 What is corrupt Nature? 153 Is it
natural, or contracted? 154 Are the Unregenerate entirely under the Gov^r^^^nt
of it? 156 Wherein does the Sinfulness of it consist? 157 Why don't Mankind see
the Sinfulness of it? 161 Do all actu^l Sins proceed from it? 163 Why are
Sinners so averse to the true Knowledge of God, and so blind to his Beauty? 166
What is the Nature of restraining Grace? 168 How came our Nature to be
corrupted? 171 What Good does it do for Sinners to use the Means of Gra^^? 178,
381. What is the shortest and easiest Method to bring the main Controversies
between Arminians and Calvinists to a final Issue? 193, 207 How is the Doctrine
of Perseverance consistent with all the Cautions given to Believers to take
heed lest they fall? 197 Is it a Sin for Believers ever to doubt of their good
Estate? 205 What is the most fundamental Difference between the Arminians and
Calvinists? 214 In what Sense are wicked Men ignorant of their own Hearts? 229
Why does a Sight of the Strictness of the Law discourage Hypocrites, and kill
their Religion? 236 Are Believers ever as blind and dead, and as much without
all spiritual Strength, as Unbelievers? 241 See also Page 181, 199, 226, 399,
408.
The CONTENTS of the second Discourse.
THE Introduction. Page 247 Of the Trinity, and of the Character each Person
sustains in the Affair of our Salvation. 249 GOD does in the Gospel consider us
as in a perishing Condition. 253 Because of our original Apostasy in Adam. 255
Who was constituted our public Head. 255 Which Constitution was well suited to
the general Good of Mankind. 261 And God had Power or Right to make it. 263 And
because we are apostate Creatures. 271 Enemies to GOD, 272 And averse to a
Reconciliation, ibid. As such the Gospel considers us. 274 -- GOD was not moved
to provide a Savior for us, under any Notion that the Constitution wi^^ ADAM
was unjust. 275 Or the Law of Nature too severe. 277 Or that our Impotency
renders us the less to Blame. 281 Or from any Expectation that we should, of
our own free Accord, so much as heartily thank him for it. 284 But entirely
from his own Self-moving Goodness, free and sovereign Grace. 285 -- The
Necessity of Satisfaction for Sin argued from the Perfections of GOD. 295 From
Scripture. 308 And from Fact. 309 The Necessity of the Law's being obeyed. 314
-- The Sufficiency of CHRIST's Satisfaction and Merit 321 He was fit to be a
Mediator between God and Man. 322 Was authorized. 325 And what h^ has done, is
perfectly suited, in its own Nature, to answer all the Ends proposed. 326 --
GOD may now, through Christ, consistently with his own Honor, save any that
believe. 337 And use what Means he pleases for the Recovery of obstinate
Sinners. 345 A View of the Methods of divine Grace with Mankind, from the
Beginning of the World. 360 -- A genuine Compliance with the Gospel. 384 Saving
Faith. 388 It results from divine Light. 389 Which lays a Foundation for a
supernatural Belief of the Gospel. ibid. Regeneration, Faith, Repentance and
Conversion connected together. ibid Spiritual Light and true Faith always in
Proportion. 390 Humility and true Faith always in Proportion. 391 What
encourages the Sinner to believe in CHRIST. 392 The Act of Faith defined. 393
Faith in Christ emboldens the humbled Sinner to return to God and trust in him.
ibid. The various Actings of Faith distinguished. 394 Faith and Holiness always
in Proportion. 397 True Faith habitual, growing, and persevering. 399 The Faith
of the Legal and of the Evangelical Hypocrite, described. 401, 403 -- The
Everlasting Life promised to Believers implies the everlasting Love and Favor
of GOD, and the everlasting I^dwelling of the Holy Spirit as a Sanctifier. 407,
408 Of the Spirit of Adoption. 410 Of the Seal and Witness of the Spirit. 411
See also Page 204 Of (...) mavelous Change made by true Conversion. 411 How
Faith interests us in CHRIST and intitles us to Life. 412 The Gospel-Way of
Salvation perfectly adapted to make M^n holy. 420, 421
Various QUESTIONS occasionally considered in the second Discourse.
WHAT was implied in the Death threatened to Adam? Page 259 What is the
Difference between the Law of Nature and the first Covenant? 260, 277, 413 What
is it that does most commonly convince Men of the Doctrine of original Sin? 268
Why is original Sin no oftener spoken of in Scripture? 269 See also Page 173
Were we by the Fall brought into a State of B^ing worse than not to be? 288
Ought we to b^ thankful for our Beings? 289 Is it a Blessing to have Children?
291 What is the Nature of Satisfaction for Sin? 327 Does it render Sin a less
Evil, or take away its natural ill-Desert? 334 Does it move the divine
Compassion? 335 Are the Elect, before Faith, as much under the Wrath of GOD as
others, notwithstanding the Satisfaction of Christ. 336 See also Page 73
Wherein consists our Need of CHRIST, and when is it seen? 312, 317 Why was Adam
placed in a State of Probation? 315 Is a State of Probation consistent with
God's making his Creature's Happiness his last End? 318 Are all the common
Mercies which Mankind enjoy, the Effects of CHRIST's Merits? 346 In what Sense
did CHRIST die for all the World? 338 And in what Sense only for the Elect? 348
Is a confirmed Habit of Grace before the first Act of Faith, or after? 408 Does
Faith consist in believing that (...) my Sins are forgiven? 404 See also Page
76, 336.
A List of SUBSCRIBERS, in an Alphabetical Order.
A
MR. Lemuel Abbot, Ridgefield, Connecticut. Mr. John Adams, Canaan. Mr. James
Agard, Litchfield. Capt. William Allen, Newbury, Massachusetts, 6 Books. Mr.
James Allen, Boston, 3 Books. Mr. Daniel Allen -- Connecticut. Mr. Jonathan
Atwood, Woodbury. Mr. Benjamin Alvord, Northampton, Massachusetts. Mr. John
Andrews, New-Hartford, Connecticut. Mr. William Angier, Cambridge. Mr. Heber
Andrews. Mr. John Andross Bethlem, Connecticut. Mr. Elijah Atwood. Capt. Josiah
Avered. Mr. Reuben Avered.
B.
CApt. John Baker, Woodbury, Connecticut. Mr. Jabez Baker, Gloucester,
Massachusetts. Mr. William Baldwin, Newton. Mr. Caleb Baldwin, -- Connecticut,
Mr. Abner Barnard, Northampton. Mr. John Ball, Boston. Mr. Abel Barns,
Litchfield, Connecticut. Mr. Samuel Bancroft, jun. Reading, Massachusetts. Rev.
Mr. Ja. Beebe of North-Stratfield, Connecticut, 12 Book^ Deacon Abraham Bennet,
Newtown. Mr. Nathan Beers, Stratford, 12 Books. Capt. Samuel Beebe, Salsbury.
Mr. John Beebe, Canaan. Mr. James Bellamy, Westbury. Mr. Joseph Bean,
Cambridge, Massachusetts. Mrs. Rebecca Beck, Newbury, 6 Books. Mr. Jacob
Benton, Harrington, Connecticut. Mr. Isaac Benton. Mr. Timothy Benedic,
Ridgefield. Rev. Mr. Edward Billings, Cold-Spring, Massa^husetts. Mr. James
Bird, Litchfield, Connecticut. Mr. Jabez Bingham, Salisbury. Mr. Daniel
Bingham, Salisbury. Capt. Benjamin Blaney, Malden, Massachusetts. Mr. David
Boland, Woodbury, Connecticut. Mr. Isaac Bonton. Mr. John Botsford, Newtown.
Mr. Ephraim Botsford, Mr. Amos Botsford, Mr. Joseph Botsford, Mr Gideon
Botsford. Mr. Moses Boardman, jun Cambridge. William Brattle, Esquire Cambridge.
Mr. Edward Bromfield, Boston, Merchant. Rev. Mr. James Brown, Long Island,
New York, 12 Book. Rev. Mr. Daniel Brinsmade, Judea, Connecticut, 36 Books.
Rev. Mr. Samuel Buel, Long Island, New York, 6 Books. Deacon Stephen Burr,
Reading, Connecticut, 2 Books. Mr. William Buroughs, Boston. Mr. Gershom
Bunnel, Norwalk, Connecticut. Mr. Jacob Burn. Mr. Benjamin Butler, Cambridge.
Rev. Mr. Mather Byles, Boston.
C.
MR. Andrew Cambell, Boston, Benjamin Church, A. M. Boston, 2 Books. Mr. Aaron
Chapin, Boston. Mr (...). Mr. Benjamin Chapman, --, Connecticut. Mr. Thomas
Chip^^^, Salisbury. Mr. Samuel Chipman, Rev. Mr. John Cleaveland, Ipswich,
Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Ephraim Clark, Boston. Mr. Gideon Clark, Northampton.
Mr. Ebenezer Cleaveland, Gloucester. Mr. Israel Clark, Bethlem, Connecticut. Mr.
Eliphalet Clark. Mr. Eliezer Clark. Mr. John Mc'Cleare, Phillippi, New York.
Roland Cotton, Esquire Woburn, Massachusetts. Mr. Samuel Coollidge, Watertown.
William Cook, A. B. Danbury, Connecticut. Rev. Mr. Josiah Cotton, Woburn*
Massachusetts. Mr. Hezekiah Corry, Salisbury, Connecticut. 6 Books. Mr. Samuel
Colver. Mr. Daniel Cook, Newton, Massachusetts. Mr. Ebenezer Couch, Reading,
Connecticut. Mr. Benjamin Covels, C^n^an. Mr. Daniel Curtiss, Woodbury. Mr.
Alexander Cunningham, Boston, 2 Books.
D.
REv. Mr. Joseph Davis, Holden, Massachusetts. Napthali Dagget, A. B.
Long Island, New York. John Darbe, A. B. Mr. William Dawse, Boston. Mr.
Nathanael Dean, --, Connecticut. 2 Books. John Dickinson, Esquire -- New York, 6
Books. Mr. Ebenezer Downs, Woodbury, Connecticut. Mr. John Durant, jun. Boston.
Mr. Benjamin Dunton --, Connecticut. 6 Books. Mr. Benjamin Dunning, Newtown.
Mr. Daniel Dudley, Bethlem. Mr. Warman Durican Timothy Dwight, Esquire Northampton,
Massachusetts.
E.
MR. Jonathan Eames, Cambridge. Rev. Mr. Jonathan Edwards, Northampton. 3
Books. Mr. James Eddy. Rev. Mr. Joseph Emerson, Malden. Rev. Mr. Daniel
Emerson, Holles, New Hampshire. 2 Books. Rev. Mr. Joseph Emerson, Groton. Mr.
Josiah Evers, --, Connecticut. Mr. Clear Everite, -- New York.
F.
MR. George Farrar, Student at Harvard-Colledge. Mr. William Fallass, Boston.
Mr. William Fessenden, Master of the Grammar School in Cambridge. Deacon
Grafton Fe^veryear, Boston. Mr. Ephraim Fellows, Canaan, Connecticut. Mr.
William F^^ch, Canterbury, Elisha Fish, A. B. Cambridge. Mr. David Field,
Deerfield. Rev. Mr. Thomas Foxcroft, Boston. Mr. Mark Fowler, --, Connecticut.
Mr. John Franklen. Mr. Ebenezer Frost, Cambridge. Mr. Gideon Frost. Mr. Edmund
Frost, jun. Mr. Amos Fuller, Salsbury, Connecticut.
G.
MR. John Gay, --, Connecticut. 2 Books. Mr. Ebenezer Gay. Mr. Jonathan Garnsy,
Westbury. Mr. Joseph Garnsy, Bethlem. Mr. Peter Garnsy, Mr. William Gaylord,
New-Milford. Mr. John Gazlay, -- New York. Mr. Joshua Giteau, Bethlem,
Connecticut. Mr. Francis Gitteau, 12 Books. Mr. Isaac Goodale, Northampton. Mr.
Waitstill Goodrick Bethlem, Connecticut. Mr. John Gordon, Valentown, 24 Books.
Rev. Mr. John Graham, Southbury. Mr. John Gray. Mr. Jonathan Graves,
Cold-Spring, Massachusetts. Mr. Elijah Grant, Litchfield, Connecticut. Mr.
Joseph Gregory, Phillippi, New York, 6 Books. Mr. Joshua Greenleaf, Newbury,
Massachusetts. Mr. Timothy Greenleaf. Mr. Jonathan Gridley, Farmingtown,
Connecticut.
H.
REv. Mr. Elias Haven, Wrentham, Massachusetts, 6 Books. Mr. Ebenezer Hanchet,
Salisbury, Connecticut. Gideon Hawley, A. B. Stratfield, 6 Books. Mr. Ebenezer
Hamblin. Mr. Constant Havens, Long Island New York. Mr. James Hains. Mr. Nathan
Hallsey. Mr. Israel Hallsey. Mr. Daniel Hausford, Canaan, Connecticut. Mr.
Daniel Hausford, jun. Mr. Joseph Hawley, Reading, 6 Books. Mr. James Hamilton,
Litchfield. Mr. Hugh Hannah, Bethlem. Mr. James Hannah. Mr. Joseph Haven,
Framingham, Massachusetts. Mr. Elkanah Haven, 2 Books. Mr. Samuel Harris,
Newbury. Jonathan Hastings, M. A. Cambridge. Mr. Barzilla Hendee, Bethlem,
Connecticut. Mr. Bartholomew Heath. Noah Hinman, Esquire Woodbury. Mr. David Hide.
-- Mr. Benjamin Hitchcock, Bethlem. Mrs. Susannah Hill. Mr. Ahira Hill. Mr.
Jacob Hill. Cambridge. Mr. Jonathan Hill. Rev. Mr. Ivory Hovey, Rochester, 12
Books. Mr. William Homes, Boston, 2 Books. Hezekiah Hooker, Esquire Bethlem,
Connecticut. Mr. Hezekiah Hooker, jun. Mr. Jesse Hooker. Mrs. Abigail Hooker.
Mr. Elisha Howell. Mr. David Holcomb, Canaan. Mr Ebenezer Houlchet, Salisbury.
Mr. Israel Holley, jun. -- Mr. Samuel Hopkins. -- Mr. Edward Howell,
Long Island, New York. Mr. Arthur Howell. Mr. Samuel Hollister, jun. --
Connecticut. Ephraim Hubbel, Esquire -- Mr. John Hubbard, -- Mr. Samuel Hutchinson.
-- Mr. Reuben Hyberd, Bethlem.
I.
MR. Samuel Jackson, Litchfield, Connecticut. Mr. Stephen Jagger, Long Island,
New York. Mr. Isaac Jessup. Mr. Matthew St. John, -- Connecticut. Rev. David
Judson, Newtown. Mrs. Rachel Judd, Bethlem. Mr. Isaac Judson, Woodbury.
K.
MR. James Kaffon, Woodbury, Connecticut. Rev. Elisha Kent, Philippi, New York,
6 Books. Capt. Caleb Kenrick, N^w^on, Massachusetts. Deacon Jonathan Kelsey,
Bethlem, Connecticut. Mr. John Kernickerbacker. Mr. Samuel Keeler, Ridgefield.
Mr. Benjamin Kellogg, Canaan. Mr. Thomas Kidder, Cambridge, Mr. Jonathan
Kingsley, Northampton. Mr. Supply Kingsley. Mr. John Kneeland, Boston. Mr.
Nathanael Kneeland.
L.
MR. Edward Langdon, jun. Boston, Mr. Caleb Lamson, Charlestown. Mr. Isaac
Lawrence, Canaan, Connecticut. Rev. Mr. Nathanael Leonard, Plymouth,
Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Jonathan Lee, Salisbury, Connecticut. Mr. Joseph Lee.
Mr. William Lee. Mr. Ebenezer Lewis, Bethlem. Mr. Ebenezer Little, Newbury,
Massachusetts. Mr. Simeon Lyman, Salisbury, Connecticut. Mr. David Lyman,
Bethlem.
M.
MR. Joseph Mann, Boston, Mr. Jonas Marsh, Canaan, Connecticut. Mr. Samuel
Marshal, Bethlem. Mr. Thomas Marshal, Boston, 2 Books. Mr. Eliakim Merrel,
New-Hartford, Connecticut, 3 Books. Mr. John Mead, Newton, Massachusetts. Mr.
Edward Merret, jun. Cambridge. Mr. James Merit, Bethlem, Connecticut. Mr. John
Meigs. Deacon Samuel Minor, Woodbury, Connecticut. Mr. Joseph Miller. Mr.
Benjamin Milliken, Black-Point, Mr. David Mitchel, Cambridge. Mr. David
Mitchel, jun. Student at Harvard-College. Jedidiah Mills, jun. A. B.
Stratfield, Connecticut, 12 Books. Mrs. Esther Mitchel, Woodbury. Mrs.
Elizabeth Minor, Bethlem. Mr. Ebenezer Mi^rick, -- New York. Mr. Samuel Morse,
Cambridge. Mr. William Morse. Samuel Moody, M. A. Newbury. Mr. John Moulten,
Newbury. Mr. Jonathan Munger, Bethlem, Connecticut. Mr. Daniel Munger.
N.
CApt. Thomas Newcomb, -- New York. Mr. Joseph Northrop, Ridgefield,
Connecticut. Mr. Benjamin Northrop, Newtown.
O.
MR. Samuel Orlen, Litchfield, Connecticut. Mr. Benjamin Osbern, Mr. Cornelius
Osborn, -- New York. Mr. John Owen, Simsbury, Connecticut, 15 Books.
P.
REv. Mr. Jonathan Parsons, Newbury, Massachusetts, 12 Books Mr. Noah Parsons,
Northampton, 6 Books. Mr. Joseph Parsons, Mr. Jehiel Pardee, -- Connecticut.
Mr. John Pardee, -- Mr. John Pardee, jun. -- Deacon Josiah Peck, Danbury,
Connecticut. 3 Books. Mr. Moses Peek, Boston. Mr. Isaael Peck, Canaan,
Connecticut. Mr. Michael Perrey, Woodbury. Mr. Elisha Perry, Ridgefield. Mr.
Richard Peet, Bethlem. Mr. Edward Phelps, Litchfield. Mr. Eleazer Phillips,
Charlestown, Massachusetts. Job Pierson, Esquire Long Island, New York. 6 Books. Mr
David Pierson. Mr. Josiah Pierson. Mr. Abraham Pierson. Mr. James Pierce,
Charlestown, Massachusetts. Mr. Nathan Pierce, Newbury. Rev. Mr. John Porter,
Bridgewater. Mr. Elisha Pomroy, Northampton. Mr Nathaniel Porter, jun Bethlem,
Connecticut. Rev. Mr Thomas Prince, Boston. 6 Books. William Preston, Esquire
Woodbury. Mr. Samuel Prindle, Canaan, Connecticut. Deacon Henry Prentice,
Cambridge. Mr. Henry Prentice. Mr. Jonas Prentice. Mr. Daniel Prentice. Mr.
Caleb Prentice. Mr. John Proctet, jun. Boston.
R.
MR. James Read, Cambridge. Mr. Moses Reed, -- Connecticut. Isaac Royal, Esquire
Charlestown. Rev. Mr. Daniel Rogers, Exeter, New Hampshire. Rev. Mr. Nathaniel
Roberts, Torrington, 18 Books. Mr. Stephen Rossiter, Litchfield. Mr. Samuel
Robbins, -- Connecticut. Mr. Jabez Rockwell, Ridgefield. Mr. David Rockwell.
Mr. Jesse Roots, Woodbury Mr. Daniel Roberts, -- New York. Mr. Jonathan Rust,
Northampton, Massachusetts. Mr. Jonathan Russell, -- Connecticut. Mr. John
Russell, Long Island, New York. Mr. John Rumril, Woodbury, Connecticut.
S.
REv. Mr. -- Sacket, Bedford, Connecticut. 48 Books. Mr Joseph Sanford,
Litchfield Mr. Zechariah Sanford, Long Island, New York Reverend Joseph Sewall,
D. D. Boston. Rev. Mr John Searl, Sharon, Connecticut 6 Books. Mr Benjamin
Shelden, Northampton, Massachusetts. Mr Daniel Shearman, Woodbury, Connecticut.
Mr. Samuel Shearman, Philippi, New York. Mr Nathanael Skinner, -- Connecticut,
6 Books Mr. Ebenezer Skinnner, Jun. Bolton, 6 Books Mr. Nathanael Skinner, -- 2
Books. Mr Samuel Slater, Bethlem. Obadiah Smith, Esquire Long Island, New York.
Deliverance Smith, A. B. -- Connecticut. Mr Samuel Smedley, Litchfield, William
Smith, A. B. Long Island, New York. Mr. Daniel Smith, jun. Mr. Joseph Smith,
Newtown, Connecticut. Mr. Thomas Soden, Cambridge. John Sprague, Esquire --
New York. 6 Books. Mr Jonathan Sprague, -- Connecticut. Mr. Ebenzer Sprague, --
Connecticut. Mr. Reuben Spaulding, Canaan. Mr William Spencer, Salisbury. Capt.
Josiah Starr, Danbury. Mr. Comfort Starr, Danbury, Merchant. 12 Books. Mr.
Daniel Starr, Danbury, Merchant. Mr. Nathan Starr, Student at Yale-College.
Capt. Elisha Stoddard, Woodbury. Mr. Elisha Steel, Bethlem. Mr. Solomon Steel.
Mr. Luke Stebbins, Springfield, Massachusetts. 2 Books. Mr. Ebenezer Stedman,
Cambridge. Capt Caleb Strong, -- Connecticut. Mr. Josiah Stoddard, Salisbury.
Mr Josiah Strong Mrs Anne S^one, Bethlem. Mr Samuel Strong. Mr. Rowland
Sweatland, -- Connecticut. Mr John Symmes, Boston.
T.
REv. Mr Nathanael Tailor, New-Milford, Connecticut. Mr. Moses Taft, Student at
Harvard-College. Mr Tunis Tappin, -- New York Mr Zebulun Tailor, Litchfield,
Connecticut Capt. Robert Tammage, New Haven. 6 Books. Mr. Ezra Terrill,
Woodbury. Mr Recompense Thomas, Ridgefield Mr Ebenezer Thompson, Bethlem,
Connecticut. Mr. William Thomas, Marlborough, Massachusetts. Mr Enoch Titcomb,
Jun Newbury. Josiah Topping, A. B. Long Island, New York. Henry True, A. B.
Cambridge. Mr. William Tucker, -- Connecticut. Mr. John Twiss, Woodbury.
V.
COl. L. Vankleeck, -- New York. Theodorus Vanwyck, Esquire -- New York. 12 Books.
W.
MR. Isaac Watson, Cambridge. Mr. Jacob Watson. Mrs. Rosannah Watson, Bethlem,
Connecticut. Mr. Josiah Waters, Boston. 2 Books. Mr. Benjamin Webster,
Litchfield, Connecticut. Mr. Joseph Weeks, Dorcester, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr.
Ebenezer White, Danbury, Connecticut. 7 Books. Rev. Mr. Sylvanus White,
Long Island, New York. Capt David Whitney, Canaan, Connecticut. Deacon Jabez
Whittlesey, Bethlem. Mr. Samuel Whitney, Canaan. Mr. William Whitney. Mr. David
Whitney, Jun. Mr. Josiah Whittlesey, Bethlem. Deacon Samuel Whittemore,
Cambridge. Benjamin White, M. A. Brookline. Mr. Jonathan White, Weymouth. Mr.
Elnathan White, Long Island, New York. Mr. Ebenezer White, jun. The Hon. Josiah
Willard, Esquire Secretary of the Massachusetts. Mr. John Willard, Student at
Harvard-College. John Williams, Esquire Sharon, Connecticut. 2 Books. Mr. William
Winter, Boston. Mr. Noah Wiswall, Newton, Massachusetts. Mr. John Woodhull,
Long Island, New York. Mr. David Woodruff. Mr. Charles Woodruff, Litchfield,
Connecticut. Mr. Jacob Woodruff. Mr. Benjamin Woodruff. Mr. Gideon Woodwell,
Newbury, Massachusetts. Mr. Noah Wright, Northampton. Mr. Ebenezer Wright, --
Connecticut. Mr. Ebenezer Wyeth, Cambridge. Mr. John Wyeth.
Y.
REv. Mr. David Youngs, Long Island, New York. 3 Books. Anthony Yolverton, Esquire
-- New York.
N. B. If there should be any of the Names in the foregoing List without their
proper Titles, wrong spelt, or Places of Abode not right inserted, we desire to
be excused.

And as on a careful revisal of the foregoing Pages we have not observed any
material Errata, except a few Literals, we hope the candid Reader will excuse
the same; especially considering the Author's Distance from the Press, and so
had not the Advantage of his Perusal.


