IRENICUM ECCLESIASTICUM, OR A Humble I^^^^tial ESSAY UPON THE PEACE of
JERUSALEM,

WHEREIN The Analogy between Jerusalem and the visible Church is in some
Instances, briefly hinted.

The NATURE, the ORDER, the UNION, of the visible CHURCH, together with her
Terms of COMMUNION, are particularly considered, and their Excellency opened.

Moreover the following important POINTS are largely explained.

1. What is to be understood by the PEACE of Jerusalem. 2. What by praying for
the PEACE of Jerusalem. 3. How, and why we should pray for its Peace and
Prosperity.
Under the aforesaid General Heads, the following Particulars are discussed,
viz. The Nature, Kinds, Hindrances, Means and Motives, of PEACE and UNION,
together with an Answer to OBJECTIONS.

ALSO A Prefatory Address to the SYNODS of New York and Philadelphia.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M.

Romans xii. 18. If it be possible, live peaceable with all Men.

Ephesians. iv. 3. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace.

Pax una Triumphis, inumeris, melior, vis unita fortior.

PHILADELPHIA. Printed and Sold by W. BRADFORD, at the Sign of the Bible in
Second-Street. MDCCXLIX.

A PREFATORY ADDRESS. TO THE Reverend, the SYNODS of New York and Philadelphia;
and to all the Religious SOCIETIES under their respective Care and Charge.
Reverend, Honored, and Beloved Fathers and Brethren!
THE divided State of the Presbyterian Churches, in this Part of the World,
where divine Providence has cast our Lot, has opened a melancholy Prospect to
my View for some considerable Space of Time! Which I did not think proper to
communicate to others for a Season; not knowing what were the Sentiments of my
Brethren upon either Side of the Question, because I thought, however
expedient, honorable and advantageous to the Redeemer's Kingdom, a Reunion
might be, yet it was not practicable, unless the Body of both SYNODS was
inclined thereto.

BUT hearing of a Number of both SYNODS more desirous of Peace and Union of
late, and being excited by some Reverend Members of the Synod of New York, and
one of the Synod of Philadelphia, to move in this Affair: I did at the last
Session of the Synod of New York, in pursuance of my own Judgment and
Inclination, and in compliance with the aforesaid Excitements, together with
some of my Brethren, make a Motion to the Synod, for Proposals of Peace and
Union, which after some Reasoning upon the Head, was complied with, and
Messengers appointed to make Overtures of Peace and Union of both Synods into
one, which was done accordingly, and are now under Consideration.

AND being informed, that the Proposals of Peace and Union, occasioned some
Uneasiness in several Societies, I thought it my Duty, to endeavor to remove
the Grounds thereof, and promote the glorious and truly evangelical Design of
Peace, as well as I could, by committing my Thoughts on that Subject to
Writing, and exposing them to public View!

MY Motives to endeavor in earnest to promote Peace and Union are these,

NOT a Change of Sentiment, about the late Revival of Religion, No! I do now
declare solemnly before the World, that I have seen no Cause to alter my
Opinion in Relation to it, and therefore I do now believe its Reality, as much
as formerly; and if after this open and express Declaration, any will unjustly
Censure me with the Contrary, perhaps because I cannot be so narrow as
themselves, I shall take no farther Notice of it, than to pity their
unreasonable Prejudice, and appeal from their unrighteous Judgment, to a
higher and more impartial Tribunal; to a God that knows all the Thoughts and
Designs of Men!

I cannot come into a Union with any Body of Men, whereto Acknowledgements
contradictory to what I have now declared, are required, as Terms of Communion:
No! I would rather choose a Prison, or any kind of Sufferings: Nor is what I
have said in the following Treatise, concerning the Matters of doubtful
Speculation, in the least Degree inconsistent herewith; because those
Expressions do not respect the Nature, Necessity, or Value of a Work of
Conversion in general, or its Reality and Certainty considered in itself; but
only the Uncertainty of the Appearances of such a Work in others, to us; or the
Uncertainty of our Judgment concerning them.

NOW between those two Things, the Difference is as wide as between Heaven and
Earth, between divine Revelation and human Conjecture; if there be any who
cannot perceive the Difference, they are to be pitied as Objects of Compassion,
as Non Compos^! And if they do perceive it, and will not acknowledge it, they
discover by their Want of Candor, a bad Cause, which needs such insincere
sophistical Arts to support it; and deserve Reproof: Such I would accost in the
Language of Job to Zophar, Will you speak wickedly for GOD, and talk
deceitfully for him?

TO cry up the Certainty of our Opinion, about any Instances of Conversion, in
others in our Day, so as to make it a Badge of Distinction, between, or Engine
of Division among the Professors of Christianity, is (in its direct Tendency)
to abuse GOD'S Work to the Dishonor of his Name, and the Injury of his
Kingdom, instead of exalting GOD it is to exalt our selves and our Opinion,
(though probably the Honor of GOD is seriously intended,) which is always
(respecting such secret Matters) precarious and often partial.

THOUGH I value the late Work of GOD highly, yet in the mean Time, I think it is
sinful to make my Opinion of it. a Term of Communion to others; for though I am
as fully persuaded as ever of its Reality, yet in the mean Time, I believe that
my Opinion, and the Opinion of all others about such Matters, is fallible and
uncertain: Nor can I see in the sacred Scriptures, any Warrant for imposing my
Opinion, or the Opinion of others, respecting the invisible Grace of GOD in
particular Persons, as a Term of Communion, either Ministerial or Christian

NOR have I been Moved to this Important Enterprise, by any Thing that concerns
myself, either by Grief for any supposed Misconduct of Mine, in Time past, or
any Expectation of Credit, Comfort or Benefit, that may result from such a
Peace and Union in Time to come, so far as they Respect me!

BUT MERELY by the Consideration, of the positive Command of GOD, to pray for
the Peace of Jerusalem, to pursue Peace, and to keep the Unity of the Spirit,
in the Bond of Peace.

TOGETHER with a Prospect of the Honor that I conceive will redound to GOD'S
Name as well as Manifold Benefits, Credit, and Comfort to the Societies of our
Denomination, for a long Time to come, in Case such a Reunion be obtained,
upon a Scriptural Foundation: Generations yet unborn, are like to reap valuable
Advantages by it, and praise GOD, for it with joyful Lips! I have been likewise
encouraged in this, by considering calmly, and as impartially as I could, the
Nature of the Controversy, that has subsisted among us, which appears to me, to
be only about Circumstantials!

PERMIT me, my Reverend Fathers and Brethren, in all humility, and with due
deference to the Judgment of others, to express my Sentiments, upon this Head,
with a peaceful Intention.

It seems to me, that through the heat of Debate, the principal Matters
Controverted, were either not so very clearly and distinctly apprehended, or
not so sufficiently and happily attended to, by the Parties in Controversey, as
could be wished!

FOR as upon one Hand the nature and necessity of Conversion to GOD, as is
represented in the Scriptures of Truth, and in our Confession of Faith
according to them, was acknowledged, and only the Opinion of some concerning
the Reality, or Number of some late instances of Conversion, (or respecting
both together) disputed, and contradicted.

SO upon the other Hand, the nature and necessity of Order and Government in
the Church of CHRIST, as they are represented in the Holy Scripture, and in our
Confession of Faith, according to them, were also Acknowledged, and only some
prudential Acts and Rules, not expressed in the sacred Scriptures, or our
Directory, for Worship and Government, disputed and opposed.

THE Substance of the Points disputed were freely acknowledged by the Reverend
Brethren upon both Sides of the Question, viz. the nature and necessity of
Conversion to GOD as it is held forth in the Scriptures, and in our Confession
of Faith, and the nature and necessity of Church Discipline, (in all
essentials) as represented in the Holy Scriptures, and in our Directory; so
that the Controversey in my Apprehension, turns entirely upon Circumstantials.
And any Action that was Mutually complained of, was grounded upon, and issued
from a Difference of Opinion, about the Circumstantials aforesaid, or as the
inspired Apostle phrases them, Matters of doubtful Disputation!

NOW as it appears to me, that the Matters controverted were Circumstantial, so
I cannot but believe, that the Reverend Brethren upon both Sides of the
Question, had sincere and good designs, in the different Parts they bore in the
late Controversy: While some were earnestly contending, for the Credit of the
late extraordinary Religious appearances, with design that they might spread
far and wide! Others were streneously Contending, for the Order and Government
of CHRIST'S Kingdom, least they should Suffer, and be quite unhinged, in that
uncommon situation of, and ferment that obtained among the Churches!

BUT though the Things controverted, considered calmly and in a true distinct
Light, were small; yet the Heat of Debate about them, run very high; this
together with evil Surmisings, severe Censurings, and rash Judgings of each
other, encouraged and enflamed, by Misrepresentations, carried to and fro, by
the unwearied Industry of Tale-bearers and Tatlers, who are generally busy on
such Occasions, increased mutual Prejudices and Suspicions, to a Melancholy
Crisis, and so occasioned the unhappy Rupture of the Churches Union, which has
subsisted among Us for some Years!

REVEREND Fathers, and Dear Brethren, the earnest desire of my Heart after
Peac^, and Union of the Churches in this Part of the World, has induced me to
Compose the following Sheets, (festinante calamo) somewhat hastily, and humbly
to offer them to your Consideration, as well as to submit them to your
Correction.

I can honestly declare, that I Design to offend no one, of either Side of the
Question; but to Essay the compromising of the Matters of Difference, and
promote Peace and Union in the best Manner I can!

I trust my Brethren, that you will heartily interpret, and kindly accept, this
humble Attempt, for the Peace of Jerusalem!

IF there be any Pass^ges in the following Performance, not suitably expressed,
I hope your Candor will suggest this in my excuse, that the Province, which I
have through a Zeal for GOD, and not any Notion of my own Capacity, ventured
upon, is exceeding Difficult: It is hard to say any Thing, closely upon a Point
in Controversey, without giving Offense to Persons of one, or both Sides of the
Question!

SO far as I know, I have not been influenced in the least Degree, by any
regard to my own Reputation, or any partial Bias whatsoever, in the following
Composure, and if I am mistaken in any Sentiment there expressed I am willing
to be convinced of it by Arguments but not by the persecuting Methods of
Threatenings, and upon Conviction, to alter my Opinion, and acknowledge my
Mistake!

THE following Essay, after its Composure, I have not had the Opportunity to
consult with any of my Brethren, (in the Ministry) upon; and therefore if any
fault be found with it, it should not in Justice be charged upon them, no I am
freely willing to bear all the Blame myself, in so good, so important a Cause,
as that of the Peace of CHRIST'S Kingdom, I have said nothing of myself, or of
others, in the following Pages, but what appeared to me necessary, to promote
the valuable Design in View.

WHATEVER may be the issue of this Essay, which I cheerfully commit to the
Disposal of the GOD of Peace and Love, yet this I must declare in the mean
Time, that I greatly rejoice in this Opportunity, I have before I Die, of
expressing the very Sentiments of my Heart, upon so Amiable and Important an
Occasion* Were I to go before the great Judge of all the Earth Tomorrow, I
should be glad to finish this immediately before it!

NOTHING appears to me, more Beautiful and Glorious, then Peace and Love, and
Union among the Professors of the RELIGION, of the Meek and Humble JESUS.

AND therefore I am grieved in my Heart, for the narrow Notions, of some Pious,
and in other respects valuable Men; who are fondly desiring, or vainly
attempting, to promote the good of the Church of CHRIST, either by multiplying,
or continuing her unhappy, dishonorable, and dangerous Divisions!

THOUGH I trust their Zeal is Sincere, and their designs Pious, for which they
deserve Esteem, and Commendation; yet as to their Divisive contracted Measures,
I would say as Jacob of Simon and Levi, Instruments of Cruelty (instead of
Kindness which they inintend) are in their Habitation to the poor wounded
broken Church of GOD: O my Soul! come not into their Secret! min^ Honor be not
thou United!

NO on the contrary! through GOD'S assistance, I will pray for the Peace of
Jerusalem, and say, Peace be within thy Walls, and Prosperity be within thy
Palaces for my Brethren and Companion's Sake, I will say Peace be within thee;
because of the House of the LORD our GOD, I will seek thy Good. I am resolved
whatever others say, or do, to Labor for the Peace and Prosperity of Zion, and
Jerusalem, while I Live, and to Sigh for it, with my dying Breath!

TWO Things I would desire of Readers in General, viz. That they would divest
themselves of Prejudice, if they have any; and give what I offer for Peace, in
the Name of my Master, the Prince of Peace, a fair hearing, weighing heartily
and impartially, with a humble Mind, the Grounds thereof, for GOD'S sake, the
Churches sake, and their own: And that they would Remember me, before the
Throne of Grace, who am the greatest of Sinners, and far less than the least of
all Saints, and not worthy of the Character of an Ambassador of CHRIST that I
may obtain Mercy of GOD to be faithful to the Death.

AND of you particularly my Reverend Fathers, and Dear Brethren, I earnestly
beg a Remembrance in your Prayers; you know Sirs, better than I can express,
how becoming and glorious it is, for the Ambassadors of the Prince of Peace, to
seek Peace and ensue it, with unshaken Magnimity, unbroken Patience, and
unwearied Industry, notwithstanding any Difficulties, that may be cast in their
Way, by devout Men of narrow Souls and hot Imaginations. But I must conclude
this Address with respectful Salutations, to all of you, and Cordial wishes
that every one of you, through the rich pure blessing of GOD, may be of eminent
Service, in promoting the precious Interests, of the Kingdom of our Dear Lord
JESUS CHRIST, in your Day and Generation: And may obtain all needful Good in
this Life, and that which is to come, and to all the People of your respective
Charges, I wish from my Heart, Grace, Mercy, and PEACE, from GOD the Father,
and from our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

Reverend, Honored and beloved Fathers and Brethren; I remain, your
affectionate Friend, unworthy Brother, Son, and Servant. G. TENNENT
Philadelphia; June ^9th. 1749.
PSALMS cxxii. 6, 7, 8, 9. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem: They shall Prosper
that Love thee. Peace be within thy Walls, and Prosperity be within thy
Palaces. For my Brethrens and Companions sake, I will now say Peace be within
thee. Because of the House of the Lord our GOD, I will seek thy good.


THE Weal of the visible Church, or Kingdom of God among Men, must needs be
very dear to every gracious Heart. What the Prophet Isaiah and the Psalm^^^ say
of themselves, is common to them all. For Jerusalems sake I will not hold my
Peace, and for Zion's sake I will not be silent, until the Righteousness
thereof go forth as brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that
burns. If I forget the O Jerusalem, let my right Hand forget her cunning: Let
my Tongue cleave to the Roof of my Mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem to my chief
Joy.

BUT though the People of God are agreed about the Object of their chief Care and
Regard, about the End they aim at; yet they are sometimes of very different
Sentiments as to some of the Measures they concert and pursue to obtain that
valuable End.

THIS Diversity perhaps is owing to their different natural Tempers, different
Capacities, different Methods of Education, different Opportunities of
Conversation, different advances in divine Knowledge and Grace; and it may be
in some Instances owing to the insensible corrupt Bias of Prejudice.

NOW among the different Measures which good Men propose for promoting the
aforesaid End, namely, the Weal of God's visible Church and Kingdom on Earth,
methinks those are most likely to be serviceable, which have the express stamp
of divine Authority, and agree with all the other Parts of divine Revelation,
for God's Wisdom is infinitely superior to Man's, and what comes from him, must
needs agree with itself, seeing it proceeds from the same Cause, and has the
same Design.

OF this Kind is the Duty which I am now to discourse upon, namely, seeking the
Peace of Jerusalem. When we only seek a Peace bottomed upon the express
acknowledgment of all essential and necessary Articles, in Doctrine, Worship,
and Discipline, contained in the sacred Scriptures, and in our excellent
Westmins^er Confession of Faith, Catechisms, and Directory for Worship and
Government agreeable to them, and no sinful Acknowledgments are required. I say
such a Peace is agreeable to the whole System of Truth and Duty which we are
required to believe and perform by the KING of the Church, our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, in his sacred Word, whose peculiar Royality it is alone to appoint
Terms of Communion, both Christian and Ministerial; and entirely consistent
with that Liberty wherewith he has made us free: A Plan which is a noble medium
between the two extremes of anti-scriptural rigor upon the one Hand, and
anti-scriptural laxness upon the other; such a Peace being consistent with
Truth and Righteousness, must needs be excellent and important. Pray for the
Peace of Jerusalem, etc.

THIS Psalm, as almost all interpreters conclude, Arias Montanus, Vatabulus,
Muis, Castalio, Hieron, Musculus.
was wrote by the Psalmist, when the Ark of GOD was bro't by David to
Jerusalem, and placed in the Tabernacle, to be publicly Sung there by the
People of Israel, at the Seasons of their Annual and Solemn Festivals; that so
the People might be induced to fall in Love with Jerusalem, and especially with
the Solemnities of Religious Worship there celebrated!

HENCE the People are here introduced, as Congratulating each other* on
occasion of the Opportunity that presented of going to the House of GOD; I was
glad when they said unto me, let us go into the House of the Lord; our Feet
shall stand within thy Gates O Jerusalem, one is here represented as comforting
himself and his fellow Travelers upon the Road, during the fatigues of their
Journey to Jerusalem, with the Expectation of their Arrival there, and their
being present at the Solemnities of public Worship, (in which they stood)
which would more than compensate all their Pains! The Israelites were wont to
sing this Verse upon the Road, while during the Feast of Pentecost, they
brought the first Fruits to the Temple, as Vatabulus, Muis, Gejerus and Seldom
asure us.

GRACIOUS Persons cannot but love the Place where Gods Honor dwells, and his
Tabernacles are amiable to them: One Thing they especially desire with great
Intensness, namely, to see the Beauty of the LORD, and to enquire in his
Temple. And agreeable to the estimate and precedent of GOD himself, they cannot
but love the GATES of ZION more than all the dwellings of Jacob, i. e. prefer
public Worship to private, because God is thereby more glorified, and, for the
general, more peculiarly and eminently present. The dear Imanuel walks in the
midst of the golden Candlesticks, clad with awful and s^rene Majesty, and
clothed with unparrellel'd, inimitable and inexpressible Beauty and Luster!
Enrob'd with a Garment down to the Foot, and girt about the Paps with a golden
Girdle; his Head and his Hair are white like Wool, as white as Snow; and his
Eyes are as a Flame of Fire, and his Feet like unto fine Brass, as if they
burned in a Furnace; and his Voice as the Sound of many Waters; he has in his
right Hand seven STARS; out of his Mouth goes a sharp two-edged Sword, and his
Countenance is as the Sun shining in his Strength. In the Assemblies of the
Church are the Olive Branches, as the Prophet Zechary represents it, which through
the golden Pipes empty the golden Oil out of themselves. From the boundless
unexhausted fullness of CHRIST the anointed, we receive Grace for Grace, from
CHRIST the Olive Tree, by the Spirit the Olive Branch, all the golden Oil of
Grace is communicated to Believers, which keeps their Lamps burning by
continued supplies of divine Influence, without which they would soon languish
and expire!

FARTHER, the People are introduced in this Psalm, as celebrating the Praises
of Jerusalem, and wishing her Peace and Prosperity. Jerusalem is a City that is
compact together, not only in respect of the beautiful Order and Connection of
the Houses, which were not scattered here and there as in Vilages, but closely
joined together; but especially upon the account of the well constituted ORDER
and UNITY, of its Inhabitants, and therefore like to be permanent Arias
Montanus, Vatabulus, Muis, Castalio, Hierom, Musculus.
compact together, partly in its Buildings says Pool in his Anotation^, which
are not dispersed as they are in villages, nor divided into two Cities, as it
was before, but united and enlarged: (1 Chronicles. xi. 7.8.) and principly in its
Government and Religion, which was distinct and opposite, before David took the
Fort of Zion from the Jebusites. It was a Type of the Gospel Church says
Henry, which is compact together in Holy Love and Christian Communion, so that
it is all one City.

THITHER the Tribes go up to the Testimony of Isreal, to give Thanks to the
Name of the LORD; for there are set Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the
House of David; Jerusalem was the Place of general Rendevous or Concourse, for
all the scattered Tribes of Israel to meet in, to receive Instructions from
GOD, and ascribe Glory to him.

THERE was the Testimony of Israel, i. e. by a metonimy the ARK which is called
the Testimony of Israel, because of the Tables of the Covenant kept in it,
which are called the Testimony ( Exodus xxv. 16.) and very reasonably the
Testimony of Israel, because it was given by GOD, to Israel for their good.

THERE was the Thrones of Judgment, the Supreme Courts of Justice for
Ecclesiastical and Civil Affairs, the great Sanhedrim or Senate of the Nation,
consisting of 72, the Royal Seat allotted to David and his Descendants.

AFTER the aforesaid Commendation of Jerusalem, he proceeds to the Words of our
Text, pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, etc. which contains a positive command,
together with the Manner how it should be performed, prescribed, and an
Excitement thereto anex'd. And 2d. the Psalmists Resolution in reference
thereto, with the grounds thereof. And

1st. WE have a COMMAND, pray for the Peace of Jerusalem pray, beg, entreat,
plead for, beseech, namely from God, say Grotius, Pagnine, Mariana, upon the
Place, i. e. use the utmost Importunity and unwearied Vehemence, Peace so the
Syriack and Arabic Versions and also the Versions of Piscator and Arias
Montanous, says Pool in his Synopsis. For Peace, so Munster and Chemnitius,
seek its Peace and Felicity, because upon that hangs the Peace of the whole
Kingdom, says Munster.

PEACE doubtless includes the Union of her Inhabitants, their Protection from
Dangers and Enemies, their universal Welfare, and Enjoyment of all the Good
they need. We should earnestly pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, and that
therein we may have Peace. Peace is the Gift of God, and for it he will be
enquired of. Such as can do nothing else for the Peace of Jerusalem, can pray
for it, which is something more than showing their goodwill, for it is the
appointed way of obtaining Mercy: The Peace and Welfare of the Gospel Church
in our Land, is to be earnestly desired and prayed for by every one of us.

NOW the Manner of praying for Jerusalem, is prescribed thus, Peace be within
thy Walls, i. e. to all the Inhabitants within thy Walls, high and low, rich
and poor, bond and free: Peace be in all thy Dwellings, Peace be in all thy
Fortifications and Armies, let them never be attacked, or if they are, let them
never be taken; so Musculus, Pagnine, Hieron.

AND Prosperity within thy Palaces, i. e. let abundance of Peace and Felicity
be in the Houses, Courts and Towers of the Great, both of a civil and sacred
Character: He makes particular mention of these, not for the Sake of
Ostentation, but because their Safety eminently extended to inferiors, as many
learned Interpreters justly observe. Gegerus, Symachus, Chemnitius, Munster,
Pagnine, Vatabulus, Muis, Piscator, Henry, Pool in Locum.
In a Word we are directed to pray for all Good to the Inhabitants in general,
and for the Princes and Rulers in particular, who manage the Helm of the Church
and State, and conduct the Affairs of the Public, both religious and civil.

NOW we are encouraged to pray in the Manner aforesaid, for the Peace of
Jerusalem, by a promise of Prosperity, they shall Prosper that love thee: Those
that sincerely love, and heartily pray and strive for the Peace and Weal of
Jerusalem, shall prosper; that God whom they hereby glorify, will bless them,
and make at least their Souls prosper; however Men may censure them. God will
approve of their conduct, and favor them with his gracious Presence; to this
effect Arias Montanus, and Gegerus interpret the Words.

This Encouragement is exactly agreeable to that which the Prince of Peace
vouchsafes, Mat. v. 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called
the Children of God. The World blesses the boisterous and unquiet, who blow up
the Coals of War, Sedition and Division, but they are blessed indeed, in the
Judgment of our Savior, and by his Royal Authority, who study to be quiet,
seeking Peace and pursuing it, and are so far from sowing the Seeds of Discord,
or blowing the Coals of Contention, that it is their great Study, their earnest
Desire, and unwearied Labor, to make Peace between God and Man, between Man
and himself, and between Man and his Neighbor, doing this in obedience to God,
and from a principle of love to him and his Kingdom; for those that do so shall
approve themselves to God as his Children, who is the God of Peace, and shall
hereby evidence the same to themselves and others, they shall be called the
Children of God. To be a Peacemaker, is to have a peaceable Disposition and
Practice; as to make a lie, is to be adicted to lying; so to make Peace, is to
have a strong and hearty Affection to Peace; to love, desire, and delight in
Peace, to be in it as our Element, and to study to be quiet; to endeavor to
preserve the Peace where it is, that it be not broken, and to recover it where
it is broken, both by making and harkening to proposals of Peace; where there
are debates and divisions among Brethren and Neighbors, doing all we can,
consistent with Truth and Holiness, to accommodate them and repair Breaches:
Such Persons are blessed of God however they may be censured by Men, pray for
the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee. Here observe that a
peaceable Temper and Behavior is an Evidence of sincere love to Jerusalem, or
to the Church of GOD. But,

2d. WE have the Psalmist's religious Resolution, with the Grounds thereof, for
my Brethren and Companions sake, I will now say Peace be within thee, i. e.
whatever others speak or do, I am determined to show myself the real Friend of
Jerusalem, by praying and striving for her Peace and Welfare, I will now say
Peace be within thee; I will pray for thy Peace, I will consult thy Peace, I
will plead for thy Peace. So the Tigurine and Arabic Versions, and that of
Castalio, vid^ Pol^ ^nop. in Loc.
I will seek thy Good, I will do all within the compass of my Power to promote
thy Welfare, I will second my Prayers by earnest and incessant endeavors:
Here observe, my Brethren, that the Peace and Welfare of Jerusalem, have a
near and dear Relation to each other, a close and inseparable Connection: so
that he who truly and consistently seeks one, must also seek the other, and he
that opposes the one does virtually and consequentially (though in a misguided
Zeal not designedly) oppose the other: They are beautiful and inseparable
Companions, I will say Peace be within thee, I will seek thy Good; Truth,
Peace, Holiness, and Zion's increase should be sought in Harmony, in their
mutual Dependence and Conection: It may here farther be observed, that wishing
Peace was a common Salutation among the Hebrews, importing all good and
prosperity.

BUT, Sirs, it is a dreadful Thing to separate what God has joined, and to set
up one part of Religion in Opposition to the other, or oppose the Means to the
End. And is it not a lamentable Contradiction to pretend to pray for the Peace
of Jerusalem, and in the mean Time to labor with all our might by unreasonable
complaints, by indecent tumultuous Threats and Reflections, to hinder the
Answer of our own Prayers? Would it not be more self-consistent not to pretend
to pray at all for the Peace or Prosperity of Jerusalem, and so strike that
Command altogether out of our Bibles, least it should cross our peevish, though
well meant, humors and murmurs?

NOW the Grounds of the aforesaid Resolution of the Psalmist are these two,
viz. 1st The real Regard he had to all his fellow Citizens, to all the
Israelites, whom, though his Subjects and Inferiors, he owns as his Brethren and
Companions in the principal Privileges enjoyed at Jerusalem, for my Brethren
and Companions sake, I will now say Peace be within thee, i. e. its the
BENEFIT, the COMMUNION, and EDIFICATION of the SAINTS of GOD, whom I Love and
Esteem as my Brethren; and who have frequently been endeared to me, as
Companions in Religious Worship; that is my CHIEF MOTIVE, in seeking the Peace
of Jerusalem, and no INTEREST or CREDIT of my OWN, nothing that concerns me
personally. And 2d. Another Ground of his pious Resolution, was the Regard he
had to the public Ordinances of the divine Worship, which are celebrated with
greatest Beauty when the Sons and Daughters of Zion maintain the Unity of the
Spirit in the Bond of Peace, and dwell in Harmony. Because of the House of the
Lord our God, I will seek thy Good.

I intend not to speak distinctly upon all that is contained in these Verses,
which I have chose for the Subject of our present Meditations; I would
therefore only observe this Proposition from them all, viz.

That it is a very important Duty, enjoined upon all by divine Authority, to
pray for the Peace and Prosperity of Jerusalem. Pray for the Peace of
Jerusalem, Peace be within thy Walls, and Prosperity within thy Palaces; for my
Brethren and Companions Sake I will now say Peace be within thee.

IN discoursing upon which, let us enquire, I. What is to be understood by
Jerusalem. II. What by the Peace of it. III. What by praying for the Peace of
Jerusalem. IV. How we should pray for the Peace and Prosperity thereof, and why.


NOW by JERUSALEM we are to understand the visible Church. This Title is given
to it in several Passages of the Old Testament, some of which have been already
mentioned in the Introduction to this Discourse: And in the New Testament it is
called the Jerusalem that is from above, which is free and the Mother of us
all. This Jerusalem may be said to be from above, because the Charter of
Privileges whereby she is enriched, and Laws whereby she should be governed are
from above, from Heaven. This Gospel Church is free from the Yoke of the
Ceremonial Law, and much more from the Bondage of human Inventions, in
Doctrine, Worship or Discipline, imposed as Terms of Communion. She is
instrumentally the Mother of Believers, in respect of Conversion, Growth and
Nourishment, by the Word faithfully preached, the Sacraments duly dispensed,
and Discipline prudently and faithfully administered, through the blessing of God
upon them. The visible Church is also called the heavenly Jerusalem, (Heb. xii.
22) But ye are come unto mount Zion, and to the City of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem; now it is so termed, because its original, nature and
design are all heavenly.

THE visible Church i^ called Jerusalem, because of the ORDER, UNION, and
Strength of that City, and because of the Temple of GOD therein, to which as a
Center of Unity, the far distant and dispersed Tribes of Israel resorted to
Worship God. And are not ORDER and UNION necessary to the Well-Being of the
visible Kingdom of CHRIST? Yes surely. And hence is that divine Injunction* (1
Cor xiv. 40) Let all Things be done decently and in order. And hence the
Apostles Joy and Gladness, in observing the Order of the Church at Coloss,
(Colos. ii. 5.) Joying and beholding your Order, and the Steadfastness of your
Faith in CHRIST, i. e. your good Constitution and regular Behavior agreeable
to the Discipline appointed by Jesus Christ, which has direct tendency to, and
happy Influence upon your Perseverance in Truth and Holiness.

THE Original Word for Order (TAXIN,) i. e. good Order (Eutaxian) says
Menochius, signifies that all Things were done among them Right and in Order
agreeable to Church Discipline well concerted; Moreover that the Manner and
Behavior of every one were regular and orderly, (2 These. iii. 6.) now we
Command you Brethren, in the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, that ye withdraw
your selves, from every Brother that walks Disorderly, and not after the
Tradition ye received of Us; Observe with what solemn Ephasis, all that fear
GOD in general and the Ministers of CHRIST in particular, are enjoined to
check, and endeavor to bring to a just Sense of their Sins, those that walk
disorderly, by withdrawing from, and shunning their fellowship (if gentler
Methods avail not) so Erasmus and Piscator.

This was a lesser kind of Excommunication, like that 1 Cor. v. 11. say
Augustine, Chrisostom, Aquinas, Cajetan.

But who are those the Apostle would have treated in this Manner, why such as
walk disorderly, contrary to the Order, Institution of Doctrine delivered to
them; they are such as the same Apostle speaks of in his first Epistle to the
Thessalonians, v. Chap. and 14. ver. Now we exhort you Brethren, warn them that
are UNRULY; this is the same Word in the Original, it signifies such as disturb
the public Peace, as are unquiet, idle, and curious inquirers into others
Affairs; who do not keep their own Place and Order, doing the proper Duties
thereof; but disturb others in their Spheres, it is a Metaphor taken from the
Soldiers that leave their Ranks, and strole about the Country in a confused
irregular Manner; so Estius, Symachus, Hamond.

In particular Men may be said to be Disorderly, three Ways.

1st. viz. In Natural respects, when they observe not the Directions of Reason,
in the performance of the Duties of Natural Relation.

2d. In Civil respects, either when they live without a calling, or neglect the
proper Business of it, and intrude into other People's.

3d. In Spiritual respects, when they Neglect or Transgress the Rules and Order
of their walking in a Church State (which are of a Divine presciption) either
with respect to their Pastors, or one another.

The Original Word says Erasmus, also intends those, that are untrack^able and
obstinate who re^use to obey the Order of CHRIST's Church, and so disturb the
public Peace.

Now all such are to be faithfully warned and admonished, of the^^ ^in and
Danger, and discountenanced in their tumultuous Proceedings.


agreeable to which, is the solemn Exhortation of the same Apostle, in his
first Epistle to the Thesselonians, 4th Chap. and 1st Verse; Farthermore we
Beseech you Brethren, and Exhort you by the Lord JESUS, that as ye have
received of us how ye ought to walk, and to please GOD, so ye would abound more
and more.

MOREOVER it signifies, their Consent to, and Concord in the Foundation
Doctrines, and Duties of Religion; for it alludes to a Band or Company of
Soldiers, well instructed in the Art of War, and in good Order, gathered
together into a close compact Body; agreeable to that beautiful and memorable
Expression in our Context, of JERUSALEM'S being a CITY compacted together. As
many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them and Mercy, and on the
Israel of GOD, (Gala. vi. 16.) The Word Rule CANOON, signifies a Way made
according to Rule, evidently right* and strictly exact, says B^za, and the
original Word Soichein, signifies to go on in a certain Order, and not to
transgress the right Line prescribed by Divine authority; says the same learned
Author: The Word Be is not in the Original, which rus thus, Peace upon them,
and Mercy; these Blessings are represented as present, because certainly
future, according to the Usage of the Holy Scripture, which sometimes
represents Things that will surely come to pass, either as present or past
already; thus because CHRIST will certainly come to judge the World, he is
therefore represented as upon his way, (Rev. i. 7.) Behold he comes with the
Clouds. And because CHRIST was certainly to be slain in the fullness of Time for
the Sins of Men, he is therefore spoke of as the Lamb slain from the Foundation
of the World, to signify that he should be as certainly slain in the appointed
Time, as if he were already slain; as many as walk according to this Rule,
Peace shall surely be upon them and all God's spiritual Israel, whether Jews or
Gentiles. PEACE, i. e. all Good and Happiness, thus Grace and Peace are joined.
(1 Cor. i. 3.) Grace unto you, and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ. The same form of Salutation is repeated elsewhere, (2 Cor. i. 2.
Ephesians. i. 2. Romans i. 2.) In 2 Timothy i 2. Grace Mercy and Peace are joined. I
would add only one Scripture more to illustrate this Point, which is ( Mat. x.
13.) And if the House be worthy let your Peace come upon it, i. e. that safety
and felicity you wish for in your Salutation; for the Greeks in Imitation of
the Hebrews, designed to express by the Word Peace, all that was good and
desirable, as Grotius, Piscator, and Castalio justly observe.

TO what has been said, I may add these Scriptures following, (1 Cor. xvi. 1.)
as I have given Order to the Churches of Galatia. (Tit. i. 5) For this Cause
left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order the Things that are
wanting. (1 Cor. xi. 34.) And the rest I will set in Order when I come. (1 Cor.
xv. 23.) But every Man in his own Order. A cloud of learned Witnesses explain
the Word ORDER for Substance as I have done. Grotius, Simachus, Menochius,
Beza, Hamond, Davenant, Gomarus, Erasmus, and others.


JOYING and beholding your Order, and the Steadfastness of your Faith in
Christ. The original Word, (Steroma) has great Emphasis in it, it imports
firmness, solidity, increase of Strength, and Confirmation. There is a
beautiful hebraism in the original (Steroma tes pisteos, pro ten sterian
pistin) a stable, immovable and firm Faith. Pasor, Estius, Menochius, Gomarus,
Davenant, Grotius, Erasmus, agreeable to which says Pool in his Synop. are the
Tigurine and Pagnine versions, and those also of Piscator and Beza.
Faith when of the right Kind, in the observance of that ecclesiastical Order
which Jehovah has instituted, is firm as the Firmament itself, and stable as
the Heavens: There seems to be an Allusion in the Word to the heavenly Bodies,
which keep their constant Stations, and observe their regular Courses through
imeasurable Tracts of Either, for a long Succession of Ages inviolably, without
the least swerving or suspension of Motion, except in some extraordinary
Instances, when Omnipotence interposed, then indeed the great Lights of Heaven
forgot to run their wonted Courses!

AMAZING was the believing boldness of Joshua, in his Prayer upon this
Occasion! Who in the Sight of Israel, with an air of Majesty, Authority and
Empire, arested the Eye of Heaven in his Race, and held the falling Day: And in
like Manner enjoined the lesser Luminary to stop its swift career, and by a
febler Light assist his Victory and Triumph! Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon,
and thou Moon in the Valey of Ajalon. Gibeon was the Place of Action, the Seat
of War, the Scene of Battle, and the Valey of Ajalon was near to it.

AND as amazing was the Success of this eminent Instance, of fiducial
Recumbence upon the Divine Power and Promise, for the Sun stood still, and the
Moon stayed, until he had avenged himself upon their Enemies. ( Jos. 10.) O the
Stupenduous prevailence of believing Prayer! that thus in a Moment can
control, the established Laws of Nature! and stop the Motions of the heavenly
Bodies! This may bring to our welcome Remembrance, that famous Scripture,
(Isa. xlv. 11.) Concerning the Work of my Hands command ye me. Herein the
Almighty, by a Condescension truly astonishing and inexpressible, puts equal
Honor upon, and gives equal encouragement to believing Prayer! Pray for the
Peace of Jerusalem, they shall Prosper that love thee.

BUT JERUSALEM had not only excellent ORDER, but likewise a firm UNION among
its Inhabitants, both which stand and fall together. And thus the visible
Church is under Regulations of a divine Original, for God is a God of Order, he
is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, in all the Churches of the
Saints, (1 Cor. xiv. 33.) The Word Confusion, (acatastasi^s) signifies
dissension, tumult, turbulent, faction, vexing, disturbance, or a confused
state, wherein Order is unhinged and overthrown. But God is not the Author of
Confusion, but of Peace, and therefore of Order, which is the Contrary of
Confusion, and the cause and antecedent of Peace; to this purpose speak many
learned Writers, Arius Montanus, the vulgar Latin, Tremelius ex sir, and Bezas,
versions, Cajetan, Piscator, Erasmus, Pasor, Vatabulus, Symachus.
God himself is Order and Harmony, both in his Nature and in his Laws, which
are but a Representation of his Nature, so far as it is imitable by intelligent
Beings. Now vital and practical Religion is but a Conformity to both, the Copy
and Original or Prototype, and therefore it is of Necessity in its Nature and
Genius, the very reverse or contrary to discord, confusion and division.

AND as the Church is united to CHRIST as ITS Head by Faith, so by Love to each
other, like the natural B^dy, to which it is compared in Scripture, which is
not only united to the Head, but each Member thereof to the other; which Union
is the Foundation of their Sympathy with, and Care for each other, as well as
of their mutual Nourishment, Growth, Strength, Comfort and Beauty, every of
which is injured, if not quite destroyed, by a Breach of Union. Just so it is
with the visible Church or Kingdom of Christ. But on the Contrary, a firm Union
makes it comfortable to itself, profitable to its Friends, and terrible to its
Enemies, as an Army with Banners; so that we may say of it as Balam, under a
divine Impulse, said of Israel, when he saw the several Tribes, who were united
in one great Body, regularly encamped under their respective Standards, with
their Colors flying, how ^o^dly are thy Tents O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles O
Israel? (Number. xxiv, 5.) In this glorious situation the visible Church strikes a
dread, a panick, into the Hearts of all her Foes, like an Army with Bann^rs,
like regular veteran Troops, kept under good Discipline, marshaled in good
Order, and drawn up in Battalia, with their proper military Ensigns, Arms and
Officers, ready to repel with Valor, Conduct, and Success any Assailants.

PRAY observe, my Brethren, that the great God positively Commands us to keep
the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, (Ephesians. iv, 3) Every Word of this
blessed Precept is big with Emphasis, (Spudazontes terein, ten enoteta tou
pneumatos, en to sundesmo tes eirenes) The Word translated keep, (spudazontes)
signifies our earnest endeavor to preserve a Thing with great study,
solicitude and labor. This Precept is truly Evangelical; the Law requires
absolute Perfection upon pain of Death, but CHRIST urges our intense and
diligent Endeavor after Obedience.

BUT what is it that we should keep with so great Care and Pains? Why the UNITY
of the Spirit, (ten enoteta tou pneumatos) the Oneness of the Spirit; it is
that Oneness which he had spoken of in the second and third Chapters of this
Book, viz. of the Body of Christ, composed of different sorts of People, united
to one Head, Christ Jesus, at least in Appearance and Profession.

THE Apostle calls the UNITY of the visible Church, the Unity of the Spirit,
not only because there is a real spiritual and saving Union, between some of
the visible Church to CHRIST formed by the Holy Spirit, from which the rest are
(Synecdochically) denominated; but also because the external Union of the whole
Church, is not Bodily, but Spiritual, namely of Minds agreeing among themselves.

MOREOVER as the visible Church is not the natural Body of CHRIST, and yet has
a religious Relation to him, it may therefore be called his spiritual or
mystical Body visible, or in Profession at least; therefore the Union must be
spiritual also, of the same Kind with the Body to which it belongs.

BESIDES God, who is a Spirit, is the Author of this external Union of
professing Christians into Church Fellowship, or of their being outwardly in
Covenant with him, which has a spiritual and noble tendency to engage them to
be the Lords; to affect their Spirits and turn them from Sin to God; in which
respect this external religious Relation to the Father of Spirits, may be truly
called the Unity of the Spirit: So that here a twofold Unity of the Spirit is
enjoined, viz. internal, of the Mind, in Sentiment and of the Will in
Affection; and external in a joint partaking of outward, but spiritual,
Ordinances of Worship.

The Word Bond (sundesmos) signifies, that which connects one Thing with
another, or that which joins one Thing to another.

NOW the Bond here enjoined is Peace. (eirene para to eis en eiren, a
conectendo in unum, says Pasor) The etymology of the Word Peace signifies to
connect or join different Things into one; and this truly is the tendency of
Peace; it removes Prejudices, asswages Resentments, conciliates and unites Men's
Minds, and thus it preserves the Unity of the Church of God, which is broken by
angry Contentions and Debates.

PEACE cannot be kept without mutual forbearance in lesser Things, which
Mankind are apt to entertain very different Sentiments of: But forbearance has
no Place among the fierce and furious, but only among the humble and meek.
Unity cannot be preserved where Pride and Envy reign which are its
irreconcilable Enemies Grot, Zanchy, Beza, Erasmus, Simachus, Menochius,
Vatabulus.


NOW if the Command of GOD obliges us to prevent as much as in us lies, in the
Use of all lawful Means, a Breach of the external Union of the Church of GOD,
then by a necessary Consequence, the same Command of GOD, obliges us to use all
lawful Means to recover this Union, when it is broke: These two Things have an
inseparable Connection, he therefore that denies one, denies both
consequentially, and so opposes the commanding Authority of Almighty GOD.

THE Apostle urges the aforesaid UNITY, enjoined in the Verses immediately
following, by these ARGUMENTS, viz.

THAT there is but one Body mystical, the visible Church, the Type whereof was
the Jewish Tabernacle, and in the room thereof afterward one Temple. We are
one Body, says Tertullian, from a conscientious Regard to the Unity of Religion
and Discipline, and Hope of the Covenant. Corpus sumus, de conscientia
religionis, et discipline unitate, (...) ^pei Foederis. Tertull. in apologet.
Seeing the Church is but one Body, because of it is external, visible and
stated Conjunction in religious Offices, it is therefore the Duty of those who
are Members of it, to endeavor to preserve it is Unity; to this effect speak
Zanchy, Estius, Camero and Grotius.

AND one divine Spirit, which governs and quickens the Church, and unites it
into one Body, which cannot disagree with itself, (1 Cor. xii. 4.) so Zanchy
and Grotius: Or the Word Spirit, as Beza thinks, may be taken for the human
Mind, those that join in Church Fellowship, agree in Mind, and Spirit among
themselves, as if they were but one Spirit, which cannot disagree with itself.
What is more monstrous than for a Man to rise up against himself, as Tirinus
and Zanchy observe.

ONE Hope of your Calling, we expect one and the same eternal Salvation, the
Object of Hope; the Apostle by a Metonimy calls Hope, because of their Relation
to each other; now seeing we all expect the same eternal Felicity, why should
we disagree and divide in our way to it? The Hope to which we are called cannot
be divided; thus Menochius, Zanchy, Symachus.

ONE Lord of the Church by the Father's Appointment, viz. JESUS CHRIST, who is
the Redeemer, Savior, Head and Governor of the Church; who neither will nor
can be divided, whom nevertheless such Labor (virtually) to divide and tear,
who promote Schisms Contentions and Confusions in the visible Church, so
Zanchy, Grotius, Vorstius, Erasmus* Menochius.

ONE Faith, one Rule of Faith, contained in the Scriptures, which we all
follow, or one Doctrine of Salvation, which we all believe, which was always
one, and therefore the Faith of the whole Church visible; to this Effect,
Erasmus, Zanchy, Grotius, Menochius, Tirinus.

ONE Baptism, one Mode of professing this Faith, viz. by Baptism, as Alting
observes; as all have the same Faith, so all have the same Symbol of Faith,
Baptism, which was always one, even before CHRIST'S coming in the Flesh, it was
the same as to the Thing signified, and now one also not only in that Respect,
but likewise as to the external Sign, so Grotius and Zanchy, and I think justly.

ONE GOD and Father of all, who is above all, in respect of absolute and
universal Empire, essential and transcendent Excellency, and through all, who by
his Providence permeats, upholds, and rules all, and more especially the
Members of his visible Kingdom, and in you all, uniting you to himself at least
visibly, as one Father of all by JESUS CHRIST; this last Clause respects GOD
the Father personally, the other two Persons being beforementioned, thus
Erasmus, Hieronimus, Grotius, Pool, and others.

OBSERVE how the blessed Apostle labors this important and momentuous Point,
viz. the external UNION of the Church visible; he is not satisfied with
mentioning the express Command of God enjoining all to labor for it, by the
highest Authority, No! but knowing the strong natural Aversion of Mankind
against it, he urges our Compliance, by a beautiful Train of pertinent and
nervous Reasonings, sumarily represented, with amiable Elegance, and Energy of
Address, to gain our naturally reluctant Consent, to our Honor, our Duty, and
our Interest!

GOD knows there is great Need of the aforesaid Precept, and all the poignant
Arguments whereby it is enforced, and of our attending thereto with all our
Powers; for the Breaches of Union among the visible Members of CHRIST'S Body,
are as common as they are dishonorable and fatal! The Ignorance, the Pride,
the Humor and Prejudice of Men's Hearts, dispose them strongly to run into
inumerable Sects, Parties, and Factions; and that under religious Pretexts of
greater Purity, etc. and doubtless in diverse Instances with pious Intentions,
as if CHRIST must be divided, as if his Kingdom was like to be strengthened by
crumbling it into little Parties, and setting them by the Ears to tear one
another to Pieces about Circumstantials, while through the unhappy Influence of
angry Debate, the chief Things of Religion, are for a Time, too much neglected,
and the common Enemy laughs in his Sleeve at both!

SATAN has more Sense than that comes to, he knows by long Experience, that the
Way for him to command, is to divide, and therefore he encourages Division,
with all his Might, he secretly blows up People's Pride, Prejudice and
Resentment, against each other, that so he may bring them to open Ruptures, as
well as fix them in that unhappy State, if possible beyond a Retrieve: Then the
Name of GOD is dishonored, his People rendered contemptible, and Brethren by
Profession and Principle in Fundamentals, as sinfully as miserably engaged to
vex and hurt one another instead of promoting their own, each others, and the
public good, and all this under religious Pretexts of Zeal for GOD, which
makes such Conduct sit the easier on Men's Minds; O Sirs! Is not the Christian
Church divided enough already, without any new Additions? Consider how the
Jews, Turks, Pagans* and Deists are strengthened in their Prejudices against
Christianity altogether, by the scandalous Contentions and Divisions of the
Professors of it! And yet more and more new Sects are starting up now and then!
through the Agency of Men of hot Tempers, and narrow Minds, Lord have Mercy upon
us! What shall be the End of these Things? It is shocking to think of the
Divisions that are now in Scotland! O! the needless sinful Schisms of the
visible Church, deserve to be bewailed if possible with Tears of Blood! It
would look more like the Spirit of Christianity, to endeavor by peaceable,
calm and condescending Methods, to unite if possible, the main Bodies of the
Protestants (who hold the same Foundation Principles) into one, than to tear
afresh the seamless Coat of CHRIST into more Pieces and Shreds.

BUT on the contrary, how pleasant is it for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity? As the Psalmist informs us, Ps. cxxxiiii. 1. Here observe, that this
Psalm was composed upon the happy Occasion of the Conclusion of the Civil Wars,
between the two Houses of Saul and David, in which having felt the sad Effects
of Discord and Division, both the King and People were more sensible of the
Blessing of Peace and Union.

BEHOLD how good, and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity. It is like the precious Ointment upon the Head, that ran down upon the
Beard, even Aaron's Beard, that went down to the Shirts of his Garments, as the
Dew of Hermon, and as the Dew that defended upon the Mountains of Zyon, for
there the Lord commanded the Blessing even Life forevermore.

THE Concord and Unity of Brethren, who profess the same essential Principles,
in mutual Love and Endearment, and in the social united Observance of all the
Ordinances of religious Worship, is good, pleasant and profitable.

IT is good in itself, because agreeable to the positive Command of GOD, and
the Dictates of right Reason, yea it is very good, it is more excellent,
amiable, noble, and ornamental, than we can conceive or express, and indeed it
is not only good in itself, but it is good to us. For,

IT is pleasant like the holy aromatic anointing Oil, which was poured on
Aaron's Head, when he was consecrated to his high and honorable Office of
Priesthood, and that with such a liberal Effusion, that it ran down his Beard,
and even to the Skirts of his Garment, filling the House with a balsamic
Odor, a diffusive delightful Fragrancy; this costly precious Unguent and
Perfume which rejoice the Heart, was not concealed in, or confined to a Box,
but poured forth with a generous Profusion, and rich Abundance. So nothing can
be more agreeable to a truly pious Mind, than Union and Harmony, in Truth, in
Purity, in Love! Moreover,

IT is profitable, as the Dew to the Earth, it is as the Dew of Hermon, and the
Dew that descended upon the Mountains of Zyon, i. e. profitable both to Civil
and Religious Societies, as the Dew is from Heaven, so is religious Concord and
Unity. As Dew is mild and gentle in its Descent, not like the Rain which is
sometimes impetuous stormy and violent; so is Love, Concord and Unity all
Harmony, Gentleness and Sweetness; whereas Contention, and Division are harsh,
discordant, furious!

MOREOVER, the Dew cools the sultry Air, refreshes the parched Glebe, and
promotes its fruitfulness. So Peace and Unity cool our angry Resentments,
gently refresh our laboring Bosoms, and open a field of Usefulness before us.

AS the Dew makes the face of Nature Smile, and put on a verdent Vestment, so
Concord and Unity difuse a universal Sweetness, evangelical Gaiety, and
generous Beneficence; and under its Protection and Influence the smallest
Things grow great and are established; whereas by Discord and Disunion,
together with the fatal Fruits thereof, their Springs of Solace and Sweetness
are deeply tinged with Mara's Waters, their beauty stained, and their Strength
broken.

FARTHER, Concord, Brotherly Love and Unity, are profitable, because of the
Blessing of God. Such as dwell together in Unity and live in Love, the Lord
commands upon them the Blessing, even Life for evermore, i. e. the Almighty
Wills that they be happy, who so live. Where there is true Concord, there is
the Blessing of God, a happy affluence of all good, it shall be well with them
here and forever hereafter; for God will give them all the Mercies they need in
this Life, together with the Remission of their Sins, and everlasting
Blessedness in a future World. There, there the Lord commands the Blessing,
even Life forevermore, they that dwell in Love, dwell in God, and God in them,
for God is Love. As the Perfection of Love is the Blessedness of Heaven, so the
Truth and Exercise of Love, is the foretaste and earnest of that Blessedness
upon the Earth: And as it is said of ^he Dew, that it tarrieth not for Man, nor
waits for the Sons of Men, (Mica. v. 7.) so neither should our Love to our
poor Brethren, tarry for their love to us, but generously prevent and incite
theirs.

I Have dwelt the longer upon the Order and Unity of the visible Church, in
which it resembles the earthly Jerusalem, not only because of the great Moment
and Importance of these Points, but also because I fear, that they are either
not fully understood, or not duly considered and suitably esteemed by diverse
that profess Christianity. But to proceed,

JERUSALEM was a strong City; it had not only Order and Unity, but what is the
consequence of both, Strength; for according to the common but just Proverb,
unita vis fortior, Forces united are stronger. But besides Unity and Order,
Jerusalem had impregnable Fortresses for Defense against her Enemies. And is
not the visible Church built upon a Rock, against which the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail; the Munition of Rocks is her Defense, and under the Wing of
Jehovah she may safely trust.

JERUSALEM was exceeding Beautiful in respect of its agreeable Situation and
magnificent Structures, particularly the Temple, which was the Wonder of the
World, beautiful for Situation, the Joy of the whole Earth is Mount Zion, on
the Sides of the North, the City of the great King. (Ps xlviii. 2.) and hence
she was called even by Strangers, the perfection of Beauty, (Lam. ii. 5.) And
is not the visible Church upon this Account, compared to her. (Cant. vi. 4)
Thou art Beautiful O my Love as Tirza, comely as Jerusalem.

THE Church because of its superior Meekness and amiableness, is likewise
compared to a Lilly and a Dove, as a Lilly among Thorns, so is my Love among
the Daughters; O my Dove, that art in the Clefts of the Rock, in the secret
Places of the Stairs, let me see thy Countenance, let me hear thy Voice, for
sweet is thy Voice and thy Countenance is comley; the Dove when attacked by
Birds of prey, has no Refuge but its Wings, by which it hastens to the Clefts
of the Rock for security, nor does the Lilly when it is shaded and scrach'd by
obstinate, unrelenting Thorns, dare to scratch again!

AND for the same Reason, the visible Church is compared to an Olive Tree,
(Ho^. xiv. 7.) His Branches shall spread, and his Beauty shall be as the Olive
Tree, and his smell as Lebanon. She is likewise said to look forth as the
Morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun. Amiable as the fresh rosy Blushes
of the opening Morn, the rising Day, beautiful as the Moon, the Queen of
Heaven, when uneclipsed by envious Clouds, she ascends the summit of the
Horizon, banishes its gloom and darkness by her Silver Beams, and turns the
Night into Day; or like the Sun, that glorious Orb of Light and Lamp of Heaven,
when he appears in his meridian Splendour and Majesty! And hence every sincere
Member of the visible Church is said to be all glorious within, for the Beauty
of Heaven, the Wonder of Angels, the Brightness of his Fathers Glory, makes
them comely with his comeliness which he puts upon them.

IN Jerusalem was likewise the Temple, the KING'S Palace, or chief Place of
Residence, which made it renowned above other Cities. And is not the visible
Church the Habitation of the blessed God, the KING of KINGS and LORD of LORDS,
the Lord dwells in Zion, in Salem is his Tabernacle, says the Psalmist, he
has chosen Zion for his Habitation; this is my rest forever, here will I
dwell, for I have desired it; I will abundantly bless her Provision and satisfy
her Poor with Bread. I will also clothe her Priests with Salvation, and her
Saints shall shout aloud for Joy, Ps. ix. 11. And cxxxii.

HERE let it be observed, that the CHURCH of CHRIST is eitheir invisible or
visible.

THE invisible Church consists only of those that are sincerely pious, whether
in Heaven or upon Earth, sattered up and down in many Places, and Nations, and
under a variety of Professions; this is the Catholic or universal Church which
we profess to believe, in that excellent Sumary of Christian Principles, the
Apostles Creed, they are called the invisible Church, because we are not able
certainly to determine who they are in particular, their Principles of Action
not being open to human Observance.

SUCH of this invisible Church as are on Earth, considered complexly, are
called the Church militant, or Church-waring, because in this Life they have
many Miseries to endure, and many Enemies to conflict with, viz. the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh; which afford constant Cause for Watchfulness and
Humility; and frequent Occasions for Mourning and Combat; for in many Things we
offend all; on this Account the blessed Apostle Paul affectionately bewails his
indwelling Corruption, the bitter Root of all actual Disorders, O wretched Man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? Now the blessed
GOD has furnished his People for the Combat, with complete Spiritual Armor, he
provides a Helmet, Breast Plate, Sword, Shoe, and Shield; and urges them to put
on this Armor, to stand to their Arms, to fight, to quit themselves like Men,
and be strong.

SUCH of the invisible Church as are in Heaven, are called the Church
triumphant, because having fought the good Fight of Faith, finished their
Course and ^^^ained complete Victory over all their Enemies, they do in Heaven
celebrate perpetually, the Triumphs of the Victory they have obtained, through
divine Grace and Power, over every of their fatal Foes; and are there fully and
finally delivered from the Reach of their Rage, as well as completely conformed
to the Purity of the divine Nature, and made Partakers of the divine Love, in a
Degree to us at present inconceivable, and inexpressible!

BUT the visible Church consists of all those that are baptized, and profess
Faith in the fundamental, or essential and necessary Truths of the Gospel,
which have most direct Influence upon the Heart and Life.

THIS is a mixed Body of Good and Bad, which none can separate from each other
in this Life, nor should any attempt such an impracticable Task. Our Lord, so
far as I can yet learn, has not given Authority to any Ministers, or Churches,
to suspend from, or cast out of their Communion, any who have a competent
Measure of divine Knowledge, profess Faith in the Fundamentals of the Christian
Religion, Subjection to the Government of the Church of CHRIST, and live a
regular Life. The following Similitudes, to which CHRIST compares the visible
Church, sufficiently confirm this.

THE first Similitude that I would mention is related by the Evangelist,
Matthew xiii. from the 24th, to the 30th Verse, and runs thus, The Kingdom of
Heaven is likned unto a Man that sowed good Seed in his Field, but while Men
slept, his Enemy came and sowed Tares among the Wheat, and went away, but when
the Blade was sprung up, and brought forth Fruit, then appeared the Tares also,
so the Servants of the Householder came and said unto him, Sir, did thou not
sow good Seed in thy Field, from whence then has it Tares? He said unto them,
an Enemy has done this, the Servants then said unto him, will thou then that
we go and gather them up, but he said ^ay; least while ye gather up the Tares,
ye root up also the Wheat with them; let them both grow together until the
Harvest, and in the Time of the Harvest, I will say to the Reapers, gather ye
together first the Tares, and bind them in Bundles to burn them, but gather the
Wheat into my Barn.

THE Explication our Savior gives of the Parable now mentioned is this, He
that sows the good Seed, is the Son of Man, the Field is the World, the good
Seed are the Children of the Kingdom, but the Tares are the Children of the
wicked One; the Enemy that sowed them is the Devil, the Harvest is the End of
the World, and the Reapers are the Angels.

NOTHING can be more plain and express to the Point in Hand, than this Parable
of our Savior, together with his own Explication of it; if it be considered,

1. THAT by the Kingdom of Heaven, which is the Subject Matter of this
Discourse, the visible Church is to be understood, which is compared in the
Verses immediately following, on account of its speedy Growth and Progress, in
the early Times of Christianity, to a Grain of Mustard Seed, soon becoming a
Tree, and to Leaven hid in three Measures of Meal, till the whole was leavened.

IT is called a Kingdom, because in it as in temporal Kingdoms, there is a King
to rule over it, namely JESUS CHRIST, Persons to be ruled over, Laws of
Government, as well as a Necessity of Obedience to them, and Subjection to the
Prince of the Kings of the Earth, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

IT is called the Kingdom of Heaven, because the Original of the Constitution
of the visible Church, was from Heaven and the Tendency thereof is Heavenly,
and the final Issue to all that sincerely and believingly obey the Laws of this
Kingdom, is Heaven or Salvation: And hence the King of it is said to be the
Author of eternal Salvation to all that obey him. GOD the Father has set his
beloved Son upon his holy Hill of Zion, (Ps. ii. 6.) i. e. constituted him King
over the visible Church, of which Zyon is the Beginning, Foundation and Mother,
as is evident from the Character given it, Holy Hill, it was called Holy,
because of the Temple built there, which was a Figure of the Church of CHRIST.
( Isa. lx. 14. Heb. xii. 22. Rev. xiv. 1.) GOD is said to send the Rod of his
Strength out of Zyon, (Ps. cx. 2.) i. e. his everlasting Gospel and the Power
of his Spirit working with it; of the same Tendency is that notable Saying of
the Prophet Isaiah (ii. 3.) For out of Zyon shall go forth a Law, and the Word
of the Lord from Jerusalem: The Mountain of Zyon had two Hills, upon one of
which was placed the Castle of David, and upon the other the Temple, under a
twofold Magistracy, viz. Political and Ecclesiastical, the Church lives and is
protected; which is called GOD'S holy Mountain, or Mountain of his Holiness in
many Places of Scripture, or Sanctuary, elsewhere we read of the Mountain of
Holiness. (Jer. xxxi 20.) and People of Holiness, (Dan. ix. 24.) This Mountain
was called holy, not inherently but relatively, because of the Ark translated
there, and on Account of the Temple's being built there. (2 Samuel vi. 17. 1 Chronicles. xvi. 1.) What I have offered by way Explication upon Ps. ii. 6. is
agreeable to the Sentiments of many learned Interpreters. Gegerus, Piscator,
Ainsworth, Yatabulus, Pagnin, Musculus* ^^ol, Henery.


THE visible Church is justly called the Kingdom of Heaven in Scripture, though
there are many Hypocrites in it; because CHRIST governs it as a KING, and there
is a remnant in it, that are willingly subject to his governing Authority, who
is the Lord from Heaven, from whom as the better part it is denominated, this
Church is the Kingdom of Heaven upon Earth.

2. THE Design of this Parable is twofold, 1st. To show that the State of the
visible Church is a mixed State in this World; it consists, as our Lord informs
us, of Wheat and Tares, the Children of the Kingdom, and the Children of the
wicked one, good and bad. And 2d. That the Servants of the Church, the
Ministers and other Church Officers, must not attempt to separate the bad from
the good, who are in the visible Church, who have such a resemblance of Wheat,
of Piety in their outward Appearance, that they cannot be rooted out, without
the Hazard of a mistake, and in consequence of it, rooting up the Wheat with
them, as Mr. Pool observes.

The Case is here fairly stated, and an explicit Answer given thereto by our
Lord Jesus Christ. The zealous Servants who were very desirous and forward to
have a perfect Church upon Earth, and to this purpose to have the Tares rooted
out of it, enquire of their Master, what was his Will and Pleasure in this
Case? Will thou then that we go and gather them up; observe it was not the
openly Profane or avowed Heretics, that divulge their Sentiments, for these
may be known, and according to the express Order of God elsewhere related, are
to be cast out of the Church, or out of Communion with it, No! But it was the
close Hypocrites, who were Doctrinally sound in main Points of Truth, and
outwardly regular in Conduct, that the Servants wanted to be tampering with,
and cast out; and it seems they imagined that they were sufficiently qualified
for that awful Province of searching the Hearts of others, and juding of their
invisible Grace! O lamentable Vanity! But Christ was not of their Opinion,
their Master was not of their Mind, he stopped their well meant but dangerous
Career, by a plain, authoritative and well grounded NEGATIVE to their Question,
NAY, least while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up also the Wheat with them,
i. e. you are not qualified for, you are not equal to that task you are so
ready to engage in, and so fond to undertake, viz. of judging and determining
about the States of Men's Souls, from their inward, spiritual and invisible
Experiences, and making your Sentiments about them Terms of Communion; and
therefore let them grow together until the Harvest, that is, to the End of the
World, as our Lord himself explains it, i. e. let the good and bad continue in
the Bosom and Fellowship of the visible Church till the End of Time, the
General Judgment, the Consumation of all Things, and then the Angels shall make
a full and final Separation between them in that Day, namely, of the general
Judgment, when the Lord of Hosts makes up his Jewels, then, and not before, ye
shall certainly discern between the Righteous and the wicked, betw^^^ him that
serves God, and him that serves him not. (Mal. iii. 17, 18.)

OBSERVE, my Brethren, that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Wisdom of the Father,
and the King of the Church, who knows best how to promote the good thereof, and
who only is vested with rightful Authority to prescribe Laws thereto, whatever
some good Men fondly imagine, or whatever pious Purposes they have of purifying
the Church by Methods of their own devising notwithstanding; positively
commands his Servants to let the Tares and Wheat grow together until the
Harvest. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy, who art
thou that judge another? (Jam. iv, 12.) Upon which the reverend and learned
Mr. Pool glosseth thus, One absolute, supreme, universal and spiritual
Lawgiver, who can simply and directly bind Men's Consciences, and make Laws for
their Souls, ( Pro. viii. 15, 16. Isa. xxxiii, 22. Act. iv. 19.) By this he
intimates, that they did invade God's Right, who took upon them a legislative
power in prescribing to other Men's Consciences, and making their own Will the
Rule of the others Duty. Who is able to save and destroy both temporally and
eternally, ( Deuteronomy. xxxii, 39. 1 Samuel ii. 6. and Isa. xliii. 13.) whereas other
Lawgivers cannot save or destroy Men's Souls, nor so much as their Lives,
without God's concurrence. Who art thou that judge another, what a sorry
Creature, a Man, a Worm, that thou should lift up thy self into God's Place,
and make thyself a Judge of one not subject to thee, the Servant of another
Master. ( Romans xiv. 4.) It is a fond Thing for thee to take upon thee the Power
of a Judge, when thou have no Power of saving or destroying, rewarding or
punishing. Thus Mr. Pool.

AND shall we, Sirs, under pious pretexts of purifying the Church, in our own
way, openly rebel against the Authority of our King and Sovereign, prefer our
Wisdom, I might justly say folly, to his infinite Understanding, and reflect
upon his Fidelity and Care for his Churches good, as if he had not given a
sufficient System of Laws for its good Government and Advantage, without our
Additions* God forbid!

SIRS, all Methods of purifying the Church of Christ, by measures of human
Contrivance, notwithstanding of their fair Face, and the good design of their
zealous formers, are mischeivous to it; they rob us of the Liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free, puff up foolish Mortals with Pride of Seize they
have not; set them in chase of the Knowledge of other Peoples Hearts, which
they cannot attain, to the neglect of their own, which they may in some Degree
attain, and rend the Body of Christ in pieces, by debates, envyings, wraths,
strifes, backbitings, wisperings, swellings, tumults, (2 Cor. xii. 20.) And
therefore let us inviolably observe the express command of our Master, let them
grow together till the Harvest.

I shall beg leave to cite a Paragraph of Mr. Henry's Annotations on the
Parable I have mentioned, which I think is very excellent. Note. It is not
possible for any Man infallibly to distinguish between Tares and Wheat, but he
may be mistaken, and therefore such is the Wisdom and Grace of Christ, that he
will rather permit the Tares, than any way endanger the Wheat. It Is certain
scandalous Offenders are to be censured, and we are to withdraw from them:
Those that are openly the Children of the wicked one, are not to be admitted to
special Ordinances; yet it is possible there may be a Discipline either so
mistaken in its Rules, or so over nice in the Application of them, as may prove
vexatious to many that are truly godly and conscientious: Great Caution must be
used in inflicting and continuing Church censures, least the Wheat be trodden
down if not plucked up; the Wisdom from above, as it is pure so it is
peaceable; and those that oppose themselves, must not be cut of, but instructed
and with MEEKN^SS. (2 Timothy ii. 25.) The Tares if continued under the Means of
Grace, may become good Corn, therefore have Patience with them.

Note, The overhasty and inconsiderate Zeal of Christ's Servants, before they
have consulted with their Master, is sometimes ready, with the Hazard of the
Church, to root out all that they presume to be Tares, will thou then that we
go and ga^^er them up.

Of the same Sentiments are many other learned Interpreters. Viz, Lucas,
Brugensis, Munsterus, Simachus, Grotius, Zegerus, Heronimus, Beza. The Word
Tares (xixania) signifies a kind of burnt Wheat, which cannot be pulled up
without pulling up the Wheat along with it, it is a kind of Cockel or Darnel,
which springs from Wheat corrupted, or other kinds of Grain corrupted, which is
very like to Wheat, springs up before the Harvest, and is very difficult to be
distinguished from Wheat; thus Scultetus, Exederadius, Theophrastus, Rembertus,
Dodoneus, Pomponius, and Sabinus; the same is called by Virgil, infelix Lolium;
Matthew alone uses this Word; and always in the plural Number (xixania, quasi
Sitoizania, quod idzane insideat sito, et cum eo cresscit.) the original Word
translated Tare implies its sitting upon the Wheat, and growing together with
it, as Gualtperius and Shmidius observe, and therefore a twofold kind of Wheat
is intended, viz. that which is noble, and that which is degenerated, and
sordid, by which we are to understand good and bad Christians, both distinct
from other Men, and distinct among themselves. Thus Doctor Lightf^^t.


IF it be said that CHRHST in his Explication of the aforesaid Parable,
signifies that the Field is the World.

I Answer, with Mr. Henry, that the Word World there signifies the visible
Church, scattered all the World over, not confined to one Nation: In the
Parable it is called Christ's Field, for all Things are delivered to him of the
Father, and to imagine that the World in this Passage of Scripture, is not to
be taken in the aforesaid limited Sense, is to suppose that Christ himself
speaks besides the Point he had undertaken to speak upon, which is absurd, and
therefore that cannot be true which it flows from.

IF it again be suggested, that the gathering up of the Tares mentioned in the
aforesaid Parable, intends, a putting of them to Death, and so is not
applicable to confirm that for which it is aduc'd.

I Answer, that to charge such a Blood thirsty Disposition upon the Servants of
CHRIST in general, without clear Ground and Necessity from the Text, is very
uncharitable, and therefore sinful. Now there is no Necessity to take the Words
so, for there are other Ways of putting People out of the visible Church
without killing of them: And as such a gloss is uncharitable, so it is
irrational and absurd, because it supposes a Disposition in the Servants of
CHRIST to put Members of the visible Church to Death merely for their want of
Grace unexpressed by Speech and Action; for the Parable treats of Tares that do
so nearly resemble the Wheat, that they cannot be certainly distinguished from
it by the most pious and intelligent: Now to kill People merely for the want of
saving Grace, unevidenced by any Instance of criminal Conduct prejudicial to
Society, is such a monster of Barbarity and Nonsense, that the very worst
Persecutors that have ever appeared upon the Stage of the World, since the
Foundations of it were laid, have not (so far as I know) been guilty of it; and
to suppose the Ministers of Christ's Religion, in general, to be more cruel and
nonsensical then all the rest of Mankind, is no great Compliment either to it
or them.

BESIDHS such a gloss is contrary to the Words of the Parable; it is not living
absolutely in the World that Christ speaks of, but living respectively in a
State of external Union in the visible Church, let them both grow together till
the Harvest: And it is contrary to the Design and Explication of the Parable.

THH Design of the Parable is to show that the visible Church or Kingdom of
CHRIST, which is joined together by an external Bond of Union, is composed of
good and bad, and will remain mixed till the End of Time; and that we ought to
let it remain so, ought to let them grow together, because we are not capable
to make a judicial actual Distinction between Saints and Hypocrites* without
doing Injury to the former. The Thing in view is the unlawfulness of breaking
the Churches outward Union, because of our Judgment about internals; which is
contradicted by the aforesaid gloss; for though it acknowledges the sinfulness of
killing People merely because we judge they want invisible Grace; yet it allows
of a Breach of the Churches Union upon that slender Foundation, which opposes
CHRIST'S Sentiment and the Reason of it, which is this, the Danger of doing
wrong through our incapacity, which does not only conclude against the highest
Degrees of wrong, but every Degree of it, and all Methods of Management tending
thereto; because all wrong is of the same general Kind, all unreasonable and
contrary to the Law of Nature. As Church fellowship is a valuable Privilege,
so of consequence to be deprived of it, without just Cause, is unjust, as
really as to be unjustly deprived of Life, though not in so great a Degree; and
therefore all Attempts that are like to involve us in either of these Evils,
should be carefully avoided.

NOR is the aforesaid gloss agreeable to our Lords Interpretation of the
Parable, which informs us, that the Angels shall gather out of his Kingdom all
Things that Offend, and them which do Iniquity, and shall cast them into a
Furnace of Fire, i. e. the Angels, as Instruments of divine Justice, shall
separate the wicked from the good, with whom in this Life some of them have
associated in Church Fellowship, and cast them into a Place of Misery. But will
they destroy the Life they have, or anihilate their Existence? No. Our Savior
assures us, that there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, But to proceed;
The

2d. SIMILITUDE which I would discourse of, is that mentioned by John the
Baptist, (Mat. iii. 12.) whereby the visible Church of CHRIST is compared to a
FLOOR, upon which is Chaff and Wheat, whose Fan is in his Hand, and he will
thoroughly purge his Floor, and gather his Wheat into the Garner, but he will
burn up the Chaff with unquenchable Fire.

Here observe the following Particulars.

1 THAT the visible Church is Christ's Floor, (Isa. xxi. 10.) the Temple, a
Type of it was built upon a threshing Floor.

2. THAT in this Floor there is a mixture of Chaff and Wheat, good and bad, in
the same outward Communion.

3. THAT there is a Day coming, when there shall be a full and final Separation
made between the Chaff and Wheat, viz. the Day of Judgment, then there will be
a visible Distinction between the Good and Bad, in respect of their Doctrines,
their Works, their Persons, (1 Cor. iii. 13 -- 15. Matt. xxv. 32.) Before him
shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall SEPARATE them one from another, as
a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats.

4. THAT the Lord JESUS CHRIST is only capable, to make a true a just and final
Separation, or Distinction among Men universally according to their States and
Actions; being the Wisdom of his Father, and all Eye, and that he alone has
Authority to occupy this important Province, and execute this difficult Trust;
seeing all Judgment is committed to him, and to him only, by his Father; and
hence we are told, that his FAN in his Hand, which is threefold, says
Brugensis, viz. a FAN of Doctrone, of the Cross, and of Judgment.

A FAN of Doctrine, whereby some internal Distinction is made between good and
bad, while the Nature and Characters of true Christianity, are scripturally and
cautiously opened, while the Promises and Threatenings are distinctly and
pertinently proposed and pronounced.

A FAN of the Cross, or of Sufferings upon a religious Account, whereby
sometimes much Chaff is blown away from the Wheat.

A FAN of Judgment, whereby CHRIST searches the Heart and Reins of all the
Children of Men, and distinguishes the most subtle Hypocrite from the truly
Pious, and will openly separate them all from each other, in the great Day of
his coming, in virtue of a supreme judicial Authority, assigned him by his
Father, as a Reward of his Abasement; this is his peculiar Prerogative and
incommunicable Royalty, which it is great Sacrilege for any to assume. This
FAN of Judgment, which is principally intended in the aforesaid Words, for till
the Time of the last Judgment the Floor of the visible Church shall not be
thoroughly purged, I say, this Fan of Judgment is in CHRIST'S Hand alone,
exclusive of all Competitors to his Crown and Dignity!

As this Similitude plainly represents the mixed State of the visible Church of
CHRIST, namely, that it consists of real Saints and close Hypocrites, so it
shows with equal Evidence, that it is CHRIST alone that is qualified with
competent Capacity, and vested with rightful Authority, to make a judicial
universal Separation between them: And of Consequence, that it is an unjust
Presumption and criminal Invasion of his royal Prerogative, for any of the
Children of Adam to assume and attempt it, whatever be their civil or religious
Character or their superior Endowments notwithstanding. But to proceed; a

3d. SIMILITUDE, which is very remarkable and instructive, concerning the
Nature and State of the visible Church of CHRIST on Earth, we have in the 13th
Chapter of Matthew, the 47th, 48th, and 49th Verses, Again, the Kingdom of
Heaven is like unto a Net, that was cast into the Sea, and gathered of every
Kind, which when it was full, they drew to Shore, and set down and gathered the
good into Vessels, and cast the Bad away; so shall it be in the End of the
World, the Angels shall come forth, and sever the Wicked from among the Just,
and shall cast them into the Furnace of Fire.

THE Kingdom of Heaven, or the Church visible, (say Malvenda, Burgensis,
Grotius, Beza, Gegerus, Piscator, and others) is compared to a Net, (Sagine) a
DRAG-NET, as Ulpian and Varro explain the Word, the Nature of which is to draw
along with it whatever it meets with, and this is indeed confirmed by the
following Words of the Parable, and gathered of every Kind, i. e. of Fishes,
because the Parable treats of fishing, yet no doubt other Things are apt to
come into a Drag-net, it is apt to sweep along with it, not a little Trash and
Rubbish. By this Similitude our Lord informs his Disciples,

1st. THAT there will be a Mixture of good and bad, in the visible Church, in
this World; a Mixture of Saints and Hypocrites, least they should be troubled
when they saw not that Purity in the Church which they desired. And,

2d. THAT this Mixture should continue to the End of Time, till the Mystery of
GOD is finished, till the Net that is now cast into the Sea, be full, till the
Church the Kingdom of CHRIST, that is now in the World be completed, and the
Gospel thereof has fulfilled, has answered the End for which it was sent.

3d. THAT during the Space of the Net's filling, and before it be drawn to
shore; the Fishermen themselves know not what is in it, nor do those of them
that are discreet, and well informed, attempt to make any Separation of the bad
Fish from the good, while the Net is in the Sea, or while it is a drawing to
the Shore; No! For the sake of the good Fish that they hope are in it; they
draw it in with hard Labor, great Care, Tenderness and Caution; least the F^^^
should be frightened, and either violently break through the Net, or wantonly jump
over it, and so run wild again in the Ocean.

4th. THAT at the End of the World, when the Net is drawn ashore, then and
indeed not till then, there will be a certain Discovery of the Distinction
between the Good and Bad, and a visible Separation made between them, the Good
will be gathered into Vessels, and the Bad cast away.

AT the End of the World, says our Lord, the Angels shall come forth, and SEVER
the Wicked from among the Just; ay, the Angels of Heaven having Authority and
Instructions from him, to whom all Things are naked and open, who knows all
Men, and with Complacence those that are his; shall effect thoroughly what some
pious, well-meaning though misguided Angels of the Churches, have attempted in
vain, without either Commission or Capacity; for such a tremenduous Province!
as that of making a Separation between Saints and Hypocrites; to this Purpose,
Tertullian excellently observes, in his Apology, that He who has once appointed
the eternal Judgment, at the End of the World, does not precipitate or hasten
that Distinction or Separation, which is to be the Condition of the Judgment,
before the End of the World. Qui semel eternum judcium destinavit, post seculi
finem, non precipitat discretionem, que est conditio judicii, ante seculi
finem. Tertul. Apolog.


HAVING endeavored to represent the mixed State of the Church visible, by
considering three Scriptural Similitudes, that treat of it; I would now proceed
to Discourse a little upon the Terms of Admission into it, and Exclusion from it

BAPTISM is certainly the Door of Entrance into the visible Church, or Kingdom
of CHRIST, and hence those that were baptized were said to be added to the
Church, (Acts ii)

NOW this initiatory Ordinance, is, according to the Judgment of the main Body
of the Protestant Churches, (agreeable to the holy Scriptures) and particularly
of our OWN, to be dispensed not upon the Foundation of Persons having Grace, or
upon the Church's Judgment, concerning their inward gracious Experiences, No!
But upon the Profession of their Faith, and outward Covenant Relation to GOD.
The Words of our Confession of Faith are these, Not only those that do actually
profess Faith in, and Obedience unto CHRIST, but also the Infants of one or
both believing Parents, are to be baptized, (See Mark xvi. 15.16. Acts viii.
37, 38. Acts ii. 41. Genesis xvii. 7, 9. Gal. iii. 9.14. Col. ii. 11, 12.) and
upon this Head it is farther added,

THAT by the right Use of this Ordinance, the Grace promised is not only
offered, but really exhibited, and conferred by the Holy Ghost to such,
(whether of Age or Infants) that Grace belongs unto, according to the Council
of GOD'S Will, in his appointed Time (Gal. iii. 27.) For as many of you as have
been baptized unto CHRIST have put on CHRIST, Tit. iii. 5. He saved us by the
Washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Ephesians. v. 25, 26. As
CHRIST loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and
cleanse it with the washing of Water by the Word. Acts ii. 38. Then Peter said
unto them, repent and be baptized every one of you, and ye shall receive the
Gift of the Holy Ghost, Con. chap. 28. Sct. 4, 6.

AS all the aforesaid Places of Scripture, speak of the Efficacy of Baptism,
when accompanied by the Holy Spirit, so some of them of the Mode of
Administration by Washing, hence they term it Lutron Lavacrum a Laver, in
Allusion to these Places of Scripture, the ancient Fathers of the three first
Centuries, generally if not universally called Baptism- Regeneration,
Renovation, the Laver, etc.

NOR does our Church pretend to any Right or Authority, of excluding any from
the Lord's Supper, upon the precarious Foundation of their Judgment, concerning
Men's inward Experiences of a Work of invisible Grace, No; the Compilers of our
Confession had more Judgment, than to advance such an indefensible Notion; see
the Answer to the 173d Question, in the Larger Catechism, May any who profess
the Faith, and desire to come to the Lord's Supper, be kept from it?

ANSWER, Such as are found to be ignorant, or scandalous, notwithstanding their
Profession of Faith, and Desire to come to the Lord's Supper, may and ought to
be kept from that Sacrament by the Power that CHRIST has left in his Church,
until they receive Instruction, and manifest Reformation.

IT is pleasant to see, the amiable Modesty, the necessary Caution, and good
Judgment of our Church, in declining to assume the BENCH, and make her
uncertain Opinion of Men's spiritual Experiences, the Term of their Admission
either to the initiatory or confirming Seals of the New Covenant, No; She well
understood and remembered, that ancient scriptural, rational and equitable
Maxim, that (Ecclesia non judicat de internis) the Church has no business to
judge of Internals, or make her Opinion of Men's spiritual Experiences, the
Ground of her judicial Proceedings toward them.

I may add to what has been said, that our Church declares, that Grace is
exhibited, in or by the Sacraments, rightly used, 1 Pet. iii 21. The like
Figure whereunto even Baptism does also now save us. Conf. chap. 27. Sect. 3.
GIVE me leave, my Brethren, to cite here, the Opinions of some very great and
good Divines of the Protestant Churches.

DOCTOR Burges (de bapt. regenerat elect infans) asserts Baptism to be the
moral Instrument of initial Regeneration, and for this Opinion cites not only
the ancient Fathers, and the Church of England, but likewise Calvin, Chamier,
Bucer, Musculus, Junius, Zanchy, Vosius, Jewel, Whitaker, Amesius, and Davenant.

DOCTOR Ward, in (vindic. gr. sacramentis) teaches, that Sacraments do convey
Grace as moral instrumental Causes, to those that do not put a Bar in the Way.

VOETIUS says, that elect Infants, that have faederal Holiness have at the
same Time the Grace of Regeneration, Dest. elect.

WENDILINE does not only affirm that the Sacraments of Confirmation may
organically begin Faith, but adds, that this is the orthodox ^pinion, he means
the generally or universally received Opinion of the Calvinist Churches. Exer.
81. page 1311 and 12.

BEZA proposes these two Rules or Maxims, viz. 1. That the Supper is instituted
for Disciples, and that all such as profess Christ are Discip^es.

MR. Thomas Hooker, is of the same Sentiment with Beza beforementioned. See
Su^vey. page 41. 42.

OF the same Sentiment likewise are Messrs. Blake, Humphry, Timson, all which
have wrote in defense of it.

MR Stoddard, of New England, joins his Suffrage to those just mentioned, and
h^s wrote in vindication of it, a Book, entitled, An Appeal to the Learned.




AS to the Terms of a total Exclusion from Church Fellowship, viz.
Excommunication, they are Heresy in Doctrine, and Immorality in Life. Tit. iii.
10. A Man that is a Heretic after the first and second Admonition, reject.
Matt. xviii. 15, 16, 17. Moreover if thy Brother shall trespass against thee,
go and tell him his Fault, between thee and him alone, if he shall hear thee,
thou have gained thy Brother, but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee
one or two more, that in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every Word may be
established, and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church, i. e.
to the Church-Representative, the Officers of the Church, but if he neglect to
hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a heathen Man and a Publican 2 Cor.
vi. 7. The Apostle speaking of the incestuous Corinthian, says, sufficient to
such a Man, is the Punishment which was inflicted of many, so that contrary
wise ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him, least perhaps, such a one
should be swallowed up vith over much Sorrow.

HOW excellent and rational is this Order, this Command of our dear Lord Jesus
Christ? How much does a conscientious observance of it tend to preserve the
Peace and Unity of Christ's Kingdom, or Church visible? But when the very
reverse hereof takes Place, when instead of going to our Brother, who is
supposed to Trespass and telling him privately of it, from a due respect to his
Credit and Character, we go among our acquaintances and blaze it abroad, and
set it perhaps in no advantageous light: Does not such ungenerous backbitting
and tattling, tend to disturb the Peace of the Church of CHRIST, break its
Union and turn all into a Flame? What can be the Cause of such unkind, unjust
Proceeding, so directly contrary to the express and positive command of the
KING of the Church? Is it Ignorance or is it forgetfulness of this Command and
Institution, or is it Pride and Stuborness, that will not suffer us to stoop,
to submit to the Kingly Authority of the great REDEEMER? And do we by such a
kind of Conduct, conform to the Law of Nature and Nations, which requires that
Persons be heard before they be condemned, or do by others as we would have
them do by us? The Resolution of these Questions, let our own Consciences
determine.

BUT as to the Notion of excommunicating Persons, either by separating from
them at first, or by continuing contentedly in a State of Separation, without
the Use of Means to get it removed, when there is any probability of Success,
(which are indeed substantially the same) on the account of different Opinions
in Circumstantials in Doctrine, and acting accordingly; or on account of our
Judgment or Persuasion of their being graceless or without Christian
Experience; although there are scandalous Presidents for the former of these, in
the violent Ferments and Animosities that arose even in the early Times of
Christianity, between the Eastern and Western Churches, which came to that
pitch, that they excommunicated one another, and that for no greater Matter
than the Observation of Easter upon different Days! Much like this was the
Perment and Prejudices that arose between the Jewish and Gentile Christians,
and their uncharitable Conduct toward each other, which were still of an
earlier Date. Presidents that demand our pity and caution, but deserve not our
Imitation! but of the latter I know no Example in Scripture or History; and far
less is there any Foundation in the Holy Scriptures, or in our excellent
Confession of Faith, for such unaccountable Proceedings! No! Our CHURCH is so
far from such an unreasonable, uncharitable and Church dividing Principle, that
she does not make her Opinion of Peoples secret spiritual Experiences the
Ground of a far less censure, viz. of suspending them from the Lords Supper for
a Time: Nor does she make a Difference in circumstantial Points, (so far as I
know) a sufficient Ground for any Censure at all.

YOU know, my Reverend and Beloved Fathers and Brethren, it is our bounden Duty
to beware of all superstitious human Inventions, in Doctrine, Worship and
Discipline, however piously they are designed and zealously they are defended
notwithstanding. We are commanded by supreme Authority to stand fast in the
Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, least we be entangled in a Yoke of
Bondage. The Lord Jesus is the only KING and Head of his Church; he alone is
her Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy; he only has Authority to
make Terms of Communion for his visible Kingdom, and to those we must adhere
inviolably.

He has given us a perfect self-consistent System of Laws, which need no
Addition of new ones of our Contrivance to complete their Number, No. A
faithful observance of those which Christ has given us, will fully answer the
valuable End proposed.

OUR dear Redeemer is faithful in all his House, as Moses, for he is Wisdom,
Goodness and Love itself; he has never freed his Churches from the Ceremonial
Institutions of a divine Original, to gall the Necks of his Disciples with a
heavier Yoke of human Inventions, No. his Yoke is peculiarly easy, and his
Burden light in the present Evangelick Day.

NOW Sirs, as we should disdain to couch like Issachar under the Burden of
unreasonable impositions of others in Matters of LIBERTY; so common Justice
requires, that we should equally abhor imposing our Notions about
Circumstantials upon them; let us ever Remember and observe, the golden Rule of
Righteousness, which Our Lord has given Us, viz. to do by others as we would
have them do by us. But I proceed to the,

Second, General Head proposed which was to enquire; What is to be understood
by the PEACE of JERUSALEM.

TO this End observe, that Peace is threefold, viz. with God, with ourselves,
and with our Neighbor.

Peace with God, consists in actual Reconciliation to him, through a sincere and
unreserved Acceptance of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Peacemaker, in all his
Offices and Relations, fully, freely and forever; as well as through an entire
Dependence upon his Merit, as the only deserving Cause of our Acceptance with
God: Which is preceeded in the Adult, with a distressing Sense of our awful
natural Enmity against God, our extreme undoness thereby, and our utter
Impotency, either to make Satisfaction to divine Justice for our Offenses, or
cure the moral Maladies of our Minds.

AND is followed with an implacable hatred against Sin, the great make bate
between God and us Pax Dei, est bellum, contra satanam. Peace with God is War
against the Devil.
; a high Veneration for Jesus Christ, the Peacemaker; an honorable esteem of,
and cordial complacence in the Gospel PLAN of Peace, together with a friendly
Disposition and Behavior habitually toward the Author of Peace, the blessed
God, his Honor and Kingdom, and toward all such whom we conceive to be his
People, (when freed from the Power of unreasonable Prejudices and violent
Temptations) whatever Denomination they bear, and though they differ from us in
lesser Things.

THIS Peace, as well as that with ourselves, and our Neighbor, proceeds from
GOD the Father, as the Projector of it, in the Depths of his unsearchable
Wisdom; and hence the Author to the Hebrews speaks of him in this endearing
strain, Now the God of Peace that brought from the Dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant.

THIS Peace proceeds also from God the Son, as the Purchaser of it, by the
invaluable Treasures of his precious Blood; and hence in the Epistle of Paul to
the Colosians, he is said to have made Peace through the Blood of his Cross.

THIS Peace proceeds likewise from God the Holy Ghost, as the applyer of it, by
the efficacious influence of his Operations, without which we would not accept
the Mediator, nor could our natural Enmity be broke.

PEACE with ourselves, consists in a calmness, sweetness and holy security of
Mind, following after Reconciliation to God by Faith, and flowing from
Communion with him in Love, Union to God in Christ by Faith, is the Ground of
Communion in the divine Love.
attended with a habitual, unreluctant, unreserved, undisguis'd, uniform
Subjection to his Government, both by his Precepts and Providence; and neither
shuns the Trial of God's Word, nor is, for the general, puffed up. This Peace
is an invaluable Jewel, the blessed Legacy which the blessed Jesus left to his
Disciples; the agreeable rest of the Soul, and the Life of Life; hereby we are
sweetly supported under every present pressure, and sufficiently fortified
against every uneasy fear of future Misery and Danger. This makes the Soul
serene under the most gloomy and formidable aspects of Providence; stable and
unshaken amidst all the Revolutions of Nature, and shifting Scenes of Time.

PEACE with our Neighbor is threefold, viz. Oeconomical, Political,
Eeclesiastical.

PEACE Oeconomical, or quiet in the Family, is a comfortable Privilege, (Psalm.
cvii. 41.) He sets the Poor on high from Affliction, and makes him Families
like a Flock; the Righteous shall see it and rejoice, and all Iniquity shall
stop her Mouth. Among the surprising Changes which a sovereign Providence
brings to pass sometimes among the Affairs of the Children of Men, this that
the Psalmist mentions in this Psalm, is very remarkable. That while the
Almighty abases the Great and Honorable, pours Contempt on Princes that abuse
their Authority, and slight his Mercy, while he dethrones them from their
Grandeur and Dignity, reduces them to distressing straits, and Causes them to
wander in the Wilderness where there is no Way; baffles their Councils, and
breaks their Pride and Pomp. He in the mean Time exalts the Humble, he sets
the Poor on high, he raises them from the Dust of meaness and obscurity, to
Places of Trust and Honor. And that which adds equal Security, Beauty and Ease
to their Elevation, is the number and quietness of their Children and Families,
he makes their Families like a Flock; a Flock of Sheep^^ numerous indeed; but
meek, peaceful, useful, sociable, in this resembling the true and living
Members of the Church of Christ, who are clothed with this instructive amiable
Character. (John x) When ones Family is quiet and calm, it is a noble Asylum, a
little Sanctuary to retreat to from Tempests abroad, a great Satisfaction and
Support in Life, that sooths all our Sorrows, sweetens all our Labors and
Anxieties, and lulls every Grief to rest. But the Contrary is no little
Addition to our other Calamities; it storms us from our proper Place of Refuge
and Retreat; puts Vinegar and Nitre into our Wounds, and adds double weight to
all our Woes!

PEACE Political, or quiet in the State, (of the right Kind) is a freedom from
War, with National Enemies, upon a safe and honorable Foundation, and a Union
and Harmony among ourselves, respecting Matters of a civil Nature.

THEN we no more hear the confused noise of the Warrior, or see Garments rolled
in Blood, a rueful, pitious spectacle, that cannot but excite, in generous
Bosoms, the softest Sympathy's of Sorrow, the tenderest Sentiments of Humanity!

HOW amiable, desirable and valuable a Benefit must political Peace (of the
right Kind) be; it opens a pleasing scene of Plenty before us, and frees us
from innumerable Anxieties, (Psalm. clxvii. 14.) He makes Peace in thy Borders
and fills thee with the finest of the Wheat.

IT must needs be an entertaining Prospect to devout Noah, after he had been so
long exposed to a constant Scene of extraordinary Terror, by a more shocking
Inundation then any of the Sons of Men had ever seen before; so long immured in
a floating Castle of immense and unweildly bulk, which had neither Helm nor
Compass to check its random Motions, amidst a vast abyss of Waters, upon the
foaming angry Main, together with so prodigious and troublesome a Family, no
less than a World of Animals in its capacious Bosom; Creatures of every Kind
and Form, amiable and hideous, mild and malignant: I say it must needs be
agreeable to him to feel this vast Machine rest from its wild wanderings, upon
the lofty summit of Ararat! To hear no more grating noisy Murmurs of descending
Torrents, or awful Shrieks of expiring Mortals, abandoned to the depths of Woe,
frightened at the dismal Symptoms of Natures Catastrophe, and their own
approaching Fate; upon his opening of the Ark to behold the asswaging Waters,
and the mild, returning, faithful Dove, returning not on a lingering Wing, but
with a rapid Flight, carrying the amiable Emblem of Peace, an Olive Leaf in her
Mouth, an agreeable Symptom of the Resurrection of entomed Nature, a sure Sign
of her emerging above her watery Pressures, into her original Form, Beauty and
Use. (at least in some Degree) Give me leave, my dear Brethren, to make this
brief Reflection, en passant, O happy, thrice happy, are all those who finding
no more rest in this weary World, this mazy Labyrinth of Labor and of Woe, do
fly with an eager wing by F^^^h to CHRIST, the Sanctuary, the Ark of the
oppressed, the Rest of the weary, the Balsom of the wounded: This glorious
God-Man, our venerable Imanuel, will save those that Trust in him, from the
awful torrents of divine Resentment, and from sinking in the Sea of Jehovah's
anger. He is, as the Prophet Isaiah expresses it. a hiding Place from the Wind,
and a covert from the Tempest, as Rivers of Water in a dry Place, and as the
Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. But I proceed,

PEACE Ecclesiastical, or Peace in the Church, is opposed both to Schism from
within, in its own Body, and Persecution from without, from open Enemies. This
Peace, with Truth and Righteousness, is one of the most important Mercies upon
Earth. Now the Peace of Jerusalem, which we should pray for, includes all the
Kinds of Peace I have mentioned: When we use this Petition in our Prayers, we
beg or supplicate that the Members of the visible Church may have Peace with
GOD, Peace in their own Consciences; Peace in their private Families; Peace be
within thy Walls; and likewise that there may be Peace in the State, Prosperity
in her Palaces; and particularly that their may be Peace in the Church, Peace
in Jerusalem, that she may be as a City compact together.

NOW seeing that the Peace of the Church, is especially intended, let us fix our
Meditations upon this momentuous Subject, for a little while, and enquire* what
is intended by the PEACE of JERUSALEM?

IN answer to this Enquiry, let it be observed, that Peace generally supposes
Debate and Contention preceding, which alas, to the great Scandal of
Christianity, is too natural and common among the Professors of it; the
principal Causes of which, are unkind treatment of one another, different
Sentiments in smaller Matters, of curious Speculation, which have little
Influence upon Practice; the remainders of Corruption in all Men, which the
grand Enemy of the Churches Peace inflames, by raising false Reports, and
especially when they keep at a Distance from each other, and aggravating true;
and by ascribing every Thing said and done, to a bad Design; as well as by
working upon the Ignorance and Narrowness of some Men's Minds, the peculiar heat
of their Tempers, and warmth of their Imaginations.

NOW as Peace generally supposes Contention and Debate, and sometimes in
consequence thereof, an open Breach of Union, so under this View, it implies
these Things following, viz,

1. A Cessation of Arms, a laying aside for a Time hostile attacks, (tending to
the Prejudice of each others Characters) which is the first step to Peace* this
gives room to think and reflect; this gives leisure to parley and deliberate
cooley upon the tendencies and issues of Things.

2. PEACE after Contention and Debates, implies* Proposals of Accommodation,
which among contending Parties that seriously desire Peace should be mutual,
condescending and Scriptural;

1. THEY should be mutual, because in Controversies that rise to a high Degree
of Warmth, and continue for a considerable space of Time there is generally
faults on both Sides, those that are most in the right, are in some Things in
the wrong, at least in their corrupt way of Managing, what is materially right;
but alas it is as Difficult for us to be convinced of our Mistakes, as it is
easy and natural to Mistake!

THE Causes hereof, are our native Ignorance, Pride, Prejudice, and immoderate
Self-Love* hence we have the Eyes of Arg^s, are quick sighted to discern others
faults, but as to our own, we are as blind as M^les, and as deaf as Adders,
unwilling to see them, (naturally) unwilling to hear of them, unwilling to own
them, how plain soever they are pointed ou^ to us, we can more easily discern a
Mote in our Brothers Eye, than a Beam in our own.

And though we all in Words disclaim the Doctrines of Infalibility in Judgment,
and Perfection in Practice; yet it would seem that many hold both practically;
for they look upon it to be a very great disgrace to be convinced of any
Mistake in Opinion, even in lesser Things, and any misconduct in Practice
conseque^^ thereupon; and therefore to prevent that false Disgrace, they will
hold fast their pretended Or^hodoxy in every punctilio with the stoutest
obstinacy!

AS they have swallowed perhaps not a few Things by the lump through an implicit
Faith, without impartially examining the Grounds of their Persuasion, so it
would seem they are resolved to hold the whole of it fast and firm to the
Death, against all Opposition, although it be of Scripture, Reason, Antiquity,
yea and common Sense, and thus they go through thick and thin with undaunted
Courage, so that one had as good almost take a Bear by the Tooth, or talk to a
Block, as to such rigid fierce Bigots; for while they are spoken to, they are
not modestly concluding they may be mistaken as well as other People, and so
endeavoring to weigh impartially what is spoken, no, not at all; they
constantly take it for granted, that they are certainly Right in all their
Sentiments, and therefore instead of weighing what is spoken, they are
contriving to find out some plausible pretext, some shadow to screne and help
them to hold fast their favorite infalible Notions.

THOUGH it is generally acknowledged that we should grow in Knowledge, yet some
are scared at more enlarged Views of the same Things, which they had some dark
and confused Notions of before, and much more at the Discovery of any Point of
Truth even in Circumstantials, which they did not know before, as if it was a
Duty to bind ourselves forever in the sordid shackles of that ignorance and
narrowness of Soul which is common to People in younger Years, when they begin
to profess Religion, and to be frightened at the Answer of our own Prayers for
Wisdom and Knowledge, as well as shun the granting of our Requests with as much
Care as possible, in order to keep our Credit with those of our own Cast and
Stature: For if it happen that we are by a larger View of Things, constrained
to differ, though upon the firmest Foundation of Reason and Revelation, the
Breadth of a Hair in after Years, from our first raw and indigested Notions of
Things, it is an unpardonable Iniquity and Scandal, not to be wiped away. And
if that be the Case, that we must hold every Notion we have had, right or
wrong, it is certainly best to avoid close thinking upon Things altogether, and
examining of them, least thereby we be forced to quit some Notion we have held
before, or in other Words, we must maintain, with the Papists, that ignorance
is the Mother of Devotion! Farther.

2. THE Proposals of Peace should be Condescending; for it is such only that
have a tendency to remove Prejudices, and conciliate mutual Love and Respect;
every Thing should be given up for Peace, but Truth and Holiness. The more we
give up our Humors, our Pride our Prejudices, yea our Credit among the
Ignorant of Mankind, if the Case require it, and we do no Injustice to
ourselves therein, the more we obey the Precepts and Answer the Design of the
Gospel of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, which enjoins us to deny ourselves, to take up
the Cross of our Master, to mortify our Corruptions, and let not our RIGOR and
Stiffness (...) small Things) but our MODERATION be known to all Men.

3. THE Proposals of Peace and Union should be Scriptural, such as the KING of
the Church has appointed, and no other; (...) ^uch as some Devout Men, of
narrow Minds and hot Tempers, have (...), with a pious Purpose to maintain
Truth and promote the Purity of the Church: Let their Piety and Learning be
never so great, and their Designs never so good, they have no Authority to
impose their Notions, about Circumstantials, as Terms of Communion.

IN general I may observe, that the Terms that should be proposed, are such as
tend to preserve and transmit, pure and uncorrupted, (...) the latest
Posterity, the essential and necessary Truths of CHRIST on the one Hand, and
yet to maintain inviolable the LIBERTY wherewith Christ has made us free, upon
the other, and not entangle ourselves again with a new Yoke of Bondage of human
Invention, and thereby open awful Occasion for a continued series of Schisms,
Convulsions and Confusions in the Church of God.

NOW the scriptural Terms of Ecclesiastical Peace and Union, are either
Doctrinal or Practical.

THE Doctrinal Term of Peace and Union which our LORD has appointed, is a
Confession of essential and necessary Articles, in Doctrine, Worship and
Discipline, contained in the holy Scriptures, agreeable to which are our
excellent Westminster Confession of Faith, Catechisms and Directory for Worship
and Government.

THESE Terms are truly Scriptural, inasmuch as we are enjoined in the sacred
Oracles, by the same supreme Authority, to reject Heretics, or those that
obstinately hold fundamental Errors, after the first and second Admonition, and
in the mean Time to receive the Weak, who hold circumstantial Errors, being in
other Things sound. We are of Consequence, plainly directed to make essential
and necessary Articles only, Terms of Communion.

And indeed these terms are rational, Catholic, and peaceable, they may be
defended by Argument, and no other that I know of, they are a noble Medium
between two dangerous Extremes of unjustifyable severity upon the one Hand, and
Criminal laxness, on the other, the former of which encroaches upon our
Liberty, and the latter is Prejudicial to Truth, both which ought to be ever
Dear to us! If any other Method besides what is before mentioned be taken,
either fundamental Truths will be betrayed, or good Men rejected, whom we are
commanded to receive, and who when received, are like to be of service to
CHRIST'S Kingdom.

NOR should it be lightly passed over, that we should not receive the Weak, to
doubtful disputations, i. e. we should not distress and ensnare them, with
Debates about Things of small Moment, which are comparatively doubtful and
uncertain, not only obscure in their own Nature, but such as there is no
absolute promise of the Holy Unction to lead all good Men to the Knowledge of;
and seeing the Case is so it is no Argument either of good Judgment or great
Humility, to be very peremptory and confident about such Things, because the
confidence is dispr^portion'd to its foundation, the foundation is obscure and
uncertain what good and great Men differ about, and the (...) is so peremptory
and certain as if they were not liable to Mistake, but were exempted peculiarly
from the common Frailties and Weaknesses of human Nature; will a discreet Man
raise a Superstructure larger then its Basis, or will our Passions and
Prejudices alter the Nature of Things? Stabit opus milius, fi been fixa Basis.
The Superstructure will stand the firmer, that the Foundation be well laid.


THE abuse of these Terms cannot take away the regular Use of them, no more
than the abuse of other good Things can reasonably deprive us of the comfort of
them.

AND though the Number of essential and necessary Articles has not hitherto been
determined, by any Church that I know of, yet every Person, and of Consequence
every Church, as such, must certainly have a right to determine for themselves,
what they reckon to be such. But to proceed,

THE Practical Term of Peace and Union in Churches where there are complaints
of Misconduct, are either an Express verbal acknowledgement of them in Things
of a Moral nature, or a Reformation from them.

NO doubt in Churches formed and united, an explicit open verbal
Acknowledgment, should be required, especially for gross Instances of immoral
Conduct, which the Light of Nature teaches the Sinfulness of.

BUT when the Church is either in its Infancy not fully formed, or in a broken
and divided State, and when there is a Reformation from the Evils complained
of, and urging a verbal Acknowledgement tends to open wider the bleeding Wounds
of the Church, to tear her in pieces; and consequently to destroy her; it
should not be insisted on even in respect of gross Immorality; because the
Design of Discipline is answered by Reformation in such Cases, and much less
should it be even proposed at all, in Matters which are (comparatively
speaking) of a doubtful Nature, and have long since happened; to say that there
should be no Moderation used in the Discipline of the Church, (no epeceia
juris) no Variation of it is Exercise, under different Circumstances and Aspect,
in such a Manner as tends to preserve the Church from Ruin, is to say in effect
that it is unreasonable and indefensible, and consequently to impute to JESUS
CHRIST the Author of it, either want of Wisdom, or want of Love, in forming the
Plan or Model of it is Institution, both which are false, and blasphemous, and
of Consequence that from which such Consequences naturally and easily flow; to
apply the same Medicine to the Body in all the Variety of it is Maladies in the
same Manner, and in the same Degree, would tend to kill instead of a Cure, and
thus it is in Ecclesiastical Matters. But

3. PEACE does not only imply a Cessation of Arms, and Proposals of
Accommodation, but likewise our sincere Acceptance of them, after due
Deliberation upon their Nature and Importance, and with full Resolution through
divine Grace to adhere thereto,

4. IT implies real Reconciliation upon this Acceptance; when the Terms of
Peace proposed are mutually come into, we should then bury in perpetual
Oblivion past Offenses, as though they had never been, and return to a State of
sincere Friendship, with the same Readiness, as though there never had been any
Breach; if our Brother offends us, as our Lord observes, not only seven times,
but seventy times seven; we should forgive him, and Sirs, the greater the
Offenses have been, the more noble and Godlike is the Forgiveness!

5. PEACE implies a Union by Love (at least) to those we are reconciled to Love
is the Band of Souls, (gluten animari^n) the Cement of Societies, without which
they cannot continue or subsist comfortably, or profitably in a State of Union.

LOVE is the Substance of the Law, the Scope of the Gospel, the Glory of
Christianity; by this we imitate the blessed GOD, in one of his most amiable
Attributes, which he himself reckons his Glory (Ex 34.) By this we promote the
Religion of the meek and peceable Jesus, more effectually than by all our angry
Contentions and Debates, about lesser Things; by this we adorn our Profession
and Character, in the Eyes of all Mankind, who are not blinded and biased by
the Force of Passion and Prejudice; and the more numerous, and as we suppose
heinous, the Offenses have been that we pass over, the more eminent, the more
noble, the more Christ-like is our Love; because it is the more free and
immerited, the more strong and efficacious.

6. PEACE implies the Performance of friendly Offices, to each other, after
Reconciliation to and Union with our Brethren. O how stately and glorious does
it look, not only to pass by Offenses, and love with our Hearts, those who have
done us Injury, but to delight to do them all the kind Offices in our Power,
and contend with them who shall love most, and exceed each other in Courtesy
and Gentleness, in Acts of Benignity and Endearment! This! this! my dear,
reverend, honored and beloved Brethren! is the Religion of the holy JESUS, it
breathes Sweetness and Mercy, it smells of the fragrant Spices of Heaven: O it
imitates the gracious Dealings of the blessed GOD, with his poor sinful froward
Creatures, in which, are stupenduous Stoops of condescending humble Majesty,
mixed with astonishing, incomprehensible, inexpressible, and unparalled
Displays of the strongest, purest Affection, the richest Benignity, and
tenderest Mercy and Love! O, the breadth, the length, the depth, the height of
the Love of CHRIST which passes Knowledge! Let us imitate it, dear Sirs! that
we may be filled with the Fullness of GOD; let us walk in Love as Christ also
has loved us and has given himself for us, an Offering, and a Sacrifice to
God, for a sweet smelling savor. I proceed to the

THIRD general Head proposed, which was to show, What is included in praying
for the Peace of Jerusalem? And

1. It includes our high esteem of Peace, as a very important Mercy. This will
appear by considering that Peace is more excellent in itself, then all the
Triumphs of the most lawful War, Pax una triumphis, inumeris melior.
because it contains a more necessary difficult and noble Victory, namely, over
ourselves: It is true undaunted Valor, and Heroic (martial) Bravery, in the
high Places of the Field, in defense of our King and Country, and all that is
naturally dear to us, when conducted with good Judgment, executed with intrepid
Magnanimity, and crowned with desirable Success, is truly amiable, commendable
and rewardable; it merits the laurels of Honor and distinguished Recompense,
yet this Self-conquest is still more difficult, because of the strong
Propensity in our degenerate Nature to resentment, The Spirit that is in us
lusts to envy.
and more necessary for a peaceful Temper is one Branch of that Change, without
which we cannot see GOD, so as to enjoy him hereafter; and therefore it is more
Noble. I freely acknowledge, that the carrying on of a lawful War is consistent
with a peaceable Temper of Mind, and that it requires the exercise of
Self-denial in a great Degree, to prosecute War according to the Laws of
Justice and Humanity, to moderate our Resentments and keep them within proper
bounds. Yet Peace seems to require a still greater Degree of Self-denial, in
that by it all shadow of Resentment must be laid aside entirely. What I have
said of War by the Sword, is applicable to the other kinds of lawful War.


FARTHER Peace is a help to the quiet Enjoyment of ourselves, a great Comfort
in Life.

THIS assists our Progress in Religion, which is not a little kindred by angry
Contentions, for by these the blessed Spirit the peaceful heavenly Dove is
drove Reluctant from our Bosoms!

NOR does Peace tend less to promote our servicableness to others; certainly
those that are Angry with us, are like to get little good by us.

By Peace and Condescension God is Honored, our Profession adorned, and the
Unity of the Church preserved. Whereas the Contrary, tends to bring Reproah
upon the Name, the Ways and People of God, and manifold Mischiefs into
religious Societies, as well as into our own Souls, and Injury upon our
Characters, Persons Estates and Families; for hereby others are exasperated
against us, and therefore will try to do us all the hurt they can. But

2. PRAYING for the Peace of Jerusalem, includes our earnest Desire after
Peace: And this is indeed the natural and necessary Consequent of the former.
Desire flows from Esteem, and is exactly proportioned to the Degree of it:
Moreover Prayer is but Desire expressed and offered to God in the Mediators
Name. To suppose that God Commands us to pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, and
yet not desire it, is to imagine that he commands us to flatter him with our
Lips, while our Hearts are far from him, and consequently approves of
Hypocrisy, the worst of Evils, and the Mockery of himself, which is the most
audacious and malignant of Crimes; both which are absurd and blasphemous!
absolutely inconsistent with the divine Wisdom and Purity! and yet they are the
natural Consequences of the aforesaid Supposition, and therefore demonstrate
the falseness and impiety of it. What are Words without desire in intelligent
Beings, better than Mockry?

3. PRAYING for the Peace of Jerusalem includes affectionate mourning for the
want of Peace. The Church in general, and every Believer in particular, because
of their mournful Disposition and Practice in this Valey of Tears, are compared
to a Dove, a Turtle-Dove, (Psalm. lxxiv. 19.) which is remarkable for its
dolorous, solitary, warbling Accents, in the shady silent retreats. Nec gemere
(...), ^essabit Tur^r (...) ulmo.
And surely the bad State of the Church is not the least among the Sorrows of
those mourning Doves,

IN the Book of Lamentations, the Prophet Jeremiah bewails the melancholy State
of the Jewish Church and Nation, with the most moving strains of mournful
Eloquence; he paints Zions pitious Calamities, and his own painful Passion upon
this Occasion, with the softest touches, and strongest Images! and adorns them
(but with ease and negligence) with all the Pomp of Grief and Woe, reduced to
the most deplorable Extremity! A few Passages of which allow me to mention.

Zyon spreads forth her Hands, and has none to comfort her. How has the
Lord covered the Daughter of Zion with a Cloud in his Anger, and cast down from
Heaven to Earth the Beauty of Israel. In the Tabernacle of the Daughter of
Zion, he poured out his fury like fire. How is the Gold become dim, the most
fine Gold changed. The Anger of the Lord has divided them, he will no more
Regard them. Thou have made us as the Refuse in the midst of the People. Mine
Eyes do fail, my Bowels are troubled for these Things, I weep, mine Eye, mine
Eye, runs down with Water!

AND elsewhere the same Prophet taking a view of the melancholy Circumstances
of the People of Israel, and of the crimson Evils that too much prevailed among
them, such as slander, falsehood, debate, etc. indulges the most passionate
Lamentation! wishing that his Head was Waters, and his Eyes a fountain of
Tears, that he might weep Night and Day! And likewise wishing, that he had in
the Wilderness a lodging Place of way fareing Men, some humble Cottage fitted
for lonely Retirement, that he might be at rest from the strife of Tongues, and
no more behold the melancholy Scenes that had been presented before him. ( Jer.
ix.)

NOR was the sweet Singer of Israel les^ affected, with a view of the violence
and strife, that were in the City of Jerusalem, this occasioned his wishing for
the Wings of a Dove, that he might Fly away and be at rest, that he might
hasten far off into the Wilderness, and escape the Windy Storm and Tempest; as
the Dove when pursued by Birds of prey, flies Swiftly, and into far distant
Places of Solitude, and hides herself in the Holes of the Rock. (Ps. 55.) The
Wings of a Dove best became him, who was of a Dove like Disposition, now it is
said of the Dove, that it exceeds all Birds in the Swiftness of its flight.
Utinam, ut turbinea celeri impetu columba, oethereas nubes pera mearem, chorus,
apud sophochem, in oedipo.


AND in the 120 Psalm 5, 6, 7. verses: The Psalmist bewails the want of Peace
in the following Language: Woe is me that I Sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in
the Tents of Kedar. My Soul has long dwelt with him that hates Peace: I am
for Peace but when I speak, they are for War. Upon which Words Mr. Henry
glosseth thus.

THOSE that David dwelt with, were such as not only hated him, but hated Peace,
and proclaimed War with it, who might write upon their Weapons of War, Non sic
Sequimur pacem, but sic Prosequimur, perhaps Readiness Court was the Mesech, and
Kedar in which David dwelt, and Saul was the Man he Means that hated Peace.

See here 1st. The Character of every good Man in David, who could truly say,
though he was a Man of War, I am for Peace, for living peaceably with all Men,
and unpeaceably with none, I Peace, so it is in the Original, I love Peace, and
pursue Peace, my Disposition is to Peace, and my delight is in it, I pray for
Peace, and strive for Peace, will do any Thing, Submit to any Thing, part with
any Thing in reason for Peace; I am for Peace, I have made it appear that I am
so, the Wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable.

2. The Character, of the worst of bad Men in David's Enemies, who would pick a
Quarrel with those that were most peaceably disposed, When I speak they are for
War, and the more forward for War, the more they find me inclined to Peace; he
spoke with all the Respect and Kindness that could be, proposed Methods of
Accommodation, spoke Reason, spoke Love, but they would not so much as hear him
patiently but cried out to Arms to Arms, so fierce and implacaple were they,
and bent to Mischief. Such were CHRIST'S Enemies, for his Love they were his
Adversaries, and for his good Words and Works they stoned him: And if we meet
with such Enemies, we must not think it strange, or love Peace the less for our
seeking it in vain, be not overcome of Evil; no not of such Evil as this, even
when thus tried, still try to overcome Evil with good.

4. PRAYING for the Peace of Jerusalem, includes delight in the Prospect and
Approach of Peace. As desire of Peace is equal to our Esteem of it, so is our
Sorrow in its absence, equal to the Degree of our Desire after it; and
consequently our Delight and Joy must arise on Occasion of any encouraging
Appearance of its access to us, just in Proportion to the Measure of our Sorrow
in want of it. If we heartily Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, it must needs
gladen our Hearts (if rightly informed) to see any Symptoms of the Answer of
our Prayers.

WHEN the Prophet delivered a threatening message to King Hesekiah, he comforted
himself with the hopes of Peace in his Time. Is. xxxix. 8. Then said Hesekiah
to Isaiah, good is the Word of the Lord which thou have spoken, for there shall
be Peace and Truth in my Days. (Pro. xii. 20.) But to the Counselors of Peace
is Joy; especially when any agreeable Prospect opens of a good issue to their
Councils. Those that study the Things that make for Peace, and to this End
concert healing Methods, and promote healing Attempts, will not only have the
Credit, but the Comfort of it: To them there is Joy and Success, perhaps beyond
Expectation. ( Prove. xiii. 12.) Hope deferred makes the Heart Sick, but when
the desire comes; it is a Tree of Life.

5. PRAYING for the Peace of Jerusalem, includes unwearied Labor, to obtain
and preserve it; and this as naturally flows from desire, when sincere and
strong, as desire from Esteem, or as Eating when one is Hungry, and as our
endeavors result from our desires, so they are exactly proportioned to the
Measure and Degree of them. The Spouse having an earnest desire after her
LORD'S Presence, sought him on her Bed, but not finding him there, went about
the Streets of the City in quest of him, and was restless till she found him, (
Cant. iii.)

NOW Endeavors after Peace are twofold, viz. Negative and Positive, or in
other Words, our careful avoiding the Hindrances of Peace, and our serious Use
of the Means and Helps that have a Tendency to acquire and preserve it.

BUT what are the Hindrances of Peace in general, which should be carefully
avoided?

I Answer, They are these following, viz. unkind Thoughts, Speeches and Actions.

1. UNKIND hard Thoughts of others, which spring not from superior Penetration,
but from Pride, Envy, narrowness of Mind, or a misguided Zeal. These, these are
the fatal, fertile, formidable Sources of all our severe Sentiments of, and
unkindness to our poor Brethren. Unkind Thoughts, Sirs, are directly contrary
to the Nature of that amiable, evangelick Charity, which the blessed Apostle
Paul so highly extols, with the most honorable Encomiums, preferring it to
Faith and Hope, and so earnestly rec^mmends to our Imitation and Observance: He
assures us, that the true Genius of this God-like glorious Grace, is to think
no Evil, and to hope all Things. Charity, says he, suffers long, and is
kind. Charity envieth not, vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, does not
behave itself unseemly, Uses no reproachful Words or Gestures, as Chrysostom
interprets.
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, rejoiceth not in Iniquity, (in
bad Reports of our Brethren) but rejoiceth in the Truth, (in their just
Vindication) bears all Things, believes all Things, endures all Things. Now
though we have the Gift of Prophesy, and understand all Mysteries, and all
Knowledge, and though we have all Faith so that we could remove Mountains, and
have no Charity, we are nothing; yea though we bestow all our Goods to feed the
poor, and give our Bodies to be burned, and have not Charity, it profits us
nothing (1 Cor. xiii.) And elsewhere the same Apostle observes, that Knowledge
puffs up, but Charity edifyeth, (1 Cor viii 1.)

FROM the aforesaid beautiful Description, we may learn, that Charity consists
in Candor and Kindness, in Sweetness and Generosity, in Mercy and in
Forbearance, in Forgiveness and Disinterestedness in our Conversation toward
all Men; it inclines the Person possessed of it, to be a common Good. It does
not consist in Sourness, Suspicion and Severity, but in Courtisy, easiness of
access, Gentleness and Humanity; it is hard to be provoked, and easy to
forgive; does not want to establish its own Reputation upon the ruin of
another; is not suspicious, or easily suspicious of Evil in others without
evident Reason, but puts a favorable Interpretation upon even the doubtful
Speeches and Actions of our Brother; to this Effect speak the following great
Divines, Dr. Hammond, Erasmus, Vatabulus, Camero, Grotius, Pareus, Calvin,
Symachus, Hescius, Pool, and others.

BUT is Charity blind?

I Answer, No, not quite, But yet it hopes the best of others, as long as it
can, with any Reason; and when it is constrained by glaring Evidence, to see
Evil in others, its View is attended with Reluctance and Sorrow; and in the
mean Time it makes all the Apology it can for them: Thus we do for ourselves,
and are we not commanded to love others as we do ourselves? Charity is glad
when others are vindicated from false Charges.

BUT though Charity be not quite blind, yet it has not the sharp Sight of the
Lynx, in spying others Faults, while it is blind to its own; but inclines the
possessor of it, to be most inquisitive into his own Conduct, and most severe
against the Faults of it. The Nature of Charity, or Love, as Solomon observes,
is to cover a multitude of Sins of our Brother. ( Pro. x. 12.) To the same
Purpose speaks the inspired Apostle Peter, (1 Epistle iv. 8.) And above all
Things, have fervent Charity among yourselves; see that ye take Care of this in
the first Place, and in the highest Degree: Why? for Charity covers a multitude
of Sins, i. e. it conceals, bears, excuses, and forgives many Offenses and
Injuries of our Brethren, composes and calms Debates, which cause hatred, (1
Cor. xiii. 7. Pro. x. 12.) So Estius, Gerhardus, Symachus, Menochius and Beza
justly interpre^ the Words.

SO that from the whole you may see, my Brethren, that that Charity that is
easily suspicious, severe, moross, envious, puffed up, censorious against
others, rejoicing secretly in hearing of bad Reports of those whom we dislike,
is easily provoked, and hard to forgive, is not the Charity the Apostle speaks
of, No. But the very Contrary. It is real hatred (at least in a great Degree)
against our Brother, blended with Pride and ill nature; and therefore to grow
in this, is to grow backwards; I mean, more unlike the Law of God, which is
fullfil'd by Love; more contrary to the Spirit and Scope of the Gospel of
CHRIST, which also is Love.

WELL but I have a good Intention in those Suspicions, and purpose good by them.

I Answer, It Is very like you have; and this indeed lessens the malignity of
your cruel Suspicion, but it does not take it away quite; the blessed God does
not need your Wickedness to promote his Cause and Kingdom; you must not do Evil
that good may come. Your unreasonable Suspicions and evil Surmisings of your
Brother, are Instances of hatred against him: And do you think that an
infinitely wise God can command Contradictions, namely, that you should love
your Brother and hate him at the same Time. To suspect him without evident
Cause, is unreasonable and cruel, and every cruelty and unkindness is a Degree
of hatred; it is such Treatment as you would not like to be shown to
yourselves. Is not that which is without Reason, unreasonable, and that
Treatment which you would not have shown to yourselves, unjust for you to
express to others? And do you think that a good and holy God can approve of
such a Complication of Perverseness? And is it reasonable to suppose, that he
will make it a mean to promote his Kingdom, which is Righteousness and Peace?
Surely No! Such Methods serve only to promote Pride, Prejudice, Division,
Confusion, and every evil Work!

2. ANOTHER hindrance of Peace that ought to be with equal Care avoided, is
evil Speaking. This is contrary to the positive Command of God, which obliges
us, to speak Evil of no Man, (Tit. iii. 2.) It is represented as the Character
of the wicked, that they whet their Tongues like a Sword, and bend their bows
to shoot their Arrows, even bitter Words, (Psalm. lxiv. 3.) But the Words of the
Pure, are pleasant Words, (Pro. xv. 26.) And the Law of Kindness is in their
Lips, (Pro. xxxi. 26.) Our Lord informs us, ( Mat. v. 22.) That whosoever shall
say to his Brother Raca, i. e. vain Man, shall be in danger of the Council, but
whosoever shall say thou Fool, shall be in Danger of Hellfire. There is an
allusion, in the aforesaid Scripture to the Courts of Judicature among the
Jews, which were three: 1st. Of the Triumvirs, or of the three Men, who took
Cognizance of small Money Cases, and consequently inflicted smaller
Punishments: 2d. Of 23 Men, who managed Capital Causes, and inflicted heavier
Punishments: 3d. The great Sanhedrim consisting of 71 or 72 which determined
the most weighty Matters, and inflicted four kinds of Punishment, upon
Transgressors, viz. the Halter, the Sword, the Stone and Fire, so Scultetus,
Beza, Symachus.

Our Lord designing to represent, the different Degrees of Punishment, in the
future World, and that in Proportion to the different Degrees of Offenses in
this, uses the aforesaid Similitude, of different Penalties, inflicted by the
Jewish Courts; says Grotius.

The dear Redeemer, does not here oppose himself to the Law of Moses, which, as
Erasmus truly observes, he always revered, No! but only explains its true
meaning, and shows its Spiritual extent, observing that it reaches the Mind,
and fixes reasonable Boundaries to its Sentiments, and Passions, which are the
proper Sources of Speech and Action.

Our Lord only opposed the corrupt and narrow Glosses of the Scribes upon the
Moral Law, which confined its Obligation, only to overt Acts, (...) Violence
and Murder: But our Savior on the contrary observes, that it also forbids
angry Dispositions, and angry Speeches, both more and less reproachful, which
proceeds therefrom, and which naturally tend to, and often issue in Violence
and Blood.

He is truly a Murderer, who has a Murdering Mind, which he certainly has who
is angry with, and reproaches his Brother without a Cause; reproach is no
farther from Wrath, then beating from reproach, and Murder from beating: There
is a dreadful train and connection, between the different Degrees of this
Henious and Perilous Iniquity. Anger that Transgresses, the bounds of Reason
and Decency, has no Measure, we know not where it will terminate; our Lord here
informs us, that not only greater but smaller Degrees of rash anger, either
confined to the Heart or expressed in Speech, more or less reviling, are realy
Sinful, and do expose to eternal Punishment, proportioned in weight, to the
Degree thereof.

To which Doctor Lightfoot, adds temporal Punishments in some Cases by the
Magistrate, as follows:

By the Judgment* (says he) is meant, the Judgment of God, by the Council,
and Hellfire, not only the Judgment and Vengeance of God, but the Judgments
and Punishments, that are inflicted in the Courts of Men, that are Magistrates
who bear not the Sword in vain, so that the Sense is this, I say unto you, that
if a Man ^oth but in his Heart nourish wrath and anger against another, without
a just Cause, and lets it grow up into Malice, and thoughts and desires of
private Revenge, though he be not by it Obnoxious to Courts of Justice, who can
only determine upon overt Acts, yet he is accountable to God, and liable to his
Judgment, but if Men suffer their Passions to break out, into reviling Terms,
such as Raca, signifying a vain Person, or thou Fool, speaking this from anger
or malice, they are not only liable to the eternal Vengeance of God, but ought
to be punished by the civil Magistrate; every civil Government is obliged to
punish such Offenses, as being the beginning of Murder, previous to it, and
indications of Murderous Hearts, Hearts full of that which in the Eyes of God
is Murder: 1 John iii. 15. Whosoever hates his Brother, is a Murderer, and ye
know that no Murderer has eternal Life abiding in him.




NOW there are various kinds of evil Speaking, which are pernicious to the
Peace of Society, the chief of which are these two, viz. Slander and rash
judging.

THE first of these, viz. Slander, is manifold and exceeding malignant, (Prove.
x. 18.) He that hides hatred with lying Lips, and he thut utters Slander, is
a Fool. All Malice is folly and wickedness; it is so when concealed by Flattery
and Dissimulation: Lying Lips are bad enough of themselves, but have a peculiar
Perverseness in them when made a cloak of Maliciousness; and cannot be hid from
God, who is Omniscient, to him the Darkness is as the Light, and the Midnight
as the Morning.

NOR is it any better when vented in spiteful and mischeivous Language, he that
utters Slander is a Fool, for God will sooner or later bring forth that
Righteousness as the Light, which is hereby clouded and eclipsed, and will find
an expedient to roll the unjust Reproach away.

NOW the general Nature of the Sin of Slander, consists in a false Accusation
of our Neighbor, which is forbidden by the ninth Command, and is a great
Wickedness, considered in every shape and form

IF it is publicly and upon Oath before civil Courts of Judicature, it is
called, bearing false Witness against our Neighbor, or Perjury, which is
forbidden by the ninth Command, and is an Evil of horible malignity! When we
call God to Witness what we know to be false, it is one of the basest
Blasphemies, the rudest Insults that can be offered to the Deity, and one of
the greatest Injuries to Men that can be committed. He that invokes the
Almighty to attest a Lie, either imagines that he knows not the Truth, and so
imputes Ignorance to him; or that he is not displeased with it, and so denies
his Purity, or that he is not able to avenge it, and so contemns his Power and
Almightiness. Now is there much difference between denying these Perfections of
Jehovah, without which he cannot exist, and the Atheistical denial of his Being
altogether? No surely.

AND as to Men, Perjury is not only a wrong to particular Persons, but it is
Treason against human Society in general; it saps the very Foundations of
public Peace and Justice, and the private Security of every Man's Property,
Honor, Life, and Fortune; yea and cruelly turns the equitable Laws, which were
designed for the Defense of the Inocent, and Punishment of the Guilty, into an
Engine of Ruin to the former, and Promotion to the latter! What can be more
horrible than this? Justly therefore does Solomon observe, that a false Witness
against his Neighbor, is a Maul, and a Sword, and a sharp Arrow. (Prove. xxv.
18) This Iniquity entails a Curse upon the Person guilty of it, and his
Posterity, (Zec. v. 4.) I will bring the Curse forth, says the Lord of Hosts,
and it shall enter into the House of the Thief, and of him that swears
falsely by my Name, and it shall remain in the midst of his House, and consume
it, with the Timber thereof, and the Stones thereof.

BUT when Slander is out of Court, and before a Persons Face, and accompanied
with harsh Words, it is termed railing, (Jude 9.) We are told, that when
Michael the Archangel, contended with the Devil about the Body of Moses, he did
not bring against him a railing Accusation, he knew he was no match for Satan
at that, which is the Business of his proper Province; it is his constant
Practice to accuse the Brethren, (Rev. xii. 10.) the good Angel only mildly
said, the Lord Rebuke thee. And as Railers and false Accusers are faithful
followers of their Father the Devil, who was a liar and a murderer from the
Beginning, and abode not in the Truth; so the Apostle Peter assures us, that
they are as natural Brute Beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, that they
speak Evil of the Things they understand not, and shall utterly perish in their
own Corruption, (2 Pet. ii. 10 -- 12.)

MOREOVER, Flattery in Peoples Presence, or unjust Commendation, the Evil
contrary to the former, ought with great Care to be avoided. It is a mean
sordid Iniquity, as contrary to good Manners as it is to Religion, though it
pleases ignorant proud Pedants, it puts modest and virtuous Persons to the
blush, in Company, and is a kind of Persecution. The Psalmist represents it to
be the Character of the wicked, (Psalm. v. 9.) There is no faithfulness in their
Mouth, their Throat is an open Sepulcher; how so, why? they Flatter with their
Tongue; and elsewhere he assures us, that God will cut off all flattering Lips,
(Psalm. xii. 3.) Does not the wise Man justly advise us, not to meddle with him
that flattereth with his Lips, (Pro xx. 19.) Because a Flatterer, as he
elsewhere observes, spreads a Net for our Feet, as artfully as disingenously
lays a Trap for us, by soothing our Vanity, working on our weak Side, and so
effects our ruin. (Pro. xxix. 5. and xxvi. 28.) But

SLANDR behind ones back is called in Scripture whispering, backbiting,
supplanting, tatling, all which are cowardly, sneaking and pernicious
Iniquities; Prove. xviii. 8. The Words of a Talebearer as Wounds go into the
inermost Parts of the Belly. (Prove. xxvi. 20.) Where there is no Wood the Fire
goes out, so where there is no Talebearer, the Strife cease (Pro. xvi. 28.)
A froward Man sows Strife, and a whisperer separateth chief Friends. But on
the contrary we are told, ( Ps. xv. 3.) That the good Man Backbiteth not with
his Tongue, nor takes up Reproach against his Neighbor: He does not readily
receive or greedily believe, bad Stories of them: No! The charitable and
generous Temper of his Soul, disposes him to the Contrary. The Apostle ranks
backbiters and haters of God in the same Class, and declares that they are
worthy of Death, ( Romans i. 30 -- 32.)

THE Prophet Jeremiah complains with keen and poignant Language, of the
Supplanters, the artful, invidious, underminers of others Characters in his
Time, (Jer. ix. 4.) Take heed every Man of his Neighbor, and trust ye not in
any Brother, for every Brother will utterly supplant, and every Neighbor will
walk with Slanderers. Supplanters are the most dangerous and successful
Enemies, by their sly, smooth, soft, but slanderous Insinuations; they
maliciously stab their Neighbors Reputation, and give, under a Cloak of
Friendship, the deepest Wounds; and hereby these Enemies of Society, as
ungenerously as unjustly lay an Embargo upon others Usefulness, and cramp the
Sinews of their Endeavors to do good to Mankind.

THE Supplanter, or Detractor, looks with an envious Eye upon the just respect
that is paid to another Endowments and Actions, as if it was so much taken
from his own Reputation; and therefore he endeavors by all the low Arts of
malevolent Subtilty, and sly, selfish Insinuation, to lessen the Value of what
another says or does; he either has not the Capacity to reach the height of
others Seize, or likes not to be at the Pains to this Purpose, and
therefore like the Tyrant Procrustes, he cruelly cuts of their Legs, to a
length with his own; he equally hates either to comply with the Dictates of
Justice, in rendering Honor to whom Honor is due, or with the Sentiments of
Charity, in believing every Thing that is good of his Neighbor. O! let such
consider what God speaks to them by the Prophet, (Isa. v. 22 -- 24.) Woe unto
them that justify the wicked for Reward: and take away the Righteousness of the
Righteous from him; therefore as the Fire devoureth the Stuble, and the Flame
consumes the Chaff, so their Root shall be as Rotteness; and their Blossom
shall go up as Dust. And notwithstanding of all their dispicable invidious Arts
and Efforts, the gracious God shall bring forth the Righteousness of those that
fear him, as the Light, and their Judgment as the Noonday.

BUSY-BODIES and Tattlers, are also very prejudicial to the Peace of Society.
Hear how awfully the Apostle speaks of them, (1 Timothy v. 12, 13.) having
Damnation, because they have cast of their first Faith, and withal they learn
to be idle, wandering about from House to House, and not only idle but Tattlers
also, and Busy-Bodies, (pragmatical medlers with Business that does not belong
to them) speaking Evil of the Things they ought not. The Apostle reproves the
following sorts of Persons, in the verse referred to viz:

IDLE People, (argol, ex a particula privativa, et ergon opus,) without Work,
Persons that either have no Business of their own to do, or neglect to do it.

WANDERERS about from House to House, (perierchomi^^i ta^ ^lcias,) the Apostle,
( Tit. ii. 5.) among the Duties of Women, mentions this among the rest, that
they should stay at Home, or be keepers at Home; diverse of the ancients, made
a Tortoise that never goes out of its Shell, the Emblem of a good Woman; to
this purpose Euripedes observes, that it becomes a Virtuous Woman to stay at
Home, but that those who are of no consequence, may Gad about; Domi manner
opor^^s feminam bonam, f^ris que mullius est pretii.

TATLERS, (ph^laroi,) those that Babble bad Things, against others, says Paser.

BUSY-BODIES, (p^riergoi ex peri circum, et ergon opus.) to Work all round
about.

THE Apostle uses an Epanorthosis, a beautiful gradation in the Words, it is as
if he had said, they are it is true idle, but this would be more tolerable, if
it was alone, for its better to be idle then to be ill employed; but they are
Tatlers also, as well as Idle; speaking impertinently, not only of their own
but others, concerns that don't belong to them.

BUT how do these Things agree, to be Idle and in the mean Time Busy.

I Answer, very well, for such Persons as neglect their own Business, are the
most forward to intrude into others Affairs.

THIS same evil is spoken of, (2 These. iii. 11, 12.) For we hear, that there
are some, that walk among you Disorderly, (outactoos unquietly) Working not at
all; but are Busy-Bodies; there is an elegant paranomasia, in the original;
meden ergazominous, alla periergazominous; doing nothing, and yet doing
everything; i. e. doing nothing of their own proper Business, but meddling with
every other Bodies Business; where they have no call, and often no Capacity;
they do no Work of their own, and therefore have leisure, to wander about from
House to House, and curiously enquire into, and severely censure other Folks.
Of these Horace speaks, Percunctatorem fugito, nam garrulus idem est, i. e.
shun a curious enquirer, for he is a Chatterer. Now them that are such, says
the Apostle, we command and exhort by our Lord JESUS CHRIST, that with
Quietness, they work and eat their own Bread.


The same Apostle Cautions the Corinthians against those Evils, (2 Cor. xii.
20.) I fear least when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, least
there be among you Debates; Envying, Strifes, Swellings, Tumults. The Apostle
in this Verse makes mention of many awful Disorders (abounding among the
Corinthians) with a proper Sense of the Evil of them; which every good Man
should be affected with, and more especially the Watchmen upon the Walls of
Jerusalem, the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ; whose Business it is to weep
in secret Places for Peoples Pride, as well as between the Porch and the Alter;
and to cry to God for them, that Jehovah would spare them and not give up his
Heritage to reproach: And also to reprove them faithfully, whether they will
hear or whether they will forbear.

How can they be otherwise than grieved for such Disorders as the Apostle
mentions in the Verse aforesaid, considering the Dishonor that is thereby Cast
upon the Name and Ways of God, the Injury that is done to the Souls of Men, and
to the Peace and Welfare of Society.

The Particulars which he speaks of are these following.

DEBATES (ereis) Battles of Words, engaged in only for the sake of Victory; so
Erasmus.

ENVYING, (zeloi) Emulation or heats of Passion, proceeding from envying of
others natural or acquired Endowments or Possessions; to this purpose Beza,
Erasmus.

WRATHS, (thum^i) the ragings or ferments of burning Anger, (see Acts xix 28.
Gal. v. 20. Ephesians. iv. 31. Col. iii. 8.) thus Grotius and Menochius.

STRIFES, (eritheai) chidings, contentions, wranglings, both in Disposition,
Speech and Action; Erasmus, Cajetan, and Grotius. (See Romans ii. 8. Philip. i.
16. Jam. iii. 14 -- 16.)

BACKBITINGS, or Detractions, (catalalei) derived (from cata contra et laleo
loquor) from Words that signify to speak against one; and hence it is called in
general evil speaking. (1 Pet. ii. 1. Romans i. 3.) Passor.

WHISPERINGS, (psithurismoi) who secretly bite their Neighbors, and suggest
evil Suspicions, that they may separate Friends. It signifies to utter Slander
against another secretly, into the Ear (Psa. xli. 7.) Erasmus, Menocius,
Symachus, Tolletus, Pareus, Grotius. Of this Ovid speaks Linguaque resert
audita Susurro, Slanderers, Revilers, and Backbiters, by evil Speeches hurt
another fame, more openly, but the Whisperer more slighly, softly, and
secretly, and sometimes even under the Umbrage of Friendship, this is a new way
of calumniating, say Suetonius and Polibyus, to accuse, in Apologies, and
condemn in Praise, excusando opprobrare, et Laudantem Ledere.

SWELLINGS, (phusios^is) it signifies Persons being puffed up with Pride, as a
Blad^er with Wind, or a Dropsical Man with Water, on account of real or
supposed Graces, Wisdom or Wealth, etc. Of such the Apostle speaks (1 Cor. iv.
18, 19. and v. 2. and viii. 1. and xiii. 4.) in all which Places the same
original Word is used, that signifies a proud Carriage, struting and vaunting,
and the swelling of the Mind. Montanus, Erasmus, Symachus, Grotius, Menochius,
and Passor.

TUMULTS (acatastasia) confusions, disorders, uproars, whereby others quiet is
disturbed; Beza, Pasor, Piscator; or Seditions, which often spring from Schisms
and Confusion, as Grotius and Clement (in his Epistle to the Corinthians)
informs us. See Luke xxi, 9. When ye shall hear of Wars and Commotions, which
is the same Word in the Original.

NOW as the Apostle Paul signifies, that he feared when he came to Corinth he
should not find them such as he would; that is thoroughly reformed from the
aforesaid aw^^ and pernicious Disorders? so he feared that he should be found
to them, such as they would not, i. e. he feared that he should be obliged in
Duty to his Master, and faithfulness to them, contrary to his own Inclination
(which would choose rather the soft and tender strains of Love and Endearment,
than the harsh Language of Reproof) to use Severity with them, as a stern
displeased Father, to cry aloud and not to spare, to lift up his Voice like a
Trumpet, and show God's professing People their Transgressions, and the House
of Jacob their Sins. ( Isa. lviii. 1.) which probably would not be very
pleasing to some of them, though necessity and profitable; so Piscatur, Beza,
Paguine. The Apostle speaks much in the same Language, (1 Cor. iv. 18, 21.) Now
are ye puffed up what will ye, shall I come unto you with a R^d, or in Love,
and in the Spirit of Meekness. His Mind was re^^^^ant to severity and sharp
reproof; he would have been exceeding glad there had been no Occasion for it,
but it was rendered necessary by their Disorders, as a corosive Remedy for
their Cure, and that of divine Appointment, ( Tit. i. 10, 13.) for there are
many unruly and vain ta^e^s and deceivers, wherefore Rebuke them sharply that
they may be found in the Faith. The Word unruly (anupo^acto^) signifies,
refractory, intractable, strangers to a yielding Temper, obstinate untaimed,
and a verse to the Discipline of the Church of Christ. The Word (...)
(aporomoos) signifies, cuttingly, pointedly; it comes from the (...) t^mno
^^co, to cut.




OF all Incendaries to Mischief, Supplanters, Tattlers, Busy-Bodies and
Backbiters are the worst; they are the Bane of Company, the Pests of Society,
the lumber and burden of the Creation, under which it groans and travails even
until now; some of the most contemptible, but pestilent Animals, whose Business
it is to accuse the Brethren, to sow the Seeds of ^ontention, and inflame
Debate, with ignoble Pleasure and unwearied Industry; and like the Salamander
to dwell with Delight in the Flames they have kindled. The slanderous
Invectives of such, should be rejected with abhorrence, as the North Wind
drives away Rain, so does an angry Countenance a backbiting Tongue. Almighty
God expressly prohibits this Practice, (Lev. xix. 16.) Thou shall not go up and
down as a talebearer among my People. Upon which Mr. Henry glosseth thus, It Is
as ill an Office as a Man can put himself into To be a publisher of others Men's
faults, divulging what was secret, aggravating Crimes, and making the worst of
every Thing that was amiss, with design to blast and ruin Men's Reputation, and
to sow discord among Neighbors. The Word used for a Talebearer, signifies a
Pedlar, or petty Chapman, the Interlopers of Trade, for Tale-bearers pick up
ill natured Stories, at one House, and utter them at another, and commonly
barter Slanders by way of exchange. This evil is condemned in Pro. xi. 13. A
talebearer reveals secrets, but he that is of a faithful Spirit concealeth
the Matter. (Pro. xx. 19.) He that goes about as a talebearer, reveals
Secrets, therefore medale not with him that flattereth with his Lips.
Slanderers, of every Kind, are Madmen who cast about Firebrands Arrows, and
Death, and yet say they are in Sport.

The Psalmist compares Doeg's malicious Tongue to a sharp Razor. And certainly
slanderers Tongues are like Razors, that not only wound Men's Characters, but
even sometimes cut their Throats. It is an Evil that disparages human Nature,
and tends to disband civil Society altogether. It is directly contrary to the
Apostles Exhortation, (Ephesians. iv. 31, 32.) Let all bitterness, and wrath, and
evil speaking be put away from you, with all Malice, and be ye kind one to
another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ 's sake
has forgiven you. The Psalmist gives this Character of a wicked Man, (Psalm. l.
19, 20.) Thou give thy Mouth to Evil, and thy Tongue frames Deceit. Thou
fittest and speak against thy Brother, thou slanderest thy own Mothers Son.
The Name Diabolos, Devil, signifies a Slanderer: And indeed the Slanderer has
not only the Devils Name, but his Nature and Practice; for the principal
ingredient in the Nature of the Devil is Malice; and Satan, in pursuance
thereof, is the accuser of the Brethren. Both these the Slanderer is no
stranger to, and therefore it is evident, he does not bear Satan's Name in vain.

WHATEVER we may pretend, if we bridle not our Tongue, that unruly Member, that
World of Iniquity, our Religion is in vain. And whatever sordid Delight any one
may take in doing mischief to others, yet let him remember, that in due Time it
will recoil upon himself. A Fools Mouth, says Solomon, is his Destruction, his
Lips are the Snare of his Soul. The Lip of Truth shall be established forever;
but a lying Lip is but for a Moment. He that walks uprightly, walks surely;
but he that perverteth his Ways shall be known. And when the Slanderer is
known, he is contemned as a public Enemy to Society, because others know not
how soon they may be injured by him. All noble generous Minds detest this
Practice, and cannot entertain it with Complacence. A righteous Man hates
lying, says Solomon. (Pro. xiii. 5.) It is only ill natured People that
encourages such, (Pro. xvii. 4.) a wicked doer gives heed to false Lips; and
a liar gives heed to a naughty Tongue.

BUT because LYING is included in Slander, and of dreadful Tendency to Society,
I shall speak a little of its Nature and Malignity.

AUGUSTINE gives this Description of its Nature, viz. That it is a voluntary
speaking of an untruth, with design to deceive.

IT is a speaking of an untruth, yea what we know to be such; for to lie is to
go against the Mind. Mentire, est contra mentem ire.


FARTHER, it is uttered with an Intention to deceive the Person to whom it is
spoken; and therefore Parables are no lies, though they be not literally true,
because not uttered with a design to deceive, and their Scope is true; thus our
Lord is called, parabolically a Door, a Rock, a Fountain. Nor are Hyperboles
lies, for the same Reason, tho they be not literally and strictly true; hence
the Spies asserted, in their return from Canaan, that the Walls were up to
Heaven; their meaning was, that the Walls were very high. In like manner it is
said, that if all our Lord had done was written, the World itself would not
contain the Books; this was not expressed with a Design to deceive, but to
convince of Error; the meaning was no more than that many Things CHRIST did
were not Recorded.

NOR are Ironies lies, though they be not literally true, (1 King xviii. 27.) He
mocked them and said, cry aloud for he is a God. This was not uttered with a
design to deceive, but to convince of Error, and reprove upon the Account of it.

I may add, that a Persons acting contrary to what he before said, is not
lying, if the Circumstances of a Thing be altered, (Genesis xix. 2.) The Angels
told Lot that they would not come into his House, but abide in the Street all
Night; yet upon his importunity they went in with him: And so Peter with some
Vehemence refused that CHRIST should wash his Feet, but when he was instructed
in the Significancy of this Condescension of our SAVIOR, he entreated him to
do it. But in the mean Time this Caution must be observed, that the Actions be
not such as we are bound to by divine Precept, or such as we have bound
ourselves to, by some Vow to God, or such that our neglect of them will be
prejudicial to others; for if we have promised to another what is beneficial to
him, however we have changed our Opinion, we must not change our Purpose,
unless he release us, or has failed in the Condition of the Promise.

DIVINES do generally distinguish Lies into three Kinds, viz. Jocose, Officious
and Malicious,

JOCOSE Lies are told to divert the Company; but it is too expensive a Method
to divert others by, for such as lie in Jest must expect to go to Hell in
Earnest, except they repent; besides it prepares Persons for that which is of a
more malignant Kind.

OFFICIOUS Lies are told with design to do some kind Office to others; but we
must not do Evil that Good may come. Bishop Saunderson justly observes upon
this Head, That we know not a greater Good than the Glory of God; that we know
not a lesser Sin, if any Sin may be called little, than a Jocose lie, yet may
not this be done for that, will thou speak wickedly for God, or talk
deceitfully for him, says Zophar to Job, and surely if we may not speak
deceitfully for God, much less for Man. But

MALICIOUS Lies are when Persons endeavor to fix false Charges designedly,
upon the Inocent for their Hurt.

NOW lying of every Kind, especially of the last, is a Violation of God's
Precept, which enjoins us, not to lie one to another, (Col. iii. 9.) and that
we should put away lying and speaking guile, (Ephesians. iv. 25.)

LYING is also odious to the God of Truth: A lying Tongue is one of the seven
Things that are an abomination to him. (Pro vi.)

LYING tends to the Destruction of human Society, and contradicts the Use and
End of Speech, which is to promote Communion and Commerce, and therefore it is
implicitly agreed to by all Men to speak Truth to one another. But if lying be
indulged, how can Society be promoted, when mutual Confidence and Love are
broken? Seeing that Truth is a Debt we owe to all that we converse with, lying
must needs be unjust and lead to every Injury, Violence, and Rapine. These
Evils naturally follow Men's making no Conscience of performing their Promises
and Contracts.

LYING is base and ignoble; it justly brings a blot upon the Character of him
who is guilty of i^, when it is found out, as it generally is at the long r^n,
because of their Inconsistencies: It shows a base, cowardly Disposition not to
dare to tell the Truth. This Evil is not only hated by God, but by good Men. I
hate and abhor lying, says the Psalmist, he that tells Lies shall not tarry in
my House, (Psalm. ci. 7.)

LYING is an Imitation of the Devil, who when he speaks a Lie, speaks of
his own, i. e. agreeable to his natural Inclination and Genius, for he is a
liar and the Father of it, he was a Murderer from the Beginning, and abode not
in the Truth. (Joh. viii. 44) Observe Malice is joined with lying, in the
Character of Satan; he is a Murderer as well as a Liar, to show that malicious
lying is the first born of the Devil, the Beginning of his Strength, for by
Lies he prevailed over Mankind at first, and therefore this is his darling Sin.
When Persons lie, they but repeat what Satan dictates; hence is that saying of
Peter's, (Act v. 3.) Why has Satan filled thine Heart to lie unto the Holy
Ghost?

LYING is not only very Criminal but very Dangerous, it cracks the Credit of
the Guilty Person, when found out; those that are accustomed to lie, will not
be believed when they speak the Truth; and its generally found out pretty soon;
its generally and justly esteemed to be one of the basest evils, because it
bewrays a cowardly fear of Man, and most daring Contempt of GOD! whoever lies
does it out of some sordid fear, least some Inconvenience should come upon them
if they told the Truth: And this Montaign in his Essays, gives as the Reason
why the Charge of lying is the most reproachful Ignominy, which can be cast
upon any, and therefore excites Men to the most warm resentments: Indeed lying
unfits Persons for common Converse, and for all Business. Besides,

LYING, exposes to the Vengeance of GOD forever, (Rev. xxi. ult.) Without are
Dogs and Sorcerers, and every one who loves, and makes a lie. (Rev. xxi 8.)
And all liars shall have their Part in the Lake, which burns with Fire and
Brimstone. Again,

LYING is an awful Evidence of a bad State: A course of lying proves Persons to
be the genuine Children of the Devil, who is the Father of Lies. On the
contrary Truth in Speech, is the Character of GOD'S People, (Is. lxiii. 8.)
Surely they are my People, Children that will not lie. Unless we make
Conscience of avoiding all those Kinds of evil Speaking, that I have mentioned,
we cannot consistently or successfully, Endeavor after Peace. But the

2d. KIND of evil-speaking beforementioned, is RASH JUDOING. To prevent
Mistakes, I think it necessary to be distinct and particular here, and to
observe, that that which I oppose as rash Judging, consists in these
Particulars following, viz.

1. WHEN we take upon us, to judge and condemn Men's secret Designs, in acting
not made evident. And

2. WHEN we judge our Brother's different Opinion from ours in Circumstantials,
and different or contrary Conduct to ours, grounded thereupon, to be a
sufficient Foundation, for concluding the State of his Soul to be bad. And

3. WHEN we make our Judgment of Men's State toward GOD, founded upon their
spiritual Experience, separate from Principles and Practice, the Ground of our
public Conduct toward them.

THE first of these is a manifest assuming of the divine Prerogative of
searching the Heart; and has a direct Tendency to overthrow all Goodness of
human Action entirely; for the very best of them, may by this Claim of Power,
be unjustly ascribed to a mean a bad Cause; thus CHRIST was treated by the
Pharisees, who gave bad Names to all his virtuous Actions, and ascribed his
miraculous Works to the Devil, his easiness of Access, and kind Treatment of
the looser Sort of Mankind, as a Physician, in order to their Cure, they termed
a criminal familiarity with them, as a Companion: His innocent Openness and
freedom of Behavio^ as to Meats and Drinks, they ascribed to an inordinate
Appetite: His miraculous Works which they could not deny, they ascribed to a
bad Cause, the Power of Beelzebub. Behold a gluttonous Person^ a Wine-bibber;
and a Friend of Publicans and Sinners.

PAUL's faithful Endeavor to do extensive Good by preaching, was ascribed to a
seditious Design. And also Job's exemplary and unblemished Integrity, was
assigned by Satan to a (sinfully) selfish Cause, Does Job fear GOD for naught?

AS this Method of Proceeding, implies in it, a sacreligious Invasion of the
Rights of Heaven, and a criminal Imitation of the worst of Men, yea, of the
Devil himself, so it is directly contrary to Charity, which obliges and
inclines us to hope the best, until there be Evidence of the contrary; and
therefore in one Word, it tends utterly to eradicate all mutual Confidence from
among Men, all Peace and Quiet, all Union, Order, and Harmony, from Church and
State; and to turn every Thing into the utmost Confusion.

THE second Instance of rash Judging, is directly contrary to the entire Series
of the Apostle's Reasonings, in the 14th Chapter to the Romans, for he declares
that Persons, upon both Sides of the circumstantial Controversy then
subsisting, were sincere and accepted of GOD; and informs us, that the
condemning of Persons upon the Account of such smaller Matters, was in effect
to condemn the Law itself, as an insufficient Rule of Action, without our after
Additions thereto, and an Encroachment upon our Christian Liberty; He that
judges his Brother, speaks Evil of the Law, and judges the Law; because the
Law gives no such Power, ( Jam. iv. 11.) but assigns all Judgment of secret
Things to GOD only (1 Cor. iv. 3, 4, 5.) But with me it is a very small Thing,
that I should be judged of you, or of Man's Judgment, but he that judges me is
the Lord, therefore judge nothing before the Time, until the Lord come, who
will bring to Light the hidden Things of Darkness, and will make manifest the
Councils of the Heart, and then shall every Man, every good Man, have Praise of
GOD.

SOME there were in those early Times, who were of Apollos and Cephas's Party
or Faction, that slighted Paul, judged him with rashness, censured him with
indecency, and preferred Apollo's and Cephas before him: Those that blessed Man
informs, that he esteemed very lightly of their Censure or Judgment, so far as
it concerned him (Emoi de eis elachiston estin ina up humoon anacritho) The
Word Elachiston (para to elo to ephairo ab auferendo) signifies a very
inconsiderable Thing, I esteem it as the very least of Things, whether you
judge me better or worse than others, sincere or unsincere; I neither value nor
fear the Judgment of Men; the Judgment of my value does not belong to you, nor
to any of the Children of Men, nor to my self; yea, I judge not my own self; I
pronounce no Sentence for my self, I leave my self to the Judgment of GOD: I
may be mistaken in my Judgment concerning my self, and therefore I will affirm
nothing as to myself, and yet I am better known to myself than to you; I will
not boast of myself, nor be confident of my own fallible Judgment of myself;
nor offended with your Censures!

THOUGH I am not conscious of any willful Unfaithfulness, in the Course of my
Ministry, yet I cannot from thence certainly conclude, that I am free from
Blame, because I do not perfectly know my self; perhaps the Almighty sees
Blemishes in me, that I see not myself, perhaps I have through Ignorance, omitted
something, that was right and necessary, and committed something that was wrong
and hurtful, or forgotten some things wherein I did offend; we often fall into
Sins we know not, says Chrysostom, sepe incidmus, in peccata que neshimus; in
many Things we offend all.

THEREFORE judge nothing before the Time, until the Lord come, i. e. seeing
that secret Things belong to God, Deuteronomy. xxiii. 23. leave the Judgment of them
to him, and do not judge any secret Thing, till CHRIST comes in the Clouds to
judge the World: He only can, and he certainly will, in the Day of his
Appearance, bring to light the hidden Things of Darkness, and make manifest the
Councils of the Hearts, remove all disguises, and make certainly and fully
known, all the Thoughts and Designs of Men. Here you may observe a positive
COMMAND of GOD, against JUDGING of SECRET THINGS. To the aforesaid Purpose upon
the Place, speak the following Divines, Mr. Pool, in his Annotat. Grotius,
Castallio, Menochius, Tirinus, Erasmus, Estius, Simachus, Justinian, Scultetus,
Calvin, Piscator, Beza, Cameron.

AND in 1 Cor. x. 22. the Apostle speaks thus, For why is my Liberty judged of
another Man's Conscience? i. e. says Pool, Why should my Practice in a Thing
wherein I have liberty, be censured or condemned by the Conscience of another,
he being persuaded that what I do, and judge that I have liberty to do, and may
do lawfully, is done by me sinfully; and I by him accounted a Transgressor for
it. As to the

3d. INSTANCE of rash Judging, I desire to know, where Almighty GOD has given
any of the Children of Men, Authority to inspect into the spiritual Experiences
of others, so as to make our Judgment of them, abstract from their Doctrines
and Life, the Ground of our Opinion concerning the State of their Souls, and of
our public Conduct toward them? If any suppose that there is a divine Warrant
for such Conduct, they would do well to discover it, for others Instruction;
for my part I must freely confess my Ignorance of the Matter, I know of no
Places of Scripture, that give such a Power to any of the Sons of Men, and much
less to every Man.

PERHAPS some gracious and well meaning Persons, of the present Day, do not
thoroughly understand, or have not sufficiently considered the evil Nature and
awful Consequences of rash judging; it appears to me to be an Evil pregnant
with Pride, Malice and Mischief, though perhaps not perceived or intended: An
Evil which under a Cloak of misguided ill-temper'd Zeal for GOD, Christian
Liberty, and superior Seize in Knowledge and Religion; rebelliously
opposes the clearest Dictates of Reason and Humanity, the plainest Laws of
revealed Religion; an Evil that under a Pretext of Kindness and Piety, cruelly
rends our Neighbor's Character, saps the Foundations of the Church's Peace,
and turns it is Union, Order and Harmony into the wildest Confusion, of
ungoverned Anarchy, Schism, Prejudice and Hate!

AN Evil that sometimes rages the more under corrosive Remedies, proper and
necessary for it is Cure, and expresses its unreasonable Resentment, in the very
Language of impiety; our Tongues are our own and who is Lord over us, not
considering that when Man's Tongue is abused to uncharitable and ignoble
Purposes, his Glory is turned into Shame, and that those shall have Judgment
without Mercy, who show no Mercy.

AN Evil that scorns Control, either by human or divine Authority, and spurns
at Restraint, either from GOD or Man! which in Opposition hereto, is wont to
express its haughty Sentiments, in the following Strains of Rebellion and
Faction, Let us break their Bands asunder and cast their Cords from us.

BUT if any after all that has been said, are still inclined to execute the
Office of spiritual Judges, let me ^eg of such, to answer in their own Minds,
these two Questions, viz. Pray, Sirs, how are you qualified for your Office?
And how do you discharge it?

YOU know that the Office of a temporal JUDGE, is a very important and
difficult Business, to manage well, and yet much depends upon their good
Management; wherefore it is necessary, that they be Men of superior acumen or
Genius, and Men of distinguished Eminence, in acquired Endowments: This being
the Dictate of Reason, and common Sentiment of all Nations, they endeavor to
make Provision accordingly.

AND likewise it is acknowledged by all Mankind, that Judges should be no
Accusers, in respect of the Affairs, that they judge of, for if they are either
ignorant or biased, just Judgment cannot reasonably be expected from them.

BESIDES it is highly necessary, to have a Commission for this grave and
important Function from a proper Authority, otherwise what we do in it is
assuming and unjust.

NOW my Friends, pray examine, whether you are qualified as I have now
represented, to take the BENCH?

IN the mean Time let this be premised, as a self-evident Maxim, that there is
vastly more Difficulty attending our judging aright of some spiritual Cases,
than any temporal; because of the variety of the Operations of a Sovereign GOD,
upon the Souls of Men; the plausible Advances that some make toward Religion,
who have not a right Principle of Action, and the melancholy Decays of some,
that have it; and especially, because the Soul is a Province hid from human
Observance, so that there is vastly more Difficulty in being a spiritual Judge,
than in being a Lord Chancellor of England. The Words of CHRIST to Nicodemus,
concerning the Nature of Regeneration, John. iii. 8. deserve to be thought of
under this Head, The Wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the Sound
thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes, so is every
one that is born of the Spirit. Though the Spirit, as Mr. Henery observes, works
powerfully in Regeneration, you hear the Sound thereof, though its Causes are
hidden, its Effects are manifest; yet he works arbitrarily, and as a free
Agent; the Wind blows where it lists for us, and does not attend our Order,
nor is subject to our Command: The Spirit dispenses his Influences where, and
when, ^n whom and in what Measure he pleases; and as he works arbitrarily, so
mysteriously, and in secret hidden ways; the Manner and Method of the Spirit's
Workings is a Mystery!

MR. Pool observes in his Annotations, That the Original of the Winds Motion,
is to us imperceptible, we can speak something philosophically to the Cause of
it, and can tell whether it blows from the East, West, North or South, but we
cannot tell the particular Place, where or from whence it arises; so is every
one who is regenerated, by the Working of the Spirit of GOD, changed and
renewed so as we can give ourselves or others no Account of it, in all Points
as to the inward Operation, though in the Effects it be discernable.

BECAUSE he had began to speak of the Spirit, he takes an Example from the
Wind, which is also wont to be called a Spirit, ( Gen viii 1.) and often
elsewhere.

Minutus Octavio observes, that though all Things are impelled, shaken and tossed
by the Wind, and Blast, yet we cannot see them, with our Eyes; Vento et
flatibus, omnia impelluntur, vibrantur, agitantur, at sub oculis tamen non
venit ventus, et flatus.

THE Wind moves itself, now here, now there, with a free and unconstant
impetus; it is a Metaphor taken from Men, like that Romans ix. 19. to 22. a Will
is ascribed to the Wind, by the Figure Prosop^^y, as in the Writing of the
Apostle Paul, the Law, Sin, and Death are introduced in the same Manner.

YOU hear the Sound thereof, but know not whence it comes, or whither it goes,
its Original is not perceived, some imagine it to be a natural Flux of the Air,
others Exhalations from the Earth, there is such a Diversity of Conjectures
concerning it, even in the same Places, that its Nature cannot be fully known,
its Original is sought but not beheld.

NOR is it known, where it goes, or known where it ceases, its Exit is no
better perceived than its Original.

AND so it is with every one, that is born of the Spirit; admirable Actions of
one regenerated by the Spirit are beheld, but the Original from which they
spring, and the End to which they tend, are quite hid from the View of all
Mortals in this Life; the certain Discovery of them is reserved for a future
World; the End indeed is eternal Life, and our Life is hid with CHRIST in GOD,
( Romans vi. 22. Col. iii. 3.) Regeneration can neither be beheld with our Eyes,
nor the Mode or Manner of it comprehended by our Reason.

THE Similitude which our Lord uses plainly shows these three Things, viz. 1
That the Work of the holy Spirit in Regeneration, is something real; this its
Fruits and Effects point forth, as the Sound indicates the Wind. 2. That the
holy Spirit acts freely and sovereignly in this Matter, according to his own
Pleasure; and not according to any Dignity or Me^^^s of Creatures, or Limits
prescribed by them; he breathes upon whom, and when and how he pleases. And 3.
The Similitude shows, that the Work of Regeneration is unsearchable to human
Reason, from whence the afflatus comes, and to what Event the Spirit operates
upon, even the Regenerate themselves do not know. To the aforesaid Gloss that I
have given of the Words of CHRIST, agree the following Interpreters, viz. Beza,
Grotius, Simachus, Chemnitus, Burgensis, and Dr. Lightfoot.

SURELY Sirs, your Reason must inform you, that Persons cannot judge well what
they do not understand, and that it is not probable, they will judge
impartially, of a Case in which they are Parties and Accusers, and that it is
unjust for them to judge what does not belong to them, or what they have no
Commission or Authority for.

WHETHER you have all of you, such peculiar Poignance of natural Genius and
uncommon Eminence in acquired Knowledge, as well as Freedom from corrupt
partial bias, in these Times of Division and Debate, as to qualify you for the
high Office of spiritual JUDGES, are too tender Points for me to touch; I
therefore leave them to the Decision of your own Consciences, and humbly beg
you would produce your Commission to judge Men's secret Thoughts and Designs,
or the States of Men's Souls, upon the Foundation of circumstantial Differences
in Opinion, and Practice consequent thereupon: Where is your Authority? What
Part of the Bible contains your Commission? Methinks, it is but reasonable,
that you should either produce it, or quit your Office? Who art thou that
judge another Man's Servant?

BUT after you have assumed the Judge's Office, pray how do you manage in that
Business? Do you therein conform to the common and rational Course of judicial
Proceedings, and Example of good Judges? Do you hear with Patience the
Defendant's Apology for his Conduct, and examine it thoroughly, before you pass
Sentence? And are you of Council to him? Do you examine all Parts of his
Apology with Candor, putting a favorable Construction on Things that appear
doubtful, as far as Reason will admit, being loath to find your Fellow Creature
guilty of what is criminal and dishonorable to human Nature? Farther, do you
lay the Stress of your Sentence only upon Things that are plainly proved?
(allegatis et probatis) And do you pass your Sentence of Condemnation with
Grief and Reluctance, from a Principle of Justice attended with Humanity? Being
willing that several guilty Persons should escape with Impunity, rather than
that one innocent Person should suffer? For the former is only inconvenient,
but the latter unjust.

ARE not every of these Particulars now mentioned, agreeable to the clearest
Dictates of Reason, and plainest Maxims of Equity? And if the Conduct of any of
us has been, or is disagreeable thereto, is it not condemned by both? Pray let
us consider seriously, these few Passages of Scripture following; (Prove. xviii.
13.) He that answers a Matter before he hears it, it is a Folly and Shame
unto him, (Ps. cxxxi. 1.) Lord my Heart is not haughty, nor mine Eyes lofty,
neither do I exercise myself in great Matters, or in things too high for me.
(Jer. xvii. 9.10.) The Heart is deceitful and desparately wicked, who can know
it? I the Lord search the Heart, I try the Reins.

IT is true, upon conversing with Mankind about divine Things, we cannot well
help thinking something about the States of those with whom we converse; as to
some there will be a sweet Satisfaction in our Minds, and of some others there
will be Fears and Doubts: Now as there is a sinful Jealousy, which is quite
without Foundation, springs from the Corruption of our own Nature, and is
contrary to the Nature of that blessed Grace of Charity, or Love which thinks
no Evil; so there is a Godly Jealousy, which has some ground of Fear, at least
in our Apprehension: Of this the Apostle Paul speaks, 2 Cor. xi. 2, 3. For I am
jealous over you, with a godly Jealousy; I fear, and in the Fourth Chapter of
his Epistle to the Galations, and Twentieth Verse we have these very remarkable
Words, I desire to be present with you now, and to change my Voice, for I stand
in doubt of you. I do not know what to think of you. The original Word for
standing in doubt Aporumai, ex (a particula privativa, et poros via transitus.)
ubi via est interclusa, ubi non datur transitus, proprie de corpore, per
metaphoram vero transfertur ad animum, perplexus, dubious, item pauper, cum
genit. aporia concilii inopia, Luke xxi. 25. aporeo proprie ad angustias, ex
quibus me explicare nequeo, reductus besito; Act. xxv. 20.
is very emphatical and instructive; it is derived from a Particle and a Word,
which signify to be in a Labyrinth, through which there is no Passage; it
properly relates to Bodies, but is by a Metaphor transferred to the Mind; and
signifies one's being perplexed, or in anxious suspense, doubtful, poor,
wanting Council, from which he cannot extricate himself. The same Word is used
Luke xxi. 25. and translated Perplexity, and upon the Earth distress of
Nations, with Perplexity, the Sea and the Waves roaring. And Acts xxv. 20. it
is translated doubting, And because I doubted of such Manner of Questions. Many
learned Men explain the Word, as I have mentioned. Pasor, Castalio, Tremelius,
Erasmus, Vatabulus, Regerius, Piscator, Beza, Arius Montanus,


HERE you may observe, the vast Difficulty that attends our Thoughts about the
States of others, (some especially) and the humble Modesty and great Caution
which the great Doctor of the Gentiles used, in expressing his: There is a vast
difference between this godly Jealousy, this rational Fear, and unreasonable
doubting of the Case of others, or rash Judging.

NO doubt the Reasons of this pious fear and doubting, may be either expressed
publicly and generally, especially by Gospel Ministers, in the discharge of
their important Trust, in the manner the Apostle did his; or privately and
particularly to the Persons we are afraid of, in Case there is a rational
probability of Success in so doing.

AND in Case this personal Application, is conducted with Discretion, Humility,
and Meekness, and attended with that defference and respect, which the God of
Order requires should be express^ to the different Stations, Characters and
Conditions of Me^ and in Case our private fears be kept private, and not
divulg^ to the disgrace of the Characters of particular Persons, and bre^ of
the public Peace and Union; and in Case our private fe^ are not made the
Foundation of any public Process, or of (...) Behavior toward them. With
such Limitations, I believe i^ our Duty to express our fears, and that it may
be of Serv^ so to do: But otherwise I believe it is sinful and dangerous (...)
the Honor of God, the Peace of Society, and to the Souls of M^

BUT perhaps some may object, against what has been offer^ that Passage of
Scripture, (1 Cor. ii. 15.) But be that is spirits (...) judges all Things,
yet he himself is judged of no Man.

I Answer, That the Place, rightly understood, confirms wh^ I have said against
rash-Judging.

NOW to the right Understanding of it, it is proper to observ^ that the
Apostles Scope in this Chapter, is to extol the Wisdom of God, in the
mysterious Method of Man's Salvation by Christ crucified, as far superior to
the natural Wisdom of Man, howbeit, says he, we speak the Wisdom of God in a
mystery; though it is wont to be esteemed foolishness by such who are strangers
to its Power and Influence, by such who have nothing but Nature and Reason to
direct them, which is owing partly to the Weakness, Darkness, and Pride of the
human Mind, which cannot find out this Way to Heaven by a Mediator, without
Supernatural Revelation, nor esteem it when revealed outwardly, without divine
Influence. The Mind is vainly puffed up with a conceit of self-sufficiency, and
strongly prejudiced against Justification by the Righteousness of a MEDIATOR,
by our being born under a Covenant of Works, of which disorders we are never
cured until we are convinced by the Holy-Spirit, of Sin, of Righteousness, and
of Judgment. Quo Semel imbuta, Servabit oderem testa di^, i. e. a Vessel keep
long, the taint of Liquour once put into it.

We like the Spider's proud Motto, who spins its Web, out of its ow^ Bowels.

Michi Soli Debe^. I am a Debtor to myself alone.

I bear them record, says the Apostle that they have a Zeal of GOD, but not
according to Knowledge, for they being ignorant of GOD's Righteousness, and
going about to establish their own Righteousness, have not submitted themselves
to the Righteousness of GOD. ( Romans x. 2, 3.) For when in the Wisdom of GOD.
the World by Wisdom knew not GOD, it pleased GOD, by the Foolishness of
Preaching, to save them that believe (1 Cor. i. 21.) We preach CHRIST
crucified, to the Jews a stumbling Block, and to the Greeks foolishness, but to
those that believe the Wisdom of GOD and the Power of GOD, (1 Cor. i. 24.)




FARTHER, Persons in a State of Nature are inclined to esteem the Mysteries of
the Gospel, foolishness, partly because of the Corruption of their Wills, which
will not, cannot cordially comply therewith, until renewed by the Holy-Spirit.
( Joh. v. 40. Joh vi. 44.)

BUT after the Mind is illuminated, and the Will changed, it discerns great
Beauty in the Gospel of the Grace of God, and great Value in the Blessings
therein contained; highly esteems the Device therein opened; greatly admires
the Wisdom of God therein displayed; heartily consents to the Terms therein
required, and is pleased with the whole Plan so far as discovered to it; thus
the spiritual Man judges, or rather as the Word should be rendered, discerns
all Things.

MOREOVER the Antithesis between the natural and spiritual Man, in the Verse I
am considering, and that immediately preceding, gives light to the laboring
Point.

THE natural or animal Man, (psuchicos) one that depends wholly upon human
Reason, such as were many of the Philosophers of the Greeks, and many of the
Jews, says Grotius. The Word animal being opposed to spiritual, is undoubtedly
the same with carnal, says Alting, Calvin, Symachus; one that follows the
Conduct of the Flesh, a mere natural Man, who has nothing noble in him but a
rational Soul, much degenerated, by the Inclinations of which he is governed,
and not by the Spirit; one who is not regenerated. (to this Effect Piscator.)

DOES not receive or approve of the Things of God, i. e. those divine and
spiritual Mysteries which exceed the Reach of human Reason, and are not known
without the Revelation of the Spirit; such as the Method of Salvation by
CHRIST'S Sufferings, and the Happiness prepared for those that love God.

THERE is, says Pareus, a natural Impotency in Man to know spiritual Things,
partly through want of Light in the Mind, and partly through the Corruption of the
Will, because spiritual Things are discerned, apprehended, and distinguished
spiritually, i. e. by a spiritual Understanding and Light of Faith, or by the
Influence of the Holy Spirit. To this purpose speak Beza, Piscator, Erasmus,
and Arias Montanus.

BUT the spiritual Man, or regenerated Person, who is led by the Spirit, (so
Piscator, Calvin, Sclaterus) judges all Things. The original Word (anacri^ei)
here translated judges, primarily and properly signifies, to discern,
apprehend, or distinguish, and so it is translated in the Verse immediately
preceding, and in many other Places of Scripture, (see Mat. xvi. 3) O ye
Hypocrites ye can discern the Face of the Sky, but can ye not discern the Signs
of the Times. (1 Cor. xi. 29.) Not discerning the Lord's Body. (Act. xv. 9.)
and put no difference between us and them. (1 Cor. xii. 10.) to another
discerning of Spirits. (Heb. v. 14) who by Reason of use have their Senses
exercised to discern between good and evil.

ALL THINGS. Observe it is not Persons that are represented as discerned by the
spiritual Man, but Things; and the Word ALL, must be understood with that
Restriction the Context leads us to, viz. All the peculiar and important
Mysteries of Christianity, which are absolutely necessary to Salvation or the
Method of Salvation by Jesus Christ, which the Apostle had been discoursing of,
through the series of this Chapter. To understand the Word ALL in an absolute
unlimited Sense, charges falsehood upon the Apostle; for we are sure that every
spiritual Man, nay not one of them in this Life, understands all Things, both
natural, civil and religious; and if the Word be restricted to religious
Matters, yet without limitation, it is not true: Every spiritual Man
understands not the whole System or Analogy of Faith, in all its Branches, and
their mutual Relations and Dependencies. Nor do many of them understand the
Chronological Difficulties of the Scriptures, or perceive the great variety of
their Rethorical Charms, and Elegancies, etc. So that the true meaning of the
Words, is no more than this, that the regenerated Person discerns, apprehends
and distinguishes the grand peculiars of the Gospel Method of Salvation, by the
Death of the SON of GOD, discerns Things that are absolutely necessary to his
own Salvation, in some Measure.

BUT he himself, in the mean Time, is discerned or known certainly, by none, by
no Man; and hence God's People are called his hidden ones, (Psa. lxxxiii. 3.)
And special Grace in them, is called the hidden Man of the Heart. (1. Pet. iii.
4.) and their Life is said to be hid with Christ in God, (Col. iii. 3.) and
that the World knows them not. They are not only unknown to the World, who
generally esteem those that are pious as Fools, wicked or miserable Persons,
but even in part to themselves, because many of them feel the divine Life in
them weak and doubtful, because of their inward Corruptions, because of
Temptations, of the World, the Devil and the Flesh.

IT is farther observable, that pious People are sealed, (Ephesians. iv. 30.) And
grieve not the holy Spirit whereby ye are sealed to the Day of Redemption. (2
Cor. i. 22.) Who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in
our Hearts. And in diverse other Places God's People are represented as the
sealed ones. Now every one knows that the Design of a Seal is not only Security
and Confirmation, but Secresy also; and hence Letters are sealed up to this
Purpose. And are not the pious Corinthians called the Epistle of CHRIST,
written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in Tables of
Stone, but in the fleshly Tables of their Hearts. (2 Cor. iii. 3.) not only to
signify the reality and permanency Litera scripta manet.
of the good Impressions made upon them by the Apostles Ministry, through the
divine Concurrence therewith; but also the Secresy of those Impressions. The
springs of Action in good Men are hid from all Men, and therefore the State of
their Souls, which may said in some Sense, to be built thereupon, is certainly
discerned by no Man.

But do we not read of that Gift of discerning of Spirits being given?

I Answer, Yes, we read of it in 1 Cor. xii. 10. To another the working of
Miracles, to another Prophesy, to another discerning of Spirits, to another
diverse Kinds of Tongues. This was a Power, says Pool, wherein God for the
farther Authority and Credit of his Gospel, in the Primitive Times,
communicated to some Men something of his own Prerogative, to discern Men's
inward Thoughts and Hearts, and to make up a Judgment of their Truth and
Sincerity; or contrawise of their Falsehood and Hypocrisy. This was an
extraordinary and admirable faculty given even to private Men, to discover and
reprove fanatical Spirits, and false and develish Prophets, of which there were
many at that Time. (1 John iv. 1) And hence the false Pretender is said to be
convinced of all, and judged of all, (1 Cor. xiv. 24.) or as the original Word
signifies, discerned of all. But this Gift seems to have been especially given
to such as presided (pro tempore) among the Presbiters, who often met to judge
of this Matter. (1 Cor. xiv. 29 -- 33.) To the aforesaid purpose, for
Substance, speak the following learned Men, Beza, Grotius, Erasmus, Pool,
Cameron, Lightfoot, Man^chi^^, Tirinus, Munsterus,
.

THIS was a miraculous Gift as well as the rest joined with it in the same
Verse; so that for any to pretend to it now, when miraculous Gifts are ceased,
is the vainest Vanity! Nor have we any Reason to believe their Pretenses,
unless they can speak with Tongues they have never learned, or unless they can
speak the sick whole, and the Dead alive in an Instant, without the Use of
Means.

I THINK it his highly probable, that it was by this Method of Miraculous
discerning, that the Church of Ephesus tried those, which said they were
Apostles, and were not, and upon Trial found them to be Liars; because it was
the easiest, speediest Method, and did at that Time obtain in the Church.

BUT if it was not so, they doubtless tried them by their fruits, that is by
their Doctrines and Lives, say Piscator, and Beza; the Pretenders falsely said
they were Apostles, immediately sent in an extraordinary Manner as Paul was:
Now an excellent Method of knowing such, says Grotius, was if they privately
sought after Money, which they pretended to contemn; then it appeared that they
were such who are discrib'd, (2 Cor. xi. 13.) And found them to be Liars, i. e.
discovered their deceits. Many false Prophets had gone forth, of which they had
sufficient warning, (1 Timothy i. 3. Acts xx. 29, 30.) Among which were the
Heritical Ebion and Cerinthus and his followers, who feigned they had their
Revelations from an Apostle of the first Rank; so Cluverus, Brightman, Pareus,
and Hammond.

NOW neither of these Methods, give the least Handle for Rash-Judging. The
first being Miraculous, has long since expired; and the last being external
only, does not in the least Countenance making our Opinion, of spiritual
Experience (in Particulars) a Term of Communion.

BUT does not our LORD assure us, that we may judge the Tree, by the Fruits.

I ANSWER our LORD informs us, that we may know the Tree by the Fruits, ( Mat
xii. 33.) Our Savior does not propose a certain, but only a probable Sign, he
speaks of Things as they happen generally, as Maldonate justly observes; he
does not say that a bad Tree cannot become good, but that while it is bad, it
cannot bring forth good Fruit. (i. e. spiritually good) a bad Tree cannot bring
forth good Fruits, unless it be engrafted, and a good Tree will bring forth
bad, if it be not cultivated; says Tertullian. Non dabit arbor mala bonos
fructus, si non inseratur, et bon^ malos dabit, si non colatur Tertul.
The Fruits CHRIST speaks of, are the Doctrines and Lives of Men, so Simachus
Maldonate, Hammond

CHRIST'S memorable Negative Precept, mentioned ( Mat. vii. 1, 2, 3.) strongly
confirms what has been now said, Judge not that ye be not judged, for with what
Judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, and why beholdest thou the Mote, that is
in thy Brothers Eye, but considerest not the Beam that is in thy own Eye.

THAT which is here forbidden, says Pool in his Annotations, is either, 1st.
Rash-Judgment of his State, or a judging him for doing his Duty, such was
Simons or the Disciples Judgment respecting the Woman, ( Mat. xxvi. 6, 7.) Or,
2d. A Judgeing of others, for Things, which they judge to be indifferent,
forbidden. ( Romans xiv. 1, 2, 3.) Or, 3d. a Judging of them for secret Things,
such as inward Habits of Grace, when no apparent Fruits to the contrary are
seen, or a condemning others for single Acts, or a Public censuring others for
private failings.

FOR with what Judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; that is, the ordinary
Temper of Men and Judgment of GOD, will not leave such a Practice unrewarded,
they are generally paid in this World in their own Coin, good Measure, pressed
down and running over.

THE same worthy Author farther observes from that saying of our Savior, And
why beholdest thou the Mote that is in thy Brothers Eye, but considerest not
the Beam that is in thine own, these Things following. 1. That those who are
most censorious of others, are usually more notorious themselves, if not for
the same Sins; yet for others of equal if not greater Magnitude. 2d. That it is
notorious Hypocricy, to spy smaller faults in others, and not to see greater in
ourselves. 3d. that is notorious Impudence, to pretend to Censure and Judge
others, for Sins in which we live ourselves. 4th. That there is no such Way to
teach us Charity, in not hastily, rashly, or too severely judging others, as to
look first into our own Hearts and Ways, and seeing if we have not the same, or
greater failings. Our Charity in this Kind should begin at home.

GIVE me leave to consider one Objection more, which is this, viz. That the
denial of our Judgment about, or certain Knowledge of Men's spiritual
Experiences and gracious State by them, renders our exercising a special love
toward them, impracticable, which is nevertheless a commanded Duty, and
otherthrows the Communion of Saints, which we profess our belief of in the
Apostles Creed.

I Answer, That the aforesaid Consequencies do not fairly and necessarily
follow, because our charitable Hope concerning the good State of others,
grounded on their Doctrines and Lives, is sufficient to excite our special
Respect to them as Brethren, and Communion with them as such; and our
conferring special Kindness upon them, as being of the Household of Faith.

WHAT our Lord asserts, ( Mat. x. 41, 42.) sufficiently confirms this; the
Words are these, He that receives a Prophet in the Name of a Prophet, shall
receive a Prophets reward; and he that receives a righteous Man, in the Name
of a righteous Man, shall receive a righteous Man's reward: And whosoever shall
give to drink unto one of those little ones, a Cup of cold Water only, in the
Name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise loose his Reward.

NOW to receive them in the Name of a Prophet, Righteous Man, or Disciple, is
to receive them in quality of such, or as such; not because they are rich,
powerful, learned, eloquent, or related to us, but because they bear the
Character of Ministers of CHRIST, or religious Persons, and appear so to us, by
Reason of their regular Admission into the Ministry, Doctrines and Lives; or if
of a private Station, by their Principles and Practice only. Now our Lord
informs us, that if we be mistaken in our charitable Opinion of them, and
Kindness toward them, yet if we have been sincere in our Designs therein, we
shall not miss a gracious and liberal Reward, even for the most minute
Instances of our Generosity, if proportioned to our ability: The Lord will look
upon such Kindnesses as done to himself. Thus Grotius, Mead, and Pool,
interpret the aforesaid memorable Scripture.

IF it had been the Will of God, that we should have farther Grounds than I
have mentioned, for the performance of the aforesaid Duties, he would have
expressed it somewhere in his Word, and enjoined us to seek after it, as well
as directed us how to manage so difficult and important an Affair, and given us
a Capacity equal to it, as well as some Examples (in all probability) of some
pious Men that had attempted to perform this arduous Business of searching the
Heart; but of these Things the Scriptures of Truth, which ought to be the Rule
of all our Sentiments and Conduct in religious Matters, are entirely silent, so
far as I know, excepting the Case of miraculous discerning, which I have spoke
of before, and does not concern the ordinary Times and State of the Christian
Church in Point of Practice. But

3. NOT only unkind Thoughts and hard Speeches should be avoided, in order to
obtain Peace of every Kind, but likewise unjust and unkind Actions.

FRAUD and Injustice, breaking of our Words, overreaching in our Bargains,
taking advantage of the Necessities of the Poor to oppress them, and grind
their Faces, and all other Methods of Circumvention, the whole Mystery of
Deceit, are exceeding Perverse, but if any or all of these Things are done
under a Cloak of Religion, they are much more heinous: This makes the
Professors of Religion stink in the Nostrils of others, and strengthens their
natural Prejudices against all Religion, O therefore let us not go beyond and
defraud one another, seeing God if the avenger of all such. Some of the
Pharisees were of this Stamp; for a Pretense they made long Prayers, that they
might devour Widows Houses: Such accursed Practices have doubtless occasioned
that infamous Proverb, viz. That in the Name of God every Evil begins. In
nomine Domeni, incipit omne malum.


BESIDES a proud, disdainful, distant Behavior and Neglect of returning
Offices of Humanity, Civility and Respect, as they bewray unmannerliness and
ill nature, so they are prejudicial to Peace, and should therefore be avoided
by all those that are desirous of it. But,

2. POSITIVELY, The following Means tending to Peace, should be carefully
observed, viz.

1. KIND Thoughts of our Brothers Speeches and Actions, for Charity Thinks no
Evil, and hopes all Things that are good.

2. COURTEOUS Speech, let the Law of love be in our Hearts, and the Law of
Kindness in our Lips; soft Words assuage Wrath: The Wisdom that is from above,
is peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated; full of Mercy and good Fruits,
without Partiality and without Hypocrisy. But bitter Envying and Strife, is a
Wisdom that descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish.

3. IN our Actions and Behavior, we should not only be strictly just to all,
but charitable to the indigent, and express that Respect to every Man which his
Place and Station require, hereby obeying the Command of God, in giving Honor
to whom Honor is due. As a levelling Principle and Carriage, is contrary to
all Order and Government, as well as good Manners, so its far from being a
humble, self-denying Principle in People of lower Life, as is pretended by
some. Clownishness is a wild freak of Enthusiasm, Nonsense and Arrogance, but
no part of the Religion of JESUS.

IT is likewise necessary to bear with Patience hard Treatment, not insisting
on our Right in small Things, forgiving Offenses freely, as God for Christ's
sake has forgiven us: To this End we should consider him who endured the
Contradiction of Sinners against himself, least we be weary and faint in our
Minds.

BUT how should we pray for the Peace and Prosperity of Jerusalem? I Answer,

1st. HUMBLY, being sensible of GOD'S Glory and Greatness, our own Meanness and
Vileness, behold I have taken upon me to speak to the Lord of Hosts, who am but
Dust and Ashes, O let not the LORD be Angry: A constant Reverence of GOD'S
Majesty, because of his Infinite Distance from us in respect of Dignity should
inspire our Minds, when we bow before his gracious Throne, to implore, any
benefit from him for ourselves or others!

2d. SINCERELY, with a right View that GOD may be hereby glorified, ye ask and
receive not, says the Apostle James, because ye ask amiss. As all Things are
from GOD, as a creating Cause, and through him as a preserving and governing
Cause, so all Things should be to him as a final Cause. If we have not upright
Views in our Petitions, we are not like to speed; Sincerity is the Benjamin,
without which our Supplications will not meet with favorable access. If even
in Eating and Drinking and in every other natural, yea in all the civil Actions
of our Lives, we should aim at the Glory of God, much more ought this to be in
all our sacred Service. Happy, and only happy are those who are Israelites
indeed, in whom there is no governing guile.

3. FERVENTLY. We should pray for the Peace and Prosperity of Jerusalem, with
the utmost engagedness of Soul; we must be fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord,
not Lukewarm and Indifferent, for such who are neither cold nor hot, the Lord
Jesus will spue out of his Mouth. i. e. reject with great Abhorrence!

4. FREQUENTLY and perseveringly. O Sirs, we should often send up Sighs to GOD
for Jerusalem, and plead with him to make her a Praise on the Earth; plead that
Jehovah's Arm might awake in her behalf, as in the Days of Old; that he would
Command Deliverances for Jacob and speak Salvation to Israel; that he would
make her Peace as a River, and her Glory as a flowing Stream; that the Time may
be hastened when the Children of Juda and Israel, Brethren, unhappily disunited,
shall be reunited in one Band of Affection, and external Union; shall join
together in seeking the Lord their God, shall ask the Way to Zion, with their
Races thither ward, and weep as they go; that the Time may be hastened, when
Juda and Ephraim, being reunited in brotherly love, may join together in
social Serviceableness, to promote the common and valuable Interests of
Religion and Virtue, and thus become as one Stick in the Hand of the Lord.

AGAIN, we should pray for the Peace and Prosperity of Jerusalem,

5. BELIVINGLY. (Mat. xxi. 22) And all Things whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer
believing, ye shall receive. O! how sweet and Soul supporting are these Words
of our dear Lord! But what is it to pray beleivingly?

I ANSWER, it contains these following Particulars, viz,

1. OUR full Persuasion that what we ask is lawful, agreeable to God's revealed
Will of Precept and Promise, which are the Guides of our Petitions, the
Measures of our Devotion. And

2. That God is able to grant what we ask, yea able to do exceeding abundanly
above what we can ask or think The passage of Scripture referred to, viz.
(Ephesians. iii. 20.) Has a very strong and beautiful Emphasis in thse Words,
exceeding abundantly, (Huper ec perision, ex huper supra et perissos abundantia
vel redundantia.) Above abundance, above redundancy, above Measure, so Pasor.
Above, exceedingly above, the Observation and past Experience of our Lives,
above the conception of our Minds, raised to the utmost sublimity, they are
capable of; for even then they are but finite still, but the Power of GOD is
infinite, absolute immense, vastly above not only the utmost elevation of our
thoughts, but likewise above all the expressions that we can Form. Our Woras
our Thoughts are lost, in this un^athomable Abyss, this incomprehensible Ocean,
of Omnipotence! Omnia facere, supra ea que petimus, aut mente concipimus, vel
petere aut cogitare audeamus, says Grotius, i. e. He is able to do above what
we ask, with our Lips, or conceive in our Minds, yea more then what we dare ask
or think!

THE Words are particles of gradual increase, heaped up together says Camero,
in them is an amiable auxesis, which Form of Speech the Apostle Paul loved,
(See 2 Cor. iii. 9. and vii. 13. Phil. i. 9. 1 These. iv. 10. Romans v. 20. 2 Cor.
vii. 4.) It is an emphatical Periphrasis, of GOD the Father, says Vorstius who
can do all Things with infinite redundance, with immense plenty, and
unexhausted Profusion, to this Purpose Grotius, Erasmus, Vatabulus.

To the utmost, (Eis to panteles, ex pan omne et teleios perfectus) perfect and
complete in all Things. Our Lord Jesus is able to bring us to perfect and
perpetual Salvation, because as a Priest he purchased it by his B^ood for us,
and in the same Character constantly interceeds with his Father for the
Application of that purchased Salvation to us.


We can ask a great deal, and yet our Thoughts exceed our Words: But God's
Power exceeds both; for they are but finite and limited; but this is infinite,
incomprehensible, immense! As the Heavens are high above the Earth, so are
God's Thoughts and Ways above ours. Seeing Jehovah JESUS is Almighty in Power,
and infinite in Merit, he is able to save to the uttermost all that come to the
Father by him; seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them. (Heb. vii.
25) O! the Power of GOD is a glorious support and stay to Faith in Prayer; in
all extremities; in the most difficult arduous and gloomy Conjunctures, when
all human Helps fail, and there is no Way open for escape, Omnipotence, who has
an absolute Sovereignity over all Nature, and Grace, Heaven and Earth, who
holds the Springs and Rule of both in his Hand, and carries the KEYS of the
invisible World at his Girdle; can easily turn in a moment our deepest Darkness
into the light of the Morning; the most doleful Captivity of Zion into the most
agreeable Liberty, and make us like those that Dream, (compass our Deliverance
so suddenly, that we can hardly for a Time think it real) yea fill our Mouth
with Laughter and our Tongue with Singing upon this Occasion. (Isa. cxxvi.)

WHEN the State of the Church is reduced to the most deplorable and hopeless
Extremity, like dry Bones in the open Valey, without Life, without moisture,
without Motion, without Beauty, Strength, yea without Connection and Defense,
open to all the Artillery of the North, and all the inclemencies of the
Seasons, a pieteous gassful Spectacle indeed! Well but even in this extremity,
Omnipotence can easily interpose, and Cause the Dead to leap into Life, and the
Bone return to his Bone, (Ezekiel. xxxvii.) But to proceed, praying believingly,
includes our Persuasion,

3. THAT GOD is gracious and merciful, yea, Love itself, and consequently
inclined to confer, yea, and that he will confer all those Benefits that are
for his own Glory, and his People's Advantage, in case they make their humble
Suit to him in their Distresses, (Ex. xxxiv. 6, 7.) And the Lord passed by
before him and proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth; keeping Mercy for
Thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin. (Is. lxiii. 15.) Look
down from Heaven and behold, from the Habitation of thy Holiness, and of thy
Glory, where is thy Zeal and thy Strength, the sounding of thy Bowels, and of
thy Mercies toward me, are they restraind? (Hos. xi. 8.) How shall I give thee
up Ephraim, how shall I deliver thee Israel, how shall I make thee as Admah,
how shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine Heart is turned within me, my Repenting
are kindled together. (Ps. ciii. 13.) Like as a Father pitieth his Children, so
the Lord pitieth them that fear him. (Is. xlix. 15. 16.) Can a Woman forget her
sucking Child, that she should not have Compassion on the Son of her Womb, yea,
they may forget, but I will not forget thee. Behold I have graven thee upon the
Palms of my Hands, thy Walls are continually before me, mine Eye and Heart is
constantly upon thee. There is an Allusion in the Words to the common Practice
of Men, who put Memorials or Signets of what they tenderly regard, and would
remember, upon their Hands: Thy Walls are continually before me; thy broken
down ruined Walls, though not a pleasing Prospect, No! but a sorrowful Spectacle,
a sable Scene, are constantly in my Thoughts, how to repair and rebuild them;
the Model, the Plan of this is immovably fixed in my Purpose, which Providence
goes Pregnant with, and will certainly bring to the Birth in the appointed
Season, Do Zyon's Friends favor her very Dust, so does her gracious GOD much
more; her Walls are constantly under his Eye and Care: O! the tenderest
Compassions of the most indulgent earthly Relations, are but as savage Cruelty,
as obstinate Iron and impenetrable Adamant, compared with the BOWELS of a GOD,
in CHRIST! in Covenant! For the Lord GOD is a Sun and Shield, the Lord will
give Grace and Glory, and no good Thing will be withold from them that walk
uprightly. (Ps. cxlv. 18.) The Lord is nigh to all them that call upon him, to
all that call upon him in Truth. (Ps. l, 15.) Call upon me in the Day of
Trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, (Is. lxv. 24) And it
shall come to pass, that before they call I will answer, and while they are yet
speaking I will hear: Jehovah is so much inclined to Pity and Benignity, that
he sometimes gives Mercies unasked, he sometimes prevents the Prayers of his
Church and People, with the Blessings of his Goodness. When David did but say,
I will confess, a gracious GOD forgave! The Father of the Prodigal ran to meet
him, and embraced him with open Arms, with the utmost Tenderness and
Endearment, without so much as the least Mention of his former unhappy Conduct!
While they are yet speaking I will hear; before they conclude their Prayer, the
Blessings they implore shall b^ ^onferred!

AN eminent Instance of this we have in Daniel, while that pious generous
Prophet was passionately bewailing the desolate and melancholy Circumstances of
the City and Temple of Jerusalem, whose Buildings were demolished, and whose
Altars were laid waste, to the great Reproach of the Professors of Religion in
that Day, as well as lamenting their Sins, as the procuring Causes of so great
and general Calamities, and earnestly interceding with GOD for his favorable
Smiles upon his Sanctuary, in such striking Language as this! O Lord I beseech
thee, let thine Anger and thy Fury be turned away from this City Jerusalem, thy
holy Mountain, because for our Sins; Jerusalem and thy People are become a
Reproach to all that are about us: Now therefore, O, our GOD, hear the Prayer
of thy Servant, and cause thy Face to shine upon thy Sanctuary, that is
desolate, for the Lord's Sake, i e. rebuild it upon its ancient Foundation, and
repair its unhappy and perilous Breaches!

NOW while that gracious Man was yet praying, in the Manner before observed,
for the Repair of the Breaches of Zyon, the removal of her Desolations, and the
propitious Influxes of her GOD; which lay nearer to his zealous Heart, than all
the civil Interests of the Nation: A gracious Grant was made of the important
Mercies he asked, and an Angel sent in haste (being caused to fly swiftly) to
inform him of it, before he concluded his Devotion: Which noble Messenger
addressed the Prophet in this respectful Manner; O, Daniel, I am now come
forth, to give thee Skill and Understanding; at the Beginning of thy
Supplication the Commandment came forth; and I am come to show thee, for thou
art greatly beloved. Hence we may note, that the ready Way to be greatly
beloved by GOD, is to be much concerned for, and laborious after Zyon's
Prosperity, and the REPARING of her BREACHES, or in other Words, to pray for
the Peace of Jerusalem. But

4. PRAYING believingly, includes our relying upon GOD in CHRIST, for what we
ask, our relying upon the Attributes of the divine Nature, and Promises of the
divine Word, (Is. l. 10.) Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys
the Voice of his Servant, that walks in Darkness, and has no Light, let him
trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay himself upon his GOD. (1 Pet. v. 7)
Casting all your Care upon him, for he cares for you. (Ps. xxii. 4. 5.) Our
Fathers trusted in thee, they trusted and thou did deliver them, they cried
unto thee and were delivered, they trusted in thee and were not confounded^
(Ps. xxxi. 19.) O how great is thy Goodness, which thou have laid up for them
that fear thee, which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the
Sons of Men. (P. cxxv. 1.) They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zyon,
which cannot be removed. (Ps. xviii. 30.) As for God his Way is perfect, the
Word of the Lord is tried, he is a Buckler to all that trust in him. (Ps.
xxxiv. 21.) None of them that trust in him shall be desolate. (Ps. xxxvii. 40.)
And the Lord shall help them, and deliver them and save them because they trust
in him. Though he slay me, says Job, yet will I trust in him. Again,

5. PRAYING beleivingly, imports our patient Expectation, in the WAY of Duty,
of a gracious Answer to our Requests, and hence it is said, that he that
beleiveth shall not make haste, (Is. xxviii. 16.) that is, sinful haste, to
obtain his Desires, by going out of GOD'S Way. (P. xxxvii. 5, 7, 8, 9) Commit
thy Way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass. Rest
in the Lord, and wait patiently for him. Fr^t not thy self in any Ways to do
Evil. (Ps. xl. 1.) I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me,
and heard my cry. The Prophet Isaiah informs us, that the Church of old, used
this as an Argument to obtain Favor and Deliverance. (Is. xxxiii 2.) O Lord be
gracious unto us, we have waited for thee, be thou their Arm every Morning, our
Salvation also in the Time of Trouble. (Is. xxx. 18, 19.) Blessed are all they
that wait for him, for the People shall dwell in Zyon, at Jerusalem, thou shall
weep no more, he will be gracious unto thee, at the Voice of thy Cry, when he
shall hear it he will answer thee. (Is. viii. 17.) I will wait upon the Lord,
that bideth his Face from the House of Jacob, and I will look for him. (Mic.
vii. 7.) Therefore I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my
Salvation, my God will hear me. (Heb. vi 19.) Which Hope we have as the Anchor
of the Soul, both sure and steadfast: As the Anchor by fastening under Water,
upon a Rock, or firm Ground, stays the Ship in a Storm, and keeps her from
running upon Rocks, Sandbanks, or into the foaming Main; so Hope by fastening
upon an invisible Savior, who is the Rock of Ages, the Rock of our Salvation,
stays our Souls and keeps them from running adrift into Presumption; or from
being entirely overwhelmed by Despair; amidst the inumerable Temptations and
Pressures, to which we are here exposed, Hope of the right Kind, is not only
firm and stable objectively, by Reason of the Foundations it is built upon,
viz. the Promises of GOD, confirmed by his Oath, the complete Satisfaction and
continual prevalent Intercession of the dear Redeemer, which are impregnable,
immovable and eternal; and hence it is said to enter within the Vail: But it
is also firm instrumentally, for under GOD it makes us so; this Similitude
opens before us, the Difficulty Danger, and Uncertainty, of our State in this
World. We are like a Ship upon the instable Element, the open Ocean tossed with
Tempests, (Is. live. 11.) subject to a variety of Vicissitudes, of Winds and
Weathers, in which we need some stay and support; which the Hope or Expectation
of promised (spiritual and) future Benefits affords us, yea, better in some
Instances than the Anchor to the Ship, for that may be broken and is some
remora to the Ship's Motion, but Hope is an immortal Seed which shall never
make us ashamed; this instead of obstructing quickens and animates our Course,
to the P^rt of the heavenly Paradise; by setting the Glory thereof before us,
it makes us diligent in religious Labors, intrepid in Dangers, patient, yea,
cheerful in the darkest Glooms and greatest Depths of Adversity; by this we
rejoice, though under the humblest Circumstances, and are glad though involved in
the most inextricable Labyrinths, and exposed to the greatest Calamties, Pains
and Pressures* I say, notwithstanding of all of them, we rejoice in the
Expectation of the Glory of GOD, in comparison of which exceeding great and
eternal Weight of blessedness, the Sufferings of this World, which are light
and but for a Moment, are not worthy to be once compared. In this calm Haven is
our Hope fixed and fastened; where no Tempest can reach or Sea roll: There
Beleivers after all their tossings upon this tempestuous Ocean, shall soon
enjoy a calm serene, a secure Retreat from every Wind and Tempest, a sweet and
eternal Rest from every Labor, which shall as far exceed all our Thoughts,
Expressions and Hopes, as it does our Deserts. But Hope for Good from GOD in a
Course of Negligence, or Omission of the Duties enjoined us, is the Hope of the
Hypocrite which will make ashamed at last, and fail in Extremity like a Spiders
Web, the Person that would lay hold of it, to stay him from falling down a
steep and dangerous precipice; Sloth and Indolence, is not spiritual but carnal
and perverse, opposed to the current of the whole Book of God, which enjoint
us, to (...), wrestle, strive, and Labor, (Religiously) is order to obtain the
blessings, spiritual and eternal which, we implore, desire, and expect: Sloth
and Indolence is not a ^^ting for GOD, but for his and our Enemy, a Spirit of
Error and Delusion.
The next Particular under the

FOURTH General Head of Discourse, comes now to be considered, which was to
show why we should pray for the Peace and Prosperity of Jerusalem? Now the
Reasons are these following, viz.

1. BECAUSE it is the Command of GOD, as our Text imforms us, Pray for the
Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee. And in the Epistle of
Paul to the Hebrews, chap. xii. ver. 14. We are commanded to follow The
original Word Diocein (is the same in the three Places of Scripture before
mentioned which are marked with an Asterism and) signifies a singular
Contrivance, Speed and Vehemence, in the Prosecution of what we have in View,
and is frequently applied in Scripture, to Persecution, which is generally
carried on (alas for it!) with much Haste, Fervor and Industry, so that there
is a great Emphasis in the Word, The Almighty hereby signifies, that we should
prosecute the important Blessing of PEACE, so far as is agreeable to Truth and
Holiness, with the utmost Study, A^^crity and Diligence; at all Adventures.
Peace with all Men, and Holiness, and assured that without these we cannot see
the Lord. And in the Epistle of Paul to the Romans, (chap xii. ver. 17. 18.)
this important Duty is again enjoined, in these Words; recompense to no Man
Evil, for Evil: -- If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably
with all Men. Of the same tendency are these Words of GOD, by the Apostle
Peter, (1 Epistle, chap. iii. ver. 11.) Let him eschew Evil and do Good, let
him seek Peace and ensue it. The original Word Diocein (is the same in the
three Places of Scripture before mentioned which are marked with an Asterism
and) signifies a singular Contrivance, Speed and Vehemence, in the Prosecution
of what we have in View, and is frequently applied in Scripture, to
Persecution, which is generally carried on (alas for it!) with much Haste,
Fervor and Industry, so that there is a great Emphasis in the Word, The
Almighty hereby signifies, that we should prosecute the important Blessing of
PEACE, so far as is agreeable to Truth and Holiness, with the utmost Study,
A^^crity and Diligence; at all Adventures.
And elsewhere another Apostle speaks thus, let us therefore follow after The
original Word Diocein (is the same in the three Places of Scripture before
mentioned which are marked with an Asterism and) signifies a singular
Contrivance, Speed and Vehemence, in the Prosecution of what we have in View,
and is frequently applied in Scripture, to Persecution, which is generally
carried on (alas for it!) with much Haste, Fervor and Industry, so that there
is a great Emphasis in the Word, The Almighty hereby signifies, that we should
prosecute the important Blessing of PEACE, so far as is agreeable to Truth and
Holiness, with the utmost Study, A^^crity and Diligence; at all Adventures.
the Things which make for Peace, and Things wherewith we may edify one
another, and for Meat destroy not the Work of God.

2. TO pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, is the Spirit and Genius of true
Religion, as appears from the following Places of Scripture, ( Romans viii. 6.)
To be spiritually minded is Peace, i e. spiritual mindedness it not only
accompanied with Peace with GOD, but disposes to Peace with Men. (Romans xiv. 17)
The Kingdom of GOD is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and Joy
in the Holy Ghost, i. e. the Power and Life of true Religion, consist not in
circumstantial Points of Truth, and Practices dependant on them, but in real
Holiness of Heart and Life, in a peaceable DISPOSITION of Soul, toward every
Man, and in a cordial COMPLACENCE in the Perfections of GOD'S Nature, the Works
of Creation, the Conduct of divine Providence, the Methods of divine Grace, and
in the Good and Welfare of all Men, whether Friends or Enemies.

THE Gospel of this Kingdom, is a Gospel of Peace, (Romans x 15.) How beautiful
are the Feet of them that preach the Gospel of Peace. The Author of the Gospel
is the GOD of Peace, the Ministers of the Gospel are Messengers of Peace; the
Design and Tendency of the Gospel is Peace, with GOD and Man. (1 Cor. vii. 15)
But GOD has called us to Peace. (1 Cor. xiv. 33) But GOD is not the Author of
Confusion, but of Peace in all the Churches of the Saints, (Gal. v. 22.) The
Fruit of the Spirit is Peace, Love, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness,
Faith, but the Works of the Flesh, are Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Envyings.
(Jam. iii. 17.) The Wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy. (Jam. iii. 14, 15, 16.) But if
ye have bitter Envying and Strife in your Hearts, glory not; don't boast of
your Wickedness; and lie not against the Truth, this Wisdom descends not from
above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish; for where Envying and Strife is,
there is Confusion, and every evil Work. (1 Cor. iii. 3.) For whereas there is
Envying among you, and Strife and DIVISIONS, are ye not CARNAL, and walk as
Men? What is sickly and infirm, is wont to be full of Uneasiness and Complaint!
Omne invalidum, est sua natura querelum,
(Romans xiii 13.) Let us walk honestly as in the Day, how; not in Strife and
Envying. Has not CHRIST given us a new Commandment, a Commandment newly
inculcated, and enforced with new Arguments, and Incentives; to LOVE ONE
ANTOHER; a Commandment which contains the Sum and Source of all the Duties
required by the second Table of the Law; and is not the natural and necessary
Consequence of this, Love, Peace, at least in Disposition and Endeavor?

TO oppose Peace when it may be had with Safety, to the Fundamentals in
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, of the Religion of JESUS, is to set
ourselves virtually and really, (though I believe not designedly) against the
Authority, Spirit, and Intention of the Gospel; as well as the Example of the
Author of it, and to rise up in Rebellion against the commanding Authority, of
the King of the Church, which expressly and positively enjoins all his Subjects
to receive one another, as he receives them to the Glory of GOD.

3. THIS Peace and Union our dear Lord prayed for (Joh. xvii. 11.) Holy Father
keep, through thine own Name, those whom thou have given me, that they may be one
as we are: i. e. that they may continue to be one among themselves, in Mind,
Spirit, Agreement, Faith and Love, As we are ONE in Essence and Will. The
Particle as, is not a Note of Equality, but of Similitude. To this Purpose
speak diverse learned Men, viz. Ludovicus de di^, Grotius, Burgensis, and
Simplicius.
This Prayer of our Savior, says Mr. Pool, in his Annotations, on the Place,
does oblige all those who, in any Sincerity own Christ, to study UNION, both in
Opinion and Affection, and also give us Ground of Hopes, that there is a Time
coming, when there shall be a greater Measure of it than we have seen in those
miserably divided Times, wherein we have lived, and do yet live.

IN Sum tne Unity here prayed for, consists especially in these Things, viz.
Design, Affection and main Principles, (which the holy Unction is promised to
direct unto) together with an external joining into one Body mystical and
visible, by one Spirit, says the Apostle, we are all Baptized into one Body,
and drink into one Spirit. (1 Cor. xii. 13.) But speaking the Truth in Love,
may grow up unto him in all Things, which is the Head even CHRIST, from whom
the whole Body fitly joined together and compacted, makes Increase, to the
edifying of itself in Love, (Ephesians. iv. 15, 16.) As the Church is united to
CHRIST their Head, by the Spirit and Faith; so among themselves, by the
Profession of fundamental Truths, and unfeigned Love. Jerusalem is a City that
is compact together.

THIS Passage of Scripture ( Ephesians. iv. 15.16.) is so very remarkable, and
applicable to the Subject I am discoursing upon, that I shall beg leave to
consider it a little particularly,

FITLY joined together, (sunarmologemenon, a sun con, et aro apto.) to fit the
Joints of Things exactly together, to build with agreeable Proportion.

AND compacted, (sumbibaz omenon, proprie facio ut aliquis ^at mecum, a sun cum
et baino incedo, per metaphoram doceo, assentire cogo, ut aliquis mecum in
eandem sententiam desce^dat,) Acts ix. 22. compelling them by force of Argument
to assent, that JESUS was the CHRIST. And hence it sometimes signifies
Instruction, so it is translated (1 Cor. ii. 16.) and sometimes a Union in
Love, which is often the Fruit of an Agreement in Sentiment. ( Col. ii. 2.)

THIS Word, says Hammond and Grotius, seems to signify a closer Band than the
former, that denotes a suitable fitting of the Parts, but this a Connecting of
them together, as with Cement, or with a Peg, so firmly and straightly, that they
cannot be well pulled asunder; the Words plainly import an exact Order,
suitable Disposition, and close Connection of the Parts, or Members among
themselves, and in Consequence thereof a social Performance of religious
Offices.

EVERY Joint supplieth, (Pases aples tes epichregias, aple ab aptein tangere)
The Word Joint is derived from a Verb that signifies to touch, and points to
the Ligaments, Veins, and Nerves of the Body, by which the Members of it are
joined to the Head, and among each other, says Zanchy.

IN a Word, the visible Church, in the Verse referred to, and some preceding,
is compared to a natural Body, and to a House, in which we may observe these
Things.

1. THAT the Head of this mystical Body, the Foundation of this mystical
Building, is JESUS CHRIST.

2. THAT the several Members of this Body, the several Parts of this Building
are united to the Head, to the Foundation, and among themselves, by certain
Ligaments, Joints, and Junctures.

3. THAT upon this Union depends, and by the Joints or Bands thereof are
conveyed, the Church's Edification and Growth.

4. THAT the Band or Ligament of a visible Union to the Head or Foundation, is
a Profession of Faith, (in Subjects capable of it) and of a vital Union the
Grace of Faith (Heb. x. 23.) Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith
without wavering, for he is faithful that promised. (Ephesians. iii. 17.) That CHRIST
may dwell in your Hearts by Faith.

MOREOVER that the Bands and Ligaments of Union among themselves, are
especially these,

1. TRUTH, Agreement in essential and necessary Truths, Now we beseech you
Brethren by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
Things, and that there be no Divisions among you (or Schisms as it is in the
Original, Chismata) but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same Mind,
and in the same Judgment, (1 Cor. i. 10.)

BY Schisms, the Apostle means new Factions, Sects and Parties within the
Church, whereby it is torn, Ferments promoted in its Bowels, the Affections of
the People uncharitably and unreasonably alienated from each other, not upon
the Account of Differences in Essentials of Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline,
but circumstantial Matters; while some gloried in this, and some in the other
Patron; some carnally crying up Paul, and some Apollos, and some Cephas, to the
Disparagement of each other, and the Prejudice of the Church's Peace and Union;
so Calvin, Beza, Pareus, Grotius, and Symachus.

THE Conduct of the Apostle Paul upon this critical Occasion, was truly
amiable, and worthy of a Minister of JESUS CHRIST, he refused their immoderate
Respect, and spoke DIMINUTIVELY of HIMSELF, with Design to stop the perilous
CAREER of the People, in making new Parties, Sects, and Factions, and setting
himself at the Head of one of them, he would by no Means accept of such a false
Honor, to the Prejudice of CHRIST'S Kingdom, No! He abhorred it! He would
rather be condemned and despised by the Corinthians, than condemned by GOD, and
his own Mind; for being the Instrument of uncharitahle Schisms and Factions!

HE therefore nobly ventures his Character in the Cause of GOD, the Cause of
the Church's Peace and Union, and fearlessly exposes himself to all the Fury of
their Reflections, for his Fidelity to his Master: Reflections which were as
unreasonable as they were well intended.

THAT blessed Man, endeavored to stop the violent Torrent of Faction, by
addressing the Corinthians in this humble Language,

BUT is CHRIST divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were ye baptized in the
Name of Paul? 1 Cor. i. 13. How came these Parties? There is but one CHRIRT.
Did I enlist any that I baptized, under my own Banner? Seeing the Head is but
one, why should the Body be divided?

NOW compare the aforesaid Scriptures with what the same Apostle says Phil.
iii. 15, 16. and you may easily perceive, that he urges Forbearance in lesser
Things, and only proposes Essentials as Terms of Communion, the Words are
these, Let us therefore as many as be perfect (i. e. sincere and grown
Christians) be thus minded, and if in any Thing ye be otherwise minded, GOD
shall reveal even this unto you, nevertheless whereto we have already attained,
let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same Thing. But

2. ANOTHER Bond or Ligament of Union among ourselves, is Love, Ephesians. iv. 15.
But speaking the Truth in Love, may grow up into him in all Things, which is
the Head even CHRIST. The Words are beautiful in the Original, Aletheuontes en
agape, which either signifies the Sincerity or Truth of our Love, or our
contending for Truth, in a Consistency with Love, viz. our speaking for Truth
with a loving Frame of Mind, without Anger or Bitterness, seeing the Wrath of
Man works not the Righteousness of GOD. And likewise our forbearing from Love,
those that differ from us in lesser Things. Truth and Love agree sweetly, in
the harmonious System of the Religion of JESUS, and should they not do so in
our Sentiments, Temper of Mind, and outward Behavior? But to proceed, a

3d. LIGAMENT of Union with our Brethren, is Peace, and hence we are commanded
to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of PEACE. Without a peaceable
Temper and Behavior, Union can neither be obtained, or long preserved.

TO these I may add the Observance of the Order CHRIST has instituted, and the
joint or social Performance of religious Duties, which the Words joined
together and compacted import, as was observed before, which Duties are of
noble Tendency to promote and preserve Union among ourselves.

FROM all which I would observe, that when any of these Duties are neglected,
the Edification and Increase of CHRIST'S Body mystical is opposed and marred.

4. THIS Peace CHRIST laid down his Life to purchase, as well as Peace with
GOD, which is signified by the Commemoration of his Death, in the Ordinance of
his Supper, designed to promote Love and Fellowship among the Members of his
visible Church: and hence we are exhorted, to walk in Love, as CHRIST also has
loved us, and given himself for us, an Offering and Sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor to GOD.

5. Are not Christian Churches agreeing in Fundamentals, the Children of the
Kingdom, the visible Children of GOD, and so related to each other as Brethren;
and should such quarrel together in their Way to Heaven? Does this become their
Profession, their Relation, their Character, their Hopes? O do not the Enemies
of Religion warm their Hands at the fire of their contentions? Do they not
deride their scandalous Debates, about Matters (comparatively speaking) of
small Moment; and are not their Prejudices against Religion altogether, hereby
fatally strengthened and confirmed?

6. Quarelling about lesser Things, much obstructs our religigious Progress,
for it diverts our Minds from more important, delightful and Soul nourishing
Subjects, breaks the pleasing calm of our Souls, and stirs up sinful Anger.
This is so self evident a truth, that even a Belarmine acknowledged it, and
signified his being weary of Thorny Controversies of small Moment, and his
choosing to dwell upon practical Subjects, that tend to improve and delight the
Mind, and reform the Life.

7. Angry Debates, and Divisions about little Things, are awful Presages of
impending Judgments and Calamities. When the Sea roars and swells, it looks
like an approaching Storm! The lamentable Desolation of the Protestant Churches
of France, by the unparellel'd Treachery and Barbarity of the Papists, was
prefac'd by sinful and scandalous Divisions among themselves!

Angry Debates and Divisions about Circumstantial Matters in Religion,
dishonor GOD, render the Church Contemptible, make the several Members of it
terrible to each other, instead of being desirable and amiable, engines of
mutual Sorrow and Mischief, instead of Comfort and Benefit; and likewise Mar
the public Good, which every generous Mind has a principal regard to. For
Zyon's sake says the Zealous Prophet, I will not hold my Peace, and for
Jerusalems sake I will not rest, until the Righteousness thereof go forth as
Brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns; and the Gentiles
shall see thy Righteousness, and all the Kings thy Glory. Alas the Conversion
of Strangers from the Error of their Ways to the Wisdom of the just, is hereby
unhappily prevented, for nothing Hardens and Stumbles such more, then the
unchristian Contentions and Animosities of Professors; it is on this Account
that our Savior pronounces a w^ to the World because of Offenses.

YEA my Brethren such Divisions and Contentions, tend to and would certainly
issue in, did not Almighty Power interpose, the utter Destruction of the
visible Kingdom of Christ, upon the Earth; for as he himself who is the Wisdom
of the Father, justly and excellently observes; how can a House that is divided
against itself stand.

BUT by Peace and Union, on the Terms before observed, GOD is glorified, in our
obedience to his Precepts, and Conformity to his attributes, Religion is
honored, by a real, a visible and amiable Representation, of its peaceful,
kind and beneficent Nature.

THE visible Church is strengthened, and made awful to its inveterate Enemies,
its implacable opposers: Our own Minds are delighted with the most agreeable
prospect and sweet Sensations; and others Benefit is thereby promoted, for
being at Peace with them they are the more ready to receive our Council and
Reproofs!

BUT should we join with those who we fear are Graceless?

I Answer the Terms of Church fellowship, that GOD has fixed are soundness in
the Main Doctrines of Religion, and a regular Life; a Heritick says the
Apostle after the first and second Admonition reject; him that is weak in Faith
receive ye, but not to doubtful disputation: Receive one another, as CHRIST has
received you, to the Glory of GOD.

WHEN Persons are sound in the Fundamental Truths of Religion, and regular in
Life, we ought to hope well of them, till they prove the contrary by their
Practice; and receive them to Communion, Charity thinks no Evil, and hopes all
Things, that are good; whatever jealousies we may have and perhaps sinful ones,
they should be kept Secret, and not divulged to our Neighbors Prejudice, and
far less made Terms of Communion.

THE standard of our King and Master we must buckle to, and not follow our own
fickle and often partial and biased Fancies and Humors. The aforesaid Terms
that CHRIST has fixed are invariable and perpetual, nor can we add to them,
without reflecting upon his Wisdom and Fidelity, and invading his
incommunicable Royalty, without rebelliously attempting to commense Kings in
his Kingdom, contrary to his Order, and robbing his Subjects of the Liberty,
wherewith he has made them Free.

THE aforesaid Terms that Christ has fixed may be certainly known, and
therefore they are rational. But some of the novel and superstitious Terms,
which some good Men have invented, though with a pious design, are irrational,
because they cannot be certainly known, unless it be supposed that Churches are
infallible in their Determinations; a claim which the Protestants, (some
Enthusiasts excepted) have not pretended to, at least in Words; but the Bible
is a stranger to such Terms of Communion. I know not one Passage in it, that
proves converting Grace, or the Churches Judgment of it, to be a Term of
Christian Communion of divine Appointment. If any think otherwise, let them
prove it, and I will give an attentive Ear, and readily submit to their
Instruction and Correction: But I humbly conceive, they will find it a hard
task, without producing another Bible. I cannot find that the Christians of the
three first Centuries after CHRIST made gracious experiences, or the Church's
Judgment about them Terms of Communion* they made no Enquiries about them as to
Baptism, and all that were Baptized, and of adult Age, and free from Church
Censure, were admitted to the Sacrament.


BUT must not we adhere to our former Testimony to Conversion?

I Answer, Yes, and we do so by declaring our assent to the Holy Scriptures,
and by maintaining our excellent Westminster Confession of Faith and
Catechisms, which open the Nature, and assert the Necessity of Conversion
agreeable to the sacred Oracles.

AND as to our fallible Opinion concerning the late religious Appearances,
which is a distinct Thing from the Doctrine of Conversion in general; we may
and ought to maintain it, but in a consistency with Peace, Love and Charity.

THERE is a vast difference between our holding our uncertain Opinion
concerning the reality of this or that Instance of Conversion, and our imposing
it upon others as a Term of Communion, either Ministerial or Christian. Such as
are for imposing their private Opinion about Matters of Liberty, which they
cannot certainly know, of which Kind particular Instances of a Work of
Conversion in any (in our Times) undoubtedly are, as a Term of Church
Fellowship, refusing to join with them in Communion, until they be of their
Sentiment; should either produce their Charter from the Holy-Scriptures, for
such an extraordinary claim of Power, for such an unprecedented kind of
Proceeding, or at least be silent, if they are not free to do what perhaps they
urge upon others, viz. to confess their Error in Principle, and Indiscretion in
Practice.

IF they cannot prove a Difference of Opinion from theirs, respecting some
Instances of a Work of Coversion (for more or less don't alter the Kind) in
others of our Times, and since the first Ages of Christianity, to be a
fundamental Article of Religion, their Cause is entirely lost: And if they can,
Fundamentals are built upon a very precarious Bottom indeed; and how to
distinguish between such Fundamentals and Circumstantials, is I confess vastly
beyond the Reach of my Understanding: At this rate of Proceeding, the Number of
fundamental Articles, will increase or change every Age; for every Man's
Conversion, with all its Circumstances, makes one of the Number: If this Method
be followed, shall we not have a goodly Multitude of Fundamentals? Our
Confession of Faith will swell to a bulk much superior to the late Universal
History, twenty Volumns of which have been already printed, and a great Part
left yet undone.

IN short, such a Sentiment seems to me to be equally contrary to Scripture,
Reason, Antiquity, and the Peace and Union of the Churches of CHRIST.

INASMUCH as good Men may and do differ in Opinion about such uncertain Things.
Witness the Messrs. the Erskines and their followers, with others that might be
mentioned. To make them Terms of Communion, will oblige us to cast out of
Church Fellowship, those that are sound in the main Doctrines of Religion, and
regular in Life, whom CHRIST commands us to receive; and therefore it directly
opposes his Authority. Besides as it is an Addition to the Terms which the KING
of the Church has fixed, it is an Invasion of his Royalty, and an Infringement
upon our Brothers Liberty.

IS it not unreasonable to make that a Term of Communion which we cannot
certainly know, for hereby such as should be received are in Danger of being
rejected, as CHRIST himself observes in his Parable of the Tares.

WHAT Church from the Foundation of the World to the present Times, ever made
the open acknowledgment of some Men's Judgments, concerning the reality of some
Instances of Conversion, carried on in their Times, without the Testimony of
Miracles, a Term of Ministerial Communion. I confess I know of no Instance of
this kind, in Scripture, or History.

AND seeing in a Case of such uncertainty, as Men's Judgment of gracious
Experiences of others, good Men are apt to be of contrary Sentiments, because
of their different Degrees of Knowledge, different Experiences in some Things,
different Trials, Byasses, and natural Tempers, it has a direct Tendency to
alienate their Affections from each other, and so disturb the Churches Peace,
weaken her mutual Love, and break her social Union, and consequently tear the
seemless Coat of CHRIIT into an infinite Num^er of Parts; Yea and prevent a
desirable reunion, after unhappy Breaches, it is a schismatical Evil, pregnant
with dangerous Divisions, and manifold Mischiefs of hideous forms and ma^ignant
Influence. The Apostle Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans, ^ounsels with great
Seriousness, Christians to shun the Abettors of ^uch Evils, in the following
Language, Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and
Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them, for
they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ. And in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, he writes thus, for ye are yet Carnal, whereas there is among you
Envying and Strife, and Divisions; are ye not carnal and walk as Men? Against
this Evil he observes, that there should be no Schism in the Body, but the
Members should have the same Care one for another. Now ye are the Body of
Christ and Members in particular. Union is the Strength, the Beauty and Glory
of the visible Church, unita viz fortior; but Division covers it with Scandal,
and renders it weak and contemptible.

IF it be a commanded Duty to pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, to long for it,
to pursue after it, with Vehemence, rejoice in its Approaches, and to bewail
its Absence; it must needs be a great Iniquity to fly from it, as if it were a
Buck-bear, to reject the Offers of it upon reasonable Terms, to be grieved for
and frightened at its approaches, as if it were an Enemy, and pleased with its
Distance: This shows a distorted Judgment and distempered Heart: This Religion,
or rather misguided and ill-temper'd Zeal, and severe narrowness of Soul, is
directly contrary to right Reason and to the Christian Revelation; Contrary to
all social Offices, and every valuable Interest of Society. Alas its pity that
any who are sincere in Heart, should have such contracted, gloomy, and
irregular Views of Things! May it please the GOD of Mercy, Love and Peace, to
instruct, enlighten and reclaim them, and soften their well meant Rigours, and
untamed Fierceness into Gentleness and Love!

But how can those who have offended be received to Communion, without a
confession of their fault? I Answer Confession is twofold, eitheir virtual or
express, a virtual Confession of Sin is a Reformation from Sin, this
necessarily supposes a sight of Sin and Sorrow for it, in Cases of a moral
Nature. But express and public Acknowledgment in Words is not always
necessary; it is enough in some Circumstances of the Church, to have
Reformation, which is the End thereof: We have this Power, (viz. of Government)
to Edification and not to Destruction, says the Apostle. Discipline is designed
for the good, and building up of the visible Church, and therefore it must be
administered in such a way as tends to promote it, in such a Way as is suited to
its ordinary and extraordinary Circumstances. Reformation implies a real
Confession, which is much better than a verbal one, for it cannot be reasonably
supposed, that one will of his own accord reform from an Evil which he sees not
the Danger of.

TO imagine that our Lord by the Discipline he has instituted, always requires
an open and explicit Confession of Faults, even of a moral Nature, not only in
a Church formed and established, but even in a Church forming, or in its
Infancy, or in a broken and divided State; prejudiced against each other by
mutual Contentions and angry Debates, even after there is a Reformation and
Disposition to be at Peace upon equitable and honorable Terms, seems to make
Discipline an Enemy to Christ's Kingdom, a mischievous Engine to destroy what
it was designed to promote: I cannot be easily induced to imagine, that the
^l-wise and gracious Redeemer, would ever communicate to his Churches such an
irrational and pernicious plan of Government, which they had better be without
altogether, O! No. There is an amiable Harmony in all divine Truths, in all
divine Institutions, a noble moral Tendency to answer their Design, the Glory
of GOD and good of Mankind.

EXCELLENT Mr. Durham, one of the most pious, judicious and calm Divines of the
Scottish Nation, fully confirms what I have been now observing, in his truly
valuable Treatise of Scandal, a Book well worthy of our serious perusal.

BUT as to Offenses in Conduct, occasioned by different Sentiments in
Circumstantials, the Case is still more plain, that urging of acknowledgments,
when Controversies between the contending Parties are dropped, is unreasonable
and unjust, not only in an Infant and broken State of the Church, but even in a
Church united and formed; the Reason is, because it implies our imposing upon
others our Sentiments in Matters comparitively doubtful, contrary to the
Command of GOD, which obliges us to receive the Weak, or those that err in
Circumstantials only, but not to doubtful Disputations; what Christ has left
free, we should leave so too.

AND it is also contrary to the Apostles Practice, in Relation to the Jewish
and Gentile Christians, who contended about Days and Meats to that degree of
ungoverned, unchristian fierceness, that they condemned one another, and were
inclined to unchurch each other. Now did the Apostle encourage their rashness
and severity, and advise them to insist upon mutual open Acknowledgments of
their faults, in order to Love and Union; No, by no means* He understood the
Nature and Design of Church Government better than by unreasonable rigor and
harshness, to blow up the Churches Peace, Beauty and Strength.

OR did he desire the Gentiles, who were in the Right as to the Points in
Debate, to insist upon the Jews acknowledgment, or wait till the Jewish
Christians came and made Proposals of Peace; No. Instead hereof, he expressly
enjoins them to receive the weak. He was so far from the Severity mentioned,
that he did not say explicitly which Party was in the Right, or which was in
the wrong, as to the Matters they contended about; but made charitable
Apologies for both, as to their States toward God, and their pious Designs in
contrary Practices, respecting the Matters then controverted among them, He
that regards the Day, regards it unto the Lord; he that regards not the
Day to the Lord, he does not regard it.

IN the mean Time he reproved them smartly for their sinful judging of each
other, and well he might: for that God provoking, Church rending Iniquity, was
unspeakably worse than a m^stake in Opinion about the Points controverted among
them. Let not him that eats, says he, despise him that eats not; who art
thou that judges another Man's Servant? Why do thou judge thy Brother? and
why do thou set at naught thy Brother? for we shall all stand before the
Judgment Seat of Christ: Let us not therefore Judge one another any more, but
judge this rather, that no Man put a stumbling ^^lock, or occasion to fall, in
his Brothers Way. O blessed Advise, well worthy of an Apostle, well becoming
the genius of Christianity and Dictates of right Reason.

PEOPLE must be plainly told the evil and danger of this horrible impiety of
rash-judging, whether they will hear or whether they will forbear; even tho a
necessary corosive should, through their unrelenting obstinacy, aggravate the
Disease to appearance, and make it rage for a time with more fury and
fierceness against the friendly Hands who run the risk of their Reputation in
offering a Medicine for its Cure.

RASH-JUDING, Sirs, of Men's States and Designs in general, and more especially
about Things of a circumstantial Nature, is like a train of Gunpowder, which
tends to blow up the Churches Peace, Unity, Beauty, Comfort, Order, and
Usefulness, at one dismal blast.

TO divert the aforesaid contending Parties herefrom, the Apostle informs them,
that the Nature and Power of true Religion, did not consist in any Sentiments
and Controversies about Matters of small Moment. The Kingdom of God is not Meat
and Drink, says he, but Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. He
that in these Things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of Men.
(see Romans xiv) i. e. If we are agreed in main Points of Doctrine, Worship and
Discipline, and are Holy in Heart and Life, peaceable in Disposition and
Behavior, and have spiritual Complacence in GOD through a Mediator, Jehovah will
justify our Persons and Conduct, and Men of Piety, Judgment, Can^or and good
Temper, who are not under the sinful bias of Temptation and Party-Zeal, will
have charity for our Pers^n, and be pleased with our honest Attempts for God,
and the (...) of his visible Kingdom.

BUT to proceed, That the noble designs of Peace and Union might he carried on
among them, he advises them to beware of hurting their Brethren in their best
Interests, through want of Forbearance and Condescension in smaller Matters, for
Meat destroy not the Work of God: And likewise counsels them, especially in
Times of Temptation and Debate, (which was the Case of those he spoke to) to
keep their Opinion about Circumstantials to themselves, and be satisfied with
the Liberty of enjoying their own Judgment; have thou Faith, have it to thyself
before God; let every Man be fully persuaded in his own Mind. O! how far was
this blessed Apostle from a quarelsom, imposing Temper, in respect of
Circumstantials, or lesser Matters in Religion. To insist therefore upon the
absolute, universal and continual necessity of Acknowledgments, in all Cases of
Offense and Scandal, and especially of such as are occasioned by lesser Errors
in Sentiment, is to rebel against the commanding Authority of the great GOD,
and prefer our Wisdom to his, as well as to contradict the Practice of his
inspired Apostle.


BUT perhaps it will be objected, that what has been now said is not pertinent
to the Controversy of the Times.

I Answer, Why so? What is it that is disputed? Is it the necessity of
Conversion to God, in order to Salvation? No. That is freely acknowledged upon
both sides of the Question.

IS it the Nature of Conversion proposed in the Scriptures of Truth, and in our
excellent Confession of Faith agreeable thereto? No! For that is likewise
acknowledged by both the contending Parties.

IS it the Marks and Signs of Conversion mentioned in the Scriptures? No! For
these are also confessed by Persons of both Sides.

IS it the reality of those Instances of Conversion contained in the Bible? No!
The divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures, is equally asserted by both the
Parties in Controversy.

IS it whither some have not been converted, in the successive Ages of the
Christian Church, from the Apostle's Times to the present Day, and whether some
have not been converted in this Age, and in this Part of the World, and whether
Good has not been done, and some effectually changed to all Appearance during
the late Revival of Religion? No! For these Things are also acknowledged.

WHAT is it then that is controverted? Why our Opinion respecting the religious
Experiences of some in the late Times, and concerning the Number of such; it
has been disputed, whether those Experiences were of a saving Kind, and whether
the Number was so great, as is concluded by some.

AND is our OPINION concerning what we cannot certainly know, a great Matter
think ye? Or are we infallible in our Judgment my Brethren, about these Things
that are hid from the View of all Mortals? If not, why is all (...) Heat and
Flame about Uncertainties? But if we were infallible, a Claim which belongs to
none of the Sons of Adam, and which none of us has the Vanity to pretend to in
WORDS: Yet unless we could give that Gift to others, that differ from us in
some Circumstantials; I see no Reason for severe Censure upon them, for
indecent and ungovernable Heats against them!

DON'T let big Words, my Brethren, unexplained and undistinguished, frighten
you into a Panick of groundless Fear, or raise you into a Ferment of sinful
Anger; for Passion is a blind Guide, DECEIT lurks in Generals, nor does our
Anger work the Righteousness of GOD. Remember the just Rebuke, which the Meek
and loving JESUS gave to his Disciples James and John, for their fiery furious
Zeal against the Samaritans, for treating their Master ill, ye know not, says
CHRIST, what manner of Spirit ye are of, as if he had said, you are not
sensible what Wickedness is in your Disposition and Temper, how much Pride,
Peevishness, Passion, Prejudice, and personal Revenge is covered under and
mixed with your real honest Zeal for your Master's Honor! The Son of Man is
not come to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them; my Religion is to be
propagated by Love and Condescension, by Gentleness and Sweetness, and all the
amiable Methods of Endearment, not by Force and Bitterness, by Fire, Fury, and
Blood; I came to slay all Enmities of every Kind and Form, not to animate and
increase them, under any Pretext whatsoever. Now Sirs, examine the Matter
calmly, and let sober Reason touch the Point in Debate, and that which appears
like a huge Mount^in, when beheld at a Distance transiently and confusedly,
will shrink exceedingly; I had almost said into a Molehill, but I forbear. --
It does certainly shrink into a Circumstantial, and that is enough.

BE it supposed and asserted, that the late Revival of Religion had in diverse
Instances I mean of Individuals, all the external Signs of a divine Original;
yet can it be safely said, that these Signs are certain and infallible, or
equally evident to all that are pious? And can no charitable Apology be
reasonably made concerning the Mistakes of good Men. Are not even such liable
in Times of great Temptation, to the corrupt but insensible Byass's of
Prejudice and Passion? Pray was there nothing of the carnal Corinthian Disease
among us, in the late Times? Were not some too highly extolled, and others
depressed too low?

NO doubt different Degrees of Love, may and ought to be entertained toward
Men, according to the different Degrees of their Knowledge, apparent Goodness
and Usefulness; but in the mean Time none ought to be IDOLIZED upon the one
H^nd, nor should any be SLIGHTED and dis^uraged on the other: For Extremes both
ways are dangerous, and of f^al the Peace of the Church, and to (...) Souls o^
Men. Respect ^ou^d be shown to the ministerial Character in all ^se (...) ha^
been regularly introduced ^to the Min^y. Such wh^ (...) so^nd in the main
Pr^nciples of Religion, and (...) in Life, (...) be honored for their Work's
sake, their Office sake, nor should any be condemned positively as to the State
of their Souls, who have the aforesaid Fruits or Evidences of Religion, which
are the only certain Scriptural Standards of our fixed Sentiments concerning
Men, and public Proceedings toward them.

WAS there no rash Judging in the late Times on both Sides the Question? None
that had religious Impressions and lost them, and turned to open Profaneness, or
dangerous Errors and Delusions? Was there nothing extraordinary in the bodily
Commotions of some which give some Occasion of Prejudice? Were there no
Irregularities and Indiscretions in no Part of the Country? No false Reports
spread of Persons and Things? Well, if there was any Truth in any or all of
these Particulars, why may it not be supposed, that some good Men might be led
insensibly through a secret wrong Bias of Prejudice, to mistake in Opinion
concerning the aforesaid Instances of Conversion, and of Consequence to speak
and act agreeable to that Mistake?

IN a Word, Sirs, the controverted POINT is either fundamental or
circumstantial, I know of no Medium, now choose which ye will, if you say that
it is a fundamental, you consequently say that the holy Scriptures are
imperfect, for they want this Fundamental, there is not a Word of it in the
Bible: The Scriptures declare of themselves that they are perfect, and able to
make the Man of GOD so, but how can they be perfect if they want a fundamental
Article? Can a House be said to be perfect that wants a Part of its Foundation,
or an impo^nt Piece of the Building very near to it? And does not this Opinion
bear hard upon our excellent Westminster Confession of Faith, as if it was
deficient in Fundamentals, for it has nothing of this in it.

IF you say it is a circumstantial Point, you have no Right to impose it upon
others, no Reason for your irregular Ferments of Party-Zeal, Prejudice and
Censure!

DOES it not agree with that Pride, Resentment, and immoderate Self-love which
we are all by Nature deeply tainted with? To cry out with much Heat, against
others Mistakes and Faults in lesser Matters, and vehemently urge their being
brought to the Stool of Repentance for them, as if it was a Fundamental in
Christianity, while in the mean Time we are either ignorant of our own, or very
hard to be convinced of them, and unwilling to acknowledge them? Is this right,
is it commendable? On the contrary, does not the Word of GOD recommend Mercy,
and Charity toward others, and a wholesome Severity toward ourselves? and
does not the true Spirit of the Gospel, the real Temper of sincere Christianity
as far as we are possessed of it, incline us proportionally hereto? O, it is
pity that the Eye that sees others should not see itself!

MOREOVER, I must in Justice add to what has been offered, that the Reverend
Brethren, who cast us out of Synodical Communion, do deny the Charge of
endeavoring to prejudice People against the Work of GOD'S Power and Grace, in
the Conversion of Sinners, wherever there were any hopeful Appearances of it.
Mr. John Thomson, in their Name, observes upon this Head as follows,

IT is true, there are some Things in our Brethren's Conduct, which we cannot
but condemn; and have condemned and spoken against both in private and public;
and some Things also which are the frequent Effects of their Preaching on many
of their Hearers, which we cannot so highly esteem of, as both they and their
Admirers do. Among which he mentions crying out aloud in the midst of the
Congregation, in the Time of public Worship; and others falling down half
dead, or working like Persons in Convulsion Fits. And in another Paragraph, he
speaks in the following candid charitable Strain, to the Honor of the late
Revival of Religion, as well as the Honor of the Ministers he opposed, It is
true, since our Brethren have thus intinerated, there are, as I am informed and
partly know, a great many who are stirred up to have more serious Thoughts
about their Soul's Concerns than ever they had before; which is a Thing truly
to be rejoiced in; and many, it is said, are much reformed, in several
Particulars of moral Practice, which also is just Matter of Satisfaction; may
the Lord grant that it may be more and more so. And elsewhere he speaks in the
following Christian-like humble Strain, As to the general Complaint which Mr.
Blair in his Introduction makes, concerning the low State of Religion, and
experimental Godliness, and the Influence which the Negligence and Remisness,
of Ministers in the Duties of their Office and Station, have upon the same, I
acknowledge that I believe there is too much Ground for it; and that it is just
Matter of Mourning and Lamentation, to all who have the Welfare of Zyon, and
Prosperity of Souls at their Heart; yea, I am firmly persuaded, that our
Barrenness and Fuitlessness under the Means of Grace, the Decay of vital
Godliness in both Ministers and People, our too great Ease and Contentedness
with a lifeless, lukewarm Orthodoxy of Profession, is one principal Evil
whereby our GOD has been provoked against us, to suffer us to fall into such
Divisions and Confusions, as we are now visibly involved in. And O, that the
Lord, by his holy Spirit, would send a Reviving to his own Work in the Hearts
and Lives of both Ministers and People. In another Part of the same Book he
speaks thus, However, we rejoice that the great GOD, who over rules all Events
for his own Glory, and the Good of his Church, does make the Gospel preached by
these Brethren, effectual in many, to stir them up to a more serious
Consideration of their Soul-Concerns, than ever before. I also hope that our
gracious Lord will give us, who are in the Ministry, Grace to observe and obey
his Voice by his Providence to us, to search and try our Ways, and turn again
unto the Lord; to search out our own real Faults and short comings, in our
Christian and Ministerial Capacity, and to study Repentance and Reformation, as
there is great Need we should; the general Lifelesness and Lukewarmness of the
present Age, no doubt has had too much Place with us, and Influence upon us,
may the Lord teach us now to hear the rod, and who has appointed it, and
without delay to obey his Call to us thereby. See his Book upon the Government
of the Church of CHRIST, Pages 29, 32, 33, 34, 48.
And in Page 119. he says, 'Whatever be the instrumental or inferior Cause of
this our confused divided, melancholy Condition; we may be sure the Lord is
pleading a Controversy with us; we certainly have offended and provoked him to
anger against us, and so to suffer a Spirit of DIVISION and DISCORD to get
footing among us. And having made mention of several prevailing Evils, he says,
Neither is it to be doubted, but that we who are in the Ministry, are in no
small Degree justly chargeable with the Guilt of these Evils, on various
Accounts; by our personal Guilt of those abounding Sins; by our not bearing
Testimony against them with that Zeal the Case requires, both doctrinarily and
in a disciplinary Way; by our not mourning over them, and lamenting with due
sorrow of Heart before the Lord; by our too lax and untender walk in our own
private Conversation; by our being too Carnal in our conversing with our People
and one another. -- And farther I think it not unlikely that God in his
infinite Wisdom, has permitted our Brethren, who appear to be so MUCH MORE
ZEALOUS then WE for carrying on a WORK of CONVERSION -- which they apprehend is
wholly neglected by us, as it is indeed too much, to be Instruments in the
Lord's Hands to chastise us for our neglects and short comings.

NOW seeing the Reverend Mr. John Thomson appeared as the Appologist of the
present SYNOD of Philadelphia, it may be reasonably presumed, that he speaks
the Mind of at least the generality of that Body; and therefore it is evident
from the aforesaid Passages, that they were far from opposing (with Design) the
late REVIVAL of RELIGION; that on the contrary they expressly ACKNOWLEDGED it,
REJOICED in it, and PRAYED for its INCREASE; yea and in several Instances as
HUMBLY as PUBLICLY ACKNOWLEDGED their own Imperfections in Relation to the
present Debate. Do not the aforesaid Passages, breath the candid and humble
Spirit of sincere Christianity? Why therefore is this string of Acknowledgment
so much harped upon? Pray have we done in this as much as our Brethren? Or are
we forsooth absolutely Perfect and Infallible even in a Time of Temptation and
Debate? For my own Part, I must declare my utter abhorrence of inflexible
Stifness in our own Justification in every Thing in so perplexing a
Controversy, of so long Continuance, as well as of unrelenting Rigours and
Severities against our Brethren.

O that the God of Peace and Love would in Mercy give us all such a pacifick
Temper, as the very Reverend Dr. Bates ascribes to excellent Mr. Baxter in his
Funeral Sermon, in the following Words, His pacifick Spirit was a clear
Character of his being a Child of God. How ardently he endeavored to cement
the Breaches among us, which others widen and keep open, is publicly known. He
said to a Friend, I can as willingly be a Martyr for LOVE as for any Article of
the Creed. It Is strange to astonishment, says the Doctor, that those who agree
in the substantial and great Points of the reformed Religion, and are of
differing Sentiments only in Things not so clear, nor of that moment as these
wherein they consent, should still be opposite Parties. Methinks the
Remembrance how our Divisions lately exposed us to our watchful Adversary, and
were almost fatal to the Interest of Religion, should conciliate our
Affections. Our common Danger and common Deliverance should prepare our Spirits
for a sincere and firm Union. Integrity, with Charity, would remove those
Things that have so long disunited us. What Dr. Bates observes, is agreeable to
that excellent Maxim, in necessariis unitas, in non necessariis Libertas, in
omnibus charitas. In fundamentals Unity, in circumstantials Liberty, and in all
Things Charity. O its pity that this does not universally obtain among the
Children of Men!

BUT are we not enjoined to turn away from those that have Form of Godliness,
but deny the Power thereof, (2 Timothy iii. 5.)

I answer, those whom the Apostle advises Timothy to turn away from, were both
profane in Practice, and heretical in Sentiment: for thus he describes them in
the Context, covetouus, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents,
unthankful, unholy, without natural Affection, (aspondei make bates) such as
will be held by no Bonds, or rather as the Word is translated, Romans i. 31.
implacable, Men so full of Malice, that they will admit of no Terms of Peace.
False Accusers, (Diaboloi DEVILS, for so the Word signifies) incontinent,
FIERCE, and despisers of them that are good, Traitors, heady, high-minded,
lovers of Pleasure, more than lovers of GOD: Men of corrupt Minds, roprobate
concerning the Faith.

BUT, why then are they said to have a Form of Godliness? (Morphosin) a Mask or
Visor.

I answer, they had in it Speech in Pretense, but not in Practice or Power;
they pretended to a right Way of worshipping GOD, and to be the only true
Church; and this was all: And therefore according to the Rules of the Gospel,
they were not fit Persons to associate with.

BUT was not the Prophet enjoined to take forth the Precious from the Vile?

ANSWER, Yes: That is, says Pool, He was to separate the precious Truths of
GOD, from the vile Conceits of Men; or rather to preach so, as to distinguish
good and bad Men from one another. To the same Purpose speaks Mr. Henry, in his
Annotations, That the Good and Bad should be distinguished in our Preaching,
not by their Names, but by their Characters, and each have his proper Portion
given him. To the like Effect speak Piscator and Calvin.

WHEN there is a Breach of Union in a Society, should not that Party that is
most in the right, tarry, till the other sue for Peace?

I answer with Mr. Durham, No: The more they are in the Right, and the less
Need they have of Peace upon their own account, the more self-denying and noble
are their innocent humble Condescentions, their early and earnest Suits for
Peace and Union for GOD'S sake, and for his Kingdom's sake, and not for their
own! The Religion of JESUS, is not a business of Pride, of State, or Stoutness,
(that hangs on haughty Ceremony) but of Humility and Self-denial; the more of
these Graces we have, and exercise, the more we imitate the blessed IMANUEL,
and the more we partake of, and express the Spirit of his Religion, and conform
to its important aad truly noble Design. Surely as Solomon observes, It is a
Glory to pass over a Transgression, but for Men to search their own Glory, it
not Glory. He that has no Rule over his own Spirit, is like a City that is
broken down, and without Walls, but he that is stow to Anger is better than the
Mighty; and he that rules his Spirit, than he that takes a City.

IF it be said, that there is no Necessity of this Peace and Union, we are well
enough as we are.

I answer, that there is always a Necessity of Obedience to GOD'S commanding
Authority, nor are we ever well, but while we endeavor to comply therewith.
Now is it not the Command of GOD, that we should pray for the Peace of
Jerusalem, and keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace? If we should
keep Unity when we have it, should not we labor to recover it when it is lost?

BUT perhaps some may object, to this Purpose, that to join with a Company of
dead Men, is the ready way to make us deader than we are.

ANSWER, It is cruel and censorious Judging, to condemn the States of those we
know not; and to condemn positively and openly the spiritual States of such as
are sound in fundamental Doctrines, and regular in Life. The Way to obtain
quickening Grace, is the Path of Duty, and not the scandalous Practice of that
God-provoking and Church-rendring Iniquity RASH-JUDGING, this may quicken
indeed, but not to any Thing that is good: but to Backbiting, Slandering,
Wrath, Malignity, and all Manner of Mischief! O! that a gracious GOD would open
the Eyes of the Children of Men, to see the inexpressible Baseness and Horrors
of this detestable IMPIETY, that is pregnant with inumerable Evils!

AGAIN, it may be objected, that we are enjoined in diverse Places of Scripture,
to beware of Wolves in Sheep's clothing, of Dogs, of Foxes, etc.

I answer, these Places, and others of like tendency, if they are strictly
examined, together with the Context, where they are they will be found to
respect in my OPINION, primarily, principally and directly erroneous and
heretical Teachers, such may be known, and such should be with Care avoided;
but to separate from such as are sound in essential and necessary Articles, of
Faith, regular in Life, and edifying in their Ministry, merely or only because
they differ from us in some circumstantial Points which they do not impose, or
are judged by us to be unregenerate, is uncharitable, unscriptural, and of
dangerous Tendency! As this Practice wants a divine Warrant, so it puts the
Peace and Union of the visible Church of CHRIST, upon a very uncertain and
precarious Bottom, and opens a Door to inumerable mischevious and scandalous
Rents and Divisions! And if it be sinful to make a Breach on such a Foundation,
(which has been ever my Opinion, though now I confess, through GOD'S Mercy, I have
a more distinct and enlarged View of the Case than formerly,) it must needs be
so to keep up the Breach, to neglect or refuse reasonable Overtures of Peace,
upon such a Foundation.

IF it be farther said, that the Church is now in a cold declining State, and
that when there was more Liveliness, and more Good done, no Proposals of Peace
or Union were made, nor was there any Prospect of it.

I answer, the Church is now in its ordinary State, in which Men being calm,
can best examine and judge concerning the Doctrines of Religion, although not so
many are alarmed out of their Security, as some Time since, yet through divine
Goodness, some are awakened and to Appearance converted; and the Body of CHRIST
is edified, for which there is great Cause of Thankfulness. We are not wont to
think it a bad Year, in temporal Respects, because we have not such an
extraordinary Harvest, as in the seven plenteous Years in Egypt, when the Earth
brought forth by Handfuls, or as the Jews had every sixth Year in Canaan, when
through the surprising Blessing of GOD, the Earth brought forth Fruit sufficient
for three Years.

SOME Years past, the Church in this American Wilderness, was in an
extraordinary Situation, by Reason of a very uncommon Effusion of divine
Influence, in the Conviction, and Conversion of Sinners, (to all Appearance) in
much greater Numbers than what is usual, but the Ignorance of some, and corru^t
Passions of others, mixing therewith, cast a Cloud over the blessed Work of
GOD, and were at least the Occasion of Offense and Stumbling to some (which if
they had more PATIENTLY ENDURED, for a Time, would probably have prevented
unhappy Consequences,) These Things together with some difference of Sentiment
about lesser Matters and warm Disputes pro and con respecting them, raised the
Ferment so high, that it was to no Purpose, to make Proposals of Peace,
speedily after the Rupture, till the Minds of the contending Parties, became
more calm, and took more Time to reflect upon, and examine Matters with more
Impartiality and Exactness.

FARTHER, there was as hopeful Appearances, of ministerial Success before the
Breach, as after, and this is certain, that Breaches of Communion, being
carnal, have no Tendency to Success or any Good.

IF the Objection could be proved, which I believe cannot, yet it would
conclude nothing: The variable Frames of Men's Minds, and Successes of their
Labors, which a Sovereign GOD dispenses with infinite variety, can be no Rule
of Action to us, to the Law and to the Testimony. -- Duty is ours, but Events
are GOD'S.

SUCCESS in a great degree, will not prove those that have it to be right in
all their Sentiments, and Conduct respecting lesser Things. No! a gra^ious GOD
often overlooks, as it were Mistakes in Opinion in such Matters, and many
Imperfections in his poor Servants, who are in the Main upright before him, and
blesses their Labors notwithstanding; to deny this is to ascribe Success to
one Sect or Party only, which is exceeding uncharitable: This enthusiastical
Argument which I am now opposing, shows a want of better, and therefore
manifests the Badness of the Cause for which it is produced.

IF there is not so much Appearance of Zeal among Professors at present, as
formerly, yet I trust it has this valuable superior advantage, viz. that it is
more ^ing, at least in some and better tempered with Humility, Meek^^ss and
Love. Is (...) a little grain of solid Gold preferable to a great lump of
Brass, that has some mixture of Gold in it, notwithstanding its superior bulk
and showy Appearance! Much Ignorance and wildfire, much unmerciful rashness
and severity sometimes attend the Zeal of young Converts, who are Ignorant and
of a passionate Temper, which it is a favor to be delivered from, through
farther acquaintance with ourselves, by a variety of Trials, outward and
inward. Nor is it any Argument of coldness or decays in Religion, to have that
fiery, furious fierceness against others, softened and qualified with Charity,
Meekness and Mercy; but of the Contrary, namely, of real advances in true
Holiness, whatever its misguided votaries pretend to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

BUT if we are in any Measure grown cold, the best way to obtain quickening, is
to obey the blessed GOD in praying and striving, as much as in us lies, for the
Peace of Jerusalem. The Path of Peace and Love, so far as is consistent with
essential and necessary Truths, is certainly the Way which God himself has
chaulk'd out, to obtain that quickening which is of the right Kind.

BUT does not our joining with those that hold circumstantial Errors, imply our
Approbation of them?

I Answer, No, by no means! No more than our joining with imperfect People,
infers our approving all their Imperfections. For if the Case was so, it would
be altogether sinful to unite into a Church State, because all are imperfect,
there is no Man that lives and sineth not, but that God who cannot look upon
Sin but with abhorrence has appointed a Union in Churches and therefore the
other is false.

BESIDES the Almighty commands us to receive the Weak, as I have before
observed, or such as Err only in Circumstantials. Now if our joining with them
in Church fellowship, necessarily included, our Approbation of their Errors,
then it would follow, that the GOD of Truth commanded us to approve of Error,
which is impossible and blasphemous. No our joining with them only shows, our
mutual Agreement in essential and necessary Articles, and our Charity for them,
as Children of the Kingdom, or rightful Members of the visible Church.

IT may be again objected, that Paul being beaten publicly by the Magistrates,
uncondemn'd declined to go out of the Prison privately, till they came and
fetched him, ( Act. xvi. 37.)

I Answer, That in Order to understand this Scripture aright, it should be
observed, that by the Porcian and Sempronian Laws, it was utterly unlawful to
beat a Roman Citizen unless the Sentence of Death had been pronounced upon him;
and still more so when the beating was public, and the Cause unheard; so
Cicero, Hesiod, Appuleius, and Tertulian Witness, with many others.

ACCORDING to the Constitution of said Laws, when a Roman Citizen was wronged,
the Majesty of the Roman People was reckoned to be wronged or les'd, says
Grotius.

NOW the Pagan Magistrates of Philippi, a Roman Colony, being stirred up by the
Clamours of the People, broke the aforesaid Laws in ordering Paul and Silas to
be beaten publicly and imprisoned, who were not condemned to Death, being
ignorant they were Roman Citizens: The Apostle knowing that when the
Magistrates came to understand this, they would be terrified with the
Apprehension of incurring the Displeasure of the Roman Empire for so manifest a
Violation of their Laws, ( Act. xxii. 29) and therefore ready to come into some
Condescentions to prevent it; prudently declined going out of Prison directly,
in a private manner as they were desired, and insisted on the Magistrates
coming themselves and bringing them out, alleging that they were Romans. This
the Apostle probably did to prevent future Severities of the like Kind; and
partly to vindicate their Characters from the Imputation of Crimes that
demerited such scandalous corporal Punishment.

GROTIUS observes justly, that Paul knew how to use the Roman Laws for the
Defense of Inocence and a good Cause.

BUT can any Body think, that the Apostle would have stayed some Years in
Prison, when he had Liberty to go out in Case the Magistrates had delayed their
coming so long. No! Surely.

IN a Word, we are to learn from this Instance, the necessity of human
Prudence, especially in Affairs of a civil Nature, and therefore it is foreign
to the Point in Debate: The cases are not parallel, which appears thus, in the
one, the Persons Offending were Pagan Magistrates, the Offense was upon one
side only, the Offense was of a civil Nature, depriving the Apostle of the
right of a Roman Citizen: The Offense was committed against the civil Laws of
the Land, as well as against the Law of Nature directly. But in the other Case,
the Persons offending are Brethren, of the sacred Character, professing the
same fundamental Principles of the Christian Religion; the Offenses are not
against the civil Laws of the Land, nor against the Law of Nature, (directly)
but have been occasioned by difference in Opinion about Circumstantials in
Religion; the Offenses have been mutual in a greater or lesser degree, in
Matter or Manner of management; the Offenses are not properly of a civil Nature.

NOW seeing the Cases are not parallel, no just inference can be drawn from the
one to the other, of deffering Endeavors after Peace and Union, until the
Party that is most in the fault, come first into some Condescensions in order
to it; and indeed as it is in itself unjust to draw the same Conclusion from
different Premises, so it likewise makes the Apostle contradict himself, for in
the 14th Chap. of his Epistle to the Romans, he exhorts Parties contending
about Circumstantials, to come into a Peace and Union without such
Preliminaries; nor is it reasonable that any one should neglect his Duty
because another neglects his; for if so, he may possibly neglect it during
Life, and thus make void the Law and yet be guiltless. But supposing the Cases
were parallel, the aforesaid Instance would not conclude, for there has been a
delay already of several Years, and we do not know that the Apostle delayed so
much as one Day

BUT don't mistake me, I am for Peace and Union, though I insist upon
Acknowledgment.

I Answer, It may be so in Words and Intention, but not in Deed. Is it not very
inconsistent in a Case of Debate of a long Continuance, wherein are mutual
complaints of Misconduct, flowing from a difference of Sentiment in lesser
Things, for one of the Parties to urge Acknowledgment, and yet pretend Peace,
seeing it directly tends to renew the War? For the Right of Self-Vindication is
equal upon both Sides; and if one has a right to require Acknowledgment, so has
the other, and doubtless will in such a Case; for self-love is common to all,
and a due Degree of it is but reasonable. This severe Method therefore of
course brings upon the Carpet all the dormant Controversies that have been
between the contending Parties, and loudly summons them to War and Arms, both
offensive and defensive: This excites them respectively to defend their own
Conduct, and to charge and recriminate upon the others; and hence the Churches
Wounds are like to bleed afresh, and the Breach instead of being healed will be
widen'd: For how can Men, with a good Conscience, acknowledge that to be wrong
which they don't see to be wrong? And where has God obliged us upon pain of
Exclusion from Church fellowship, to be of one Opinion in every little Thing?
And thus in this Way, the Churches Peace and Union are like to be perpetually
prevented. Now can we suppose reasonably that the All-wise God in order to
promote Peace and Union (in a Case of this Nature) enjoins us to take a Meth^^
^^at is but an alarm to War, and tends to increase the Debate. Will not some be
tempted to say, that while Acknowledgment is insisted on, by any of the Parties
in Controversy, as a Term of Communion, and in the mean Time they do not bewail
the want of Peace and Union, nor Use any Method to remove Uneasinesses, (but on
the Contrary perhaps such as tend to inflame the Debate) I say will not some be
tempted to think, that all their talk of Peace is a mere sham and pretense,
Words and no more, empty Words and Flourishes, without a meaning, unless it be
to screne themselves, but in vain, from the dint of numerous Passages of holy
Scripture, which enjoin Peace and Union among those that profess the same
Foundation P^ciples of Religion, and forbid the contrary, which it would ^e a
shame explicitly and formally to oppose; this would look like an abandoning of
the Bible, and commencing open War against the Christian Religion. Here it may
be queried, whether it would not be more candid and consistent, to say in plain
Words, that unless others come to be of our Minds in all Circumstantials, we
will have nothing to do with Peace; but on the Contrary, are determined for
War, Debate Schisms and Confusions during Life! For by the same Rule that one
circumstantial of human Invention is made a Term of Communion, a Thousand may
be made; and then what will become of the Churches Peace and Union?

BUT do not we by coming into a Union without Acknowledgment, give up the Work
of GOD?

I Answer, No. We do and may retain our Opinion concerning it till Death, only
we do not make it a Term of Communion to others, for which we have no Authority
in the Scriptures. Did the inspired Apostle Paul advise the Gentile Christians
to give up the Truths respecting Liberty, for which they contended, when he
exhorted them to receive the Jews to Communion, that denied them? If yea, then
the Bible is wrong! For the aforesaid Advice is of the same Original with the
rest of the Scriptures. If nay, the Objection vanishes! If every Thing we
believe must be made a Term of Communion, or it is given up, there can be no
Church on Earth, because there can scarce be found any that are agreed in every
Thing.

IF it be said, that opposing the late revival of Religion, is worse than open
Immorality.

I Answer, It is a great mistake, which appears thus, all must acknowledge that
Sins against light, are worse then those that flow from Ignorance or Mistake;
because there is a greater contempt of God's Authority in them, than in the
other. If I had not come and told them, they would not have had Sin, but now
their Sin remains; now they have no Cloak for their Sins. This general self
evident Maxim easily applies itself thus, gross Iniquities against the Moral
Law, are against the light of Conscience, which is common to all, and hard, if
possible, to be quite extinguished, and therefore they are heinious, and admit
of no Apology. But Opposition to the late revival of Religion, might, and we
have Reason in Charity to believe, it flowed from Mistake, about a Matter,
comparitively, doubtful, not discoverable by the mere Light of Nature, namely,
the inward Experiences of some of a work of Conversion; which the best of Men
may, and generally are at least in some Instances, mistaken about, and more
especially when they are under any Temptation by hard Usuage, and other
Incidents. It is true, if they did it against clear Light and Conviction to the
Contrary, it would be a dreadful Evil; but none can say this in the present
Case, except they take upon them the peculiar Province of GOD, to judge the
secret Thoughts of the Heart, and break the Law of Charity, both which heinous
Evils, we should with equal Care avoid.

AND if they did it from Mistake, it is vastly less faulty than immoral Conduct.
Now to require an acknowledgment of them upon this account includes one or
other of these two Things, viz. either 1st. Our imposing our Opinion upon them,
or obliging them to believe as we believe, upon pain of exclusion, in a Matter
comparitively doubtful, without a divine Warrant, yea contrary to a divine
Precept, which enjoins to receive the Weak. Or else 2d. It includes our
obliging them to act contrary to their Consciences, viz. in acknowledging that
to be wrong, which they think to be Right. Now seeing, as the Apostle informs
us, he that doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of Faith, i. e.
if one does what he doubts is unlawful to be done, he commits a damnable Sin,
or a Sin that deserves Damnation; and therefore to urge Acknowledgment in this
Situation of Things, is in effect to desire a Man to offend God and damn his
Soul; or to do that which wounds and ensnares the Soul, and merits everlasting
Ruin! I believe indeed that those that urge Acknowledgments, have no such
Design, have no such view of the Case, but this is the real Language of the
Principle, the true State of the Matter. Now judge calmly and impartially in
your own Minds, if both the aforesaid Particulars be not exceeding unreasonable
and sinful?

NOR can I see any possible Medium between the aforesaid dangerous extremes,
but mutual forbearance: For if there is any Right to urge Circumstantials, and
acting agreeable to them, as Terms of Communion; the Right is equal upon both
Sides of the Question, and then there must be contrary Acknowledgments,
respecting the same Thing: Which every Eye may see are absurd and rediculous!

THE Apostle has directed us to the aforesaid Medium in a Case of the same
Nature, ( Romans xiv. 22.) Have thou faith have it to thy self before GOD, happy
is he that Condemns not himself, in that Thing, which he allows.

UPON which Mr. Pool in his Annotations speaks as follows, He does not speak of
Faith in the fundamentals of Religion, this must be professed, and
acknowledged, let who will be offended, but of Faith in indifferent Things,
(which are the subject Matter he is treating of) our believing or persuasion
therein, is not to be unseasonably uttered, or declared, so as to occasion
Scandal or Contention,; an excellent Aphorism respecting all, especially the
Stronger and more knowing Christian; the Sense is, he is a happy Man that when
he knows a Thing to be lawful, he does so manage the Practice of it, that he
has no Reason to accuse or condemn himself, or else that inwardly does not
condemn himself for doing that against his Conscience, which he openly allows
or practiceth: Such a one is happy in this respect, because he is free from
those Terrors that torment those who act against their Consciences. And ver. 20
of the same Chapter, for Meat destroy not the work of God; all Things indeed
are pure, but it is evil for that Man who eats with Offense, i. e. by sharp
Contentions about circumstantial Things. Do not destroy the work of God. What
is that?

Answer, Peace and Union, which GOD works among believers, says Pool in his
Annot. And indeed of this the Apostle speaks in the Verse immediately
preceding. Love, say Toletus, Beza, Menochius, and this is the same for
Substance with the former; for Love is the Source of Peace and Union, or
beginning Piety in your weak Brother, says Estius. Or your Neighbor, whom God
has made religious, so Menochius. All these Glosses are very consistent; the
Sum of the whole is, do not disturb the public Peace, or break the Union of
Societies, or weaken brotherly Love, or injure your Brothers Soul, by angry
Debates about Circumstantials; all which unhappy Effects, such needless
Contentions do frequently produce. Here is advice worthy of an Apostle,
Counsel, or rather a positive Command, of great weight and moment, well would
it be for the Churches if it was better understood and observed by the bulk of
Mankind.

I may add, that it should be seriously examined, and considered, whether none
were accessory to the Opposition which others made to the late Revival of
Religion, by treating them hardly, and condemning their States, upon an
insufficient Foundation, and so guilty in some Degree of what they themselves
so warmly oppose; and whether they are as ready and zealous to make
acknowledgments of this themselves as to require it of others?

IN the mean Time, it should be also seriously enquired, whether Persons not
being convinced by sufficient Evidence, was not unreasonable, and their
expressing their private Sentiments in such a Manner as had a tendency to
offend their Brethren, sinful, though I will not dare to encroach upon my
Brothers Liberty, or judge his Conscience; Yet this I may say, that Liberty may
be so used as to give Cause of Offense, and occasion stumbling and prejudice.

IF any upon either Side of the Question should object against a reunion, that
there is Corruption in Principle, or Evil in Practice, in any one of either of
the Bodies.

I Answer, That I hope there is no such Cause of Complaint, upon either Side,
as some perhaps have supposed. Party-Zeal is apt to create Prejudice, as well
as heighten Matters, and set them in too strong a Light, partly through its o^n
Bias, and partly through Misinformation, which very much abounds in Times of
Contention. But if the Case was really so, I think with judicious, pious and
peaceable Mr. Durham, that it is an Argument for, and not against a Union;
because in a State of Union these Things may be much better remedied, than in a
divided State.

NOR should Reports, of an ungenerous Use, made by some, of the Conference for
Accommodation, obstruct or discourage our honest and earnest Endeavors for
Peace and Union, upon Scriptural Terms. I hope Things are not quite so as they
are represented. When People are divided and prejudiced against each other,
they are apt, through the force of their Passions, to misapprehend one another
meaning, which of Consequence they mis-relate; besides after long Debates,
Persons are under strong Temptations in order to make themselves appear
Consistent, or support what they call their Credit, to speak of Things that
should be buried in silence, in an undue Manner, which has a very bad tendency.

IT is certainly a very lamentable Evil, to prefer what we are apt to reckon
our Credit, to the Peace of the Church of GOD. On the Contrary, it is our real
Credit, in the Account of an Allwise GOD, and of all such as are judicious and
free from the Bias of Prejudice, to deny ourselves, and condescend, as far as
we can with Inocence, for Peace. Solomon truly observes, that it is an Honor
to cease from Strife,

BUT the very Appearance of Prejudice in some, shows the Necessity of a Union
to remove it. Nor can this, after a wide Breach and long Debate, be ordinarily
obtained without Difficulty and Uneasiness; but it is better to bear a
medicinal Pain in order to a Cure, than to let the Distemper grow desparate,
through a total neglect of proper Means. The advantages of a Union to the Kingdom
of CHRIST, obtained upon an equitable Foundation, would much preponderate such
temporary Disquietudes.

IF any should say, that it is wrong and dangerous to reunite to a set of
disorderly Men.

I Answer, It is true; it is unreasonable to unite to such as oppose the
Essentials of that Order and Government which CHRIST has appointed in his Word.

BUT perhaps the true State of this Case has, through the heat of Debate, either
not been thoroughly understood by some, or not sufficiently attended to.

HERE if it be enquired, what Order and Government was opposed in the late Time
of Contention among us.

WAS it the Necessity of Order and Government in the Church of CHRIST in
general? No.

WAS it the Nature of that Government which the Scripture expresses? No.

WAS it that Plan of Government which is expressed in our Directory, agreeable
to the Scriptures? No.

WAS it what was reckoned fundamental in our Constitution, by the Majority? No.

WHAT then was the Core of the Controversy? Why some Circumstantials in
Government; or in other Words, some Rules or Acts of Discipline, formed by the
Majority, and reckoned prudential and expedient by them; but on the Contrary,
prejudicial and sinful by the Minor Party.

NOW it may be considered, whether it be not at least as unreasonable to make
Circumstantials in Discipline, Terms of Communion, as Circumstantials in
Doctrine? And if so, whether what has been before said against such Things, as
Terms of Communion, does not conclude here with equal Evidence?

NO doubt a smaller Number ought freely to submit to the Conclusions of the
Majority, in Matters relating to Government, which they (the Majority) judge
essential to the well-being of the Church: For without this, there can be no
Government at all: Without this the Minor Party would have Power to impose upon
the Major, in Things which they reckon of the last Conse^uence to the good of
the Society; which is absurd.

IT is true, the Major Party may be mistaken as well as the Minor, and
consequently abuse their Power, for which there is no help in the present
imperfect State of Things, but humble Remonstrating by Reason and Argument: Yet
considered as a Society, the Majority have a right to judge for themselves,
(upon the Plan of private Judgment) what they reckon essential to their
Constitution, or to the well-being of the Church under their Care, and
consequently to exclude from their Society such as do not comply therewith.

MOREOVER, even in Matters that are reckoned Circumstantial by the Majority,
the Minor Party ought, for Peace sake, to comply, if they be not Conscience
bound in the Matter; but if so they cannot; and whether Forbearance should not
be exercised toward them, in this, as well as other parallel Cases, I leave to
others to determine.

IT will not do for any to say, that we are surely Right, we are certainly
Right.

I answer, The great Degree of our Confidence will not prove us to be so; for
then two Contraries would be Right; seeing that Confidence is generally equal
in Degree upon both Sides of the Question, and never stronger than in doubtful
Matters.

EITHER there is an absolute Promise, that all good Men shall be set right in
every small circumstantial Matter in this Life, or there is not. If there is,
then one of these two Things will follow necessarily, viz. Either that the
Promise is not fullfil'd, which charges unfaithfulness upon GOD, or that all
true Christians are reduced to one Party, and to a small Number of that Party,
which is as uncharitable as the other is blasphemous: For there are perhaps
scarcely Ten of a Thousand of religious People, even of the same Denomination,
that exactly agree in every minute Point of Religion. Well if there be no
absolute Promise in Relation to Circumstantials; then it unavoidably follows,
that we have no firm Foundation for such a great degree of Confidence; and
therefore seeing it is either without Foundation altogether, or disproportioned
in Measure to its Foundation, it is as foolish as it is pernicious.

BUT the Matter of Difference is of great Moment.

I answer, It is easy and natural to think so in Matters that we are engaged
in, because in such Cases, our Honor and Humor are apt to be affected; which
through our dreadful Degeneracy, our Ignorance and Corruption, we are apt to
prefer at least for a Time, to the most important Things, viz. the Peace and
Union of Christ's visible Kingdom among Men.

OUR Affections, are apt to give a secret wrong Bias to our Minds, which we
ourselves discern not so that while we are critically and warmly Spying and
Censuring others supposed or real Mistakes and Blunders, we over look our own:
Our Affections incline us to look upon both what we like and dislike, in a
magnifying Glass, which soons turns, to our heated Imaginations, Musketoes into
Mountains, and so unhappily, but equally, misleads us in our judgment, both as
to the Objects of our desire and aversion.

LET our warmest Zeal and our best Actions, be but quite stripped of all sinful
selfish Respects, and they will be found notwithstanding of all their gay
Appearances, to be very lean and Jejune; we sometimes contend for our Honors
and Humors, more than for GOD, (tho we know it not) and that under a Cloak of
Zeal for him; this is a doleful dreadful Truth, which may justly humble the
Pride of Man, and reasonably excite us to be as suspicious of ourselves, as
cautious and moderate in our Censures of others: The Heart of Man is deceitful
and desparately wicked, who can know it?

NO doubt those great Bodies of religious People, that so fiercely contended in
the primitive Times, about Easter Day; looked upon it to be a Point of the last
Moment, for they were so violent and furious upon the Matter, that they were
deaf to Scripture and Argument, they would not regard all the sober Reasonings
of pious peaceful Irenius and others for Accommodation, but with obstinate and
unrelenting Fury, proceeded to the dreadful Sentence of Excommunication against
each other.

IN like Manner the Jewish and Gentile Christians were all by the Ears, about
Days and Meats, they imagined their different Opinions about these doubtful
Points in Dispute, to be as clear and evident as mathematical Demonstration,
and of such vast Importance and Moment, as to give Ground to determine the
States of Men's Souls to be bad, on both Sides the Question, and to deserve a
tot^ Exclusion of their Persons from Communion; and in Consequence hereof, they
indulged the keenest Resentment, and were all in Fire and Flames, full of
mutual Prejudice, severe Censure and Rash-judging against, and of one another;
and no doubt imagined they were doing great Service to Religion thereby; but
the Apostle Paul was of a very different Opinion!

BUT perhaps some may object in this Manner; say what you will upon this Head,
I will not believe you.

ANSWER, I do not desire you to believe me, or take for granted what I say,
without Enquiry; nay, on the contrary, I desire you not to believe me, or any
other Man in that Sense, Call no Man Master upon Earth: I only desire your
unprejudiced serious Attention, to what appears to me upon sober Enquiry to be
scriptural and rational, and your Assent to it, if upon an impartial Trial, it
appears so to you; and if you will not, it will be your own greatest Loss; I
cannot pretend to debate the Matter with Men's Preposessions and Prejudices,
for I know Scripture and Reason will stand no Chance in such a Contest; being
both condemned before they are heard, so far as they relate to the Matter in
dispute!

WE think it a bad Sign of you, to speak in the Manner you do!

ANSWER: As to your Censures upon me, though I hope you mean well in them, yet I
must tell you, that they do not affect me; because I know you, and all other
Men are incompetent Judges of such secret Matters: I may assure you, tha^ it is
a little Thing to me, to be judged by you, or by Man's Judgment.

BUT were my Case so, as you apprehend, it would not conclude the Point it is
brought for: Doctrinal Sentiments may be right, even where the State and Frame
are bad; and Truth should be received with readiness, respect and candor, for
GOD'S sake, as well as its own, whatever he be that delivers it. Solomon tells
us, that it is not good to have Respect of Persons in Judgment. And the Apostle
James, in like Manner assures us, that if we have respect of Persons we sin,
and are convinced of the Law as Transgressors.

YOU know you are liable to Mistakes as well as I am. Well, seeing the Case is
so, we should retain a constant Sense of our Weakness and fallability, upon our
Minds; and thence be enduc'd to re-examine Matters with a Disposition to be
confirmed in what is right, and convinced of what is wrong; for without this,
if we are so unhappy as to be in Mistakes, we are like to hold them to our own,
and other's Prejudice, without any Probability of a Retrieve.

AND now my Reverend Fathers and Brethren, should we not be excited to comply
with the Command of GOD in praying and striving for the Peace of Jerusalem.

THE Religion of the peaceful JESUS tempers the Minds of all that sincerely
embrace it, to Benignity, Love, and Peace, and to all the kind and
condescending O^^ices of mutual Charity and End^rment; notwithstanding of the
great Variety of their civil Characters, natural Complections, and acquired
Endowments; as well as different Sentiments in religious Matters of a
circumstantial Nature.

THIS represents all that truly embrace it, as Servants of the same Lord, as
Children of the same Father, and therefore Brethren; as Members of the same
Body mystical, as Objects of the same divine Affection, as Partakers of the
same important Privileges, as Soldiers enlisted in the same spiritual Warfare,
as Professors of the same essential and necessary Truths, and Expectants of the
same immortal Blessedness, and thence as united by the strongest Bands and
dearest Relations.

THIS opens the narrowest Minds, by beholding the transcendant Glories of the
Deity, and tends when rightly understood, to free us from the Shackles of
sordid Bigottry, and Party-Zeal. When we see the serene Majesty, and unspotted
Purity of GOD, and compare therewith our moral Deformity, native Meanness and
Dependence, we are justly incited to humble and adoring Reverence, which is the
Source of Peace.

THIS sweetens the unsocial sourness, and softens the pharasaical Fierceness
and Rigor of our Spirits, by communicating to us, a Sense of the divine Love,
and by setting the Example thereof before us.

THIS truly informs us, that he who has no Rule over his own Spirit, is like a
City that is broken down, and without Walls, defenseless in the midst of
Danger, and so liable to be seduced and taken, as an easy Prey, by every
Temptation to Envy and Revenge; which sour Men's Tempers, mar the Comfort of
their Liv^, and are as hurtful to the Health and firmness of our Bodies, as to
the Purity and Safety of our Souls!

BUT that on the contrary, he who has a just government over his Affections, is
like a City whose Walls are so well finished, and fortified, that they despise
the rudest Assaults of the most formidable Foe. He is like a Rock immovable
amidst all the Fury and Violence, which the angry Surges discharge upon it,
with unwearied Industry, and unrelenting Resentment.

WHEN our Passions are reduced to their original Order, under the Government of
right Reason, they render all the Enjoyments of Life agreeable and especially
the Duties of Religion; they flow silently and smoothly on, in amiable Harmony,
and instead of obstructing, they serve as a strong Tide to assist and
accelerate our pious Progress, and waft us to the Embraces of the Deity, as our
last End, our chief Excellency, our supreme Good, and Center of Rest.

WE are obliged to be peaceful, charitable, and merciful, my Brethren, not only
by the positive Command of GOD, but by the original Constitution of our Nature,
which is so formed as to need Sympathy and Succor from others. What kindness
we desire and expect should be shown to us, in our Distresses, let Equity and
Humanity incline us to render to others in our turn!

IT has pleased the All-wise good GOD, to implant a Propensity in our Natures
to compassionate the Calamities of others, which is no small Argument that we
should exercise it, upon proper Occasions; our Bowels yern toward the
Miserable, with a natural Sympathy, and we cannot prevent, on our viewing their
Maladies, Sentiments of Pity, without doing Violence to ourselves! Hence
Solomon justly observes, that the merciful Man does Good to his Soul, but he
that is cruel troubles his own Flesh.

AND as there is, notwithstanding our Apostasy, some remaining Tendencies in
our Nature to Peace and Pity, so a peaceful Temper of Mind is a Part of the
gracious Change, which the blessed Spirit effects in those that are sincerely
Good: A Star and not the least illustrious in that amiable Train, or
Constellation of Graces which takes Possession of pious Bosoms, when they are
renewed after the divine Image; for this Reason the KINGDOM of GOD is said to
be PEACE, and the FRUIT of the SPIRIT PEACE, Love, Joy, Long-Suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith: Surely, as the Apostle observes, the Fruit of
Righteousness is sown in Peace, of them that love Peace.

NOR do the Laws of Society, both civil and religious, less oblige to peaceful
Sentiments, Dispositions and Practice; we need the Assistance of Society for
Instruction, Comfort and Defense, and hence the Almighty has formed a natural
Inclination in us, thereto: Now the aforesaid valuable Ends of Society, are
entirely frustrated, and consequently the Foundations thereof overthrown, by a
quarelsome hostile Temper and Behavior, for hereby we are prejudiced against
the Councils and Reproofs of our Brethren, who instead of a Comfort become a
Terror to us, in such an unhappy Situation; and we are in constant Fear of
falling a Prey to their Resentments: This makes a social State much more
uncomfortable and dangerous than an independent one!

BUT on the contrary, when Peace, Harmony, and mutual Confidence subsist in
religious Societies, they exceedingly promote not only our Comfort, but our
Benefit, many Ways; and hence it is said, that the Churches had Peace,
throughout all Judea, and were EDIFIED; walking in the Fear of the Lord, and in
the Comfort of the Holy Ghost.

THIS God-like temper of Mind, and beautiful Behavior, gives a Man the true
Possession of himself, hereby our Bosoms become like the Pacifick Ocean, smooth
and serene, while such as ignobly indulge a criminal Resentment, are like the
raging Sea, vexed with the Winds, which constantly casts forth Mire and Dirt;
this calm the painful Tumults of Passion, into Gentleness and Benignity, and
sweetens their uneasy Rigours and Severities by Love! The more holy and
heavenly any one is, the more peaceful and composed he is; like the higher
Heavens, which as Seneca observes, are not discomposed by Clouds and Tempests,
but possess an invariable Brightness, a stable Serene!

BLESSED says our great Master, the Prince of Peace, are the Peacemakers, for
they shall be called the Children of God. Such as are desirous of the Peace of
Jerusalem, disposed to it, and laborious to promote it in themselves and
others, by the earnest Use of all proper Means, either to prevent or heal her
Breaches, which, alas for it, in many Places are wide as the Sea, though they
often meet with severe Censures from Men on both Sides the Question in Debate,
yet they will get the Blessing of God, and Evidence themselves to be his
genuine Children, who is essentially, exemplarily, declaratively and
efficiently LOVE and PEACE.

WHEN Peace prevails, it gives us great advantage to perform the Office of a
Friend by Instruction, Reproof and Council, with the probability of Success.
Love and Gentleness disarm the most obstinate Prejudice, and command Attention
to what is spoken; they easily open the obstructed avenues of the Mind, and
efficaciously unlock the Springs of Affection: By this, our simple but friendly
Addresses softly insinuate themselves into the Heart, and consequently become
more powerful and prevalent, than all the force of Argument and Charms of
Rethorick from the Mouth of an Opponent. We are therefore commanded, to let our
Moderation be known to all Men; to be long suffering toward all, and as we
have Opportunity to do good unto all; not rendering Evil for Evil; not being
Contentious, but Gentle, showing all Meekness to all Men. The Ministers of the
Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all Men, Patient, in Meekness,
instructing those that oppose themselves.

THE Cloud of Witnesses with which we are encompassed, should incite us to run
with Patience the Race that it set before us, looking to JESUS the Author and
Finisher of our Faith, who endured the Cross, despising the shame, who endured
the Contradiction of Sinners against himself, least we be weary and faint in
our Minds.

IN particular, how amiable is the Example of the Apostle Paul, who gave no
Offense to the Jews or Gentiles, or to the Church of God, who pleased all Men
in all Things, that they might be saved; who though free from all, yet made
himself a Servant to all, that he might gain the more to CHRIST; and for the
same noble Purpose, became all Things to all Men.

AND still the Example of our dearest LORD, the meek and loving Lamb of GOD,
shone with superior and distinguished Luster. He who was GOD over all blessed
forever, stooped from the highest Glory to the deepest Abasement, and laid down
his Life, his Blood, for the sake of his inveterate Enemies, who neither
desired no^ deserved his divine Respect. Ye know the Grace of our Lord JESUS,
that ^ho' he was rich, y^^ for our Sakes he became Poor, that we through his
Poverty might ^e made rich. He was a friend to Publicans and Sinners; he went
about unweariedly doing good to the Souls and Bodies of Men, constantly
diffusing, like the SUN the obscure Emblem of his Brightness and Benificence,
salutary Light and healing Influences all around (...)!

THIS compassionate REDEEMER seeing the Multitu^ fainting and scattered abroad
like Sheep wanting a Shepherd, was moved with Compassion on them,
(esplanchnisthe) his tender Bowels yearned; he was led as a Lamb to the
Slaughter, (...) he opened not his Mouth. When he was reviled, he reviled not
again; when he suffered he threatened not. And though free yet for the sake of
Peace, he paid the Tribute Money at the Expense of a Miracle. His whole Life
was full of Love, of Peace and Sweetness. Now should not such who say they
abide in him, walk even as he walked? Should not the same humble, peaceable
Mind, which was in him, be in them?

NOR should we overlook the glorious Example of the blessed GOD, who is Kind to
the Evil and unthankful, who devised the Plan of Peace by a MEDIATOR, sent his
SON out of his Bosom to purchase it; sends his Messengers to proclaim it, and
his Holy Spirit to apply it. Is not his tender Mercy over all his Works? How
unlimited is his Benificence to the sinful Children of Men? He causes his Sun
to shine, and his Rain to descend upon the Fields of the Evil and the Good. O!
how immense is his Clemency, and how unwearied his long-suffering and tender
Mercy toward such as bid defiance to his Power and Authority, and ungratefully
contemn the amazing Riches and Condescentions of his Grace and Love?

NOW methinks my Fathers and Brethren, we should be excited to pray for the
Peace and Prosperity of Jerusalem in the Manner before represented, not only by
the Divine Precept enjoining it, (Is. lxii. 6, 7.) I have set Watchmen upon thy
Walls O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their Peace, Day nor Night, and give
him no rest, till he shall establish, and till he make Jerusalem, a Praise in
the Earth,

BUT likewise by the Examples of good Men who have gone before us, who were
under no greater Obligations, nor had any greater Encouragements thereto than
we. (Psa. li. 18) Do good in thy good Pleasure unto Zion, build thou the Walls
of Jerusalem. Agreeable to which are the Words I have been discoursing upon,
Peace be within thy Walls and Prosperity within thy Palaces: For my Brethren
and Companions Sake I will say Peace be within thee, because of the House of
the Lord our God, I will seek thy Good.

MOREOVER the kind Things that GOD has said of Zyon and Jerusalem, and gracious
Promises he has made of good Things to her, may encourage and animate us, in
our Prayers for her Peace and Prosperity.

HERE observe, that Zion and Jerusalem are synonimous Terms, frequently
signifying the same Thing, because a great Part of Jerusalem was built upon
Mount Zion; or rather Zion is (synecdochicaly) put for Jerusalem, because it
was an eminent part thereof, and both put for the People of Israel and Church
of God.

THE Almighty has told us, that he has chosen Jerusalem, that his Name might
be there. (2 Chronicles. vi. 6) and that he has conferred Mercies for Jerusalems
Sake, that he has chosen. (1. King xi. 13. and Psa. cxxxii. 13 -- 16.)

The following Promises deserve to be thought upon, (Psa. cii.) Thou shall
^rise and have Mercy upon Zion, for thy Servants take Pleasure in her Stones,
and favor the Dust thereof. When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear
in his Glory; he will regard the Prayer of the Destitute, and not despise their
Prayer. (Psa. cxxviii. 5, 6.) The Lord shall bless thee out of Zion, and thou
shall see the Good of Jerusalem, yea thou shall see PEACE upon Israel. (Psa.
cxxv. 5.) As for such as turn aside into their crooked Ways, the Lord shall
lead them forth, but Peace shall be upon Israel.

Isa. lxvi. 10, 12. For thus says the Lord, behold I will extend PEACE to her
as a River, and the Glory of the Gentiles like a flowing Stream.

Isa: live. 11. And all thy Children shall be taught of God, and great shall be
the Peace of thy Children.

Isa. lx. 17. I will also make thy Officers Peace, and thy Exactors
Righteousness, i. e. loving, meek and peaceable; the abstract is put for the
concrete as usual.

AND it shall come to pass in the last Days, that the Mountain of the Lord's
House shall be established in the Top of the Mountains, and shall he exalted
above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it; for out of Zion shall go
forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

Zec. i. 17. The Lord shall yet Comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem.

Isa. li. 3 -- 16. For the Lord shall Comfort Zion, he will Comfort all her
waste Places; he will make her Wilderness like Eden, and her Desert like the
Garden of GOD, Joy and Gladness shall be found therein, Thanksgiving and the
Voice of Melody; that I may plant the Heavens and lay the Foundations of the
Earth, and say unto Zion thou art my People.

Isa. iv. The Lord will create upon every dwelling Place of mount Zion, and
upon her Assemblies, a Cloud, for upon all the Glory shall be a defense.

Isa. xxxi, 5. As Birds flying, so will the Lord of Hosts defend Jerusalem;
defending also he will deliver it, and passing over, he will preserve it.

Zec. viii, 15. ^o again I have thought in these Days to do well unto
Jerusalem, fear ye not.

Isa. xxiv. 23. Then the Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when
the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his
Ancients gloriously; that is, all the Splendour of earthly Potentates, shall be
obscured by the superior brightness of the MESIAH'S Advent, who is KING of
KINGS and LORD of LORDS, when he shall be Incarnate and set up his Kingdom in
Jerusalem, and afterward in other Nations, in the Presence of his Ministers
and People, and more especially, when this great REDEEMER being clad with Light
as a Garment, enrob'd with all the State of Heaven, arrayed with all the
Majesty and Grandeur of the DEITY, and attended with a train of innumerable
Seraphims, shall come to judge the World, and shine forth in all the
unparalled Brightness and inexpressible eflulgence of his own and his Fathers
Glory! This magnificent Appearance of the great GOD our Savior, to judge the
Universe, will, by the force of its superior Luster, eclipse the Lights of
Heaven, turn the Sun into Darkness, and the Moon into Blood.

NOR should the following memorable Promises be lightly passed over. Jer l. 4.
5. In those Days, and that Time, says the Lord, the Children of Israel shall
come, they and the Children of Judah together, going and weeping they shall go,
and seek the Lord their God; they shall ask the Way to Zion, with their Faces
thither ward, saying, come and let us join ourselves to the Lord in a perpetual
Covenant that shall not be forgotten.

This Promise it is true, more immediately respects the return of some of the
two Tribes, and some of the Ten, from their Babilonish Captivity, (which
happened in the Time of Cyrus, Emperor of the Meeds) to their native Country,
and their uniting cordially and humbly into one Body, in performing the Duties
of public Worship, notwithstanding of their former Differences. They shall
come, they and the Children of Judah together, going and ^weeping they shall
seek the Lord their God, saying, come and let us join ourselves to the Lord.
All these Expressions plainly show, a Union, Harmony and Concord between the
Remains of the ten Tribes and of the two, so that there was to be no more angry
Debate and Division among them, as Calvin, Symachus, and Marian^ observe.

They are represented as very desirous to see Zion, which they had been long
separated from by their Captivity; they could not rest till they saw it; and
tho the Difficulties of finding the Road and traveling in it, were not small,
yet they were not discouraged, No! They were fully fixed and bent upon it, they
set their Faces toward Zion, and enquired the Way thither, which they had
forgot by their long a^sence, while a in State of Captivity.

THOSE different Tribes, went in Company, and wept as they went, toward Zyon;
either on Account of their former Sins, the Causes of all the Calamities they
endured, as Calvin, Symachus and Lyra conclude; and not improbably; or with
joy, at the thoughts of their unexpected Release, from a melancholy Captivity
and Return to their native Soil their na^ive Country; and especially to the
Temple Service, in UNION with their Brethren! Or, with Grief, because of the
Ruins or Desolate State of the Temple and City of Jerusalem, as Erasmus thinks.
For my Part I see no inconsistency in admiting a Concurrence of all the
aforesaid Causes, in exciting a mixed P^ssion of Sorrow and Joy in the pious
Israelites, upon so extraordinary an Occasion. There is something very devout
and ^harming in the aforesaid Representation, which is indeed a well drawn
Picture of the Temper and Practice of convinced Sinners, in their seeking Rest
to their wounded weary Souls, from JESUS CHRIST, in the way of his appointment.

THAT the Promise aforesaid does extend to Gospel Times, appears, as I
apprehend, from the following Considerations. viz.

1st. BECAUSE the Completion it had among the Jews was but small; there were
but few that returned from the Babilonish Captivity, in the Time of Cyrus says
Junius.

2d. IT is a spiritual Promise, of a spiritual Union, among Brethren, that
professed the same Substantials of Religion, and likewise of a spiritual
Concern for their own Souls, and Zeal for the public Worship of GOD! Now what
can be more proper and rational than to extend such a Promise to a Dispensation
peculiarly, and eminently Spiritual, in which a greater Effusion of divine
Influences was promised? And particularly such as greatly incline to a
peaceable Temper and Behavior, as appears from several Pr^mises before quoted,
to which I would only add these followi^g, viz.

ISAIAH xxxiv. And I will pour Water upon ^^m that is thirsty, and Floods upon
the dry Ground; I will pour out my Spirit upon his Seed, and my Blessing upon
his Offspring, and they shall spring up as the Grass, as Willows by the
Watercourse.

ZECHA. xii. 10. And I will pour upon the House of David and upon the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and they shall
look upon me whom they have pierced, and mourn, as one mourns for his only
Son, and be in Bitterness for him, as one that is in Bitterness for his
Firstborn.

JOEL ii. 28. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my
Spirit upon all Flesh. i. e. upon Persons of all Nations, the Partition Wall
between Jew and Gentile being removed.

ISAIAH xxxv. The Wilderness and the solitary Place, shall be glad for them,
and the Desert shall rejoice and blossom as the Rose, it shall blossom
abundantly, and rejoice even with Joy and Singing, the Glory of Lebanon shall
be given unto it, the Excellency of Carmel and Sharon, in the Wilderness shall
Waters break out, and Streams in the Desert, and the parched Ground shall
become a Pool, and the thirsty Land Springs of Water. And,

3d. IF it be farther considered, that a flourishing State of the Gospel Church
is promised, before the End of the World; a Time when the fullness of the
Gentiles shall come in, and all Israel shall be saved. i. e. when the Infidel
Tribes shall flock to the REDEEMER'S Standard, and the Generality of the Jewish
Nation, be converted to Christianity to promote which the Union of Brethren
into one Body, who hold the same Foundation-Principles, is an excellent Mean;
and as such prayed for by our dear Lord JESUS CHRIST. John xvii. 21. That all
may be one, that they also may be ONE in us, that the World may believe that
thou have sent me, that is, that Strangers to Christianity by beholding the
Love of those that profess it, to each other, and UNION AMONG THEMSELVES, which
is the proper Consequent of it; may be convinced of my divine Mission, and
induced to receive the Declarations I have made to Men, in pursuance of it; or
in other Words, that they may receive my Gospel.

AND indeed Sirs, as nothing is more amiable, than to see Brethren, who have
been broken from one another by Division, and prejudiced against one another by
angry Debate, seeking the Lord in UNION and Harmony, with sincere Sorrow,
strong Desires, humble Enquiries, and unfainting Diligence.

SO nothing is more efficacious, to excite Mankind to admire and embrace the
Gospel, than the mutual Love and Unity of the Professors of it, by this they
know that they are CHRIST'S Disciples by this, they see a divine Excellency in
his Religion; by this Christianity spread so far and so fast, in the first Ages
of it, this made the Heathens admiring say (in the Time of Tertullian) how do
the Christians love one another. This as easily as speedily with a gentle
Violence triumphed over the unreasonable Prejudices of the most obstinate
Infidels of every Nation, Age, Order, Sex, and Character, and conquered
Kingdoms to the Faith of CHRIST.

BUT the contrary is a dreadful Stumbling Block, that Prejudices the Jews,
Turks, and Pagans, against the Religion of JESUS; and makes diverse even in
Christian Countries question its divine Original.

NOR can its ablest Advocates, by all their learned Apologies, do it so much
Service as this does Injury! For every new Schism in the Body of Christ,
weakens it, and is used as a new Argument against the whole of Christianity,
and though unjustly, yet really pours Contempt upon it. O, if zealous Men of
narrow Minds, would but consider this, they would tremble at the Thoughts of
Breaches and Schisms in the Church of Christ, and on the contrary, pray and
strive, in the earnest Use of all appointed Means, that as there is but one
Shepherd, so there may be but one Sheepfold, (John x. 16.) ( Mia poimne eis
poimen) there is an Elegancy in the Original, the copulative And is not in it,
as in our Version; the Words are these, one Sheepfold, one Shepherd, viz. Jesus
Christ, one Church of all Christians, gathered under and united to Christ, as
their Head; one People of Jews and Gentiles, the Partition Wall being removed,
( Ephesians. ii. 14.) the Meaning is, to one Shepherd one Flock belongs; as I am
therefore one Pastor, so my SHEEPFOLD shall be ONE. So Grotius and Luodovicus
de diu.


I say, when all these Things are considered complexly, together with the
broken divided State of the Christian Church at present, they plainly show that
the aforesaid Scripture, Jer. l. 4, 5. extends to the Gospel Church, (so
Calvin, Pool, and Henery understand it.) and that as yet it has not had a full
Accomplishment, and therefore it is a great Encouragement, to pray and strive
for the Blessing contained in it.

ANOTHER remarkable Promise, we have in Ezekiel. xxxvii 19. Thus says the Lord
God, behold I will take the Stick of Joseph, which is in the Hand of Ephraim,
and the Tribes of Israel his Fellows, and will put them with him even with the
Stick of Judah, and make them one Stick, and they shall become one in my Hand.

THERE had been a Breach of Union, and unhappy Animosities consequent
thereupon, between the two Kingdoms of Israel and Judah, who were Bretbren, and
but one Kingdom before the fatal Breach, after which upon all Occasions,
Ephraim envied Judah, and on the other Hand Judah vexed Ephraim: But here it is
promised, that that divided State, which was so uncomfortable to, and unsafe
for both, should continue no longer, but that there should be a happy, a
comfortable Coalition between them, disposing them to bury former Offenses, and
angry Contentions in the Grave of perpetual Oblivion, and for the future only
contend who should love one another most, and excel in the humble but amiable
Offices of mutual Kindness and Endearment!

THEY had been two STICKS opposing and hurting one another but now they shall
become ONE, supporting and strengthening each other, and unitedly under GOD,
promoting the same good Cause and Design.

NOW although this Promise, has a primary and direct Referrence to the Jews, yet
undoubtedly it extends farther, even to the Union of Jews and Gentiles into one
Church, under the Gospel-Oeconomy; professing one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
and is very applicable to a reunion of Brethren, of the same Sentiments into
one Body or religious Community.

UNCHARITAPLE Divisions and Separations on account of Circumstantials, or
lesser Things (not imposed) among those that profess the same fundamentals of
Religion is a crimson Iniquity, attended with most awful Aggravations!

THEY are exceeding contrary to the very Nature of GOD, who is Love, as has
been before observed: Love is the Perfection of all Grace, the End of all
Duties, the most excellent Way, the Work of Heaven, the new Commandment, the
Imitation of the best of Beings, and a principal mean to obtain and maintain a
Communion with him. He that loves, dwells in God, and God in him, for God is
Love.

UNCHARITABLE Divisions are exceeding contrary to the whole Law and Word of
GOD, which is fufill'd by Love, and especially to that express Precept which
enjoins us to keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace.

NOR are they less contrary to the whole Gospel of GOD, which is a most
astonishing Display of the divine Love and Goodness, in all it is Glory, Riches,
Charms, and Condescensions, and therefore contains the strongest Incentives to
Love and Unity, all which are thereby opposed. But

UNCHARITABLE Divisions are not only contrary to the Nature of GOD, the Law of
God, and the Gospel of God, but likewise to the Christ of God, they stain his
Honor, and oppose his Design in our Redemption; making many Bodies, looks like
a Disposition to have have many Heads, and so either to renounce CHRIST, or
divide him (1 Cor. i. 13.) it is an Attempt to make CHRIST himself a Sectarian,
or a Ringleader of a Sect; which is a vile Affront; CHRIST is the common Head
of Christians, but he is not, he cannot be the Head of Parties and Factions, as
such: Besides such Divisions represent the dear Redeemer as an impotent Prince
that cannot keep his Kingdom in Unity, or communicate, a suitable and
sufficient System of Doctrines and Laws of this Tendency; the scandalous
Behavior of his Subjects is cast upon Zyon's King, his Laws, and the
Constitution of his Government: For the Design of the holy JESUS in our
Redemption, was to reconcile all that believe, to GOD, to unite and center them
all in him, to gather together in one, the Children of GOD, that are scattered
abroad, to make in himself of twain, one new Man, so making Peace. (See John
xi. 52. Ephesians. ii. 15.) Farther,

UNCHARITABLE Divisions are exceeding contrary to the Spirit and Work of GOD.
They oppose the Work of God the Holy Ghost in our own Souls, and in the Souls
of others, in its Nature, Design, and Tendency. By one Spirit, says the
Apostle, we are all baptized into one Body, whether Jew or Gentile, bond or
free; and have all been made to drink into one Spirit. (1 Cor. xii. 13.) The
Nature and Tendency of the Work of the blessed Spirit of God, in our own and
others Souls, is Love, Peace, Unity: And hence the two former are called the
Fruits of the Spirit, (Gal. v. 22.) and the latter is called the Unity of the
Spirit, (Ephesians. iv. 24) And the Thessalonians are said to be taught of God to
love one another, (1 Thessalonians. iv. 9.) Hence you may see, that those who promote
uncharitable Divisions, oppose (though not with Design) not only the Word of GOD,
but likewise the Work of GOD in their own Souls, and in the Souls of others: By
provoking their angry Resentments sinfully, they fight against the Nature,
Spirit and Genius of Conversion to God, and real Christianity. Again,

UNCHARITABLE Divisions are exceeding contrary to the Ordinances of GOD, viz.
Baptism, the Word preached, and the LORD'S Supper, the Design of which is to
procure and preserve the Unity of his Church, and Kingdom.

BY Baptism Persons are added to the Church (Acts ii. and 1 Cor, xii. 12, 13.)
For as the Body is one and has many Members, and all the Members of that one
Body; so also is CHTIST; that is, Christ Mistical, or the visible Church which
is his Body: The Reason of which Union in the Church of CHRIST, or mean to
procure it is Baptism; for says the Apostle, by one Spirit we are all Baptized
into one Body; i. e. The design of Baptism is not only as a Sign to represent,
a mean to obtain the aforesaid Union; but likewise as a solemn Bond of
Engagement upon us to promote and preserve it, by all proper Endeavors,
without which we are not like to have the Answer of a good Conscience, in
performing the Vows and answering the End of that gracious Institution.

AND does not faith come by hearing, and hearing by the Word of GOD? Which we
cant hear, says the Apostle, without a Preacher; even that faith which unites
to CHRIST our Head, and works by Love to his Members our Brethren. Moreover,

BY the Lord's Supper as the inspired writer observes, we are one Bread, and
one Body, though we be many, for we are all partakers of that one Bread, (1 Cor.
x. 17.) i. e. We declare that we are but one Body Mistical, by our joint
Communicating at the LORD'S Supper, of one Bread, or one Loaf, which is made up
of many Grains, and as we declare the aforesaid Unity, so by partaking of this
confirming Seal of the Covenant, we renew and confirm, our solemn Obligations
entered into by Baptism, to do all that in us lies, to procure and preserve
that Unity: Which repeated Engagements if it be not a great Evil to violate, I
know not what is.

NOR are the aforesaid Divisions less contrary, to the Design of the Ministry
of GOD, the Dispensers of the Word and Ordinances; which is the edifying of the
Body of CHRIST; not tearing into Parts the one Body of Jesus, and making many
of it, No! but building of it up, as the Word signifies, by bringing new
Members to it, and strengthening those that are brought in alrea^ in Knowledge,
Faith and Holiness: And likewise bringing Persons to the Unity of the SON of
GOD, and to Growth and Establishment therein, that they may be no more tossed
to and fro as Children by every Wind of Doctrine (Ephesians. iv. 13.) Now how shall
Unity in Sentiment, and steadfastness therein be preserved, against all the
shocks of Seducers, without Unity to our Brethren? Is not the Flock more likely
to be ensnared when it is broken and scattered? Beza justly observes, that the
Apostle speaks of the Church as one Man, that he may declare its Unity, which
it is the great Business of CHRIST'S Ministers to promote. Farther,

SUCH Divisions are likewise exceeding contrary to the Credit, Comfort,
Prosperity and Safety of the Church of GOD.

AS cutting of a Member of the Body deforms it, so does rending and tearing the
Church of CHRIST: If you pluck out an Eye, or cut of ^n Arm, or slit the Nose,
how gashful and contemptible does (...) make the Person look! And is it not so
in Relation to the Church of CHRIST, when broken by Divisions? These cruel
Methods, mar its Beauty, and make it as much the Grief of its Friends, as the
Scorn of its Enemies.

AND what comfort can be expected, in the midst of Wranglings, Tumults and
Confusions, which obstruct every Duty, embitter every Sweet of Life, and open
before us, the sable Scene of our own Corruptions, as well as of the Blunders
of our Brethren, and present at the same Time to our View, gloomy Ideas of
impending Calamities?

NOR is the Church's Prosperity and Progress, less obstructed by uncharitable
Divisions; for while the Members of the Church are possessed with Prejudices
and Envyings against each other, they loose the Benefits of one another's
Gifts, and of that religious Communion, which is equally the amiable Ornament
of Christianity, and the agreeable Entertainment of the sincere Profe^sors of
it; While their Minds and Hearts are possessed with that Wisdom, that
descends not from above, and bitter Zeal, (Zelon picron) which the inspired
Apostle Terms, earthly, sensual, devilish, (Jam. iv) their Understandings are
darkened, their Affections corrupted, and their Food turned to the Nourishment
of their Disease: Instead of growing up in Humility, Meekness, and Love, they
grow in Pride, Peevishness and severe Censure; more and more unlike the blessed
Jesus, and the true Genius of his Religion; and yet know not what Spirit they
are of! Whereas, if they were of one Mind, and lived in Peace, the God of Love
and Peace would be with them.

BUT uncharitable Divisions, like a Trojan Horse, pregnant with concealed
Enemies, tend to introduce into the Church of Christ, a dismal Train of Errors
and Delusions, as well as excite and encourage Ambition, Ill Nature, and
Falsehood; the awful Iniquities of the grand Enemy: Hence it is, that Men are
sometimes induced, through desire of Popularity, and with design of Fame for
their singular Conduct, (as it would seem) to arise as the Heads of Factions,
and speak perverse Things, that they may draw Disciples after them. (Acts xx.
30.) In a Word uncharitable Divisions, tend not only to obstruct all good
Dispositions in our own Souls, but to promote evil Affections, corrupt
Principles, and all Manner of Wickedness in Life, for where Envying (or Zeal,
Zelos) and Strife are, i. e. envying Zeal, there is Confusion and every evil
Work. (Jam. iii. 16.) Again,

UNCHARITABLE Divisions do also hinder the Progress of the Gospel of Jesus in
the World, and obstruct the Conversion of poor Sinners to the blessed GOD, and
thereby their eternal Salvation: For what Encouragement have they to be
religious, while the Church is torn by Divisions, into so great a Number of
Parts and Parties, (diverse of whom do cruelly condemn all but those of their
own way) that they do not know what Religion or Profession to be of? O! this is
a melancholy Case, which deserves to be lamented, if it were possible, with
Tears of Blood.

BESIDES Schisms and Divisions, directly lead to a total Apostasy from the
Faith of Christ, it is doubtless the Master-PLOT of the DEVIL, to confound Men
with such a Multitude of Religions, that they may be brought to think that
there is nothing in them all, and so reject the Gospel either as a Fancy or
Imposture, (a cunningly devised Fable) and oppose Jesus Christ as an
insignificant Person, or grand Deceiver.

SCHISMS and Divisions, my Brethren, do not only expose the Church to Contempt
and Scorn, but likewise to a total Dissolution, to entire Ruin, and
Destruction; either more directly by the Hands of her professed, yea, real
Friends, through misguided and ill-temper'd Zeal, destroying each others
Characters, while they should be better employed, in promoting her Edification,
and Defense; or by the Hands of Enemies, who have hereby an Opportunity to
attack her unarmed; and also the Assistance of her Friends, contrary to their
Design, to compass her Ruin, to forward her final overthrow!

THE Words of our dear Redeemer to this Purpose, should not be lightly passed
over, Mat. xii. 25. Every Kingdom divided against itself, is brought to
Desolation, and ever City, or House, divided against itself, shall not stand,
that is, every Kingdom though large and strong, yet if divided into various
Factions, is like to be overthrown. (thus Beza, Camero,) It was a common Saying
among the Hebrews, like that of Salust, Concordia res parve crescunt, discordia
maxim dilabuntur, i. e. by Concord small Things increase, but by Discord great
are destroyed. Or of Cicero, Que domus, tam stabilis, que tam firma civitas
est, que non odiis, atque disidiis, funditus, possit everti, i. e. what House
is so stable, what City so strong and impregnable, as cannot be entirely
overthrown, by Hatred and Discord?

OUR Lord insinuates, by applying the aforesaid Proverb to the Occasion, upon
which it was spoken, that Satan had more Sagacity, than to attempt to promote
his Kingdom by Division; and may we not learn Prudence from an Enemy, Certe fas
est et, ab host doceri.

SCALIGER'S Observation is truly applicable to Man's degenerate State;
Quickquid ad Multitudinem vergit, Antipathiam continet, et quicquid vero ad
Unitatem tendit; Simpathiam habet, i. e. whatever verges to Multitude, (of
Rivals) promotes Antipathy, but whatever tends to Unity, contains Sympathy.
Opening the Veins of the Body and letting it bleed incessantly, (as poor Seneca
was treated) does not more directly tend to its Destruction than uncharitable
Divisions to the Church's Ruin! Any who will deliberately read the History of
the Church, may easily see what dismal Havoc, Divisions have made in it, for
these Seventeen Hundred Years! In many Countries where Churches once
flourished, Divisions have turned all into Desolation, and delivered them up to
Mohammedan Delusion, the Contentions between Constantinople and Rome, the
Eastern and Western Churches, have shaken the Christian Interest upon the
Earth, and delivered up much of the Christian World to Papal Blindness and
Tyranny! yea, such have been the Effects of this detestable Iniquity, that it
would long ago have rooted the Christian Name from off the Earth, if
Almightiness had not frequently and marvelously interposed, to prevent it; any
Body that wants to promote the Disgrace and Destruction of CHRIST'S Kingdom on
Earth, cannot take a more direct and effectual Method, to that Purpose, than by
earnest and unwearied Endeavors to divide it, either by making new Rents, or
continuing those already made.

IN Confirmation of which the Words of the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the
Galatians chap v. ver. 15. are remarkable, but if ye bite and devour one
another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another, i. e. beware that
you do not wound or tear one another, by Words pointed with Envy and Calumny,
and by injurious Deeds; least the Issue thereof should terminate in your mutual
Overthrow, and final Ruin! least that GOD who is a consuming Fire, should be
provoked by your Impiety to send desolating Calamities and ^wift Destruction.
There is doubtless an Allusion in the Words, bite and devour to the ill-natured
Snarling and furious Biteing of DOGS, for these Things are indeed more becoming
such brutish savage Animals than Men and Christians.

AND hence the Apostle observes, in the 14th, 16th, 17th, and 20th Verses of
the same Chapter, that the whole Will of GOD, containing our Duty toward Men,
is reducible to this one thing LOVE; for whatever the Almighty requires toward
them, is but a Branch from this Root, a Stream from this Fountain; The End of
the Commandment, is Charity out of a pure Heart, and Faith unfeigned: The
contrary to which, viz. Wrath, Strife, SEDITIONS, Heresies, he expressly calls
the manifest Works of the Flesh, the Lustings of the Flesh against the Spirit,
Things contrary to the Spirit, which if we walk in the Spirit we shall not
fulfill.

AND observe that one of those Works of the Flesh is SEDITION, (dichostasiai, a
distemi disto, sejungo, dissension dissidium) Dissension, Discord; the same
that is elsewhere called Division, and SCHISM, consisting in an uncharitable
Alienation of Mind, among those that profess the same Fundamentals of Religion,
on Account of Circumstantial Differences of Opinion; often breaking the
external Unity of the Church of CHRIST, and dividing it into Parties, which
follow different Leaders, whose Persons they have in Admiration: One saying he
is of Paul; another he is of Apollos; another of Cephas; and another of CHRIST.
( Romans xvi. 17. 1 Cor. i. 10. And iii. 3. xi. 18. xii. 25.) What is called
Sedition in the State, is generally termed Schism in the Church, but the latter
so much resembles the former, in its Rise, Progress, and Issue, that it has
sometimes the same Name assigned it.

AND yet that which makes this horrible Iniquity the more perilous and fatal,
is that it is seldom repented of, nay, it is commonly justified by those that
commit it, and contended for, as an Instance of Spirituality, an important
Duty, and a proper Mean to promote CHRIST'S Kingdom. It Is true it may be
Spiritual, but then it is not from the Spirit of GOD, but as the Apostle James
observes, the Spirit of the Devil; and to try to promote CHRIST'S Kingdom
thereby, is just as prudent, as to cut off our Legs in order to quicken our
Motion; or pluck out our Heart or Bowels to promote our Health! It is easy to
convince People of the Sinfulness of Swearing, or Drunkenness, but it is
difficult to convince them of this, which is perhaps as much spoken against by
the blessed GOD, as any Sin in the Bible; nay, some, instead of seeing Evil in
it, father the Abomination upon GOD himself, which is horrible Blasphemy though
undesign'd!

AND that which tends to confirm Persons in this unhappy Mistake, is the Piety
of some that are guilty of it, but we should learn to distinguish between
Persons and their Actions; and to love the one, while we sometimes reasonably
hate the other: The Goodness of none can either justify, or protect our
Imitation of them in what is bad; all Men are V^^ity, nor should the Interest
of Truth be sacrificed to their Credit, and far less to their Humor! Whatever
good or bad Men may say in favor of envious bitter Zeal, and pretend to derive
its Original from Heaven, the Apostle James assures us, that it does not
descend from above, but from beneath, from an infernal Source; and that those
who say otherwise, do lie against the Truth: How unreasonable then is it for
any to be offended, that others cannot join with them in calling Evil Good, and
Good Evil! And to speak Evil of such as cannot run with them to the same Excess
of Riot!

BUT the aforesaid uncharitable Divisions, are not only exceeding contrary to
the Credit, Comfort, Prosperity and Safety of the Church of GOD, but likewise
to all the dear and honorable Relations we sustain to GOD, and one another: We
are all (professedly) the Children of GOD, by Faith in Jesus Christ. (Gal. iii.
26.) Members of his mystical Body. (Romans xii. 5.) We are also GOD's building,
fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of GOD. (1 Cor. iii. 9.
Ephesians. ii. 19.) Now are civil Wars comfortable in a Kingdom? Or angry
Contentions decent in a Family among Brethren? May I not speak to such in the
Language of Abrahom to Lot, (Genesis xiii. 8.) Let there be no Strife I pray thee,
between me and thee, for we are Brethren? Is it a friendly Part, to wound or
maim our Bodies? Or can that be the Safety of this Kingdom which is the Ruin of
all others?

AND dear Sirs, are not such Divisions, exceeding contrary the to Heavenly
State, where perfect Love, entire Harmony, and delightful Union reign, without
any envious Motion, or discordant Jar forever! How then can angry Resentments,
sinful Divisions, and ungovernable Tumults, lead to that Kingdom of Peace, of
Unity and Love?

Nay, my Brehren, is not such a wretched State of Things, in some respects,
worse than the Kingdom of Satan? who has a greater Regard to his Interest than
to destroy it, by dividing it. ( Mat. xii. 26)

But are not we commanded, to come out from among them, and to be separate and
not to touch the unclean Thing, and told that the Lord will receive us. (2 Cor.
vi. 17.

I answer, These Words are taken from Isaiah lii. 11. to which are joined some
Words from Levt. xxvi. 12. What the Prophet says concerning leaving the
Babilonians, the Apostle applies, by a Parity of Reason, to other gross
Idolaters, which likewise must be forsaken, as Grotius observes.

And touch not the Unclean Thing. By unclean Animals, and unclean Things, the
Hebrews mean Idolaters, ( Act. x. 14.) because abstinence from Meats,
pronounced unclean by the ceremonial Law, was one principal Stone in the Wall
of Separation, between the Jews who called themselves clean, and the Idolatrous
Gentiles, whom they reckoned unclean; so that this Text does not reach the
Point at all, that it is brought for, it only speaks of leaving Infidels and
gross Idolaters, that are out of the Communion of the visible Church; but it
speaks not of breaking Communion with the Church at all.

THIS Interpretation, the Verses immediately Preceding confirm, which speak in
this Manner, what Concord has CHRIST with Belial? Or what Part has he that
believes with an Infidel? And what agreement has the Temple of GOD with
Idols? With Belial, that is, either 1st. with the Devil who is so called by way
of emphasis, as elsewhere the wicked one; for Belial signifies a Knave, or out
Law, so the Seventy interpret the Original Word. Or 2d. with his Laques, Men
notoriously Wicked and Scandalous, who are called Children of Belial, (See
Deuteronomy. xiii. 13. Judge. xix. 22. 1 Samuel i. 16. and 2 Chronicles. xiii. 7.) i. e. what
Portion, Communion or Society has Christ with the Devil, or profane Idolaters?
This was a common Phrase among the Hebrews, See Jos. xxii. 24. What have you to
do with the LORD GOD of Israel? What agreement has the Temple of GOD with
Idols? i. e. What religious Confederacy or Communion can we who are Members of
the Church of GOD and Temples of GOD, have with Infidels, or the Worshipers of
Idols; who are the Temples of Idols, that is of the Devil worshipped in them; to
this Purpose speak many learned Interpreters. Beza, Piscator, Erasmus,
Menochius, Drusius, Grotius, Vorstius, Zegerus, Baxter, Pool.


TO suppose that it intends a separation from the visible Church, upon the
Account of Circumstantials not imposed, is in effect to say, that Almighty God
commands positive Contradictions, because he elsewhere enjoins such to receive
each other and therefore that Gloss must needs be false from which such a
Contradiction flows.

IT is true if any Church imposes Circumstantials upon us, against our
Consciences, as Terms of Communion, we must obey God rather than Man, in
forbearing to communicate with them: and if divine Providence offers an
Opportunity of enjoying religious Privileges, without such Impositions, no
doubt we may peaceably and charitably withdraw and embrace it: This is far from
Schism, which chiefly consists in an uncharitable Allienation of Mind from our
Brethren: And hence the Apostle speaks of Schisms among the Corinthians, who
met at the same Sacramental Table. Chillingworth, Hales, and Dr. H. More have
justly asserted, That if the Pope had imposed but one lie to be subscribed, or
one Sin to be done, and said all Nations and Persons that do not this, are no
Christians, or shall have no Communion with the Church: The Man that refuses
that imposed Lie or Sin, is guiltless of the Schism, and does but obey God and
save his Soul; and the Usurperer that imposes them will be found the henious
schismatic before God, and the Cause of all these Divisions of the Church.

SOME draw an Objection against Union from these Words of GOD to the Prophet
Jeremiah, (chap. xv. 19, 20.) Let them return unto thee, but return not thou
unto them, and I will make thee unto this People a fenced brazen Wall, and they
shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee.

ANSWER, I think Mr. Pool gives us the true meaning of the aforesaid Place of
Scripture, in these Words, He charge the Prophet to keep his ground and not
to go over unto wicked Men, but to use his endeavor to reduce them to that
Obedience he yielded to him, Do not flatter them or conform to their Evil
Practice, but labor to reclaim them and bring them under the Yoke of God,
declare faithfully what I have commanded thee; to this Effect speak Calvin,
Junius and Grotius. So that what is forbidden, is a criminal Neglect of Duty, a
criminal Compliance with, or conformity to what is Evil; but to seek Peace
with, and Union to our Brethren, who hold the same Foundation Principles, and
are regular in Life, is so far from being Evil, that it is positively
commanded: Hence it appears, that the Text aforesaid, is foreign to the Point
for which it is aduced. To take the aforesaid Scripture in any other Sense than
I have given of it, makes it contradict many positive divine Precepts, which
enjoin us to ensue Peace, to leave our Gift at the Altar, and go first and be
reconciled to our Brother; and therefore any other Sense of the Text cannot be
true, for GOD cannot command Contradictions.

IN reading the late Christian History, composed by Mr. Prince of Boston, I
could not but observe in the Accounts he gives of many Reverend Ministers of
New England, who favored the late revival of Religion, that notwithstanding of
their Zeal for that blessed Work of the most high God, they still retained
charitable Sentiments of their Brethren, who differed from them in Opinion upon
that Head, and spoke honorably of them: This is an Example well worthy of our
Imitation, which may it please the God of Peace and Love, to incline and enable
us all to conform to.

OBJECTION, But we must not partake of other Men's Sins, (1 Timothy v. 22.)

I Answer, It is very true, we must not partake of them by Consent, either
negatively, by neglecting any Duty incumbent on us for the Prevention or Cure
thereof; or positively encouraging it by our Council or Example, but when you
have done all that is your Part to oppose and prevent it, the Sin is not yours.

TO suppose that your Presence or joining in public Ordinances, makes you
Guilty without your Consent, is ridiculous Nonsense: For at this Rate, as was
hinted before, all social Worship must be destroyed. For if by joining in
Communion with them in outward Ordinances, we are, contrary to our Consent,
made partakers of one Sin of our Brother, why not of all his Sins, by the same
Rule? And if of his, why not of every other Man's that we join in Worship with?
It is absurd to imagine with some Ignorant, though well meaning People, that we
partake of this Guilt at the Sacrament only, for we join in religious Worship
with them in other Parts of it, such as Prayer and Praises, as really as there;
and therefore the aforesaid Gloss will make us guilty of all the Sins of every
one that we join with in Worship, either in our Families or public Assemblies.
And if the Case be so, Reason will teach us, to avoid with great Care, all
private and public Worship, for the sake of our Safety, to prevent our Ruin
and Damnation; and yet the Almighty enjoins both, to promote our Benefit and
Salvation.

Now how can these Things consist together? Can it be reasonably supposed, that
an all-wise and gracious GOD would, in order to promote our good, enjoin us to
use any Method which would bring upon us the Guilt of inumerable
Transgressions? By the aforesaid Objection, considered in its just and natural
Consequences, all private and public Worship are entirely overthrown; because
all Men that we do, or can associate with in this World, are imperfect
Creatures, guilty of Multitudes of Sins, which according to it becomes ours, on
our worshipping Jehovah with them, according to his Command; and therefore it
does not only destroy private and public Worship altogether, but casts base
Blasphemy upon the blessed GOD, as if he was an Enemy to his Creatures as such,
and enjoined a Religion upon them that tended directly to promote their eternal
Damnation, and that under the Pretext of Kindness and Love! But where is the
Sense of our being Guilty of the Sins that we never consented to either
virtually or actually?

BUT pray observe, that God is not only blasphemed by the aforesaid Objection,
and all private and public Worship overthrown but likewise all Church
Government is entirely unhinged; for ununder the ubrage of it, every one that
is Ignorant enough, and inclined to be a proud Separatist, (the Character of
the Pharisees of old) may according to their humor pretend Dissatisfaction
with some circumstantials in Principle, or fault in Practice, either in the
Minister or some of the Communicants, where they were wont to join, and so pack
of abruptly as the fit takes them, agreeable to the wild flights of their
ungovernable Fancy: According to this Plan every Member of the Body takes upon
himself, without any Authority, the Government of the whole, the Rule of which
is humor and caprice.

SURELY if People were more watchful over their own Hearts and Ways, they would
have less of the leaven of the Pharisees, that is, of their proud separating
Disposition from others, less of their Sowerness and Severity in censuring of
others, for not Tything Mint and Annis and Cummin, for not being so good as
they are forsooth, or even fit to converse with them. Hear how the Almighty
speaks of such, (Isa. lxv. 2, 3, 5.) I have spread out my Hands all the Day,
unto a rebellious People, which walks in a way that was not good, after their
own Thoughts; a People that provokes me to anger continually to my Face; which
say stand by thyself, come not near to me, for I am holier than thou: Those are
a smoke in my Nose, a fire that burns all the Day.

UPON which Mr. Henry glosseth justly as follows, The most provoking Iniquity
of the Jews, in our Savior's Time, was their Pride and Hypocrisy, that Sin of
the Scribes and Pharisees, against which CHRIST denounces so many Woes. They
say, stand by thy self, keep off, get thee to thine, so the original is, keep
to thine own Companions, but come not near to me, least thou pollute me; touch
me not, I will not allow thee any familiarity with me, for I am holier than
thou, and therefore thou art not good enough to converse with me, I am not at
other Men, nor even as this Publican. They thought themselves holier than any,
better than any of their Neighbors. These are a Smoke in my Nose says GOD,
such a Smoke as comes not from a quick Fire which soon becomes glowing and
pleasant, but from a Fire of wet Wood, that burns all the Day, and is nothing
but Smoke. Note, nothing in Men is more Odious, and Offensive to GOD, then a
Proud Conceit of themselves, and Contempt of others, for commonly those are
mos^ ^nholy of all, that think themselves Holier than any.

THERE were many Corruptions in the Churches at Corinth, Galatia and Laodocea,
but we read of no Command to separate from them on account thereof.

GIVE me leave to consider one Objection more, which is this, viz. That our
Brethren of the present Synod of Philadelphia, have opposed the whole of the
late Work of God in this Land, and ascribed it to the Devil; in support of
which, these Things following are alleged, viz.

A Satirical Lampoon, entitled, the Wandering Spirit. But seeing that Piece was
Anonymous, (had no Name affixed to it) and was never owned by our Brethren, as
a Body, it cannot, without manifest Injustice, be ascribed to them, as such;
nor is there any certain or sufficient Proof, that ever it was owned and
approved of (in all its Parts) by any one of them, so far as I know: And if
there was, it cannot affect the whole, unless the like Proof can be offered
against them.

AGAIN, The Querists are produced as another Proof, in Confirmation of the
Charge; to which it may be replied, That notwithstanding of some slighty
Representations of the late religious Commotions, interspersed in some Passages
of those Writings; yet I know not that they assign any of them, and much less
all of them, to the Devil: Moreover it should be considered, that these Books
were Anonymus, and never approved by the Synod of Philadelphia, by any
authoritative judicial Act, nor, so far as I know, by any of their inferior
Judicatures, as such, and therefore cannot be justly charged upon that Body as
their Act and Deed.

BUT the following Paragraph of the Protest, page 11. is though it by some to be a
sufficient Evidence of the Charge. The Words are these 6. Their preaching the
Terrors of the Law in such Manner and Dialect as has no precedent in the Word
of God, but rather appears to be borrowed from a worse Dialect, and so
industriously working on the Passions and Affections of weak Minds, so as to
cause them to cry out in a hideous Manner, and fall down in Convulsion-like
Fits, to the marring of the profiting both of themselves and others, who are so
taken up in seeing and hearing these odd Symptoms, that they cannot attend to,
or hear what the Preacher says; and then after all, boasting of these Things as
the Work of God, which we are persuaded do proceed from an inferior or worse
Cause.

The insufficiency of this Evidence, may be plainly perceived by considering,
that it is only some exceptionable particulars that are opposed in the
preceding Paragraph, viz. an unscriptural Mode of preaching the Terrors of the
Law, an industrious working on the Passions of weak Minds, causing hideous out
cries, and falling down in Convulsion-like Fits, and boasting of these Things
as the Work of God. Now are any of these Things a Part, or all of them
together, the Work of God we have been contending for, or any Part of it, any
necessary Apendage of it, or any Evidence of it? If we say Yea, we ourselves
brand the Work of God with Scandal and Ridicule, if nay, then these Things come
from an inferior or worse Cause. Pray is not Nature, a Cause inferior to GOD,
and worse then him? And does not Charity oblige us, to put the most mild
Construction upon others Words, that they can in Reason bear? The Sense I have
given of the Words, is easy and natural, but the other is a Force upon them;
pray does it not look more like the strength of Prejudice then Argument, to
turn Particulars into Generals or Universals, and put the hardest
Interpretation upon Words, that they can possibly bear. The Words of the
Paragragph are particular and limited, boasting of THESE THINGS, as the work of
GOD, if any were Guilty hereof, (as doubtless our Brethren were so informed)
they were to be pitied for their Weakness, and if any of the younger Ministers,
imprudently aggravated to an excessive pitch, the Passions of the disress'd, by
an unscriptural or unseasonable Inculcation of Terrors, (at any Time) it was
certainly very wrong; but whether there was any Foundation for this Charge, in
any Degree, it is not my Business at present to Inquire?

IN a Word, whatever unadvised Expressions, in private Conversation, might
possibly drop from the Lips of some of our Brethren in a heat of Passion, or
ferment of Dispute, (in disparagement of the Work of GOD) many Years agone,
which Methinks it is now high Time to forget, yet upon Enquiry I cannot find
any UNITED TESTIMONY of their BODY upon Record against the late REVIVAL of
RELIGION, (truly so called) not one by which they deny the Reality of it, and
far less ascribe it to the Devil. Now whither it is Reasonable or Charitable,
for any to suffer their Minds to be inflamed with prejudice against their
Brethren, by unprov'd reports, judge ye? It never was, nor I believe ever can
or will be proved, against the present Synod of Philadelphia, That they have
generally, universally, or as a Body ascribed the late revival of Religion
(truly and properly so called) to the Devil, and therefore however Pious our
Designs are, it is no Act of Friendship to Truth, to Justice, to Charity, or to
the Peace and Weal of CHRIST'S visible Kingdom, to receive or spread such
Charges, as directly tend to create, increase, and confirm Prejudices, and
inflame resentments against our Brethren, widen the Breaches of Zyon as the
Sea, and make her Wounds Bleed a fresh, and reject a Remedy: May GOD in Mercy
to his poor Church, Pardon and Reform such unaccountable Conduct!

PRAY may not an Acknowledgement be as reasonably desired of us, for LICENCING
and ORDAINING contrary to the Act of the Synod, as we can desire an
Acknowledgement, upon the Account of the PROTEST? But can we make such an
Acknowledgment? No! for whither we did right or wrong in Licencing etc. we did
it in the integrity of our Hearts, as believing it to be our Duty; and if we
would exercise the same Charity toward our Brethren, as we desire toward
ourselves, in this Case, would no^ we believe that they protested against us
with the like Integrity, from an Apprehension that the Church was in no small
Danger of expiring out right, and that quickly as to the Form, Order and
Constitution of an Organized Church (As they themselves express it in the 5th
Page of the Protest) and if so whither their view of Things was right or wrong,
if they remain of the same Judgment how can they acknowledge without Sinning
against Conscience? And thus by insisting on Acknowledgments, the way to Union
is as effectually, as uncharitably, unscripturally, and unreasonably shut up,
without any probability of an Alteration; and is not this a lamentable Case?
Surely it is!

NOW in order to avoid uncharitable Divisions, and Tumults; it is necessary to
beware of Pride; for as Solomon observes, It is only by Pride that Contention
comes, (Prove. xiii. 10.) And elsewhere he declares, that a proud Spirit
stirs up Strife; this makes Men easy to be provoked, and hard to be
reconciled, the proud Man is always aiming at some higher Mark of Honor: and
if Peace and Union will not answer that, War and Division shall; what else but
Ambition made War in Heaven itself? Pride inclines us to obtrude with Violence
our Opinion even in lesser Things upon others, and unjustly deny them the
Liberty we desire for ourselves. And therefore we are told, that the Overseer
or Pastor of a particular Flock, or Bishop should be no Novice, least being
lifted up, or puffed up with Pride, he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil.
(1 Timothy iii. 6.) it was doubtless upon the Account of Pride, that the Apostle
John complains of Diotrep^ who through Love to Pre-eminence, refused to receive
the Brethren, (...) forbid them that would, yea, and cast them out of the
Church; prating against them with malicious Words, (3 John 9, 10.) But on the
contrary Humility will incline us to dwell at home, and think ourselves
unworthy of the Communion of our Brethren, and to be most quarrelsome against
our own Corruptions; it will incline us to do nothing in Strife and Vainglory,
but in lowliness of Mind, each to esteem the other, better than himself. It
will incline us to reckon ourselves, the Chief of Sinners, and far less than
the least of all Saints.

O, how precious and amiable is this Grace, in the esteem of GOD and good Men!
This should be our constant Garb, our constant Ornament, with which we should
be clothed, and without which we are indeed naked, and deformed; He that
humbles himself shall be exalted, (but Pride goes before a Fall, and a high
Mind before Destruction.) In such, GOD dwells; to such he gives Increase of
Grace, and such he guides in his Way, but the Proud he looks on afar off: And
hence the Apostle cautions us against being wise in our own Conceits, and
minding high Things, (Romans xii. 16.) i. e. Things above our Capacities and
Callings, and that we should not think over highly of ourselves, but soberly as
we ought to think, (Romans xii. 3.) alla phronein, eis to sopronein; which was
the Psalmist's Sentiment and Practice. ( Ps. cxxxi. 1.) So Chrysostom, Erasmus,
Beza, Grotius.


NOR is it less necessary, to beware of narrowness of Soul; which not only the
Warmth of some Men's Tempers, disposes them to, as well as their conversing
with such only who are of their turn of Mind, and small Stature in respect of
Knowledge; but especially their Unacquaintedness with the History of the Church
of CHRIST in past Ages, as well as with its present State throughout the World.
If religious People did but know the great Mischief that Divisions have done in
former Times, to the Church of CHRIST, they would not pretend to reform her, by
that which has almost proved her Ruin: Or uncharitably confine the Church of
CHRIST within the narrow Compass of a Nut-shell. I mean a few Societies of
their own superfine Cast or Party; and so rob the Redeemer, of his visible
Kingdom on Earth almost altogether.

FARTHER it is likewise exceeding necessary, in order to preserve the UNION of
the visible Church, to AVOID ALTERING the TERMS of COMMUNION which CHRIST has
FIXED; we should let Matters stand as our Lord has left them, and not pretend
to make any new Terms of Communion, or make any thing necessary to the UNION of
the Church, which CHRIST has not made necessary. To the aforesaid Purpose
speaks Dr. Stillingfleet
Ministers are but Servants, as their Name signifies, and therefore should not
Lord is over their Brethren, and usurp the Legislator's Place, or attempt to be
Masters of our Faith, No! CHRIST, and none but CHRIST, is our KING, in Matters
purely religious; though the Church it is true, has an executive, yet she has no
legislative Authority, nor is there any Need of it, the holy Scriptures are a
complete Rule, able to make the Man of God perfect, and thoroughly furnished to
every good Work. And if there was Need, the Church has no Capacity equal to
that Province; her Business is to obey the Precepts already issued forth, by
the royal Authority of Zyon's King, and not to obtrude new ones of her own
Invention, which serve only to enslave the Consciences of Men to a human
Authority, to divide the Mediator's Kingdom into numberless Parts, and draw his
Subjects from their Allegiance, to their rightful Lord and Sovereign.

IT is also necessary, Sirs, to beware of enslaving ourselves, to any Party of
Men, by confining all our Respect to them, to the Neglect of others; and making
them Masters of our Consciences, because of their Piety; so as to take for
granted what they say, by an implicit Faith, without examining it; or so as to
be slavishly afraid to contradict them: No! my Brethren, we must not judge of
Doctrines by the Persons that hold them; though this is, alas, almost as common,
as it is perverse and fatal; but by the Word of GOD, which is our only Rule;
sometimes it happens that a bad Man is in the Right, and a good Man in the
Wrong.

NEVERTHELESS the Judgment of the aged and experienced, in whom the fierce
Fires of Youth are abated, (which some call Zeal, but falsely) not only by the
Influence of Years, but by farther Acquaintance with themselves, (in a great
Variety of Vicissitudes, and Tossings upon this turbulent Ocean) as well as
with the rest of Mankind, and by more deep and calm Searches, into the Meaning
of the Scriptures, and History of past Ages: I say the Judgment of such, is
more to be valued, and especially in Matters that concern the Peace of the
Church of GOD, than the indigested Notions of rash-headed, fiery and
unexperienced Youth: Yet the Judgment of none should be taken without Trial, as
the great Apostle Paul humbly acknowledges concerning himself, that when he was
a Child, he spoke as a Child; so had others his Humility they would acknowledge
the same Thing; but it seems, as if many imagined themselves Men in Knowledge,
without ever passing through the Infant Age; contrary to the Order of Nature, and
of GOD; and consequently conceit that their Knowledge is miraculous, in an Age
long after Miracles have ceased; but can give no Proof of this extraordinary
Attainment, excepting vain and strong Confidence in their own Opinion,
(respecting little Things) and a Contempt of the Opinion of others, who had the
Misfortune not to know so much at first as afterward; both which are
insufficient Vouchers; but when the Apostle grew to the Stature of a Man, he
was not ashamed to put away Childish Things; nor should others, to follow his
Example, how much soever they may suffer for it, by such, who would seem to
have it understood, that they are infallible, and that Wisdom must die with
them.

FARTHER any that desire, to promote the Peace and Union of CHRIST'S Kingdom,
should beware of meddling with the Faults of the Ministers of it, in such a Way
as tends to Disparage them and Obstruct their usefulness; no doubt they may and
ought to be reproved, when there is need of it, but this ought to be in their
presence, with Humility, Meekness and Love, so as tends to promote their Cure;
(and hence we are directed to entreat an Elder as a Father.) Not by Backbiting
and Slandering of them in their absence, or threatening and reviling them in
their presence, which has no other Tendency but to express our sinful
Resentments, inflame theirs, and render both Contemptible!

NOR should we forget, what the sacred Scriptures inform us, of the Mutiny of
Corah and his numerous Companions, who gathered themselves together, against
Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, ye take too much upon you, seeing all the
Congregation are Holy, every one of them, and the LORD is among them, wherefore
then, lift ye up yourselves, above the Congregation of the LORD? The issue of
which Mutiny was exceeding dreadful! (See Number. xvi.) My Brethren says the
Apostle James, be not many Masters, (Didascaloi, teachers) knowing that ye
shall receive the greater Condemnation, (Jam. iii.)

AND should not such as are desirous of Peace, and Union beware of looking with
an envious Eye, upon the Conduct of others, only to carp and accuse? Yes
Surely, we should be more ready to observe, what is good and commend it; let us
imitate the Be, that feeds on fragrant Flowers, and not the Crow, that passes
over them with a sordid neglect, and feeds only on Carrion. And when we observe
any Corruption in the Church, we ought to take notice of the contrary extreme,
least while we shun one Evil, we run into another, which is as natural as it is
fatal.

ENVY my Brethren, basely Spites every Thing that is Excellent and truly Noble:
But is the most direct and sworn Enemy to Peace and Union: 'Twas the Envy of
the Devil, that first disturbed the Peace and Order of the World; that set Men
in Battle Array against GOD, and one another: And it is the same that foments
all the Jars Confusions and Divisions of the Church and State, so that Satan
may be justly called the Father of Discords and Divisions, as well as of Lies;
indeed the envious Man is a Universal Enemy.

NOR should we keep at a Distance from those we differ with* Hearing of their
Reasons calmly, has an excellent tendency to remove Prejudices, and unite Men's
Minds and Affections, but the contrary Method, which too much obtains among
Parties generally, viz. keeping at a great distance from each other and
conversing only with those of their own Sentiments; together with a ready
Reception of bad Reports of one another, and spreading them about with speed
and diligence, and perhaps with the Addition of some aggravating Circumstance,
or stronger Point of Light, the Omissiion of some favorable one and ascribing
the whole Charge to a secret bad Design; without hearing the accused Persons
Apology, or having any certain Proof of the Accusation, or making any kind
Interpretations in his favor, is most unjust and barbarous, and tends to turn
all into Flame and Uproar!

AGAIN my Brethren, it is no more prejudicial to Peace and Unity, then it is
base and degenerous in itself, for Persons of either Side of the Question in
Debate, to make a sordid Triumph over, to lampoon, redicule, and burlesque,
supposed or real Condescentions, in order to Peace and Union, without which
they are not like to be attained; such who thus sit in the scorners Chair, and
labor to oppress with Scandal and Contempt, what is truly virtuous and
commendable, do thereby declare themselves to be Enemies to the Peace of
Christ's Kingdom; and that they prefer their Party-Passions, and Prejudices
before it; nor do they less manifest their own inconsistency, for if they
suppose that any have changed their Sentiments for the better, in any Instance,
why do they reproach it? If for the worse, why did they not approve their
former Sentiments? It is inglorious to Deride, or Triumph over the supposed or
real Mistake, or Distress, even of an Enemy, how much more then of a Friend? In
a Word, such Men if they may be called so; (seeing they bid defiance to the
Sentiments of Humanity,) like brute Beasts speak Evil of what they understand
not, publish their own shame, and instead of exposing others, do contrary to
their Design, (in Effect) pronounce a Panegyric upon them, and a just Satire
upon themselves!

ON the Contrary, dear Sirs, let us with sincerity, speed and steadfastness,
comply with the positive Means of Peace and Union before hinted. O! let us
entertain kind Thoughts of the Speech and Actions of our Brethren. Dr. H. More
observes justly, That it would do much more good in the World, if all Parties
instead of severe Censure, were ready to find out and commend what is good in
the Doctrine and Worship of those that differ from them; that this would
incline them to listen to advice for Reformation, and keep up the Credit of the
common Truths and Duties of Religion; when this envious snarling at all that
others do, tends to bring Mankind to Atheism, and banish all reverence of
Religion, together with Christian Charity, from the Earth.

DID not our LORD use this Method when he reproved the Churches of Ephesus,
Pergamos and Thyatyra? to soften their native Obstinacy and Reluctance against
Reproof, and to make it efficacious to answer its Design: The blessed JESUS
introduced it with a Commendation of what was Praise worthy in them, (Rev. ii.)
This is an Example truly rational, and well worthy of Imitation.

O! let us not believe every bad Story we hear of our Brethren. Scultetus (from
Tossanus) relates this Passage of Prince Frederick of Montpelgard, who had been
prejudiced against the Protestants by a Papal Tuition, that when he was at
Geneva and Helvetia, he was wont to say, Geneve et in Helvetia, vidi multa, de
quibus, nihil, pauca eorum de quibus sepe audivi. i. e. At Geneva and Helvetia,
I have seen many Things of which I heard nothing before, and few of those
Things which I have often heard of. It was likewise a just and generous saying
of Lord Verulam, in his Essays, worthy of a good Mind, That the GOD above, who
knows the Heart, does discern, that frail Men in some of their
Contradictions, intend the same Thing, and accepts both. This is in Substance
the same with the Apostles truly Catholic Sentiments expressed in the
fourteenth Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, a Chapter exceeding necessary
to be well understood, and seriously considered at this Juncture.

IF we would but defend an accused Brother in his absence, as far as Reason
directs, as far as we would desire him to defend us in the like Circumstances,
and be hardly induced to believe what is bad of them; and even when we are
constrained to it by sufficient and credible Evidence, to yield an unwilling
assent; and in the mean time to impute the faulty Sentiment, the criminal
Conduct to good Design, or to Ignorance, Oversight and Inconsideration, rather
than Malignity, as far as we reasonably can, it would probably have a happy
Influence to promote Peace and Union. And

FARTHER, if to kind Thoughts, we add candid courteous Speech, and friendly
Behavior and Action, it will crown the Scene, soften their Prejudices, invite
mutual Respect, from all that are not entirely lost to a Sense of Ingenuity and
Gratitude, and so preserve Peace and Union where they are, and at least prepare
the Way for them where they are not. If such a Conduct is like to have
Influence upon an Enemy, surely much more upon a displeased Friend and Brother.
But that is the Case, and hence we are advised to it by the Apostle, (Romans xii.
20.) Therefore if thy Enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst give him drink; for
in so doing, thou shall heap Coals of Fire on his Head, i. e. instead of
returning Evil for Evil to thine Adversary, do him kind Offices, which have a
noble Tendency to make him relent; this will heap Coals of Fire upon his Head,
not of wrath, but love, not to burn him, but to soften his obstinate
Resentments: This will excite him to reciprocal Respect, say Augustine and
Erasmus. The Apostle probably alludes to some hard Metals, which are softened
by Fire, not only put under, but sometimes cast on the Top of the Cruciple. To
love Friends ( or those that are kind to us) is common to all, says Tertulian,
but to love Enemies, is peculiar to Christians. Amicos enim diligere omnium
est, inimicos solorum christian ^rum. Tertul. Contra Scapulam.
And therefore we should not be overcome of Evil, but overcome Evil with good.
He that revenges himself (i. e. privately) is overcome by the Evil of his
Enemy, and the Passion of his own Mind; but he that shows Kindness for Cruelty,
carries the Laurels of Victory and Triumph! Not to recompense Evil for Evil, or
retaliate Injuries by private Resentment, which is as natural to us as it is
prejudicial to Society, as it is truly excellent in itself, so it is often
beneficial to those that observe it: For, as Valerius Maximus nobly observes,
Injuries are more beautifully conquered with Kindnesses, than requited by the
obstinacy of mutual hatred Speciosius injury beneficiis vincuntur, quam mutui
odii partinacia pensantur. Valor M^^.


WITHOUT Beneficence, our in-offencive Carriage will be looked upon as a
suspicious Strangeness, rather than a peaceable Demeanor, especially if when
pressed with Necessity, we do not relieve them, they will look upon themselves
to be slighted and wronged; for Need, in the Opinion of those that feel it,
begets a title to competent relief, which if they be denied, they think they
are injured.

DEARLY beloved avenge not yourselves, but rather give place unto Wrath, for
Vengeance is the Lords, and he will repay it. Because this Duty of abstaining
from private Revenge is so difficult to Flesh and Blood, the Apostle repeats it
with a friendly Compelation, that his entreaty might prevail the more, he
counsels the believing Romans to restrain their Anger from Resistance, and to
leave the Part of Judgment and Punishment to GOD, and commit their Cause to
him, who judges righteously, and will in due Time vindicate the Inocent.

BE of the same Mind one toward another, in respect of Concord and Affection
in your Councils and Actions. Let not Mercy and Truth forsake thee, bind them
about thy neck, write them upon the Table of thine Heart, so shall thou find
favor in the fight of God and Man. (Pro. iii. 3.4.) If it be possible, as much
as lies in you, live peaceably with all Men. The Apostle here supposes, that
it may so happen, by Reason of the frowardness of some Men's Tempers, and the
unreasonableness of the Conditions of Peace they propose, that it will be
impracticable to live in Peace with them, it may be inconsistent with Truth and
Holiness to comply with their Demands; nevertheless as much as lies in us, we
should carefully avoid offering Occasion of Disturbance, and Endeavor
(Provirili) Studiously, with all our Might, those Things that tend to procure
Peace, where it is not, and preserve it where it is, by a peaceable Temper and
Behavior, by peaceable Desires, Designs, Councils, Proposals, Pleadings,
Condescensions; to this Purpose speak Camero, Gomarus, Pareus, Toletus,
Erasmus, Grotius.

LET us do Justice and love Mercy, we should be just in our Dealings to all
Men, punctually observing our Contracts, impartially deciding Controversies,
equally distributing Rewards. JUSTICE in its own Nature, and by the common
Agreement of Men, is designed to be the Guardian of Peace and Union, and
sovereign Remedy of Contentions.

NOR is it less necessary, to remit our right in nice, rigorous and doubtful
Points, to avoid as much as we can, hard Measures, and Extremities, especially
in smaller Matters; for such Severities show little kindness to our Neighbors,
or Regard to their Good; which tends to exasperate them, and make them believe
we are their Enemies, and so excite them to be ours; but on the contrary some
rebatement of Right, will enduce them to have an honorable Opinion of us, and
a sincere Affection to us.

AS Money is the Sinew of War, so is Peace of Society; without which it is so
far from obtaining any of its just and valuable Ends, that perfect Solitude is
preferrable to it, for in that we only want the Help of Friends, but in this we
receive Injury from them; it is Peace that makes Society a Defense, and
distinguishes the Congresses of Men from the Herds of Beasts: As Union
strengthens every Thing, so Peace cements Union and holds all together; this
gives Beauty, Order, Proportion, Decency and Agreeableness to Society; this
inclines every Man to keep within his proper Sphere, and not to aspire after
another's Business; the Hand does not affect the Place of the Eye, nor the Foot
of the Head; the Result of which must be the most consumate Beauty, and perfect
Harmony: This derives an innocent and great Delight to the whole Body, for who
can express the noble Pleasures of sincere Affection? The Sweetnesses that
issue from mutual Kindness, entire Confidence, and a firm Union of Minds?

SEEING we are here in a State of Imperfection, where the most Intelligent know
but in Part, and consequently where difference of Sentiment about
Circumstantials, or Matters of lesser Moment, wherein the Interest of vital and
practical Christianity is little concerned; it is unreasonable to suffer the
Vigor of our mutual Affections to abate, and much more so when we indulge an
Alienation of them!

THE great Things of Religion wherein we are happily agreed, should suffice to
maintain mutual Respect, and be an enduring Bond of Affection and Union among
us.

FORASMUCH as we have no Reason to believe that lesser Differences of
Sentiment, do exclude Persons from the Love of our common Lord, they should not
from ours; and doubtless it is on this Account, that our dear Savior and his
Apostles, have so frequently inculcated the great Duties of mutual Forbearance,
Patience and Love; which we would be more ready inviolably to observe, if we
had a just and humble Sense of the Weakness of our Understandings, and great
Deficiency of our Knowledge, in this mutable, mortal, miserable and imperfect
State? We need the Mantle of other's Charity, to vail our Mistakes and Failures
in Sentiment and Practice, and can we consistently deny the same to others? Our
great Master and compassionate Redeemer overlooks many Mistakes and
Imperfections in his sincere Servants, and why should not we do so likewise?
Should not the some Mind that was in him be in us? Should not we in imitation
of his glorious Example, Receive others as he has received us, (Romans xv. 7.)
Should not such as are strong, bear with the Infirmities of the Weak? And not
please themselves, but their Neighbor for his Good and Edification, even as
CHRIST pleased not himself? (Romans xv. 3, 12.)

DEAR Sirs! Why should not we make such due Allowances, and charitable
Apologies for our Brethren's Misapprehension in Opinion, and Indiscretions in
Practice, and for their unhappy Byasses of Prejudice and Passion, the true
Source of the former, as we are or should be conscious, we need for our own?
And be ready to exercise the same Forbearance toward them, that we desire and
expect? If not, how can we love our Neighbor as ourselves? The Observance of
which Precept, you know, Sirs, as it is highly rational in itself, so it is of
the last Importance in all Societies, both civil and religious; why therefore
should we not stoop to the humblest Offices of Kindness toward them? And if
any of them are overtaken with a Fault, to restore such with the Spirit of
Meekness, considering ourselves, least we also should be tempted.

THE Vindication of Misdemeanors committed against us, does not belong to us,
for indeed we are not competent Judges of them; it being (our own Cause) nor
rightful Executors of the Punishment due for them; and therefore GOD has
reasonably reserved this difficult Province to himself, Vengeance is mine,
says the Lord, and I will repay it.

INSTEAD of exciting Revenge, to which we have naturally such a wild, fierce
and ungovernable Proness, we are obliged by the Religion of JESUS, to interpret
our Neighbor's Offenses in the mildest Sense they are capable of, as flowing
from Infirmity or Mistake, and to forgive them, in imitation of the blessed
GOD, who is gracious and merciful, and slow to anger.

WE ourselves being subject to the same, or greater Faults, do need Pardon from
others; and therefore should extend the same to them: And if GOD has forgiven
us a Thousand Talents shall we take our Brother by the Throat for a few Pence?
And indeed the Almighty has made our forgiving others, a necessary Condition of
our obtaining Pardon ourselves. (Matt. vi.) If ye forgive Men their Trespasses,
your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if ye forgive not Men their
Trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive your Trespasses. Nor does
private Revenge do any Service, but on the contrary, provoke to greater
Injuries.

BUT the Example of our LORD, should especially enduce us to Meekness and
Patience; and hence we are commanded to learn of him, who is meek and lowly in
Heart, (and assured that in this way) we shall find rest to our Souls. And
elsewhere we are enjoined, to consider him who endured the Contradiction of
Sinners against himself, least we be weary and faint in our Minds.

THE Example of our LORD, my Brethren, was the most perfect, amiable and
glorious of this Kind that ever was presented to human View; he was above all
Expression, a Man of Sorrows and acquainted with Grief; his whole Life was a
continued train of Miseries; and therein shone forth with unclouded and
inexpressible Brightness, the unstained, uninterrupted exercise of Meekness and
Patience, in all their amiable Oriency, Charms and Atractives.

HIS Parentage was, to appearance, obscure and mean. His Life was spent not
only in continual Labor and hard Travel, but in extreme Poverty; and hence it
is said of him, that the Foxes have Holes, and the Birds of the Air have Nests,
but that the Son of Man has no where to lay his Head. Sometimes he fed upon
course fare, and sometimes was destitute of ordinary Food, and sometimes was
indebted for it, even to Strangers of the humblest Order and Character; yet we
find no shadow of murmur by our LORD'S Conduct in that humble situation, or
any Endeavor after a change of it.

NOR was he only in a low and poor Estate, but environed round with the most
formidable Dangers, and exposed to all the Darts of Envy in their utmost
virulence and malignity, the World hated him because he was not of it, and
sought to slay him; and this in return for the most important unparalled and
condescending Kindness and Mercy that ever was or can be expressed to the Sons
of Men! Yet he was grievously asperss'd and inhumanly persecuted, without
committing the least Offense; these Things our LORD bore with an undisturbed
calm of Mind, and instead of Revenge, poured down Blessings on his Enemies: He
instructed their Minds, forgave their Offenses, sympathiz'd with them in their
Straits, their Sorrows, healed their Diseases and supplicated his Father in
their favor, Father forgive them!

WHEN his Countrymen and Kindred showed him ungrateful disrespect, instead of
complaining, he excused their Rudeness, by observing, that a Prophet was not
without Honor save in his own Country, and in his own House. And when the
Samaritan Strangers treated him with indecency and contempt, and his forward
Disciples were fired with unhallowed Indignation, for the Indignity and Affront
that was shown to their Master, he gently labored to soften their Severity,
and calm their Resentment, by observing, that they knew not what Spirit they
were of, and that he came not into the World to destroy Men's lives, but to save
them.

WHEN the Disciples indulged an unreasonable incredulity in the midst of the
most powerful Arguments to the Contrary, the blessed JESUS only gave a gentle
Admonition, why are ye fearful, O ye of little Faith?

WHEN Judas in the most ungrateful and treacherous Manner betrayed him, he
saluted him with gentleness and courtesy, Friend wherefore art thou come?

WHEN his Disciples, in the Juncture of his extreme Distress, were sleepy and
slothful, notwithstanding of his affectionate warnings and moving entreaties to
the Contrary; yet the meek JESUS only gave them a gentle Rebuke, and
immediately added to it, a charitable Apology in their favor, least the
Reproof should make too deep Impression upon their Minds, could ye not watch
with me one Hour? The Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak. Blessed
Lord JESUS, how dear and amiable, and yet how amazing are thy Meekness and
Patience! O send down thy holy Dove-like Spirit into this wretched World, from
which Meekness and Patience have almost taken their final flight, and make, O
make thy People like thyself.

WHEN his zealous overconfident Apostle (Peter) denied him, in a very
scandalous and dreadful Manner, with Oaths and Curses, did our LORD storm at
him, and reject him? No! but looked him into CONTRITION by his LOVE, and
ordered the first TIDINGS of his RESURECTION to be told to him in particular,
go and tell the Disciples, and tell Peter; poor Peter that has denied me, yet I
know him, I remember him, I love him still; tell him this for his Comfort, that
his Friend and Savior has risen from the Dead. O! the amazing Meekness! O the
inexpressible incomparable Tenderness of the Mercy and Love of our dear, dear
Lord JESUS CHRIST! The Heavens and the Earth may be astonished at it! Surely
our blessed High Priest is tenderly touched with the feeling of our
Infirmities! His Bowels sound seasonable Succor to the Distressed and
Indigent, his Bowels bleed over them in their Calamities.

WHEN the High Priests Officers did injuriously strike him, he only returned a
mild Expostulation, If I have spoken Evil, bear Witness of the Evil, if well,
why smitest thou me?

OUR LORD protected from harm the very Instruments of his Sufferings, as
appears in the Cure of the High-Priest's Servant, whose Ear Peter had rashly
struck off. Suffer me thus far, said the meek JESUS, i. e. suffer me to do this
Thing, (says Ludovicus de diu) unbind my Hands for a little moment, that I may
heal this poor Man. Our LORD was more zealous for the safety of his Enemies
than his own! All his Behavior at the Time of his Trial and last Sufferings,
was a perfect calm; he was led as a Lamb to the Slaughter, so he opened not his
Mouth. All the load of Calumny that was cast upon him, and cruel Treatment he
endured, did not extort one angry Word, No! Instead thereof, he prayed his
Father to forgive their Offenses, and labored to extenuate them, to apologize
for them on the Account of their Ignorance and Mistake: They know not what they
do! O the kindness of CHRIST! O glorious Example! It was a just Observation of
Elipha^^, that A^^ction comes not out of the Dust. The Almighty has a right to
dispose of our Condition, and manages the Government of the Universe with
infinite Wisdom, and inflexible Righteousness; with irresistible Power and
unexhausted Goodness: There is the exactest Harmony, the noblest Tendency, the
firmest Union and strictest Adjustment, in and among all the Parts of the grand
Sy^ of Providence, which shall be made fully manifest, to the whole intelligent
Creation, at the End of Time: When the Deep and at present impenetrable Plot of
this surprising Drama, shall be opened* Then shall every one be satisfied with
its Beauty, Conduct and Design, though now to us who sit in a dark Corner of this
vast Theater, some of its Part seem cloudy and perplexed, GOD's ways are
(often) in the great Deep, and his footsteps are not known; he covers with
Darkness his Pavilion, and hides the Face of his Throne: He gives no account of
his Matters, does not open the Springs, Connection, and particular Scope of the
several Parts of Providence, to the Sons of Men; No! there is a wheel, within a
wheel; which makes good Men think, that many Things are against them, and
against the Church, which really tend to and shall issue in the good of both,
as in the Advancement of Joseph in Egypt, which was compassed by a series of
seemingly contrary Events, each of which was so necessary to carry on the
Design, that the removal of it would have effectually marred the whole; or like
the misty veil of the Morning, which though for a while by an unfriendly Aspect,
it clouds the grateful Light, yet soon ushers in a brighter Day; hence the
great Doctor of the Gentiles, exclaims upon this stupenduous Subject of
Providence, with humble Rapturous, but just Astonishment, in the following
noble Language, O the Depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of
God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways (...) finding out?

BUT to Forebearance, Meekness and Patience, let us add the glorious Grace and
Virtue of Love: This is essential to the Nature of true Christianity; this is
the grand Characteristick of its sincere Professors; this is their great
Preparative for its promised Rewards.

LOVE, Dear Sirs, is essential to the Nature of Christianity; and hence it is
called by our Lord himself, the first and great Command, (Mat. xxii. 37, 38,
39.) and truly so it is, in respect of its Object, its Order, its Obligation,
its Extent, its Excellency, its End.

THE Supreme Object of Love, is the highest and best of Beings, the blessed
GOD, who is the Supreme Excellency and the chief Good. Augustine esteemed it as
an inestimable Privilege, that he had Liberty to Love. Who am I, says he, that
thou command me to love, and threatnest me with Misery if I do not love thee.

THE order and dignity of Love, is such, that we must place it before all other
Graces and Duties, as the Foundation of Piety: Whatsoever is taught in the Law,
and the Prophets, flows from this as a Fountain, and grows upon this as a Root,
and hence we are commanded to be rooted and grounded in Love.

THE Obligation of Love, is indispensable, and perpetual. As Jehovah first
bestows his Love upon us, and then whatever he conferrs afterward, he gives in
Love, so the blessed GOD requires, that we first give him our Love, and then do
all from that Principle. No Duty can warrant the Intermission of our Love one
Moment; diverse other Duties may be dispensed with for a Time, but the Almighty
can no more dispense with this then deny himself!

THE extent of Love, is exceeding large, in respect of its Object, Subject,
Duration; it regards its supreme Object the blessed GOD, with a supreme
respect, in the Unity of his Essence, and Trinity of Persons, in all his
atributes, both incommunicable and communicable, and in all the Discoveries he
has given of them in his Word and Works of Creation, Redemption and Providence:
It is likewise carried out to its inferior OBJECT the whole Human race, with
Benignity and Benevolence, and toward the visible Children of the Kingdom, or
Saints of GOD (according to the Sentiment of Charity) with peculiar
Complacence! As to its SUBJECT, it requires the harmonius Concurrence of all
our Powers, the whole Man, the whole Heart and Soul, the whole Mind, the whole
Strength, as the great Prophet of the Church informs us. As to its DURATION it
is Everlasting. Most of the other Commands shall expire with this World, but
this endures forever, when Repentance and Mortification which do or ought to
employ, a considerable Part of our Time expire, when Faith turns into vision,
and Hope into fruition, Love will live, and burn in all its Beauty and
Brightness, with an unmixed, undeminish'd, uninterrupted and eternal Flame.
Here it is weakened and diverted by a variety of sensible Objects, and strong
Temptations, but there it will run in one continued Current toward its
glorious Object and Center, without fear or jealousy forever: Charity says the
Apostle, never fails; but whether there (...) Prophesies, they shall fail;
whether there be Knowledge it shall vanish away, for we know in part, and
Prophesy in part: But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in
part shall be done away.

THE Excellency of Love is transcendent, in regard of its Matter. Love to GOD,
and consequently Love to Man, (which in the Judgment of our Savior is like to
it) is the most excellent of all Graces. Love among the Graces, is like the Sun
among the Stars, which not only enlightens the lower World, but illuminates the
Stars themselves: Love does not only do its own Office but it enlivens the
other Graces, and gives fresh springs to all the Offices of Devotion, to all
the Duties of Obedience; both active and passive, it makes us ready to run, in
the Path of the one, and glad to endure the Yoke of the other: When our Hearts
are enlarged by Love, with the devout Psalmist, we run in the Way of GOD's
Commandments: When our Bosoms beat with Love, we will not with blessed Paul,
count our Lives Dear, that we may finish our course with Joy; but on the
contrary, with the primitive Christians, rejoice that we are counted worthy to
suffer Reproach for CHRIST's Name sake. Love does not behave itself unseemly
but bears all Things, beliveth all Things. Love is a conformity to the Nature
of the blessed GOD, who is not only loving, but Love. Love is as it were a
grateful requital of GOD, with something like the Kindness he Vouchsafes:
Jehovah may require many Things of us, but he requires nothing like this of
Love; because this is the only thing by which we can answer GOD in kind; in
other Things we cannot render alike for alike. The Almighty created us,
preserves us, and confers many benefits upon us, but we can do nothing like
these Things for GOD, he is infinitely above our returns, but by Love, we
render something like his Love to us. Love contains all the Divine Precepts of
the Law and Gospel in its Bosom; partly because no Endeavor to obey any of
them without it will be accepted, but every honest Endeavor will be accepted
with it; and partly because it realy inclines us to obey them all, and
therefore virtually contains in it obedience to them all: And thus it may be
truly called the Fullfillment of the Law: For it is realy so in the sight of
GOD, in Design, Disposition and Principle. Though David did not actually build
the Temple, yet because he sincerely intended it and was strongly inclined to
it, it is therefore said by GOD himself, to be done. Farther, Love appears to
be the first and great Command, if it be considered as an End, all the Commands
are referred to it, as their last Subordinate End and Scope: Upon the Account of
which, or to promote which is the End of the Commandment; or rather Promise, as
the Word Epangelias generally signifies, that is the Gospel which includes, and
recommends the Law; (See 1 Timothy i. 5.) The End of the Commandment is Charity:
As if the Apostle had said the Design and Perfection of the whole Christian
Institution, is not Strife and Contention, which curious Questions create, but
love to God and Man, and godly Edification, the proper Fruit thereof. Our
Doctrine tends to love, but their's to Contention: To the aforesaid Purpose
speak many learned Interpreters; particularly Augustine, Beza, Piscator,
Acquinas, Erasmus, Daneus, Vorstius, Magalianus, Simachus, Tirinus, Scultetus,
Vatabulus, Grotius.


I may add, that as LOVE is the End of the Law and Gospel, so it is of all the
Christian Graces, e. g. spiritual Knowledge tends to it, terminates in it, and
is vain without it; the more we know of God, and divine Things, the more we are
induced to love them, because of their Excellency, and of Consequence to love
our Brethren, and in the next Life, our Knowledge in Part, will be done away.
(1 Cor. xiii. 9, 10.) Indeed without LOVE Knowledge is but a sounding Brass,
and a tinkling Cymbal.

FARTHER, as Love is the End of Knowledge, so it is of Faith and Hope; Faith
leads to it by giving us a realizing view of the most excellent Objects, which
naturally, when beheld in proper Points of Light, command Veneration, and
excite Desire: And as Faith leads to love as a principle of Action, so it works
by it as a Mean or Instrument of Action, and excites to earnest and universal
Obedience from that principle, and by that mean, (Gal. v. 6.) for in Christ
Jesus neither Circumcision avails any Thing, nor uncircumsion (i. e. to
Salvation) but Faith that works by love.

THUS love is the End of Hope; we rejoice, says the Apostle, in the Hope of
the Glory of God, with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. Now what is
rejoicing, but a love of Delight in the Object of Desire, either apprehended or
possessed? This Hope promotes, and therefore is referred to it as its End. The
Apostle farther confirms what I have been observing, by these Words, (1 Cor.
xiii. 13.) And now abides Faith, Hope, Charity, but the greatest of these is
Charity. Grotius observes, That the Apostle enumerates these three Graces,
according to the Order of their Generation, first Faith, by which we believe
God. 2d. Hope by which we expect the Promises from him. 3d. Charity by which we
love God as our chief Good. The Beginning of Life is Faith, and the End of Life
is Charity, says Ignatius. Arche et c. Initium vice fides, finis autem
charitas. Ignat. in ^pistola ad ephesio^.
The Apostle prefers Charity to Faith, say Sclaterus, Beza, Erasmus, because of
its Utility, it profits more, it expands itself far and wide in its Fruits to
our Neighbor, when Faith and Hope are confined to our own Bosoms; and because
Faith and Hope lead to love, unite us to God, and make us like him, without
which Faith and Hope would be unfruitful, (1 John iv. 8. Gal. v. 6. Jam. ii.
14.)

AND thus we may say, that LOVE is the subordinate End of all the Parts, which
each Person of the sacred Trinity bore in the Business of Redemption. Hence the
Apostle John makes mention of the LOVE of GOD the FATHER therein to us, that
ours may be thereby excited to our Brethren. (1 John iv. 10, 11.) Herein is
Love, not that we loved GOD, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
Propitiation for our Sins, beloved if GOD so loved us, we ought also to Love
one another.

MOREOVER the SON of GOD declares of himself, that when he is lifted up, he
will draw all Men after him. i. e. by the Magnet of his Dying Love for them,
allure their Love to him; for GOD commends his Love toward us, in that while
we were yet Sinners CHRIST dyed for us: And hence we are exhorted to walk in
Love, as CHRIST also has loved us, and has given himself for us an offering
and a Sacrifice to GOD, for a sweet smelling Savor. (Romans v. 8. Ephesians. v. 2.)

NOW as the procuring and promoting of the Love of Men to GOD, and one another,
was the Design of GOD the Father in projecting the Plan of Man's Redemption,
and giving his Son out of his Bosom to a State of the greatest Abasement and
Suffering, to purchase it, as well as of the Son of GOD in the whole of his
mediatorial Office and Character; so likewise it is of the blessed SPIRIT, in
his Function of COMFORTER; for according to the Order of the divine Economy,
he produc^^ by his omnipotent Influence, all Grace in the redeemed, and this of
Love among the rest, which is a principal Part of the new Creation; and hence
it is said to be the Fruit of the Spirit, and has the Precedence given it, to
all the other Fruits thereof; to all the Train of Graces, which constitute the
new Man, ( Gal. v. 22.) to promote which is doubtless the Design of all his
convincing, converting, sanctifying, comforting and sealing Instances, for to
this they all have a direct Tendency.

BUT Love, my Brethren, is not only essential to the Nature of true
Christianity, but it is the grand Characteristick of its sincere Professors, it
is indeed a satisfying Evidence to ourselves of our Integrity when it is
sincere, chiefly for the sake of other's Piety, proportioned to the Degrees of
it, that is, if we love those most that we apprehend to be the most holy,
whether of our Sentiments or not in lesser Things; and if it be universal to
all that we have Reason to think are really religious, and effectual, showing
itself in Deed and in Truth as Occasion requires, and we are capable; for we
know, says the Apostle John, that we have passed from Death to Life, because
we love the Brethren, (1 John iii. 14.) Beloved, let us love one another, for
Love is of GOD, and every one that loves is born of GOD, and knows GOD, (1
John iv. 7.) He that loves his Brother, abides in the Light, and there is no
Occasion of stumbling in him, (1 John ii. 10.)

BUT on the contrary, the Apostle John in his first Epistle, assures us, that
he that says he is in the Light, and hates his Brother, is in Darkness, even
until now. That he that hates his Brother is in Darkness, and walks in
Darkness, and knows not whither he goes; because Darkness has blinded his
Eyes; and that in this the Children of GOD are manifest, and the Children of
the Devil, whosoever does no^ Righteousness is not of God, neither be that
loves not his Brother: He that loves not his Brother, abides in Death;
whosoever hates his Brother is a Murderer; and ye know that no Murderer has
eternal Life abiding in him. He that loves not, knows not GOD, for GOD is
Love. If any Man say, I love GOD, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar; for he
that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love GOD whom he has
not seen.

BUT Love is not only a satisfactory Evidence to ourselves, of our Sincerity in
Religion, but it is made by our great Redeemer, the Badge and Cognizance of our
DISCILLESHIP the visible Mark of Distinction, between those that profess
Christianity, and those that do not, By this shall all Men know, that ye are my
Disciples, if ye love one another. LOVE, my Brethren, is the LIVERY, which the
King of the Church has appointed his Subjects and Servants to wear, that
thereby they may manifest to others, who they belong to, who is their Prince
and Master; and indeed when this blessed Grace is exercised, in all its amiable
Extent of Patience, Meekness, Kindness, Sympathy, Beneficence, and that at
Times in the midst of Temptations to the contrary, when we bear with the
Weaknesses of our Brethren, which we must expect to meet with in a World of
Imperfection; (for Grace in the Heart, in this Life is like Gold in the Oar,)
when we readily forgive their Offenses against us, and really befriend their
Characters in their Absence, as well as all their Interests civil and
religious; when we sympathize with them in their Sorrows; are pleased with, and
commend the Gifts that GOD has graciously given them, and their other desirable
Qualities; when we answer their angry Speeches with Meekness and Gentleness,
and relieve them in their Wants and Necessities, as we have Opportunity, doing
Good to all Men, but especially to the Household of Faith; and not suffering our
Love to consist altogether in Word and in Tongue, but in Deed and in Truth,
herein imitating the blessed JESUS, who went about doing Good; it is a
convincing Proof, to the World about us, that the Religion we profess is from
GOD, and that we are sincere in the Profession of it, and is like to have a
powerful Influence upon them, in alluring them to embrace so excellent, so
amiable, so useful an Institution; by this good Temper and Conversation, many
are like to be won to Christianity, and therefore as the Apostle exhorts us,
let our Adorning not consist in gay Dress, but let it be the hidden Man of the
Heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet
Spirit, which is, in the Sight of GOD, of great Price, (1 Pet. iii.)

NOW if LOVE, as has been observed, be essential to true Christianity, the most
eminent of all the Graces, and the grand Characteristick of our Profession,
then these Things do necessarily follow, viz.,

THAT our Profession of, and Stature in Christianity, is to be measured by our
Love; the Reality of the former by the Sincerity of it; and the Progress of the
latter by the Degree of it; while Persons have but little love for those that
differ from them in smaller Things, and are inclined to fierce Controversies,
strong Prejudices, Schisms and Factions, about circumstantial Matters, it is
Sign they have learned but little of the Gospel of CHRIST, and are of small
Stature in Christianity; see 1 Cor. iii. 1, 2, 3, 4. And I, Brethren, could not
speak unto you, as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto Babes in
CHRIST. I have fed you with Milk, and not with Meat; For hitherto ye were not
able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able. For ye are yet carnal: For
whereas there is among you Env^ing and Strife, and Divisions, are ye not carnal
and walk as Men. For while one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of
Apollos, are ye not Carnal.

THE Apostle Means, that they were not so Spiritual as others, but BABES or
INFANTS in Spiritual STATURE, though they were realy pious, yet it was but in a
small Degree, they were rude in Faith and divine Knowledge, such whom he
elsewhere calls NOVICES, (1 Timothy iii. 6.) Homer and Hesiod term Men of little
Knowledge and Conduct, Nepious, Infants; agreeable to the Language of this
Epistle, and the Hebrews, were wont to term them generally Children at School:
They were in a great Degree fleshly, governed much by their Passions and
Prejudices, yea often Times were more ruled by their Affections, than by sober
Reason and sound Judgment, and therefore were prone to uncharitable Ferments
and Factions, which are hateful to GOD, and contrary to his Spirit and
Religion; they walked as Men, i. e. in those Divisions, agreeable to the
Dictates and Bias of human and carnal Affections, not according to the divine
Prescription, but as Men behave, who are destitute of the Spirit of GOD, and
therefore the Apostle could not speak unto them as unto Spiritual, i. e. as to
adult and grown Christians, the sublimer Truths of the Religion of Jesus (Heb.
v. 11.) but was constrained to feed them as a Nurse does Children with Milk,
which is of easy Digestion, soft, nourishing and Pleasant, our first food: That
is, to preach to them the first Principles or Elements of Religion, in a simple
way. We prefer, says Origin, the profounder Truths of Religion, when we have
intelligent and skillful Hearers, otherwise we are silent about them. Ta en
hemin malista, cala, et c. dogmata nostra prestantissima et profundissima
proferimus, cum auditores nacti simus peritos, alioquin de iis tacemus, Origin,
contra celsum. L 3.
But such sublime Truths the Corinthians could not bear; to this Effect speak
many learned Interpreters upon the Place. Ambrose, Theophilact, Calvin,
Grotius, Erasmus, Beza, Pareus, Gataker, Lightfoot, Sclaterus, Simachus,
Vorilius.


FARTHER, as we may judge of our Stature in Christianity, by the Degree of our
LOVE, so we may conclude that all CONTROVERSIES in RELIGION, managed with a
bitter Zeal, are prejudicial to our religious PROGRESS, but especially fierce
Contentions, cruel Judgings, and needless schismatical Separations, either made
(or contentedly continued in, which are substantially the very same) on Account
of smaller Matters in Religion, oppose the very Life of Christianity, and are
like to bring People under spiritual decays, and leaness of Souls; they
directly tend to bring the Mind into a Hectic Fever, which is an awful Symptom.

IT is true, Zeal is excellent and advantageous, when directed by Knowledge and
Discretion, tempered with Humility, Meekness and Mercy, and proportioned in
Degree to the Importance of Things: But when it springs from Ignorance, is
attended with uncharitableness and bitterness, and disproportioned to the
Importance of Things, runs out in a high Degree, and with great Flame, upon
small and doubtful Matters, it is exceeding pernicious to the Peace and Weal of
CHRIST'S Kingdom in general, and the Souls of Men in particular. Hot and
violent Zeal in an ignorant Man, especially about Circumstantials, is like a
drawn Sword in a blind or a Madman's Hand, exceeding dangerous to himself and
others. Knowledge without Love, is cold and ineffectual, like the light of the
Moon: And Zeal without Love is like a fierce Flame, which scorches and devours
all before it. But Knowledge and Zeal, with Love, are like the Light of the Sun
which yields a gentle, warming, refreshing and fruitful Influence. O! how
lovely is this Disposition and Conduct! This puts Honor upon Christianity:
This enlarges and establishes the Kingdom of CHRIST upon Earth, and makes it
firm, beautiful and illustrious! But what an indelible Scandal and Reproach,
what complicated, pregnant, permanent and unspeakable Injury does the Contrary
hereto produce and Occasion?

IT was justly observed by Alphonso Turretine, in his Speech to the Council of
Geneva, That in Things indifferent there ought to be no restraint. It Is not an
indifferent Thing to burden Consciences, in Things as to which God has not
burdened them. It is not an Indifferent Thing to impose a Yoke which Jesus
Christ has not imposed. It Is no Indifferent Matter, to put a Wall of
Separation, between Protestants at a Time, when it is so much their Interest to
Unite.

IT is extremely hard, we must be allowed to affirm it, that a Society that
does its Duty, and that speaks what in conscience it believes to be for the
good of the Church, should thus see itself torn to pieces by calumny, and for
what? Because they are for Moderation as to those Points that are indifferent,
for in short, this is all their Crime -- One must be blind not to see, that
there is a growing Moderation on all Sides as to these Matters, (in Germany,
England and Switzerland, of which he had spoken before,) and that this
Moderation is infinitely for our Advantage, for the Honor of our Churches, and
the Union of Protestants.

ONCE more Dear Sirs! Love is the most suitable Prelude to, and Preparative for
the Heavenly State before us; we are expectants of a glorious Immortality, in
which there will be no discordant Sentiments, no jar in Affection: Perfect
Light will prevent the former, and perfect Purity the latter. Indeed a view of
the melancholy Contentions of the Church militant, may reasonably incite our
longing to be with the Church Triumphant; where we shall enjoy a complete and
eternal Rest from Sin, Strife and Sorrow, which may God of his infinite Mercy
for CHRIST^ sake, grant to us all in due Time. I shall add no more at present,
but the Advice of the Apostle Paul to the Philipians and Corinthians (Philp.
ii. 1 -- 6. 2 Cor. xiii. 11.) If there be therefore any Consolation in Christ,
if any Comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and
Mercies, fulfill ye my Joy, that ye be like-minded, having the same love, being
of one accord, of one Mind. Let nothing be done through Strife or vain Glory. Let
each esteem other better than themselves. Look (...) every Man on his own
Things, but every Man also on the Things of others. Let this Mind be in you,
which was also in Christ Jesus. Finally, Brethren, farewell: Be Perfect, be of
good Comfort, be of one Mind, live in Peace, and the God of Love and Peace
shall be with you. Amen and Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PREFATORY Address, page 5. line 29. for as is, read as it is. p. 8, (...) 2,
for Thesselonians r. Thessalonians. p. ^^. l. 16. for Fan (...) Fan is in. p.
29. l. 37, for inventions r. invention. p. 44. l. 21. for proceeds r. proceed
p. 51. l. 1. for encourages r. encourage. ^ p 55. l. 10. for incidmus r.
incidimus. p. 66. l. last, for domeni r. domini. p. 72. l. 31. for enpectation
r. expectation. p. 75. l. 15. for sumbibaz omenon r. sumbibazomenon. p. 86. l.
10. for give r. gave. p. 116. l. 38. for the to r. to the.


