GOD's PROTECTING PROVIDENCE, MAN's Surest Help and Defense, IN Times of the
greatest DIFFICULTY, and most Eminent DANGER. EVIDENCED. In the remarkable
Deliverance of Robert Barrow, with diverse other Persons, from the devouring
Waves of the Sea; among which they suffered SHIPWRECK: And also, From the
cruel, devouring Jaws of the inhuman Canibals of Florida.

Faithfully related by JONATHAN DICKINSON, one of the Persons concerned therein.

The Fourth EDITION.

The Lord on High is mightier than the Noise of many Waters; yea, than the
mighty Waves of the Sea, Psalm xciii.4.

The dark Places of the Earth are full of the Habitations of Cruelty, Psalm
lxxiv.20.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM BRADFORD, at the SIGN of the BIBLE,
in Second-Street. M, DCC, LI.

THE PREFACE.
INgratitude toward Men, after signal Favors received, is amongst all
civilized People, looked upon with a just Detestation; insomuch, that the Moral
Gentiles, in Ages post, thought they could give no worse a Character of a
Person, than to call him Ungrateful: How much more then are Christians
(especially in a Time of such Light, as now shines) engaged, to shun this Sin
of Ingratitude, toward their God, whom they sensibly know, to be The Fountain
of all their Mercies? And surely, next to the infinite Mercy, showed them for
Christ's sake, in causing the Day spring from on high to visit their Souls,
remarkable outward Deliverances, ought in a more than commonly remarkable
Manner, to be the Objects of Gratitude to their great Deliverer. I must
confess, ^hanksgiving (which is what we poor Mortals can return, for the
manifold Favors we daily receive from Him) has its Rise in the Heart; and as
out of the Abundance of the Heart, the Mouth speaks; how can those who are
truly thankful in Heart, but render the Calves of their Lips, in telling to
their Friends and Acquaintance, How great Things God has done for them? Nay,
they are so affected with such eminent Appearances of the protecting Hand of
Providence, for their Help, Preservation and Deliverance, that they are not
willing to confine it to them only, but publish it to the World, that the Fame
of their GOD may be spread from Sea to Sea, and from one End of the Earth to
the other.

The following Relation being large, I shall endeavor to be short; only, some
of the Things which seem to me most remarkable, I would more particularly
recommend to the Reader's Observation.

1. The Hearts of all Men are in the Hands of God, he can turn them as he
pleases. When these Men-Eaters Fury was at height, their Knives in one Hand,
and the poor Shipwrack'd People's Heads in the other, their Knees upon the
others Shoulders, and their Looks dismal; on a sudden, the Savages were struck
dumb, and their Countenances changed, that they looked like another People; the
Cassekey (or King) becoming as a Safeguard to the Distressed, from the Injuries
of his own Men: Nay, such Confidence put he in them, that he would trust them
to remove the Money he had taken from themselves, before he would trust his own
People. When they were got from there, to another Place, where they expected
more Safety, they found themselves disappointed, fresh Dangers presenting
themselves, as dismally as before; yet God prevented any further Mischief, than
the stripping them of those poor Rags the others had left them, and some other
Abuses, which by that Time were grown familiar to them, and were looked upon,
as light Afflictions: The Cassekey's Wife being made an Instrument for their
Delivery, she, and some others, having something of Tenderness of Heart in
them, though amongst such an inhuman Crew.

2. Many were the particular Diliverances, upon occasion of Injuries offered:
Once, an Arrow shot at them narrowly escaped them: Another Time, some going to
shoot Arrows at them, certain of their own Company caught hold of their Bows
and Arms; nay, though some of them shot, yet their Arrows mist. Not to mention
the frequent Dangers they were in, upon every slight Suspicion of their being
English, of which, more anon. And well might these poor Sufferers be in
continual Fear of their Lives, since about a Twelve Month before, a Parcel of
Dutchmen, who had likewise suffered Shipwreck, had been killed and devoured;
and moreover, of the many Vessels, supposed to be lost on that Coast, these are
the first Company that are known to have escaped: Neither is it so wonderful
that they are thus cruel to Strangers, since they are unnatural to their own
aged People; they having no more Compassion on them, than to make them Slaves
to the Younger. Yet are these Men-Eaters as cowardly as cruel; when the
Spaniards came up, the Sight of a rusty Musket presented toward them, would
make several of them fly.

3. The Dangers they were delivered from, arose not only from Men, but the
Elements also, which God permitted to threaten and afflict them. One Time,
rowing in their Boat, the Sea swelled, so that it was dangerous continuing
there all Night, and as dangerous, to endeavor for the Shore; yet Providence
failed them not, but conducted them safe thither, as though there had been a
Lane made through the Breakers: Another Time, by Reason of a great Flood, they
were forced to remove their Lodgings several Times, and for diverse Days, were
in a continual Apprehension of being drowned, at length were preserved upon an
Oyster Hill: Not to mention the frequent Dangers they were in, by reason of the
extreme Cold, too tedious to touch at here; wherein this however is remarkable,
that God can both administer Strength in the Midst of Weakness, and also take
away Strength, and cause Weakness to seize, whenever he pleases: Here was an
Old Man, a Woman with a Sucking Child, and another with Child, Persons
seemingly very unlikely to encounter such Hardships, all escaped; and diverse
Negroes, used to more Hardiness, perished.

4. As to Lodging, I shall say little, any discreet Person may imagine, how
hard it was to People, well brought up, to lie on a Floor, swarming with
Abundance of many Sorts of creeping Things, occasioned by the throwing the
Berry Stones on the Floor, and letting all the Nastiness they made, lie there,
which bred these Vermin; and yet perhaps might be accounted good Lodging, in
Comparison of the cold Ground, whereon they often lay afterward unsheltered,
exposed to the bleak Blasts of the rigid North-West-Wind.

5. Their Food most scanty, the best of it such, as (I am ready to think) the
meanest Negro here, would not touch with his Lips: Sometimes the Gills and Guts
of Fish, picked off a Dunghill; sometimes the Scraps the Indians f^ung away,
and the Water they boiled their Fish in, though never so undecently handled. At
first their Sorrows were so great, and their Alarms so many, they could not
eat; afterward their Diet so uncouth, they could not away with it; until at
length Hunger had so far prevailed over them, that they could eat with an
Appetite, the Palmetto-Berries; the Taste whereof was once irksome, and ready
to take away their Breath; nay, so fond were they of them, that the getting of
about a Bushel accidentally, was looked on a^ a great Prize.

6. Their being forced to mask themselves, under the Name of Spaniards, though
few of them could speak any Spanish, was another Hardship; mostly because the
Natives often suspected them to be English, and thereby they were continually
in Danger of their Lives: Whether their Cruelty against the English, proceeds
from their being under no Apprehension of Danger from them, and so may think
themselves lawless, in what they do against our Nation; or whether it proceeds
from any particular Disgust offered them by some English, I shall not
determine: However, it would do well, for those that are not under their Power
to avoid giving them any just Cause of Offense, least their Neighbors suffer
for their Faults: One of these Savages could complain, That, some Years past,
he had been taken off by some of our English Sloops, from whom he escaped by
Swimming, and was therewith disgusted, insomuch, that could he, by his sifting,
have found out, that they were English, it might have proved of ill Consequence
to them.

7. The Courtesy of the Governor of Augustine, who clothed these naked People,
fed their hungry Stomachs, and caused them to be conducted safely to Carolina,
is not to be passed by, without due Notice; especially being a Man of another
Nation, as well as of a different Religion; and what is more, of such an one,
as does not teach its Votaries so much Compassion, toward those they count
Heretics: Neither let me forget the Governor of Carolina, whose Generosity
completed, what the Governor of Augustine had begun, in assisting and
cherishing these our afflicted Friends and Country Folks; with which, I shall
conclude these Remarks, to trea^ more particularly, concerning that faithful
Servant of the Lord, Robert Barrow, who was one of this Company.

This Man of God, whose Habitation was in one of the Northern Counties of
England, was early convinced of the blessed Truth of God, professed by the
People called Quakers, and soon after had a Dispensation of the Gospel
committed to him. He lived, in his native Country, in esteem amongst his
Neighbors, for his Godly Conversation; and honored in the Church of God, as
an Elder, who had abode faithful in his Testimony, both in Preaching the
Gospel, Suffering for the same, and Behaving himself answerable thereunto. And
in the Year 1^94. the Spirit of God (from whom he first had his Commission)
requiring him to come over into these Parts, to Preach the Gospel here also; he
was not disobient to the Heavenly Call, but gave up to do the Will of God,
though in a Cross to his own, as appeared by an Expression of his, before he
left England,; which was to this Effect: That he had ^^^her immediately have
laid down his natural Life there, if by so doing he could have kept his Peace
with God, than to have crossed the Seas to America. Well, hither he came; and
(...) he had thoroughly visited these Parts, he took Ship for the West India
Islands* and at length was returning from Jamaica, to this Town of
Philadelphia, when these Calamities, mentioned in the ensuing Journal, befell
him: How he behaved himself under them, with what Faith he overcome, (...)
worst of Men; so that it may be said, He was more (...) ^onqueror over those
Blood-Thirsty Canibals; looking to Him who was Invisible, and by his Grace
seeing beyond them and their Cruelty; by Prayer wrestling with God for a
Blessing; even the Blessing of being delivered out of their barbarous Hands,
and laying his Bo^es (...) ^^ithful Friends; and so effectual were his (...)
Prayers, that they prevailed with God; and so gracious was his God unto him,
that he sealed an Assurance upon his Spirit, That his Prayers were heard, and
should in due Time be answered, before he was yet off his Knees. And doubtless,
he was made a Strength and a Comfort to his Companions in Affliction; whose
Remembrance will not be easily blotted out of their Minds.

One remarkable Passage I cannot well omit, which demonstrates he had well
learned of Him who is a God of Truth, to speak the Truth upon all Occasions,
though with the Hazard of his Life. For, as the Reader may observe in the
Series of this following Relation, these poor People, for the Safeguard of
their Lives, had assumed the Name of Spaniards; some on that Account, asserting
what was wrong, others concealing the Truth; yet this Honest-hearted Man, being
directly asked the Question, Nickalier, Nickalier? (their Word for Englishmen)
could do neither; but in Simplicity answered, Yes; being asked so concerning
another, he again answered, Yes. Yet though for his Plain-dealing, he was
stripped of his Clothes; which, till then, he had saved, God suffered not these
Savages to touch his Life, or the Lives of any of his Company.

Thus he passed through this afflicting Trial, and at length arrived at this
Place, on the 1st Day of the 2d Month, 1697. though in much Weakness; having
been taken very ill of the Bellyach and Flux at Augustine; of which he never
recovered, but still grew worse, to his dying Day. It was about the 8th Hour in
the Evening, when the Vessel, he was Passenger in, arrived at this Place.
Diverse Friends went on board, in order to get him a Shore, but he being in a
very weak Condition, they could not remove him at that Time. He declared, His
great Satisfaction, that the Lord had granted his Request, that he might lay
down his Bones in this Place; that his Heart was strong, and he hoped he might
first see Friends again at the Meeting. He made mention of the Goodness of God
to him, and that his Presence had attended him in all his Exercises.

The next Morning, being the 2d of the 2d Month, diverse Friends went on board,
to help the Vessel up to a Wharf, in order to get him on Shore; in which Time
he spoke as before related, God's Power attending him. About the 7th Hour,
diverse Friends carried him in a Hammocker (being wrapped up in a Blanket, and
Clothes to keep him warm) to the House of Samuel Carpenter, where he declared,
The Goodness of God to him; and that his Heart was yet strong, and his Memory
and Understanding good. After which he was shifted, and then slept a
considerable Time.

On the same Day, some Friends coming into the Room to visit him, at the Sight
of them he seemed to rejoice; and, putting forth his Hand, was ready to embrace
them in much Love, and in a very tender Frame of Spirit. The Friends expressed
their Gladness to see him; but said, They were sorry to see him so very weak:
To which he replied, Although my Body be weak, my Mind is sound, and Memory
good. And further said, The Lord has been very good to me, all along unto this
very Day; and this Morning has sweetly refreshed me. And further added, The
Lord has answered my Desire, for I desired Content, and that I might come to
this Place, to lay my Bones amongst you. And afterward said, It is a good
Thing to have a Conscience void of Offense, both toward God, and toward Men.

On the 4th Day of the 2d Month, being the 1st Day of the Week, about the 5th
Hour in the Morning, he desired a Friend to write for him to his dear Wife, To
remember his dear Love to her: and to let her know of his Travels, and being
here; and that the Lord was with him; that his outward Affairs were settled;
and That she had wherewithal to live on. He further said, diverse Friends being
present; That the Lord was with him, and all Things were well; and that he had
nothing to do, but to die: And accordingly on this Day ^e dep^rted; and on the
3d Day following, being the 6th Day of the 2d Month, was buried in Friends
Burying-ground, in this Town of Philadelphia.

And now, having brought my Relation, concerning this good Man, to the last
Period of his Life, I might very well have put a Period to my Preface: But that
I foresee, Some Persons may be ready to say. Here is an Account of very strange
Passages, but of what Credit is the Relator? May we depend upon his Authority,
without Danger of being Imposed upon? To such I answer, He is a Man well known
in this Town, of good Credit and Repute; on whose Fidelity and Veracity, those
who have any Knowledge of him, will readily rely without suspecting Fallacy.
But that in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every Thing may be established,
besides him and his Wife, a Person, whose Residence (when at home) is in this
Town, viz. Joseph Kirle, the Master of the Barkentine, in which they suffered
Shipwreck, a Man of an honest Character amongst his Neighbors, had the Perusal
of it, before it went to the Press; and approved it. With which I shall
conclude, wishing my Reader much Satisfaction in the Reading of it; but never
the Unhappiness of Experiencing, in proper Person, the Truth of it.

A Journal of the Travels of several Persons, with their Sufferings, being cast
away in the Gulf (among the Canibals) of Florida, etc.
The Persons Names, viz: ^^seph Kirle, Commander of the Barkentine-Reformation.
Mariners.
^ichard Limpeney, Mate. ^olomon Cresson. Joseph Buckley. Thomas Fownes. Thomas
Jemmet. Nathaniel Randal.
John Hillard, the Master's Boy. Ben. the Master's Negro.
Passengers.
Jonathan Dickinson. Mary Dickinson. Jonathan Dickinson, a Sucking Child, Six
Months old. Robert Borrow. Benjamin Allen.
Belonging to Jonathan Dickinson.
Peter, London. Jack. Caesar. Negro Men. Cajoe, a Child. Hagar. Sarah. Bella.
Susanah. Quensa. Negro Woman. Venus, an Indian Girl.


THE Twenty-third Day of the Sixth Month, called August 1696. Being in Company
with Twelve or Thirteen Sail of Merchantmen, under the Convoy of the Hampshire
Frigate, Captain Fletcher Commander, sailed from Port Royal, in Jamaica, we
being bound for Pennsylvania.

The 24th Day about Noon came a Sloop from Port Royal, overtook us often
Portland; gave an Account of the French-Fleet's being at Cape Antonio.

This Evening we lay by off Black-Rivers-Mouth, in order to go the next Morning
to Blewfilds; but it being calm for many Days following, the Current drove us
to Westward of the Island.

The 31st Day, This Evening we lost sight of the Hamshire-Frigat, and then beat
to Windward again.

The 1st Day the 7th Month, we Anchored to Westward of Savanna La Mar, and lost
our Anchor.

The 2d Day, we got into Blewfields Road to Water.

The 4th Day, This Morning we sailed from Blewfields intending our Passage
through the Gulf.

The 14th Day, about Noon, were a Breast with Cape Antonia; and about a League
to the Eastward off the Cape was a Fire with a great Smoke: At length People
appeared on the Bay, making Signs for us to put on Shore; but having a fresh
Gale, and not knowing who they were, our Master would not.

The 16th Day made the Table-land of the Havanna, and this Evening stood over
for Cape Florida; but about Eight or Nine at Night we saw two Lights, being
about a Mile from us; we fearing we were got amongst the French-Fleet, tacked,
and stood for the Havanna.

The 18th Day, This Morning no Sail appeared, and being most of the Day calm;
we lay about Four Leagues off the Havanna; we had a fair Wind, and were
designed for that Port, to enquire of the French-Fleet. This Afternoon came a
Turnado from the Land, and our Master being on the Quarter Deck, our Boom
gibing knocked him down, and broke his Leg, which Accident was grievious to him
and us; but having Things suitable, with a little Experience, set it. At this
Time had I Four of my Family very sick; one whereof was an Indian Girl being
just as I had bound up the the Master's Leg taken with Fitts, which continued
some Hours, and then she died. This Evening we stood over for Cape Florida,
having the Wind North Easterly.

The 19th Day, this Morning the Wind not being fair, we stood up for Cuba; and
about Sunrising we espied the Sails that we saw before, they standing as we
stood: Therefore we supposed them to be some of our Company; we wronged them in
Sailing, and by Noon lost sight of them. About Four this Afternoon we espied a
Ship, to the Eastward of us (we being about Four Leagues off Shore, and about
Fifteen Leagues to Eastward of the Havanna) supposing her to be a Frenchman,
therefore stood in for the Shore; but she gained on us: Then a Turnado sprang
up, and a great Shower of Rain followed, which hid us. Hereupon we tacked, and
stood over for Florida. Night came on, that we saw no more of that Sail, having
the Wind fair.

The 20th Day. This Morning we were in the Gulf, having a fair Wind, and
seeing the two Ships following us, we believed them to be of our Company.

The 21st Day. This Morning the Wind at East, and shifting Northerly.

The 22d Day, This Day the Storm began at N. E.

The 23d Day, About One a Clock in the Morning we felt our Vessel strike some
few strokes, and then she Floated again, for five or six Minutes, before she
ran fast a Ground, where she beat violently at first; the Wind was violent; and
it was very dark, that our Mariners could see no Land: The Seas broke over us,
that we were in a quarter of an Hour Floating in the Cabin: We endeavored to
get a Candle lighted, which in a little Time was accomplished. By this Time we
felt the Vessel not to strike so often; but several of her Timbers were broken,
and some Plank started; the Seas continued breaking over us, and no Land to be
seen. We concluded to keep in the Vessel as long as she would hold together.
About the Third Hour this Morning, we supposed we saw Land at some considerable
Distance. And at this Time we found the Water began to run out of the Vessel;
and at Daylight we perceived we were upon the Shore, on a B^ach lying on the
Breach of the Sea; which, at Times, as the Surges of the Sea reversed, was dry.
In taking a view of our Vessel, we found that the Violence of the Weather had
forced many Sorts of the Sea-Birds on Board of our Vessel; some of which were,
by Force of Wind, bl^wn into and under our Hen-Coops, and many remained alive.
Our Hogs and Sheep were washed away, and swam on Shore, except one of the Hogs,
which remained in the Vessel. We rejoiced at this our Preservation from the
raging Seas; but at the same Instant feared the sad Consequences that followed;
yet, having Hopes still, we got our Sick and Lame on Shore; also our
Provisions, with Sparrs and Sails to make a Tent. I went, with one Negro, to
view the Land, and seek the most convenient Place for that purpose. But the
Wilderness Country looked very dismal, having no Trees, but only Sand-Hills,
covered with shrubby Palmetto, the stalks of which were prickly, that there was
no walking amongst them: I espied a Place almost a Furlong within that Beach,
being a Bottom; to this Place I with my Negro soon cut a Passage; the Storm and
Rain continuing^ Thither I got my Wife and sick Chi^d, being six Months and
twelve Days old; also Robert Barrow, an aged Man, who had been sick about five
or six Months; our Master, who some Days past had broke his Leg; and my Kinsman
Benjamin Allen, who had been very ill, with a violent Fever, most Part of the
Voyage: These, with others, we got to the Place, under the shelter of some few
Bushes, which broke off some of the Wind, but kept none of the Rain from them;
I got a Fire made: The most of our People were getting Provisions a Shore; our
Chests, Trunks, and the rest our Clothing, were all very wet and cold.

About the Eighth or Ninth Hour, came two Indian-Men (being naked, except a
small piece of Pla^ted-Work, which (...) fastened behind, like a Horse-Tail in
Shape, made of a Sort of Silk-Grass) from the Southward, running fiercely, and
foaming at the Month, having no Weapons but their Knives, and forthwith, not
making any step, violently seized the two first of our Men they met with, who
were carrying Corn from the Vessel to the Top of the Bank, where I stood to
receive it, and put it into a Cask; they used no Violence, for the Men resisted
not; but taking them under the Arm, brought them toward me: Their Countenances
were very Furious and Blo^dy: They had their Hair tied in a Roll behind, in
which stuck two Bones shaped, one like a broad Arrow, in the other a Spear
Head; the rest of our Men followed from the Vessel, asking me what they should
do, whether they should get their Guns to kill these two; but I persuaded them
otherwise, desiring them to be quiet, (showing their Inability to defend us
from what would follow) and to put our Trust in the Lord, who was able to
defend to the uttermost. I walked toward the Place where our Sick and Lame
were, the two Indian-Men following me, I told them the Indians were come and
coming upon us: And whilst these two (setting the Men loose) stood with a wild
furious Countenance, looking upon us; I thought with my self to give them some
Tobacco and Pipes, which they greedily snatched from me, and making a snussing
Noise like a Wild-Beast, turned their Backs upon us, and run away.

We communed together, and considered our Condition, being among a barbarous
People, such as were generally accounted Men-Eaters, believing those two were
gone to Alarm their People: We sat our selves down, expecting Cruelty and hard
Death, except it should please the Almighty God to Work wonderfu^ly for our
Deliverance. In this deep Concernment some of us were not left without Hopes;
blessed be the Name of the Lord, in whom we trusted;

As we were under a deep exercise and Concernment, a Notion arose from one of
us, that if we should put our selves under the Denomination of Spaniards (it
being known that Nation had some Influence on them) and one of us, named
Solomon Cresson, speaking the Spanish Language well, it was hoped this might be
a Means for our Delivery; to which, the most of the Company assented.

Within two or three Hours after the Departure of the two Indians, some of our
People being near the Beach or Stand, returned and said, the Indians were
coming in a very great Number, all running and shouting: About this Time the
Storm was much abated, the Rain ceased, and the Sun appeared, which had been
hid from us several Days. The Indians went all to the Vessel, casting forth
what ever they could lay hold on, except Rum, Sugar, Molasses, Beef and Pork.

But their Cassekey (for so they call their King) with about thirty more, came
down to us in a furious manner, having a dismal Aspect, and foaming at the
Mouth; their Weapons were large Spanish Knives, except their Cassekey's, who
had a Baggonet, that belonged to the Master of our Vessel: They rushed in upon
us, and cried, Nickaleer, Nickaleer; we understood them not at first; they
repeating it unto us often, at last they cried Epania for Spaniards; by which
we understood them, that at first they meant English, but they were answered to
the latter in Spanish, yea; to which they replied. No Epania, no; but all
cried, Nickaleer, Nickaleer: We sitting on our Chests, Boxes and Trunks, and
some on the Ground, the Indians surrounded us; we stirred nor moved not, but
sat all, or most of us, very calm and still, some of us in a good Frame of
Spirit, being freely given up to the Will of God.

Whilst we were thus sitting, as a People almost unconcerned, these bloody
minded Creatures placed themselves each behind one, kicking and throwing away
the Bushes that were nigh, or under their Feet; the Cassekey had placed himself
behind me, standing on the Chest which I sat upon; they all having their Arms
extended, with their Knives in their Hands, ready to execute their bloody
Design, some taking hold of some of us by the Heads, with their Knees set
against our Shoulders: In this Posture they seemed to wait for the Cassekey to
begin: They were high in Words, which we understood not: But on a sudden, it
pleased the Lord to work wonderfully for our Preservation, and instantly all
these Savage-Men were struck Dumb, and like Men amazed the Space of a quarter
of an Hour, in which Time their Countenances fell, and they looked like another
People: They quitted their Places they had taken behind us, and came in amongst
us, requiring to have all our Chests, Trunks and Boxes unlocked, which being
done, they divided all that was in them. Our Money the Cassekey took unto
himself, privately hiding it in the Bushes: Then they went to pulling off our
Clothes, leaving each of us only a pair of Breeches, or an old Coat, except my
Wife and Child, Robert Barrow, and our Master, from whom they took but little
this Day.

Having thus done, they asked us again. Nickaleer, Nickaleer? But we answered,
by saying, Pennsylvania.

We began to enquire after St. Augusteen, also would talk of Santa Lucea, which
was the Town that lay about a Degree to the Northward; but they cunningly
would seem to persuade us, that they both lay to the Southward: We signified
(...) them, that they lay to the Northward; and we would ^k of the Havana that
lay to the Southward. These ^ces they had heard of, and knew which way they lay.

At length, the Cassekey told us, how long it was to Santa Lucea, by Days
Travel; but cared not to hear us mention St. Augusteen. They would signify by
Signs, we should go to the Southward. We answered, That we must go to the
Northward, for Augusteen. When (...) found they could not otherwise persuade
us, they signified, that we should go to the Southward, for the Havana, and
that it was but a little Way.

We gave them to understand, that we came that Way. and were for the Northward:
All which took Place with them. We perceived, that the Cassekey's Heart was
tendered toward us; for he kept mostly with us, and would the remaining Part
of this Day keep off the Petty-Robbers, which would have had our few Rags from
us. Some Time before Night we had a Shower of Rain, whereupon the Cassekey made
Signs for us to build some Shelter; upon which we got our Tent up, and some
Leaves to lie upon.

About this Time our Vessel lay dry on Shore, and the Indians gathered
themselves together, Men and Woman, some Hundreds in Number. Having got all the
Goods out of the Vessel, and covered the Bay for a large Distance, opened all
the Stuffs and Linen, and spread them to dry. They would touch no Sort of
strong Drink, Sugar, nor Molasses, but left it in the Vessel. They shouted, and
made a great Noises in the Time of Plunder. Night coming on, the Cassekey put
those Chests and Trunks, which he had reserved for himself, into our Tent;
which pleased us, and gave an Expectation of his Company; for he was now become
a Defender of us from the Rage of others. The Cassekey went down to the
Waterside, amongst his People, and returned with three old Coats that were wet
and torn; which he gave us; one whereof I had. We made a Fire at each End of
our Tent, and laid our selves down, it being dark: But hearing hideous Noises,
and fearing that they were not satisfied, we expected them upon us. The chief
Indian (or Cassekey) lay in the Tent upon his Chests. And about Midnight, we
heard a Company of Indians coming from the Vessel toward us, making terrible
Shouts, and coming fiercely up to the Tent; the Cassekey called to them, which
caused them to stand: It seemed they had killed a Hog, and brought him; so the
Cassekey asked us, if we would eat the Hog? Solomon Cresson, by our desire
answered him, That we used not to eat at that Time of the Night: Whereupon they
threw the Hog down before the Tent, and the Cassekey sent them away. They went
shouting to the Seashore, where there were some Hundreds of them, Revelling
about our Wreck.

The 25th of the Seventh Month; the 6th Day of the Week.
This Morning, having purposed to endeavor for Liberty to pass to the
Northward, Solomon opened the Matter to the Cassekey; who answered, we must go
to his Town to the Southward.

This occasioned us to go for Santa Lucea (this Place having a Spanish Name,
supposed to have found it under the Government of that Nation, whence we might
expect Relief) But the Cassekey told us, That it was about two or three Days
Joueney thither; and that, when we came there, we should have our Throats and
Scalps cut; and be Shot, burned and Eaten. We thought that Information was but
to divert us, so that we were more earnest to go; but he sternly denied us,
saying, We must go to his Town.

About Eight a Clock this Morning, the Cassekey came into our Tent, and set
himself amongst us, asking the old Question, Nickaleer, Nickaleer? Directing
his Speech to one particular of us, who in Simplicity answered, Yes. Which
caused the Cassekey to ask in the said Person, if another Person, which he
pointed to was Nickaleer? He answered, Yes. Then he said, To^os (or all)
Nickaleer; and went from among us: Returning in a short Time, with some of his
Men with him, and a fresh they went greedily to strip my Wife and Child, Robert
Barrow, and our Master, who had escaped till now. Thus were we left almost
Naked, till the Feud was something abated; and then we got somewhat from them,
which displeased some of them. We then cut our Tents in Pieces, and got the
most of our Clothing out of it; which the Indians perceiving, took the Remains
from us. We Men had most of us Breeches, and Pieces of Canvas; and all the
Company interceded for my Wife, so that all was not taken from her. About Noon,
the Indians having removed all their Plunder off the Bay, and many of them
gone; a Guard was provided, armed with Bows and Arrows, with whom we were
summoned to march; and a Burden provided for every one to carry, that was any
ways able. Our Master, with his broken Leg, was helped along by his Negro Ben.
My Wife was forced to carry her Child, they not suffering any of us to relieve
her. But if any of us offered to lay down our Burden, we were threatened to be
shot. Thus were we forced along the Beach barefooted.

We had saved one of the Master's Quadrants, and Sedmens Calender, with two
other Books. As we walked along the Bay (the Time suiting) our Mate, Richard
Limpeney, took an Observation, and we found our selves to be in the Latitude of
twenty seven Degrees and eight Minutes: Some of the Indians were offended at
it; when he held up his Quadrant to observe, one would draw an Arrow to shoot
him; but it pleased God hitherto to prevent them from shedding any of our Blood.

One Passage I have omitted: Two of our Mariners, named Thomas Fowns and
Richard Limpany, went forth this Morning, from our Tent, down to the Bay where
the Indians were, and viewing of them at some Distance, an Indian-Man came
running upon them, with his Knife in his Hand took hold of Thomas Fowns to stab
him; but the said Thomas fell on his Knees, using a Spanish Ceremony, and
begged not to kill him, whereupon the Indian desisted, and bid him be gone to
the Place from whence he came. The said Thomas at his Return, acquainted us how
narrowly he had escaped.

After we had traveled about five Miles along the deep Sand, the Sun being
extreme hot, we came to an Inlet: On the other side was the Indian-Town, being
little Wigwams, made of small Poles stuck in the Ground, which they bended one
to another, making an Arch, and covered them with Thatch of small Palmetto
Leaves: Here we were commanded to sit down, and the Cassekey came to us, who
with his Hand, scratched a Hole in the Sand, about a Foot deep, and came to
Water, which he made Signs for us to come and Drink, we being extreme Thirsty,
did, but the Water was almost Salt: Whilst we sat here, we saw great Fires
making on the other Side of the Inlet, which some of us thought was preparing
for us. After an Hours Time being spent here, at length came an Indian with a
small Cannoo from the other Side, and I, with my Wife and Child, and Robert
Barrow, were ordered to go in; the same Cannoo was but just wide enough for us
to sit down in; over we were carried, and being landed, the Man made Signs for
us to walk to Wigwams, which we did; but the young Indians would seem to be
frightened, and fly from us. We were directed to a Wigwam, which, afterward we
understood to be the Cassekey's: It was about a Man's height to the Top; herein
was the Cassekey's Wife, and some old Women, sitting on a Cabin, made of
Sticks, about a Foot high, covered with a Mat, they made Signs for us to sit
down on the Ground, which we did: The Cassekey's Wife having a young Child
sucking at her Breast, gave it to another Woman, and would have my Child, which
my Wife was very loath to suffer; but she would not be denied, took our Child
and suckled it at her Breast, viewing and feeling it from Top to Toe, at length
returned it to my Wife; and by this Time was another Parcel of our People come
over; and sitting down by the Wigwam Side, our Indian brought a Fish boiled, on
a Palmetto Leaf, and set it down amongst us, making Signs for us to Eat; but
our Exercise was too great for us to have any Inclination to receive Food; at
length our People were brought over, and afterward came the Cassekey: As soon
as he came to his Wigwam, he set himself to work, got some stakes, and stuck
them in a row, joining to his Wigwam, and tied some Sticks, whereon were these
small Palmettos, tied and fastened them to the stakes, about three Foot high,
and laid two or three Mats made of Reeds down by his Shelter; which, it seems,
he made for us, to break the Wind off us, and ordered us to lie down there,
which we did, as many as the Mats would hold, the rest lay on the Ground by us;
the Cassekey went into his Wigwam, and seated himself on his Cabin
cross-legged; having a Basket of Palmetto Berries brought him, which he eat
very greedily; after which, came some Indians unto him, and talked much; Night
come on; the Moon being up, an Indian, who performs their Ceremonies, stood
out, looking full at the Moon, making a hideous Noise, and crying out, acting
like a Madman for the Space of half an Hour, all the Indians being silent till
he had done; after which, they all made a fearful Noise, some like the Barking
of a Dog, or Wolf, and other strange Sounds: After this, one gets a Logg, and
sets himself down, holding the stick of Logg upright on the Ground, and several
others getting about him, made a hideous Noise, singing to our Amazement; at
length their Women joined Concort, making the Noise more terrible, this they
continued till Midnight. Toward Morning was great Dews: Our Fire being
expended, we were extreme cold.

This Morning the Cassekey looking on us with a mild Aspect, sent his Son with
a striking Staff to the Inlet, to strike Fish for us, which was performed with
great Dexterity, for some of us walked down with him, and though we looked very
earnestly when he threw ^is Staff from him, could not see a Fish, at which Time
he saw it, and brought it on Shore on the End of his Staff. Sometimes he would
run swiftly pursuing a Fish, and seldom mist when he darted at him. In two
Hours Time he got as many Fish as would serve twenty Men: There were others
also Fishing at the same Time, so that Fish was plenty; but the sense of our
Conditions, stayed our hungry Stomachs, for some amongst us thought they would
feed us, to feed themselves.

The Cassekey went this Morning toward our Vessel in his absence the other
Indians looked very untowardly upon us, which created a Jealousy of their
Cruelty yet to come. This Afternoon we saw a great Fire nigh the Place of our
Vessel; whereupon we concluded, that our Vessel and our Boat were Burned:
Whereupon we were almost confirmed that they designed to destroy us. About
Sunsetting the Cassekey came home; we spoke to him, he answered us, and seemed
very affable, which we liked well: Night drawing on, and the Wind shifting
Northward, we removed our Shelter, and added the Mats to it to break the Wind
off us, which blowed cold, and laid our selves on the Sand. About an Hour
within Night came a parcel of Indians from the Southward, being all armed with
Bow and Arrows, and coming near our Tent, some of us espied them, whereupon
they squatted down: This seemed a fresh Token of Danger, and we awaked those of
us that where fallen a sleep, and bid them prepare, for things seemed
dangerous, we supposing they were come to forward our Destruction, or to carry
us to the Southward; they sat thus a considerable Time; at length they
distributed themselves to the Wigwam: Thus would Danger often appear unto us,
and almost swallow us up; but at Times we should be set over it, having a
secret Hope, that God would work our Deliverance, having preserved us in so
many Perils.

Sometime before Night, Robert Barrow was exhorting us to be patient, and in a
Godly Manner did he expound that Text of Scripture, Because (...) kept the Word
of my Patience, Rev. 3.10 After (...) ^ded with a most fervent Prayer, desiring
(...) that whereas he had suffered us to be cast (...) Barbarous and Heathenish
People, if that it (...) blessed Will, He would preserve and deliver us (...)
amongst them, that our Names might not be buried in Oblivion, and that he might
lay his Body amongst Faithful Friends; And at the close of his Prayer, he
seemed to have an Assurance that his Petition would be granted; in all which,
some of us were livingly refreshed and strengthened.

The 27th of the 7th Month; the 1st of the Week,
This Morning we again used our Endeavors with the Cassekey, that we might go
to the Northward for Augusteen; his Answer was, We should be all killed, but at
length we prevailed, and he said on the Morning we should go: Hereupon, he took
three Negro-Men (one of Joseph Kirle's, and two of mine) and with a Cannoo went
up the Sound

This Day the Indians were busy with what they had taken out of our Vessel,
and would have employed all of us to do, some one thing, some another, for
them; but we not knowing the Consequence endeavored to shun it, and would deny
their demands. But some of our Men did answer their desires in making and
sewing some Cloth together, stringing our Beds, mending of Locks, of the
Chefts, etc. What ever they thought was a-miss they would be putting upon us to
mend, till we wholly refused; at which Time I heard a saving, that came from
one of the Chief Indians, thus ( English Son of a Bitch) which Word startted
me; for I did believe they had had some of our Nation in their Possession, of
whom they had heard such an Expression^: I passed away from the Wigwam in much
trouble.

This Day being the first of the Week, we having a large Bible, and a Book of
Robert Barclay's, some one or other was often reading in them: But being most
of us sat together, Robert Barrow desired our People to wai^ (...); in which
Time Robert had a Word in (...) us, and afterward went to Prayer, all the
(...) Mocking, but not to our Disturbance: The (...) ^rt stood very modestly
the whole Time: After ^^^yer ended, they all withdrew quietly: But some of the
(especially the Cassekey's eldest Son) would take great delight in our Reading,
and would take the Bible, or other Book, and give to one or other to read; the
Sound of which pleased them; for they would sit quietly, and ^ery attentively,
to hear us.

The Cassekey having been gone the most Part of the Day, with three Negroes in
our Boat coming over the Bar into the Inlet: We rejoiced to see Our Boat, for
we thought she had been burned. Our Negroes told us, they went up the Sound
with the Cassekey and landed near the Place where our Tent had been: The chief
Business was, to remove the Money from one Place to another, and bury it. This
old Man would trust our People, but not his own. After that was done, they went
to the Place where our Vessel was burned: They lanched our Boat, in which the
old Cassekey put his Chests, wherein was our Linen, and other of our Things.
Also they got a small Runlet, which they filled with Wine out of a Quarter-Cask
that was left; and brought Sugar out of the Wreck, which was not consumed with
the Fire. By this Time came the Cassekey, and other Negro, in the Cannoo. He
told us, on the Morrow we should go with our Boat: This was cheerful News unto
us. All the Time some Indians had been out, and brought home some Oysters; and
the Cassekey gave us some, bidding us, take what we had Mind to. A little
before Night, the Cassekey opened his Chest and and Boxes: And his Wife came,
and took what was in them from him. But he seemed very generous to my Wife and
Child, and gave her several Things which were useful to her and our Child.

Our Boat was very Leaky, so that we got her into a Creek to sink her, that the
Water might swell her.

The 28th of the 7th Month; the 2d Day of the Week.
This Morning we waited an Opportunity to get leave to depart, which was
granted us. Whereupon we asked for such Things as they did not make use of viz*
a great Glass, wherein was five or six pound of Butter, some Sugar, the Rundlet
of Wine, and some Balls of Chocolate; All which was granted us, also a Bowl to
heave Water out of the Boat: But the Cassekey would have a Negro Boy of mine,
named Caesar, to which I could not tell what to say; but he was resolved on it.
We got down to the Waterside, and sent all our People over that were to
Travel; And Joseph Kirle, Robert Barrow, I, my Wife and Child, with two of our
Mariners went in the Boat, and rowed along Shore Northwards, but the Cassekey
would have us to have gone with our Boat up the Sound: We supposed the Sound
was a great River, and therefore were not willing to take his Advice, having no
Knowledge; but his Counsel was good, as we found afterward, for the
Convenience of Passage.

The Cassekey, and some other Indians, went with our People toward our Wreck,
we rowing along Shore, and our Boat very leaky, that one Person had employ
enough to heave out the Water.

Just before we left the Indians-Town, several Indians were for taking the
little Cloths and Rags we had got; but calling out to the Cassekey, he would
cause them to let us alone.

Solomon Cresson was mightly in one Indian's Favor, who would hardly stir from
his Wigwam but Solomon must be with him, and go Arm in Arm; which Indian,
amongst his Plunder, had a Morning-Gown, which he put on Solomon, and Solomon
had worn it most of the Time we were there; but when the Time of our Departure
came, an Indian unrob'd him, and left only a pair of Breeches and seemed very
angry.

It was high Noon when we left our Wreck (she being burned down to her
Floor-Timbers which lay in the Sand) we setting forward, some in the Boat, the
rest traveled along Shore; and a little before Sunsetting our People came up
with Abundance of small Fish that had been forced on Shore, as we may suppose,
by the Storm that drove us a Shore (they lying far from the Water and being
much tainted) covered the Shore for nigh a Mile in length, of which our People
gathered as many as they could carry: About Sunsetting we put on Shore to
refresh our selves, and take a small Respite, also to take my Kinsman, Benjamin
Allen, into our Boat; For this Afternoon, in his Travel, he was taken with a
Fever and Ague, and we had much Trouble to get him along, he having been sick
nigh unto Death (being first taken, the Day before we left Blewfield's Roads)
until about a Week before we were cast away.

One of my Negroes had saved a Tinder-box and Flint, and we had reserved two
Knives, by which means we got a Fire, though with much difficulty, for our
Tinder was bad, and all the Wood Salt-Water-Soaken; which being accomplished,
we broiled all our Fish, feeding heartily on some of them, and the rest we
kept, not knowing when we should be thus furnished again; for which, some of us
were ^y thankful to the God of all our Mercies.

Having a large Fire, many of us got under the Lee of it; and others buried
themselves in the Sand, in Hopes to get a little sleep, that we might be
somewhat refreshed, and thereby be the better enabled, some to travel, and some
to Row, the remaining part of the Night; but the Sand-Flies, and Musketoes,
were so extreme thick, it was impossible: The Moon Shining, we launced our
Boat, I, and my Wife, and Child, the Master, Robert Barrow, my Kinsman Allen,
Solomon Cresson, Joseph Buckley, and the Master's Negro, went in our Boat, the
rest traveled along Shore: About midnight, or a little after, our People came
by an Indian-Town; the Indians came out in a great Number, but offered no
Violence, more than endeavoring to take from them what little they had; but
making some small resistance, the Indians were put by their purpose: They were
very desirous to have us come on shore, and would hale us, but our People would
have us keep off: We were got among a parcel of Breakers, and so had much a do
to get out to Sea

The 29th of the 7th Month; the 3d of the Week.
This Morning about Sunrising we stood in for the Land, and looked out for our
People, but could not see them, therefore we lay by for the space of two Hours,
and at length saw them coming along and a great many Indians with them. When
they came a breast of us, the Indians wasted us a shore, but we refused,
perceiving they were wickedly bent; they would be ever and anon snatching one
thing or other* at which time our People would point to us in the Boat; but
perceiving they could not get us ashore, in some few Hours left them.

This Day at Noon, Joseph Kirle having his Quadrant and Calendar, took an
Observation, being in the Latitude of 27 Degrees. 45 Min. About one a Clock we saw
two Indians, with Bows and Arrows, running to meet our People; who, when they
saw them, at first they made a halt, and afterward retreated, at which the
Indians let fly an Arrow, which narrowly escaped one of them; whereupon they
stopped, the Indians looked strangely on them, but our People set forwards, and
the Indians with them, until they came to the Indian-Town: We saw our People go
into the Wigwams, but stayed a very short time, for the Indians were for taking
those pieces of Canvas they had, from them. They got some Water and set forward
again; the two Indians still followed them* About this Time we saw a Sail to
the Eastward, and we supposing it at first to be a Brigantius, agreed to follow
her; but in a small Time, we made it to be a Cannoo or Boat, with two Masts and
Sail: She stood in for the Shore, but as soon as they espied us, she bore away;
and when she saw we made not after her, she stood ashore again for the
Indian-Town; hereupon a Jealousy got amongst us, that she might go on Shore,
and get strong with Men, and come after us, whereupon we rowed very hard, and
kept an offing for some Hours; but finding they came not out, we stood toward
the Shore again. This Day was extreme hot, and we had no Water since we left
the Indian-Town, to the Southward of our Wreck, called by the Name of Hoe-Bay,
therefore we were desirous to get on Shore; but when we endeavored it we could
not, for the Seas swelled very much, and came rolling from the Eastward, so
that the Seas run very hollow, and broke almost a Mile from the Shore; our
Master said, It was impossible to get on shore alive: But I being under some
Exercise, was desirous to be on Shore, and thereupon did express my self to the
rest of our People, they started the Danger, all which I was as sensible of as
they; yet I could not rest, but insisted on going a shore: The Master and Men
said, We should not save our lives: But I gained so far, that they attempted,
and were got within half a Mile of a shore; but the Seas came on us so large
and hollow, that one Sea had like to have overwhelmed us, we just got a Top of
it, before it broke; there was then no persuading them to go further, but we
stood off, and designed to keep off all Night, our People being very weary, and
the Sun setting, we divided one half to get some Sleep, the other to watch, and
keep the Boat's head to the Sea. The weather looked as though it would be bad,
and the Sea increased, whereupon I began a-fresh to persuade them to go on
shore; all were desirous, but thought it impossible; at length we resolved to
venture, and so committing our selves to the Protection of the Almighty God, We
stood in for the shore, and made Signs to our People that we designed it. And
it pleased God to order it so, that we went on shore, as though there had been
a Lane made through the Breakers, and were carried to the Top of the Bank,
where we got aged Robert Barrow, my Wife and Child out of the Boat, before ever
a Sea came to fill us; which it did, as soon as they were got out: But we got
our Boat up from the wash of the Sea.

The two Indians were for taking off our Clothes, (which would not cover our
Bodies) but we not being willing to yield, they would snatch a piece from one,
and a bit from another, and run away with that, and than come again and do the
like. These two Indians took away what was given to my Wife and Child, which we
knew not how to help, but exercised Patience.

We enquired how far it was from St. Lucia (one of them speaking a little
Spanish) and by Signs we understood it was not far. They made Signs that when
we came there, we should be put to most cruel Death, but we hoped otherwise.

At this Place, within the Land, and over the Sound, our People said, before it
was dark, they saw two or three Houses which looked white, as though they were
plaistered with Lime, which put us in hopes that there were Spaniards there; so
we set forwards, as the Indians directed, for St. Lucia; they made Signs that
we should come to an Inlet of the Sea, and on the other side was St. Lucia. We
traveled about four Miles, and came to an Inlet, but saw no Settlement on the
other side, so we concluded to lie there all night: We saw the tract of a large
Bear, and other wild Beasts whereupon we set to work to get Wood, and then a
Fire: Abundance of Muskittoes and Sand-flyes hindered our Rest; to Remedy which,
we dug holes in the Sand, got some Grass, and laid it therein to lie upon,
in order to cover ourselves from the Flies, which most of us did; but it being
extreme Cold, and Firing (...), we had little Comfort.

About Midnight we sent our People to see if they could get off our Boat, and
bring it into the Inlet that we might get over to the other side: They went and
Launched her but the Sea was so rough, that there was no possibility of getting
her off; for she was soon filled, and they put to swim; and they, Boat and all,
were driven on Shore again.

Whilst our People were gone for the Boat, we espied some Indian in a Cannoo,
with their Torch, a Fishing; we sent for Solomon, (who was gone to Launch the
Boat) expecting they would come, seeing Fires, and we should not tell what to
say to them; but they did not. Here we lay watching, for no rest could be taken.

The 30th of the 7th Month; the 2d Day of the Week.
This Morning, by break of Day, we saw a small Cannoo from the other side, put
off Shore, with two Indians in her, going up the River (or Sound) a Fishing. We
hailed them in Spanish, and as soon as they heard and saw us, they made to the
Shore with all speed, and away to their Town they run. We, perceiving they were
shy of us, began to doubt of their Amity, which we had so much depended on;
whereupon we counseled our People how to deport themselves, especially our
Negroes. About Sunrising we saw the Indians coming, running in a very great
Number, with their Bows and Arrows, to the Inlet; where, having five or six
Cannoos, they got into them, as many as those Cannoos could hold; others took
the Water, and swam over unto us: They came in the greatest Rage that possibly
a Barbarous People could. Solomon began to speak Spanish to them; but they
answered not till they came a Shore, some distance from us; and then coming
running upon us, they cried out, Nickaleer, Nickaleer? We sat all still,
expecting Death, and that in a most barbarous Manner They that did speak unto
them could not be heard: But they rushed violently on us, rending and tearing
those few Clothes we had; they that had Breeches had so many about them, that
they hardly touched the Ground, till they were shaken out of them; they tore
all from my Wife; and espying her Hair-Lace, some were going to cut the Hair,
away to get it; but, like greedy Dogs, another snatched and tore it off. As for
our poor young Child, they snatched from it what little it had, as though they
would have shaken and torn it, Limb from Limb. After they had taken all from us
but our Lives, they began to talk one to another, vehemently Foaming at the
Mouth, like wild Boars, and taking their Bows and Arrows, with other Weapons,
cried out, Nickaleer, Nickaleer, Solomon spoke in Spanish to them, and said, We
were Spaniards: But they would not hear him, and continued crying out
Nickaleer, Nickaleer; withal drawing their Arrows to the Head. But suddenly we
perceived them to look about and listen, and then desisted to prosecute their
bloody Design. One of them took a pair of Breeches, and gave it to my Wife. We
brought our great Bible, and a large Book of Robert Barclay's, to this Place.
And being all stripped as Naked as we were born, and endeavoring to hide our
Nakedness, these Canibals took the Books, and tearing out the Leaves, would
give each of us a Leaf to cover us; which we took from them: At which Time they
would deride and smite us, and instantly another of them would snatch away what
the other gave us, smiting and deriding us withal.

Robert Barrow, with my self, Wife and Child, were ordered to go into a Cannoo,
to be carried to the other Side of the Inlet, being a Furlong over; four
Indians being in the Cannoo to paddle: When we came to the other Side, within a
Cannoo's length of two of the Shore, a Number of Indians, with their Bows and
Arrows, came running into the Water, some to their Knees, some deeper, having
their Bows and Arrows drawn up, crying out, Nickaleer, Nickaleer; which they
continued without ceasing. The Indians that brought us over leaped out of the
Cannoo, and swam a Shore, fearing they should be shot. But in this Juncture it
pleased God to tender the Hearts of some of them toward us, especially the
Cassekey's Wife, and some of the chiefest amongst them, who were made
Instruments to intercede for us, and stop the Rage of the Multitude, who seemed
not to be satisfied without our Blood. The Casseekey ordered some to swim, and
fetch the Cannoo a Shore; which being done, his Wife came in a Compassionate
Manner and took my Wife out of the Cannoo, ordering her to follow her, which we
did some distance from the Inlet Side, and stood till all our People were
brought over, which in a little Time was done. But the Rage of some was still
great, thirsting to shed our Blood; and a mighty Strife there was amongst them;
some would kill us, others would prevent it: And thus one Indian was striving
with another. All being got over, were to walk along the Seashore to their
Town. In this Passage we, most of us, felt the Rage of some of them, either by
striking or stoning; and diverse Arrows were shot: But those that were for
Preserving us, would watch those that were for destroying us: And when some of
them would go to shoot, others of them would catch hold of their Bows or Arms.
It was so ordered, that not one of us was touched with their Arrows; several of
us were knocked down, and some tumbled into the Sea; we dared not help one
another, but help we had by some of them, being made instrumental to help us.
My Wife received several Blows; and an Indian came and took hold of her Hair,
and was going either to cut her Throat, or something like it, having his Knife
nigh her Throat; but I looked at him, making a sign that he should not; so he
desisted. At which Time another Indian came, with a handful of Sea-Sand, and
filled our poor Child's Mouth. By this Time the Cassekey's Wife, came to my
Wife, seeing her oppressed, and they pulled the Sand out of our Child's Mouth,
and kept by my Wife until we got into the Cassakey's House, which was about
Forty Foot long, and Twenty-five Foot wide, covered with Palmetto Leaves both
Top and sides. There was a Range of Cabbins, or a Barbecue, on one side and two
Ends: At the entering on one Side of the House, a Passage was made of Benches
on each Side, leading to the Cabbins. On these Benches sat the chief Indians,
and at the upper End of the Cabin was the Cassekey seated. A kind of Debate
was held amongst them for an Hour's Time. After which Solomon, and some others
were called to the Cassekey, and were seated on the Cabin; where the Cassekey
talked to Solomon in the Spanish Language, but could not hold a Discourse. In a
little Time some raw Deer-Skins were brought in, and given to my Wife, and
Negro-Women; and to us Men such as the Indians wear, being a Piece of
Platt-work of a kind of Silk-Grass wrought of diverse Colors, and of a
triangular Figure, with a Belt of four Fingers broad of (...) same, wrought
together, which goes about the Waste* and the Angle of the other having a
thing to it, coming between the Legs; and Strings to the Ends of the Belt. All
three meeting together, are fastened behind with a Horse-Tail, or a Bunch of
Silk-Grass, exactly resembling it* of a Flaxen Color. This being all the
Apparel or Covering that the Men wear; and thus they Clothed us* A Place was
appointed for us, Mats being laid on the Floor of the House, where we were
ordered to lie down. But the Place was extreme nasty; for all the Stones of
the Berries which they eat, and all the Nastness that is made amongst them, lay
on their Floor, that the Place swarmed with abundance of many Sorts of creeping
things; as, a large black hairy Spider, which has two Claws like a Carb,
Scorpions, and numberless Number of small Buggs. On these Mats we lay, these
Vermin crawling over our naked Bodies. To brush them off, was like driving of
Mus^ittoes from one, where they are extreme thick. The Indians were seated, as
aforesaid, the Cassekey at the upper End of them; and the Range of Cabbins was
filled with Men, Women and Children, beholding us: At length we heard a Women
or two cry, according to their Manner, and that very sorrowfully, one of which
I took to be the Cassekey's Wife, which occasioned some of us to think, that
something extraordinary was to be done to us. We heard a strange Sort of a
Noise, which was not like the Noise made by a Man, but we could not understand
what, nor where it was; for sometimes it sounded to be in one Part of the
House, sometimes in another, to which we had an Ear: And indeed our Ears and
Eyes could perceive or hear nothing, but what was Strange and Dismal, and Death
seemed to sorround us; but Time discovered this Noise unto us. The Occasion of
it was thus: In one Part of this House where the Fire was kept, was an Indian
Man, having a Pot on the Fire, wherein he was making a Drink, of the Leaves of
a Shrub (which we understood afterward by the Spaniards is called Casseena)
boiling the said Leaves, after they had parched them in a Pot; then with a
Gourd, having a long Neck, and at the Top of it a small Hole, which the Top of
one's Finger could cover, and at the Side of it a round Hole of two Inches
Diameter; they take the Liquor out of the Pot, and put it into a deep ^ound
Bowl, which being almost filled, contains nigh three Gallons: With this Gourd
they brew the Liquor, and make it froth very much; it looks of a deep brown
Color. In the Brewing of this Liquor was this Noise made, which we thought
strange; for the pressing of this Gourd gently down into the Liquor, and the
Air which is contained, being forced out of the little hole at Top, occasioned
a Sound, which according to the Time and motion given, would be various. This
Drink, when made, and cool to Sup, was in a Conck-Shell, first carried to the
Cassekey, who threw Part of it on the Ground, and the rest he drank up, and
then would make a loud Him; and afterward the Cup passed to the rest of the
Cassekey's Associaties, as aforesaid; but no other Man, Woman nor Child, must
touch or taste of this Sort of Drink; of which he sat Sipping, Chattering and
smoking Tobacco, or some other Herb instead thereof, for the most Part of the
Day.

About Noon was some Fish brought us on small Palmetto Leaves, being boiled
with Scales, Heads and Gills, and nothing taken from them but the Guts, but our
Troubles and Exercise were such, that we cared not for Food.

In the Evening, we being laid on the Place aforesaid, the Indians made a Drum
of a Skin, covering therewith the deep Bowl, in which they brewed their Drink,
beating thereon with a Stick, and having a couple of Rattles, made of small
Gourds put on Sticks with small Stones in, shaking them, they began to set up a
most hideous howling, very irksome to us, and sometime after came some of their
Young Women, some Singing, some Dancing. This was contined till Midnight,
after which they went to Sleep.

The 1st of the 8th Month; the 5th of the Week.
This Day the Cassekey looking on us pleasantly, made Presents to some of us,
especially to my Wife; he gave her a Parcel of Shellfish, which are known by
the Name of Clamms; one or two, he roasted and gave her, showing that she must
serve the rest so, and eat them. The Indian Women would take our Child and
Suckle it, for its Mother's Milk was almost gone, that it could not get a Meal:
And our Child, which had been at Death's Door, from the Time of its Birth,
until we were cast away, began now to be Cheerful, and have an Appetite to
Food; it had no covering but a small Piece of raw Dear-Skin, not a Shred of
Linen or Woolen to put on it.

About the tenth Hour, we observed the Indians to be on a sudden Motion; most
of the Principal of them betook themselves to their Houses; the Cassekey went
to Dressing his Head, and Painting himself, and so did all the rest: When they
had done, they came into the Cassekey's House, and seated themselves in Order:
In a small Time after came an Indian with some Attendance into the House,
making a Ceremonious Motion, and seated himself by the Cassekey, the Persons
that came with him seated themselves amongst the others: After some small
pause, the Cassekey began a Discourse, which held nigh an Hour; After which the
Strange Indian and his Companions went forth to the Waterside, unto their
Cannoo, lying in the Sound, and returned presently with such Presents as they
had brought, delivering them unto the Cassekey, and those sitting by giving an
Applause. The Presents were some few Bunches of the Herb they make their Drink
of, and another Herb which they use instead of Tobacco, and some platted Balls,
stuffed with Moss, to lay their Heads on, instead of Pillows: The Ceremony
being ended, they all seated themselves again, and went to Drinking Casseena,
Smoking and Talking, during the Strangers stay.

About Noon some Fish was brought us; Hunger was grown stronger upon us, and
the Quaintity given was not much more than each a Mouthful, which we Eat; The
Cassekey ordered the Master, Joseph Kirle, Solomon Cresson, my Wife and me, to
sit upon their Cabin to eat our Fish; and they gave us some of their Berries to
Eat: We tasted them* but not one amongst us could suffer them to stay in our
Mouths, for we could compare the taste of them to nothing else, but rotten
Cheese steeped with Tobacco. Sometime after we had eaten, some of the Indian,
asked us, If we were Spaniards? Solomon answered them, Yes. Then some of the
Indians would point to those whose Hair was Black, or of a deep Brown, and say
such a one was a Spaniard of the Havana, and such of Augusteen; but those whose
Hair was of a light Color, they were doubtful of; some would say they were no
Spaniards.

About the third Hour in the Afternoon, the Strangers went away, and some small
Time after, they having satisfied themselves that most of us were Spaniards,
told us that we should be sent for to the next Town; and they told us that
there was a Nickaleer off, and we understood them [ English Men of Bristol]
also the Number of six Men and a Woman; and that they were to be put to Death
before we should get thither. We were silent, although much concerned to hear
that Report: They also told us, that a Messenger would come for us, to direct
us to the next Town, thence to Augusteen. Night coming on, they betook
themselves to their accustomed Singing and Dancing.

About the tenth or twelfth Hour in the Night, before the Singing and Dancing
was ended, came in a Stranger armed with Bow and Arrows; the Cassekey and his
Companions entertained him with half an Hours Discourse, which ended, we were
on a sudden ordered to get up, and hurried away with this Stranger, they not
giving us Time to see if we were altogether, and a Troop of young Indian-Men
and Boys followed us for about four Miles, all which way they pelted us with
Stones: At length they all left us except two and our Guide; but we missed
Solomon Cresson and Joseph Kirle's Boy, and Negro Ben, which was no small
Trouble to us. We had not traveled above five Miles, before our Guide caused
us to stop, and at some small distance was an Indian-Town* which I suppose our
Guide belonged to; for Indians cam^ thence with Fire and Water for him, and
with Palmett^* Leaves they made a blast of Fire; here we stayed nigh^ two
Hours: The Flies were very thick, and the Night very Cold, so that our naked
Bodies were not able to endure it, but with Grief. At length we left the Place;
the whole Night following we were troubled with these two young Indians, who at
Times would be abusing one or other of us, singling them out, and asking if
they were not Nickaleer, or English? If they said, nay, then they would hit
them a Blow or more with a Truncheon, which they had; and said, they were. We
traveled all Night without stopping, from the aforesaid Place.

The 2d of the 8th Month; the 6th Day of the Week.
After Sunrising, we came up with the Wreck of the Vessel that we heard was
cast away. She was Staved all to Piece; for her Keelson was driven a Shore. We
saw Suger-Hogsheads, Ginger and Logwood, which gave us to suppose, that it was
one of our Fleet; and we thought it to be either Borroughs or Smith, belonging
to Bristol. A Mile or more from hence we came to an Inlet; our Guide told us,
we must swim over, except my Wife and Robert Barrow; but we signified that we
could not: He carried Robert Barrow, Joseph Kirle, Me, my Wife and Child, over
first; and at length the whole Company: For it was a great way over. By that
Time we were all over; the Day was hot, and my Wife quite tired and faint; as
also Robert Barrow, and Joseph Kirle, whose Leg was grown so painful, that it
overcame him. We got under a Grape-Bush for shelter from the Sun; I sent one of
my Negroes to seek for Water for them, but there was none to be had; but he got
some Seaside Grapes; which, with resting, refreshed the Weak and Lame.

Our Guide was for forcing us forward; so we traveled about four or five Miles
further, and met with the Cassekey of this Town, and Commander of the Northern
Part of this Coast. He was an ancient Man, his Beard and Hair gray: He enquired
for the Captain, so our People pointed to Joseph Kirle, whom he went to, and
embraced him; then he asked for our Mate, or Pilot. This Man could speak
Spanish better than any we had met with; but not so well as to Discourse, only
to ask some Questions; and we had three or four amongst us could make a shift
to answer him; for Solomon was kept behind. This old Cassekey seemed to have
Compassion on us, and said, That those People, who had served us thus, in
stripping of us, were Rogoues: But we were his Comerades or Friends. Withal he
said, in few Days he would carry us to Augusteen; and thereupon he told us of
six Englishmen, and one Woman, being at his Town. We enquired, if he ^ntended
them for Augusteen? But he would shake his Head, and point to the Southward,
saying, Nickaleer no Comerade (Englishmen were not his Friends) Which Words
were unpleasant to us. This People kept us Company till we came within a Mile
or two of their Town, and then they left us; they, going faster, got in before
us. Their Town stood about half a Mile from the Seashore, within the Land, on
the Sound, being surrounded with a Swamp, in which grew white Mangrove-Trees,
which hid the Town from the Sea. We were directed to the Cassekey's House,
which was large, and filled with Indians; and then ordered to sit down. The old
Cassekey fetched some Water, and washed Robert Barrow's Feet, and my Wife's:
After which he got some Canvas and Crocus Ginger-Bags, which they had got out
of the Vessel that was cast on Shore, which was distributed among us. Joseph
Kirle had a Coat given him, which they had taken from the People of the other
Vessel, but it was rent down the back. My Wife had two Pieces of Sail-Canvas
given her. And I, with others, had a Crocus Ginger-Bag. They gave a Piece of an
old Check Linen Shirt, the Bigness of a small Hankerchief, to cover our Child:
This was all our Clothing. Robert Barrow and my Wife were quite spent with
traveling barefooted on the hot Sand, having bruised their Feet; and with
Stumps, Stones, and Prickles their Feet, especially Robert Barrow's, had holes
in them, that one might have put the Top of one's Thumb in. We were directed to
lie down on a Cabin. The other Vessel's Company were, one John Smith, Master of
the Nan^witch, a Barque belonging to Bristol, which came out of Jamaica with
us, with five Men, and one Woman, viz. Andrew Murray, Merchant, Andrew Barnes,
Mate, Hugh Allen, John Osler, John Shears, and Cornelius Toker, Two Boys, and a
Woman Passenger, named Penelope. We took an Opportunity to discourse them. They
were cast away the same Night we were, and their Vessel being forced by the
Storm, (they not being able for two Days before to carry any Sail) on Shore;
they got into their Boat, and so on Shore: And in a small Time was a great Part
of their Wreck driven on Shore; amongst which was a Barrel or more of Water,
some Barrels of Beef or Pork, with their Chests, and many other Things which
they got. On the Morrow they designed to travel to the Northward: But Andrew
Barnes, their Mate, having been along Time afflicted with a Flux, which had
wasted his Body to Skin and Bone, so that he was not able to help himself, they
left him, and traveled a Mile or more, and came to the Inlet, which they could
not pass: Whereupon they returned back again, to take their Boat; but at their
Return, before they could get away with their Boat, they espied the Indians
coming on them, who soon got to them; asked in Spanish, What Nation they were?
If Spaniards, English or French? But the Indians made Signs to give them their
Clothing, which they readily did. But still they enquired, Of what Nation? At
first they answered Spaniards; but the Natives looked so furiously, that they
soon answered them, Englishmen. Thereupon every one had it, Nickaleer,
Nickaleer. And then they very eagerly stripped them of all they had on: After
which they drove them away to the Northward, unto their Town; but Andrew Barnes
being not able to stand nor go, was left behind; after they had stripped him on
the Land naked, when they were driven away. Before they got to the Town, the
Indian Casse^^y gave them some Clothing, and no violence offered to their
Persons. They had plenty of Fish and Berries to the Time of our coming? John
Smith and Andrew Murray had their Being in the Cassekey's House, and the Woman,
named Penelope: The rest of Smith's People lodged in other Indian-Houses. But
on our coming, the old Cassekey told them, They must turn out, and make Room
for the Spaniards: But Smith and Murray would not go; and the Indian did not
force them out. In some Time after we had been in the House, came in an
Indian-Woman, laden with Baskets of Berries, mostly of the Palm; some Seaside
Coco-Plumbs, and Seaside Grapes. Of the two latter we could eat, but of the
Palm Berries we could not bear the Taste in our Mouths. We laid our selves on
the Cabin, on that Part which was appointed us; on the other Part, the young
Cassekey or King, lay; being parted by a Chest that stood thereon. Before Night
was a Parcel of large Fish, called Drumms, brought in; the old Cassekey told
Joseph Kirle, That those were for the Spaniards, and bid him let somebody
dress them: He also ordered us a Pot. They were soon dressed, and we eat them.
Night being come, the old Cassekey enquired after our Losses; which we, as well
as we could, gave him to understand, that in our Vessel was a great deal of
Clothing and Money, which the Indians at Hoebay had taken from us! He
understood so much of the Matter, that he grew covetous, and said, he would go
and get some of it from them.

About Midnight came Solomon Cresson in a Cannoo, with two Indians: The old
Cassekey began to examine him concerning our Vessel, Goods and Money, or Plate;
of which Solomon rendered a further Account unto him, than we could: Which
caused him to resolve, on the Morrow to provide Men and Boats, and to go down
the Sound to Hoebay, to have Part from them. He would have had Solomon to have
gone with him, but Solomon refused.

We enquired of Solomon concerning his stay, and of the Negro Ben and Joseph
Kirle's Boy: He said, that he was stayed by force; but the Negro and the Boy
were asleep in another House when we were driven away. They had a design, in
staying of Solomon, which he could not rightly understand, but supposed, that
they doubted that we were not all Spaniards; for the Indians of St. Lucia would
say to Solomon, that he was a Spaniard, and some others, but the most of us
were not Spaniards, and that they had stolen Solomon: But Solomon denied it.

The 3th of the 8th Month; the 7th of the Week.
This Morning the Old Cassekey with two Cannoos, and Ten Indians with him, went
hence for Hoe-Bay: He promised, that as soon as he returned, he would carry us
for Augusteen; which he supposed would be in six Days, if he had good Weather:
But this Day the Wind was got North-East, and it looked as though the Weather
would be Stormy: The Wind increased, and toward Eveninig the Water in the
Sound did rise, that it began to cover the Land, and came into the Houses, but
we had little or no Rain till Night; then the Wind increased and Rain also.

The 4th of the 8th Month; the 1st of the Week.
This Morning the Wind was violent with Rain; the King's House was knee deep
with Water, and like to continue rising; I removed with my Wife, Child, Robert
Barrow and Benjamin Allen, to an Indian-Hause that stood on a Hill of
Oyster-shells; in this House we remained this Day: The Wind continuing at
North-East very violent, and by Reason of much Rain, the Water rising every
Hour, the Indians began to put their dry Berries into their Cannoos, and to
seek which way to secure them. Several Indians betook themselves to their Boats
and carried what they had to some high Land at a considerable Distance, where a
Place was made for their Cassekey or King; but before Day, the House we were in
was a Float, and the Indians were for turning us out, bidding us take an old
Cannoo, that had a hole in the side of her, almost at the bottom, big enough
for a Man to put his hand through, so that she was full of Water; in this
Cannoo they would have had us shift for our selves, but we were not willing to
go; the Indians made signs for us to be gone diverse times: At length they grew
Angry, and took my Kinsman Allen into the Cannoo, and carried him away; in a
little time after returned with the Cannoo, and bid me and Robert Barrow be
gone: By this time day appeared, the Wind and Rain still violent; I then saw a
House on another Oyster-Hill that the Water was not got over yet; to which I
got, and asked by signs if I might be there? The Indians seemed willing; so
thither I got my Wife, Child, and Robert Barrow, and remained there. All this
day the Wind was violent, it rained, and the Flood continued: We imagined that
the Sea was broke in upon the Land, and that we should be drowned. The House
was almost blown to pieces, and the Indians often tying and mending it. The
chief Man of this House caused his Wife to Suckle our Child, for it was almost
famished, its Mother having no Milk in her Breasts for we had received no
Sustenance since the Storm began: Fresh Water was not to be had, the Land being
covered with the Sea. The Indians offered us some of their Berries, which we
endeavored to eat; but could not, the Taste was so irksome, and ready to take
our Breath from us, when we tried to eat them; but we expected that if the
Flood continued long, we should not need for Water. Yet nevertheless, we
enjoying Health and Strength, and Hunger growing violent, we would be tasting
the Berries, though we could reap no satifaction.

The 6th of the 8th Month; the 3d of the Week.
This Morning the Flood began to come into this House also; the Indians seemed
much concerned: The Storm of Wind and Rain held till about Midday; at which
time the Wind shifted Southwest, with the Rain and in some few Hours the Flood
began to abate.

The 7th of the 8th Month; the 4th of the Week.
By this day Noon the Water fell many feet, and I went out to see our People
whom I left in the King's House; I found them where I left them. All the
Indians had left the House, and our People remained on the Cabin, which was
about four foot from the Floor. The Flood had risen within two or three Inches
of the Top of the Cabin; and they said, They expected to dye there. We began to
express our Hunger and Thirst to each other; but there was no help as yet for
either: We went to the Springs, but they were all as Salt as the Sea; and we
would be striving with the Berries, but they were so Offensive unto us, that we
could reap no satisfaction from them. We went a begging at Times to the
Indian-Women to suckle our Child, which they would seldom deny.

The 8th of the 8th Month; the 5th of the Week.
This Day we got some Water to drink, but it was very brackish, and at best not
good.

The 9th of the 8th Month; the 6th of the Week.
This Day the young Cassekey returned to his House, with his Chests and other
Things.

The 10th of the 8th Month; the 7th of the Week.
This Day we got a Meal of Fish, the greatest plenty we had received since we
were here. We longed for the Old Cassekey's return, and feared that this bad
Weather would lengthen the Time.

The 11th of the 8th Month; the 1st of the Week.
The Morning early came a Messenger, giving an Account, that the Old Cassekey
was within some few Leagues of the Town, and that we might expect him this
Forenoon, within the Time he came in sight: We all drew down to the Waterside
to receive him; we perceived he came in State, having his two Cannoos lashed
together, with Poles athwar^ from the one to the other, making a Platform
which being covered with a Mat, on it stood a Chest, which was belonging to us,
and my Negro-Boy Caesar, (which the Cassekey of Hoe-Bay took from me) whom he
had got from the Indians at Hoe-Bay: Upon this Chest he sat cross-legged, being
newly painted red, his Men with Poles setting the Cannoos along unto the Shore.
Seeing us, he cried [ Whough] and looked very sternly at us. He was received by
his People with great Homage, holding out his Hands (as their Custom is) to be
kissed, having his Chest carried before him unto his House, whither he went,
the House being filled with Indians. The Old Cassekey began, and held a
Discourse for some Hours, giving an Account, as we suppose, what he heard and
saw; in which Discourse, he would often mention, Nickaleer; which caused us to
fear, that all Things were not well: After he had told his Story, and some of
the Elder Indians had expressed their Sentiments thereof, they Drank Casseena,
and Smoaked until Evening. The House being clear, the Old Cassekey looking very
unplesantly, showed unto us several Things which he had got; as, a Hatchet, a
Knife, the Chest, and many other Things, asking us, if they were not ours?
Which we owned; whereupon he would say, they were Nickaleer (or English:) We
signified that we had them of the English, but our Money was Spanish. Toward
the Evening, Joseph Kirle, my self and Solomon, got an Opportunity to Discourse
him; we began to urge his Promise, of carrying us for Augusteen: At first he
stated his Hardships and Labor to Hoe-Bay, and back, and that he must have
Time to rest, before he could go out again: Then he told us, the Way was long,
and would be tedious, and that at several Places we must draw the Cannoos over
Land for a great distance; he also mentioned how many Towns there were between
this, and Augusteen, in Number Ten; But nigh the Conclusion, be setting an
angry Countenance upon us, told us, that at Hoe-Bay he was informed, that we
should say, We were all English men; after he said this, in an angry Manner, he
turned from us, and went away.

This laid all our hopes in the Dust, and we soon perceived the Indians grew
jealous of us; for they would now be daily asking us, if we were not, Nickaleer
or English? And would not seem satisfied with a denial. Many Days were spent,
and the Time drew nigh, that we understood the Old Cassekey was intended for
Augusteen; hereupon we applied our selves to him, requesting, that if all might
not go, he would carry some of us; but he told us, he would carry but one. This
put us on querying, which of us should be that One. The Generality was for Me;
but I and Joseph Kirle were for Solomon; because he could speak the
Spanish-Language well, and no other of us could: And should any other of us
have gone, and come amongst those Indians to the Northward; who, we supposed,
could speak the Spanish-Language well, we should be discovered to be what those
People did supose we were; therefore it might overthrow all our Expectation;
but Solomon might pass all those Objections. These Reasons did not satisfy our
People, so that some of them grew Choleric; of which the old Cassekey took
notice, and told Solomon, that if they made such a Stir, he would not carry
one: If he did, it should be either Solomon, Joseph Kirle or Me. Whereupon we
prevailed with him, that Solomon might go, and accordingly made Preparations;
the Cassekey appointed the Number of Indians to go with him; also a Cannoo was
sent for; which, when it came, we found it to have belonged to the English, by
the Make of her. This Cannoo had a great Hole in the Head, nigh the Bottom,
with many great Rents and Holes in her: Joseph Kirle and I were required to
mend her; which, with much a-do, was accomplished; the Cannoo being much
decayed, and rotten where the Rents were

The 18th of the 8th Month; the 1st of the Week.
This Day-morning, the old Cassekey, with Solomon, and six Indians, in a
Cannoo, set out for Augusteen. The Cassekey carried a small Chest, in which was
nigh One Hundred Pieces of Eight, as some of our People did suppose, with some
other Matters that were gotten from our Vessel. The Weather was likely for
Rain, which caused us to fear, should the Weather prove bad, that Solomon would
hardly live to get to Augusteen; for he had nothing to cover him except a pair
of Indian Breeches, and a small piece of Skin that covered his Breast.

We understood by the old Cassekey, that it would be a Month, or next New Moon,
before we could expect their Return: All which Time we spent in much Trouble
and Hardship. The Weather began to grow cold, and Provision very short; that
is, Palm-Berries, Coker-Plumbs, and Sea-Grapes, (which are the three Sorts
before expressed) the Time of these Fruits-bearing being over, they having no
Sort of Fruit till next Spring.

These People neither Sow nor Plant any manner of Thing whatsoever, nor Care
for any Thing, but what the Barren Sands Produce: Fish they have as plenty as
they please, but sometimes they would make it scarce to us; so that a Meal in a
Week was most commonly our portion, and three Meals a Rarity. After the old
Cassekey's Departure, our Hardships increased, especially my Wife's and Child's
for want of Food of any Sort; my Wife's Milk was gone, and our poor Child was
in great want; the Indians now and then would give it suck, but rarely to
satisfy it; for there was a Woman or two of their own which had young
Children, and not able to suckle them. Our Extremity was such, that any manner
of Thing would go down with us; the Gills and Guts of Fish, picked off a
Dunghill, was acceptable; the Scraps the Indians threw away, and the Water
they boiled their Fish in, we were thankful for, though never so undecently
handled by them. And though my Wife had hardly any Milk for her Child, yet an
Indian-Woman, who was lately delivered of a Child, and had no Milk in her
Breast, would have had her to suckle her Child; which my Wife consented unto.
And this was a means of her and our Child's reaping a Benefit; for the Indians
would give her Fish: Which helped to increase Milk for our Child. Many were our
Exercises, both in Body and Mind amongst this People. Sometimes they would look
upon us, as though they had some ill Intent toward the whole of us; at other
Times, they would tell us, (who were nominally Spaniards) How and in what
Manner those of Smith's Company should be put to Death. And thus were we daily
exercised in Sorrow and grievous Troubles. Sometimes doubt would arise amongst
us, concerning what would be the End of us, and what manner of Deaths we should
pass through: And whomsoever these Doubts did appear in, it would be hard for
another to help with Counsel: But some there were, whose Hope never failed,
they trusting in the Lord to work our Deliverance. One thing did seem more
grievous to me and my Wife, than any other Thing, which was. That if it should
so happen, that we should be put to Death, we feared that our Child would be
kept Alive, and bred up as one of those People: When these Thoughts did arise,
it wounded us deep.

This Day, being the Time of the Moon's entering the First Quarter, the Indians
have a Ceremonious Dance, which they begin about Eight a Clock in the Morning:
In the first Place comes an old Man, and takes a Staff, about eight Foot long,
having a broad Arrow on the head thereof, and thence half way painted Red and
White, like unto a Barker's-Pole* in the middle of this Staff is fixed a piece
of Wood, shaped like unto a Thigh, Leg and Foot of a Man; and the lower Part
thereof is painted Black; and this Staff being carried out of the Cassekey's
House, is set fast in the Ground, standing upright; this done, he also brings
out a Basket, containing Six Rattles, which are taken out of the Basket, and
placed at the Foot of his Staff; then another old Man comes, and sets up a
Howling, like unto a mighty Dog, but beyond him for length of Breath; withal
making a Proclamation: This being done, the most of them having painted
themselves, some red, some Black, some with Black and red; with their Belly
girt up as Tight as well they can Gird themselves with Ropes, having their
Sheafs of Arrows at their Backs, and their Bows in their Hands; being gathered
together about this Staff, six of the chiefest Men in Esteem amongst them,
especially one who is their Doctor, and much esteemed, taking up the Rattles,
begin a hideous Noise, standing round this Staff, shaking their Rattles, and
bowing without ceasing unto the Staff for about half an Hour; whilst these six
are thus employed, all the rest are staring and scraching, pointing upwards and
downwards, on this and the other Side, every way, looking like Men frighted, or
more like Furries; thus behaving themselves until the six have done shaking
their Rattles. Then they all begin a Dance, violently stamping on the Ground,
for the Space of an Hour or more, without ceasing: In which Time they will
sweat in a most excessive Manner, that by the Time the Dance is over, what by
their Sweat, and the violent stamping of their Feet, the Ground is trodden into
Furrows; and by the Morning, the Place where they danced was covered with
Maggots: Thus, often repeating the Manner, they continue till about three or
four a Clock in the Afternoon; by which Time many were sick and fainty. And
then, being gathered into the Cassekey's House, they sit down, having some hot
Casseena ready, which they drink plentifully, and give greater quantities
thereof to the Sick and Fainty, than to others: Then they eat Berries. On these
Days they eat not any Food till Night.

The next Day, about the same Time, they begin their Dance, at the Day before.
Also the third Day they begin their Dance* at the usual Time: At which Time
came many Indians from other Towns, and fell to Dancing, without taking any
Notice one of the other.

This Day they were stricter than the other two Days, for no Woman must look
upon them; but if any of their Women go out of their Houses, they go veiled
with a Mat.

The 25 of the 8th Month; the 1st of the Week.
This Day was a Day of plenty unto us, for we had as much Fish and Berries, as
would serve us two Days.

This Week we observed that great Baskets of dried Berries were brought in from
diverse Towns, and delivered to the King, or young Cassekey, which we supposed
to be a Tribute to the King of this Town, who is Chief of all the Towns from
Santa Lucia, to the Northward of this Town of Jece.

The 27th of the 8th Month; the 3d of the Week.
This Day was a Bag of Berries (the Bag made of Grass) given us, which we eat
in two or three Days; and then we fasted as many Days, before the young
Cassekey would give us more.

About this Time John Smith and Andrew Morray were sharply seized with a Fever
and Ague: When the Fit of the Ague was on them, the Indians would mock and
deride them: This we well observed, that these People had no Compassion on
their own Aged declining People, when they were past their Labor, nor on
others of their own, which lay in any declining Condition: For the Younger is
served before the Elder, and the Elder People, both Men and Women, are Slaves
to the Younger.

In this Place we saw many Tokens of some of our Nation's having fallen into
the Hands of these People: As, two English Cannoos, one of Cedar, the other of
Cotton-Tree, like those of Jamaica; several Blocks and Shelves of Lignum-Vitae;
several Tools and Knives, and more particularly, a Razor, on the haft of which,
was writ the Man's Name, thus, THOMAS FOSTER. Some of these Things looked as
though they had been several Years amongst them, some but a few: But we never
dared to enquire, for we thought they brought some Things in our view to try us.

Here was a Man in this Town, who, some Years past, had been taken off by some
of our English Sloops for a Diver on the Wreck, to the Eastward of Cuba, where
he was sometime: But the Vessel putting into Cuba, for Water, this Indian Swam
on Shore, and got to the Havanna, thence to Augusteen, and so to his Native
Town. The greatest Charge this Man had against the English, was, for taking
him, and their People away; not but that he was well used amongst them: It Is
Indian would often call Joseph Kirle, Solomon Cresson, and some of us into his
House, seeming very cheerful, asking, if they would eat, withal asking the
names of the Berries, expecting we would call them after the English manner [
Plumbs] but perceiving his drift, and having learned the Name of them, as the
Spaniards calls them [ Uvas; then he would tell us, that the English called
them Plumbs:] Such Sort of Discourse we had at Times, for he would be striving
to entrap us, viz. Joseph, Solomon and Me, in Words, but he never had an
Advantage; for when Solomon was gone, we shunned all his Invitations and
Arguments.

The 31st of the 8th Month; the 7th of the Week.
This Day came in a Cannoo laden with Fish, and it was free, for those that
would, to take as much as they pleased. The Indians put us to go and take, for
it was a kind of a Scramble, amongst us, and the young Indian-Men and Boys: All
of us got Fish enough to serve us two or three Days.

The 2d of the 9th Month; the 2d of the Week:
This Morning, about Sunrising, came two Strange Indians, who had run so hard,
that they Sweated extremely, of whom we understood, that the Spaniards were
coming with their Old Cassekey: which News surprised us, doubting the Truth of
it, for Solomon had been gone but sixteen Days, and we understood that they
must have an extraordinary Passage to be here in a Month: We had not long to
consider of the Matter, for in an Hour's Time we heard four Muskets discharged,
and immediately we looked out, and the Spaniards in their Perriauger were in
sight. The Indians were like a People amazed, and overcome with Fear: We
perceived the Noise of a Gun was terrible unto them. The Spaniards Landed,
being in number Twelve, one Sebastian Lopez Commanding Ten Soldiers, with one
Indian an Interpeter. The Spaniards embraced us very cheerfully, and expressed
their being glad to find us alive: But we were not able to Discourse each
other, though we had so much Sp^sh as to ask Questions, and answer some Part of
what the^ asked us. One of the Spaniards said, they could not speak English nor
could we speak Spanish enough to understand each other sufficiently; this the
Indians perceived, and immediately cried out, Nickaleer, Nickaleer, and looked
enviously on us, so that, could they have had their wills, we believed they
would not have suffered us to have lived many Hours; but the Spaniards awed
them.

We received a Letter from Solomon, which he writ when he met with Capt.
Sebastian Lopez, signifying the Governnment of Augusteen's great Care for our
Preservation, of what Nation soever we were: But how these Persons, or the
Governor of Augusteen, had knowledge of us, we could not understand; for they
had been fourteen Days from Augusteen, which was nigh the Time Solomon went
hence; and they met Solomon about half way, and sent him for Augusteen with
other Guides, bringing the Old Cassekey and his People with them: We observed
that the Old Cassekey seemed much dejected. We supposed the Spaniards had taken
from him the Money, and what other Things he had carried with him; or that he
was vexed he should be so deceived, in taking us for Spaniards.

The Spaniards were extraordinary kind unto us, so that we had Occasion to
rejoice, and thank the Lord for this part of our Delivrance by their Means:
They were also a Terror unto the Indians; for they searched their Houses, and
took all from them that ever they could find, even to the Stump of a ^ail;
which aggravated them, and increased their dis-affection to usward, so that we
dared not stir from a Spaniard. The Spanish Captain made inquiry where we were
cast away, and what was saved that we had in our Vessel? We gave an Account, so
well as we could, to make him understand us; which Account made him very
desirous to go down thither; but looking over a Paper often, which we supposed,
was the Governor's Order and Instructions to him; we understood they would not
permit him to prosecute his Designs; besides, we made him sensible of the
Danger we should be in, if he and his Men should go and leave us amongst these
People, who were bitterly incensed against us.

They inquired what became of the Boat that belonged to Smith's Vessel and
ours, we told them, that these Indians had taken Smith's Boat and sunk her
somewhere in the Sound, but ours was at St. Lucia: The Spaniards made the
Indians go and show where they had sunk Smith's Boat, and help our People to
get her up; which being done, she was brought to the Town: The Spaniards were
mightily pleased with her, and proposed, that they in their Cannoo, and our
People in that Boat, should go to Hoe-Bay, whereby they might get all from the
Indians, which they had gotten from us, but we would not countenance the
Matter: We were for us speedy departing from amongst these People, as we could,
since it pleased God to open a Way for our Deliverance.

This Morning the Spanish Captain made the Indians provide two Cannoos, which
he caused to be lashed together, at some distance, with Sticks a cross, and
matted on the Top; which being done, with four Indians, Joseph Kirle, John
Smith, Robert Barrow, Andrew Morray, Benjamin Allen, Nathaniel Randall, John
Shears, Cornelius Toker, Joseph Kirle's Boy John Hilliar, four Negors, viz.
Jack, Caesar, Sarah and Quenza, were sent away for Augusteen; but not one
Morsel of Victuals, except a very few Berries, had they with them; and not one
Spaniard to Guard them, but were put under the Government of those four
Indians. About an Hour after Joseph Kirle was gone, the Spanish Captain ordered
Smith's Boat to be get ready, with two Spaniards, and four of our Men, to row
to the Place where the drift of Smith's Vessel was, to look for Log-wood or old
Iron. When they returned, there was not any Thing of Value: But our People
said, that as they were searching about, they found the Bones of Andrew Barns;
his Skull and Jaw Bone were broken, which occasioned us suspect, that he was
knocked on the Head by the Indians, after they had driven away Smith and his
People.

We told the Spanish Captain, that Joseph Kirle's Negro, Ben, had been absent,
ever since the Day after Solomon Cresson went hence, being gone with the Old
Cassekey's Wife, but we knew not whither. The Captain made inquiry of the
Indians whither he was gone; they said, for Hoe-Bay: Then be ordered them to
send for him, for he would not leave him behind: The Indians said, he would be
here within a Day or two.

The Spaniards were continually searching for what they could find, of such
Things as the Indians had gotten from us or others: And when they could find no
more, they would offer to buy with Tobacco what they could persuade the Indians
to bring to Light A Leaf, or half a Leaf of Tobacco, would purchase a Yard of
Linen or Woollen, or Silk, from the Indians; such Admirers of Tobacco are they,
that they esteem it beyond any other Thing.

An Indian of the Town, sometime before the Spaniards came, having a
considerable Quantity of Ambergreece boasted, that when he went for Augusteen
with that, he could purchase of the Spaniards, a Looking-Glass, an Ax, a Knife
or two, and three or four Mannocoes, (which is about five or six Pounds) of
Tobacco: The Quantity of Ambergris might be about five Pound weight.

The 4th of the 9th Month; the 4th of the Week.
This Day we made Oars for Smith's Boat, of Sticks, and the Cantle-pieces of
Sugar-Hogsheads, which were gotten on the Beach, where the drift of Smith's
Vessel came on Shore: And this Evening came the Old Cassekey's Wife, with
Joseph Kirle's Negro Ben, and Joseph Kirle's Boat, which was of great advantage
to help to carry us. We worked all this Night to fit the Boat, and Oars unto
her, being intented to go away, as soon as we could complete that Jobb.

The Spaniards had brought little Provision with them, so that there was not
much to spare for us, having not above a Rove of Corn, and a little New-Spain
Bread, which was so bad, that it was more Dust, and dead Wevels, than Bread; an
handful of it was an acceptable Present to us. We would mix it with a little
Water, making it into a Paste, which would eat pleasantly; but Hunger was no
Stranger unto us, and we knew not that we should have any Victuals on our
Journey; but our Deliverance seemed to overbalance all. The Indians would not
give us any Berries; but our People watched an Opportunity, and took one of the
Cassekey's Bags of Berries, which might contain about a Bushel, which was all
that One and Thirty of us had to depend on.

The 5th of the 9th Month; the 5th of the Week.
This Morning, about three Hours before Day, we departed from this Town of
Jece; the weather was grown Cold, we had nothing wherewith to cover our Bodies,
besides what the Indians gave us at first, except my Wife, for whom the
Spaniards got an old Jacket (which had been one of Smith's Men's) and gave her
to wear; also a small piece of Cloth to cover our poor Child: But it pleased
God to strengthen us, in this our Condition, so that we rowed all this Day
without ceasing, until three Hours after it was dark, by which Time we got to
an Indian-Town: Here we met with Joseph Kirle, Robert Barrow and the others,
who got thither not above an Hour or two bfore us. They had not received any
Manner of Sustenance from the Time they left us, until they got some Berries
of us, having lain one Night of the two in a Swamp; but they were as cheerful
as Men could be in this Straight.

Since they left us, amongst their other Hardships, Joseph Kirle had like to
have lost his Life several Times: The first was thus, Whilst the two Cannoos
were lashed together, having a few Berries, that were designed to have been
shared amongst them, the Irish-Boy, Cornelius Toker, would ever and non be
taking some of them; who, being often Reproved by Joseph Kirle and others,
would not desist; whereupon Joseph Kirle, with the Paddle he paddled the Cannoo
along with, struck him; thereupon an Indian took his Bow and Arrow, and was
going to shoot Joseph; (who seemed little concerned, whether he lived or died)
withal saying, The Spaniards would justify him.

Another Time, when he was spent with paddling the Cannoo, and desired John
Smith, Andrew Murray, and others of them, as well able as himself, to give him
a Spell, which they refused; he being not able to paddle further, laid down his
paddle; whereupon the Indians commanding him to paddle, he refused, saying,
they might kill him if they would; opening his Breast for them to execute their
Wills: Which they seemed as though they would have done; but, after great
threatening they desisted.

Another Time, The Wind being high, and the Seas rough, that they were forced
to unlash their Cannoos, by Joseph Kirle's persuasion, and to go single; Joseph
Kirle taking one Cannoo to his own Management, having Robert Barrow, his Boy,
my Kinsman, Nathaniel Randal, and the Negroes, in her; which, being thus single
from the other Company, was more satisfactory to him than before, though none to
help but Nathaniel Randal, My Negro-Woman, named Sarah, having beaten and
abused a Girl, named Quenza; being reproved often by him and Robert Barrow, she
therefore abused them in an extraordinary Manner; whereupon Joseph struck her
with the Paddle; at which, one of the Indians, in the other Cannoo, took his
striking Staff and darted at him, narrowly missing him.

This Morning, Joseph Kirle, with those that were with him, were, by the
Spanish Captain, ordered away at Break of Day, he not taking any care to give
them a little Sustenance; and about an Hour or two after we followed, rowing
all this Day without ceasing, until an Hour or two in the Night: By which Time
we got to an Indian-Town, where not any Thing was to be had but Water: About
two Hours after us came Joseph Kirle, the Spanish Captain would not let them
come on Shore, but ordered them to keep on, that we might get next Night to the
Place where we must hale our Boats over Land, from one Sound unto another.

The 7th of the 9th Month; the 7th of the Week.
This Morning we set forward very early, and rowed hard: About Noon we got to a
parcel of Marshy Islands, amongst which we were to go up Creeks: The Passage
was very difficult to find. At length, when we were got nigh an Indian-Town,
the Spaniards hollowed, and an Indian came out into the Marsh, but was very
loath to come near us; at length he came wading to us to be our Pilot: We set
forward, and in an Hour's Time, or more, were got to the place where Joseph
Kirle, and those with him, were; the Indians that were with Joseph would not
let them proceed further, until we came up with them. In half an Hour's Time we
got to the Place where we were to hale our Boats over Land, being about a
Quarter of a Mile from Sound to Sound: At this Place the Sea was half a Furlong
from us. The Spanish Captain gave the Indian, we last took in, a piece of a
Leaf of Tobacco, commanding him to go, with all speed, and bid his Cassekey,
with all his able Men, come to help to hale our Boats over Land. But we set to
work, and had them over by that Time the Indians came. The Spanish Captain gave
the Cassekey a Leaf or two of Tobacco, and discharged them; only ordered the
Cassekey to send some Men a Fishing for him; which they did, and before Night
brought a stately Parcel of Fish; but none of our People had any Part of it,
except my Wife and Penelope: What they did not eat, they kept to carry with
them.

A little before Night, sprang up a Storm of Wind at North-East. It seemed
likely to be a Dismal Night of Wind and Rain, and we were got to a Place where
there was not a Tree, or Bush, or any Manner of Shelter, and the Wind so very
cold that we thought we should not live till the next Day. We had no Wood to
make a Fire with, and what to do we could not tell; but we were resolved to try
to get some, and in order thereto* some of the ablest of us went along the Bay,
to search for Drift-Wood, and found a little but Rain came, with the Night, and
no Shelter to be had, but our Boats; and the Spaniards would not let us meddle
with them, to turn them bottom upwards for Shelter, which seemed very hard; but
they had made themselves some Shelter with Mats: We were forced to exercise
Patience; and with what Salt-Water-Wood we had, made as good a Fire as we
could, and laid our selves down on the Sand by it: And it pleased God we had a
Comfortable Night, beyond our Expectation; only the Cold was very sharp.

The 8th of the 9th Month; the 1st of the Week.
This Morning we set forward, but the Water was so low, that we were forced to
wade, and thrust the Boat along for some Miles: At length we got into a deep
Channel, where was nothing to be seen but Marsh and Water, and no fast Land,
nor Trees. About ten a Clock we heard three or four Muskets fired a little
ahead of us, in the Channel we were in. Our Spaniards presently answered them
with the like; and in a little Time we met. This was a Perriauger to join with
that that came for us, having order to go to the place where we were Cast way,
and to get what was to be had from the Indians: But this other Boat turned
back, for there was no place to go on Shore. And in an Hour or two's Time we
got into the other Sound, where the Land was not to be seen from side to side
in some Places: The like was in the other we came through. About an Hour before
Sunset we got to an Indian Plantation (this was the first Place we saw any
thing planted) being full of Pumpion-Vines, and some small Pumpions on them;
but the Spaniards were too quick for us, and got all before us. Some of us got
a few as big as on's Fist. We had a Fire there, yet had not patience to dress
them as they should be, but put them into the Fire, roast^d them, and eat them.
The Spaniards used a great deal of Cookery with their Pumpions. And the
Perriauger, that came from Augusteen, had brought Bread, Corn, and strung Beef;
but it was kept from us except a Piece of strung Beef, the Captain of the
Spaniards gave my Wife, as big as a Stick of Sealing-Wax, which we treasured
up, expecting it must be harder with us when we left this People. Here Captain
Sebastian Lopez drew up a Writing, and would have had me and Joseph Kirle to
Sign it, which we refused. For we perceived he had a design, especially against
me, to oblige me to give him some of my Negroes. We answered him short, that I
reckoned my self and Negroes at the Governor of Augusteen's disposal, and we
would Sign no Writing: We borrowed a Pot, and boiled Pumpion-Leaves, having
nothing to put to to them but Water, which was Satisfactory. But this Night was
more terrible than the last, the Wind being at North-West; it did not blow
hard, yet it was very cold, we lying in an open Field, without any Shelter: One
Side of us would scorch, while the other was Freezing. Our Negro-Woman Hagar's
little Boy, named Cajo^, was seized with Convulsion-Fits about two in the
Morning, which was chiefly occasioned by the Cold and want of Food: But help
there was not from us. The Spanish Captain came to see the Child, and supposing
that it would die, asked if the Child was a Christian? He was answered, as good
a one as he could make it. But he called for some Water, putting some of it on
the Crown of the Child's Head, and Crossing it, called him Francisco. This
Action pacified its Father and Mother.

The 9th of the 9th Month; the 2d of the Week.
This Morning we were to go forward, and the Spaniards were to return to the
Place where we were cast away: But our two Boats could not carry us all,
therefore we had the Spaniards great Perrianger to carry us one Day's Journey
further, to an Indian-Town, and four Spaniards with us, three of which were to
bring the Perriauger back, the other was to be our Guide for Augusteen. We
departed, and met with an intricate Passage; for sometimes we should be a
Ground on Oyster-Banks, or Shoals, and almost out of sight of Land. About two
or three in the Afternoon, we had no Water to go any further; the Wind being
North-Westerly drove the Water out of the Sound; but being nigh the Shore,
where had been an Indian-Town, we went on Shore, and found some ripe Berries on
the Palm-Shrubs, which we were very earnest after, till such Time as a Storm of
Wind, with Rain, began to come upon us, and Night nigh at hand; whereupon we
all got together, considering what we should do, since there was no possibility
of getting Shelter here. Our Indian Guide said, we might get to a Town about
two Leagues off; which we were glad to hear, for it rained hard. So we, with
our Guide, set forward, and walked over a Parcel of scraggy shrubby Hills, to
the Seashore; along which we traveled till we got to the Indian-Town, where
we got plenty of Berries for our Supper. It rained much till toward Morning.

The 10th of the 9th Month; the 3d of the Week.
This Morning the Indians were not willing to stay any longer; and we were by
our Guide required to depart, which we did, and a great many young Indian-Men
followed us some Miles along the Bay, and offered violence to Robert Barrow,
and several others; but were easily stopped, by showing them a rusty Musket,
presented toward them, and so they left us. We had an untoward Passage from
the Seashore athwart the Land to the Indian-Town, the Ground being swampey,
and scraggy Hills, which to our bare Feet, was very troublesome. This was a
large Town, and there was another large Town, about a Mile distant in sight,
thither part of our Company was sent to be quartered; at which Town, about a
twelve Month since, a Parcel of Dutchmen were killed; who having been Cast
away on the Bahama Shoals, in a Flat which they built escaped hither, and were
herd devoured by these Canibals, as we understood by the Spaniards: The Flat or
Boat our People saw; but they seemed kind to them, giving them Fish and Berries
to eat: We remained at these two Towns till next Morning. The Indians of the
Town I was at, were not so kind, as those at the other Town had been: Some of
our People were for selling their Rags to the Indians for Fish; but we thought
it was necessary, of the two Extremes, to defend against the Cold, for every
Day grew Colder than other; and we feared, that if, we were much longer exposed
to it, we should not live it out.

The 11th of the 9th Month; the 4th of the Week.
This Morning, leaving this Town, we Embarked in our two Boats, and those of
our People that were at the other Town, were to have a large Cannoo to carry
them thence, and were to meet us in the Sound: We rowed several Leagues, and
did not meet them, it being then about ten a Clock; the Spaniard would go on
Shore, and travel back by Land to see after them. We being by an Inlet of the
Sea, which was a Mile over, the Spaniard ordered us to go on the other side,
and there stay for him; which we did many Hours: At this Place we all went upon
search, to see if any thing was to be had for the Belly, some on the Land, some
in the Water: The Land yielded nothing, but in the Water we got a Sort of
Shellfish, called Water-Soldiers, which we eat: At length the Cannoo with our
People came, but our Spaniard was not come; but in about an half Hour's Time he
came with a small Cannoo. This was the Place where Solomon met the Spaniards,
The Cannoos had each two Indians to set them along; and we had one Indian for
our Guide, named Juan Antonio* who the Spaniard said was a Christian, but an
Inhabitant of that Town, where the Dutchmen were killed. We set forward in our
two Boats, and the two Cannoos, and rowed till Night, being nigh a Place of
thicketty Wood, which we made choice of to lodge at for this Night: Here was
Wood enough; we made large Fires, we were pleased with the Place, and lay down
to rest. About Midnight I had a great Loss, having a Quart of Berries whole,
and as much pounded to mix with Water, to feed our Child with; the Fire being
disturbed, the Cloth which we had our Food in was burned; all was lost, and
nothing to be had until we could get to the Spaniards, which was two Days
March at least: About an Hour after this, the Wind rose at North-West, and it
began to Rain; but having small Palmetto which grew nigh, Joseph Kirle and I
set to Work, and made a Shelter, which would keep Ten or more of us from the
Weather: We had no sooner completed our Work, but it rained hard. In this
Shower of Rain the Four Indians got from among us, took their Cannoos, and away
they went back again: When Day appeared, we missed them, upon which we went to
the Waterside, where we found the two Cannoos gone; and now we were in a great
strait; but the Spaniard said, those that could Travel best, must go by Land.
The Persons pitched upon, were Richard Limpeney, Andrew Murray, Cornelius
Tuker, Joseph Kirle's Boy John Hillard, and Penelope, with seven Negroes,
named, Peter, Jack, Caesar, Sarah, Bella, Susanna and Quenza; the Spaniards,
and the Indian, Juan Antonio went with them, to direct them the Way, leading
them over Land to the Sea Shore, and then directing to keep by the Seashore
along to the Northward.

They returned to us, and we with our two Boats rowed all Day without ceasing,
till Sunsetting; and when we put on Shore, the Place was an old Indian-Field,
on a high bleak Hill, where had been a large Indian-House, but it was tumbled
down: Of the Ruins of this House, we made a Shelter against the North-West
Wind, which began to blow very bleak. The Spaniard went to the Sea, which was
not two Miles off, to see if our People had passed, and at his Return he said,
They were gone by: We asked if they could reach to any House, or Indian-Town
for Shelter? For we supposed, should they be without Fire this Night, they
could not live: He said, they must travel all Night* Night came on; we had Fire
and Wood enough, and had gathered a great heap of Grass to lie in, hoping to
have got some rest; but the North-West-Wind increased, and the Cold was so
violent, that we were in a lamentable Condition, not able to rest, for as we
lay or stood so close to the Fire, that it would scorch us, that side from it
was ready to Freeze: We had no other Way, but to stand and keep turning for the
most Part of the Night; we all thought we never felt the like. The Spaniard
that was clothed, was as bad to bear it, as we that were naked: At length Day
appeared, and we must go.

The 13th of the 9th Month; the 6th of the Week.
T^^ Morning we were loath to part with our Fires, but to stay here it could not
be; so we went to our Boats, wading in the Water, till it was ready to b^num
us: But we put forward, and rowing about 2 Leagues, came to an old House, where
the Spaniard told us, we must leave the Boats, and Travel by Land; we had a
Boggy Marsh to wade through for a Mile, to get to the Seashore, and had about
five or six Leagues, along the Bay or Strand, to the Spanish Sentinal's House:
The North-West-Wind was violent, and the Cold such, that the strongest of us
thought we should not outlive that Day. Having got through the Boggy Marsh,
and on the Seashore, our People, Black and White, made all Speed, one not
staying for another that could not Travel so fast: none but I, with my Wife and
Child, Robert Barrow, my Kinsman Benjamin Allen, and my Negro London, whom I
kept to help carry my Child, keeping together; the rest of our Company had left
us, not expecting to see some of us again; especially Robert Barrow, my Wife
and Child. We traveled after as well as we could, having gone about two Miles,
the Cold so seized on my Kinsman, Benjamin Allen, that he began to be st^ff in
his Limbs, and staggered and fell, grieviously complaining that the Cold would
kill him: Our Negro having our young Child, I and my Wife took our Kinsman
under each Arm, and helped him along; but at length his Limbs were quite stiff,
his Speech almost gone, and he began to Foam at the Mouth: In this strait we
knew not what to do; to stay with him we must perish also, and we were willing
to strive as long as we could. We carried our Kinsman, and laid him under the
Bank, not being Dead; I resolved to run after our People, some of them not
being out of Sight; which I did, and left my Wife and Child, with the Negro, to
follow as fast as they could. I run about two Miles, making signs to them,
thinking if they should look behind them, and see me running, they would stop
till I got up with them. I was in hopes, if I could have accomplished this my
design, to have got help to have carried my Kinsman along; but they stopped
not, and I ran until the Wind pierced me, so that my Limbs failed, and I fell;
yet still I strove and getting up, walked backwards to meet my Wife; as I was
going, I met with the Spaniard coming out of the Sand-Hills, and Joseph Kirle's
Negro Ben. I made my Complaint to the Spaniard, but he not being able to
understand me well, went forward. I then applied my self to the Negro, making
large Promises, if he would fetch my Kinsman; he offered to go back, and used
his endeavor, which he did. At length my Wife and Child came up with me, she
was almost overcome with Grief, expressing in what Manner we were forced to
part with our Kinsman; and expecting that she and the Child should go next.

Poor Robert Barrow was a great way behind us, I feared we should never see him
again. I used my endeavor to comfort and cheer my Wife, entreating her not to
let Grief overcome her: I had hopes that the Lord would help us in this
straight, as he had done in many since we were in this Land: And if it pleased
God that we should lay down our Lives in this Wilderness, that we might beseech
him to enable us to do it willingly. Thus striving in a deep Exercise of Body
and Mind, we traveled on, admiring God's Goodness in preserving us thus far
through so many eminent Dangers; in the sense of which, a secret hope would
arise, (though involved with human Doubts and Fears) That the Lord would yet
preserve us. I took my Child from the Negro, and carried him. I had an
Indian-Mat, with a split in it, through which I put my Head, hanging over my
Breast unto my Waste; under this I carried my Child, which helped to break the
Wind off it; but the poor Babe was black with cold from Head to Foot, and its
Flesh as cold as a Stone; yet it was not froward. Its Mother would take it now
and then, and give it the Breast, but little could it get at it: Besides, we
dared not stop in the least; for if we did, we should perceive our Limbs to
fail. About two a Clock in the Afternoon, we came up with our Negro-Woman
Hagar, with her Child at her Back, almost dead: And a little further we came up
with our Negro-Girl Quen^a, being dead, as we thought; for she was as stiff as
a dead, Body could be, and her Eyes set; but at length we perceived her Breath;
but she had no Sense nor Motion. We carried her from the Waterside, under the
Bank. This increased my Wife's Sorrow, and she began to doubt, she should not
be able to travel much further; but I endeavored to encourage her, not to leave
her striving, as long as any Ability was left. All our People were out of Sight
except four, and those we had gained upon. I sent my Negro to overtake them,
and to desire them to slacken their pace, till we got up with them; being in
hopes, that gaining their Company, would cheer up my Wife; but they would not;
so the Negro stopped for us. We had lost sight of Robert Barrow by this Time.
Soon after we overtook John Smith, who was one of the four; he began to fail
and his Companions left him; whereupon he made grievous Complaints, which I
reproved him for, lest he should discourage my Wife. The Sun was nigh setting*
and (...) began to look out for the Sentinal's Post, and my Negro at Times got
upon several of the highest Sand-Hill to look out, but could not see any House,
not the Smo^ of a fire. This was terrible to us all; for the Day being so cold,
the Night much more, and we not able to travel without rest; being a starved
People, both within our Bodies and without; and if we ceased from traveling we
should instantly be nummed and move no further. In the midst of these
Reasonings and Doubtings, we were got into, I espied a Man, as I thought,
standing on the Bank, but at great distance; I was afraid to speak, lest it
should prove otherwise, but he was soon seen by the whole Company; and at
length we espied him walking toward the Land, this confirmed us; and so we
betook to the Hills again, to look out, yet could not see the House from
thence; but on the next Hill we saw it: This was Joy unto us, though we began
to have a Sense of our tiredness; for our Resolution abated, after we had got
Sight of the House.

When we got to the House, we found four Sentinals, and the Spaniard our Guide,
with three of our Men, viz. Joseph Buckley, Nathaniel Randal, and John Shires.
The Spaniards bid us welcome, and made Room for us to sit down by the Fire. The
chiefest Man of the Sentinals took a Kersey-Coat and gave my Wife to cover her,
and gave each of us a piece of Bread, made of Indian-Corn, which was pleasant
unto us; after it we had plenty of hot Casseena-Drink. It was dark, and we
endeavored to prevail with the Spaniards to go seek for Robert Barrow and my
Kinsman, oftering them considerable; but they seemed not fully to understand
me, yet I could make them sensible, that my Kinsman was almost dead, if not
quite; and that the Old Man was in a bad Condition. They made me to understand,
that the Weather was not fit to go out, but they would watch if Robert would
pass by. About an Hour or two after, one of the Spaniards being walking out on
the Bay, met with Robert, and brought him into the House: We rejoiced to see
him, and enquired concerning our Kinsman and Negro Ben. He said, our Kinsman
was striving to get up, and could not; he came to him, and spoke unto him; he
could not answer, but cried, and he could not help him. But coming along, at
some considerable distance, met Negro Ben, who said he was going for Benjamin
Allen, so he past him. And some Miles further, he saw Negro Jack, drawing
himself down from the Bank, his Lower Parts being dead, and crying out for some
Fire, that he might save his Life; but did not see the Negro Girl, whom we
halled out of the Way. We were under a great Concern for our Kinsman; the
Spaniards we could not prevail upon to go and fetch him, or go and carry
wherewith to make a Fire; which had they done, and found them living, it might
have preserved them. But we hoped Negro Ben. would bring our Kinsman. The
Spaniards would have had most of us to have gone to the next Sentinal's House,
which was a League farther, but we all begged hard of them to let us lie in
their House, in any Place, on the Ground; for we were not able to travel
further: Besides, the cold would kill us; for we were in such a trembling
shaking Condition, and so full of pain, from Head to Foot, that it is not to be
expressed. At length the Spaniards consented, that Robert Barrow, I, my Wife
and Child, and John Smith, should lie in the House; but to Joseph Buckley,
Nathaniel Randal, John Sheirs, and my Negro London, they would not grant that
Favor. So one of the Spaniards taking a Firebrand, bid these four to go with
him; he directed them to a small Thicket of Trees, and showed them to gather
Wood, and make large Fires, and sleep there. These poor Creatures lay out, and
it proved a hard frosty Night. The Spaniard returned and said, they were got
into a Wood, and had Fire enough. We were silent, but feared they would hardly
live till Morning.

After they were gone, the Spaniards took a Pint of Indian-Corn, and parched
it, and gave part to us, which we accepted cheerfully; also they gave us some
Casseena-drink* We were in extraordinary Pain, so that we could not rest* and
our Feet were extremely bruised, the Skin was of^ and the Sand caked with the
Blood, that we could hardly set our Feet to the Ground, after we had been some
Time in the House. The Night was extreme cold, though we were in the House, and
by the Fire we could not be warm, for the one Side did scorch, whilst the other
was ready to freeze; and thus we passed the Night.

The 14th of the 9th Month; the 7th of the Week.
This Morning we looked out, and there was a very hard Frost on the Ground; so
it was terrible to go out of Doors. Our People returned from the Wood, but
complained heavily of their Hardship in the Night. They had not been an Hour in
the House before the Spaniards gave us all a Charge to be gone to the next
Sentinal's House. This was greivious to us all, but more especially to my Wife,
^ho could not raise herself when down: But go we must; (...) though we
entreated hard for my Wife and Robert Barrow, we could not prevail that they
might stay till we could get a Cannoo. As we were all going, one Spaniard made
sign for me and my Wife to stay, which we did, and it was to have a Handful of
parched Corn. As soon as we had received it, they bid us to be gone to the next
Sentinel's, where was Victuals enough for us. The Sun was a great height, but
we could not feel any warmth it gave; the North-Wester beginning to blow as
hard as it did the Day before. And having deep Sand to travel through, which
made our Traveling this one League very hard, especially to my Wife and
Robert. The Spaniards lent my Wife a Blanket to be left at the next Sentinal's
House.

At length we came to an Inlet of the Sea; on the other Side was the Look-out
and Sentinal's House: Here were all our People sitting, waiting to be carried
over, and in a little Time came one of the Sentinals, with a Cannoo, and
carried us over.

This Sentinal would not suffer us to come into his House, but caused us to
kindle a Fire under the Lee of his House, and there sit down: About half an
Hour after he bid us be gone to the next Sentinal's, which was a League
further, giving us a Cup of Casseena, and two Quarts of Indian-Corn for us all,
bidding us go to our Company at the next House, and get our Corn dress^d there.

I understood that our Negro-Woman, Hagar, got hither late last Night, having
her Child dead at her Back, which the Spaniards burried.

One of the Spaniards went with us to the next Inlet, carrying a stick of Fire,
to set Fire to some Trash, to make a Signal for them on the other Side, to
fetch us over, the Inlet being very wide. When the Cannoo came over for us, our
Guide took the Blanket from my Wife; but the Negro, which brought over the
Cannoo, lent my Wife one of his Coats, so we got over; but before we got to the
House, we had a Shower of Hail. At this House we were kindly received, having
such a Mess of Victuals, as we had not had in a long Time before, which was
very pleasant to our Hunger starved Stomachs. Our People went hence this
Morning for Augusteen, having a Guide with them; but John Hosler and Penelope
were left here, not being able to travel. We remained here till the Morrow, but
the Night was so extreme Cold, that we could not rest.

The 15th of the 9th Month; the 1st of the Week.
This Morning the Spaniards bid us prepare to travel, for they were not able to
maintain us. We understood that it was five or six Leagues to Augusteen, and we
could not travel so far, being all of us lamed and stiff: We entreated them to
let us go in a Cannoo, but they denied us: We entreated for the two Woman and
Robert Barrow; at length we prevailed, that they should go up in a Cannoo, for
the Cannoo was to go, whether we went or no.

While all this Discourse was, came in a couple of Spaniards, one being the
Sentinal that went with our People the Day before, the other was a Person the
Governor had sent, with a Cannoo and four Spaniards, to fetch us; This was
cheerful News; for had we gone to have traveled without a Guide, we should
have perished. The Man that came for us, brought two Blankets, one for my Wife,
the other for Penelope; he desired us to be going. About a League distance from
the Place, he left the Cannoo, which we parted with very unwillingly; for some
of our People, had they had a Mile further to have gone, could not have gone
it: The Wind still continued at North-West, and blowed very fiercely, and
extreme Cold it was: We had such a continual Shivering, and Pain in our Bones,
that we were in violent Anguish.

Our poor Child was quiet, but so black with Cold, and shaking, that it was
admirable how it lived. We got to Augusteen about two Hours before Night; being
put on Shore, we were directed to the Governor's House: Being got thither, we
were had up a pair of Stairs, at the head whereof, stood the Governor, who
ordered my Wife to be conducted to his Wife's Appartment. I and John Smi^h went
into a Room, where the Governor asked us a few Questions; but seeing how
extreme cold we were, he gave us a Cup of Spanish-Wine, and sent us into his
Kitchen to warm our selves at the Fire. About half an Hour afterward, the
Governor sent for John Smith and Me, and gave us a Shirt and Sliders, a Hat,
and a pair of Silk Stockings; telling us, he had no Woollen Clothes as yet, but
Would have some made: We put on the linen, and made all haste into the Kitchen
to the Fire. Robert Barrow was quartered at another House: The Persons came to
the Governor's House, and took such as they were minded to Quarter in their
Houses; so that Joseph Kirle, John Smith, I, my Wife and Child, lodged at the
Governor's House. All our People that came up with Joseph Kirle, came to see
us. We perceived the People's great Kindness; for they were all well cloth^d,
from Head to Foot, with the best the People had. Joseph Kirle began to tell us
of his travel after he left us on the Bay, and how that they all concluded,
that they should never see my Wife and Child, and Robert Barrow any more, if
they did my Kinsman and me, Richard Limpeney, and those that went with him, had
a hard travel, for Thirty six Hours without ceasing; in which Travel, three of
our Negroes, that went with them, were lost (viz, Jack, Caesar and Quenza) by
sitting down to rest themselves, they were in a little Time to nummed, that
they could not go, and there perished; so that we lost five in that Day's
Travel, and began to doubt that Negro Ben perished also. Joseph Kirle said,
that he thought he should have lost some of our People, in their Travel from
the last Sentinal's hither, for they were much tired, and the Cold violent, and
the latter Part of that Day's Journey, they waded for many Miles through much
Water, and deep Sand-hills, and when they came in sight of Augusteen, they
stayed for Boats to fetch them, in which Time, some nummed with the Cold;
Joseph Kirle applied himself to the Governor on our behalfs, to send us help,
for he doubted whether we were all living; the Governor readily assented, and
forthwith sent for a Person fit for his purpose, charging him to get a
Perriauger and Men, and go forthwith and fetch us, but the Tide fell out so
that he could not go till Midnight. The Governor was so concerned, that he
would not go to Bed till they were gone; when the Tide served, he went to the
Waterside, and saw the Men put off, giving them a strict Charge.

Solomon Cresson began to tell us of his Travels from Jece, having most Part of
the Way much Rain: The Indians were very kind unto him, until they came to the
Indian-Town, where the Dutchmen were killed; at which Place, some of those
Indians made a discovery of him to be no Spaniard: They said nothing to him
thereof, but were very dogged to him, giving him no Food, and causing him to
lie on the Ground, amongst Vermin. On the Morrow he was to go with his former
Company, who were grown so extremely bitter, and envious to him, that when they
did but look upon him, they were ready to smite him; having gone until about
midday, passing an Inlet, the Weather being extreme bad, with Wind, Rain and
much Cold, they put on Shore (this was the place where we put on Shore, and got
Water-Soilders, and stayed for the Spaniard, when he went back to look for our
People, that were to follow us in a Cannoo) but the Rage of these Bloody People
was such, that he expected to Dye. being on Shore they readily kindled a Fire,
about which time he heard a noise of a Boat and Oars, and presently the Spanish
Perreauger put on Shore upon them: The Indians were extraordinarily surprised,
and stood amazed, but Solomon was glad to see them, and they him: The Spaniards
took the old Cassekey's Chest, and whatever he had from him, commanding them to
return to the Indian-Towns from whence they came; staying a Night, the next
Morning the Spaniards sent Solomon under the Conduct of two Indians, belonging
to these Towns, who were commanded by the Spaniards to carry Solomon unto the
Sentinal's House, but these two Indians carried him a little beyond the Place
where we put on Shore to Travel, and they seemed as though they had Mischief in
their Hearts against him: He asked if they would go forward? But they looking
untowardly on him, answered him not: So he went himself, and was glad when he
saw they did not follow him.

But we were desirous to know how the Spaniards had knowledge of us, which it
seems was thus:

When we got to Jece, where Smith and his Company were, and we going under the
Denomination of Spaniards, and the other English, the report of us run from
Indian-Town to Indian-Town, to the Northward, unto the Northernmost Town, at
which Town were two or more Indians that were converted to the Romish-Faith:
These, or one of these, went to the next Spanish Sentinal's, and gave an
Account that he heard, that there were two Vessels cast away to the Southward
of Jece, one being a Spaniard, the other an English Vessel; the Spaniards
having two Vessels gone for the Havana, to seek for supplies, feared it was
those Vessels: And the same day as this News came to the Governor of
Augusteen, came also News of one of their Fryar's being murdered by some of the
Cape Indians. After this manner we understood it, viz. Three Friars being under
a Vow to go amongst the Indians on the Cape to Convert them; they went to a
certain Town to the Northward, off where we were cast away, but it lay within
the Sound. The Cassekey of this Town they gained on, to embrace the
Roman-Faith, but all his People were much incensed against the Friars, and
therefore would have their Cassekey renounce his Faith, and put the Friars to
Death; but he would Assent to neither; therefore they killed him and one Friar,
the other two escaped: Hereupon was a Perreauger forthwith sent for us, of what
Nation soever we might be, also a party of Spaniards and Indians were sent
against that Town where the Friar was killed. We had a plentiful Supper, and we
fed like People that had been half starved, for we eat, not knowing when we had
enough; and we found our Palates so changed by eating of Berries, that we could
not relish the taste of Salt, no more than if it had no Saltness in it. We had
lodging provided but few Beds.

The 16th of the 9th. Month; the 2d of the Week.
This Morning we had Ice half an Inch thick, and it had been for some Mornings
past, but as the Sun rises it is gone.

The Governor came this Morning to our Apartment inquiring how we did: We
having had Chocolate for Breakfast, he asked if we would have any thing else
that his House could afford; If we would but ask, it should be brought us: But
we modestly answered. That this was sufficient, although our Appetites were not
to be satisfied. The Governor stated the Poverty of the Country unto us. The
Place is a Garrison, maintained one half by the King of Spain, the other half
by the Church of Rome. The Male Inhabitants are all Soldiers, every one
receiving Pay according to their Post. A Sentinal's Pay is 150 pieces of Eight
a Year: And all their supply of Bread, Clothing and Money, comes from the
Havana and Porto-Bello: And it is going on of three Years, since they have had
a Vessel from any place whatsoever, which makes their Wants very great; all
things being expended, except Ammunition and Salt, of which they said they had
enough. The Governor offered us the Freedom of what his House afforded,
withal, gave us a Charge to be careful in going abroad, especially of some
Persons that did not affect our Nation: We promissed to be ruled, and submit to
the Governor's Pleasure for our Liberty. Our People came in, and we told them
the Caution; but they s^id, They had been all over the Town, and in many
Houses, where they were kindly received, and such as the People had, they would
give them. They told us of some English that lived here, and they had been at
their Houses: the chiefest in esteem, was one William Carr of the Isle of Man,
who about thirty Years ago, was in a Vessel bound for South Carolina, but
missing their Port, were cast away nigh this Port; many were drowned, but he,
and some others, were brought hither by the Indians, some of them got away in
Spanish Vessels, others dyed here: This Man turned Roman Catholic, and Married
a Spanish Woman, of whom he had seven Children, and is an Officer in the
Garrison; He was chief Interpreter.

This Day came Joseph Kirle's Negro Ben, he gave us this Account, That after we
had sent him back, he having looked, and not finding my Kinsman, went to seek
for a place to shelter himself from the Cold, and some place he found to creep
in, where he lay down, and continued there all Night, but by Morning, was so
stiff with Cold that he could not use his Legs, but halled himself toward the
Bay. The Spaniard, our Guide, from the first Sentry-house, the Morning after we
went thence, returned along the Bay, to see if any of our People were living;
but he found all dead, except Negro Ben. and he getting a Fire made, Negro Ben.
was recovered, and got the use of his Limbs.

William Carr, the interpreter, acquainted u^, That the Governor, and two
Royal Officers, would examine us, concerning our being cast aw^y, and what
Goods and Moneys was lost in our Vessel, and concerning our Hardships among the
Florida-Indians, etc. Which was done and every one did sign it. This took up
two or three Days time to complete it. After this was done the Governor told
us, that he expected Captain Sebastian Lopas in some few Days; and after his
Arrival, he would provide for our going to Carolina, with Cannoos, and Men to
guard us.

This Week my Wife was taken with a Fever and Ague, which held her three Days,
and then left her. The Governor ordered his own Doctor to administer such
things as were helpful. The Governor's k^^dn^ss is to us all was
extraordinary; for he would daily e^quire of us, if we wanted any thing which
he ^ad; or which he gave us an account; and we eat no worse than he d^d.

The Town we saw from one end to the other; it is of about three quarters of a
Mile in length, not regularly Built, the Houses not very thick; they having
large Orchards, in which are plenty of Oranges Lemmons, Pome-Citrous, Lymes,
Figgs and Peaches: The Houses, most of them, old Buildings; and not half of
them Inhabited. The Number of Men being about Three Hundred, that belong to the
Government; and many of them are kept as Sentinals at their Look outs. At the
North-end of the Town stands a large Fortification, being a Quadrangle with
Bastions; each Bastion will contain thirteen Guns; but there was not past. Two
thirds ot Fifty two mounted. In the Curtin they cannot mount any Guns, being
only for small Arms. The Wall of the Fortifications is about thirty Foot high,
built of sawed Stone, such as they g^t out of the Sand, between the Sea and the
Sound. This Stone is only Sand and small Shells connexed together, being not
very hard, till exposed to the Sun. The Fort is moated round; they would not
admit us to come near the Fort; bur Joseph Kirle took an opportunity, and
walked round about it.

The 23d of the 9th Month; the 2d of the Week:
This Day Joseph Kirle and I, considering that the latter end of this Week was
talked of, for our setting forward toward Carolina (which the Spaniards ca'l
St. George's) We concluded to endeavor to provide ourselves if we could, with
Clothing; considering we should be exposed to all the Weather that might
happen, and have no shelter but what we carry with us: Therefore we were
inclined to sell, he his, and I one or two of my Negroes, to provide us
Clothing and Provisions. We addressed ourselves to the Governor, and withal
offered him, if he pleased to except the choice of my Negroes* but he denied
our offer. We stated our Matter to him, and asked, if we might dispose of our
Negroes? He said ^e should not; neither could we sell to any Person but
himself, for the King's Account, without a special License: Therefore he would
consult the two Royal Officers, and give us his answer.

The 24th of the 9th Month; the 3d of the Week.
This Day the Governor sent for us, and told us, That he would give us credit
for what we and the rest of the Company, would. I told him, That my Wife and
Child would want some warmer Clothing; also Joseph Kirle and myself should
want some, if to be had. He ordered us to give our account of what we should
want; and, if to be had, we should have it: And Joseph Kirle and I should give
our Obligation, to pay the Governor of Carolina what the Sum amounted unto;
which we were willing to do. But we desired that our People should give us
their Obligation, for what we were engaged for, on their account; which the
Governor thought reasonable. I gave in an account of particulars for Joseph
Kirle, Robert Barrow, My Self and Family: Also the quantity of Indian-Corn,
Pease, stringed ^eaf, Salt, and Earthen-Pots, for the whole Company: But
Clothing was not to be had, except as much Stuff as made a Suit for my Wife
and Child, and a few Skins Joseph Kirle and I got: I got also Seven Blankets,
though the Price was great. These served Joseph Kirle, Robert Barrow, My Self and
Family. We had five Roves of Ammunition-Bread, so full of Weavel, that Corn was
far better; twenty Roves of strung Beef; sixty Roves of Indian-Corn: ten Roves
of Pease; one Rove of Salt; Jars for Water, and Earthen-Pots to boil our
Victuals (...).

The 25th of the 9th Month; the 4th of the Week.
The Gov^rnour s^ent for Joseph Kirle and me, to certify, That all that was to
be g^t, he had got for us. And he further sig^ned unto us, That he did expect
Sebastian Lopas before this time; and he would not have us go till he came; for
whatsoever he could get of our Money and Goods we should have it every Do^t.
But we said, we desired not to be detained on that account; for we had given
that already over for gone from us. And as it had pleased God to make them the
Instruments of our Preservation, so we did freely give any thing of that which
was, or may be d^e^ed ours, to the Governor, and these Persons that were sent
for us. The Governor said, He would not have any thing to do with it; for
whatever he did was for Charit-sake. Then we desired the Soldiers should have
it, if any should be got, which we doubted, And hereupon we Considered, that
should those poor Men get nothing, we ought to allow them something in General:
Therefore Joseph Kirle and I offered the Governor, That we would allow Captain
Sebastian Lopas, and his Men, an Hundred Pieces of Eight, for bring^ng us up
from amongst the Indians. The Governor was pleased with our Offer, and said
^hey should have it.

About this time, Robert Barrow was taken with a grievous Belly-ach; after
which he fell into a violent Flux. Several of our People were also taken with
the Belly-ach, and a great Scouring; all which was chiefly occasioned by our
unreasonable Eating, and not Governing ourselves therein. Our chief Diet was
Hommeney, Herbs and Pumpions, having not much Meat. Which mean Diet was our
Preservation: For had it been all Flesh, we should have destroyed our selves.
But we had the best the Place afforded.

The 26th of the 9th Month; the 5th of the Week.
This Day we signed our Obligation, for Four Hundred Pieces of Eight; and we
were to be gone the 28th or 29th Instant: Afrer which our People signed their
Obligation to us, to pay their Proportion of what was provided for them in
Provisions; and their part of what should be paid for their Passage, from the
Indians to Carolina: Whereupon we made the best Provision we could. I had got
some Wine and Brandy for my self and Family, and some small Necessaries for our
Child, With a great, Resolution to go through.

The 29th of the 9th Month; the 1st of the Week.
This Day after we had dined, Cannoos being got ready, one Captain F^ancisca de
Roma, with Six Soldiers, was to go our Conductor; the Governor walked down to
see us embarque; and taking our Farewell, he embraced some of us, and wished us
well, saying WE SHOULD FORGET HIM WHEN WE GOT AMONGST OUR OWN NATION. And also
added, THAT IF WE FORGOT GOD WOULD NOT FORGET HIM. Thus in a courteous manner
we parted; which was about two or three a Clock in the Afternoon, taking our
departure from Agusteen, we had about two or three Leagues to an Indian-Town,
called St. a Cruce; where, b^ing landed, we were directed to the Indian
Warehouse: It is built round, having sixteen Squares; on each Square is a
Cabin built, and painted, which will hold two People; the H^use being about
fifty foot diameter in the middle often he top is a square opening, about fifteen
Foot. This House was very clean, and Fires being ready made nigh our Cabins.
The Spanish Captain made choice of Cabins. for him and his ^oldiers, and
appointed eus our Cabins. In this Town they have a Friar, and a ^arge House to
worship in, with three Bells; and the Indians go as constantly to their
Devotion, at all times and seasons, as any of the Spaniards Night being come,
and the time of their Devotion over the Friar came in, and many of the Indians,
both Men and Women, having a Dance, according to their way and custom. We had
plenty of Casseena-drink, and such Victuals as the Indians had provided for us;
some bringing Corn boiled, others Pease; some one thing, some another; of all
which we made a good Supper, and slept till Morning.

The 30th of the 9th Month; the 2d of the Week.
This Morning early, we left this Town, having about two Leagues to go with the
Canoos; then we were to travel by Land: But a Cart was provided to carry our
Provisions and Necessaries; in which Cart those that could not travel were
carried. We had about five Leagues to a Sentinal's House, where we lay all
Night; and next Morning traveled along the Sea-shoar, about four Leagues to an
Inlet: Here we wanted for Cannoos to come for us, to carry us about two Miles,
to a Town, called St. Juan, an Indian-Town, (...) We went through a Sk^rt of
Wood into the Indian Plantations, for a Mile. In the middle of this Island is
the Town of St. Juan, a large Town and many People They have a Friar, and a
Worshiping-House. The People are very Industrious, having plenty of Hogs and
Fowls, and large Crops of Corn, as we could tell by their Corn-Houses. The
Indians brought us Victuals as at the last Town, and we lay in their
Warehouse, which was larger than that at the other Town.

The 2d of the 10th Month; the 4th of the Week.
This Morning the Indians brought us Victuals for Breakfast, and the Friar gave
my Wife some Loaves of Bread made of Indian-Corn, which was somewhat
extraordinary; also a parcel of Fowls. About ten o Clock in the forenoon we
left St. Juan, walking about a Mile from the Sound* where were Cannoos and
Indians, ready to Transport us to the next Town; We did believe we might have
come all the way along the Sound, but the Spaniards were not willing to
discover the place unto us.

An hour before Sunset we got to the Town, called St. Mary's: This is a
Frontier, and a Garrison Town; the Inhabitants are Indians, with some Spanish
Soldiers. We were conducted to the Warehouse, as the Custom is, for every Town
has a Warehouse: Or, as we understood, these Houses were for their times of
Mirth and Dancing and to lodge and entertain Strangers: This House is about 81
Foot Diameter, built Round with 32 Squares, in each Square a Cabin about 8 Foot
long, of a good height, being Painted and well Ma^ted. The Center of this
Building is a Quadrangle of 20 Foot, being open at top of the House, against
which the House is Built; thus, in this Quadrangle is the place the Dance,
having a great Fire in the middle: One of the Squares of this Building is the
Gate-Way or Passage in. The Women, Natives of these Towns, cloth themselves
with the Mo^s of Trees, making Gowns and Peticoats thereof, which, at a
distance, or in the Night, looks very neat. The Indian Boys, we saw, were kept
to School in the Church the Friar being their Schoolmaster. This is the
largest Town of all. About a Mile from this, is another Town called (...) At
this Town of St* Mary'^ were we to stay till the 5th or 6th Instant; where also
we were to receive our sixty Rov^s of Corn and ten Rov^s of Pease; while we
stayed we had one half of our Corn beaten into Meal by the Indians, the other
we kept whole not knowing what Weather we should have: for the Friar of this
Town, some Years past, was at Charles Town, in South Carolina, and he had a
Months Passage in going, about this time of the Year: This News was very
unpleasant, to think of lying out a Month at this Season, having been so
Weather-beaten before; but we endeavored to shun looking back, considering how
great our Preservation had been hitherto. While we stayed here, we were willing
to make all the Provision we could, for Back and Belly: We got of the Indians,
plenty of Garlic and long Pepper, to season our Corn and Pease, both which
were griping and windy: And we made us wooden Trays, and Spoons to eat with: We
got Rushes, and made a sort of a platted Rope thereof; the use we chiefly
intended it for, was to be serviceable to help us in building Huts, or Tents
with, at such times as we should meet with hard Weather.

The time drawing on, that we were to leave this Town, we had seven large
Cannoos provided to carry us, being in all about sixty Persons; eighteen of us,
S^x of Smith's Company, seven Spaniards, and thirty odd Indians, which were to
Row the Cannoos, and be our Pilo^s. We had some Indians from all the Towns, and
two Cassekeys. We understood that the Carolina-Indians, called the Yammasees,
which are related to these Indians, were here about a Month since, trading for
Deer-Skins.

I have omitted a considerable Passage that happened in Augusteen: The Woman,
named Penelope, being big with Child, by the Spaniards Persuasion, stayed with
them: Also Joseph Kirle's Boy, named John Hillier, w^ ^tained by the Spaniards.
Joseph Kirle strove hard with the Governor, that he might have his Boy; but
the Lad was conveyed out of Town, and not be found. The Governor promised that
he would send him after him if possible; but the Boy came not to us, and we
were to depart hence on the Morrow.

The 5th of the 10th Month; the 1st of the Week.
This Morning we embarked, and departed this place, and put into the Town St.
Phillips, where the Spanish Captain invited us on Shore, to drink Casseena,
which we did: The Spaniards having left something behind, we stayed here about
an hour, and then set forward. About two or three Leagues hence, we came in
sight of an Indian-Town, called Sappataw, but we went about a League to the
Northward of it, to a Sentinel's House, where we put our Boats on Shoars and
had Casseena brought us, making no stay, we went hence, rowing till next
Morning: In the Night we had lost our Way, but got to rights in a little time.

The 7th of the 10th Month; the 2d of the Week.
This Morning we pu^ Shore, having past an Inlet of the Sea, and here we dressed
some Victuals, and got a little Sleep, until the Tide served. Some of our
Indians went out a Hunting for Deer and Hogs, of both which the Spaniards said,
there was plenty, and when the Tide served, we were to go to the Nothernmost
end of this Island, and stay for the Hunters. One of the Indians brought a
Deer, which he threwed down among the other Indians, and he went out again to
Hunt, to the North end of the Island, where we were to rendezvouse for this
Night. We set forward about ten a Clock, and got to the Place appointed, an
hour or two before Sunset, it being a fine lofty Wood, we employed our selves
in geting Firewood for the Night, and Moss to lie on, of both which we got
plenty, having a large Oak to lie under. The Indians brought in several Hogs
and Deer, of which we had part, so that we fared richly; having a pleasant
Nights repose, we got up, to be gone about an hour before Day.

The 8th of the 10th Month; the 3d of the Week.
This Day hav^ng rowed from the last place, until two hours before Sun-^et, we
put on Shore, at a place where had been an Indian Settlement, it being on a
high Bank, from whence we had a P^ospect of the Sound: Here we employed our
selves to go and fetch Bushes, to make sh^^ter against the Wind and Dews of the
Night, and in cutting o^ dry Grass to lie on, and getting of Wood, which was at
a considerable distance, but we resolved to have it, if Labor would purchase
it. Those that were not employed in these services, were providing of Water and
Victuals, for we had always enough to do. We had a pleasant Night, and rested
well.

The 9th of the 10th Month; the 4th of the Week.
This Morning about Sunrising, we saw a Cannoo of Carolina-Indians, a going to
the Southward a Hunting; they kept the Western side of the Sound being fearful
of us; we had a Cannoo manned with Indians and Spaniards, to go after them, to
speak to them, being desirous to get them to carry Letters to inform of our
coming, not knowing but she might Alarm the Qut-Settlements of Carolina. This
Cannoo of ours, pursued the other, but the Carolina-Indians put on Shore, run
into a Marsh, and Fired at our People: The Spanish-Indians, who could speak the
Yammaw's Language, called unto them, and told them their business, withal
entreating them to come unto them, but they answered, that they were going a
Hunting for the Season, therefore desired them to be gone, for they would not
come near them: Thus our People returned unto us. The Carolina-Indians went
their way, and we prepared to go forward. We having the Cassekey of St. Juan
with us, sent him away last Night, to see if he could meet any of the
Yammawsee-Indians of Carolina, he being acquainted with and related to them;
but this Ca^^^o passed him: We set forward, and rowed all the day, till about
an hour before Sunset, and then we put on Shore at an Indian-Field, which was
overgrown with S^ge, it being low wet Land: Here we made our accustomed
Provision for Lodging, lying this N^ght in a Wood, having dressed Victuals for
this time, and to Morrow; and having rested well this Night, about Daybreak or
sooner, we left th^s place.

The 10^h of the 10th Month, the 5th of the Week.
The Day about ^en a Clock, we cro^s'd an Inlet, but the T^de being against us,
we put on Shore at an old Indian-Fie^d: At this place under the Shelter of some
Trees, was the Cassekey of St. Juan. Here we stayed and drank some Casseena:
There was abundance of Rabbets, but we made no stay. Not passing two hours, the
Cassekey was sent before to make discovery, and we followed, rowing until an
hour before Sunset, by which time we got to the place, called St. Catalena,
where has been a great Settlement of Indians, for the Land has been cleared
for Planting, for some Miles distant: Here also we met the Cassekey; also a
Canoo of Carolina-Indians, being a Man, his Wife, and Children, having his
Dogs, and other Hunting Implements, for to lie out this Winter Season. The
Spanish Captain, by his Interpreter, discoursed him about carrying our Letters,
which he readily assented unto; whereupon the Spanish Captain set himself to
writing to the Governor of Carolina.

We had a large Field to lie in, and no manner of Shelter but what was a Mile
distant or more; but we spared not pains, but some fell to cutting of Boughs
and Brush, at that great distance, some to carrying it to the Place, some to
get Firewood, so that by Night we had a brave Shelter.

The Spanish Captain sent for me, to write to the Governor of Carolina; which I
did: I wrote also to a Person of my acquaintance there. The Letters being
finished, and Night coming on, I delivered my Letters to the Captain, and
returned to my Company. By this time they had completed our Booth, which we
thought was sufficient, if no Rain fell. We provided our Victuals for our
Supper, and for the next Day's Travel; as also some dry Grass to lie on, in
hopes of resting well this Night. About ten at Night the Carolina-Indians went
with our Letters for Carolina.

The 11th of the 10th Month; the 6th of the Week.
This Morning, about two hours before Day, we had a Gust of Wind at the
North-West; and the Sky was overcast, and looked as though we should have
abundance of Rain. In a little time the Rain fell; against which we had no
Shelter, but our Blankets. The Rain held until break of Day, at which time
began the North-West Wind to blow violent hard and cold. Our Shelter was
fronting the North-West; and we fell to work to shift our Booth, and to getting
more Boughs, Brush and Grass; the Grass was to fill and keep up a Bank of Earth
which we raised about three or four Foot high, to break the Wind from us: All
this Day were we employed in enlarging our Booth, and geting of Wood for
Firing. The North-West blew extreme hard; and this Night was hard, getting but
little rest, the Cold pinching us.

The 12th of the 10th Month; the 7th of the Week.
This Day, the Wind continued without ceasing. We began to mend what the Wind
had put out of order by Night; and heaved up more Earth on our Booth, and made
some inlargements; for we were not negligent by Day, to provide for the Night,
which pinched us with cold, especially aged Robert Barrow; who, having a
violent Flux, that had held him from Augusteen hither, and by the violent Cold,
being grown on him, so that he could not govern his w^akness, nor get natural
Rest; he was extremely racked with the Cold, that in this juncture of Hardship
we could get no warmth in him; but he was contented with our mean help,
although he received little benefit by it. This Day at times, we went out to
get Wood, having along way to go in an open Field, and the Cold almost numming
us, by that time we could get to the Booth. This Evening the Wind was somewhat
abated, and we were in great hopes it was over; but it blowed fiercely the
latter part of the Night.

The 13th of the 10th Month; the 1st of the Week.
This Morning the Wind was something abated, and the Sun gave forth a little
warmth: Joseph Kirle borrowed a Gun, Powder and Shot, of the Spaniards, and
went to kill some wild Geese, or what other Game he might come up with; but he
had no success, coming home without any Game. And we were well content with a
Dinner of Indian-Corn, and Strung Beef. The Spanish-Indians hunted all these
three Days, and killed several Deer; but they eat them as fast as they kil^'d
them, having little or no other Provision, their Corn being spent. The latter
part of this Day, the Wind was very moderate, and we hoped to be going the next
Morning. Whereupon we provided for the next Day's Travel.

The 14th of the 10th. Month; the 2d of the Week.
This Morning we Embarked, and set forward, having fair Weather, the Wind
down; we rowed all Day until three a Clock, being come to a great Inlet of the
Sea; but the Weather looked, as though we should have Wind and Rain; and to
cross the Inlet would be dangerous, it being about two Leagues over, and little
Wind, making a rough Sea. So we put on Shore, it being high Land, and lofty
Woods, mostly Pine and Live Oaks. Here we made all the expedition we could to
get Shelter against the Weather. The Indians set to work, to build themselves
little Huts or Wigwams, which they had not done til now. They got small
Palmetto-Leaves, and covered their Buildings, but ours were covered mostly with
Boughs, which would not keep out much Rain. By Night we had a great deal of
Rain and Wind. And it being the Evening of the Spaniards Christmas, they used
some of their Ceremonies, with tinkling on a piece of Iron, and Singing,
begging for somewhat for the Day following: They begged of the Indians, and the
Indians in like manner begged of the Spaniards; and what the Indians gave the
Spaniards, that was returned to the Indians.

The 16th of the 10th Month; the 4th of the Week.
This Morning was very foggy, and proved a Rainy Day; but we kept rowing until
two in the Afternoon, the Rain being hard, and the Wind increased at N. E. We
put on Shore; but the Captain told us, we should not stay here long, he
intended further, and if the Weather permitted, would go all Night but the
Weather was likely to be worse rather than better; and we sat in the Rain
until Night was come; then we entreated the Captain, that we might stay all
Night, and that we might provide against the Weather; but he pretended the
Weather would break up, and he would be gone; but there was no like^ihood of
it: The Rain was increased, and we all wet and starved with Cold: At length he
assented to stay. Then were we hard put to it, (being Night) to provide
Shelter, But in the dark did we work, until we had made us a Shelter, that
would keep the Rain from us. Having Fires, we pu^ ^ff our wet Clothes, and
dried them as well as we could. Toward Morning, the Rain broke up.

The 17th of the 10th Month; the 5th of the Week.
This Morning at Sunrising, we set Forward, and Rowed until Noon; at which
time we came to an Inlet, and put a Shore; there we stayed all this Afternoon,
and dried our Blankets, and what was not dried last Night; we also dressed our
Victuals. And as soon as it was dark, went hence, designing to Row all Night;
but having an intricate Passage amongst Marshes, where were diverse Creeks and
Ways, that we rowed somet^mes in a wrong one; then back again, and rowed in
another; about Midnight our Pilots were at a loss, not knowing which way to
go, nor where to find any dry Land, that we might go on Shore: But three of our
Boats rowed until we found a dry Knap to get on Shore, where we lay until day,
having good Fires. As soon as it was light, we got our Boats, and went to look
for the rest of our Company, whom we found, having made their Cannoos fast to
the Sedge, and siting therein until we came to them.

The 18th of the 10th Month; the 6th of the Week.
The Night was exteam Foggy, and so was this Morning; but we searched about and
found our Passage, being a little Channel just broad enough for our Boats to
pass, and a Mile in length. After we past this, we came into a great Sound,
which went down into a large Inlet, that the Land could not be seen from the
one side to the other. Into the Sound comes down a great River, called the
Savanna-River; which, when we got into the Course of it, the Water was fresh,
though in this great Sound; the Spaniards called it, the Cross-Bar, or St. a
Cruce. About Noon we got over this Sound; and here we rowed out to Sea for two
Leagues, to get into another Sound. And about three a Clock, the Wind began to
blow at North-East, and it looked very black, so that we feared a Storm. We
desired to get on Shore, to provide against it; but the Captain said, about a
few Leagues further we should get near Port Royal: But in the interim, we saw a
Cannoo on the Shore; we made to her, and there we found some Indian Wigwams:
Here we went on Shore. This was a Cannoo, laden with Skins, that belonged to
Merchants at Carolina, having four Indians belonging to her, but three of them
run away fearing the Spaniards, and one stayed. The Indian Wigwams were in a
bad Condition, not fit to keep out the Weather; so we set to work to mend them.
Here was plenty of Palmetto-Leaves, with which we covered them, and made
Addition to them; but the Storm of Wind and Rain came violently before we could
complete our work, and held all Night, yet we lay indifferent dry, though the
Storm was very great.

The 19th of the 10th Month; the 7th of the Week.
This Morning the Storm of Wind continued at N. E. with Rain; we, being likely
to stay some time here, enlarged our Wigwam, fearing a North-Wester; which
about ten a Clock this Day, began to blow fiercely, with Snow, for some hours.
The Wind was so violent, that we feared, lest the tall Pines should be blown on
us. We sent the Carolina-Indian out, to bring his three Mates in; but they
would not. The Spanissh-Indians made great Complaint for Food; We gave amongst
them four Rove of Corn, being unwilling to spare any more, not knowing how long
we should be detained by the Weather. Some of our People had almost eaten up
their shares, and we expected, should we be detained long, we must supply them
with what we had to spare,

The 20th of the 10th. Month; the 1st of the Week.
This Day the Wind continued at N. E. and extreme cold it was; but we, in our
Wigwam, were well enough secured from cold. About Noon our Mariners Wigwams
got Fire, and was burnt; their's was the leeward-most of all (for we had Eight
Wigwams) otherwise the whole had been in danger. We understood that we were not
passing two or three days Journey from the English Settlements; but the
Spanish^Indians told us that it was more, till we were better inform^ed, by
this Indian, who belonged to that place.

The 21st of the 10th Month; the 2d of the Week.
This Day early, we set forward, and passed Port-Roya^ Sound, being some
Leagues over; and about two a Clock i^ the Afternoon we put on Shore, the Tide
being against us. Here was a close Wood, where we lay indifferent well all
Night.

The 22d of the 10th Month; the 3d of the Week.
This Morning early, we set forward, and rowed all Day, until one a Clock in
the Afternoon; at which time we got to the first Settlement in Carolina,
belonging to one Richard Bennet, who received us kindly, and provided
plentifully for us, of good Food, and good Drink, showing the Spaniards all
kindness possibly he could, for our sakes, which the Spaniards did acknowledge:
We stayed here all Night,

The 23d of the 10th Month; the fourth of the Week.
This Morning having Eaten plentifully, and Drank also, we went hence, in
Company of some of the Inhabitants, about ten a Clock, and rowed until two
hours within Night, having passed by several Plantations, we put on Shore, on a
Point of Land, to wait a Tide, having a Wood to shelter in, and making good
Fires, we stayed until Midnight, at which time we went thence, and rowed until
an hour or two before Day, by which time we got to Governor Blake's House.

The 24th of the 10th Month; the 5th of the Week.
This Morning when the Governor arose, he sent for Joseph Kirle, John Smith,
Andrew Murrey and Me, making enquiry of us concerning our Pas^age, and on what
account the Spaniards came with us. We rendered him an account of the Governor
of Augusteen's Generosity toward us, and that he sent us freely, without any
Demands, except what he had freely Contracted: The Governor sent for the
Spanish Captain in, and received the Letters that were sent from the Governor
of Augusteen; also our Obligation, which the Governor accepted. The Governor
showed a great deal of kindness to us, made inquiry into all our Conditions.
Robert Barrow he sent to his Neighbor, Margaret Bammers, who, he said, would
be careful and Nurse him: She was an Ancient Friend, about two Miles distant;
so he went on Horseback. The Governor clothed Joseph Kirle, John Smith, Andrew
Murrey, Me, my Wife and Child; to the rest of our People, he gave each of them
a Duff^l Blanket, which would keep them Warm; and plenty of Victuals and drink
was provided: We obtained leave of the Governor, to permit the Spaniards to go
to Charlestown wiih us, being willing to gratify them according to our
Abilities.

The 25th of the 10th Month; the 6th of the Week.
This Day in the Afternoon, Joseph Kirle, John Smith, I, my Wife and Child,
went to Margaret Bammers, where Robert Barrow was; staying all Night, till next
Morning, when the Spaniards called for us as they came by Water.

The 26th of the 10th Month; the 7th of the Week.
This Morning we went hence with the Spaniards, for Charlestown, where we
arrived about an hour within Night. The Gentlemen of the Town appointed a
public House, of good Credit, to entertain the Spaniards with Meat, and Drink,
and Lodging, which was done to the Spaniards Admiration; they stayed here eight
days. We got our People together, and agreed jointly, to give the Spaniards a
hundred pieces of eight* which Joseph Kirle and I divided amongst them,
according to their degrees, we two adding to the Sum.

The 4^h of the 11th Month; the 2d of the Week.
Joseph Kirle and I provided a small Present to send to the Governor of
Au^^^teen, and this day we went with the Spaniards to Governo^ Bl^ke's, staying
there one day* the Governor treated (...) Sp^ds, and having completed his
Letters, gave the (...) a considerable Present, and sent him home^ (...) to
call on the Yammasee-Indians, where they might h^ as much Indian-Corn as they
pleased, to carry home with (...); the Town of these Indians, being about two
or the (...) rowing from Charlestown.

The 9^h (...) the 11th Month; the 7th of the Week.
This Day I returned, with my Wife and Child, to Charlestown, leaving R^bert
Barrow in a weak and low Condition with Margaret Bammer. I, my Wife and Family,
with Josep^ Kirle, were entertained by Captain James Risbee, the time o^ our
stay in Carolina. Our Seamen were mostly employed, some in one Vessel, and
some in another, that belonged to the Port

The 6th of the 12th Month; the 2d of the Week.
Joseph Kirle went hence to the Island of Providence, i^ hopes of gaining a
speedy Passage for Pensylvania, the place of his ab^de,

Toward the beginning of this Month, Robert Barrow was brought to Charlestown,
being extreme Weak, and was Lodged at the House of Mary Cross, who nursed him.

Thy 18th of the 1st Month; the 5th of the Week.
This Day, I, with my Family, and Robert Barrow, Embarked, and set Sail from
this place for Pennsylvania, and had fourteen Days Passage to Philadelphia.

The 4th of the 2d Month; the 1st of the Week.
This Day in the Evening, Robert Barrow departed this Life, and was Buried the
sixth Instant, having passed through great Exercises, in much Patience; and in
all the Times of our greatest Troubles, was ready to council us to Patience,
and to wait what the Lord our God would bring to pass: And he would often
express, That it was his Belief, that our Lives should be spared, and not be
lost in that Wilderness, and amongst those People, who would have made a Prey
of us. And so this good Man, having finished his Course with Joy; laid down his
Body, and is with Him who rewards the just.

Thus having completed our hard Passage hither, wherein God's great Mercy, and
wonderful loving Kindness, has been largely extended unto us, in delivering
and preserving us, to this Day and Time; I hope that I, with all those of us,
that have been spared hitherto, shall never be forgetful nor unmindful of the
low Estate we were brought unto; but that we may double our Deligence in
serving the Lord God, is the Breathing, and earnest Desire of my Soul. Amen.

Jonathan Dickinson.

FINIS.

