IDEA of the ENGLISH SCHOOL, Sketch'd out for the Consideration of the TRUSTEES
of the PHILADELPHIA ACADEMY.
IT is expected that every Scholar to be admitted into this School, be at least
able to pronounce and divide the Syllables in Reading, and to write a legible
Hand. None to be received that are under (...) Years of Age.

First or lowest CLASS.
LET the first Class learn the English Grammar Rules, and at the same time let
particular Care be taken to improve them in Orthography. Perhaps the latter is
best done by Pairing the Scholars, two of those nearest equal in their Spelling
to be put together; let these strive for Victory, each propounding Ten Words
every Day to the other to be spelt. He that spells truly most of the other's
Words, is Victor for that Day; he that is Victor most Days in a Month, to
obtain a Prize, a pretty neat Book of some Kind useful in their future Studies.
This Method fixes the Attention of Children extremely to the Orthography of
Words, and makes them good Spellers very early. It Is a Shame for a Man to be so
ignorant of this little Art, in his own Language, as to be perpetually
confounding Words of like Sound and different Significations; the Consciousness
of which Defect, makes some Men, otherwise of good Learning and Understanding,
averse to Writing even a common Letter.

LET the Pieces read by the Scholars in this Class be short, such as Croxall's
Fables, and little Stories. In giving the Lesson, let it be read to them; let
the Meaning of the difficult Words in it be explained to them, and let them con
it over by themselves before they are called to read to the Master, or Usher;
who is to take particular Care that they do not read too fast, and that they
duly observe the Stops and Pauses. A Vocabulary of the most usual difficult
Words might be formed for their Use, with Explanations; and they might daily
get a few of those Words and Explanations by Heart, which would a little
exercise their Memories; or at least they might write a Number of them in a
small Book for the Purpose, which would help to fix the Meaning of those Words
in their Minds, and at the same Time furnish every one with a little Dictionary
for his future Use.

The Second CLASS to be taught
READING with Attention, and with proper Modulations of the Voice according to
the Sentiments and Subject.

SOME short Pieces, not exceeding the Length of a Spectator, to be given this
Class as Lessons (and some of the easier Spectators would be very suitable for
the Purpose.) These Lessons might be given over Night as Tasks, the Scholars to
study them against the Morning. Let it then be required of them to give an
Account, first of the Parts of Speech, and Construction of one or two
Sentences; this will oblige them to recur frequently to their Grammar, and fix
its principal Rules in their Memory. Next of the Intention of the Writer, or
the Scope of the Piece; the Meaning of each Sentence, and of every uncommon
Word. This would early acquaint them with the Meaning and Force of Words, and
give them that most necessary Habit, of Reading with Attention.

THE Master then to read the Piece with the proper Modulations of Voice, due
Emphasis, and suitable Action, where Action is required; and put the Youth on
imitating his Manner.

WHERE the Author has used an Expression not the best, let it be pointed out;
and let his Beauties be particularly remarked to the Youth.

LET the Lessons for Reading be varied, that the Youth may be made acquainted
with good Styles of all Kinds in Prose and Verse, and the proper Manner of
reading each Kind. Sometimes a well-told Story, a Piece of a Sermon, a
General's Speech to his Soldiers, a Speech in a Tragedy, some Part of a Comedy,
an Ode, a Satyr, a Letter, Blank Verse, Hudibrastick, Heroic, etc. But let such
Lessons for Reading be chosen, as contain some useful Instruction, whereby the
Understandings or Morals of the Youth, may at the same Time be improved.

IT is required that they should first study and understand the Lessons, before
they are put upon reading them properly, to which End each Boy should have an
English Dictionary to help him over Difficulties. When our Boys read English to
us, we are apt to imagine they understand what they read because we do, and
because it is their Mother Tongue. But they often read as Parrots speak, knowing
little or nothing of the Meaning. And it is impossible a Reader should give the
due Modulation to his Voice, and pronounce properly, unless his Understanding
goes before his Tongue, and makes him Master of the Sentiment. Accustoming Boys
to read aloud what they do not first understand, is the Cause of those even set
Tones so common among Readers, which when they have once got a Habit of using,
they find so difficult to correct: By which Means, among Fifty Readers we
scarcely find a good One. For want of good Reading, Pieces published with a
View to influence the Minds of Men for their own or the public Benefit, lose
Half their Force. Were there but one good Reader in a Neighborhood, a public
Orator might be heard throughout a Nation with the same Advantages, and have
the same Effect on his Audience, as if they stood within the Reach of his Voice.

The Third CLASS to be taught
SPEAKING properly and gracefully, which is near of Kin to good Reading, and
naturally follows it in the Studies of Youth. Let the Scholars of this Class
begin with learning the Elements of Rhetoric from some short System, so as to
be able to give an Account of the most usual Tropes and Figures. Let all their
bad Habits of Speaking, all Offenses against good Grammar, all corrupt or
foreign Accents, and all improper Phrases, be pointed out to them. Short
Speeches from the Roman or other History, or from our Parliamentary Debates,
might be got by heart, and delivered with the proper Action, etc. Speeches and
Scenes in our best Tragedies and Comedies (avoiding every Thing that could
injure the Morals of Youth) might likewise be got by Rote, and the Boys
exercised in delivering or acting them; great Care being taken to form their
Manner after the truest Models.

FOR their farther Improvement, and a little to vary their Studies, let them
now begin to read History, after having got by Heart a short Table of the
principal Epochas in Chronology. They may begin with Rollin's Ancient and Roman
Histories, and proceed at proper Hours as they go through the subsequent Classes,
with the best Histories of our own Nation and Colonies. Let Emulation be
excited among the Boys by giving, Weekly, little Prizes, or other small
Encouragements to those who are able to give the best Account of what they have
read, as to Times, Places, Names of Persons, etc. This will make them read with
Attention, and imprint the History well in their Memories. In remarking on the
History, the Master will have fine Opportunities of instilling Instruction of
various Kinds, and improving the Morals as well as the Understandings of Youth.

THE Natural and Mechanic History contained in Spectacle de la Nature, might
also be begun in this Class, and continued through the subsequent Classes by
other Books of the same Kind: For next to the Knowledge of Duty, this Kind of
Knowledge is certainly the most useful, as well as the most entertaining. The
Merchant may thereby be enabled better to understand many Commodities in Trade;
the Handicraftsman to improve his Business by new Instruments, Mixtures and
Materials; and frequently Hints are given of new Manufactures, or new Methods
of improving Land, that may be set on foot greatly to the Advantage of a
Country.

The Fourth CLASS to be taught
COMPOSITION. Writing one's own Language well, is the next necessary
Accomplishment after good Speaking. It Is the Writing-Master's Business to take
Care that the Boys make fair Characters, and place them straight and even in
the Lines: But to form their Style, and even to take Care that the Stops and
Capitals are properly disposed, is the Part of the English Master. The Boys
should be put on Writing Letters to each other on any common Occurrences, and
on various Subjects, imaginary Business, etc. containing little Stories,
Accounts of their late Reading, what Parts of Authors please them, and why.
Letters of Congratulation, of Compliment, of Request, of Thanks, of
Recommendation, of Admonition, of Consolation, of Expostulation, Excuse, etc.
In these they should be taught to express themselves clearly, concisely, and
naturally, without affected Words, or highflown Phrases. All their Letters to
pass through the Master's Hand, who is to point out the Faults, advise the
Corrections, and commend what he finds right. Some of the best Letters
published in our own Language, as Sir William Temple's, those of Pope, and his
Friends, and some others, might be set before the Youth as Models, their
Beauties pointed out and explained by the Master, the Letters themselves
transcribed by the Scholar.

DR. JOHNSON's Ethices Elementa, or first Principles of Morality, may now be
read by the Scholars, and explained by the Master, to lay a solid Foundation of
Virtue and Piety in their Minds. And as this Class continues the Reading of
History, let them now at proper Hours receive some farther Instructions in
Chronology, and in that Part of Geography (from the Mathematical Master) which
is necessary to understand the Maps and Globes. They should also be acquainted
with the modern Names of the Places they find mentioned in ancient Writers. The
Exercises of good Reading and proper Speaking still continued at suitable Times.

Fifth CLASS.
To Improve the Youth in Composition, they may now, besides continuing to write
Letters, begin to write little Essays in Prose; and sometimes in Verse, not to
make them Poets, but for this Reason, that nothing acquaints a Lad so speedily
with Variety of Expression, as the Necessity of finding such Words and Phrases
as will suit with the Measure, Sound and Rhyme of Verse, and at the same Time
well express the Sentiment. These Essays should all pass under the Master's
Eye, who will point out their Faults, and put the Writer on correcting them.
Where the Judgment is not ripe enough for forming new Essays, let the
Sentiments of a Spectator be given, and required to be clothed in a Scholar's
own Words; or the Circumstances of some good Story, the Scholar to find
Expression. Let them be put sometimes on abridging a Paragraph of a diffuse
Author, sometimes on dilating or amplifying what is wrote more closely. And now
let Dr. Johnson's Noetica, or first Principles of human Knowledge, containing a
Logic, or Art of Reasoning, etc. be read by the Youth, and the Difficulties
that may occur to them be explained by the Master. The Reading of History, and
the Exercises of good Reading and just Speaking still continued.

Sixth CLASS.
IN this Class, besides continuing the Studies of the preceding, in History,
Rhetoric, Logic, Moral and Natural Philosophy, the best English Authors may be
read and explained; as Tillotson, Milton, Lock, Addison, Pope, Swift, the
higher Papers in the Spectator and Guardian, the best Translations of Homer,
Virgil and Horace, of Telemachus, Travels of Cyrus, etc.

ONCE a Year, let there be public Exercises in the Hall, the Trustees and
Citizens present. Then let fine gilt Books be given as Prizes to such Boys as
distinguish themselves, and excel the others in any Branch of Learning; making
three Degrees of Comparison; giving the best Prize to him that performs best; a
less valuable One to him that comes up next to the best; and another to the
third. Commendations, Encouragement and Advice to the rest; keeping up their
Hopes that by Industry they may excel another Time. The Names of those that
obtain the Prizes, to be yearly printed in a List.

THE Hours of each Day are to be divided and disposed in such a Manner, as that
some Classes may be with the Writing-Master, improving their Hands, others with
the Mathematical Master, learning Arithmetic, Accounts, Geography, Use of the
Globes, Drawing, Mechanics, etc. while the rest are in the English School,
under the English Master's Care.

THUS instructed, Youth will come out of this School fitted for learning any
Business, Calling or Profession, except such wherein Languages are required;
and though unaquainted with any ancient or foreign Tongue, they will be Masters
of their own, which is of more immediate and general Use; and withal will have
attained many other valuable Accomplishments; the Time usually spent in
acquiring those Languages, often without Success, being here employed in laying
such a Foundation of Knowledge and Ability, as, properly improved, may qualify
them to pass through and execute the several Offices of civil Life, with
Advantage and Reputation to themselves and Country.

B. F.

THE END.

