Anno Regni GEORGII REGIS Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, OCTAVO.

At the Parliament begun and holden at Westminster, the Seventeenth Day of
March, Anno Dom. 1714. In the First Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord
GEORGE, by the Grace of God, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, King,
Defender of the Faith, etc.

And from thence Continued by several Prorogations to the Nineteenth Day of
October, 1721. Being the Eighth Session of this present Parliament.

DIEU ET MON DROIT


LONDON, Printed by John Basket, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty,
1722.

NEW LONDON, Reprinted by Timothy Green, Printer to the Governor and Company
of His Majesty's English Colony of Connecticut in New England, 1751.

Anno octavo Georgii Regis.
An Act giving further Encouragement for the Importation of Naval Stores; and
for other Purposes therein mentioned.

WHEREAS in the Third, and Fourth Years of the Reign of Her late Majesty Queen
Anne, a good Law was made for Encouraging the Importation of Naval Stores from
Her Majesty's Plantations in America, by an Act which commenced the First Day
of January, Preamble.
One thousand seven hundred, and five, and continued from thence forward for
the space of Nine Years; and by an Act made in the Twelfth Year of Her said
late Majesty's Reign, the aforesaid Act is continued from the time of the
Expiration of the same, for the further Term of Eleven Years, and from thence
to the End of the next Session of Parliament; and by the Act last mentioned,
Encouragement is given for the Importation of Naval Stores from that Part of
Great Britain called Scotland, to that Part of Great Britain called England,
during the Remainder of the time limited for granting Premiums to the Importers
of Naval Stores from America, by the said Acts: And whereas in Consequence of
the said Encouragement, it is found by Experience that great Quantities of
Good, and Merchantable Pitch, and Tar (part of the Naval Stores mentioned in
the said Acts) have been imported into this Kingdom from the said Plantations
in America, which Pitch and Tar have been found useful for the Service of His
Majesty's Navy, and it is necessary to give farther Encouragement therein: And
whereas it is probable that the Owners of large Tracts of Land in the said
Plantations, and in that Part of Great Britain called Scotland, lying near the
Sea, and upon Navigable Rivers, would be induced to sow the same with Hemp, if
farther Encouragement were given for that Purpose:

May it therefore Please Your Most Excellent Majesty, That it may be Enacted,

And be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice, and Consent of the Lord's Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons in this
Present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, Premium for Ton
of Hemp water-rotted, etc continued from Expiration of the Act 12 Anne, for 16
Years, etc.
That the Premium, or Reward of Six Pounds given by the said Acts for every Ton
of Hemp water-rotted, bright, and clean, each Ton containing Twenty Gross
Hundreds, and Six Pounds, shall be continued from the Expiration of the said
Act of the Twelfth Year of Her said late Majesty's Reign, for, and during the
Term of Sixteen Years, and from thence to the End of the next Session of
Parliament; and shall be paid, and payable in the same manner, Hemp imported
after 24 of June 1722. Duty-free
and under the same Rules, Methods, and Restrictions, as are prescribed in, and
by the said former Acts, or either of them, touching the same; and all such
Hemp, being lawfully imported into this Kingdom after the Four, and twentieth
Day of June, One thousand seven hundred, and twenty two, shall be free, and
clear of, and from all Duties, Customs, and Impositions whatsoever, payable to
His Majesty, His Heirs, or Successors; Any Law, Custom, or other Matter, or
Thing to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And Whereas great Quantities of Wood, and Timber, and of the Goods commonly
called Lumber, herein after particularly enumerated (That is to say) Deals of
several Sorts, Timber-Balks of several Sizes, Barrel-Boards, Clap-Boards,
Pipe-Boards, or Pipe-Holt, White-Boards for Shoe-makers, Boom, and Cant-Spars,
Bow-Staves, Capravens, Clap-Holt, Ebony-Wood, Headings for Pipes, and for
Hogsheads, and Barrels, Hoops for Coopers, Oars, Pipe, and Hogshead-Staves,
Barrel-Staves, Firkin-Staves, Trunnels, Speckled-Wood, Sweet Wood, Small Spars,
Oak, Plank, and Wainscot, or some of them, have usually been imported into this
Kingdom from Foreign Countries at excessive Rates, or Prices, especially in
Time of War, and Foreigners have thereby found Opportunities to export the
coined Moneys of this Realm; and it is well known that the said Commodities,
being of the Growth, and Product of His Majesty's Plantations in America, may
be furnished from thence if due Encouragement was given in that Behalf.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all, and every
Person, and Persons who within the Term of One and Twenty Years, Wood, Lumber,
etc. (except Masts, etc) imported, from America, for 21 Years after 24 of June,
1722. Duty-free
to be reckoned from the Four, and twentieth Day of June, One thousand seven
hundred, and twenty two, shall import, or cause to be imported into Great
Britain, directly from any of His Majesty's British Plantations or Colonies in
America, in any Ship, or Vessel, Ships, or Vessels, which may lawfully trade
to, or from His Majesty's said Plantations, or Colonies, and which shall be
navigated according to Law, any sort of Wood, Plank, or Timber whatsoever,
Wrought, or Unwrought, or any of the Goods called Lumber, before in this Act
enumerated, such Wood, Plank, Timber, and Lumber, being of the Growth, and
Product of the said Plantations, or Colonies, or some of them (except Masts,
Yards, and Bow-sprits, touching which Duties, and Premiums are ascertained by
former Acts in that behalf) shall and may import the same free from all
Customs, and Impositions whatsoever, granted to His Majesty, His Heirs, or
Successors.

And to the End, His Majesty's Royal Navy may, from time to time, have the
Benefit of so much of such Hemp, as shall be requisite for the Service thereof.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That upon the Importation of
any Hemp, for which any Bounty, or Premium is by this, or any former Act given,
the Preemption, Such Hemp not contracted for by them within 20 Days, to be
otherwise disposed of.
or Refusal of such Hemp shall be offered, and tendered to the Commissioners of
His Majesty's Navy, or some of their Agents for the time being, upon landing
the same; and if within the space of Twenty Days after such Tender, the said
Commissioners shall not contract, or bargain for the same, it shall be lawful
for the Importer, or Importers, Owner, or Owners of such Hemp, otherwise to
dispose thereof, as by Law they may, for his, her, or their best Profit, and
Advantage.

And Whereas in and by the said Act made in the Third, and Fourth Years of Her
said late Majesty Queen Anne, Entitled, An Act for Encouraging the Importation
of Naval Stores from Her Majesty's Plantations in America, a Reward, or Premium
was given for Tar brought into this Kingdom, directly from Her Majesty's
Plantations in America, after the Rate of Four Pounds for every Ton of Good,
and Merchantable Tar, under such Rules, Regulations, and Provisoes, as are
therein mentioned; which Act was continued by one other Act made in the Twelfth
Year of the same Reign, Entitled, An Act for continuing an Act made in the
Third, and Fourth Years of the Reign of Her present Majesty, Entitled, An Act
for Encouraging the Importation of Naval Stores from Her Majesty's Plantations
in America; and for Encouraging the Importation of Naval Stores from that Part
of Great Britain called Scotland, to that Part of Great Britain called England,
and is still in Force; and by the said last mentioned Act the like Reward, or
Premium of Four Pounds per Ton, was extended to and given for Tar brought from
that Part of Great Britain called Scotland, to that Part of Great Britain
called England, under the like Rules, Regulations, and Provisoes, as in the
Case of Plantation Tar.

And Whereas by one other Act passed in the Fifth Year of the Reign of His
present Majesty, Entitled, An Act against Clandestine Running of uncustomed
Goods; and for the more Effectual preventing of Frauds relating to the Customs,
the said Reward, or Premium is to be allowed for such Tar only as should be
clean, good, merchantable, and well conditioned, and fit for making Cordage;
and nevertheless, the Tar imported from the said Plantations has hitherto been
found to retain an hot, and thick Quality, whereby it is not so fit for making
Cordage, as the East Country Tar.

Wherefore for Remedy thereof for the future, and to the End His Majesty's Navy
may have the Benefits intended by the said Acts in being supplied with
Plantation Tar fit for making Cordage. After 29 Sept. 1724, no Certificate to
be made, nor Bill granted by Commissioner of Navy to entitled Importer of Tar,
to Premium, Unless, etc.


Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the Twenty-ninth
Day of September, which shall be in the Year of our Lord, One thousand seven
hundred, and twenty-four, no Certificate be made out by any Officer of His
Majesty's Customs in any Port of this Kingdom, for any Tar which shall be
imported into this Kingdom, from (...) of His Majesty's Colonies or Plantations
in America, nor any Bill made out by the Commissioners or Principal Officers of
His Majesty's Navy, whereby to entitle the Importer of such Tar to any Reward
or Premium, unless the Certificate of the Governor, Lieutenant Governor,
Collector of the Customs, and Naval Officer, or any Two of them (which
Certificate is by the said Act of the Third and Fourth Years of the Reign of
Her said late Majesty Queen Anne, directed to be by them made out in such
Terms, Manner, and Form, and for such Intents and Purposes, as are therein
mentioned) do express that it has appeared to them (the Persons so certifying)
by the Oath of the Owner or Maker of the Tar, for which such Certificate shall
be granted (such Oath to be made before any Justice of the Peace within the
Colony or Plantation where such Tar shall be made, who is hereby authorized to
administer the same) that the Tar therein mentioned was made from Green Trees
prepared for that purpose, after the following manner; That is to say, That
when such Trees were fit to bark, the Bark thereof was stripped Eight Foot, The
manner.
or thereabouts, up from the Root of each Tree, a Slip of the Bark of about
Four Inches in Breadth having been left on one side of each Tree, and that each
Tree, after having been so barkt had stood during one Year at the least, and
was not before cut down for the making of Tar; Any thing herein, or in any
former Law to the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas the Laws already made, and still in force, for the Preservation of
white Pine Trees, in His Majesty's Colonies of New Hampshire, the
Massachusetts Bay, and Province of Main, Rhode Island, and Providence
Plantation, the Narraganset Country, or Kings-Province, and Connecticut in
New England, and New York, and New Jersey in America, for the Masting the Royal
Navy, have been found insufficient for that Purpose, so that a further
Provision is necessary to be made therein: And forasmuch as there are great
Numbers of White Pine-Trees, fit for Masting the Royal Navy, growing in His
Majesty's Province of Nova Scotia in America.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
Twenty-first Day of September, No White Pine Trees, etc. in America to be cut
or felled after 21 Sept 1722
One thousand seven hundred and twenty-two, no Person or Persons within the
said Colonies or Plantations of Nova Scotia, New Hampshire, the
Massachusetts Bay, and Province of Main, Rhode Island, and Providence
Plantation, and the Narraganset Country, or Kings Province, and Connecticut in
New England, and New York and New Jersey, in America, or within any of them, do
or shall presume to cut, fell, or destroy any White Pine Trees, not growing
within any Township, or the Bounds, Lines, or Limits thereof, in any of the
said Colonies or Plantations, without His Majesty's Royal License for so doing
first had and obtained, on Pain that every Persons so cutting, felling, and
destroying such Pine-Trees, or who shall be aiding or assisting therein, or in
drawing away the said Pine-Trees, after the same shall have been so cut,
felled, or destroyed, shall, for every such Offense, Penalty on Offenders.
forfeit and pay the several and respective Sums following; That is to say, For
every White Pine Tree, of the Growth of Twelve Inches Diameter and under, at
Three Feet from the Earth, the Sum of Five Pounds; for every such Tree, from
Twelve Inches to Eighteen Inches Diameter, the Sum of Ten-Pounds; for every
such Tree, from Eighteen Inches to Four and twenty Inches Diameter, the Sum of
Twenty Pounds; and for every such Tree, from Four and twenty Inches Diameter
and upwards, the Sum of Fifty Pounds; which several Penalties, and Forfeitures
shall and may be sued for within Six Months after the Offense committed, by
Plaint or Information, upon the Oath of One or more Credible Witness or
Witnesses, before the Judge of the Admiralty, (...)
or his Deputy, within the Colony or Plantation where such Pine Tree shall be
cut, felled, or destroyed; One Moiety of such Penalties and Forfeitures to be
to His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, the other Moiety to the Informer who
shall Sue for the same; And in case any Dispute shall arise whether such Tree,
when cut, felled, or destroyed, was growing within any Township, or the Bounds,
Lines, or Limits thereof, as aforesaid, the Proof shall lie upon the Owner; and
on Conviction of such Offender for such Offense, as aforesaid, if he shall
refuse or neglect to pay the Penalty and Forfeiture thereby incurred by the
Space of Twenty Days after such Conviction, that then such Judge, or his
Deputy, shall and may, by Warrant under his Hand and Seal, cause the same to be
levied by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the Offender, rendering the
Overplus, if any be, to the Owner; and when no sufficient Distress can be found
such Judge or Deputy shall commit the Offender to Prison, within the Colony or
Plantation where such Offense shall be committed, there to remain without Bail
or Mainprize, during such time as such Judge or Deputy shall appoint, not
exceeding Twelve Months, nor less than Three Months, or until such Offender
shall pay the Penalty or Sum of Money so recovered; and after such Payment
made, shall likewise find sufficient Security for his good Behavior, during
the space of Three Years, to be accounted from the time of such his Conviction:
And it is hereby Declared, That all White Pine-Trees, Masts, or Logs made from
such Trees, which from and after the said One and twentieth Day of September,
One thousand seven hundred and twenty-two, White Pine-Trees, Masts, etc. felled
shall be found cut or felled, without such License, as aforesaid, in any of
His Majesty's said Colonies, or Plantations, shall be forfeited, and seized for
the Use of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors; Any former Law, Usage, or
Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Whereas by one other Act made in the Ninth Year of the Reign of Her late
Majesty Queen Anne, Entitled, An Act for the Preservation of White, and other
Pine Trees growing in Her Majesty's Colonies of New Hampshire, the
Massachusetts Bay, and Province of Main, and Rhode Island, and Providence
Plantation, the Narraganset Country, or Kings Province, Connecticut, in
New England, and New York, and New Jersey, in America, for the Masting Her
Majesty's Navy; It was, amongst other things, Enacted, That no Person, or
Persons within the said Colonies, and Plantations should cut, fell, or destroy
any White Pine Tree fit for Mast (not being the Property of any private Person)
such Trees being of the Growth of Four, and twenty Inches Diameter, and
upwards, at Twelve Inches from the Earth, without Her Majesty's License, on the
Penalty of One Hundred Pounds Sterling, to be recovered, levied, and
distributed, as therein is mentioned.

Be it hereby further Enacted, Repeal of part of the Act 9 A. for Preservation
of white and other Pine-Trees, etc.
That so much of the said Act as relates to the cutting, felling, or destroying
such White Pine-Trees, and the Penalties to be incurred thereby, shall, from
and after the One, and twentieth Day of September, One thousand seven hundred,
and twenty-two, be, and stand absolutely Repealed.


