A Short History OF A Long Travel, FROM BABYLON, TO BETHEL.

Written the 9th Month, 1691.

The Seventh Edition.

London: Printed and Sold by J. Soul, and Reprinted by Cornelia Bradford in
Philadelphia, 1751.

A SHORT HISTORY OF A Long Travel, etc.
IN the Days of my Youth, when I lived at Home in my Father's House, I heard
many People talk of the House of God; and that whosoever did attain to get into
it, did enjoy all manner of Happiness, both in this World, and that which is to
come. And a great Desire kindled in me, if it was possible, to get into the
House; but I knew not where it was, neither did they that talked of it: But
they had heard the Report, and they had reported what they had heard. There
were also some Books that had been written by Men that had been in that House:
which Books did declare much of the Joy and Felicity they had in that House:
Which Books I got, and Read them over and over, which did much strengthen my
Belief in the Truth of the Reports; but by no means could I tell which was my
Way. Yet so ardent were my desires, that I thought my self willing to forsake
my Father's House, and country and all, to Travel any where, wherever my Legs
could carry me, so I might find this House.

And upon a Time I was breaking my Mind to a Friend of mine upon this Subject,
who really told me, there were Men appointed in every Place, to Guide them that
were willing to go thither; and it was their Business, and they had nothing
else to do. When I heard this I was Comforted; and desired him if he loved me,
to bring me Acquainted with one of these Men.

He told me he would, which he did; and when I came to Treat with the Man, and
let him know the fervent Desire I had to get to the House of God, which I had
heard such Excellent Things of; and that I heard he was one Appointed to Guide
any thither, that were willing to go. He very readily Answered, and told me it
was his Business to Guide any thither that were willing to go, and to persuade
Folks that were not yet willing to go; and if I would comply with his Terms,
and follow him, he would lead me thither.

I asked him what his Terms were; he said, the Way was long, and would lead him
from his Home, and I must bear his Charges, and something over. -- To all which
I agreed; so we set forward on our Journey early in the Morning; but before we
had gone one Days Journey, I saw my Guide sometimes stand still and look about
him; and sometimes would pull a little Book out of his Pocket, and read a
little to himself; which made me begin to mistrust, that he knew the Way no
better than I. However I said nothing, but went on, following him several Days
Journey after this manner; and the further he went the more my Guide was at a
lost; and went sometimes a little on, and then would look about him, and then
turn another Way, and sometimes right back again for a while, and then turn
again. So my Suspicion grew very strong, and I began to be in great Anxiety of
Spirit, but said little to him about it.

But one day as we were Traveling along, we met with a Man that took Notice of
my sad Countenance, and tired Condition, and he spoke very kindly to me, Young
Man, whether art thou Bound? And when I began to tell him something of my
Journey, he desired me to sit down upon the Grass, in a shady Place, and
Discourse a little about my Journey, and so we did, and I told him how things
had gone with me to that very hour. And whilst I was telling him the Story, my
Guide fell asleep; at which I was not sorry, for thereby I had the more freedom
to Discourse with the Man; and when I had told him all, he pitied me, and
withal told me, to his certain Knowledge this Guide of mine had never been at
the House, neither did know the way to it, but as he had got some marks of the
way, which he had received, as I or another may do, and if I followed him all
my Days, I should be never the nearer to it, and should find at last, I had
spent my Time, Money and Labor, to no purpose.

This Discourse did so astonish me, that I was at my wits end, and did not know
what Course to take. The Man seeing what an Agony I was in, began to Comfort
me, and told me that the House I sought was nearer than I was aware of; and if
I would forsake that Guide, and follow him, he would soon bring me in sight of
that House. Quoth he, I am one that belongs to that House, and have done so
several Years; and whereas, said he, thou art to bear his Charges, and give him
Money besides, I will assure thee it is not the manner of the Guides that
belong to this House of God to take Money for Guiding People thither, I my self
have been a Guide to many a one in my Time, but never took one Penny of them
for it.

By this time you may think within your selves, how my drooping Spirits were
Comforted, and a new Hope springing, and a Resolution to forsake my wandering
Guide, and to follow this New one.

Upon which, I awaked my Guide, and told him my Mind, and Paid him what I had
agreed for, And Advised him never to serve poor Soul as he had done me; for I
see, said I, thou know not the way, but as thou have learned in some Books
of it. If Book-Learning would have served my turn to have found this famous
House, I needed not thee, nor any body else to have guided me to it, for there
are but very few that have written experimentally of it; but I have Read them
diligently; but now I have met with a Man, that I judge has more experience of
the way than thou have, and I am resolved to go with him; and if thou will
honestly confess thy Ignorance, and go along with us, come and welcome, one
Guide will serve two Travelers as well as one in the way; but I could not
persuade him, so I left him to take his own way as he pleased.

So I set forward with my new Guide pretty cheerfully, and he entertained me
with a good deal of Discourse by the way, and we went on in pretty smooths
Paths, and without stopping, and he told me in a short Time, we should come in
sight of the House, which made my Travel the easier; and he also told me
something of the Rules and Orders of the House, at which I was not at all
Discouraged; for I considered, God was a God of Order, and I doubted not but
there was good Orders in his House, to which I was willing to submit.

And as we were thus Traveling along, he of a sudden spoke to me, saying
yonder is the House; at which I was exceeding glad, for now I thought I had not
spent my Labor in vain, and the nearer we grew to it, the more my Joy
increased; and when I came in view of it, I pleased my self extremely with
looking at it, and viewing the Towers and Turrets that were upon it, and the
excellent Carvings and Paintings with which it was adorned; and there was as
much of Art in setting it forth, as could be imagined. Oh! thought I, if there
be so much Glory without, surely there is more within, which I shall shortly be
a Partaker of.

And as I was thus Contemplating my Happiness, and was come within as it were a
Bow shot of the House, we were to go down into a Valley, which we did, and in
the Bottom of the Valley glided a long small River, and I looked about to see
for a Bridge to go over it, but could see none; at which I wondered; but on we
went till we came to the River side, then I asked my Guide where the Bridge
was; truly he told me there was none, but we must go through it, and so must all
that go into that House. I was a little troubled with my self, but he told me
he had been through it, and there was no Danger at all. With that I began to
think within my self, have I taken all this Pains, and shall give over for so
small a matter as this is; what would I have gone through when in my Father's
House, to attain to the Knowledge of the House of God, and a Possession
therein; not Water nor verily Fire would have stopped me then, if I had had so
fair a Prospect of it as now I have.

I told my Guide, if he pleased to go before, I would follow him; so in he
went, and I after him; but when I came at the middle, there it was so deep,
that the Water went over my Head but I made shift to keep my Feet to the
ground, and got well out on the other side; and my Guided and I went up
together very pleasantly; and when we came to the top of the Hill, there was a
wide Plain, and in the middle thereof the House stood. So we went apace, and
drew near to it, and there I saw a very stately Porch at the West end of the
House, and at the Door stood a strong tall Porter, to whom my Guide spoke, and
said to him on this wise.

This Young Man has long had a Desire to be Entertained in the House of God,
thereupon I have conducted him hither; the Porter asked him which way I came
thither? He said through the River, and I don't remember he asked him any more
Questions, but bid me welcome, and let me into the House, and my Guide went in
with me, through many turnings and windings into a great Hall; mine Eyes went
to and fro as I went about the House, and in the great Hall there I saw many
People, they bid me welcome, but none knew the Anguish of my Soul; for I began
to Question, whether I was not again beguiled, for I found the House foul and
Dirty, almost in every Part, and so belined with Spiders and Cobwebs, that I
thought in my self it had never been Swept clean since it was Built; and some
things I met withal that displeased me yet worse, as ye shall hear; howbeit a
good Bed was provided for me to Rest upon if I could; and I having little
Stomach, after I saw how it was made ready, I went to Bed, and disposed my self
to Sleep what I could, but alas Sleep departed from me, and my Spirits were
grievously vexed, and my Cogitations were many, and grievous; sometimes I
thought of the Paintings without, and how that Suited not with the Dirtiness
that was within; and if I was deceived, what Course I should take,

After a long and tedious thinking, I pleased my self with this, it may be
better Tomorrow, so I fell into a Slumber a pretty while. In the Morning
before I Rose, I heard two or three Contendind about some Accounts, in which
one laid Fraud to the others Charge; the other, instead of vindicating himself,
fell a twitting him in the Teeth with something of the like kind; they grew hot
in Words, so that they threatened to turn each other out of Doors, and drive
him back again through the River, and never suffer him to come into the House
any more.

My Heart was ready to burst with Sorrow, and in the Anguish of my Spirit, I
Rose and went to them, and told them, I little thought to have found such
Doings, or heard such Language in the House of God. I fear, quoth I, I am
deceived, and brought in amongst you by a fair Show, but see not the Glory,
Peace and Tranquillity.

So I walked away to another Part of the House where I heard a great noise of
hard Words, and I drew near, and understood it was about choosing an Officer,
and two was striving about it, and each of them had got a Party, and each Party
grew hot one against another. As soon as I could be heard, I spoke to them, and
told them such kind of doings as this, did more resemble a place in the World,
called Billingsgate, than the House of God.

I went a little further, and there I heard some Women Scolding about taking
the upper hand, and about some Fashions in their Clothes; and others about
getting their Childrens Play things from each other. All this and much more
than I shall mention, increased my Sorrow: I now began to long to speak with my
Guide that brought me thither; and with diligent Search at last I found him,
and began with him in this Manner.

Whether have thou brought me, and where are the Rules and Orders thou toldest
me were in the House of God? I have often read of the Beauty, Order, Peace and
Purity of the House of God, but here I find nothing but the contrary; I fear
thou have brought me to a wrong House, and have beguiled me; so I Rehearsed to
him what I had met withal. To which he Replied; I must expect Men have their
humane Frailties, and that Men were but Men, and persuaded me to be satisfied,
and make further Trial. And as for the Orders he spoke of, they were most about
Meats and Drinks, and about Rules for Electing of Officers to Rule the House of
God, as I would see in Time, if I stayed; and as to the Dirtiness of the House,
he confessed, them to whom the Care belonged, and was Committed, to keep the
House Clean, had not been so Diligent as they ought to have been, but he hoped,
upon Admonition, they would be more Careful. To which, I returned this Answer.
What! do thou talk of Humane Frailties in the House of God? that Complaint is
at large in the World, but does not become the House of God, into which, I have
heard none can come, but such as are Redeemed from the Earth, and are washed
from their Polutions; for God says, all the Vessels in my House shall be Holy;
and they that dwell in the House of God, must have pure Hearts, and clean
Hands; and much more I told him of what I heard and read concerning the House
of God. And told him plainly, I had let in such a Belief of the Peace, Purity,
Glory and Comeliness of the House of God, that I was persuaded that was none of
it, and where to find it I knew not; but if I never found it while I lived, I
would never give over seeking; my Desires were so after it, that I thought
nothing would satisfy me short of the Enjoyment of it. But as for your House
here I have no Satisfaction in it to be the Place I seek for, so I must leave
you.

His Answer was to me, he was sorry I could not be satisfied there as well as
he, but if I could not, he would lay no Restraint upon me; for his part, he had
directed me as far as he knew, and he could do no more for me. After our
Discourse was ended, I got up and went out, but knew not where to go; several
in the House threw things after me in a spiteful manner, but none hurt me; and
I wandered sometimes North, and sometimes South, and over every way that came
in my Mind; but whithersoever I went, the Anguish of my Soul went along with
me, which was more than Tongue or Pen can declare or utter, or any one can
believe; except this Relation should meet with any one that has experienced the
same Travel; which if it does, they will understand it.

But so was, I had no Comfort Night nor Day, but still kept going on, whether
Right or Wrong I knew not, nor durst I ask any Body, for fear of being beguiled
as before. Thus I got into a vast howling Wilderness, where there seemed to be
no way in it, only now and then I found some Men and Women footsteps, which was
some Comfort to me in my Sorrow; but whither they got out, without being
devoured of Wild Beasts, or whither I should go I knew not. But in this woeful
State I traveled from Day to Day, casting within my self what I had best to
do, whether utterly to Despair in that Condition, or whether I had best to seek
some other Town or City, to see if I could get some other Guide. The first I
saw to be desperate, I also despaired of the last, having been so deceived from
Time to Time; so that all these Consultatons did but increase the bitterness of
my Soul.

And one Day as I was Traveling in the Afternoon a terrible Storm arose, with
Hail and Thunder, and great Wind, which lasted till Night, and in the Night
also. I being weary, both of Body and Mind, lay me down under a great Tree, and
alter some Time I fell asleep; and when I waked, and came to my self, it was
still very Dark; and looking about, I saw a small Light pretty near me; and it
came in my Mind to go to it, and see what it was, and as I went, that went
before me.

Then it came into my Mind that I had heard of false Lights, as Ignis-Fatuus,
and such like, that would lead People out of their Way; then thought I again,
how could I be led out of my Way, that knew no way of Safety. And whilst I sat
down to let these starving Thoughts have their Course, I took notice, and
beheld the Light as near me as at the first, as if it had waited for me. At
which I was strongly affected, and thought within my self, may be some good
Spirit is come to take pity of me, and is come to lead me out of this
miserable Condition. And so a Resolution arose in my Mind, that I should get up
and follow it; concluding in my self, that I could not be brought into a much
worse Condition than I was now in. So I arose and followed it, and it went a
gentle easy pace at first, and I kept my Eye strait to it; but afterward I
found a great part of the Luggage and Provision I had got together, did but
burden me in my Journey; so I threw away one thing, and then another, that I
thought I could best spare, but kept a great bundle of Clothes still by me, not
knowing whether I should need them. And as I thus went on and the Light before
me, it led me out of the Wilderness, along a plain Champion Country, without
Trees, or Inhabitants; only I perceived as if some few had gone that way, and
the Light kept strait in that Path, without any winding or turning till I came
to the Foot of a great Mountain; and going up that great Mountain, I found it
hard getting up, and began to consider my great bundle of Clothes and Garments,
and that several of them were in use for a Traveller as I was, and did not know
how far I should go, nor whether I should want them, if ever I was so Happy as
to attain what I aimed at; nor whether the Fashions would suit the Place I was
going to. So I threw away some, and anon other some, till I had none left but
what I worn. And as I followed this my Guide, I at last got up to the top of
this Mountain, and saw another yet higher; and there I saw a Man; he asked me
whither I was going, I told him I could not well tell; but I would tell him
whither I desired to go, he said whither, to the House of God? He told me it
was that way, but he thought I should never get thither. I asked him why? Why,
quoth he, there lies in yonder Mountain, so many Vipers, Adders, and Serpents,
and such Venomous Beasts, that they devour many People that are going that way.
For my part said he, I was going also, but I was so afrighted with those
Venomous Serpents, I was forced to turn back, and so I would have you.

I answered him, Friend, I have for a pretty while taken yonder Light for my
Guide, and it has directed me a long way, and it does not leave me; look, do
thou see it there before me? He answered yes, I see it; well, said I, I have
heard by Travelers, that if a Man have Fire or Light, the Venomous Beast,
cannot hurt him; and I intend to quicken my pace a little, and keep as close to
the Light as I can, come go along with me and venture it.

He said it was true, he had heard that Fire would preserve from them, but he
thought Light would not. However, for his part, he would not venture his sweet
Life amongst them; If would, I might, he wished me well, and so we parted; and
I made haste, got up pretty near the Light, and up I went the Second Mountain;
and when I came almost to the top of the Mountain, I saw many Serpents Dens,
and Vipers Holes, both on the Right Hand, and on the Lift, and they drew near
me, and hissed at me, and I began to be in great fear, and trembled
exceedingly; but many times when they were ready to sting me. the Light would
step in, or appear betwixt me and them, and they were afrighted, and run away
into their Holes and Dens.

Oh! when I perceived this, how did my heart leap for joy within me, my joy
abounded, my fear of the Serpents abated, my Love to my kind and tender Guide
increased, and my Courage and Confidence abounded; and I began to believe I was
in the Right way to attain my Desire. So on I went, keeping my Eye to the
Light, through them all, without harm, till I came to the top of the Mountain;
and then I saw an exceeding large Valley, that I could not see to the further
side of it; it seemed to be all Moors, and Places of Water, and Boggs and Mire
all over the Valley, which began again to dishearten me; but thought I, what
shall I do; all is well hitherto; I was strangely delivered from the Serpents,
and whatever comes of it, if this Light leave me not, I will follow it, if it
be through Fire and Water; and so I kept on, and went down the Mountain a
gentle easy pace, and see many of those cruel Creatures by the way, who put
out their Stings at me, but none hurt me. And I took Notice, the nearer I kept
to the Light, the more they kept from me; so I got down to the bottom of the
Mountain, into the large Valley, which was very Green and Pleasant for a little
Way; but by and by the Light went toward a great Moorish Ground full of Water,
and that I thought was very Dangerous; but when I came just to the side of the
Place, I saw a small Narrow Path through the middle of it, just broad enough
for a Man to go upon it, and into that Narrow Way the Light lead me, and went
before me; and whilst I kept my Eye steady to it, I went on safely; but if at
any time I began to gaze about, my Feet slipped into the Mire, and Puddles, and
then I had much ado to get into my Way again, had not the Light kindly and
tenderly waited for me, I had lost sight of it, and had perished in the way;
for sometimes it was so far before me, that I could hardly discern it, and then
I would quicken my Diligence, and be more Careful of my Goings, and keep as
close to it as I could. So that sometimes the Light shined round about me, and
I walked in the shining of it with great fullness of Spirit, and after I had
walked a long time in this Narrow Way. I lift up my Eyes, and saw to the
further side of the Moorish Valley; and saw beyond, that there was a very high
Mountain, and on the top of that, there was a very great House; at the sight of
which I was greatly comforted, supposing that might be the House I had for a
long sought.

But after this, I met with another sore Exercise; for there were many I
perceived had been Traveling in that Narrow Way, and had fallen into the Mire,
some on the Right Hand, and some on the Lift; and they lay wallowing, full of
Envy; some by plucing at me, to pull me in; others by throwing Mire and Dirt
upon me, to Discourage me: Others would speak very fair, on purpose to draw me
into Discourse with them, that whilst I spent my precious Time, I might be cast
so far behind, that I might lose that Sight of my good Guide. But I saw their
Evil Designs, and was aware of them, keeping on my Narrow Way till I came to
the End of the Boggy Valley, and then found Firm Ground under my Feet, to my
great Comfort. And I had gone but a little way, and then my Guide the Light
went into a Narrow Lane, well Hedged on both sides; at which I was glad,
thinking I could not go wrong, and need not now take so very much Care; but
alas, I quickly found so many By-Lanes, and Ways, that lay almost so strait
forward as that I went in; so that if it had not been for the Light which went
a little before me, I might certainly gone wrong many time; but by carefully
keeping to my good Guide, I got at last up the Mountain, and saw the House
again, and discerned a Man, of that Country a pretty way off; and I called to
him, Friend, Ho! Friend, pray tell me what is the Name of yonder Great House;
He told me, the Name of it was Bethel; then I presently remembered that that
was the Name by which the House of God was called in my Fathers Country, where
I had heard the Reports of it, and was so earnestly set to find it out.

Oh! the Joy and Consolation that I felt in my Soul, no Tongue can express it,
to think that now after all my Travels, Perils and Disappointments, I had now
found that I sought for. So on I went Journying with Joy unspeakable; and as I
went I viewed the outside of the House, and that was very large, and had but
one Tower, there was no Carved Work about it, nor no Paintings, nor any kind of
Device that I could discern, but all the Stones were curiously Joined together
from the Top to the Bottom. I also took Notice that all the Stones of the
Building were Transparent, some more, and some less, and I saw no Windows to
let in Light, from without; and when I drew near to it, it had a large outward
Court, and a pretty large Gate to go into it, so that a Man might go into it
with a large Burden on his Back; and when I came at it, in I went, where I saw
many People that were very cheerful, and lived very pleasant Lives; and some of
them told me they had lived there many Years, and wanted for nothing, for there
was a mighty Tree grew in the midst of the Court, and the Fruit thereof was
good, and the Leaves also, and they were well contented with it, and it bore
Fruit all the Year long; and many of them were so kind as to invite me to sit
down and Eat with them, but that I refused; and they showed me a great Cistern,
they had hewn out to themselves to catch Water from the Elements, and they had
made themselves convenient Lodgings, in the sides of the Court, to Lodge in;
but this did not satisfy me, (...) I saw my beloved Guide pass through them
all, and enter in at a little Door at the further side of it; whereupon I left
them, and made haste to the Door, wherein I see my Guide had entered, and
attempted to enter in thereat, but could not, it was so strait, which put me
into great sorrow of Mind, and what to do I knew not, my thoughts troubled me
on every side; and all ways I tried, but in vain; Oh! thought I, are all my
Troubles and Labors come to this, must I be shut out at the last, what shall I
do? And as I was thus perplexing my self, I thought I heard a Voice, but knew
not from whence it came, which said, Young Man, strip thee of thy old Garments,
and so thou may enter. This occasioned yet more trouble of Mind, for I was
loath to go in Naked; but at last, I thought it better to go in Naked, than not
at all. So at last I went to Stripping, thinking a few pitiful Rags should not
hinder me of so great an Enjoyment. And when I was strip start Naked as ever I
was born, I tried to enter, and found great difficulty in it; and so soon as I
was entered, one met me, and cast a Garment of pure white Linen over me, which
reached down to my Feet; and he brought me into a narrow Room, and said, Rest
here a while. And then I lay me down in so much Joy and Comfort, as is
impossible to be expressed, all things were so pleasant about me; and my
Resting place was so delightful, and my Heart was so fully satisfied, that it
overcame me with Songs of Joy; but I found my Business to be still and quiet in
my happy Condition, that I was come for to enjoy.

I had not been long in this Room, before I was called out to see the Beauty
and Comeliness, of the House: And as I walked, I found every thing so Clean and
Bright, that I was ravished in an admirable Manner with it; and I met also with
some People that welcomed me to the House of God, with such Kindness as
refreshed my Heart; and as I came to be Acquainted with them, I marked their
Conversations, and their Discourses were exceeding Comfortable to me; no
Quarrelling, no Contention, no high or hot Words, but all passed with Meekness,
and Reverence, and due respect one for the other; the young Men waited for the
Words of the Ancients and Fathers, and Virgins carried a reverent respect to
the Matrons, and there was an Universal Concord and Unity, so that I wondered
greatly; and one Day I was opening my Mind to an Ancient, and told him, I
admired much, and wondered greatly at the Universal Concord that I had taken
Notice of, beyong all I had met with in my Life. He said it must needs be so,
and could not be otherwise; for that was the Guide which lead me hither, had
been the Guide to them all. And further told me, there could be no Contentino
but where two Spirits strove for Mastery, but it was not so in this House. His
Answer was so full and satisfactory to me, that I said no more to him at that
time, but went on, viewing and beholding the Order of every thing I saw, till
my soul was filled, and I might say, my Cup did overflow. So that my former
Labors and Disappointments, Sorrows and Perils did signify nothing to me, I
had a full Reward, a hundred fold.

So I returned to my Rest again, in a Larger Room than before, where I Sung
Praises to my God; and setting forth the Praises of the House, and them that
dwell therein. And a while after I was called forth of the Room where I was,
and told, I was not brought to that Place, only to take pleasure and delight
therein, but there was Work to be done, and I must take my part of it, and be
faithful and deligent in what I was set about. To which I answered, it was
enough I had attained my desires in being admitted into the Heavenly Place; but
if there were any Business that I could do, I was willing to do it, be it what
it would, for it would be my greatest Joy to do any thing to the Advancement of
the Honor of the House of God, and them that dwell therein. Then he that
talked with me, told me, it was my Work, to teach the Children so far as I knew
and had learned, and as far as I should from Time to time be further
instructed. Indeed I was a little amazed thereat, knowing my Inabilities: But
when I had a little pondered that part of the Sentence; that I should be from
Time to Time further instructed, I took Courage in my Work, and made some
Progress in it with great Fear, and Reverence, waiting daily for those
Instructions I was to receive, and I did receive in an abundant manner; and the
work prospered in my Hand, and the Children loved me, and I loved them
entirely, as though they had been my own Children; and many of them grew up to
a good Understanding, and observed their places and orders, to my great
Delight. And after I had thus continued a while, the Elder that talked with me
before, came and told me, I must take the charge of part of the Household, and
give them their Meat in due season; and suit every ones Meat, in deviding to
every ones State and Condition; and not to feed strong Men with Milk, or Babes
with strong Meat; and for that Purpose, he gave me a Key that led into the
Treasure, or Sore-House; which when I came to see and behold it was abundently
filled with all sorts of Nourishments that never could be exhausted or spent
while the World endured.

And after some Time I took out to Distribute daily among the Household of God,
and the Store House was still full, as at the beginning, and so it continues to
this day, and for ever.

And having continued a long while in this Heavenly Habitation, it comes in my
Mind to let my Countrymen the Children of my old Father whom I lest in Babylon,
hear of me; for I suppose they judge me lost, or devoured; but I could be glad
if any, yea all of them were hear to behold, and taste and feel what I do.

And let none of them say, I happened better than many can; for I have wandered
since I came into this House. The same Light that appeared to me does appear to
any poor distressed Soul in the whole World; but the reason that so few come
here, is because they fear the Perils and dangers that are in the Way, more
than they love the Light that would lead them thither through them; and so turn
aside, and shelter themselves in an Old Rotten Building, that at one time or
other will fall on their Heads and they perish in the Ruins.

Now if any one have a mind to know my Name in my Fathers Country; but in this
long and tedious Journey I have lost it. but since I came hither, I have a new
Name, but I have no Characters to signify it by, that I can Write, or they can
Read. But if any will come where I am, they shall know my Name. But for further
Satisfaction, I was born in Egypt, Spiritually called and my Father went and
lived in Babylon, about the Time the true Children of Isarel were in Captivity;
there I came acquainted with some of the Stock of the Jews, about the time they
were returning to their own Land; and they told me wonderful things of the
Glory of the House they had at Jerusalem, and would have had me gone along with
them; and amongst the rest, I understood that Solomon with many thousands of
Carpenters and Masons had built it. Upon which I considered, within my self,
that if Solomon, and the Carpenters and Masons had Built it, Carpenters and
Masons might at one time or other pull it down again. So I went not, but sought
a City, whose Builder is God: And now I have found it Hallalujah in the
Highest, Glory, Honor, and Renown to his Worthy Name, and Power, throughout
all Ages and Geanrations, Amen.

S. C.

FINIS.

