State of Religion AMONG The Protestant DISSENTERS IN VIRGINIA; In a LETTER To
the Rev. Mr. Joseph Bellamy, of Bethlem, in New England: From the Reverend Mr.
SAMUEL DAVIES, V.D.M. in Hanover County, Virginia.

As cold Water to a thirsty Soul, so is good News from a far Country. SOLOMON,
Prove. 25. 25. BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, in Queen Street,
opposite the Prison. MDCCLI.

A LETTER, etc.
Reverend and dear Sir,
IF the Publication of a Narrative of the Rise, Progress and present Situation
of Religion in Virginia, may not only gratify good People, but (as you give me
Reason to hope) animate their Prayers for us, and also encourage Preachers to
come into these Parts; I should charge my self with a criminal Neglect, did I
deprive this Colony of these Blessings, by delaying or refusing to publish the
mavelous Works of the Lord among us. Such Matters are liable to
Misrepresentations; and I doubt not but the State of Religion in these Parts
has suffered the same Fate with other Facts reported by common Fame, and been
magnified or diminished to you. I shall therefore, Sir, with as much Brevity
and Accuracy as the Case and my Circumstances will allow, give you an Account
of the State of Religion among the Protestant Dissenters in Virginia, not only
in my Congregation in Hanover, but also in the Frontier Counties of this
Colony, which are generally inhabited by Dissenters; which, after Perusal, you
may present to the Public, or doom to Oblivion, as your Prudence will direct.
I look upon my self under the most sacred Obligations to maintain the strictest
Regard to Matter of Fact in my Narrative: and as my Residence in Hanover above
three Years, and my Itinerations among the vacant Congregations in the Frontier
Counties, have furnished me with-peculiar Opportunities of Information, my
Misrepresentations would be the more inexcusable.

My Design Sir, is not to inform the World of my petty personal Concerns, to
boast of Proselytes, or to asperse the Church of England here established; and
therefore, to avoid Suspicions, I must suppress sundry Particulars that might
be proper to mention in the Freedoms of amicable Conversation, but are not to
be trusted to the Candor of a censorious World; and I have always though it it an
Instance of Imprudence pregnant with mischievous Consequences, when Persons in
such Cases unbosom themselves to Mankind in general, with the unguarded
Liberties of intimate Friendship.

It will not probably be worth while to give you any further Geographical
Account of Hanover County, where the late Revival of Religion began, than that
it is situated, I think, pretty near the Center of Virginia; is a flourishing
County, and generally very healthy to Persons from all Nations; which I mention
Sir, to remove your Scruple, Whether this Climate agrees with the Constitution
of New England Men?

I hope I may observe without the Umbrage of Calumny, what glares with
irresistible Evidence on the Eyes of the Serious of all Denominations among us,
that Religion has been, and in most Parts of the Colony still is, in a very low
State. A surprising Negligence appears in attending on public Worship; and an
equally surprising Levity and Unconcernedness in those that attend.
Family-Religion is a Rarity, and a solemn Solicitude about eternal Things is
still a greater. Vices of various Kinds are triumphant, and even a Form of
Godliness is not common. The Clergy universally, as far as my Intelligence
extends, have embraced the modish System of Arminian Divinity, (though I allow my
self the Pleasure to hope there are sundry conscientious Persons among them)
and the Calvinistic, or rather PAULINE Articles of their own Church are counted
horrendous and insufferable. -- But I suppose universal Fame has superseded my
Information; and therefore I willingly exempt my self from the disagreable Task.

I cannot find there has been a dissenting Minister settled in Virginia, 'till
lately, since its first Plantation. You no doubt remember what Dr. Mather, and
Mr. Neal from him, relate of the sending of Messirs. James, Knowles, and
Thomson into it from New England, at the Invitation of sundry of its
Inhabitants, above a Hundred Years ago; and of their being compelled to depart
the Colony by the Governor's Order, after preaching a few Sermons: See Neal's
Hist. of N. England, Vol. I. p. 220. sub an. 1642.
Since which, there have been hardly any Attempts made to obtain such
Ministers, 'till a few Years ago; and many of the Populace knew little or
nothing of any Denomination, but that in which they had been educated.

I have Reason to hope Sir, there are and have been a few Names in various
Parts of the Colony, who are sincerely seeking the Lord, and groping after
Religion, in the Communion of the Church of England; which I charitably presume
from my finding there were a few of this happy Character in and about Hanover
before the late Revival of Religion. Such were awakened, as they have told me,
either by their own serious Reflections, suggested and enforced by divine
Energy; or on reading some Authors of the last Century, particularly Bolton,
Baxter, Flavel, Bunyan, etc. Some of them were wont to attend on public
Worship in the established Church without much murmuring at the Entertainments
there; though they were sensible these were vastly inferior to what past Ages
were favored with, and often wondered if there were such Doctrines taught any
where in the World at present, as they found in the Writings of these good Men.
Others of them, though they had no Objections against the Ceremonies of the
Church of England, except a few who were shocked at the impracticable
Obligations imposed upon the Sponsors in Baptism, were utterly dissatisfied
with the usual Doctrines taught from the Pulpit. Though these were generally
true, and would have been useful, in their Connection with the Scheme of
evangelical Doctrines; yet so many necessary Truths were neglected, as rendered
those that were inculcated of very little Service. The whole System of what is
distinguished by the Name of experimental Religion, was past over in Silence.
The Depravity of humane Nature, the Necessity of Regeneration, and it is
Pre-requisites, Nature and Effects, the various Exercises of pious Souls
according to their several Cases, etc. these were omitted; and without these,
you know Sir, the finest Declamations on moral Duties or speculative Truths,
will be but wretched Entertainment to hungry Souls. Such a maimed System is not
the complete Religion of JESUS, that glories in the amiable Symmetry, mutual
Dependency and Subserviency of all its Doctrines, as its peculiar
Characteristic. Had the whole Counsel of God been declared, had all the
Doctrines of the Gospel been solemnly and faithfully preached in the
established Church; I am persuaded there would have been but few Dissenters in
these Parts of Virginia; for, as I observed, their first Objections were not
against the peculiar Rites and Ceremonies of that Church, much less against her
excellent Articles; but against the general Strain of the Doctrines delivered
from the Pulpit, in which these Articles were opposed, or (which was the more
common Case) not mentioned at all: so that at first they were not properly
Dissenters from the original Constitution of the Church of England, but the
most strict Adherents to it, and only dissented from those that had forsaken
it, though they still usurped the Denomination. But though such Impartiality in
preaching the Gospel might have prevented the Advancement of the Interest of
the Dissenters as a Party, it would have tended to promote the infinitely more
valuable Interests of the blessed Redeemer: and had this been the Case, our
Zeal and Industry to convert them to Presbyterianism, would have been almost
superfluous, and quite disproportioned. -- And here Sir, it may be proper to
observe, That when in this Narrative I speak of the Increase of Dissenters in
these Parts with an Air of Satisfaction, I do not boast of them as mere
Captures from the Church of England, but as hopefully sincere Proselytes to
living Religion, or at least as lying open to Conviction, and in the Way of
more profitable Means. I cannot indeed but conscienciously dissent from some of
the Peculiarities of that Church; and it tends a little to heighten our
Satisfaction, when such as agree with us in Essentials, and appear truly pious,
do also agree with us in Circumstantials; for as Agreement is the Foundation
and Measure of social Love, this must be coextended with that: Yet as I am
fully persuaded the Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness and
Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and that Persons of superior Piety and
Judgment have used these Rites and Ceremonies with Approbation; I think the
Alteration of Men's Principles and Practice with Respect to these Things only,
without being born again of God, is a wretched Conversion; and it would inspire
me with much greater Joy to see a pious Churchman, than a graceless
Presbyterian. I cheerfully embrace the Sentiments of that illustrious Divine
Mr. How, See Howe's Works, Vol. II. p. 474.
That without the Effusion of the Spirit from high, to fashion the Hearts of
Men into a Conformity to the blessed God, and to prepare them for a happy
Immortality, it matters little, and signifies to me scarce one Straw, what
Party of us is uppermost: The most Righteous, (as they may be vogu'd) will be
but as Briars and scratching Thorns; and it is better to suffer by such, than
to be of them. The chief Reason Sir, why I call upon you to congratulate the
Increase of the Dissenters here, and rejoice in it my self, is, because I have
Ground to hope that the Number of the Heirs of Heaven is augmented in some
Proportion, though alas! not to an Equality; and to triumph on inferior Accounts,
would argue the narrow Genius of a Bigot. -- But to return.

The Few that professed a Dissatisfaction with the general Strain of Preaching
in Church, and therefore either absented themselves, or attended with Murmuring
and Reluctance, were generally counted whimsical Creatures, and hypocritical
Affectors of Singularity: and indeed they could not but own their Sentiments
singular; for they knew of none in the present Age of the same Mind with them;
and therefore had no Prospect of obtaining a Minister to preach to them those
Doctrines they thirsted for. Their Notions, as far as I can learn, were sound
in the main; though intermixed with some corrupt Notions verging toward
Antinomianism, the opposite Extreme to that they had left. And though this
rendered them more odious to their Adversaries, and furnished them with
Occasions more plausibly to expose them; yet, considering their Circumstances
as being destitute of a judicious Minister to instruct them in the Doctrines of
the Gospel, and caution them against Mistakes; and as laboring under the
Prejudices of Education, and transported with the Sallies of their first Zeal,
which is generally imprudent and wild; I am more surprised at their Soundness
and Regularity in most Things, than at their Mistakes and Extravagancies in a
few.

In this Case about ten or twelve Persons who are now Members of my
Congregation, had been for some Time before the Revival of Religion which began
in the Year 1743. One Mr. Samuel Morris (for I am not ashamed publicly to
mention his Name, notwithstanding the Calumnies flung upon it by many) a Person
of a forward, sociable Spirit, who had for some Time been extremely anxious
about his eternal State, and unweariedly seeking Relief by all Means within his
Reach, at length obtained a Discovery of that glorious Method of Salvation
through Jesus Christ, to which Sinners from all the Ends of the Earth look, and
are saved, and where they universally agree to six all their Hopes,
notwithstanding the great Diversity of their Circumstances as to Situation,
Education, outward Instruction, etc. The distinct Relation he has given me of
his Exercises at that Time and since, and the prevailing Piety of his common
Behavior, leave me no Room to be anxious about the Sincerity of his Religion;
though, as it is common in such Cases, his former pious Zeal to do Good, with a
few very pardonable Imprudences that attended it, have fixed an indelible Odium
on his Character among many who opposed the religious Concern he attempted to
promote. After this Discovery of the Gospel, his Soul was anxious for the
Salvation of his Neighbors, and inflamed with Zeal to use Means to awaken
them. This was the Tendency of his Conversation; and he also read to them such
Authors as had been most useful to him, particularly Luther's Comment upon the
Galatians, which first opened to him the Way of Justification through Christ
alone, and his Table-Discourses; sundry Pieces of honest Bunyan's etc. By those
Means a few of his Neighbors were made more tho'tful about Religion than
usual, and doubtful they had lived 'till then in a careless Ignorance of it;
but the Concern was not very extensive.

I have prevailed, Sir, on my good Friend before mentioned, who was the
principal private Instrument of promoting the late Work, and therefore well
acquainted with it, to write me a Narrative of its Rise and Progress from this
Period 'till my Settlement here: and this, together with the Substance of what
he and others have told me, I shall present to you without any material
Alterations, and personate him, though I shall not exactly use his Words.

The Reverend Mr. Whitefield had been in Virginia, I think, in the Year 1740,
and at the Invitation of the Rev. Mr. Blair, our late Commissary, had preached
in Williamsburg, our Metropolis, about 60 Miles from Hanover. His Fame was much
spread abroad, as a very warm and alarming Preacher; which made such of us in
Hanover as had been awakened, very eager to see and hear him; but as he left
the Colony before we heard of him, we had no Opportunity. But in the Year --
43, a young Gentleman arrived from Scotland with a Book of his Sermons preached
in Glasgow, and taken from his Mouth in short Hand, which with Difficulty I
procured. After I had read it with great Liking and Benefit, I invited my
Neighbors to come and hear it; and the Plainness, Popularity, and Fervency of
the Discourses, being peculiarly fitted to affect our unimproved Minds, and the
Lord rendering the Word efficacious, many were convinced of their undone
Condition, and constrained to seek Deliverance with the greatest Solicitude. A
considerable Number convened every Sabbath to hear these Sermons, instead of
going to Church, and frequently on Week Days. The Concern of some was so
passionate and violent, that they could not avoid crying out, weeping bitterly,
etc. and that when such Indications of religious Concern were so strange and
ridiculous, that they could not be occasioned by Example or Sympathy, and the
Affectation of them would have been so unprofitable an Instance of Hypocrisy,
that none could be tempted to it. My Dwelling House at length was too small to
contain the People; whereupon we determined to build a Meeting House, merely
for Reading; for we knew of no Minister in the World whom we could get to
preach to us according to our Liking; and having never been accustomed to
social extempore Prayer, none of us durst attempt it in Company. By this single
Mean sundry were solemnly awakened, and their Conduct ever since is a living
Attestation of the Continuance and happy Issue of their Impressions. When the
Report of these Sermons and the Effects occasioned by reading them was spread
Abroad, I was invited to several Places to read them, at a considerable
Distance; and by this Means the Concern was propagated.

About this Time, our absenting our selves from Church, contrary, as was
alleged, to the Laws of the Land, was taken Notice of; and we were called upon
by the Court to assign our Reasons for it, and to declare what Denomination we
were of. As we knew but little of any Denomination of Dissenters, except
Quakers, we were at a Loss what Name to assume. At length recollecting that
Luther was a noted Reformer, and that his Doctrines were agreeable to our
Sentiments, and had been of special Service to us, we declared our selves
Lutherans; and thus we continued 'till Providence afforded us an unexpected
Opportunity of hearing the Rev. Mr. William Robinson.

Here Sir, it may be proper for me to lay aside the Person of my Informer for a
while, and interrupt the Connection of his Relation, to give you some Account
of the Travels and Successes of that zealous, faithful and laborious Minister
of Christ, the late Mr. Robinson, whose dear Memory will mingle with my softest
and most grateful Thot's, as long as I am capable of Reflection. He was in the
Ministry about six Years, and never took the Charge of a Congregation 'till a
few Months before his happy and triumphant Exit. The necessitous Circumstances
of many Vacancies, and the Prospect of more extensive Usefulness engaged him to
expose his shattered Constitution, to all the Hardships and Fatigues of almost
unioterrupted Itinerations; and it has been my Lot to trace his Travels in
sundry Parts of Pennsylvania, Maryland and Virginia; and I cannot recollect one
Place in which he had officiated for any Time, where there were not some
illustrious Effects of his Ministry. He had a noble disinterested Ambition to
preach the Gospel, where Christ was not named; and therefore, by the Permission
of the Presbyte y, he took a Journey through the new Settlements in Pennsylvania,
Virginia, and North Carolina, in which he continued about two Years, oppressed
with the usual Difficulties a weakly Constitution finds in traveling a
Wilderness, and animated only by his glorious Successes. He continued for some
Time in Lunenburg, a County about 100 Miles S. W. of this, where (as I shall
have Occasion to observe more fully hereafter) a small Number of Presbyterians
from the northern Colonies were settled, intermixed with a Number of loose
Virginians; and there he was the happy Instrument of reclaiming many tho'tless
Creatures, and founding a flourishing Congregation. In Amelia also, a County
somewhat nearer this than the former, his Labors were extensively blessed; and
while he was there, or near it, some of the People in Hanover having had some
imperfect Information of him, sent him an Invitation to come and preach to
them, though they knew very little of his Character or Method of Preaching, only
that it was uncommon and tended to awaken People. They ventured to make an
Appointment for him to preach at their Reading-House (if I may so call it)
before they received any Promise from him by their Messenger; and with much
Difficulty he came against the Day appointed. Some of the People were anxious
to discover his Principles privately in the Morning before he was to preach;
but knew not how, 'till they fell upon the Device of asking his Opinion of some
Books they approved of. Upon his declaring his Approbation of these Tests of
Orthodoxy, they were transported with the most pleasing Expectations, and with
eager Impatience attended him to the Place where he was to preach.

I shall now reassume the Person of my Informer, and proceed in his Narrative
-- On the 6th of July -- 43, Mr. Robinson preached his first Sermon to us from
Luke 13.3. and continued with us preaching four Days successively. The
Congregation was large the first Day; and as the Report of him spread, it
vastly increased on the three ensuing. It Is hard for the liveliest Imagination
to form an Image of the Condition of the Assembly on these glorious Days of the
Son of Man. Such of us as had been hungring for the Word before, were lost in
an agreeable Confusion of various Passions, surprised, astonished, pleased,
enraptured! so that we were hardly capable of SelfGovernment, and some could
not refrain from publicly declaring their Transport: we were overwhelmed with
the Tho'ts of the unexpected Goodness of God, in allowing us to hear the Gospel
preached in a Manner that surpassed even our former Wishes, and much more our
Hopes. Many that came through Curiosity were pricked to the Heart; and but few in
the numerous Assemblies on these four Days appeared unaffected. They returned
astonished, alarmed with Apprehensions of their dangerous Condition, convinced
of their former entire Ignorance of Religion, and anxiously enquiring, what
they should do to be saved; and there is Reason to believe there was as much
Good done by these four Sermons, as by all the Sermons preached in these Parts
before or since.

Before Mr. Robinson left us, he successfully endeavored to correct some of
our Antinomian Mistakes, and to bring us to carry on the Worship of God more
regularly at our Meetings. He advised us to meet to read good Sermons, and to
begin and conclude with Prayer and singing of Psalms, which 'till then we had
omitted. When we met next, we complied with his Directions; and when all the
rest refused, I read and prayed with Trembling and Diffidence; which Method was
observed in sundry Places 'till we were furnished with a Minister. The Blessing
of God remarkably attended these more private Means; and it was really
astonishing to observe the solemn Impressions begun or continued in many, by
hearing good Discourses read. I had repeated Invitations to come to many Places
round, some of them 30 or 40 Miles distant, to read; with which I generally
complied. Considerable Numbers were will not to attend, with eager Attention and
awful Solemnity; and sundry were, in a Judgment of Charity, thoro'ly turned to
God, and thereupon erected MeetingHouses, and chose Readers among themselves,
by which the Work was more extensively carried on.

Soon after our Father, Mr. Robinson, left us, the Rev. Mr. John Blair paid us
a short Visit; and truly he came to us in the Fullness of the Gospel of Christ.
Former Impressions were ripened, and new formed on many Hearts. One Night in
particular a whole House-full of People was quite overcome with the Power of
the Word, particularly of one pungent Sentence that dropped from his Lips; and
they could hardly sit or stand, or keep their Passions under any proper
Restraints, so general was the Concern during his Stay with us; and so ignorant
were we of the Danger Persons in such a Case were in of Apostasy, which unhappy
Observation has since taught us, that we pleased our selves with the
Expectation of the gathering of more People to the divine Shiloh than now seem
to have been actually gathered to him; though there be still the greatest Reason
to hope that sundry bound themselves to the Lord in an everlasting Covenant,
never to be forgotten.

Some Time after this, the Rev. Mr. John Roan, was sent by the Presbytery of
New Castle, (under whose immediate Care we had voluntarily placed our selves to
supply us. He continued with us longer than either of the former; and the happy
Effects of his Ministrations are still apparent in many Instances. He preached
at sundry Places at the earnest Solicitations of the People, which was the
happy Occasion of beginning and promoting the religious Concern, where there
were little Appearances of it before. This, together with his speaking pretty
freely about the Degeneracy of the Clergy in this Colony, gave a general Alarm,
and some Measures were concerted to suppress us. To incense the Indignation of
the Government the more, a perfidious Wretch deposed, he heard Mr. Roan use
some blasphemous Expressions in his Sermon, and speak in the most shocking and
reproachful Manner of the established Church. An Indictment was thereupon drawn
up against Mr. Roan, (though by that Time he had departed the Colony) and some of
the People who had invited him to preach at their Houses, were cited to appear
before the General Court, (which in this Government consists of the Governor
or Commander in Chief, and His Majesty's Council) and two of them were fined
twenty Shillings Sterling, besides the Costs, which in one of the Cases would
have amounted to near fifty Pounds, had the Evidences demanded their Due. While
my Cause was upon Trial, I had Reason to rejoice that the Throne of Grace is
accessible in all Places, and that helpless Creatures can waft up their Desires
unseen, to God, in the midst of a Crowd. Six Evidences were cited to prove the
Indictment against Mr. Roan; but their Depositions were in his Favor; and as
for the Evidence mentioned just now, who accused him of Blasphemy against God
and the Church, when he heard of Messirs. G. Tennent's and S. Finley's Arrival,
he fled, and has not returned since; so that the Indictment was dropped. I had
Reason to fear being banished the Colony, and all Circumstances seemed to
threaten the Extirpation of Religion among the Dissenters in these Parts.

In these Difficulties we lay, without any Person of a public Character to
appear in our Favor; whereupon we determined to acquaint the Synod of NewYork
with our Case; hoping that a Synodical Representation of it to our worthy
Governor, the Hon. Sir WILLIAM GOOCH, might free him from the Misinformations
under which he labored, and procure us the Liberties granted to Protestant
Dissenters by the Act of Toleration. Accordingly four of us went to the Synod,
May 1745, when the Lord favored us with Success. The Synod being informed of
our Difficulties, and presuming they might be removed by an impartial
Representation of our Affairs, drew up an Address to our Governor, and sent
the Rev. Messirs. G. Tennent and Samuel Finley to wait on his Honor to present
it, and to officiate a few Days among us. Sir WILLIAM received them with
Condescension and Respect, and granted them Liberty to preach in Hanover. By
this Means the tremendous Cloud that hung over us was dissipated for a Time,
and our languid Hopes were revived. Mr. Tennent and Mr. Finley continued with
us about a Week, and though the Deluge of Passion in which we were at first
overwhelmed, was by this Time somewhat abated; yet much Good was done by their
Ministry. The People of God were refreshed, and sundry careless Sinners were
awakened. Some that had confided before in their moral Conduct and religious
Duties, were convinced of the Depravity of their Nature, and the Necessity of
being renewed in the Spirit of their Mind; though indeed there were but few
uneregenerate Persons among us at that Time that could claim so regular a
Character; the Generality of Professors indulging themselves in criminal
Liberties, and being remiss in the Duties of Religion; which alas! is too
commonly the Case still in such Parts of the Colony as the late Revival did not
extend to.

After these Gentlemen had left us, we continued vacant for a considerable
Time, and kept up our Meetings for Reading and Prayer in sundry Places; and the
Lord favored us at these Occasions with his gracious Presence. I was again
repeatedly presented and fined in Court for absenting myself from Church, and
keeping up unlawful Meetings, as they were called; but the Bush flourished in
the Flames.

The next that were appointed to supply us were the Rev. Messirs. William
Tennent and Samuel Blair. They waited on the Governor, and readily obtained
his Permission to officiate among us. Their Labors were not in vain in the
Lord. They administered the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper among us before their
Departure; which was the first Administration of that heavenly Ordinance among
us since our dissent from the Church of England; and we have Reason to remember
it 'till our last Moments, as a most glorious Day of the Son of Man. The
Assembly was large, and the Novelty of the Mode of Administration did
peculiarly engage their Attention. The Children were abundantly fed, and others
were bro't to hunger and thirst after Righteousness. It appeared as one of the
Days of Heaven to some of us; and we could hardly help wishing we could with
Joshua have delayed the Revolutions of the Heavens to prolong it.

Messieurs Tennent and Blair continued with us about a Fortnight, and
immediately after their Departure, Mr. Whitefield came and preached four or
five Days in these Parts; which was the happy Means of giving us farther
Encouragement, and engaging others to the Lord, especially among the
Church-People, who received his Doctrines more readily than they would from
Ministers of the Presbyterian Denomination.

After his Departure, we were destitute of a Minister, and followed our usual
Method of Reading and Prayer at our Meetings, 'till the Rev. Mr. Davies, our
present Pastor, was sent by the Presbytery to supply us about six Week, in
Spring, Anno 1747, when our Discouragements from the Government were renewed
and multiplied: For on one Sunday the Governor's Proclamation was set up at
our Meeting House, strictly requiring all Magistrates to suppress and prohibit,
as far as they lawfully could, all itinerant Preachers, etc. which occasioned
us to forbear Reading that Day, 'till we had Time to deliberate and consult
what was expedient to do; but how joyfully were we surprised before the next
Sabbath, when we unexpectedly heard that Mr. Davies was come to preach so long
among us; and especially, that he had qualified himself according to Law, and
obtained the Licensure of four Meeting Houses among us, which had never been
done before! Thus when our Hopes were expiring, and our Liberties more
precarious than ever, we were suddenly advanced to a more secure Situation.
"Man's Extremity is the Lord's Opportunity." For this seasonable Instance of
the Interposition of divine Providence, we desire to offer our grateful
Praises; and we importune the Friends of Zion generously to concur in the
delightful Employ.

Thus, Sir, I have given you a brief Account of the Rise and Progress of
Religion here 'till my first coming into the Colony; and the Facts themselves I
know to be well attested, though the Order in which I have related them, is in
some Instances preposterous. -- I shall now proceed in my Narrative from my own
Knowledge, and inform you of the State of Affairs since April 1747.

The Dissenters here were under peculiar Disadvantages for want of a settled
Minister. By this they were not only deprived of the stated Ministrations of
the Gospel, but also exposed to great Difficulties from the Government, which
could not be wholly removed while they continued vacant; for it was alleged,
(this is no proper Place to enquire with how much Law or Reason) that 'till
they were an organized Congregation, and had a Minister qualified, and their
Meeting Houses lic^^s'd, according to Law, they could not claim the Liberties
and Immunities of the Act of Toleration. Besides, the Itinerations of my
Brethren, though occasioned by Necessity, were misconstructed, as turning all
Things upside down, as a mere Artifice to wheedle People out of their Money,
and as an Evidence there were such prodigious Swarms of us to the Northward,
that we were obliged to make Excursions into distant Parts: When indeed the
chief Reason was the small Number of our Ministers and Candidates, which was
vastly disproportioned to the Vacancies in Pennsylvania, and much more to those
in Maryland and Virginia, (not to mention the Discouragements that would be
naturally suggested to young Ministers, at the Thoughts of removing to a
strange Colony, separated from their Brethren, exposed to peculiar Fatigues,
and the Embarrassments of so limited and precarious a Toleration as they then
had Reason to expect.) On these Accounts the Synod, and particularly the
Presbytery of New Castle, were very solicitous to settle a Minister among them
as soon as possible. I was therefore sent by said Preshytery into Hanover at
the Time mentioned above, both to officiate for some Time, and to see if my Way
should be cleared to settle there. Upon my Arrival, I petitioned the General
Court to grant me a License to officiate in and about Hanover, at four
Meeting Houses; which after some Delay, was granted, upon my qualifying
according to the Act of Toleration, i. e. taking the usual Oaths to His
Majesty's Person and Government, getting the Meeting Houses recorded, and
subscribing the Articles of the Church of England, except the 34, 35, 36, and
this Clause of the 20th, The Church has Power to decree Rites or Ceremonies,
and Authority in Controversies of Faith; and yet --

I preached frequently in Hanover and some of the adjacent Counties at this
Time; and though the Fervor of the late Work was considerably abated, and my
Labors were not blessed with Success equal to those of my Brethren; yet I have
Reason to hope they were of Service in sundry Instances. I have conversed with
a few since, that were awakened at that Time; and sundry that had been under
languishing Concern, were hastening to the Birth. The Importunities they used
with me to settle were invincible; and upon my Departure, they sent a Call for
me to the Presbytery, which, with three besides, from other Places, all very
necessitous, I took under Consideration. I was fully convinced Hanover stood in
greater Need of a Minister than any Place I knew; and that if my Health
permitted, and none of my Brethren could be prevailed upon to settle there, I
could not refuse their Call consistently with Duty. After my Return from
Virginia, I spent near a Year under melancholy and consumptive Languishments,
which I certainly expected would have conveyed me into the eternal World; and
by this I hoped to be exempted from the disagreable Obligation. In the Spring
1748, I began slowly to recover; though I then looked upon it only as the
Intermission of a Disorder that would finally prove mortal. But upon the
Arrival of a Messenger from Hanover, I put my Life in my Hand, and determined
to accept of their Call; hoping I might live to organize the Congregation, and
prepare the Way for some more useful Successor; and willing to expire under the
Fatigues of Duty, rather than in voluntary Negligence. -- But I forget, Sir,
that this Narrative may perhaps be presented to the Public, and indulge myself
in an Egotism, as though I were writing only to a Friend. The only Apology I can
make is, that some of my personal Affairs are so interwoven with those of this
Congregation, that I find it difficult to relate the latter, without using too
great Freedoms in the former. However, you have my full Consent to obliterate
whatever you think unworthy of a public View.

My dearest Brother, the Rev. Mr. John Rodgers, was sent along with me to
Hanover, to assist me for a few Sabbaths at my first Settlement. But when he
offered himself in the General Court to take the Qualifications enjoined by
Law, he was rejected, under Pretense that his Certificate not being granted by
the Synod, and particularly that of Philadelphia, but only by the Presbytery,
was insufficient, (though, by the Bye, it was as sufficient as mine, which they
had admitted; and given according to universal President among Presbyterians)
whereupon he was obliged to return without preaching but one Sermon.

On this Occasion, as well as all others, we had Reason to acknowledge with the
most dutiful Gratitude, the Condescension and Clemency of the Hon. Sir WILLIAM
GOOCH, our late Governor, who always discovered a ready Disposition to allow
us all claimable Privileges, and the greatest Aversion to persecuting
Measures; but considering the horrendous and shocking Reports spread Abroad
concerning us by officious Malignants, it was no great Wonder the Council
discovered a considerable Reluctance to tolerate us. Had it not been for this,
I persuade my self they would have shown themselves the Guardians of our legal
Privileges, as well as generous Patriots to their Country; which is the
illustrious Character generally given them.

I observed, Sir, before, that I obtained the Licensure of four Meeting Houses
when I first came to the Colony. In October 1748, the People petitioned for the
Licensure of three more, which with great Difficulty was obtained. Among these
seven, I have hitherto divided my Time, in Proportion to the Number of
Dissenters at each Meeting House: Three of them lie in Hanover County, one in
Henrico County, which lies Southward; one in Caroline County, which lies
Northward; one in Louisa County, situated to the Westward; and one in
Goochland, to the South-west of Hanover. The nearest are 12 or 15 Miles distant
from each other, and the Extremes about 40. My Congregation is very much
dispersed; and notwithstanding the Number of the Meeting Houses, some live 20,
some 30, and a few 40 Miles from the nearest. Were they all compactly situated
in one County, they would be sufficient to form three distinct Congregations;
but in their present Situation, I believe they could constitute but two large
ones, each capable of affording a competent Maintenance to a Minister. At the
lower Meeting House in Hanover, which I took more immediately as my Charge when
I accepted their Call, there is a sufficient Number to form a large
Congregation; but as it lies between that in Caroline, and that in Henrico
which are but weak, it would seem cruel to separate it from them, as they could
not each of them maintain a Minister of their own. The People about the four
upper Meeting Houses are waiting for a Minister with impatient Eagerness, and
intend to reduce their Houses into three.

Were you Sir, to preach at any of these Houses, where there is the smallest
Number of Dissenters, you would imagine there was a sufficient Number of People
to form a distinct Congregation at each of them; for where there are not above
15 or 20 Families that have fully joined with me, you will see perhaps 4 or 500
Hearers, and sometimes twice that Number; the Church-People in general being
very eager to hear. This I looked upon at first as a mere Curiosity after
Novelty; but as it continues in general without Abatement, and in some Places
seems to increase; I cannot but look upon it as a happy Presage. This I have
the more Reason to do now, as I have observed many of these neutral Hearers
become at length thoroughly engaged, and sundry of them bro't to be solemnly
tho'tful. I believe I could number up 50 or 60 Families, who have thus been
happily entangled in the Net of the Gospel by their own Curiosity, or some such
Motive, since my coming here; and I have Reason to hope, that were there
another Minister settled here, it would cause a very great Addition to our
Number. Indeed this appears to me the most promising Circumstance that at
present attends us; for alas! there seems no great Prospect of the Conviction
of those that are thoroughly proselyted, and yet have rested short of real
Religion (though blessed be the Lord, a few of them are awakened now and then)
but when any of these transient Hearers, that are at their own Disposal, and
not under the Influence of their Relations, etc. who are already attached, do
join with us, it is generally a Sign of some considerable Degrees of Conviction;
as the Epithet New-Light (the usual Brand with which we are here stigmatized)
is so reproachful, that the Secure will not venture to incur the Odium.

There are about 300 Communicants in my Congretion, who make an external
Profession of real Religion. I am not fond of publishing a Calculation of
Christians; as I am sensible of the Fallibility of my Judgment in such Cases:
but it is impossible for a Heart anxious for the Salvation of Men, to deny
itself the Comfort of counting up at Times the Number of those that appear such
in a Judgment of rational Charity; and I entertain the pleasing Hope that the
greatest Number of these Communicants are sincere in their Profession, and
shall walk with Christ in White in the Fields of immortal Glory. Besides these,
there are many that are constant Hearers and cordial Proselytes, who through a
consciousness of Unfitness, or excessive Scrupulosity, do not seek Admission as
yet to the Lord's Table.

Ethiopia has also stretched forth her Hands unto God. There is a great Number
of Negroes in these Parts; and sometimes I see a 100 and more among my Hearers.
I have baptized about 40 Adults of them within these three Years, upon their
making such a Profession of saving Faith as I then judged credible. Some of
them, I fear, have apostatized; but others of them, I trust, will persevere to
the End. I have had as satisfactory Evidences of the sincere Piety of sundry of
them, as ever I had from any Person in my Life; and their artless Simplicity,
their passionate Aspirations after Christ, their incessant Endeavors to learn
and do the Will of God, have charmed my very Soul. But alas! while my Charge is
so extensive, and my Labors parcelled out among so many, I cannot take
sufficient Pains with them for their Instruction; which often oppresses my
Heart.

There have been, Sir, a few Instances of unhappy Apostasy among us; but I
count it a peculiar Blessing, that there have not been so many Backsliders
here, in Proportion to the Number once awakened, as I have generally observed
in other Places, where there has been a great religious Commotion.

There are a few that I know of at present under deep and promising
Impressions, and sundry languishing under feeble Convictions: But in general, a
lamentable Security prevails; and, as it generally happens in a Time of the
Withdrawment of the divine Presence, the faint Impressions that are made on
some by the Dint of Preaching, soon wear off. -- Oh! for a little Revival in
our Bondage! In this Prayer Sir, I doubt not but you will heartily join, and
endeavor to procure the Concurrence of others in so seasonable a Petition.

Last Sabbath I administered the Lord's Supper at one of my Meeting Houses; and
there appeared more Solemnity and Affection in the numerous Assembly, than I
have seen for some Months.

I might Sir, have given you a particular Account of the Conversion of some
Persons here; as indeed there are some uncommon Instances of it: but it would
occupy too much of my Time, and swell this History to an excessive Bulk. It may
suffice in general to observe, that abstracting peculiar Appendages and in
different Circumstances, the Work of Conversion here has been generally carried
on in those Steps that are described by experimental Divines, as Alliene,
Shepherd, Stoddard, Flavel, etc. And there is nothing confirms me more in the
Truth of their Notions of experimental Piety, than the universal Uniformity and
Agreement in Substance of the Exercises of those that can make the fairest
Claim to saving Grace, however different their Residences, Education, external
Means, etc. be.

There is one Isaac Oliver here, a Miracle of a Man, whose History, could I
write it intelligibly to you, would be very entertaining. He has been deaf and
dumb from his Birth, and is now grown up to Manhood. The want of these
Faculties rendered him wholly incapable of all humane Converse and Instruction,
except by Signs; and as for the most of divine Things, they seem to me of so
abstract and sp^^^^^al a Nature, that the first Notions of them can never be
conveyed by this obscure Medium: And yet (I mention it with grateful Wonder) I
have the utmost Reason to believe he is truly gracious, and also acquainted
with most of the Doctrines of Christianity, and many Matters of Fact related in
the historical Part of the Bible. I my self have seen him represent the
Crucifixion of Christ, the Swallowing and Ejection of Jonah by the Whale, etc.
in such significant Signs, that I could not but understand them. Some of his
Signs whereby he described Heaven and Hell were also intelligible to me; but
many of them about other Things, I could make nothing of. Those that live in
the House with him, can hold an intelligible Conversation with him, and he with
them, upon most of Things, with surprising Readiness; and he undoubtedly has
the most significant Gestures of any Man I ever saw in my Life, which his
Relations understand by repeated Observation, and use them to communicate their
Tho'ts to him. There is so much of the devout Ardour of his Soul discovered in
them at Times, as is really affecting; and I have seen him converse in Signs
about the Love and Sufferings of Christ, 'till he has been transported with
Earnestness, and dissolved into affectionate Tears. The above Mr Morris, with
whom he lives, has told me, that Isaac informs him he had these Discoveries of
divine Things made to him while in Bed, probably in a Dream; and that eight
Years ago he appeared remarkably changed in Temper and Conduct. He seems ever
since very conscientious in the whole of his Behavior; generally delights to
attend public and domestic Worship, though he cannot hear a Word; and is observed
sometimes to retire for secret Devotion; though he signifies that he is praying
with his Heart, when about his Business, or in Company; which is peculiarly
practicable to him, as in all Places he enjoys the undisturbed Serenity of
Retirement. He discovers an expert Genius in those Things he is capable of,
particularly in sundry mechanical Employments; and his Passions seem very
vigorous: in any passionate Emotions, his whole Visage and all his Gestures are
surprizingly expressive of the Temper of his Mind; so that he seems to stand in
the least Need of the Faculty of Speech of any Man I have known. -- I could
relate sundry other remarkable Peculiarities concerning him; but as they are
unintelligible to my self, or might seem incredible to those that are
unacquainted with him, I omit them. It Is the general Opinion of those that are
acquainted with him, and especially of the Family where he lives, who have best
Opportunities of observing him, that he can read. The first Evidence of it
appeared when he seemed to be first under religious Impressions; for he was
then observed to be frequently taking the Bible and looking into it: and ever
fince, he gives the following Evidences of it: He frequently looks into the
Bible, or other good Books, with great Intenseness; and sometimes points with
his Finger to some particular Sentences, and tries to persuade others to read
them; and these Sentences, as the Family tells me, are peculiarly affecting,
and worthy of distinct Notice. If you put a Book into his Hand inverted, he
will immediately turn it into a proper Position. When a History, or the like,
is put into his Hand, after looking into it a little while, he throws it away
with Signs of its Uselesness; but give him a Bible, though it were of a Size and
Character he never saw before, or some other good Book upon religious Subjects,
he hugs it in his Bosom with Signs of the most endeared Approbation. He
intimates by Signs, that the Almanac treats of the Sun, Moon and Stars, the
Weather, etc. I have opened the Bible in Jonah, and shown it him; and after a
little Perusal, he has given me a very lively Description of the Fate of that
Prophet. -- Many other such Things are observable concerning him; but whether
these are sufficient Indications that he can read, and whether they are fit to
be offered to public View, is wholly submitted to your Judgment. If he can
receive Ideas from visible Characters, which to him cannot be the Signs of
Words or Sounds, it must be entirely miraculous. Every One must see, that no
Methods could be used to teach one to read, who has been entirely deaf and dumb
from the first Point of his Existence: And though we should suppose him to have
as expert a Genius as the first Inventors of Characters as the Signs of Words;
yet, as he is wholly ignorant of the Nature of Language, it appears
inconceivable to me how he could possibly find out the arbitrary Connection
between Letters and Ideas, without the Medium of Words. But is there any Thing
too hard for the Lord? --
So much, however, I know of him, that I cannot but look upon him as a
miraculous Monument of almighty Grace, that can perform its beneficent Purposes
on Mankind, notwithstanding the greatest natural or moral Impediments; and I
submit it to others Judgment, whether a Person so incapable of external
Instructions, could be brought to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven
any other Way than by immediate Revelation. -- Besides the People here, sundry
of my Brethren, who have been here, particularly the Rev. Messirs. Samuel Blair
and John Roan, can attest this Relation; though to some it may appear an
hyperbolical Affectation of the Mavelous; or the Effect of popular
Superstition, which is wont to ascribe something prophetic or divine to those
that labor under such natural Defects.

I forgot to inform you, Sir, in its proper Place, that the Rev. Mr. Davenport
was sent by the Synod to Hanover last Summer, and continued here about 2
Months. There appeared some Evidences then, and I have discovered more since,
that he did not labor in vain. Some were brought under solemn Impressions,
which seem to have a happy Issue; and many of the Lord's People were much
revived, and can never forget the Instrument of it.

Thus, dear Sir, I have given you a brief Narrative of the Rise and Progress of
Religion among us; and I doubt not but you will readily acquiesce in the
Conclusion which after sufficient Scrutiny I have drawn, That this is the
Lord's Doing. I claim no Infallibility; but I must not under the modest
Pretense of renouncing it, scruple a Matter attested with all possible
Evidences, and so rush into Septicism. If I could form no Judgment of so public
a Work, I should renounce my Function this Moment; for with what Face can I
pretend to promote a divine Work in the Conversion of Men, if I cannot have any
satisfying Knowledge of it, when it appears? I act in the Dark, and promote I
know not what. Indeed the Evidence of its Divinity here is so irresistible,
that it has extorted an Acknowledgement from some, from whom it could hardly be
expected. The Rev. Mr. John Thomson, who, though a Man of Judgment, and, I hope,
Piety, unhappily opposed the late Revival in Pennsylvania with the most
industrious Zeal, has repeatedly declared, That whatever our Ministers had done
elsewhere, they have undoubtedly done MUCH GOOD in Hanover; and that he
heartily rejoiced in it. Were your Soul, Sir, contracted with the narrow Spirit
of a Bigot, you would no doubt indulge an ignoble Joy at the Though It, that there
are now some Hundreds of Dissenters in a Place where a few Years ago there were
not ten that I know of within a hundred Miles; There are and have been in this
Colony a great Number of Stotch Merchants, who were educated Presbyterians; but
(I speak but what their Conduct more loudly proclaims) they generally upon
their Arrival here, prove Scandals to their Religion and Country by their loose
Principles and immoral Practices, and either fall into an Indifferency about
Religion in general, or affect to be polite by turning Deists, or fashionable
by conforming to the Church.
but I assure my self of your Congratulations on a nobler Account, because a
considerable Number of perishing Sinners are gained to the blessed Redeemer,
with whom, though you never see them in these Regions of Mortality, you may spend
a blissful Eternity in the divinest Intimacy, and mutually assist each other in
ascribing immortal Praises to the Lamb that was slain, and has redeemed his
People by his Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation.
-- After all, poor Virginia demands your Compassion; for Religion at present is
but like the little Cloud which Elijah's Servant saw; and sometimes I am afraid
of its unseasonable Dissipation. Oh! that it may spread, and cover the Land,
and drop down Fatness upon it! and may the Lord keep us from despising the Day
of small Things!

It Is likely, Sir, you may desire some Account of the State of Religion in
other Counties where Dissenters are settled; and therefore, as I have
undertaken this History, and as I know not any other Way in which you may
receive as full Information, I shall endeavor to gratify you.

There is an immense Quantity of Land unsettled to the Westward of Hanover,
between this and Missisippii-River; to which People from most of the Northern
Colonies, particularly from Pennsylvania and New Jersey, are yearly removing in
vast Multitudes. The three Frontier Counties of this Colony, Frederick,
Augusta, and Lunenburg, which are prodigiously large, are chiefly inhabited by
such; especially Augusta, in which there are very few others. There is also a
considerable Number of them in Amelia County and Albemarle. They are generally
Irish People, and were educated in the Preshyterian Religion, and have seen no
Reason to change their Religion with their Residence. As their Encouragement
tends to the great Advantage of the Colony, and there are but few Virginians
among them, especially in Augusta and Frederick, to be proselyted; the Council,
(who, I verily believe, are possessed with a noble Spirit of Patriotism to
promote the temporal Welfare of their Country) have given them, or the
Ministers that have officiated among them, but little Mole^^^^ion. There are
two Congregations of them, one in Albemarle, and one in Augusta County,
belonging to the Synod of Philadelphia, that have Ministers settled among them:
but those that have put themselves under the Care of New Castle Presbytery
belonging to the Synod of New York, (which are vastly more numerous)
notwithstanding their zealous and repeated Endeavors, are still destitute of
Ministers, by Reason of the Scarcity of Ministers and Multitude of Vacancies in
said Presbytery. They are sufficiently numerous to form 5 distinct
Congregations, three at least in Augusta, one in Frederica, and one at least
(...) ^unenburg and Amelia. The only Method our Presby^^^^ has been capable to
take to supply them, is, to send some of its Members or Candidates to officiate
transiently among them, as long and as frequently as the Circumstances of their
own Congregations or of other Vacancies would permit; but notwithstanding all
the Supplies they could obtain this Way, some of them, particularly Lunenburg,
have been above a Year together without one Sermon. I hope that one of them may
obtain a settled Minister soon, as I am told, there is a pious popular Youth,
The Rev. Mr. John Todd.
sent by New-Brunswick Presbytery among them, whose Heart seems disposed to
settle somewhere in Virginia: But truly, Sir, I have no Prospect how the rest
shall be furnished with stated Ministers; for I can now count up at least 6 or
7 vacant Congregations in Pennsylvania, and 2 or 3 in Maryland, besides the 5
mentioned in the Frontier Counties of Virginia, and a Part of my Congregation,
which I would willingly declare vacant, had they Opportunity of obtaining
another Minister: There are perhaps 20 or 30 Places where there is a Number of
Families, thirsting after the Word, besides these mentioned; which require
transient Supplies; but as they are not yet sufficient to form distinct
Congregations, and maintain Ministers of their own, I have not numbered them
among the vacant Congregations.
And there are but 12 Members in New Castle Presbytery, each of whom has a
stated Charge; and two or three Candidates, who are pre-engaged to vacant
Congregations in Pennsylvania: From whence you may easily calculate the
Disproportion of our Ministers to the Vacancies. Our Number indeed has been
increased of late Years by the Licensure of sundry pious Youth, who make up the
most of the Number mentioned; and I have the pleasing Prospect of the Licensure
of 3 or 4 more within a few Years: But our Vacancies increase almost as fast as
our Ministers, by the Settlement of new Places, or by the breaking out of
religious Concern in Places where there were little or no Appearances of it
before; upon which they generally apply to our Presbytery: And the Lord removes
from us all Occasion to boast of our Number, by advancing some of our most
useful Members, in the Bloom of Life, and in the midst of their Successes, from
their painful Labors below, to join the Church triumphant in eternal Rest. Mr.
Robinson and Mr. Dean, led the Way; and I have lately had the melancholy
Account, that the great Mr. Samuel Blair, the brightest Light in these Parts of
Zion, is just on the Wing to follow. -- My Father! my Father! the Chariots of
Israel, and the Horsemen thereof! The very Though It strikes a Terror to the
Friends of Zion. Upon my receiving this mournful Information about a Month ago
by common Fame and Letters from my Correspondents in Pennsylvania, I could not
but indulge my unpracticed Muse in the following abrupt Excursions; which you
may allow a Place in the Margin, if you think they will afford any proper
Entertainment to the Reader, and that this is a suitable Place for them.

WHAT melancholy News does distant Fame,
To anxious Crowds, and my shocked Ears proclaim!
With what strange Pannic is each Bosom struck,
As though some Pillar of the Heavens were broke!
Alas! is Blair the great, unrivaled Blair,
Most dear to All, but Oh! to me more dear;
My Father! Tutor! Friend! each tender Name,
That can the softest, tenderest Passions claim!
My faithful Guide to Science and to Truth,
In the raw Years of unexperienced Youth;
Ah! is the heavenly Man just on the Wing,
And to his longed for Skies about to spring?
About to leave us mourning here below,
And amongst us share the Remnant of his Woe?
Ah! does he pine away in hectic Fire, His Illness is supposed to be of a
consumptive Nature.

Anhelant, panting, ready to expire?
Oh! cruel Fame! why did thou haste thy Flight,
To bring the inauspicious News to Light?
Ah! cruel Correspondents! to reveal
The dismal Tidings, Love would fain conceal.
Why did not Tears blot out the Intelligence?
Or your sad Hands tremble to guide your Pens?
Oh! had you not the mournful News divulged;
My Mind had still the pleasing Dream indulged,
Still fancied Blair with Health and Vigor blessed.
With some grand Purpose laboring in his Breast;
In studious Though It pursuing Truth divine,
'Till the full Demonstration round him shine;
Or from the sacred Desk, proclaiming loud,
His Master's Message to the attentive Crowd;
While heavenly Truth with bright Conviction glares,
And coward Error shrinks and disappears;
While quick Remorse the hardy Sinner feels,
And Clav'ry's Balm the bleeding Conscience heals.
But now, alas! the sweet Delusion's fled;
My Blair is dying, or perhaps is dead;
Or hastening to the calm celestial Shore;
Or safe arrived, and all the Dangers over.
Even now perhaps, released from cumbr'ous Clay,
His Soul Expatiates in immortal Day.
Pardon, blessed Shade! the Ravings of my Love.
That would recall thee from the Bliss above;
Would wish thee down in these sad Realms again,
From Choirs of Angels, to converse with Men;
Ungrateful Men! who broke thy Heart, and long
Withstood the strong Persuasion of thy Tongue;
Baffled thy Love, and Vanity pursued,
Deaf to thy Calls, deaf to a Savior's Blood!
Oh! might thou from the Dead return again,
And that strange unknown World disclose to Men!
Apostles from the Dead sure could not preach in vain.
Superfluous Wish! what could thou teach us more,
Than thy divine Discourses did before?
But if in mortal Climes be still thy stay,
Oh! can our Prayers the fatal Hour delay?
Prevail with Heaven to spare thy sacred Breath,
And snatch thee from the impending Grasp of Death?
Come, Saints, your Importunities renew;
Try what the united Force of fervent Prayer can do,
Believing Prayer, eternal Truth has sworn,
Sh'an't pant in vain, but bring a rich Return.
'Twill gain this Blessing from propitious Heaven;
Or greater, if a greater can be given.
" Thou sovereign Arbiter of Life and Death,
" At whose almighty Nod we catch and yield our Breath;
" Whose Fiat organized our mortal Clay,
" And can repair it in its last Decay,
" And from the greedy Grave snatch the expected Prey.
" Oh! hear the bursting, deep, united Groan,
" That from ten Thousand Hearts arises to thy Throne,
" Restore our Prophet! -- Best for him, it is true,
" To die; but Oh! what shall poor Zion do?
" Zion whose Foes are many, Friends are few.
" See! how she languishes in plaintive Grief;
" By Blair's Recovery only hopes Relief.
" Where shall the wounded, tortured Conscience find,
" A healing Hand so skilful and so kind?
" Where heavenly Truth so firm an Advocate?
" Or dubious Minds so certain Conduct get?
" Restore our Prophet, and his Health renew;
" For Oh! we need him more than Heaven can do;
" There Myriads of Thy Ministers of Flame
" Perform Thy Orders, and adore Thy Name:

On these Accounts, Sir, I am afraid the most of these Vancancies in Virginia,
cannot be settled with Ministers from New Castle Presbytery this considerable
Time; which is the more affecting, as they have been destitute these 8 or 10
Years, i.e. since their first Settlement. You may easily conjecture I mention
this as an Inducement to faithful Ministers from New England and elsewhere,
where they may be spared, to come into our Macedonia to help us.

Though these Congregations have been hitherto destitute of the stated
Ministrations of the Gospel; yet the Itenerations of my Brethren among them,
have been attended with very considerable Success. Mr. Robinson, as I intimated
before, took a Tour through these Frontier Counties, and into North Carolina,
about seven Years ago. He underwent great Hardships in Carolina, without much
Success, by Reason of the Fewness of the Inhabitants at that Time; who were
generally such uncultivated Savages, that there was little Prospect of doing
them much Service without continuing a long Time among them to teach them the
first Rudiments of Christianity; and so scattered, that but very few of them
could convene in one Place to hear. The Case is indeed happily altered there
since that Time, as the Inhabitants are vastly more numerous, and some Persons
that had a religious Education are settled among them. A new Congregation, I
think upon Pee-dee River, sent a Petition to me last Year to be presented to
New Castle Presbytery for a Minister, subscribed by more than a Hundred
Persons, chiefly Heads of Families; and one of my Correspondents there informs
me, that they are very sufficient to maintain a Minister. Our Presbytery
appointed Mr. James Finley to visit them; but by Indisposition he was
prevented; so that they have lain wholly destitute hitherto, and are like to do
so, unless they can obtain some foreign Assistance, besides what our Presbytery
can afford them. Besides this, I hear of sundry other Places in North Carolina,
that are ripening very fast for the Gospel: And Oh! that the Lord would THRUST
forth Laborers into that Part of his Harvest; for I am afraid but few will go
thither, 'till they are thrust and constrained by an irresistible Zeal, and a
providential Concurrence of Circumstances. --

" But here, alas! how few prepared like Blair,
" Thy sacred Message to the World to bear?
" With equal Skill eternal Things to show?
" And guide thy Churches militant below?
" Restore our Prophet, Lord! and in his stead
" Let worthless me be to the Skies conveyed:
" Thy earthly House such useless Lumber may
"Resign; but Oh! snatch not our Blair away."
But even his Worth now bids us to despair,
And threatens the Denial of our Prayer;
His Worth that makes his sacred Life so dear.
So great, so heavenly, so refined a Mind,
Demands Employment of a nobler Kind.
What Earth could teach, he learned, and now must rise,
To a superior Class above the Skies.
Too much refined in this dark World to bear
The humble Place of Zion's Minister,
Heaven calls him to sustain some nobler Function there;
With Gabriel to perform the Orders given,
And bear JEHOVAH's Errands through the Vast of Heaven;
Prompt as the Angelic Armies to obey,
Fervent and bright and vigorous as they.
Heaven kind to him, will not consent to hear,
Nor curse him with the Answer of our Prayer -- etc.
But I find I must suppress the rest, lest I tire you, and lose the Historian
in the Poet.

Mr. Robinson continued, I think, 15 Sabbaths in Lunenburg and Amelia, and left
sundry spiritual Children there behind him. A considerable Number of
Virginians, who knew nothing of real Religion before, were awakened by his
Ministry; and their Conduct since gives Ground for a charitable Judgment
concerning them. Sundry also that had removed thither from the Northward, and
had a religious Education, and a System of orthodox Principles, were convinced
of their unregenerate Condition, and that they had had but a Form of Godliness
without the Power, who now appear solid Christians. -- At their repeated
Solicitations, I spent about a Fortnight preaching among them the Beginning of
this Month [June]; and though they seem sensibly languishing for the Want of the
Means of Grace, yet sundry give agreeable Evidences of real Religion; and there
is a Prospect of doing much Service, were they furnished with a faithful
Minister. I met with most Encouragement in a Part of Amelia County, where very
few had heard any of my Brethren. The Assemblies were large even on Week Days,
and sometimes there appeared much Solemnity and Affection among them. There
appears the greatest Probability, that if they had faithful Preaching
frequently, many of them would be turned to the Lord; and it was really
afflictive to me, that the Necessity of my own Congregation constrained me to
leave them so soon, and refuse sundry Invitations they gave me to preach in
other Places in the County. I believe another Congregation would soon be
gathered there, had they frequent Preaching.

In Augusta, there is a great Number of solid and warm Christians; some of whom
were such when they came thither, and others have experienced a happy Change
since. There was a pretty general Awakening there some Years ago under the
Ministry of Mr. Dean (now at Rest) and Mr. Byram; the Effects of which in
sundry Instances are still apparent; and the Itinerations of most of my
Brethren before and since, have been blessed with Success. I believe three
Ministers might live very comfortably among them.

I have no general Acquaintance in Frederic County, though I have passed through
it, and preached frequently in some Parts of it: but I am credibly informed by
such of my Brethren as have been often there, that there has been a
considerable Awakening there some Years ago, which has had a blessed Issue in
many, and that the Congregation is in promising Circumstances, and has been
endeavoring, though unsuccessfully, to obtain a Minister, for sundry Years.

You will no doubt, be glad to have some certain Information of the State of
Religion in Maryland; and therefore, though I now live at a great Distance from
the Places there where it flourishes, yet as I preached at most of them
formerly, when the religious Commotion was at its Height, and as I have heard
of no remarkable Alterations in them since, I shall give the following concise
Account; which you may depend upon as true.

There has been a considerable Revival (shall I call it?) or first Plantation
of Religion in Baltimore County, which lies along Susquehannah River, bordering
on Pennsylvania, where, I Am informed, Mr. Whittlesey (with whom I find, you are
acquainted) is like to settle. -- Of this Mr. S. Blair, if I remember rightly,
gives an Account in, The Christian History; and therefore I shall say no more
of it.

In Kent County and Queen Ann's, which lie between Cheasapeak Bay and Delaware,
a Number of careless Sinners have been awakened and hopefully brought to
Christ. The Work was begun and chiefly carried on by the Instrumentality of
that favored Man Mr. Robinson; whose Success, whenever I reflect upon it,
astonishes me. Oh! he did much in a little Time; and who would not choose so
expeditious a Pilgrimage through this World? There is in these Places a
considerable Congregation; and they have made repeated Essays to obtain a
settled Minister, but are not like to succeed 'till our Number is increased.

There was a great Stir about Religion in a Place called Buckingham, on the
Seashore, about four Years ago, when I was there; but it was not then come to
Maturity. It has spread since, and issued in a hopeful Conversion in sundry
Instances; and I am informed they are now sufficient to constitute a
Congregation, and are waiting for a Minister.

But the most glorious Display of divine Grace in Maryland has been in and
about Somerset County, which lies at some Distance from Cheasapeak Bay on the
Eastern Shore. It began, I think, in the Year 1745, by the Ministry of Mr.
Robinson; and was afterward carried on by sundry Ministers that preached
transiently there. I was there about two Months, when the Work was at its
Height; and I never saw such a deep and spreading Concern among People in my
Life as then appeared among them: The Assemblies were numerous, though it was in
the Extremity of a cold Winter, and unwearied in attending the Word; and
frequently there were very few among them that did not give some plain
Indications of Distress or Joy. Oh! these were the happiest Days that ever my
Eyes saw, or are, as I fear, like to see. Since that, the Harvest seems over
there; though considerable Gleanings, I hear, are still gathered; and many of the
late Converts give the utmost Reason to presume their final Perseverance. There
had been a Congregation of Presbyterians there for many Years; but they were
reduced almost to nothing before the late Revival; when many of the
ChurchPeople were brought under deep Impressions, and cordially joined with
them; so that now they form at least one large Congregation; and after many
friutless Attempts, they have lately been so happy as to obtain the Reverend
Mr. Hugh Henry for their Minister, a Youth of a good Genius and undoubted
Piety, who will I trust, be an extensive Blessing to that Part of the Colony.

I might, Sir, have been more particular on most of Things in this Narrative;
but as a general View may perhaps be sufficient to you and the Public, and is
most convenient to me in my present Hurry, I have declined it. -- The
indigested Order and other Inaccuries you will easily discern, are proper
Objects for your Candor and Generosity; and I have no other Apology to make,
but that the unavoidable Hurry of the Bearer on a Business of the greatest
Importance to the Interest of Religion in Virginia, in which we doubt not of
your hearty Concurrence, will not suffer me to transcribe this first Draft.

I shall prize it, dear Sir, as an inestimable Blessing, if you and others of
the Lord's Servants and People in distant Parts, favor us with the Concurrence
of your Prayers to promote the declining Work of Religion among us; which is
the only Way I can expect the Assistance of most of them.

The Constancy of your Correspondence, Sir, affords me peculiar Satisfaction in
my present solitary Situation: And if any of the sacred Character, in any Parts
of the Church where this Narrative may come, should condescend to favor me
with their Correspondence, I should most gratefully acknowledge it, and make
them the best Returns in my Power. Our Acquaintance with the State of the
Church in various Parts, qualifies us to adapt our Prayers to it; and therefore
such mutual Intelligences may be of special Service to us in our Intercessions.

May your divine Master bless you, dear Sir, and succeed your Ministrations!
And may the Spirit be richly poured forth from on high on that favored Land
where you reside.

I am, Reverend SIR, Your very affectionate Brother and Servant, in the Kingdom
and Patience of JESUS CHRIST. SAMUEL DAVIES.
Honover, June 28. 1751.
APPENDIX.
I At first intended, Sir, to have said Nothing of a particular Restraint
imposed upon us at present by the civil Government; lest I should seem fond of
raising the Cry of Persecution, which is very indecent in the Followers of the
uncomplaining Lamb of God, especially when there is in Truth so little Occasion
for it; or to fling injurious Reflections on His Majesty's Council for this
Colony, for whom I have the profoundest Veneration on Account both of their
honorable Character and their Accomplishments for it; and under whose
indulgent Administration we enjoy so many civil and sacred Liberties.

But as I know not, Sir, but this Narrative may come into the Hands of some who
may have some Influence to secure our Privileges, or procure their
Enlargement, if it may be judged that we lie under any illegal Restraints; and
as the Matter is not only public in this Colony, but has been lately laid
before the Government in England by the President and Council, for Advice; I
shall venture to give you the following short, simple Narrative of it; without
any tedious Argumentations upon it; and without injurious Aspersions, which are
far from my Heart.

The General Court, as I informed you, have licensed seven Meeting Houses for
me to officiate in; and I should not desire to have their Number and my
Fatigues increased, were not the Circumstances of the Dissenters in Virginia
extraordinary and peculiar. There are a few of them in sundry Counties besides
these in which the licensed Houses are, who are too weak to maintain a Minister
of their own; and were they never so able, they could not obtain one in the
present Scarcity of Ministers. These have given me repeated and importunate
Invitations to come and preach among them; but I judged it imprudent to comply
till the Places were legally licensed. Upon this some of them, with a View to
obtain my Labors transiently among them, at least on Week Days, and the Visits
of my Brethren in their Itinerations, have petitioned the Courts of their
respective Counties for Licenses for Places convenient to them; but they have
either been denied, or the License granted by the County Court has been
nullified by the Council; which has discouraged others that they have made no
Application. This is a Disadvantage to the People, not only as they are thereby
deprived of the Preaching of the Word, but as they are exposed to the
intolerable Hardship of carrying their Children so great a Way to be baptized.

The Council has superseded a License granted by a County Court on the
Presumption, " That it does not belong to a County Court to proceed in such
Affairs; and, That a dissenting Minister has no legal Right to more
Meeting Houses than one:" And these two Points have been submitted to the
Determination of those to whose Province it belongs in England; but no Answer
is yet arrived.

The taking the Authority from County Courts of administering the legal
Qualifications to Ministers and licensing Meeting Houses, would be no great
Disadvantage to us in Havover, because we might easily apply to the Commander
in Chief, or the General Court; and therefore it is of small Importance with me
how it be determined; though it would occasion a considerable Difficulty to those
that live 2 or 300 Miles distant from Williamsburg.

But the restraining a dissenting Minister to but one Meeting House would be a
prodigious Grievance to the People in their present Circumstances. -- This,
Sir, is not a proper Place to debate the Legality of it, nor does it belong to
my Province to determine it; yet I may inoffensively suggest the following
Remarks upon it, as Matters of Speculation to the Curious, and of Determination
to those in Authority.

His Majesty's private Instructions with Respect to Dissenters, to the
Governor or Commander in Chief, (so far as I can recoliect them from a
transient View, which the Hon. Col. LEE, our late President favored me with)
run thus verhatim, You are to tolerate all Dissenters (except Papists) who lead
quiet and inoffensive Lives -- But how can such Dissenters be tolerated, who by
Reason of Weakness and the Scarcity of Ministers, cannot obtain a Minister of
their own, unless they may legally share in the Labors of a Minister with
other Places, which cannot be without a Plurality of Meeting Houses under the
Care of one Minister?

The Act of Toleration (which has been received by our Legislature This Act was
received An, quart. Reginae Annae, in these Words, "If any Person being of the
Age of twenty-one Years, or upwards, shall wilfully absent him or herself from
Divine Service at his or her Parish Church or Chapel, the Space of one Month,
(EXCEPTING AS IS EXCEPTED IN AN ACT OF PARLIAMENT PASSED IN THE FIRST YEAR OF
K. WILLIAM AND Q. MARY, entitled, An Act for exempting their Majesty's
Protestant Subjects dissenting from the Church of England, from the Penalty of
certain Laws) -- Every such Person -- being lawfully convicted, by Confession,
or otherwise, -- shall forfeit and pay, for every such Offense, the Sum of Five
Shillings, or fifty Pounds of Tobacco."
) does not determine the Number of Meeting Houses, but only gives a general
Toleration to legally qualified Ministers to officiate in Places legally
licensed: And may it not be reasonably presumed from hence, That the Number is
left to be determined according to the peculiar Circumstances of particular
Congregations?

Father; The said Act expressly says, -- That all the Laws made and provided for
the frequenting of divine Service on the Lord's Day, commonly called Sunday,
shall be still in Force, and executed against all Persons that offend against
the said Laws, except such Persons come to some Congregation or Assembly of
religious Worship, allowed or permitted by this Act. But how can Persons come
to such Congregation or Assembly, unless a Place within their Reach be licensed
for that Purpose? If this Liberty be denied them, are they not obliged,
according to the Act of Toleration it self, to attend constantly on Worship in
the established Church? And if so, where is their Toleration?

Finally; It is a very common Thing in this Colony, and allowed expressly by
Law, that where the Parish is of great Extent, and cannot be divided into
sundry, each of them capable to maintain a Minister, to erect 2, 3 or 4
Churches or Chapels of Ease, for the Convenience of the Parish, where the
Minister officiates alternately, or in Proportion to the Number of People: And
since the Reason for a Plurality of Meeting Houses among us, is the same; why
is it not equally legal? -- Sundry under Things might be suggested; but I
forbear.

I am, ut ante.


