Mr. Hobart's SERMON On Psalm xi. 3.

If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do? Civil Government
the Foundation Social Happiness.

A SERMON Preached before the General Assembly of the Colony of Connecticut, at
Hartford, on the Day of their Anniversary ELECTION, May 10th, 1750.

By Noah Hobart, A. M. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Fairfield.

Psalm lxxxii. 5. -- All the Foundations of the Earth are out of Course. Prove.
x. 25. -- The righteous is an everlasting Foundation. Micah vi. 2. Hear ye, O
Mountains, the Lord's Controversy, and ye strong Foundations of the Earth. N.
LONDON, Printed, and Sold by T. GREEN, Printer to the GOVERNOR and COMPANY,
1751.

At a General Assembly holden at Hartford, etc. on the second Thursday of May,
Anno Domini, 1750.
Ordered, THAT ANDREW BURR Esquire; and Mr. DAVID ROWLAND, return the Thanks of
this Assembly to the Reverend Mr. NOAH HOBART, for his Sermon delivered (on the
Tenth Day of May, Instant) before the Assembly, and desire a Copy thereof that
it may be Printed.

George Wyllys Secr.

An Election SERMON.
PSALM XI. 3. If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do?
IT is evidently agreeable to the will of God, the Sovereign Ruler of the
World, that men whom He has made sociable Creatures, should live in
Communities, and enjoy the Benefits and Advantages that are peculiar to the
Social Life. This cannot possibly be effected without erecting and supporting
Civil Government: For men in a State of Anarchy, such a State wherein every One
does that which is right in his own Eyes; or rather that which gratifies his
irregular Appetites without considering whether it be Right, or Wrong, or
regarding how much it infringes the Right, or affects the Happiness of others,
are so far from enjoying the proper Advantages of Society, that a wise man
would choose the most retired Solitude rather than such Company.

THE Nature of Government requires that there be men of different Orders, some
vested with Authority to command and others under Obligations to obey; or that
there be Rulers and Subjects in every Community. Different Forms of Civil
Government have all along obtained in the World, and probably will do so to the
End of Time. And after all the Disputes which particular Species of it is in it
self most perfect and excellent, it must be owned that there is that
Difference, perhaps in the very Constitution and Genius of different Nations,
or certainly in their Condition and Circumstances as renders one Form of
Government most suitable to one Nation, and best adapted to promote it is
Happiness; while another Form shall best answer the great Ends of Government
with a different People. It has not pleased God to interpose in this Case, by
instituting one Form of Civil Government and obliging all Nations to submit to
it; and therefore though Government in general must be owned as a Divine
Institution, yet no one particular Species of it as opposed to another, can
justly claim the Honor of subsisting by a strictly Divine Right. Whether we
consult the Light of Nature or Revelation; we shall find Reason to conclude
that all regular Forms of Civil Administration, so far as they answer the
Intentions of Government, are equally agreeable to the Will of God. And
perhaps, if our Views were sufficiently extended, we should see that the Good
of the whole World is best promoted, and the Grand Scheme of Divine Providence
in the Government of it, most effectually carried on, while diverse Nations are
under different Forms of Civil Government.

PUBLIC Happiness is the original Design and great End of Civil Government. The
magistrate under all Forms of Government, is according to the Intention of his
Office, God's minister attending continually upon this very Thing. If we
consider the magistrate's Authority as derived from God; we cannot Doubt that
this is the End for which it is given. A man must certainly have very absurd
Notions of the Divine Being, if he can persuade himself that God, in appointing
Civil Government, aimed at nothing higher than aggrandizing Rulers; and it
would be blasphemous to suppose that his Intention was, to give some men a
Right to gratify their Pride and Ambition, their Cruelty, Lust, or Revenge at
the Expense of the public Happiness of a whole Nation. It is evidently much
more agreeable to our natural Conceptions of God, as well as to the express
Revelations He has made of Himself, to suppose Him, as the indulgent Parent of
mankind, aiming at and providing for their public Welfare in appointing Civil
Government, than to consider Him as the Patron of Tyranny, Cruelty and
Oppression, and of their genuine Consequences, Public Desolation and universal
misery. And it requires but a little Reflection to be convinced, that Civil
Government is wisely suited to promote it is great Design in securing the public
Happiness of Human Society.

GOD will forever have the Glory of all his wise and gracious Appointments for
the Welfare of his Creatures; but men through their own Folly and Wickedness
may miss of the Advantage designed them. Civil Government may, and too often
does fail of answering it is End; and public Happiness is not effectually
secured even by this excellent method which infinite wisdom has provided for
that Purpose. This sometimes happens through the weakness or wickedness of
Rulers, and sometimes through the Folly and madness of Subjects, And whoever
are the blameable Causes of unhinging a Government, and preventing its
answering its Design, the effect will be very pernicious, and men of all Sorts
will sooner or later suffer under it; though the Righteous, men of honest
Intentions and peaceable Dispositions, will ordinarily be the first and deepest
Sufferers.

THIS is beautifully expressed in the words I have chosen for the Subject of
our present meditations, If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the
Righteous do? In which words Civil Government is spoken of as the Foundation of
the Safety, Security and Happiness of men considered as formed into Society,
the Case of these Foundation's being destroyed is supposed, and upon this
Supposition the Question is put, What can the Righteous do? That this is the
Sense of the words seems plain from the Context. The Psalmist here flies to God
and trusts in Him for Protection in a Time of Danger. In the Lord put I my
Trust; how say ye to my Soul, Flee as a Bird to your mountain? ver. 1. The
Danger he was in is thus expressed, for lo, the wicked bend their Bow, they
make ready their Arrow upon the String; that they may privily shoot at the
upright in Heart. ver. 2. In this Case it was the Duty, and it ought to have
the Care of the Civil Magistrate to restrain the wicked and protect the
upright: But the Government was too weak to do this; or else they who had the
Administration of it, were negligent of the Duty of their Office, and would not
interpose in the Case; or perhaps the Magistrate himself who ought to have
defended the innocent, was the very man who in this Case attempted to destroy
him. King Saul, who sought David's Life as when one does hunt a Partridge in
the Mountains 1 Samuel xxvi. 20.
, may be intended by the wicked man who had bent his Bow, and made ready his
Arrow upon the String to shoot at the upright in Heart. Thus the Power of the
magistrate, which was originally designed for the Protection of the innocent,
was so perverted as to be used as the means of his Destruction; or at least was
not so exerted as to afford him Safety and Protection. This State of Things the
Psalmist describes by the Expression of the Foundations being destroyed, and in
these Circumstances he demands, what can the Righteous do? which Question
plainly represents men of this Character as exposed to peculiar Difficulties in
such a State of Things as is here mentioned.

IN discoursing from these words on the present Occasion, my Design is, to
consider some of the principal Things on the Account of which Civil Government
is styled the Foundation of Social Security and Happiness; and under each of
these Heads, I shall mention some of the most obvious Ways in which this
Foundation may be destroyed, and point out the special Difficulties of the
righteous in the several Cases that will come under Consideration. Wherefore,

I. CIVIL Government is the Foundation of Social Happiness as it is designed
and suited to render men safe, easy and secure in their Persons.

THERE are many Things relating to men's Persons, of such a Nature and
Importance that they cannot be happy, nor indeed so much as comfortable without
having some Security for the quiet Possession, and Enjoyment of them. Of this
kind are Life, Liberty, Reputation, Ease and the like: He that enjoys these has
a Value for them; and in Proportion to his Esteem of them, will be his
uneasiness when he finds himself insecure in the Possession of them, or in
Danger of loosing them. Social Happiness cannot be enjoyed unless men have some
reasonable Security with Regard to these personal Things; nor are there any
advantages arising from Society that can balance a Want of Security with
respect to some of them. What reasonable man would not choose to be destitute of
all the Benefits of the Social Life, rather than to live among a Company of
lawless Banditti, Robbers or Pirates; any one of which might on the least
Provocation, or even without any Provocation at all, insult and abuse, beat,
wound, or torture him, or even take away his Life? What Advantage resulting
from Society can be named, that would make amends for this constant and
imminent Danger of being ill-treated and abused* put to the most excruciating
Tortures, or deprived of Limbs and even of Life it self?

LIBERTY, or a Freedom from unnecessary and burdensome Confinements,
Restraints or Imprisonment, is what men are naturally, and indeed very justly
desirous of. The Possession of it gives a sweet and pleasant Relish to Life and
the Enjoyments of it, and the want of this renders them all tasteless if not
nauseous. A wise and good man, one who does not desire to use Liberty for a
Cloak of maliciousness 1 Pet. ii. 16.
, will readily consent to all reasonable Restraints, that is, to all such as
are necessary to the Peace and welfare of the Community of which he is a
member: But unnecessary and unreasonable Abridgments of Liberty are very
grievous; and the total Loss of it, or absolute Slavery is to a generous Mind
next to, (if not worse than) the Loss of Life it self.

A GOOD NAME is what men in general are with very good Reason fond of, for it
really is better than precious Ointment: Eccl. vii. 1.
But those who have the best Right to it are usually the most tender of it,
while profligate Persons are sometimes so abandoned as to have no sense of
Shame, no Fear of Infamy, nor any Regard to their Reputation in the world. A
good Conscience, a Sense of Innocence, an Expectation of being acquitted and
approved in the Day when God shall judge the Secrets of men, will do a great
deal toward supporting and comforting the upright under a Load of calumny and
Defamation: But even this inward Satisfaction, though so greatly desirable, is
not sufficient to Social Happiness. A man who is possessed of this, though he
has Peace in his own mind, yet considered as a member of Society, is by obloquy
and Defamation, laid under many Disadvantages, and rendered less happy as well
as less useful than he would otherwise be.

GOVERNMENT is designed and suited to defend men in the Enjoyment of these
personal Rights, which are so essential to Social Happiness. Laws are made to
curb the unruly Passions of men, and prevent their wounding the Persons or
Reputations of their Neighbors, their depriving them of Life, Ease or Liberty.
The Magistrate has just Authority, to punish the Transgressors of these
wholesome Laws, and to proportion the Punishment to the Injury done, and to the
necessary Intention of deterring others from doing the like. A strict and
impartial Administration of Justice in these Cases, is the greatest Political
Security against the Perpetration and Increase of Crimes of this Kind; and
consequently tends to render every Member of the Community secure and safe in
the Possession of Life and Liberty, Reputation and Ease. And Civil Government
considered as intended and adapted to protect men in these Respects, deserves
to be called the Foundation of Social Happiness; and, when duly administered,
it is a very firm and solid Foundation.

BUT this Foundation, solid as it is, may yet be destroyed; and all the
Confidence and Security built upon it, may end in Disappointment and Ruin. A
particular Government may perhaps be essentially wrong, in its very Formation,
by being built upon such Maxims as are diametrically opposite to the Nature,
and subversive of the original Design of Society, or inconsistent with public
and Social Happiness. Or a Government originally well formed, may by a gradual
and perhaps an imperceptible Departure from its original Principles, in Length
of Time, become quite the Reverse of what it at first was. Magistrates may
degenerate into Tyrants; a mild and Legal Government may corrupt and turn into
mere Arbitrariness and Despotism: or, on the other Hand, the Administration may
become weak, and so incapable of answering its Intention; the Magistrate may
loose his Influence and Authority, and the Laws may become contemptible in the
Eyes of the People. This may arise from a general Remisness in the Execution of
them, which if continued for any Length of Time, seldom fails of producing this
fatal Effect: Or it may proceed from the Prevalence of a discontented, factious
and mutinous spirit in the People, which some times rises to such an Height
that the Magistrate has not Strength to repel and subdue it. In these Cases it
is evident that the Foundation of Social Happiness is destroyed; for in such
Circumstances no Man has a proper Security for his Ease or Liberty, his
Reputation or even his Life.

TYRANNY, whether natural to the Constitution of a Government or owing to
Corruption in the Administration, is utterly inconsistent with Social
Happiness. The Subjects in an arbitrary Government have indeed some Security
against being assaulted, abused, defamed or murdered by their Fellow Subjects;
but even this is not so strong as public Happiness requires it should be,
because arbitrary Rulers suspend the Execution of the Laws at their Pleasure,
and that even of those Laws the regular Execution of which is most essentially
necessary to the Security even of the Lives of their Subjects. And then
Subjects in such Governments, have no Security at all, even of Life itself,
against their Rulers. Every man has a Right to his own Life by the Law of
Nature; and when men enter into Society they are so far from giving up this
Right, that it must be supposed the securing it to them was one of the
principal Reasons of men's forming themselves into Communities. If any man
doubts this, he need only ask himself whether he would, on any Consideration,
join with a Society in which it should be a fundamental Article, that any one
man, or any Number of men should have a Right to take away his Life when they
pleased? A man may forfeit his Life, and when he has done so the magistrate may
justly take it away: But without such Forfeiture made, the magistrate has no
more Right to take away the Life of a Subject, than one private Person has to
take away the Life of another. Murder committed with all the Solemnities of a
legal Trial and Execution, is the worst Kind of murder; The innocent man
suffers most in this way, as his Reputation is murdered as well as his Person:
and those who in this method shed innocent Blood, contract an aggravated Guilt
as they make the Authority of the magistrate which was given on Purpose to
protect the innocent, the very means of his Destruction. This I take to be the
meaning of that Speech of Christ to Pilate, Thou could have no Power at all
against me, except it were given thee from above: Therefore he that delivered
me unto thee has the greater Sin. John xix. 11. and so Confinement or an
Abridgment of that Liberty which the Intentions and Laws of Society allow to
men in general; Infamy, and the Infliction of Corporal Pain are to be
considered as Punishments; and as such they suppose Guilt in the Subjects of
them: And when these are inflicted on any Man not convicted of a Crime that
deserves them, he has an Injury done him. And when Magistrates without
regarding the Rules of distributive Justice, act in an arbitrary, Tyrannical
Manner, and treat the innocents as if they were guilty, the Distinction between
Right and Wrong, and so the Foundation of Society and public Happiness and
Security is destroyed.

THE Case is much the same when the Magistrate wants Power, as when he wants
the Will to protect the Innocent, and punish the Guilty. Tyranny and Anarchy,
like Fire and Frost, though contrary in their Natures, are in many Instances much
alike in their Effects. A factious, ungovernable Disposition in the People does
as effectually destroy the Foundations of public Happiness, as Tyranny in the
Rulers: And a man has no more security of his Life or any of the Enjoyments of
it, when the Execution of the Laws is prevented by the mutinous Temper of the
People, than he would have if the Laws were Suspended by the arbitrary Will of
tyrannical Governors.

IF the Foundations be destroyed in either of these Ways, What can the
Righteous do? While the authority of the Magistrate is rightly directed, duly
exercised, and properly reverenced and submitted to, every Member of the
Community has the highest Political Security against personal Injuries and
Abuses: But when the Administration of Justice is perverted, and the Ends of
Government rendered impractible, either by Corruption and Tyranny in the Rulers
or by Obstinacy a^^ Ungovernableness in the People, no man (...) proper
Security in these Respects; but (...) is liable to the greatest of personal
Injuries, even to that of having his life violently taken away. In these
Circumstances wicked Men may for a while preserve themselves; they can cringe
and fawn; they have no Restraints of Conscience to prevent their flatterring a
Tyrant, or sacrificing the Liberties of their Country, and the Happiness of
their Fellow Subjects to his lawless Will; or even their yielding themselves to
him, and becoming the criminal Instruments in his Hands of entailing Misery on
Generations yet unborn. Or, if the Tide sets the other Way, and popular
Discontent and Faction prevail against the just Authority of the Magistrate,
yet such men can still swim with the Stream. They will join with the factious,
and be some of the loudest in popular Clamours against Rulers; and under a
Pretense of Patriotism and Zeal for the Liberties of the People, such men will
revile the Persons, and contemn the Authority of the Magistrate, weaken the
Administration of Government, and enervate the Laws, and so destroy the
Foundations of public Happiness to secure their own private Interest. But now
the Righteous whose Consciences restrain them from using such wicked Arts, they
who religiously adhere to the Constitution and Interests of their Country, and
will neither sacrifice the just Liberties of the People to Rulers of an
arbitrary Disposition, nor give up the legal Authority of Rulers to a
prevailing Faction, these honest upright men are most exposed; they are not
likely to the Favorites of an ambitious Tyrant, nor the Darlings of a lawless
Mob, but are generally looked on with a jealous Eye, and marked out for Ruin by
them both.

II. CIVIL Government is the Foundation of Social Happiness as it is designed
and suited to secure Men in their Rights and Properties, by a due
administration of Justice in all Civil Causes.

SOCIAL Happiness requires that men be secured in their civil Rights and
Properties, as well as in their Persons; and this is one great Design of
Government. Property is prior to all Humane Laws and Constitutions. God has
given the Earth to the Children of men Psalm cxv. 16.
; and if by the original Grant every one of them has an equal Right to every
particular Thing, while it continues merely in the State wherein Nature
produced it, yet when any one man has by his own Labor rendered it better, more
suitable to the Uses of Human Life and therefore more valuable, he has now a
better Right to it, than any other man has; and being in Possession, he cannot
justly be turned out by one who has not so good a Title as he himself has. But
Properties and Possessions would be very precarious Things in a State of
Nature, they need the Sanctions of Government and Laws to render them in any
measure secure and safe; and the obtaining this Security was no doubt one great
Reason that induced men to combine in regular Societies, and establish
Government. For in a State of Nature, though no man had a Right to disturb the
Happiness, or take away the Property of another, yet the stronger would prey
upon and devour the weaker: And when any Disputes arose concerning Property,
there being no Persons authorized to judge and determine between the Parties,
every man was Judge in his own Cause; and would put his Judgment in Execution
in such a manner as would best answer his End, either by Force or Fraud. A
State of Nature is a State of War; and in all the Controversies that might
arise in it, there was no Appeal but to the Sword.

GOVERNMENT is excellently suited to remedy this Evil, and to secure and defend
men in the quiet Possession of their Rights and Properties. This can no
otherwise be done but by a due Administration of Justice in Civil Causes; and
therefore it is essential to Society that Judges be appointed, and that they
have sufficient Authority to carry their Judgments into Execution, by obliging
even the most stubborn and refractory to submit to it. And as the whole Force
of the Community is to be applied, when necessary, to execute Legal Judgments,
every man in a well constituted Government, has the highest Political Security
for the Enjoyment of his Property, for all his Fellow Subjects are engaged to
defend him therein, with their united Force and Strength.

IN this View of the Case the Foundations may be destroyed several ways, as,
when good Laws are not provided, or Judges not appointed to execute them; when
Corruption and Bribery prevail, and Judgment is bought and sold; or when
through the weakness of the Administration, or the Strength of Factions, a
righteous Judgment cannot be carried into Execution, and so Justice cannot be
done. It Is possible for some of these Things to arise to such an Height as
absolutely to dissolve a Government, and reduce a People to a mere State of
Nature, and so to deprive them wholly of the Advantages that arise from
Society: and every Degree of them affects the Foundation of public Happiness,
as it weakens the Security which every Man in Social Life ought to have, for
the quiet Possession of his Property or Estate.

THE Righteous will be exposed to peculiar Difficulties in this Case as well as
the former. For such being under the Restraints of Religion and Conscience,
cannot bribe a Judge, nor corrupt a Jury, nor suborn an Evidence; nor on the
other Hand can they join with the mutinous, promote Riots, or raise a Mob to
protect them. But they who are under no such Restraints will readily use these
and such like wicked Arts; and by them, when the Foundations are thus
destroyed, they too often not only Defend themselves, but oppress and ruin
their innocent Neighbors.

III. CIVIL Government is the Foundation of Social Happiness, as it is
appointed and suited to promote the Practice of all those Virtues which conduce
to render a Community safe, flourishing and happy; and to suppress those Vices
which tend to destroy or hurt it.

IT IS a very just Observation, that Righteousness exalts a Nation, and Sin is
a Reproach to any People Prove. xiv 34.
. Sin of any Kind when connived at and encouraged, brings public Guilt; public
Guilt deserves public Judgments; and it may reasonably be expected, that the
Sovereign Ruler of the World will manifest the Holiness of his Nature, and
discover the Righteousness of his moral Government, by rendering a wicked and
debauched Community a miserable one. Indeed it can hardly be otherwise, in the
Nature of Things, where some particular Sorts of Vice prevail, and become
general. Some Vices are in their own Nature destructive of public Happiness;
such, for Instance, are Idleness, Extravagance, Intemperance, and the Neglect
of proper Care for the Education and Instruction of the rising Generation.

EVERY Member of a Community is obliged to contribute, in his Station, to the
good of the whole, and every industrious, frugal Man does so; he serves
himself, and he serves the Public at the same Time. Whatever any man gains by
honest Labor, is just so much gained to the Society of which he is a Member:
And on the contrary Idleness in particular Persons is prejudicial to the
Public; there is at least the Loss of what the Community might have been
benefitted by their Labor. And then as he that is slothful in his work is
Brother to him that is a great Waster Prove. xviii. 9.
, and Laziness is the Parent of Poverty and Want, Idleness tends to hurt the
Public by increasing the Number of Beggars, or that of Thieves and Robbers.

EXTRAVAGANCE as it tends to impoverish particular Persons and Families, has
the same evil Aspect upon public Happiness as Idleness has; and besides this,
it impoverishes a Community as it turns the Balance of Trade against them, and
so obliges them to send to other Countries what ought to serve as a Medium of
Trade among themselves, and reduces them to the miserable Expedient of a base
Currency which no body will take off their Hands. The Difficulties which this
brings on and continues, are at present so publicly known, and so generally
felt, that I need not spend Time in describing them. There is no one Kind of
Extravagance so pernicious in its Nature and Consequences as an intemperate use
of strong Drink. This produces the same fatal Effects with Idleness, and the
other sorts of Extravagance, besides many others, as destructive to social
Happiness, which are peculiar to it self. It debauches the Mind, and enfeebles
the Body, it ruins the Constitutions and destroys the Health of such as
practice it; and degrades a man, who was made for noble and useful Purposes,
into one of the meanest, most insignificant and useless of all Creatures. Not
only so, but it is productive of Brawls, Riots and Quarrels, which too often
produce Fighting, and issue in wounds and Blood, Who has Woe? who has Sorrow?
who has Contentions? who has Bablings? who has Wounds-?-They that tarry long
at the Wine, they that go to seek mixed Wine Prove. xxiii. 29, 30.
.

THESE Vices tend to the present and immediate Destruction of Social Happiness,
and the Neglect of proper Care for the Instruction and Education of Youth, does
as certainly tend to entail public Misery on Posterity. Ignorance and
Wickedness are prejudicial to Society, while Learning and Virtue greatly
promote the Happiness of it. The P^almist's Observation that the dark Places of
the Earth are full of the Habitations of Cruelty Psalm. lxxiv. 20.
, or that Ignorance and Misery accompany one another, is verified in the
History of all Ages and Nations. The proper Design of Schools and Colleges, is,
that Youth may be trained up in useful Learning and strict Virtue or Religion:
And there is nothing more necessary to the maintaining Social Happiness, and
rendering it a durable Thing, such an one as shall continue from Generation to
Generation, than that these be set up and supported, and so regulated as
effectually to answer their End.

GOVERNMENT is the Foundation of Social Happiness as it is designed to prevent
such Things as are detrimental to it, and to promote those Things which tend to
advance and perpetuate it. That this is one Design of Magistracy, is plain from
the Apostle's describing Rulers as being a Terror not to good Works, but to the
evil; Romans xiii. 3.
for whatever tends to prevent or destroy public Happiness, is evil both in a
moral and in a political Sense. Government is well adapted to answer this it is
Intention: The Magistrate has the Power of the Sword committed to him, that he
may be the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does evil
Ver. ^.
. The Authority he is vested with enables him to punish and suppress Idleness,
Extravagance and Intemperance; to lay such Duties upon the Means of Luxury and
Drunkenness as shall at least prevent the general Practice of them; and to give
proper and needful Encouragement to useful Arts and Manufactures. The
Magistrate's Authority capacitates him for erecting and supporting Schools and
Colleges, and for ordering and regulating them, and the Circumstances relating
to them so as effectually to promote the good Designs of their Institution.

THE Foundations may be destroyed by Carelessness and Indifference with Regard
to these Things. When no Encouragement is given to Learning, Ingenuity,
Frugality and Diligence, nor any Thing done to discountenance and prevent
Idleness, Extravagance and Intemperance; when Laws are not provided, or, if
made, not executed to prevent those vicious Practices which directly tend to
procure public Misery, or to encourage those virtuous, amiable and useful
Things which promote the Happiness of Human Society, then are the Foundation,
in this View of Things destroyed.

IN this Case vicious Persons, such especially as are addicted to the
particular Vices that have been now mentioned, will think themselves happy.
They may be as idle, extravagant and intemperate as they please; they may
gratify their Corruptions, at the Expense of their Estates, their Health and
their Lives; they may bring their Families to Poverty, and leave them a Burden
to the Public; they may indulge themselves in Drunkenness and Rioting, to the
Disturbance of the Quiet and Peace of the Neighborhood, and to the Prejudice
of the public Happiness of Society; they may do all this without any one to
punish them, or make them ashamed: And this these miserable Creatures call
Freedom, Liberty and Happiness. But What can the Righteous now do? The most
valuable members of Society must, in such Circumstances, bear a very heavy
Burden: The Public must be supported by laying severe Taxes on useful Arts and
painful Labor, that the luxurious and intemperate, useless and even hurtful
Members of the Community, may gratify their Corruptions at the cheaper Rate. He
that has been endeavoring by honest Labor, to make Provision for his own
Family, shall find himself oppressed by being obliged to support the Children
of his Neighbor, reduced to Nakedness and Starving by the Idleness,
Extravagance, or Drunkenness of their Parents. I will add but one Thing more.

IV. CIVIL Government is the Foundation of Social Happiness as it is designed
and adapted to encourage and promote Religion, and to protect and secure Men in
the Exercise of their Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Rights and Privileges.

NATURAL Religion is essential to Society; Morality is as indispensibly
nececessary to the Political Happiness of Communities as it is to the Eternal
Happiness of particular Persons. Were the Practice of the strictest and most
exalted Morality, such an one as the Gospel prescribes and requires,
universally to prevail in any Community, it would constitute a sort of Heaven
upon Earth: And on the contrary, where it is wholly disregarded, where Vice and
Wickedness of every Kind maintain an unrestrained Dominion, there is properly
an Hell upon Earth. In the intermediate States between the universal Practice
of Virtue and the uncontrouled Prevalence of Vice, a Society is happy or
miserable in Proportion as it approaches to one or the other of these
Conditions.

IF the Matter be considered in this Light, I suppose no reasonable Man will
deny that Religion is an especial Object of the Civil Magistrate's Concern.
It Is necessary to the Happiness of Society, and to the Security of every Member
of it, that the Belief of the Being, and Perfections, and Providence of God
should be kept up; that men should be acquainted with the Doctrine of the
Immortality of the Soul, and of a future and eternal State of Happiness or
Misery; that men should look upon themselves as accountable Creatures, and
expect the great and awful Day when they must stand before the Tribunal of God,
the Sovereign and universal Judge, to give account of the Actions done in the
Flesh, whether they have been good, or whether they have been evil. The firm
Belief of such Things as these is so essentially necessary to Social Happiness,
that he deserves to be esteemed an Enemy to mankind, who endeavors to weaken
the Evidence, or lessen the Importance of them. For without a Belief of these
Things, what shall restrain men from injuring, oppressing, or even destroying
one another, when they have, as they frequently will have, opportunity of doing
so without any great Danger of being detected and punished by the Magistrate?
And if a sense of these Things be taken away, or much weakened, what Security
can we possibly have for the Truth of what men declare under the most solemn
Oaths? It must therefore be allowed, that whatever is necessary to keep up the
Belief and Practice of natural Religion, belongs properly to the Province of
the Civil Magistrate; and that his Authority cannot be exerted in a way more
agreeable to the Will of God, from whom all Authority proceeds, or indeed more
conducive to the Design of Magistracy, which is Social Happiness, than when
used to promote and encourage these Things, and to punish and suppress whatever
is contrary to them.

THE Christian Institution considered as such, or as distinguished from natural
Religion, is not absolutely necessary to the Subsistence of Civil Society. This
is evident since there were Governments in the World, and some of them so
wisely formed and so justly administered, that Social Happiness was tolerably
provided for, before men were favored with the Christian Revelation. Yet it
must be owned that Morality is incomparably better explained, carried to a
vastly higher Degree of Perfection, and enforced on the Minds of men b^
infinitely stronger Motives in the Gospel, (...) ever was before, or than it
possibly can be on any other Hypothesis. And the Gospel in all these Views does
greatly conduce to Social Happiness; and therefore ought to be supported,
countenanced and encouraged by the Civil Magistrate.

BUT then though the Gospel Revelation is wisely suited to promote temporal
Prosperity, or the Social Happiness of mankind; yet this is not the principal
Design of it. Future and Eternal Happiness as it is in it self of infinitely
greater Importance than any Thing that is confined to the present mean, short
and uncertain State of Existence, so it is the Thing principally aimed at in
the Christian Religion: The Salvation of the Soul is the End of that Faith
which the Gospel requires, and is designed to produce. The securing this ought
to be the first Concern and principal Business of every particular Person; and
to use the Christian Religion as a Political Instrument of promoting Social
Happiness, in such a manner as shall prevent its proving the Power of God to
eternal Salvation to any who enjoy it, is to pervert the Gospel it self, by
making the most important and ultimate Design of it give way to that which is
of little or no Consequence any further than it tends to promote it; or making
the means instead of being subservent to the End, instrumental in preventing
the End's being attained.

THE Gospel discovers the Provision God has made, in his unsearchable Wisdom
and unbounden Grace, for our being recovered to his Favor, renewed after his
Image, and trained up to an actual Meetness for the everlasting Enjoyment of
Himself. Jesus Christ is in it set forth as the Propitiation for Sin Romans iii.
25.
, and revealed as that Glorious Person in whom it has pleased the Father that
all Fullness should dwell Coloss. i. 19.
, that so He might be the Fountain of Holiness and Comfort to his People. He
that has a proper Sense of the wonderful Love of God his Savior, will find
himself powerfully but sweetly constrained to make all possible Returns of
Homage, Worship and Obedience to him: His greatest Delight will be in honoring
and glorifying Him by a Life of universal Holiness and persevering Obedience;
and in enjoying Communion with Him in the instituted Acts or Ordinances of
Divine Worship. And it is impossible men should have a well grounded Hope of
being finally Accepted of God, or a regular Expectation of everlasting Life
without the Testimony of their own Consciences to their Sincerity in these
Things.

NOW, if it be the Duty of every Man to work out his own Salvation, and to give
Diligence to make his Calling and Election sure; if Men are strictly obliged to
make if their great Care to secure an Interest in the Favor of God, and obtain
the Evidences of it; and if this cannot be done without having the Testimony of
their own Hearts that they worship Him in Sincerity and Truth; it must be
allowed that every Man has a just Right to worship God in such a manner as he,
after making due Inquiry, judges most agreeable to the Nature and Will of God,
and so most likely to obtain Acceptance with Him: Otherwise men will be
obliged, under the severest of all Penalties to do that which at the same time
they have no Right to do. The Right of Private Judgment in matters merely
Religious in their Nature, and of acting upon this Judgment by worshipping God
in such a Manner as a man, with the best Light he can obtain, judges agreeable
to God's revealed Will, does therefore stand upon as firm a Foundation as the
Duty of endeavoring to secure the Favor and Enjoyment of God. For no man can
expect this by worshipping God in such a Way as he himself believes
disagreeable to Him, nor even in the Neglect of such Worship as his own
Conscience, after suitable Endeavors to inform it, tells him God does require
of him.

THE Civil Magistrate, if he would answer the Design of his Office, instead of
denying men this Right, or inflicting any Punishment on them for using it in a
quiet, peaceable manner, ought to protect and defend them in it: Otherwise
Government it self, which certainly was appointed for the Good of men, will on
the whole be a Disadvantage to them. For if the Exercise of this Right be
necessary to the eternal Happiness of men, it is certain that none of the
Advantages men derive from Civil Government, can balance the Disadvantage of
being deprived of it. The free allowance of this Right, is so far from
disturbing the Peace of Civil Society, that it is undoubtedly one of the best
Means of preserving and securing it. If the Magistrate countenances and
supports one Party in oppressing and persecuting another, the Consequence will
be, that they arrive at a greater and more irreconcilable Distance from each
other; Animosities and Quarrels may be expected; and, when the Parties are near
equal in Numbers and Strength, a Civil War is too often the Effect. But when
the Magistrate protects all peaceable Subjects in their Religious as well as
Civil Rights, and suffers no one to oppress or disturb another, they are most
likely to act the Part of good Subjects toward their Rulers, and that of good
Neighbors toward one another: And this is the most probable Way to bring men
to unite in Judgment as well as Affection.

IT IS indeed possible for men to use this Liberty as a Cloak of Maliciousness;
they may in Preaching or even in Prayer use seditious or treasonable
Expressions, they may revile the Rulers of their People, contemn and disparage
the good Laws of their Country, or slander and abuse their Neighbors. When
ever they do so, they are beyond all doubt justly punishable by the Civil
Magistrate, and the Peace and Happiness of Human Society do sometimes make it
necessary that they should be punished with severity. There is nothing in this
at all inconsistent with Liberty of Conscience; for my Right to worship God
according to the Dictates of my own Conscience does by no means include a Right
to destroy the public Happiness of Civil Society, by subverting the Government
of it; nor does it in the least Degree authorize me to revile my Superiors, or
to defame and abuse any Man. Let then Treason and Sedition, Slander and
Defamation, and every Thing that destroys Social Happiness be punished as they
deserve; let no Pretense of Conscience excuse any Person in the Commission of
these Crimes; let their being committed under the Notion of Praying, or of
performing any other act of Divine Worship be esteemed (as it really is) a
great Aggravation of the criminal Action, and all the Intentions of Civil
Government will be answered without at all infringing Liberty of Conscience, or
taking from quiet and peaceable Men the invaluable Right of worshipping God in
such a Manner as they believe He requires and will accept.

PRINCIPLES and Practices which don't affect Civil Society, and so cannot be
said to have any Political Evil in them, may yet be evil in a Religious or
Ecclesiastical Sense, and so may justly expose Men to Church Censures: But then
these Censures ought not to have Civil Punishments annexed to them; because it
is only Political Evil that deserves Political Punishment. The Apostolic
Directions relating to withdrawing from a Brother that walks disorderly 2
These iii. 6.
, and having no Company with one that is under Censure that he may be ashamed
Ver. 14.
, and the like, do no doubt concern all Christians, and therefore the Person
vested with Magistracy, if he be a Christian; and the caressing, encouraging
and promoting a man under Ecclesiastical Censure, cannot, I think, be
reconciled to these Precepts. But neither these nor any other Texts of
Scripture that I know of require the Civil Magistrate to annex temporal Pains
and Penalties to Ecclesiastical Censures.

WHILE the Civil Magistrate continued Heathen, the Church had as much Right to
censure its own members as it has now; and while its Censures were administered
agreeable to the Will and Command of Christ, and with a Dependence on Him to
succeed them, they best answered the Intentions for which they were instituted.
But when the Roman Empire became Christian, 'twas pretended that it belonged to
the Magistrate to strengthen the Hands of the Church by annexing Civil
Punishments to her Censures. When this Point was once gained, the Party that
could by any means ingratiate it self with the Emperor, was sure to persecute
all the Rest. They all had their Turns of Suffering, and they that thus took
the Sword did many of them perish by the Sword: Constantine the first Christian
Emperor, banished the Arians, and his Son did the same by the Orthodox.

IT was at first pretended that this belonged to the Civil Magistrate by virtue
of his being a nursing Father to the Church; and 'twas said that mild and
moderate Punishments were all that were desired, or proper to be used in this
Case: But in Process of Time the Magistrate was degraded from the honorable
Character of a nursing Father into the mean and ignoble one of a mere
Executioner. In some Countries which call themselves Christian, the Civil
Magistrate is at this Day obliged, under the Penalty of Excommunication, which
with them includes a Forfeiture of his Temporal Dominion, to inflict Capital
Punishments of the most cruel and barbarous Kind, upon all that are condemned
by the Church for Heresy. And though the Person be one of his own Subjects, one
whom he is obliged by his Office to protect and Defend, yet he is not allowed
to look into the Process against him, or at all to inquire whether the Sentence
he executes be just or unjust Vid* Limborch's Hist, of the Inquisition, V. II.
Chapter xl.
.

WHEN the Foundations are destroyed by the Civil Magistrate's neglecting to
countenance and encourage Religion, or to protect men in the peaceable Exercise
of their Religious Rights; and especially when he joins with one Party to
persecute and destroy all that dissent from them, it is easy to see that the
Righteous will be bro't under peculiar Difficulties, and be the greatest
Sufferers. A man of no Religion can comply with the established Religion, how
corrupt soever it be; He that believes nothing can profess any Thing; he that
makes Conscience of nothing can conform to any Thing; and he that cares not
whether he worships God at all, will not be very solicitous about the manner or
modes of Worship. Thus the irreligious Part of mankind can easily escape
Persecution in these Cases: But the Righteous, they who make Conscience of what
they do, cannot subscribe Articles of Faith which they esteem false or unfound,
nor profess what they do not believe; they cannot conform to what they judge
corrupt and sinful, though established by the highest Human Authority; nor dare
they neglect to attend such Worship and Ordinances as they find God has
instituted, even though the Laws of their Country should make it penal to attend
them. Thus Men of Honesty and Sincerity, such as really endeavor to serve and
please God, and to obtain his Favor to eternal Life, are the Men that will
suffer when the Foundations of common Security and Safety are thus destroyed.

I COME now to the IMPROVEMENT of this Subject. And here,

I. WITH all the Defference due to the Character of Magistracy, and yet with
the Freedom that becomes a Minister of the Gospel, I would address the
Honorable the GOVERNOR, the DEPUTY GOVERNOR, and ASSISTANTS of this Colony,
with the REPRESENTATIVES of the Freemen of the same, now assembled in a
general Court of Election.

My honored Fathers,

I HAVE been endeavoring, though in a weak and imperfect Manner, to represent
the Design and Usefulness, and consequently the Dignity and Importance of that
Office which Divine Providence has placed you in. My Design herein has been to
promote such a Direction and Exercise of the Authority you are vested with, as
is agreeable to the wise and benevolent Designs of God in the Institution of
Civil Government; such an one as shall render you eminent Benefactors to the
People of this Colony, and the dignified Instruments of promoting Public Peace
and Social Happiness.

THERE is nothing of greater Importance to Men in any Office, than frequently
calling to Mind the original Design and great End of the Office they sustain.
This naturally suggests to their Thoughts what are the peculiar Duties
incumbent on them, what the great God expects and requires of them, and how
they must conduct themselves at present, if they would at last be able to give
their Accounts with Joy. In this View the Practice of preaching on this
Occasion which I suppose has been continued from the very Beginning of this
Government, appears very reasonable and proper. For though it will frequently
happen (as I am very sensible it does this Day in particular) that the Preacher
shall have less acquaintance with the Nature and Methods of Government than a
great Part of his Hearers, yet being obliged to apply his mind with some close
Attention to the Subject he discourses upon, he may perhaps suggest some
Things, which though known, would not otherwise have been so distinctly thought
of, and so one who cannot Pretend to instruct you, may yet stir up your minds
by way of Remembrance.

GOVERNMENT is the Foundation of the Peace and Happiness of men considered as
formed into Civil Society; it is so in the gracious Design of God, and it will
be so in the Event, at least in all ordinary Cases, if it be suitably Conducted
and Administered. The two great Things necessary to this Purpose, are, the
enacting wise and righteous Laws, and the administering Justice according to
them, both in Civil and Criminal Causes, with a steady and impartial Hand.
These both belong to your Province, as you are assembled this Day not only in
your Legislative Capacity, but also to appoint such executive Officers to whom
the Administration of Law and Justice is to be committed. Allow me to say that
both God and man expect that in both these important Branches of your Authority
you keep the great and original Design of Government in a near View, and
sincerely aim at promoting the Public Welfare of His Majesty's Subjec^^ under
your immediate Government.

THE happy Constitution of this Government is such, that I cannot think it
needful to caution you against carrying the Civil Authority of the Magistrate
too high, or fixing a Tyrannical Administration upon us: Since you are Members
of the same Society with us, and hold your Seats in the Administration over us
by the annual Choice of the Community. I wish I could say there was as little
Danger of having the Foundations of our Public Peace and Social Happiness
destroyed, or even shaken, by Popular Discontent and Uneasiness. This I take to
be the peculiar Danger in Elective Governments. It will frequently happen that
such Measures as are necessary, or highly conducive to Public Good, shall be
very unpopular. People in general cannot be thought sufficiently skilled in the
Nature of Government, or enough acquainted with public Affairs to know what
Measures are proper to be taken in a great variety of Cases that frequently
happen. And though, if let alone, they will not ordinarily be desirous of a
Change of Government, so long as the Administration is steady, uniform, and
impartial, and the good Ends of Government are in a comfortable Degree
answered; Yet it must be owned that it is too easy for crafty* designing Men to
work upon them, to propagate a spirit of Uneasiness and Disaffection, and so to
lead a Society into Parties. In this Case the Magistrate who espouses an
unpopular Measure, though it be in it self ever so just and reasonable, and even
necessary, incurs the Danger of being left out at the next Election. In such
Circumstances the Security of this Colony depends very much upon the Resolution
and Virtue of its Magistrates. Should such a Case happen, we trust that you,
our Political Fathers, will approve your selves the firm and immovable
Foundations of our Happiness, by steadily pursuing what in your Wisdom you
judge our true Interest, even though it should happen to be against the
prevailing Opinion of the People. For it certainly becomes you as Fathers of
your Country, not to humor and indulge us to our Hurt, but by a wise,
righteous, and mild Administration to promote our Good.

THE Things that have been mentioned as necessary to Social Happiness, such as
the Securing men in their Persons and Properties, the promoting such Things as
tend to the Public Good, and suppressing whatever is contrary thereto, the
countenancing and encouraging Religion and protecting men in the quiet
Enjoyment of Religious Rights and Privileges, deserve your serious
Consideration and constant Attention. For without these Things the Intentions
of Government cannot be answered, and a slight Attention or Indifference with
regard to any one of them will greatly endanger, if not certainly destroy the
Foundations of Public Peace and Social Happiness.

PERMIT me to recommend it as a Thing worthy of your most serious
Consideration, whether nothing further can be done to reform men's Morals, and
to put a stop to the Growth of Injustice and Profaneness, Idleness and
Extravagance, Intemperance, and Uncleanness, which are so visibly increasing
upon us, and do so awfully threaten to be our Ruin. We have good Laws against
such Vices as these; but it deserves to be considered whether there is not some
further Provision wanting to carry them into such a vigorous and steady
Execution, as the present state of Things seems plainly to require. Penal Laws
are designed to procure Public Safety; Offenders are to be punished that others
may hear and fear, and so be restrained from such Practices as are inconsistent
with the Safety and Happiness of Human Society. If therefore the Laws against
Theft and Burglary (for Instance) serve no higher Purpose than to help the
Owner in recovering Goods Stolen from him, which it is generally known is too
often the Case; though it cannot be said that these Laws do no Good at all, yet
it is plain that they do not answer the proper Intention of Penal Laws, nor
afford that Security to the Public which Social Happiness evidently requires.
And indeed Penal Laws in general, if they are not put in Execution, do rather
hinder than promote the Good of the Public, as they inure People to a Disregard
to the Law, and a Contempt of the Authority of Rulers.

IF the Reason of so general a Remisness in the Execution of Penal Laws be
inquired into, perhaps it will be found very much owing to our Executive
Officers acting so much Singly, and not meeting in a Body as is practiced in
other Governments. It is not to be wondered at if a single Grand-Juryman, or a
single Justice of the Peace, should in many Cases be ignorant of the Duty of
his Office, or at a Loss with Regard to the Method and Forms in which he ought
to proceed: Nor even, if in some Cases he should be intimidated, and afraid to
proceed against some particular Offenders. Whereas if they were regularly to
meet in a Body, and act conjunctly, one would instruct and encourage another;
they would thus be under much greater Advantages for suppressing vicious and
destructive Practices, and there would be much less Danger of encouraging
Wickedness by suffering Offenders to go unpunished. If I am rightly informed
this is the only Government within the British Dominions; in which the Justices
and Grand Jury of a County do not statedly meet in their Sessions of the Peace:
And perhaps if they did so with us, it would be as uncommon to see an open
Transgressor of the Laws of his Country escape with Impunity, as it now is to
see such an one prosecuted to Effect.

IT IS Part of the magistrate's Office to encourage and promote Religion, and to
defend the Subject in the peaceable Exercise of his Religious Rights. And this,
you will suffer me to say, is in an especial manner incumbent on you, my
honored Fathers; since Divine Providence has placed you at the Head of a
Government originally settled on a Religious Design, and by an excellent Set of
men who thought themselves obliged to bear Testimony against Human Institutions
in Religion, and Impositions on the Consciences of men; and who freely left all
the Delights of their native Country, and retired into this then howling
wilderness, that they might, without Offense or Disturbance to others, enjoy
the inestimable Privilege of worshipping God agreeable to the Directions of his
Word, without any Additions or Impositions of men; and that they might leave
this Privilege as an invaluable Inheritance to their Posterity after them.

THE Churches planted by these noble Confessors and sufferers for the Cause of
pure Religion and Ecclesiastical Liberty, think themselves to have some Title
to the peculiar Protection and Favor of their Civil Rulers. And I hope they
will never abuse it by desiring any Thing inconsistant with an extensive
Toleration of such as conscientiously and peaceably dissent from them: I hope a
Spirit of Ambition, Tyranny and Domination, so unbecoming the Disciples of the
meek and lowly JESUS, will never possess these Churches or their Ministers: I
trust they will always be far from asking you to pass Acts of Uniformity, to
oblige all men by Civil Penalties to conform or submit to them; or from
desiring you to inflict temporal Punishments on such as they censure for Faults
that are merely Ecclesiastical in their Nature, and do not affect the Peace and
Happiness of Civil Society. And while they act thus, I make no doubt of your
approving Yourselves nursing Fathers to them, by protecting them in all the
Rights and Privileges which belong to them as the Establishment of this Colony,
by countenancing and encouraging their Ministry, and affording them such
Assistance as they may at any Time need in raising a proper Support, and decent
Maintenance for them.

COULD I think, my honored Fathers, you needed a strong Motive to excite you to
the Discharge of these Duties of your exalted Station, I need not depart from
my Text to find such an one. If the Foundation be destroyed, what can the
Righteous do? God the Sovereign Ruler and Judge of Magistrates and People, is
Himself a most righteous Being, and He loves his own Image in his Creatures;
His Countenance beholds the upright. Now these Persons who are so dear to
God, are the very men that will immediately suffer by the Destruction of the
Foundations, or by your acting contrary to, or neglecting to promote the great
Intentions, of Government. Were it only the pernicious Part of Mankind, those
voracious Persons that, like Beasts of Prey, support themselves by devouring
other men, and so may justly be esteemed Enemies to their own Species, that
suffered by the Foundation's being destroyed; or indeed were it only the
useless and insignificant Members of Society, that were brought into
Difficulties thereby, Negligence in Magistrates would be in some Degree
excusable: But since it is the Righteous, the man that is more excellent than
his Neighbor Prove. xii, 26.
, that is the chief Sufferer; since the Difficulty in this Case, falls upon the
most useful and valuable Part of the Human Species; since those will be most
injured for whom God has the greatest Love, and whose Cause He will sooner or
later appear to plead and avenge, it is a matter of vast Importance that you
exert the Authority with which you are clothed, in constant Endeavors to
promote the great and original Design of Civil Government. In this Way you will
approve your selves the Foundations of Peace, Security and Happiness to the
People of this Community; and be the dignified and happy Instruments of
accomplishing the Purposes of Divine Wisdom and Benevolence toward them: Thus
shall you resemble the Sovereign Ruler of the World, while Righteousness
clothes you, and Judgment is as a Robe and a Diadem to you. This is the Way to
have the Time of your Administration over us, shine in future Annals as the
Reign of King Solomon does in the Prophetic Psalm, He shall judge the poor of
the People, he shall save the Children of the needy, amd shall break in Pieces
the Oppressor. -- In his Days shall the Righteous flourish, and there shall be
abundance of Peace Psalm lxxii, 4, 7.
And finally, thus your Memories shall be honored, and your Names shall be
mentioned with Praise in future Generations, on the account of the many worthy
Deeds done by you for the People of this Colony, (perhaps even for some that
were not in the Time of them accepted with becoming Thankfulness; while you
yourselves shall with ineffable Delight, cast your Crowns at the Foot of Him
that sits on the Throne, and ascribe to the rich and sovereign Grace of God
the entire and undivided Glory of all the great and good Things done by you as
well as for you. But,

II. THIS Discourse is to be addressed to the MINISTERS of the Gospel. My
Reverend Fathers and Brethren, the Subject I have now been discoursing of
suggests many Things worthy of your serious Consideration, more indeed than the
Time will allow me distinctly to mention. Suffer me however briefly to apply
some of them to you, as well as to my Self.

THE great Design of that sacred Office we sustain, is to promote the Glory of
God, by advancing the Intentions of redeeming Wisdom and Grace in the eternal
Salvation of men. It is of infinite Consequence that we keep this in our View,
and that our Conduct in Public and Private, be directed and influenced by a
steady and constant Regard to it. The Foundations we are principally concerned
with, are those of Repentance from dead Works, and of Faith toward God. That
these may be laid deep and firm in the Hearts of men, and so as to bear the
Superstructure of an holy and religious Life, we must endeavor to awaken
careless and stupid Sinners, who are sleeping on the Brink of eternal Ruin, and
to warn them to flee from the wrath to come; and we must direct the weary and
heavy laden Sinner to Jesus who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, and but by
whom no man comes unto the Father. Having led our Hearers to Christ both for
Righteousness to justify their Persons, and for Grace to renew and sanctify
their Natures, and to furnish their Souls with the Principles of Evangelical
and acceptable Obedience; we are on this Foundation to build all the Virtues
and Duties of the Christian Life. We must explain all the Duties of the Moral
Law, in that Latitude and Extent wherein they are inculcated in the Gospel; and
we must enforce the Observation of them by setting those exalted and powerful
Obligations to Holiness and practical Religion which are peculiarly
Evangelical, in the strongest and most affecting Light we are capable of.

IT IS no small or inconsiderable Part of our Work to explain and enforce
Relative Duties, or the Virtues which are peculiarly necessary and conducive to
Social Happiness. Religion never appears in a more amiabl^ Light than when it
disposes men to a ready and cheerful Performance of relative and social Duties.
When they that before were stubborn and disobedient to their Superiors in
Civil, Sacred, or Domestic Relations, and continually ready to join with the
turbulent and factious, in fomenting Uneasiness and promoting Contentions,
become submissive and obedient, ready to pay all proper Regards to those who
are set over them, and studious to promote the same Temper in all they converse
with; when they that once were proud, haughty and insolent to their Inferiors,
become humble, affable and gentle; when such as formerly were cruel, malicious,
revengeful and implacable, become kind, meek, charitable and forgiving; when, I
say, such a Change as this appears in a man's Temper and Conduct, upon his
professing himself a Christian, it is hardly possible for an Infidel to doubt
the Divine Original of the Gospel. But when nothing like this appears on Men's
making the highest Profession of Religion, and even boasting of their
Experiences of a work of Grace on their own Souls; and especially when the
visible Change is the very Reverse of this, what can be expected but that the
sacred Name of God should be blasphemed, and the Minds of many filled with
unconquerable Prejudices against all serious Religion? And when a righteous GOD
makes Inquisition for Blood, He will remember and take vengeance of Persons of
this Character, for in their Skirts will be found Blood, even the Blood of
Religion it self.

IT IS our Duty, my Fathers and Brethren, to engage our Hearers to adorn the
Doctrine of God their Savior by the Discharge of Social Duties, and in a
particular Manner of those they owe to their Civil Rulers, the Discharge of
which is, as we have heard, so very necessary to render Government a solid and
durable Foundation of Public Peace and Happiness. The inspired Apostles thought
this a matter of so great Importance that they frequently mention it, and
insist upon it in their Epistles: Nor did they think it enough ^o insert it in
their Epistles to the Churches, (...) they left it in Charge to Ministers to
preach upon these Duties. Put them in mind (says St. Paul to Titus) to be
subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every
good work; to speak Evil of no man, to be no Brawlers, but gentle, showing all
meekness to all men. Titus iii, 1, 2.
By observing these and such like Apostolic Directions we shall contribute in
our Station, to strengthen the Foundations of public Peace, and to promote the
Welfare and Happiness of Mankind.

OUR Lord and Master, whose we are and whom it ought to be our highest Ambition
to imitate and serve, discovered the greatest Love to Mankind that the World
ever heard of; such Love as is the object of the Admiration and Astonishment of
the Angelic World, and the delightful Subject of those Praises which are sung
in Seraphic Strains in the Temple above. This led Him to pity and relieve them
under the Miseries of the present Life, as well as to provide for their future
and eternal Happiness. The Prophet elegantly describes Him as bearing our
Griefs, and carrying away our Sorrows, Isai. liii, 4.
and though this ultimately refers to his Sufferings for our Salvation, yet the
Evangelist speaks of this Prophecy as being in some sense fulfilled when Jesus
cast out evil Spirits, and healed all that were Sick Matthew viii, 16. 17.
. In Proportion as we have the Spirit and Temper of Christ, we shall be
influenced by a tender Concern, both for the temporal and eternal Welfare of
Men. And we take the direct Method to promote both, when we sincerely endeavor
to bring our Hearers to practice Social Virtues from truly Christian
Principles; teaching them to render to all their Dues; Tribute to whom Tribute
is due; Custom to whom Custom; Fear to whom Fear; Honor to whom Honor; to Owe
no man any Thing, but to Love one another Romans xiii, 7, 8.


BUT it is more than Time that I should,

III. IN the last Place, apply what has been said in an Address to this
numerous Assembly. And this I must do in a few Words.

YOU see, my Brethren, what abundant Reason we have to be thankful to God for
the Appointment of Civil Government, and for casting our Lot under so equitable
a Constitution and so righteous and mild an Administration; that we enjoy such
distinguishing Privileges, and that the Foundations of our public Peace and
Happiness do as yet stand so firm and secure. It becomes us at all times to
maintain and express a thankful Sense of these distinguishing Favors of
Heaven, and especially should we do so, when as at this Day, we are favored
with the Return of an Anniversary ELECTION. It is a Time of Joy with us, and it
becomes us to rejoice in the Lord, and triumph in the God of our Salvation.
Thankfulness to God for these Favors, if it be sincere, will produce in us
great Carefulness that we do not by any means abuse and forfeit our Privileges;
and it will prevent those Uneasinesses, Discontents and Divisions, which, if
indulged, may justly provoke a holy God to deprive us of them, and to turn
this, which has for so long a Time been a Day of Gladness and Rejoicing, into a
Day of Lamentation and Mourning.

THOUGH Government is designed and suited to secure Public Happiness, and
though Magistrates wisely and faithfully endeavor to promote the great design
of their Office, and continually attend to this very Thing; yet it will be in
the Power of the People to defeat the Design, and render themselves and their
Posterity miserable after all. They take the direct way to Ruin, when they
indulge groundless Jealousies of their Rulers, and spread idle Reports to the
Disadvantage of their Characters, when they join with the Discontented and
Uneasy, and by their Clamours, Animosities and Divisions dishearten their
Rulers, weaken the Administration of Government, and render it less capable of
producing its salutary Effects. People contribute to their own Misery when they
indulge themselves in Idleness, Extravagance, Intemperance and the like vicious
Practices, which as we have seen tend to destroy the public Peace and Happiness
of Human Society.

I MUST add, that People really help to destroy the Foundations of their own
Happiness, when from a restless and uneasy Spirit, they are continually and
without any just Reason endeavoring a Change of the principal Persons in the
Administration of Government. I know the Freemen of this Colony have the Right
of choosing their own Rulers annually, and I acknowledge it is a great Privilege,
such an one as if wisely improved, will greatly conduce to the perpetuating our
Prosperity and Happiness. But then it must be granted, on the other Hand, that
it is capable of being abused to the great Detriment of Public Happiness. If
the Freemen of this Colony should ever admit it as a Principle, or make it the
Rule in giving their Votes, that a Magistrate of known Ability and approved
Faithfulness is to be laid aside, merely because he cannot be brought to
consent to such Measures as he esteems prejudicial to his Country, though they
happen to be popular, what is this but in Effect saying that neither Wisdom nor
Fidelity are of any use in a Magistrate? For he that has neither of them, can
Vote according to the Humor or Prejudices of the People, and in many Cases is
more likely to do so than he that has them both. And surely a Principle which
would render the most necessary Qualifications in a Magistrate useless, must
tend to destroy the Foundations of public Happiness, and therefore ought not to
be admitted, or acted upon.

To conclude, Let us all endeavor, in our several Stations, faithfully to
Discharge the Duties incumbent on us, and wisely to improve the advantages put
into our Hands for promoting the Glory of Divine goodness both in the temporal
and eternal Happiness of men. To quicken us to the greater Activity and
Diligence in serving our Generation according to the will of God, let us
consider that all our abilities and opportunities for usefulness are Talents
committed to our Trust by our Great Lord, and Master, and that the Improvement
of them must at last be accounted for to Him. Let us call to mind that neither
the highest pitch of Grandeur and Authority nor the lowest State of Meanness
and Obscurity will exempt any Person from being called to a strict Account. Let
us think beforehand of the great and awful Day, when the dead both small and
great shall stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and remember that we who
this Day appear before God in his House, as men of such different Orders and
Degrees as are suited to the present State of Things, shall probably never meet
again in one Assembly, till that important and decisive Day when all these
Distinctions shall vanish, and we shall all stand upon a Level at the Bar of a
righteous Judge that every one may receive the Things done in his Body,
according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad.

AND now, the Lord grant unto us all that we may find mercy of the Lord in that
Day. AMEN.

The END.

