SOME OBSERVATIONS Relating to the PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE Province of the
Massachusetts Bay; Humbly offered to the CONSIDERATION of the General Assembly.

The Romans carefully cultivated their own Lands without coveting those of
their Neighbors; and by that Means enriched the Republic and enlarged the
Empire with such a Number of Lands, Cities and Nations.

CICERO. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by D. FOUL, next to the Prison in
Queen Street. 1750.

Lately Published, And Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street, next to the
Prison,

AN Exact TABLE to bring Old Tenor into Lawful Money. Also a TABLE to know the
Value of Pistoles, Guineas, Johannes, and double Johannes, Moydores, English
Crowns, Half Crowns, Shillings, and Copper Half Pence, at the Rate of Dollars
at SIX SHILLINGS a Piece, at which invariable Value they are fixed by a late
Act of this Government. The Act to be in Force from and after the 31st of
MARCH. 1750.

Also a Correct TABLE from ONE PENNY to TWENTY SHILLINGS Old Tenor; which may
serve as a Supplement to the above TABLE, and be further useful to Shopkeepers
in new marking the prizes of their Goods.

The above TABLES have been so well approved of by the Public for two Months
past, that no Person has yet pretended to find a Single Mistake in them.

Some OBSERVATIONS relating to the Circumstances of the Province.
IF an Inhabitant of this Province, who is much interested in its Happiness,
will but cast his Eye back on the three or four past Years, and view his
Country sinking under an insupportable Burden of Taxes and a Decay of Trade,
his Mind must feel a very sensible Shock: and even any one who is possessed of
but the common Principles of Humanity, and so ways interested in the Fate of
this Province, would be excited to a generous Pity for its unhappy
Circumstances, when he viewed it in such a Situation.

IT is some Alleviation however of such a Misfortune, that it proceeded from
heavy Charges, consequent on a long expensive War, carried on by Subjects, who
have distinguished themselves by Loyalty to the best of Kings, and by a firm
Attachment to the Liberty and Privileges of the happiest of Governments.

WHILE the Neighboring Provinces have, as it were, lain basking in the
Sunshine of Peace and Security, smiling in their Ease and defended from the
Incursion of an Indian Enemy, by us as their Barriers; we on the contrary have
been obliged, for the common Safety, to garrison our Frontiers and to be at the
Expense of our Blood and Treasure, to secure ourselves from the Destruction
which even a small Number of the Indian Enemy could always spread around us;
when at the same time some of these Provinces have happily felt, in a
proportionable Degree, the good Effects of the exerting of our Strength during
the Course of this War.

BY our Zeal and Loyalty (carried almost to a Pitch of Enthusiasm) we have not
only prevented the breaking up of the Settlements of some of the more
neighboring Provinces, but we have also saved that very important Fortress of
Annapolis, when on the very Brink of being surrendered to the French, who
always prove the worst of Neighbors; in Peace eternally encroaching upon the
Rights of Mankind, and in War not always behaving in the most generous Manner:
And even at this Time, notwithstanding the most solemn Treaties, instigating
the Indian Enemy to spread Murders and Desolation among the new Settlements in
Nova Scotia, when (notwithstanding their national Perfidy) they dare not appear
as immediate Actors in this Scene of Villainy. Nay such an Abhorrence have even
some of the Priests of their own Nation, at their late horrid Act of sending
Missionaries among some of the Eastern Indian Tribes, in order to instigate
them to this Cruelty, that one of them was humane enough to say, that he would
not be concerned in such a Mission for all the Riches in America.

IN the beginning of the Spanish War our Expense was very great, in raising
Levies for what is called the Cuba Expedition; and notwithstanding the Distance
of that Island from this Province, and the little Prospect that the Success of
that Expedition would immediately affect us, yet from a Principle of Loyalty,
five hundred Men from this Government were embarked upon it, at no
inconsiderable Charge, of which not above fifty returned.

BUT the most chargeable Expedition was that to Cape-Breton, in which we
expended almost two Millions old Tenor, a Sum vastly exceeding our Ability, and
which nothing but the last Extremity could excuse us the expending of; an
Extremity which not only very nearly affected us, but also the whole Continent
besides, and in which the Trade of the English Nation both with Regard to that
great Branch of it the Cod-Fishery, as also its Navigation to the Northern
Colonies was deeply interested. In this Expedition we almost made ourselves
Bankrupts, not only with Respect to Money, but also with Regard to Labor, the
worst Bankruptcy that a Community can suffer; for we expended some thousands of
Lives, which were lost by a Mortality consequent on the surrender of
Louisbourg, who were some of the Flower of the People; and whose Loss to a
Country that wants Inhabitants, can be repaired neither in a short Time nor
without great Charge and Difficulty.

ANOTHER Expedition in which we were at great Expense, was that designed for
Canada, and recommended from the Crown; and although the Scheme was not
executed, yet Bounty Money and Billetting two thousand Men, could be very ill
spared by a People, who were already so much drained of both Men and Money.

THIS was the late unhappy Situation of this distressed Province; whilst its
remaining Inhabitants were groaning under a Burden of Taxes, which had almost
sunk them into Ruin; and which they would not have been able to have supported,
had not the Parliament of Great Britain, (as a Reward of our Loyalty and
Services) discharged our Provincial Debt, by a Grant enabling us to sink our
Paper Currency.

THIS Slavery we are redeemed from, almost instantaneously, instead of lingering
out a few unhappy Years: And to this agreeable Prospect I now cheerfully turn
my Eyes, and sincerely congratulate my fellow Subjects of this Province on so
sudden a Transition from a State of Perplexity to a Scene opening to social
Happiness, if we are not wanting to ourselves; which surely we cannot be, after
so happy a Deliverance.

THE Wisdom of our Legislature in providing a salutary Method to make the
Parliamentary Grant as beneficial as possible, by passing a Law to call in our
bad Paper Currency, is a Conduct highly to be applauded: And the Firmness and
Resolution which the General Assembly in their last Sessions, showed, in
confirming that Law (notwithstanding the Quibbling and Chicanery of some
designing Men to invalidate it, in order to demand Silver according to the Face
of those Province Bills which they were Possessors of) is what expresses the
highest Regard to the good of the Society, and what is like to have a most
happy Influence on our Political and Commercial Affairs, if as steadily pursued.

IT was surprising to see the little Arts, and to hear the Sophistry of some
designing Mock Patriots, to evade the Force of this Law; but it was more
affecting to see honest well meaning Persons deluded by them. The standing
Argument was Oppression; that the Province could never bear so sudden a Change
of its Medium, and that the Silver would be immediately shipped off; by which
Means there would be no Currency to support the Trade of the Province. This
looked plausible and popular, but the Veil was too thin to conceal the Artifice
from the least penetrating Eye; for the proposed Effect from this Argument was,
that Individuals who had for some little Time past cloistered the Paper Bills,
rendering them useless to the Community, should have that Quantity of Silver
for those Bills which they were worth at the Emission of them. Unhappily, a
great Number of Well-wishers to their Country struck in with this Scheme and
raised a popular Clamor; which had they seen through, I dare affirm they never
would have done; for the inevitable Consequence of it would have been, the
raising eight or nine hundred thousand Pounds Tax Old Tenor upon the
Inhabitants of this Province; which had it been raised, I believe the
Projectors of it would almost have been cursed for. This Tax we are now
disburthened of, by the Firmness of some, who sincerely wished their Country's
Happiness.

SUFFERERS there are and will be without the least Doubt; and this occasions
some severe, unjust, and give me leave to say, libellous Censures on the
Government: but such Persons ought to remember, that in a Community where
Affairs are so unhappily complicated as they have been in ours, the general
Good of that, as well as of every other Society, ought to be the first
Principle of Action in each of its Individuals: and to promote the Ruin of Nine
Tenths of a Community to enrich the other Tenth, is the worst Heresy in
Politics, and which no wise Government would ever be guilty of. Such Persons
ought farther to consider, that it has not the least Affinity to Justice, to
suffer a Number of Persons who have been so lucky, as within a few Months to
have filled their Chests with Province Bills, when in so short a Time their
Value is not altered one Farthing; I say, it would be even Injustice to suffer
such Persons to make a Prey of the rest of the Community, by demanding two
Ounces of Silver for but one Ounce Value in other Commodities, which they have
so lately exchanged for those Bills.

AS I said before, real Sufferers there will be; but had this Affair been
conducted agreeable to the avaritious Views of some; where there is one
Sufferer now, there would then have been at least twenty. I take that Maxim to
be founded on eternal Truth, viz. Salus Populi est suprema Lex, i. e, the
Safety of the People is the ultimate End of Society. But I forbear enlarging
here, as all the Exceptions that have been made to this Act, have been fully
and sensibly answered, in a Pamphlet published last Year, entitled, A brief
Account of the Rise, Progress and present State of the Paper Currency of New
England.

SINCE Things are brought to this Crisis, it certainly must be the Duty of
every Member of Society to promote its Welfare to the utmost of its Power, and
to make its Peace and Plenty flow in an even, steady Channel; which it is
certainly in our Power to do, and we shall have none to blame but our selves,
if our Affairs should be diverted into a wrong one.

PARTICULARLY are our Eyes turned to the General Assembly in their present
Session; and it is to You the Fathers of our Country, that we address our
selves, for it is on you more immediately that we depend for future Happiness.
It is in your Power, by the Steadiness and Prudence of your Conduct in making
salutary Laws, and in giving proper Encouragement to our Trade and to the
Produce of our Soil, to lay the Foundation of our Welfare so deep, that the
Envy of our Neighbors shall not be able to undermine it. Peace we are now
blessed with, and if we do not make Plenty the Attendant on it, let us never
murmur at Providence for what future Misfortunes may befall us; since our
present Circumstances are such, that we have it very much in our Power to
prevent them. The Conduct of Providence with Regard to our political Affairs
has been too singular to be passed by unobserved; and it seems, that whatever
Inconveniences we have suffered by engaging in that very chargeable Expedition
against Cape Breton, they are more than fully recompensed by the Destruction of
a depreciating Paper Medium: and had it not been for that Expedition, perhaps
we should not have so convincingly felt the wretched Detail of Vice and Misery,
which always follows large Emissions of it: There has one Inconvenience always
gone Hand in Hand with those large Emissions, which I believe is very little
considered; and that is, the Minds of many seem to be so much debauched by it,
that the Notions of Right and Wrong are quite indistinct and are excluded from
other Parts of their Conduct in Life: And whatever affects the Morals of a
Community ought surely to be regarded, in Proportion to the Degree in which
they are so affected.

BUT besides the alteration of our Currency, many other things seem to require
the closest Attention and most vigorous Prosecution, in order to introduce and
establish the public Happiness and Prosperity.

In the first Place, as Nature has calculated our Situation for a beneficial
Trade, such Trade ought to be nursed in the most tender Manner; for unless we
can by good Economy export larger Quantities of Commodities than we import, we
must necessarily be reduced to Poverty. We are now free from our Provincial
Debt, and it is generally imagined by those who have examined most critically
the Commerce of the Province, that upon settling the whole Account, the
Balance is in our Favor: But taking it for granted that we were one hundred
thousand Pounds Sterling in Debt, yet it would be no great Misfortune; for we
have at this Time two Millions Old Tenor in Silver in the Province; and
supposing we should immediately discharge that one hundred thousand Pound with
Part of it, yet we should have eight hundred thousand Pound Old Tenor remaining
for a Medium amongst us, at the lowest Computation; which Sum is allowed by
those who are well acquainted with the Course of our Trade, to be fully
sufficient to answer all the Purposes of a Medium for it. And I think this
ought to remove all Fears of the Silver's being exiled the Province; for
besides the above State of the Case, there are considerable Quantities of
Silver and Gold imported from the West Indies and other Places; so that if we
at last loose that which is generally agreed upon by Mankind for a Medium of
Trade and ought to be the only one with us, it will certainly be our own
Faults; and the only Way which it can be lost in, is by our own Luxury and
Extravagance, which if we do not retrench, and give up that Part of our Trade
which indulges them, it will be in vain to attempt the retaining Silver with
us; And if we had ten thousand Times as much as we now have, yet such ill
Conduct would infallibly make it useless to us, and those who supplied this
Luxury and Extravagance of ours would reap the Benefit of our Loss of the
Silver in Exchange for their gratifying our Vice and Folly. The Case is easily
reduced to Demonstration: only substitute a private Person in the Room of the
Province, and let that Person be possessed of ten thousand Pound clear from all
Debt, yet if that Person will expend annually the Interest of his ten thousand
Pound and one thousand Pound per Year of the Principle besides, (having no
other Means of Support) he must certainly in the Course of a Few Years, prove a
Bankrupt: On the contrary, supposing this same Person should expend the
Interest of only nine thousand Pound of this Money Annually, he must
necessarily add to his Estate and grow rich in a Course of Years. These
supposed Facts are too plain to be denied by the most ignorant Examiner, and
this is the State of every Society. An Advantageous Trade ought therefore in
every Manner to be encouraged, and a disadvantageous one by all Ways to be
discouraged; what Laws may burden the former should be repealed, and any
Sumptuary ones that may clog the latter be enacted. For if the Balance upon
the whole of the Trade of any Country is in its Favor, that Country must grow
rich, since the Balance in its Favor, whatever it be, must be paid in Money;
on the contrary, when the Balance of the whole Trade is against a Country,
that Country, must necessarily grow Poor, as long as such Trade is carried on,
till at last it becomes quite Bankrupt, at least as to the Means of carrying
Trade on, viz. its Money. Nor will any Medium the Government can find at all
help the Matter, this we all know has been the popular Argument amongst us for
a long Time past, but it is as absurd and preposterous as it is popular. It is
a certain and undoubted Maxim, that Trade ought to find its own Medium; and for
this plain Reason, because if it be a profitable Trade, the Profit arising from
it, that is the Balance will be paid in Money, and of Consequence it will
support it self without the Help of any Government Medium; and if it be a
losing Trade, which is the only one that can stand in need of any Artificial
Medium, it ought not to be encouraged, nay, not only so, but any such Medium
will banish the intrinsic good Medium entirely away, and convert a profitable
Trade into the direct contrary.

THIS one would have thought our own past Experience would have convinced every
Man of. For what End, with Regard to Trade, has the enormous Quantities of
Paper Bills, that have been issued out, served but the increasing our luxurious
and extravagant Consumption of foreign Commodities, the loss of all our Money,
the Destruction in a great measure of public and private Faith, the debauching
our Morals, the Encouragement of Idleness, and Introduction of Poverty: And
this must eternally be the Case, since, as there can be no Occasion for the
Government's finding a Medium, but in support of a losing Trade, the
Consequence must necessarily be, that the Money will soon be gone, and as
foreign Debts increase, (for increase they must as long as this Trade is
carried on) there must be a greater Demand for those Things, that will answer
in Payment, and the greater that Demand is, the dearer those Things will be
with Regard to this Government-Medium, or in other Words, this Medium must
depreciate, this naturally introduces Cheating and Oppression, and brings on
Luxury and Extravagance, which produces Idleness, and at last ends in the
extremest Poverty. Has not this been the Case with us! Did not the Emission
of Paper Money soon banish Gold and Silver from amongst us? Did not our foreign
Debts continually increase till we had lost our Credit abroad? Did not the
Demand for Returns to pay these Debts depreciate our Paper Medium till it was
reduced to less than a sixth Part of its original Value? Has not this
introduced all Kinds of Cheating and Oppression, without Regard I had almost
said either to public or private Faith? Have not many Persons amassed Estates,
by running first of all into, and then continuing in Debt, till they have at
last by the Depreciation of the Currency paid their Creditors with three
quarters or one half the Value of the Original Debt? Has not this been the
great Occasion of our remarkable and daily increasing Luxury? Has not this
been a great Discouragement to Industry, without which no Community can
flourish, and a great Encouragement of Idleness, the Bane and Destruction of
every Society? Have not many Persons left off their more industrious, laborious
Employments in which they have been brought up, when they saw they could get a
better Living in so much easier a Manner? And have we not been reduced to such
a Degree of Poverty, that we should have been in the greatest Perplexity, had
not the Parliament reimbursed us the Charge of the Louisbourg Expedition, and
our own Legislature, in so wise a manner, provided for the Redemption of our
Bills of Credit?

UPON the whole, we may safely conclude, that any artificial local Medium for
the Support of Trade, instead of answering the good Ends pretended to be
designed by it, will entirely destroy it, by driving away all Trade that is
beneficial, and can support none but such as a Country had better be without;
such an one, as the longer it is supported, will bring us into more Debt, and
involve us in greater Misery.

IT is then of the utmost Importance to give a due Attention to the Trade and
Commerce of a Country, upon which the Riches or Poverty of it depends, and of
the last Necessity, to give a proper Encouragement to the raising and
manufacturing those Things that it is capable of, both for its own Consumption,
and for Exportation in return for what is necessarily obliged to take from
others; and that there should be a sufficient Discouragement to the Consumption
of all foreign unnecessary Commodities, that serve only for the feeding Luxury
and gratifying Extravagance.

ANOTHER Article of very great Importance, is the easing the Inhabitants of the
Province, as much as possible, of future Taxes. In case of another War, there
will infallibly arise new and great Charges to the Government; and consequently
Individuals must pay a larger Tax to the Defense and Support of it, than they
are obliged to in a Time of Peace: But during a Peace, the Scheme to pay the
current Charges of the Government is so easy, practicable and obvious, that it
would be surprising if it was overlooked, According to some late Calculations,
we consume annually nigh one million eight hundred thousand Pounds Old Tenor in
spirituous Liquors: so large a Sum seems almost incredible; but if the Time
that is misspent in the Consumption of those Liquors is taken into the
Calculation, I make no Doubt it is too low; but giving up that large Sum, let
us only take it for granted that a Million Old Tenor is annually consumed; yet
the Expense even of that Sum (which I believe is vastly within the Bounds of
Truth) is a Piece of Luxury that ought to be retrenched; and if it cannot be
retrenched, the Consumers have not the least Reason to complain of an Excise
upon it; and any Person of the least Modesty who contributed to this Luxury,
would be ashamed to appear publicly against such a Proposal; since the large
Consumption of those Liquors tends to ruin our Constitutions; which is a
Misfortune that not only will attend us, but reaches to our Posterity; and at
the same Time produces an Habit of Idleness, which has already impoverished
many Families, and is completing the Ruin of many more. To see such a Province
as this, blessed with so healthy a Climate; such a Variety of Soils calculated
for the Produce of almost all the Necessaries and Conveniences of Life;
inhabited by a People situated under the happiest of Governments; as brave in
their natural Temper as any People on Earth; I say, to see a Province under all
these and many other natural Advantages consuming their Health and Estate in
Luxury and Extravagance, must needs distinguish us to the rest of Mankind as
guilty of the greatest Misconduct, not to apply the Remedy which courts us: But
if Individuals are loath to break off their bad Habits, it is strictly incumbent
on the Legislature to make some Good arise out of so much Evil.

THE Excise upon Rum and other spirituous Liquors is now two Shillings Old
Tenor per Gallon, and the annual Produce of this and the other Excises is
twenty-three thousand Pound Old Tenor. -- It is supposed that not one half of
it is accounted for; now supposing the Excise should be raised to four
Shillings Old Tenor per Gallon, and to be paid at the Still Head; the neat
Produce of this with the Duties of Import (which ought also to be raised on
what is consumed within the Province) would be sufficient to pay all the
Charges of the Government. And in this Manner to be eased of all our public
Taxes, seems so prudent and necessary a Scheme, that a tender Regard for the
good of the Province, absolutely requires it to be thought of at least.

NOW I am on this Article of Taxes, I would just observe that it seems quite
reasonable that a small Tax should be laid on Waste Lands. The Inhabitants of
the Province are taxed for their Faculties, and why a Tract of unimproved Land,
that is rising perhaps twenty per Cent per Annum should not be considered in
some such Light, is difficult to distinguish.

WE have been so long burdened with Taxes, that it would reconcile the Minds of
many of us to a Silver Medium, and detach us from our Fondness of a Paper
Currency, if we could now have the Satisfaction, that we were for the future to
be eased of our old dreaded Burdens. This may be done, and the Question is
whether it ought not to be done?

OTHER Sumptuary Laws besides the Excise, may be necessary, that would not
interfere with the Interest of our Mother Country; particularly with Respect to
the Extravagance of Dress. The Lex Oppia among the Romans, which was made in
the 540th Year of the City, ordained, that no Woman should have above half an
Ounce of Gold, wear a party colored Garment, or be carried in a Chariot in any
City, Town or to any Place within a Miles Distance, unless upon the Account of
celebrating some sacred Solemnity. I just mention this to show the Care of the
Roman Commonwealth in preserving their ancient Frugality, and not to
distinguish the Ladies for greater Extravagance than the Men; so far from it,
that taking the whole into Consideration, the other Sex are vastly more
inexcusable for Levity and the Folly of Dress.

DOUBTLESS, prudent Laws to regulate Extravagance, would have a very good
Effect; but at the same Time, the Polite Part of the Society, Gentlemen of
Figure and Character might by their Example effectuate it. It is what is
necessary to be done, and the different Characters in Life ought to distinguish
themselves in it.

ANOTHER Article which deserves Consideration, is the Improvement of our Soil.
And here is such a large Field of Variety, to range in, that it requires not
only Skill but Industry to cultivate it. The Art of Husbandry, however trifling
it may appear, is a Subject equal to the greatest Genius; and the proper
Application of such a Genius would make it vastly serviceable to any Community.
Mankind are very fondly attached to the Customs of their Predecessors, and
adopt them as their second Nature; and hence, by being so loath to leave the old
Road, they cramp that Invention which might be very useful in Life, and from
which they might reap a double Profit: So that it seems necessary in such a
Country as this, for a Legislature to encourage Improvements of this Nature; by
making it worth the while to deviate from such old Roads or Customs; which
after they have so done renders needless any future Provisions of the same
Nature: for the Interest of Mankind will be sufficient to induce them to such
Practices, when they are once convinced from Experiment that that Interest is
advanced thereby. We supply ourselves from other Governments, in a great
Measure, with Provisions of various Sorts, which Strangers tell us, is a Shame
for us to do; and we ourselves ought to think it a Shame; for we have many
different Soils, as well adapted to those Necessaries of Life as our
Neighbors. Corn, Rye, Barley and Oats we are sure, from our own Experience,
are quite easy to be raised among us; and I believe, were we as industrious as
some other Nations, we should raise enough not only for our own Consumption,
but also for Exportation, if required; but instead of so doing, we pay large
Sums for those Commodities to some of our neighboring Provinces. The main
Difficulty is, raising of Wheat, but even as to that Article (for which we pay
a great Balance to others) it may doubtless be produced among ourselves; for
why should not those County's especially which are contiguous to the
Connecticut Wheat Soil be as capable of producing it as that Soil is: Surely
every Argument that is urged against this important Affair must be the Effect
of Indolence; for it is well known that in many Counties of this Province good
Wheat has been raised to Advantage. But it seems our Wheat is subject to Smut
and Mildew: And so it is in England; but pray is not England one of the most
remarkable Wheat Countries in the World? Doubtless, was there a proper Bounty
given for the raising it, we should soon learn so much of the Art of Husbandry,
as to prevent those Smuts and Mildews with as much Ease as others do. And I am
apt to think that Observation, made by a Gentleman of Discernment, is very
just, viz. that Wheat is very subject to Blast in the rainy Seasons of Paper
Money.

A Bounty given to the manufacturing of what Wheat we raised, into Flour, would
be another prudential Method, if we would only consider how many thousand
Barrels of this we yearly import into the Province.

BARLEY is an Article of great Consequence, and I never heard a Farmer that
ever raised it, but would allow it was a profitable Improvement of Land. Some
Lands will produce sixty Bushels an Acre; and suppose but twenty Bushels are
allowed, the Thing speaks for itself: And if we should get into this Practice
in general, we should not only reap the Profits of our Trouble by a Crop, but
it would also introduce the Custom of drinking Malt Liquors, on which an hard
Labourer in England will work and grow fat and healthy, while a lazy Labourer
here, in the Use of spiritous Liquors, and of Cider made from Fruit bad in its
own Nature and rotten by Carelessness, will grow as Meagre as his Liquor,
starve his Family, and entail the Curse of a bad Constitution on his Posterity.

BUT what is of as great Consequence as any Kind of Produce, is the raising
Hemp and Flax. There are many Tuns of Shipping built in this Province, and
large Quantities of those Articles are used upon our Navigation; and more
particularly of the former, which comes to us through several Hands, and must
therefore cost us dear; whereas by proper Economy, we might not only raise
enough for the Navigation of the Province, but might afford in a short Time, to
ship it to our Mother Country; which would not only be an easy Way of paying
for the Manufactures we depend on her for, but would also be a Saving to the
Nation, in Proportion as what we shipped to England would lessen their
Importation from the Northern Countries. This may perhaps look chimerical at
first View; but it is a Fact capable of being proved: for in Holland or Ireland
the Produce of an Acre of Hemp on good Land is one Tun, but supposing it would
produce here but half of a Tun; yet upon a Calculation of the Labor to raise
it and dress it, and the Price it produces, it will turn out a very profitable
Article; besides, a great Part of the Labor may be performed in the Winter
Season, when Labor is of less Value than in any other Part of the Year; and
besides even this, a vast Deal of Labor might be saved by managing some Part
of its Manufacture with Waterworks. Supposing then upon the whole, that we have
a Demand for our own Use, for four hundred Tuns per Year, which some think a
large Calculation; yet this Quantity requires, at the above Computation of its
Produce, no more than eight hundred Acres of Land; and will any one suggest
that so many Acres suitable to raise Hemp upon, cannot be picked out of the
whole Province? It is confirmed by many that have raised it, that though it was
laborious to go through the whole Process of it, yet that it was at last very
profitable. As to the Objection of not having Land suitable for it, it is quite
idle; for it is well known, that we have very large Tracts of low Lands, which
lie uncultivated notwithstanding their being the richest Soils we have; but the
Difficulty of clearing them deters many from the Work. Those Lands, if they
were cleared (as they might be in the Winter Season when People have little
else to do, excepting their Attendance on the necessary and important
Avocations of a Tavern) we should find to be some of our best Estates: This is
a Fact, which a few Experiments have made incontestable, and to increase
Experiments upon it, would make the most ample Amends.

THE same Arguments here used for raising Hemp may serve for raising Flax,
which is another important Article of Produce. It is said, that the Town of
Nutfield in New Hampshire Government, manufactures into Linen to the Amount of
thirty or forty thousand Pounds Old Tenor per Year; and why the whole Province
of the Massachusetts Bay may not do something on this Head in some Proportion
to the Town of Nutfield, would be very difficult to assign a good Reason for.
We import such large Quantities of foreign Linen, that a proper Degree of
Emulation and Industry would save a large Balance to the Province. Some that
are always fond of Excuses for their Indolence, will say, that our Soil is not
adapted to Hemp and Flax; but besides the Answer just now given to this
Objection, I would beg Leave to subjoin another, viz. That we can make Soils if
we cannot find them: but as this comes more properly under the Art of
Husbandry, I would refer those, who are in Earnest, to the Authors who treat on
this Subject, and particularly to the Pamphlets on Field Husbandry, which are
annually published by the Rev. Mr. JARED ELIOT of Killingsworth in Connecticut,
which show so much good Sense, founded on his own and the most authentic
Experiments, and are so peculiarly adapted to our Climate, that every Farmer
ought to have them by him, and to teach them to his Children, as including in
them not the least Part of the Duty which they owe to their Country.

BUT that which is of the last Importance, and must be the Foundation of all
other Prosperity is, the Increase of our Inhabitants: And without this, the
largest Tracts, best situated and most luxuriant Soil under Heaven avails
nothing. But here I am in some Measure anticipated by a well-timed prudent
Resolve of the General Assembly in their last Sessions, in lending the Province
Ship for the Importation, and in appropriating four Townships for the
Settlement of Foreigners; a Conduct highly becoming the Paternal Care, of
those, who are styled the Fathers of their Country. When we consider the Loss
of so many thousands of our best Laboring Men in the Course of a few Years
past, we ought not to sit still and despair, but to repair the Misfortune as
soon as possible. We see the happy Effect of such a Measure in the Province of
Pensylvania; where so many have been imported of late Years, that their Cities,
their Trade, and their Riches have increased to a prodigious Degree. Let us
only consider that the Labor of five hundred Men, as Wages are now, will
amount to fifty thousand Pound per Year Profit; and whether that Sum is not
worth saving, let any judge. It is the Number of industrious Inhabitants that
must enrich a Country; it is their Number that must make the Charges of
Government sit light and easy, when such Charges do arise; and it is their
Number that must be the chief Defense of a Province, exposed, as we are, to the
Ravages of an Enemy on an extended Frontier: Let then the Number of industrious
foreign Protestants be still encouraged. In this Method we shall not only
alleviate our Loss of Men, but in all Probability the Loss of many useful
Artificers, who have been taken off by the late Wars.

SOME are very fond of the Name of Posterity, and think the Introduction of
Foreigners would oblige their Children to sell their Country; but if they would
only be pleased to consider one Moment, that if Inhabitants were to increase
only in a Course of Nature, how many Millions of Acres would in this Province
lie uncultivated; and that their own Estates would be of little Value in this
ordinary Way of Generation; whereas notwithstanding the Introduction of
Foreigners, they might save as much Land for their Children as they would
cultivate in many Generations; and at the same Time raise the Value of what
they could conveniently spare to others; unless they will carry their Foresight
to ten thousand Generations; and if they are so overprudent as this, I will
allow they will want not only another Province for Posterity, but also another
Continent. But I should be glad such Objectors would ask themselves, whether in
Case of another French War they would not be willing to have others bear a
small Part, at least, of the Burden of Military Duties, and Taxes consequent
thereon.

I have gone through the several Articles I purposed to mention, though many
other things are left untouched, and willingly leave the Consideration of them
to the Friends of their Country. If any Thing of Importance has been offered, I
doubt not it will have its due Weight. Whatever is disagreeable, unpopular,
inaccurate or trifling, I hope will be overlooked, as the whole was designed
for the Benefit of the Province. I was induced to mention them at this Time, as
the Result of the last Session of the General Assembly is looked upon as an
Earnest of much future Good, and as the Assembly is not again met: And should
any of those Articles be worth their Notice, the acting their Part immediately
might have the happiest Influence on the Prosperity of the Province. One Year
saved, in our particular happy Circumstances, might probably produce the most
beneficial Consequences, and the Loss of a Session might be productive (...)
the most unhappy.

FINIS.

