Political Rulers Authorized and Influenced by GOD our SAVIOR, to decree and
execute JUSTICE:

A SERMON Preached at BOSTON: In the AUDIENCE of His HONOR SPENCER PHIPS, Esquire;
Commander in Chief; The HONORABLE His Majesty's COUNCIL, And the HONORABLE
House of Representatives, Of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, On MAY 30th. 1750.

Being the Anniversary for the Election of His Majesty's COUNCIL for the said
Province.

By SAMUEL PHILLIPS, A. M. And Pastor of the South-Church in Andover.

Deuteronomy. xvi. 20. That which is Altogether Just shall thou follow, that thou
may live, and inherit the Land. -- The several Paragraphs which, for want of
Time, were omitted in Preaching, are here inserted in their proper Places.

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: Printed by JOHN DRAP^R, Printer to His Honor the
Lieutenant Governor and Council.

1750.

In Council, May 31. 1750.
ORDERED, THAT Thomas Berry and Andrew Oliver, Esqrs. give the Thanks of this
Board to the Rev'd Mr. Samuel Phillips, for his Sermon preached Yesterday
before the General Court, being the Anniversary for the Election of
Councillors; and desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

S. Phips.
Copy examined, per J. Willard, Secr.

AN Election SERMON.
PROVERBS VIII. 15, 16. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice: By me
Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth.
WE have very great Reason, Sirs, to give Thanks to Almighty GOD, that our
civil Liberties, as granted by the Royal Charter, are still continued to us: --
And that the Anniversary for the Election of his Majesty's COUNCIL for this
Province is now revolved upon us: -- Also, that we are invited by our
Honorable Rulers on this weighty Occasion, to come up to the House of the
LORD, and to enquire in his Temple; That is, in the most solemn manner to
acknowledge HIM, first, by Prayer and Supplication with Thanksgiving: And then,
by hearing what HE has to say unto us.

And O, that both You and I may be, by Him, enabled to speak, and hear, as it
becomes the Gospel of CHRIST, and the Oracles of GOD!

The Words before us are the Words of Wisdom, who is no other but CHRIST, in
whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. It Is true indeed, by
Wisdom we are sometimes, in Scripture, to understand an Attribute of the divine
Nature; and sometimes Religion is hereby intended: But the Wisdom spoken of, or
rather who speaks, in my Text, is no other but the Second glorious
Subsistence in the adorable Trinity: For, "personal Qualities and Properties,
Affections and Effects are predicated of this Wisdom," as is obvious to any who
will consult the Context, and the subsequent Chapter. As also Chap. 1. 20, --
23. Where we read, not only of Wisdom's crying aloud to Sinners, and
expostulating with them because of their Dilatoriness and Perverseness, and
exhorting them to turn at his Reproof; but moreover, a Promise is added, that
if they would indeed turn unto GOD, then, I (says Wisdom) will pour out my
Spirit unto you, I will make known my Words (i. e.) more clearly and
effectually, unto you. -- Which promise of pouring out his Spirit, etc.
sufficiently evinces the Personality of this Wisdom* Nor can this Person
reasonably be though it to be any other but the SON of GOD.

It Is HE, I say, who tells us, as in the Text, by me Kings reign, and Princes
decree Justice, etc.

Here we may take Notice of Three Things;

1. That the Words not only have respect to the King, who is supreme; but also
to others who bear Rule under him; including, doubtless, the various Degrees
and Orders of Men concerned in the Civil Government, of what particular Title
or Denomination soever; for, both the Legislative and the Executive Powers are
here specified; Judges as well as Kings. -- Yea, and the Words do most probably
refer also to the various Forms of civil Government which are in the World; for
the ^anner of Expression is applicable to each of them.

2. It Is plainly hinted to us, when the civil Powers may be said to Rule well,
viz. when they decree Justice, that is, just and good Laws (the Abstract being
put for the Concrete) and not only Decree, but also Execute the same: For
otherwise, the Decrees would be quite vain and insignificant. Kings and others
in subordination to them are not exalted, merely, that so they might be in a
State of Superiority over their Fellow-Men: No, they are to Rule; but then
their manner of Rule must be suited to the Ends of civil Society, and for the
promoting of the public Good; which necessarily implys the Executing as well as
the Decreeing of Justice.

3. and lastly; We are expressly told, by whom it is that Kings reign, and
Princes decree Justice. -- By Me, says the Wisdom of GOD, or the Son of GOD. Q.
D. They derive their Authority from Me: And moreover, by Me, are they quickened
and enabled, first, to Decree; and then, to Execute just and good Laws; and
thereby to answer the great End of their exalted Station.

Some read it, For me; others, In me, Kings reign -- But I shall consider the
Text according to our Translation, which is the same with the Marginal reading.

So that, from the Words we may note this

DOCTRINE. That it is from the LORD JESUS CHRIST that Kings and all other civil
Rulers do derive their Authority: And it is by Him also, that they do exercise
the same in a due manner.

This may be spoken to under two Propositions.

1. That Kings and all other civil Rulers derive their Authority from CHRIST.
And 2. It is by him also, that they exercise the same in a due manner.

PROP. I. That Kings and all other civil Rulers do derive their Power and
Authority from CHRIST.

By Me, says Wisdom, Kings reign --: And By Me, Princes rule, and Nobles, even
all the Judges of the Earth.

This I shall, 1. In a more general Way (in some measure) evince the Truth of.
And then, 2. For further Illustration, shall mention in what Respects, civil
Rulers may be said to derive their Authority from CHRIST.

First; I am, in a more general Way (in some measure) to evince the Truth of
this Proposition.

Here then let it be considered.

That all Power both in Heaven and on Earth is given unto CHRIST. True indeed;
as he is GOD co-essential, and coeternal with the Father, so, he is equal with
him in Power and Glory: But as God-Man and Mediator, so all Power was given to
him. This Doctrine was known and received under the old Testament; for it was
not only Decreed, that the Messiah should have the Kingdom, but also this
Decree was published. Psalm. 2. 6, -- 9. and Psalm. 45. 6, 7. and to the same
Purport, in many other Scriptures of the old Testament. -- And agreeable
hereto, our LORD JESUS himself told his Disciples, as in Mat. 28. 18. All Power
is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth. And John 5. 22. The Father judges no
Man, but has committed all Judgment unto the Son: -- And this same Doctrine
was afterward taught by his Apostles; Thus Peter said, that JESUS CHRIST was
LORD of all. Acts 10. 36. And the Apostle Paul says, as in Phil. 2. 9. 10, 11.
GOD has highly exalted him, -- that at the Name of JESUS, every Knee should
bow, -- and and that every Tongue should confess, that JESUS CHRIST is LORD.
And in Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22. And set him at his own right Hand -- far above all
Principality and Power -- in this World, and that which is to come. And has
put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the Head over all things to
the Church. i. e. for the Benefit of the same.

SO that, it is evident, that our LORD JESUS CHRIST is the sole universal
Monarch; and that by Donation and Unction from the Father. He rules not only
in the Kingdom of Grace, but also in that of Providence: And may therefore very
fitly say, as in my Text, By me Kings reign, etc. And so I proceed to say,

That our LORD JESUS CHRIST does actually exercise this his Kingly Power and
Authority. He does not sit in Heaven, merely, as a Spectator, or, only to
behold the Things which are done here, upon the Earth, No; but he actually
orders and overrules according to his own good Will and Pleasure, and yet,
always in Wisdom and Righteousness. -- This is that Judge of all the Earth
(spoken of in Genesis 18. 25.) who can do no other but right. The Scepter of his
Kingdom is a right Scepter. -- And he is Wise as well as Righteous in all his
Administrations, and is fitly styled Wisdom, as in my Text.

Certainly, all such are grossly mistaken who imagine, either, that it is
beneath the LORD JESUS, now, in his State of Exaltation, to regard Men and
Things here below: Or, that it is too great a Burden for him to inspect and
govern in all Affairs: For, He by whom all things were made, does not think it
beneath him to govern the World: Nor is the Government of the same, in any
measure tedious to him, who, as GOD, is present in all Places, and is also
infinite in Power, and in all other divine Perfections: -- As in making the
World, He spoke and it was done, he commanded and it stood fast; even so, by a
Word's speaking, he can, now, put quite another Face upon Things, and make all
the Commotions which are on the Earth, to serve his own Purpose and Glory: Yea,
and he actually does so, from time to time; for he causes the Wrath of Man to
praise him, and the remainder of Wrath he restrains. Psalm 76. 10. -- It Is not
only a truth that the Kingdom is CHRIST's, but moreover, he really presides as
Governor among the Nations. Psalm. 22. 28. He not only has ^he Honor to
sustain the Title and Character, but also acts the part, and does the Business
of an Universal Monarch. -- And it was with this View, Namely, to encourage and
embolden his Apostles to proceed in their Ministry, notwithstanding all
Oppositions, that he informed them, before his Ascension into Heaven, that all
Power was given unto him.

But then,

Our LORD JESUS CHRIST does not ordinarily exercise his Power and Authority
over Men, immediately, or by himself only: Nay, but for the most part, he
employs and improves some, by whom he rules over others of 'em. -- True
indeed; he sometimes executes Judgment on his Enemies without the hand of Man?
and this he does to make his Power known, and to proclaim his Holiness, as also
to convince People of an overruling Providence, and that all around may hear,
and be afraid to do the like Wickedness. Psalm. 9. 16. The LORD is known by the
Judgment which he executes; the Wicked is snared in the Work of his own Hands.
-- It Is also true, that our LORD JESUS does sometimes, in a very signal manner,
protect and defend his favorite Servants and People; viz. When he observes
that otherwise, they, together with his own Cause and Interest, will suffer
great Wrong: And from hence, many have been induced to acknowledge (as in Psalm.
58. ult) Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous; verily he is a GOD that
judges in the Earth.

But yet, I say, that the LORD JESUS does ordinarily exercise his Authority
over Men, by some of their own Species: For it is obvious to all of us, that
some Men do actually bear Rule over others: And it is also evident from my Text,
and from many others (which I shall have occasion to mention) that civil Rulers
have and receive their Authority from CHRIST: They rule by and under him.

And this is to be further illustrated and confirmed,

Secondly; By showing in what Respects Kings and other civil Rulers may be said
to derive their Power and Authority from CHRIST.

Here then,

In the 1 st place; Let it be remarked, that civil Government it self is an
Institution of CHRIST. It Is not barely a Permission of Providence, no, but an
Appointment of Heaven: The Distinction of Rulers and Ruled is not the
Contrivance of crafty and ambitious Men, no, but of divine Ordination.

But then, to prevent a mistake; let it be here observed, that I am not now
speaking of any particular Form of Government; for it does not appear, that any
one Form or Species of civil Government is established by CHRIST: Nay, but this
Matter seems to be left to the Genius and Prudence of each Nation and Language:
And accordingly, it is easy to observe, that one Manner and Form of Government
obdains in one Nation and Country; and another in another; and a third is
different from both; and a fourth differs from all three.

But what I assert is, that CHRIST has appointed that there shall be civil
Government in some Form or other: It Is of divine Original, from Heaven and not
of Men, that there be Rulers over Men, and that they be taken from among Men.
-- The Gentiles had their Kings; yea, and a Principle of Self-preservation,
which is a Branch of the Law of Nature, led them hereunto; and this Law of
Nature is no other but the Law of GOD. -- But then, the Examples and Precepts
relating hereto, which are upon Record in the holy Scriptures, do render this
Article incontestible. -- For, it was the Angel of the Covenant, or, the Son of
GOD, who long before his Incarnation, appeared unto Moses in a Flame of Fire
out of the midst of a Bush, and appointed him to lead his People out of Egypt,
and to be King in Jeshurun. -- And Joshua had the honor assigned to him, by
the same divine Person, of leading the several Tribes into Canaan, and of
making Room for them there. -- After him, several Judges being authorized from
Heaven, presided over Israel successively. -- And then, there was a Succession
of Kings, and that by the express Direction and Appointment of the most High.
-- I might have observed also, that even before the Death of Moses, it was the
Pleasure of the LORD of Hosts, that there should be not only a Commander in
Chief, but also Rulers under him, viz. Rulers of thousands, -- of hundreds --
of fifties, and -- of tens. Yea, while Israel was in the Wilderness, a National
Council was appointed, consisting of seventy Elders, and called the grand
Sanhedrim. -- By which it appears, that although the Jews were (for a season)
more directly and immediately than any other People, under the divine
Government (and therefore their Government is called a Theocracy) yet, it was
the Will of GOD, that they should even then, be under the Government of Men
also, like themselves, and of their own Nation.

And when our LORD appeared in the Flesh, he was so far from disclaiming civil
Government, that, by what he said and did, he confirmed and established it;
for, he exhorted the People to pay Tribute to Caesar; nor did he refuse to do
the same himself.

And agreeable hereto, the holy and inspired Apostles taught the same Doctrine,
and have strictly enjoined Christians to be in Subjection to the civil
Authority, namely, as an Ordinance of GOD. Romans 13. begin: 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.

And indeed; this divine Institution is an unspeakable Favor to Mankind: Alas!
what would Men do, if they had no Rulers to control them, but even like the
Fishes in the Sea, or, as the wild Beasts in the Desert, the greater devour the
less?

And now, I say, seeing civil Government is an Institution of our LORD
Redeemer, therefore Kings and all subordinate Rulers, do, in this respect,
derive their Authority from him.

But then, besides this,

2. Kings and other civil Rulers are, Themselves, of our LORD's appointing and
advancing. Some Kingdoms, indeed, are Hereditary and others Elective; but
however, the Powers that be, are ordained of GOD. (Romans 13. 1.) Here the
Apostle by a Metonimy of the Adjunct for the Subject, puts the Power for the
Person, in whom it is lodged. And "if the Power itself be of GOD's ordaining,
so likewise are the Persons invested with it: For, Power to act always supposes
some Subject invested with that Power, and that in order to the exerting of it."

It Is evident to all Men, that there are many and different Posts of Honor and
Service in one and the same Form of Administration: Some are in higher, and
others in lower Stations. We read (in 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.) of the King as
Supreme, and of Governors as sent by him: And besides these, there are
different Ranks and Degrees of Men, and accordingly, have different Business
assigned them. Some are concerned in the Legislative, and others in the
Executive part, and some in both. -- But whoever they be that are vested with
Authority, they are introduced and advanced thereunto by our LORD JESUS CHRIST.
-- I don't mean, as in former Times, in a way of special Nomination, or
immediate Designation; No, but in a Mediate way and manner: That is, by the
Mediation of Men, and according to the diverse Constitutions of Kingdoms and
States: But then, the all governing Providence of the LORD of all the Earth is
always concerned herein: As they are vested with his Authority, and hold under
him, so it is He, who in his Providence, promotes them to Honor and Dignity. 1 Samuel 2. 8. He raises up the Poor out of the Dust -- to set them among Princes
-- for the Pillars of the Earth (meaning civil Rulers) are the LORD's, and he
has set the World (of Mankind) upon them; to be, under him, guided and
governed by them. And agreably, in Psalm. 75. 6, 7. Promotion comes not from
the East, nor from the West, nor from the South; but GOD is the Judge, he
puts down one, and sets up another. These Shields of the Earth are said
to belong to GOD: Because they both rule under him, and are set up by him.

And this holds true, not only with respect to such, who rule in and over the
Israel of GOD; but also, as to those, who bear rule over the Heathen. And
agreably, we read of some Heathen Princes, that they were exalted by GOD. He
raised up Pharaoh. Exodus 9. 16. And he calls Nebuchadnezzar his Servant. Jer.
25. 9. And he styles Cyrus, his Shepherd, and his Anointed. Isa. 44. ult. and
45. 1. And the same is true concerning all others; for, GOD reigns over the
Heathen. Psalm. 47. 8.

Yea, and even such Rulers who prove themselves to be no other but Tyrants,
these also are exalted by the most High. -- Such an one as Hazael, who
discovered more of the Beast than of the Man, yet, GOD had showed to the
Prophet, that he should be King over Syria; yea, and foretold what Enormities
and Barbarities he would be guilty of. 2 Kings 8. 12, 13. Not, that the Abuse
of Power is from GOD, No, but yet the Power it self is his.

Nor is it at all inconsistent with the Government and Perfections of GOD,
sometimes to advance such to bear rule over Men, whom he fore-knows will be no
better than Beasts of Prey: Nay, but he illustrates his Holiness, and preserves
the Honor of his Government, while he thus punishes a sinful People for their
Wickedness. And a very dreadful Punishment, truly it is, For, as a roaring
Lion, and a ranging Bear so is a wicked Ruler over the poor People. Prove. 28.
15.

I may add,

3. That civil Rulers may be said to have and to hold their Power and Authority
from CHRIST, and to rule by him, in that, they bear Rule, but only during his
good Pleasure. As it is he who exalts them, so it is he (and no other) who
holds their Souls in Life, and who continues them in their exalted Stations. --
Whenever he pleases, he removes them from their Seats of Dignity, either by
Death, or in some other Way: For, by him the Bows of the mighty are broken, and
^e sometimes (...) Contempt upon Princes. -- As Advancement, so Abasement is
from him. And when he speaks the Word, it is not in the Power of Princes, nor
of their Victorious Arms, to prolong either their Lives or their Reign: For,
every one must bow to him, as well the King as the Subject; and who can stay
his Hand, or may say unto him, W^^* do th^^? The very high and haughty
(...), though he though it himself above Control, yet, was bro't to acknowledge, and
that in the most open and public manner, the Authority and Sovereignty of the
GOD of Heaven. D^^. 4. 34, 35.

In a Word*

It is the LORD JESUS CHRIST, who upholds Kings, and all in Authority under
them, whether they be considered as Men, or as Rulers: They receive both their
Authority for Government, and their Power for Action from him: And they cannot
perform one Act of Power, nor yet move one single Step without him, nor one
Moment longer than he pleases.

This may suffice for the first Proposition.

PROP. II. It is also from and by CHRIST that Kings and other civil Rulers do
exercise their Power and Authority in a due manner.

By me, says he, Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice, or, just and good
Laws.

Not the Abuse, but the due Exercise of Power is from him: He cannot be the
Author of Confusion, or of any Sin; but from him comes down every good and
every perfect Gift.

Now under this Head, 1. I may show, What is implied in Princes decreeing
Justice: Or, when civil Rulers may be said to exercise their Authority in a due
manner. And then, 2. Evince and Prove, that it is from CHRIST, that they so do.

First; I am to show, what is implied in Princes decreeing Justice; or, when
civil Rulers may be said to exercise their Authority in a due manner.

And in General;

It implies, that they should have the several Qualifications, which are
necessary to sit them for Government: And also denotes, that their Authority
ought to be improved and exercised for promoting the good of the Public: --
For, it is not the End of the Institution, that some Men may have the
Opportunity, merely, to serve themselves; No, but that they may be Benefactors
to the People, or, Ministers of GOD unto them for good.

And now, this cannot be unless they both Decree and Execute Justice. -- You
observe I said, Execute as well as Decree Justice: For, although that be not
expressed in the Text, yet, it is necessarily implied, because the Executive
Power is inseparable from Rule and Government: Without the Exercise of this, a
Power to decree Justice would be of no avail.

But to be more Particular;

1. It implies, that Rulers should be able Men; that is, should be furnished
with a good measure of Knowledge and Wisdom, according to their respective
Posts and Stations in the Kingdom or Commonwealth. -- Every Man, and every
Ruler in particular, should be well acquainted with his BIBLE, and improve the
same as the Man of his Counsel: -- But then, besides this, he should have a
right understanding of the Constitution he is under, both civil and religious,
and especially the former: As also, a good Acquaintance with the Laws of his
Country. -- Nor may he, if in an exalted Station, be ignorant of the Manners
and Customs of the People, that so he may descry to what Dangers they expose
themselves; and being furnished with Wisdom, may be capable of forming a right
Judgment what Methods would be the most probable Means of Prevention. -- And in
short, he should be acquainted with Books and Men too, and in particular, with
the State of the Province, that so, having understanding of the Times, he may
know what is most seasonable to be said or done in this or that particular
Juncture, and may provide accordingly. -- It was the Commendation of the Heads
of the Tribe of Issachar (1 Chronicles. 12. 32.) that they had understanding of the
Times, to know what Israel ought to do. And it is mentioned ( Est. 1. 13.) as an
Essential Part of the Character of Statesmen, viz. that they are such as know
the Times. And truly, without this Knowledge, a People cannot be provided, from
one Time to another, with such Laws as are just and good, suitable and proper.

2. This Decreeing of Justice does also imply, that in a mixed Government, such
as Our's is, there ought to be special Care taken to preserve, what may be
called "a Balance of Power" For, neither Part of the Legislature, may with any
show, either of Honor or Justice, invade the Province of the other; Nay, but
by so doing, the Political Fabric it self must soon fall, and thereby
Government be at an End. Such is the good Constitution in Britain, and so among
our selves, "that the Powers of each are limited, and bro't to an happy Poise;
Power and Privilege are so twisted together, and inlaid in the Foundation of
the Constitution, as not to bear a Separation without a mutual Destruction". So
that, I say, it is the first Point of Justice and Righteousness in a Kingdom or
Province, to act up to the Constitution.

3. This Decreeing of Justice implies also that such civil Rulers as are vested
with the Power of making Decrees, or enacting Laws, ought to endeavor, so far
as shall be consistent with the Rules of Justice, to preserve the Peace and
Safety of their People, as also to promote their Prosperity and Flourishing,
and that in all Regards; because these are the great Ends of Government.

For Instance;

The Laws which they enact, and the Resolves which they come into, from Time to
Time, should be such as tend to promote the public Weal, and yet such only as
are Just and Right: Not Might, but Right should influence and govern them in
this important exercise of Power, otherwise their Persons and Authority too
will soon be had in Contempt. -- Here I shall say in few Words; That all Just
and Proper Laws should be provided for the preserving of a People in the quiet
Possession and Enjoyment of their Liberty and Property, or, of their Rights,
natural, civil and religious; and for the Recovery of the same, when unjustly
taken away or diminished. -- Also L^ws for the detecting and severely punishing
Fraud, Forgery and Perjury: And for the putting an effectual stop ((...)
possible) to Profaneness and Intemperance, and every other Branch of
Immorality: And also, for the Encouraging of Learning, Virtue and Piety. -- Nor
do I understand, why Christian Rulers, now, as well as the Romans, of old, may
not provide Sumptuary Laws, viz. for Retrenching Excesses and Extravagancies in
Diet and Apparel (especially the (...)) and to encourage Diligence and
Frugality: For, this is but a Point of Justice toward such, who will not
otherwise be Just, either to themselves or to their Creditors.

And truly, the Sanctions as well as the Laws themselves, should savor of
Justice and Righteousness; the Penalty being in proportion to the Nature of the
Crime; and the Crime to be weighed, not only as an Evil in it self, but
moreover, as it affects and injures the Public.

And not only should good Laws be provided, but it is also the unquestionable
Duty of a Legislature to keep the public Faith, and fulfill the public Promise,
as near as possible. And to take Care to discharge the public Debt, as soon as
may be: And to see that no Person suffers Damage, by reason of his having
served, or, for his having credited the Public.

And it can be no other but Just and Right that there be a strict and even a
sacred Regard had to all such Leagues, and Contracts, as have been entered into
with one or more Nations, although they be ever so untamed and savage. -- It Is
one essential part of the Character of civil Rulers, that they be Men of Truth:
And accordingly, if one or more of their People are so wicked as to Defraud,
and much more, if (to wreak their Malice) they venture to Murder one or more of
such a Nation; then, those bold Transgressors ought, upon Conviction, to be
made the Examples of public Justice for their more than doubly aggravated
Enormity: This is one way, in which civil Rulers ought to (...) the (...) of
their People's Peace, and the lengthening out their Tranquillity.

Nor may the higher Powers be unmindful in a Time of Peace, to provide, in some
measure at least, for War; because such a Time may be justly expected, nor do
we know how soon it may come. -- And Oh! what an Advantage would an Enemy have
against a secure and defenseless People! Yea, they, by their Indolence, do even
tempt their Neighbour-Nations to break their League with them, that so they may
make a Prey of 'em. King Asa had so much Prudence as to provide for War, while
the Land had rest. 2 Chronicles. 14. 6, 7. Nor need we look far from Home, to find
the like Example.

I shall just add,

That it belongs to the Legislative Powers to take the most effectual C^re,
that so, the true and certain Value of the Medium, which is current among their
People, may be preserved invariable; that so they may have a sure Rule and
Standard to guide them (continually) in their Commerce, and for the Prevention
of Fraud and Oppression.

But then, besides this; It will be but an Act of Justice, in the said
Honorable Powers to make effectual Provision also, that all and every of the
People's Weights and Measures, by which they Buy and Sell, may be preserved
from Time to Time, in a Due Regulation: For otherwise, the wicked and crafty
will impose upon or defraud the simple and honest. Prove. 20. 23. Diverse Weights
are an abomination to the Lord, and a false Balance is not good. Deuteronomy. 25. 13,
14, 15. -- Thou shall have a perfect and just Weight; a perfect and just
Measure shall thou have.

In a Word;

Unless the Legislators decree Justice, how is it possible, that such Men, with
whom the Executive Power is lodged, should minister Justice to the People? If
the Foundations are out of Course, what can the Righteous do? A special Care
ought therefore to be taken, both in the Choice of Representatives and
Councillors, that such Men may be Elected, who walk uprightly and work
Righteousness, and speak the Truth in their Hearts. -- More of which afterward.

But then;

Although there be ever so many wholesome, just and good Laws provided, yet, they
avail not, if there be not a due Execution of the same.

Wherefore;

4. The decreeing of Justice further implies in it a proper Care for the due
Execution of such Decrees. -- The Executive Power (as was before noted) is
inseparable from Rule and Government; and therefore, it highly concerns such a
Part of the Honorable Legislature to whom it appertains, always to make Choice
of and appoint those Persons for this Business, who are best qualified for, and
are most likely to answer the true end and intention of their respective
Offices; such as will not bear the Sword in vain, but approve themselves the
Ministers of GOD, and Revengers to execute Wrath upon them that do evil: As
also, commend and protect all those who are quiet and peaceable in the Land.

And I may add; that when any who are appointed to execute the Decrees of
Justice, are evidently Delinquent; or if they shall exceed the Limits of their
Commission, to the detriment of the Public, or even of any particular Person,
doubtless, they ought (in Terrorem) to suffer Disgrace in proportion to their
Offense; as also, to make good all Damages. --

But on the other hand; all such who are not only skillful in the Law, but are
also diligent and faithful in the Discharge of the Trusts reposed in them,
ought to have the Praise of it, yea, and a Reward for it, that is, higher and
greater Honors conferred upon them. -- Their Commissions should rise with their
Accomplishments for, and their Applications to, the service of the Public: That
so, all around may see and know, that the Preference is given to such as are
faithful in the Land. -- And truly, this would be an excellent means to bring
Virtue and Faithfulness more and more into Repute among all the People.

In a Word; It Is a seasonable and prudent Execution that gives Life to the
Decrees of Justice; and without this, they will be but a dead Letter: For, the
bare Promulgation of the same will not suffice to restrain such as are
vitiously disposed; No; but they must see and feel too (when there is just
Occasion) that the civil Authority is in good earnest; -- otherwise, Vice will
grow still more rampant, and seek to bear down all before it. -- If there be no
more but the shaking of the Spear, this will only be laughed at by all such who
love to run into an excess of Riot.

To proceed;

5. The decreeing of Justice does also imply, that whatsoever has any tendency
to obstruct, either the Decreeing or the Executing of Justice, ought to be
avoided and detested; and consequently, that all civil Rulers should shake
their Hands from holding of Bribes. i. e. "Though it be thrust into their Hands,
yet they may not hold it, but should shake it out, looking upon it as an
Affront." -- For alas! What unrighteous Resolves would be, many times, come
into; and how often would unjust Petitions be granted, and such as are just be
rejected, if a Legislature, or the major Part of the same, should come into the
Method of taking Gifts (of what Name or Kind soever) of one or the other of the
Parties concerned! Yea, if they be, by far, the minor Part, yet being Men of
Influence, it is highly probable, that they may easily gain their Point, and
obtain an unrighteous Vote; and yet, they themselves (for the present) not be
sensible of the injustice of it: And the Reason is, because, as says the
Scripture, a Gift blinds the Wise. -- And so like wise, if Pests of Honor
and Profit may be purchased with Money, then, many times, such Persons who are
least qualified for them, will sustain them; which would be exceedingly to the
detriment of the Public. -- And it is as true, that if a Magistrate does judge
for Reward, or give Judgment in favor of him who gives Gifts, this would be
no other but a selling of Justice (if I may term it, Justice) to the highest
Bidder.

It was a Law in Israel, in order to prevent the giving of false Judgment, and
it is of perpetual Obligation, for it is a Branch of the Moral Law, viz. (Deuteronomy.
16. 18, 19.) Judges and Offices shall thou make, -- and they shall judge the
People with just Judgment; thou shall not wrest Judgment; thou shall not
respect Persons, neither take a Gift, for, a Gift does blind the Eyes of the
Wise, and pervert the Words of the Righteous.

Civil Rulers of every Denomination should be Men of Truth and ^^ters of
Coveteousness; for, the love of Money is the Root of all Evil. They should be
Men of a public Spirit, and have at Heart the Weal of the State, much more than
the making of any private Gain to themselves. Not the Fear of Man, nor yet
Respects to a Friend or Party, but a tender Regard to Justice should direct and
influence all their Councils and Administrations. Deuteronomy. 16. 20. That which is
altogether just shall thou follow. Or, as it is in the Original, Justice,
Justice shall thou follow. i. e. "They must adhere to the Principles of
Justice, and act by the Rules of Justice; must labor to do right to all, and
beware of doing wrong to any."

But yet, we may not wholly exclude Compassion and Clemency from the Character
of civil Rulers: For truly, the exercise of this is sometimes a necessary part
of Righteousness, and particularly, in a King or his Representative; for as the
Throne is said to be established by Righteousness. Prove. 16. 12. So it is also
said to be upheld by Mercy. Prove. 20. 28. That is, when the exercise of Mercy
will not be at all prejudicial to the public Weal; but on the contrary, has a
direct tendency to promote the same: With this Limitation and Proviso, Pity and
Compassion in a Ruler, will come under the general Head of Justice and
Righteousness.

But then,

6. The Words further imply, that civil Rulers should be Patterns of
Righteousness in their Business and Commerce of a private Nature; as also,
bright Examples of every other Virtue: For, with how very ill a grace does a
Man of bad Morals pretend either to decree or execute Justice! Such an one
would be a constant Self-contradiction, and would probably do more hurt than
good; and therefore, it is insisted upon in the Oracles of GOD, that Rulers
should be Men of Virtue; Just Men, Men of Truth, etc. Here then,

(1. They should be exemplary for Commutative Justice, and render unto all
their dues; yea, study to do Justice to all, in their Persons, Goods and good
Name. -- It Is evident, that most Men who are clothed with Authority, have
Business of a private (as well as of a public) Nature; Now I say, it becomes
and concerns them (in particular) to deal justly with all, and thereby to
instruct and incite the People to conduct honestly one toward another: And not
by using any mean Artifices, and least of all, by running over the Law, teach
and encourage People to do the like, and thereby, to defraud and devour one
another; and at the same time, render their Persons as well as their Authority
contemptible.

And yet, I don't intend, that Rulers may be so exactly and strictly just to
themselves, as not to be examples of Charity: For truly, the exercise of this
Virtue toward proper Objects is an act of Justice as well as of Beneficence in
all Men, according to their several Abilities; and would be peculiarly amiable
as well as influential in the Leaders of a People. -- And indeed, sometimes,
the civil Authority, as such, is obliged in Justice, to take Cognizance of the
Case of one or more Persons, and to dispense Relief out of the public Stock.

But then, they should not only be fair and honest in their Dealings, and true
and faithful to their Promises, as also kind to such as are in Need, after the
Example of Job, Job 29. 11, -- 16.
who was a Man in Authority; But moreover,

(2. They should labor to exhibit every other Virtue in their Conduct among
Men. --

I shall just hint at some of 'em. As, first, Meekness: For surely, all such
who rule over Men ought to have the rule over their own Spirits: -- Nor is this
at all inconsistent with a regular Zeal for the Glory of GOD, and the People's
Weal; as is undeniably evident from the Instance and Example of Moses, who was
very meek above all the Men which were upon the face of the Earth; and yet, was
eminently faithful to him that appointed him. The Wrath of Man works not the
Righteousness of GOD. -- Again; They should be exemplary for Humility. I don't
mean, that they should be of a dastardly and timorous Spirit, but condescending
to Men of low degree: Not too familiar, and yet not puffed up, but discovering
a due sense of the weight and importance of the Trust reposed in them. -- Even
as I well remember a Gentleman, The Honorable JOHN BURRIL, Esquire;
who was, for many years Speaker of the Honorable House of Representatives,
and afterward One of his Majesty's Council for this Province, and also One of
the Judges of the Inferior Court for the County of Essex, was spoken of by
such who had the Opportunity to observe him, that the more he was advanced, the
more humble he appeared to be: And truly, he had an excellent Character in all
other respects. -- May such Examples be more common! -- Again; they should be
Patterns of Temperance in the use both of Meats and Drinks, and particularly of
the latter: For, otherwise, they will not only be unfit to bear rule, but will
render themselves the very Scorn of the Multitude. -- Moreover; they should
also be Examples of Chastity: For, the Reverse to this is one of those Vices
which destroys Kings. Prove. 31. 3. Whoredom, as well as Wine, takes away the
Heart. Hos. 4. 11. -- And without doubt, they should retain and discover a
public Spirit, or, a Paternal Love to their Country; and (as Political Fathers)
should be unwearied in their Studies and Applications to promote the Weal of
the People; as Mordecai, who sought the Wealth of his People, and spoke Peace
to all his Seed. Esth. 10. 3. They should rather suffer in their private
Interests, than be profuse and lavish in disposing of the public Money; and
yet, they may not be sparing of the same, when there is a fair Prospect of
procuring thereby, to the People, that which will answer much better than
Money. -- And Wisdom is profitable to direct in this matter; and indeed, in
every other matter relating to Government: Pilots have need of Prudence, and
such are Magistrates to a People. Take ye wise Men, said Moses, and I will make
them Rulers over you. And I must add; that they should be Men of Courage: For,
this is an Endowment highly necessary. Prudence without Courage will not avail,
but these in Conjunction bode well to a People. -- Nor may I omit to say, that
they ought to live Frugally, and not run into all the Extravagancies of the
Age: And even, in all other respects, should behave wisely in their own Houses;
and thus, while they preserve a public Spirit, must take care also to discharge
the Duties of whatever private Relations they sustain.

It Is a just Observation, that when Economy, Honesty and a public Spirit do
obtain among a People, then they are in the Road to Prosperity. And doubtless,
Political Fathers ought to be shining Examples of the same.

What I say, is, that the exhibiting of Virtue, by Rulers, in the several
Branches thereof, is highly necessary in order to reform a People: The making
of wholesome and good Laws, and a due Execution of the same is indeed a proper
means; But yet, if such who make and execute them, are not virtuous themselves,
then, the People will incline to think, that their Rulers aim at nothing more
than to keep them in Awe, and to oblige 'em to support them in their Vice, as
well as their Grandeur: The People will not be persuaded, but that they may
live as they list, when they observe (...) as they are very apt to do, that it
^s the manner of their Superiors, or of many of them, so to do. -- But now, on
the other hand, if Rulers are virtuous themselves, then, the common People will
be led to think, that truly it is high Time for them to be so too: yea, and will
be, much the rather, disposed to endeavor it, agreeable to that Observation,
Precepts teach, but Examples were Men: But then, there is a peculiar Force in
the Examples of Superiors, and especially of Rulers; and hence is that
Proverbial saying, that all Men will fellow the King's Example.

Once more;

7. The decreeing and executing of Justice implies in it Religion as well as
Virtue. The Ruler must do honor to GOD, as well as seek to promote the Peace
and Prosperity of Men: He must heedfully observe the first as well as the
second Table duties. Political Rulers should not only be able Men, and Men of
Truth, but also such as fear GOD, Exodus 18. 21
as Joseph, Genesis 42. 1^. I fear GOD; and Nehemiah, Chap. 5. 15. So did not I,
because of the fear of GOD. The GOD of Israel said, he that rules over Men
must be just, ruling in the fear of GOD. 2 Samuel 23. 3.
That is, he should have such a sense of GOD and of his holy Religion upon his
Mind, as not only to stand in Awe, that he Sins not; but may also study the
things that please GOD, and that in Worship, as well as at other Times. -- For
Instance; he should keep up the Practice of the Duty of Prayer, both in his
Closet and Family. If he be not a Man of Prayer, he quite degrades himself, and
is unworthy, as also unfit, to have the Rule over Men. And not only Closet and
Family Worship, but also Family-Instruction and Government, should be by him
maintained: If he does not rule well his own House, how should he govern well
in public Affairs? And then, besides this, the public Worship of GOD ought to
be, in the stated Seasons for it, willingly and devoutly attended by him: Like
that good King David, he should rejoice, whenever he is invited to go up to
the House of the LORD* yea, and when he is there, he should reverence GOD's
Sanctuary. -- All such whom GOD has, in his Providence, advanced to Places of
public Honor and Trust, are peculiarly obliged, viz. in point of Gratitude to
him, and for the sake of setting a good Example before others, as well as for
their own personal Benefit, to do Honor and pay Homage to him in the most
public manner: And truly, such of them who neglect to do this, not only incense
the Wrath of GOD against them, but also bring a Blemish on their own Character,
as Rulers; for it is quite shameful, when any who are thus exalted, and expect,
therefore, that their Fellow-Men will be in Subjection unto them, yet, they
themselves will not do Homage to him who is universal Monarch, the most high
GOD, and the possessor of Heaven and Earth; but choose rather for some weak
(not to say wicked) Reason, to be excused.

Nor is it eno' that they be Righteous and Religious before Men; but moreover,
they should be Lovers of Justice because of the Beauty, as well as for the
Benefit of it, and because it is a part of the divine Image: As Sin, in all the
Instances of it, should be odious to them, because of it is Deformity, and as it
is the abominable thing which the Soul of GOD hates; even so, Justice or
Righteousness, not only in a strict, but also in a larger sense of the Word,
viz. as it intends Holiness, of an universal Rectitude of all our Actions
relating both to GOD and Man, should be their Delight and Ambition.

This is what would add a shining Luster to all their other good
Qualifications, and would not only cause them to be reverenced by bad Men, but
also render them the delight of good Men, yea, of good Angels, and which is
infinitely more, of the good GOD.

I don't say, that every good Man is qualified to be a Ruler in the
Commonwealth, but a good Man ( caeteris paribus) will certainly make the best
Ruler: I mean, one, who, in the Judgment of rational Charity, has a living,
holy Principle within him, and so, has the Interest of CHRIST, as well as the
Prosperity of the People at Heart, and bears a dutiful Regard to his Savior's
Authority in all his Actions.

This is the good Man; yea, and he is very often in Scripture, called by the
Name of the Righteous Man: Nor indeed, may we depend upon any other, but one of
this Character, to decree or execute Justice, at all Times, -- It Is true, a Man
that is destitute of the Fear of GOD, and who is a Stranger to vital Piety and
to the Power of Godliness, may do some very worthy Deeds, in his Day and Place
(as Tertullus said of and to Felix) for, Men's Honor and Worldly Interest will
oftentimes incline and prompt them this Way: But what I say, is, that a Man
void of the Fear and Love of GOD, and of Faith in CHRIST, will not adhere
closely and steadily, and at all times, to the Word of Truth and Righteousness,
but will deviate from the same when he can serve a turn thereby: And, in a
Word, Self is at the bottom in such a Man; and although he be industrious to
cloak and hide it, yet, in reality, this is what he regards much more than any
thing else in this World, or even in Heaven it self, for, it is his Idol; and
therefore, the public is not in safety while in his Hand.

And this may suffice for the first general Head under the 2 d. PROP. which was
to show, what things are Implied in Rulers decreeing and executing Justice.

I proceed now, more briefly,

Secondly; To Evince and Prove, that it is from CHRIST, that they so do.

Here then, let us consider,

1. That the best Rules which Political Rulers have to guide and govern
themselves by, both for the enacting and executing Just and good Laws, are from
the LORD JESUS CHRIST.

It Is certain, that neither the Legislative nor the Executive Powers may act
their own Will and Pleasure; Nay, but his, who authorizes and improves them;
and therefore, such of them who have the Opportunity for it, are obliged to
consult his revealed Mind and Will, and to take their Measures (chiefly) from
thence, and not conform to any State or Statesmen any further than is
consistent with this divine Rule and Pattern.

And Thanks be to GOD our SAVIOR, that the Sacred Oracles are at hand; and all
of us, Rulers and others, have the Opportunity, not only to read, but also to
hear the same explained and applied, and so to learn what is good, and what the
LORD our GOD requires of us. -- And it was enjoined on the Kings of Israel in
particular, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19.
that they should have a Copy of the divine Law, and read therein all the Days
of their Life, that they might learn to fear the LORD, and to keep his
Statutes, and might not turn aside, either to the right hand or to the left.

And truly, it is no less necessary now, that Kings and even all subordinate
Rulers should consult the HOLY BIBLE, and the Moral Law in particular; for,
this is of perpetual Obligation, and accordingly was Ratified by our SAVIOR,
and is enjoined upon us by him, as the Rule of Life; Matt. 5. 17, -- 20.
And this, if rightly understood, and duly considered, in it is several Precepts
and Branches, would be (in the main) a sufficient Directory for our Conduct,
whether we be in private or public Station.

The Christian Magistrate is Custos utriusque Tabulae: He must keep all the
Words of this Law; that is, not only be obedient to all the Commandments, and
thereby, set a good Example before others (as was before shown,) but also
should protect them from Insult, and take care that others submit and conform
to them.

So then, civil Rulers may not think, that the weighty Affairs of State, and
much less their own Business of a private Nature, will excuse them from reading
and hearing the Word of GOD: They ought to be the Ministers of GOD unto People
for their good; and therefore, it concerns them to learn yet more thoroughly,
what is the good and acceptable and perfect Will of GOD.

And Oh, that Rulers in general, throughout the Land and Nation, would be pleased
more frequently and devoutly to consult the sacred Scriptures, as also to
attend the public Preaching of the Word! This would be, not only an Honor to
them, but also a Token for good, both to themselves and to their People; and
especially, if they would improve it as the Man of their Counsel: For,
whatever some may think of it, yet, here are such Maxims of Wisdom, and such
Rules of Justice and Equity, as are not elsewhere to be found. Indeed, many
other Books are of use, but yet, none come up to the Writings of Moses and the
Prophets, of CHRIST and his Apostles.

And I may proceed to say, that not only Christian Rulers, but such also who
have the Government over Heathen Nations, and even all the Judges of the Earth,
are beholden to CHRIST for all those good Rules and wholesome Laws which obtain
among them. -- Several of those Nations did formerly receive many Principles of
Wisdom from the Jews, who were then conversant among them: And doubtless, many
of them, more lately, from the Mouths of Christians: And all this must be
ascribed to the kind Providence of the King of Nations.

But then, besides this, they have the Light of Nature; and so have some sense
of Justice and Equity, of Honor and Purity, and of Love and Charity: The Light
of Nature, not only forbids Murder, Lying, Stealing, Perjury, etc. but also
teaches Obedience to Parents, Pity to the miserable, as also the Conservation
of public Peace and Order; yea, and it dictates to such who are inquisitive
about that matter, many suitable Methods for that End: So that, the Heathen are
a Law unto themselves; and accordingly, their Consciences do either accuse or
excuse them, as they do, or do not, observe the same. -- And now, this Law and
Light of Nature, as well as that of Scripture, is from the LORD JESUS CHRIST:
Unto him is Mankind indebted for those poor Remains of the divine Image which
survive our primative Apostasy; For, this is he, who lights every Man that
comes into the World. John 1. ^^. Moreover,

2. Not only good Rules, but also the Ruler's good Qualifications for
Government are from the LORD JESUS.

As there are different Posts and Offices in the civil Government, so, some Men
need more and greater Endowments and Abilities than others: One Station
requires a greater degree of Skill, Courage and Resolution than another does.
-- And it is also certain that each Man's Qualifications are from CHRIST: Thus
we are taught in my Text, By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice. And in
the preceding Verse, Counsel is mine, and sound Wisdom; I am Understanding, I
have Strength. And in Chap. 2. 6. The LORD gives Wisdom, etc.

This is that Prince of the Kings of the Earth, who gave King Solomon his
Wisdom, and made him to be so judicious a Prince, and even the wisest of all
Men. -- And when Saul was made King over Israel; it is said, that the LORD gave
him another Heart. That is, he was (thereupon) qualified more than before for
public Service, and had a Spirit for Government: Being immediately called of
GOD, he was also (in some measure) immediately qualified for that high Station.
-- Not that we may expect civil Rulers, now, in these Days, to be furnished and
prepared for public Service, in such an immediate and extraordinary manner; No,
but Choice should be made of such who appear to be the best qualified for it,
and then Prayer ought to be made daily by them for themselves, and by others
for them, that they may be still more and more so.

Nothing is more easy to observe than that some Men's Natural Parts are much
greater and brighter than some others: And it is the LORD JESUS who makes this
difference; -- for, no Man is more capable than he makes him to be. -- And the
same is true, when some Men, by means of Education and close Application,
acquire a greater measure of Knowledge and Understanding than others; for, this
is owing to the Blessing of CHRIST on those Means: All our Powers both Natural
and Acquired come from him. He gives Wisdom to the Wise, and Knowledge to them
that know Understanding. Dan. 2. 21. -- But then, I shall add, that when a Man
has a Principle of Righteousness, I mean, a gracious and holy Principle
implanted in him, this is a special Gift of CHRIST, by the Energy of the divine
Spirit.

Again,

3. Not only the Qualifications, but also the Skill and Will and Power to
improve the same in a due manner, is from CHRIST: The readiness of Mind and
ability of Body, to act, as well as the Principle and Habit of Virtue and
Goodness, is from him. -- Alas! how many neglect the Gift which is in them, and
may be said to hide or bury their Talents: And there are others still more
wicked, for, they pervert their Powers, both of Body and Mind; instead of doing
good, they do abundance of mischief. -- But then, on the other hand; there are
some who are not only disposed, but fully determined (notwithstanding any
Temptations to the contrary) to do what good they can, in their Places, and
exert themselves accordingly: And these whether they be vested with Authority,
or not, are under the kind Influence of CHRIST, who works in us both to will
and to do, of his good Pleasure.

And now, I say, seeing the good Rules for Government, as also the Ruler's good
Qualifications, together with an Heart to improve them aright, are from CHRIST,
it follows, that it is by him, that they both decree and execute Justice.

One more,

4. It is by him that they rule, inasmuch as all the Success of their wise and
just Decrees and Administrations is from him: Neither the Decree, nor the
utmost Care to execute the same would answer any good end without his Blessing.
-- We are too apt to think, that Men of superior Parts and great Understanding,
and more especially, if they are great Politicians, will do some eminent
Service in the State; yea, that many great and worthy Deeds will be done by
them: But how often has it been found, that the help of Man is vain. -- If
CHRIST be forgotten, or neglected, and the Blessing of Heaven be denied, then,
the Counsel of the deepest Politician is turned into Foolishness: For, he
leads Counselors away spoiled, and makes the Judges fools. -- But on the
other hand; when a due Regard is paid to the Authority of Heaven, and CHRIST
espouses their Cause, then, both Councellor and Judge go on prosperously;
because he, unto whom all Judgment is committed, is nigh to them, both to
direct their Path, and to succeed their Measures.

And this may serve for the Illustration and Confirmation of the 2 d PROP.

But yet, before I come to the Application, I shall just desire you to Remark,
that all this is said to be done by him, who is WISDOM.

And truly, the Wisdom of the Son of GOD is very conspicuous herein, namely, in
Appointing that the generality of the humane Race should be under the Rule and
Government of some of the same make and frame with themselves: And then, in
Qualifing and Authorizing some to bear Rule; and in disposing others to submit.
--

I say, here is Wisdom, as also Goodness and Kindness: For, as humane Societies
cannot subsist without Government, so neither would it, at all suit with the
Nature of Man, in its present frail state, to be under the immediate Government
of the most High, "and to be directed only, from time to time, by a Voice from
Heaven, accompanied with such Appearances, as would become the Majesty of
Heaven and Earth": For, this would so fill us with amazement, as to unfit us
for Service, and instead of bringing us near to GOD, would rather drive us
further from him: And accordingly, we read, that when our first Parents heard
the Voice of the LORD GOD, they hid themselves. Genesis 3. 8.
Being Guilty, they absconded: And surely, we are all Guilty, and may justly
tremble at the Though It of GOD's appearing and speaking unto us. -- We are also
told, Exodus 20. 19.
that the People of Israel said unto Moses, speak thou with us, and we will
hear; but let not GOD speak with us, lest we die. -- And GOD was pleased to
grant them their Request.

I shall only just add, that the Wisdom, as also the Kindness of him, who is
the Head over all things to the Church, are very evident, not only in
Governing, but also in Teaching us by Men like our selves, whose Terror shall
not make us afraid, nor their Hand be heavy upon us.

I proceed now to the

APPLICATION.
And,

1. If civil Government be (as we have heard) of divine Institution, this
teaches us, that great is the Error of such who plead for a perfect Level among
Men. -- These impeach the Wisdom, as also despise the Mercy and Goodness of the
SON of GOD. -- Yea, the Notion of Levelism is not only a Defiance to the Will
and Wisdom of CHRIST, but also contradicts the Reason and Experience of Mankind
in general. It was a very dreadful time in Israel, when there was no King
there, but every Man did that which was right in his own Eyes, Judge. 17. 6.
which was no other but to do evil in the sight of the LORD.

2. We Learn, that our LORD JESUS CHRIST is most fitly styled, KING OF KINGS,
and LORD OF LORDS. Rev. 19. 16.
For, they all derive their Authority, as also receive their Qualifications
from him; and do hold by, from and under him, and during his good Pleasure.

And truly, he is not only more high, but in all other respects, more excellent
that any, yea, than all the Kings of the Earth conjunctly considered. -- He is
the SON OF GOD, whereas earthly Kings are but the Sons of Men; of the Earth,
Earthy. -- He is Prior to them in point of Existence, for* he is from
Everlasting, as well as to Everlasting. -- He is the Creator, and they but
Creatures, and his Creatures. -- He has infinitely better Attendants. -- And
his Presence and Favor is unspeakably more desirable. -- None among the Sons
of the mighty may be compared with him, for his Understanding is infinite: He
does all things well, nor is there the least degree of Imprudence in any of his
Decrees or Administrations, and is therefore fitly styled Wisdom: Known unto
him are all his Works from the Beginning to the End^ but as for the Potentates
of the Earth they are but short-sighted, and therefore often go into Measures,
which are not for their Interest; though indeed, thereby the LORD JESUS serves
his own Designs; for their Hearts are in his Hand. -- Neither is any thing too
hard for him, for he is not only the universal Monarch, but the Almighty, and
therefore can easily dash in pieces, Princes and their Subjects, as so many
Power's Vessels: He is also able and ready to save; a present help to his
People in all their Times of Trouble. -- And he is a Bring of unspotted Purity.
-- Nor can be deceive any who trust in and submit unto him: It Is better
therefore to trust in the LORD, than to put confidence in Princes. -- He is
m^re ready to forgive such as have rebelled, upon their Repentance and
Submission. -- And is more lowly and condescending: The very meanest among Men
may have free Access to him, and to the Father by him; for, he is no Respecter
of Persons. -- And his Mercy endures to all Generations: He is the ^^me
Yesterday, to Day, and for ever, and changes not. -- And in a Word; he is the
chief among ten thousands, and altogether lovely.

3. Seeing Kings and other civil Rulers derive their Authority from CHRIST, and
do rule by and under him, this may teach them that they must certainly give
account to him, how they have discharged their respective Trusts.

That they are Mortal, is evident to all; for, we see, that wise Men die: Though
they are sometimes styled gods, yet they are so by Office only. Psalm. 82. 6, 7.
I have said, ye are Gods, but ye shall die like Men: All their Authority
together with all their Riches and Grandeur can be no security to them against
the Arrests of the King of Terrors.

And not only must they die, but give Account of their Doings to their LORD and
MASTER; viz. how they have improved their Authority, and all the other Talents
which he has betrusted them with. -- Yea, even Monarchs themselves, though
accountable to none upon Earth, but act their own Will and Pleasure without
Control, yet, must all appear at WISDOM's Bar, and receive their Sentence from
his Mouth, Namely, either, Come ye Blessed --, or, Go ye Cursed --. Nor will
there lay any Appeal from his Judgment Seat, for, his Sentence will be absolute
and decisive.

4. Do Kings and all other civil Officers rule BY and under CHRIST, then they
may easily infer, that they ought to Rule for him, and to act and conduct, in
their several places, so as to be unto him, for a Praise, Honor and Glory.

It Is impossible for them to be in Favor with him, unless they cheerfully
submit to be instructed and governed by him; and then, evidence that they so
do, by being diligent and faithful in the discharge of their respective Trusts,
and by setting such an Example, even in the whole of their Conversation, as to
adorn the Doctrine of CHRIST in all things. -- Oh, how sad a thing is it, when
such who have the Rule over others, (yet) have no Government over themselves,
but are mere Slaves to their own vile Affections and Lusts, so as to go or
come, according as they are solicited by the Flesh, and fleshly-minded Men! O
how dreadful (they so continuing) will their Account be! -- But on the other
hand; Good and Joyful will their's be, who, now, wisely and faithfully consult,
and endeavor to promote, the Honor of CHRIST, and the Welfare of the People;
not only of those under their Government, but also, to enlarge the Kingdom of
the LORD JESUS.

These are the great ends which they must keep in view, as they would answer
the design of their Promotion. -- And indeed, they are obliged to prosecute the
same, both by the Law of Justice and Gratitude; for, they cannot make returns
suitable to the Honor conferred on them, unless they exert themselves to
advance the Honor of CHRIST, and of his holy Religion, and thereby, to promote
the Weal of their Fellow Creatures.

What! Has CHRIST put Honor upon them, and are they regardless of his Honor?
then, they are both unjust and ungrateful to their LORD and Benefactor, and he
will highly resent it.

Nor indeed, can they be said to act up to the Dignity of their exalted
Stations, unless they are sollicitous to answer the great and good design of
the same: This is the way for them to honor and adorn their respective
Offices, and so, to get Honor to themselves. Such as honor me, says GOD, I
will honor; but they who despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. The way to be
great, is to be good, and to do good: And the way to be had in Contempt, is, to
make light of CHRIST and his Laws: Or, if these Men have a little Honor at
present, it shall soon be laid in the Dust: Nor may they marvel at the matter,
seeing it is no other but the natural Product of their own Mis-conduct.

Would to GOD, that those Words in Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12. may be very heedfully
regarded by Kings, and even by all in subordinate Authority! viz. Serve the
LORD with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling: Kiss the SON, lest he be angry and
ye perish from the way. That is, they should give him the Honor of all their
Advancements and Seize, not only by a verbal acknowledgment, but also by
an humble and dutiful Submission to him in all things.

5. Seeing it is from Christ, that Kings and all other Political Rulers do
derive their Authority, as also exercise the same in a due manner, this may
teach us, that it is the Peoples Interest, as well as Duty, to Study the things
that please him.

Would you have good Rulers set up, and continued over you? Or, would you have
the Presence of CHRIST with them, to direct them to the most proper Measures,
and then to animate them to prosecute the same, and finally, to give the
desired Success to their wise and just Administrations? Why, in order to this,
the People must return, every one, from his evil way, and learn to do justly,
to love mercy, and to walk humbly with GOD. Or, in other Words, they must pay a
religious Regard to the several Duties, both of Natural and Revealed Religion,
and do all in the Name of CHRIST.

It Is readily acknowledged by all, that the Safety and Prosperity of a People
does very much depend, under CHRIST, upon their having wise and good Rulers:
Surely then, it concerns People (if they would consult their own Welfare) to
get and keep in good terms with him, by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree
justice. That is, Not only to profess themselves his Disciples, but also to
labor to approve themselves his loyal Subjects, in all regards.

And I cannot forbear to add my unfeigned Wish, that a proper Respect may be had
to the Declaration of the Synod for Reformation Convened, Anno 1679, 80.
in Answer to that Question, What are the Evils which have provoked the Lord to
bring his Judgments on NEW ENGLAND?

6. Our Text and Doctrine plainly teach us, unto whom we ought to give Thanks
for good Government, and for all the Benefits and Comforts of it, viz. to the
incarnate Word and Wisdom of GOD; but not exclusive of the other glorious
Subsistences in the Godhead.

Here then, let me say, in a few Words; that unto him belongs the Honor of
Founding the ENGLISH, and best of civil Constitutions: As also, that the same
abides Firm and Ur^^^ker, notwithstanding the repeated Efforts of Hell and
Rome, to subvert it: And for the happy Settlement of the Succession in the
PROTESTANT Line, and the Illustrious House of HANOVER: And that we have a
delightful Prospect in the numerous Branches of the Royal Family: And that we
have at this Day, not only a Protestant Prince on the British Throne, but a
King who is, and has been, tender of the People's Interest, and studious to
promote the Prosperity of the Nation, and therefore, has merited the honorable
and sacred Character of a Nursing Father Isa. 49. 23.
Yea and he has extended his Paternal Regards to his Subjects in America; and
to the People of this Province in one Respect and another. -- For all which
Favors we owe our grateful Acknowledgments to our inthroned JESUS:

As also, for the Continuance of the Privileges granted by the Royal Charter;
and particularly, the Favor of Electing our own Counselors; which is "a
Privilege above the Inhabitants of Great Britain it self" and though lightly
though it of by some, yet, may very justly be esteemed "as an Hedge about us, and
much too valuable to be parted with"

And we may not omit to give Thanks to our supreme Lawgiver, King and Judge,
for all that Direction, Assistance and Success, which has been vouchsafed by
him, at one time and another, to the Government immediately over us. -- And
that although there be some things which wait to be rectified, yet it may be
truly said, that we still enjoy most of our pleasant and precious Things.

And Oh, that we and our Children may so know, as to improve the same in the
best manner; left, otherwise we provoke New-England's most indulgent Benefactor
to hide them from our Eyes!

7. Seeing Political Rulers derive their Authority from CHRIST, and rule under
him, this teaches us, that it is the unquestionable Duty of the People to
submit to them, and that for Conscience sake. -- That is to say, unless they
shall so pervert their Authority, as to decree and administer in such manner,
as has a direct tendency to overthrow the Protestant Religion, or to deprive
the People of their Liberty and Property; or, in a Word; unless they violate
their Oath, and appear no other but as Enemies to the civil and religious
Constitution. --

For although I constantly teach Submission to the King as Supreme, and unto
Governors as being sent by him, and in due Proportion, to all others who are
clothed with Authority; yet, I could never see Reason to countenance the
Doctrine of Passive-Obedience and Non-Resistance in the Latitude which some
have pleaded for. -- Which I mention, not that I think we are at present in any
Danger --: And GOD grant that we never may!

But to proceed;

What I have to say under this Head is, that civil Rulers ought (in token of
People's submission) to be Addressed by them in a Respectful manner, agreeable
to the Stations which they severally sustain. -- Nor is it a light Evil to
disobey their just and lawful Commands Romans 13. 1, 2. 1 Pe^. 2. 13, 14.
-- And they ought to be honorably Supported according to their Rank and
Character, and that without Grudging. Our Savior himself paid Tribute-Money:
And the Apostle directs and exhorts (as in Rom 13. 7.) Render to all their
Dues; Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, etc. -- Nor may
the People omit to pray for all such who have the Rule over them. 1 Timothy 2
begin. I exhort, that Prayer be made for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and
Honesty: (then it follows) for this is good and acceptable in the sight of GOD
our Savior: By whom (as you have heard) Kings reign, and Princes decree
Justice. -- And not only should the People pray for their Rulers, but as there
may be occasion, should also exert themselves in the Defense, both of their
Persons and Authority, when unjustly assaulted; or even, when in danger of
being insulted by any Adversary, whether foreign, or from among themselves;
for, this is just and right in the sight of GOD and Man.

8. If civil Rulers do abide in their several Stations, and exercise their
Authority, so long as CHRIST pleases, and no longer, This should teach us to
eye his Hand in the Removal of Kings and other civil Powers from their Seats of
Dignity, whether it be by Death, or in some other way.

As it is his Prerogative to exalt them, so likewise, to remove them: It Is he
who brings low, as well as lifts up. Nor may we disregard so grievous a
Dispensation, as is that of a People's Bereavement of good Rulers, or even, but
of One such. The Loss it self ought to be lamented: And the Anger of an holy
and good GOD, which is evident therein, ought to be laid to Heart: And this
should incite us to consider of the evil of our Ways; for it is because of the
Sins of a People, that GOD is provoked, sometimes to remove one or more of
their wisest and best Men, and in the midst of their usefulness too. Isa. 3. 1,
-- 4.

And I may add,

9. That our Text and Doctrine teach us, unto whom we are to look to Repair so
wide a Breach; even, unto GOD our Savior: For, with him is the residue of the
Spirit; so that he can raise up others as good as those who went before. He
changes the Times and the Seasons: He removes Kings, and sets up Kings.
Dan. 2. 21. And the same is true with respect to all subordinate Powers. -- So
then the People ought, on such an Occasion, to be looking unto him, and be
waiting on him by Prayer and Supplication with penitent Confession of Sin, as
also a general Reformation: Nor may Thanksgiving be omitted, for his having
given such and such good Rulers, and that he continued them so long, and for
the many Benefits reaped by their Counsels and Administrations.

Once more;

10. and lastly; Do Kings and all others in Authority derive the same (though in
a mediate way) from the LORD JESUS, hence let all good Christians be excited to
an holy Joy in him. Indeed all the Earth have reason to Rejoice because of the
Equity of his Government, Psalm. 97. 1. The LORD reigns, let the Earth
rejoice; let the multitude of Isles be glad thereat. But then, more especially,
let the true Children of Zion be joyful in this their King. Psalm. 49. 2. --
Rejoice in him, because of what he is in himself; and because of what he has
done, and will yet do; for in him all the great and precious Premises are Yea
and Amen. -- Be joyful in him, as the Son of GOD, and as the only Mediator
between GOD and Man; and as the GOD of your Salvation; who has begun the good
Work in you, and has promised to make all things to work together for your
good; and has undertaken to keep you by his mighty Power, through Faith unto
Salvation. -- In Days of Prosperity, let your Joy center in him: And in times
of Adversity, still rejoice in him; for he has hitherto been your best Friend,
nor are the treasures of his goodness, in the least measure diminished Habbak.
3. 17, 18.
Yea, in the midst of the greatest Revolutions, you may triumph in him, and so
triumph over the most threatening Dangers, and say as the Psalmist, in Psalm. 46.
1, -- 5. GOD is our Refuge, etc. -- And even, upon your Sick and Deathbeds you
may be joyful in him (Psalm. 149. 5.) For, this GOD is your GOD for ever and
ever; he will be your Guide even unto Death. Psalm. 48. ult.

But then, special Privileges demand answerable Obedience: Wherefore let it be
also your Joy and Delight to do his Will, and that in all things relating both
to GOD and Man. Yea, let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your
good Works, and glorify your Father, who is in Heaven.

But it is high time for me to proceed, agreeable to good Custom, to a more
particular APPLICATION:

Wherefore, I shall, in the first place, and with all dutiful Respect, Address
my self unto your HONOR, our Commander in Chief, who with the Honorable
Board, have ordered me, though most unworthy, into the awful Desk, this Day:

May it please your HONOR,

I persuade my self that it will not be disagreable, if, on this Occasion, I
take the Liberty just to mention the Name, and essay to revive the Memory, of
his Excellency, Sir WILLIAM PHIPS, Knight.

We are not unmindful, that that Gentleman, your Honorable Relative, received
from his Majesty KING WILLIAM, of glorious Memory, a Commission to be Governor
in Chief in and over this Province, immediately, upon the granting of the
present ROYAL CHARTER:

And we have Reason sufficient from the Account given us, in the History of his
Government, to conclude, that he exerted himself to his utmost, to serve his
Country, and was very faithful in the Discharge of that high and weighty Trust.

And we are in no doubt, but your Honor will still uphold and preserve the
Reputation of his and your own Honorable Family, by studying to answer the
great and good Ends of Rule and Government over the same Province.

SIR; I assure you from the Oracles of GOD, that 'twas indeed, no other but the
LORD Redeemer, who, in his all-governing Providence, disposed his present
Majesty, K. GEORGE II.
whom GOD preserve, to grant you that Honorable Commission and Title, which,
for several Years past, you have sustained. Lieut. Governor.


And it is the same Incarnate Word, and Wisdom of GOD, who has, Providentially,
appointed your Honor, for the Time being, to be the First and Chief in the
Administration over us: Which I believe, was not at all desired by you; But
being now called hereunto, your Honor will not be wanting to defend and secure
the Royal Prerogative (which we, as becomes a Loyal People, desire you would
do) and at the same time, will have a kind and tender Regard to the Just Rights
and Privileges of the People under your Care.

And SIR,

Being a Native of the Province, you have had the greater Opportunity to be
acquainted with the Genius of this People; as also with the State of the
Province from Time to Time. -- And being our Bone and our Flesh, you will
doubtless Naturally care for, and seek to promote, our Weal: And the rather
still, because your Family as also your Substance are Embarked in the same
Bottom with ours.

And moreover, SIR,

Having experienced the great Advantage of a Liberal Education, your Honor
will, therefore, the more readily consult the Prosperity of our COLLEGE, and
freely Consent to all such Resolves or Grants, which are needful to encourage
the Reverend President, and the Eminent Professors of that Learned House, so
much the Glory of the Province.

And seeing your Honor has openly chosen the LORD to serve Him; -- You will be
inclined to seek the Peace and Flourishing of the several Churches within your
Jurisdiction, And in order thereto, will Countenance the honorable Support of
their respective Ministers.

And we doubt not, SIR, but as Occasion may require, your Eye will be upon
such, who are best Qualified, to Nominate and Commission them, and them only,
for the Service of the Public.

And in a Word;

We Esteem and Respect your Honor, as under GOD, and the KING, our present
Political Head; and we question not but you will, during your Administration,
Consult the Welfare of this whole People, in all regards; and will also be
accepted of the multitude of your Brethren.

And finally;

SIR, We Pray GOD our Savior to direct all your Paths for you; as also, to
think upon you for good according to all that you have done, or may hereafter
do for this his People!

And now, in the next place;

I would in all humble manner, and yet, still mindful of my own holy Calling,
Address my Speech to the Honorable his MAJESTY's COUNCIL, and the Honorable
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, this Day, in General Court Assembled:

SIRS,

None of this great Assembly may be supposed to be ignorant of the Business of
this Day, nor to be unacquainted in whose Hands the Power of Election is
lodged; Nor yet, are any but the tho'tless among the People, unmindful and
insensible of how great Importance it is, that Men of true Wisdom and solid
Goodness be selected from out of our Tribes, to sit at the Honorable Board:
For, we do, or may know, that the Gentlemen who shall, this Day, be Elected (by
the Representative Body of this People, in Conjunction with his Majesty's
Council now in being) and then be Approved by his Majesty's Representative,
will not only be obliged, when desired, to assist the Captain General with
their best Advice in all Articles relating to Government, and particularly, in
that weighty one, of Constituting Judges and other civil Officers: As also,
bear a Part in the Inspection and Government of the College: But besides all
this, they will make one main Branch of our Legislature.

So that the Liberty of making choice of Councillors from among our selves, may
justly be reckoned one of the greatest of our present Charter Privileges: A
Privilege, as was before noted, above the Inhabitants of Great Britain it self:
-- And in a Word, the Welfare of the whole Province in all regards, viz. as to
Church, State and College, does under GOD, very much depend upon a wise and
good Choice. --

Wherefore, much honored Gentlemen-Electors,

It highly concerns you, and all of us, to be still seeking Direction from
above: As also, that you be very considerate and circumspect in this matter:
And then, to be fully satisfied in your own Minds and Consciences, that all
such whom you shall give your Vote for, are, Matters being duly weighed, the
most suitable and proper Persons, whom you know of, in the Province, for that
honorable Station.

Be pleased to permit me here to say,

That as not Piety alone, so neither may Learning alone, or the greatest skill
in Politics, determine your Choice this Day: And much less, merely a flowing
Income, or, only some high Title of Honor. -- But when these meet in one, as
sometimes they do, such a Man is worthy of the public Voice.

It Is very desirable indeed, that they be Gentlemen of good Extract, and of
large Interests; and doubtless a sufficient Number of such may still be found
among us, and who also in other and better respects are duly Qualified.

But whatever else be lacking, yet, pray, endeavor to be satisfied, that they
are Persons of a pious Principle, and that they have a good measure of
Knowledge and Wisdom; not only acquainted with, but also Friends to our
Constitution, both of Church and State; Well-wishers to our College, and the
other means of Education; Lovers of GOD, and of all good Men, of every
Denomination; most capable and best inclined to encourage and promote Piety
toward GOD and Justice toward Men: And in a Word, Men approved of by the
People of GOD in general, wherever they are known: For, this was an ancient
Rule, Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Take ye wise Men and understanding, and known among your
Tribes, and I will make them Rulers over you. That is, such as were known to be
wise and good Men, and had been all along approved of as such.

O SIRS, allow me to be so free and open, as to entreat of you, in the Name of
HIM, who has, in his all-governing Providence, committed to you this Power and
Privilege; and in the behalf of this whole People; and even for your own sakes,
to exercise your selves, this Day in particular, to have Consciences void of
Offense both toward GOD and Man. -- Let not Favor nor Prejudice determine you
for, or against any Man: Seek not your selves, nor merely to oblige your
Friend; but let the Honor of CHRIST and the Weal of this People be your great
and governing Design.

As it is not a matter of personal Concern, but of the most public nature, so,
the Eyes of all of us, both Ministers and People, are upon you, hoping that you
will, one and all, act your part very faithfully and sincerely.

Yea, and more than all this, the Eye of HIM by whom Princes rule, will be upon
you; nor indeed, will HE be far from you, For, he stands in the Congregation
of the mighty, and judges among the gods. He does and will see into, and
through you, to observe, whether you are trifling or selfish in this weighty
Affair; or whether, on the other hand, you have a due Regard to Person's Piety
and other necessary Qualifications: And suffer me just to put you in mind, that
you must, each one, e're long, most certainly give Account to him, from what
Principle, and with what Views, you shall manage the important Business of this
Day.

It Is Required (you know) of Trustees, that they be found Faithful; pray
consider your selves as such in this matter: Neither forget, that our
Privileges, Civil, Religious and Academical are too precious in themselves; and
moreover, have been too dearly bought, to be put into the hands of such Men,
who are either unskillfull or unfaithful.

But that I be not further tedious;

My Fathers, you have the whole Province before you: And I know of no better
Rule for you to go by, than that of Jethro to Moses; and which was approved of
by GOD himself, viz. Exodus 18. 21. Thou shall provide out of all the People,
able Men, such as fear GOD, Men of Truth, and hating Covetousness, and place
such over them. -- Here it is said, able Men: Or, Men of good Sense and Courage,
able to support the Authority of their Station, and equal to their Trust. Such
as fear GOD: i. e. Conscientious Men, who not only believe the Being and
Providence of GOD; but will move and act, decree and execute, as under his Eye;
and therefore dare not do an ill Thing, nor indulge any sinister Views. -- Men
of Truth: Or, such who will not act a Part or betray a Trust; whose Fidelity
and Steadiness may, on all Occasions, be relied upon. Hating Covetousness. i.
e. Not only, not seeking, or not taking; but even abhorring whatsoever has any
tendency to forestall their Minds, or bribe and bias their Judgments.

These are the Men who honor GOD, and whom he will honor with his Presence:
As they are on his side, so will he be on their's. -- But now, as for Men of a
contrary Character; as they are not the friends of GOD (nor indeed of Men,
unless when they can serve themselves) so neither may any other be expected,
but that he will leave them to walk on in their own Counsels, and consequently,
to bring Mischief both on themselves and their Dependents.

And finally; We earnestly pray, that GOD would be pleased to direct this your
Path for you, and to lead you into the Choice of such, who are Men after his
own Heart: With him we humbly and gladly leave you, who has the Government both
of the Church and World upon his Shoulder; and whose Name is called Wonderful,
Councellor, the Mighty GOD, the everlasting Father, and the Prince of Peace.

And now, having thus spoken respecting the particular and special Business of
this Day;

I presume it will not be taken amiss, if I go on to say, We humbly trust, that
when the weighty Affair of the Election is over, that then, the several
Branches of our Honorable Legislature will be very mindful of HIM, by whom (as
you have heard) Princes decree Justice, and will be daily seeking to HIM, to
lead and guide you into such Acts and Resolves as shall be agreeable to the Laws
and Rules of his holy Word, and consequently will be good in his sight.

We desire to be very thankful for all those just and wholesome Laws, which
have been already Enacted, at one Time and another, by the Government of this
Province, for the suppressing of Vice and Immorality, and for the encouraging
of Virtue, Religion and good Literature among us. Ah! were it not for such
Laws, we had doubtless, been in a most forlorn Condition long before this Day.

But pray, Gentlemen, be pleased to consider, whether something further may not
yet be done;

And particularly, first, for the prevention of that beastly Sin of
Uncleanness; by which, I now more especially intend, the Sin of Fornication;
which it seems, is made very light of by many among us; although it be expressly
and frequently prohibited in the Oracles of GOD. 1 Cor. 6. 13, 18. and 7. 2.
and 10. 8. 1 These. 4. 3. 4.
-- Also, something further, to suppress the Sin of Drunkenness; which is not
only an heinous Transgression in it self, but is also big with all manner of
evil, both moral and mischievous. -- And O, that something may be done for the
retrenching of Pride and Prodigality, and for the bringing into fashion again
Modesty and Frugality: For, alas! What will become of us, if our Superfluities
be not pared off, the Support and Maintenance whereof is abundantly more
Expensive than would suffice to answer the whole Charge both of Church and
State. O, how long shall this Country be spoken of by Travelers, as exceeding
all others, (and not our Mother Country only) in costly Fashions; and for
Extravagance in manner of Living, as well as in their Attire; and those of the
lower Rank among us, as muchas if not more than any. -- And pray, may not some
more effectual Method be taken to promote Industry; and especially to oblige
such who are but Pests to a Commonwealth, to become some way or other useful
and beneficial to it: Or, if not useful, yet may they not be so confined, as to
be restrained from being mischievous. -- And not only Idle Persons, but also
our Wast and Wilderness Loads must be Subdued and Improved, as we would ever be
a flourishing Province. -- And O that we may be a People henceforth remarked
for Justice and Honesty, and no longer be spoken of as addicted to oppress one
another!

And in a Word; whatever is further needful in order to cure us of the
aforesaid, and other our Immoralities; and to prevent any new ones which may
seem to threaten us, and to render and preserve us a virtuous People, we pray
our Honorable Legislature, in their great Wisdom to meditate the most proper
Methods for, and by their Authority to see that the same be put in Execution.

And will your Honors allow me to be your humble Monitor, and say, it is not
eno' that Righteousness and other moral Virtues be cultivated and cherished,
but moreover, Religion and the public Worship of GOD in particular, must come
under your special Care: The first as well as the second Table being committed
to the Custody and Protection of the civil Magistrate.

Will you be pleased therefore, to improve your Authority, that so the LORD's
Day, in particular, may be more strictly observed, and the public Worship be
more frequently attended: For, GOD has given that Day to be a sign between him
and his People; it is therefore, most highly offensive to him, when the same is
profaned; nor may we wonder if he shall evidence his Resentment of it by his
Judgments; and in particular, in that awful manner spoken of by the Prophet in
Jer. 17. ult. If ye will not hearken unto me, to hallow the Sabbath Day, --
then I will kindle a fire in the Gates, and it shall devour the Palaces, and
shall not be quenched.

And may it be also your Care, that a pious, learned and orthodox Ministry be
duly encouraged and supported among us; even, as you would express and
testify a dutiful Regard unto HIM, whose Ambassadors they are, and by and
under whom you rule.

It Is well known, that our pious Progenitors founded the COLLEGE in Cambridge,
chiefly with this View, that so, the Churches in the Country might, from time
to time, have their Supply from that Fountain: And indeed, neither the civil
nor ecclesiastical State can be preserved in a flourishing Condition without
Men of good Learning.

However contemptibly some ignorant Persons may have spoken concerning
Learning, yet it is certain, "that Learning and the Gospel Ministry are vitally
linked with Religion: Religion will soon decay without Learning, and even die
without a learned and faithful Ministry: And if we lose our Religion, what have
we ^ore? For, it is not only the best Religion in the World, out it is the very
best thing that we have: So that our All very much turns upon an effectual,
wise Care to see that Learning and the Gospel Ministry be well supported."

It Is obvious to all who are acquainted with the History of the Country, that
NEW ENGLAND was originally Planted, not so much for Trade as for Religion, (
viz. with an Eye not only to their own and their Posterity's spiritual weal,
but also to the Christianizing of the Heathen;) And truly, the way for the
former to flourish, is to be tender of the latter: But if Religion be not
cherished, Trade will decay more and more; or, if it should flourish, it will
prove no other but a Curse to us.

I may not omit to add, that we are very thankful to our honorable Rulers for
their Smiles on the College hitherto; and do humbly and earnestly entreat the
continuance of the same: -- As also that there may be effectual Provision (if
possible) that the good Laws concerning Inferior Schools may not be eluded, as
has too often been the Case; lest the Children rising up prove an ignorant and
ungoverned Generation, and the succeeding ones be still more so.

We are also thankful to Heaven for the good Laws which some former Assemblies
have enacted for the Encouragement and Support of the Gospel Ministry among us,
and especially for that Standing and Righteous Law, viz. All Contracts and
Agreements made, or that shall be made respecting Ministers Settlement or
Maintenance shall remain good and valid ACCORDING TO THE TRUE INTENT THEREOF,
and shall accordingly be pursued, put in execution and fulfilled.

But alas! has not this just and good Law been too much disregarded by many
People, for more than thirty Years past* And i^ Justice shall be done for the
Time to come, can this in any measure, make amends for past Deficiencies?

I am sensible, that this is called a tender Point; but yet, I hope, not
grievous to any who have a tender Conscience, and are willing in all things to
live honestly.

Believe me, Sirs, I should very gladly wave it, and not trouble your Honors
and this Audience with it, if I could only persuade my self, that I may omit
it, and yet be faithful to GOD and Man: But the truth is, I understand not how
I can be said to be faithful to the (...), if I am silent in this matter; nor
to him, who in a med^^te way, has called me here this Day, to speak in his Name.

Will our honored Fathers therefore be pleased, if only in kindness to the
Province, and yet in the fear of GOD, to consider at Leisure, as follows, viz.

Whether the generality of the People do not live in the Sin of detaining from
their Ministers a part of their just Due: My meaning is, do they not live under
the Guilt of a manifest and long continued violation of that good Law of GOD
and Man, which relates to, and strictly enjoins Justice and Equity? If not;
then the matter ought to be wholly dropped. But if so, then, whether there be
not just Reason, both from the Word of GOD, and the nature of the thing to
conclude, that the Province is under the Rebukes of a righteous GOD, partly, on
this account?

And if so;

Then, whether it may reasonably be expected, that HE will be atoned to the
Province, (although we should, in every other respect, become a reformed People)
until this matter shall be adjusted; Righteousness between Man and Man, being
an essential branch of the Religion of our LORD and Savior?

And lastly,

If this be the Case with us, whether some effectual Remedy should not be
applied?

[King Solomon makes mention both of the Sin, and the ill consequence of it.
Prove. 11. 24. There is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it tends to
Poverty. -- And without doubt, an holy and righteous GOD does now in these
Days, (as well as formerly) interpret the People's withholding from his
Ministers, a part of their honest Due, as a Robbing of him: And if so; then, I
humbly enquire, whether this Land must not be supposed to be (as was that of
Canaan) under a Rebuke or Curse for this Sin? Be pleased carefully to peruse
Mal. 3. 8, -- 12.

Not, that I am pleading for Tithes, no, but only for Justice and Honesty,
agreeable to the abovementioned Law of this Province.

Not that I am under suffering Circumstances my self; having through the Mercy of
GOD, some other small Means -- as doubtless many of my Brethren also have: --
But can it be though it to be a right thing in the sight of GOD, that a Delinquent
(though capable) People, and not our respective Families, should reap the Benefit
of those other means?

It Is said indeed by some (and inconsiderately eno') that the Law is open: --
But we are humbly of the Opinion, that it properly belongs to the higher
Powers, or to the honorable Legislature, to take the Ministers of Religion
under your special Care, and (without any Complaint of theirs) to make search,
as may easily be done, whether a due Regard has been paid to the Law; and if
not, to give effectual Orders that right may take place.

But in what particular Method, -- it does not belong to me to suggest.

The Egyptian Princes, though Heathen, took an immediate Care of their Priests.
Genesis 47. 22. The Land of the Priests, Joseph bought not, for they had a Portion
assigned them by Pharaoh, and did eat their Portion which Pharaoh gave them.
"Had their Portions out of the King's own Treasuries" says Mr. Reynolds.


And in Israel, the Priests and Levites had the special Countenance and
Protection of the good Kings. -- We have a more particular mention made of
Hezekiah. 2 Chronicles. 30. 22. That he spoke comfortably unto all the Levites, that
taught the good knowledge of the LORD. And not only spoke comfortably to them,
but did also take effectual care that they might have Justice done them. For we
read in the next Chap. v. 4, -- 10. That he commanded the People to give the
Portion of the Priests and the Levites (that is to pay in their Dues, according
to the Law) that they might be encouraged in the Law of the LORD. And we are
told, that as soon as the Commandment came abroad, they bro't in the Tithe of
all things. For where the Commanding Word of a King (or of a Legislature) is,
there is power.

Also, that good Governor Nehemiah (in Chap. 13. 10, -- 13. When he perceived
(without Complaint made by them) that the Levites had been wronged, in that,
their Portions had not been given them; instead of blaming the People, he laid
the Fault on the Rulers because of their Neglect. Then contended I (says he)
with the Rulers, and said, why is the House of GOD forsaken? Whereupon, all
Judah bro't in the Tithe of the Corn, New-Wine and Oil unto the Treasuries: And
then, as one well expresses it, he provided that just and prompt Payment should
be made of their Stipends; and accordingly,

( Treasurers, or) COMMISSIONERS were appointed to see it done; even such as
were counted faithful; and they are expressed by Name. And not only Scripture,
but even the Nature of the thing, or at least the Nature of Mankind, bespeaks
the immediate Care of the honorable Legislature in this matter; for, it has a
direct tendency to frustrate the true intention of the Ministerial Office for
Men of that Order, Personally, and in a Course of Law, to Demand, that Justice
be done them. -- It Is too evident to be denied, that this occasions uneasiness
among People, yea, such an Alienation of Affection, as many times puts an end
to their Usefulness; and consequently, it cannot be the Will of CHRIST, that his
Ministers should be obliged to take that course for coming at Justice, (for
certainly, he would not have any Institution of his made void and of no effect)
and yet, it is his Will that they (as well as other Men) receive their honest
Due, and be not in any measure defrauded. Romans 13. 7, 8. Matt. 22. 21.

But I enlarge not -- only shall just say, that I presume, the Liberty which
was taken by Paul to Reason before Felix, concerning Righteousness -- (when he
was sent for, to preach) and that Governor's seeming Approbation of his
Discourse Acts 24. 24, 25.
may Apologize for the freedom which I have now taken before the Guardians of
our Holy Religion, in behalf of this People, and that I might deliver my own
Soul.]

Finally; It is and shall be our humble and earnest Prayer to GOD, that no
Guilt, on any account whatever, may lie on this Government, but that as you
rule under, so you may rule for CHRIST: And that you may come, each one, to
reign with him for ever and ever! -- And in particular, we wish you, whom we
highly respect and honor the best Conduct, as also Unanimity, and Dispatch of
Business, the Year ensuing.

I proceed now, in few Words, and with suitable deference, to Address my self
to the EXECUTIVE Powers over us; and first, to our Honorable and Worshipful
JUDGES and JUSTICES;

Justice, we all know, must be executed as well as decreed; this Power
therefore, ought always to be lodged with such Men who are best qualified and
spirited for and unto this good Work. -- And indeed, we have not a little
Reason to be thankful, that so many of our Judges and Justices are Men of
Wisdom and Righteousness, and that they do so well adorn their Office and
Character by an exemplary Conduct. And O, that such Men may be from time to
time, sought out and Commissioned, who shall administer Justice without
Partiality, and yet exercise some degree of Compassion, when consistent with
the Law of GOD and Man: For doubless a difference ought to be made between the
presumptuous and the inadvertent Transgressor.

It Is certainly a very great Trust Gentlemen, which is committed to you; and a
faithful Discharge of the same will greatly contribute to the Weal of this
People, as also to your own Peace and Comfort. -- Let me put you in mind of the
Words of the good King Jehoshaphat to the Judges then in Commission, and which
are worthy to be impressed on the Minds of all the Judges and Justices in the
Land, and even the World throughout; viz. Take heed what you do, for ye Judge not
for Man, but for the LORD, who is with you in the Judgment: Wherefore now, let
the fear of the LORD be upon you, take heed and do it, for there is no Iniquity
with the LORD our GOD, nor respect of Persons, nor taking of gifts. 2 Chronicles.
19. 6, 7.
A Magistrate should have an habitual Disposition to execute Justice; and that
he may actually do so, should not only be armed with Zeal and undaunted
Courage, but moreover, must be diligent to find out the truth and merits of the
Cause, and then, and not till then, to give Judgment upon it; after the Example
of Job: I put on Righteousness, and it clothed me, -- And the Cause which I
knew not I searched out. Job 29. 14, 16.


And will the learned Gentlemen, the COUNSELORS and PRACTISERS of the Law,
suffer me to beseech you to bear in mind the great and good Intention of your
Office; soil: To consult and endeavor the Benefit of Society more than your
own private advantage: And in order to have Justice done to every Man, to
labor to put always a due Sense and meaning on the Law; as also represent
Facts in a true and clear Light. -- Or, in other Words; to promote (when you
may) an Agreement between Man and Man; and if that cannot be obtained, then to
plead for, and defend the Innocent and Injured; and to beware of going about to
support any Cause which is evidently wrong and unjust; as knowing that you
yourselves must e're long come into Judgment before HIM, who will not be
prevailed with to pervert Justice. -- And O, that that great Day may be more
though it upon by all of us.

And let the Grand-Jurors, as also Tything-Men, remember that they are under
the Oath of GOD; and that HE will be a swift Witness against them, if they
violate or neglect the same.

And may our Juries from time to time, take the utmost Care to come at a right
understanding of the Causes depending, and to bring in such Verdicts, as they
could freely offer, if the LORD JESUS himself was personally and visibly upon
the Bench.

I proceed now, to Address my reverend and much esteemed FATHERS and BRETHREN
in the MINISTRY. -- As the Magistracy, so the Ministry is an Institution of the
LORD JESUS CHRIST: And it is he who has called us to, and assisted us in, this
good Work; and unto him are we indebted for all the Success which we have had.
-- And thanks be to him, that notwithstanding the Iniquities and Difficulties
of the Times, we continue in his special Service unto this Day. -- I humbly
trust, Brethren, it has been in faithfulness to CHRIST, and in love to his
Work, and to precious Souls, that we have, for so many Years, endured the
shock, and not left the People as Sheep without a Shepherd. -- And truly,
whether it will be much better, for any term of Time to come, is very
uncertain: But however, let us go on to the end, to serve our LORD and Master
faithfully, and not listen to Temptations to desert, or to be negligent in any
part of his Service; and then, we may depend on it, that HE will not be unjust,
to forget our work and labor of Love for his Name's sake, -- May we, each one,
look well to his own Vineyard: And nextly, to the Souls under our immediate
Care; be much in Prayer for them, as well as Preach frequently and scripturally
to them: And O, that it may please GOD to teach both them and us to profit!

Let us, my dear Brethren, be tender of his Honor, who has put so great Honor
upon us, as to appoint us to be some of his Ambassadors to our fellow-men. --
And as we would hope to be still owned and honored by him in our Work, let Him
be the principal Subject of our Preaching: Nor can we treat on one more noble,
he being the marrow and scope of the holy Scriptures; I mean the Doctrines of
CHRIST, viz. of his Person, Natures, Offices and Benefits: -- And next to
these, let us preach all other the Principles of our holy Religion.

And while we endeavor to preserve the honor of the divine Sovereignty, we
must also encourage the People to be waiting and hoping (in GOD's way) for the
powerful Influences of the divine Spirit, that they may be effectually turned
unto GOD.

Nor may Moral Duties be omitted, nay, but must be frequently preached up, and
as Duties required and enjoined by GOD our Savior. -- But then, we must also
show People the necessity of their having a living holy principle within them,
in order to their bringing forth such fruit as shall be well-pleasing to the
holy one of Israel. A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit: Cleanse first
(says our Savior) that which is within, that the outside may be clean also.
Mat. 23. 26.

And I may add, that abundance of good may be done by Pastoral Visits prudently
managed: And also by Catechizing the younger Sort.

And I cannot forbear to say, that it becomes us to testify against all
unchristian Separations; as also to beware of countenancing in any measure, an
ignorant and unlearned Ministry.

And let us continue, Brethren, to do Honor to our civil Rulers; and in our
public Prayers and Sermons, and also by our Example, teach the People to do so
too.

Men of the civil and sacred Order ought to be helpful to each other, in their
Places, for the leading and guiding of the People. Psalm. 77. ult. Thou leddest
thy people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

And finally,

O, that We in the Ministry (in particular) may be excited to greater Industry
in our Calling, considering that the time is hastening on, when we shall be no
longer Stewards, but must go away to give account of our Stewardship. -- We
have had frequent Admonitions of the truth of this in the Providence of GOD:
And now again, very lately in the Death of one of the Pastors of this Town: The
Rev. Mr. JOHN WEBB.
A Man of solid Goodness, as well as of good Learning; found in the Faith and
of an excellent Spirit; wise to win Souls, and not sparing of his Pains: And in
a Word, for I may not now enlarge, he was a burning and shining Light, a
faithful and wise Servant.

May the Spirit be doubled on the surviving Pastor The Rev. Mr. ANDREW ELIOT.
! And may the bereaved Flock and Family be visited with the Consolations of GOD!

And O, that all the LORD's Ministers, here present, may lay this sorrowful
Dispensation to Heart, and while the Day lasts, be very diligent in doing the
Work which is given us to do! And may our LORD, when he comes find us all so
doing!

And lastly;

Let me direct my self to the Body of the People.

Suffer, I beseech you, the Word of Exhortation, and be entreated to recall to
mind, the main Intention, on which our Fathers came into this then howling
Wilderness; Not on a Worldly design, no, but on the account of Religion; viz.
that they might (without molestation) worship GOD with that Purity and
Simplicity, which they looked upon to be most agreeable to the Gospel of CHRIST,
and might leave the same as a Legacy to their Children: And they had an Eye
also to the Instruction and Conversion of the Aboriginal Natives; which ought
still to be Prosecuted.

And it is very evident, that GOD remarkably owned and blessed them, increased
and established them; and thanks be to GOD, we are, at this Day, in the
possession and enjoyment of most of their external Privileges. -- But yet alas!
the Crown is fallen from our head, in that, now a Worldly Spirit threatens to
eat out the Heart of Religion; yea, to destroy the very Name as well as the
Power of it.

Indeed, Many Vices seem to abound in the midst of us, but this of
Worldly-mindedness is become a general Malady; and truly it is of a fatal
Aspect and Tendency; for, hereby the Word of GOD is choked and rendered
unfruitful; and hence, People prove to be good for themselves only; yea, and
that in so low and vile a Sense, as to destroy themselves, as well as injure
the Public.

The first Lesson you have to learn, is, to Fear GOD. Wherefore, let Him, and
not the World, have the Empire over you.

The next Lesson is, to Honor the King: And therefore, pray, continue to be
dutiful and loyal Subjects to our rightful and gracious SOVEREIGN: Yea, and not
to him only, but to all such also, who have the immediate Rule over us: O
beware, Brethren, of speaking evil of Dignities, and especially, when it is
apparent, that they exert themselves in our Service. Some it seems have been
too apt to speak contemptibly of our Rulers; having heard, that they have been
sometimes bro't into such a strait, that they knew not what to do. But let me
tell such People, that it would better become you, to enquire, whether you have
not had a hand in provoking the most high, at some Seasons, to scatter Darkness
in their Paths? The Word of the Prophet Isaiah are very worthy of your
Consideration. Chap. 29. 13, 14. Wherefore, the Lord said, forasmuch as this
People draw near me with their Mouth, and with their Lips do honor me, but
have removed their Heart far from me, -- therefore, behold I will proceed to do
a marvelous work amongst this People, -- for the Wisdom of their wise Men shall
perish, and the Understanding of their prudent Men shall be hid. -- And now,
enquire, has not Formality in divine Service been exceeding prevalent in the
Land? Alas! How greatly has a sluggish, or an heedless Disposition been
indulged in our several Congregations! And how few, who appear to Worship GOD
in Spirit and Truth! Yea, and GOD knows, whether there be not many among us,
who would seldom if ever attend the public Worship, were it not for shame or
the fear of Man.

I deny not that our honorable Rulers themselves have their Imperfections, and
doubtless they are sensible of it: -- But what I say, is, let the People also
learn to look at home, and labor to approve your selves unto GOD both in
Worship and Conversation, and be much in Prayer for all such who have the Rule
over you. -- And in a Word; if both they and you shall be upright before GOD,
then he will guide them by his Counsel, and will make their Path always safe,
as well as plain before them.

But then, let me go on to say, that you ought not only, to honor and pray for
our civil Rulers, in being, or, as such; but moreover to be very careful what
manner of Men you shall make choice of from Year to Year, to Represent you at
the Great and General Court: And omit not to beg of GOD (at the season for it)
that He would lead you into the Choice of the most suitable Persons to take
part in the Government over you. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall
direct thy paths.

This, Brethren, of which I now speak, is a matter of very great Importance:
For, be pleased to consider, that the Honorable House of Representatives do
make One Branch of our Legislature; and not only so, but moreover, they have it
under GOD, very much in their power, by reason of their Number, to determine,
with the Consent of the Captain General, what particular Gentlemen shall
constitute another Branch of the same.

Wherefore, as you tender the Weal of the whole Province, let every Town be
very circumspect in this matter: And as you do, or ought to desire, that your
several Representatives would conduct at Court, even so do ye in the Choice of
them; viz. lay aside all Sinister Views, and don't seek merely to gratify a
Friend, nor let a prospect of any personal Interest determine you in this
weighty Affair: But choose ye out wise Men, and of a public Spirit; true
Friends to the Province, and the Privileges thereof, Religious and Academical
as well as Civil: But then, (I say) they must be Wise Men, as well as Zealous
in their Country's Cause; because Zeal without Prudence will but hurry Rulers
and their People with them into the depth of Misery: Yea, and they should be
Honest Men, I mean, such as have a principle of Justice within them, and have
their Eyes open, so as to be able to See for their Neighbor as well as for
themselves; and will deny themselves rather than injure the Public, or even a
particular Person.

And this leads me to exhort the whole Body of the People, to study to be
Honest. -- We set up for a Religious People; but our Religion is quite vain, if
Honesty be so wanting, that People in ^^^eral will be continually casting off
the Yoke, and ^^nning over many of the good Laws both of GOD and Man, for the
sake of some private Gain, to the injury of public Justice, as well as to the
Detriment of some particular Members of the Community: Wherefore, I beseech
you, to be in subjection to lawful Authority in all lawful things, and that not
by constraint, but willingly, and for Conscience sake.

Yea, and suffer me in kindness to you, to desire you to learn to distinguish
between the Sin of Covetousness and a Love to Justice; and don't Charge any
Man, or Order of Men, with the Guilt of the Former, merely, because he or they
humbly desire no more than the bare exercise of the Latter; for this would
either discover gross Ignorance in you; or, which is much worse, would favor
of Maliciousness. -- It Is certain, that Defrauding is not good Husbandry, but
Honesty is the best Policy: Render therefore unto all their Dues; and owe no
man any thing, but to love one another. -- This is to be kind to your selves,
and the way to become a delightsome Land, Mal. 3. 8, -- 12.


But if, on the other hand, a People, and especially in a Protestant Country,
will not be punctual to their own voluntary Obligations, according to the true
and proper Intent and Meaning of the same, although as capable of fulfilling them
as formerly, and more so; what else can be expected, but that a Righteous GOD
will make DISTRAINT upon them, either by a Succession of Judgments, or else
bring them under some Yoke more heavy than the present.

If a People who make as high a profession of Religion as any upon Earth (yet)
will indulge Formality in Worship, as also neglect to do justly. -- Some from a
vain pretense of showing kindness to the Poor; though they are told by GOD
himself Isa. 61. 8.
that He loves Judgment, and hates Robbery, even for Burnt Offering. -- And
some, lest they should offend their Neighbors; Whenas they ought to set a good
Example before them. -- And others, because they cannot see for their
Neighbors, as they can for themselves, etc. What can such a Country expect,
but to be involved in Difficulties more and more? -- If they will Oppress one
another, GOD will press hard upon them, and so cause the Punishment to answer
to the Sin, till He has made them the Tail and the very scorn of the Provinces.
-- They may groan under their Burdens, but may expect no relief, unless they,
reform, and become devout and sincere in divine Service, and also pay a greater
regard to the good Law of Equity and Justice.

Yea, and such a People's Sin and Danger are still the greater, if they despise
(not to say hate) him or them, whose Office obliges them to Reprove in the
Gate: Or, if they are quite impatient when put in mind of their faults; although
they cannot but know, that it is the Indispensible Duty of their Ministers to
reprove, rebuke, and exhort as there shall be Occasion; yea, to cry aloud and
not spare, to lift up their Voice like a Trumpet, and show the People their
Transgressions and Sins. -- When the Case is thus, the Watchmen are bro't to
this sad Dilemma, viz. Whether to disobey GOD, or to displease Men. But then
the Difficulty soon vanishes, if it be considered, that we are under infinitely
greater Obligations to obey GOD, than we are, or can be, to please Men: -- And
this Maxim ought to be received and remembered by the People also, that so, they
may be patient under seasonable reproof and admonition: Yea, it concerns them,
not only to hear, but to humble themselves and reform, lest GOD shall in some
more severe method of dispensation, so humble them, as to stain the pride of
all their glory: For, those that walk in pride, he is able to abase.

Nor do I deny, that the Case is sometimes so, that the Watchman himself stands
in need of being called upon: -- Although People should beware of a captious,
litigious Spirit, yet, if they, or any of them observe any thing in their
Minister's Doctrine or Conduct, which is inconsistent with the Oracles of GOD;
or, do apprehend, that he is too remiss in the Discharge of any part of his
Office; then doubless, they may and ought, in a proper decent manner, to put
him in mind of it, and to say to him, as the Brethren of the Church in Colosse
were directed to say to Archippus (Col. 4. 17.) Take heed to the Ministry which
thou have received in the LORD, that thou fulfill it. -- You observe that I
said, in a decent manner, and not magisterially; for, an Elder, whether in Age
or Office, must be entreated as a Father. 1 Timothy 5. 1.

To Proceed;

Be ye not as Children tossed too and fro with every wind of Doctrine: Neither
heap to your selves Teachers, having itching Ears; for as there were false
Prophets among the People in old time, even so, without doubt, there will be
false Teachers among you: Wherefore, hold fast the form of sound Words in faith
and love, which is in CHRIST JESUS. -- And as I said, some Years ago, on a
public Occasion, In my Artillery-Election Sermon, page 51. Preached on June 1
st. 1741.
so I say again, Hold fast, in particular, the Doctrine of Original Sin, and
that of the Nature and Necessity of the New Birth, and that of Justification by
Faith without the Works of the Law, and that of the divine Decrees, as also
that of the Saints Perseverance, viz. as taught you in the BIBLE; and agreeable
thereunto have been taught by the godly Reformers; and as they now stand
asserted and explained in the famous Articles of the Church of England: And
which if suitably improved, will mightily serve to promote practical Religion
and vital Piety.

True indeed, you must have respect to all GOD's Commandments: This is a
faithful saying, and we constantly teach and affirm it, that they who believe
in GOD, and in JESUS whom he has sent, must be careful to maintain good Works:
Yea, and you will be careful so to do, if you have a good Principle within you:
Put then, you may not have the least Dependence on the same to justify you
before the Holy LORD GOD, but must Build on CHRIST, the Rock of Ages, and the
Hope of all true Israelites. -- To him you must look for Guidance, Strength and
Righteousness: And the more you adore and rely upon Free Grace through JESUS
CHRIST, in the way of well doing, the more will your Souls be in Health and
Prosper.

And pray, let special Care be taken by Parents and Masters, that so, the
Rising Generation may be unto the LORD for a Praise and a Glory. Let your
Children and Servants be under a due Regimen, as well as be Instructed in the
Principles of our holy Religion, and in other useful Learning. -- Be fervent in
Prayer to GOD with and for them; as also Exhort and Caution, Charge and Watch
over them for their good: And thus let a good Foundation be laid for the
Generation next succeeding, yea, for many Generations. -- Think it not too
much, I beseech you, to provide and support good Schools for their sakes: For
certainly a part of your annual Incomes being thus expended, will turn
unspeakably more to their real Advantage, than if otherways improved, and in
the mean time, their Education be neglected: Good Instruction is much better
for them, than Silver, and Knowledge than the finest Gold.

And let me be an humble Petitioner to my Dear Countrymen, to bestow, in
Imitation of your good Fathers, a Liberal Education on the most hopeful and
promising of your Sons; that so, there may be a Succession of Men, capable of
serving GOD and their Generation, both in the civil and sacred Order.

It has been matter of Grief, that any who call themselves Friends to Religion,
do so contradict and dishonor the good Fathers of this Country, and the
Founders of our University (which has proved so rich a Blessing to the Land) as
to make light of Learning, and a learned Ministry: For, all such Persons, though
perhaps they may not, at present, be sensible of it, instead of cherishing, are
wounding Religion: Their Zeal is not according to Knowledge, nay, but in
proportion to their own Ignorance, a blind, mis-guided Zeal: And although they
acknowledge it not, yet most probably, takes its Rise from Pride of Heart, and
a Fondness to be improved: And I may truly add, that there is more of the Hand
of Satan in this matter than many imagine.

But to draw toward a Close;

As it is a true saying, that the best Constitution cannot without a proper
Administration, make a People happy; so it is likewise a manifest Truth, that
unless there be a Concurrence of the People with their Rulers, they cannot be
in a flourishing State; for, no People can be made happy without their own
Consent: And therefore let the People of this Province suffer me without
Offense, to urge and inculcate upon you, the Necessity of avoiding the very
appearance of that shameful and pernicious evil of Corahism, and to entreat and
beseech you, cheerfully to submit to every Ordinance of Man for the LORD's
sake; and in Obedience to Him, as also for your own Benefit.

Yea, Brethren, Whatsover things are true, -- honest, -- just, pure, -- lovely,
-- and of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think upon, and be found in the Practice of those things Phil. 4. 8.
. -- And let all be done in the Name of CHRIST, and after a godly sort; that
so, your Praise may be, not of Man only, but of GOD also.

And O, let none of us, of what Order or Calling, Age or Language soever, be
unmindful of Him by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice; but let us
Kiss the SON, and acknowledge Him as the LORD our Righteousness and Strength*
and submit to Him, even, in all his Offices, as we would partake in all his
Benefits: For, He is the Way, the Truth and the Life, and no Man comes to the
Father but by him.

And Finally,

As our Honorable Rulers will doubtless be very cautious lest they give any
just Occasion to any Man to speak evil of them; as also, will be much in Prayer
both for themselves and for the People under their Government;

Even so, let us the LORD's Ministers bear them together with our most Gracious
SOVEREIGN and the Ministry at Home, upon our Hearts, in our Addresses to the
Throne of Grace; not in public only, but every Day, both in private and secret.

And let all the People both rich and poor, do the like; and in so doing, you
will pray for yourselves.

And may it please GOD, this Day, and every Day, to hear us in Heaven, his holy
dwelling place, and when he hears, to forgive the Sins of the Land, and do
for us, as the matter does or may require! And more especially, to make us to
be an Habitation of Righteousness and Mountain of Holiness!

And then, We shall not only find favor in the Eyes of the KING and of his
Counselors; but moreover, GOD will in all other respects also, cause his Face
to shine upon us; yea, He Himself will take delight to dwell in the midst of
us: And if He be with us and for us, who can be against us? Happy is that
People whose GOD is the LORD.

O, that This GOD, may still be NEW-ENGLAND's GOD! And as He was with our
Fathers, so may* He be with us and with our Children, and Children's Children,
even to the latest Generation!

And let all the People say,

AMEN.

