A DISCOURSE ON THE PREPARATION of the BODY FOR THE SMALLPOX: AND The Manner
of receiving the INFECTION.

As it was delivered in the Public Hall of the ACADEMY, before the TRUSTEES,
and others, on Wednesday, the ^1st of November, 1750.

By ADAM THOMSON, Physician in Philadelphia.

In Stibio, and Mercurio, ad magnam penetrabilitatem art deductis, nec tamen
salin^ acrimonia nimium corrosivis, sed been unitis, ut quaeramus ( remedium,
nempe, specificum Antivariolosum,) incitat aliquis horum aliquando successus.
APH. HERM. BOERH. No. 1392. Prophylaxis insitiva videtur satis certa, tutaque.
Idem, Ibidem. No. 1403. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL.
MDCCL.

PREFACE.
THE Day after this Discourse was delivered, being at a House where I was told
it had given great Offense to some of the Profession in Town, I happened to
take up a Book, which presented to me the following Passage, Apology for the
Tale of the Tub. Edit. 9 Land.
Had the Author writ a Book to expose the Abuses in Law, or in Physic, he
believes the learned Professors in either Faculty, would have been so far from
resenting it, as to have given him Thanks for his Pains, especially if he had
made an honorable Reservation for the true Practice of either Science. Now,
though I did not write designedly to expose the Abuses in Physic, yet in what is
accidentally hinted on that Subject, I believe it will scarcely be denied that
I have made an honorable Reservation for the true Practice of the Science.
Neither have I so much as pretended to be capable of effecting any one Thing
but what I have expressly acknowledged any other duly qualified Physician can do
likewise. To whom then I would desire to know, can there be given any just
Cause of Offense? The Answer must be, To none but those who are conscious of
being Quacks, for a Quack, who did not believe himself to be one, could not
take Offense, because he would think himself possessed of those Qualifications
that are said to be necessary for a Physician, and consequently not affected by
any Thing said against Quackery: Nay, I should imagine it would be wrong Policy
even in one who know himself to be a Quack to take Offense, for that would be
pleading guilty.

HAD I indeed confined the Character of a Physician to a Graduate, or
restricted the Method of studying the Science to certain Opportunities, which
every one of the Practitioners here may not have enjoyed, the Case would have
been different; but whatever may be my Opinion of these Matters, I have no
where declared it; having only contended in general, that Physic is a Science
founded on just and rational Principles, and that the Knowledge of these
Principles are absolutely necessary to qualify a Man for being a safe practical
Physician. Whoever is possessed of the necessary Qualifications, let him come
by them which Way he will, and whether he has a Diploma or not (for it must be
owned a Diploma is often easily and undeservedly obtained) is to all Intents
and Purposes, in the Sense I have used the Term, a duly qualified Physician:
And whoever has them not, be his Pretensions what they will, is a Quack. It Is
true, I have hinted, that this Matter is for the most Part too slightly
examined into, and unqualified Persons too often trusted in America; but this
is so notorious a Truth, that it is almost in every Body's Mouth; and I never
met with a Practitioner in America, even among the lowest Class of them I ever
conversed with, but what would freely own it. At present, therefore, seeing
there is no just Cause of Offense given, though I have been frequently told great
Offense has been taken, yet not being certain of it, having only heard it in
general without any Names, I must suppose it either a false Rumor, or that
those who are offended, did not hear the Discourse, and have had a wrong
Representation of the Matter given them, which they will be convinced of upon
seeing the Piece itself.

BUT as the Manner this Performance came to be ushered into the World, was
something uncommon in these Parts, I must beg Leave to be a little more
particular concerning it.

IT is a Thing very well known, that in all Places set apart for universal
Education, public Orations on physical Subjects, as well as on any other
Branch of natural Knowledge, are exceeding common. Yet in Reality the Discourse
was not originally writ with that View, for I had actually finished what I
intended for the Public on the Subject, before I had any Thoughts of
delivering it as a public Oration. But reflecting there was an Academy newly
erected here, and finding the Length of the Discourse would suit such a Design,
I thought there would be nothing amiss in desiring the President, if he
approved of it, to propose it to the Trustees, which was accordingly done and
agreed to without any Objection, as I was informed both by the President, and
other of the Trustees. The Novelty of the Thing, however, I understand, affords
Matter of Sneer to some few, who, perhaps, are unwilling to own the true
Motives of their Disapprobation. But whatever these may be, I am quite easy
under the Consciousness of having meant well.

AS some late Miscarriages in Inoculation, though but very few, had staggered
many People about a Practice, which I was firmly persuaded in my own Mind, was
of the most salutary Nature, I thought it my Duty to give a State of my Opinion
to the Public, together with the Reasons of it, in hopes that what had
convinced me, might possibly convince others: Besides this, I conceived I had
something new and useful to offer, at least Improvements on the common Methods
of Management: And seeing these Things related to a Distemper at present in
this Place, I cannot think unprejudiced People will judge it unseasonable.

WHAT is interspersed concerning the Qualifications of a Physician, and the
Abuses of the Practice of Physic, fell naturally in my Way, and are pointed at
no particular Person living, as the Discourse itself, which is printed verbatim
as it was delivered, will plainly show, whatever Misrepresentations may have
been spread to the contrary. If these Things be true, seeing the Welfare of
Mankind is concerned in the Dispute, it could never be wrong to mention them:
If any Man thinks them false, he has a Right to make it appear, the Press is
free. For my own Part, I shall always be open to Conviction, and ready to
acknowledge my Error in the same public Way I have committed it, or to give my
Reasons in Reply, if I should not be convinced. This I imagine is the fair Way
of settling a Dispute that so nearly concerns the Public; for most certainly,
who is or is not qualified to be entrusted with the Management of the Sick, is
a Matter of no small Importance to every Community. Any other Method of
condemning what is said relating to that Affair, whether by low invidious
Insinuations, to raise Clamor and Prejudice against the Author, which is
altogether unworthy of Gentlemen; or by pretending with an Air of Consequence
and superior Abilities, it was not worth While to confute it (a very common
Pretense among weak, conceited Creatures, when they really can say nothing to
the Purpose) I make no Question but every Thing of this Kind would be easily
seen through by sensible impartial Men, and attributed to its just Cause.

TO conclude; if the Piece has any Merit, it will find Friends in this Place, I
make no doubt, as well as elsewhere; and if two or three People were to take it
into their Heads, from a high Notion of their Interest and Influence, that what
they should be pleased to say about the Matter, must determine its Reception, I
fancy they would in the End find themselves mistaken: But on the contrary, if
the Piece has no Merit, there is no Occasion to put it to the Rack, it will
soon die of itself, and be deservedly neglected and forgotten.

A DISCOURSE ON THE Preparation of the Body for the SMALLPOX, and the Manner
of receiving the Infection, etc.
Much honored and worthy Gentlemen, Trustees of this Academy,

HAVING some Things to offer which I conceive may be of public Benefit, I
thought they could not be more properly addressed, than to a Set of Gentlemen,
who were so sensible of the Necessity and Usefulness of Academical Learning, as
to become, in the most generous and disinterested Manner, the first Promoters
of it in this Place. In all Places for Education, Medicine has been ever
accounted one of the most useful Branches of natural Knowledge; and every
Attempt to improve any Part of it, has been always countenanced and encouraged
by the Friends and Well-wishers of the liberal Arts. I make no Doubt then but
you will favor me with your Attention, while I propose some Things to your
Consideration relating to the SMALLPOX, a Disease at present in this Place,
and which oftentimes proves fatal in every Part of the World where it has
hitherto been known. As I have not been used to harangue in this public
Manner, I rely entirely on your Candor and Goodnature, to make a proper
Allowance for all Defects in Point of Oratory. Truth, indeed, stands seldom in
Need of any Embellishments, and often appears to the greatest Advantage when
dressed in its own native Simplicity; more especially these Sort of Truths
which are rather intended to convince the Mind than excite the Passions. The
Flowers of Rhetoric on such Occasions, appear, for the most Part, only as so
many specious and superfluous Ornaments. I shall endeavor, therefore, to
deliver myself with all the Plainness and Brevity I am capable, and the Nature
of the Subject will admit.

EVER since the SMALLPOX appeared in the World, it has always been accounted a
dangerous, and frequently a mortal Distemper: When the Disease is violent, it
is certainly extremely dangerous in its own Nature, but capable of being
rendered much more so by a wrong Management. The hot Regimen, which was
universally practiced before Sydenham's Time, and by too many since, has
hurried Numbers out of the World, which might have been easily saved by a
different Treatment: But every Thing relating to the Management of the Patient
through the Course of the Distemper having been so fully handled by others, I
propose not to dwell upon it in the present Discourse. My principal Design is,
to offer some Things concerning the Preparation of the Body, and the Manner of
receiving the Infection; which, from any Thing I have yet seen, appears to me,
never to have been considered with that Attention the Importance of the Subject
deserves: This too seems the more necessary, as there are some Points relating
to this Matter, of the utmost Consequence to the Life and Safety of Numbers of
Mankind, concerning which, People are by no Means agreed in their Opinions.

WITHOUT farther Introduction then in treating this Subject, I propose to
observe the following Method.

I. I shall premise some general Things, and enquire a little into the Nature
of this Disease.

II. From these Premises I shall endeavor to show what State of the Body is
best fitted to receive the Infection, and how it ought to be prepared, as well
in those who receive it in the natural Way, as in those who take it by
Inoculation.

III. I shall try to discuss this Question, viz. Whether it be safest and most
eligible to run the Risque of catching this Distemper without any Precaution in
the natural Way; to take the Infection in the natural Way premeditately after
due Preparation; or by Inoculation? And,

LASTLY, I shall conclude with a few Reflections on the whole.

To begin then with the first Thing in the Method, which was to premise some
general Things, and enquire a little into the Nature of this Disease. Though Vid.
Variolorum Antiquitates Graetis erutae. D. Hahn.
some have taken a good deal of Pains to show, that the SMALLPOX was described
by the old Greek Physicians, under the Title of Carbuncle, yet I must own
myself of the same Opinion with the learned and judicious Sydenham, Opera
Universa. Edit. noviss. Lugdum Batavor, Page 240.
that the Places quoted in Proof of it, are most unreasonably wrested, and that
in Reality the SMALLPOX is not to be found described either in Hippocrates or
Galen. Had it existed at that Time in the World, he thinks so sagacious an
Observer as Hippocrates, would not failed to have described it with his usual
Exactness and Accuracy, so as to leave no room for any Dispute. The Arabians,
therefore, seem to have been the first who have handed us down any authentic
Accounts of this Disease.

IT seems highly probable, as well from Reason as Observation, that those
epidemic Diseases which cannot be accounted for from the manifest Qualities of
the Air, ( viz. Heat and Cold, Moisture and Dryness) have their Beginning,
Increase, Perfection, Declination and Period; and this, perhaps, in a great
Measure, from the various Exhalations, that according to the different and
unknown Alterations happening in the Bowels, or on the Surface of the Earth,
taint the Atmosphere with hurtful Miasmata, which, though they be too subtle to
undergo the Examination of the Senses, may yet act at certain Conjunctures on
the human Frame, and produce particular Diseases. This, I say, may be, and very
probably is the general Cause of all epidemic Diseases which do not depend upon
the manifest Qualities of the Air. Now, though the variolous Contagion, is
generally taken from an infected Person, yet it is plain from Facts that the
Disease is often epidemic, and that this epidemical Constitution of the Air is
sometimes more, and sometimes less pernicious: Nay, so strongly was the Air of
England tainted with an epidemical Constitution of this Sort for the Space of
near three Years ( viz. in the Years 1667, 1668, and Part of 1669) that great
Numbers during that Season, who had already suffered the SMALLPOX, were seized
with what Dr. Sydenham calls a Opera Universa. Page 163, and 164.
Variolous Fever, from its having every distinguishing Symptom of that
Distemper, the Eruption of Pustles alone excepted: At the same Time too, the
SMALLPOX was very frequent among those who never had the Distemper before. It
is very likely that the Fuel for this Disease always existed in the human
Blood, for the Indian Natives of America, where the SMALLPOX was never known,
before the Europeans came amongst them, catch it as readily from an infected
Person, as any other. Yet it seems very probable the SMALLPOX never appeared
in the World, before a variolous epidemical Constitution of the Air called it
forth.

BUT it will be more to the present Purpose to enquire a little into the Nature
and Effects of this Disease, now it has appeared, than to examine when, or how
it came into the World. Now it appears in every Instance, that after the
Variolous Contagion, whatever Way communicated, is mixed with the Mass of Blood
of any Person who never had the Disease, it always produces an inflammatory
Fever. And in Proportion to the Violence of the Disease, so always are the
Symptoms of this contagious Fever, in so much that from these, for the most
part, a pretty exact Prognostic may be formed, whether the Disease will be more
or less dangerous in its Issue. Aphorism. Hermon. Boerhaav. Edit. Leydens.
quarta. No 1384.
Blood taken from a Person in the Beginning of this first Stage of the Fever,
makes the same Appearance as in sound Health; but after it has continued three
or four Days, it looks inflamed and sizy, exactly like the Blood of a Person in
a Pleurisy, or any other inflammatory Disorder. So nearly allied are the
Symptoms of this contagious Fever to that of a simple inflammatory One, that
unless a Physician from other Idem. Ibid. No 1387.
Circumstances had Reason to suspect this Disorder, the very best might be
liable to be deceived. All the succeeding Appearances in the Progress of the
Disorder are evidently of the same Kind. The Eruption is no other than a Number
of small Inflammations, which, when the Disease is moderate, regularly ripen
into thick white, or yellowish Matter, and form small Abscesses, from which,
however numerous they may be, there is seldom much Danger under due Management.
On the other hand, when the Disease is violent, the dangerous Appearances are
all of the gangrenous Kind, arising from a putrid Dissolution of the Blood,
which are still the genuine Effects of a higher and more exasperated Degree of
the inflammatory Fever. The narrow Limits of this Design will not permit me to
enter into a more minute Detail of Particulars; but it would be easy to show,
that every threatening and mortal Symptom of this Disease proceeds from the
Causes assigned. I shall conclude, therefore, what I proposed to premise in
general concerning this Disease, with supposing it sufficiently proved, that
whatever be the more hidden and abstruse Nature of the Variolous Contagion,
when it comes to be mixed with the Blood of a Person who never had the SMALL
POX, it is posess'd of a stimulating Power, which produces an inflammatory
Fever, and that frequently of the worst and most dangerous Sort.

I proceed now to the second Thing proposed, which was to endeavor to show,
from the foregoing Premises, what State of the Body is best fitted to receive
the Infection, and how it ought to be prepared, as well in those who take it in
the natural Way, as in those who take it by Inoculation. In general then, as it
appears from what has been offered, that the whole Danger of this Distemper
proceeds from a high inflammatory Fever, producing a putrid Dissolution of the
Blood, that State of the Vessels which is the least disposed to favor
Inflammation, and that State of the Fluids which will be aptest to resist
Putrefaction, must certainly be that State of the Body which is best fitted to
receive this Disease. Now soft and flexible Vessels, containing a cool and
temperate Blood, has been found, by universal Idem. Ibid. No 1387.
Experience and Observation, to be this State. Hence it is that old People,
whose Vessels are stiff and rigid, are more endangered by the SMALL POX, as
well as all other inflammatory Disorders, than Young. And hence, likewise,
those whose Blood is heated by High-living and strong Liquors, are in great
Danger by the same Distempers, than those who live more temperately. A very
small Attention will easily discover the Reason of this. Every inflammatory
Fever, as well as every topical Inflammation, is attended with an Obstruction
in the small Vessels; and surely the more lax, and moveable these Vessels are,
the more easily will these obstructed Particles find a Passage through them.
Again, Putrefaction is always occasioned by too much Heat, and animal Heat is
generated by the Attrition of the circulating Blood, and the Action of the
Vessels: Now the more soft, rare, and inelastic the Bodies engaged in Attrition
are, the less Heat will be produced, caeteris paribus: But it appears, by many
Experiments, that hot and intemperate Blood is composed of much more dense,
compacted, and elastic Parts, than cool and temperate, and the Vessels that
contain it are generally more tense and rigid; therefore a much greater Degree
of Heat will be excited, even supposing the same Celerity of Circulation in
both. A very moderate Skill in the Doctrine of Attrition, I imagine, is
sufficient to discover the Force of this Reasoning. But besides this, cool and
temperate Blood would much longer resist Putrefaction in the same Degree of
Heat and Motion with that of hot and intemperate. For the Blood is composed of
what we eat and drink, considerably altered indeed by the Action of the animal
Organs, yet still retaining a good deal of the Nature of the Food it was formed
from. Now the temperate Blood here spoken of, is such as is chiefly formed from
a cooling, vegetable, or Milk Diet; and the intemperate such as principally
comes from hot, inflaming, animal Food, with high seasoned Sauces, diluted
perhaps with spirituous Liquors. But Milk, and all Vegetables (a few hot
Antiscorbuticks excepted) by heat turn acid, which is directly opposite to
Putrefaction, and resists it: Whereas, on the other hand, all animal Food,
either Flesh or Fish, naturally tends to Putrefaction, and stands in no need of
the Heat introduced by high seasoned Sauces, or spirituous Liquors, to increase
and assist it. On this Account it is that the Flesh of those Animals, who live
upon other Animals, putrefies a good deal sooner, than the Flesh of those who
live entirely on Vegetables, in the same Degree of heat. Nay, most of the
rapacious Birds of Prey, even while alive, have a foetid Smell. And it is
certain, from Experience, that the human Body cannot subsist long on animal
Food alone, unless it be qualified with Salt or Acids, without falling into
putrid Disorders. Commentaria in Aphorism. Edit. Leydens. Tom. prim. Page 115.
Van Swieten relates as an Instance of this, that while the great Boerhaave was
himself afflicted with violent rheumatic Pains, he proposed to live entirely
for some Time on Veal-Broth without Salt, in hopes it would both serve for
Nourishment, and as a soft Medicine to sheath and blunt the Acrimony of the
Humors which caused the Pain; but he could not bear it beyond five Days, and
was obliged to fly to the Use of acescent Whey, upon which he lived wholly for
a long Time, with great Relief from his Pain. Whoever reflects duly on these
Things will, I imagine, be fully satisfied, that soft and flexible Vessels,
containing a cool and temperate Blood, prepared chiefly from a subacid
vegetable, or Milk Diet, must be in general that State of the Body which is
best fitted to receive an inflammatory Distemper, whose dangerous Effects is a
putrid Dissolution of the Blood, which was previously shown to be the Case in
the SMALLPOX.

BUT I foresee an Objection which may probably be raised against what has been
advanced. It may be asked, if this Matter be as it has been stated, how comes
it pass, that sometimes a strong, lusty, gross Person, who takes the SMALLPOX
in the natural Way without any Precaution, shall have it very moderately,
whilst another, again, of a thin, spare, and seemingly more advantageous Habit,
perhaps too, after a careful Preparation, shall have it in a much more violent
Manner? It is undeniable Matter of Fact, that there have been Instances, which
if they do not come up fully to this Case, at least come very near it: No body,
however, I believe, will allege that I have not done complete Justice to the
Objection; and I confess, at first Sight, it looks very plausible, but I think
(...) of a fair and satisfactory Answer: First, then* (...) to be remem^^^^^
that a thin, spare Person, may have hot (...), whilst the same Fluid in a more
corpulent Habit, may be much more cool and temperate. Secondly; By a careful
Preparation, is for the most Part meant, an abstemious Diet, with Bleeding and
Purging: But I must beg Leave to observe, that Errors are easily committed in
pursuing this Course. By such Evacuations, and too abstemious a Diet, the
Patient may be rendered too weak to undergo so tedious a Disease, and by
over-purging, the Blood may be easily rendered hot, acrid and putrescent, which
would be much worse than no Preparation at all; so that it requires more Skill
to judge how far that Regimen, and these Evacuations, are proper in different
Constitutions, than is generally imagined: And if the Qualifications of those
who are often entrusted with the Direction of such Affairs be heartily
considered, there can, I think, little Doubt be made that they are frequently
injudiciously used. But, thirdly; To give the Objection its full Force, let it
be granted that sometimes (for the apparent Instances are but rare) the best
prepared Body has the Disease worst, nothing more will follow than that those
rare Instances are Exceptions from a general Rule, and it is said that all
general Rules have Exceptions. The Observations of the ablest Aphorism. Herm.
Boerh. No 1381.
Physicians are all in Favor of what has been advanced, particularly those of
the judicious Sydenham, to whom the World is indebted for almost all they know,
both of the History and Cure of this Distemper. No Man ever had better
Opportunities of making Observations; no Man ever observed with more Accuracy;
and it is universally allowed, that no Man ever related his Observations with
more Candor. He tells Opera Universa. Pagin. 141, and alibi sparsim.
us, he observed in general, that old People fared worse under this Disease
than young, and Men worse than Women, the latter being naturally of a softer
and laxer Texture: That young Men again, in the Flower of their Youth, whose
Blood was heated by free Living, were more in Danger than those who had not yet
entered into Company: Nay, that the Children of poor People, who live chiefly
on a homely vegetable and Milk Diet, generally had this Disease more moderately
than the Children of rich People, who were used to higher Feeding. These
Things, I should think, are sufficient to establish the Truth of what was laid
down, and remove the Objection; but perhaps, before what is intended to be said
on some other Matters relating to the Preparation of the Body, be finished,
these Instances on which the Objection is founded, may be made a proper Use of,
and accounted for. I go on, therefore, to offer something farther on that
Subject.

Now though the State of the Vessels, and Temper of Blood described, be certainly
a most useful and necessary Part of the Preparation, yet I am humbly of
Opinion, something more may be done; I think too, I have Reason from what I
have experienced in Practice, to be of that Opinion: However, I shall explain
myself heartily on this Matter, with as much Perspicuity as I can, freely
submitting it to the Judgment and future Experience of others. It appears to me
then, highly probable, that there is a certain Quantity of an infinitely
subtle Matter, which may be called the variolous Fuel, equally, intimately and
universally diffused through the Blood of every human Creature, in some more,
in others less, that lies still and quiet in the Body, never showing itself in
any Manner hitherto discovered, until put in Action by the variolous Contagion,
at which Time it is totally expelled in the Course of the Disease. First, I
say, this variolous Fuel seems to be infinitely subtle; that is, so subtle as
to evade the Discovery of our Senses, assisted by the best Helps yet found;
because the Blood of a Person who never had the SMALLPOX, makes the very same
Appearance, and affords the same Analysis under the strictest Examination, as
the Blood of o^^ who had already suffered the Disease. Secondly; It seems to be
equally, intimately and universally diffused through the Blood of every human
Creature; for we find the Infection may be communicated at all Parts of the
Body equally; and all the different Inhabitants of the Globe, Europeans,
Asiaticks, Africans, and Americans, have been hitherto found equally
susceptible of the Disease. Thirdly; This variolous Fuel, seems in some to be
more, in others less in Quantity, and very probably different likewise in
Quality, for we see People of the same apparent advantageous Habits, very
differently affected with the same Infection. Nor are there any Marks hitherto
discovered by which it can be so much as guessed at, whether any Person has a
greater or less Quantity of this variolous Fuel in the Blood, or whether it be
of a greater or less malignant Quality. And this I think would serve to account
for these Instances in a former Objection, where strong, lusty, gross People,
sometimes have the Disease very moderately, whilst others again of apparently
more advantageous Habits, have it with much greater Violence; because, if the
Quantity of this variolous Fuel in the former be small, and its Quality benign,
the Fever and all its consequent Effects upon the Blood will be proportionably
small; whereas on the other Hand, should those of more advantageous Habits,
have it in greater Quantity, or more malign Quality, though the Body would be
better prepared to sustain an equal Degree of Fever, yet as this would by no
Means be the Case, the Danger would be much greater. But fourthly and lastly;
this variolous Fuel lies still and quiet in the Body, until it is put in Action
by the variolous Contagion, at which Time it is totally expelled in the Course
of the Disease: This is so plain that nothing farther need be offered in Proof
of it, than that those who have once had the Distemper, let them be never so
much exposed to the Infection afterward, are not liable to have it a second
Time. Yet whether ever there was a well attested Instance of the same Person
having the Disease twice, I shall not take upon me to determine. Supposing
there was, some uncommon Accident or Particularity in the Constitution may have
prevented the total Expulsion of it the first Time. But if there be any such
Thing at all, it happens so exceeding rare, that it ought to be considered as a
Kind of Prodigy, and then the Answer is, that though uncommon and extraordinary
Phenomena of Nature appear sometimes, yet it is never thought a good Argument
against reasoning from its usual Course. All the general Appearances then of
the SMALLPOX evidently favor this Hypothesis, which is more than can be said
of any other that I know of; but it was not with a View to establish a Piece of
Theory that it was first advanced, I proceed therefore to make the intended Use
of it.

IF then there be such a subtle Matter in the Blood of all those who never had
the SMALL POX, as, from what has been offered, appears, at least, highly
probable, it would certainly be of the greatest Benefit to Mankind to find out
a specific Medicine, which would either expel it entirely, alter it so as to
render it quite innocent, or mitigate its malignant Quality. A Specific
possessed of the former Virtues would undoubtedly be the most desirable; yet a
Medicine capable only of mitigating the Malignity of the variolous Fuel, would
certainly make a noble Preparative for the Disease. It has been the Opinion of
very eminent Aphor. Boerhaav. No 1390.
Physicians, that a Specific for the SMALL POX ought to be sought for, and may
probably be found. Idem, Ibid. 1392.
Boerhaave seems to think (for he speaks with Reserve) that from some Things he
had seen performed by the Use of some of the finer, and milder Preparations of
Antimony and Mercury intimately united, it was well worth while to make farther
Trials of them, in order to find out a Specific in this Distemper. As for the
general Idem, Ibid. 1393.
Antiphlogistic Method, by which the same great Man proposes to check the
Distemper in its first Stage, and prevent the Eruption of Pustles, or even
after the Pustles have appeared, to cure the Inflammation, and stop its farther
Progress, I cannot take upon me to say how far it may be certain or safe to
pursue it, having never seen'd it tried. But Idem, Ibid. 1395
he asserts, there have been many Instances of its Success, while Physicians
not appris'd of the SMALL POX, treated the Symptoms and Eruption in the same
Manner as they would have done any other high inflammatory Fever. The Danger of
such a Method would be, that if it did not succeed, the large Bleedings
necessary to be used, must render the Patient so weak, that he would be very
apt to sink under the tedious and trying Course which he must afterward
undergo. This Method, therefore, is not likely to take Place, unless, by
repeated Trials on Criminals condemned to Death, it was found certain, and to
be depended upon. But the Trial of an easy operating antimonial and mercurial
Medicine, as a Preparative for receiving the Disease can be attended with no
Danger. If it does not alter the variolous Fuel, so as to render it perfectly
innocent, or expel it entirely, it may perhaps expel it in Part, or mitigate
its malignant Quality; and in either Case the Advantage would be considerable.
Though I cannot take upon me to assert any Thing positively on this Matter, yet
there can be no Harm in relating what I have experienced in this Affair. On
every Occasion, for the Space of twelve Years that I have been called upon to
prepare People for the SMALL POX, either for receiving it in the natural Way,
or by Inoculation (for I have prepared many for both) I have constantly used
such a Medicine as has been mentioned, and I can honestly declare I never saw
one so prepared, in any considerable Danger by the Disease. One of them indeed
that received the Infection in the natural Way, had the confluent Pock, but I
attributed that to his having rid near twenty Miles in cold damp Weather the
first Day of the contagious Fever, being taken unwell in the Morning before he
set off. However though he was a young Gentleman in the Flower of his Youth, he
got very safely over it. This Disease is often so easily got over without any
Precaution, that many People are unwilling to be at much Trouble about
preparing for it, so that eight, ten Days, or a Fortnight, has been the longest
Time I have ever been able to persuade any body to set apart for it, which was
too little. For as the variolous Fuel is universally diffused, in order to
obtain the full Efficacy of the Medicine, the whole Mass of Blood ought to be
richly impregnated with it. I met with one Instance, however, which, as it
seems a little remarkable, I will take the Liberty to relate. About ten Years
ago, in the Family where I lodged, there were five Children who had never had
the SMALL POX. The eldest was about twelve Years of Age, and the youngest about
two. They were all of healthy Constitutions, born of the same Parents, and
lived after the same Manner, eating and drinking together every Day. The SMALL
POX came to the Place, and their Mother would not hear of Inoculation. They
were kept as much as possible out of the Way of the Distemper; but at last the
eldest and youngest were both taken with very violent Symptoms, that presaged a
high and dangerous Degree of the Disease, which indeed they both had, though they
got over it. This alarmed the Mother, upon which she desired I would prepare
the other three for taking the Infection in the natural Way. I gave them a
Fortnight's Preparation in the Manner aforesaid, and then they came freely into
the Room where the others were. Two of them took the Disease, yet in the most
moderate Manner, so as never to lie by an Hour with it. But the third could not
catch it at all, notwithstanding he slept in the Bed with his Brothers and
Sisters with the SMALL POX upon them. This young Man is now an Apprentice to a
Practitioner in this Town, and he tells me he has been frequently among the
SMALL POX since, and goes at this Time, as he has done for some Time past,
freely amongst them every Day, dressing inoculated Sores, etc. yet never has
caught it to this Hour. I would not be understood to offer this as a
Demonstration of what has been suggested, for I know there are Instances of
People having resisted very strong Degrees of the Infection, who have
afterward taken it on very slight Occasions, and perhaps this Youth may be
amongst that Number. It is far from my Intention to impose by drawing certain
Conclusions from doubtful ^remises: But after having stated Things fairly, and
in the clearest Manner I could, I leave every Man to judge for himself.

I HAVE purposely avoided giving any formal Directions about the Preparation,
thinking it sufficient to propose the general Intentions to be pursued, which
every judicious Physician easily knows how to execute, and adapt to different
Constitutions; for I think none else ought to be entrusted with a Matter of
this Sort. Nor do I mean by such, all those who by the Courtesy of America are
styled Doctors, because it is well known that Surgeons, Apothecaries, Chemists,
and Druggists, or even mere Smatterers in any of these, are all promiscuously
called by that Title, as well as real Physicians. I mention this as well to
make People a little more careful in examining into the Pretensions of those
they entrust as Physicians, for surely it is a most important Trust, as to gain
the Method of Preparation proposed fair play.

HAVING thus finished what I intended on the second Thing in the Method, I
proceed now in order to the third Thing proposed, which was to try to discuss
this Question, viz. Whether it be safest and most eligible to run the Risque of
catching the SMALL POX in the natural Way without any Precaution, to take the
Infection in the natural Way premeditately after due Preparation, or by
Inoculation? Now whoever attentively considers what has been said concerning
the Nature of this Disease, and the Advantages of a proper Preparation, must, I
think, allow that the same Person would certainly have the Disease much more
moderately, while his Body was in that State described as the fittest, than if
he was to have it under the opposite Circumstances. But no one who runs the
Risque of catching the Disease at random can tell but the latter may be his
Case. Nay it is most likely to be the Case; for the more hot and putrescent the
Blood is, the more tense and active the Vessels are, the apter they will be to
imbibe any Thing applied to them. An Instance of this we see in acute Fevers,
where that is the State of the Blood and Vessels. Let a Person in this
Condition drink as much as he will, the Moisture applied to the Vessels of his
Mouth and Throat is soon sucked up, and they quickly again feel parched and
dry, which evidently shows that this Power of Absorption in the Vessels, by
which Power alone it is that any Thing is taken into the Blood, is increased by
that very State of the Body which is most unfriendly to the SMALL POX;
consequently, a Person will be aptest to catch the Infection when he is worst
prepared for it. Seeing this is the Case then, it must certainly be the most
dangerous and unsafe Method to run the Risque of catching the Distemper in the
natural Way, without any Precaution.

BUT to this some will reply, Allowing the Matter to be as it has been stated,
as there are Instances of some who never get the Disease at all, there is a
Possibility of escaping it entirely; and besides that, getting a Distemper
industriously looks like Presumption, or a tempting of Providence. These
Things, I am sensible, have considerable Influence on some People, but, with
Submission, they seem to me to have little of any Consequence in them. For
first, the Instances of those who never have the SMALLPOX at all, in populous
Cities, where the Distemper is frequently among the Inhabitants, (for I speak
only of such,) are exceeding rare, at most not one in ten Thousand. This Chance
then is so small as scarcely to deserve any Consideration, when the Danger of
running the Chance, and the Advantages of the other Method are set in
Competition.

But farther, as the Almighty has formed us rational Beings, he surely intended
we should act on rational Motives; now Certainty is often out of our Reach, and
Probabilities are the only rational Motives we have to act upon in most Cases.
The Probability therefore of the greatest Safety being so strongly on the Side
contended for, there can be no Presumption in acting agreeable to it; otherwise
taking the most probable Means for Self-preservation, a Principle ingrafted in
us by the Author of our Nature, would be acting presumptuously against him,
which is a palpable Absurdity. The Presumption in neglecting the most probable
Means of Safety, seems rather to lie on the other Side. But, in truth, though it
be reckoned Presumption by some, yet there are many Things of the same Sort
practiced every Day by these very People, without any Scruple. Who amongst
them, for instance, would hesitate to bleed, vomit, or purge, in order to
prevent any dangerous Disease, which they had but the slightest Reason to be
apprehensive of? And yet Bleeding, Vomiting and Purging, are all as real
Diseases as the SMALLPOX, while they last, and such as have proved mortal too,
even when they have been industriously brought on: Yet no Body calls this
Practice Presumption, or a tempting of Providence. The Case, I think, is
exactly the same with respect to the voluntary Way of taking the SMALLPOX. A
less Danger is willingly embraced to avoid a greater, not on slight Grounds,
but with great Probability apprehended. Thus I have endeavored to obviate an
Objection, which I have known to stick with Numbers of well-meaning but
scrupulous Minds, and I thought it my Duty to do so in a Discourse intended for
the Public, though perhaps it may have been unnecessary to the Bulk of more
intelligent People: But having already shown that to run the Risque of catching
the SMALLPOX in the natural Way without any Precaution, is by far the most
unsafe Method, I proceed to examine, Whether it be safest and most eligible to
take the Infection premeditately in the natural Way, after due Preparation, or
by Inoculation?

AND first it may not be improper to remark, that, after due Pains taken to
prepare the Vessels, one cannot be so certain of taking the Infection in the
natural Way, as by Inoculation. The Regimen and Medicines would probably render
the Vessels not so ready to catch it, which might considerably prolong the Care
and Caution necessary to be used before the Affair was over: So that supposing
both Ways of receiving the Infection equally safe, Inoculation ought to be
preferred. But that we may search into the Bottom of this Matter, let us in the
next Place suppose the Body equally prepared in both Cases, when the Infection
is received, and then the only Difference will be in the Manner of receiving
it, which, if I am not much deceived, will appear, on a strict Examination, to
be of much more Importance than is generally imagined, and greatly in favor of
Inoculation. As the Contagion in infected Places is always contained in the
Air, when it is received in the natural Way, it must be taken in by the Vessels
of the Nose, Mouth, Throat, Lungs, or Stomach, from the Air drawn in by
Inspiration, or swallowed down by Deglutition. For, though the external Skin
abounds with bibulous Vessels, yet but little of that is exposed; and besides,
their Orifices neither being so open, nor so moist, are not so fitly disposed
to take in any Thing applied to them in that Manner. But the internal Coats of
the Nose, Mouth, Throat, Air Vessels of the Lungs and Stomach, are all lined
with a lubricating Mucus, fit to entangle the infectious Miasmata, and the
inhalant Vessels of these Parts are always open, and ready to suck up and
convey into the Blood whatever is applied to them: So that should the Contagion
in the Air at any Time be strong enough to enter the inhalant Vessels of the
external Skin, it would certainly enter the Vessels of these internal Parts at
the same time, as it must be applied to them with such superior Advantages. Now
the peculiar Advantage of Inoculation, I take to be this, that by this Method
the Infection is conveyed into the Blood by the external Vessels alone, and
that only from one particular Spot, which may be chose in any Part of the Body.
It may be worth while therefore, to examine in what this peculiar Excellency
particularly consists.

It is a Thing well known, that the Danger of all inflammatory Distempers
almost wholly depends upon the Nature and Function of the Part where the
Inflammation principally fixes. An Inflammation in the Legs or Arms for
Example, or any external Part, is not near so dangerous as one in the Viscera
of any of the Cavities of the Belly, Breast, or Brain. When the Inflammation
suppurates in the former Case, it may always be cured, and often when it
gangrenes; but any considerable Quantity of Matter lodged in any of the three
Cavities mentioned, almost always proves mortal, and a Gangrene there is
certain Death. Whatever then will be instrumental in determining the Crisis of
the inflammatory Fever raised by the variolous Contagion, toward the internal
and more noble Parts, must be hurtful and dangerous; whereas on the other Hand,
whatever tends to lead this Crisis outwardly, and to the more remote Parts,
must be highly advantageous and serviceable. That the Method of receiving the
variolous Infection in the natural Way is of the former, and that by
Inoculation of the latter Sort, appears to me strongly supported by the
following Observations.

FIRST, we observe, that in other Poisons which induce an Inflammation or
Gangrene, it principally affects those Parts where the Poison first enters,
whether it be the internal Coats of the Nose, Mouth, Throat, Lungs and Stomach,
or the external Surface of the Body. Secondly; It has been remarked that the
Pustles round the inoculated Part are generally very thick; nay I have often
observed the whole Side on which the Inoculation was made, to be much thicker
of Pustles than the other. Thirdly; The Wound itself, though made small, which
would otherwise heal up in a few Days, often becomes an ill-conditioned Sore,
and keeps running in most Cases for the Space of a Month, and in some a good
deal longer. Fourthly; I have taken particular Notice, that those who take the
Disease by Inoculation, even when the Pock is equally numerous upon the Surface
of the Body, are not near so subject to Sore Throats, and these other Symptoms
which show the internal Parts affected, as those who take the Infection in the
natural Way. From all which it would appear, that (...) variolous Contagion,
which Way soever it enters the Blood, disorders the whole Body, and raises an
inflammatory Fever, yet that it affects those Parts it enters at, in a
particular Manner, so as to determine the Crisis of the Fever principally that
Way. This then, I say, seems to me to be the peculiar Advantage of Inoculation,
that it determines the Crisis of the contagious Fever, from the internal and
dangerous Parts to the external and less dangerous, which, as has been already
shown, must be of the highest Benefit.

GIVE me Leave to add, as a corroborating Circumstance, that the Effects of the
different Ways of taking the Infection as described, will, in my humble
Opinion, clearly account for a very remarkable Phenomenon of this Distemper,
taken Notice of by Opera Universa. Pagin. 591, and 592.
Dr. Sydenham, which hitherto has never been accounted for, at least, that I
ever heard of. The Phenomenon is this: That the Danger of the SMALLPOX is
entirely to be estimated by the Number and Nature of the Pustles upon the Face;
so that however few and distinct they may be upon the rest of the Body, if they
are numerous and confluent upon the Face, there is the same Danger as if the
Body was covered with the same Sort: The Observation holds too, vice versa.
Now, agreeable to what has been said, if the variolous Infection enters chiefly
at the Vessels of the Nose, Mouth and Throat, which has been shown to be the
Places it is most likely to enter at when the Infection is taken in the natural
Way, the Crisis of the contagious Fever will be principally determined that
Way. But the Carotid Arteries and others, which supply those Places as well as
the Face, send likewise considerable Branches into the Brain, so that a
proportionable Part of the same Sort of inflammatory Particles that constitute
the Pustles on the Face, must be lodged in the Membranes of the Brain; and as
they are of a mild and benign Sort or otherwise, will produce more or less
Danger in the Course of the Disease. For the Face considered in itself, is a
Place of no Danger, and consequently one would imagine, no such Prognostic
could be taken from it, but when for the Causes assigned, it comes to give
certain Indications of the State of so important a Part as the Brain, the Case
differs widely, and the Reason of Sydenham's Observation appears evident.

BUT besides this, the Advantages described, arising from the Manner of
receiving the Infection by Inoculation, are confirmed by Experience; for it is
a Thing well known in this Place, that at different Times, while the SMALLPOX
was very mortal among those who took the Infection in the natural Way, great
Numbers were inoculated, a careful Preparation being little practiced, yet few,
very few indeed, miscarried. Nor can this various Success be ascribed to the
Care taken in communicating the Infection from a Pock of a good Kind by
Inoculation; for we see frequent Instances of those, who live in the House
where the SMALLPOX of the worst Kind is, having, notwithstanding, the Disease
mild and moderate; whilst others again, who never had been near any in the
confluent Sort, yet have it in the most violent Manner: Nay, some who have been
inoculated from a Pock of the best Kind, have nevertheless had the worst. So
that though it be a Practice to be very careful in getting the Infection from a
Pock of a good Kind, and to be sure there is no Harm in it, yet it would seem
to be a Matter of small Importance. If therefore the experienced Success of
Inoculation can neither be ascribed to the Preparation of the Body, which was
but little practiced, or to that of taking the Infection from a Pock of a good
Kind, which appears to be of no Moment, I cannot see any other possible Way of
accounting for it, but from the different Way of receiving the Infection. I
have endeavored to do this by Arguments, as I think, drawn from fair Reason,
and just Observation; and I hope by this Time it appears sufficiently plain,
that it is by far the safest and most eligible Way to take the variolous
Infection by Inoculation.

HAVING thus finished what I intended on the three Heads of the Discourse, I
come now in the last Place to make a few Reflections on the whole.

AND first, from what was hinted in the Beginning of this Discourse, that an
epidemical Constitution of the Air for producing this Distemper is sometimes
more, and sometimes less pernicious: I should think the best Time for getting
over this Disease would be when it was accidentally brought to a Place, and
there was nothing in the Air to favor it at all, or when the epidemical Pock
was of a good Kind: For the Disease is to be suffered but once, and once every
one who travels, or is obliged to be often in large Cities where it comes, must
in all human Probability have it. And the History of the Disease shows, that it
is at some Seasons much more mortal, than at others. Certainly therefore it
will be running the least Risque, to try to get over the threatening Danger at
the Season abovementioned.

SECONDLY; If those Parts the Infection enters at, be of such Consequence as to
determine the Crisis of the contagious Fever principally that Way, it will
undoubtedly be best to convey it at those Branches of the vascular System which
have the most distant Communication with the Vessels that supply the more noble
Parts. For this Reason, I should imagine it would be safest to inoculate in the
lower Extremities rather than the upper, because the axillary Arteries, which
chiefly supply the Arms, come from the Subclavians, and they derive their
Origin from what is called the ascending Trunk of the Aorta, which sends off
all those Branches which supply the Head, and a great Part of the Thorax, where
the vital and dangerous Parts are contained. Now, should the Crisis be
principally determined toward the Arm where the Inoculation was performed, the
vital Parts will be in more Danger of partaking of it, than if it was
determined toward the Legs and Feet, as the Course of the Blood in those
Vessels from whence the lower Extremities are supplied, lead quite a different
Way. I know the common Practice is to inoculate in the Arm, and perhaps a Sore
in the Feet or Legs may be somewhat more inconvenient; but a Probability of
greater Safety, in a Matter where Life itself is concerned, ought certainly to
take Place of a mere Convenience. These Sores are sometimes extremely
troublesome, and difficult to heal, giving forth a thin, ichorous, corroding
Matter, which both eats and inflames the adjacent Parts. To prevent or remedy
this, about three or four Half Drachms of Jesuits Bark given at so many Doses
through the Day, will, I believe, seldom or never fail to bring good Matter
into the Sore, and dispose it to heal. I am sensible this Effect of the Bark in
bad Sores, and even in the Pustles of the SMALLPOX, has been taken Notice of,
and made known to the World by the deservedly famous Medical Essays. Edinb.
Edit. Vol. 5. Part 1st. Art. 10.
Monro, of Edinburgh, whose Name, as one of my first Masters in the healing
Art, it is my Duty always to mention with Gratitude and Honor. But having
often experienced its good Effects in this particular Case, I judged there
would be nothing amiss in mentioning it by the bye.

But thirdly; From what has been said concerning this Disease, and the
Advantages of a well prepared State of Body for receiving it, I think it
clearly follows, that it will be much the safest Method to have the Body put
into that State at all Times when the Disease is expected, as well in those who
are determined to wait for it in the natural Course of Things, as in those who
premeditately take the Infection. For though the SMALLPOX be frequently got over
in a very easy Manner without any Precaution, yet as it often proves a
dangerous and mortal Distemper, too much Care cannot well be taken in a Matter
of such Importance. Inoculation has been shown to be much the best and fafest
Way of taking the Infection, yet even in this way it sometimes proves mortal;
and indeed, considering how uncautiously and precipitantly this is often done,
I am surprised it has not been much more frequently the Case. Inoculation seems
to be considered by many as a mere chirurgical Operation, and accordingly we
see almost every one who knows how to handle a Lancet entrusted with the whole
Management of it: But it has been shown, that what ought to be done on this
Occasion for the Safety and Security of the Patient, a judicious and skilful
Physician only can judge. In Matters of Property and Interest prudent Men are
always cautious and circumspect, in proportion to the Value of the Thing in
Danger. Now here, Life itself, the most valuable of all earthly Things, is
liable to be put in the most imminent Danger by Mismanagement and want of
Skill; and yet of all Professions in America, the true Qualifications of a
Physician are the least examined into. This seems something strange and
inconsistent, but the Fact is notorious. It may, perhaps, be occasioned, in
some Measure, by a Notion which prevails even among some from whom better
Things might be expected, that Physic is not a real Science, founded on just
and rational Principles, but a Sort of Knack to be got entirely by Practice,
which an ignorant, illiterate Person, may as readily attain, as one of Learning
and Knowledge, who had taken due Pains to study it. If this was the true Notion
of Physic, the Distinction betwixt Physician and Quack would be without
Foundation, for that is in Reality the Principle on which Empiricism is
founded. But the ablest Physicians in all Ages have repeatedly confuted it, and
proved it to be in the highest Degree senseless and absurd. They have bore
their public Testimony against it, as an injurious Slander on their
Profession, exceedingly hurtful too in its Consequences to Mankind, as serving
for a Cloak to screen Impostors. In every Country of the known World, where
Learning flourishes, Physic is regularly taught as a Science, and studied as
such by all those who qualify for practical Physicians. But without entering
minutely into the Argument, whoever will be at the Trouble of making only a
slight Examination into this Matter, will soon be convinced that the human Body
is a pure Machine, and that its Disorders are not to be understood, however
often they may be seen in Practice, without a particular Knowledge of its
Organization and Structure. They would soon confess with Dr. Mead, that "
Mechanical Account of Poisons. Fourth Edit. Page 13, of the Preface.
He is likely to be the best Physician, who having the same Assistance of
Observations and Histories with others, best understands the Human Economy,
the Texture of the Parts, Motions of the Fluids, and the Power which other
Bodies have to make Alterations on any of these." In the Knowledge of these
Things, consists what is called the Theory or Principles of Physic, without
which, says Sydenham, Opera Universa. Pagin. 490.
He who endeavors to conquer Diseases, will be something like the Roman
Andabatae, a sort of Gladiators, that used to fight blindfolded; or like a
Mariner, who goes to Sea without a Compass. That some Things in this Human
Economy are not thoroughly understood, may be easily granted, and is
undoubtedly true; yet nothing follows from the Concession, but that the Science
is not perfect; and I would desire to know what human Science is? Many Things
are certainly known concerning it, and he who knows these Things best, must be
best qualified to judge of Observations in Practice; and he who is ignorant of
them, understands nothing that he sees, and is not qualified for Practice at
all. Yet the Mischiefs committed by the ignorant Professors of Medicine are
seldom publicly known, because the noxious Things they administer work all
their Effects in the dark, within the hidden Recesses of the Body, which the
greatest Part of Mankind are not qualified to judge of; and therefore are
easily made believe proceeded not from the injudicious Administration, but the
Malignity of the Disease, or some other Cause, which either the Empiric himself
through Ignorance thinks the true One, or artfully invents to save his
Character. This however is an Unhappiness much easier lamented than remedied,
unless the Legislature was to interpose in Behalf of the Safety of the People,
and appoint proper Persons to judge of the Qualifications of those who were
permitted to Practice. This, I believe, has been done by all the well regulated
Governments of Europe; and there is certainly a better Reason why it should be
done in a young Country, where the Arts and Sciences are but in their Infancy,
because there the Bulk of the People being more illiterate, are more liable to
be imposed on, as they will be less capable of detecting Impostors.

YOU, Gentlemen, have made a laudable Attempt to erect an Academy in this Place
for the Advancement of Literature, and the Improvement of the liberal Arts; I
heartily wish your generous Endeavors may be crowned with Success, to the
utter Mortification and Discouragement of Impostors of all Kinds, and the
Increase of true Knowledge, which is the Source of all individual, as well as
social Happiness.

The END.

