Mr. Byles's SERMON Before the Execution of a Murderer.

THE Prayer and Plea of DAVID, To be delivered from Blood-Guiltiness, Improved
in a SERMON At the ancient Thursday-Lecture in Boston, May 16 th 1751. Before
the Execution of a Young Negro Servant, for Poisoning an Infant.

BY Mr. BYLES.

PSALM. XL.9, 10. I have preached thy Righteousness in the GREAT CONGREGATION.
-- I have declared thy Salvation: I have not concealed thy Loving Kindness, and
thy Truth, from the GREAT CONGREGATION. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by SAMUEL
KNEELAND, opposite the Prison in Queen Street, 1751.

David's Prayer and Plea for Pardon from Blood-Guiltiness.
PSALM LI. 14. Deliver me from Blood-guiltiness, O GOD, thou GOD of my
Salvation: and my Tongue shall sing aloud of thy Righteousness.


THEY are the penitent Words of David, reflecting upon his barbarous Murder of
Uriah: A most earnest Prayer to GOD to forgive his Crime, and restore the Peace
of his Soul. You have the dreadful Story in II Sam. xi, and xii, Chapters.
After his great and complicated Wickedness, Nathan the Prophet is sent to him
with a Message from GOD; a Message full of Conviction, Resentment, and Mercy.
The Prophet, in the Name of GOD, charges home his Sin upon his Conscience; Thou
art the Man! He denounces the Judgments of Heaven against him, and against his
House. He aggravates his Wickedness to him, in all its Circumstances of
Darkness and Horror, and informs him of the mighty Anger of GOD burning and
raging against him. And now the poor King has his Heart melted within him. He
has nothing to say in his own Excuse. He had carried on his Impiety, with
Hypocrisy, Deceit and Lies: But the Spirit of GOD seizes him; He is overcome;
He has no Heart to proceed any further. And David said unto Nathan, I have
sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said unto David, the Lord also has put
away thy Sin; thou shall not die. Here Is Penitence! Here Is Mercy! The weeping
David at once condemns himself; owns his Guilt; falls down before GOD, in Shame
and Self-loathing. But Oh! How surprised was he to hear the Pardon pronounced,
soon as his Repentance was declared?

When Nathan left him, he retired to fast and pray for the Life of his Child:
And now, a sudden Afflatus from GOD came upon him, and inspired he writes the
Psalm before us. The Spirit of GOD comes back again to his Soul: and though
perhaps he intended to make a Prayer for the Recovery of his Infant, The Words
are altered in his Mouth, and in his Pen; And he gives us the most noble
Process of Repentance that is any where to be met with. That Part of the Psalm
that I am upon, suited to the awful Occasion of this Day, is the Address of the
humble Penitent to GOD, to pardon his dreadful Murder: Deliver me from
Blood-guiltiness, O GOD, thou GOD of my Salvation: and my Tongue shall sing
aloud of thy Righteousness. -- In discoursing on these Words, I shall in the
Name of GOD, endeavor the following Things.

I. I shall describe the Crime of David: Blood-Guiltiness.

II. I shall consider his Prayer: Deliver me from Blood-Guiltiness.

III. I shall state the Argument of his Hopes: O GOD, thou GOD of my Salvation.

And lastly, His grateful Resolution in Case God forgave him; My Tongue shall
sing aloud of thy Righteousness.

I shall endeavor to be as brief as I can upon these Points, that I may hasten
to that particular and solemn Application, which I am called to by the
affecting Object before us.

I. I am to describe to you the Crime of David; expressed in that Word
Blood-Guiltiness. The original Word literally translated is Bloods -- From
Bloods. 'Twas an involved Crime, a perplexed Piece of Villainy. It had in it a
Plurality of dark Circumstances and Murders. Bloods: There was more than one it
seems in it. Perhaps when Uriah was set in the Front of the Battle, it was so
ordered that others should fall with him to disguise the Business. II Sam.
xi.25. Then David said to the Messenger -- The Sword devoureth one as well as
another: Make the Battle stronger next Time. However, Joah was guilty as well
as David; and it all rested in the End upon the Head of David, who caused Joah
to sin. So that the Guilt of two fell upon him singly, and in this Respect, he
might well speak of Bloods. Besides this, the poor innocent Infant must die for
his Father's Sin; so that in some Sort he was the Author of his Child's Death
too. But it may be David used the plural Number here, reflecting upon his
murderous Designs once or twice before: For he had the Guilt in his Heart, though
GOD withheld him from completing the Act. -- What a Madman was he in the Case
of Nabal! It Is true, the Son of Belial used him unjustly and scurilously: But
was that any Reason that he should murder him, and his whole Family with him?
Because Nabal was a Churl, must David turn a revengeful, bloody Ruffian? And
yet what a Speech did he make upon this Occasion, when he heard Nabal had
affronted him? He was all on Fire. 'Twas but a Word and a Blow with him. In an
Instant he flies out in a Frenzy, curses all his Enemies, profanes the Name of
his GOD, and vows to kill Nabal and all his Family before Morning. 1 Samuel
xxv.12. So David's young Men turned their Way, and went again, and came and
told him all those Sayings. And David said unto his Men, Gird you on every Man
his Sword! and they girded on every Man his Sword, and went up after David four
hundred Men. And David said. Surely in vain have I kept all that this Fellow
has in the Wilderness -- And he has requited me Evil for Good. So and more
also do GOD unto the Enemies of David, if I leave of all that pertain to him by
the Morning Light, even so much as a Dog. And did you ever hear such Language
as this from the Mouth of any but a bloody-minded Madman? And though a good GOD
prevented the Execution of this rash Vow, who can excuse David from having
Murder in his Heart? Well then might David in his Penitence, reflect upon more
Murders than one, and pray to be delivered from Bloods.

But to confine our Selves to this particular Crime, and if you please, to keep
to the English Translation, Blood-guiltiness: O what a Scene of Impiety opens
to our View! It Is one of the most dismal Histories in all the Scriptures. The
strangest Instance of a Fall from GOD that was ever before known. David, a poor
unregardable little Shepherd, chosen by the peculiar Grace of GOD,
distinguished from, and advanced above all his goodly elder Brethren, preserved
by a constant Series of Miracles, raised to the Throne of the peculiar People
of GOD, surrounded by all the Blessings of Earth and Heaven; inspired by the
vast Possession of the Holy Spirit; and in one Word, declared to be, The Man
after GOD's own Heart. This David now; (would you think it!) This very David,
falls into Adultery and Murder. The least Sin, had in him been great, who was
under so many Obligations to GOD: But Adultery and Murder! What could a
Heathen, or an Athiest do worse?

And yet this is the very Case before us. David, under all his indissoluble
Obligations, and matchless. Advantages, thus foully falls, an eternal Reproach
to human Nature, and an Instance what frail Creatures we are, even the best Men
upon Earth.

David then goes up to the Battlements of his Palace, and there walks idly from
Side to Side; and having no Business to employ him, falls a Prey to the
Temptations of Coveteousness and Lust. Happy had it been for thee, David, had
thou now been employed in the Affairs of the Kingdom, or in thy Retirements
addressed a Psalm to Heaven. But he was idle! And O what an Inlet is this
cursed Vice to all Mischief and Wickedness? Being idle he stood as it were a
Man in the Devil's Market Place, waiting to be set to Work. Here Satan found
him out of God's Way; and this which appears to many so little a Sin, lead the
Way to all the Excess and Licentiousness following. He was tempted and he fell.
The generous Uriah was now in the bloody Field, fighting the Battles of the
Lord, and maintaining the Honor of this David; while he basely betrayed his
Wife. Afraid the Matter should be discovered, he uses the meanest Artifices,
and the vilest Hypocrisy to cover his Wickedness: But when he found none of his
base Schemes took Effect, then (wonder O Heavens, and be astonished O Earth, be
ye horribly afraid, and be ye very desolate!) then he conspires the Death of
Uriah, one of his bravest and most gallant Friends. He who merited to be ranked
with the thirty Worthies, must be ranked in the Forefront of the Battle, that
he may be numbered to the Sword of the Enemy. Was ever any Thing more
treacherous and perfideous! The vile Conspiracy took Effect, and the brave
Uriah falls a Victim to the Cruelty and Lust of David. The Adultery was
detestible; But nothing could be more barbarous and cursed than the Murder.
Consider the Criminal, the Manner, and the Subject, and there was no such Deed
done nor seen from the Day that the Children of Israel came out of the Land of
Egypt, unto this Day: Consider of it, confer together, and speak your Minds.
How often must David's Conscience check him, while he was conspiring this
Wickedness? How many Reluctings must he needs have within? And yet,
deliberately, and bearing down all, he compleats the Guilt, and the gallant
Hero bleeds a Sacrifice to his lewd Desires.

Now David began to make himself easy. The Murder was committed, and he thought
that it would be concealed: There could never be any Proof of the Matter, and
he fancied himself secure. But Oh, poor Man, thy GOD, and thy Conscience know
the Affair, and in vain would thou disguise it from the World, while the
Guilt and the Anguish corrodes within. Alas! there are no more quiet Hours for
David. His Heart smites him, his GOD withdraws, the Ghost of the murdered Uriah
haunts his Dreams, and perplexes his waking Hours. He turns pale and starts at
every Noise, and hears the Blood cry from the Ground, for Vengeance to the GOD
of Heaven. He who a few Nights ago could fall asleep in the Raptures of his
Master's Love, now has no Rest in his Bones because of his Sin. He who was wont
to remember his GOD with Joy upon his Bed, now waters his Couch with his Tears.
The Anguish of his Mind was insupportable long before Nathan was sent from GOD
to him. He quickly begun to repent after the Fact was over.

I know it is the general Opinion, that David lived in his Sin, for several
Months, and was never brought to Repentance 'till this Visit from Nathan. But,
with all Submission, I think the Case was much otherwise. It appears as though
several Passages of the penitential Psalms were written after the Murder of
Uriah, and before Nathan had said, The Lord also has put away thy Sin. Psalm.
6.32.38.51.102.130.143.
Would David, do you imagine, have written in such disponding Terms, after God
himself had assured him that he was pardoned? No: though this Psalm wherein is my
Text, was written after Nathan's Message, yet it should seem from the different
Air, that other of the penitential Psalms were composed in the Depth of
Penitence, before David could persuade himself that GOD had forgiven him.

See the poor King in his dark Retirements! Adultery and Murder lay upon his
Soul. He complains of Disquietude, Wounds, and broken Bones. He weeps and rores
with inward Distress. His Tears are his Meat Night and Day, and he finds no
Relief as yet from GOD or Man. However, his Penitence is sincere, though he sees
it not. He would not commit the Wickedness again for a thousand Worlds. As yet,
the C^^^^^ was concealed from the World, and as GOD had concealed it, he had no
need to blaze it abroad. But however, he is brought into this submissive
Temper, as every true Penitent is, if ever Providence should bring it out, his
Repentance should be as public as his Sin. This is the true Disposition of a
sincere Convert. And now the fullness of Time was come for a merciful GOD to
regard his Distress, and send the Words of Pardon to him. The Prophet comes at
the divine Order, and charges his Guilt home upon him, Thou art the Man! At
once David confesses without Hesitation or Reluctance. He bursts into Tears,
and cries out, I have sinned against the Lord. Now you see David again. He
appears like his former Self. Full of Faith, and Love, and Prayer, and
Gratitude, he returns to his GOD, and rises in all his Glory. Nathan goes away,
and David retires to Fasting and Prayer, to ask the Life of his unlawful Child.
But GOD meets him in the miraculous Inspiration, and he forgets his own
particular Request, and writes this penitential Psalm, for the Benefit of the
Church in all future Ages.

We have thus considered the Crime of David, and how vast was it! How dreadful
in itself, and how aggravated in him! And yet, hoping in GOD, he makes this
Prayer, Deliver me from Blood-guiltiness, O GOD, thou GOD of my Salvation: and
my Tongue shall sing aloud of thy Righteousness. And this is the second Thing
to be considered.

II. I am to observe upon the Prayer of David, with Regard to his dreadful Sin.
He prays; and 'twas the best Thing he could do. The wisest Course we can take
after we have fallen into Sin, is at once to pray for Repentance. If ever Satan
can keep us from praying, he has us fast enough. If David had restrained
Prayer, after his Sin, what had become of him then indeed! then he had been
ruined without Hope. But he prayed to his GOD: and what said he: Deliver me
from Blood-guiltiness, O GOD, thou GOD of my Salvation etc. Deliver me from it.
Happy had it been for David, had he made this Prayer, when he was first tempted
to it. But now it is past, he is convinced, that if GOD will please to forgive
him, he may yet be delivered. The Man who is pardoned, is in the Sight of GOD,
as pure as he who never sinned.

III. You observe the Argument which David makes use of in his Plea for a
Pardon. O GOD, thou GOD of my Salvation. -- Past Experiences are Arguments for
future Favors. -- The Name of GOD is his strong Tower, to which he flies for
Protection. His Name is the GOD of Salvation: Wherefore, for his Name's Sake,
David urges for a Pardon. Thou GOD of my Salvation: It Is as if he had said,
Thou GOD my SAVIOR. This was the Name for the MESSIAH. And under that dark
Dispensation, 'twas as though he had said, For CHRIST's Sake. And thus are we to
seek Pardon from GOD. Not for the Sake of our own Prayers and Tears, and good
Works: But only on the Account of our Savior's Merits: O GOD, thou GOD of my
Salvation. Of his own Mercy he saved us. Ephesians. ii.8. For by Grace are ye saved,
through Faith, and that not of your selves: it is the Gift of GOD. It Is a fatal
Mistake, to pray for a Pardon, and think we shall obtain it for the Sake of the
Prayer. Or if we endeavor to repent of Sin, and reform our Lives, it oversets
the whole Work, if we depend upon this Repentance and Reformation, and not on
GOD our Savior. Romans x.3, 4. For they being ignorant of GOD's Righteousness,
and going about to establish their own Righteousness, have not submitted
themselves unto the Righteousness of GOD. For CHRIST is the End of the Law for
Righteousness to every one that believes. Our whole Argument for a Pardon
then, must be, O GOD, Thou GOD of my Salvation. We must depend upon the Mercies
of GOD, and the Merits of our Savior, for Pardon, and Acceptance, and
Reconciliation. After all the vile Crime of David, he could make this his
Confidence, and take Sanctuary here. There Is no Sinner so great, but here is
enough for him, upon his sincere return.

The last Thing I observed in the Text, was

IV. David's grateful Resolution in Case GOD forgave him; and the blessed
Effect of pardoning Mercy. My Tongue shall sing aloud of thy Righteousness.

Says the Penitent David, I am under the Guilt of Bloods -- But O my GOD
forgive me, and my Tongue shall sing aloud of thy Righteousness. Praise and
Thanksgiving are the immediate Practice of every pardoned Sinner. O when a poor
Creature has been shaken over the Mouth of Hell, and then sees himself
delivered, he is swallowed up in the Love of GOD, and burns with the most
lively Gratitude to him. O, says he, what has my GOD done for me! and what
shall I render to him! Thou GOD of my Salvation, how can I praise thee enough!
Never can I requite thee; but how shall I testify the Sincerity and Ardors of
my Love!

But in the original Text, the Particle And is omitted. It runs, Deliver me
from Bloods, O GOD, Thou GOD of my Salvation; -- My Tongue shall sing aloud of
thy Righteousness. This expresses the Assurance the Psalmist had, that GOD had
heard him, and the Joy of Pardon was breaking in. It teaches us, that
wherever true Repentance is, there is certainly Forgiveness. The English
Translation expresses the grateful Resentment of a Pardon: the original Hebrew
declares, the certain Effect of Repentance. As David prays to be delivered, he
stops short and says inward, I am so: My Tongue shall sing aloud of thy
Righteousness.

You observe; If we are pardoned it is because of the Righteousness of GOD our
Savior. This must be imputed to us, if ever we are forgiven by GOD. If after
all our Sins, we are again received into Favor, we must not attribute it to
our own Merits, but sing aloud of his Righteousness.

You observe, That it is an Act of Justice in GOD to forgive the believing
Penitent. CHRIST, in a Word, has paid the full Price of a Pardon for all that
repent and believe. It Is then a Debt upon GOD's giving us Faith and Repentance:
GOD is Righteous when he receives us upon our Repentance and Faith. He may be
just, and yet justify him that believes. It Is a great Word, and if GOD had not
said it himself, we should not have dared to; I Joh. i.9. If we confess our
Sins, he is Faithful and Just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from
all Unrighteousness. Convinced of this, David assured of the divine Pardon,
prepares to sing aloud of the Righteousness of GOD, which first purchased, and
then bestowed it.

I have now gone through the several Points of Doctrine which I intended, and am
arrived to my Application.

I. From what has been said, you see into what dreadful Sins human Nature may
fall; even the best of Men, a David himself, off his Guard, and loosing his
Hold of God, falls into Adultery, Persidy, Ingratitude, Hypocrisy and Murder! O
what Cause have we to walk cautiously and humbly with our God.

II. Let none venture to Sin from the Example of David. Would any seek to
justify or excuse their own Wickedness from this dismal History? Do they say,
David did as bad as we can? Vain Men, is David to be imitated or no? If he is,
why do you not follow him in his Repentance, his Devotion, his steady and long
continued Course of Holiness, as well as in one Act which he himself pronounced
detestable. So that, thou Hypocrite, out of thy own Mouth shall thou be
condemned. But if you say he is not to be imitated, then pray never mention his
Name to paliate or soften thy own Crimes. -- 'Twas one of the greatest
Agravations of his Sin, that it gave Occasion to the Enemies of the Lord to
Blaspheme.

III. Let none applaud his own Innocence, when he compares himself with the
Falls of David. Say not, how pure am I, who never committed such enormous
Crimes? The Law says, Thou shall not kill, thou shall not commit Adultery. Say
not, These have I kept from my Youth. 'Twas the proud Pharisee who uttered the
profane Boast, God I thank thee that I am not as other Men are, Extortioners,
Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican. Nay, let him that thinks he
stands, take Heed least he fall. Whilst I have been Preaching of Adultery and
Murder, let not the bigger Part of the Audience think that they have little to
do with it. Alas, in this vile Heart of mine, are the Seeds of all these
blackest Sins. So said the blessed Martyr Bradford, striking on his Breast;
when he heard of the great Sins of others. If God should leave us to ourselves,
there is no Sin so vile but the very best of us would presently commit. Nay, who
can pronounce himself clear, when the LORD JESUS CHRIST himself, that best
Expositer of the divine Law, has positively declared, Whosoever is angry at his
Brother without a Cause is a Murderer: Whosoever looks with irregular Desire is
an Adulterer. Matthew. v.21, 27. Nay, in the Name of God, I indict every
impenitent Sinner in this great Assembly, of Murder, most execrable Murder! You
have your Share in the Guilt that has murdered all Mankind. For as by one Man
Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, so has Death passed upon all Men,
in that all have sinned. More than this, every Time you have committed a Sin,
you have given a deadly Stab to your ruined Spirits. He that does it,
destroys his own Soul. When you have been about to commit Sin, how have you
once and again felt your Heart misgive, your Conscience smite you. You were
that Moment going to kill your Souls: And had you attended, you had heard them
cry out, MURDER! And yet, you have stopped your Ears to their bitter Shreeks,
and have gone on, 'till now perhaps they are wholly dead, quite insensible, and
the Spirit of GOD may never work upon them any more. But what say you to that
Indictment of the Apostle, Heb. vi.6. If they shall fall away, it is impossible
to renew them again unto Repentance: seeing they crucify to themselves the Son
of GOD afresh, and put him to open Shame. Or what shall the profane Approacher
to the Lord's Table say to that Indictment, He is guilty of the Body and Blood
of the Lord. To every impenitent Sinner, who shall ask, What has a Sermon to a
Murderer to do with me? I tell him, as the Prophet from GOD to David, Thou art
the Man. The Blood of your murdered Souls cries to Heaven against you. Against
thy own Life have thou done this Thing! All of us then have need enough to make
the Prayer of my Text, Deliver me from Blood-guiltiness, O GOD, Thou GOD of my
Salvation etc. --

But, I come now to the more particular Application of the Day; and address the
Word of GOD to the poor Malefactor before us in the Terrors of the Shadow of
Death.

Ah! poor Daughter of Death, Hear what Messages I bring you from Heaven, and
GOD give you Faith in the Hearing.

Poor Criminal, here you stand condemned before GOD; within a few Moments of
Death and Eternity. Need I say any Thing to excite your Attention to the
Admonitions of Heaven. You are too nearly concerned to be a sleepy Hearer. I
shall speak to you, as to One just launching into the invisible World, with the
utmost Fidelity to GOD, my own Soul, and yours.

This is not a Time to give flattering Words, but as far as I can, first to
convince, to affect, to awaken you; and then to show you the right Way to a
Pardon, and encourage you to lay hold on it.

Ah, unhappy Malefactor! The Voice of the innocent Blood cries aloud from the
Ground to Heaven. In many Regards my Text is suited to you, and your
Circumstances are like David's. GOD has blessed you with a religious Education.
Like David you have been distinguished among your Nation by peculiar Favors of
GOD.

And now, what Improvement did you make of your Advantages? What Returns did
you make to the good GOD that distinguished you? You are ready in some Sort to
own how disobedient and false and mischievous you have been. GOD gave you a
Space to repent, and tried you from Day to Day: But you repented not; you were
hard and incorrigible. GOD provoked, left you: and you see what is come of it:
Young as you are, ripe for the Vengeance of a capital Execution! However, He
was good to you still: and in your long Confinement, in Darkness and Solitude,
he has given you Opportunities to seek his Favor; and GOD knows how miserably
you have improved them.

But, O poor Malefactor, I would not drive you to Despair. I bring you good
Tidings of great Joy, unto you is offered a Savior; Pardon and Life and
Salvation. You know what the Law of GOD says expressly, Exodus xx.13. Thou shall
not kill. You have read what awful Words GOD spoke to Noah, Genesis ix.5, 6.
Surely your Blood of your Lives will I require: at the Hand of every Man's
Brother will I require the Life of Man. Whosoever sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man
shall his Blood be shed. You have been told of that unalterable Sentence of
Heaven, Numb. xxxv.16. If he smite him (so that he die) he is a Murderer: the
Murderer shall surely be put to Death. Here, in the Word of GOD, you read your
Crime and your Punishment. It would be a Sin in any so much as to wish for your
Life, Prove. xxviii.17. A Man that does Violence to the Blood of any Person,
shall flee to the Pit, let no Man stay him. Numb. xxxv.31. Moreover, ye shall
take no Satisfaction for the Life of a Murderer, which is guilty of Death: but
he shall, be surely put to Death.

But though you have lost your Life for this World, there is yet some Hope
remaining that you may obtain a better. Indeed they are dreadful Words, I Joh.
iii.15. No Murderer has eternal Life. It Is a dreadful Description, Rev.
xxii.15. Shut out of the holy City, are Dogs, and Whoremongers, and Murderers,
and whosoever loves and makes a Lie. It Is a dreadful Declaration, Gal. v.19,
21. The Works of the Flesh are these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness,
Murders, Drunkenness -- They that do such Things shall not inherit the Kingdom
of GOD. It Is a dreadful Account, Rev. xxi.8. The Unbelieving, and the
Abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and all Liars, shall have their
Part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone; which is the second
Death. This, miserable Creature, must be your certain Doom, if after all, you
die impenient. You have fallen into the Hands of Men, and they have condemned
you as not fit to live: But O you will find it a fearful Thing to fall into the
Hands of the living GOD.

But yet, after all these dreadful Words, I am here, in the Name of CHRIST, to
make you another Offer of a Pardon. Like Nathan, I would first convict you: And
then, like him, I am to inform you of the Mercies of GOD, and the Hopes of
Forgiveness. You must be in Agony, but you may not Despair. Though Murder is such
a flagrant Crime, and the Word of GOD speaks so terribly of it, yet, it is no
more than what you see David has been pardoned for before. So was Manasseh, who
is now in Glory, after all his Wickedness and Murders. He shed innocent Blood
very much, which the Lord would not pardon, so as not to punish it in this
World: No more did he David's Murder, but for ever after this was he pursued by
one Affliction after another, 'till he died: But yet David and Manasseh are
both now in Paradise, blessing and admiring the Grace of GOD together: You,
poor Criminal, may in a few Hours be with them.

'Twas long before Manasseh repented. Not 'till he was bound with Fetters, and
held in Cords of Affliction: II Chron. xxxiii.11. And when he was in Affliction
he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his
Fathers, and prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him, and heard his
Supplication: Then Manasseh knew that the Lord he is God. Nay, what
Encouragement would you desire, disconsolate Prisoner! The very Men who
murdered the Son of God, were pardoned and are now in Heaven. See Act. ii.23.36
-- 41.

It Is true, the innocent Blood cries from the Ground for Vengeance: But yet,
the Blood of Sprinkling speaks better Things than the Bood of Abel, and this
lifts up a prevailing Cry for Pardon and Forgiveness for you. When the
frightened Jailour was going to Murder himself, and cried out, trembling, What
shall I do to be saved? The Apostle answered him, Act. xvi.31. Believe on the
LORD JESUS CHRIST, and thou shall be saved. So I say to you, Prisoner of Death.
I shall explain your Duty in this Thing, and so conclude my Discourse.

Spend some of your few Moments in calling to Mind your Sins, in their several
Argravations, and confess them as particularly as you can to GOD. He that
covers his Transgression shall not prosper: But he that confesses and
forsakes shall find Mercy.

As you see yourself thus ruined on all Hands, now betake yourself to GOD in
CHRIST. Here, poor Criminal, here is Mercy and plentious Redemption for you.
Here Is Pardon and Righteousness, Sanctification and eternal Life. Say, O GOD,
thou GOD of my Salvation, for thy Names Sake, and for thy Son's Sake, forgive
me, and renew me. Submit to GOD your Savior, and choose and trust in the
blessed JESUS, as your Prophet, Priest and King. Renounce your own
Righteousness, and depend upon his. Say, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in
him. If God enables you to be sincere and thorough in this, there shall after
all be Joy in Heaven over you. The Prodigal returning shall be met and embraced
by the tender Father.

And now let your Tongue sing aloud of his Righteousness. Plead the
Righteousness of your Savior for your Justification; praise and admire this:
Adore the Righteousness of GOD, who gives you up for this World; but offers you
a Pardon for the next. Justify God, and condemn yourself. Submit and resign,
and fall down before this sovereign and just GOD. Thus spend the few Moments of
your Life here, and if GOD should indeed give you such a Heart, in that Hour
when you leave this World, the LORD JESUS CHRIST who himself suffered without
the Gates, shall say to you, as once to the Malefactor at his Execution. To Day
shall thou be with me in Paradise.

But I now turn me to this very great Congregation: And Oh! Let the chief of
Sinners here before GOD, hence learn their Duty, and take Warning. Flee
instantly from the Wrath to come, the Evil which pursue Sinners.

Despair not, my Brethren, but remember David, after all his most horrible
Guilt, coming back and receiving Pardon. Sinner as thou art, look into the
World of the Blessed, and there see the perfected Spirit of this once enormous
Offender, amidst Missions of others, once first in the Ranks of Misery and
Wickedness, but now the divinest Triumphs of the Redeemer's Blood, and the most
illustrious Workmanship of the Sovereign Spirit. Look into the World of the
Blessed, I say, and the Holy Ghost has taught you to repeat, I Cor. vi.9, 10,
11. Neither For^^^ators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Self-Polluter* nor
Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards,
nor Revilers, shall inherit the Kingdom of GOD; and such were some of you: but
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. O Glories of my Context! Thy Mercy, O
GOD! thy Loving Kindness! The Multitude of thy tender Mercies!

Like David then forsake your Sins with the utmost Abhorrence; retire to plead
unbounded Mercy, and lay hold on it for a Pardon. Be convinced of your
Transgressions as he was, confess them with Freedom and Fullness, and deep
Conviction: But see the Provision which a merciful GOD has made for you, in a
Sacrifice infinitely preferable to all Burnt-Offerings, in the Death of his Son
for you. O unbounded Grace, that gave you this Savior! And if he spared not
his own Son, but delivered him up freely for us all; how shall he not in Him
freely give us all Things? Pardon, Grace and Glory, and every good Thing?

O the Joys among the Blessed, at the Conversion of such a Sinner as David, and
as You! More than over ninety nine just Persons who need no Repentance. With
how much Affection will your heavenly Father run out to meet you; and in
Embraces and Kisses, proclaim, This my Son was dead and is alive, was lost and
is found.

FINIS.

