Anno Regni GEORGII II. REGIS

Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, DECIMO TERTIO.

At the Parliament begun and holden at Westminster, Anno Dom. 1740. In the
Thirteenth Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord GEORGE the Second, by the
Grace of God, of Great Britain, France,and Ireland, King, Defender of the
Faith, etc.



LONDON, Printed by John (...), Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty,
1740.

NEW LONDON, Reprinted by Timothy (...), Printer to the Governor and Company
of His Majesty's English Colony of Connecticut in New England, 1751.

Anno decimo tertio Georgii II. Regis.
An Act for the more effectual Securing, and Encouraging the Trade of His
Majesty's British Subjects to America; and for the Encouragement of Seamen to
Enter into His Majesty's Service.
W HEREAS the Trade of His Majesty's Subjects in America has for many Years
been greatly Annoyed by the Spaniards, their undoubted Right to Navigate in
those Seas without any Molestation, Preamble.
has been Unjustly interrupted, on Pretenses altogether Groundless and
Unwarrantable; diverse Ships and Vessels belonging to British Subjects have been
Seized and Confiscated, the Sailors have been Injuriously Imprisoned and
Barbarously Treated; and the British Colors have been Insulted in the most
Ignominious manner: And whereas His Majesty has been Obliged to Declare War
against the King of Spain, his Vassals and Subjects, to Revenge the Injuries
and Obtain Ample Satisfaction for the Wrongs done to His Subjects.

Now for the better carrying on the said War with Vigor, and for the
Encouragement of the Officers and Seamen of His Majesty's Ships of War, and the
Officers, and Seamen of all other British Ships, and Vessels, having
Commissions, or Letters of Marque, and for inducing all British Seamen who may
be in any Foreign Service, to Return into this Kingdom, and become Serviceable
to His Majesty; and for the more Effectual Securing, and Extending the Trade of
His Majesty's Subjects to America, and Elsewhere:

Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice,
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons, in this Present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, The Officers, Seamen,
Marines and Soldiers on Board any Vessel of War, in His Majesty's Pay to have
the sole Benefit of what Prizes they Take.
That the Flag-Officers, Commanders, and other Officers, Seamen, Marines, and
Soldiers on Board every Ship and Vessel of War in His Majesty's Pay, shall
have the sole Interest and Property of, and in all and every Ship, Vessel,
Goods and Merchandise which they shall Take after the Fourth Day of January, in
the Year of Our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty Nine, in Europe; and
after the Twenty-fourth Day of June, in the Year of Our Lord One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Forty, in any other part of the World (being first adjudged lawful
Prize in any of His Majesty's Courts of Admiralty in Great Britain, or in His
Plantations in America, or elsewhere) to be Divided in such Proportions, and
after such Manner as His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors shall think fit to
Order and Direct, by Proclamation to be Issued for that purpose.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lord High
Admiral of Great Britain, or the Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord
High Admiral of Great Britain for the Time Being, The Lord High Admiral, or
Commissioners, to Appoint, and Grant Commissions to any Person to Attack any
Place on Land or Vessel by Sea, etc.
or any Three or more of them, or any Person or Persons in any part of America
or elsewhere, by him, or them Empowered and Appointed, shall, from and after the
Fourth Day of January, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty Nine, at the
Request of any British Owner or Owners of any Ship or Vessel, giving such Bail
and Security as have been usually taken upon granting Commissions, or Letters
of Marque (except only for the Payment of the Tenths of the Value of Prizes
which shall be Taken to the Lord High Admiral, or Commissioners for Executing
the Office of Lord High Admiral, for the Time being) caused to be Issued forth
in the usual Manner, one or more Commission or Commissions to any Person or
Persons, whom such Owner or Owners shall Nominate, to be Commander, or in case
of Death successively Commanders of such Ship or Vessel, for the Attacking,
Surprising, Seizing and Taking, by and with such Ship or Vessel, or the Crew
thereof, any Place or Fortress upon the Land, or any Ship or Vessel, Goods,
Ammunition, Arms, Stores of War, or Merchandises belonging to, or possessed by
any of His Majesty's Enemies, in any Sea, Creek, Haven or River: And that such
Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels, Arms, Ammunition, Stores of War, Goods and
Merchandises whatsoever, with all their Furniture, Tackle or Apparel, so to be
Taken by or with such Private Owner, or Owners Ship or Vessel, according to
such Commission and Commissions, being first adjudged lawful Prize in any of
His Majesty's Courts of Admiralty, as aforesaid, shall wholly and Entirely
Belong to and be Divided between and among the Owner and Owners of such Ship or
Vessel, And shall belong to the Owners of such Vessels, and to the Persons
taking such Prizes from the Enemy.
and the several Persons which shall be on Board the same and be Aiding and
Assisting to the Taking thereof, in such Shares and Proportions as shall be
agreed on with the Owner, or Owners of such Ship or Vessel, as shall be the
Captor thereof, their Agents, or Factors as the proper Goods and Chattels of
such Owner or Owners, and the Persons that shall be thus Entitled thereto by
virtue of such Agreements among themselves: And that neither His Majesty, His
Heirs or Successors, or any Admiral, Vice Admiral, Governor or other Person
Commissioned by, or Claming under His Majesty, His Heirs, or Successors, or any
Person, or Persons whatsoever, other than the Owner or Owners of such Ship or
Vessel being the Captor of such Prize Ship or Vessel, Arms Ammunition, Stores
of War; Goods, and Merchandises: And the Persons Claiming under them shall be
Entitled to any Part, or Share thereof, Except as to the Customs, and Duties
hereafter mentioned; any Custom, Statute, or other Law to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And for the more speedy proceeding to Condemnation or other Determination of
any Prize Ship or Vessel, Goods or Merchandises, Taken as aforesaid, and for
Lessening the Expenses that have been usual in the like Cases.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Judge, or Judges of
such Court of Admiralty, The Judges of the Court of Admiralty in 5 days after
they are Requested to Examine the proper Persons to prove Captures to be lawful
Prizes, or not.
or other Person or Persons thereto Authorized, shall within the space of Five
Days after Request to him, or them for that purpose made, Finish the usual
preparatory Examination of the Persons commonly Examined in such Cases, in
order to prove the Capture to be lawful Prize, or to Enquire whether the same
be lawful Prize or not, and that the proper Monition usual in such Cases shall
be Issued by the Person, or Persons proper to Issue the same, and shall be
Executed in the usual Manner by the Person, or Persons proper to Execute the
same within the space of Three Days after Request in that behalf made.

And in case no Claim of such Capture Ship, Vessel, or Goods, shall be duly
Entered, or Made in the usual Form, and Attested upon Oath, If no Claimants
appear to Captures, etc.
giving Twenty Days Notice after the Execution of such Monition: Or if there be
such Claim, and the Claimant, or Claimants shall not within Five Days give
sufficient Security, (to be Approved by such Court of Admiralty) to pay double
Costs to the Captor, or Captors* of such Ship, Vessel, or Goods, in case the
same so Claimed shall be adjudged Lawful Prize, that then the Judge, or Judges
of such Court of Admiralty, shall upon producing to him, or them the said
Examination, or Copies thereof, and upon producing to him or them upon Oath all
Papers, and Writings which shall have been found Taken in, or with such
Capture, or upon Oath made that no such Papers were found; immediately, and
without further delay proceed to Sentence, either to Discharge, and Acquit such
Capture; or to Adjudge, and Condemn the same as Lawful Prize, according as the
Case shall appear to him, or them upon perusal of such preparatory
Examinations, and also of the Writings found Taken in, or with such Capture, if
any such Writing shall be found.

And in case such Claim shall be duly Entered or Made and Security given
thereupon, In case it appear Doubtful how to proceed.
according to the Tenor and true Meaning of this Act and there shall appear no
Occasion to Examine any Witnesses, other than what shall be then near to such
Court of Admiralty, that then such Judge or Judges shall forthwith cause such
Witnesses to be Examined, and within the space of Ten Days after such Claim
made, and Security given proceed to such Sentence, as aforesaid, touching such
Capture: But in case upon Making, or Entering such Claim, and the Allegation,
and Oath thereupon, or the producing such Writings as shall have been found
Taken in, or with such Capture, or upon the said preparatory Examinations, it
shall appear Doubtful to the Judge, or Judges of such Court of Admiralty,
whether such Capture be lawful Prize, or not, and it shall appear Necessary,
according to the Circumstances of the case for the Clearing, and Determining
such Doubt, to have an Examination of Witnesses that are Remote from such Court
of Admiralty, and such Examination shall be desired, and that it be still
Insisted on, on behalf of the Captors that the said Capture is lawful Prize,
and that the Contrary be still Persisted in, on the Claimants behalf, that then
the said Judge, or Judges shall forthwith cause such Capture to be Appraised by
Persons Named on the part of the Captor, and Sworn truly to Appraise the same,
according to the best of their Skill, and Knowledge: For which purpose the said
Judge, or Judges shall cause the Goods found on Board to be Unladen, and put
into proper Warehouses, with separate Locks of the Collector, and Comptroller
of the Customs, and where there is no Comptroller, of the Naval Officer: And
the Agents, or Persons Employed by the Captors, and Claimants, at the Charge of
the Party, or Parties desiring the same, and shall after such Appraisement
made, and within the space of Fourteen Days after the making of such Claim
proceed to take good, and sufficient Security from the Claimants to Pay the
Captors the full Value thereof, according to such Appraisement, in case the
same shall be adjudged lawful Prize; and after such Security duly given, the
said Judge, or Judges shall make an Interlocutory Order for Releasing, or
Delivering the same to such Claimant, or Claimants, or his, or their Agents,
and the same shall be actually Released, or Delivered accordingly.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Claimant,
Claimants refusing to give Security, the Judges to take Security of the Captors
or Claimants shall refuse to give such Security, the Judge, or Judges shall
cause the Captor or Captors in like manner to give good and sufficient
Security, to be approved of by the Claimant, or Claimants to Pay the said
Claimant or Claimants the full Value thereof, according to the Appraisement, in
case any such Capture or Captures shall be adjudged not to be lawful Prize; and
the said Judge or Judges shall thereupon proceed to make an Interlocutory Order
for the Releasing and Delivering of the same to the said Captor or Captors or
their Agents.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all such Captures,
All Captures bro't into any of His Majesty's Colonies in America, to be under
the Care, and Custody of the Collector, and Comptroller of the Customs, or
Naval Officer
as aforesaid, which shall be brought into any of His Majesty's Colonies or
Plantations in America, shall without breaking Bulk, stay there and be under
the joint Care and Custody of the Collector and Comptroller of the Customs; or
where there is no Comptroller, of the Naval Officer of the Port or Place where
the same shall be brought; and all the Captors thereof and their Agents, until
either the same shall by final Sentence have been either Cleared and
Discharged, or Adjudged and Condemned as lawful Prize, or that such
Interlocutory Orders, as aforesaid shall have been made for the Releasing or
Delivering of the same: And upon the Condemnation or Adjudication thereof as
lawful Prize, shall in case the same were Taken by any such Private Ship or
Ships, Commissioned as aforesaid, he immediately Delivered unto the Captors
thereof and their Agents, to be by them disposed of as their Goods* and
Chattels.

And in case the same were Taken by by any of His Majesty's Ships of War, If
Taken by any of His Majesty's Ships of War, etc.
unto such Person, or Persons, and to be so divided, and disposed of as His
Majesty, His Heirs, and Successors shall by Proclamation to that purpose Order,
and Direct.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Judge, or
Judges, or other Officer, or Officers in any of His Majesty's Plantations, or
Dominions Abroad, to whom respectively it shall appertain, shall delay the
Doing, Performing, Making, or Pronouncing any of the several Proceedings,
Matters, or Things, for, toward, or relating to Condemning, Penalty on Judges,
and other Officers who Delay, and not Perform their Duty in respect of
Releasing, or Condemning Captures etc.
or Discharging, Releasing, or Delivering of any such Capture, in Manner
aforesaid, within the respective Times herein before limited, or as soon as the
same, or any of them ought to be done, according to the Tenor, and true
Meaning of this Act, all, and every such Judge, and Judges, and other Officer,
or Officers shall for every such Offense forfeit the Sum of Five Hundred
Pounds: One moiety thereof to His Majesty, His Heirs, and Successors; the other
moiety thereof with full Costs of Suit, to such Person, or Persons who shall
Inform, or Sue for the same in any of the Courts in, or for any of His
Majesty's Colonies, or Plantations, or in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record
within His Kingdom of Great Britain.

And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall
not be Paid unto, or among all the Judges, and Officers of such Court of
Admiralty in any of His Majesty's Plantations, Their Allowance.
or Dominions Abroad, for, toward, or relating to the Adjudging, or Condemning
of such Capture, as aforesaid, as lawful Prize, above the Sum of Ten Pounds, in
case such Prize Ship, or Vessel be under the Burden of One Hundred Tons; nor
above the Sum of Fifteen Pounds, in case the same be of that, or any greater
Burden: And that upon Payment of either of the said respective Sums, as the
case shall require to the said Judge, or Judges, or any of them, to be by him,
or them disposed, or divided, as he, or they shall think fit, among the
Officers of such Court: Such Judges, and Officers, and every of them shall be
liable to all, and every the several Penalties hereby imposed for Neglecting,
or Delaying to do, and perform their several, and respective Duties, or Offices
in, and relating to the several Proceedings aforesaid, within the respective
Times herein for that purpose Limited.

Provided Nevertheless, A Proviso.
And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
Captor, or Captors, Claimant, or Claimants, shall not rest satisfied with the
Sentence given in such Court of Admiralty, in any of His Majesty's Plantations,
or Dominions Abroad, it shall, and may be Lawful for the Party, or Parties
thereby aggrieved, to Appeal from the said Court of Admiralty to the
Commissioners, Appointed, or to be Appointed under the Great Seal of Great
Britain, for Receiving, Hearing, and Determining Appeals in Causes of Prizes:
Such Appeal to be Allowed in the like manner as Appeals to such Commissioners
are now allowed from the Court of Admiralty within this Kingdom; so as the same
be made within Fourteen Days after Sentence, and a good Security be likewise
given by the Appellant, or Appellants that he, or they will effectually
prosecute such Appeal, and answer the Condemnation, and also pay Treble Costs
as shall be Awarded in case the Sentence of such Court of Admiralty be
Affirmed; any thing in this Act before to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided Always, Provided also.
That the Execution of any Sentence so Appealed from, as aforesaid, shall not
be Suspended by reason of such Appeal, in case the Party, or Parties Appellate,
shall give sufficient Security, to be Approved of by the Court in which said
Sentence shall be given, to Restore the Ship, Vessel, Goods, or Effects
concerning which such Sentence shall be Pronounced, or the full Value thereof
to the Appellant, or Appellants, in case the Sentence so Appealed from shall be
Reversed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Commander,
Commanders, Seamen. etc. breaking Bulk of any Prize, or Embezilling any of the
Money, etc. to forfeit Treble the Value.
or Commanders, Officer, or Officers, Seamen, Marines, Soldiers or Others,
shall break Bulk on Board, or Embezel any of the Money, Jewels, Plate, Goods,
Merchandise, Tackle, Furniture or Apparel, of, or belonging to such Prize, or
Prizes so Taken, such Commander, Officer, Seamen, Marine, Soldier or Others,
shall forfeit Treble the Value of all such Money, Jewels, Plate, Goods,
Merchandise, Tackle, Furniture, or Apparel, as he or they shall Embezel, one
Third part thereof to be to the use of Greenwich Hospital, and the other two
Third parts thereof to him, or them that will Sue for the same by Action of
Debt, Plaint, or Information, in any Court of Record in Great Britian, in which
no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law, or more than One Imparlance shall be
allowed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid That all Appraisements,
and Sales of any Ship, or Ships, Goods, Wares, or Merchandises, Appraisements
and Sales how made.
as shall be Taken by any of His Majesty's Ships of War, shall be made by
Agents, or Persons Nominated, and Appointed in equal Numbers, by the Commander,
Officer, or Ships Company, and others Entitled thereunto, ( That is to say,)
That if the Commander, or Commanders of such Ship or Ships as shall Take any
such Prize, or Prizes shall Nominate, and Appoint one, (or more) Person, or
Persons, Agent, or Agents to Sell, or Appraise the same, as aforesaid, then the
Officers Entitled thereunto, or the Majority of them, shall Nominate, and
Appoint the like Number of Persons, or Agents to Act for them, and the Ships
Company, and Others, or the Major part of them shall also Nominate, and Appoint
the same Number of Persons, or Agents to Act on their behalf in such
Appraisement, or Sale.

Provided, That nothing herein contained, shall Extend, or be Construed to
alter, Proviso.
or make void any Agreement, or Agreements, made or to be made in Writing
between the Owners, Officers, and Seamen of any private Ships, or Vessels of
War.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That after the Sale,
Public Notification to be made.
or Sales of such Prize, or Prizes as shall be Taken from the Enemy by any of
His Majesty's Ships of War, public Notification shall be given by the Persons,
or Agents appointed, as aforesaid, of the Day appointed for the payment of the
several Shares to the Captors, aforesaid; after which public Notification if
any Men's Share shall remain in the Hands of the Persons, or Agents appointed,
as aforesaid, and shall not be legally Demanded within Three Years, then such
Share, or Shares so remaining in the Persons, or Agents hands, shall go, and be
paid to the Use of Greenwich Hospital.

Provided Always, Provided also.
And be it Declared, and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That nothing
herein contained shall Extend, or be Construed to Extend, to Exempt any Ships,
Goods, Wares, or Merchandises, which shall be Taken as Prize, and brought, or
imported into this Kingdom, or any of His Majesty's Plantations in America,
from the payment of any Customs, or Duties, or from being subject to such
Restrictions, and Regulations to which the same now are, or shall hereafter be
liable, by Virtue of the Laws, and Statutes of this Realm.

And for the Encouraging His Majesty's Subjects to Engage in Joint, and United,
as well as Separate Expenses, Expeditions, and Adventures.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, His Majesty, His Heirs, etc
to grant Commissions to Persons to Attack and Destroy any Place by Land or
Vessel at Sea in America belonging to, or possessed by His Enemies.
That His Majesty be, and He, and His Heirs, and Successors are hereby
empowered, from time to time, during the Continuance of the present, or any
future War, to grant, or make any Charters Commissions, or Grants for the
better, or more effectual Enabling any Society, or Societies, or particular
Persons to Join in any Expeditions, or Adventures by Sea, or Land, and to Sail
to, and in any of the Seas in America, for the Attacking, Surprising, Taking,
or Destroying any Ships, Goods, Movables, and Immoveables, Settlements,
Factories, Creeks, Harbors, Places of Strength, Lands, Forts, Castles, and
Fortifications now belonging, or hereafter to belong to, or to be Possessed by
any Enemy of His Majesty, His Heirs, or Successors, in any Part, or Parts of
America.

And for the better Making, and Carrying on any Preparations for such Purpose,
and Purposes, and for the Making, and Assuring to the Societies, and Persons
which may be Concerned, their Heirs, Successors, Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, full, and undoubted Properties, Rights, and Titles, of, in, and to,
and the full Enjoyment of all, and every the Ships, Ammunition, Stores of War,
Goods, Chattels, Movables, and Immoveables, Settlements, Factories, Places of
Strength, or Security, Lands, Forts, Castles, or Fortifications now Belonging
to, or Possessed by or hereafter to Belong to, or to be Possessed by any Enemy
of His Majesty, His Heirs, or Successors, in any of the Parts of America, which
such Society, or Persons shall Take, or cause to be Taken from any such Enemy;
together with all the proceed Profits, and Advantages which may Accrue of, or
by the same, or any of them, with, and under such Regulations, and in such
Manner, and Form as His Majesty, His Heirs, and Successors shall think Fit, and
at any Time, or Times afterward by any further Grants, Such as Take etc. to
have the full Benefit*
or Charters to Confirm, Corroborate, and farther Assure the Premises, and
every, or any of them, to the said Societies, or Persons concerned, their, and
every of their Heirs, Successors, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, so as
to Enable them, and every of them to Have, Hold, and Enjoy the full Benefit
thereof according to the true Intent, and Meaning of this Act; any Law,
Statute, Provision, or Declaration to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, Proviso.
That nothing shall be Contained in any Charter, Commission, or Grant made in
pursuance of this Act, to Exclude, or Restrain any of His Majesty's Subjects
from having a Full, and Free Trade to, and in any Part of America.

And as a further Encouragement to the Officers, Seamen, Marines, Soldiers,
and Others, on Board His Majesty's Ships of War, as also of Privateers, to
Attack, Take, and Destroy any Ship of Force belonging to the Enemy.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be paid by the
Treasury of His Majesty's Navy, upon Bill to be made forth by the Commissioners
of the Navy, to be paid according to the Course thereof, Five Pounds to be paid
by the Treasurer of His Majesty's Navy, to every Person on Board any of His
Majesty's Ships of War, who shall Take, or Destroy any Vessel belonging to the
Enemy.
without Fee, or Reward, unto the Officers, Seamen, Marines, Soldiers, or
Others, that shall have been Actually on Board such of His Majesty's Ship, or
Ships of War, or Privateer, or Privateers, in any Action where any Ship, or
Ships of War, or Privateers, shall have been Taken from the Enemy* Sunk, Burnt,
or otherwise Destroyed, Five Pounds for every Man which was Living on Board any
Ship, or Ships so Taken, Sunk, Burnt, or otherwise Destroyed, at the beginning
of the Engagement between them: The Numbers of such Men to be Proved by the
Oaths of Three, or more of the Chief Officers, or Men which were belonging to
the said Ship, or Ships of War, or Privateers, of the Enemy at the time of her,
or their being Taken as Prize, Sunk, Burnt, or otherwise Destroyed, before the
Mayor, or other Chief Magistrate of the Port, or whereunto any Prize, or
Officers, or Men of such Ships, as were Sunk, Burnt, or otherwise Destroyed
shall be brought; which Oaths the said Mayor, or other Chief Magistrate of any
such Port is hereby Empowered, and Required to Administer; and shall forthwith
grant a Certificate thereof, without Fee, or Reward, directed to the
Commissioners of the Navy, upon producing which Certificate to the
Commissioners of His Majesty's Navy, together with an authentic Copy of the
Condemnation of such Ship so Taken; or if such Ship be Sunk, Burnt, or
otherwise Destroyed, on (...) a Certificate from the Mayor, or other Chief
Magistrate, as (...), the said Commissioners of His Majesty's Navy, or such
Person, or Persons as they shall appoint for that Purpose, shall according to
the Course of the Navy, within Fifteen Days make out Bills for the amount of
such Bounty, directed to the Treasury of the Navy, Payable to, and to be
Divided amongst the Officers, Seamen, Marines, and Soldiers on Board His
Majesty's Ships of War, in Manner, Form, and Proportion as by His Majesty's
Proclamation to be Issued for that purpose shall be directed, and appointed;
and amongst the Owners, Officers, and Seamen of any Private Vessel, or Ship of
War in such Manner, and Proportion as by any Agreement in Writing they shall
have Entered into for that purpose shall be directed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Bill, or Bills
to be made out for the Bounty hereby granted to the Commanders, To be paid to
themselves, or to their Agents.
Officers, Seamen, Marines, Soldiers and Others of His Majesty's Ships of War,
for Taking, Sinking, Burning, or otherwise Destroying any Ships of War, or
Privateers, belonging to any of His Majesty's Enemies, shall be made Payable to
such Person, or Persons as shall be Authorized, and Appointed by the Commander,
and by the majority of the Officers, and the major Part of such Ships Company,
and Others that shall have Taken, Sunk, Burnt, or otherwise Destroyed the same;
to be Distributed, and Divided by the said Person, or Persons so Authorized,
and Appointed amongst the Captors, in such Manner, Form, and Proportion, as
aforesaid: The several Shares of which Captors, if not Legally Demanded within
Three Years after public Notification, shall be applied to the Use of Greenwich
Hospital; and that the Bill, or Bills to be made out for the Bounty hereby
granted to Privateers for Taking, Sinking, Burning, or otherwise Destroying any
Ships of War, or Privateers belonging to any of His Majesty's Enemies, shall be
made Payable to such Person, or Persons as shall be Nominated, and Appointed by
the Owner, or Owners, Officers, and Seamen of such Privateer, or Privateers who
shall have Taken, Sunk, Burnt, or otherwise Destroyed the same, or the major
part of them; to be Divided in such Manner, and Proportion as shall have been
Agreed by them, as aforesaid.

Provided Nevertheless, And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, A
Proviso.
That nothing herein contained shall Extend, or be Construed to Extend, to
Oblige, or Authorize any Judge of any of His Majesty's Courts of Admiralty in
the Plantations, or Colonies in America, or elsewhere out of Great Britain, to
Adjudge, or Determine concerning the Validity of the Capture of any Ship, or
Ships, whether Men of War, or Merchant Ships, commonly called Flota Ships, or
Galleons, or any Ship having a Register Bound from Buenos Airs, or Handuras,
or any Goods on Board any such Ship; but that all such Ships called Flota
Ships, or Galleons, and every Ship having a Register, Bound from Buenos Airs,
or Handuras, which shall be Taken by any Ship, or Ships, shall with their
Cargoes be Tried, and Adjudged in His Majesty's High Court of Admiralty; Any
thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided Always, And be it Enacted, That if any Ship, Vessel, or Boat,
Provided also.
Taken as Prize, or any Goods therein shall Appear, and be Proved in the Court
of Admiralty, to be Belonging to any of His Majesty's Subjects of Great
Britain, or Ireland, or any of the Dominions, and Territories remaining, and
continuing under His Majesty's Protection, and Obedience, which were before
Taken, or Surprised by any of His Majesty's Enemies, and afterward again
Surprised, and Re-taken by any of His Majesty's Ships of War, or any Private
Men of War, or other Ship, Vessel, or Boat under His Majesty's Protection, or
Obedience, that then such Ships, Vessels, Boats, and Goods, and every such
part, and parts thereof, as aforesaid Belonging to such His Majesty's Subjects,
shall be adjudged to be Restored, and shall by Decree of the said Court
accordingly Restored to such former Owner, or Owners, or Proprietors, he, or
they paying for, and in Lieu of Salvage, if taken by one of His Majesty's Ships
of War, an Eighth part of the true Value of the Ships, Vessels, Boats, and
Goods respectively, so to be Restored: Which Salvage shall be answered, and
paid to the Captains, Officers, and Seamen in the said Man of War; to be
Divided in such Manner as before in this Act is directed touching the Share of
Prizes belonging to the Flag-Officers, Captains, Officers, Seamen, Marines, and
Soldiers, where Prizes are Taken by any of His Majesty's Ships of War; and if
Taken by a Privateer, or other Ship, Vessel, or Boat, after having been in the
Possession of the Enemy Twenty-four Hours, an Eighth part of the true Value of
the said Ships, Vessels, Boats, and Goods; and if above Twenty-four Hours, and
under Forty-eight Hours, a Fifth part thereof; and if above Forty-eight Hours,
and under Ninety-six Hours, a Third part thereof: All which Payments to any
Privateer, or other Ship, Vessel, or Boat, shall be without any Deductions: And
if such Ship so Retaken shall appear to have been after the Taking by the
Enemy, by them set forth as a Man of War, the former Owners, or Proprietors to
whom the same shall be Restored, shall be Adjudged to pay, and shall pay for
Salvage, the full Moiety of the true value of the said Ship so Taken, and
Restored, without Deduction, as aforesaid, any Law, Custom, or Usage to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted, That in case any Ship, or Vessel, or any Good,
Ships, or Vessels Taken by Collusion, etc
or Merchandises, shall be Taken by any Privateer, through Consent, or
Clandestinely, or by Collusion, or Connivance, such Ship, and Vessel, and such
Goods, and Merchandises, and also the Ships Tackle, Apparel, Furniture, and
Ammunition of such Privateer, shall upon Proof thereof to be made in His
Majesty's Court of Exchequer, or in the Court of Admiralty, to be Declared, and
Adjudged to be good Prize to His Majesty: One moiety thereof shall be to the
Use of His Majesty, His Heirs, and Successors; and the other moiety to the Use
of such Person who shall Discover, and Sue for the same: And the Bond given by
the Captain of such Privateer, shall be, and is hereby adjudged to be Forfeited
to His Majesty.

And in case any such Ship, or Vessel, or any Goods, or Merchandise, If so by a
Man of War, etc.
as aforesaid, shall be Taken by any Man of War, through Consent Clandestinely,
or by Collusion, or Connivance of the Commander, or Captain, such Commander, or
Captain shall Forfeit the Sum of One Thousand Pounds: One moiety thereof to the
Use of His Majesty, His Heirs, and Successors; and the other Moiety to the Use
of such Person who shall Discover, and Sue for the same: To be Recovered by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, in any of His Majesty's Court of
Record, wherein no Essoign, Protection, Privilege, or Wager of Law, or any more
than one Imparlance shall be allowed; and such Captain, or Officer shall
forfeit his Command, and Employment, and shall be and is hereby Dis-abled, and
made incapable of any Office, or Employment under His Majesty, during the space
of Seven Years.

And the said Goods, and Merchandises, and the Ships Tackle, Apparel,
Furniture, Guns, and Ammunition so Taken by Collusion, shall be and is hereby
adjudged to be good Prize to His Majesty.

And Whereas good, and necessary Laws have been Made, and still are in Force
within several of His Majesty's Colonies, or Plantations in America, for the
preventing the Carrying off from the said Colonies, or Plantations, any
Servant, or Slave without the Consent of the Owner; or the Carrying off from
thence any other Person, or Persons whatsoever, until such Person have taken
out his Ticket from the Secretary's Office within such respective Colony, or
Plantation, in such Manner, and under such Penalties, and Forfeitures as in,
and by the said several Laws is Declared, and Provided.

Be it therefore further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Commanders of Private Ships of War, Letters of Marque going into any Port, to
be subject to the Directions thereof
or Merchant Ships having Letters of Marque, shall upon their going into any of
those Ports, or Harbors, be Subject, and they are hereby determined to be
Subject to the several Directions, Provisions, Penalties, and Forfeitures in,
and by such Laws Made, and Provided, any Thing in this Act contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.


