AN EXAMINATION OF Mr. Hobart's Second Address.

A CONTINUATION OF THE Calm and Dispassionate VINDICATION OF THE PROFESSORS OF
THE Church of England, AGAINST THE abusive Misrepresentations and fallacious
Argumentations of Mr. NOAH HOBART, in his second ADDRESS to them. Humbly
offered to the Consideration of the good People of NEW ENGLAND.

By John Beach, A. M. Minister of the first Church of CHRIST in Reading.

1 Pet. iii. 19. Not rendering Evil for Evil, or Railing for Railing.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by D. FOUL in Queen Street, next to the Prison. 1751.

BOOKS sold by D. Foul in Boston.
Dr. WATTS's Orthodoxy and Charity United: In several Reconciling Essays, on
the Law and Gospel, Faith and Works; viz. ESSAY I. The Substance or Matter of
the Gospel. II. The Form of the Gospel. III. The Use of the Law under the
Gospel. IV. Mistaken Ways of coming to God without Christ. V. A plain and easy
Account of Saving Faith, etc. VI. A Reconciling Thought on various
Controversies about Faith and Salvation. VII. Against Uncharitableness. VIII.
The Difficulties in Scripture, and the different Opinions of Christians. IX. An
Apology for Christians of different Sentiments.

Meditations and Contemplations. In two Volumes. Containing VOL. I. Mediations
among the Tombs. -- Reflections on a Flower-Garden. -- And a Descant on
Creation. -- VOL. II. Contemplations on the Night. -- Contemplations on the
Starry Heavens; -- And a Winter-Piece, By JAMES HERVEY, A. B. Late of
Lincoln-College, Oxford. The Eighth Edition.

A Summary, Historical, and Political, Of the First Planting, progressive
Improvements, and present State of the British Settlements in North America;
with some transient Accounts of the Bordering French and Spanish Settlements.

By WILLIAM DOUGLASS, M. D.

A Continuation of the Calm and Dispassionate Vindication, etc.
DISPUNTING on Points on Religion would be one of the most pleasant as well as
profitable Entertainments of this imperfect State, if those who engage in
Controversy would be but careful to maintain that good Nature and Charity, that
benevolent and kind Regard to their Antagonists, which Christianity obliges us
to show toward all Men: If a sincere Zeal for Truth, and a fervent Love to one
another did direct and animate our Enquiries and Disquisitions, they would
certainly bring us nearer to one another in our Sentiments, if not cause us all
to think and speak the same Things.

But if, instead of offering the Reasons of our Opinions with Meekness, and
speaking the Truth in Love, we use the most provoking and insulting Language we
can invent, and rake every Dunghill to find Scandal to fling at our
Adversaries, and care not whether it be true or fa^^^, so it be but spiteful
and disgraceful, if instead of rectifying their Mistakes we try to blast the
Reputation of those who differ from us, and represent them as hateful and
ridiculous, as Men of no Conscience or Reason, and strain their Expressions to
such an ill Sense as was never intended; though this kind of managing
Controversy may make Sport for Fools, yet it must needs do a World of Mischief
by souring Men's Tempers, and propagating Malice and Ill Nature, which is the
very Temper of the Devils; and so making Men much more the Children of Hell,
than they would be, if they did remain ignorant of the Truth in Contest.

We never have more need to remember the Command of our Blessed Master, to love
our Enemies, and to bless them that curse us, than while we are engaged with
such an unfair Disputant, especially if his Malice and Falsehood be masked with
Saintship and a pretended Zeal for Piety.

I am sensible Mr. Hobart has the Advantage of me both as to his Matter and
Manner of Writing; his Business is to load us with Reproaches, and once in a
while to show the Sprightliness of his Wit by breaking of a bitter Jest upon
us: And it is an old Observation, that Satyrs are more eagerly entertained, and
read with more Applause than Vindications. And the Spectator observes, Ill
Nature among ordinary Observes, passes for Wit. A spiteful Saying gratifies so
many little Passions in those who hear it, that it generally meets with a good
Reception. The Laugh rises upon it, and the Man who uttered it, is looked upon
as a shrewd Satyrist. But I am so near to that World in which all are serious,
that I shall leave him in the quiet Possession of that sort of Arguments. I
shall likewise overlook most of his personal Reflections, and cruel Mockings,
which his Friend Mr. Dickinson, says, are as really Persecution as Bonds and
Imprisonments, P. 168. And shall directly come to the Point in Dispute.

The Controversy lies chiefly in these three Points.

I. Whether there can be any true Ministers of JESUS CHRIST without a
Succession? II. Whether the Succession in the Church of England has ever been
broken? III. Whether the the Presbyterian Ministers in New England have
Authority from CHRIST by Successions?
To begin with the first of these, when I say, that there cannot be a lawful
Minister without an uninterrupted Succession; I mean, that in order to a Man's
being a lawful Minister, he must be ordained or appointed to that Office by
some Men who have received Authority to ordain, and they who have not received
such Authorrity, can not constitute and Ambassador of Christ; and this
Authority to ordain since the Apostles Time, is not immediately from Heaven,
but by Men. And it is not material whether the Ordainers be called Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, or by any other Name, if they have had the Power of
Ordination committed to them it is sufficient.

To prove this I cited Mr. Law's Reasoning, which I esteem as clear a
Demonstration as such Truths are capable of; who says thus "If there be no
Succession of Person authorized from CHRIST to send others to act in his Name,
then both Episcopal and Presbyterian Preachers are equally Usurpers, and as
mere Laymen as any at all. For there cannot be any other Difference between the
Clergy and Laity, but as the one has Authority derived from CHRIST, to perform
Offices, which the other has not. But this Authority can be no otherwise had,
than by an uninterrupted Succession of Men from CHRIST, empowered to qualify
others. For if the Succession be once broke, People must either go into the
Ministry of their own Accord, or be sent by such as have no more Power to send
others than to go themselves. And can these be called Ministers of CHRIST, or
received as his Ambassadors? Can they be thought to act in his Name, who have
no Authority from him? If so, then every christian Slave, may ordain to as good
Purpose as the best Bishop in Old England or New. For it can only be objected
to such Actions, that they had no Authority from CHRIST. And if there be no
Succession of Ordainers from CHRIST, every one is equally qualified to ordain.
-- The Administering a Sacrament is an Action we have no Right to perform,
considered either as Men, Gentlemen, or Scholars, or Members of the civil
Society. Who then can have any Authority to interpose, but he that has it from
CHRIST? And how that can be had from him, without a Succession of Men from him,
is not easily conceived. Should a private Person choose a Lord Chancellor, and
declare his Authority good; would there be any Thing but Absurdity, Impudence
and Presumption in it? But why he cannot as well Commission a Person to act,
sign and seal in the King's Name, as in the Name of CHRIST, is unaccountable.

The Ministers of CHRIST are as much positive Ordinances as the Sacraments, and
we might as well think, that Sacraments no instituted by him, might be means of
Grace, as those past for his Ministers, who have no Authority from him.

Once more, all Things are either in Common in the Church of CHRIST, or they
are not: if they are, then every one may Preach, Baptize, Ordain, etc. If all
Things are not thus common, but the administering the Sacraments and Ordination,
etc. are Offices appropriated to particular Persons, then I desire to know,
how, in the present Age, or any other since the Apostles, Christians can know
their respective Duties, or what they may or may not do, with respect to the
several Acts of Church Communion, if there be no uninterrupted Succession of
Persons authorized from CHRIST? For till Authority from CHRIST appears to make
a Difference between them, we are all alike, and any one may ossiciate as well
as another. Therefore to make a Jest of the uninterrupted Succession, is to
make a Jest of Ordiantion, to destroy the sacred Character, and to make all
Pretenders to it, as good as those who are sent by CHRIST.

Now what Answer has Mr. Hobart returned to this Reasoning? Alas, he has past
it over in profound Silence. But why was this Neglect? Certainly it could not
be an oversight, for it was the first Argument that stared him in the Face.
Neither was it for want of Time or Paper, for after above a Year of
Preparation, he has sent us a large Piece of 172 Pages, pretending that it is
an Answer to our Reasons for our not being Dissenters; and yet the most
material are entirely overlooked. Or lastly, did he think this Reasoning to be
too weak and childish for him to take Notice of it? No, surely, for the weaker
he accounts any Part of our Discourse, the more he labor to expose it to
Contempt. It remains therefore that the only Reason must be, that he knew it
was unanswerable: and therefore the wisest Course was to pass by it in Silence;
in which Manner he has treated most of our Arguments. But if he had answered
this one single Argument effectually, it would have been of infinitely more
Value than all his great Book without it. Had he cleared up but this one Point,
and showed how a Man who has no Authority from CHRIST, can constituted a true
Ambassador for him, I would have returned him my hearty Thanks, and have joined
immediately with the Dissenters, although I believe they have no Mission from
CHRIST. But to be pestered and teased from Time to Time with long and virulent
Addresses, urging us to become Dissenters with such vehement Importunity, as
though all we are worth to Eternity, as well as the Salvation of the Heathen
World did depend upon it; and yet at the same Time not to afford one faint
Endeavor to remove the Obstacle out of the Way; really Mr. Hobart, this looks
a little disingenuous. Indeed, I blame no Man for not doing Impossibilites, as
this is: I only blame him for boasting so often that he had confuted us, when
he knew, that our chief Arguments not only remained untouched, but were really
unanswerable. But though he cannot answer our plain Reasons for the Necessity
of a Succession, yet he thinks to bear us down by Authorities. Whereas I must
let him know, that ten Thousand Authorities in Matters of Religion are not
equivalent to one plain Reason. And it will not excuse my living in Error and
Sin, to say, it was agreeable to the Opinion of such a Divine, or such a
Church. Reason is the Birth Right of every Man, for the using of which he must
be be accountable to the Author of it.

However we will allow the Opinion of others its proper Weight and Influence.
The first Authority he cites, is Article XXIII, of the Churh of England, which
runs thus, It is not lawful for any Man to take upon him the Office of public
Preaching, or ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be
lawfully called and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge
lawfully called and sent, which be chosen and called to this Work by Men who
have public Authority given into the Lord's Vineyard.

You will now easily perceive that this Article asserts the Necessity of a
Succession in the same Sense as I have done, if you observe, that the World
Congregation, when these Articles were composed, was used in a different Sense
from what is annexed to it at this Day. A Congregation now denotes a Number of
Christians who can meet to Worship in one Place, but in these Articles it
signifies the whole Catholic Church dispersed all over the Earth; as you may
see in Article XIX, where the Catholic Church is thus defined, The visible
Church of CHRIST is a Congregation of faithful Men, etc. Now, says this
Article, none are to be accounted lawful Ministers unless they have had an
Ordination by such Men as have received an outward Commission or Authority in
the Church, impowering them to call and send others. And he who is ordained by
such Men, who never had public Authority committed unto them in the Church, to
call and send Ministers into the LORD's Vineyard, he is no lawful Minister.
From hence it follows, that where there is no Succession, there is no lawful
Minister, and where the Ordainers never received Authority to call and send
others, there the Ordination is a Nullity. Thus, if the Bishop who ordained me
had received no Authority to ordain, then I am no lawful Minister, and the same
is true of him, if his Ordainers had not received public Authority, and the
same holds true in all Ages. So that the Line of Succession must reach up to
the Apostles, otherwise there can be no lawful Ministry. So that according to
this Article, the Presbyterian or Independent Ministers of New England are no
lawful Ministers, for that Set of Priests who separated from the Church of
England and ordained them, never had received public Authority in the Church
to ordain or send others; whatever Authority they used, it was assumed or
stolen, no such public Authority was ever committed to them. These Ministers
therefore entered not in by the Door, but climbed up another Way. How unlucky
was Mr. Hobart in producing this Article for Proof, that a Succession is
unnecessary?

His next Evidence is Archbishop Laud, P. 57. who says, I do not find any one
of the ancient Fathers that makes the local, personal, visible and a continued
Succession, a necessary Sign or Mark of the true Church in any one Place.

But pray, what Succession is this, which he says is not necessary? Is it a
Succession in the Christian Priesthood or Ministry? No certainly: but a local,
personal, visible, continued Succession of the Church, i. e. in one Place:
This, be says, is not necessary, or a Mark of its being true. Thus, although
there has not been a visible continued Succession of what we call a Protestant
Church in England in the Times of Popery, yet that is no certain Mark of Sign
that this Protestant Church is not a true Church. This, I suppose was in Answer
to the Papists, who incessantly demand, Where was your Protestant Church before
Luther? But how impertinent was this to the Case before us? Dare Mr. Hobart
say, that Archbishop Laud was of Opinion that the apostolic or ministerial
Authority was lost in England in the Times of Popery? Had he taught such
Doctrine as this, I dare say, the Red hot Zealots would not have cut off his
Head for his Popery: nor would Mr. Neal, and other Dissenters at this Day speak
of him as being more than a Devil. Surely he was hard put to it, to find
Evidences, otherwise he would not have produced such impertinent ones as these,
and put them in Capitals.

It is difficult to bring all his Evidences together, they being scattered here
and there at a great Distance. But I think there is but one more, P. 78. He
cites Bishop Hoadly, saying, This regular uninterrupted Succession of Persons,
qualified and regularly ordained, is a Matter impossible to be proved, etc. And
there is a Certainty that this Succession has often been interrupted. In
answer to which I would observe, his Lordship uses the Words, This regular
uninterrupted Succession, in the Sense of the Non-Jurors, against whom he was
writing: and therefore this Evidence is nothing to the Purpose. We hold the
Necessity of a Succession in no other Sense than is expressed in Article xxiii.
of the Church of England; that is, that they who ordain others must have
Authority to do it, otherwise the Ordained are not lawful Ministers: Whereas
this Regular Succession which the Non-Jurors contended for is broken, when some
Bishops are deprived by the Civil Government, although they who succeed them are
ordained by Men who have public Authority so to do. Now this Regular
Succession (so called by the Non-Jurors) I freely own is not necessary; nay, it
is certain, it has been interrupted in several Instances. But then these
Interruptions (so called) have not at all impaired the Apostolic Authority
which is continued still by Ordinations performed by true Bishops. In other
Words, a Breach in the Non-Jurors Regular Successions, is no Breach at all in
the real Ministerial Succession by Ordination, which we believe to be necessary.

But if his Lordship really meant, (as I believe he did not) that they who
ordain others, may convey valid Orders, although they themselves have no
Authority to ordain; then I must beg leave to dissent, and reply in his own
Words, Defense of Episcopal Ordination, P. 406.
I hope he will not expect that I should be led by Authorities of modern
Authors, (when he himself has so often declared against it) in a Matter of
mere Judgment and Reasoning;or yield to great Names, without considering the
Grounds upon which their Assertions are built. The Grounds of the contrary
Judgment, I have already given: and his profound Silence in such an important
Point, is a tacit Acknowledgment, that it is unanswerable.

I grant, that as Men may use the World Succession in different Senses, and
view the Thing in different Lights, so there may be some Men of great Learning,
who taking it in the Sense of some Non-Jurors, may with Reason make a Jest of
it. But I Am inclined to think there is no sound Believer, much less learned
Bishop or Divine, who will say, that a Succession, (as I use the Word) is
unnecessary; or in other Words, that it is not necessary that they who ordain
should have Authority so to do: which is all I now plead for.

Lastly, I would observe, this same learned Divine, now Bishop of Winchester,
wrote a Treatise on Purpose to show the Necessity of those called Presbyterian
Ministers yielding to be ordained by true Bishops, in order to their being
accounted true Ministers; in which he has carried the Matter as high, and done
it as effectually as ever I could wish to see it done. And a Man's Judgment is
to be discovered by the professed Design of his Writing, and not by a single
Sentence separated from all the rest.

These are, I think, all the Authorities he has cited to prove the
Non-Necessity of a Succession in the Ministry; and whether they are sufficient,
I leave to the Reader to judge. I must confess it appears to me to be a very
odd Way of Proceeding, to quote Authorities and great Names to prove
Contradictions to be Truths, and Impossibilities to be real Facts, which is
really the Case here. For if a Succession be not necessary, but Men may be true
Ambassadors of CHRIST without it, then Men who have no Authority from CHRIST to
go themselves or to send others, yet have good Right to constitute Ambassadors
for him, and those so sent without any Authority, yet have good Authority to
Sign and Seal in CHRIST'S Name. Mr. Hobart has said a great deal, and with no
small degree of Assurance, which may serve to amuse the Reader and puzzle the
Cause, but every Man of plain common Sense may with a very little Pains be
fully satisfied where the Truth lies. When Mr. Hobart has tired himself with
laughing at the Succession, only ask him this plain Question; supposing the
Authority CHRIST gave to the Apostles is not contunied by a successive
Ordination, and that such a Thing is needless, how can one Man have a better
Right than another, to act in CHRIST'S Name, or as his Ambassador? If he should
say, some Men were ordained to that Office, but others were not: Ask him again,
how came these Ordainers to have more Power to Ordain than every Body else? To
this he must Answer, because they themselves had been ordained to the Ministry.
And the like Answer he must return till you come up to our Blessed LORD JESUS
who was the first Ordainer. In a Word, there is no Medium betwixt holding the
Necessity of a Succession, and laying the Ministry open and common, and
asserting the Lawfulness of Lay-Ordination.

Mr. Hobart is very angry with the New-Light Ministers, because they are not
ordained by Ministers, which he supposes to be the only Method that GOD has
appointed. And for that Reason he says, Christ will condemn them; and we should
not countenance or receive them. Now if the Succession ever was broke, and the
Apostolic Power lost, this must be the Case of all the Ministers who arose
after that Interruption, and began a new Succession, for there could be no
Ministers then to ordain them. And if all the Ministers, for Instance, a
Thousand Years ago, undertook the Ministry without an Ordination by Ministers,
we my do so again, and again; it is no Matter how often; for the Apostolic
Power being once lost, is lost for ever. And who in that Case has any Authority
to begin a new Ministry? If some have a Right to begin a new Succession, why
have not every one the like Right? Why not New-Lights as well as Old-Lights?
Indeed the Case is so exceeding plain and evident, that it should seem like an
Affront to a common Understanding to take any more Pains to prove, that a
Succession is necessary to make a lawful Minister.

I am very sorry to observe, that Mr. Hobart instead of confuting this sort of
Reasoning, has given himself an unaccountable Liberty to slander and
misrepresent us, and imputes to us such absurd Tenets as we never had the least
Inclination to. Thus in his former Address, he calls the peculiar Whims of the
Non-Jurors, our Darling Principles, P. 120. And he would have it understood,
that according to our Principles, the Civil Power had no Authority to deprive
the Nor-juring Bishops; with a great deal of the like Nature; which is so far
from being true, that I sincerely believe, that their Deprivation was both just
and necessary, and that the State had a Right not only to deprive, but to
banish them; as Solomon did Abiathar. For the State certainly has a Right to
defend and preserve etself, which it could not do, if its Enemies were allowed
to hold the highest Dignities in the Church.

The same untrue and unjust Representation of our Principles he constantly
makes in this last Address, ascribing any Tenets to us, which he can easily
confute, without any Regard to Truth or Justice.

Thus says he, We have already observed, that a Succession of the Ministry in
general will not satisfy Mr. Beach, but it is a Succession in the particular
Order of Bishops, as superior to Presbyters, which his Scheme makes necessary,
P. 47.

Which is so far from being true, that as I declared before, and he knew it, so
I say again, let the Ordainers be called Bishops, or Presbyters, or Deacons, or
Ruling Elders, or Pastors, let them be Superiors, or Inferiors, or all Equal,
it alters not the Case so far as the present Controversy is concerned: the only
Thing I insist upon here, is, that they who Ordain, should have received
Authority to send others, as our Article XXIII, requires.

And yet almost all Mr. Hobart's Discourse is pointed against this Tenet, which
he falsely ascribed to me. And therefore it is no Wonder he has done nothing
toward convincing me of my Error, if I am in one.

Again, he affirms, that according to me, the Laity in their Communion aree in
as bad a Situation, (as I should have been in if I had remained with them,
against the Dictates of my own Conscience,) For their Acceptance with GOD,
absolutely depends on such a Succession in the Ministry as they are wholly
destitute of. P. 27. If this be true, I have certainly damned every
Presbyterian and Independent in New England. And yet he often affirms that I
say that Men's Acceptance with GOD, absolutely depends upon this Succession.
And at the same Time it is so far from being true, that I hold nothing is
absolutely necessary on our Part, but only Holiness; I don't esteem the
Sacraments themselves to be absolutely necessary?

With what Conscience could Mr. Hobart charge me with this stingy and
uncharitable Opinion, when he saw with his own Eyes the clean Contrary in that
Paragraph, part of which he cites? P. 42, where I used these Words, Had I
remained with you, and had the same Sense of the Matter as I now have, and (I
think) cannot help but have, I fear I should have perished in the Gainsaying of
Core, Jude 11. -- In saying these Things, I don't judge, censure, or condemn
your Ministers, or mean to insinuate, that they cannot be saved. For that is a
Sin of Ignorance in another, which in me would be a damning Crime. I am far
from judging that your cannot be saved in your Way, though erroneous.

Does this look like making Men's Salvation absolutely to depend upon the
Succession? Does it appear like damning all the Dissenters; as he represents
it? He talks of using an honest Freedom; I Am thoroughly convinced of his using
Freedom enough, I only wish we could see some Sign of his Honesty. Let a Man
take that Freedom Mr. Hobart makes use of, and he will find no Difficulty to
triumph over any Antagonist, and answer any Arguments without ever coming near
them.

And as to his saying so often, that it is a dreadful Thing to venture our
Salvation upon a Succession, as we do; I can see no Sense in it: For we run no
Venture at all; but let it turn out which Way it will, we are as safe as they
can be. If GOD don't require us to attend to a Succession, then we have only
taken a little more Pains to please him than was necessary: But if our Opinion
be true, and GOD does require us to attend to the Succession; then such Men who
have despised and neglected it, will appear to have contracted no small Guilt.

This Case is very much like that of the Christian Religion; Infidels tell us,
that we venture our Souls upon the Truth of the Gospel, which perhaps may turn
out to be a mere Cheat. To whom we reply, we don't run any Hazard at all by
being Christians. For if the Gospel be a Fiction; our believing it to be true,
and living up to it, can do us no hurt. But if it be true, as we have
sufficient Reason to believe it is, then Unbelievers are in amazing Danger. So
it is here, our Salvation is not at all endangered by our believing and
regarding a Succession in the Ministry, No, it is the only Way to be (...) all
the Danger lies in neglecting it.

And how this can ^^^troy a Man's Comfort, (as he says) is quite above my
Comprehension: for we can consider, if there be a Succession, no Church on
Earth has a better Claim to it than the Church of England; And if there be no
Succession, or no need of it, then we are certainly safe, and in no Danger,
whether we have it or not. So that we have the Comfort of being safe, which is
no small Consolation. And every Man for the Peace of his own Conscience should
make a proper Enquiry, whether the Minister of whose Hands he receives the
Sacraments be indeed CHRIST'S Ambassador. And that Plea which some of the Laity
make for their Carelessness in this Affair, will not excuse their Sloth before
GOD, that is, let Ministers dispute this Point among themselves; it don't
belong to us to trouble our Heads about that Controversy, who are lawful
Ministers. For he who is qualified to serve on a Jury to try Men's Titles to an
Estate, cannot pretend that he is not capable to form a Judgment in this Case.
And to say that it will not be enquired in the Day of Judgment, whether we were
Church Men or Presbyterians, is not true; for we are accountable for our
careless Neglect of the least Truth that we might have known. And the more
diligent and faithful we have been to know, and do the Truth, the more
acceptable we shall be to our great Master.

As to his saying, that our Notion of a Succession tends to Infidelity, it is
equally groundless: for an uninterrupted Succession in the Ministry is a
standing Proof of the Truth of Christianity. But it tempts Men to despise the
Ministers of the Gospel, when they hear them call themselves CHRIST'S
Ambassadors, and pretend to be his Agents or Attorneys, to act, sign, and seal
in CHRIST'S Name and Stead; and yet know, that CHRIST never sent them, nor any
empowered by him. What Man of Sense can reverence such Pretenders as CHRIST'S
Representatives; when a Man cannot be a Attorney for the poorest Fellow in the
Land, without his own Act and Appointment? And when Ministers are despised, and
not esteemed as CHRIST'S Ambassadors, Religion etself will fall into Contempt
with them.

The only Argument, I think, which he produces to prove that there is no
Necessity of Succession, is the want of Evidence that in Fact there has been a
Succession. Now to prevent contending where we don't really deffer, I must
observe, that he asserts the Necessity of a Succession in the very same Sense
as I do. For, P. 55, 56, he affirms, a standing Ministry is an Ordinance of
CHRIST; which is the very same, as when I say, an uninterrupted Succession in
the Ministry is CHRIST'S Ordinance. He makes Imposition of Hands by Gospel
Ministers of Necessity to make a lawful Minister. And he says, it is disorderly
and sinful to depart from this Method, P. 56. Now by Gospel Ministers, he means
such as have the Power of Ordination, for he thinks all Gospel Minsters have
this Power. And this (say he) is sufficient to condemn the New-Light
Separatists with their Lay-Ordinations -- These disorderly Walkers have Reason
to expect that CHRIST, instead of owning them as his Ministers, will reject and
condemn them for acting contrary to his Will, discovered by the Practice and
Example of his Apostles, which he caused to be recorded for the Instruction of
his Church in all Ages. And the Direction given to the Churches of CHRIST, with
Regard to such disorderly and irregular Persons, is not to countenance, own or
receive them, but on the contrary to discountenance and censure them. Now if
this Doctrine be true, that CHRIST will condemn those who act as Ministers, and
yet are not ordained by the Imposition of commissionated Hands, as he affirms,
then it necessarily follows, that if this unlawful Minister who was ordained by
uncommissionated Hands Yester-day, should ordain a second Minster Today,
CHRIST will condemn him too; because all the Ministerial Acts of the first, are
disowned and condemned by CHRIST. And if this second unlawful Minister should
Tomorrow ordain a third, CHRIST will likewise disown and condemn him too. And
so on to the End, though they should continue this disorderly and irregular
Practice a hundred, or a thousand Years, yet CHRIST will never own them for his
Ministers; neither should his Churches countenance, but censure them.
Wickedness by a long Duration will not become a Virtue. Thus Mr. Hobart and I
are entirely agreed, in the Necessity of a Succession; only he is too much of a
High-Flier for me, and is too rigid and severe toward them who have no
Succession; for he boldly affirms that CHRIST will reject and condemn them:
Whereas I hope CHRIST will pardon their Mistakes and Irregularities, and accept
of their Sincerity; though at the same Time I should not dare to venture upon
such an unlawful Practice, nor countenance those who do, and that is the Reason
of my leaving the Dissenters. You see now, that after all Mr. Hobart's
Exclamations against a Succession, he differs from me about it in nothing but
only in being more uncharitable, stingy and severe toward those who have it
not.

If one were disposed to be merry, it would be really diverting to observe how
much Pains he takes to seem to differ from me; and yet after all his Toil and
Sweat, he cannot get one Inch from my Opinion. He delivers his Opinion thus, P.
56. Upon the whole; to make Ordination, meaning thereby, Imposition of
commissionated Hands, necessary in Point of Order, is a different Thing from
making it essential to the ministerial Character.

And yet just before in the same Page he had said, that it is sinful and
disorderly to neglect such Ordination: that CHRIST will not own such as do
neglect it for his Ministers, but reject and condemn them, and the Churches
should not countenance, own, or receive them, but discountenance and censure
them. Now if it be not essential to a Minister, that he should not enter upon
the Work in a sinful and disorderly Manner, but come in at the Door, if it be
not essential to a Minster, that he should be so ordained, as that CHRIST will
own him for his Minister, and not reject and condemn him; if it be not
essential to the ministerial Character, that he who pretends to it should be so
authorized as that the Churches should not be obliged to disown,
discountenance, and censure him; I say, if this be not essential, I wonder what
is. But upon the whole, this I must say, let it be essential or circumstantial,
I don't think it safe to be in such Ministers Condition; since Mr. Hobart says
himself, CHRIST will not own but condemn them; and for fear of that I chose to
be ordained by commissionated Hands.

And indeed you may try it every Way, and as long as you please; and after all,
you will find it impossible to condemn the New-Light Ministry, without
asserting the Succession. For what is wanting in their Ministry, but only that
they who ordained them, had no Commission for it? And can we imagine that when
a Man is ordained without any Authority, yet that he himself should have good
Authority to ordain? Or that his Successor should have it, though he had not?
No surely. But as in Arithmetic, a thousand Noughts in a Row make no Sum; so a
thousand such Ordinations succeeding one another, will not make one lawful
Minister, but CHRIST may condemn the last as well as the first.

But to help Mr. Hobart's Charity toward the New-Light Ministers, whom he in
Scorn to us, calls our Brethren, I can tell him, that they are nearer akin to
him than he is aware; for by conversing with some of them, I find, that they
have a Mixture of a Presbyterian Ordination with their Lay-Orders, and some
Ministers have laid their Hands on them together with the Brethren; so that
within a little Time the Leathern-Mitten will be quite worn out with them too;
and theirs will become very good and substantial Presbyterian Ordination.

I come now to another Part of the Argument. I had said, that GOD made it the
Duty of the Israelites to attend to the Succession in the Levitical Ministry,
and it is equally necessary to attend to the Succession in the Gospel Ministry,
and there is as much if not more Evidence to direct us as to the Gospel
Succession, than there was to direct them about the Levitical. In Answer to
this, he allows, that there was a Succession in that Ministry and Priesthood;
But then he says, it was a legal Succession, and it had a legal Proof, P. 62,
64, 65. But still he very much defies that we should pretend, that there is as
clear Evidence of a Succession under the Gospel, as there was under the Law.
Here then let us join Issue, and if I cannot prove that there is the same kind
of Evidence of the Succession under the Gospel, as there was under the Law, and
if I cannot produce as good Proof that I was ordained by one who had Authority
from the Apostles by a successive Ordination, as an ordinary Priest at Christ's
Birth could show for his Descent from Aaron, then I Will contentedly bear his
Reproach of Enthusiasm. To begin, he says, that the Aaronical Priests had a
good legal Proof, and they had only a legal Succession. And the same I say of
the Succession under the Gospel; a hidden and secret Succession, and invisible
and secret Defects which are known only to GOD, I have no Concern with: secret
Things belong unto GOD. What does not appear, is not. But what legal Proof had
the Aaronical Priests at the Time of CHRIST'S coming in the Flesh? Why, he
tells us, P. 64. Authentic Registers of the Sacerdotal Family were kept among
the Jews as long, and with as great Care as those of the Royal Family. And this
is the whole of his legal Proof. And if I should allow it to be altogether
true, it would not amount to any Proof at all, that these Priests were Aaron's
Descendents; for he don't pretend that these Registers were kept longer than
those of the Royal Family: and it was several hundred Years after Aaron's Death
before there was any Royal Family: How then could any Man know what
Interruptions might happen in the Priesthood between the Death of Aaron and the
reign of King David?

But that we may not be amused with empty Words, it is necessary that we should
consider, what is meant by authentic Registers, kept of all the Descendents of
Levi. And doubtless it must mean, that among the Israelites there were Officers
sworn to record every Male Child of the Tribe of Levi, and that this Practice
was begun in Aaron's Life Time, and without any Interruption continued in all
Places and in all Times of their Apostasy, Captivity and Dispersions till
CHRIST came. If Mr. Hobart has Credulity enough to believe this to be fact, he
cannot meet with any difficulty in believing all the Jewish Fables and Oral Law,
or all the Legends of Rome.

I grant, that the Jews some times made Registers, and so has the Christian
Church much more. Every Bishop in England, has his Name in more than one
authentic Register. Nay every Priest and Deacon is registered. But then
neither these nor the Jewish Registers are everlasting; but by accidents may be
destroyed. The Text he cites to prove that the Jews kept Registers is a full
Proof of this. Ezra ii. 61, 62. The Children of Barzillai, which took a Wife of
the Daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called after their Name:
These sought their Register among those who were reckoned by Genealogy, but
they were not found. Upon this Text, Dr. Patrick observes, this Person,
whosoever he was, thought it so great an Honor to be descended from such a
noble Family as that of Barzillai, that he chose to be called by that Name,
which he preferred before his own in the Family of the Priests: By which vain
Ambition he lost his Title to the Priesthood, because he could not make out his
Pedigree from the Priests, but from Barzillai. From hence it is evident, that
though the Jews sometimes made Registers of their Priests, yet they did not
constantly do so. No such Thing was done in their Captivity: And the Registers
they had before the Captivity, when the City and Temple were burnt, and the
Remains of the People in the utmost Confusion carried Captive, even these were
burnt or otherwise lost; at least in great Part. So that upon their return from
Babylon they must know who were Priests by their retaining the Names of those
who had formerly executed the Priest Office in the Temple. So that if this Man
had not exchanged his own Name in the Family of the Priests for his Wives more
honorable Name, though he had no Register to show, yet he would not have been
put by the Priesthood. Registers they often had, which in all Probability were
made by the help of Tradition, some hundred Years after some of the Persons
named in them were dead. And the Christian Church abounds with such authentic
Registers. If you should ask how the Israelites could know, who belonged to the
Royal, who to the Aaronical Family, and so to every Tribe and Family in order
to their quiet Enjoyment of the Land which GOD gave them by Lot; if there were
no authentic Registers kept, how could they know, what Land, or what Offices
belonged to each Man? I answer, they knew it by Possession, by Tradition, by
their retaining the Names of their several Families, as other Nations do; but
much less by authentic Registers and public Records kept under Oath, than we
do. And GOD never had appointed this Method; and if he did, they were far from
carefully observing it. The ignorant and barbarous Indians, know very well, who
among them are Sachems by Descent, and they have good legal Proof of it,
without keeping authentic Registers. And the Israelites in the Time of their
Idolatry and Ignorance used no better Methods to preserve the Pedigree of their
Priests clear, than the Indians do that of their Sachems, neither were they so
careful and zealous about it, as will evidently appear, if we consider, how
often they forsook the true GOD, and fell into the most sottish Idolatry. Among
the ten Tribes, from the Division of the Kingdom till their final Captivity,
any Body was allowed to execute the Priests Office: It is therefore certain no
authentic Registers of the true Priests were kept among them. In Judah, often,
and for a long Time together, the Priest's Work was entirely laid aside, and
they undistinguished from common Men. Nay so little Regard had they for the
true Religion, that the Bible itself was not known among them. And when one was
found, both the high Priest and King were mightily surprised at what was
contained in it. Now can we suppose, that they were extremely careful to keep
Registers of all the Males born in the Tribe of Levi, when they were so stupid
and careless as to lose the Holy Bible, which contained all their Religion? Did
ever such stupid Negligence and sottish Ignorance obtain in the Christian
Church? It is true, the Christian Church did decline from their first Purity
and Zeal; and the Western Church fell into Superstition and Idolatry: yet never
were they without many Thousand Copies of the Holy Scriptures. Never was the
Christian Church so careless, as to suffer Men to perform the sacred Offices
unless they had been ordained by commissionated Hands. Records and Histories of
every Age since Christ's Ascension, afford a good legal Proof of this. But can
we imagine, that the Jews were careful to keep the Priesthood pure and unmixt,
and authentic Registers, of all who were born to it, when they had no Worship
of GOD at all among them; and were resolved never to have again? For what End
should they preserve the Priesthood pure, when they never intended to make any
Use of it? I may appeal to any Man who is not under the Influence of some
Enthusiastic Instinct, whether it is probable, that the Israelites kept
authentic Registers of the true Priests, when there was no King in Israel, and
every Man did what was right in his own Eyes? As Micah who himself ordained his
own Son, and then a Levite for a Priest, when the whole Nation had lost the
Kowledge of GOD and his Priesthood, and are thus described, 2 Chronicles. xv. 3. Now
for a long Season Israel has been without the true GOD, and without a teaching
Priest, and without Law. That Nation for a long Time was sunk into such
Ignorance and Stupidity, that it is more probable, that not one Priest in a
Thousand could either read or write, than that they kept authentic Registers
of all who were born to the Priesthood. And one might almost as well look for
authentic Registers among the wild Indians, as to expect to find them in those
Ages of Darkness, Confusion and Irreligion among the Israelites.

How can it be thought, that this People were so exceeding careful to keep
authentic Registers of all their Priests and their Children, when there was no
officiating Priests among them, and they never intended that there should be
any? Yet this was often, for a long Time together the State of the Jewish
Church. But was this, or any thing like it ever the Case of the Christian
Church; or of the Church of England? Certainly it was not. But there always has
been a Standing and officiating Ministry. In a Word, whatever good legal Proof
he shall find for the Aaronical Succession, the same in kind, and much clearer
I will produce for the Succession under the Gospel. But when he insinuates that
the Jewish Priests at Christ's Time could all of them produce authentic
Registers of their Pedigree reaching up to Aaron, I must use the honest Freedom
to tell him it is not only perfect Fiction and Romance, but plainly
contradicted by the holy Scripture, Ezra ii. 62.

And yet I allow that they had then, as we now have a good legal Proof of a
Right by Succession. We now have such Evidence of our Title to the Ministry by
Succession, as all Nations, all Ages and Courts allow to be a good legal Proof
of a good Title to an Estate. And there is no Man now in England prossest of an
ancient Estate by Descent, who can give a better legal Proof of his legal Right
to it, than every Bishop can give of his Right to the Ministerial Authority by
a successive Ordination.

But as for his pretending that the Jews were more careful to keep authentic
Registers than Christians have been, which is all that he can offer on this
Subject, it is perfectly impossible for me to believe it, while I consider, how
much more Knowledge has prevailed in the Christian, than in the Jewish Church;
and how much more careful Christians have been to preserve the divine
Ordinances pure, than the Jews were. The Jews for many Years together wholly
neglected GOD's Ordinances, Circumcision, the Passover, etc. and in a Manner
forgot them. And is it likely that they were mighty careful about the
Priesthood? It is morally impossible. But the Christian Church never did
despise and neglect Baptism and the Lord's Supper: But always observed them
with great Veneration, they never were in any Age careless about the
Oridination of their Clergy, so as to neglect it, or suffer it to be performed
by Laymen. If any Man denies this, let him name the Age, when the Christian
Church neglected these Ordinances of CHRIST. Whereas it is very easy to prove
from holy Scripture that the Israelites wholly laid aside and despised the
Ordinances of their GOD, together with his Priests. I have now done with this
Head, and I hope I have said enough, if not more than enough to prove, that we
have as good a Proof of our Succession from the Apostles, as the Jewish Priests
had of their Descent from Aaron.

II. I come now to the second Enquiry, viz. Whether the Succession has been
preserved in the Church of England? Mr. Hobart seems very angry with me for
saying, that he had undertaken to prove that it was broken in the Church of
England: and now says, P. 67. that if I had been honest I should have seen,
that what he undertook to prove was, that the Succession was not clear and
indisputable. Now wheter the Dishonesty is in me or Mr. Hobart; let the Reader
judge, when he has observed that Mr. Hobart in his first Address uses these
very Words, P. 120. That the Line of Succession was broken in these Instances
is very clear. You see he does not express it modestly, nor say, it was
disputable; but affirms that he had clearly proved that it was broken. However,
now he is ashamed of it, and is become very modest, and I wish it might
continue, although what is written is written. But now he is come a Peg lower,
and only says, that our Succession is disputed, and absolutely denied. And had
he laid his Charge no higher before, I should not have taken any Pains to
confute it: For there is not one Truth in Religion but what is disputed and
absolutely denied by some Body or other. Some dispute and absolutely deny the
Existence of GOD. Must I then turn Atheist, or Sceptick? The Question should
be, what Reason have they for disputing or denying any Tenet? If they have no
Reason for it, I hope we are not obliged to part with what some Men please to
dispute or absolutely deny. I shall now examine his Reasons for disputing the
Succession in the Church of England: And shall begin with an Argument he used
in his first Address, P. 121. which he thinks I did not sufficiently attend to.
I shall therefore now make ample Amends. He tells us Arch Bishop Parker was
ordained by four Bishops who had been legally deprived in Queen Mary's Reign,
and were not restored when they performed this Action. This he says, renders
Parker's Consecration very doubtful, and indeed bids fair to nullify it. P. 74.
and yet upon this, he says, all the Ordinations in the Church of England to
this Day depend. And after all, he tells us, an Act of Parliament was procured
to confirm Parker 's Consecration about seven Years after it was performed. Let
us try now, whether we cannot fairly get over these two Difficulties, and give
such an Account of the Affair as shall satisfy any reasonable Person. The legal
Deprivation which these Bishops were under did not at all hinder their giving
valid Orders. So the Government thought; othersise they would have restored
them, before they employed them to consecrate Parker. Can any Protestant of
Sense imagine, that a Papist Queen and Parliament could really and forever take
away the Power of Ordination given by CHRIST to his Ministers? if so, then the
Heathen Kings and Emperors could have deprived the Apostles and all CHRIST'S
Ministers of that Authority he gave them, and have reduced them to the
Condition of mere Laymen. I grant with his Author, that when these deprived
Bishops were employed to consecrate Parker, the Legality of their Proceedings
were not so clear as might be wished for. But what then? One could not wish to
have it clearer, that it was a valid canonical and regular Ordination according
to the Gospel: and that here is no room, to suspect an Interruption; and this
is all we contend for. And as to the legal Defect, it was purged away by the
Queen's Warrant to them. So that all is exceeding clear here. And now as to the
Act of Parliament to confirm Parker's Consecration seven Years after it was
over, which makes the Matter look suspiciously. The Case was thus, as Dr.
Heylyn, Bishop Burnet, and all Historians that I ever saw agree, All that was
done, says Heylyn, was no more than this, and on ths Occasion, a Question had
been made by captious and unquiet Men, and amongst the rest, by Dr. Bonner,
sometime Bishop of London, whether the Bishops of those Times were lawfully
ordained or not; the Reason of the Doubt being this, because the Book of
Ordination which was annulled and abrogated in the first of Queen Mary, had not
been yet restored and received by any legal Act of Queen Elizabeth's Time;
which Cause being brought before the Parliament in the Eighth Year of her
Reigh, the Parliament took Notice first, that their not restoring that Book to
the former Power in Terms significant and express, was but Casus omissus; and
the declare, that by the Statute fifth and sixth of Edward VI, it had been
added to the Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments as a
Member of it, or at least as an Appendant to it, and therefore by the Statute 1
Eliz. c. 2. was restored again, together with the said Book of Common Prayer
intentionally at least, if not in Terms. But being the Words in the said
Statute, were not clear enough to remove all Doubts, they therefore did revive
now, and did accordingly enact, that whatsoever had been done by Virtue of that
Ordination, should be good in Law. This is the Total of the St^^^^. Refor.
justified, p. 21.
Bishop Burnet gives the same Account. He says, Abr. V. ii. P. 328.
The Book of Ordination was not specially mentioned in the Act; which gave
Occasion to Bonner afterward to question the Legality of Ordinations made by
it. But it had been made a Part of the Common Prayer Book in the 5th Year of
King Edward; and the whole Book, then set out, was now confirmed; so that by a
special Act made some Years after this it was declared, that, that Office was
understood to be a Part of it.

Here you see, that the only Ground of the Scruple was because the Book by
which these Bishops had been ordained, had not been revived in express Terms by
Act of Parliament, after its having been condemned by a Papist Queen and
Parliament. And allowing this to be so, how was the Succession at all hurt by
it? The Scruple was not abo^^ (...) Validity of their Ordination in the Sense
of the Gospel, but about its Legality: or whether it was agreeable to the Laws
of England. An Ordination may be valid, yea and canonical, and yet not strictly
legal. An Ordination by one Bishop is valid, an Ordination by three is
canonical, but an Ordination is not legal in England unless the Form by which
it is performed be established by Act of Parliament. Now all that the
Parliament did in the Eighth of Elizabeth, was to declare that the Ordination
of these Bishops was legal or good in Law, since the Book by which they had
been ordained was revived and established by Parliament before they were
ordained by it. It is strange that Mr. Hobart who has for so many Years
frequented the Courts, should be quilty of such an Inaccuracy as not to
distinguish betwixt Validity and Legality. But the Truth is, such Mistakes are
absolutely necessary to maintain a bad Cause.

It Is worth observing, that this Cavil instead of weakening, does very much
confirm the Succession and expel all Doubts: For can we imagine that the
Papists who were so extremely inclined to cavil against the Protestant Bishops,
as to make a Clamor for such a Trifle, would not have made a Parliament
Business of it, if they had had any material Defect to object against them? Can
we suppose, that if there had been any Pretense then of the Nag's Head
Consecration, or that the Ordainers had not been true Bishops; they would not
have made some Noise about it at that Time? Doubtless they would have made the
Nation ring with it. But all that Bonner and other inveterate Enemies had to
object, was this, that the Book of Ordination which the Papist Parliament had
condemned, had not yet been legally revived by the Protestant Parliament, which
if it had been true (as it was false) yet it would have amounted to no more
than a legal Defect, which would not at all have hurt their Character as
Ministers of CHRIST, and Bishops of his Church. Neither CHRIST, nor his
Apostles, nor any other of his Ministers for three hundred Years, had any legal
Right to officiate in any Nation on Earth: And if there is any Truth in what
Mr. Hobart says, that this bids fair to nullify Parker' s Ordination; it
certainly bids much fairer to nullify all the authoritative Acts of CHRIST, and
of all his Ministers for the first three hundred Years, for it is certain, none
of them were legal, or according to the Law of any Nation in which they
officiated. What miserable Shifts is this Writer driven to in order to prove
that our Ordinations are disputable, even such as prove our Blessed Savior's
Ordination to be equally, nay, more disputable. Here I shall observe once for
all, that the Bishops of England are to be considered in a twofold Capacity,
either as to their spiritual Power, or as to their temporal Privileges and
Honors. As to the Calling and Authority of Bishops in spiritual Matters it is
derived from CHRIST and his Apostles by Ordination, and from no other, neither
King nor Parliament can give or take it away: But besides this spiritual
Authority, the Bishops of England have certain temporal Honors and Estates
bestowed on them by the King's Bounty, together with Jurisdiction in Cases of
Marriage, Wills and the like from continual Usage, which are ratified and
confirmed to them by Magna Charta; like the Estates and Privileges of other
Subjects of the Realm. Now these temporal Privileges depend upon the Legality
of their Ordination; so that if the Book by which they were ordained, had been
ever so agreeable to the holy Scripture, yet if it had not been established by
Act of Parliament, they could not be esteemed Bishops in Law, i. e. they could
not have held their temporal Privileges, no, nor legally have exercised their
spiritual Powers in England; and yet at the same Time their Authority as
CHRIST'S Ambassadors would have remained nevertheless certain and indisputable.
Now the Act of Parliament under Consideration was not intended to put their
spiritual Character out of Dispute, but their temporal, that is, to declare
that their Ordination was according to the Laws of the Land; so that they
should meet with no Opposition in obtaining their temporal Dues, or in
exercising their ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which by Law belonged to them,
just as an Act of Parliament confirms any other Subjects in the peaceable
Enjoyment of their Estates and Fortunes; when through some unreasonable
Pretenses they have been liable to a Molestation in the Law.

Now I hope I have said enough to show that Parker's Consecration stands as
fair and as clear from all rational Exceptions in Point of Validity, as it is
possible for any Ordination to be. By the Way, if any should enquire, why did
not Queen Elizabeth's Protestant Parliament restore those Protestant Bishops
whom Queen Mary's Papist Parliament had deprived of their Bishoprics? Bishop
Burnet gives us this Account of it, Abrid. V. 2. P. 330.
Some Bills were proposed but not passed: One was for restoring the Bishops
deprived by Queen Mary, who were Barlow, Scory, and Coverdale; but the first of
those had been made to resign, and the last being extreme old, resolved to
follow Latimer's Example, and not to return to his See: So it was not thought
worth the while to make an Act for Scory alone.

Now the Question lying betwixt us is this, whether the civil Powers, Kings,
Parliaments, or Emperors can take away from CHRIST'S Ambassadors, that
Authority which he gave them in Ordination, and absolutely vacate his
Commission? He pretends to hold, that they can, and have done it. And I am
proving that they cannot do it. I own they have a Right to put to Death, banish
or deprive Bishops of the Liberty of executing their spiritual Powers in their
Dominions: but they cannot vacate their Commission, or so deprive them, that
they must cease to the CHRIST'S Ministers, and lose his Commission. Otherwise
CHRIST'S Commission from his Father, and the Apostles Commission from CHRIST,
might have been taken away from them by the civil Powers, under whom they
lived. These their implacable Enemies did all they could to deprive them, but
they knew of no other Method than to imprison, banish and kill them. But it
seems, if Mr. Hobart had lived at that Time he could have taught them a more
easy and effectual Method, which was only to pass an Act of Deprivation, and
then it would have been all over with these Preachers; and CHRIST'S Kingdom
would have been at an End. And doubtless if the civil Powers can deprive us of
CHRIST'S Authority given in Ordination, they can deprive us of our Christianity
obtained in Baptism too. If they can unmake Men as Bishops, they can unmake us
as Christians too. If they can disannul Ordination, they can also disannul
Baptism. Mr. Hobart says, our Opinion tempts Men to turn Infidels: But what can
tempt Men more to despise CHRIST'S Kingdom and Religion, than to observe that
there is nothing sacred in it; but that all its Powers are given and taken away
just as the State pleases? Nay, that the Enemies of CHRIST can when they please
vacate his Commission and nullify all his Authority? Again, if the Parliament's
Deprivation did unmake the deprived Bishops, then could they not be restored
without a new Ordination: a second Consecration in that Case must be as
absolutely necessary as the first was. But such a Thing was never heard of. So
that I cannot think that a Man of Mr. Hobart's Sense can possibly think that
there is any Solidity in what he has said to prove that the civil Powers did
take away from CHRIST'S Ministers the Authority committed to them in
Ordination; and yet if he did not believe it himself, I Am at a loss to account
for his Honesty in taking so much Pains to persuade the ignorant that it was
really so. And although the Act of Deprivation names Offices; yet that denotes
no other Offices than what they had received from the State, not such as they
had received from CHRIST. The Office committed to them in Ordination they
cannot resign or part with, although they should be ever so desirous to part
with it.

And though these Bishops had acknowledged that they had received their
Spiritualities from the King, yet this means no more than that they were
beholden to him for the Liberty of executing their spiritual Powers in his
Dominions; or as it was expressed in some Patents, to perform all Parts of the
Episcopal Function, that by the Word of GOD were committed to Bishops. Now
these Offices and Liberties which the State had given, they justly took away
from their Enemies. And whereas he supposes, that I expose myself to the
Resentment of my Superiors by this Plea; it is so far from the Truth, that it
is the Plea that all the Friends of the Revolution and present Establishment
have ever made: And on the other Hand, his Pretense that the Act of Deprivation
was designed to unmake the Non-juring Bishops, and vacate their Commission from
CHRIST, is one of the worst Slanders that the most virulent Non-Jurors and
Jacobites ever cast upon the Government. And had I said such Things as he has
done, I confess I should have had some Apprehension of Danger. But as to Mr.
Hobart he may write what he pleases without incurring any Danger at all in this
World, that is the Privilege of the Lawless.

As to the Non-juring Bishops in King William's Reign, as our Succession is not
through them, so they were not so absurd as to pretend that the Bishops who
succeeded in their Sees had not Authority by Virtue of their Consecration to
confer valid Orders, they only said that no other Bishops had a Right to their
Sees while they were alive, which whether true, or false, alters not our Case,
nor hurts our Succession. For our Ordinations are not like those of the
Independents, we are not ordained to this or that See, or Parish, or Flock; but
Ministers of JESUS CHRIST without any particular Relation to one Place more
than another.

And therefore supposing, with the Non Jurors, that Dr. Tillotson, had no Right
before GOD to be Archbishop of Canterbury, while Dr. Sancroft was alive, yet
that can raise no Dispute about the Validity of his Episcopal Consecration; for
he was not ordained to that See more than to any other.

This Observation would be needless, if Mr. Hobart did not undertake to write
confidently about such Things, as he has no proper Knowledge of. Now to sum up
the Evidence on both Sides, and leave it to the Reader's Judgment. Mr. Hobart
pretends, it is likely that the Succession was broken when Dr. Parker was
consecrated. The Nag's Head Story he now tells us he always looked upon as a
Falsehood, P. 74. But then Parker was ordained by four Bishops who had been
deprived by Act of Parliament under Queen Mary, and not then restored, so that
they were under a legal Incapacity, P. 75. To which I reply,

1. All the Bishops who ordained Parker, were not under a Deprivation, and
therefore supposing, that Deprivation had reduced them to the Condition of mere
Laymen, yet if but one of the four was a true Bishop, that Ordination was valid.

2. This Deprivation was no more than the civil Power's restraining their
acting as Bishops in their own Dominions; and when this Restraint was by the
civil Power taken off, that Deprivation then, and so far ceased. Now Queen
Elizabeth's granting a Warrant to these deprived Bishops to consecrate Parker,
so far took off the Deprivation, and purged even the legal Defect.

3. Nay, supposing they had had no Warrant from the civil Power to ordain, yet
their ordaining Parker according to the Gospel, would have been very good and
valid; though ever so much against the Will of the Government. For such were
all the Ordinations transacted in the Church for three hundred Years after
CHRIST, all being illegal, or against Law.

4. If Deprivation unmakes Bishops, then they could never after do any
Episcopal Act without a second Ordination, a Restoration by Act of Parliament
will not make a Bishop of him who was not a Bishop before that Act. Indeed I
could not have believed, had I not seen it, that the Power of Prejudice should
be so great, as to make a wise Man continue such a Noise about a civil
Deprivation by a Papist Parliament, and call it unmaking Bishops, and I know
not what. Suppose, that Queen Mary and her Parliament had banished these
Protestant Bishops out of the Nation, and they had gone and settled in some
other Parts of the Earth, can any Man suspect that this Deprivation would have
followed them to the Ends of the Earth, and have rendered them incapable of
acting as CHRIST'S Ministers? And yet this Banishment is Deprivation, and a
great deal more.

From this Mr. Hobart makes a start back to the Apostles Time; and says, P. 76.
Having thus taken a view of two or three Links at this End of the Chain, and
seen how flawy and defective they look; let us now examine a few Links at the
other End. -- And here produces two Evidences to make it doubtful who were the
first Bishops in Rome: And adds his own Remark, P, 84. thus, I know of no other
Scheme on which the Difficulties that occur in the Succession of these Persons
can be solved.

If he knows of none, I can acquaint him with one, which Mr. Bingham has given
us, Antigu. V. 1. P. 57.
It is true, says he, there is a little Difference in the Account which these
Authors give of the Succession: for some reckon Linus first, then Anacletus,
then Clemens; others begin with Clemens, and reckon him the first in Order from
St. Peter, but this is easily reconciled by learned Men; who make it appear
that Linus and Anacletus died whilst St. Peter lived; and that Clemens was
ordained their Successor by St. Peter also. So that we have two or three
Persons, by this Account, ordained successively Bishops of Rome by the Hands of
the Apostles.

But to prevent impertinent wrangling, I must observe again, that when we speak
of the Necessity of a Succession, we mean no more than what he says every Body
allows. I suppose, says he, P. 82. every one will grant, that it was the
Practice from the Times of the Apostles, for Ministers to ordain Ministers. And
they who do otherwise, he says, are guilty of Sin and Disorder, and CHRIST will
not own but condemn them.

This is all we contend for, which yet he says, in us is the Height of Madness,
P. 78. And yet our high and raving Madness is no worse than this, we believe
that the Apostles ordained Successors, and they others to succeed them; and the
same has been the Practice in every Age. So the Holy Scripture and the History
of all Places and Ages inform us; It is no Matter whether these Ministers were
Bishops, or Presbyters, or both; if they were Ministers of Ordination it will
satisfy the Height of our Madness. And it is no Matter whether we know for
certain, who were ordained by the Apostles, so long as we know they did ordain
others, and this Custom has always continued, as Mr. Hobart affirms. And thus
we are agreed that there is a Succession and good Evidence of it, after all
that he has said, to prove it the Height of Madness. What although Historians
differ about, who were first ordained by the Apostles at Rome, since all are
agreed that they did ordain Successors, and they others, and this has been the
constant Practice in all Ages? He concludes his Discourse against the
Succession with this Remark, P. 82. There is, says he, a vastly greater
Probability that the Presbyterian Succession has been preserved entire and
uninterrupted, than that the Episcopal Succession has been so. Several Things
have occurred to my Thoughts while writing on this Subject, which fully
convince me of this.

This I confess is a new Discovery; Dissenters highest Ambition formerly was
satisfied with a Power equal to any Bishop in England; but Mr. Hobart has quite
outdone all that ever went before him; by his hard Study and long Writing on
this Subject, he has found out that the Dissenters Power and Succession, though
it is only from the Bishops, is vastly clearer and more indisputable than
theirs.

But let us try this rare Paradox by the Test of common Sense, and see if it be
solid. Does not he pretend that the Bishops of New England had all their Power
from the Bishops of the Church of England? How then came they by a vastly
better Claim than those they sprang from? Why, he tells us, that their
Succession as Presbyters is clear, but not their Succession as Bishops. Well,
but don't he affirm, that Bishop and Presbyter is one and the same? How then
can one have a clearer Succession than the other? Besides, did the Bishops
ordain those Men who afterward left the Church and turned Dissenters, in their
Capacity, as they were Presbyters, and at the same Time ordain those who
continued in the Church in their Capacity as they were Bishops? No certainly.
If they ordained us as Bishops, then as they were Bishops, they ordained you
too: If they ordained you, as they were Presbyters, then as Presbyters they
ordained us likewise. There could be no Difference; so that his rare Discovery,
the Fruit of much Study, turns out to be but a childish Jingle; and is more
easily confuted than explained. However, we may observe, that he allows, that
the Succession in the Church of England as to our Presbyters or Priests, is
clear and indisputable. And he says, P. 85, that what he has said, establishes
that (Succession) in the Line of Presbyters. So that we who are Presbyters in
the Church, are in the Line of Succession from the Apostles, our Enemies being
Judges.

III. We come now to the last Enquiry, which is, Whether the Ministers of the
Presbyterian or Independent Persuasion in New England have Authority from
CHRIST by Succession? And because I would not have the Reader's Mind diverted
from the main Question, I shall take no Notice of what he has said about the
Principles and Practices of the first Settlers of this Country, not because I
think his Account just, but because it does not concern the Controversy. And to
treat him with the utmost Fairness, I shall grant him what he pleads for, that
all the Lay Ordinations in the Country shall not prejudice his Cause in the
least Degree, and that the first Ministers in this Country were ordained by the
Bishops of England. The only Question now is, whether by Virtue of the
Episcopal Ordination, they were invested with a Power to ordain others? Upon
this single Point the whole Controversy turns. For he grants, the Necessity of
a Succession, as I have already showed, and that this Succession is in the
Church of England, and claims a Power from CHRIST by Virtue of their Episcopal
Ordination in this Church. Here therefore, let the Reader, who would make a
true Judgment, carefully weigh the Reasons on both Sides. In my first
Vindication, as I considered all the Arguments on this Head, that I had ever
heard or read, so first I took Notice of Mr. Neals's, and expressed myself thus,
You satisfy yourselves with the Argument Mr. Neal has advanced, who says, the
Form of ordaining a Priest and a Bishop is the same. But I am sorry that I am
obliged to tell you, there is no Truth in it. For they are two Forms, and as
different as the Forms of ordaining a Priest and a Deacon. Now hear Mr.
Hobart's Reply to this, P. 103. He says, I cannot leave this Subject, without
taking Notice of the Injustice done to Mr. Neal, whom Mr. Beach charges with
Falsehood. He tells us, that Mr. Neal has said, the Form of ordaining a Priest
and a Bishop is the same; and he assures us there is no Truth in it. The Case
is this, Mr. Neal in the Place Mr. Beach refers to, is speaking of the Book of
Ordination composed in the Reign of Edward VI, and he says of it; The Form of
ordaining a Priest and a Bishop is the same, there being no express mention in
the Words of Ordination, whether it be for the one or the other Office: This
has been altered of late Years, since a Distinction of the two Orders has been
so generally admitted, but that was not the received Doctrine of these Times.
Now, says Mr. Hobart, Mr Beach I suppose, will not deny that the Case was truly
thus, with Regard to King Edward's Book; and I cannot imagine with what
Conscience he could charge Mr. Neal with Falsehood, because in the present Book
of Ordination, the Form for ordaining a Bishop is different from that for
ordaining a Priest, which Mr. Neal does not deny. Can you now believe, that Mr.
Beach, wrote under a Sense that his next Answer might be to his eternal Judge.

Mr. Hobart has so often reviled me for this serious Expression, and
represented me, (as he owns) as being guilty of little less than Perjury, that
if I should vindicate my Innocence in every Instance, I must write a Book as
large as his, and yet neglect material Points. I desire herefore the candid
Reader, by this one Instance of my supposed Falsehood, to judge of all the rest.
Mr. Hobart's Friend in Boston, (I suppose) has thought this so material a
Point, as to make a distinct Head of it, and put it in the Index thus, Mr. Neal
vindicated against the Charge of Falsehood. Let us see then, where the Falsehood
will fall. And here I need make no Defense but what Bishop Maddox has made for
me in his Answer to Mr. Neal, P. 57. He having shown that the three Orders had
obtained from the beginning, and universally in the Christian Church, then says;
Notwithstanding all this, Mr. Neal is extremely fond of a Parity among the
Clergy, and has taken too much Pains in that Cause. It was an Excess of Zeal to
press the pious Reformers and King Edward's Ordinal into this Service.

And here, (says Mr. Neal,) "it is observable that the Form of ordaining a
Priest, and a Bishop IS THE SAME. Again says he, our Reformers admitted but two
Orders of Church Officers to be Divine Appointment, viz. Bishops and Deacons,
Presbyter and Bishop according to them, being but two Names for the same
OFFICE. By this Account, says the Bishop, it is plain, Mr. Neal would have it
believed, that Bishop and Priest were, in the Opinion of the first Reformers,
synonimous Terms, signifying not only the same Order, but the same Office. His
material Proof is the public Ordinal; and to be sure, if any where, the
Reformers spoke distinctly, when they are designedly treating upon this
Subject, and appointing the very Forms of Ordination and Consecration. Here
then we join Issue, and both appeal to the same Ordinal, as a decisive Proof.

Mr. Neal's Assertion is in these Words, The first Reformers believed BUT TWO
Orders of Church Men in Holy Scripture, viz. Bishops and Deacons. These very
same first Reformers, in the very same Ordinal, he refers to, make the
following express Declaration. Preface to King Edward's Ordinal.
It is evident unto all Men, diligently reading Holy Scripture and ancient
Autours, that from the Apostles Time there have been THESE ORDERS of Ministers
in CHRISTE' s Church, BISHOPS, PRIESTS and Deacons.

Without stopping for one Reflection, let us go on to his next Assertion, which
runs thus;

The Form of ordaining a Priest and a Bishop is the same?

Here we have Recourse to the same Ordinal, and find therein two Forms, one for
the Priest, and the other for the Bishop, as distinct from each other as the
Forms of a Deacon and a Priest. The Title of the one Form is, The Form of
ordaining of Priests; the Title of the other is, The Form of Consecration of an
Archbishop or Bishop. Perhaps Mr. Neal means, that the very Form of Ordination
and Consecration, those individual Words, by which they are ordained and
consecrated, are the same. But neither is this the Case. The Form for the
Priest is as follows. When this Prayer is done, the Bishop with the Priests
present, shall lay their Hands severally upon the Head of every one that
receives Orders, the Receivers humbly kneeling upon their Knees, and the
Bishop saying, Receive the Holy Ghost: Whose Sins thou do forgive, they are
forgiven: And whose Sins thou do retain, they are retained; and be thou a
faithful Dispenser of the Word of GOD, and of his Holy Sacraments: In the Name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. -- The Bishop shall
deliver to every one of them, the Bible in his Hand, saying, Take thou
Authority to preach the Word of GOD, and to Minister the Holy Sacraments in the
Congregation where thou shall be so appointed.

The Form of consecrating and Arch Bishop, or Bishop is this. Then the
Archbishop and Bishops present, shall lay their Hands upon the Head of the
Elect Bishop, the Archbishop, saying, Take the Holy Ghost, and remember that
thou stir up the Grace of GOD which is in thee, by Imposition of Hands; for GOD
has not given the Spirit of Fear, but of Power and Love, and Soberness. Then
the Archbishop shall deliver him the Bible, saying, Give Heed unto Reading,
Exhortation and Doctrine; Think upon these Things contained in this Book: Be
diligent in them, that the Increase coming thereby, may be manifest unto all
Men. Take Heed unto thyself, and unto Teaching, and be diligent in doing them;
for by doing this, thou shall save thyself, and those that hear thee. Be to the
Flock of CHRIST a Shepherd, not a Wolf: Feed them, devour them not: Hold up the
weak, heal the sick, bring together the broken, bring again the outcast, seek
the lost; be so merciful, that ye' be not too remiss so Minister Discipline,
that you forget not Mercy; that when the chief Shepherd shall come, you may
receive the immarcescible Crown of Glory, through JESUS CHRIST our Lord. Amen.

These are the Forms of ordaining a Bishop and a Priest, which are called the
SAME. The Weight of thus misrepresenting a public Ordinal, falls wholly upon
Mr. Neal." "The old Puritans complained, that the Priest receives in his
Ordination no Authority to govern the Flock, but only to preach the Word and
Administer the Sacraments.

Nothing, sure, but the Impossibility of supporting his Scheme, and proving the
Parity of Presbyters and Bishops, any other Way, could have put Mr. Neal upon
this Method of attempting it. He had indeed undertaken a difficult Task, and
must therefore have great Allowances in the Execution of it. The Sense and
Practice of the whole Christian Church for fifteen hundred Years, in a Form of
Church Government, so early, so universally, so constantly received, were great
Obstacles. No Instances of Presbyters executing the distinguishing Offices of a
Bishop. No Example of a Man's being a Bishop one Day, and reduced to a mere
Presbyter the next, as must have been the Case, had a Bishop, as is sometimes
alleged, been no more than a Chair Man, a Moderator, or temporary President of
a Presbytery. No Instances of many Bishops in Places where there were many
Priests; on the contrary, we always find one particular Person mentioned as the
Bishop, and sole Bishop of one particular City; even where there were many
Presbyters. This being the Case, and the promiscuous Use of Names, not
sufficient to overcome so many Arguments, or show the Identity of Order and
Office between a Bishop and a Priest, any more than an Apostle's calling
himself a Deacon Ephesians. iii. 7. Col. i. 23.
will prove the Apostolate and Deaconship to be one Order; other Methods were
to be tried, and the very Form of consecrating a Bishop who had before been
ordained a Priest, be employed to prove there was in the Opinion of the
Compilers of that Form, no such Order as Bishops in the Church, all mere
Presbyters, and nothing more; not only the Order but the very Office the same!
Since Mr. Neal [and Mr. Hobart after him] has thought fit to introduce the
Reformers as Patrons of this Notion, of Bishops and Priests being the same, it
may not be improper to lay before the Reader Bishop Burnet's Account of the
Authors of that Opinion. Hist. R. V. 1. P. 366.
In the ancient Church they knew none of these Subtilties which were found out
in the latter Ages. 'Twas then thought enough that a Bishop was to be dedicated
to his Function by a new Imposition of Hands, and that several Offices could
not be performed without Bishops; such as Ordination, Confirmation, etc. But
they did not refine in these Matters, so much as to enquire whether Bishops and
Priests differed in Order and Office, or only in degree. But after the
Schoolmen fell to examine Matters of Divinity with logical and unintelligible
Niceties, and the Canonists began to comment upon the Rules of the ancient
Church, they studied to make Bishops and Priests seem very near one another; so
that the Difference was but small. They did it with different Designs. The
Schoolmen having set up the grand Mystery of Transubstantiation, were to exalt
the Priestly Office as much as was possible; for the turning the Host into GOD,
was so great an Action, that they reckoned that there could be no Office higher
than that which qualified a Man to so mighty a Performance: Therefore as they
changed the Form of Ordination from what it was anciently believed to consist
in, to a delivering the sacred Vessels, and held that a Priest had his Orders
by that Rite, and not by the Imposition of Hands; so they raised their Order or
Office so high as to make it equal with the Order of a Bishop; but as they
designed to extol the Order of Priesthood, so the Canonists had as great a Mind
to depress the Episcopal Order. They generally wrote for Preferment; and the
Way to it was to exalt the Papacy. Nothing could do that so effectually, as to
bring down the Power of Bishops. This only could justify the Exemptions of the
Monks and Friars, etc. All which were unlawful, if the Bishops had by Divine
Right, Jurisdiction in their Dioceses; therefore it was necessary to lay them
as low as could be, and to make them think, that the Power they held, was
rather as Delegates of tha Apostolic See, than by a Commission from CHRIST or
his Apostles; so that they looked on the declaring Episcopal Authority to be of
Divine Right as a Blow that would be fatal to the Court of Rome; and therefore
they did after this at Trent use all possible Endeavors to hinder any such
Decision: It having been then the common Style of that Age to reckon Bishops
and Priests as the same Office, it is no Wonder if at this Time the Clergy of
this Church, the greatest Part of them being still leavened with the old
Superstition, and the rest of them not having Time enough to examine lesser
Matters, retained still the former Phrases in this particular. On this I have
insisted the more, that it may appear how little they have considered Things
who are so far carried with their Zeal against the established Government of
this Church, as to make much Use of some Passages of the Schoolmen and
Canonists that deny them to be distinct Offices; For these are the very Dregs
of Popery; the one raising the Priest higher for the sake of
Transubstantiation; the other pulling down the Bishops lower for the sake of
the Pope's Supremacy; and by such Means bringing them almost to an Equality. So
partial are some Men to their particular Conceits that they make Use of the
most mischievous Topics, when they can serve their Turn, not considering how
much further these Arguments will run, if they ever admit them. Mr. Neal
imputes these Sentiments of some in the Reign of King Henry VIII. to the
Reformers under King Edward VI, though in the Preface to their Ordinal they
expressly declare the contrary."

And now I leave it with the Reader, who are guilty of the Falsehood, we who say
that one and one make two, or Mr. Neal, Mr. Hobart, and his Friend in Boston,
who affirm that two distinct Offices are one and the same? It is a stubborn
Matter of Fact, which will not bend to Men's Humors. Every one may see that as
these Forms are two now, so they were in King Edward's Time. Seeing then after
a Man is ordained Priest, he must be ordained anew, and by a distinct Form, in
order to receive the Power of Ordination, it is certain that those mere Priests
who came into New England and set up the Business of ordaining here, acted
without any Authority received by their Ordination: Consequently the present
Ministry which sprang from them, have no Authority by Succession.

Let us now consider Mr. Hobart's other Argument, which is taken from there
being but one Commission in the holy Scripture. He says, P. 99. If there be but
one Order, and Presbyters have Authority from CHRIST, (as I allow,) which they
cannot have, unless CHRIST'S (Commission belongs to them, and if it belongs to
them at all, they must have all the Authority contained in it. That GOD has
joined, Men cannot separate. P. 100. This Argument contains the Strength of
their whole Cause, and is to them like Samson's Locks, I shall therefore
carefully re-examine it, although I had answered it before.

1. It is not true, that if a Man has Part of the Gospel Ministry he must have
all. A Deacon in the Church has a Part of the Gospel Ministry, but not the
whole, the Expressions in ordaining a Deacon, are sufficiently descriptive of
the Gospel Ministry, yet the whole Power that CHRIST has annexed to the Gospel
Ministry no more belongs to a Deacon, than to a Layman. A Deacon is expressly
empowered to preach, to baptize, and to assist in the Administration of the
Lord's Supper. Now if Mr. Hobart's Argument be good, a Deacon has the whole
Apostolic Commission, and as much Authority to ordain as any Bishop in England.

To this he makes no Reply.

Again, the twelve Apostles before CHRIST'S Resurrection, had a Part, but not
the whole of the Ministry: They had Power to preach, baptize and administer the
Lord's Supper, yet CHRIST kept the Power of Ordination in his own Hands, and
never committed it to them till just before his final Ascension; when he said,
as my Father sent me, so send I you. Judas had received Part of the Ministry,
but never the whole of it. Acts i. 17. For he was numbered with us, and had
obtained part of this Ministry. It will not do, to say this was not the Gospel
Ministry, for here St. Peter says expressly, it was PART of that very Ministry
which they had after CHRIST'S Ascension; yet Judas never had the Power of
Ordination. I grant, Men cannot lawfully separate what GOD has joined. But then
GOD never has so joined the whole of the Gospel Ministry, as that a Man cannot
have a Part withouth the whole. Where, when, did GOD say, "He that has a Part
shall have all." Prove, xxx. 6. Add thou not unto his Words, lest he reprove
thee, and thou be found a Liar. A Man may be empowered to preach, or to
baptize, and yet have no more of the Apostolic Commission as the Deacons had:
We read Acts x. 48. When by St. Peter's Preaching, a great Number were
converted, he commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the LORD. Now it is
most probable, that the Persons whom he commanded to baptize these new
Converts, were the Lay-Brethren who had accompanied him from Joppa. v. 23. By
this Command they were authorized to baptize these Persons, and yet they had no
Authority to preach, much less to ordain, nay, after this Service was over,
they were as absolute Laymen as any at all. So when three thousand were
converted and baptized in one Day, it is most likely that more Hands were
employed in it, than the Apostles, St. Paul baptized but few of those whom he
converted. He was not sent to baptize, but to preach. So that it is most
probable that his Converts were chiefly baptized by Persons empowered by his
Command to do it.

But whether this was really the Case, or not, it cannot be denied but that they
might take this Method; and then it is certain they could give Part, without
giving the whole of their Authority. Nay Dissenters do certainly undertake to
give a Part of the Ministry without giving the whole of it. It is a universal
Custom among them to examine Candidates, and when they approve of them, they
send them to preach the Gospel, in Testimony of which they give them a written
Instrument signed by their Ministers. Now this Right, Liberty or Power to
preach the Gospel is a Part of the Gospel Ministry or Apostolic Commission.
And though in this Case they do not commonly use the Rite or Ceremony of
Imposition of Hands, yet this does not hinder, but that they have as good
Authority to preach, as if their Hands had been laid on them. And Mr. Hobart is
clear in it, that Imposition of Hands is not necessary to convey the
Ministerial Authority, but if they who appoint a Man to the Ministry, do but
signify this their Appointment any other way it is sufficient. No body, (says
he), I suppose, upon Ministerial Authority as such a physical Quality, as is
communicable only by Contact, first Ad. P. 114. So that as often as the
Presbyterian Ministers approve and send a Man only to preach, they do really
undertake to give a Part of the Ministry without the whole. And by a
Certificate signed by their Hands, they empower him, as effectually as if their
Hands had been laid on his Head. Suppose then, that a Number of these licensed
Preachers should take upon them to ordain others, would you not call them Sons
of Korah and Usurpers? Yet they could defend themselves with the same Argument
that New England Ministers use. They could say, we were appointed to preach the
Gospel, which is a Part of the Apostolic Commission or Gospel Ministry, and we
cannot have Part without having the whole. There is but one Commission, and it
cannot be divided, he that has any Part of it, must have all. If there is but
one Order, we are of that Order, and so must be equal to those who appointed us
to preach.

Will you now tell these Preachers, that they want Imposition of Hands? they
can tell you as Mr. Hobart does, that is only a Point of Order, but is not
essential to the ministerial Character, and all allow physical Contact is not
necessary. Will you tell these mere Preachers, that they who appointed them to
Preach, never intended to give them Power to ordain? The same we say to you
with Regard to those Priests who first set up Presbyterian Ordination in this
Country, the Bishops who ordained them, never intended to qualify them to
ordain others, and they themselves vowed they would never do any such Thing;
which rendered them less qualified to ordain than absolute Laymen. Let us now
proceed one step further, suppose your Ministers after having examined and
approved of a Candidate to go and preach the Gospel, should not only pray for a
Blessing upon this his Undertaking, as I hope they do, but should also use the
Rite of Imposition of Hands. I ask now, whether this does not make him a
Minister of the Gospel, as far as Preaching goes? Certainly it does. Again, I
desire to know why you may not, in sending forth a Man to Preach, use the Rite
of laying on of Hands, as well as that of signing a Certificate to the same
Purpose? The only Difference is, the one is scriptural, and the other is not.
If then such a Thing can be done, then the Gospel Ministry may be divided, and
a Man may have a Part, and not the whole. And if it can be done as the
Dissenters constant Practice shows that they think it can; then it is really
done in the Church of England, and Priests have a Part of the Gospel Ministry,
and not the Power of Ordination. And that set of Priests who came into
New England, and ordained the Presbyterian and Independent Bishops, had no
better Warrant for this, than the probationary Preachers among the Dissenters
have to ordain others to the whole Gospel Ministry.

In the New England Churches there are as really three distinct Orders; as in
the Church of England, in some Churches there are Deacons ordained to assist in
the administering the holy Sacrament, to pray in the Congregation, especially in
the Minister's Absence, etc. There is a second Order sent forth merely to
preach and pray, these of the second Order are as fully authorized to that Part
of the Gospel Ministry, as they can be by those who send them: for physical
Contact is not essential, says Mr. Hobart. The highest Order is their Bishops
who claim the sole Power of Ordination, and so exclude both the Inferior Orders
from any share in this Office. So that for my Part, I have no difficulty to
join with them upon the Score of three Orders, all I fear is that none of their
Orders have any Mission from CHRIST.

Appointing a Man to preach the Gospel is really ordaining him, whether it be
done by a written Instrument, as the Dissenters do, or by Imposition of Hands,
as our Bishops do, it alters not the Case. If a Bishop should upon examining a
Man, approve of him to go and preach the Gospel, and give him a Testimonial of
this his appointing him to that Work, signed by his own Hand, as the Dissenters
do, this Man would no longer be a mere Layman, but as really a Minister of
GOD's Word, as the Bishop himself, and yet be no Minister of the Sacraments,
nor of Ordination. In a Word, the Argument can not be evaded, turn it over and
over, view it on which side you please, it proves that the Gospel Ministry can
be, and is divided, Men can, and do receive a Part without the whole. And
therefore the great Argument to defend the Lawfulness of the New England
Ministry is certainly a Mistake. Stubborn Matters of Fact, confute it.

2. Another Mistake in his Argument is, that every Minister to the End of the
World must have that very individual Commission which CHRIST gave to the
Apostles, Matthew. xxviii. 20. Whereas really what he calls the Commission is
nothing more than the Account or History of their last Ordination: And is the
Commission of no Man now living. Every Minister's Commission is given at his
Ordination, and the Words and significant Signs then used, show what his
Commission is. And yet,

3. It does not follow, as he imagines, that we are no Ministers of CHRIST;
because our Commission is not to be found in the Bible. For that Man who is
ordained or sent to perform any Part of the Gospel Ministry by such as have
CHRIST'S Authority to send him, is so far CHRIST'S Minister, and has his
Authority.

4. The Office of a Priest in the Church of England, according to Mr. Hobart is
no Office of CHRIST'S Appointment: As it is described in the Book of
Ordination, it is inferior to that of a Bishop. And Mr. Hobart says, P. 52.
that the Priests are but the Bishops Substitutes or Curates instead of being
CHRIST'S Ministers. And therefore his supposing that CHRIST has in the holy
Scripture annexed the Power of Ordination to this Office, is certainly vain and
groundless, and therefore those Priests who came into this Country, and
ordained the New England Ministers clearly and certainly, had no Authority to
do it by Virtue of their Episcopal Ordination; but the Leathern Mitten
Ordinations were quite as Regular, and much more honest.

Nay, Mr. Hobart insists upon it, that they by Virtue of their Episcopal
Ordination had not Authority so much as to Preach, how much less to ordain
Bishops? It is certain, if neither CHRIST nor his Apostles instituted more than
one Order of Gospel Ministers, then the Order of Priests is only of
Ecclesiastical Institution; and CHRIST has not annexed the Power of Ordination
to this merely human Appointment. So that according to Mr. Hobart's Principles,
it is demonstrable that the New England Bishops have no Authority from CHRIST
by Succession.

What he says about a Constable's being ignorant of the extent of his Power,
when first put into his Office, is nothing to the Purpose: because the Law
discovers that. But the Gospel as it makes no Mention of the Institution of
this Order of Priests, so it is perfectly silent about any Power of Ordination
annexed to it.

The Case of an Antipedobaptists covenanting not to baptize Infants, is not a
Parallel, because he is supposed to have Power to baptize, and he who can
baptize, may lawfully baptize any who are the proper Subjects of Baptism. But
the Priest in the Church of England, receives not Power to ordain any at all;
as I before demonstrated, and the old Puritans complained. Mr. Hobart tells us
how compassionately concerned he is for some good People, who ask him what they
shall do, when we who should be Guides differ so widely? Now I would advise
such serious Persons to put on the same Temper of Mind, as if they were under
Oath to serve on the Jury to decide a Controversy about an Estate. The Case you
are to try, is this, whether those Priests of the Church of England, who came
into this Country, and set up the New England Succession, had Authority to
ordain? Mr. Hobart says they had: We think they had not. We plead, that if a
Man receiving Priest's Orders, can be supposed to receive Authority to ordain
Bishops, he must be supposed to receive this Authority, not only without any
Word, or Sign which does express it, not only without any such Intention in the
Church, or in the Bishop ordaining, or lastly in himself, but even against the
Will and Intention of the Church, against the Will and Intention of the
Ordainer, nay against his own Resolution, declared in a solemn Vow at the Time
of his Ordination. And you know no Title to Land or Estate is ever so conveyed.
This Mr. Hobart does not deny; but acknowledges it looks like Demonstration,
and he himself says a great deal more to prove that it is utterly impossible
that they should have received Power to ordain by Virtue of their Episcopal
Ordination: for says he, that Ordination don't give them so much as Power to
preach, and they were only the Bishops Substitutes and Curates, and if so, it
is impossible that they should be Bishops themselves, and have Power to ordain.

But now he pleads, that though these Priests were so ignorant of the Extent of
that Office at the Time of their being ordained to it, that they tied their own
Hands by Vows not to act as Bishops, yet seeing CHRIST in the Gospel has annexed
the Power of Ordination to it, they had therefore good right to use those
Powers which at first they did not understand to belong to their Office.

And though at first they did not know that they had the Power of Ordination,
yet if CHRIST has annexed the Power of Ordination to their Office, they had good
Right to use it, their former Ignorance and Vows notwithstanding. Upon this
Plea his whole Cause depends.

To which I answer, the Office or Commission, into which these Priests had been
introduced is not recorded in the Scripture. This Paragraph is not so to be
understood as though the Commission of Priests is not comprehended in the
Apostolic Commission, for that it virtually is, and consequently is in the
New Testament, being a part of the Power therein given to the Apostles: And it
manifestly appears, that they had a Right (and so their Successors in the whole
of their Commission) to convey Part of their Power to a subordinate Officer,
such as is now called a Priest. For it is evident, that under the infallible
Guidance of the Spirit of GOD they did ordain to that subordinate Office to
administer the Word and Sacraments without the Power of Ordination. For it
appears in the New Testament, that in several Churches there were such inferior
Officers, over which the Apostles notwithstanding, thought it necessary to
appoint one to preside in the whole Commission granted to them, who besides the
Power of administering the Word and Sacraments, had the Power of presiding in
Government, and granting either plenary or partial Commissions to others. And
that such subordinate Officers did obtain throughout the Christian Church,
agreeable to holy Scripture, is an evident Fact from all ancient Writers
attesting it with one Consent; and never has or can be disproved by any of our
Adversaries.
Therefore no Powers are there annexed to it. It is true, that he who would know
the Extent of any civil Officer's Power must not judge of it by the Mistakes of
the Officer at the Time of his being put into that Office, but by what Power
the Law has annexed to his Office. So he who would know whether the Power of
Ordination belongs to that Office, called the Office of a Priest, he must judge
of it by the Commission itself, but this Commission is no where to be found in
the Scripture. The Presbyterians all say, no such Office is to be found in the
New Testament, and we grant that our Commission is not there, and therefore
certainly no Power of Ordination is annexed to it in Scripture. But he who would
know what Powers we have, must consult the Book of Ordination, where our
Commission is to be seen, and there he will find no Power of Ordination is
annexed to our Office: but the contrary fully declared.

If now Mr. Hobart should say, (for I know not what else he can say,) if the
Case be so, that our Commission is not to be found in the Gospel, then we are
not CHRIST'S Ministers. I answer, this does not follow, for as I said before he
who is ordained to any Part of the Gospel Ministry by such as have Power from
CHRIST, is CHRIST'S Minister. It is a groundless Imagination, that none are
CHRIST'S Ministers, unless their Commission is recorded in the Gospel. They who
have Authority to act in CHRIST'S Name, are as really his Ambassadors, as if
their Ordination had been recorded in the Gospel.

Let me suppose, that we who have had Episcopal Ordination, should be convinced
by Mr. Hobart's Reasoning, that our Subordination and Subjection to our
Bishops, is that servile calling Men Master, which our LORD has forbidden, and
should take it into our Heads to ordain others, and declare such to be as good
Bishops and have as much Authority as any in England, and at the same Time
should not fall in with Mr. Hobart's Party, but join with the New-Lights (whom
he sneeringly calls our Brethren) I would fain know, whether it is not very
likely, that he would condemn us as guilty of the greatest Wickedness, calls us
all Sons of Korah, and perjured Usurpers? Be sure every indifferent Judge, must
condemn it with abhorrence. And I Am sure I should enter upon such a Course with
as much Horror in my Conscience as I should engage in a Course of Adultery. Yet
this was exactly the Case of the first Set of Ministers who began the
New England Succession, they had exactly the same Ordination as we; without one
Word's Variation, they had made the same Vows of Subjection to their Superiors,
they never had received a Power to ordain either explicitly or implicitly by
Words or Signs; yet they presumed to ordain Bishops, and give an Authority
which they themselves had never received. Such a shocking Presumption this was,
that all Church History for fifteen hundred Years don't afford any Instance
like it. In saying this, I would not insinuate, that these Priests though
guilty of Usurpation, were all wicked Men and lost; I will not say of them as
Mr. Hobart does of the New-Light Ministers, that CHRIST will condemn them. I
esteem the Memory of some of them for their religious Zeal. But at the same
Time I detest that Usurpation, and believe that in me it would be the Sin of
Korah, and we should not imitate even good Men in any bad Action.

Mr. Hobart very much misrepresents the Case, when he so often pretends that we
join with the Church of England merely to get rid of disputed Ordination, but
don't mend the Matter by coming into the Church. No, no, this is not the Case,
we choose Ordination by the Bishops, because no Reason can be offered, why we
should doubt of its Validity. And we dare not venture upon your Ordination,
because we think we can demonstrate that it is the Fruit of Usurpation. We
don't say to you, as you do to us, who knows but that some Time or other, there
has been some secret Flaws in your Line of Succession, which are now known only
to GOD? No, but we point out to you the Time, and show you how you set up
without any Mission from CHRIST, either mediate or immediate. We freely
acknowledge from that Time, your Succession is uninterrupted, though you have
no Registers to show; and some Lay-Ordinations have not spoiled your
Succession, but it is just as good now as when you began. And in choosing
Episcopal Ordination we venture nothing; for if yours be as good as can be, it
cannot be better than the Bishops, from whom you say, you had it. If we are
prejudiced and biast in this Affair, it must be a very strange Piece of
Self-denial that blinds us; For it is natural to all Men, to love Power and
Greatness; and can any Man think, that we had not rather be as high in Power
and Authority as any Bishop in England, as your Principle would make us, than
to be only the Bishop's Curate and Substitute? Who had not rather think that he
has Power to ordain, and act independently, than to be in Subordination,
provided the Evidence were equal on both Sides? But the Evidence against our
bing really Bishops, (as you would make us) is so clear and full, that we think
nothing but the Pride of Korah, can hinder our seeing it. And if we are not
Bishops, it is certain these Ministers are nothing, that is, they have no
Authority by Succession, for we have the same Authority as they had, who first
ordained the New England Ministers. If they were real Bishops, so are we; if we
have not the Power of Ordination, it is certain they had it not. And if they
had it not, their Successors have none. In a Word, Mr. Hobart and Brethren
cannot prove themselves lawful Ministers, without proving us to be Bishops at
the same Time. And who can think we should not be glad to see that Point well
proved?

As I know that I am liable to Mistakes, so I endeavor always to keep my Ears
open, and be disposed to receive Truth from any Person, and I should not have
been ashamed or unwilling to have changed my Opinion once more, could I have
seen Reason for it. Upon sevral Accounts I should have been very glad, to be
convinced, that I may go safe to Heaven in the Dissenting Way. I grant, that
what he says, is true, that if we would all become Dissenters it would save a
great deal of Money: Besides, it would save Candidates for the Ministry the
Charge and Danger of a Voyage, in which several have lost their Lives already,
it would preserve us from much Obloquy and Reproach cast upon us by Reason of
our Conformity to the Church of England: were it not for which, we might have
as much Respect and Honor as others: whereas now our Names are cast out as
evil, and we have the Trial of cruel Mockings, and are treated as the
Offscouring of all Things, and have almost all manner of Evil said of us
falsely for Conscience Sake: so that a Man that values his Reputation, had need
have in some Degree the Spirit of a Martyr, ar at least of Confessor, in order
to become a Churchman.

But then on the other Hand, I am obliged to consider, that if I turn
Dissenter, besides other Evils, I must assume the Office of a Bishop and
ordain, which in me would be a taking GOD's Name in vain, and a lying in
CHRIST'S Name, saying that he has sent me to ordain, when I know he has not.
And I must countenance and own those who do so: While those Words sound awfully
in my Ears, Numb. xvi. 40. That he be not as Korah and his Company. If I had
lived among the Successors of Jonathan, Micah's Priest, I Am sure it would have
been my Duty to have separated from them, although they had as signal
Blessings, and as long Possession to show for their Usurpation, as the
New England Ministers have. I often reflect on the Case of Saul, King of
Israel, who for his transgressing the divine Order, pleaded his pious
Intentions and the Necessity he was under, 1 Samuel xiii. 9. 12. Therefore said
I, the Philistines will come down now upon me from Gilgal, and I have not made
Supplication unto the LORD; I forced myself therefore, and offered a burnt
offering. If ever the Plea of Necessity, and Zeal for Worshipping GOD, could
excuse the transgressing GOD's Method and Order, certainly Saul must have been
justified in what he had done. For he forced himself to it out of an earnest
Desire to recommend himself to GOD's Protection in so eminent a Danger. He
would have been glad with all his Soul to have complied punctually with GOD's
Rule.

Now hear Samuel's Answer to this Plea of Necessity. ver. 13. And Samuel said
unto Saul, thou have done foolishly: thou have not kept the Commandment of the
LORD thy GOD, which he commanded thee, now thy Kingdom shall not continue. And
again upon the like Occasion, he says to him, 1 Samuel xi. 22. Has the LORD as
great Delight in burnt Offerings and Sacrifices, as in obeying the Voice of the
LORD? Behold to obey, is better than Sacrifice; and to hearken, than the Fat of
Rams. For Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft, and Stubbornness is as
Iniquity and Idolatry. Now Sacrifices and burnt Offerings were then positive
Institutions, as Ordination and the Sacraments are now, from hence I certainly
conclude, it is safer to wait GOD's Time for them, than to receive them from
uncommissionated Hands. And where GOD gives not an Opportunity to receive them
according to his appointed Order, he will not be displeased with us for not
receiving them.

When I consider how heinous a Crime it is to counterfit a Man's Hand, and much
more the Hand and Seal of a Prince, I am afraid to pretend that I have a
Commission to send Ambassadors to act, sign, and seal in CHRIST'S Name, when I
know I have none; or even to join with those who do so. Here is one Difficulty,
which if Mr. Hobart, had helped me to overcome, I should have returned him many
Thanks; and have been encouraged to have proposed some more. But since he
either will not, or can not help me to get rid of the Apprehension of this
amazing Guilt which stares me full in the Face, when ever I think of joining
with the Dissenters, I hope he will not be so unkind to my Soul, as to continue
to urge me to that Course which will expose me to the Danger of eternal
Damnation. For though I may be mistaken, and the Thing in itself be harmless
enough, yet so long as I believe it to be a Crime of a very heinous Nature, the
doing it must expose me to the Lashes of a guilty Conscience, and the Anger of
GOD. For he that doubts is damned, and whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin.
Whatever a Man believes to be a Sin, though in itself innocent, yet in him it
is a wilful Sin if he does it. I know without his Teaching, that there are some
Things in the Church of England, that might be altered for the better, and I
hope will be so, but seeing as it now is, it is the best I can join with. I
therefore hope to live and die in it, and leave it to the Reader whether this
is not the safest Course I can take? But if after all the serious Reader should
think thus, there is a great deal of Piety among the New England Ministers, and
therefore though their Call or Ordination is not regular, yet it may be safe to
continue with them. I would ask one Question, suppose, that the good People who
first settled this Country, instead of erecting a new Ministry, had only
changed the Elements of the LORD'S Supper; and instead of Bread and Wine, had
used Flesh and Cider, if that had been the Case, might there not have been as
much Piety among them as there is now? And yet would it not have been our Duty
to have joined with a more regular Church? And if the altering of CHRIST'S
Supper would have made Separation a Duty, why not the altering his Ministry?

I have now finished the most valuable Part of the Controversy; what remains is
little else, but a Collection of Calumnies, some of the most remarkable, I
shall briefly examine. Mr. Hobart asserts, that there is no Discipline in the
Church of England, unless a Shadow is a Substance, and in this Country we have
less than none, if less can be; this I called unruly Talking. Upon which he
makes a Remark in these Words, P. 104. Mr. Beach represents those who complain
of Defects in the Discipline of the Church as her Adversaries, and would have
you conceive of them as a Pack of unruly Talkers. And yet at the same Time, I
never pretended that there were no Defects in the Discipline of the Church, nor
ever knew any Churchman that did pretend it. All that I did, was to give you
Bishop Beveridge's Account of it, that you might judge whether it were so vile
as some Men pretend. I did not look upon myself at all concerned to justify or
condemn the spiritual Courts, as we in this Country shall never be concerned
with them, unless we choose them. And yet to vindicate the Government at Home,
and to wipe off a horrid Calumny from the Laws of our Mother Country, I will
venture to say again, it is unruly Talking to say, that by the Law a Clergyman
is bound to admit to the Lord's Supper, Drunkards, Whoremongerers, Adulterers,
Deists and Atheists, provided they have or may have a Commission; and if the
Minister refuses, he must be fined five hundred Pounds Sterling. So that in
this Case there is no Medium between Starving and Damming. This I call unruly
Talking, and I hope I can make it appear such to every candid Reader.

1. The Test Act here complained of, is the Law of the Nation, not the Church,
and it requires that they who have Commissions should be Communicants in the
Church. Now let it be Mr. Hildrop, or who it will, who says this Law leaves a
Clergyman no Medium between Starving or Damning, he arraigns the Laws of the
Nation, and charges the whole Legislature with the horrid Sin of Persecution in
the highest Degree. For neither Heathen, nor Papal Rome in the hottest
Persecution, ever did worse than to leave Christians no Medium between Dying or
Damning.

2. If any Clergyman should ever suffer any Penalty, much more that of five
hundred Pounds Sterling, for refusing to give the Sacrament to a notorious
scandalous Person, how great a Man soever he might be, this Clergy-man's
Suffering, cannot be owing to the Law, but to the Injustice of the Judge or
Jury. For such a Minister, so repelling has the Law clearly on his Side. For
the Rubric is the Law, which runs thus, So many as intend to be Partakers of
the holy Communion, shall signify their Names to the Curate, at least some Time
the Day before. And if any of those be an open and notorious evil Liver, or
have done any wrong to his Neighbors by Word or Deed, so that the Congregation
be thereby offended; the Curate having Knowledge thereof, shall call him, and
advertise him, that in any wise he presume not to come to the LORD 'S Table,
until he has openly declared himself to have truly repented and amended his
former naughty Life; and he is not to suffer them to be Partakers of the LORD
'S Table, till this is done. Now this I say is the Law, and by it every
Minister is obliged to repel all notorious evil Livers, and no to suffer them
to come to the LORD'S Table. And there is no Law that difannuls it. And though
it may happen once in an Age, that a Minister may be undone by doing his Duty
according to Law; yet it is false, to say that the Law undoes him, it is the
Wickedness of the Judge, or Jury, or the Malice of some great Man that starves
and undoes him. And may not a Dissenting Minister happen to be undone so too?

As to our Discipline in this Country, which he says is none at all, I
observed, our Clergy may be suspended by the Commissary, silenced by the
Bishop, and finally imprisoned if need be. To this he makes no Reply.

And as to the Laity, we keep from the Communion all that we judge unworthy.
But he says we have no Right to do this, but should be punished for our
Presumption, if we were not too far from England.

But I would observe, that as the Rubric is the Law of the Church, and the
Design of it is, that no scandalous Person should be suffered to partake of the
LORD'S Supper, so when the Cause cannot be laid before the Ordinary, not only
not within fourteen Days, but also not within fourteen Years, yet still it
gives us Right, and obliges us to keep the Offender from the LORD'S Supper till
he repent.

And to say that we must repel none from the Sacrament, because we cannot give
an Account of it to the Ordinary, within fourteen Days, is to defeat the End of
the Law, and contradict the Design of it, it is such a perverse Interpretation,
as would be admitted by no equal Judges.

And our Superiors at Home, are so far from resenting our Conduct in this
Affair, as he pretends, that they would be highly and justly displeased with
us, if we did not keep all notorious Offenders from the Communion.

He taxes me with Falsehood and Profaneness, in speaking so slightily of their
Discipline in the Case of Mr. Robbins of Branford, and some good People of
Guilford, whom they laid under Censure; and as I was informed, excommunicated.

He says, Mr. Robbins was restored; which I never denied. What I said was this,
that in Defiance of their Censure and silencing, he continued his
Administrations as much as ever; and so in all likelihood would have done to
this Day, if they had never took off the Censure. Their Censure signified
nothing.

As to the good People at Guilford, their Case (if I mistake not) was this,
upon choosing a Minister, a considerable Part of the Congregation, declared
their Dissatisfaction in the Person chosen, and so refused to own him as their
Minister. After some Time they were laid under Censure. But notwithstanding
this Censure, which I suppose remains upon them to this Day, they became and
continue as regular a Church as any in the Government. In mentioning this Case,
I called them zealous Souls, which I did from a personal Acquaintance I had had
with some of them, who appeared to me to be very honest, and as zealous as any
Set of Men at all, and told me with Tears in their Eyes, that they would not
have exposed themselves to so much Trouble and Difficulty, had it not been for
Conscience sake. And I must confess that it appeared to me amazing, (though I
was then a Dissenter) that so many serious, grave and religious People, for a
small and common Error, should be all without Mercy given up to Satan. This
Expression it seems has raised his Anger to a very high Pitch. He calls it
B^^^^squing the holy Scripture, and Infidel like, and I know not what. But I
hope the bare stating the Case will justify me. To show what mischievous
Wretches the Ministers of the Church of England are in this Country, he
frequently repeats that Calumny that we receive to our Communion, such
scandalous Persons as they have laid under Censure, and would have it believed
that this is our common Practice. P. 112. Now if he had known any one Instance
of this Nature, I Am persuaded that he who deals so much in Scandal would have
published it. For my Part I know of no such Thing. And notwithstanding his
swaggering so much of their Discipline that in the several Towns where I am
concerned, and among many hundreds of People, I know of but one Person under
their Censure, and given to Satan. And this Man has ever had a good Character,
and for many Years has been a Messenger of one of their Churches, and a Member
of their Ecclesiastical Councils, but he happened to fall into that abominable
Sin of saying that his Minister preached false Doctrine. Now the false Doctrine
was no worse than this, that the Sins of a Child of GOD, were better Evidences
of his good Estate than external Duties, etc. And his disliking and condemning
such Doctrine in his Minister, was all the Scandal that I could ever hear that
he was charged with, and I have seen the Charge drawn up against him; and yet
to Satan he was given. Now if this Man had desired Admission to our Communion,
as he never did; yet to prevent Obloquy I should not have received him, until I
had consulted with my Superiors, and taken their Directions. Whoever reads Mr.
Hobart and finds the Practice of receiving those whom they Censure so often,
and so awfully charged upon us, must needs conclude, that they drive on a
mighty Trade of censuring and excommunicating their People for Immoralities,
and we as constantly receive to our Communion those whom they resigned to
Satan. And yet every Body in these Parts knows that there is not one Word of
Truth in it. What can be more unjust than such Slanders, unless it be what
follows? P. 112. He says thus, That the Practice of Religion declines, and that
Irreligion and Profaneness grow upon us in all Places where the Church
prevails, you all know in your own Consciences that it is true; and Mr. Beach
himself has not the Hardiness to deny it. If I have not Hardiness, I Am sure he
has a very large Stock of it. I have known some Men who in a violent Passion,
have Hardiness enough to say any Thing that is Spightful and Ill-natured,
although there is no Truth in it. To be sure, what he says I had not the
Hardiness to deny, I really did deny at the same Time. The Generality of
waspish People after a short Fit of Anger, grow calm; but the longer Mr. Hobart
writes, the more fierce and out-ragious he grows. He says, P. 112. All my
Argument seems as if it were designed to prove that the worst Religion commonly
does produce the best Men. To which I reply, when a Man is transported with
Passion, Arguments and Things seem quite different from what they really are.
And if Mr. Hobart will put off Wrath and grow cool, my Argument will appear in
a very different Light. And certainly he does not well to be so very angry,
because he found himself unable to answer it. My Argument as he calls it, is
this, we cannot know whether the peculiar Tenets of any Sect of Christians are
true or false, merely by the good or bad Lives of the Professors of that Sect,
E. G. You cannot certainly determine, whether the peculiar Tenets of the
Baptists, Congregationalists, Presbyterians or Church Men are true, by
observing their Lives, because they all agree in holding the omnipotent Motives
to a holy Life, contained in the Gospel. And because some Men who have
unhappily fallen into such Heresies as Arrianism and Socinianism have lived
excellent Lives, it is therefore very dangerous to make this our Rule to judge
by. Now I don't find, that Mr. Hobart is able to confute this, but instead of
that, falls to his wonted Practice of Railing, and says, I seem to design to
prove that the worst Religion commonly makes the best Men. Whereas I was not
speaking of different Religions, but only of different Opinions in the same
excellent Religion. And though it may again provoke his Anger, I will venture
to add, although he Boasts much of their Discipline, as though it were the main
Pillar of Religion, yet the Quaker Discipline does vastly excel the
Presbyterian in Strictness; and they censure ten at least, to the Presbyterians
one; and yet I suppose he will not think that a good Reason to turn Quaker.

In saying these Things, I do not take it for granted, as he says, that the
Practice of Religion decays, as the Church grows.

I am persuaded, that solid Christian Virtue, as well as Knowledge increases as
the Church gains Ground in the Country; and Thousands of People are really
bettered by it in their moral Character. If he knows none that are so, I think
I do. I should be ashamed of this kind of Disputing, if he had not compelled me
to it. In a Word, there is nothing in the Church of England, that can hinder us
from being as eminent in true Piety, as we can possibly be in any Church on
Earth. And therefore whether it be true, or false, that there are many loose
People who pretend to be Churchmen, yet it is nothing to the Purpose: For other
Men's neglecting or abusing the best Means of Piety, need be no Hindrance to my
making a good Improvement of them.

I come now to examine what he has said of the Conduct of the Venerable
Society. Which he begins with an Introduction in these Words, P. 113. I suppose
nothing in my former Address is more resented by my Antagonists, than what I
said on this Head; and they have their Reasons for it; for it must be owned,
that Interest is a very tender Point with most Men. -- Their Interest and a
very considerable one, evidently lay at Stake. -- Now what such ill-natured and
unmanly Flouts can prove, I do not understand; unless it be the Author's
Uncharitableness and Censoriousness, he must needs judge our Hearts by his own,
otherwise he could not conclude that Interest is dearer to us than the Truth of
CHRIST. Besides, this malicious Aspersion is perfectly groundless; for Mr.
Caner whom he in particular charges with it, has no Interest at all at Stake,
nor any Concern with the Society, and Dr. Johnson and I could at any Time
advance our Interest by leaving New England; so that if we were ever so wicked
Men, this Reproach is certainly groundless. And to slander the Devil, is
unmanly. Jude 9. Michael the Archangel when contending with the Devil, durst
not bring against him a railing Accusation, but these speak evil of those
Things which they know not. However, in Gratitude toward that venerable and
charitable Corporation, I shall say a few obvious Things in answer to his
virulent Aspersions. What he chiefly insists upon is, that the Society ought
not to send Missionaries to such Places where there are Protestant Ministers of
any Denomination, at least no till the Heathen are all converted, and all such
Places as have no sort of Protestant Ministers are supplied. This is the grand
Point which he contends for, and pretends he does it out of a Principle of
Charity to the Souls which are perishing in Darkness. I think this is the Sum
of his Discourse in both Addresses. This I confess has a plausible Appearance;
but I think a very pernicious Tendency. For,

1. There are now so many Colleges and Shepherd's Tents, and so many Teachers
of various Opinions, all called Protestant Ministers, that there is scarce a
Place on the Continent settled by his Majesty's Subjects, where there is not a
Protestant Minister of one Kind or another settled amongst them. So that if the
Society must not send Missionaries where there are Protestant Ministers, they
must very soon send none to this Continent; For wherever the Society erects a
Mission, there the Dissenters soon open a Meeting.

I will not say, there is no Place, where it is otherwise; but this is true of
all Places that I know; and if it be otherwise in a few Places now, I am
persuaded it will not be so long. If therefore Mr. Hobart's Reasoning takes
Place, the Society must withdraw all their Missions from this Continent, and
leave many Thousands of Church People to turn Sectaries, any Thing or Nothing:
which will certainly be the Consequence. Which whether it can consist with
their Charity I leave.

I readily agree with him, that it is not the Design of the Charter that the
Society should send Missionaries to convert Presbyterians to the Church: and I
am farther of Opinion, that it is a base Reflection in him to say they do so.
For they never send a Missionary where there is a Protestant Minister of any
Denomination, unless there be likewise a Number of Church People who earnestly
desire a Minister, and yet cannot afford a sufficient Maintenance. They never
send Missionaries to convert Protestants to the Church of England; but to
minister to Church People; and if Dissenters by that Means are added to the
Church, they are not ashamed to own, they do not think by this any Evil is
done. This is the Truth and all the Truth. And therefore it is a scurvie
Reflection, when he says that the Society and their Missionaries do just as the
Bishop of St. David's says, the Romish Society de Propaganda Fide do; only
changing the Word Pope for Bishops. P. 132.

I grant, there was a Time, when, as Dr. Bray says, there was little or no
Occasion of sending Missionaries to the Massachusetts or Connecticut, because
there was then few or no Church People who wanted a Minister, yet now the Case
is very much altered, and as there are some Thousands, so they are like to
increase, notwithstanding all Opposition. I think he is mistaken in supposing
that the Church would have come to nothing before this Time, if the Society had
not upheld it; for though we acknowledge their Charity with the sincerest
Gratitude; yet I believe, unless we had met with as severe a Persecution, as
the Protestants do in France, it would have subsisted and grown. For the People
in this Country are naturally inquisitive, and the Dissenting Religion always
changing and fluctuating, and the Writings of the Church coming in to the
Country and exceeding all others, the most ingenious People would from Time to
Time become in Heart Churchmen, though they had not an Opportunity to join with
the Church. This was the Case of several before ever the Society opened a
Mission in Connecticut.

In answer to what I had said of the Society's being ready to improve all
Opportunities to convert the Heathen, he says, P. 142. he will mention one
particular Instance of the Society's neglecting a fair Opportunity of
christianizing the Heathen, which is the Scheme of the late Reverend Mr.
Sergeant for erecting a Boarding School, for the Education of Indian Children,
etc.

Now as to this, I will venture to say, that had Mr. Sergeant applied to the
Society, and offered to be their Missionary to these very Indians, they would
certainly have received him joyfully, and have supported him in that Mission
Liberally. But as there never was any such Motion made to them; so I cannot see
with what Justice they can for this be charged with neglecting the Heathen. Is
it a Crime in the Society, that by Orthodox Clergy, they don't think is meant
all sorts of Dissenting Ministers or Teachers, and consequently don't incline
to maintain them? Indeed he undertakes to prove that by Orthodox Clergy, in
their Charter, is meant all kind of Ministers except Romish Priests. P. 143.
All Calvinist Ministers at least. But every one who understands English, knows
that the Words Clergy and Orthodox Clergy in England, no more means Dissenting
Ministers of the Presbyterian, Independent, or Baptist Persuasion, than the
Word Bishops denotes Presbyterian, Independent, or Anabaptist Bishops; though
they all esteem themselves the only true Bishops, and the only Orthodox Clergy.

He further argues, that King William who granted this Charter was a Calvinist.
But I answer, he was no Dissenter, but being the Head or Protector of the
Church of England, he used the Word in the same Sense as the Church uses it.
And such a Calvinist as he was, he gave a Salary to support a Minister in the
first Church of England Congregation in New England. And as to what he says of
Dr. Macsparran, he is mistaken, for the King in Council never did declare
Dissenting Ministers to be Orthodox Clergy in the legal Sense; it was only in
the Dissenters Sense, or what was supposed the Sense of the Donors of the Land
in Dispute. And when the Story is rightly told, it will appear, they had but
little Occasion for giving public Thanks to Almighty GOD upon that Account as
some of them did. He adds, that the Society understood it so. But I add they
never did so understand it, and accordingly never did send a Dissenter upon the
Mission. Neither does the Words Calvinist Minister, denote a Dissenting Teacher
as Mr. Hobart imagines.

Mr. Hobart seems so full of Compassion toward the poor Indians, that he would
have us all quit New England, and go amongst them, although we have no manner
of Prospect of Success, but were sure to be knocked on the Head, or shot to
Death for our Pains. For says he, It Is a poor Shift indeed to pretend that the
Indians Aversion to Christianity excuses the Society from making any Attempts
to convert them to it. Had the Apostles and primitive Christians been of Mr.
Beach 's Mind in this Case, Christianity had probably never made any Progress
in the World. P. 139.

I answer, the Case of the Apostles differed widely from ours, they had
Miracles to awaken the Attention of the most stupid or obstinate, and therefore
might expect Success where there was no previous Inclination to hear or receive
them. They might with good Reason have gone into such a Country as Spain now
is, notwithstanding the Inquisition; and have Preached freely against
Superstition and Idolatry; but I don't see that any sober Minister how zealous
soever, no, nor so great an Enthusiast as Mr. Whitefild does think that he has
at this Day a Call to do so: or should be likely to do any Good in such a mad
Undertaking.

Mr. Hobart goes on in his usual Way of Fleering, and says, I hope Mr. Beach
does not mean, that so long as the Indians have an Aversion to Christianity,
the Society are excusable in letting them alone; but if once they should
embrace it in the Form of Presbyterianism or Independency, it would be Time to
send Missionaries to convert them to the Episcopacy and Liturgy of the Church
of England. P. 139.

No, no, Mr. Hobart, I don't mean any Thing like that, and you know I don't.
All I desire of you is, that when we endeavor to instruct them in the
Christian Religion, you would not try to prejudice them against us, as some
have done. When I first came into this Mission, I made an Attempt to instruct
the Indians near to Newtown, being about 20 Families: but after a short Trial I
found that I labored in vain, and they refused to hear any Thing about
Religion from me, and to show how much they defied the Thoughts of the Church
of England, they would call me Churchman, Churchman, out of Contempt, which
they had learned from the neighboring Dissenters. And some of these poor
Creatures with whom I had cultivated some Intimacy, advised me to give over my
Attempt; for the English they said, had told them, that if they received me for
their Minister, they must maintain me, and I would in Time get their Land from
them. Pretty much as Mr. Hobart strives to prejudice the good People of
New England against the Church, by telling them of an intolerable Yoke that it
will bring them under, if they come into it; that they must pay Tithes and
maintain the dignified Clergy in England, etc. As I esteem it a greater Good to
convert one Infidel to Christianity, than an hundred Dissenters to the Church;
so it would have been a vast Pleasure to me, if I might but have succeeded in
this Design. And though he reproaches the Society for neglecting the Indians at
Stockbridge; yet I am persuaded if they should open a Mission there, (as I am
confident they would if desired,) and send one of us to instruct those Indians,
Mr. Hobart would dislike it as much as he does our continuing among the
English. And if so, it will seem that his Charity to the Indians Souls, is like
Judas his Charity to the Poor, who said, why was this Waste? It might have been
sold for much, and have been given to the Poor, not that he cared for the Poor.
-- Envy sometimes wears the Mask of Charity.

Mr. Hobart represents it, as though wherever the Church comes, it destroys the
Practice of Religion, and brings an Inundation of Wickedness -- and yet that if
we would go and set up this same wicked Church, almost any where out of
New England, he says, it would be an enlarging the Redeemer's Kingdom, and a
bringing many Souls to Glory; which is such a monstrous Inconsistency, that one
would be tempted to think, that if we might but be banished, or starved out of
New England, Mr. Hobart does not much care whose Kingdom we enlarge.

And seeing he is so extremely urgent for us all to leave New England, and go
some where among the Indians, and yet does not pretend that he can tell us
where we may go, to be received by them and live among them; it looks therefore
as though he had so much Love and good Will to our Souls, as to wish us all the
great Happiness of going to Heaven by the Way of Martyrdom.

I shall conclude this Head when I have made one or two Remarks.

1. It is impossible with any Degree of Modesty to arraign either the Wisdom or
Faithfulness of the Society, upon the Account of their not sending Missionaries
to this or that Place; unless we knew their Affairs and in what Degree the
People who seem to be neglected, were worthy of a Missionary, as well as the
Society do; which certainly Mr. Hobart does not. 2. Every Benefactor to the
Society is allowed the Privilege to appropriate his Benefaction to the
instructing the Heathen, if he pleases; so that it shall be put to no other
Use. Accordingly some do confine their Benefactions to the instructing the
Negroes, some to the purchasing Bibles to be sent to one particular Missionary,
etc. and every ones Desire is punctually complied with. And therefore Mr.
Hobart's representing the Society as being false to their Trust and defeating
the Design of the Donors, is very unjust. 3. As the Benefactors certainly know,
where the Missionaries are sent, so it must be presumed, that it is their
Desire that their Donations should be put to that Use, to which they are now
applied. Nay, that they would withdraw their Subscriptions and Benefactions if
they were not so used.
Mr. Hobart tells us, that in Queen Anne's Reign, when High-Church was rampant,
and the Protestant Religion lay gasping at her Feet -- it was at this unhappy
Season, that the Society diverted from their original Design, and engaged in
the Party Business of promoting the Church of England and Presbyterians.

And yet in the same Page, before he has got to the Bottom, he forgets himself,
and says, it was when Mr. Cutler, Mr. Johnson, and Mr. Brown went for Orders.
This says he, turned the Attention of the Society from those Places in which
they were before propagating the Gospel, and put an End to their Schemes of
enlarging the Redeemer's Kingdom by bringing the Heathen into it.

Now as both these Assertions cannot be true, seeing they make an absolute
Contradiction, so there is not one Word of Truth in either of them. For the
Society since that Time have been so far from laying aside their Scheme of
enlarging the Redeemer's Kingdom by bringing the Heathen into it, that they
have done ten Times as much both in converting Negroes and Indians since, than
ever they did before. And at that Time which he says, was especially fatal to
Christianity, the Society erected but one single Mission in New England in
which Dr. Cutler now serves. An astonishing Thing indeed, that the assisting of
that one poor Congregation in Boston, should prove the FATAL Overthrow of
Christianity, and put an End to any further enlarging of the Redeemer's
Kingdom! It is true, since the first Mission was opened in Connecticut, which
was not at either of the Seasons mentioned by Mr. Hobart, the Church has been
growing here, and all Opposition and Discouragements seem still to increase it.
Which methinks should make its Adversaries suspect, that it may be that Plant
which our heavenly Father has planted, and therefore cannot be rooted up. And
certainly it would be no Disparagement even to the Wisdom of Mr. Hobart, to
reflect upon the Advice of Gamaliel, Acts v. 38. Now I say unto you, refrain
from these Men, and let them alone, for if this Counsel, or this Work be of
Men, it will come to naught. But if it be of GOD, ye cannot overthrow it; lest
happily ye be found even to fight against GOD.

If instead of publishing so many defamatory Untruths against the Church People
in general, against the Society, nay, and representing that excellent Princess
Queen Anne, as a most mortal Enemy to the Protestant Religion, for which he has
no Grounds, but only because she was not able for some Time before she died, to
attend to the public Business; I say, if instead of publishing such virulent
Untruths, he had fairly reasoned against our Tenets, he would certainly have
consulted his own Innocence better, although he had not gained so much Applause
among the Bigots and High fliers of his Party. As for that Calumny which Mr.
Hobart has published of Dr. Johnson and his Son, viz. that they were guilty of
the Sin of Sacrilege in taking the Society's Pay, a Year or two for no Services
done; this is an absolute Forgery of his own: as is made very evident by the
Dr. in his Vindication of himself and his Son in his Letter to the Publisher of
the Post-Boy of June 24, 1751, See also a Letter of the Doctor's, dated Aug. 2,
which was sent to the Publisher of the Post-Boy, but not printed, and is now
added as an Appendix to this.
in which he says, My Son was 2 or 3 Years in doubt which of the two
Professions to follow: during which Time he was appointed Catechist, and
constantly officiated at Ripton, or Stratford in my Absence, according to
Agreement, til he finally concluded to follow the Law. -- Upon which he
immediately on March 25, 1748, wrote his Resignation to the Society; and I have
by me from the Secretary an Answer dated June 23, following, wherein are these
Words," "I will acquaint the Society at the next Board with Mr. Johnson 's
Resignation of the Catechist's Place, and heartily wish him Success in whatever
Profession he designs. -- In the same Letter he also vindicates the School
there from Mr. Hobart's Calumny, and I doubt not but as good an Account if
there were Opportunity, might be given of all the rest of his slandrous Stories
and Insinuations. -- As to the Rev. Mr. Caner, in particular, I believe any
impartial Person that shall compare his Vindication of himself with this
pretended Answer, will judge, that his, except a little idle quibbling, is in
effect, only urging the same Things over again; notwithstanding which, I cannot
but think his Vindication will be thought yet to stand good; as well as Dr.
Johnson's Preface, notwithstanding all he has pretended to answer to that. --
At least we are content to leave all that are disposed to do us Justice to
compare and judge between us.

As many of Mr. Hobart's Calumnies are formed upon an inadvertent or else a
wilful Misrepresentation of the Society's yearly Abstracts, I will here once
for all, state the Truth of this Matter, that every honest Man may see the
Injustice Mr. Hobart is guilty of, whether he will own it or not. As it is
impossible for the Society to foresee what Accidents may happen in regard to
the Death or Removal of their Missionaries; it is their Practice in stating
their annual Accounts to charge themselves with every Salary by them at any
Time, granted to Missionaries, Catechists, or Schoolmasters, till such Times
as they have agreed to drop any such Mission or School by them erected. By this
Means every one concerned, may see what is their ordinary annual Expense, which
they are liable to pay, though perhaps by Reason of the Death or Resignation of
some of their Missionaries or Catechists, the whole of it may not actually be
drawn out of the Treasurers Hands that Year. Thus for Instance, Marblehead is
now vacant, and has been so for about two Years, and yet the Place is kept upon
the Abstract, and the Society charge themselves with L 60 per Ann. to that
Mission, though neither is any Thing paid, nor is there any Missionary there to
demand it. And the Reason is, that the Society intend to re-establish that
Mission, as soon as a proper Person appears to discharge the Duties of it.

In like Manner the Society are not solicitous, to drop the Name of any Person
employed by them from the Abstract, immediately upon his Discharge, provided
they intend to replace another in his Stead, but oftentimes wait till a new
Appointment determine who is to succeed. Thus Dr. Johnson's Son was not only
continued upon he List, but is still continued, and perhaps may be continued,
till some other Person is appointed to succeed him, though he has received
nothing from the Society since the 25th of March 1748, but then the Salary
allowed for the Place where he formerly officiated, is annually carried forward
to the succeeding Years Account, under the Article of Money, remaining in the
Hands of the Treasurer. -- The short is, the Society's Design is to exhibit to
their Benefactors, not so much the precise Sum actually paid every Year, which
sometimes considering the Death of Missionaries at a great Distance, or other
such Accidents may be very difficult if not impossible; as to give an Abstract
of the annual Charge to which they are liable, and which they have taken upon
themselves to make good, if regularly called for. Nor is there any Injustice
done here to the Benefactors, or to any one else, since (as I observed before)
the Surplusage if any such there be, is brought into the next Year's Account,
as Money remaining in the Treasurer's Hands.

From hence now any unprejudiced Person, may see what Injustice Mr. Hobart has
been guilty of toward Dr. Johnson and the Society in charging them in such a
bold unwarrantable Manner, without truly understanding the Affair of which he
was writing. I will not hastily charge him as wilfully misrepresenting the
Case, but surely he should have taken better Care to inform himself rightly,
before he pretended to lay so heavy and grievous a Charge. Nor can I think that
he will be able to vindicate himself in this particular, as a candid Writer or
an honest Man, unless he publicly retracts this abusive Calumny.

Among other Slanders, he says, P. 148. It is credibly reported, that those who
have signed Petitions for Missionaries, have (to appear like Persons of some
Consideration) been some Times dignified with Civil or Military Titles which
they had no Right to. -- Now as to this,

I remember very well about forty Years ago, I heard this credible Report among
the Boys at Stratford, the Church People had just then sent a Petition to the
Society for a Minister, and a certain Boy, whom I can name reported, as Mr.
Hobart says, that some of them in signing this Petition gave themselves the
Title of Justices of the Peace, others Captains, some Majors, and one Man,
esteemed the very poorest among them, called himself Colonel. I have not heard
this credible Report since, till now that it is published by Mr. Hobart. And a
great many such credible Reports would have perished in eternal Oblivion, had
not this great HISTORIAN revived, and brought them to Light. But now as to the
Credibility of this Report, (which like the Nag's Head Consecration, has now
slept about 40 Years.) The first Church People in Stratford, whatever their
moral Character might be among their Enemies, were certainly Men of good Sense
and Knowledge, their Enemies being Judges. And is it credible, that they would
use such a foolish, and more than childish Method to impose upon the Society!
Especially when they did nothing, but by the Direction and with the Mediation
of Colonel Heathcote and Governor Hunter. Is it credible, that these Gentlemen
would countenance such a foolish, and wicked Project, when they had both been
at Stratford, and conversed with these Churchmen all together? as they informed
the Society. Society's History, P. 334.
Besides all this, the Society's History confutes this credible Report, it
gives us the Character of the Church People at Stratford at that very Time,
thus, The first People who strove to have the Church Worship settled here,
(Stratford,) were about 15 Families, most Tradesmen, some Husbandmen, who had
been born and bred in England. Here you see are no civil or military Titles.

Indeed the Society by long Information from all Parts of this Country, have a
more perfect and universal Knowledge of the State of Religion in it, and of the
Manners of the People, than either Mr. Hobart or I have. And his Arguments,
they had well weighed, above 40 Years ago, as is evident from their History.

But to return to his credible Report, every one who has Malice and Impudence
enough to invent any disgraceful Story of the Church People, especially of
their Minister, is with such as Mr. Hobart, esteemed a credible Reporter. I
have had many such credible Reports raised of me. It has been as credibly
reported, that I get so so drunk at the holy Communion that I cannot go home,
but lie and sleep in the Streets. And when his History of the Episcopal
Separation with which he threatens us, comes out, it will no Doubt be filled
with many such credible Reports.

If what Mr. Dickinson says, is just, P. 168. When a Person has Trial of cruel
Mockings, and has his Name cast out as evil, for keeping a good Conscience, and
doing his Duty; it is as really Persecution, as if he suffered Bonds and
Imprisonments. If it be so, the Church People in this Country have had a large
and full Cup of Persecution. But of late, (if my Observation don't fail me)
this Bitterness is happily abating, and Charity and mutual good Offices and
Friendship are increasing among us; I hope Mr. Hobart with all his credible
Reports, will not be able to revive and rekindle that bitter unchristian Spirit
of Envy which was almost extinguished. Mr. Hobart's Artifice is well described
by the Spectator, No. 125. There is, says he, one Piece of Sophistry practiced
by both Sides, and that is the taking any scandalous Story that has been ever
whispered or invented of a private Man, for a known undoubted Truth, and
raising Speculations upon it. Calumnies that have never been proved, or have
been often refuted, are the ordinary Postulatums of these infamous Scriblers,
upon which they proceed as upon first Principles granted by all Men, though in
their Hearts they know they are false, or at least very doubtful, when they
have laid these Foundations of Scurrility, it is no Wonder that their
Superstructure is every way answerable to them. -- It is the restless Ambition
of artful Men, that thus breaks a People into Factions, and draws several
well-meaning Persons to their Interest by a special Concern for Religion. How
many honest Minds are filled with uncharitable and barbarous Notions out of
their Zeal for Religion? What Cruelties and Outrages would they not commit,
against Men of an adverse Party, whom they would honor and esteem, if instead
of considering them as they are represented, they knew them as they are? Thus
are Persons of the greatest Probity seduced into shameful Errors and Prejudices
and made bad Men, even by that noblest of Principles the Love of Religion. I
cannot here forbear mentioning the famous Spanish Proverb. If there were
neither Fools nor Knaves in the World, all People would be of one Mind.

How exactly this Desciption agrees to Mr. Hobart's Piece, I shall no further
determine, than to observe, that he has either collected or invented a Number
of Facts, some of which are mere Fiction and Romance, and have no Truth at all
in them, others he has very much disguised and misrepresented, and from these
Postulatums he has reasoned and drawn Inferences until he has proved us to be
the most foolish and wicked Set of Men, the Bane and Pests of the Country, the
Murderers of Souls, nay, and of Religion itself, so that we ought to be the
Scorn and Abhorrence of all Mankind.

Here it may not be improper to examine one Instance of Railing, which he would
have it thought that I am guilty of; which is this, In answer to his saying,
that our Conformity to the Church Worship is not to be esteemed an Act of
Obedience either to GOD, or the King, I said, that I feared, that such as he
disobeyed both God and the King, in particular, in that they refused to pray
for the Royal Family, according to the Form injoined by the King. For they
think it unlawful to use a Form of Prayer, imposed by the highest Authority on
Earth; and so make Conscience of disobeying GOD and the King.

This put Mr. Hobart into such a violent Passion, that as he tells us, he quite
trembled, he cries out, is this the Man that began his Book with those solemn
Expressions, which considered in this Connection, I tremble to repeat.

This he says, is one of the heaviest Charges he ever knew brought against any
Man, it is horrid almost beyond Conception, for my Part, I cannot conceive any
Man on Earth so bad, and I doubt whether human Nature is capable of so great a
Degree of Wickedness. P. 39. In this Strain he runs on, several Pages together.
Now that the Reader may judge whether I deserve such Treatment for this
Expression, 1. I would observe that it is agreed, that our Governor did send
the King's Command to every Dissenting Minister in this Colony, in all Prayers
for the Royal Family to use these individual Words, Frederick Prince of Wales,
etc. 2. It is notorious Fact that Dissenters do make Conscience of refusing to
use, or to submit to a Form of Prayer, enjoined by the highest human Authority.
I hope I need not prove to a Dissenter, that it is their grand Principle, that
though a Thing or Form of Prayer be in itself ever so indifferent or innocent,
yet if it once comes to be enjoined or commanded in Religion by human
Authority, they are then obliged in Conscience, not to yield to use it or
submit to the Imposition. Now this making Conscience of disobeying the King,
when he commands innocent and lawful Things, I verily believe is likewise a
disobeying GOD, who has commanded us to obey the King. And I would to GOD, I
might have no greater Guilt upon my Soul, when I come before my eternal Judge,
than I have contracted by this Expression. I did not suppose, that the
Dissenters thought that they disobeyed GOD in this; For it is a Contradiction,
and impossible to be moved by Conscience to do what I know or believe to be
contrary to GOD's Will, for Conscience implies a Belief that it is GOD's Will
that I should do so. But my meaning evidently was, that Differenters make
Conscience of not doing what they ought to do; under the Opinion that GOD has
forbidden them to do it, e. g. GOD has commanded them to obey the King, but
they think they are bound in Conscience to disobey him, if he enjoins any
indifferent Thing in Religion. Mr. Hobart pretends that the King did not send
this Command to the Dissenters. But I answer, then our Governor is mistaken,
and it must be because the King knows, that Dissenters make Conscience of
disobeying him, or he does not at all value their Prayers. But let that be as
it will, what I insist upon is this, that if the King had laid such a Command
upon them, and they keep to their Principles, they would disobey him out of
Conscience, and that I believe is di^^^^^ing GOD. And therefore the horrid
Representa^^^^ of me, that Mr. Hobart has made, for saying, so, is most
unrighteous and abusive. However, I will not say of his praying for me upon
this Occasion, as he does of my praying that GOD would forgive him, viz. that
it is but a Mockery. No, but I say Amen to it, and thank him for it, and am
glad that he found and Inclination in his Heart to pray for me, though I fear
it was not without too much Wrath.

And now as to that Question, why Church People here cannot support their Way
of Religion, as well as the Presbyterians theirs? I answer, because we have not
the like Assistance from the Government. When a Congregation of Presbyterians
first set up their Worship in any Place, the Government lays a Tax on all the
Land in the Parish for the building their Meeting House and settling their
Minister, from which neither the Church People nor Minister is exempted; their
Colony Rates are likewise given them, etc.

To which Mr. Hobart replies, P. 135. What a peculiar Burden is this? Was ever
any poor People so oppressed before? And thus he goes on canting and fleering,
and says he, the Oppression which Mr. Beach groans under, seems almost to make
this wise Man mad. This I confess is unmercifully Arch and Witty! And perhaps
it may pass for solid Reason, and do great Execution, because it will raise a
stout Horse-Laugh, which is the Victory of a Banterer. But it does by no Means
convince me. He knows I don't complain, that Churchmen pay Colony Rates; but I
say we don't enjoy those Favors and Privileges, which our Neighbors do, and
this he knows to be true. Nay in some Respects Churchmen are denied the
Privilege of Englishmen, and treated as Slaves, not being allowed to vote, but
must be taxed by our Masters according to their Pleasure. I omit the Affair of
the Parsonage, it being more proper for the Law. And as to the Church of
England's being strictly and legally established in this Country, it having
always appeared to me disputable, I leave it to be disputed by Lawyers, and
build upon no Foundation, but what is clear and certain. He pretends, that I
falsify when I intimate, that a Churchman in Reading would save Money by
turning Dissenter. But as I have a better Opportunity to understand this Affair
than he, so I know that several Churchmen here would have saved some hundred
Pounds, if they had turned Dissenters. I grant indeed, that as the Government
is not pleased to empower us to raise Taxes among ourselves, but we do all by
Free Will, so some few it is possible may make an Advantage by it. But whose
Fault is this!

He represents us as being generally Men of little or no Religion, and few in
Number, and poor, and yet complains because we have built five Churches in the
two Towns of Stratford and Fairfield; which methinks, don't seem to hang very
handsomely together; for the less Religion People have, the less Cost and Pains
they will be at for the Worship of GOD.

Mr. Hobart says to us, P. 159. If your Separation from us is not certainly
right, it is certainly wrong. In this he is certainly mistaken. For we are
under no Tie of Conscience whatsoever, to worship GOD in the Dissenting Way? No
Law of GOD or Man requires it. If the Church be not established here, besure no
other Way is. No Law of this Government forbids the Worship of the Church, or
if it did, it must be null and void from the Beginning, such a Law being
inconsistent with the Charter. And therefore certainly it is no Sin to join in
the Church Worship. And consequently if the Worship of the Church appears a
more excellent Way, or if I am doubtful whether the New England Bishops, be
really lawful Bishops, it is not only harmless and safe, but my bounden Duty to
join with the Church. If any Dissenter is doubtful, whether it was right to
separate from the Church of England, I must say with Mr. Hobart, I apprehend an
easy and satisfactory Answer may be given. Which is, if you are doubtful
whether it was right to separate from the Church, that very Doubt is enough to
convince you, that it is wrong for you to keep out of the Church.

He says, P. 160. Every Man is undeniably under some Obligation to the Church
of which he is a Member.

Mr. Hobart in all his three Pieces about Schism has slily taken a notorious
Untruth for his Postulatum, and built all his Discourse upon it: viz. that the
Churches of New England are One uniform Church, like the Established Church of
England, so that for a Dissenter here to become a Churchman, is the same as a
Churchman's turning Dissenter in England, which is a poor begging the Question,
and has no Truth in it, as I shall now show. It is certain and notorious, that
the Dissenting Churches in this Country differ as really, and as much from one
another, as many of them do from the Church of England. And if you should say
the Difference is not so great, yet I say Degrees alter not the kind. In some
Meetings, they use the Lord's Prayer, read the holy Scriptures, the Minister
keeps very much to one Form of Prayer, and preaches Arminianism, in other
Meetings, there is nothing of all this. In some Meetings the Terms of Communion
are very rigid, none are to be admitted, unless they make a Relation of their
Conversion, in others there is nothing like it, and many abhor it. In some they
will gladly admit a Churchman to their Communion; in others they will not,
unless he makes of Recantation and enters into a particular Church Covenant.
But a few Years ago the Ministers of some of the most eminent Churches dare not
venture to baptize out of their own Meeting Houses, out of their own Town they
had no Power, upon any Occasion whatever. But to say no more of the Variety,
suppose I am baptized in, and am a Member of any Meeting in Connecticut, I
suppose all will allow, that I may join with any other Presbyterian or
Independent Church in Connecticut; although these two Churches do as really
differ from each other, as either of them do from the Church of England; why
then may I not as lawfully join with the Church of England? I hope my being
baptized in a Meeting, does not oblige me to be at peace with all, but only
with the national Church.

Again, if I was baptized in, and became a Member of the Church of Connecticut
or Stratford, why is not the Church of England as much a Part of the Church of
Connecticut, or of Stratford, as any other Church is? I must confess I cannot
see any Thing in this Plea, but a mere Scarecrow to affright weak People. For
if this Government had ever so good a Right to establish, yet they really have
established no Way of Worship, but have left every Society to do what is right
in their own Eyes. So that every Congregation may pray by Book, or without
Book, just as the Minister and People can agree, and therefore I am no more an
Offender against Connecticut Constitution, for using the Liturgy, than Mr.
Hobart for neglecting it. And seeing most of the Churches of this Government
have always been altering, improving and reforming till some of them have got
to be almost, if not altogether Presbyterians, I can not see, why I might not
reform and amend too, as well as my Neighbors, without incurring the awful
Guilt of Schism. And pray, whom are we Churchmen Schismatics from? From the
Church of Connecticut, or the Church of New England? That cannot be; for there
is no such Church; But here are Scores or Hundreds of Churches, all differing,
both in Doctrine, Discipline and Worship, not only from one another, but even
from themselves in the Compass of a few Years. And therefore I don't understand
with what Propriety he styles us a Separation. For I Am no more a Separate from
him than he is from me. My Congregation are no more Separatists from his, than
his is from mine. The Presbyterian Congregation in Reading, are as much
Separatists from us, as we are from them, we are no more obliged by any Law of
GOD, or Man, to go to them, than they are obliged to come to us.

I suppose, Mr. Hobart would say, that the Presbyterian Churches were set up
first, and therefore we ought to yield to them. But this is not true; and if it
were true, it would make the Presbyterian Congregation in this Place
Schismatics, for the Episcopal Church was here first settled, before there was
any other Church. And as to this Country in general, the Church People, both
Ministers and People came as soon as the Independents; and were some of the
Patentees. And the Independents overpowering them, and banishing them, did not
deprive all Churchmen of a Right to breathe in New England Air.

And what if Sir Edmund Andross and his Company were as Arbitrary as the Grand
Turk, and as void of all true Religion as the Devils, as he represents them,
What is that to our Case? Does not your own Historian tell you, that some of
the first Patentees were Churchmen, and set up that Worship, and refused to
part with the Religion of their Mother Country, and for the were banished? And
yet Mr. Hobart allows that a Colony transplanting themselves carry the Religion
of their Mother Country with them. If so, I Am sure every Churchman who comes
from England, had a good Right to keep to the Worship. And as Church People had
at first at least as good a Right to set up the Church Worship, as the
Brownists and Congregationalists had to set up their Way, so we never lost this
Right, though for some Years unjustly kept out of it while there was no King in
Israel, and every Man did what was Right in his own Eyes.

Nay, let us put the Case that never any Churchman or Presbyterian had set Foot
on New England Shore, but as the Brownists and Independents first set up their
Way, so they had continued without Variation to this Day, had this been the
Case, I ask whether it would be sinful or schismatical for some, or all of
these to turn Presbyterians, and set up that Way?

I suppose, Mr. Hobart or any Presbyterian must allow, this would not only be
lawful, but a happy Change, and glorious Reformation, although they had all
been baptized and owned their Covenants, in Independent Churches, nay, although
Independents live as good Lives as Presbyterians, and have a stricter
Discipline, and are more rigid in their Terms of Communion. And if this be
granted, as certainly it cannot be denied by a conscientious Presbyterian, then
it unavoidably follows, that if there never had been a Churchman in New England
till this Day, yet it would be no Schism, no Transgression of any Law of GOD
for those who have been educated in the Presbyterian Way, and have been Members
of their Churches to set up the Worship of the Church of England. All the
Dispute is, whether it is not a much better or more excellent Way? If it be, it
is a glorious Reformation for Presbyterians to become Churchmen.

Mr. Hobart would account it a commendable Thing for a Member of a New-Light
Church, notwithstanding the Obligations he is under as a Member, to separate
from them, and to join with the Old Lights? Why then may not we esteem it a
commendable Things, for either old Lights or new, to join with the Church of
England? For they all originally schismatically left the Church of England.

He says indeed, that they only left the Corruptions of the Church. And just so
we only leave the Corruptions, Errors and Disorders of the Dissenters. But so
far as they are right, we are ready at all Times to join with them.

In the Conclusion he puts several awful Questions to our Conscience, all
grounded upon the false Representation of Facts, he had made before. Which
though numerous for the better Show, yet really amount to no more than this,
viz. if our asking the Society to assist us, has occasioned their neglecting
the Heather, then we are the criminal Causes of their eternal Damnation. And
whether we had not better all turn Dissenters? and whether it is not morally
certain if we would do so, that the Event would be the Conversion of a
Multitude of Pagans?

To which I reply, we must not do a certain Evil to obtain an uncertain Good.
For me to turn Dissenter, is to sin against my own Conscience. I can part with
my Money, and I hope with my Life: but I cannot part with my Religion.

And as to the Conversion of the Heathen, I Am so far from being morally
certain, that my turning Dissenter would be the Means of the Conversion of one
Heathen to Christianity, that I cannot see the least Probability of it. I am
morally certain that if the Society knew of any Place besides those they now
take care of, where there is a moral Certainty, that a Mission would be
successful, they would most gladly embrace such an Opportunity to convert the
Heathen; and rather than the want of Money should hinder, we would cheerfully
part with their Favors to us. This Money may perish with him, who thinks it is
more valuable than the Salvation of Souls. And I think we may safely conclude,
that we are not the criminal Causes of putting a Stop to the enlarging of the
Redeemer's Kingdom; for we are most heartily willing for the Promotion of it,
not only to part with the Society's Charity; but with our own Estates also.

But then we don't think it proper, to take Mr. Hobart's Advice, and for a mere
Dream of I know not what to be done among Pagans, and no Body knows where to
leave the Church and loose the Means of Grace, which through the Society's
Goodness we now enjoy.

How it can be a criminal Hindrance to the Enlargement of the Redeemer's
Kingdom, for us to ask the Society's Assistance, I cannot understand, since we
know that they are vastly more forward to send Missionaries to the Heathen,
when there is a Prospect of Success, than to us; as their Wants are more
pressing than ours, and Mr. Hobart's so often asserting the contrary is mere
Calumny.

And when we apply to the Society, we only desire them to judge, whether it be
more agreeable to their pious Designs, to grant, or to deny our Request. And
they are the properest Judges where their Missionaries are like to do the most
good.

I have now examined every Thing which I esteem material in this Piece, and
some Things perhaps too trivial: And after all remain of Opinion, that he has
offered nothing that can justify me before GOD or Man, if I should according to
his Desire turn Dissenter. If I mistake not, his Piece is mere vehement
Declamation grounded upon Untruths, Misrepresentations, and Calumnies. However,
as every one has a Right to judge for himself, I don't expect or desire, that
my Judgment should influence and Body else.

As I have remarked upon Mr. Hobart's Performance, with an honest Freedom: so
any one is welcome to find what Fault he pleases with my Opinion, provided he
treats me with Truth and Justice; which I Am sure Mr. Hobart has not done.

I shall now conclude with an Appeal to my Presbyterian Neighbors, who are
competent Witnesses, whether several heinous Crimes laid to my Charge are true.
Mr. Hobart has charged us one and all with the Blood of Souls, yea, with the
Blood of Religion itself, P. 160. because we so readily receive those whom they
for Scandal have laid under Censure; this he has represented as our common
Practice. Now no Guilt can be more amazing than the Murder of Souls, and the
Murder of Religion itself. Damnation is very dreadful, but a double Damnation
is due for the Murder of Souls, and of Religion. And yet how often has he
repeated this Charge? Now you my Brethren and Neighbors, are Eye Witnesses of
our Conduct, you can certainly tell whether these Things are so: To you I
Appeal against this Accuser, did I ever receive to our Communion one Person,
Man or Woman, whom you had censured or cast out from your Communion? You all
know for certain, that there never was any Thing of this Nature done. Nay, some
of you have complained that I have been too rigid toward those who have been
so unhappy as to fall into a gross Sin, in that I do not readmit them to
Communion immediately upon their acknowledging their Sin, but wait some Time
for their Amendment.

Again, do I ever, as he charges me, foment Divisions amongst you, or disturb
your Civil or Ecclesiatical Affairs? Is it possible to meddle less with other
Men's Affairs, or to live more peaceably and inoffensively than I do?

When he asserts, that such and such Things are credibly reported of us, e. g.
as that we dignify ourselves with Civil and Military Titles, which belong not
to us, when we sign Petitions to the Society, you must know that they are so
far from being credible, that they are incredible and malicious Slanders.

And since you see with your Eyes, that these horrid Charges and Accusations
are groundless Calumnies and Slanders, (and I believe the same Appeal may be
made by all my Brethren, as I have now made) I desire it of you, as a Piece of
common Justice, that you would not countenance or encourage such Railers, and
Propagators of injurious Falsehoods. For it is a Sin to love and hug a Lie, as
well as to make it. Whenever I have heard you of the Presbyterian Persuasion
abused and misrepresented by malicious Persons, I have esteemed it but just, to
vindicate you so far as I knew you to be wronged. And it is but just that we
should expect the same Treatment from you. Honest Men of all Sides should
combine to discountenance the Propagators of Scandal, though of their own
Party. For this wicked Practice is not only a great Injury to the Person
defamed, but it alienates and sours the Tempers of People who are obliged to
live together, and fills them with Spleen and Rancour to such a Degree, as
their Regard to their private Interest would never do.

And however you may boast of your Piety, there is really no more Religion
amongst you, than there is Love. Love or Charity is but another Name for
Holiness. And GOD is Love. And though Mr. Hobart is pleased to censure the
generality of the Church People as having little or no Religion; yet so little
as we have, if any of us should abandon himself to Slander in such a Manner as
he has done, I am confident our People would be perfectly ashamed of his
Writings.

The very Devil has his Name from Slandering and false Accusing; and no Sin in
the holy Scripture is more severely threatened than this, Psalm. xv. 1. The
Question is put, Lord who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy
holy Hill? Part of the Answer is, He that backbiteth not with his Tongue, nor
does evil to his Neighbor, nor takes up a Reproach against his Neighbbour. In
the New Testament it is expressly declared, that Revilers shall not inherit the
Kingdom of GOD, 1 Cor. vi. 10. St. Paul declares that Railers or false Accusers
are as worthy of Church Censures as Drunkards, 1 Cor. v. 11. If Discipline were
so carefully used among Presbyterians as Mr. Hobart pretends, he would
certainly feel the Smart of it himself.

But as for you my Brethren and Neighbors, I hope better Things of you; I hope
you will not suffer your Minds to be soured with his Leaven. That we should be
all of one Opinion is rather to be wished for, than expected; but that we
should treat each other fairly, that we should not speak evil one of another,
but promote each others Comfort and Happiness, is what we all acknowledge to be
right. No Difference of Opinion can excuse us, if we violate the common Rules
of Justice and Humanity. Mala. xi. 10. Have we not all one Father? has not one
GOD created us? why do we deal treacherously every Man against his Brother. Let
us love as Brethren, let us follow Peace with all Men, and the GOD of Love and
Peace will be with us.

And though you, or we, may at last be found to have lived in some Mistakes;
yet, if it shall appear, that we have uprightly endeavored to know and do
GOD'S Will; I hope such unavoidable Mistakes will not be imputed to you, or us,
to our Condemnation; but through GOD's infinite Mercies, and CHRIST'S
all-sufficient Merits, we shall rejoice together in eternal Love and Peace.
Which is the earnest Prayer of your Souls sincere Friend,

John Beach.

APPENDIX.
The following Letter was sent to the Publisher of the Post-Boy, sometime in
August last, in Answer to one of Mr. Hobart's, inserted in that Paper; but as
it was then neglected, it may not be improper to annex it to the foregoing
Vindication.

To the Publisher of the Post-Boy.
STRATFORD, August 2. SIR,
ONE would have thought an ingenuous Mind with any thing of a truly christian
Temper and Disposition, would, upon being misled into any wrong Representations
of a Fact injurious to a Neighbor's good Name, be glad to be set right, and
ready to repair the Injury. -- But Mr. Hobart, it seems is so far from this,
that, though I had given a Transcript of my Letter, clearly settling the Point,
against what he had insinuated, he has in yours by the last Post, done all he
could, to establish the odious Character he had given of me, without the least
Truth, or Provocation. -- It would be very easy to answer every Line of his
long quibbling and impertinent Performance, if this were a proper Place for it:
But as it is not, I beg leave only just to fix him down to the Facts as they
really are, and he knows them to be: -- He knows, the only Fact I objected to,
was, That my Son, (as he would have it,) continued to draw for his Salary,
after he ceased to do Duty. -- He knows he had charged this in so many Words,
by saying, This is the Case of Dr. Johnson, viz. without any Truth, joining
others with me in these Words, Their Fathers are not so speedy as they should
be, etc. but sometimes let their Pay run on for a Year or two after they have
left the Service. P. 150. This, says he, is the Case of Dr. Johnson. -- On the
other Hand, he now knows, my Son resigned, March 25, 1748. i. e. as soon as he
concluded to leave the Service, and that it was accepted June 23 following. --
Can he or any other Mortal, be so silly as to imagine, he or I would continue
to draw after the Term of his Resignation? I assure him we never did. -- Can
there be a more idle Quibble, than that against his Resigning immediately,
after he concluded to follow the Law, that he was present at two or three
Courts before, only the better to make a Judgment, whether that Profession
would be eligible to him; when he knows he never appeared at the Bar, till
above half a Year after? -- or than that against the Constancy of his
officiating, that he made a Tour to Cambridge in that Time, which it was before
agreed he should? -- Miserable must be the Condition of a Man reduced to such
Shifts as these! -- Is his own very frequent Attendance on the Courts, an
Argument that he ought long before now to have resigned his Salary and the
Ministry, and turned Lawyer? -- Or is it a reasonable Objection against his own
Constancy at Fairfield, that he sometimes takes a Ride to Boston? -- I am sorry
and ashamed for him, that he should so very weakly discover so much Venom! --
Now he would have it thought I impose on the World in pretending the Secretary
was ill at the Bath about that Time. -- Must I then produce another Letter from
him some time after this, thanking GOD for his Recovery, and excusing, on
Account of his late long Sickness, his not answering my Letters of October
1748, and March 1749, and Mr. Ogilvie's Testimony, who was then there, that he
was long Sick, and at the Bath about that Time? -- Might he not write his Name,
and yet not be able to make the Abstract? -- Or might not the most faithful
Secretary in the World, or Under Secretary be liable to some little
Inadvertencies? -- If Mr. H -- t had the least Candor he might have been
sensible that it was to this, and not to his Absence, that I ascribed Ripton's
being called a neighboring Town. -- And now as to the School, can the Society
be said to be imposed upon, when Mr. Brown for L. 15, takes Care that their
School here is faithfully kept, though by another Man, (to which they are
knowing,) and that it is done better than he could do it himself, as the People
here account it to be, though for this Care, he retains a small Part of the
Money? -- Whatever Mr. H -- t says, I do not believe any Person of Veracity
ever told him that Mr. Silby told him he did it for one third, because it never
was so, and Silby assures me he never said so: and I challenge him to produce
his veracious Gentleman. -- It is indeed to be lamented as a Dishonor to
Christianity, that any one who professes himself a Minister of the Gospel of
Peace and Charity, should (in direct Opposition to the Dictates of that Charity
which thinks no Evil, and hops all Things in favor to our Neighbor) so
laboriously, from mere Hearsays through three or four Hands, and mere Surmizes
and Supposes of his own, endeavor publicly to fasten the most odious
Characters on his Brethren, and even Elders (with whom he has no Business)
against whom the Apostle forbids even their own Bishops to take an Accusation,
but under two or three faithful Witnesses. -- But the Brevity I am obliged to
study, forbids me to add any more. -- I only pray Mr. Hobart's Name may never
so grossly suffer by such abusive Measures from any one, as I suffer from him.
-- And as he has now seen the Letter of my Son's Resignation, and the
Secretary's Answer, I cannot but hope he will yet have the Ingenuity to retract
and do me Justice.

I am Sir, etc. S. Johnson.

FINIS.
Books sold by D. Foul in Boston.
Janua Coelestis: Or, the Mystery of the GOSPEL in the SALVATION of a SINNER,
opened and explained; wherein the Nature of the Gospel Salvation is stated, the
Possibility of the Sinner's being saved is evinced, the Terms of the Gospel
Covenant are ascertained and cleared, the Importance of Salvation is
illustrated, and the great Concern of every Soul is excited and enforced: In
several DISCOURSES on ACTS 16.30. By JOHN BARNARD, A. M. Pastor of the first
Church in Marblehead.

Practical Discourses on the Parable of the TEN VIRGINS. Being a serious Call
and Admonition to Watchfulness and Diligence in preparing for Death and
Judgment. By BENJAMIN COLMAN, D. D. late Pastor of a Church in Boston,
New England.

DISCOURSES on the World to come: Or, The JOYS and SORROWS of departed Souls at
Death, and the GLORY and TERROR of the RESURRECTION. Wherein, after some
Representations of the HAPPINESS of HEAVEN, and a Preparation for it, there
follows a Rational and Scriptural Account of the PUNISHMENTS in HELL, and a
Proof of their Eternal Duration. With a plain ANSWER to all the most plausible
OBJECTIONS. By I. WATTS, D. D. Formerly published in TWO VOLUMES, and now
reduced into One.

HORAE LYRICAE. POEMS, Chiefly of the LYRIC Kind, In Three Books. Sacred I. To
DEVOTION and PIETY. II. To VIRTUE, HONOR and FRIENDSHIP. III. To the MEMORY of
the DEAD. By I. WATTS, D. D. The NINTH EDITION, Corrected.

Sermons on various Subjects, Divine and Moral. With a sacred Hymn suited to
each Subject. Designed for the Use of Christian Families, as well as for the
Hours of devout Retirement. By I. WATTS. D. D.

Memoirs of the Remarkable Life and Surprising Adventures of Miss JENNY
CAMERON, a Lady, who by her Attachment to the Person and Cause of the young
Pretender, has rendered herself famous by her Exploits in his Service; and for
whose Sake she underwent all the Severities of a Winter's Campaign. By the Rev.
Archibald Arbothnot.

The Author of this entertaining HISTORY says, "I am encouraged to undertake
the above WORK, as I am intimately acquainted with Miss JENNY CAMERON and her
Family, and have known the Manner of her Life and Conversation from her Cradle
till her Junction with the PRETENDER; and therefore the Facts I shall relate of
her may be depended upon as true.


