Mr. Porter's SERMON AGAINST undue Appretiating OF Moral Virtue.

The Absurdity and Blasphemy of substituting the personal Righteousness of Men
in the Room of the Surety-Righteousness of CHRIST, in the important Article of
Justification before GOD.

A SERMON Preached at the South Precinct in Braintree, December 25th 1749.

By John Porter, A. M. Pastor of the Fourth Church of CHRIST in Bridgewater.

Published at the earnest Desire of the Hearers.

Iustificatio ex Fide sola est Articulus stantis et cadentis Ecclesiae.

Luther. Bona Opera non praecedunt justificandum, sed sequuntur justificatum.

Aug. Romans iii.26, 27, -- 31. To declare at this Time his Righteousness; that
he might be just, and the Iustifier of him which believes in Jesus -- Where is
Boasting then? It Is excluded. By what Law? of Works? Nay: But by the Law of
Faith -- Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid: Yea we establish
the Law.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold opposite the Prison in Queen Street. MDCCL.

JUSTIFICATION BY THE Personal Righteousness of Men IS Absurd and Blasphemous.
ISAIAH lxiv.6. All our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags.
IN the sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto we shall do well to take heed, as unto
a Light that shines in a dark Place, until the Day dawn and the Day Star arise
upon our Hearts, it fully appears; that the infinitely wise GOD, foreseeing
from Eternity, that the first Adam, whom he designed to constitute and treat
with, as federal Head and Representative of all his Posterity would, (as he
actually did when tried) violate the positive Precept, that should be given him
as the Test of his Obedience, upon which his and their Happiness turned, and
thereby involve himself and them in universal Guilt and Ruin -- did, out of the
infinite Riches of his Goodness, for the Glory of his great Name, and the
eternal Felicity of some of Mankind, constitute his own Son, who is coequal
co-essential and coeternal with Himself, second Adam, to stand Head and
Representative of this Number; and in the fullness of Time sent him in their
Nature to finish their Transgression, make an End of their Sin, and make
Reconciliation for their Iniquity, by bringing in an everlasting Righteousness
for them, that so they might be restored to the Image and Favor of God, enjoy
him here and forever hereafter, consistent with all his adorable Perfections.

And that blind perishing Men might have a clear Knowledge and unshaken Belief
of these important Articles, with others necessarily connected with, and
dependant upon them, it has pleased God to favor them with divine Revelation.

It was the principal Design of Heaven in this gracious Dispensation, to lead
blind Men to see, their universal Guilt and Pollution by Nature, as Descendants
from Adam their moral Head, the first Transgressor; and how they may obtain
complete Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption from the second Adam
Jesus Christ, the Righteous, by a vital Union to him. And in this blessed
Volumn, these Things are, (as they should be in all the Sermons Ministers
preach) set forth in the clearest Light, so that he that runs may read them.

And since Things are so, it is truly surprising, and what one could hardly
believe, did we not hear it with our Ears and see it with our Eyes, that any
who are so orthodox as only to profess the sacred Bible to be the Rule of Faith
and Manners, and have it in their Hands, and can read it, though but of ordinary
Capacities; especially that Men of Learning, and professed Ministers of the
Lord Jesus too, should in Conversation, and from the Pulpit, and Press, boldly
banter and oppose these Soul-humbling, Christ-exalting Doctrines, so clearly
revealed and incontestibly proved in this professed infallible Rule: I say, One
could hardly believe this of any who enjoy the Word, especially of such as
profess to preach the Word of Righteousness, whatever we might of Turks and
Heathens, who have only the blind Alcoran and Book of the Creatures to lead to
the Knowledge of divine Things, did we not see and hear it. Alas! Alas! that
there are so many professed Preachers of Righteousness of the younger Sort, who
if sound and serious, would be the Beauty of the Land, and would fill the Souls
of all that wish well to Zion, both Old and Young, Ministers and People, with
great Joy, under the pleasing Prospects, from this comfortable Omen, that God
has Blessings in Store for the Churches. And O, with what divine Calmness, and
pleasing Satisfaction, would our venerable Fathers, who have long graced their
Pulpits, and edified their People, with the Truth as it is in Jesus, leave the
World, while they see a hopeful Set of young Men rising up and filling their
Pulpits and the Land, with the same Doctrines and Conversation, that they,
through Grace, have gone before them in: Surely, it would occasion them joyfully
to say as good old Simeon did, when he had Christ in his Arms; " Now let thy
Servants depart in Peace, for we see what we have long been wishing and praying
for.

But to return, I say, it is Matter of great Lamentation, that so many pretended
Preachers of Righteousness, who profess the Bible the Rule, (which is an
orthodox Profession,) should turn out so sadly hetorodox in their Explanation
of it.

Some in their Explication of this professed Rule, don't duly consult the Text
and Context, the Scope and Design of the inspired Penman, to find the genuine
Meaning of the Passage under Consideration; nor regard the Analogy of Faith:
But their Manner is (it seems) first to fix upon some certain Principles, which
feed their hereditary Corruptions, and foster the natural Pride of their
Hearts, and then search to find some Text of Scripture in favor of their
pre-conceived Notions: And O how will they study and strive, with all their
plausible Harrangues, to make the World believe that the Design and Scope of
the Prophet or Apostle in the Text and Context, and all their other Writings,
is to prove their favorite Scheme! Thus the Arians, Socinians, Arminians,
Antinomians, and even the Quakers, have endeavored to support and maintain
their destructive Tenets.

And some entertaining an high Opinion of their Gifts and Abilities, and
looking upon themselves as finished Disputants, who sadly err in their
Principles, and are fond of propagating them; finding an inspired Text standing
in their Way in full Force and Virtue against them, will fix on that, and exert
themselves to the utmost to twist and wrest the same, to make it speak
something in Vindication of their Errors.

Has not my Text lately been upon the Wrack, and there miserably perverted, to
make it confess something contrary to the Truth as it is in Jesus? Has it not
been improved to substitute the personal Righteousness of Men, in the Place of
the Surety-Righteousness of Christ, as though the former and not the latter was
the Thing for which Men shall be accepted and rewarded by God in this and the
future World? And how absurd and blasphemous an Attempt is this! It Is injurious
to the Prophet, to the Scriptures of Truth, and to the immortal Souls of Men.

It Is therefore a Matter of great Importance, a Design richly worth
undertaking, to clear the Text of this false Gloss, this sad Abuse.

My present Design therefore (though the meanest Labourer in Christ's Vineyard,
yet being set for the Defense of the Gospel) by divine Help in considering of
these Words, shall be to do Justice to the Text, and to divine Truth: for through
the Grace of God, I can willingly do nothing against, but for the Truth. And I
am obliged, as I would be innocent and approve myself to my Lord and Master, to
contend earnestly, and that publicly as well as privately, for the Faith which
was once delivered to the Saints in the holy Scriptures.

And in order hereunto, and from this Text, I shall endeavor the following
Things, Namely*

1st. Show the Design of the inspired Prophet in the Phrase, all our
Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags.

2dly. In what Respects the personal Righteousnesses of the best Men may be
properly styled filthy Rags.

3dly. That the Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST is the only spotless and
acceptable Garment in and for which the best Men can be justified and admitted
into the Favor and Kingdom of God.

4thly. That though the personal Righteousnesses of the best Men are as filthy
Rags in Point of Justification, and the perfect Righteousness of CHRIST is the
only material as well as meretorious Cause thereof; yet as it is the bounden
Duty, so it is the habitual Disposition and Endeavor of all the Justified to
maintain good Works.

5thly. Point out some of the dreadful Consequences that naturally and
necessarily follow upon substituting the personal Righteousness of Men, in the
Room of the Surety-Righteousness of CHRIST in the great Affair of Justification.

6thly. Make Improvement.

I. I am to show the Design of the inspired Prophet in the Phrase, all our
Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags.

By this Phrase the Prophet does not design a Description of the hypocritical
Performances of some of the worst of Men, as some seem to imagine, but of the
personal Righteousness of some of the best; and this and not that he here
styles filthy Rags.

Though I could easily clear this Point by Arguments drawn from the Context, and
other Parts of Isaiah's Prophecy, yet since the Text without going further,
furnishes us with Arguments sufficient for the Purpose, I shall confine myself
to it. And the

1st Arg: Is taken from the Word Righteousnesses. All our Righteousnesses are
as filthy Rags, says the Prophet. Now if the Words Righteousness and
Righteousnesses in Scripture (where we have the Character of the Wicked given,
perhaps more than a thousand Times, and in a variety of Terms) are never used
for the hypocritical Performances of wicked Men, but for something truly good
and excellent; then we must suppose that the latter, and not the former is
intended in the Text: And I appeal to you all, whether these Words are not
constantly used in this Sense from the Beginning of Genesis to the End of the
Revelation. The

2d Arg: Is taken from the Word all. All our Righteousnesses are as filthy
Rags. i. e. Not only the Righteousnesses of some but the Righteousnesses of
all: All the Righteousnesses of all are as filthy Rags. So that if there were
any among the numerous Body of the Jews at the Time which Isaiah refers to, who
were truly righteous, and God always had a righteous Seed among them; then he
styles personal Righteousnesses filthy Rags. Nay,

3dly. The Word our in the Text is a Demonstration of the present Truth. All
our Righteousnesses, says the Prophet, are as filthy Rags. If any after what
has been already said, suppose the People of the Jews at the Time, were
generally, yea universally abandoned to extraordinary Wickedness and Hypocrisy,
yet they will not say the Prophet Isaiah was. He was a sincerely good Man all
allow; a Man conformed in Heart and Life to the Will of God; a Man that lived
soberly righteously and godly. And yet this personally righteous Man says not,
all their Righteousnesses, who are a Company of profligate abandoned Wretches,
are as filthy Rags, but all our Righteousnesses; my personal Righteousnesses as
well as theirs, are as filthy Rags. So that it evidently appears, that the
Prophet by the Phrase in the Text means the personal Righteousnesses of the
best Men; and that these he styles filthy Rags.

Thus I have shown from the Text that the Prophet in the Phrase, all our
Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags, does design a Description of the personal
Righteousnesses of the best, and not the hypocritical Performances of the worst
Men, and that those he styles filthy Rags. It is now Time to proceed to the
second Thing proposed, namely,

II. To show in what Respects the personal Righteousnesses of the best of Men
may be properly styled filthy Rags.

And although in all Respects they may not with Propriety be so styled, yet in
some Respects they may. And

1. May Not the personal Righteousnesses of the best of Men be styled so, when
viewed in a comparative Light.

If we compare the personal imperfect Righteousnesses of the best Men in the
World, with the infinitely perfect Righteousness of the eternal JEHOVAH, in
whose Sight the holy Heavens are not clean, and who charges his spotless Angels
with Folly; I say, may not the imperfect Righteousness of the best Men, when
compared with his spotless Purity and infinite Holiness be, without Offense and
with some Propriety, styled filthy Rags? Surely, such a View of the LORD as
Isaiah had in the 6th Chapter of his Prophecy, would immediately bring any Man
living, whatever high Opinion he might before have entertained of his own
personal Righteousness, to cry out as he did, ver. 5. Woe is me for I am undone,
because I am a Man of unclean Lips; and fully convince him of the absolute
Necessity of having a better Righteousness than his own to appear safely and
comfortably before God in. But

2. And to come nearer the Matter, they may be so styled in Point of
Justification before God.

In this grand and important Affair, good Works, the personal Righteousnesses
of the best Men are of no Account at all. A Man clothed with filthy Rags has
as suitable an Attire on to approach an earthly Monarch for his special Favor,
and is as likely to obtain the same, and that although spotless Raiment is the
Condition thereof; as the best Man in the World having only his own personal
Righteousness on, would be to approach the infinitely holy God for his special
Blessings; and that because spotless Raiment, perfect Righteousness is the
unalterable Condition of them. This the Scripture throughout teaches, and
exceeding plainly in the Epistles to the Romans and Galations: Particularly in
Romans 3 and 4 Chapters; and Galatians 2 and 3 Chapters. There you will see our
personal Righteousnesses entirely excluded in the important Article of
Justification, and the Righteousness of CHRIST spoken of as the only Merit and
Matter thereof; And therefore in this Respect our personal Righteousness may be
styled filthy Rags, as in the Text.

And there is an agreeable Propriety in the Analogy, a beautiful Resemblance
between the personal Righteousnesses of the best Men and filthy Rags, viewed in
this Light.

For,

First, As Rags are not fit to make a comely Garment, to cover the Nakedness of
the Body, and render it agreeable to the Eye of an earthly King; so the personal
Righteousnesses of Men are utterly unfit to cover their moral Nakedness and
render them agreeable to the Eye of the King of Glory. Rags will do the former,
as well as personal Righteousness will the latter: but they are both unfit for
the Business. The sacred Scripture, our professed Rule, is ungainsayably clear
in this Point; see a few of the Multitude of Texts that might be mentioned.
Psalm. 143.2. Acts 13.39. Rom 3.20. Gal. 3.10, 11, 21.

Further, as Rags are not fit to make the Whole of such a Garment, so they are
not fit to make a Part of it, but are entirely useless for this Purpose: So the
personal Righteousnesses of Men, as they will not answer in Whole for a justifying
Righteousness, so they are not accepted as a Part of it, but are entirely
excluded in this important Matter. Agreably the inspired Apostle Paul says,
Romans 3.28. Men are justified without the Deeds of the Law, i. e. Without their
personal Righteousnesses having any Hand in the Affair as the meritorious or
material Cause thereof.

Again, the personal Righteousnesses of the best Men are not only as Rags, but
as filthy Rags, in that they are defiled with Sin. The best Works of the best
Men are not done from such a perfectly good Principle, to such a purely good
End, and in such a Manner, but that Sin cleaves to them. And of this the best
Men carry a deep Conviction in their own Consciences. If I should say, I am
perfect (says Job) that would prove me perverse, Job 9, 20. When I would do
Good, Evil is present with me; says Paul, Romans 7.21.

Once more, as filthy Rags are utterly unfit not only to make the Whole or any
Part of a comely Garment, but for every other Use, 'till washed and made clean;
so the personal Righteousnesses of the best Men are not only refused as the
Whole or Part of their justifying Garment, but in every other Respect 'till
washed in the Blood of Jesus. It Is by Reason hereof that their Acceptance is
gained with the Father, who is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity. It Is not
from any Merit of Condignity or Congruity in the personal Righteousness of Men,
that God accepts and rewards them, but solely for the Merits of Jesus Christ.
Rev. 8.3. In this Text you have the true Reason why the poor imperfect personal
Righteousnesses of Men do find Acceptance with God, namely, because perfumed
with the Odours of Christ's Merits, and presented to the Father by his own
Mediation and Intercession.

Thus I have shown you in what Respects the personal Righteousnesses of the
best of Men may be properly styled filthy Rags. And by this Time, if you have not
been dull of hearing, you may be convinced that your personal Righteousnesses
will not answer to justify you in the Sight of God, and may be desirous to know
what Righteousness will do it. To answer your Desire and the Method proposed,
'I come to say,

III. That the Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST is the only spotless and
acceptable Garment in and for which the Children of Men can be justified, and
admitted into the Favor and Kingdom of God.

This weighty and important Article of the Christian Scheme admits of easy
Proof both from Reason and Revelation. I think the following rational
scriptural progressive Positions made good, will prove the Point to a
Demonstration.

1. That all Mankind are by Nature under Sin, and therefore condemned.

This Point the Apostle Paul has sufficiently proved in some of the first
Chapters of his Epistle to the Romans, as he thought; and who will dare to
think otherwise, when he says, Chap. 3. ver. 9. We have before proved both Jews
and Gentiles, that they are all under Sin. All Mankind are naturally Sinners,
condemned Sinners. The Way that Mankind came into this sinful condemned State
was by the first Transgression of Adam their natural and federal Head and
Representative. Romans 5.12. By one Man [Adam] Sin entered into the World -- And
in him all have sinned. And as the shorter Catechism, a Body of Divinity
approved and used in all our Churches, says; The Covenant being made with Adam
not only for himself, but for his Posterity, all Mankind descending from him by
ordinary Generation, sinned in him and fell with him in his first Transgression.

2. That there is a Way in which Sinners may be justified in the Sight of God
-- admitted into his Favor here, and to the Blessedness of his Kingdom
hereafter.

Though the Way was blocked up by the Apostasy of Man, and Cherubims and a
flaming Sword set, which turned every Way to keep the Way of the Tree of Life;
yet, through the infinite Mercy of God it is opened again, and Man may come to
it, take of it, eat and live forever; may be admitted into the Favor and
Kingdom of God. This is abundantly manifested from the innumerable Calls in the
Gospel to Sinners to come to God; from the Institution of the Gospel Ministry,
and the sending forth Men to beseech Sinners in Christ's Stead to be reconciled
to God; and further in that many of Mankind have been actually justified. It is
God that justifies; (says the Apostle) Who is he that condemns? But ye are
justified -- says Paul to the condemned Corinthians.

3. That Sinners are justified in such a Way and only such a Way as is
consistent with, and for the Honor of the divine Law and Perfections.

The Honor of the divine Law and Perfections is dearer to God than all Heaven
and Earth; and therefore most certain it is, he never will justify and save Men
in a Way derogatory thereto: No, before he will do this, he will for their Sins
damn them all for ever. The Law must be fully answered, divine Justice
completely satisfied, or no Man justified and saved. Agreably, we are assured
from the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, that not one Iota of the Law
shall fail, though all Men fail of Justification and Life. And that God cannot
deny himself, though it would prevent the eternal Destruction of Myriads of
precious Souls. Hence we see, that if ever Men are justified and saved, the Law
must be answered in all its Commands and Demands, and Justice satisfied.

4. That Sinners cannot by all their Repentance, Obedience, and Sufferings,
answer the Commands and Demands of the divine Law, and satisfy the rightful
Claims of Justice.

The Scripture informs us, Psalm. 49.7, 8. that the Redemption of the Soul is
precious, and cease for ever; for what Men can do toward its Redemption.
This Truth will illustriously shine forth, if we consider the several gradual
Steps following; Namely,

First, That Man before Regeneration cannot do any good Thing in a right
Manner. The Repentance Obedience and Sufferings of all unregenerate Men have
nothing really spiritually good in them The inspired, and therefore
unexceptionable Description of all natural Men, is that in Psalm. 14.3. There is
none that does Good; no, not one. So that their Righteousnesses, if any Thing
they do may be called so, are filthy Rags with a Witness; and their best Works
in this respect abominable, though they may call 'em good Works, in that though
what they do for the Matter may be Righteousnesses, or good Works, yet
considering the Principle End and Manner of them, they are filthy
Righteousnesses, abominable Works. And how can these justify? It Is Blasphemy to
suppose it.

Again, after Regeneration the best Works of Men are but imperfectly good Works
The Obedience of the Regenerate don't answer the Requirements of the divine
Law. My Brethren, a serious Reflection on the Temper of the Soul and external
Behavior but for one Day, were there nothing else, would satisfy every one
that is in any good Measure acquainted with his own Heart and with the Extent
Strictness and Spirituality of the Law, that he daily violates it in Thought
Word and Deed. But what says the Scripture? (for we must keep to that, and
there is no Danger from this Quarter; for the Scripture is not yea and nay, a
contradictory Volumn, but yea, yea, a consistent one) why, there is not a just
Man on Earth that does Good and sins not; in many Things we all offend -- I
have seen an End of all Perfection; but thy Commandment is exceeding broad. --
[and] Cursed is every one that continues not in all Things written in the Book
of the Law to do them. So that from hence it appears, that the best Men instead
of getting into God's Favor and Kingdom by their own personal Righteousness,
shall be cursed forever out of it for the want of a Law-fulfilling
Righteousness.

But further, if it were possible, which it is not, for Men to yield perfect
and unsinning Obedience to the Law for the future, yet they could not make
Atonement for their past Offenses in any finite Space of Time; for Sin is an
infinite Evil, being committed against an infinite God, and therefore justly
deserves an infinite Punishment; hence if Man who is finite pays the dreadful
Score, he must of necessity be eternally Suffering, in order to the satisfying
of Divine Justice.

Once more, and to go one Step higher. If it were possible for Men to answer
the Law by making Satisfaction for past Offenses, and by yiedling unsinning
Obedience for the Time to come; yet this would not serve for a justifying
Righteousness, and that for this weighty Reason, namely, it is not the
Righteousness constituted for this glorious Business by the Judge of all the
Earth. God has constituted another Righteousness for our justifying
Righteousness, even the Righteousness of Jesus Christ. Agreably you read, that
God sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our Sins; and by the Obedience of
one (i e. Christ) shall many be made righteous. 1 John 4.10. Romans 5.19. And
this leads me to observe,

5. That Jesus Christ has, as elect Men's Surety, by his active and passive
Obedience, fully answered the Demands of the Law, and satisfied the rightful
Claims of divine Justice.

Jesus Christ, as elect Men's Surety and Cautioner, has paid the Debt of
Obedience and Sufferings: For the divine Nature being personally united to the
humane in him, there was infinite Value and Virtue derived to his Obedience and
Sufferings. As Man he obeyed and suffered, as God he satisfied; and so by the
Obedience and Blood of this God-Man, the Law is magnified and made honorable,
divine Justice satisfied, and a Way opened for the free Justification, and
eternal Salvation of the greatest Sinners. God declares himself well pleased
with this Righteousness Christ has wrought out and brought in; and why? Because
it fully answers the Law. And he can and will be well pleased with, justify and
save all that accept it, and are found in it. Accordingly you read, that God is
just, exactly eternally just, and the Iustifier of him that believes in Jesus:
and not only is God said to be just in this Way of justifying Sinners, but to
declare his Justice, Romans 3.26 And in Acts 4.10, 11, 12. The Apostle Peter
says, Be it known unto you all, and to all the People -- That Christ who is set
at naught by you Builders, is become the Head of the Corner -- Neither is there
Salvation in any other: For there is none other Name under Heaven given among
Men whereby we must be saved.

6. That the Scripture every where, when speaking of the Justification of Men
in the Sight of God, attributes it to Faith in the Surety-Righteousness of
Christ, to the Exclusion of the personal Righteousness of Men in this Affair.

I shall mention three Texts to prove this Point: The first is in Romans 3.28:
Therefore we conclude that a Man is justified by Faith, without the Deeds of
the Law. This Conclusion, which is so full in Favor of free Justification by
Faith in the imputed Righteousness of Christ, and so full against our
Justification by our personal Righteousness, followed a Train of Arguments made
Use of by learned Paul, who was no ordinary Disputant, but knew the Force and
Strength of an Argument well. Another is in Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a Man is
not justified by Works, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ; even we have believed
in Jesus Christ; that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by
the Works of the Law; for by the Works of the Law shall no Flesh be justified.
The last is in Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. Not by Works of Righteousness which we have
done, but according to his Mercy he saved us etc.

How fully do these Scriptures clear the Point! Surely Men must have a new Way
of interpreting Scripture, to evade the Force of them.

I now pass on to say,

7th. and lastly, What undeniably follows upon the former, namely, That the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ is the only Garment in and for which any Man can
be justified, and admitted into the Favor and Kingdom of God.

This was the Point to be proved; and judge ye, if it is not sufficiently done.
"Truth is great and it will prevail."

And now this admirable Scheme, we see, is exactly harmonious with right Reason
and divine Revelation. -- The only divinely constituted Way of Justification --
The Way in which all Mankind are ever justified and saved, who are justified
and saved. The old and new Testament, the Law and Prophets and Apostles, all
witness to this glorious Truth.

The wedding Garment, of which you read in the Gospel; as also the fine Linen,
white and clean, mentioned in the Revelation, principally intends this
Righteousness, and not the personal Righteousness of Men* though we don't deny
but inherent and external Holiness may be comprehended therein; for these are
inseparably connected with that, so that wherever that is, these will be* and
will be clearly discovered in the Temper and Behavior of those who are
justified. And this leads me on to the

IV. Head proposed, namely, That though the personal Righteousnesses of Men are
as filthy Rags in Point of Justification, and the perfect Righteousness of
Christ is the only material as well as meritorious Cause thereof; yet, it is the
bounden Duty so it is the habitual Disposition and Endeavor of all the
Justified to maintain good Words.

By good Works I understand the Duties of the first and second Table of the
Decalogue; such as the Duties of Piety, Righteousness, and Sobriety -- The
Duties of our several Places, Stations and Relations, performed from a right
Principle, to a right End, and in a right Manner.

And now so far is the Doctrine of free Justification by Faith only in the
Righteousness of Christ from discouraging Men in the Performance of such good
Works; that of all the Men in the World, those justified by this imputed
Righteousness, are the only Persons cordially inclined to, constant in, and who
actually do them. For,

First, Those justified by Christ's Righteousness are in their Measure
internally conformed to the Law of God, the eternal Rule of Righteousness. All
that are justified by the Surety Righteousness of Jesus Christ, are sanctified
by the Spirit of Jesus Christ: There is an inseparable Connection between them;
and hence put together in the Scripture: When a Person is justified, the moral
Image of God, lost entirely by the Fall, which consists in Knowledge,
Righteousness, and true Holiness is restored to, and reinstamped on the Soul;
and thereby the Disorders of it are rectified: The Understanding enlightened,
the Will set in a Measure strait with the Will of God, and the Affections
sanctified, fitly placed and well regulated; and therefore there is an
Agreableness between the moral Law and their Souls; and so they are naturally
and necessarily inclined and disposed to obey it in all its Precepts.

Again, The Justified are disposed to, and endeavor Obedience, from a Sight
they have had of the perfect Reasonableness of the Commands of God in the
Gospel. The justified before God have clearly seen, that all the divine
Commands are holy just and good. The Apostle Paul, one of the justified in this
Way, declares this, Romans 7.12. for he saw it, as all the Justified do in some
Degree. The Anointing they have had from the holy One, has given them to see
and know, that they are all (excepting those two positive Institutions, the two
Sacraments, and these they are convinced are of excellent Use in the Christian
Life) founded in the Nature of God and of the reasonable Creature, and
therefore perfectly reasonable; and hence none of the Commands are grievous to
them, but their Delight. This view of the real Beauty of Holiness -- Excellency
of Religion -- perfect Reasonableness of the divine Commands; which delightful
View all the justified by Christ's Righteousness have had, does make them
rejoice in working Righteousness -- serve the Lord with gladness -- sing at
their Work -- run the Ways of God's Commandments with Diligence and Delight.

Again, the Justified are disposed to and will maintain good Works from a
Principle of Love to God, and because they tend to the Glory of God and
Interest of the Redeemer in the World. The Justified by Christ's Righteousness,
have seen God to be infinitely lovely in Himself, and on Account of the
peculiar Favors he has bestowed on them in Jesus Christ; so that they do love,
and cannot but love God with uprightness of Heart, entirely, and above every
other Object. And if any Man love me, says Christ, he will keep my
Commandments. This Love sweetly and powerfully constrains them to persevering
and universal Obedience. And also as Obedience tends to advance the Glory of
God, and Interest of the Redeemer in the World, which lie near their Hearts,
and are dearer to them than their Lives, they are heartily engaged thereunto.
To promote God's Glory, and the Redeemer's Interest, they will, by the Grace of
Christ assisting, readily suffer and do the hardest Things, sacrifice their
All; go through Furnaces of Fire, and Seas of Blood: Surely then they will do and
suffer the more easy Things, which tend to the same glorious Ends. --
Certainly, as universal Obedience is one of the most essential Ways of
glorifying God and the Redeemer, and that in the Conviction and Conversion of
Souls, wherein the Glory of the Power and Wisdom, Love and Grace of God shines
forth most conspicuously -- As practical Godliness does cast such a Luster on
Religion, and give such convincing Demonstrations of its Reality and Divinity,
that Sinners often cannot stand against the Force and Power thereof, 1 Pet.
2.12; It will be their highest Ambition to be practically godly, universally
obedient.

Again, they are disposed to and endeavor Obedience from the Comforts and
Rewards of it. There are great Comforts and Rewards, that all such share in as
maintain good Works. Hence you read, Isai. 32.17. The Work of Righteousness
shall be Peace, and the Effect of Righteousness, Quietness and Assurance for
ever. And Psalm. 19.11. In keeping of them [the Commands] there is a great
Reward. And justified Men may assure themselves from the infallible Oracles,
that in Proportion to their evangelical Obedience, their Comforts and Rewards
will be, if not here, yet hereafter; or as the Scripture speaks, according to
their Works; which, were there no higher Motives, might be sufficient to
encourage all considerate Men to universal Obedience. In this Way, the
Scripture proposes Comforts and Rewards, and yet not for the Merit of our
Obedience; no: And it is pretty well worthy of particular Notice, that among all
the inspired Penmen of the old and new Testament, when treating of this Matter,
not one of them says, that Men shall be comforted or rewarded here or hereafter
for, but always according to their Works; which might be sufficient to dash
Pretenders of Merit out of Countenance, and would, it is probable, were they not
hardened in their Error. But,

Finally, they are disposed to, and endeavor Obedience, because hereby they
testify their Gratitude to God, and justify their Faith before Men. "Practical
Gratitude is most emphatical," and discovers more of the real Sentiments of the
Soul, than the highest verbal Expressions of Gratitude can do. By practical
Godliness, or universal Obedience, Men exhibit to the World, the brightest
Testimonials of their real Thankfulness to their kind and bountiful God. And
it is in this Way also the Faith of God's People is justified before Men; as the
Apostle James abundantly proves in his Epistle. When the Faith Men pretend to
is productive of good Works, -- disposes them to exemplify the Religion of
Christ in the whole of their Behavior; it is a sufficient Demonstration that
it is of the justifying and saving Kind. And seeing good Works do most
convincingly testify their Gratitude to God, and justify their Faith before
Men, they are the more diposed to abound in them.

Thus I have shown you that it is the Disposition and Endeavor of the justified
by Christ's Righteousness to maintain good Works, and the Reasons thereof. And
you see their Care and Constancy in maintaining good Works, does not spring
from any the least View or Hope, that for the Sake of them or any Value in
them, they shall recommend themselves to God, or be justified in his Sight, or
entitled to the Comforts or Rewards of his Kingdom of Grace or Glory. No this
is entirely out of the Question with them; they act from higher and more noble
Views and Motives. And I might easily show that the Views and Reasons obliging
to Obedience which I have mentioned, are vastly stronger, and more powerful to
constrain to universal Obedience, than the Consideration of meriting thereby
could be; but it is needless I pass now,

Vthly. To point out some of the dreadful Consequences that follow upon
substituting the personal Righteousness of Men in the Room of the
Surety-Righteousness of CHRIST in the Affair of Justification. And,

1st. It tends to overthrow the Foundation laid for the Salvation of Sinners,
which is the Result of infinite Wisdom.

When none in Earth or Heaven among Men or Angels could fix on a Way of
Salvation, for guilty polluted Man, consistent with the divine Perfections and
Honor of the Law; God, who is infinite in Wisdom, did, out of Love to Men,
pitch upon this admirable Way of justifying and saving Men entirely by the
Righteousness of his own Son Jesus Christ And God has expressly told us, that
there is Salvation in no other Way, Acts 4.12. And that other Foundation can no
Man lay, though they may wrack their Brains ever so much for it, than that which
is laid, which is Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 3.11. This is the Way and only Way
according to Scripture: but Men by substituting our personal Righteousnesses in
the Room of it, endeavor to lay a new Foundation -- to introduce a new Way to
Heaven, which the Gospel knows nothing of; and to destroy the new and living
Way which the Gospel clearly reveals. And if the only Foundation laid in Zion
by God be destroyed; what shall the Righteous do? Why they must all be damned
as well as the Wicked.

2ly. It tends to cut the Sinews of true Gospel Obedience entirely. Faith in
Scripture and all our approved Systems of Divinity is ever defined so as to
include these two Things (at least) in it, namely, (1) Renunciation of our own
Righteousness as to Dependence -- having no Confidence in the Flesh -- going
off our own Bottom -- or as the Apostle Paul speaks accounting all our own
Righteousness as Loss and Dung as any Way serving for a justifying
Righteousness. (2) Appropriation of Christ's Righteousness to ourselves, and
resting on it alone for Justification and Life. This is the scriptural Account
of Faith: And of this Faith only it is said that it purifies the Heart, and
works by Love, i. e. internally conforms the Soul to God and his holy Law, and
disposes it also to all external genuine Obedience. Faith is the Root of all
true Holiness and evangelical Obedience. Faith is the Principle and Parent of
all good Works It lays a Foundation for all Gospel acceptable Obedience. Heb.
11.6. And without it therefore it is not only unlikely, but utterly impossible
to do one Action acceptable or pleasing to God. All the pretended good Works
and moral Virtues of Men without Faith, are but specious splendid Sins, and
heathenish Morality. And therefore whatever Men may say in Favor of their new
vamp'd Scheme, as that it has a mighty Tendency to promote Obedience; yet we
see that it really tends directly to cut the Sinews of true Gospel Obedience
entirely, to banish it off the Earth; and to leave in the Room thereof, nothing
but dry Formality and heathenish Morality: i e. Morality without a Principle of
justifying Faith and Sanctification. A sad Exchange!

3dly. It tends to shut up, yea to dry up all the Springs of Consolation opened
in the Gospel. The glorious Gospel is full of divine and heavenly Consolations:
It Is a Treasury of Grace -- A Magazine of Christian Comfort; it contains Pardon
and Reconciliation with God, Peace and Assurance, Grace and Glory; and it is a
Treasure opened for the Supply of the needy Sons of Men. But how came there to
be such a rich and invaluable Treasure? How came it to be opened? How do Men
come to it? And for what do they receive the great good Things in it? Why, (if
we believe the Bible) it is all by the Obedience and Blood of Jesus Christ. The
Scripture abundantly informs us, and in the plainest Manner, that it is the
Righteousness of Christ only that has purchased the rich Treasure -- that has
opened the Way to it -- that Men go in to it, and for which they receive the
glorious Blessings contained therein. There is no Pardon, Peace, Joy,
Assurance, nor eternal Life proposed, offered, or possible to be had according
to the Gospel in any other Way. So that Men by substituting their personal
Righteousness in the Room of Christ's as the Way to, and Thing for which we
shall receive these great and heavenly Comforts, do really bar up the right
Way, and effectually stop all Mankind from receiving the least Spark of true
Joy and Comfort. This Way of managing therefore, though plausible in the Eyes of
some, yet surely can justly be pleasing to none: It Is a most uncomfortable
Scheme; there is no true Comfort in it. Who in their right Wits then will
embrace it? Certainly if the Admirers of it did not make high Pretensions to
Reason, one would think they were deprived thereof; for this their Way is their
Folly: And yet alas, many approve their Sayings.

4ly. It tends, (O dreadful Tendency) to drown all Mankind in endless
Perdition. He and he only that believes, i. e. that renounces all his own
personal Righteousnesses as to Dependence, and as any Way serving for a
justifying Righteousness, and receives and rests on Christ's alone for
Justification and Life, shall be saved; but he that believes not after this
Manner, though he has ever so much personal Righteousness, shall be damned; is a
scriptural and therefore unquestionable Truth. Mark 16.16. That Faith, (which
is the only true Faith) which carries a Man out of himself, entirely off the
rotten Bottom of his own personal Righteousness, unto Christ, and fixes him on
the infinitely safe Bottom of his perfect Righteousness, is the only divinely
constituted revealed Way of escaping everlasting Misery in Hell, and enjoying
the ineffable eternal Glories of Heaven. And therefore, whoever are
establishing a Scheme, the Foundation of which is, Do and you shall be saved,
or in other Words, is substituting the personal Righteousness of Men, in the
Room of the Surety-Righteousness of Christ, in the Affair of Justification and
Salvation, runs counter to the Gospel, and will assuredly (continuing therein)
find themselves and their Admirers falling infinitely short of the Favor and
Kingdom of God, and plunging themselves into the unfathomable Abyss of eternal
Woe and Misery; for the Scheme tends, as you have heard, to this dreadful End.
Destruction upon Destruction. -- Damnation, the greater Damnation is cried in
the Scripture upon all such as have heard of the Surety-Righteousness of
Christ, and will not submit to it; and this, though their personal Righteousnesses,
in their own Apprehension, may reach to the very Heavens, and on Account of
their glittering Appearance, in the Apprehension of others, they may shine like
Angels.

Thus I have shown you the dreadful Tendency, -- amazing Consequences, of
substituting our personal Righteousness in the Room of the Surety-Righteousness
of Christ. Enough, I should think, to put every Man out of Conceit of so doing;
and warn him to shun such a Way as leads to eternal Darkness, Despair and Death.

I am now in the

VI. and last Place to make Improvement. And,

1. From what has been said we see the Absurdity and Blasphemy of substituting
the personal Righteousness of Men in the Room of the Surety-Righteousness of
Christ in the Affair of Justification and Salvation. It has (I think) been
clearly demonstrated in the foregoing Discourse, that it is contrary to right
Reason and divine Revelation, and therefore absurd and blasphemous: It Is being
contrary to right Reason shows it is Absurdity, and it is being contrary to
divine Revelation shows it is Blasphemy. But yet, unaccountable as it is, some
who make high Pretensions to Reason and Religion, and would monopolize the same
to themselves, heartily fall in with, and vehemently labor to maintain and
propagate this irrational and irreligious, absurd and blasphemous Scheme.

2ly. From what has been said we may learn, that the good old calvinistical Way
of Preaching up Justification by Faith in the Righteousness of Christ, has by
far a greater Tendency to promote true Gospel Obedience, than the modern
Arminian Way. That lays a Foundation for genuine Obedience, for Obedience that
is free and natural, according to the new Nature; This only for a blind and
forced Obedience. That leads Men to work from Life; this only for Life. That to
obey the divine Commands from a right Principle, to a right End, and in a right
Manner. This from a selfish Principle, End and Manner. Such and so great is the
Difference between them. And which then is most likely to produce true
evangelical Obedience? Why, it is easy to see clearly with half an Eye, that
preaching up Justification by Faith tends abundantly the most to it: and this,
notwithstanding the loud Cry of the Enemies of the Doctrine, as if it tends to
Licentiousness.

3ly. From what has been said we see, the proper Place of good Works in the
glorious Plan of Man's Salvation. Good Works are not to be looked on, or
considered as the Cause of the Justification and Salvation of Men; but only as
the Fruits or Effects of Justification, and as a Part of the Salvation
purchased by Christ: The renewed are therefore said to be the Workmanship of
God created in Christ Jesus unto good Works; not for the Sake of their good
Works done. And we shall do well to mind (though some would not have us mind it)
that though our Lord in his famous Sermon on the Mount, which is a summary of the
Gospel, says, the pure in Heart only shall see God, and his Apostle, that
without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord; yet they don't say for the Sake of
their Purity and Holiness they shall see the Lord God; no, not a Word of that:
For their Design was not to show the Causes of Salvation, or what entitled Men
to the Favor and Kingdom of God; but the meet Qualifications of the Persons
entitled thereunto. And I know of none that are sound in the Faith among the
strenuous Contenders for free Justification by Faith without Works, but what
hold that Sanctification, which is necessarily connected with Justification, is
a necessary Qualification for Heaven; and urge it on their Hearers as
frequently, and from more powerful Motives, than any can possibly do, who are
in a contrary Scheme. Though we don't see nor can see from Scripture or Reason
how a Man can be justified and saved for the Merit of any Thing wrought in, or
done by him, yet we are not so blind but we can see and do see from both, it is
absolutely necessary that such a Temper be wrought in a Man as is suitable to
the Objects which are to entertain him for ever, in order to his taking
Complacency in them: which we hold (and truly) is an holy Temper; but this holy
Temper, from whence flows an holy Practice, can be looked on, if viewed in a
Gospel Light, only as a Part of Salvation: It Is Salvation begun; and the good
Works flowing from this holy Temper, and from the Efficacy of this justifying
Faith, are a further Part of the same Salvation, and lead on to the Perfection
thereof. And now, how that which is only an Effect, can be the Cause, or that
which is a Part of a Thing can be the Cause of the Thing, is beyond me, and I
believe every other Man on Earth, to comprehend. But some would have us
comprehend it, or their favorite Scheme will fall to the Ground, never to rise
more.

4ly. What has been said shows us the egregious Folly, and destructive Madness
of all such as substitute the personal Righteousness of Men in the Room of the
Surety-Righteousness of Christ in the Affair of Justification. The Builders of
a Babel to preserve from a second Deluge, and climb to Heaven upon, and
Solomon's Madman, who threw Firebrands Arrows and Death, were not more
egregiously foolish or destructively mad than these are. For by this Conduct of
theirs, they endeavor (I hope ignorantly) to overthrow the only Foundation of
Salvation laid in Zion, to cut the Sinews of true Gospel-Obedience, and to
banish it off the Earth, which tends so much to God's Glory, and the Weal of
humane Society -- To dry up all the Springs of Consolation opened in the
glorious Gospel of the blessed God -- and to drown all Mankind in the
bottomless Ocean of divine Wrath. If it is Folly and Madness to deprive the
humane Race of all true Hope and Comfort, and bring them into the blackest
Despair in Life and Death, and after Death to deprive of all the heavenly
Glories, and to sink them into the amazing Gulf of eternal Misery; I say, if
this is Folly and Madness, then to substitute our personal Righteousness in the
Room of Christ's, is Folly and Madness. For all these terrible Things are the
natural and necessary Consequences thereof; as has been sufficiently proved to
you.

5ly. Let what has been said put us all upon a close Examination of our selves,
to find which of these two widely different Schemes we are in. Whether that
pleaded for, or that opposed in this Sermon. Let me seriously and solemnly ask
you, my dear Hearers, whether you hold to Justification in Whole or Part by
your own Righteousness; or entirely by the Righteousness of Christ? Methinks I
hear you, one and all saying, O by the Righteousness of CHRIST! Very well, so
far: But I have not done with you yet; nor is it Time for you to have done with
your selves. Suffer me, out of Love to your Souls, to ask you further; Are you
sound in Heart as well as in Head? Doubtless many who have orthodox Heads, have
heterodox Hearts -- Many that hold to Justification by Christ's Righteousness,
who have never received it by Faith: And this may be the Case of some of you:
But only to profess Christ's Righteousness the only justifying Righteousness,
without receiving and resting upon it alone for Justification, will really
avail nothing: Such will be damned as well as Self-Iusticiaries. Therefore it
infinitely concerns you closely to examine, whether you are clothed with this
Righteousness? And here, that you may come to the Knowledge of your State, I
shall in a few Particulars, show who they are that have on them this justifying
Garment. And,

1. They are such as have been brought by the Spirit of God to see that they
have no Righteousness of their own, nor can work out any, which will do all, or
any thing toward their Justification. Man is such a proud obstinate Creature --
so closely attached to the Covenant of Works -- so fond of finding Life at his
own Hand; that while he imagines he can do a Part, though not the whole, toward
it, he never will submit to be saved entirely by the Righteousness of another:
No, this is too self-denying and mortifying a Business for proud Man. And
entertaining such a Thought, he will be damned before he will do it: And
therefore whoever have submitted to Christ's Righteousness for Justification
and Life, have seen the Nothingness of their own in the Affair. And have you,
my Brethren, been brought to this View of the Matter? Have you seen your own
Righteousness to be but as filthy Rags, as Loss and Dung, not any Way serving
as the Whole or a Part of a justifying Righteousness in the Sight of God? And
so to despair of Justification from this Quarter? Surely it has been thus with
all the Justified.

2. They are such as have been brought to see that the Righteousness of Christ,
wro't out and bro't in by his active and passive Obedience, is every Way
suitable and sufficient for a justifying Righteousness. That it is the only
Righteousness constituted for the glorious Business -- That it is commensurate
with the divine Law in all its Commands and Demands -- That God can be just and
the Justifier of all found in it. And now, have you ever seen this
Righteousness in its Compleatness and perfect Sufficiency -- And the eternal
Safety of your Souls appearing before God in it! Surely you have, if you have
ever rightly accepted it: For none, I dare say, will ever venture the Weight of
their eternal Salvation on an unknown Righteousness. I know whom I have
believed, says the Apostle: And if he had not known HIM, he would not have
committed his eternal All into his Hands, as he did, 2 Timothy 1.12.

3. They are such as have seen this Righteousness freely offered to them in the
Gospel for their justifying Righteousness, and upon the Sight of the free
Offer, accepted it as such. All that accept this Righteousness to
Justification, see it is so far their's in the Gospel Offer, that they have an
indisputable Right to take it: and this brings them to renounce their own
Righteousness, and to take the Righteousness of Christ, as that only in which
God can be well pleased with and justify them. And have you seen this
Righteousness so far yours in the Offer, that from a View of your Right to
take it, you have gone off your own Bottom, and ventured all upon this
infinitely safe Bottom? Thus the truly Justified have done.

4. They are such as are heartily well pleased with this Way of Justification.
The Justified have had such a View of the infinite Beauty, Glory, and Safety of
the Way of Justification by Faith in the imputed Righteousness of Christ, that
they choose it above all other Ways. In this Way they see the Glory of the
Wisdom, Love and Grace of God shining forth in the brightest, as well as most
surprising Manner; and also that in this Way there is the most Safety and
Happiness to the Soul, and therefore like it the best. And who would not under
such a View prefer it? And have you, my Hearers, had such a View of the
infinite Glory and Safety of this Way, as that you are heartily well pleased
with it, and entirely satisfied to be saved in it, yea do chose it above any
other Way? If you are justified, you have.

5. They are such as are sanctified. Whom God justifies them he sanctifies; and
makes them holy as he is holy: God gives to Men in Justification such a View of
his infinite Glories, as they display themselves, and shine forth in the Face
of Jesus Christ, as powerfully changes them into his holy Image -- as leaves a
divine Stamp upon them. And are you transformed into the divine Image by the
renewing of your Minds? If justified, you are.

6. They are such as maintain good Works. The special Grace of God received, as
well as the efficacious Grace of God in the Gospel, that brings Salvation,
effectually teaches the Subjects of it to deny all Ungodliness and worldly
Lusts, and to live soberly righteously and godly in this present World? And are
you careful to maintain good Works? Surely, if justified, you are. It Is your
habibitual Disposition and Endeavor. But,

By this Time it is like that some of you are ready to say, that if these are
certain Signs, then we are justified; and others, that we are not. I shall say
a Word to each of you, and finish the Subject.

1. A Word to the Justified: And it shall be a Word of Consolation and
Exhortation; And what Word of greater Consolation can I speak to you, than that
in the fifth Chapter of the Romans, the first and following Verses. Being
justified by Faith, we have, says the Apostle; have what? Eno' in Hand and Hope:

As Peace and Reconciliation with God. God is your Friend, your reconciled God
and Father in Christ; and all his Perfections are engaged for, and surround you
by Day and Night for your Preservation; so that you are infinitely more secure
than Solomon was when surrounded with Life-Guards of sixty valiant Israelites
with Sword in Hand. GOD'S legal Enmity to you is done away by the Obedience of
Christ, and your real Enmity is done away by Sanctification; and hence a
blessed Friendship subsists between you, never to be broken: And from this
Reconciliation arises Peace of Conscience. O the divine Calmness and blessed
Serenity of Soul the Justified have, by being reconciled to God through Christ!
Far better felt than expressed.

Again, free Access to God. You may go to God your heavenly Father with an
humble Boldness and holy Confidence, under all your Griefs, Burdens, Trials,
Temptations, and Difficulties of Soul and Body; who is infinitely able and
ready to help you. Earthly Parents are not so ready to give to their dear
crying Children, as God is to give to his Children those Things they need, and
which will be for his Glory and their Good, when they come to him for them.

Again, full Assurance and Joy in hope of Glory. Such as are justified have, by
imputed and inherent Righteousness, a fair Title to, and some meetness for
eternal Glory; and therefore according to the Gospel, a sure Foundation laid
for it; and so may upon safest Grounds be fully assured of the divine Love, and
rejoice in Hope of the Glory of God.

Again, Joy in the greatest Tribulations in Life. In the midst of these you may
rejoice, as being assured from the divine Oracles, that all Things shall work
for Good unto you. These light Afflictions which are but for a Moment, work for
you a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory. And in the darkest Shades
of Death, you may triumphantly sing, O Death, where is thy Sting! O Grave,
where is thy Victory? For Death is unarmed, the Grave perfumed, and an happy
Resurrection assured to you by your dear Jesus; who died for your Offenses, and
arose again for your Justification

Thus much there is (and it is eno') in this World in Life and Death for you;
and in the next unspeakably greater Things than these: -- as complete eternal
Salvation; which includes in it, freedom from Sin and Sorrow -- Perfection in
Grace - fullness of Joy -- open Vision and uninterrupted everlasting Fruition of
God and the Lamb: For whom he justifies, them he also glorifies.

It would be a fruitless Attempt if I should essay to describe heavenly
Glories, and what there is kept in Store for the Justified, and that they will
actually be put in Possession of when they leave this World: For it is a Glory
to be revealed.

But having shown a little, and but a little, of what you have in Hand and Hope
-- what you have here, and what you have shall hereafter; for which there is
the Word and Oath of God, two immutable Things, and so abundant Ground for
strongest Consolation. I shall pass

2ly. To the Word of Exhortation. And what more suitable and seasonable Word
than that, in 2 These. 2.13. to the End of the Chapter. Brethren, beloved of the
Lord, because God has from the Beginning chosen you to Salvation through
Sanctification of the Spirit and Belief of the Truth; whereunto he called you
by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ:
Therefore Brethren, stand fast, and hold the Traditions which have been taught,
whether by Word or our Epistle. Now our Lord Jesus Christ, and God even our
Father, which has loved us, and has given us everlasting Consolation, and
good Hope through Grace, comfort your Hearts, and stablish you in every good Word
and Work."

But I must turn from Gerizzim, the Mount of Blessings, to Ebal the Mount of
Cursings; -- in one Word.

2. To those who are not justified. Poor Souls! I pity you, but cannot speak
Comfort to you, because the Gospel speaks none. Your Case is truly dreadful:
You are without God, without Christ, and without Hope in the World: You are
this Moment upon the Brink of eternal Burnings: and should God cut the slender
Thread of your Lives, you would be immediately beyond all Hope and Help for
ever: He that made you would not have Mercy on you, and he that formed you
would show you no Favor. But your Case (though sad) is not desperate! As yet,
you are within the Reach of Mercy; and a Righteousness is now offered you for
your Justification. O Pray and Labor to see your absolute Necessity thereof,
and it is Sufficiency for and free tender to you: And O accept it, accept it,
for God's Sake, for Christ's Sake, for your precious Souls Sake.

AMEN.
ERRATA.
Page 6. l. 14 r. their personal -- p. 15. l. 5. r. as it is -- and l. 23. 1.
hence they are -- p. 19. l. 22. r. as not any --

The following ATTESTATION should have stood before the SERMON, but happened to
be there omitted.
THE Reverend Mr. Porter having favored us with a Perusal of his Sermon on
Isai. 64 6 We fully agree with him, that Man's personal Righteousness in the
great Affair of Justification in God's Sight, is but filthy Rags, agreeable to
the Words of the Text: And that the Text is greatly abused in the Rev. Mr.
Briant's Sermon, by his altering the Sense from our Righteousnesses, to their
Righteousnesses.

We rejoice that this our dear Brother is enabled to stand up in Defense of the
Gospel; and we both Pray and Hope, that this seasonable Discourse will be a
Means, under GOD, of establishing many in the Truth as it is in JESUS; and as
it has been taught in these Churches from the Beginning of New England. And we
cannot but lament the dreadful Increase of Arminiasm and other Errors in the
Land, among Ministers and People.

Nathanael Leonard Jonathan Parker John Cotton Solomon Prentice Elisha Eaton.



