Dr. Mayhew's SERMON Occasioned by the DEATH OF THE Prince of Wales.

A SERMON Preached at BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND, May 26. 1751. Occasioned by The
much-lamented DEATH of His Royal Highness FREDERICK, PRINCE of WALES, etc. etc.
etc.

BY JONATHAN MAYHEW, D.D. Pastor of the West-Church in BOSTON.

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: Printed and Sold by RICHARD DRAPER in Newbury-Street, and
DANIEL GOOKIN, in Marlborough-Street. 1751.

A SERMON occasioned by the Death of His Royal Highness FREDERICK, Prince of
Wales, etc.
PSALM CXVIII. 9 V. IT is better to trust in the LORD than to put confidence in
Princes.
IF we do not think too highly of ourselves, but soberly, as we ought to think,
it is very well. We are certainly weak, indigent creatures. Indeed all men are,
in some degree, conscious of their own natural and unavoidable imperfection.
Why else do they not tarry at home, glorying in their own self-sufficiency; and
take up satisfied with what they find there, instead of wandering abroad to find
something on which they may rest secure; something in which they may be quiet
from fear of evil, and in patience possess their souls? Is any man so satisfied
with himself? Does any man feel such omnipotence within, (...) to make him
scorn an alliance with every thing extrinsic to himself, in order to his
avoiding evil and procuring good? No: All, all with one consent, have recourse
to some foreign aid, to make up that deficiency which they find at home. They
do not, indeed, all place their hope in the same objects; their expectations
are variously founded, some on one thing and some on another. Some Trust
in-chariots, and some in horses; while others make gold their hope, and say
unto the fine gold, Thou art my confidence. And as all feel a certain internal
want and poverty, which makes them go abroad to beg an alms, so all actually
find that which serves to relieve them in some measure; to buoy up their
spirits, and to preserve them from that despondency into which they must
unavoidably be plunged, had they nothing to trust to but themselves.

IT is beyond the design of this discourse, to show what vain and slender props
those are in general, on which the most lean for support, and rest to their
weary and heavy laden minds; how weak; how insufficient they are for that
purpose, while they are possessed; and how soon they must wholly fail. We are
led more particularly to consider, how little reason there is for us to place
our trust even in the Princes and Potentates of the earth, who have doubtless
the most natural claim to it of any thing in this world: And, at the same time,
also to consider the reasonableness of placing it in Almighty God, who is the
confidence of the ends of the earth.

IT is natural and, indeed, reasonable for people to exercise some sort and
degree of dependence one upon another; upon persons in the same rank of life
with themselves; and to repose a mutual confidence in each others good offices.
This is just; because a Man may not only be profitable unto himself, as every
one that is wise is; but his righteousness may also profit the son of man, and
be instrumental to the happiness of others, as well as to his own. This makes
it reasonable for mankind in common to rely, in a certain measure and
proportion, one upon another. But nevertheless, as we find it observed in the
verse immediately preceding that which you heard me read, It is better to
trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in man.

Moreover,

As it is natural and just for men to place some hope in others, in persons in
common life, their equals; so it is still more naturally and just for them to
put their trust in those that are exalted to stations of power and dignity; in
their kings and other civil rulers; in those who have, or are like soon to
have, the administration of the public affairs devolved upon them; in the good
management of which, the welfare of every individual is more or less concerned.
These persons, by how much greater their power and influence are, and their
obligations stronger, than those of men acting in a private station; by so much
more are they the natural objects of our confidence. But still it is better to
trust in the Lord than to put confidence [even] in Princes. An inferior and
subordinate trust may be fitly placed in those who are called gods in this
world; but the God of heaven, whose ministers for good, whose servants and
instruments, they are, ought to be our first and last resort; the supreme
object of our hope and dependence. This will equally appear, whether we
consider the moral or the natural imperfections of the greatest monarchs of
this world, compared with the perfections of Him whose throne is in the
heavens, and who judges among the gods.

TRUST in any person or being, if it be a reasonable trust, presupposes in him
certain qualities and powers as the proper ground of it. Otherwise you are
sensible it would be as rational to put our trust in the serpent, as in Him
that was to bruise his head; as proper to put confidence in a bear or a tiger;
in an ape or a crocodile; or in the idols of the heathen, which are vanity and
a lie; as in the living and true God.

THOSE qualities in any being, which are a just foundation on which to build
our hopes, are reducible to the heads of goodness, wisdom and power. It is only
an indigent creature, as was intimated before; one that stands in need of some
protection and assistance from without; one whose abilities are not equal to
his own wa^^s and necessities; it is only such an one, that is the subject of
that affection which we express by the terms trust, hope, confidence, and the
like. It is incompatible to, and can take no place in, a being that is perfect,
self-sufficient and independent. And as that affection of the human mind which
is expressed indifferently by those several terms, presupposes a certain
indigence and poverty of nature, from whence it arises, so, when rightly fixed
and terminated, it equally supposes certain properties and affections in some
other being, corresponding thereto; or a being that is fit to have confidence
reposed in him: Who surely can be no other than one whose beneficent
disposition, whose knowledge and whose abilities, may afford a supply of that
good and felicity, the absence and desire of which, are implied in trust or
hope. A being that is averse to the doing of good to us, is certainly unfit to
have confidence placed in him for what we want: so also is one that either
knows not our wants, or how to relive them: and he is equally so, who is unable
to do it; though he had both a disposition for it, and knowledge sufficient to
direct his actions.

You see then, that these three things must concur and unite, at least in some
degree of them, in that being who is, in any measure, a suitable object of human
confidence. And from hence the conclusion seems very obvious, That that being
who possesses these qualities in the greatest measure, must also be the
highest object of trust. According to the proportion in which any one is
inclined to befriend us; knows how to do it, and has ability for it; in the
same proportion is our hope to be fixed on him. The most perfect being, then,
must certainly be the fittest to be relied on, not only by us, but all other
dependent creatures. And who this is, surely no one in this assembly needs to
be informed.

BUT if you please, we will apply the general principle laid down above, a
little more particularly to the point in hand, by some reflections on the
apparent deficiency of all earthly princes and sovereigns, with relation to
those qualities which are the foundation of a rational trust; while God is
possessed of them, in an unconfined, unlimited manner. The order in which they
have already been mentioned, may possibly serve our purpose as well as any
other. We will therefore keep to it; and, accordingly, being with goodness.

UNDER this term you will here understand the moral qualities in general; for,
indeed, from this source they all flow; and in this they all terminate again;
since he that loves another, has fulfilled the law. Justice and mercy;
fidelity and righteousness, and the like virtues, distinguished one from
another by particular names; seem only so many different modifications and
exertions of that one great principle of goodness, regulated, as to the
exercise of it, by reason, or wisdom. And it must be acknowledged that many
princes have been adorned with these moral excellencies in a great degree; so
that their own subjects, and foreign states in league with them, might have
considerable dependence upon them; and indeed, have actually been happy under
their smiles and patronage. Such glorious princes we ourselves have been blessed
with. But surely it will be no reflection upon the best of earthly sovereigns,
to say that their goodness falls infinitely short of that of the Universal
Sovereign; who is good to all; righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works; and all whose subjects either have partaken, or do now actually partake,
of his beneficence. For God is Love; and none absolutely good besides him. No
earthly monarch is perfectly divested of moral imperfections: And those who
have heretofore administered public affairs with the greatest integrity and
clemency, have nevertheless deviated from the rule of right in some instances,
to the hurt of those who confided in them. There are not wanting instances of
those, who, in the first part of their reign, have justly procured to
themselves universal love and respect; and yet have, long before the close of
it, stained their hands, and royal character, with violence, oppression and
blood: Becoming the curse and scourges, instead of the guardians, of such as
trusted in them. Even Nero was esteemed a prince of great justice and clemency,
the former part of his time: But what was he afterward? A royal monster, and
imperial butcher! The same is true of many others likewise. So that subjects
can never have an absolute security, that even the best of kings will not alter
their measures; and oppress and devour, instead of defending, them. They are as
liable to fall, and turn away from their righteousness, as other men. It is a
great mistake to imagine that any state of earthly power and greatness, can
make a man independent; exalt him above the reach of temptation, or remove him
beyond a possiblity of doing the most cruel, unjust and shameful things. As men
rise to wealth and power and grandeur, their old passions often rise with them;
or some new and unnatural ones start up in their breasts, to lead them astray.
There are no bounds that can be set to human folly and extravagance, any more
than madness can be controlled and regulated by reason -- No bounds set, unless
it be by Him, who says to the raging ocean, Thus far shall thou come, and no
farther; and here shall thy proud waves be stayed. Nor indeed does it appear
(surely not in this age of the world) but that those who are fixed in the
highest seats of worldly power and magnificence, have still their wants and
cravings, of some sort or other, as much as the vulgar; and can be induced to
as great and shameful wickedness. Any man may possibly be drawn away of his own
unnatural lusts and enticed, how much soever he may be exalted above the rest
of the world: Whereas God, and He only, cannot be tempted with evil; because it
is He, and only He, that is truly and properly independent.

But if even the best of princes may not be absolutely relied on, what will you
think of the worst? or of those that are no better than other people usually
are? There are many princes in the world, or at least there have been many, who
could not be trusted at all; perfidious, cruel, despotic and unrighteous men;
whose power has been employed for destruction, and not for salvation; for
bringing misery and ruin upon their subjects, instead of promoting the common
felicity. You will all readily acknowledge that there have been such princes in
the world. And do you imagine that our own nation has been wholly free from
them formerly, as, God be thanked, it has been for several of the last reigns?
Have there not been kings upon the throne of England, who have impiously
violated all their solemn oaths and engagements to their people; as if they had
sworn, only in order to show how little they either feared God or regarded man?
-- Kings who have robbed their subjects of their rights and substance, by
laying taxes upon them in an illegal manner? -- Kings that have set up the most
iniquitous and arbitrary courts? -- Kings that have corrupted lawyers and
judges, to uphold them and their creatures, in all their unrighteous and
opp^^^^^^ measures? -- Kings that have been the encouragers and patrons of
persecution for religion? -- Kings that were for taking away all our civil and
sacred privileges? -- Kings that were for introducing popery and arbitrary
rule amongst a free people -- Kings that were for governing, not by fixed,
standing laws, but standing armies? -- Kings, under whose administration no
man's conscience, or money, or life, could be secure a single day? -- Are the
very names of CHARLES and JAMES forgotten! -- Or do you not remember there was
once a royal House of Stewart! -- One might almost venture to assert, that it
were better to trust, not only in the Lord, but even in the Prince of the power
of the air, than in some other princes whose history we have read; and in whom
scarce any one ever trusted, without being deceived and mocked and abused; and
having reason afterward to be ashamed of his confidence.

So that you see it is by no means safe to place an entire trust in earthly
princes; not even in the best, and much less in others. For men of high degree
are often a lie, while men of low degree are vanity. Nor indeed are the latter
ever more vanity, than in that blind and undue confidence which they often
place in the former. But in God we may securely confide. For he is immutably
good and faithful. Though earthly thrones may be polluted and dishonored with
falsehood and unrighteousness; yet justice and judgment are always the
habitation of His: mercy and truth go before. His face.

BUT if we could suppose the goodness of princes to be perfect, like that of
God, so that we might always depend upon their best endeavors to serve us; yet
their wisdom and sagacity would not be equal to the goodness of their
intentions. For which reason it would not be proper to place an unreserved
confidence in them. It is a very ancient observation, and sufficiently verified
by the experience of later times, that great men are not always wise. A king
may be a child in more respects than one. Good sense is not entailed with the
crown* on the elder branch of the male line. Human laws cannot make wisdom
hereditary, though they may things of inferior value -- thrones and scepters. And
what great degree of trust is there to be placed in a weak, shortsighted
prince, whose head has nothing but a crown to adorn it? Be his intentions ever
so good, nothing considerable is to be hoped from him: and indeed he may
probably destroy, while he means to save. Especially since he is continually
exposed to be misled by crafty and designing courtiers, who will stick at no
measures, however ruinous to the public, in order to advance their own power
and fortune. By these he may be prompted to make foolish wars and foolish
peaces with his neighbors, to the impoverishing and distressing of his own
subjects; and to the loss of many thousands of their lives: And in short, be
led to do an hundred other things to the detriment of the public. Nor have
there been wanting examples of whole nations brought to ruin, by well-meaning,
but impolitic, princes, under the influence of wicked counsels.

BUT let your prince be wise as well as good; what is human wisdom at best,
compared to that of the only wise God? All human policy and sagacity, are mere
ignorance, if put in competition with His, who sees all the connexions and
dependencies of things, not only within the limits of one earthly empire, but
through the empire of the universe. The wisest of kings might join with David in
that humble acknowledgement -- O God, thou know my foolishness. -- God
takes the wise in their own craftiness: and whatever he purposes, with
relation to the welfare, or the destruction, of any nation, there is no wisdom
nor understanding nor counsel against the Lord. So that his wisdom, no less
than his goodness, may be safely confided in; though the best and wisest princes
may mistake in their measures.

IT will farther illustrate and confirm the main point in view, if we consider
to what a narrow sphere the power of the greatest monarchs is confined: Whereas
God's kingdom rules over all, and none can stay his hand. Our sovereigns are,
at best, but frail, weak creatures, being frequently unable to accomplish their
well-meant designs for their subjects; so that the good which they would, they
do not. They are not always able to preserve peace at home amongst their own
people, or to protect them against the invasions and violence of foreign
enemies. But all nations, before the Almighty, are as the small dust of the
balance. He stilleth the noise of the seas, and the tumult of the people; and
makes wars to cease.

THERE are many great and national calamities, which no earthly potentates have
ability either to prevent or to remedy. For though Solomon says, that where the
word of a king is, there is power; this is far from being true without any
restriction. Will the king's word dispel the tempest that hangs over us? Will
it arrest the thunder, and the lightning, anticipating the final conflagration,
and striking terror through a guilty world? Will the king's word steady the earth
when it trembles to its center, threatening to swallow up his towns and cities?
What will the royal mandate signify against the murrain, the plague and the
pestilence, laying waste his dominions? Will these obey his majesty's command,
and spare his subjects? Can the king call rain from heaven at his pleasure, to
refresh the languishing earth? or keep his people alive in famine? Yea, do not
contemptible insects baffle his power and sovereignty? the locust and the
caterpillar; and prove themselves mightier than he? Whither then can we flee
for succor, under these and suchlike distresses, but to that God who sways an
universal scepter, and whom all things obey?

AMIDST the confusions and disorders; the wars and tumults and mighty
revolutions, of the world; the numerous calamities we are daily exposed to; it
is manifest that all human power is but a poor refuge. The only security we can
have, is in the strength and providence of the Almighty. It is he that is our
refuge and strength; a very present help in trouble, when the help of man is
vain. And therefore, says the Psalmist, will not we fear, though the earth be
removed into the midst of the sea; though the waters thereof roar and be
troubled; though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof -- He that
dwells in the secret place of the most high shall abide under the shadow of
the Almighty -- I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress; my
God, in him will I trust. Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the
fowler, and from the noisome pestilence: He shall cover thee with his feathers;
and under his wings shall thou trust.

So far are the princes of the earth from being adequate objects of trust and
hope to us, that they are not always able to protect themselves. They totter
and tremble upon their thrones, like a reed shaken with the wind; and must
betake themselves to God for support, on whom is all their dependence. And is
it not evidently vain for us to rely chiefly on those, whose great hope and
security must be placed in a power superior to their own?

BESIDES it is to be remembered that we have a future, as well as a present,
interest depending: our souls are to be provided for, no less than our bodies.
And on whom shall we rely for the safety of them? Can our kings forgive our
sins; and calm our troubled consciences? Can they preserve us from the wrath to
come? and bestow upon us a blessed immortality? How great soever the power of
our princes is, to succor and befriend us, during this momentary life; yet
surely when this has a period put to it, their power over us also ceases* When
our mortal course is once finished, they have no more that they can do, whether
to harm or help us. As to what is to follow after we leave this world, our only
dependence is to be placed where it ought principally to be placed at present;
in that God whose power extends to our immortal, no less than our mortal, part;
and who can either destroy both soul and body in bell, or cause both to live
and rejoice in heaven. God can be our support and comfort, not only in the
sunshine of life, but in the valley of the shadow of death, which we must soon
pass through. When all outward succor fails; yea, when our own flesh and heart
shall fail us; He is still the strength of our heart, and our portion forever.

NOR indeed can we be certain-of protection from our earthly sovereigns, even
while we live, because they themselves may die before us. It is appointed unto
kings and princes once to die, as well as to slaves and beggars. And what
secure confidence can be reposed in those, who will in a few days lose all the
little power they have at present? Let your king be good; let him be wise; let
him be great and powerful; the life of this earthly god is as precarious as
that of men. The rulers and potentates of the world, are not commonly blessed
with firmer nerves and sinews, and more robust constitutions, than the meanest
of their subjects. They wither away, and fall with years, as others do; unless,
perhaps, they find a premature death. A dagger, or a cannon-ball, or poison, is
as fatal to the prince as the peasant. The lives of the great, are in continual
jeopardy, either from secret treachery, or open violence. Sickness does not
reverence the head that wears a crown, any more than one which has not so much
as a cowl, or a cap to cover it. Death enters the royal court, as boldly as the
cottage; the palace, as the prison. Too many of the rulers of the earth, are
indeed apt to forget, in the greatness of their pomp and power, and while they
are giving law to others, that themselves are subject to the great law of
mortality. But search the tombs and monuments of the dead, and you will find
royal dust and ashes and bones, as well as beggarly. And he that was, perhaps,
once the terror of one half the world, and the hope and confidence of the
other, is long since become the prey of virmin. The accutest antiquary might be
puzzled to distinguish the scull of Caesar or Alexander, from that of Lazarus,
were they yet entire; and the hand that sustained a scepter, from that which
held a spade or a plough. Vid. Mr. Emlyn's Sermon on the death of K. WILLIAM.
Death levels all; and is more properly an universal monarch, than any one who
has yet aspired to that character. The great and small will lie down alike in
the dust, and the worms shall cover them. This is the conclusion of all earthly
power and splendour: -- the end of human greatness and majesty. And verily every
man at his best estate is altogether vanity. --

ONE would think that we, and indeed the whole british empire, have lately had
such an affecting example of human frailty and mortality, as might, in a
manner, supersede the necessity of all other arguments, and six our thoughts on
the ever living God, as our only sure dependence and confidence. That
illustrious personage, who is lately fallen like other of the Princes, and for
whom at least three nations mourn, was not indeed actually invested with the
regal character and dignity; but only an heir to them: And according to men's
way of guessing at future events, (for they can do no more than guess) was
likely in the course of a few years to fill and adorn the British throne. His
royal Father being already so full of days, that we cannot expect to enjoy the
blessing of his life and reign much longer: Especially as the national impiety
gives us too much reason to apprehend, that God may visit our transgressions
with a rod, and our iniquities with stripes. But while our present legal and
gracious Sovereign has been hastening toward the decline of life, and the end
of his righteous administration, the hopes of his subjects have been fixed on
his royal Son, the heir of his crown and dominions. Nor, indeed, have there
been many Princes rising up in the world, in whom the confidence of their
future subjects could be so justly placed, as in Him -- the heir, not only of
the authority and highest titles, but of the princely qualities, of his royal
ancestors.

INDEED one must be little acquainted with the state of the world at present,
or the history of former times, who is not aware how small a stock of real
merit will usually go a great ways in persons of high birth and distinction;
especially in those who have that great merit of having a crown in possession
or reversion. A small share of good sense is enough to gain even the remote
candidates for future empire, the reputation of wisdom; and Solomon himself
must be robbed of his name, to grace half-fools and idiots. As little piety and
virtue are also sufficient to procure persons in the higher classes of life,
the character of excellent men, and even of Saints -- While eminent goodness
among the vulgar and middle sort, passes wholly unobserved, or at least without
its due praise; the same, or a much less degree of it, in people of figure and
distinction, opens every mouth in its commendation; and all vie with one
another in fulsom flattery and extravagance. The good fortune of these
dignitaries, whether in church or state, together with the folly and wickedness
of parasites, are set in a strong and beautiful point of light by the poet,
whose words may be thought sufficiently grave for this place -- Unless my
memory fails me they run thus -- It Is from high life, high characters are drawn,
A saint in crape, is twice a saint in lawn:
A judge is just, a chanc'lor juster still;
A gownman learned; a bishop, what you will:
Wise, if a minister; but if a king,
More wise, more learned, more just, more every thing.


IT is in short, so common and shameful a practice to extol persons of mean
accomplishments and little worth, merely because they possess great power and
wealth and external dignity; that one is almost afraid to speak honorably of
real merit in superior life, lest it should be looked upon as words of course,
and base, servile flattery; the bad effects of which are not, perhaps, less, or
fewer in number, than those of calumny and detraction. The consideration now
mentioned, together with that of the difficulty of coming to any certain
knowledge concerning the true character of great men at a distance, either
while they live, or soon after they are dead; these considerations (not to
mention my own insufficiency for such a task) have, in a manner, discouraged me
from saying any thing particularly concerning the illustrious Prince, lately
deceased. But least a total silence upon such an occasion, should be imputed to
a worse cause, and construed into something far more criminal than caution and
diffidence:

I shall just observe,

THAT if credit is due to reports that have crossed the Atlantic; to the
general voice of the nation, and those particularly who have had the best
opportunity to acquaint themselves with this Prince's character; we might have
justly expected in Him, a good king; a true Father to His people; and such a
common blessing as would have gone as far as any thing, toward allaying the
national grief, when it should please Heaven to deprive us of Him, who now
holds the British scepter.

HIS Royal Highness had given sufficient proof of his being blessed with such a
degree of good sense, and solid understanding, as were necessary to make him a
discrete and wise ruler. Nor was his education in the principles of
superstition and tyranny, but such as became an Heir to the imperial throne of
Great Britain. His application to reading and study, especially in the last
years of his life, was very great, and, perhaps, something singular in a modern
Prince. Nor were his studies turned, as those of some other Princes have been,
to such things as were rather ornamental, than useful; or as tended only to
debase royalty into pedantry: But to those things which surely every British
King ought to know -- His duty to God and man -- Himself -- Human nature, and
the various tempers and passions of mankind; in the knowledge of which is
chiefly founded the true art of governing -- The nature and ends of civil
government -- The constitutions, and various interests of the several nations
and states of Europe; and particularly of those nations which He was to govern,
had not Heaven determined otherwise. --

HIS attendance upon the worship of God was both more constant and more devout,
than that of princes and courtiers usually is. And this, together with that
excellent example of the personal and social virtues, which he exhibited, had a
very favorable and promising aspect upon the morals of the nation; the great
need of reforming which, He was deeply sensible of.

HE was a zealous promoter of liberal arts and ingenuous learning in the
nation; not choosing, as some politicians have done, to rule over fools and
brutes, but wise men -- A great encourager of husbandry, manufactures and
commerce; (the true sources of national wealth and felicity:) And of all other
designs in which he apprehended the public interest was concerned; of which he
was doubtless among the best judges. And as he well understood the consequence
and importance of the British Settlements in America, he was accordingly
desirous of cherishing and encouraging them. Nor had NEW ENGLAND in particular,
a small share in His royal grace and affection. To which, indeed, one may say
with modesty, it had not a less just claim, than any other remote part of the
British dominions whatever; whether in respect of its steadfast loyalty to the
illustrious House of Hanover; or its beneficial services to the crown and
nation; the real interests of which, it is to be hoped, will never be thought
separate, but the same.

THE Prince's conduct in domestic life; his tenderness and fidelity to his most
excellent Princess; his paternal care and affection; his good economy, and
every thing he did within the walls of the palace, showed the good and noble,
the generous and princely mind. This they did no less than that part of his
conduct which fell under more general observation. And indeed every man's true
temper and character are much better discerned, by his behavior in common and
private life, than in public; wherein goodness is more frequently aped and
counterfeited, than really practiced. Considered in this view, the Prince
always discovered the humane and just, the well-natur'd and courteous man:
which he did without degrading himself in the eyes of those about him, or
forgetting that he was born to wear a crown, And had he lived to this, there is
no reason to doubt but those virtues which appeared so amiable, and shone so
bright, in a narrower sphere, diffusing joy through his palace, would have been
drawn forth into more public view, and exerted from the throne with peculiar
advantage; to the joy and felicity of his greater family, the people of
Great Britain: All of them, I mean, except those strange men, who had rather be
ruled by a papist, and Italian tyrant, than a protestant Prince, under the
restriction of salutary laws.

AND this leads me to observe, that the Prince had a due abhorrence of popery
and arbitrary government, as being both of them contrary to reason and
christianity; inconsistent with the natural rights of mankind, and the truest
happiness of human society. His own good sense doubtless suggested to him the
impiety of such a religion; the injustice of this sort of government; and
attached him firmly to the protestant interest, and a limited monarchy; such as
our own. But it is not improbable that he was the more established in these
glorious principles of a free government and free religion, by reflecting upon
his descent; which was from an illustrious House, the Patrons and Bulwark of
Liberty, from the very beginning of the reformation. Which reformation the
prince himself was, indeed, desirous of seeing carried into greater perfection,
and brought nearer to the primitive and christian model; especially in England.
For it is said He was a great promoter of that late, important proposal for a
Review; in order to the altering and amending of those numerous things in the
national church, which have been so long grievous, not only to non-conformists,
but also to great numbers of the best and wisest men of the established
religion.

THE Prince's charitable donations toward the relief of the poor and sick;
toward propagating christianity in the world; and upon other occasions, were
many and liberal; such as become a prince. And we may reasonably suppose, that
he was not a christian in name only, but in temper; having that divine
principle in him, which works by love and good deeds; and forms the manners.

I Do not remember that His Royal Highness had ever an opportunity afforded
him, to discover his military virtue. -- However we know he discovered a much
more excellent sort of heroism, than that which is shown in fields of battle,
and the greatest martial achievements. For he that is slow to anger, is better
than the mighty; and he that rules his spirit, than he that takes a city.

SUCH, in brief, was that excellent man, that good Prince, whose death the
nation does now, and may, perhaps, long lament. And surely such qualities in
the heir apparent, might justly raise the hopes and expectations of all, as
they promised a wise and pious, a righteous and clement successor, to the
British throne: than whom a greater blessing of a temporal nature, scarce
Heaven itself could have bestowed upon us. A person that so well understood how
to govern himself, amidst the snares and temptations of a court, where it is
not (God knows) always the fashion to be wise and virtuous; could not easily
have failed to govern others with justice and wisdom; or, in the language of
scripture, to have fed them according to the integrity of his heart, and guided
them by the skilfulness of his hands. -- But he is gone -- gone from an earthly
Kingdom, liable to changes and revolutions; to possess another, which has more
stable foundations; a kingdom that cannot be shaken; and in the peaceful
enjoyment of which, there will be no pretender to disturb him.

IT will not be imagined that what has been said above, concerning the deceased
and lamented Prince, is from any certain knowledge of the speaker; which is
impossible upon many accounts. I presume no farther, therefore, than to say,
from the best intelligence I have been able to gain in these remote parts, and
in my low station, that nothing has been said but plain, sober truth; and that
more might have been said with equal justice. It seems not consistent with the
religion of JESUS CHRIST our blessed Redeemer, in whose mouth there was no
guile; or indeed with a principle of manly simplicity and integrity, to flatter
even living princes, and much less, dead ones, as the manner of some is. And
one would think that a good man would rather lose the faculty of speech
entirely, than prostitute it in bestowing that praise, which is due only to
virtue and wisdom, upon vice and folly, however dignified by sounding titles,
wealth and authority. --

THE death of this excellent person in the midst of his days, while his royal
Father is in the decline, and his royal Son, only in blossom or bud, of life,
is one of those dark and intricate steps of divine providence, which human
reason is not able to trace, and thoroughly comprehend. That a Prince so well
formed for government; so calculated to make a people happy; should be cut down
at the middle stage of life, without ever having scope and opportunity to
exercise his regal virtues, by possessing his hereditary throne -- cut down at
a time when he was likely, in the common course of human affairs, to be soon
called upon the most public and important stage of action -- at a time when the
general expectation concerning him was raised to such a pitch; more nations
than one, hoping to sit under his shadow with great delight -- and when the
next heir to the crown, (whom God preserve and bless) is, by so many years, a
minor: -- this, surely, is one of those secret things which belong to God; and
for which he has certainly wise reasons, however inscrutable to us. Infinite
wisdom and goodness never act at random, extempore, and without design; but
always according to the exactest rules, and for important ends: Nor, indeed, at
all the less so, because short-sighted, mole-ey'd man, is not able to discern
them.

WHILE, therefore, we mourn this, to us, calamitous event, as every good Briton
does, we ought humbly and patiently to acquiesce in it, as what was perfectly
wise and righteous; saying with the inspired apostle upon another occasion -- O
the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! Indeed however
unable we may be to dive to the bottom of this and suchlike providence, which
are a great deep; we may be pretty sure that one use we are to make of them, is
the learning of humility. We are to be disciplined by them to a modest temper
and deportment; to an implicit, humble submission to the will and conduct of
the Almighty; not presuming ourselves to be competent judges of all the steps
He takes in his administration of the world. So that our ignorance is, in a
sort, our instructor and schoolmaster, in one most important branch of human
wisdom; -- the knowledge, and habitual sense, of our own folly and weakness.
Nor let us disdain to learn even of such a preceptor -- that pride was not made
for man. God would not have such creatures to be vain and arrogant; or addicted
to find fault with every thing they cannot perfectly understand, in the course
of his providence; but to be still, and know that he is God; the Governor among
the nations.

ANOTHER lesson we are to learn from this event, is doubtless that which was
the subject of the former part of this discourse, namely, That it is better to
trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in princes. We are admonished hereby,
not to place our great security and happiness, in the governors and princes of
the world; whose life is a vapor, like that of other men; and may perhaps be
suddenly dissipated, both when we least expect it, and most need their
assistance. From such weak and vain dependencies, we are naturally led up to
the great Author of all our beings; the source of all our good; the sovereign
Ruler of the world, by whom kings live and reign and decree justice: And at
whose pleasure they also die -- To Him we are led, as our rock and fortress;
our only sure refuge, the only adequate object of our hope and confidence. And
since we are under his almighty care and guardianship, we need not despair of
having all our reasonable wants supplied; or of escaping those very evils, of
which surely we have some reason to be apprehensive, with relation to the
untimely death of this good Prince. Nothing is to be despaired of, that is
truly good and proper for us, while infinite wisdom, power and goodness govern.
The world, depend upon it, the world will never suffer shipwreck, and be wholly
cast away, if God is pleased to take the helm, to steer and conduct it; though
all other pilots of the state should be washed overboard, and drowned. So that
even in the most dangerous and tempestuous seasons, we are not without
consolation: We know where to take harbor and sanctuary, from the stormy wind
and tempest; where to cast the anchor of our hope, till the sore calamities are
over-past. Whoever dies, God survives; with whom we may acquaint ourselves; and
be at peace. He lives and reigns the King eternal and immortal, though invisible
to mortal sight; and only wise also, though human folly does not discern the
wisdom of his conduct. Wherefore, while the Lord reigns, let the earth
rejoice; let the multitude of the isles be glad thereof -- Make a joyful noise
unto the Lord, all ye lands -- For the Lord is good, his mercy is everlasting,
and his truth to all generations -- Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for
his help; and whose hope is in the Lord his God, which made heaven and earth;
the sea, and all that is therein.

BUT you will remember that this is such an happiness as none can be entitled
to, but those who love and obey the God in whom they trust. It is a solecism
and contradiction for any to pretend to a pious confidence in God, and to
solace themselves in contemplating his power and providence* while they live in
wilful rebellion against him; while they abuse his mercy, despise his justice,
and scorn his thunder. If we would exercise a rational trust in God, and enjoy
the happiness naturally resulting therefrom, we must be reconciled to him through
the great Mediator betwixt Him and man; and obey his holy commandments.
Otherwise the divine wisdom and power, and even goodness, are rather a just
ground of terror, than of consolation, to us* For there is no peace, faith my
God, to the wicked.

THE great and sorrowful event we have been considering, may also serve as a
warning to all persons, exalted to power and dignity in the world, not to grow
vain and imperious; not to plume themselves upon their grandeur, and
superiority over others: But to remember that they are also once to die, sooner
or later; and to give an account of themselves to Him, who regards not the
persons of princes; -- to give an account, to what use they have applied their
wealth and superior talents; whether to the glorifying of Him that gave them,
and the good of their fellow-men; or to the dishonoring of the One, and the
injury and oppression of the other -- Alas! how many are there, with respect to
whom this will be a most awful and terrible reckoning. --

THERE is, as there ought to be, a wide difference of rank and circumstance
amongst mankind; in this world: But in the other, and before the judgment seat
of Christ, where all nations are to be gathered, these temporary distinctions
will be all laid aside. In that vast multitude, which no man can number, there
will be no distinctions of high and low, rich and poor, bond and free; there
will be neither prince nor subject; emperor nor slave. You will see none in
purple robes, with crowns and scepters and diadems; none in chains and
shackles; but all, common men, the sinful posterity of Adam and Eve, waiting
their final sentence from the Judge of all the earth: Who will do right,
rendering to every one, not according to his former rank and station in the
world, but according as his work has been.

WHEN we behold the princes and sovereigns of the world, daily doing homage to
the king of terrors; casting down their crowns at his feet, and leaving all
their royal pomp and honors in the dust; this surely admonishes us to guard
against pride and insolence; against valuing ourselves upon those little
advantages and distinctions which we are so prone to over-rate, and set a
greater price upon than they deserve. It Is a solemn lecture against that
vanity; against those swelling thoughts; against those towering imaginations,
which are but too common in persons of wealth and power; of figure and
distinction in the world. It bids them remember, that how high soever they are*
yea, tho* they exalt themselves as the eagle, and build their nest among the
stars; yet there is a God above who is able to bring them down; and to abase
those that walk in pride: A God, in whose hand their breath is, and whose are
all their ways.

MANY persons, when raised to great wealth and dignity, have been ready enough
to flatter themselves, and have actually been flattered by others, that they
were not subject to death, like the vulgar sort. But alas! these immortal
Mortals are, nevertheless, long since dead, and become the sport of voracious
insects! This also will be soon thy lot, O man! whosoever thou art, that now
exaltest thyself, and deniest the God that is above. After thy skin, worms will
destroy thy flesh, (...) and rioting on thee for a while, and then (...)
themselves. Yet there is after this, another worm; one that dies not; and a
second death, far more terrible than the first. Will thou not then, O vain and
thoughtless Mortal, forsake thy folly, till it is too late to be wise? In
season consider thy latter end, -- what thou art coming to; nor put far away
from thee the evil day. For behold, All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness
thereof is as the flower of the field; the grass withers; the flower fades.
Surely the people is grass. Neither wisdom nor power; neither splendour nor
wealth, will reverse that sentence -- Dust thou art; and unto dust shall thou
return. To use the words of the prophet, therefore, or rather of God himself;
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom; neither let the mighty man glory in
his might; let not the rich man glory in his riches: But let him that glories,
glory in this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord, which
execute loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth.

THE END.
Advertisement.
THE foregoing discourse was written in an hasty manner, without any intention
to publish it: And though some alterations have since been made in it; yet the
Author fears they are neither so many or great, as the Reader will think were
necessary.

J. M.


