Mr. Porter's REPLY TO Mr. Bryant's REMARKS Upon a Sermon of his Entitled, The
Absurdity and Blasphemy of substituting the personal Righteousness of Men etc.

A VINDICATION OF A SERMON preached at Braintree, third Parish, December 25th
1749.

Being an Answer to a Piece, entitled, Some friendly Remarks on said Sermon.

In a LETTER to the REMARKER.

By JOHN PORTER, M. A. Author of that Sermon.

Together with an APPENDIX by one of the Attestators.

Romans x.3. They being ignorant of GOD's Righteousness, and going about to
establish their own Righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the
Righteousness of GOD.

Tim. i.8. Desiring to be Teachers of the Law, understanding neither what they
say, nor whereof they affirm.

(...) i.11. Whose Mouths must be stopped --

Amisso articulo justificationis, amissa est simul tota Doctrina Christiana.

Luther. Doctrina de justificatione Fidei -- praecipuus est sustinendae
Religionis Cardo.

Calvin. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND in Queenstreet. 1751.

THE following Reply to Mr. Bryant's Letter of Remarks, would have appeared in
Print much sooner than it does, if I had been determined to have written any
thing of this Nature, upon my first receiving it; But, finding it filled with
Railery instead of Reason, for some time I did not know but it would be for the
best, to let it pass as unworthy of public Notice: However, at length (with
others) thinking it might be for the Glory of God, to make some Reply to it, I
wrote what is here offered to public View. -- Yet after it was written, it lay
by me several Months before I was fully determined to publish it to the World.
This, I hope, may be a sufficient Excuse for its appearing so late.

I now submit it, as it is, to the all-disposing Providence of God, and to the
Reader's Candor.

J. P.

A REPLY, etc. To Mr. BRYANT.
Reverend Sir,
IN the Beginning of June last, I received and read your Letter to me,
containing Remarks on my Sermon: And could not but observe, you talked something
more orthodoxly (if the Word may be used with any Propriety, in Relation to
either of your Performances) as well as more craftily in this, than you did in
your Sermon: which occasioned me to think whether mine had not produced some
good Effect, and brought you to a better Understanding. However, one Thing was
clear to me, by your sly but harsh Reflections in it upon me, viz. that you
were very angry with me, for preaching and printing the Truth, in Opposition to
your Errors. But why did it put you into such a Heat, Sir? Were you not angry
without a Cause?

You say (REM. page 27.) "We are all agreed in the divine Right of private
Judgment." i. e. We may all think for our selves: And pray, why not preach and
print too as there may be Occasion? Has not one of the youngest Sons of John
Calvin (as you call me) as good a Right, by the Press or Pulpit, to publish
Truth to the World, as you, one of the young Seed of James Arminius, have to
preach and print Errors? Errors (I say) condemned almost universally by
Protestants, by the Synod of Dort, by the Churches of England, Scotland, and
New England, and by innumerable learned and godly Divines, from the Reformation
down to this Day; and as I apprehend, by the Scriptures themselves, the Oracles
of God. Let the World judge.

I freely own, that when I studied my Sermon and preached it to my own People,
I had no View to a further Publication of it: but only designed to guard them,
whose Souls I desire always to watch for, as One that must give an Account,
against the Errors contained in yours (printed and dispersed among us) which
there, according to my Apprehension, appear very barefaced, and without their
usual Masque. But having preached it in Braintree at the Request of some People
there, a Copy for the Press was desired by the Hearers; to whose Importunity,
after much Reluctance, I at length yielded.

And since you have been so free, in the Vindication of your Self and Error, as
to take it under your Consideration, and make some friendly Remarks on it, as
you style what you have done; you will doubtless allow me to be so free, in the
Vindication of my self and the Truth, as to make as friendly a Reply to what
you have written. However, it is but what you might reasonably expect: For ab
alio expectes alteri quod feceris.

And what I have to say, I shall range in the following Order.

1. I will compare Notes, to see if in Fact it be as you say; viz. that upon
comparing Notes it would be found, there is no Controversy between us, only in
opening the Text.

2. I will say something in Favor of my Arguments, and show that they stand
good, notwithstanding what you have said to invalidate them.

3. I will inquire whether you sufficiently prove your self to be a Calvinist,
and me to be not one, in opening the Text.

I. I am to compare Notes, that we may see if your Observation be just, as to
the Difference between us.

You say (REM. page 9.) "There is no Controversy between us, only in opening
the Text." But if what you say be true, I have really a much meaner Esteem of
my Sermon than ever; and cannot in that Case but seriously wish, it might be
buried in perpetual Oblivion. However, " saying and proving differ," you
observe. (REM. page 11.) And I confess, it is easier Saying, than Proving:
Doubtless you thought so in the present Case: for you roundly assert, that if
Notes were compared, there would be found no Controversy between us only in
opening the Text; but don't so much as attempt to prove your Assertion, by
selecting Passages out of each Sermon, which stand in the most seeming
Opposition, and reconciling of them: No, not the least Appearance of this --
And you was very subtle in taking the Method you have done; though I fear, not
very honest: for it is beyond your Skill (Mr. Bryant) and the Skill of all your
Counselors and Assistants, to reconcile the two Sermons, which go upon two
Schemes so opposite and inconsistent. You can as easily unite the two Poles, or
reconcile Light and Darkness.

But though you did not see it in your Way, and for your Honor, to compare
Notes, I see it is in mine, and think it but just in me to do this; since you
have in a Sort put me upon it, and especially since this comparative View of
Things may serve very much to open the Eyes of those who are too apt to take
Things upon Trust, and to imagine there is really no Controversy between us,
but about the Meaning of one single Passage of Scripture, only because you,
with an Air of Assurance, though without a Shadow of Reason, say this is the Case.

Now that we may have the clearest View of the Disagreement and Opposition of
the two Sermons, I will select some Passages out of each, and set them in two
Columns, opposite to one another.

MY Notes.
That God did for the Glory of his great Name, and the eternal Felicity of some
of Mankind, constitute his own Son Head and Representative of this Number, and
in the Fullness of Time sent him in their Nature to die for them; that they
might be restored to the Image and Favor of God, enjoy him here, and for ever
hereafter. (SER* page 1, 2.)

That Adam by his first Transgression involved himself and all his Posterity in
universal Guilt and Ruin -- And that all Mankind, as Descendants from him their
federal Head, are universally guilty and polluted. (SER. page 1, 2.)

The moral Image of God is entirely last by the Fall. (SER. page 15.)

YOUR Notes.
That when Men read of God's choosing whole Nations to certain Privileges (and
those in this Life only) they rashly conclude that particular Persons are
unconditionally chosen to eternal Life. (SER. page 7.) Some imagine, God has
from Eternity, and that not only without any Reason, but in direct Opposition
to the very Nature and essential Constitution of his moral Government, set his
Love upon them. (SER. page 8.)

That when Men have laid before them the Character of a very loose and
abandoned People, who by their own long practiced Wickedness have rendered
themselves the Children of Wrath and fitted themselves for Destruction, they
are inclined to vilify humane Nature itself with the same vicious Character.
(SER. ibid.)

If this be Revelation and Grace, to vilify humane Nature -- Men will be damned
before they will believe. (SER. page 24.)

MY Notes.
Good Works are not to be looked on, or considered as the Cause of the
Justification and Salvation of Man; but only as the Fruits and Effects of
Justification, and a Part of the Salvation purchased by Christ.

That Men are not justified and saved for any thing wrought in or done by them
etc. (i. e. that the whole of Salvation is of free Grace) SER. page 22, 23.

That when Persons are justified, the moral Image of God, lost entirely by the
Fall, which consists in Knowledge, Righteousness, and true Holiness, is restored
and reinstamped on the Soul etc. So that they are naturally and NECESSARILY
inclined to obey the moral Law in all its Precepts. (SER. pa. 15.)

The justified by Christ's Righteousness have seen God to be infinitely lovely
in himself etc. So that they do love him, and CANNOT but love him entirely, and
above every other Object. (SER. page 16.)

That such a Friendship subsists between God and his People as can never be
broken -- And they have the Word and Oath of God that they shall be kept, and
at length actually put into Possession of heavenly Glories. (SER. page 28, 29.)

That the wedding Garment, of which you read in the Gospel; and the fine Linen
white and clean in the Revelation, principally intends the Righteousness of
Christ, and not the personal Righteousness of Men. (SER. page 14.)

I do throughout my Sermon (omiting here to transcribe particular Passages at
length) clearly hold forth, so that he that runs may read, and which indeed was
the main Design of it, That the Righteousness of CHRIST is the Merit and Matter
too of a Sinner's Justification in the Sight of God -- That Men are justified
without Works -- That the best Works of the best Men have no Hand in the Affair
of Justification, as the Merit or Matter thereof -- That full Satisfaction has
been made to the Law and Justice of God for the elect World by Jesus Christ --
That a holy Temper and Practice are a Part of Salvation, and not the Cause
thereof in any Shape whatever.

YOUR Notes.
That when Men hear of our being saved by Grace, they conceive of it so, as to
destroy all moral Agency; and set themselves down with this vain Though It, that
Nothing on their Part is necessary to Salvation, but if they are designed for
it, they shall be irresistibly driven into Heaven, whether they will or no.
(SER. page 7.)

That when Men meditate on the unchangeable Love God bears good Men, they make
this groundless Inference, that they are unchangeable also. (SER. ibid.)

That it is a Doctrine naturally tending to Licentiousness, for any to say, that
the Believer is already in such a State of Salvation, as that his final
Happiness is as certain as if he was now in the actual Possession of it. (SER.
page 25, 26.)

That the wedding Garment in the Gospel, and the fine Linen white and clean in
the Revelation, is the personal Righteousness of Men. (SER. page 15, 16.)

You (Sir) in your Sermon do affirm, that our whole Happiness is suspended on
our personal good Behavior and patient Continuance in Ways of Well-doing.
(SER. page 7.)

From hence [ i. e. from the common Notion, that the Text designs the
Righteous] this odious Character of filthy Rags has been transferred to the
moral Seize of Men under the Gospel, and the Righteousness of the most
improved Christian has been generally spoken of as no better a Qualification
(even according to the merciful Tenor of the Gospel, and considered as the
CONDITION of that final Happiness, which is in the Hands and at the Disposal of
Jesus Christ, who according to the good Pleasure of the supreme Father of all
is constituted the only Mediator between God and Man) no better a
Qualification, I say, in this mediatorial and infinitely gracious Scheme, to
appear before God with Acceptance, than filthy Rags are to dress and adorn the
Body for a Visit to the King and Court on Earth. (SER. page 10.)

Mr. BRIANT'S Notes.
That personal Righteousness is the Condition of all God's Favors; -- It opens
all the Stores of Heaven. (SER. page 20, 21.)

To speak freely, I confess, I never yet saw with what Face a Man can pretend
to exhort others to the Practice of Righteousness, who is constantly telling
them, perhaps in the same Breath, that all their Righteousness, when they have
obtained it, will be nothing but filthy Rags. "God is already satisfied in all
his Demands, his Law, his Honor, his rigorous relentless Justice, are all
satisfied, and there is nothing left for Man to do," but to believe this
undoubtedly, and the more surely, the less Grounds he has for it, to rely upon
it, that he is righteous, and shall be accepted as such: "The Believer indeed
may, if he pleases, out of mere Generosity, add Works of Righteousness of his
own, but there is no real Need of it; for his main Interest is secure without
it." He is already in such a State of Salvation, that his final Happiness is as
certain as if he was now in the actual Possession of it. The plain Truth of the
Case is this; Either our Righteousness is of some Use and Significancy in the
Affair of our Salvation, or it is not. Either it has some Connection with, and
actual Influence on our Happiness, or it is of no real Necessity as to us.
(SER. page 25, 26.)

All those who decry moral Virtue -- as a Thing of no Avail toward the
obtaining the divine Favor, and the Privileges and Rewards of Christianity, do
in Effect subvert the very fundamental Principles both of natural and revealed
Religion. (SER. page 29, 30.)

Now (Mr. Briant) the Sum of what I have quoted from you, I think, any one that
does not shut his Eyes, must see, is necessarily this, viz. That our whole
Happiness is suspended on our own personal Righteousness -- That personal
Righteousness is the Condition of our Justification, and that wherein Man may
appear before God with Acceptance -- That personal Righteousness opens all the
Stores of Heaven -- That the Law, Honor, and Justice of God are not so fully
satisfied already by Jesus Christ, but that there is something left for Man to
do by Way of Satisfaction -- That Man's main Interest is not secure without he
performs this Part of satisfying Work -- That personal Righteousness is of some
Use and Significancy in satisfying the Law and Justice of God, and so in
appeasing the divine Wrath, and procuring Salvation. -- In a Word, that
personal Righteousness will obtain for us the divine Favor. -- Such mighty
Things it will do: and yet, amazingly strange, you say, there is no Merit in
it: And you challenge me and all my Attestators, to point out one single
Passage in your Sermon, where the Doctrine of Justification by the Merit of
Man's personal Righteousness is asserted, or from whence it can by good and
necessary Consequence be inferred.

If (Mr. Briant) you really are, what you pretend to be, and don't feign your
self a Calvinist, then I think, when you say, there is no Merit, you must
intend to be understood in a sound Calvinistical, and not in a rotten Arminian
Sense. But if only the latter be your Intent, namely, to exclude Merit in no
other Sense than the Arminians do (who reject, perhaps with as much Displeasure
as you can, the Papists Doctrine of Merit of Condignity, though at the same Time
harmonizing well enough with them in their Doctrine of Merit of Congruity The
Papists say, One must dispose and fit himself by Faith (i. e. Assent to the
Gospel) Repentance and good Works, to partake of CHRIST. This they call Meritum
ex Congruo. -- And is not this the Doctrine of Arminians; and the Doctrine of
Mr. B. when he says, that Forgiveness of Sins through the Merits of Christ is
upon the Condition of Faith, Repentance, and good Living? Pray, what is the
Difference between the Papists saying, that we must fit our selves to partake
of Christ, by Faith, Repentance and good Works; and Mr. B's saying, that Faith,
Repentance and good Living are the Condition of Forgiveness of Sins through the
Merit of Christ? So that Mr. B. will find it a difficult Task to clear himself
of this Popish Merit of Congruity.
) what is then become of your Calvinism? And how will you clear your self, when
Calvinists charge the Doctrine of human Merit (at least in some low Sense) upon
you?

What, Sir, is there no Merit at all in that, upon which our whole Happiness is
suspended! No Merit in that, in which we can appear before God with Acceptance!
No Merit in that, which opens all the Stores of Heaven! No Merit in that, which
satisfies the Law and Justice of God, at least in Part! No Merit in that, which
obtains the divine Favor! Certainly your Expressions concerning the Efficacy
and Benefit of the personal Righteousness of Men (which appear as strong as
those commonly used concerning the Righteousness of Christ himself) do strongly
insinuate and imply some kind of Merit in Man's personal Righteousness;
whatever was the Intention of your Heart in using them: and upon a more careful
Review of them, Sir, I believe, you might see it, as well as others. However,
while they stand as they do at present, those in the World "who have Sense
enough and will trust their own Facilities so far as to judge in themselves
what is Right," I believe, will think you did intend by them to recommend the
Doctrine of Merit (of some Sort) in Man's personal Righteousness; and this,
notwithstanding you just hint toward the close of your Sermon in a
Parenthesis, A Parenthesis, we all know, only includes something that may be
left out in reading, and yet the Sense of the Writer remain entire.
that Forgiveness of Sins and final Acceptance with the Father is through the
Merits of his Son.

But however, Sir, it appears evident to me, that there is this wide Difference
between us in our Sermons, which I shall give you in the following short
Contrast.

On the one Hand, I maintain in my Sermon, That a determinate Number of
Individuals among Mankind were from Eternity absolutely chosen in Christ to
Salvation. -- That Adam's natural Posterity are all guilty and universally
polluted by the Fall, the moral Image of God being lost entirely. -- That the
Righteousness of Christ imputed, and received by Faith, is the only Matter, as
well as Merit, of a Sinner's Justification in the Sight of God. -- That
Salvation is of sovereignly free and distinguishing Grace. -- That there is no
falling totally and finally from special Grace. -- That good Works are the
Fruits of Faith and a Part of Salvation, not the Cause thereof, etc.

On the other Hand, You (Mr. Briant) in your Sermon (as I think the foregoing
Quotations sufficiently manifest) do plainly renounce and explode my Notion of
eternal personal Election, and only assert a temporal, national one. -- You
explode my Notion of original Sin, as vilifying human Nature, and grounded on
misapplied Scripture-Characters of an abandoned People. -- You explode likewise
my Notion of Justification by the imputed Righteousness of Christ; and
maintain, it is moral Virtue makes us amiable before God, and Forgiveness of
Sins is suspended on our own personal Righteousness. -- So, under the other
Heads mentioned, you advance Opinions directly contrary to mine: and in short,
the Current of your whole Sermon appears quite opposite to the plain Scope and
Tenor of mine.

This, I apprehend, is a fair Representation of the different Opinions advanced
in our two Sermons: And yet (Mr. Briant) you say very confidently, "There is no
Controversy between us, only in opening the Text;" and "that if I aim at you in
the rest of my Sermon, I have missed the Mark, and must charge again to do
Execution;" -- that "I have mistook the Man, and been fighting with my own
Shadow." -- But surely every unbiased Judge must see, from the comparative
View which has been given, that there is indeed a general Controversy between
us, extending throughout our Sermons, and not confined merely to our opening
the Text; and so, that I have hit the Mark; and by Mr. Briant's Reply to my
Sermon, that I have hit the Man too.

But, Sir, if after all I should have happened to take you wrong, and your
Sermon should not really be calculated nor intended to oppose these glorious
Protestant and Calvinistical Doctrines, I will assure you, my Mistake has not
been wilful. And I will readily ask your Pardon, when I am convinced of my
Mistake: And let me honestly tell you, I should be exceeding glad to be
convinced of it.

And (Mr. Briant) if you did not design to contradict and oppose these
Doctrines in your Sermon, but did then and do now believe and embrace them in
your Heart, you may easily satisfy me and others, only by some serious and
plain Declaration in the next Piece you shall have Occasion to publish, that
you did not design any Opposition to these sacred Truths; but did then and do
now believe them, any Thing in your Sermon of a contrary Aspect
notwithstanding. -- I do (dear Sir) if you can possibly comply, earnestly
request this easy, and (I think) reasonable Thing of you: And if you don't
gratify me herein, you must allow me to think still, that you do in your Sermon
and Heart too really oppose these Doctrines, commonly called the Doctrines of
Grace; for whosoever believes them with his Heart, I must suppose, will readily
confess them with his Mouth, or his Pen.

Thus, Sir, I have fairly compared Notes with you: and by this comparative
Survey, it may easily be seen, that our Harmony (a strange Kind of Harmony)
lies in Discord.

I am in the next Place,

II. To say something in Favor of the Arguments I used to support my
Construction of the controverted Text; and to show, that they remain good,
notwithstanding what you have said to invalidate them.

Now, Sir, please to remember that I said, "The Prophet by the Phrase, All our
Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags, did not design a Description of the
hypocritical Performances of some of the worst of Men, as some seem to imagine,
but the personal Righteousness of some of the best." -- SERMON. page 5.

This Exposition, I said (and I said as I verily thought) might be argued and
evidenced from the Context. The Context I enquired into as carefully as I was
capable of, and found this Chapter a Prayer of the Prophet in the Name of the
Church of God, i. e. some of the best Men; and consequently the Text, a Part of
it, an humble Confession and Acknowlegement that all their Righteousnesses were
as filthy Rags, considered comparatively, and especially in Respect of
Justification in God's Sight; though in other Respects truly good and valuable:
Agreeable to that parallel Expression or Confession of the Apostle Paul, after
his Conversion, and so when he had real Righteousness, Phil. 3.8, 9. I account
all Things but Loss and Dung, etc. Therefore I can assure you, Sir, it was not
from the least Suspicion I had in my own Mind (as you insinuate) that the
Context would not favor me, that I omitted any Proofs from thence: No, Sir,
but partly for fear of being too lengthy; though principally because I really
though it that the Arguments the Text contained, and which I offered, were
sufficient in Number and Strength to answer the End.

But you are pleased, not only to find Fault with me for not analyzing the
Context, but with my Arguments taken from the Text, and to say, there is no
Weight in them, and that you and others are astonished at me that ever I should
publish them to the World. -- But we will review them a little, and examine
whether they are indeed without any Weight, and so weak and inconclusive, as to
afford just Matter of Astonishment to you and your Brethren. What if you should
(Sir) reconsider them a little more without Prejudice, and in their proper
Light, which I shall endeavor to set them before you in? This possibly may
recover you out of your astonished Frame.

The Thing I laid down to be proved (which it is needful you, and every other
Reader should keep in Mind, to see the Drift and Force of my Arguments) was
this, viz. "That the Prophet in the Text did not DESIGN A DESCRIPTION of the
hypocritical Performances of some of the WORST of Men, as some seem to imagine,
but the PERSONAL RIGHTEOUSNESS of some of the best.

And this Exposition, i. e both the negative and positive Part of it, I said,
might be evidenced by Arguments taken from the Text. Three I collected out of
it for that End.

1. I took one Argument from the Word Righteousnesses. -- And what I say here,
is expressed in these Words, viz. That if the Words Righteousness and
Righteousnesses in Scripture, where we have the Character of the Wicked given,
perhaps more than a thousand Times, and in a variety of Terms, are never used
to intend the hypocritical Performances of wicked Men [meaning the very worst,]
but for something truly good and excellent; then we must suppose, the latter
and not the former is intended in the Text: and I appeal to you all, whether
the Words are not constantly used in this Sense from the Beginning of Genesis
to the End of the Revelation. -- Now, Sir, I did not suppose, that this
Argument, exclusive of all Reference to the Context, and of other Arguments
taken from the Text, did in any Measure prove the positive Part of my
Exposition; viz. That the Word Righteousness here designed the Righteousness of
the best Men: But the negative Part of it, viz. that it was not used in a
designed Description of the hypocritical Performances of some of the WORST of
Men, as some seem to imagine. And in this I had my Eye particularly upon your
Exposition of the Text; which was, that the Prophet here is ONLY confessing and
lamenting the aggravated Sins of the WORST of Men. (SER. page 9, 10.) The Jews
(you say) were at this Time sunk into a wretched State of Degeneracy, even
beyond their common Character. -- Their Wickedness was general and
extraordinary. They were almost universally of a corrupt Heart and polluted
Life -- They were given up to the most detestable Immoralities. -- In common
Life they practiced all Manner of Villainy, etc. -- and all the Religion they
had, consisted in a few canting Terms, and in observing some external Rites. --
And upon the whole, you say, No marvel then, if this be a just Representation
of their Case (and whoever consults the sacred History, will find them vastly
worse, rather than any Ways injured by this Character) if their moral
Character, I say, was at least as bad as I have represented it, no Man can
wonder, that the Prophet says -- All their Righteousnesses were as filthy Rags.
(SER. page 10, 12, 13, 14.) Here, Sir, you plainly exhibit your Sentiment, that
by the Word Righteousnesses is meant, either aggravated Wickedness, or at best
only a Religion that lay in a few canting Terms, and the Observance of a few
Rituals, exclusive of all moral Performances; they being destitute (according
to your Account) of the least Appearance of moral Virtue. -- Now, in Opposition
to this Sentiment of yours, I laid down my first Argument, which I thought
sufficient to disprove your Hypothesis, though it might not so directly establish
my own. My Design herein was to show, that the Word Righteousnesses was never
used in Scripture to intend "detestable Immoralities", or "the aggravated Sins
of the worst of Men", as your Expressions seem to import; neither was it ever
used (as far as I can find) to denote merely such hypocritical Performances as
you speak of, namely, the using a few canting Terms and observing a few Rites
and Ceremonies of Worship, while destitute of all moral Virtue; but always
intended something good and excellent (materially so at least) that is, it
chiefly included moral Virtues, or those Duties which carry in their Nature
something of moral Excellency; though not excluding ritual Observances, in which
there is nothing good, exclusive of the divine Institution.

This, I say, is what I aimed at in this Argument, though perhaps it is not quite
so cautiously or clearly expressed as it might have been: And in this you have
no Reason to glory over me, since you your self appear to be equally incautious
and confused in your Discourse* where you express your self so as to make your
(...), as if by Righteousness is meant Wickedness* tho I would charitably hope
you did not mean (...) But it that was not your Meaning, to be sure this was,
that the Word Righteousness intends no more than a few canting Terms and
Rituals, or the hypocritical Performances of the most immoral and very worst of
Men. This is what I have denied: And I again challenge you to bring one Text,
from the Beginning of Genesis to the End of the Revelation, where the Word
Righteousness is to be taken in this Sense only, exclusive of all moral
Services. I think, I may venture to say, if you can produce one clear Text to
the Purpose, I will give up my first Argument as quite impertinent.

2. Another Argument was taken from the Word All. -- And what I say is this,
viz. That if there were any righteous among the Jews at the Time Isaiah refers
to in the Text, and God always had a righteous Seed among them, then the
Prophet does style personal Righteousness filthy Rags, when he says, ALL our
Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags. I did think (and indeed I have not seen
Cause, from any Thing you have said to the contrary, to alter my Mind) that
considering either the Context, which is evidently a Prayer of the Prophet in
the Name of the Church of God, or the Term All, which may be taken in an
unlimited Sense, when it don't contradict the Context or the Analogy of Faith;
therefore, I say, I did and do think, that the Prophet did design (at least)
all that pious Body by the Term All, whether he meant to include the Wicked in
it, or no; and therefore that it contained an Argument of some Force in it to
my Purpose.

But you, Sir, have seen fit to contradict it: And the Substance of what you
say, is this, that I take the Word All here in too unlimited a Sense: But how
do you prove it? Why, you make some Show of arguing, in several Ways. As,

1. By quoting some Passages of Scripture, where the Word All is used only for
a major Part, and sometimes for a minor, which you say that I will readily
acknowledge. Indeed, Mr. Briant, I wish you had said also that you did readily
acknowledge them, in the same Sense as you concluded that I would: but I find
you more ready to declare my Sentiments, than your own; possibly, because mine
will bear the Test better. -- But to return, The Sum and Scope of what you say
here, if put into Form, lies in this short Argument. If the Word All is
sometimes used in Scripture for only a Part (major, or minor) then it must be
so used in the Text we are upon: But we find it so used sometimes elsewhere:
Therefore it must be so here. -- Wonderful Conclusive! Admirable Logic! --
Risum teneatis Amici!

This is an Argument (Mr. Briant) which if it holds, you may do Wonders with;
for by the same Train of Reasoning, you may prove, that the Term All is not to
be taken in an unlimited Sense any where, in the whole Bible. But this you must
know is contrary to Fact. So that what you say on this Head amounts to just
Nothing. And of this you your self indeed seem to be sensible, when you make
that Concession (REM. page 16.) "I know it will not follow, that because All is
sometimes taken in a limited Sense, that it must therefore be so taken in the
Text." Well Sir, if so, why did you insist on it at such a Length? If you
yourself did not think, it followed, why would you endeavor, by your long
Harangue, to make your Readers think it followed? Some of them, you might be
sensible, would not be well able to see into the Justness of Consequences; who
therefore might be easily imposed upon by a Sophism, and induced to imagine,
you said Something, when really you said Nothing to the Point.

You could not but be conscious (Mr. Briant) that my Argument would retain its
full Force against you, notwithstanding all you had said, 'till you could prove
that there is a Parity of Reason, or equal Ground for restraining the Word All
in our Text, as there is in the other Texts you quoted. But this you don't so
much as attempt: which is a strange Defect, especially in one that pretends to
understand so well the Rules and Principles of Reasoning. What could this
Omission arise from, but a Conviction of the Disparity of the Cases in View?
Your first Consideration then may be dismissed as a labored Impertinency.

2. Another Thing you offer in Proof of my taking All in too unlimited a Sense,
is, "That our understanding the Prophet in this unlimited Sense necessarily
runs us into a strange Mixture and Confusion of Characters; putting the most
vicious upon a Par with the most holy, in Point of Acceptance with their Maker."

Well* Sir, and what if my Expressions upon my Argument taken from the Word
All, should be so understood, as to set even the most vicious upon a Par with
the most holy, in Point of Acceptance with their Maker; not as to the Reality
of the Thing, but as to any Grounds in themselves for it? Would this
necessarily run us into a strange Mixture and Confusion of Characters? If so, I
think, the Scriptures of Truth themselves run us into a strange Mixture and
Confusion of Characters; for they every where do set them upon a Par in this
Respect, as to any Grounds or Reasons in themselves of the divine Favor toward
them. Supposing (Mr. Briant) a Minister of Christ should be preaching, to a
mixed Multitude, consisting of Saints and Sinners (which is no uncommon Case)
upon the Doctrine of Justification by Christ through Faith alone, and should tell
his Hearers that the Righteousnesses of ALL of them were as filthy Rags, in the
Affair of Justification before God: Would this at all confound Characters?
Would this set Saints and Sinners upon a Par in any other Respect, than in
Point of Justification by their own personal Righteousness; in which Respect
all the Children of Adam, Saints and Sinners, are indeed upon a Par (though you
an't willing to allow it) and this, notwithstanding God has of his free and
rich Grace found out and revealed the mediatorial and infinitely merciful
Scheme, you make mention of. Now this is the very Case, Sir: And hence it
appears, there is really no more Weight or Pertinence in what you say here,
than in what you said before; which, by your own Confession, you was sensible
was nothing to the Purpose: Nor would it have been any thing but an ingenuous
Part in you, Sir, if you had also confessed this to have been nothing more to
the Point in Hand.

Besure, there is not, as I can see, the least Shadow of Reason in the
Objections you have offered, to invalidate my second Argument. But it must be
said of you, Hic homo multa loquitur, sed nihil probat.

I think my Way now clear to proceed to the Defense of my last Argument.

3. A further Argument was taken from the Word, Our, in the Text. Which I
expressed in my Sermon thus: If any, after what has been said, suppose the
People of the Jews, at the Time, were generally, yea, universally abandoned to
extraordinary Wickedness and Hypocrisy, yet they will not say, the Prophet was; he
was a good Man, all allow, -- and yet this personally righteous Man says, not
all their Righteousnesses, who were abandoned Wretches, but all OUR
Righteousnesses, mine as well as theirs, are as filthy Rags: so that the
Prophet does mean the personal Righteousness of the best Men; and these he
styles filthy Rags.

The Word Our in the Text being an appropriating Term, I thought, that the
Prophet, when he used it, did include, and not exclude, himself; and so, that
there was some Weight in an Argument taken from this Word, to demonstrate the
Point I was upon, and accordingly used it for that Purpose. However, I was not
then appriz'd, that it ever had been improved for that Purpose by any before
me: But am confirmed in the Propriety and Force of the Argument, since I find
by Mr. Foxcroft's judicious Piece upon Isaiah 64.6. and Phil. 3.8. compared,
that the Protestants in general have though it there was some Weight in it, and
accordingly improved it against the Papists, just as I have done against Mr.
Briant: Nor am I unwilling to keep the Reformers good Company, though I part with
Mr. Briant's and Papists.

Here, Sir, I might have proceeded to consider particularly what you say to
prove the Insufficiency of this Argument; But as this will be done very
sufficiently, I doubt not, in the designed Appendix by one of the Rev.
Attestators, I shall refer you thither, and wave saying any Thing more to it my
self. But will pass to the next general Head proposed, which was,

III. To inquire into the Validity of the Pleas which you produce to prove your
self a Calvinist, and me not one, in opening the Text. -- Yet before I come
directly to consider your Proofs, allow me to premise one Remark; that if the
Difference between you and me lay only in opening the single Passage of the
Text; and you had said, the Prophet intended the worst Works of the worst Men,
but I, that he intended the best Works of the best Men, I say, had the
Difference lain only here, and we had been harmonious in other more substantial
Respects; I could have heartily subscribed a Letter to you (though I perceive,
you cannot to me) " Your Brother in the Faith and Fellowship of the Gospel," for
I should have thought you had " Faith enough for Fellowship." And it was not
that, Sir, I had principally in View in my Sermon, as any one may see who reads
it; no, I can truly say it, though I thought you was out of the Way in your
Exposition of the Text, yet this was not the main Thing in your Sermon, which I
judged to be amiss, and meant some Animadversions upon in mine, but your sly
and crafty Opposition to the Doctrines of Grace (distinguished by the Name of
Calvinistical) especially this, that the Righteousness of Jesus Christ is the
sole Matter of a Sinner's Justification in the Sight of God.

Now your Opposition to these Doctrines, I think, I have fully shown under my
Head of comparing Notes; and so, that you are diametrically opposite to Calvin
in the most of your Sermon, however harmonious with him you may pretend to be
in opening the Text. But truly it is pretty strange, that you should be so
exactly Calvinistical in opening the Text, and so diametrically opposite to
Calvin in the Tenor of your Sermon. One would have thought surely* that if you
had taken the first Step so precisely with Calvin, you would some where in the
rest of your Performance have taken a second with him, which I don't see you
have done. This Conduct, at least, gives some Grounds to suspect your Calvinism
even in your opening the Text. However, you pretend to be a Calvinist so far:
and if confident Pretension might pass for Demonstration, the Point would
certainly be settled in your Favor. But, beside pretending it, you endeavor
to prove it, even by citing Calvin's own Words in his Commentary on the Text:
Two Paragraphs you select for this End; viz. (1) "Here, there be some that
torment themselves because the Prophet speaking of the Defilement of Sin, takes
in and represents the Case of all the Jews without Exception, amongst whom
there nevertheless remained some pure Worshippers of God; but in vain, and
without Cause, because he does not here speak of every Individual, but of the
whole Body." -- Again, "This Place is wont to be cited by some, that they may
prove, there is so far from being any Thing good and valuable in our Works,
that they are in God's Sight noisome and filthy Things; but this appears to me
to be very foreign from the Sense of the Prophet." These Quotations from
Calvin, you say, favor your Exposition, and prove you a Calvinist in opening
the Text. But (Mr. Briant) let us see your Argument; and try the Force of it:
it is this; Because Calvin speaks in his Commentary on this Text, what is above
recited, therefore when I say, the Prophet designs the hypocritical
Performances and extraordinary aggravated Wickedness of some of the worst of
Men, it must follow, that I am a Calvinist. But is this (Sir) a genuine
Consequence from the Premises? Verily no, in no wise: for there is not the
least Hint in the Words cited from Calvin, that he carries the Text in the same
Sense as you do; and indeed I think, you could not but know, in Fact he does
not. So that I may with Justice say (to put no worse Construction upon it) that
if Mr. Briant was not a better Linguist, than Logician, or did not know better
how to turn Latin into English, than he does to draw Consequences from
Premises, you would certainly have needed some Elbow-Friends, as well as a
Dictionary, to construe Calvin so well as you happen to have done; yea, that
perhaps you would "look upon Latin as the Language of the Beast," and been
"startled at it."

But it may be, you will say, if you have not proved yourself a Calvinist in
opening the Text, yet you have proved me an Anti-Calvinist, at least so far.
Indeed, Sir, I confess, the Paragraphs you have quoted from Calvin, if viewed
as standing alone, and not in Connection with the rest of his Commentary on the
Text and Context, do seem to look that Way: And what then? If this should be
really the Case, Mr. Briant might as well prove me not a Calvinist, because not
a Presbyterian (as Calvin was) but a Congregationalist: For when a Man is
called a Calvinist, it is never meant in this rigid Sense, that he thinks
exactly with Calvin in every Point of Doctrine, any more than Discipline, or
that he puts the same Construction upon every Text of Scripture (which I
believe never was, nor ever will be the Case;) but his general Agreement with
him in Principles, and particularly in the five Points of Doctrine, which are
so strenuously opposed by Arminian Writers.
Would it be any thing very strange? I think not. For could it be rationally
expected, that "one of CALVIN'S youngest Sons" should so early commence such a
complete Calvinist, as to open every Text in the Bible just as Calvin did; I
cannot believe this of any of his oldest Sons. I think, Mr. Briant, it is
pretty well for the Time, that my Opinion so exactly quadrates with his in
those five Points, which Protestants in general have concurred with him in, but
which your Sermon (Sir) if I can understand it, is calculated to oppose.

After all, it is possible, if we should view what Calvin says in his Commentary
on the Chapter which contains our Text, and what he says on the Text, which
stands connected with what you have quoted from him; I say, if we should view
what he says in its Connection, it is possible I might be found to be something
more Calvinistical, even in opening the Text, than either Mr. Briant is, or is
willing to allow me to be. Let us fairly try the Case, by repairing to Calvin
himself.

This 64th Chapter of Isaiah, you cannot but be sensible, if you have read Calvin,
he considers as a Prayer of the Faithful in the Babylonish Captivity, or of the
Prophet in the Name of those Faithful, which is all one. Hence Calvin says on
the 8 th ver. Haec Precatio non promiscue quibuslibet, sed residu^s tantum
Filiis Dei dictata fuit. That is, "This Prayer was not dictated by the Prophet
to be used by every one promis^^^us^, but only by the Sons of God that
remained" viz. after the Destruction of Jerusalem by the King of Babylon*
And he accordingly begins his Comment on the 6th Verse thus: Pergunt FIDELES
in sua querimonia; deplorant enim statum suum, quod Deus nullam rationem
videatur. -- Caeterum hic duo notari debent: primum, FIDELES reatum suum
fateri, ac merito se paenas dare; deinde, nihilominus conqueri de gravitate
paenarum quas sustinent: non ut expostulent cum Deo, sed ut ipsum ad clementiam
provocent: quemadmodum ubi reus judicem flectere conatur, miserias ei suas et
calamitates exponit. Hic se nonnulli torquent, quod Propheta de scelerum
inquinamentis loquens, sine exceptione Iudaeos omnes exprimat; in quibus tamen
nonnulli restabant puri Dei cultores: sed frustra; quia non loquitur de
singulis, sed de universo corpore; quod, cum infra omnes homines abjectum atque
extrema clade affectum esset, panno sordido comparat. Hic locus citari a
quibusdam solet, ut probent adeo nihil esse meriti in operibus nostris ut coram
Deo putida ac foetida sint: sed hoc mihi videtur alienum a Prophetae Sententia,
cum de toto genere humano non loquitur, atqui eorum querimoniam describit, qui
in exilium missi, iram Domini in se sentiebant: ideoque se cum justitiis suis
panno inquinato similes esse fatebantur. -- Which I render into English thus;
The FAITHFUL go on with their Complaint; for they lament their Case because God
does not seem to take any Notice of them. -- Two Things ought to be noted here;
first, the FAITHFUL confess their Guilt, and Desert of the Punishment inflicted
on them; and then, nevertheless complain of the Weight of it: not that they
would quarrel with God, but that they would urge him to Clemency; as when a
Criminal endeavors to move the Judge to Compassion, he represents to him his
Miseries and Calamities. Here some distress themselves, that the Prophet
speaking of the Defilements of Sin, taxes all the Jews, without Exception,
among whom nevertheless there remained some sincere Worshippers of God: But in
vain; because he does not speak of every Individual, but of the whole Body [i.
e. of the CHURCH of God, as Calvin explains himself on, v. 8. Says Calvin
there, Omnes dicendo, non loquitur de singulis, ut (...) admonui, sed totum
corpus ecclesiae comprehendit. In English thus* The Prophet, in saying All,
don't speak of every Individual, (...) I noticed before [viz. in the Passages
quoted by Mr. Briant] (...) the whole Body of the Church. --
] which being abject beneath all Men, and extremely miserable, he compares to a
filthy Rag. This Place is wont to be cited by some to prove, that there is so
far from being any Thing of Merit in our Works, that before God they are
noisome and stinking Things: but this appears to me to be foreign from the
Scope of the Prophet; because he does not speak of the whole human Race, but
only sets forth the Complaint of those [ viz. of the CHURCH, or Faithful] who
being sent into Banishment, were sensible of the Wrath of God upon them; and
therefore confess themselves with their Righteousnesses to be as a filthy Rag.
-- Thus speaks Mr. Calvin in his Commentary on the controverted Text.

And now let the World judge, which is most Calvinistical in opening it;
Whether Mr. Briant, who says, the Prophet is "only confessing and lamenting the
aggravated Sins of the worst Men," "such as were utterly destitute of true
Righteousness," "utterly averse to Duty and Obedience" and " given up to the
most detestable Immoralities": -- Or I, when I say, that the Prophet designs
not the Worst, but the best Men, and that all their Righteousnesses are, in
some Respects, as filthy Rags.

But however Calvin's Sentiments may appear as expressed in his Commentaries,
it is plain, that he is fully with me in his Institutions. For there (3 Lib. 2
Cap.) speaking of Faith and the Fruits of it, and quoting our Text, he has
these Words: -- Nimirum si ipsae quoque Justitiae omnes, ad lumen veritatis
inspectae, velut pannus menstruatae inveniuntur, Injustitiae deinceps quales
reputabuntur? Which I english thus; Truly if even all our Righteousnesses
themselves, viewed in the Light of Truth, are found to be as filthy Rags, what
then shall our Unrighteousnesses be reputed? --

But not to insist on this Passage, which it may be you had not met with, there
is enough in CALVIN'S Commentaries to spoil your glorying on the Head of
Calvinism. What he says on the other Parts of this Prayer, is directly against
you, but is too long to recite here: And what he speaks on the Text it self,
does not in the least favor your Exposition. For in whatever Sense he takes
the Words, it is plain he supposes the Righteous are comprehended in them, if
not solely intended. How then comes it to pass, Mr. Briant, that you have had
the Face to tell the World, "That you have proved yourself entirely
Calvinistical in your Sense of the Text" -- "That you might with Reason be
charged with stealing your Interpretation from Calvin, rather than in the least
contradicting him" -- "That you have very honestly represented Calvin's
Meaning," etc. And upon this Foundation have gone into a warm and long
Expostulation with me and my Attestators! "How shall we account for this (real)
enormous Blunder in you"? It will doubtless occasion various Thoughts in the
Minds of Men; and some, it is probable, that will be pretty severe upon you; at
least as severe as that my (supposed) Blunder occasioned in your Mind about me.
However, Mr. Briant, you must allow us to exclaim against the Growth of
Arminianism; and to think, we have some Grounds for it, particularly in
Relation to you, 'till you afford us better Proofs of your being a Calvinist,
than you have yet done: And you must not think it strange, if we are not at all
affected with your pathetic Expostulation, when it is evidently so groundless
and altogether impertinent.

Thus I have gone through what I proposed. -- Yet before I conclude, let me
observe to you, Sir, that your friendly Remarks (as you call them) are full of
unfriendly Reflections, not on me only, but on others: And particularly on one
in the Ministry, whom you have had the Front to call "a verbose, dark,
Iesuitical Writer," etc. meaning that Reverend Gentleman, who has done the
Part of a faithful judicious PROTESTANT, in laying open the POPISH Mystery of
Iniquity, contained in your Sermon; though he did not see fit to mention it or
the Author, as judging that to answer Bellarmine was to answer Briant, his and
your Construction of the Text and Arguments upon it being so near akin, that
One would suspect you of stealing from him rather than from Calvin. I don't so
much wonder that you thought Mr. Foxcroft's Sermon verbose, and that your
Patience tired, while he was replying to the Papist, seeing it was in Effect a
chastising your " impudent Piece", as the late learned and venerable Mr. WALTER
(now with God) gave it it is Character upon perusing it. -- But one would have
thought, the Gentleman's Age, and known Ability, and Repute among us, would
have demanded better Treatment from you, were it not that you found his
Arguments so strong and so well-manag'd, that your best Artillery ( poor
indeed!) to play against them, was scurrilous Reflection. (But surely you
forgot, that Text was in the Bible, 1 Timothy 5.1. Which I leave you to look and
read.) -- And what good End (Sir) did you propose to your self, in bantering,
reflecting, and railing, at such a Rate, and unprovoked too? Did you think by
it to do what you would seem to be against, and blame others for doing, (REM
page 27.) where you say, "Some Men think to carry their Cause merely by the
Application of a few odious Appellations; instead of bringing forth their
strong Reasons, they fall to Railing and Scolding and calling Names, which is
but a more sly and covert Way of reviling and abusing an Opponent, and is
looked on by the rational Part of Mankind, as nothing but Phrensy and a
blasphemous Prostitution of the Name of God, to countenance our unsanctified
Spleen against others, and to give a Currency to our own senseless Divinity
among the thoughtless Multitude." -- Truly, Mr. Briant, when I read these Lines
of yours, and find how you yourself frequently "fall to Railing and Scolding
and 'calling Names" in your Book, I cannot help thinking whether you did not
take this Method with a View to give a Currency to your own -- Divinity among
the thoughtless Multitude: And I can scarce keep out of my Mind that inspired
Passage, Romans 2.1. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O Man; for wherein thou
judge another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judge another, do
the same Things.

I just remind you (Sir) of these Things, which I beg you to consider seriously
and dispassionately, that you may take Shame to yourself, and fly to the Blood
of Sprinkling for Pardon, and learn to preach and print with a better Spirit
and Christian Temper for the Time to come.

I shall now close my Letter with some borrowed Words: But excuse me, Sir, from
doing it in the Words of an Arian Writer, as you do your Sermon, in the Words
of Mr. JAMES FOSTER, whom you describe "a late elegant Writer and Instructor
how to preach CHRIST." A fine Preacher of Christ, and Teacher of others to
preach him, sure, a Denier of the Divinity of Christ must be! I hope, Mr.
Briant, you don't copy after this your elegant Writer, nor take your
Instructions from an Arian in Preaching; it is sad if you do! By the Way let me
just ask you (Mr. Briant) why you did not insert in your Sermon, these
remarkable Words of your celebrated Author, viz. "That to preach CHRIST, is not
-- to make his Person and his Offices INCOMPREHENSIBLE." Which Words you could
not but see, for they lie between the Sentences you quote from him? -- Why (if
I may presume to answer for you) because this Aria^ Sentence would have spoiled
all. -- I shall not close in this Author's Words, I say: Nor yet in the Words
of the Writer, that you close your Remarks with, "who is in Heaven now" you
say. It Is possible, Sir: But let me tell you, without Breach of Charity, if his
Heart, when he died, was not sounder, than his Head was, when he penned these
remarkable Words, which you adopt, viz. "The Condition of our Acceptance with
GOD always was, to endeavor to be like God in Purity and Holiness, Justice and
Righteousness, Mercy and Goodness, to cease to do Evil, and learn to do well;"
I a little suspect what his End has been, and whether he is not lodged in some
lower Region. -- But the Words I will close with, shall be those of the General
Assembly of the Church of SCOTLAND in an Act of theirs, containing Advice to
Ministers and Preachers; which wholesome Words of Advice, I pray God, that Mr.
Briant and I may consent to and follow. They are these. We recommend to
Ministers, that in their Sermons they insist frequently upon the Truth,
Necessity and Excellency of supernatural Revelation; the supreme Deity of the
SON and HOLY GHOST, as well as of the FATHER; together with the Oneness of the
Godhead: Our sinful and lost Estate by Nature, the Necessity of supernatural
Grace, and of Faith in the Righteousness of CHRIST, without which the best
Works cannot please God: And that they make it the great Scope of their Sermons
to lead Sinners from the Covenant of Works, to a Covenant of Grace, for Life
and Salvation, and from Sin and Self to precious Christ: -- That in pressing
Obedience to the Law, they show the Nature and Excellency of Gospel-Holiness;
and enforce Conformity to the moral Law both in Heart and Life, not from
Principles of Reason only, but also and more especially of Revelation* And in
Order to attain thereto, it is necessary to show Men the Corruption and
Depravity of human Nature by their Fall in Adam, their natural Impotence for,
and Aversion to, what is spiritually Good; and to lead them to the true and
only Source of all Grace and Holiness, viz. Union to CHRIST, by the Holy
Spirit's working Faith in us, and renewing us more and more after the Image of
God: And to let their Hearers know, that they must be first ingrafted into
CHRIST, as their Root before their, Fruit can be Savoury unto God; that they
must have a new Principle to animate, and a new End to direct them, before
their Actions become gracious, and acceptable in the Sight of God; and that
they teach them the Necessity of living by Faith on the Son of God, in constant
looking to, and Dependence on him, as the great Author of all gracious
Influences, for the Performance of every Duty; and withal, after the best
Performances and Seize, they must count them but Loss and Dung in Point
of Justification before God, and make it their great Desire, only to be found
in CHRIST and his Righteousness.

I add no more, but that I am, Reverend Sir, Your Friend and humble Servant,
John Porter.
Bridgwater, Sept. 25 th 1750.
An APPENDIX, relating to the same Subject.
By One of the ATTESTATORS.
THE free and rich Grace of GOD, displayed in Man's Salvation by Jesus Christ,
is a Theme of the highest Importance; and it is a delightful Theme to true
Christians, being sensible that all their Comfort and Happiness is centered
here. And when human Schemes are advanced, that tend to the depreciating of
this, such cannot but be affected with deep Concern. Now, is it not evident,
that several Pieces, of this unhappy Tendency, have of late Years been
published in the Country? And particularly, is not this the plain Scope of a
Sermon, lately published by the Rev. Mr. L. BRIANT, from Isai. lxiv.6? Is it
not the whole Drift of his Discourse, to run down and decry this Grace, at
least in the Sense hitherto generally received among us, as a " Libertine
Notion," as "vilifying human Nature, affronting human Reason, and corrupting
Christianity," -- "turning the pure and perfect Religion of Jesus into an idle
Speculation, a mysterious Faith, a senseless Superstition, and a groundless
Recumbency"!

Indeed when he comes to defend his Sermon, he would make some Appearance of
owning the Doctrine of Grace, in these Words. [REM. p. 28.] I assure you, I
always preach up (what I firmly believe) that the Grace of God is the original
Spring of all his Creatures Happiness, and that there is no such Thing as
buying, purchasing or meriting this Grace at his Hands: But that it is Free and
Rich Grace. By Free I mean, it is the essential Disposition of the Deity to be
good: By Rich I mean, the same with the sacred Writer, that he is good to All,
and that his tender Mercies are over All his Works. -- But what a lame
Confession of Faith, and what a miserable Account of his Preaching is here!
Does Mr. Briant believe and preach no other Grace of God, but that which is
"the Spring of the Happiness of All his Creatures;" and so is common to Angels,
Men, and Bruits? Does he make no Distinction between Providential Grace toward
all the Creatures, and Redeeming Grace toward perishing Sinners? And does he
verily believe and preach, that "there is no such Thing [What! absolutely, no
such Thing at all] as Buying, Purchasing or Meriting this Grace at the Hands of
God;" but that it is " Unbought Grace?" as he terms it, in absolute Language,
without any Guard or Limitation. [REM. p. 18.] Surely, Mr. Briant's Expressions
in both Places are very incautious if he holds the Doctrine of CHRIST'S
Atonement, in any Sense but the Socinian; which resolves it into mere Metaphor,
and confesses no proper Satisfaction, or Purchase of Redemption at the Hands of
Divine Justice, but ascribes Salvation simply to the Grace of God; that Grace,
Mr. Briant says, he preaches up and firmly believes; which is "the Spring of
the Happiness of all the Creatures" in common; which is " Free", in that it is
the " essential Disposition of the Deity to be good", and which is " Rich," in
that it is so extensive, even "over all the Works of his Hands." -- But what
Confusion and Error is here*

That Goodness is an essential Attribute of God, it is readily acknowledged: but
then it must be owned, Justice is so too. And is it not as much the essential
Disposition of the Deity to be just, as to be good? Therefore God has sent his
Son to be the Propitiation for our Sins, to the End that he might be Just, and
yet the Iustifier of him which believes in Jesus. Would it not have been
unspotted Justice in God, had he punished fallen Man with everlasting
Destruction, without a Remedy? Would he not have remained essentially good, had
he never been communicatively so, at least, in respect of Salvation to any of
his Rebel-Creatures? After the Apostasy, was not God at Liberty to suspend the
Exercise of his Goodness toward us, unless an Atonement were made to his
offended Justice? His Grace therefore eminently appears in his Kindness to us
by Jesus Christ; as he has set him forth to be a Propitiation for Sin, through
Faith in his Blood. And the Distinction in this Regard between the Case of Men
and Devils, puts an admirable Luster on redeeming Grace; making it appear
gloriously free. In the common Acceptance of the Word, Grace connotes the
Unworthiness of the Object, and the Condescension of Divine Love: the Addition
of the Epithet, Free, seems to heighten the Sense, and may particularly denote
God's sovereign Liberty in choosing the Objects of his Favor. Agreeably by this
Phrase, the free Grace of God, Divines truly Calvinistical understand his
special Love and Favor, through Jesus Christ, terminated on Creatures altogether
unlovely, and selecting some such for its Objects, while passing by others in
the same Condition: according to that of our Savior, Even so, Father, for so
it seemed good in thy Sight. (Matthew. xi.26) -- But does Mr. BRIANT own the
Freeness of Divine Grace in this Sense? No; he expressly disclaims it. SER. p.
7, 8.

And then as to his Construction of the other Epithet, Rich, what a wrong Idea
does it convey? The Text that he quotes, Psalm. cxlv.9. The Lord is good to all,
etc. is nothing to the Purpose for which he alleges it: It does not hold forth
to us (as he insinuates) that there is an universal Grace given to Mankind, by
the Improvement of which they may all certainly attain Salvation: But it refers
only to common and outward Favors, of which All (both Saints and Sinners, yea
and the very Bruits) partake while in this World. (See v. 15, 16.) And it is
parallel with those Texts, Matthew. v.45. He makes his Sun to rise on the Evil
and on the Good, etc. And Luke vi.35. He is kind to the Unthankful, and to the
Evil. -- This Notion of universal Grace, i. e. that there is sufficient Grace
given to all, both Heathens and professed Christians, for their Conversion and
Salvation (which Mr. Briant must mean, if he means any Thing to the Purpose) is
utterly inconsistent with the Principles of Calvinism, and is one of the prime
Doctrines of Arminius. -- None of the Calvinists suppose, that the Richness of
Divine Grace consists in the Universality of it is Extent; but in the
unsearchable Treasure of Benefits it communicates, and in the infinite Expense
it was at for the Purchase of them by Christ's precious Blood, as well as in
it is Triumphs over infinite Demerits, and in the vast Multitude of it is chosen
Objects, who being all undeserving, might justly have been left (as well as the
fallen Angels, and many of their Fellow-Men) to perish eternally in their
Wickedness. If this Grace were not special, but all Men were sharers in it
indifferently, it would not appear so wonderful in our Eyes, and so precious,
as it now does: even as worldly Riches, if common to all, would not appear of
such Value, as when in the Hands of a select Number of Men.

But if Grace universal and sufficient be given without Distinction, why then
are not all converted? The Arminians answer, because some cooperate with this
Grace, and others not; some duly improve what is given them, and so (pursuant
to Promise) receive more; while others reject it, and perish. -- So that
(according to them) it is in the Power of their own Wills, whether this Grace
shall succeed, or not; and the true Reason, why Peter was converted, and not
Judas, was not because of the Predominancy of Grace, but because the one by his
own Will made the Grace of GOD effectual; whereas the other, for want of the
like Improvement of his Free Will, was lost. -- But is this Doctrine of the
Universalists, the Doctrine of the Bible? I trow not. What says our Lord Jesus
Christ? Matthew. xi.25, 26. Thou have hid these Things from the Wise and Prudent,
and have revealed them unto Babes, etc. So, Chap. xiii.11. It is given unto you
to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given. --
What says St. Paul? Romans ix.18. Therefore has he Mercy, on whom he will have
Mercy. So, 1 Cor. iv.7. Who makes thee to differ from another? And what have
thou, that thou did not receive?

But I need not insist here, 'till Mr. BRIANT be so honest as to own more
explicitly, that he is Arminian in this, as well as other Points; it being a
main Part of my Design in this APPENDIX, rather to unmask Errors, than to
refute them, (which it will be Time eno' to do, when they are more openly and
formally acknowledged, and when defended by Arguments, instead of Banter and
Harangue.) And this I am led to by Mr. Briant's loud Complaints of the
Attestators to Mr. Porter's Sermon, for fixing the Charge of Arminianism upon
him (with others;) which he says, is founded "only upon his Interpretation of
one single Text," without any other Foundation -- If this be so, we may have
wronged him in our Attestation: -- But if I mistake not, it can easily be made
appear, upon a strict Examination of his Sermon and Letter, that they are both
inconsistent with the commonly received Doctrines, called Calvinistical; and
that (notwithstanding his Subterfuges and sly Turns in his Friendly Remarks, by
which he though it, perhaps to impose upon weak Minds) he will finally turn out a
rank Arminian, at best.

I know indeed, that Men of his Cast are not willing to own the Name, (because
at present it is a Name of Reproach in the Country) and some of them have the
Face expressly to deny it: -- But what do they mean by such Denial? -- Why,
either (1.) That they don't hold exactly with Arminius in every Point: Or, (2.)
That they do not make Arminius the Master of their Faith; that they do not hold
such Doctrines as they are Arminius's, but as they are the Doctrines of the
Bible, as they apprehend. -- As to the first Pretense, though they don't hold
exactly with Arminius in every Point, yet in as much as they do in the main
Points, they may be justly styled Arminians; and they had better be contented
with this Name, if they would not have a worse; for they generally go further
from the Truth, than even Arminius did, and their Difference from him is on the
wrong Hand. -- As to the second; Who ever called them Arminians in that Sense,
that they make Arminius the Lord of their Faith? -- Is it not plain, that all
we intend by this Name, is, that they hold the same Doctrines, in Sum and
Substance, that Arminius did; who was the great Instrument of reviving the
Semi-Pelagian Errors, in the Protestant World? -- Is it not then evident
Tricking and Collusion, to deny themselves to be Arminians upon this Ground? --
And is it not as trickish and disingenuous, to be perpetually throwing it in
the Teeth of those Divines called Calvinistical, that they make Calvin the
Master of their Faith; that they enslave their Minds and the Minds of the
People to human Schemes and Authorities; that they teach them to substitute the
Writings of weak fallible Men, in the Room of Christ and his Gospel, etc. (p.
27, 28. REM.) Whereas they know, that there is not a Calvinist upon Earth in
this Sense. -- Cannot we look upon Calvin as an eminent Man of GOD, and the
Doctrines he taught as agreeable to the Scriptures, without being stigmatized as
setting him up in the Room of Christ! -- Cannot we receive a Confession of
Faith, though drawn up by fallible Men, as a true Exposition of the Doctrine of
the Bible, without enslaving our Minds to human Schemes? -- And cannot we (for
the Direction of our own Conduct) ask others, whether they are agreed with us
in this, without enslaving them also? -- For my Part, I am but little
acquainted with the Writings of Calvin: But yet I am willing to be called a
Calvinist, that others may know what Scheme of Principles I hold to be founded
upon the Word of GOD; and don't desire (as the Manner of some is) to muffle my
self up in Shade and Obscurity, in general Terms, and ambiguous Expressions, as
if ashamed of my Principles; which Conduct, in whomsoever it is found, I look
upon as a dark Sign, agreeable to 2 Pet. 2.1.

But to come more directly to what I aim at: -- As one of the Attestators, I
think there are two Things especially incumbent upon me.

I. To see more particularly what Grounds there are to fix the Charge of
Arminianism upon Mr. Briant. And,

II. To take some Notice of his Remarks upon the Word, Our, in his Text.

I. I shall mention some Things in Support of the Charge of Arminianism bro't
against him.

When I first perused Mr. Briant's Sermon, whatever my Opinion might be of his
Orthodoxy, I though it him honest, and open enough in declaring his own Principles,
(though I should have been glad, if he had been as honest in representing the
Principles of his Opponents:) And by the Conclusion of his Sermon one would
have though it, that nothing would make him flinch from what he had so plainly
delivered as the Truth. "I am sensible (says he) that this Sort of Preaching is
not calculated for the general Taste of the present Age: -- It may not at
present be the Way to popular Applause, or to priestly Favors: -- However if
it be the Way of Truth, though the asserting of it should expose a Man to Poverty
and Contempt, and all Manner of temporal Inconveniences, a steadfast Faith and
inflexible Virtue will readily reply, -- None of these Things move me, neither
count I my Life dear to me," etc. (And to the same Purpose he speaks, p. 6.)
Here seems to be the most magnanimous Resolution, fixedly to adhere to the
Scheme of Doctrine, that he had advanced, let Death, or what would, be the
Consequence: But instead of abiding constant in the Day of Trial, how soon does
he turn his Back (what the Principle or Motive was, his Conscience knows best!)
and in his Reply to Mr. Porter, would fain persuade the World to believe, "that
there is no Controversy between them, but only as to the Sense and Design of
one single Passage, in the Book of Isaiah;" and that "what follows in Mr.
Porter's Sermon could not with the least Color of Reason be applied to any
Thing he had delivered." -- In short, in his "sly and covert Way," he would
insinuate into "vulgar Minds," that he is more Calvinistical, than even Mr.
Porter himself; though yet he cannot help bewraying himself every now and then, as
appears by his Description of free and rich Grace (of which I have spoken
before,) and by other Strokes, which I may perhaps take Notice of by and by.

But the Sermon I am to begin with; and the Grounds or Reasons why we charged
him with Arminianism in this, are such as these.

I. The Arminians deny the Doctrines of personal and unconditional Election, of
original Sin, of free and irresistible (or efficacious) Grace, and of the final
Perseverance of the Saints: -- And does not Mr. Briant do the same, in his
Sermon, p. 7, 8? -- After he had professed himself to be Orthodox in one Point
at least; namely, that the Scriptures are the only Rule, he immediately falls
foul upon these Doctrines, representing them in hideous Colors, and
dispatching them all at a Blow. -- He again vilifies and burlesques the
Doctrine of original Sin. p. 24. And likewise that of Perseverance. p. 25, 26.

II. The Arminians are ever charging it upon the Calvinists, that their
Doctrines tend to Licentiousness, and that there is no Necessity, upon their
Scheme, of inherent Holiness. -- And does not Mr. Briant herein follow them, in
his Sermon, p. 8, 9, 25, 26. And even in his Remarks, in the Title Page, by
quoting that Text, Turning the Grace of GOD into Lasciviousness, as applicable
to Mr. Porter and those like minded? --

III. The Arminians laugh at the Calvinists for laying such Stress on Faith in
Christ, calling it a mysterious Faith, a groundless Recumbency, an idle
Speculation, etc. as all know that are conversant with their Writings. -- And
so does Mr. Briant. p. 7, 8.

IV. The Arminians deny the Doctrine of free Justification by the imputed
Righteousness of Christ, exclusive of all Works: Arminius (says one of his
Contemporaries) asserit, in homini^ coram Deo justificatione, justitiam Christi
non imputari in justitiam; verum ipsam Fidem seu to Credere, per gratiosam Dei
acceptationem, esse justitiam illam nostram, qua coram Deo justificamur. --
And does not Mr. Briant do the same? Does not he chiefly level his Artillery
(such as it is) against this Doctrine; other Things coming in as it were
incidentally! -- And is not he himself conscious of this, when he acknowleges
that he is opposing a great Part of the Christian World. p. 19. That he goes
against "the general Taste of the present Age"; and that this Sort of Preaching
is not the Way to popular Applause or priestly Favors* p. 30. And intimates
some considerable Hazard in it, which by a steadfast Faith and inflexible
Virtue, he hoped to overcome p. 31. -- And is all this Cry grounded upon
nothing but his putting a different Construction upon one single Text, while he
fully agrees with the Calvinists in the great Point of Justification as
sufficiently established from other Texts? -- I cannot have so mean an Opinion
of his Understanding, as to think he meant so; but what then must he mean,
unless what he is charged with above, which was sufficient indeed to put him
into a Pannick?

I would observe further in Support of this Charge*

1. That he applies several Scripture-Phrases, which by Calvinists are
generally understood of the Righteousness of Christ, to the personal
Righteousness of Men; such as the best Robe, the Wedding Garment; the fine
Linen clean and white; and plainly signifies that this is all that is meant by
them. p. 15, 16. -- Query, Does Calvin agree with him in this? -- Let him look
and see. -- And further, Can he have the Face to say, that all the Controversy
between him and Mr. Porter, and his Attestators, is about one single Text;
especially since Mr. Porter* mentions these Texts, and puts a direct contrary
Interpretation upon them? -- And then again, if he owns the (active and
passive) Righteousness of Christ to be the sole Matter of our Justification,
how comes it about, that he applies these Scripture-Phrases solely to personal
Righteousness, when (upon Supposition of the Truth of that Doctrine) they most
naturally refer to imputed Righteousness?

2. Let any One read his Sermon attentively, and he will see "without inward
Illumination", that the whole Run of it is to prove, that the Condition of our
Acceptance with GOD (or in other Words, of our Justification) is the personal
Righteousness of Men. -- Hence these Passages, as a Samplar: -- "The pure
Religion of Jesus suspends our whole Happiness upon our personal good
Behavior", etc. p. 7. -- "'It Is the Condition of our final Happiness". p. 10,
28. -- It "renders the Saints amiable in GOD's Sight, and is the Condition of
all his Favors to them". p. 20. -- "Our Forgiveness of Sins and final
Acceptance with the Father through the Merits of the Son is upon the CONDITION
of Faith, Repentance and good Living". p. 29. -- "Those who decry moral Virtue
-- as a Thing of no Avail toward obtaining the divine Favor, -- do in Effect
subvert the very fundamental Principles of natural and revealed Religion" p.
30. -- And to the same Purpose he speaks (or rather the precious Minister of
Christ, as he styles him, whom he quotes with Approbation) in his Remarks. p.
30. "This always was the Condition of our Acceptance with GOD, to endeavor to
be like GOD in Purity and Holiness, etc. to cease to do evil, and learn to do
well". -- If this be not to set up the personal Righteousness of Men in the
Room of the Surety-Righteousness of Christ, I know not what is. Nor does he
mention imputed Righteousness, but with a Sneer. (Sermon. p. 8, 21.)

But hold, says Mr. Briant, you mistake me; I have nothing in View through out my
whole Discourse, but to rescue the Text in Isaiah from the Abuse that some put
upon it, and meddle nothing with other controverted Points in Divinity that Mr.
Porter treats upon. -- But is not this a plain Imposition upon the
Understandings of Men? Can any one read what I have just quoted from him, or
turn to the Places in the Sermon referred to, and be of this Mind? -- Besides,
is it not evident from his Introduction and other Parts of his Discourse, that
it is the Doctrine commonly grounded upon the Text, rather than the Mistake of
some in the Interpretation of it, that he chiefly assaults? -- If the
Calvinistical Doctrine of imputed Righteousness were true, the Words of the
Prophet might be applied (at least allusively) to the best Righteousness of
Men, considered in the Affair of Justification, though not in an absolute Sense:
But instead of granting this, he utterly denies, all along in his Discourse,
that the Righteousness of good Men may in any Sense be called filthy Rags: --
Yea, instead of proving his Point by a critical Analysis upon the Context (as
he should have done, if all his Design had been to have cleared up the Sense of
the Text, and not to have meddled with the Doctrine that some graft upon it) he
endeavors to show from Reason and common Sense (as well as from Revelation)
that it is absurd and blasphemous to affix this Epithet to personal
Righteousness: -- And what does this bespeak, but that the Doctrine itself is
false and erroneous, which is grounded upon the Words? viz. That personal
Righteousness is no more a Part of our justifying Righteousness, than filthy
Rags are a Part of our Ornament; Christ's Righteousness being the sole Matter
of our Justification. When a Protestant argues from Reason and common Sense
that the Words, This is my Body, cannot be taken literally; does it not follow
from thence, that (in his Judgment) the Doctrine of Transubstantiation cannot
possibly be a Matter of divine Revelation? -- If he though it the Doctrine true,
though not proved from the Text, the Method that he would take, would be, first
to concede to the Truth of it, and then by a particular Consideration of the
Words and of the Context, to endeavor to evince that they related to another
Matter, and not to that; and would not run to Reason and common Sense to prove
the Absurdity of the popish Construction. -- But Mr. Briant's Method is aliene
from this, as I have noted, and shows his true Design, however he is pleased to
gloss over the Matter, and disguise his Intention.

What may further confirm us in this, is his saying, The Words of the Text as
they are COMMONLY received, are a standing Reflection on all Virtue and good
Manners; the most effectual Discouragement that could be given to the Practice
of Christian Morality; and consequently one of the most fatal Snares that could
be laid for the Souls of Men. -- ( Ser. p. 9.) Is not this a direct Stroke
against the commonly received Protestant Doctrine of Justification, which we
hold may be in Part gathered from this Text, but more fully from other Texts?
If it tends to Libertinism, to argue from these Words, that the best
Righteousness of Men has not the least Hand in this great Affair, has it not
the same Tendency, to argue it from other Texts? -- Must it not then by
necessary Consequence be an unscriptural Doctrine? --

And then again, if his Meaning be only to set the World right about one single
Text, and not to run down commonly received Principles and Doctrines, what is
he after in that long Harrangue of his, in Page 23, 24? Would he throw away so
much Rhetoric, in combating a Shadow? -- And must the Generality of Christians
be represented as Fools and Madmen; as swallowing the greatest Absurdities and
most palpable Nonsense; as venting the Fictions of their own Brains, for the
Doctrines and Precepts of the Gospel; as receiving a Scheme of Religion that in
EVERY ARTICLE is a downright Affront to common Sense; as being ready to kill
the happy Few (among whom besure Mr. Briant is one) that have Sense eno' and
dare trust their own Faculties so far, as to judge in themselves what is right;
and will not renounce their Reason in Complaisance to their sovereign Dictates:
-- I say, must a great Part of the Christian World be thus represented, merely
because they don't see just as Mr. Briant does about this one Passage of
Scripture? -- Alas! What rabble-charming Sounds have worked him up to such a
Pitch of fiery Bigotry on a sudden! -- But if he will honestly confess, that he
had a further Reach in these Strokes (as he must do, if he will not renounce
his Reason) we will clear him of Bigotry; and desire to know, whom they were
levelled at. -- Perhaps he will turn them off upon the Papists, (which would be
as natural as several of his Evasions) But this he cannot justly do, because
they are of one Heart and Soul with him in their Construction of this Text, as
well as in some other Things. -- Whom then must he mean? -- Why the stupid and
libertine Sect of Calvinists, that have such a great Spread in the World, who
are such mortal Foes to Reason, [to use some of his own Language] who are all
for believing, and nothing for doing, -- who amuse themselves with a vain and
groundless Persuasion, that there is no Need of their being righteous
themselves, because they have the perfect Righteousness of Christ imputed unto
them, -- who think it their peculiar Privilege, to be discharged from their
Obligations to obey their Master, and that they which break his Commandments,
stand fairer for his Grace, than those who conscienciously keep them, for fear
they should trust to what they do: -- And finally, who persecute such as are
for the Way of Truth, of Honesty and Integrity (viz. Mr. Briant and those
like-minded) denying them popular Applause or priestly Favors, and
endeavoring to bring them to Poverty and Contempt. --

But Mr. Briant goes on and says, -- If you though it I had taught, that we are
perfectly righteous; or that we are as righteous as the Angels in Heaven; or
what is worse still, that our Righteousness deserves to be compared with the
infinite Purity of the divine Nature; or finally, that we can merit Heaven by
it; -- If these were your Thoughts, you have mistaken the Man, and are fighting
only with your own Shadow. -- To which he adds, I challenge you, or any one, or
all of your Attestators, to point out a single Passage in my Sermon where the
Doctrine of Justification by the Merit of Man's personal Righteousness is
asserted, or from whence it can by good and necessary Consequence be inferred. (
p. 10. REM.) -- Here Mr. Briant displays his Subtilty (not to say his "
Iesuitical" Craft) in stating the Points of Doctrine in Mr. Porter's Sermon, so
as that he might with the better Grace deny there was any Controversy between
them. -- But is there not one chief Point relating to the Doctrine of
Justification left out (besides other Doctrines more cursorily mentioned)
wherein they directly militate? Does not Mr. Porter say, that the Righteousness
of Christ is the only MATERIAL, as well as the meritorious Cause of our
Justification? And that personal Righteousness or good Works are so far from
being the Condition or Cause of our Justification, that they are only to be
considered as the Fruits and Effects of it, and as a Part of the Salvation
purchased by Christ? -- Why was not this mentioned, but because he knew in his
own Soul, that they were of quite different Sentiments here? -- The rankest
Arminian upon Earth will acknowledge, as far as Mr. Briant has done, in one of
his best Passages, viz. "Forgiveness of Sin and final Acceptance with the
Father, is through the Merits of the Son." -- Or, in other Words (to take the
Passage in a favorable Sense) The Righteousness of Christ (passive) is the
only meritorious Cause of our Justification, or of the Forgiveness of our Sins*
(in which they make the Whole of Justification to consist:) But then they add,
with Mr. Briant, "That it is upon the Condition of Faith, Repentance and good
Living." -- (SERMON. p. 29.) -- All these, they think, must necessarily precede a
Man's Justification; and so far "contribute toward it, and have an actual
Influence upon it" that when he has attained a Competency of Faith (or a good
Creed) Repentance and good Works, he then becomes entitled to the Merits of
Christ, to the Benefit of his Death and Sufferings, which procured these easy
Terms, and make up his Defects: So, upon this Foundation, he may with Comfort
apply them to his own Soul. -- And is it not evident, from the Quotations
already made, and from the whole Run of Mr. Briant's Sermon, that here he is of
one Heart and Soul with the Arminians, at least, and that he allows no more to
Christ's Righteousness than they do? And is it not as evident, that it is the
contrary Scheme maintained by Mr. Porter, i. e. That Christ's Righteousness is
the sole MATTER of our Justification; That 'till we are justified we cannot
perform one good Work, That to suppose good Works (or "good living") have an
actual Influence in the Affair, is to place them in the Room of Christ and his
Righteousness, etc. I say is it not manifest, that it is this Scheme of
Doctrine, which is loaded with such Reproach throughout Mr. Briant's Sermon, and
is represented as such a Doctrine of Licentiousness?

These Things considered, it is astonishing to me (as well as to many others)
how Mr. Briant dare pretend, that there is no Controversy between him and Mr.
Porter in Regard of the Doctrinals of Religion: -- Surely he though it (as he once
and again insinuates he did in his Sermon) that he had none but Fools and
Madmen to deal with, or he would not have ventured upon such a confident
Assertion. -- But what is become of his "Honesty and Integrity," or of his
"inflexible Virtue," all this while? -- Verily he needs Somebody to write "an
Apology" for him; as much as the Prophet or the good Gentlemen whom he so
vilifies. -- For my Part, I must say, that I never in my Life read a more
barefaced Piece of Arminianism, or worse, The Supervisor of the Press in this
Work happening to be that Writer, whom Mr. Briant, (doubtless from his
"inflexible Virtue and good Manners") has gone a little out of his Way to
distinguish, by the rare Encomium in his LETTER ( Page 22.) begs Leave, in
Return for the Gentlemen's Complement, and in Hopes his " Patience will hold
out" the Length of a Margin Note, though perhaps something tedious and trying, to
insert here a few Observations, which may have a happy Tendency to se this
Sermon in its genuine Light. -- And I think, that upon a fair impartial
Examination, 'twill be found, it ought to be allowed the Name of a Socinian,
rather than an Arminian Piece; as partly appears from the Definition it gives
of the Free and Rich Grace of GOD, already considered, and it may be more fully
from the Account it gives of CHRIST'S Preaching and Design. -- It Is true, Mr.
Briant seems well acquninted with "the Magic of Sounds," as well as the
Impression of "Assurance and a godly Tone," and finding perhaps by Experience,
how apt "Hearers are to be stupify'd and bewildered with Sounds," and confident
Airs, he takes Occasion now and then in his Sermon to make Use of what he calls
" Rabble-charming Sounds," or Expressions that sound Orthodox, which in some
Places, as he saw Occasion, he might deliver with an Air of Assurance, and
something of a Tone. The Phrases I refer to, are such as these -- "The merciful
Tenor of the Gospel -- "This mediatorial and infinitely gracious Scheme --
"Through the Mediation of Christ -- "Through the Merits of the Son, etc. But it is
all in loose and general Hints only, attended with Ambiguity, and conveying no
distinct determinate Idea: Nor is this unlike the Manner of Socinian Writers;
who, notwithstanding they deny Christ's Satisfaction, yet make no Scruple to
adopt such Phrases; nay, seem to use them as freely as Mr. Briant, and possibly
in near the same Latitude of Meaning. -- For, as in his Letter (p. 9.) he
visibly derides the Character of a "bold graceless young Heretic;" so by
"innumerable broad Hints in his Seru" any understanding Reader, without "
inward Illumination," may plainly discover a Socinian Latitude of Thought,
particularly as to the End of Christ's coming into the World, the Character he
sustained, and the Nature of his Mediation. It Is very observable, that where he
is professedly treating on this Subject (SER. p. 17, 18.) he has not, as I can
perceive, any the most distant Hint of Christ's coming to make Satisfaction, or
purchase Salvation* even though he had so inviting an Occasion for it from that
known Principle of those whom he levels his Sermon against, that Sanctification
is an essential and glorious Part of the Salvation purchased by Christ, and
though the Drift of his Argument might have naturally led him to seek some
Advantage from this professed Principle of theirs: Yet here he is all Silence
(How shall we account for this Conduct of his? Whether it was from a Fear lest
he should seem to "encourage an undue and presumptuous Reliance on the Merits
and Intercession of Christ, to the Contempt of Virtue and good Works*" his own
Conscience knows best:) and other Ends only of Christ's coming are assigned.
Our Savior (says he) was the great PREACHER of Righteousness -- He came to set
up in the World the Christian SCHEME -- to propagate TRUTH and VIRTUE among
Mankind -- In his Life and Practice he fulfilled all Righteousness, to set us
an EXAMPLE of doing likewise -- To recommend which to Mankind, he both lived
and preached it up, and sealed the Truth of his Doctrine with his most precious
Blood. -- This is the Sum total of Mr. Briant's Account of Christ's mediatorial
Undertaking: and not a Word in it, you see, of any View the Mediator had to
making Satisfaction, purchasing Redemption, or fulfilling all Righteousness in
our Stead: Which although apparently from Scripture the sole Foundation of the
Religion of JESUS, nevertheless Mr. Briant confidently insists upon personal
Righteousness as "the Basis as well as the whole Superstructure of this his
Divine Religion." And, which is truly remarkable, this Gentleman lays down the
following Position very peremptorily -- It is this and ONLY this Righteousness
(which some are pleased to call filthy Rags) which Christ preaches up through the
Whole of that Divine Sermon on the Mount; which contains the Sum and Substance
of his whole Doctrine. -- Now, if this be Fact, in both Parts of the Assertion,
no Wonder that Mr. Briant should make that Observation ( p. 30.) To preach up
chiefly what Christ himself laid the chiefest Stress upon (whether this was not
moral Virtue, let every one judge from his Discourses) must certainly, in the
Opinion of all sober Men, be called truly and properly, and in the best Sense,
preaching of CHRIST. -- And no Wonder, he calls moral Virtue "the BASIS and in
short the WHOLE SUPERSTRUCTURE" of the Christian Religion. For if Christ's
Sermon on the Mount contains his whole Doctrine in Sum and Substance, and this
and only this Righteousness (or personal Goodness and Virtue) is what he
preaches up through the Whole of that Sermon; then it is a clear Consequence, that
Christ's Satisfaction, or his fulfilling all Righteousness in our Stead,
neither is contained in that Sermon, nor is any substantial Branch of the
Doctrine of Christ, is neither itself the Basis, nor Faith in it any Part of
the Superstructure of his Divine Religion. "The plain Truth of the Case is
this;" Either Christ's Satisfaction, by fulfilling all Righteousness in our
Stead, is included among the Contents of that Sermon; or it is not: and let Mr.
Briant make the Assumption which Way he will, one Part or other of his
Assertion must be false. For if Christ's Satisfaction or Righteousness is
included, then personal Righteousness or moral Virtue is not the only
Righteousness he preaches up, through the Whole of that Sermon: And if it be not
included, then either that Sermon does not comprehend the Whole System of
Christ's Doctrine, or else Christ's Satisfaction is no Doctrine of his, at
least is not of the Substance of his Doctrine, not a Doctrine of any Importance
in the Scheme of Christianity. -- However, Mr. Briant perhaps is mistaken in
Point of Fact; and I think, may be easily convinced of it, if he will only
consult that one Clause of this Divine Sermon, in Matthew. 5.17. Where he must
own, Christ himself declaring the grand Design of his Coming, preaches up his
own Righteousness and Satisfaction: unless he will further betray himself by
adopting the Socinian Gloss on the Place, which makes Christ's fulfilling the
Law to consist only in giving a perfect Exposition and a perfect Example. --
But if Mr. Briant can allow himself to Socinianise here, I shall less wonder at
his Conduct in setting forth the commonly received Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction in the Manner he has done, with such an Air of Burlesque, as in
the following Passage of his Sermon. ( p 25.) "GOD is already SATISFIED in all
his Demands, his Law, his Honor, his RIGOROUS RELENTLESS Justice are all
SATISFIED, and there is nothing left for Man to do, but to believe this
undoubtingly," etc. -- Yet I confess, I should wonder, if any one could indulge
himself thus in Banter (almost to Profaneness) on this sacred Subject, and vent
such "unsanctify'd Spleen" in a Case of eternal Concernment, who had any real
Belief of the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, or at least who had any due
Conception of its infinite Importance in the Christian Scheme, and saw the
Necessity of its being believed and preached, with a View to discover and
display the exceeding Riches of Divine Grace in Man's Redemption by the Blood
of Atonement.

In short then, never call any Piece Calvinistical, never call it so much as
Arminian, that disowns and treats with Indignity such a grand Article of the
Christian Revelation, as Christ's Satisfaction. No, it deserves no better Name
than that of Socinian. -- But I recollect, Mr. Briant has entered his Caveat
against " calling Names," in Controversy: nor am I fond of doing it, especially
with personal Application. I shall therefore wave calling him by any Name,
unless it be the Reverse of that long Name he has honored me with in his
Letter: but for a concise one, I refer him to his Friend Dr. MAYHEW, who may
best know the Name and secret History of that new Sect he has discovered, and
very consistently chastis'd in one of his printed Lectures (p. 148, 149.) whose
distinguishing Tenet* I perceive, is this. "That Christ did not preach the
Gospel, nor designed to do it, but his Doctrines and Manner of Preaching were
LEGAL;" Or, which is the same Thing, that "the WHOLE Tenor of our Lord's
Preaching was moral;" in short, That Christ always preached the Law, and never
the Gospel. -- A Tenet, as it happens, bordering pretty near upon Mr. BRIANT'S;
That it is MORAL VIRTUE, this and ONLY this Righteousness, which Christ
preaches up through the WHOLE of his divine Sermon on the Mount; which contains
the Sum and Substance of his WHOLE Doctrine. -- But whether he is one of this
new Sect, his Intimate who made the Discovery of it, can best inform. -- In the
mean Time, I shall study for no "odious Appellations;" and desire always to be
careful how I mingle personal Reflections with Disputes, and that I take not up
a Reproach against my Neighbor* nor bring a railing Accusation, as the Manner
of some is; to whom I wish better Principles and a better Spirit.


than Mr. Briant's Sermon is: And in uncharitable Censures it goes beyond most
of the Arminian Writers. For while they charge the Calvinists with holding
Doctrines subversive of Religion and Godliness, they nevertheless take Care to
express their Charity for them, as having a quite contrary Design, even to
serve Religion, rather than hurt it, not seeing the Consequence of their
Principles: But Mr. Briant, in more Places than one, and I think every where
(except in his Quotation from Foster) makes them equally bad in Practice as in
Principle, and represents them as the most finished Set of Villains upon Earth,
-- utter Enemies to all Holiness and good Works. -- A vile and infamous Satyr
indeed!

On this Occasion, I cannot help saying, one would think, that these Men who
talk so much [in the Pulpit] of the Necessity of personal Righteousness and
good Living, and appear so zealous against Libertine-Principles and Practices,
would [out of the Pulpit] discover themselves to be some of the holiest Men
upon Earth: -- But alas! is their not too visible Ground for the Observation,
which a dignified Layman (no Friend to New-Light) not long ago made, namely,
That the Men who talk so much of good Works, he though it, had the least good Works
of any Men? -- And what if I should say, that it was spoken with peculiar
Reference to Mr. B. and some of his Intimates?

It Is in vain to urge Holiness upon Men, without laying a proper Foundation for
it in Union with Christ by Faith, in the Regeneration of the Soul which is dead
in Trespasses and in Sins, etc. -- Without this, Ministers do but build Castles
in the Air. -- But what of this appears in Mr. Briant's Sermon? -- Does Not he
seem to hold forth all along, that there is a sufficient Foundation for
Holiness laid in the Nature of Man; so that it is but improving his natural
Reason and Power of moral Agency, and he will arrive to it?

Object. But does not he hold forth the Necessity of the Spirit's Influence in
his Sermon? -- I answer, Yes; but the Influence Mr. Briant speaks of, is only
upon " Minds well disposed" already, and merely in a Way of " Concurrence."
They first rightly improving what they have by Nature, then the Spirit of GOD
comes in, to assist in completing the Work; cooperating with them 'till all
the Divine Virtues are produced, and they have "put on the New-Nature of Right
Action." SER. p. 16, -- 19.) -- This is the Scheme of Doctrine, by which he
hopes to serve the Cause of Virtue and true Religion in the World: -- Yet is not
it in truth but poorly served," as he himself seems to be sensible? (Page 29.)
Has not such Sort of Preaching rather a Tendency to banish it out of the World?
-- How many, that have endeavored to practice upon this Scheme, have
afterward confessed, that they found all their Labor to be in vain; that
notwithstanding their strongest Resolutions and Endeavors, they could not get
the Victory over their inward Corruptions, whatever Restraint was laid upon the
outward Acts? -- But that when GOD had discovered the Gospel-Way of Salvation
to them, and had wro't in them the Belief of the Truth, they then immediately
found what they before sought in vain; the Power of their Corruptions was
broken, and the Practice of Sin with Delight, cast off!

Before I leave this Head, I cannot but just take Notice how Mr. Briant seems to
flout at some of the most pious and zealous of Christ's Ambassadors, their
bitter Cry about the present Decay of Zeal for the Faith of the Fathers; and
what a Slur he casts upon our venerable Forefathers in that rude Expression,
"the Faith which was then imported." (p. 20. REM.) -- How contemptible does
this Faith appear in his Eyes, when he speaks of it in such a ludicrous Manner?
-- And what a mean Opinion has he of the Importers themselves, as well as their
Principles?

Having thus renewed and confirmed the Charge of Arminianism bro't against Mr.
B. (in which it is Pity he has so many Abettors, whether among the Clergy or
Laity) I now proceed to the other Thing proposed.

II. To take some Notice of Mr. Briant's Remarks upon the Word, Our, in his
Text; his changing of which for the Word Their, in his Sermon, the Attestators
thought to be a great Abuse of the Text, by altering the Sense of it.

The Sum and Substance of what he here says, is this, May we not rationally
suppose, that the Prophet is here speaking in a public Capacity, and that he
was the People's Mouth to GOD in this humble Confession; and of Consequence,
not designing to include himself, or to speak of his own personal (but only of
a general) Guilt. -- But what Necessity is there of supposing this? -- Does not
the Word, Our, in it is natural Import include, not only the Prophet, but all
the Righteous in the Jewish Nation? -- Why then must we depart from the proper
and literal Sense of the Term? -- May Not another, that is an Enemy to the
Doctrine of Assurance, as well come and say, that he supposes, the Prophet does
not include himself, but is only personating a few extraordinary good Men in
the Jewish Church, when he says in this Prayer, Doubtless thou art our Father,
-- Thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer -- We are thine -- We shall be
saved, etc. -- Would not his Reasoning be as cogent and conclusive, as Mr.
Briant's? -- And must not the Doctrine of Assurance necessarily fall before
him; this Construction affording him a Key to get rid of all the We's and Our's
and other appropriating Terms in the Bible, on which some lay so much Stress in
Support of this Doctrine? -- But surely Mr. Briant will not admit of this;
since he is such an Enemy to all Doctrines, that tend to rob sincere upright
Christians of that divine Comfort they are the proper Heirs of, and to fill
their Minds with needless Fears and Scruples about their spiritual State. --
And therefore we may rationally conclude, he will readily grant, that the
Prophet includes himself, as well as other good Men of that Time, in these
Passages: -- And if so, I would ask, why the Words, Our and We, must not be
understood in the same Latitude and Extent throughout this Prayer? --

No, this cannot be, says Mr. Briant, because of some Passages in the Context,
etc. But what are these? -- The first he alleges is in the same Verse with his
Text; We are all as an unclean Thing. Upon which he remarks, The Prophet must
(unless you will confound all Characters) here personate the Jewish Church and
People, and speak in their Names. -- But why cannot a good Man speak thus,
including himself, without confounding Characters? -- Pray, what does that
Confession amount to, more than this, We are all Sinners, or, We are all
defiled with Sin? -- And may not a good Man intend himself, as well as others,
in such an Expression, without setting himself upon a Level with the worst of
Sinners; or without making himself a Sinner of equal Degree with them? -- Does
not the Apostle say, O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver Me, etc? --
And does he confound Characters here? -- What does the Expression import, but
the deep Sense he had of his native Corruption, which mixed it self with and
adhered to his very best Performances? -- And does not Job (the best Man then
alive) say, Behold, I am vile, i. e. a wretched, filthy, polluted Creature!
Chap. XL. -- And why may not Isaiah be understood as speaking in the same Sense
with these good Men, in this Part of his Confession, as far as it related to
himself? -- It Is certain, the godly are conscious of such Defects and Failures
in themselves, and such Proneness to Sin, that they find just Cause, in
Confessions of Sins, to join themselves with other Men; -- as this very Prophet
elsewhere does. Chap. VI.5. Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a Man of
unclean Lips, and I dwell in the midst of a People of unclean Lips. -- And
pray, what more is there in the Words which Mr. Briant brings as an Objection,
than in the Words now quoted? -- The Prophet indeed speaks of the Uncleanness
of his Lips; but does not that imply some Uncleanness of Heart too? -- For out
of the Abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks. Matt. XII.34. And he speaks
likewise in as strong Terms of his own Uncleanness, as of that of the People's:
-- Is Not there then as great a Confusion of Characters here, as can possibly be
supposed in the other Place? -- What Evasion can Mr. Briant have here? -- He
must even fight it out with the Prophet, if he still thinks it Confusion, or a
blending of Characters, to join Saints and Sinners in the same general
Confession.

I have sometimes though it, how Mr. Briant would have triumphed in it as an
Argument ungainsayable, if the Prophet, instead of speaking so particularly in
this Place, had only said in general, Woe to us; WE are undone, for WE are ALL
of unclean Lips. -- How strongly would he have pleaded, that the Prophet could
not possibly include himself, but only spoke as the Representative of the
People? And how easily would he have got rid of the Us and We and All in the
Text? -- What, a good Man and a Prophet (he would have been ready to say) "One
that was all along in the full Exercise of Grace"* and yet undone! Under a Woe*
and a base foul-mouthed smutty "Fellow"! -- It would be almost "Blasphemy", to
suppose it. -- It would be an evident confounding of all Distinctions between
Good and Evil, between the Saint and the Sinner. -- This surely would have been
a much better Plea, than any he has produced; but with what an ill Grace does
it appear now? -- And Mr. Briant, if he has the humble Spirit of the inspired
Prophet, will confess himself to be a Man of unclean Lips, and as an unclean
Thing. Which of the Commandments does he keep as he should, without defiling
himself with the Breach thereof, in Thought, Word, or Deed?

This Text may serve as a Key, to unfold all the other parallel Places, that he
alleges, wherein he thinks that the Word, Our, must not be taken personally,
but representatively* it being as rational to suppose that the Prophet takes in
himself there, as in this Place, since the Expressions are not so strong as
they be here. -- And thus I might fairly dismiss the Point. -- But left he
should think this a mere Evasion, I shall a little consider the other Places
mentioned.

The next is Isai, LXIII.17. still a Part of this Prayer, -- Why have thou
hardened OUR Heart from thy Fear? -- If you apply this to the Prophet (says Mr.
B.) you fix the worst of Characters, that is any where given of the most
abandoned Men on Earth, on one of the best of Men then alive. -- I answer,
there are Degrees of Hardness; -- Reigning Hardness of Heart is indeed the
proper Character of the worst of Men; but is there not some Spice of this
Hardness (though not reigning) in the best of Men? -- As far as Sin remains in
them, so far their Hearts are hard; and therefore they may well include
themselves in such general Expressions. -- How often do we read of Hardness of
Heart in the very Apostles, the best Men then on Earth? Mark vi.52. -- viii.17.
-- xvi.14. -- Hence it is, that Christians in general are thus cautioned, Heb
iii.13 Exhort one another daily, -- lest any of you be hardened, etc. -- But
what is all this to the Purpose? will Mr. Briant say. This was not the Case of
Isaiah at this Time; -- His Heart was not hardened, when he made this Prayer;
but he appears to be in a high Exercise of Grace. -- I readily grant, that he
was so, and that a hardened Frame of Spirit is inconsistent with the Exercise of
Grace; -- But then I say, that a Sensibility of Hardness, and the Exercise of
Grace, are no Ways inconsistent: -- A Sense of Hardness argues Tenderness; a
Heart that is truly hard, is no Ways sensible of it; but is stupid and secure.
-- This we may see in the Instance of David; how careless and secure was he,
while under the Prevalence of a hardened Frame of Heart! But when he came to
renew Acts of Grace, how sensible was he of this Hardness, and how does he
lament it and mourn over it? -- The more strong and lively the Exercise of
Faith is, the more will a Person see of his inherent Pravity, and of the
natural Hardness of his Heart: -- The Light of Faith is an humbling Thing; in
this Light we see our Darkness: A View of Christ in his Glory will give us a
View of our own Vileness and Deformity, and abase us to the lowest. This we may
see in the Instances of Job, Chapt. xl.4. and xlii.6. of Agur, Prove. xxx. and
of Isaiah, Chap. vi.5. And this is agreeable to the Experience of all the
Children of GOD. -- (Mr. BRIANT, art thou a Master in Israel, and know not
these Things! --) Well may they therefore use such self-abasing Expressions in
their Confession of Sin to GOD, relative to their own Case.

The next parallel Text urged, is Isai. lix.12 -- Our Transgressions are
multiplied: -- And then follows an Enumeration of some particular
Transgressions, as Lying, Oppression, etc. which the Prophet could not be
guilty of. -- To this I answer, that the Prophet might include himself in the
general Confession (as being a Sinner,) though in the particular Confession
following (in which he does not so much as mention the Word Our) he may have
more especial Reference to the People. -- Is Not it the Intent of all faithful
Ministers, when they use such general Phrases in their Prayers, to include
themselves; although when they come to Particulars, they recite chiefly the Sins
of the People? --

But what if we should go a Step higher, and suppose, a good Man should intend
himself (as well as others) both in the general and particular Confession,
would there be any Absurdity in it? -- Might he not well include himself, upon
such Grounds as these, (1.) As having within himself the Seeds and Principles
of all the Sins confessed, yea, and of all Sin (though the reigning Power thereof
be broken in him) which, if GOD should withhold his Grace, might speedily break
forth into Act? -- Or (2.) As having made himself in some Measure Partaker of
other Men's Sins, by not mourning for them as he ought, by not being as earnest
as he should in crying for Pardon, and in seeking to turn away divine
Vengeance, by not bearing due Testimony against them, and in not using utmost
Endeavors to put a Stop to their Progress, etc. -- Can the best justify
themselves as to these Things altogether?

But this could not be the Case of the Prophet Isaiah, will Mr. Briant say, who
was ever faithful in these Regards. -- I answer, If he thus objects, he has
more Charity for the Prophet, than he had for himself: For what does he mean,
when he says, Chap. vi.5. Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am of unclean
Lips (which some read, I have held my Peace, I have been too silent in the
Cause of God, too little of a Monitor and Reprover, too neglectful of Prayer,
etc.) and I dwell in the midst of a People of unclean Lips. -- Is it not as if
he had said, besides my own personal Uncleanness, I have the Uncleanness of the
People in some Measure to answer for; "I have both by my Omissions and
Commissions involved my self in the Guilt of their Sins, and therefore may
justly fear to partake of their Plagues? Pool in Loc.
-- Or what was the Prophet's Intent, when he cries out, My Leanness, my
Leanness! Woe unto me! Chap. xxiv.16. Does Not it imply some Sense of
Unfaithfulness in his Office, as well as want of Success? -- But if he had not
acknowledged it in plain Terms, we might have argued it from the Nature of the
Thing; since to suppose the Prophet had nothing to confess in these Respects,
would be to suppose him perfect: and I suppose Mr. Briant no Friend to the
Doctrine of Perfection in this Life.

For my Part, I cannot see the Propriety of Ministers saying We, or Our, in
particular Confessions of Sin, without they are in some Sense (either more
nearly or remotely) guilty of what they confess. -- Suppose, GOD had taught us
by the Ministry of spotless Angels (instead of sinful Men) as he might have
done; how would such Expressions sound from their Mouths, We are all as an
unclean Thing: -- Our Transgressions are multiplied; Lying, Oppression, Revolt,
uttering from the Heart Words of Falsehood, etc. -- Is not the Thing too
shocking to imagine? -- And then further, can we find any Instance of the Man
Jesus Christ's expressing himself thus, as the Mouth of the People, while on
Earth (I don't remember any at present) even though he bare our Sins in his own
Body on the Cross!

Thus I have considered the several Instances bro't by Mr. Briant, wherein he
thinks the Words, We, and Our, cannot be taken in a personal, but only in a
relative Sense, as it is used by the Prophet in the Capacity of a public
Representative of the People. -- And upon laying these Things together, does not
it appear probable, at least, that he was under a gross Mistake?

But after all, if we should grant for Argument's sake (though I see no Reason to
grant it) that good Men may in some Cases use the Word, Our, in Confessions of
Sin, when they don't mean to include themselves; it will not follow, that this
was the Case of the Prophet in the Text; there may not be the same Reason for
the one, as for the other; in the former Case, they could not perhaps include
themselves consistently with Truth; but here the Prophet may; for it is
certainly true, that even his Righteousness was as filthy Rags* viewed
comparatively, or in respect of Justification before God; which is all we plead
for. -- Mr Briant himself in effect grants this, and so destroys the Force of
his own Argument, when he says in his Letter to Mr. Porter, (p. 17.) You
suppose, the Prophet is confessing the Insufficiency of Man's best personal
Righteousness to Justification: -- This, I grant, would sound very well; it
would be a great Expression of Humility and Self abasement, as to the godly
Part of them, to acknowledge that after all their virtuous Seize, they
could not stand Trial by the Law of perfect Obedience, but must have Recourse
to the free unbo't Grace of GOD for Pardon and Acceptance. -- Now I say, "if it
sound very well, and be a great Expression of Humility," for the Prophet to
make such a Sort of Confession, or to comprehend himself in it (with other good
Men,) he certainly might do it consistent with Truth: -- What then is become of
all Mr. Briant's Arguings (from parallel Texts and otherways) to prove, that he
could not mean himself personally without speaking falsely; which is plainly
what he is after, both in this and the foregoing Head (on the Word, All) or he
says nothing to the Purpose? -- Surely he had forgotten this Concession, or he
would not have so palpably contradicted himself -- But if Mr. Briant (to free
himself from Contradiction) should deny his Meaning to be as I have represented
it namely, that the Prophet could not intend himself without speaking falsely;
then this is the Amount of his Arguments, put into a proper Form. -- If the
Word (...) sometimes stands for Many, and the Word, Our, for Their or Your, in
some particular Passages of Scripture* because the Speaker could not comprehend
himself, o^ every Individual, without speaking falsely; then they must be so
taken in this Text also, where the Speaker may comprehend himself, etc. without
speaking falsely. -- What an absurd Consequence is here! -- Yet Mr. Briant must
necessarily father it, or acknowledge his Self-Contradiction.

However, If we should not take Advantage from "this enormous Blunder" of Mr.
Briant's, but let it pass, what do his Arguments amount to (except what he says
upon the Context) but to a mere begging the Question? -- If he had first
proved, that there was good Ground and Reason of restraining and limiting the
Words, All and Our, in several Passages of Scripture; and had then applied it
to his Text, and shown that there was the same Ground of Limitation here, he
had so far acted the Part of a Workman that needs not to be ashamed, and had
really done something to the Purpose: but what of this appears? In Effect here
is nothing but altum Silentium. -- So that, in fine, we have little more than
his bare Word for it (unless it be the few Remarks upon the Context, which have
been or shall be immediately considered) that the Terms, All and Our, in the
Text, must be taken restrictively, and not in their natural Import.

Let us now hear what he has further to say upon the Point: -- I will only add
(says he) that for the same Reason the Prophet is here supposed to include
himself in the Terms, All and Our, he must likewise be supposed to include
himself in the following Character -- There is none that calls upon thy Name,
that stirs up himself to take hold of thee. -- The Text says, NONE: -- But
was not that Prophet a Man of Prayer? -- I answer, Yes; but yet he may include
himself notwithstanding; and not only himself, but all the Righteous then
alive; of whom doubtless there were many, whatever Mr. Briant says to the
contrary; for the Prophet wrote the latter Part of his Prophecy in the Days of
Hezekiah, in whose Time there was a great Reformation. 2 Chronicles. xxx.

Mr. Briant must necessarily grant, that these Words of the Prophet must be
taken with some Restriction, and not in the most absolute Sense, as if there
were none (to whom they refer) that prayed at all; since he himself says, that
this People made many and long Prayers, insomuch that the Almighty declares
(speaking after the Manner of Men) that he was troubled and quite worried out
with them. (SERMON. p. 13.) -- And if they must be understood under a
Restriction, even when applied to the Wicked (i. e. as chiefly holding forth
the Formality and Deadness of their Prayers, rather than their total Neglect of
them) why may not we as well suppose them capable of a further Restriction, so
as likewise to be applicable to the Case of the Righteous? -- May it not in
some Sense be said even of them, especially at some particular Times, that they
call not upon GOD's Name. i. e. They don't do it with that Faith and Fervency
as they ought, or as it follows in the Verse of the Text, by stirring (or
awaking) themselves up to take hold of GOD! And may not the Prophet, when
humbling himself before GOD, also put in himself for one among the Subjects of
this Complaint, as seeing in the Light of Faith (which was then in Exercise)
how far short he came of doing his Duty in the Degree that was required? -- Or
what if we should suppose that in the general Declension that followed after
the Reformation, I just mentioned, the Prophet found in himself some Taint of
this careless, prayerless Spirit, as well as other good Men; and should
thereupon (when he came to renew Acts of Grace) lament it in such Expressions
as these, -- Our Hearts are hardened from thy Fear -- There are none that stir
up themselves to lay hold of thee, etc. -- I say, would such a Supposition be
any Ways absurd, or at all unreasonable?

But let that be as it will, I think, the other Solution sufficient, namely,
that the Prophet might include himself, from a Sense of his Short-comings in
the Duties of Faith and Prayer, and their Defectiveness in Degree, of what the
Law required, yea, and of what was really attainable in this Life. -- Alas! in
the Prayers of the Saints, at best, there is always too little of Love and Zeal
to the Name of the Lord, and too little of a stiring up themselves to take hold
of GOD. -- Suppose, GOD should now give it as the proper Character of the
People of this Land (among whom, we trust, there are many precious Servants of
Christ, who live in the Exercise of Faith,) that there are none that call upon
his Name, that stir up themselves to take hold of him; -- Might not the
Conscience of every one apply it to himself? -- Would there be a single Man,
that dare plead, not Guilty, in some Sense or other? -- Or if any did, would not
it be a Token of their Pride, rather than of their Humility; and show their
little Sense of the Spirituality and Extent of the moral Law? Their very Denial
would be a Proof of their Guilt. -- Would even Mr. Briant's warmest Devotions
stand the Test, if tried by the Law of Morality, which he appears such an
Advocate for? Does he not see moral Failures enough in them to cover him with
Confusion and Self-Abasement?

There is another Objection, of a more general Nature, hinted at in Mr.
Briant's Sermon, which not only affects our Construction of a particular Word,
but also the whole Text, in the Sense we take it; and that is founded on what
is said in the preceding Verse, Thou meetest him that rejoices and works
Righteousness, etc. -- Here true Righteousness is highly commended, how then
can we suppose that the same Righteousness should be so much depreciated,
almost in the next Sentence? -- But lest I should incur the Censure of being "
Verbose," I shall wave a particular Answer, and shall refer him to what the
Rev. Mr. Foxcroft says upon the Point in his seasonable Sermon on the Text ( p.
6, 7.) where this Objection is fully refuted. -- And as for any other occurring
Difficulties, I shall refer to the same Sermon, and to Mr. Porter's
Vindication, for a Solution.

And now having finished what I at first proposed, I shall close all with some
pertinent Extracts from the Writings of a precious Minister of Christ, now with
the Lord. -- Some think ( says he) that if good Works, and Holiness, and
Repentance, be allowed no Room in Justification, that there is no Room left for
them in the World, and in the Practice of Believers. -- So hard seems it to be
to some, to keep in their Eye the certain fixed Bounds betwixt Justification
and Sanctification. -- Again, speaking of the Arminianizing Dissenters in
England, he says; -- They will not allow the personal Righteousness of Christ
to be imputed to us any otherwise than in the Merit of it, as purchasing for us
a more easy Law of Grace; in the Observation whereof, they place all our
justifying Righteousness: Understanding hereby our own personal inherent
Holiness, and nothing else. -- They hold, That Christ died to merit this of the
Father, viz. That we might be justified upon easier Terms under the Gospel,
than those of the Law of Innocence; instead of Justification by perfect
Obedience, we are now to be justified by our own evangelical Righteousness,
made up of Faith, Repentance and sincere Obedience. -- And if we hold not with
them in this, they tell the World, we are Enemies to evangelical Holiness,
slighting the Practice of all good Works, and allowing our Hearers to live as
they list. -- Thus they slander the Preachers of free Grace, because we do not
place Justification in our our own inherent Holiness, but in Christ's perfect
Righteousness, imputed to us upon our believing in him; which Faith, we teach,
purifies the Heart, and always inclines to Holiness of Life. -- Neither do we
hold any Faith to be true and saving, that does not show it self by good Works;
without which no Man is, or can be justified, either in his own Conscience, or
before Men. --

And then again; They preach up Holiness, as if it was their proper Doctrine,
and disowned by us; when they cannot but know in their Consciences, that there
is no Difference betwixt them and us, about the Necessity of Holiness, but only
about it is Spring and Place in Salvation. -- We derive it from Jesus Christ and
Faith in him, and know assuredly that it can spring from nothing else. -- We
place it betwixt Justification and Glory; and that is it is Scripture-Place, and
no where else can it be found or stand, let Men try it as much and long as they
will.

And still further; Is it not unaccountable, to charge a People with
Licentiousness, when the Chargers cannot deny, and some cannot well bear the
Strictness of their Walk? -- It is commonly said, that it is only their
Principles, and the Tendency of them to loose walking, that they blame. -- But
it seems not fair to charge a People with licentious Doctrines, when the
Professors thereof are approved of for their Godliness; and when they do
sincerely profess, that their Godliness begun with, and is promoted by the
Faith of their Principles. --

Moreover he says; As for inherent Holiness, Is it not sufficiently secured by
the Spirit of Christ, received by Faith, the certain Spring and Cause of it; by
the Word of GOD, the plain and perfect Rule of it; by the declared Necessity of
it to all them that look to be saved, and to justify the sincerity of a Man's
Faith? unless we bring it into Justification, and thereby make our own pitiful
Holiness sit on the Throne of Judgment, with the precious Blood of the Lamb of
GOD. --

He observes further; That this Doctrine of Justification by Christ's
Righteousness alone is a spiritual Mystery, and lies not level to a natural
Understanding. 1 Cor. ii.10, 14. -- Working for Life, a Man naturally
understands; but believing for Life, he understands not. -- To mend the Old
Man, he knows; but to put on the New Man by Faith is a Riddle to him. -- The
Study of Holiness, and to endeavor to square his Life according to GOD's Law,
he knows a little of, though he can never do it; but to draw Sanctification from
Christ by Faith, in and through the Force of the Spirit of Christ in the Heart by
Faith, is mere Canting to him. -- A new Life he understands a little, but
nothing of a New Birth and Regeneration: He never saw himself stark dead. --
Nay, not only is it unknown to the natural Man, but he is by his natural State,
an Enemy to it; he neither does, nor can know it, nor approve of it. 1 Cor.
ii.14. --

Again he says; It is no small Disadvantage this Doctrine of Justification lies
under from the Spirit of this Day, we live in. -- A light, frothy, trifling
Temper prevails generally: Doctrines of the greatest Weight are talked of and
treated about with a vain unconcerned Frame of Spirit, as if Men contended
rather about Opinions and School-Points, than about the Oracles of GOD, and
Matters of Faith. -- But if Men's Hearts were seen by themselves, if Sin were
felt, if Men's Consciences were enlivened, if GOD's holy Law were known in it is
Exactness and Severity, and the Glory and Majesty of the Lawgiver shining
before Men's Eyes, if Men were living as leaving Time and launching forth into
Eternity, the Gospel-Salvation by Jesus Christ would be more regarded. --

Furthermore he adds; It is not a little provoking, that some are so captious,
that no Minister can preach in the hearing of some, ( of the Freedom of GOD's
Grace, of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, of sole and single
believing on him for Righteousness and eternal Life, of the Impossibility of a
natural Man's doing any good Work, before he be in Christ; of the Impossibility
of the mixing of Man's Righteousness and Works, with Christ's Righteousness in
the Business of Justification, etc.) but he is immediately called, or suspected
to be an Antinomian. -- If we say, that Faith in Jesus Christ is neither Work,
nor Condition, nor Qualification in Justification, but is a mere Instrument,
receiving (as an empty Hand receives the freely given Alms) the Righteousness
of Christ; and that in it is very Act, it is a renouncing of all Things but the
Gift of Grace, the Fire is kindled; -- So that it is come to that, as Mr.
Christopher Fowler said, That he that will not be Antichristian, must be called
an Antinomian. -- But what shall we do in this Case? What shall we do for Peace
with our Brethren? -- Shall we lie still under their undeserved Reproaches, and
for keeping the Peace, silently suffer others to beat us unjustly? -- If it
were our own personal Concern, we should bear it: -- If it were only their
charging us with Ignorance, Weakness, and being unstudied Divines (as they have
used liberally to call all that have not learned and dare not believe their new
Divinity) we might easily pass it by, or put it up. -- But when we see the pure
Gospel of Christ corrupted, and an Arminian Gospel new vampt and obtruded on
People, to the certain Peril of the Souls of such as believe it, and our
Ministry reflected upon, which should be dearer to us than our Lives, can we be
silent! -- As we have a Charge from the Lord, to deliver to our People what we
have received from him, so as he calls and enables, we are not to give Place by
Subjection, not for an Hour, to such as creep in, not only to Spy out, but to
destroy, not so much the Gospel Liberty, as the Gospel Salvation we have in
Christ Jesus, and to bring us back under the Yoke of legal Bondage. -- And
indeed the Case in that Epistle to the Galatians and ours have a great
Affinity. --

Once more he says; There is not a Minister that deals seriously with the
Souls of Men, but he finds an Arminian Scheme of Justification in every
unrenewed Heart. -- And is it not sadly to be bewailed, that Divines should
plead that same Cause, that we daily find the Devil pleading in the Hearts of
all natural Men? And that instead of casting down, 2 Cor. x.4, 5. they should
be making Defenses for such strong Holds, as must either be levelled with the
Dust, or the Rebel that holds them out, must eternally perish?

And to the same Purpose he says; -- Dr. Ames his Observation holds good as to
all the Arminian Divinity, that it is contra communem Sensum Fidelium, against
the common Sense of Believers. -- How evident is it, that several, who by
Education, or an unsound Ministry, having had their natural Enmity against the
Grace of GOD strengthened; when the Lord by his Spirit has broke in upon their
Hearts, and has raised a serious Soul-Exercise about their Salvation, their
turning to GOD and CHRIST, and their turning from Arminianism, have begun
together? -- And some of the greatest Champions for the Grace of GOD have been
Persons thus dealt with, as we might Instance --

Finally, he says; -- Let us make Christ crucified our great Study, as
Christians, and the Preaching of him, our main Work, as Ministers. 1 Cor. ii.2.
Paul determined to know nothing else. -- But many manage the Ministry, as if
they had taken up a contrary Determination, even to know any Thing, save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. -- We are amazed to see so many ashamed of the Cross
of Christ, and to behave as if they accounted the Tidings of Salvation, by the
slain Son of GOD, an old antiquated Story, and unfit to be daily preached. --
And what comes in the Room thereof, is not unknown, nor is it worth mentioning.
-- For all Things that come in Christ's Room, and justle him out, either of
Hearts, or Pulpits, are alike abominable to a Christian. -- How many Sermons
may a Man hear, and read, when printed; yea, and Books written, about the Way
to Heaven, wherein is hardly the Name of Jesus Christ? -- And if he be named,
it is the Name of Christ as a Judge and Lawgiver, rather than that of a
Savior. -- When we cannot avoid the observing of those sad Things, let it be a
sharp Spur to us, to preach Christ more, and live more to his Praise. -- Let us
not be deceived with that P^^^ence, That Christ may be preached, when he is not
nam^^. -- The Preaching of the Gospel is the Naming of Christ, and so called,
Romans xv.20. And Paul was to bear Christ's Name before the Gentiles, and Kings,
and the Children of Israel. Act. ix.15. --

Thus that judicious and excellent Divine. --

These Things I recommend to Mr. Briant's and every Reader's serious
Consideration -- And subscribe my self,

Their Soul's Well-Wisher, JOHN COTTON.
Hallifax, Oct. 22. 1750. P. S. I am sorry, that Mr. Briant has waited so long
for an Answer; -- But this I have to say in Excuse, that it was two Months
after the Publication of his Remarks, before I could obtain a Sight of them; He
not being so kind as to favor the Attestators with a Copy: -- And for some
Time after, I was undetermined in my own Mind whether to intermeddle further in
the Controversy: But (to pass over other Considerations, of Weight with me) the
Law of Self-Defence at last obliges me to it; and I trust, better late than
never. --



THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 7. Lin. 13. read undoubtingly --

P. 45. Marg. l. 24. r. and if this --

P. 46. Marg l. 29. r. and so --


