AN ACCOUNT OF THE Convincement, Exercises, Services and Travels, Of that
Ancient Servant of the LORD, Richard Davies: WITH Some Relation of Ancient
FRIENDS, and the Spreading of TRUTH in North Wales, etc.

The SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: PRINTED. PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted and Sold by JAMES CHATTIN, next Door
to the PIPE, in CHURCH ALLEY. M,DCC,LII.

The Testimony and Account of G. Whitehead, concerning Richard Davies, and his
Ministry.
IN a true and living Remembrance of this our dear Brother, ancient and
faithful Servant and Minister of Jesus Christ, Richard Davies, and of that dear
and brotherly Love, which remained between us, and which he had to all faithful
Friends and Brethren in Christ; I am concerned to give this brief Testimony, in
Commemoration of him, his Life, and faithful Gospel Ministry.

He was not only a Professor of the Name, Power and Spirit of our blessed Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, but also made a Partaker of Christ in Spirit, Life
and Conversation: A plain, meek and humble Man of Integrity; a Man fearing God,
and hating Iniquity; a Man sanctified by the Holy Spirit, unto unfeigned and
constant Love of his Brethren in Christ; a Man sound in Faith, in Patience, and
Charity, of a sound Mind and Judgment, being endued with a Spirit of Love: He
was a Preacher of Christ, and His Righteousness in Conversation, as well as in
Doctrine and Ministry, wherein he was examplary to the Believers, and c. He was
given up to serve the Truth and Friends; and being of a tender Spirit, did
truly sympathize with the Sufferers for the same, and used his industrious
Endeayours for their Relief, where he could have an Interest or Place with such
as had Power.

His Testimony and Ministry was evangelical, plain and sound; not in Words of
Man's Wisdom, but in the Demonstration and plain Evidence of the Holy Spirit
and Power of Christ: Being a Minister of the Spirit, and of the New Testament;
the New Covenant Dispensation, which stands not in legal Shadows, Types,
outward Signs or Figures, but in the Gospel Life and Substance, even in Christ
Jesus, in whom all the Shadows, and Dispensations thereof, are ended.

And this our dear Brother having traveled through and beyond those outward
Dispensations, Shadows and Vails; and understanding their Cessation Removal and
End, in and by Christ Jesus, his Sufferings and Death; and more especially by
His inward and spiritual Appearance, Dispensation and Work in his Heart and
Soul; whereby he was ma^e sensible of the Power of Christ's Resurrection, as
being one risen with Him: By the Brightness and Glory of whose Day, the Shadows
naturally vanish and flee away; as this faithful Minister of Christ was
Witness, with many more of his Brethren, who were and are Partakers of the
inward and spiritual Revelation of the Mystery of Christ, and of the Glory of
his Day.

And as this Gospel-Minister did see and partake of the enduring Substance, and
End of all vanishing Shadows, and carnal Ordinances; he well knew, that neither
John's Baptism with Water, nor any outward Washings therewith (though once
commanded) could ever sanctify or wash the Inside from Siri and Pollution, or
sprinkle and purify the Conscience, or make a true Christian; much less can
Sprinkling Infan's which God never commanded: But Christ's spiritual Baptism,
and Washing of Regeneration by the Water of Life, which is the One Baptisin, i.
e. the Baptism of the Spirit; this is the only saving Baptism, as our said
deceased Brother has testified, according to Holy Scripture.

He also likewise testified, that outward Bread and Wine cannot feed nor
nourish the immortal Soul, or inward Man (any more than the legal Passover) but
only the Body, or outward Man: But Christ, the Living Bread, the Bread of Life,
which comes down from Heaven; and the Cup of Blessing, which he gives to his
spiritual Communicants; He being that spiritual Meat and Drink, which all His
spiritual Israel partake of in this his Gospel Day, to their great Refreshment
and Comfort, in the spiritual Communion, and comfortable Fellowship of his Holy
Spirit. And this our dear Friend ^ Ministry tended to bring People that they
might not live in outward Shadows, but come to know and inherit Eternal Life
and Substance in Christ Jesus, which all that truly love Him shall partake of,
and possess.

And I am fully persuaded, That as this our dear and well-beloved Friend and
Brother, R. D. lived and died in the Faith, in our Blessed Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, and in true Union and Communion with His Church and People here
on Earth, so I believe he is eternally blessed, and at rest in His heavenly
Kingdom; where all the Faithful in Christ shall meet in the great and general
Assembly of Christ's triumphant Church, and enjoy glorious and everlasting
Communion in the heavenly Kingdom of Glory and Peace; which shall be the
blessed Estate and Inheritance of all who continue faithful, in true Love and
Unity, in the Grace of God, while here on Earth, unto the End of their Days.

G. W.
LONDON, the 10th of 12th Mon. 1709-10.
A short Testimony concerning my dear and loving Father, Richard Davies, whom
God, in his Mercy, took to Himself, the 22d Day of the First Month, 1707-8. He
being about 72 Years, and Eleven Months old.
I Can truly say, he was a dear and tender Father to me, in my young Years; and
as I grew up, I had a Sense of his great Love and Care over me, and it seized
my Heart, so that I often prayed to God that he would keep me from offending so
good a Father. And when I was capable of traveling with him, he usually took
me along with him, in his Journeys to London, and elsewhere: Many were the good
Opportunities we had in traveling together, and visiting Friends at their
Meetings.

And as his Care was to me, so was it over mine also, which makes our Loss the
greater; but I am satisfied it is his great Gain. Oh! how often and fervent
would be pray to the Almighty, that his Children might become the Children of
the Lord, and that he might keep us from the Allurements and Defilements of
this wicked World: And we hope the Lord will answer his Petitions on our Behalf.

My dear Father was serviceable to most Sorts of People, rich and poor, in the
Country where he lived, and in other ^laces. He was ready to give his Advice
and Counsel freely, both in Things relating to the Law, or the Gospel; and he
had much Place and Interest with several great Persons, and what he requested
of them, was generally granted him. And I may say it to the Praise of the Lord,
he was well respected by most Sorts of People, and the Loss of him is known
amongst them?

He was very ready to serve the Widow and Fatherless, in what lay in his Power;
and many were his Labors, and Travels of Love: But now he is ceased from them
all, and I question not but he is gone to his Eternal Rest with God for ever.
It is my Desire, that we may prize the great Goodness and Loving Kindness of
the Lord, in sparing of him so long unto us, for he had been but a weakly Man
of Body these late Years.

About the 10th Month, 1688, my dear Father was sick and weak, so that most
that saw him, thought he would not recover: But the Lord in his tender Mercy
ordered our dear Friend Robert Barrow and Robert Haydock to come into these
Parts to visit Friends, and they came to our House at Welsh-Pool, and they had
a Meeting there; and as they were parting with my Father, they had it in their
Hearts to pray, and they earnestly interceded with the Lord, That is might
stand good with His Will, to spare him again unto us; for we were then a
sorrowful Family. Afterward. I remember very well, dear Robert Barrow spoke,
and said to my Father, Dear Richard, thou art a very weak Man, in the Sight of
those that see thee, and not likely to live many Hours, as to she natural Man's
thinking; but the Lord has given it me at this Time to believe, I shall see
thee at our next Yearly Meeting at London. When I heard these Words, it was
joyful News to me, and it proved very true, the Lord in his wonderful Mercy,
and Loving kindness, restored him to his Health, and next Spring He went to the
Yearly Meeting at London, where also dear Robert Barrow was, and glad to see my
Father there. This was all the Lord's Doings and His Works they are marvelous
in our Eyes.

Much might be said; but my Desire is, that as our ancient Friends, Fathers and
Mothers in Israel, have bore the Burden in the Heat of the Day (through many
Tribulations and Afflictions, and now have rested from their Labors, and their
Works follow them, and their Memorial is blessed for evermore) so that we also
who are lest, may walk in the Footsteps of the Flock, and tread in the Path
they have trod in. It is, as to the outward, an easy Way now to what our
Ancients had; but the Enemy and Adversary of our immortal Souls is the same,
and he is unwearied; therefore we ought to be very careful, and double our
Diligence, to be sober and watchful, and cry incessantly to the Lord God of our
Fathers, that he may be our God, and enable us to walk worthy of all His
Mercies and Blessings, every Way, for they are many.

And now I shall give some Account of my dear Father's Departure. He was taken
ill on the 6th Day of the Week, being the 19th of the First Month, 1707-8. On
the First Day following, he sent for some Friends of Dolobran Meeting, and
several of them came to him, and had a Meeting with him in his Bedchamber; he
desired Friends to pray to the Lord, That he might have an easy Passage;
adding, That the fervent Prayers of the Righteous, the Lord would have a Regard
unto. And his Time being come, he departed this Life, as it were in a Sleep;
and so, as he has often said, he went to sleep his long Sleep, it being about
the 9th Hour in the Forenoon, the 22d of First Month, 1707-8. And on the 25th
following his Body was accompanied with a considerable Number of Friends and
People to the Burying-place, near his own House at Cloddiecochion, and there
decently interred.

And now it is my Desire, that all of us who have had such good Examples by our
Parents, may follow them in Purity and Holiness; so that we may be such good
Patterns to our Offspring, that when we lay down our Heads, and leave this
natural Life, they may have cause to praise and glorify the Lord on our
Account, as many of us can say we have had for our worthy Parents that are
gone. And if we continue in well doing, and in the Fear of the Lord, there is
no Question but we shall die in his Favor, which I desire may be the Lot of
the whole Heritage of God.

TACE ENDON.
CIODIECOCHION, the 27th of the First Mo. 1708.
A Testimony from Friends and Brethren of the Quarterly Meeting for
Montgomeryshire, Shropshire and Merionethshire, held at Dolobran, in
Montgomeryshire, the 25th of the 11 th Mon. 1708-9. concerning our ancient,
honorable Friend and Elder, Richard Davies.
HE was one of the first of Friends in these Parts, who received the blessed
Truth in the Love (...) it; and he labored much in the Morning and Heat of the
Day.

He and his Wife were very hearty, lowing, and ready to entertain Friends,
their Hearts and House being very open in that respect; and they were very
helpful and serviceable to Friends in this Country, who were Prisoners on
Truth's Account in Welsh-pool (the Place where they then lived) when there were
but few other Friends of Ability to assist them, until the Lord raised up
several other eminent Instruments in these Parts, who were serviceable with
them.

Our said Friend was a wise and prudent Man; he had a good Understanding and
Capacity, and was a Man of great Experience; and he was very willing to advise
and counsel any in Things relating to the Gospel and outward Affairs.

And as he was discreet in his Conduct among Men, the Lord gave him great Place
and Favor with several Persons of Note, with whom he had often good Service
for Truth and Friends.

The Lord blessed him with a good Gift in the Ministry, and he was made an able
Minister of the Gospel, sound in Judgment, and well received by most People who
heard him.

He traveled pretty much in diverse Parts on Truth's Service, especially in his
younger Years, and had good Service in many Places where his Lot was cast, both
at Home and Abroad; he was often at London, where he was well esteemed by many
of our Elders and Brethren.

He lived to a good old Age, and was favored with a short Sickness at last.
Some of us were with him the Day before his Departure; and he seemed sensible
that his End was near approaching, and he appeared as one that was waiting for
the same. He departed this Life the 22d of the 1st Mon. 1707-8. in the 73d Year
of his Age; and we believe he is at Rest with the Lord, together with many more
of the faithful Followers of the Lamb.

We shall not enlarge much further, but refer to the ensuing Account of his
Labors, Travels and Services, for Truth and Friends, on several Occasions,
which contains a general Relation of the most remarkable Occurrences and
Passages of Life, which was written by himself, not long before his Decease.

And we earnestly desire, that all who make Profession of the glorious Truth
with us, may really know a working out of their alvation with Fear and
Trembling; and that they may faithfully improve their Talents in their Age and
Time, and truly follow the Examples of the faithful Elders and Servants of the
Lord, in all Things wherein they followed Christ; That we may give our Account
at last with Joy, and receive an eternal Reward, with the faithful Children of
the Lord, when Time in this World to us will be no more.

So, Blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord, from henceforth; yea, says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them,
Rev. xiv. 13.

Signed on Behalf of the said Meeting, by us, Charles Lloyd, Owen Roberts,
Rowland Owen, William Reynolds, Robert Vaughan, Humphrey Owen, Robert
Griffithes, Jacob Endon, John Simpson, Owen Lewis, Tho. Cadwalader, Richard
Lewis, John Richards, Ellis Lewis, William Osborn, Thomas Oliver, Joseph
Davies, Richard Evans, Edward Ellis, William Soley, Richard Bembow, Griffith
Owen, Richard Reuff, John Roberts, Julius Palmer, John Kelsall, Amos Davies.


The Testimony of Rowland Owen, concerning his dear Friend Richard Davies, of
Cloddiecochion, lately deceased.
A Weighty Consideration came upon my Mind, in a Sense how the Almighty God, in
his unspeakable and unsearchable Wisdom, who discerns the States and
Conditions of the Sons and Daughters of Men, making Choice of some, and calls
them from among their Neighbors and Relations, to be serviceable unto him;
amongst whom our dear Friend RICHARD DAVIES was called early, in the Day of
God's Visitation to serve him, and he gave up in Obedience to the Lord, and
took up the Cross in a Time of great Persecution, etc.

The Lord made him willing and obedient, in those Days, to go abroad with a
Public Testimony for the Truth, and moved him to come to our County of
MERIONETHSHIRE, when some of us were very young in Years; and it pleased the
Lord to make him instrumental in his Hand to bring Glad-tidings to our Ears,
and his Testimony was sweet and comfortable, to the edifying and tendering of
our Hearts and Souls. Many of us loved him exceedingly, and that Love remained
between him and us till the End of his Days: He was tender and careful over us,
and a Nourisher and Strengthener of some of us in our spiritual, Exercises, and
was ready to asist the Weak and Feeble, and willing to give a helping Hand,
Counsel and Admonition to Friends and others, that had any Desires to serve the
Lord.

O the wonderful Wisdom and Love of God! who called him, and many others in
those Days, and prepared and qualified them for the great Work he had to do,
and strengthened them to tread the Way before us, that were weak and feeble: O
what strong, bold and valiant Instruments did the Lord God prepare to begin to
strike at the great Image of Pride, Haughtiness,, etc. that was then, and yet
is in the World! Indeed their Memorial is worthy to be recorded, that Ages yet
to come might see what the Lord has done for his faithful Ones, who gave up
their Lives, and all they had, on Truth's Account.

I was acquainted with our said Friend for about Forty Years, and I can say of
a Truth, That his Service was great in the Church of Christ, especially in
Times of Persecution; he having much Interest with the Magistrates, and them in
Authority in those Days. And his House was very open to entertain Friends to
the utmost of his Ability; and the Lord blessed him.

The Lord out of his Treasure of Grace, eminently endued him, to hear a sound
and seasonable Testimony, when great Assemblies and Multitudes of People were
gathered together; and he had a skilful Hand to administer unto them the Way of
Truth, and to open it to their Understandings; which many Times gave them great
Satisfaction, and they were made to speak well of Truth and its Followers. O
the deep Sense that remains upon me, of the great Want we have of the Service
of such as he was! The Lord, who in his Mercy, qualified and sitted him, is
able to prepare and raise up other faithful Laborers.

It affects me, when I remember his Gravity and gray Hairs, his manly Presence,
and lovely Countenance, especially when he stood up in a Meeting: Now he has
finished his Course, and, I believe, has done his Day's Work, and is gone to
his Eternal Rest.

Much more might be said on his Behalf, but I desire that none may mistake me,
I am not giving Honor to Man, that is but Dust and Ashes; but that all might
see how the Almighty God does bestow his spiritual Gifts upon those whom he
requires Service at their Hands. And it is our Duty, as out Savior Jesus
Christ advised his beloved Disciples, "To pray to the Lord of the Harvest
(which Harvest is great) that he would send forth more faithful Laborers into
his Harvest," that Mankind might be gathered into the inward Possession and
Substance of Christianity, which many outwardly profess; that the God of all
our Mercies, and his beloved Son Jesus Christ, may have all the Glory and
Thanksgiving, to whom it belongs, not only now, but henceforth for ever, and
for evermore, AMEN.

Rowland Owen.

An Account of the Convincement, Exercises, Services and Travels of that
Ancient Servant of the Lord, Richard Davies.
I Was born in the Year 1635, in the Town of Welch-pool, in Montgomeryshire, in
North Wales, of honest Parents, that had a small Estate there: I was brought up
in a little Learning and in the Religion and Discipline of the Church of
England. When I came to be about Twelve or Thirteen Years of Age, the Lord put
his Fear in my Heart, that I came to a Consideration, if I should die, what
would become of my Soul, if I lived after the Way that some of my Companions
did, and it came into my Heart to leave them; and I was inclined to go and hear
Sermons, and followed the best of those Sort of People that I did believe did
fear the Lord, which I then thought were the Independent People, especially one
Vavasor Powel, who was a zealous Man in his Day and Time; he tock much Pains
and Labor to gather a People into that Persuasion; and many where gathered in
these Parts to that Way; and I follow-them from one Parish to another, and from
one Meeting to another, writing their Sermons, and in Time I came to repeat
them to the People; and there, being exercised in the Historical Part of the
scriptures, I could speak and talk of them, so that those People came to speak
well of me, and this did not a lit (...) puff me up; so that I was not so
serious as I should have been to get Eternal Life by Christ Jesus, who is tho
Life himself, who said to the Jews, John v. 39, 40. Search (or ye search) the
Scriptures, for in them ye think to have Eternal Life, and they are they which
testify of me: And ye will not come to me that ye might have life.

We were diligent in Searching the Scriptures, which was good in its Place; but
the main Matter and Substance of pure Religion, is the Enjoyment of Eternal
Life to the Soul from Christ.

About the Fourteenth Year of my Age, my Father intended to put me an
Apprentice to a Shopkeeper, where I was for a Trial: But I saw that the
Conversation of my intended Master was not right, and that the Fear of the Lord
was not there; I was afraid that if I should continue there, that the little
Love and Zeal I had to God, and Goodness, would be choked and quenched in me,
and the Love and Pleasure of the World would get up again, so I should be in
Danger of growing worse than ever; and being under these serious
Considerations, I heartily prayed to God with Tenderness and Tears, what he put
in my Heart to pray for, viz. That I might be delivered from that Place where I
was intended to be bound an Apprentice, and that I might spend my Time with and
among them that feared the Lord, and though it upon his Name; and the Lord heard my
Players, and in a little Time I was sent for away from that Place.

After this I staid at Home some Time, and continued in that little Well-doing
I had known, keeping Company with sober and honest People; I delighted to read
the Scriptures and to go to the Independent Meetings. And after some Time. I
heard of a Man that professed the same Religion, who was very zealous for a
Time in going to Meetings, and performing that which we call Family Duties, and
there (with the Consent of my Parents) I bound myself an Apprentice to him,
whose Name was Evan Jones, a Feltmaker, in the Parish of Lanfair, in
Montgomeryshire; and we went together to Meetings, I writing and repeating
Sormons, and performing that Custom that was among us, in Praying in our own
Will and Time, till we were become so dead and formal, carnal airy, and many
loose Words and Action growing up amongst us, that I was gone out of Conceit
with myself, and our formal Religion; there being something in me that reproved
me for my Vanity; and when I arose from my Prayers, being sometime in a weighty
ponderous Condition, I saw that there was something that gave me no true Peace
nor Comfort in wardly to my Soul, because there remained a secret Pride and
Self-exaltation in most if not all our formal Performances.

In this State and Condition, I knew not what to do; when neither Writing,
Repeating Sermons, Reading of the Scriptures, and other good Books, and
sometimes Expounding of them, to the best of my Understanding afforded me any
Comfort, I was at a Loss, and knew not what Way to take, that I might have
Peace and Comfort in my Performances. Hitherto I knew not the Holy Spirit of
the Lord (as I ought to have done) to be my Leader and Guider into all Things
that were necessary to my Eternal Salvation.

Upon a certain Time we had a Meeting at one Hugh David's, a Tenant of Charles
Lloyd's of Dolobran, where one of our Independent Teachers (who was a great
Scripturian) was Preaching, and I writ after him, and in his Sermon he said,
The Time would come, that there would be no need of the Scripture any more than
another Book: At which I very much slumbled; and after the Meeting I asked him,
when would that Time be? He said, when the Lord would make a New Covenant with
his People, as is said in Jeremiah xxxi. 33, 34. I will make a new Covenant
with the House of Israel, after those Days, faith the Lord, I will put my Law
in their inward Parts, and write is in their Hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my People. And they shall teach no more every Man his Neighbor,
and every Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me,
from the least of them to the greatest of them faith the Lord; for I will
forgive their Iniquity, and I will remember their Sin no more. It seems that he
knew not that Day come then, though he was a great Preacher. I thought it would
then be a happy Day, when God would be the Teacher of his People himself; that
we need not teach every Man his Neighbor, or his Brother, saying, Know ye the
Lord; but that we should all know Him, from the least to the greatest: This Day
we knew not then, for all our Preaching and long Prayers; though the Lord did
then beget true Hung'rings and Thirstings in our Souls after him: We had great
Love and Zeal, and desired the Knowledge of the Truth, as it was in Jesus.
Sometime I have said, This was but like Jacob's Dream, when he awoke, he said,
Surely the Lord is in this Place, and I knew it not. And indeed we knew not the
Lord as we ought to have done; namely, by his Light, Grace and Spirit shining
in our Hearts, to give us the Light of the Knowledge of the Son of God, which
Knowledge keeps a Man meek and humble, and such are not puffed up in a vain
Mind, to seek after those Things that are too high for them, as too many are
climbing up that Way, which is not the Way to God the Father; the Way to the
Father, is the Way of Holiness and Purity, and Humility, without which no Man
shall see the Lord, nor enjoy his Presence to their Comfort.

About this Time, being in the Year 1656. our Ministers told us, That there was
a Sort of People come up in the North, called Quakers, that were a People of a
strange Posture and Principles, saying that it was the last Days and Times,
that Christ spoke of in the 24th of Matthew, Many shall come in my Name, and
deceive many ( v. 5.) For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophers,
and shall show great Signs and Wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible)
they shall deceive the very Elect. This Sort of People called Quakers were much
preached against. They told us, they were the false Prophets, etc. that they
denied the Scriptures, and all Ordinances, and also denied the very Christ that
bought them; they were represented to us to be such a dangerous Sort of People,
that we were afraid of any who had the Name of a Quaker, lest we should be
deceived by them: Hitherto they had not been in these Parts of the Country,
neither did we know what were their Principles held out by themselves; but only
such as were reported (though falsely) unto us by our Preachers and others, which
kept us in Blindness, and from making further Inquiry, and "trying all Things,
and holding fast that which is good," according to the Apostles Advice, 1 Tb.
v. 21.

Now about the Year 1657, there came a poor Man in a mean Habit to my Master's
House, named Morgan Evan, of South Wales, he had met with the People called
Quakers in his Travels, and was convinced of the Truth. This poor Man
discoursed with my Master about the Principles of Truth, and I being in the
Shop about my Calling, my Mistress came and said, Why do you not go out to help
your Master; for there is a Quaker at the Door that has put him to Silence? I
hearing this, made haste, and took my Bible under m^ (...) and put on what
Courage I could to dispute with that poor Man; but he proved too hard for us
(...) went to them they were (...) Thee and Thou; (...) rily asked him (...)
Day, we must have a (...) To which he answered, Hold fast the ^orm of sound
Words, which thou have heard of me. I asked him, Whether that was Scripture? He
asked me, Whether I would deny it? I told him, he was to prove it. Then he took
the Bible out of my Hand, and he turned to 2 Timothy i. 13. which he read, and
told me, that Hold fast there, was a Command; which I knew very well, both the
Scripture and the Command: But to prove him Further, I desired him to read a
little more of that Chapter, both backward and forward, which he freely did,
and asked me, Why I did require that of him? I told him, that we heard the
Quakers denied the Scriptures, and that they would not read them. He said,
There were many false Reports of them. And truly when he read the Scripture to
rea (...) in myself, that what (...) them, was not true; (...) reached to the
(...) every Man that comes into the World; and in that Light, I should see
more Light, and that would open the Scriptures to me, and that I should receive
a Measure of the same Spirit that gave them forth: And further, he told me, It
was the more sure Word of Prophecy, unto which I did well, if I took head as
unto a Light that shines in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star
arise in your Hearts, 2 Peter i. 19. And he spoke much of the inward Work, and
the Operation of God's Holy Spirit upon the Soul; recommending me to the Grace
of God that brings Salvation, teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
World. Titus ii. 11, 12. And so he departed from our House, and I set him a
little along on his Way.

Now when I came back from him, the Consideration of his Words took fast hold
on me, that I could not go from under them; and the more I waited in that
Light, that he recommended me to, the more my former Peace, and that in which I
formerly took Comfort in, was broken: And herein I came to see, that our former
Building could not stand; for we built upon that which the Apostle called,
Wood, Hay and Stubble. Here I came to a Loss of all my formal Knowledge and my
formal Performances proved but a sandy Foundation. Then I did, with much
Humility, and Poverty of Spirit, beg of Almighty God, that I might build upon
that Rock, that the true Church of Christ was built upon, that the Gates of
Hell might not prevail against me.

But for all this, I was yet afraid of being deceived by the Quakers; yet where
to go outwardly for Advice and Counsel I knew not. For I saw that my former
Teachers were upon a sandy Foundation: So I desired that the God of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, would be my Teacher and be fulfilled, and I believed that the
Prophecy of the Prophets would be sulfilled, and that the Lord would make a New
Covenant with his People now, as he did Promise by the Mouth of we Prophet
Jerem. xxxi. 31.32, 33, 34. Behold, the Days come, says the Lord, that I will
make a New Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah; not
according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers in the Day that I took
them by the Hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt (which my Covenant they
brake, although I was an Husband unto them, says the Lord) But this shall be
the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel, after those Days, says
the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward Parts, and write it in their
Hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my People. And they snall
teach no more every Man his Neighbor, and every Man his Brother, saying, Know
ye the Lord: For they shall all know me from the least of them, unto the
greatest of them, says the Lord: For I will forgive their Iniquity, and I will
remember their Sin no more.

These and the like precious Promises I was made willing to take hold upon, and
waited for the fulfilling of them in myself, and of that which Christ said to
the Jews, John vi. 45. As it is written in the Prophets, And they shall be all
taught of God. Every Man therefore that has heard, and has learned of the
Father, comes unto me. He that comes unto Christ Jesus the Light, that
lights every Man that comes into the World; though their Sins and their
Iniquities be great, they shall in no wise be cast out. And it is said, And all
thy Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the Peace of thy
Children, Isaiah live. 13.

When I came to know a little of the Teachings of the Lord, I took my Leave of
all my formal Teachers, and many Times went to the Woods, and other By-places,
where none might see me, to wait upon the Lord, where I should be much broken,
and tendered by the Power of God: And though I did begin to see a little of
myself, and something of the Goodness of God, yet still I was afraid of being
deceived; for I had read and heard that Satan himself is "transformed into an
Angel of Light, 2 Cor. xi. 14. And lest this Man should be as the same Apostle
said, in Verse 13. For such are false Apostles, deceitful Workers, transforming
themselves into Apostles of Christ. I desired of the Lord that I might see this
poor Man once again, for I knew not where to see the Face of any called a
Friend; and it pleased God that he came again that Way, and I desired of my
Master and Mistress to give him Lodging, and that he might be with me, to which
they consented. Then I queried of him their Way of Worship, and concerning
those two great Ordinances (so called) that we so much relied upon, viz. the
Bread and Wine, and Baptism and the Scripture, to know what was their Judgment
of them, to which he gave me some Satisfaction: And in the Morning I parted
with him, and to the best of my Knowledge, I saw him no more for several Years.

In all this Time I still kept my Retirement in the Wood, or some other private
Place; and there in my waiting, I desired of the Lord, that I might be further
satisfied by myself, as to those Things, First, whether the Scriptures were the
Word of God, as was said and preached unto us they were, and the Way to Life
and Salvation: Then the First Chapter of John came under my serious
Consideration in my Meditation, which said, In the Beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, and the Word was God, the same was in the Beginning with
God, all Things were made by him, and without him was not any Thing made, that
was made. In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men; and the Light
shines in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended it not. I considered that
the Word was in the Beginning with God the Father, and that no Part of the
Scriptures were written until Moses, who we understand was the first Writer of
those Scriptures we have, the Apostle tells us here, that the Law was given by
Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. In this Word there was Life,
Paul tells us that "the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life, now this
Life is the Light of Men, and the Word was before the Scriptures were written."
By this we may see the Word of God is Christ Jesus, that was with the Father
before the World began, "without Him there was not any Thing made, that was
made." The History that Moses gives us, is said to be written above 3000 Years
after the Creation of the World. Therefore the Scriptures cannot properly be
the Word of God.

(...) with many more, was under that Mistake, that the Jews were in, who
thought they might have Eternal Life In the Scriptures, Christ says, John v.
39. Search (or ye search) the Scriptures, for in them you think ye have Eternal
Life, and they are they which testify of me; and ye will not come to me that ye
might have Life. As he is the Life, so he is the Way to the Father, I am the
Way, and the Truth, and the Life: No Man comes unto the Father but by me, John
xiv. 6. As for the Scriptures I was a great Lover, and a great Reader of them,
and took great Pleasure in Searching of them, thinking that they would make me
wise unto Salvation, as Paul said to Timothy, And that from a Child thou have
known the Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation, through
Faith which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy iii. ^5. This main Thing was wanting;
the true and saving Faith, that is the Gift of God. It is by Grace we are
saved, through Faith, not of ourselves, it is the Gift of God, Ephesians. ii. 8. So it
is the Grace of God that brings Salvation, and not the bare historical
Knowledge of the Scriptures. Too many take a great deal of Pride in a literal
Knowledge of them; some for their Gain and Profit, others take Pleasure in
them, by wresting them to vindicate their false and erroneous Opinions, that
gender to Strife and Contention, and take little or no Notice of that meek,
holy, lovely Spirit of Life, that gave them forth; for they be of no private
Interpretation: But holy Men of God, spoke them as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, 2 Peter i. 20, 21.

Men may have a great literal Knowledge of the Scriptures, and yet remain in
Error, because they know them not, as they ought to do, nor the Power that was
in the holy Men that gave them forth, so I may say as Christ said to the Jews,
You err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God, Mat xxii. 29. So
that which gives the true Knowledge of God, and a right Understanding of the
Scriptures, is the Spirit of God; and I may say with the Apostle, For God who
commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to
give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Christ
Jesus, 2 Cor. iv. 6. And as Men and Women come to mind this Light, that is, the
Spirit of God, and to obey it, they shall come to the Comfort of the
Scriptures, as the same Apostle says, For whatsoever things were written
aforetime, were written for our Learning; that we through Patience and Comfort
of the Scriptures, might have Hope, Romans xv. 4.

And being under a serious Consideration of what I read in the Scripture,
believing the Spirit of the Lord to be the Interpreter thereof. Those great
Mysteries that were hid from Ages and Generations, and are hid now in this our
Age from many, are come to be revealed by the Spirit of God, and if any would
have Comfort in Reading the Scriptures, they must wait in that Measure of the
Spirit, which God has given them, which is the only Key that opens them to the
Understanding of those that are truly conscientious in the Reading of them; and
though I read them formally, as many do now, without a true Sense and a due
Consideration; yet now I can bless God for them, and have great Comfort in the
Reading of them; they being no more as a sealed Book unto me, and many more,
who wait for the Assistance of God's Holy Spirit, in all their Duties and
Performances that the Lord requires of them; for without him we know we can do
nothing that is pleasing unto him; though formerly we ran in our own Time and
Wills, to Preach and Pray, not having a due Regard to the Leading and Moving of
the Spirit of the Lord; yet, I beless God, it is not so now. Many Times, when I
did rise from my Knees, in a formal Way of Prayer, a Reproof was very near me,
"Who required this at thy Hands? It is a Spark of thy own kindling." I was
afraid that I should lie down in Sorrow, as was said to some by the Lord, in
Isaiah l. 11.

But as to this Head, I shall briefly conclude, though much more might be said to
the Honor of the Holy Scriptures; but this is my Desire, that they that read
them, may come to that which will give them a right Understanding, thereof: For
there is a Spirit in Man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives them
Understanding, Job xxxii. 8.

Then, as concerning Water Baptism, which I had under Consideration, I was no
Admirer of it, being not of the Persuasion of Re-baptizing: Those that were
Independents, were not so much at first for Re-baptizing; but afterward it
prevailed more among them, in these Parts, when one Henry Jessy came
here-aways. And about that Time it was that I came from among them.

I had much Reasoning and various Consultations in my Mind concerning this and
the Bread and Wine: And when I was satisfied, as to them weighty Concerns, I
thought I might rest there, and keep my old Customs and Fashions, and Language:
But that would not do, I had no Peace therein; God showed me the Customs of the
Nation were vain, and our Language not according to the Language of God's
People, recorded in the Scriptures of Truth. So I made a conscientious Search
into this Matter also. -- Where I found the Great Creator of Heaven and Earth,
who by the Word of his Power made all Things therein; Created Man in his own
Image, in the Image of God created he him: Male and Female created he them. And
God blessed them, and gave them Dominion over all Things that he had created on
the Earth: and Adam gave Names to them. And God took him, and put him in the
Garden of Eden, to dress it, and to keep it. And the Lord commanded the Man,
saying, Of every Tree of the Garden thou may freely eat, Genesis ii. 15, 16.
This is the first Thou to Man, that I read of in the Scripture; and the Great
Creator said, "Every Thing that he had made was very good," Genesis i. 31. And
his, Language to Man was very good and pure. Then again, when Adam transgressed
the Law and Commandment of God, The Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto
him, Where art thou? And he said, I heard thy Voice in the Garden, and I was
afraid, because I was naked, Genesis iii. 9, 10. Here was the Language of God to
Man, and the Language of Man to God. And in the Searching of the Scriptures, I
found that all the holy Men of God used that Language, and Christ taught his
Disciples to pray in that Language; Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be
thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, Matt.
vi. And withal, I knew a little of Grammar, and that it was improper to say Vos
[You] to one single Person, instead of Tu [Thou.] And though the Learned in our
Nation spoke it, yet I thought Christians should not use it, but should take
the Spirit of God, according to the Scripture, to be their Rule, and not to
follow the confused Language of the Heathen; for the Lord, by the Mouth of his
Prophet, commanded his People, Learn not the Way of the Heathen; for the
Customs of the People are vain, Jer. x. 2, 3. I also believed, that the Lord
would return to his People a pure Language, in these Days, as was promised in
the Days of old concerning Israel: That when they returned to the Lord, he
would bring them out of their Captivity; For then, [saith the Lord.] will I
turn to the People a pure Language, that they may all call upon the Name of the
Lord, to serve Him with one Consent, Zeph. iii. 9.

Thus I was conscienciously concerned to speak the pure Language of Thee and
Thou to every one, without Respect of Persons; which was a great Cross to me,
though it seems to some but as a weak and foolish Thing; yet when the Lord lays
a Necessity of speaking the Truth to all, in that Language that God and all his
Servants used, it comes to be of a greater Weight, than many light airy People
think it is: The Sayings of Christ came to my Mind, when he said, Whosoever
will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross daily, and
follow me, Lu. ix. 23. He does not say he should do it, but let him do it,
imperatively, which was a Command; viz. That we should Deny our selves, and
follow Him: See also Matt. xvi. 24. And moreover it is said, "He that takes
not his Cross, and follows after me, is not worthy of me," Matt. x. 38.

This Necessity being laid upon me, I spoke to my Master in that Dialect; he
was not offended at it, because he was convinced of the Truth of it, and that
it ought to be spoken to every one; but when I gave it to my Mistress, she took
a Stick and gave me such a Blow upon my bare Head, that made it swell, and it
was sore for a considerable Time, she was so disturbed at it, that she swore
she would kill me, though she should be hanged for me; the Enemy had so
possessed her, that she was quite out of Order; though before time she very
seldom, if ever, gave me an angry Word: But I considered, that the Enmity was
between the two Seeds, and that that which is born after the Flesh, did
persecute him that was born after the Spirit. I being well satisfied of the
Truth in myself, remembered Christ's Words, He that loves Father or Mother more
than me, is not worthy of me; and he that loves Son or Daughter more than me,
is not worthy of me and he that finds his Life, shall lose it; and he that
loses his Life for my Sake, shall find it, Matt. x. 37, 39.

The Almighty God put it in my Heart to consider the Cost, and that through
Tribulation I was to enter the Kingdom of Heaven; and I was faithful in this
Testimony that I had to bear; I was much encouraged to go on in that strait and
narrow Way, that God showed me I was to walk in. I also considered the Saying
of Christ, Whosoever does not bear his Cross, and come after him, cannot be his
Disciple, Luke xiv. 27. Again, Which of you intending to build a Tower, sits
not down first, and counts the Cost whether he has sufficient to finish it?
Lest happily after he has laid the Foundation, and is not able to finish it, all
that behold it, begin to mock him, Ibid. V. 28, 29. saying, This Man began to
build, but was not able to finish, v. 3^

This Consideration was weighty with me, lest I should begin to take up the
Cross, and to Walk in this Way, and should not be able to hold out to the lead;
first, because of the Temptation of Satan, the Lust of the Flesh, and the
sinful Customs and Fashions of this World, which were very prevalent; and the
Weight and Burden that was upon me was great, having none in the Country to be
a Help to me in the time of my Exercise, but the Lord alone, that has promised
to be with his People in all their Troubles and Exercises, and that he would
not leave them nor forsake them. I was very ready and willing to take hold of
his Promises; and my Prayers unto him were, That he would enable me to go
through all Things that he required. I was sensible; that without the
Assistance of his Holy Spirit, I could not perform that Service which he
required of me.

I was now first called a Quaker, because I said to a single Person Thee and
Thou, and kept on my Hat, and did not go after the Customs and Fashions of the
World, that other Professors lived and walked in. Though some of them would
complain of their Formalities, and were weary of the Fashions of the World; but
yet they did not take up their Cross, and leave them.

The Rage of my Mistress was not yet abated, though she had nothing against me,
but not conforming to the corrupt Language, and vain Customs of the World: For
I labored to keep a Conscience void of Offense, both toward God and Men; I
did my Work and Service honestly and justly, not with Eye-service, as
Men-pleasers, but in Singleness of Heart, as the Servant of Christ, doing the
Will of God from the Heart, Ephesians. vi. 5, 6, and ver. 8. Knowing that
whatsoever good thing any Man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord,
whether he be Bond or Free.

In thus doing, I had great Comfort from the Lord, and did receive from him
living Satisfaction and Encouragement, to go on in my Way; remembering that
Scripture, that says, The Righteous shall hold on his Way, and he that has
clean Hands, shall be stronger and stronger, Job xvii. 9. I might say also with
Job, But he knows the Way that I take, when he has tried me, I shall come
forth as Gold; my Foot has held his Steps; his Way have I kept, and not
declined; neither have I gone back from the Commandment of his Lips: I have
esteemed the Words of his Mouth more than my necessary Food, Job xxiii. 10, 11,
12. The Lord kept me and his People very meek and low in our Minds, in a self
denying Spirit, we waited for the Living Word, that came with a living Voice
from Him that speaks from Heaven to us by His Spirit, that He gave us to
discern between the Voice of Wisdom, and the Voice of the strange Woman, which
is the Voice of the Flesh, and the Lust thereof; and the Living Voice, is the
Voice of Christ in us, the Hope of Glory; which Voice we esteemed more than our
necessary Food. For, obeying this Voice, we came to be mocked and derided; and
they spoke all Manner of Evil against us, and hated us for his Name's Sake,
Mat. x. 22. I remembered what Christ has told us in Luke xxi. 12. They shall
lay their Hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the Synagogues,
and into Prisons, being brought before Kings and Rulers for my Name's Sake: And
it shall return to you for a Testimony. Settle it therefore in your Hearts, not
to meditate before what ye shall answer; for I will give you a Mouth and
Wisdom, which all your Adversaries shall not be able to gainsay, nor resist,
Luke xxi. 13. 14. 15.

These and the like Afflictions I was to meet with, if I truly and faithfully
followed the Lord Jesus Christ; therefore I labored to put on the whole Armor
of Light, that I might be able to withstand the fiery Darts of the Wicked One
whether in myself or by seeking to weaken my Faith, and to persuade me of the
Hardness, Streightness and Narrowness of the Way, that I should not be able to
hold out to the End, being there was not any in this Country to help and assist
me; and the fiery Darts of the Enemy that I felt, came more by his Servants
than otherwise; very prevalent he was in this poor misled Woman, my Mistress,
who was persuaded by him to kill me, and shed innocent Blood; and one Time when
she thought it a fit Opportunity, to execute her Will and Cruelty, she fell
into a great Rage, and I was freely given up to die that Hour by her; but the
Lord was pleased to accept of my Free Will Offering, and I might say with the
Apostle, that I accounted not my Life dear to myself, that I might finish my
Course with Joy. And the Lord alone appeared for my Deliverance, and made her
more moderate, the rest of my Servitude, it being something less than two
Years; and (...) I went away, the Lord visited her with a sharp Fit of
Sickness; in which Time she spoke to her Husband and them that were with her,
that she thought she should not die till she had asked me Forgiveness, and
desired them to send to me, if it were at London; and so they did: I could
freely forgive her, for that I had done long since; and I prayed to my heavenly
Father that he might forgive her also: I sent to her, and it pleased God to
touch her with a Sense of his Love, and lengthened her Days; she confessing
oftentimes the Wrong she had done to an honest, careful Young Man; as she said
I had been, who minded her and her Husband's inward and outward Good, more than
they did themselves: It pleased God to order it so, that she had a Visit from
me, before she went out of this World, and very comfortable and acceptable it
was to her; and in a little Time she ended her Days in Peace, and was buried in
Friends Burying-place near Dolgelle, in Merionethshire.

About this Time [1637.] it was the great Talk of the Country that I was become
a Quaker; my Parents were much concerned about me; I was informed that the
Priest of Welch-Pool, one W. Langford, went to them, and told them that I was
gone distracted, and that they should see for some learned Men; or Man, to come
to me, and restore me to my Senses. I had not been yet with my Father nor
Mother; but waited for Freedom and Clearness in myself, and then I went to see
them, and in my Way I visited an old Friend of mine, that was a Professor, and
had a little Opportunity to speak to him of the Things of God, and his Goodness
to me, and a young Man called David Davies was then convinced of the Truth;
this was on a Seventh-day in the Afternoon, and when I was clear there, I went
to Welch-Pool to my Parents. It was a Trouble to them, to see that I did not,
as formerly, go upon my Knees to ask their Blessing, and bow to them, and take
off my Hat, my Father soon turned his Back upon me; I had heard of his
Displeasure, and that he had said he would leave me Nothing, saying to my
Relations, that they thought to have had Comfort of me, but now they expected
none but that I would go up and down the Country, crying, Repent, Repent. Now
if my Father should have cast me off upon such an Account, I was well persuaded
it was for Christ's and the Gospel's Sake; so then I remembered David's
Condition, when he said, Hide not thy Face far from me, put not thy Servant
away in Anger: Thou have been my Help, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God
of my Salvation; when my Father and my Mother forsake me, then the Lord will
take me up: Teach me thy Way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain Path, because of
mine Enemies, Psalm xxvii. 9, 10, 11:

At length my Mother came tenderly to me, and took a View of me, looking on my
Face, and she saw that I was her Child, and that I was not as they said,
Bewitched, or Transformed into some other Likeness, which was reported of
Quakers then, and that they bewitched People to their Religion, etc. Thus they
deceived them and many others, with such strange Stories, and we were accounted
with the Apostles, Deceivers, yet true. And when I discoursed with her out of
the Scriptures, her Heart was much tendered and affected with the Goodness of
God toward me, she went to see for my Father, and when she found him, said
unto him, Be of good Comfort our Son is not as was reported of him, we hope to
have Comfort of him yet.

But when my Father came to his House he spoke not much to me that Night. The
next Day being the First Day of the week, when I heard the Bells sing, it came
upon me to go to the Steeple-House, to visit that Priest that had told my
Father I was gone distracted etc. and when he was at his Worship I wont to our
own Seat to my Father [there was no Common Prayer read then to the People, as
part of their Worship in those Days] there I sat still till he had ^one, and
when he had done what he had then to say, I stood up and told him, I ha^ he
might do well to stay, and make good the false Doctrine that he had preached
that Day, if he could, and if I was distracted, as he reported, that he might
Labor to restore me to my right Senses again, but spoke but a little while,
ever I was taken away to Prison, with the Young M^ before mentioned, that came
to see for me, and found me in the In which Tim^ God of us were taken; there we
were Prisoners that Night, in which time many far and near came to see us,
expecting that we were some deformed Creatures: In which Tim God gave me a
seasonable Exhortation to them, to fear the Lord, and indeed to cry Repent,
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven, was at Hand; letting them know that we were
God's Workmanship, created a new in Christ Jesus, with much more to that
Effect, I spoke to them from the Scripture, which was much to their
Satisfaction, and we praised God that kept us in his Fear and Counsel.

We were committed to Prison on that Law, that was made in Oliver's Days, that
none were to speak to the Priest or Preachers in hose Days, neither at their
Worship, not coming and going. The next Morning we were had before the Chief
Magistrate of the Town of Welch-Pool, after some Discourse with him, it seemed
good to him to discharge us, for he could find nothing justly to accuse us of,
except concerning the Law of (...) God.

(...) we went to our Homes, the Young Man to his Fathers, and I to my
Master's, he ^red much Violence by his Father, in r^ard that he could not
conform himself, to that dry, dead and formal Praying, that his Father used;
his Father rose from off his Knees, when he was at Prayer, and took a Staff,
and di^ violently beat his Son, and without Natural Affection, he took a Lock
and ^ Chain, and chained him out of Doors, in a cold, frosty Night. Thus our
Sufferings began to increase, for the Testimony of our Consciences toward God,
but blessed be the Name of the Lord, that preserved his People, that trusted in
Him, says my Soul.

A little after this I came to hear, that some of the People that were called
Quakers, were at Shrewsbury in the County of Salop, being distant from the
Place of my abode about 18 Miles, I waited for an Opportunity to go to see
them, and the Way of their Worship, for as yet I had not seen any of them, but
that one poor Man before ment^oned, and when the Time called Christmas came, my
Master's Work being somewhat over for that while, I got Leave to go so far, and
when I came there among them, I went first to the House of John Millington,
where many Friends resorted, and they of the Town (...) see me in great Love
and Tenderness and much Brokenness of Heart was among us, though but few Words;
we waited to f^el the Lord among us, in all our Comings together. When the
First Day of the Week came, we went to a Meeting at W. Pane's, at the Wild-Cap,
where we had a silent Meeting, and and though it was silent from Words, yet the
Word of the Lord God was among us, it was as a Hammer and a Fire, it was
sharper than any two edged Sword, if pierced through our inward Parts, it
melted and brought us into Tears, that there was scarcely a dry Eye among us,
the Lord's blessed Power overshadowed our Meeting, and I could have said, that
God alone was Master of that Assembly. The next Day as I was preparing
Homeward, having had a considerable Time with Friends there, and being much
comforted with the Goodness of God, and unfeigned Love of the Brethren, we
heard that one John a^ John was come to Town, and was to have a Meeting there;
I stayed that Meeting, (...) I heard the first Friend that was (...) a Quaker
Preach in a Meeting, and when I heard him, I thought he (...) one having
Authority, and not as the Scribes; his Words were sound and piercing.

After this Meeting at Shrewsbury, I came Home to my Master's House, where I
was under many Considerations, and especially that of Christ's Word?; Ye are
the Light of the World, a City that is set on a Hill, cannot be bid Neither do
Men light a Candle, and put it under a Bushel: But on a Candle stick, and it
gives Light unto all that are in the House. Let your Light so shine before
Men, that they may see your good Works, and glorify your Father which it in;
Heaven, Matt. v. 14, 15, 16.

I was sensible that God had opened thy Understanding, and lighted my Candle,
and given me a Sense and a Feeling of my own State and Condition, that I had
been in Darkness, and under the Region and Shadow of Death, and God having
showed Mercy and Kindness unto me, in calling me from this great Darkness to
his marvelous Light of his dear Son Christ Jesus, who is, the Light of the
World, that enlight' (...) every Man which comes into (...) World. I was made
willing (...) to Hide my Candle as it were under (...), on to hide my Talent in
the Earth; but, in the Love of God, I was made willing to let that Light (which
he pleased by his Grace to enlighten m^ withal) shine before Men, that they
might come to 'Glorify their heavenly Father, which is in Heaven,' Mat. v. 16.

The next public Service that the Lord required of me, was to go and give my
Testimony for Him, and to warn a Company of People to think of their latter
End, who were met to dance and to play, at what they call a Merry-night, not
far from my Master's House; and when I came within the Room where they were
Dancing, the Fiddler ceased Playing and they Dancing; I declared the Word of the
Lord among them; and that which was chiefly before me, (...) that of Job, They
send forth their little Ones like a Flock, and their Children dance. They take
the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the Sound of the Organ. They spend their
Days in Mirth, and in a Moment go down to the Grave, Job xxi. 11, 12, 13. And
when I had discharged myself of what lay upon me, I ^ed in Love and Peace from
them, and they thanked me for my good Exhortation; and some of them came to set
one Home.

About this Time [1658.] I heard of One that was called a Quaker, that was come
from Ireland to Llanvilling, ^ Town in this County of Momtgomery, and in the
Love of God, I went upon the First Day of the Week to visit him, where we had a
comfortable, refreshing Meeting together, and the Lord's Presence was with us,
though we were Strangers one to another, as to the outward, yet we had Fellowship
and Union one with another in the inward Life of Righteousness; his Name was
Roger Prichard. He tarried not long there but went back again to Ireland; though
it it was said, that he came to these Parts with an Intention to stay here, and
to bear his Testimony for God, in this dark Corner of North Wales; but he not
being faithful to God, who sent him here, as he was going back he susfered
great Losses by Sea, and lost his good Condition also, and turned back to the
Vanities of the World, which was a great Sorrow and Exercise to me: But the
Lord visited him again, as may be seen hereafter. Thus I was left alone again.

I continued, as the Lord made Way for me, to visit those in whom I found any
Inclination to the Things that were good: And there was one William Davies
convinced of the Truth with me? And I was also made willing to visit the
Independent Meeting, and those People that I formerly belonged unto, that were
a separate People, gathered together chiefly by Vavasor Powell beforementioned,
a zealous Man in his Day and Time. But when Truth broke for the in this
Country, I being the first that came to receive it in these Parts, did separate
myself from them, in Love to that blessed Truth that I received, and it became
my true Teacher. So the said Vavasor Powell proved angry, and preached much
against the Quakers, their Way and Principles. I hearing this, came at a
certain Time to a Place called Cloddiecochion, near Welch-Pool, to their
Meeting, expecting to find him there, but he was not there; but one John
Griffithes (called a Justice of the Peace) was Preaching there. When I came in
among them, they seemed uneasy; and when I had an Opportunity, I bore a
Testimony for God, and his Son Christ Jesus, his Way, Truth and People, which
they preached against. When I had done what I had to say, he went on again; and
when I found something more on my Spirit to declare among them, this John
Griffithes commanded to take me away; and a near Relation of mine that owned
the House, took me in his Arms and led me out of the House, through the Fold,
and through a Gate that opened to the Common, and shut the Gate after me; and
there I sat under an Ash Tree, weeping and mourning sorrowfully, to see their
Blindness, Darkness, and Hardness of Heart, with Pride and Haughtiness, that
was come over a People that once were loving, kind, and humble in Spirit. And
as I sat weightily under a serious Consideration what and when would be the End
of all these Formalities and Hardness of Heart, I prayed to the Lord for them:
And the Word of the Lord came to me, "That though they put me out of their House,
yet in Time they would come to own Truth, and that House should be a
Meeting Place for Friends: Of this a further Account may be seen hereafter. So
I went away well satisfied with the Love and Goodness of God to me that Day, in
giving me Comfort and Consolation for my Tears of Sorrow and Affliction that I
met with a little before; and I rememb'red the Saying of the Apostle, Heb. xii.
11. Now no Chast'ning for the present seems joyous, but grievous:
Nevertheless, afterward it yieldech the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness, unto
them which are exercised thereby.

After this I still waited to know the Will and Counsel of God, and that he
might direct me in my Way, and order my Steps in this my spiritual Travel; for
I had none to look unto, but to Him alone, who was All-sufficient to carry on
the Work which he had begun, tho often by weak, poor, mean and contemptible
Instruments in the Eyes of the World. Well might I say with the Apostle, But
God has chosen the foolish Things of the World, to confound the wise; and God
has chosen the weak Things of the World, to confound the Things which are
mighty; and base Things of the World, and Things which are despised, has God
chosen, yea, and Things which are not, to bring to naught Things that are, 1
Cor. i. 27, 28.

About this Time I went to visit some young Men that had been my former
Companions in Profession of Religion; Two or Three of them were convinced, and
received the Truth. So then, when we were come to the Number of Four, it was
with me that we ought to meet together, in the Name of the Lord; for I
remembered the Promise of Christ; who said, Where Two or Three are gathered
together in my Name, there am I in the Midst of them, Mat. xviii. 20.

So we all agreed to meet together, but none of us had a House of his own to
meet in; we determined therefore to meet upon a Hill in a Common, as near as we
could for the Convenience of each other, we living some Miles distant one from
another. And there we met in Silence, to the Wonder of the Country; when the
Rain and Weather did beat upon us on one Side of the Hill, we went to the other
Side; we were not free to go into any Neighbor's Enclosures, for they were so
blind, so dark and ignorant, that they looked upon us as Witches, and would go
away from us, some crossing themselves with their Hands, about their Foreheads
and Faces.

And thus we continued for some Time, when Two of them left me; one of them was
put an Apprentice by Friends to W. Shown, of London; the other young Man was a
Soldier in Oliver Cromwell's Days, and he got as soon as he could to be
disbanded, so he went to Gloucestershire, and lived among Friends; the other
was one William D^ies, that lived hard by me, and we both met together for some
Time; but at one Time he stayed longer than usual, and a foul, dark Spirit
possessed him, insomuch that the little. Time we were together, was not
comfortable to me; and when we had broke up the Meeting, by Way of Discourse he
asked me, How I did think we should stand in the Face of the whole Country? I
answered him with great Zeal, The Serpent, the Serpent, the same that beguiled
the Woman in Paradise, has beguiled thee, thou will not be able to stand: And
while we were yet discoursing, I saw my Master coming, who was also convinced,
but was not faithful to that good Spirit that convinced him of the Truth, and
showed him what he ought to do, but did it not (yet he continued loving to
Friends, and frequented their Meetings to his latter End) as I looked back I
saw him come toward us, with two Women following him, the one was his Wife, my
cruel Mistress, the other was his Sister, they both had Staves in their Hands,
and when they came unto us, the Sister began to beat her Brother, my Master,
and my Mistress set a beating of W. Davies; so his Trial came very quickly, and
W. Davies came no more to meet with me, nor any other Friends for many Years;
yet he afterward came among Friends, and continued with them to the End of his
Days, and was buried among them. Now it so happened that I had never a Blow
among them, and if I had received any, I had learnt of Christ Jesus my Lord and
Master to suffer patiently for his Name's Sake, and not to depart from him
though my Trials, Temptations and Afflictions were not a few; so that I might
say with the Apostle, But none of those Things move me, neither count I my Life
dear unto myself, so that I might finish my Course with Joy; Acts xx. 24.2 Cor.
iv. 17. Mat. x. 37.38, 39.

These young Men going away thus, I was left alone again, but still I kept
waiting upon the Lord, to know his Will and good Pleasure concerning me, and
when the Time of my Apprentiship was over, I found Freedom to go to London, to
visit Friends there, which was in the Year 1658-9. And finding many good and
living Friends there, I settled to my Trade, being a Felt-maker, and very well
satisfied I was, that I could go to Meetings, and follow my Business, and when
any Thing would come to my Mind, of this my native Country, barren and
uninhabited with Friends and Truth, I endeavored to shut it out, and to keep
where I was, and I did what I could; but all my fair Pretenses, and Reasonings
would not do, disobedient to the Lord I was, and Trouble, and Sorrow, and
Judgment from the Lord came upon me, for not obeying his Command, to go to my
own Country, to stand a Witness for him there; in this my Disobedience I
continued, till I had lost his Presence, and he smote me with Trouble within,
and Pain in my Bones, that I could not Work nor Labor; in this Time Friends of
London were very kind, and careful of me, and would freely have administered
unto me, but I was not willing to accept of any Thing from them, so long as I
had of my own, my Pain of Body and Spirit increased upon me, till at last I was
forced to bow to the Will of the great God, that was too strong for me, and
reasoning with him one Night, upon the Bed of my Sorrows, he showed me clearly,
that I was to go to my own Country, and I was made willing to give up to go if
he would be pleased to let me know his Will by the Token that he would remove
my Pain; and also I reasoned with him thus, That I was alone, like a Pelican
in the Wilderness or a Sparrow on a House Top. And the Lord still commanded me
to go, and that he would provide a Help-meet for me. And when I had made a
Covenant with the Lord to go, immediately my Pain was removed, and I had Peace
and Quietness of Mind and Spirit. And I arose next Morning, and went to my
Work; and when those tender Friends that had a Regard for me in my Sickness,
came to see me that Morning, I was gone to Work, which was to their Admiration.

So the Lord gave me a little Time and he alone provided a Help-meet for me,
for I prayed unto him, that she might be of his own providing, for it was not
yet manifest to me, where she was, nor who she was: But one Time as I was at
Horsly-down Meeting, in Southwark, I heard a Woman Friend open her Mouth by Way
of Testimony, against an Evil ranting Spirit, that did oppose Feiends much in
those Days; it came to me from the Lord, that that Woman was to be my Wife, and
to go with me to the Country, and to be a Help-meet for me; after Meeting, I
drew somewhat near to her, but I spoke nothing, nor made any Acquaintance with
her, nor did I know when or where I should see her again. I was very willing to
let the Lord order it as seemed best to himself, and therein I was easy; and in
Time the Lord bro't us acquainted one with another, and she confessed that she
had some Sight, of the same Thing, that I had seen concerning her; so after
some Time we parted, and I was freely resigned to the Will of God; and when we
came together again I told her if the Lord did order her to be my Wife, she
must come with me to a strange Country, where there were no Friends, but what
God in Time might call and gather to Himself. Upon a little Consideration she
said, If the Lord should order it so she must go with her Husband, though it were
to a Wilderness; and she being somewhat sensible of the Workings of God upon
her Spirit, in this Matter, she was willing to condescend in her Mind, to what
God had wrought in her; but by hearkening to some Friend of hers, that had not
well weighed the Matter, she became disobedient to what God had revealed to
her; which bro't great Sorrow and Trouble upon her; and I went to see her in
this poor Condition, and I rested satisfied with the Will of God in this
Concern, being freely resigned, if the Lord had wrought the same Thing in her
as was in me to receive her as the Gift of Almighty God to me; and after some
Time, we waited upon the Lord together, the arose, and declared before me, and
the other Friend that had begot Doubts and Reasonings in her Mind, that in the
Name and Power of God, she consented to be my Wife, and to go along with me,
whether the Lord should order us; and I said, In the Fear of the Lord I receive
thee as the Gift of God to me. And so I rested satisfied in the Will of God,
for a further Accomplishment of it.

And being under a weighty Consideration, which Way to take each other in
Marriage, we concluded to lay our Proceedings before our Elders, and especially
our ancient Friend George Fox (now People in those Days were married by a
Priest or before a Justice) and I told G. F. we thought to take each other in a
Public Meeting; so he desired the Lord to be with us. And when we saw our
Clearness in the Lord, we went to the Snail-Meeting, in Tower-street, London,
in the Morning; and in the Afternoon to Ho^^sly-down, Southwark, and in that
Meeting, being the 26th of the 4th Month, 1659. in the Presence of God, and
that Assembly, we took each other to be Man and Wife.

God alone did know our Innocence and our Integrity in going together; it was
not for Gold nor Silver, nor any outward Thing; but to be serviceable to him in
our Age and Generation, and to stand Witnesses for him, and his blessed Truth,
where the Lord should send us. I might say with Tobias, Thou made Adam, and
gave him Eve, his Wife, for a Helper and a Stay; of them came Mankind. Thou
have said it is not good that Man should be alone, let us make him an Aid like
himself, Tobit viii. 6, 7.

Soon after, in the Lord's Time, we made what haste we could, to come to the
Country, where we believed the Lord would have us to be, and we said, O Lord,
if thou will go with us in our Way, and give us Bread to eat, and Raiment to
put on, then, O Lord, thou shall be our God; and the Lord was with us, in all
our Journey, and gave unto us, his sweet and comfortable Presence.

Soon after we came to Welch-Pool those Professors which had been and were in
great Power, began to be fainthearted, because of the Report there was of
bringing in King Charles the Second; which in a little Time was accomplished,
and those that were in great Pomp, were bro't to Prison themselves. And I was
had before the first Justices that were made in these Parts, by the Authority
of King Charles the 2d (in the Year 1660) Notwithstanding I was a Prisoner to
the Magistrate of the Town. And when I went up before them, many of the People
of the Town followed me, to see what would become of me, and to what Prison
they would send me, or what Punishment they would inflict upon me. But the Lord
was with me, and I feared not Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, but the
living God, whom I desired to obey in all Things. And when I was come into the
Ro^m (it being in the Night) the High Sheriff one Col. Moystyn, with the
Justices of the Peace, stood as People in a Maze, to see me come with my Hat on
my Head amongst them, and they spoke not one Word to me for some Time. In a
little while, I asked them, Whether they sent for me there? And they said, They
did. And one of the Justices asked me, Where I had that new Way, and strange
Religion^ I answered him, it was the good Old Way that the Prophets and
Servants of God lived and walked in; and that Way I had found, and desired to
walk in it all my Days. That Justice was peevish, and said, I think the Man is
mad; I think we must have him whipped; though I answered them according to
Scripture, yet they were ignorant of it. They demanded of me to take the Oath
of Allegiance and Supremacy: I told them, That my Lord and Master Christ Jesus,
and his Apostle James, commanded me, not to swear at all. They had a Priest
with them there, and he took upon him to question me; the first Thing he asked
me was, which was first, Reason or Scripture? I told him, That Reason was
before Scripture; God made Man a reasonable Creature, in his Own Image; and
that the first Part of the Scripiures, which we have now extant, was writ by
Moses: The Apostle tells us, That the Law came by Moses, but Grace and Truth
came by Jesus Christ. And I further told them, That holy Men of God gave them
forth as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. A^ to this, they seemed to be
satisfied* But the Priest laid some ensnaring Questions to me; and when I
perceived it, I asked the Justices, what that Man was ^ whether he was a
Justice of the Peace, or not? And I asked whether he was not a Priest? They
said, they looked upon him to be a fitter Man than themselves to discourse with
me about Religion. I told them, I thought he was as the High Priest among the
Jews, who did ^ay ensnaring Questions to Christ, when he was brought before
them, to seek to make him an Offender; and turning myself to the Justices, I
desired them to take Notice of that Man, who laid those ensnaring Questions to
seek to make me an Offender. Then the Priest left me, and the Justices of the
Peace called to me, and asked me (seeing I would not take the Oaths) whether I
would give Bail? and said, they would take my Father's Bail for my good
Behavior I told them, my Cause was just, and that I was innocent, and I would
give them no Bail, for the Truth binds me to my good Behavior. Then the
High Sheriff (a very fair Man) told me, I was a strange Man, and of a strange
Persuasion, to come with my Hat upon my Head among them, and would not take the
Oaths, nor give Bail: you know, said he, that Paul said to Festus; Noble
Festus. I told him, That Paul had tried Festus; but I had not yet tried him;
and it might be, that I might speak of him; Noble Sheriff. Upon this they were
most of them very pleasant. He called to me, and asked me, who I did know
there? there were several of my Relations Justices there, who very well knew
me, but I made mention of none of them; but) I told him, I knew the Chief
Magistrate of the Town (one Charles Jones) whose Prisoner I was. Then they
called for him, and asked him, whether he knew me? He said he did very well,
for I was born and bred in the Town among them, and was a very honest young Man
all along; but (said he) what Devilihe has now, I know not. Then they asked
him, whether I was his Prisoner? And he said I was. Then said the Justices,
take him again to your Custody. And as I was going out of the Room, I told the
Justices, that I brought a good Hat on my Head there, but was going away
without it (for some of the baser So^ had conveyed it away), but the Justice
made diligent Search about it; so it was brought me again, and put upon my
Head, and they p^ted: with me very friendly; and the Town Magistrate took me a
little from them, and bid (...) go home to my Wife and Family. And many of the
Inhabitants of the Town accompanied me Home, praising God i^ their Way for my
Deliverance; for several Things were threat'ned against me: But, blessed be
God, Truth was over all, and had Dominion; and the Witness of God was reached
in many of them, and the High Sheriff continued loving and kind to Friends, and
ready to serve them in what he could all his Lifetime, as also was his Deputy
Sheriff, and several other of the Justices.

About the Third Month 1660, many of those Professors, both Captains,
Lieutenants and Soldiers, that were in Arms in Oliver and Richard Cromwell's
Days were put in Prison in the Town of Montgomery: My Wife and I did foresee,
that I should be sent there to them; though I never was a Soldier, nor bore any
Arms for either Side. And in a little Time, there came a Troop of Horse for me,
to take me to Prison: My Relations offered to give Bail for me, but it would
not be accepted of. So I went to acquaint my Wife of it, and to make my self
ready to go with them: One of the Soldiers came up Stairs after me, with a
Pistol and naked Sword; and my Wife rising her self up, and sitting in Bed,
(being delivered but three Days before of her first Child) she said, Dear
hushand, be faithful to God, whatever becomes of me. The Soldier seeing her,
retreated back. So I went down to the Troop of Horse standing in the Street
before my House: There was among them one bad Man (that run away in my Father's
Debt) threat'ned to compel me to follow his Horse's Heels on Foot many Miles.
But by this Time several of the Aldermen, and others of the Town were gathered
together in the Street, who desired this Man, and others of the Troop, to let
me alone for that Time, and they would engage Body for Body, that I should be
in my Prison next Morning; but they could not prevail. At length some of the
Aldermen fell into a Rage, and they bid them meddle with me if they durst; and
bid me go to my House, which I was not willing to do; for great Fear came upon
me, lest there should be a Quarrel among them concerning my going or staying.
But one or two of the Aldermen being more considerate than the rest, desired
their Patience till the Captain might be spoken with who was then in Town. He
soon granted that I should stay at Home that Night, and be in Montgomery Prison
next Morning; and was angry at that bad Man, for his Incivility toward the
Aldermen that interceded for me; for the Captain knew I was a peaceable Man,
and never concerned myself in Fighting for one Side or other. And when the
Troop had their Orders, they went on their Way; and I praised God for the
Multitude of his Mercies, in that there was no Bloodshed that Day: For many of
the Young Men of the Town, with the Aldermen, were gathered together with Clubs
and Staves, saying, What should a Town's born Child be so abused by such a bad
Fellow as that was beforementioned? My Heart often trembled within me, lest
any Thing should fall amiss in this Tumult; and I desired them often, before
they went to the Captain, that I might go along with them toward my Prison.

So, that Night I staid at Home, and next Morning I took my Journey toward my
Prison to Montgomery; and I avoided the House of my Uncle (that was a Justice
of the Peace in this Country, near my Way, and a Brother-in-Law to this
Captain) lest he should stop me from going to Prison. So I went there my self
alone, and told the Marshal, one John Mason, that I was come a Prisoner; and he
took me up to an upper Garret for my Lodging, but I had the Liberty of the
House, as well as other Prisoners; there being many of those called
Presbyterians, Independents, and Baptists, who were formerly my great
Acquaintance; but now they appeared very strange, and would not discourse with
me; But I considered the Reason, and was informed, that these old formal
Church Members or Professors had agreed among themselves, that they would not
discourse with me, nor receive any Books from me, lest the most serious inwad.
Christians among them (as they said) should turn Quakers. But in a little Time,
their Orders and Covenants were broken, and I was moved to go to their Meeting,
sometimes, having little to say among them but a Sigh or a Groan, and a Travel
in my Spirit for them, which did often put them out of Order in their Preaching
and Praying; and as the Lord would order it, I spoke a few Words among them.
And a Baptist was convinced there, and he came to meet with me in my Room. And
there was one of the Professors, Cadwalader Edwards, also convinced, and he too
came up with us to meet in the Prison: and then there came to be Discoursings
and Disputes between them and me. In this Time, I wrote a few Lines to send
Home to my Wife; but I knew not by whom to send it, for it was very hard to
send any Papers out of Prison; the Marshal, or Jailer would examine and search
such as came in, or went out, for Letters. There wassan old Friend, an
Acquaintance of (...) that came to visit her Friends and Brethren, the
Professors in Prison, whom I desired to carry that Letter to my Wife, as she
went through our Town of Welch-Pool to her Home; she was fearful and afraid to
meddle with it; partly for fear of the Jailer, and also lest she should offend
her Brethren there. I desired her not to be afraid, for I would read it to her
first, and the Jailer might see it, if he pleased; and after I had read it to
her, she was tenderly affected, and turned to her Brethren again, and said,
Surely these People will never come to us, but we must go to them. In some Time
after, through much Trouble and Affliction, she came to receive the Truth, to
live in it, and obey it: Her Name is Margaret Bowen, Wife of John Bowen of
Collsryn; and Mother to Peter Bowen, in Martin's (...) Grand, London; and she
is yet alive.

In a little Time my Service was over among those Professors in that Prison,
and the Lord made Way for my Enlargement, in about two Weeks Time, or a little
more, I came away, and left the rest of the Prisoners there, where they
continued afterward for a considerable Time; I was well satisfied with the
Goodness of God, that I found his Presence, Life and Power with me, and a
present Help in the Time of Need, that kept me low and humble, that I durst not
rejoice that Spirits were made subject; but rather that I found my Name written
in Heaven: So I came Home in great Love and Peace to my Wife and Family, and
many of my loving Neighbors rejoiced to see me.

I continued about my Calling and Buneis, and waited upon God to know his Mind
and Will concerning me. In this Time I heard of an honest old Woman, who had
received the Truth some Time before, about Montgomery, her Name was Anne Hamon,
Wife of Thomas Hamon; my Wife and I went to visit her. Soon after, about the
Year 1651. I went to a Meeting, at a Place called Edgement, near Wem in
Shropshire.

Here our Friend William Gibson and I were taken Prisoners, with about 25 or 26
more, and sent to Shrewsbury. When we were brought there, we saw the Temper of
the Jailer to be very cruel, and he threat'ned us, with a great deal of
Hardship, if we did not eat of his Meat, and drink of his Drink, and lie on his
Beds, and give him what he demanded; we told him, we were the King's Prisoners,
and we demanded a free Prison, and Straw to lie upon, but he in a Rage denied
us that, and put us in a little Room, where there was scarce Place for us to
lie down; when Night ^ame, Sleep came upon us, we being weary by traveling so
many Miles on Foot; but we were made willing and able to suffer all Things; so
that Night we lay upon the Boards, and it was pleasant unto us, being warm
Weather, and about the Time of Hay-Harvest; the next Morning we were very fresh
and well, praising God for his Mercies and Goodness to us; the Jailer came to
us, and asked us how we did like our Lodging, and how we slept? We told him, we
slept in Peace of Conscience, and Quietness of Mind, for we suffered for
Conscience sake toward God, and durst not break the Command of Christ and His
Apostle, who commanded us not to swear at all. For our supposed Transgression,
was not only for meeting together, but for refusing the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy. The Jailer being a very passionate inconsiderate Man, he would go
out in the Morning from his own House, and not come back till Night, and then
returned so drunk, that be could hardly speak or stand. The next Night when we
went to lie down, the Room was so little, we could not all lie at once; the
next Morning we complained to the Jailer, that there was not enough of Room for
us all to lie down, and desired him to let us have a little Straw, but it would
not be granted us. By this Time the Friends of the Town had Liberty to come to
visit us, and to bring us in some Provision; and when the Door was opened for
us to go into another Room, there being a corded Bedstead it that Room, William
Gibson and I lay upon the Cords, and next Morning we found that the Print of
the Cords was not only in our Clothes, but in our Skin also, so that it would
have been easier for us to have lain upon the Boards as we did before. By this
Time having well observed the Jaylor's Humor and Temper, I began to be uneasy
in myself to let him alone; so I watched him in the Morning upon his first
rising, when he would come to the Court that was before our Prison Door, and I
began to discourse with him about the Prisoners that lay in such Hardship, I
told him they were honest Men, and most of them Masters of Families, and they
had good Beds to lie upon at Home, but now they were content for Christ's and
the Gospel's Sake, to suffer that Hardship, and desired him to let them have
their Liberty to go to their Friends in Town at Night, and to come there in the
Morning, and if he would not be pleased to grant them a little Straw, then to
let them go lie in their own Beds; which he surlily denied, calling them a
Company of Rogues and Knaves, and such like Terms. He asked me, What made me to
plead for them? I told him, they were my Friends; he answered, Why your
Friends? You are no Quaker, are you? I said, I am called a Quaker. He answered,
You do not look like a Quaker: And he looked me in my Face, and on my Hands and
Body. I desired him not to disgrace me so, as to tell me I was no Quaker; then
he asked me where I lived? I told him, when I was at Home, I lived at
Welch-Pool, and my Family was there: But, said he, where are you now? I asked
him, whether he did not know I was a Prisoner there with my Friends? And he
asked me, whether I did lie upon the Boards with them? I told him, I did: He
said he was sorry for it; but went away in Anger, being much discontented in
himself. So I did not see him till next Morning, at which Time I went to him
again, and I friendly discoursed with him; he said, he did enquire about me in
the Town, and he said: might take the Liberty of the Town; I did acknowledge
his Kindness; but I told him, it would be no Comfort to me to have the Liberty
of the Town, and leave my Friends and Brethren there, he said, then I might
stay there with them: So I did not see him till the next Morning, and then I
went to him again; he was so cross and ill-conditioned, he would not suffer any
other Friend to speak to him. William Gibson did so judge him for his
Wickedness, that he kept him close in a Room by himself. After five or six
Nights lying on the Boards, I prevailed with him, that Friends might have the
Liberty of the Town in the Night, and be there in the Morning: So the next Day
he began to be more friendly to us. After some Days, I desired our Friend John
Millington to come with me to the Jaylor's House, to see whether we could have
Leave to go Home till the Assizes; but then it was not granted: But he told me,
if I pleased I might go Home till then; I told him, he might as freely let them
go as me, for most of them lived in the County, and I lived out of the County;
but no more could we have that Time of him: But I was uneasy in myself (seeing
I had got a Place in him) to let him alone, but still I pressed for my Friends
further Liberty: In a little Time afterward, I prevailed with him by serious
Arguments, as it was Harvest-time, and it was hard for their Wives, or some of
their Families, to come with weekly Necessaries for them (...) so^d, with my
Friend John Millington, prevailed with him to let them go, and he took our
Words for our Appearance at the next Assizes.

Through the Goodness of God, we all came together to Shrewsbury to our Prison
before the Assizes; and when we came there, we found a great Alteration in the
Jailer, he was very low and mournful, he had lost a Prisoner, a Malefactor, and
was to be tried for his Life for his Escape; he was very loving and kind to us,
and let Friends go themselves to Bridgenorth, about 14 Miles, where the Assizes
were then held, and he desired me to stay with him in his Affliction; and not
be much from him; he said his Life was at Stake, and if God and the Judge would
show him any Mercy, it was upon our Friends Account, and not for any Deserts
that were in himself, for he confessed he had been too severe to us; but,
notwithstanding, said he, you are merciful Men, and can forgive Wrongs and
Injuries.

Then, when we came to Bridgenorth, we were put in a large spacious room in the
House of Correction, to be there in the Daytime, that we might be all
together, and ready when called for; but we had liberty of going in and out for
Lodging, and what Necessaries we wanted: No Keeper being over us, but what we
set our selves to look to the Door, and that too many Friends might not be out
at once, and those were not to stay out too long; and we saw it convenient,
that Friends should go out by two and two, to walk the Streets; for it was a
strange Thing to People to hear of Quakers. Once it fell to my Lot to be at the
Door, (though the Door was always open, that such as would might come and see us;
with several of them we had Reasonings and Disputes about the Way of Truth and
Righteousness.) There came one, who appeared something like a Gentleman, and
asked me, Whether he might see the Quakers? I desired him to walk up along with
me, and he should see them. And when I had brought him up to the Room where
Friends were walking, I told him, Those were they. He answered, These be
Christians, like ourselves; but when are the Quakers? I told him, These were
they that were called Quakers. He asked me, Whether I was one of them? I
answered him, I was one so called. I had an Opportunity to declare to him the
Way of Truth, and that the Name of Quaker was given to us in Scorn and
Derision; and he departed very friendly. Some People were so blind and dark in
those Days, as to look upon us to be some strange Creatures, and not like other
Men and Women. They would gather much about us in the Town, and we had good
Opportunities to speak of the Things of God to 'em. But I was pretty much with
the Jailer, waiting when his Trial could be: And when it came, I went with him,
and stood somewhat near him, which he was very glad of. The Jury cleared him,
being not found guilty of a wilful Escape; which was Gladness to him, and
Satisfaction to us. And when the Assizes was near at an End, the Judge returned
us to one Justice Holland, (except William Gihson, to whom the Judge put it,
Whether he would go Home, if he was discharged? but he could not make the Judge
such a Promise as he required, so he was committed again to the same Prison)
but we were freely and friendly discharged, having had good Service in that
Town, and the Lord was with us, and brought us safe Home, to the Comfort of our
Families and ourselves; and we have cause to bless and Praise the Name of the
Lord for ever, for all his Mercies and Goodness to us all along, in the Time of
our Afflictions and Persecutions; and we could say, Surely God is good to
Israel, and unto all them that draw nigh unto him with an upright Heart.

In the Year 1662, a further Concern came upon me about Meetings in the
Country. There was one that was Con^nced in the Prison of Montgomery, when I
was there, viz. Cadwalader Edwards before mentioned, who lived near to
Dolobran; he promised me, that we should have his House to keep a Meeting in.
And in this Time I went to know, whether he would perform his Promise^, which
he readily granted; and I appointed the Day and Time with him, which he gave
Notice of to his Neighbors thereabouts. I being destitute of a Friend to go
with me to the said Meeting, depended upon the Lord, that he would provide a
suitable Companion to go with me. And my Wife going to Shrewsbury* I told her
of the Meeting, and desired her to speak to Friends there of it; and if there
was any Public Friend there, that he might come along with her. There happened
to be one Richard Moor of Salop, a worthy and faithful Labourer in the Gospel,
who came along with her to our House in Welch-Poul. This was in the 9th Month
1662. A Day or two after we went to the Meeting, where there came in Charles
Lloyd of Dolobran, who was formerly in Commission of the Peace, and had been in
Election to be High Sheriff of that County, and several of his well-meaning
Neighbors, some of them were Professors, belonging to the same People that I
formerly belonged unto. The Lord was not wanting, but afforded unto us his good
Presence; Life and Power came from Him, that reached to the Hearts and
Understanding of most of the People then present, who gave Testimony to the
Truth, Life and Power of God, that appeared with us that Time; and in the Love,
Fear, and Life of Truth we parted.

The next Morning we went to visit Charles Lloy^ of Dalobran aforesaid, who
^^^tly received us, and several of those People that were at the Meeting came
there that Day; where we had a sweet, comfortable, refreshing Time, in the
Presence of the Lord; as it is said, In his Presence is Fullness of Joy, and at
his Right Hand there are Pleosures for evermore, Psalm xvi. 11.

The Sound and Report of this Meeting went through the Country, some saying,
that most of that Side the Country were turned Quakers. Whereupon diverse were
sent for before Edward Lord Herbert, Baron of Cherbury, to a Place where he
then lived, called Llyssin, about three Miles from Dolobran; after some
Discourse with them, he sent them to Welch-Pool to Prison, for refusing to take
the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, which they refused, because they could
not swear at all; they being about Six sent together, viz. Charles Lloyd Hugh
David, Richard David, Cadwalader Edwards, Ann Lawrence, Sarah Wilson, etc.
where they were coutinued very close Prisoners.

In a little Time there were added Prisoners to them, William Lewis and
Matgaret his Wife, who were Owners of the said House of Cloddiecochion before
mentioned, where I was moved to go about the Year 1657, to a Meeting there of
the Professors (which is now the Place of my abode.) And this William Lewis my
near Relation, was he that led me out of the House to the Common, and shut the
Gate against me, as is before related ( Page 40.) And thus the Word of the Lord
was fulfilled, that came to me then, That those People should own and receive
Truth, and that House should be a Meeting House for us: Which it now is, and
has been for these 40 Years.

The Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy being tendered to them, they could not
take it for Conscience Sake; Swearing at all being forbidden by Christ and his
Apostle James; so they were sent to Prison, and continued Prisoners there.
There was also at that Time one Edward Evans, an honest, substantial Man, that
was committed to Prison for the same supposed Offense, who was convinced
sometime before: I having had some weighty Discourse with him about the Things
of God. He told me, That when he was in Prison with Vavasor Powell, with many
more of his Brethren in Pool-Goal before this Time, that Vavasor leaning upon a
Window of their Prison that opened to the Street, saw me and my dear Wife pass
by that Way, and he said on this wise, Behold Zicharias and Elizabeth! It was
said of them That they walked in the Commandments of God blameless. This Edward
Evans, and some others of the said Prisoners, looking out through the Window; saw
us two called Quakers, that he and others a little before had preached severely
against, they looked upon it, that the Lord had forced him to give that
Testimony of us, and several of 'em (as he said) were convinced thereby, and
sometime after, came to live in Obedience to the Truth, and suffered for it.

These Prisoners were kept very close, some of them were Substantial
Freeholders, who were put in a dirty nasty Place, near the Stable and House of
Office, being a low Room; the Felons and other Malefactors in a Chamber over
Head, their Chamber-Pots and Excrements, etc. often falling upon them. And
Charles Lloyd (who was a little before in Commission of the Peace, as
aforesaid) was put in a little smoaky Room, and did lie upon a little Straw
himself for a considerable Time; and at length his tender Wise Elizabeth, that
was of a considerable Family (Daughters of Sampson Lort, near Pembroke, in
South Wales), was made willing to he upon Straw, with her dear and tender
Husband. And shus they both, with the rest of Friends did rather choose to
suffer Afflictions with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin
for a Season.

So I staid at Home with them for some Time, keeping our Meetings in the
Prison; but at length the Jailer had strict Charge to keep me from among 'em,
^lle^gl^g, that I strengthened 'em in their Way and Principles: And when the
Jailer kept me out, I went to a Neighbor's Back-yard, having leave of him to
see them and to speak with them.

The Sufferings of Friends being now very great, and still increasing, they
sent the following Paper to the Quarter Sessions held at Montgomery, directed
thus:

To the Justices and Magistrates of this County of Montgomery.
FOrasmuch as it is not unknown to you, That we, who by the Scorners of this
World (that know not God) are called Quakers, are detained and kept close
Prisoners, only for the Testimony of a good Conscience toward God and Man; our
Friends not being suffered to visi^us; whereas Drunkards, Liars, Thieves and
Robbers, are not debarred of their Friends Admittance to them. This unheard of
Cruelty, is enough it self to establish us in our Ways, if they were ever so
erroneous, as you say. This we are persuaded of in our Hearts, that Christ
never did not any of his Apostles, use this, or any other Way of Cruelty, or
Persecution, to convince any of their E^ors, but contrariwise, by sound
Doctrine, and good Conversation, and doing unto others, as they would they
should do unto them; for that was the Rule that Christ left to the true
Christians.

Now consider, in the Soberness of your Hearts and Spirits, that were you in
our Condition, would not you desire your Enlargement? And seeing it is the
King's Clemency, in a Declaration beating Date, The 26th Day of December, 1662.
wherein he says, He is glad to lay hold on this Occasion, to Re-establish and
Renew unto all his Subjects concerned in those Premises, indulged by a true
Tenderness of Conscience. This Assurance and Confirmation of his Promise made
at Breda, upon the Word of a King, viz.

We do declare all Liberty to tender Consciences, and that no Man shall be
disquieted, or called in question for Diffarences of Opinion in Matters of
Religion. And moreover he says in the same Declaration, As for what concerns
the Penalties upon those who living peaceably, do not conform thereunto through
Scruple and Tenderness of misguided Consciences, but modestly, and without
Scandal, perform their Devotions in their own Way; wherein we do understand by
these Words, viz. That it is his fatherly Care to publish this his Declaration,
to stop and prevent all other Actings, according to former Acts made against
Liberty of tender Consciences. And we hope that you will be as favorable to us
your Neighbors (seeing Power is committed to your Hands) as the King (being
chief Magistrate) is unto his Subjects. These Things have we seen fit and
convenient to lay before you, that you may understand we are not ignorant of
the King's Clemency toward us. And we (whose Names are underwritten) do wait
the Fulfilling and Performing this one other Word more of a King, by you who
profess yourselves to be his obedient and loyal Subjects: Notwithstanding all
which former Word and Promises of the King, the supreme Magistrate, we have
been persecuted more by you his inferior Magistrates in this County, than in
many other Counties. And further, that you may be left without Excuse, for that
if you do persecute us, it is without any Cause from us, or any Order from the
supreme Magistrate, the King of England, if you do Justice herein, the Lord
will bless you; if not, Sin will lie at your Door.

These from your Friends, that desire the Welfare of your Souls and Bodies that
have received the Spirit of Meekness; that can pray for them that persecute us
and despightfully use us, who in Patience and Long-suffering are content to
submit to the Will of God who renders to every Man according to the Deeds done
in the Flesh.

Humpbry Wilson, William Lewis, Richard Davies, Sarah Wilson, Edward Evans,
Margaret Lewis, Charles Lloyd, Catharine Evans, Hugh David, Anne Lawrence.



The foregoing Paper was sent to the Magistrates at their Quarter Sessions,
held at Montgomery, the 8th Day of the 11th Month, 1662.

A Copy of is was also sent to the Chief Justices at Ludlow by the Jailer,
together with another Paper directed to them.

A little Time after this I went to Penlyn, near Bala; in Merionethshire, to
visit some Friends and tender Professors there, who received me kindly; and
there I settled a Meeting among them, in the Power of God; and from thence I
came Home, where I staid but a little while to visit these Prisoners. And soon
after I went to the House of Owen Lewis, at Tyddyn y Gareg, near Dolegelle, in
Merionethshire, a Man that had been in Commission of the Peace in Oliver's
Days, and was newly come from Prison from Bala, who received me kindly (he was
first convinced by Tho. Briggs.) From thence I went down to Robert Owen's, of
Dolycere, near Dolegelle, who had also been a Justice of the Peace, and a
Commander in Oliver's Time, he received me and my Testimony; as did also Owen
Humphrey, of Llwyngwril, near the Seaside, in the said County (who was a
Justice of the Peace in Oliver's Days) and his Father, his Brothers, Samuel and
John Humphrey; these, with many more there had received the Truth, in the Love
of it, and continued faithful, serviceable Men in their Country, and kept
Meetings in their Houses, and many were gathered to the Lord among the Rocks
and Mountains in those Parts; this was in the Year 1662. After this Journey,
the Lord brought me safe Home to my Wife and Family, to the Comfort of my
Friends, and one another in the Lord.

Not long after this Thomas Lloyd, Brother to the said Charles Lloyd of
Dolobran, hearing that his Brother was in Prison, came from Oxford to visit
him, having been a Student there for several Years (as also his Brother Charles
had been before him) they told me, that the great Sufferings of Friends in that
City of Oxford, by the Magistrates, and by the wild and ungodly Scholars, did
work much upon them; and they had some secret Love for Friends then. So when
Thomas Lloyd came Home; he being some Time with Friends in Prison, and
elsewhere; the Lord opened his Understanding by his Light, Life and Power, and
he received the Truth, and was obedient to it, and took up his daily Cross, and
followed Jesus, and came to be his Disciple, and was taught by him, and he went
no more to Oxford for Learning; for I may say with David, The Lord made him
wiser than all his former Teachers. He staid pretty much at Home (and with his
eldest Brother Charles Lloyd) and in these Parts.

The Jailer of Welch-Pool, was very cruel to Friends, and continued them in
that nasty Hole beforementioned, till one of these Friends, called Edward
Evans, beforesaid, fell sick (by Reason of the Dampness and Unhealthiness of
the Room) and died; and the Jailer would not suffer us to have his Body to be
buried, except we would pay the Coroner, and so clear him, as if he had had no
Hand in his Death; but at last his Relations prevailed, without a Coroner's
laquest; and they took him, and buried him on a Hill, on the Backside of the
Steeple-house, in Welch-Pool, and it happened, as they were digging the Grave,
they found some Bones of a Man, and upon Enquiry in some old Records, it was
said there was an old Judge buried there; and the Name of that Place is called
ever since Judge's-Hill. We had got no Burying-place of our own then, but were
about having one.

Thomas Lloyd and I not being Prisoners now, though (except us two) mest that
were convinced were Prisoners. The Report of such who were turned Quakers,
being spread abroad, they were soon sent for before a Magistrate, and the Oath
of Allegiance and Supremacy, was tendered to both Men and Women; and they for
Conscience Sake refusing it, were sent to Prison in order to be premunired.

My Friend Thomas Lloyd and I were moved to go and visit most of the Justices,
that had a Hand in Committing Friends to Prison, we began at the farthest
Justice toward Machynlleth, and so came down to Edward Lord Herbert Baron of
Cherbury at Llyssin aforesaid, who had committed Charles Lloyd, and several
other Friends; we understood on the Way that he was at a Bowling-Green, and
several were with him, near a Place called the Can Office, near the Highway
Side, (and not far from Llyssin;) where we beheld them Bowling, we considered
with each other, which Way to take, there being a peevish Priest, the said
Lords's Chaplain, with them, so I asked Thomas Lloyd whether he would engage
the Priest in Discourse, or go to the said Lord; he chose the last; and got
into the Green leisurely toward him where most of them knew Thomas; but he
went not in their complimenting Posture, he staid there but a little while
before they broke up their Game, and while he discoursed with the Lord Herbert,
I discoursed a little with the Priest. And the Lord Herbert coming toward the
Priest and me, he said to the Priest (whose Name was Jones) Mr. Jones, whom
have you got there? He answered, A Quaker, and Haberdasher of Hats, that lives
in Welch-Pool. Oh! said the Lord Herbert, I thought he was such an One, he
keeps his Hat so fast upon his Block. Then he intending and preparing to come
down a great steep Ditch, I stepped down to lend him my Hand to help him,
another Priest would have stepped between him and me; but the Lord Herbert
refused the Priest's Help, and stopping a little, said to the Priest, Here is a
Brother that stands by will say, "The Blind leads the Blind, and both will fall
into the Ditch." The Priest was so drunk, that the, could not stand by himself;
this Lord being a very big, fat Man, took my Help to come down, and we went
(...) long with him toward his House at Llyssin; laying the Sufferings of
Friends before him, and that their Sufferings were for Conscience Sake toward
God; he gave us no Grant them for their Enlargement, but we heard that he sent
private Instructions, and they had more Liberty. The Jailer had an empty House
at the End of the Town, and there he let Friends go, which was a sweet;
convenient Place near the Fields, without any Keeper over them; and they had
the Liberty of the Town, and to go where they pleased, except to their own
Houses.

So Charles, Lloyd took a House in Town for him and his Family to live in; and
we kept our Meetings in that House of the Jaylor's aforesaid, for several
Years; most of Friends by this Time being under a Praemunire; and many Friends
came from several Places to visit them, and those that were convinced toward
Machinlleth, as William Evans, and several others of that End of the County
(who were formerly Independents) were sent here to Prison upon the same
Account, refusing to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and also one
Peter Price, a worthy Man of Radnorshire was sent to this Prison, he had (...)
Commisson of the Peace in Oliver's Days; he, with several others with him, were
committed by the Justices of this County to the House of Correction in
Welch-Pool for Three Months, as Vagrants; because they came out of their own
County of Radnorshire, adjoining to this County of Montgomeryshire, where they
remained the Three Months; but they had the Liberty of the Town, and to go to
Meetings with the rest of the Prisoners; and other Friends that lived in and
about the Town met with them in Prison, and considerable Meetings we had in
that House aforesaid, with them together.

A little after this, one Thomas Ellis (that was called a Deacon in the
Independent Congregation) was convinced, a Man of great Esteem among them, and
so he was also afterward amongst us. He came to my House to visit the
Prisoners, his former fellow Church members; and he showed me a Letter that
came to him from their Minister Vavasor Powel, ^menting the deplorable
Condition and Danger they were in at that Time, saying, That the Christians
were in great Danger to be split between two Rocks, that was the World and Q.
(meaning the Quakers) but the worst, said he, is Q. But the Lord had opened
Thomas Ellis's Understanding, and given him a Sight of their Decay and
Formalities some Years before, the Lord did break in among them, to the
convincing of many of them; for Thomas told me, That there came two Women
Friends among them in the Time of their breaking of their Bread (I suppose it
was before I came from London) and when they had the Motion of Truth upon them;
they opened their Mouths in the Name off the Lord; in much Fear and Humility;
so that the Independent Elders stood still, and gave the Women Leave to speak
what they had to say to the People at that Time; then the Professors went on
again with their Business; and after some Time these Friends spoke again; and
then they commanded them to be taken away; but none was very ready to do it:
Then their Minister Vavasor Powel said, Brother Ellis, take them away: Thomas
Ellis told me, that he rememb'red that Christ was not hasty in passing Sentence
upon the Woman that the Jews brought before him in the Case of Adultery; But he
stooped down and wrote with his Finger upon the Ground, as though he heard them
not: So T. Ellis told me, he was not willing to take them away till they had
fully cleared themselves of what was upon them to deliver among them; but at
last they called to him again, and bid him take them away; then he arose from
among the Company, and went to them, and desired them to go with him to the
next Room, for he had something to say to them; and the Friends went readily
with him; then he told them on this wise, Friends, You see how we are met
together here, we are like the Prodigal, who was spending his Portion, and we
have a little left unspent; and when we have spent all, we must return to our
Heavenly Father, and come to you, and to your Way. And the Friends went away
well satisfied. -- I have made much Enquiry who these Friends were, and from
whence they came, but could not certainly learn who they were. As for our
Friend Thomas Ellis, the Lord blessed him, and poured his Spirit upon him, and
gave him Part of the Ministry, and he became a faithful Labourer and
serviceable Man among us; and at length he was made a Prisoner here at
Welch-Pool.

About the Year 1663. our Friend James Parkes came from the North, hearing that
some of his Acquaintance and Fellow Church Members, came to own Truth, and he
came to give them a Visit in the Love of God, and also to visit those
Independents that he formerly walked among, that were not convinced; and he
left a Paper with me, to deliver to them, which was thus:

A Lamentation and Warning from the Lord God, in the Love of Christ Jesus, unto
all the Professors in North Wales, especially those about Wrexham, in
Denbighshire, and Welch-Pool, in Montgomeryshire, whom formerly I have known,
and walked with, in a Fellowship and Worship, till the Lord awokened me out of
Sleep, and opened in me an Ear to his Voice, which cried, Come out from amongst
them, and be thou separate; touch no unclean Thing, and I will receive thee.

Friends,
HEar and lend an Ear, O ye Professors of Wrexham and Welch-Pool, and all the
Places and Towns adjacent thereunto, who have been called, Churches of Christ,
and Members of his Body, and Followers of the Lamb: I am come in my Father's
Name to visit you, and in Bowels of his Love, in this the Day of your Calamity
and Adversity, have I visited many of you, in Obedience to his Command, who
sent me in his Name and Fear into these Parts, chiefly for your Sakes at this
Time, that you might hear and come to fear Him, whose Voice has shaken the
Earth, and removed it out of its Place, and he is making the Keepers of the
House to tremble; and he has bound the strong Man in many that was armed, and
formerly kept the House, then all was at Peace; but a stronger than he is
risen, and manifest in the Hearts of Thousands, even Christ Jesus the Light of
the World, who enlight'neth every Man that comes into the World, that all in
him and through him might believe: And he is dividing the Spoil, and spoiling
Principalities and Powers; and they whose byes come to see him, the Lord of
Hosts, they come to be undone. And when Moses saw the Appearance of the Lord,
he did exceedingly fear and quake: And that was he that made Habakkuk tremble,
and his Lips to quiver. And whosoever comes to know Christ, must know him
through Death, and be baptized into his Death, and suffer with him, before they
come to live and reign with him; and they must repent of all their Wickedness,
and turn from it, before they can come to be assured of Rest and Peace. And let
none think, that God will wink at their Wickedness, as he did in the Times of
Ignorance; for now God is leaving all without Excuse, and calling every Man to
repent: And the Light is risen, that manifests Sin and Hypocrisy in them that
hold Truth in Unrighteousness. And it is not the Hame of being called
Church Members, will serve any of your Turns.

O ye Professors, of all Sorts, from the highest to the lowest, from the
richest to the poorest! I am moved of the Lord God to warn you, that while you
have Time and Space you may come to be redeemed out of all Evil; and that you
might come out from among Evildoers, and so come to be saved from the Wrath
and Destruction that will overtake the Workers of Iniquity, who repent not of
their Evil Deeds to give God the Glory; (...) with the Whirlwind of his Wrath
he will vex you in his sore Displeasure. O ye Professors of Christ and the
Apostles Words! who are not come to his Life, nor to be of the same Mind that
he was of, who endured the Contradiction of Sinners, and was made perfect
through Sufferings; whom the Apostles bare Testimony to, and suffered for;
being of the same Mind; they did not shrink nor how, nor let go their
Testimony, when Persecution arose because of the Word; but they overcame by the
Blood of the Lamb, and by the Word of his Testimony which they held; and they
loved not their Lives unto Death. -- And are you all so blind as you cannot see
yourselves out of the Light and Image of Christ, and out of their Practice, who
followed him, and confessed him, and did not deny him before Men; neither did
they change their Religion; as the Powers of the Earth changes. For whatsoever
the Powers of the harth countenanced or discountenanced they mattered not, who
were of the true Church that is in God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Pillar and Ground of Truth; but that which God made manifest to be his
Will, that they did: And though they were charged by the Powers that were then,
to speak no more in his Name, yet they spoke in his Name, and did not deny his
Name.

And dare you say, That you are Saints, and of this Church of Christ, and yet
live in the Breach of his Commandments, who said, Swear not at all; as some
more eminent in Esteem amongst you have done, and have taught others so to do?
Does not the Land mouth because of Swearing? And are not such like the Scribes
and Pharisees, who would not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven themselves, nor
suffer them that would have entered, to enter in? And are not such now shutting
up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men? And must not the Woes from the Lord be
pronounced against them? Yea assuredly, and will overtake them, and Pain shall
suddenly come upon 'em as on a travailing Woman and they shall not escape it.
And the Lord is come to deliver his People out of the Teeth of these Devourers,
who with good Words and fair Speeches have deceived the Hearts of some more
simple and honest amongst you and made Merchandise of them, by promising them
Peace, while you are in your wicked Ways and Works, which the true Prophets and
Apostles of old, whom the Lord sent, could not do; neither can they, who are of
the same Descent, Royal Seed, and Offspring now; they know, there is no Peace
to be spoken to any, while they are in their wicked Ways, drinking up Iniquity
as the Ox drinks Water. Oh! my Heart is broken within me, and I cannot but
take up a Lamentation for you, who have been esteemed beautiful, and the Glory
of many that have been called Churches, to see you carried away Captive, by the
Prince of the Power of the Air, that rules in the Children of Disobedience;
and that you should be yet lying under the Bondage of Corruption, and in Sin,
the Wages whereof is Death; and out of the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God;
and that Death should reign over you, subjecting you to the Power of the Enemy;
and you are taken Captive by him at his Will, and laden with Sins, and led
away with diverse Lusts, like the silly Women, spoken of in the Scriptures of
Truth, that were ever learning, and never able to come the Knowledge of the
Truth, but resist it, and so err in your Minds, not know^ the Scriptures, nor
the Power of God, though you talk of them; for if you knew the Scriptures, and
the Power of God, which brings into the Life of them, then you would witness
the Ability the Saints in former Times had, and now the Saints of the most High
have, to stand over the Powers of Darkness, Hell and Death; then you would come
to that, which could not be shaken, nor the Gate of Hell prevail against. --
But have not the Powers of Darkness prevailed against you, and overcome you,
and made you to bow to their Will, and to their Law, that would bind the
Conference, and hinder its full Liberty.

Oh! consider seriously, and weigh in the Coolness of your Spirits, and in the
Fear of the Lord, what you have done whether you have nor received the Beasts
Mark, either in your Foreheads, (...) in your Hands? and have you not fa^ed in
the Day of Adversity, and (...) go the Profession of your Faith, a^ wavered in
your Min's? And have you not licked up your old Vomits again? And are you not
wallowing in the Filth of Iniquity, and in your fleshly Minds, walking in
Sensuality, and in the carnal Mind, which is Enmity against God? And is it not
Death to be (...) many minded? And are they not in Death that are in the carnal
Mind* And it is not strange to me, if I find such at Enmity; because I expect no
other fr^^^ natural Men, who perceive not the Things of the Spirit; and so you
have rejected the chief Corner Stone, which is laid in Zion for a Foundation,
and have not believed in the Light of the World, who is become the Head-stone
in God's Building and Husbandry, and of the Church that is pure, without Spot
or Wrinkle, which is in God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Pillar and
Ground of Truth. And this is the City sought out, not forsaken; and this is the
Habitation of God through the Spirit, the Stones whereof are laid with fair
Colors, and Foundation of Sapphire, and all the Borders of pleasant Stones. And
such being redeemed out of Sin, and from under the Bondage of Corruption,
cannot plead for it, as some look^d upon among you, more than others do^, and
would endeavor to make you believe, that the Prophet Isaiah was always a Man of
unclean Lips; but that was before he was and one, and while the Woe was upon
him! Ah! brutish is that Spirit that would imagine, that our God should make
use of a Man to do so much for his Name and Honor as Isaiah did, (...) he a
Man of unclean Lips. This I testify that Isaiah's Iniquity was taken away, and
his Sins purged out. And such manifest themselves to be ignorant of Christ's
Death and Manifestations, which were to take away Sins, and in him was no Sin;
and all that come to believe in his Light, and to walk in it, have Fellowship
one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses them from all Sin;
and such come by him to be made free from Sin, and Servants of Righteousness,
and not of Sin: But Sin and Iniquity comes to be done away; and then God
beholds no Iniquity in Jacob, nor Transgression in Israel; and to such is given
the Tongue of the Learned to speak a Word in due Season to the Weary; and such
come to know the pure Language, which the Lord promised to turn to his People;
and such set a Watch before their Mouths, and have a Bridle for their Tongue.

Now some plead for Uncleanness, because the Prophet said, he was a Man of
unclean Lips, before he was touched with the lovely God, and before his Iniqu^
(...) done away, and his Sins purged out: And assuredly one Day you shall all
know, that this is a false Cover, too narrow to cover yourselves with, who
break the Commands of Christ, and teach others so to do; and that put your
Hands to the Plow, and look back; so that you are not fit for the Kingdom of
Heaven: But you are filled with your own Ways and wicked Devices, and false
Covers you get to cover yourselves withal; but all your false Coverings will
prove too narrow; and your beds of Ease, and false Rests, which you think to
stretch yourselves upon, too short; and no Rest or Peace there shall you have,
but you shall all yet be further tried, and your Folly shall yet be made more
manifest; and all the false Covers, all Professers out of the Life and Power of
God, have been covered with, shall be plucked off; yea, all them that are
covered, and not with the Spirit of the Lord, the Woe is to them, and they are
adding Sin to Sin, and are not come to Cleanness of Heart and Lips; and as you
are in Uncleanness, and the best of you as a Bryas pleading for it, blush for
Shame! and every one of you relinquish the Title of Church Membership, till you
come to tread in the Steps of Christ, and obey him; for his Servants ye are, to
whom ye yield yourselves to obey. And deceive yourselves no longer with the
Name of Christians only, but come to the Nature, to witness the first old
Nature and Birth slain and brought under; which you all must do, before ever
you come to know the new Nature or Birth that is of the Spirit; for that which
is born of the Flesh, is Flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit, that is
Spirit; and if any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, and old Things are
passed away, and all Things are become new; and the Church of Christ is made up
of living Stones, squared and bewed into Order, complete together, and made a
spiritual Household, and comes to be purged, washed, and made white, and the
Filth of the Flesh done away; and such come to be Vessels of Honor, fit for
the Masters Use, and receive of the theavenly, Treasure into the earthen
Vessel; and out of the Abundance of the Treasury of the Heart, bring forth good
Things; and with the Heart, Man believes unto Righteousness; and with the
Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation.

So every one come to him, that searches the Heart, and tries the Reins, and
will reward every one according to their Works, or Deeds, done in the Body,
whether they be Good or Evil; for the Lord God will be no longer mocked, such
as you low you must reap; nor he will no longer bear your halt and blind
Service, and dead Worships, out of the Life and Power of God, and your
Hypocrisy and Dissimulation is seen by the Spirit of Truth, that leads and
guides into all Truth, which you shall one Day know is now striving with you,
as it did with them before the Flood; yet shall not always strive with Men; and
it faith, Who requires these Things at your Hands? and do you think God is
pleased, or will be served, with such dry, dead and airy Service and Worships?
I tell you nay; the Light of the Glorious Gospel, is manifest and the Pearl of
great Price is found, and many have sold, and parted with all which was most
dear to them, which they most delighted in, to buy it; and they who come to
believe in Christ Jesus, the Light, the Way, the Truth, the Life, and to walk
in the Light, they stumble not, nor stagger at the Promises; but they come to
have Life in themselves, and their Mind^ Words and Actions, are seasoned; and
they are the Salt of the Earth, a City so^ on an Hill, that cannot be hidden,
and their Lights shine so before Men; that they who are not wilfully blind, may
(...) their good Works, and godly Conversation coupled with Fear; And they that
walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, have Fellowship one with another, and
the blood of Christ they witness, cleansing them from all Sin. So if ever you
come to know God aright, you must turn to the Light that repreves you for Evil
For the Reproof of instruction is the Way to Life; and they that hate that
which reproves them for their Evil Deeds, and sets their Sins in order before
them, abide in the Chambers of Death, and know n^^ Rest, Life and Peace for
their Souls Now as you come to the Light, and wait in the Light which comes
from Christ, all your Sins will be set in order before you, and it will show
you, all that ever you did; as you shad one Day know, to your Woe and Misery,
if you continue rejecting Him and this is He in whom w^ believe, and of whom
the Prophets and Apostles bore Witness whose Name is better than every Name,
unto which every Knee must bow, and every Tongue confess, and every Tongue that
would rise (...) in Judgment against Him, shall be condemned, and shall fail
before Him.

Therefore beware and take heed what you do, and repent of all your Evil Deeds,
and of all your hard Speeches, which you have uttered against him, and his
glorious Appearance in his Sons and Daughters, in this the Day of his Power,
wherein he has made many willing to follow him wheresoever he goes, even
through many Tribulations, who have washed their Robes in the Blood of the
Lamb; when you deny him, and will follow him no further than it will make with
your Peace in the World, and Enjoyment of your Pleasures, and keep the
Friendship and Favor of the World, which none ever did, but such who are
adulterated from the Life of God, and turned against the Spirit of God in
themselves, and this shall you know.

And so whether you will hearer forbear, in this I shall have Peace; and my
Reward is with God, in that I have discharged my Duty, and warned you before
your Day bequite over, and before the Lord leave off stretching forth his Hand;
who knows and searches the Hearts of all Men; who knows my Love toward you
all, and to that which is pure of him, which never consented to Sin, in all
your Consciences; even to that, and nothing else, can I, or desire I, to be
made manifest; who believe there is a Seed to be brought forth, from amongst
you, which must be gathered into the true Fold, of everlasting Rest and Peace;
for which Seed's Sake I travel Night and Day, waiting for its Redemption and
Restoration, who am your Friend, who seek not yours, but you^ that you might
come to know in this your Day the Things that concern your everlasting Peace,
Comfort and true, Settlement (upon that Rock that cannot be shaken, nor the
Gates of Hell ever prevail against) before they be hidden from your Eyes; and
knowing the Terrors of the Lord, and the Wrath that is to (...) revealed from
Heaven shortly, against all them that hold Truth in Unrighteousness; and having
obtained Mercy from the Lord, and in his Name (the strong Tower) hid myself: I
cannot but persuade all to come into the same; and being in a deep Sense of the
Loving Kindness of the Lord, and what he has one for my Soul since I walked
with you, and was esteemed one of you, which is here too large to relate;
neither indeed am I able to demonstrate the Loving kindness of the Lord, in the
Visitation of his pure Love, in turning me from Darkness (which I must confess
all the Time I was with you I walked in) into his marvelous Light, and from the
Power of Satan unto God, and he has made me to feel and witness his Power;
therein, through his Good Will toward me, I have found the Ability to perform
and to do the Good that when I was among you I desired to do; and likewise to
resist the Evil that I would not do; and this is the Lord's own Doings, and it
is marvelous in my Eves; and I defire never to forget the Lord's great Love to
me, and powerful, effectual Working in me, To will and to do, of his own good
Pleasure. And so I desire not to eat my Morsel alone; but I desire that all may
come to taste and see how good the Lord is, great and marvelous are his Works,
just and true are all his Ways, and he waits to be gracious, and there is no
Want to them that fear the Lord, he never forsakes, nor does withold any good
Thing from them that walk uprightly.

(...), Friends, while you have (...) prize it, and put not the Day of the Lord
far from you, for the Lord is (...) slack concerning his Promise, as some Men
count Slackness; but his Long-suffering is not for any to perish; but that all
should come to Repentance. And now is the Day that every Man's Works must be
tried, and every Man's Faith and Love to God will be tried. And (...) is the
Day that many great Professors make Shipwreck of their Faith, and (...) a good
Conscience, and some that for^ ^rly seemed somewhat tender and honest amongst
you, are now grown sottish and brutish, and their Understandings dark'ned,
through the Ignorance that is in them, and the God of this World has blinded
the Eyes of many great Professors, by keeping them from the Light, by which
they might be their Ways, and the Works which they are doing out of the Light,
in the Blindness which has happened to them; but if you would come to the
Light (which is pure) of God in you, then would you receive Power to perform
the acceptable Will and Reouirings of the Lord, which that you may come to know
and do, is the Desire of him, your Friend (...) seeks not yours, but you; and
desire your everlasting Peace and Happiness, who formerly was known and
esteemed of, as a Brother amongst you; by the Name of.

James Parkes.
Wrexham, the 9th of the First Month, 1662.

Several Friends, both from the North and South of England, were drawn to ^t
these Friends in Prison; many s^ and comfortable Epistles, were written (...)
them.

There was a great Convincement, in the Year 1662. in these two Counties, (...)
Montgomeryshire, and Merionethshire; and as Meetings did increase, several
Friends came into this Town, of Welch-Pool, where our Meeting was kept, in that
House that was their Prison. The Magistrates and Priest were discontent, some
saying; That there came as many to the Meeting, as went to their Worship at the
Church (as they called it.)

So the Magistrates were resolved to come and break up our Meeting, and one
First Day they came, viz. Thomas Corbet, a Councellor, and a Justice of Peace
in this County; together with the two Bailiffs of the Town, the Sergeants at
Mace and Underofficers; when they came into the Meeting, I was at Prayer and
they were indifferent civil till I had concluded, and then they began to take
our Names, and when they had done my Wife called to Justice Corbet, and told
him, they had not taken the Name of all that were at the Meeting; he asked her,
who was untaken? And she put her Child toward him, being about a Quar^ Old; he
said, that was under Age, (...) answered him and said, We are all as innocent
from Plotting and Contriving, or thinking any Harm to any Man, as this little
Child; which smote much this Thomas Corbet, and several others that were
present. They committed me to one Serjeant's House; and Thomas Lloyd, Brother
to Charles Lloyd, and one Samuel Lloyd (Son to Samuel Lloyd of Dudson, in the
County of Salop, and eldest Brother, to John and David Lloyd of London, and
Edward Lloyd of Bristol) to the other Serjeant's House; but when the Sergeant
that I was committed to was come from the Steeple-House, he turned me out, and
bid me go Home, I should not stay there; so I went first to see my Friends, the
old Prisoners, which were kept (for a little Time) more close; and we were not
suffered to go to them; they were very glad to see me, and I was refreshed also
to see them, though we could not go to one another. In a little Time I went to
see the other two Prisoners that were at the other Serjeant's House, and the
Sergeant let them come Home with me.

On Second-day following, it came in my Mind that the Magistrates would try us
with an Offer to pass by that Transgression, upon the Condition that we would
go to the Steeple-house to their Worship the next First Day following; which I
told to Friends.

On Third-day following, Justice Corbet, and the two Bailiffs that had
committed us to Prison, sent for us before them. So we Three went, viz. Thomas
Lloyd, Samuel Lloyd, and myself. After some Discourse with them, they proposed
to us, That if we would go to Church, and hear divine Service, as they called
it, we should be discharged. I told them, that when I was last there, they
turned me out of their Church; and if I should make any Promise to go there, it
might be that they would do the like to me again. Justice Corbet said, he would
engage I should not be turned out. Then I told them, I knew nothing to the
contrary but that I would go there. Justice Corbet seemed to be satisfied; but
one of the Bailiffs said, Mr. Corbet, do you think that the old Quaker will go
to Church, except it be to disturb our Minister? Corbet asked me, whether I
would disturb the Minister? I told him, if God should put something in my Heart
to speak to the People, I hope they would not impose upon me to hold my Peace.
He said, God forbid they should do so! Then I told him, I hoped I should
perform what It promised to do: And so they discharged us. Now none was under
an Engagement to go to the Steeple-house but myself, and the Report went about,
that the old Quaker would go to Church.

So when First Day came, and the Bells began to ring, the other two Friend's
(viz. Thomas Lloyd and Samuel Lloyd) came to me, and said, we think we must go
with thee to the Steeple-house, I took my Bible under my Arm, and went to
Justice Corbet's House (that was but a few Doors from my House) to let him see
that I was going; and I asked him, if he was going? He said, he was not
disposed to go that Day, but he would send his Man to see we were not
affronted. So the two Friends and myself went to my own Pew, which was opposite
to the Pulpit; there was in the Pulpit only the Curate to read the
Common Prayer, and their Service to them that Morning: There was a great
Multitude of People; it was said, there were some, that had not been at their
Church for several Years before. So nothing was laid upon us to speak to the
People till he had done: Then I stood up, and said to the People, I suppose you
are not ignorant of the Cause of our coming here this Day, which was thus; The
Magistrates of the Town came to our Meeting, and they found us upon our Knees,
praying to Almighty God; they were civil while we were at Prayer, and when we
had done, they took our Names, and committed us Three to Prison, most of the
rest that were at the Meeting were Prisoners before: The Magistrates afterward
sent for us, and told us, if we would come to Church, we should be discharged;
and now you see we are come, according to their Desire: But I find that your
Priest is not here, and now I would have you to inform him, that I say,

1. If he proves this to be the true Church of Christ;

2. And that he is a true Minister of Christ;

3. And that his Maintenance is a Gospel Maintenance;

4. And this Worship of yours is the true Worship of God:

Then we will be of your Religion, and come again to you.

But if he proves not this, then we must conclude,

1. Your Church to be a false Church;

2. And he to be no true Minister of Christ;

3. That his Maintenance is no Gospel-Maintenance;

4. And that your Worship is not the true Worship of God.

All the People were very civil and orderly, and heard me a considerable Time
in the Steeple house; and when I had done, our Friend Thomas Lloyd spoke a few
very seasonable Words to the People. And the People said, if Mr. Langford
(which was the Priest's Name) will not prove us to be the true Church of
Christ, and our Worship to be the true Worship, then we will pay him no more
Tithes; for what Richard Davies said, he proved it out of the Bible; for, you
see, he had the Bible in his Hand all the while. So for that Time we parted.

When the Bells rang again for them to go to their Evening Service, it lay upon
me to go there again, and the aforesaid Friends went along with me; where the
old High Priest was, who made a long Sermon, till we were all uneasy; but I
desired the Friends to bear all Things patiently. When the Priest had done, he
was going away; and I stepped up in my Seat, and desired him to stay, for I had
something to say to him; which was the same as aforesaid. When he heard my
Queries, and what I had to say, he turned his Back, and went away, and gave us
no Answer. Then I said, Behold the Hireling flees, because be is an Hireling;
and some of the Peoplestaid, and some of 'em went with him, but all seemed
dissatisfied that he would not prove them to be the true Church of Christ, etc.
And I had a good Opportunity to speak to the People more at large in the Grave
yard; the Lord's Presence, Life and Power was with us, blessed be the Name of
the Lord for ever, who does not leave nor forsake his People that trust in him.

When we came Home, Justice Corbet sent for us again to him; he met us in his
Court, and said, he was sorry that Mr. Langford, was so uncivil, that he did
not answer our Queries, which he thought was very reasonable that he should.
And in a little Time many of the Neighbors were gathered together in the
Street and in his Court; we had a good Opportunity to reason with him, and to
open to the People, and to declare to them the Way and Means to obtain the
Kingdom of Heaven; and he was so moderate, that one of the Neighbors said to
him, Mr. Corbet, we think you will be a Quaker too. His Answer was, I wish I
were a Quaker in my Life and Conversation. And toward the End of our
Discourse, he desired me to give him my Queries in Writing, that Mr. Langford
might answer 'em; for said he, it may be he was not prepared to answer you
then, but he may answer them in Writing. I told him, that was but a private Way
of answering; but if he was rot prepared then, I told him, we would give him a
Meeting next Firstday at the Steeple h use, or in the Town Hall upon a Market,
Day, He said that was very fair.

This Counselor Corbet was very friendly and loving to us, and did no more
persecute us to his dying Day; but did us all the Good he could in all the
Courts of Judicature, where he was concerned.

As for this Priest, William Langford, many Friends were moved to go to him to
the Steeple-house in the Time of his Service, to declare to him and the People,
what they had to say from the Lord; and when the Magistrates have committed
some of them to the Prison on that Account, this Priest, when his Service was
over, has got them to be released.

Some Time after this, he sent the Clerk of the Parish to me for
Easter-reckonings; I asked the Clerk, whether his Master did expect any Thing
of me that had nothing from him? and bid him tell his Master, I would come to
reckon with him by and by; so the Clerk went away, and in a little Time I made
myself ready, and went to him; there were a pretty many People with him: I told
him, that his Clerk had been with me from him, for that which he called
Easter-reckonings, and I was come to reckon with him; and if he could make it
appear that I owed him any Thing, I would pay him, and I expected the same from
him. He said I owed him for several Years for the Sacrament. I asked what he
meaned by the Word Sacrament, for I found no such Word in the Scripture? He
said it meaned the Bread and Wine which were used in the Church. I told him I
received none of him, and therefore not liable to pay. He answered again, Why,
then you might come to Church, and receive it. I told him, I did not believe
that his Church was the true Church of Christ; and I did not believe that he
was a true Minister of Christ, commissionated by Him to break the Bread, and
give it to the People, and much less to sell it, or take Money for it of the
People; for I did not read in all the Scripture, that the true Ministers of
Christ did take any Money of the People for that Bread they delivered unto
them. He said then, That the Labourer was worthy of his Hire; and under the Law
it was said, Thou shall not muzzle the Mouth of the Ox that treads out the
Corn. I told him, he trod out no Corn for me; and though he was an Hireling, yet
I never hired him.

The People coming thick to pay him for the Bread and Wine, I asked him how in
Conscience he could take so much Money for so little Bread and Wine? it being I
suppose about 10 d. for Man and Wife. I asked him, what Scripture he had for
it? and desired him to prove his Practice by Scripture. He asked me, what
Scripture I had to eat Flummery? I told him, I had Scripture to eat it; Paul
said to Timothy, For every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused,
if it be received with Thanksgiving: For it is sanctified by the Word of God
and Prayer, 1 Timothy iv. 4, 5. His Communicants, who were present, were much
dissatisfied that he had no better Answer and Proof for his Practice. I desired
the People to take Notice, that he could not make it appear by Scripture, that
I owed him any Thing: But I told them, that he owed me some Money, and I
desired him to pay it me; which he did; and then we parted fairly. We have a
Saying, That even or often Reckonings make long Friends. He was very friendly
afterward, and never sent to me more for Easter-reckonings. And as for the
Tithe in Time of Harvest, he charged his Servants to take from me no more than
what was called their due, nor so much: I was informed he should say, he knew
not why he should take any Thing from me, seeing I had nothing from him. He
lived here among us many Years a good Neighbor; and though in the Time of
great Persecution, yet he had no Hand in persecuting any of us.

We have Cause to bless the Lord, who carried us through all our Services and
Exercises, in the Time of our Weakness; and though we were little and low in
our own Eyes, the Lord did not leave us, nor forsake us, blessed be his holy
Name for ever.

About the Year 1663, or 1604. I went to London, and I found some there
separated from that Love and Unity, which I formerly saw them in, joining in
that Spirit with John Perrot, who was newly come from Prison at Rome to London,
as it was said, with much seeming Humility and Lowliness of Mind; a
considerable Company joined together with him, where they had me among them for
a little Time. The Tendency of that Spirit was to speak Evil of Friends, that
bore the Burden and Heat of the Day, and to cry out against Friends, as dead
and formal; and they expected a more glorious Dispensation than had been yet
among Friends; and they kept on their Hats in Time of Ptayer. I was but a
little while among them, till a Vail of Darkness came over me; and under that
Vail I came to have a light Esteem for my dear and ancient Friend G. F. and
some others, who had been near and dear to me. But it pleased the Lord to rend
the Vail of Darkness, and cause the Light of his Countenance to shine again
upon me; whereby I came to see the doleful Place I was led into, by a Spirit
that tended to nothing but Selfexaltation, and (under a Pretense of Humility
and Self-denial) the Breach of that Unity, Love and Fellowship, that formerly
we had together; and the good Esteem we had one of another in the Lord;
Children we were of one Father, esteeming one another above ourselves in the
Lord; there was no Jar or Contention among us then, but all dwelt together in
Love and Unity, and in the Fellowship of that blessed Gospel of Peace, Life and
Salvation.

At my Return Home from London, I was soon taken to the same Prison with my
Friends in Welch-Pool; and little before I came among them to Person, the under
Jailer dreamed a Dream, how that he had in his Foldra Flock of Sheep, and that
he was wrestling to get ^in one Ram among the Sheep, but could not get him in;
but when I came to Prison, he said to my Friend Charles Lloyd, Now I have got
the old Ram in among the Sheep. But the Jailer turned me out the first Night to
my Wife and Family; and though I had the Name of a Prisoner, and was premunired
as the rest of my Friends and Brethren were for several Years, yet I was not
kept close Prisoner.

This was a Time when most traveling Friends were taken up Prisoners; and
though I was a Prisoner, yet it lay upon me to get Liberty to go and visit
Friends in several Counties of England and Wales; so I followed my good Guide,
that showed me what to do; I went to the Jailer, and told him, I had an
Occasion to go out a little while, and I could not go without acquainting him
of it, because I was his Prisoner; and he said, I warrant you will go to Preach
some where or other, and then you will be taken to Prison; and what shall I do
then, said he? I told him, that if I was taken Prisoner, I would send to him
where I was, and he might send for me if he pleased, to he bid me have a care
of myself.

In a little Time in the Love of God, I took my leave here of my Friends and
Family, and committed myself, to the Protection of the Almighty; I began my
Journey, and went to Shrewsbury, and so to Worcestershire, where I had good
Service for the Lord; so I went to Tewkesbury, where I never was before; an
ancient Woman Friend followed my Horse, and before I had put up at the Inn, she
was with me, and cordially said, she had a Sense upon her, that I was one of
her (Heavenly) Father's Children; so when I went in, and had refreshed me a
little, I asked her, whether she thought I might have a Meeting with Friends
that Evening; and she readily said, She would acquaint Friends of it, and after
she had gone a little Way out of the Inn, she rereturned again, and desired to
know my Name, that she might acquaint Friends of it; I was streightened in my
self, to give her my Name, though I knew not the Cause then; but I desired her to
go in the Name of the Lord, and if I came in the Name of the Lord, they would
receive me; so she went, and came again, and told me, I might have a Meeting;
which was appointed to be at Susan Smithins; and a Blessed heavenly Meeting we
had, and the Lord gave to us our expected End; there were several Professors at
the Meeting, some came to me next Morning, and discoursed friendly with me
about the Things of God.

From thence I went through Gloucestershire, where I had good Meetings, and so to
Bristol, and when I was clear at Bristol, the Lord having blessed me, and
preserved me so far in my Journey; I set forward toward Pembrokeshire, I
traveled without any Companion, but the Lord alone, who was with me all along
in my Journey, he was my Helper and Preserver; so I came to the House of our
Friend Lewis Davies, who gladly received me in the Lord; I staying there some
Time, they lent me a Horse to go to a Meeting at Redstone, and I left my own
behind me, thinking he might rest for some Days after my hard Riding. When I
came to the Place, the Meeting was out of Doors, there being no House, that I
did know of, that could contain the Multitude of People that was there, and
when we came to the Meeting, there was one Meredith Edwards, (whom Friends
judged unfit to Preach the Gospel) that had the Confidence to speak to the
People, till they were weary of him, and those that were sensible were
burdened by him; after some Time there stood up a Friend and silenced him. I
sat as a Stranger among them, and the Lord was with us, and his good Presence
was our Comfort and Satisfaction; and after some Time I had an Opportunity to
open to the People, those Things that belong to their Eternal Salvation; so I
concluded the Meeting in Prayer, and this Man, M. E. aforesaid, stood up again
and Preached to the People, and I turned my Back and came away, and the Friends
with most Part of the People followed me, and as I was coming out, a Friend
came and told me, there was two Soldiers, (though I understood afterward, they
were the two Sons of a Priest) that had brought my Horse there some Miles, and
when I saw my Horse, I drew nigh to them, and asked them, who brought my Horse
there? And they asked me, whether I was the Man that came from Bristol? I said,
I was. Then, said they, you are the Man we were looking for. I asked them by
what Authority they came, or what Warrant they had; and they showed me their
Swords and Pistols. I told them, such Warrants High-way-men had. Then I asked
them, how they could dare to venture in such Manner among such a Company as
there was of us? They said in Answer, They knew we were peaceable Men, and
would not resist, otherwise they would have brought greater Force. I told
Friends we were not bound to obey them, and desired Friends to part, and leave
only Two or Three with me; but Friends Love was so great to me, that they kept
mostly in a Body about me; I desired the Friend, to take my Saddle and Bridle
that was on the Friend's Horse that I rid to the Meeting on, and put them upon
my own Horse; then I got upon my Horse, and bid them lay their Hands off my
Horse, for I feared not their Swords nor Pistols; but if they had a Warrant
from any Justice of the Peace, or lawful Magistrate, within the County, I would
obey it; upon which they let go their Hold, and I turning a little aside, saw
them take hold of M. E. whom I could not call a Friend, because he was not
guided by a right Spirit: I turned myself to them again, and told them, that if
any Justice of the Peace, or any lawful Magistrate within the County, had any
Thing to say to me, who came from Bristol, they might hear of me at the House
of William Bateman, in Haverford-west, for my Business required some Stay in
the Country. So they let us go pretty friendly, and I had several brave
Meetings in Haverford-west, and other Places in the County. The last Meeting I
had in the County was at Ponchison among the Welsh, they having Notice of a
Welchman coming to keep a Meeting in those Parts; many came to that Meeting,
and good Service I had for the Lord, his Truth being declared in their own
Language to them: We had the Meeting out of Doors, and I stood with my Back
toward the Wall of Thomas Simmons's House; I was young and strong, my Voice
was heard to the Steeple-house, and most of them came out to hear me, and very
few came out with the Priest when he had done; when the Priest saw there was
such a Multitude with me, he was moved into Passion, and would have had a
Constable to take me down: It was reported that some there said to the Priest,
they would not take me down, for I preached Christ and the Gospel to them, and
they would have him come and learn of me himself: I was informed that the
Priest's Wife, and two of his Daughters, were there at the Meeting, and were
very loving and tender, and came to be convinced of the Truth. The Lord was not
wanting in us, his Life and Power, and good Presence was with us; and that
Meeting was the last I had in Pembrokeshire at that Time: The Friends of that
County were very loving and careful of Friends that came from far to visit
them; they dwelt in Love and Unity among themselves: My Service was weighty
upon me, being without a Companion: The Lord alone, that knew the Integrity of
my Heart, was my Comfort, Support, and exceeding great Reward. As for the other
Man, M. E. aforesaid, the two Men before mentioned took him before a Justice;
the Justice would have been moderate to him, and would have showed him
Kindness, but he by his (...) governable Temper, provoked the Justice to
Passion, so that he committed him to the House of Correction as a Vagrant, for
three Months, to the great Trouble of Friends.

I was informed that the Justices of the Peace, and Magistrates of that County,
were generally very moderate in the hardest Times of Persecution. At Ponchison
I took my Leave of Friends in Pembrokeshire, and came pretty directly Home, to
the Comfort of my Wife and Family, and those Friends that were Prisoners;
blessed be the Name of the Lord. The Jailer was well satisfied that I came to
my Prison, without further Trouble to him; there were several taken Prisoners
at those Meetings that I was at, but the Lord preserved and delivered me,
blessed be his holy Name for ever.

I was but a little Time at Home, before there came one John Whitehouse, a
Follower of John Perrot, and he had a Meeting at my House in Welch-Pool, I
happened not to be at the Beginning of the Meeting, but came before the Meeting
was concluded, and I found that he had sown an evil Seed, and that some of and
Friends had received it, who soon after joined with that corrupt Spirit, which
led them to have a light Esteem of their Brethren, which was a great Exercise
to many honest Friends, and especially to my Wife and me; and we were ready to
say, Has the Lord sem us here to be instrumental for the gathering of a People
in this Country; and has be suffered the Enemy to scatter them in their
Imaginations. Some Time after the Lord satisfied me, That those who were
simple-hearted among them, should be restored again into a more settled
Condition than they had formerly known, and I believed in the Word of the Lord.
And in Time the Lord broke in among them, and opened the Understanding of some
of them, and they began to reason among themselves, and saw that they were in
Darkness; and most of them were restored to their first Love, and lived and
died faithful to Truth; except one Cadwalader Edwards, who continued in
Stubbornness, and Hardness of Heart, and endeavored to hurt such as were
simple-hearted. I was moved of the Lord to give forth a Paper against him, and
all his vain Imaginations: The following Paper was likewise sent to him from
Friends.

WE whose Names are here under written, are those that thou h^ been seeking to
insinuate thy corrupt Principle into; and also are those that testify against
that seducing Spirit that thou art gope into; and most of us do know the Terror
and Judgment of the Lord, for receiving that Spirit; and we do exhort all, that
they touch not, nor taste of it, lest they be separated from the Lord and his
People; and so come under the Judgment of the Lord, as we have done; and we
have all seen the hurtful Effects of that Spirit; and in the Fear of the Lord
we do deny the same, and them that be joined to it.

Charles Lloyd, Richard Evan, Owen Jones, Watkin David, William Lewis, Evan
Thomas, Evan Davies, John Reese, Richard Davies, Thomas Hammons, Elizabeth
Lloyd, Tace Davies, Ann Lawrence, Katharine Jones, Sibil Jones, Katharine
Evans, Anne Hall, Sarah Wilson.



In 1668, this being read in one of our Monthly Meetings for Worship, the Lord
was pleased to afford us his sweet Presence, and his Power melted, tendered and
mollified our Hearts; which caused us to praise the Lord, for his great
Goodness and Mercy to us, in bringing us out of that Darkness which came over
us by giving heed unto the seducing Spirit of John Perrot, John Whitehouse, and
this Cadw. Edwards. Friends were very careful afterward of receiving any
Spirit that might tend to the Breach of Love and Unity among us. Many other
Friends brought in their. Testimonies against that Spirit, among the rest,
there was one that came from our Friend Thomas Ellis, who had been particularly
warned by me, in the Fear of the Lord, not to touch nor meddle with that Spirit
(though it came with much seeming Humility) lest he should suffer thereby, which
he did, to his great Sorrow; and he set out in his Paper, and said, This have I
suffered for my mungrel, Moderation: But blessed be the Lord, he was sweetly
restored again to his former Love and Integrity, to the great Comfort of
himself, and his Brethren.

As to these Men, viz. John Perrot, John Whitehouse, and the said He became
afterward very bad, and ungodly in his Life and Conversation, and died in the
Fleet-Prison at LONDON, being there for Debt; yet near his End, he seemed to
repent of his wicked Life, and told some, That they who were preserved faithful
among the People called QUAKERS would be happy, and that they were the People
of God.
Cadw. Edwards, they turned their Backs upon God and his Truth, and followed
the Devices of their own Hearts and Imaginations.

About this Time there being a Meeting of Friends gathered at Aberystwith in
Cardiganshire, most of them were sent to Prison to Cardigan Town, and our
Friend Thomas Ellis was taken Prisoner with them; and I having the Sufferings
of these young-convinced Friends under Consideration, I found much Love in my
Heart toward them, even so as to go to the Magistrates of the County to offer
myself a Prisoner instead of my Friend and Brother Thomas Ellis, and some
others, that they might go Home to visit their Families. I acquainted my Wife
of my Exercise, which came pretty close to her; but, after some Consideration,
with much Tenderness, she gave me up for that Service. In a few Days I took my
Journey, and went first to Thomas Ellis's House to visit his Wife and Family,
before I went further; his House being about 24 Miles from Welch-Phol, and not
far off my Way to Cardiganshire, and there I very unexpectedly met T. Ellis
himself at Home; he told me they were all discharged out of Prison. And thus I
saw it was the good Will and Pleasure of my heavenly Father to accept of my
Free Will Offering instead of the Deed; and my Friend T. Ellis and his Wife
were sensible of my Love and Kindness to them therein.

And now my Service being further for Pembrokeshire, T. Ellis was willing to
accompany me in my Journey; and we went to Aberystwith to visit those Friends
there, where we had a pretty large Meeting on First Day in the Morning; there
came in one Thomas Price, Brother to Sir Richard Price of Gogorddan, and took
us all Prisoners, and committed us to the Town-prison. That Evening we had a
Meeting in the House where we were Prisoners; many of the Town's People, and
some of them Persons of Account, were at the Meeting that Evening: I declared
the Word of the Lord to them in Welsh, and showed them the Way to the Kingdom
of Heaven. And a sweet, comfortable Meeting we had, and great Satisfaction it
was to them that were there.

That Night a weighty Consideration came upon me about these young convinced
Friends, that were so lately discharged of their Imprisonment, because they
were like to go so quickly to Prison again. I asked Counsel of the Lord what we
might do for and in Behalf of those young and tender Friends; and being under a
great Exercise in my Spirit, and earnestly praying to God, that he might make
some Way for their Enlargement; it came in my Mind to write to the chief
Magistrate, Sir Richard Price, and to give him an Account of my Journey so far,
and how that my Friend T. Ellis and myself intended for Pembrokeshire, and we
rested with our Friends, and having a Meeting with them that Day, were taken
Prisoners by his Brother Thomas Price, and if it was his Pleasure to send us to
Prison to Cardigan, he would be so kind to leave his Neighbors at Home, and
accept of my Friend T. Ellis and myself as Prisoners instead of them all: To
this Effect I wrote to him, and sent it next Morning; but he sent me no Answer.
But the (...) constable came to us, and told us, we most all prepare to go to
Cardigan-Town, where the County Goal was kept. So Friends freely and heartily
prepared themselves to go. And when the Time of our going was come, they
tenderly taking their Leave of their Wives, Children and Neighbors, (for some
of the^ Neighbors came a little Way to send them out of Town) the Constable
stopped; and bid all go Home except The. Ellis and Me: For it seems the High
Constable had private Orders not go with them, but to do as I desired in my
Letter. And thus the Lord did try those tender Friends, and also delivered them.

The Constable had Instructions to bring us to the Quarter Sessions, then held
at ^lanbedar, and not to Cardigan; when we came there, the Justices being upon
the Bonch, we were had before them, some of them were formerly acquainted with
Tho. Ellis, he having been in Authority, (and according to his Place; somewhat
sharp against Offenders) the Justices were very moderate to him; but the Clerk
of the Peace was very peevish and froward. So I asked the Justices. Whether
that Man, that did question my Friend, was a Justice of the Peace? And they
told me, he was not; then I told them, we were not bound to answer him. But, if
they would give me Leave, I would give them a just Account of my Business in
that County, and upon what Account we were sent there before them; and they
desired me to speak on. -- I told them, I was at my own House, with my Wife and
Family, in Welch-Pool in Montgomeryshire, and hearing that my Friend Thomas
Ellis, and other of my Friends, were in Prison in this County of Cardigan, for
a considerable Time; it was with me to come to the Magistrates of this County,
to offer myself a Prisoner, that my Friend T. Ellis, and the rest of them,
might go for a little Time to visit their Families; in order thereunto, I came
as far as my Friend T. Ellis's House, where I found him at Home with his Wife
and Family: And they being discharged of their Imprisonment, I had a further
Concern upon me to go to Pembrokeshire, my Friend T. Ellis being not willing I
should go alone, accompanied me along: So we came to Aberystwith, to rest there
the First Day of the Week, and had a Meeting with our Friends, and were talen
Prisoners, and sent here to you, and now desire to know your Pleasure. The
Justices answered, it was great Love indeed, that caused me to come and offer
myself a Prisoner upon such an Account, and they were sorry that Sir Richard
Frice gave us that Trouble, as to send us there: And so they discharged us. And
the Court being silent, I had an Opportunity to declare the Word of the Lord
among them. Very still and attentive they were, as if I had been in a Meeting;
I commended their great Moderation, and in the Love of God we parted with them.
The Deputy-sheriff and the High-constable that brought us there, came out of
the Court, and treated us very civilly, and would have bestowed on us the best
that the Town could afford, but we were sparing of taking any Thing of them. I
was informed, that the Deputy Sheriff and High Constable were convinced, and
were very loving to Friends all along; and I know not of any that were
imprisoned in that County afterward. The Lord was with us, and he had a Regard
to the Integrity of our Hearts, and he alone pleaded our Cause, and was with us
in our Services.

Then we took Horse, and left the Town, and went on toward Pembrokeshire, till
we came to Cardigan, being about 24 Miles. We met with some Hardship on the
Way, having little or no Refreshment till we came here, where we had very good
Entertainment for ourselves and Horses; and from thence we had a Friend for our
Guide toward Ponchison in Pembrokeshire, but we were benighted, and it rai^d,
and our Guide lost his Way, and we wandered up and down among the Peat, or
Turf-pins, and other dangerous Places; but the Lord preserved us out of them
all. And at length we came to Ponchison; but it being dark, we did not know the
House where our Friend that we intended to go to lived, but I spoke to our
Guide to see where their Steeple-house Door was, and he brought us to it; then
I told them, the Friend's House was opposite to it: For I rememb'red when I had
a Meeting there, my Back was against the Wall of the House, and my Face toward
the Steeple-house Door. So we went forward, and found the House; I desired T.
E. to call and tell them, That there were some Friends that had lost their Way,
and desired to have Lodging there that Night; they, being in Bed, answered,
they thought that no good Friend was out that Time of Night; T. E. reasoned a
little with them, but still they were not willing to rise and let us in; at
last I called to the Friend, whose Name was Tho. Simmons, and to his Wife, and
desired them to rise and let us come in; and he asked me, who was there? and I
told him, in Welsh, Richard Davies was there; what, said he, Richard Davies of
Welch-pool* I told them, I was the Man: Thereupon the tender, loving Friends
hastily came down, and let us in to their House, and we were satisfied in the
Love of God. This being the first Journey that T. Ellis made to Pembrokeshire
since he was convinced.

Hence we went to Haverford-west, and so through all the Meetings in the
County, till we returned to Ponchison; again, and had a Meeting there, where;
there came many Friends, both Welsh and English; so that the House could not
contain us, and we had the Meeting out of Doors in the Street, and I declared
the Word of the Lord to them, both in Welsh and English.

As we came up to Pembrokeshire, we went to a Baptist's House, and the Woman of
the House being loving and tender, promised we should have a Meeting among the
Baptists there. We also appointed a Meeting at Newcastle, in Carmarthenshire,
Peregrine Musgrave, James Lewis, and several other Friends accompanied us to
the Meeting at Newcastle; the Magistrates of the Town were very civil, and
several of them came to the Meeting, the Weight and Service of which lay
chiefly upon me; for though my Friend and Companion T. E. was reckoned a
Deacon, and an eminent Preacher among the Independents, yet, his Mouth was but
very little opened as yet by Way of Testimony among Friends, in was an
understanding Man in the Things of God, and was not hasty to offer his
Offering, till he found a very weighty Concern on him. And as I was declaring
to the People in the Welsh language, I stood opposite to a great Window that
opened to the Street, and there was an evil-minded Man in the Street that had a
long Fowling Piece, and he put the Mouth of it through the Window, and swore,
that if I would speak another Word, I was a dead Man: But blessed be God, I was
kept in that which was above the Fear of Man, and the Lord kept me in Dominion
over all. There were two Women sitting in the Window, and the Mouth of the Gun
came between them both; one of them seeing the Gun there, turned her Back upon
it, and said in Welsh, when the Man threat'ned as before, I will die myself
first. And there was one in the Meeting went to this Man, and took the Gun away
from him; and that bad, wicked Man came into the Meeting, and was pretty quiet
there; the Lord's good Presence was with us, a good Meeting we had, and I may
say, That they that trust in the Lord are as Mount Sion, that cannot be
removed. And it was said of old, As the Hills ware round about Jerus;alem, so
is the Lord round about this People, to be a present Help to them in every
needful Time.

Here Pembrokeshire Friends and we parted, and it being somewhat late, the
Meeting having held long, we traveled, all Night over some doleful Hills,
intending to be at the Baptist Meeting next Day, which we had appointed, as
before mentioned, it was by Computation about 24 Miles. In this Time we had
little Refreshment for ourselves or Horses: But when we came there, we had no
Meeting; the Woman of the House said, That the Magistrates had heard of it, and
charged them, that we should not have a Meeting there: So the slavish Fear of
Man came over them: The Woman seemed to be sorrowful, and would have given us
some Victuals; but I told her, we did not travel so hard to come there for her
Meat and Drink, but in the (...) of God for the Good of their Souls.

Here my Friend and Companion Thomas Ellis and I parted; he went Homewards, and
I went that Night to one William ap Hugh's House (a Poor Friend, who had a
considerable Company of small Children) I lay on a little Straw upon a Hurdle
of Rods. And when the Morning appeared, I took a Bit of a Cake, and a Cup of
clean Water, and William ap Hugh and I took our Journey toward Radnorshire,
which was about so Miles, mostly over great Hills; and when I came there, I
stayed a little while among Friends. And afterward, I hast'ned Home to my
Family; and when I was come there, Margaret Bowen, brought my little Girl to
me, and said, here is a Child the Lord has given thee; she had been Sick near
unto Death: Now when I was under my Exercise in ' Pembrokeshire, one told me,
my Child was dead, and my Wife not like to recover; which was Matter of Sorrow
to me; and I turned a little aside from Friends, and the Lord satisfied me,
that neither my Wife nor Child were dead. And when I came Home, they told me my
Child had been as it were raised from Death to Life: But blessed be the Lord,
that restored her, and preserved my Family, and we were comforted in the Lord.

After this Journey, I stayed a considerable Time at Home, with my Family and
Friends, our Meetings were pretty much supplied with Traveling Friends,
especially from the North of England; and though we were Prisoners, yet we had
our Liberty to go to Meetings Abrond; we had a considerable large Meeting at
Cloddiecochion, (the Place now of my abode) near Welch-Pool, there was at our
Meeting, John ap John, and James Adamson, a North Country Friend; but the
Magistrates of Pool (it being in the Eimits of their Corporation) came and
broke up our Meeting, and took us Prisoners; we old Prisoners went to our own
Prison, i. e. the County Prison, and the rest went to the Corporation Prison. I
took my Friend John ap John by the Hand, and told him, he must go to Prison
with me: So several of us went together, and when the Hurry was over with them,
they let us who were old Prisoners; go to Prison alone; then I discharged our
Friend John ap John, and I told him, he should be my Prisoner no longer; he
stayed a little while with us, and then went homewards. the Jailer was friendly
to us, and after a while; I went to the Magistrates, and got them all released
that Night, except James Adamson. The Magistrates of the County gave strict
Charge, that if any North Country. Quakers came that Way they should be
secured; and I had a great Care upon me, to get them discharged, as soon as
might be; for I knew there was a great Concern upon them, to visit the Churches
of Christ, wheresoever God sent them: So when I faw a convenient Time, I went
to the Sergeant of the Town, and asked him, by what Auhority he kept my Friend
there a Prisoner; and I asked him, whether he had a Commitment upon him; and he
told me, No: Then I desired him to let him come with me, and I would Answer for
him. So the Friend came to my House; and Friends and I concluded together to
let him go to Shrewsbury. which was about 12 Miles from Welch-Pools, and I
desired him to stay there till he should hear from me.

The Assizes being there a few Days after; the chief Magistrate of Pool went
there, and I went there also. And as my Friend James Adamson and I were walking
under the Hall at Srewsbury we met the Magistrate of Welch-Pool, to whom James
was a Prisoner; he seemed a little angry, because I sent the Prisoner away, and
asked me, how I could answer it? For, said he, we sent to the Lord Herbert of
Cherbury, for a Commitment upon him; I told him, they had kept him too long
without a Commitment, which they could not legally answer: Now he knew not that
the Prisoner was with me; so I asked him, after some Discourse, what he would
give me for a Sight of the Prisoner; then he considered; and asked me, whether
the Man that was with me was not his Prisoner; I told him he was (for I knew
that he was then out of his Liberty) so he said to the Friend, Your Friend has
done you and me a Kindness; and I do see, that if there had been Occasion, you
would have come again; so he parted very friendly with us.

In these Times the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy was tendered to most
Friends that came into the County, if they were taken; and such were committed
to Prison, for not taking it, till the next Assizes, and then premunired; and
then little Hopes of their being released from their Imprisonment; and it came
to be a Saying, that when any Quakers were taken Prisoners in Montgomeryshire,
There would be no End of their Imprisonment.

About the Year 1669, my ancient, well beloved and dear Companion John ap John
and I, took our Journey for South Wales, to visit our Friends and Brethren in
those Parts: We went first into Radnorshire, where we had several good
Meetings; and we gave timely Notice before hand, where we appointed the
Meetings, and several Friends and other People came from Hereforashire to meet
us at the lower End of the County of Radnor, where we had a sweet, living
Meeting, and the Power of the Lord undered the Hearts of many: We declared the
Word of the Lord both in Welsh and in English; and my Friend John ap John was
very sound and intelligible in the Welsh Language; he deserved the Right hand
of Fellowship, for he was my Elder, and the first Friend that I heard declare
in a Meeting, in the English Tongue; and though he was not perfect in that
Language, yet he had the Tongue of the Learned, to such who were spiritual. And
when that Meeting was ended in Radnorshire, we both withdrew a little aside
from Friends, being bowed before the Lord, in a Sense of his Goodness amongst
us. So after a little while, I turned my Face toward the Friends, and I saw a
Man coming toward me with much Brokenness and Tears, when he came, he took me
in his Arms, and field me there, and I was very tender of him; though I knew
him not; he asked me whether I did not know him? and I told him I did not;
though I said, I could remember something of him: He said he had Cause to
remember me. And when I looked upon him again, I asked him whether (...) was
not Roger Prichard? And he said, he was the Man that had gone astray. And I was
glad, yea very glad, that the lost Sheep was found, and that he came to know
the true Shepherd and his Voice in himself, and he followed him, and went not
astray again, ash did before; and he accompanied us to several Meetings in
that County, and in Monmouthshire. And as we were parting with him, John ap
John told him, he had come far out of his Way with us: He answered, we put him
in his right Way again, and he hoped he should keep in it.

So we went through Monmouthshire, and Glamorganshire, visiting Friends; we had
a good Meeting at a Place called Scilly, and at Swanzy in Glamorganshire; where
we met some French Britains; we could understand something of their Language;
we found they were passionate among themselves.

From thence we passed to Carmarthenshire; we had a Meeting at Cardiff, and
lodged at one John Mayo's, and his Wife Elizabeth, who was as a Nursing-Mother
to Friends in the Beginning. At Cardiff, John ap John, suffered great
Persecution and in other Parts of that Country, before I was convinced, I
suppose he might be Prisoner in 1653, or 1654.

We went thence toward Pembrokeshire, where we had several good Meetings, and
the Lord was with us. Then we came homewards; but before we parted with Roger
Prichard, we appointed a Meeting at his House, which was in Almeley Wooton; the
Lord helped us on in our Journey and we came there according to the Time
appointed, and a large, sweet, comfortable Meeting we had there; I know not
that any Meeting had been there before; I appointed another Meeting to be
there; and in a few Weeks after my Return Home, I went there myself
accordingly. The Concern of that Part of the Country in Herefordshire was much
upon me, and I was often there; and when the People of that Village would see
me come, they would say one to another, Come, let us go to Mr. Prichard's, for
we shall have Prayers there to Night; and the House has been soon near full of
People, and a comfortable Time we used to have together, and many were gathered
to the Lord in those Parts. And as for Roger Prichard, the Lord blessed him in
his Ba^ket, and in his Store, and his Heart and House were open to Friends, and
he built a fine Meeting House at his own Charge, and also gave a Burying-place,
and settled both upon Friends for that Service, and lived and died in Love and
Favor with God, and in Unity with his Brethren: Say to the Righteous, it shall
go well with them.

About this Time I was pretty much at Home; and the Enemy and Adversary of the
Growth and Prosperity of Truth in these Parts, stirred up an Informer against
us, one John David, alias Pugh, a Weaver, one who was a Tenant to the Jailer,
and we had our Meeting in an upper Room in our Prison, and the said Informer
dwelt below; and once, as he was coming by my Barns, where my Cattle were, he
said to some of my Neighbors. These Cattle are all mine: They asked him, how
they were his? He said, Richard Davies has preached three Times this Day, and
that by the Laws there is 60 l. on the Preacher for the same. By this it was
noised about in the Town, that I was like to be undone; my Neighbors seemed to
be concerned thereat; and on^ of the Aldermen, that was a Relation of mine,
came chidingly to me, and asked me whether I had a Mind to ruin my Wife and
Family? Could I not leave my Preaching, when I knew the Laws were to severe
against us? I told him, I could not, when the Lord required it of me. I desired
him to let the Informer alone, and let him take his Course. He said he would
not; but said he, I will tell thee what I will do, I will take him along with
me to Severn Side, and when my Knife very sharp, and I will cut off one of the
Rogue's Ears; and if ever he informs against thee again, I will cut off the
other. I earnestly desired him to let him alone; but he and his Neighbors were
so enraged against him, that I was afraid they would have done him some
Mischief in one Place or another.

This Informer was a Weaver by Trade, and the Neighbors took their Work away
from him, so that his Children went soon after a begging, many of the Town
telling them, Their Father had got a new, rich Trade in Hand, and that they
need not give them any Thing. So the poor Children suffered very much; but my
Wife did not withold her Hand of Charity toward them.

One Time I had my Boots on ready to go out, the Jailer, that was this
Informer's Landlord, seeing him come up the Street toward my House, I being in
the Street, he said to the Informer, Mr. Informer, you see Richard Davies is
going out to Preach somewhere to Day, and I advise you to look diligently after
your Business, and find him out; and if you will not inform against him, I will
inform against you: You have got a good Trade in Hand; and if you do this great
Service for the King, you must needs have either Dolobran or Caedcowrid for
your Pains. The one was the Mansion House, and the other the Jointure-house
that belonged to my Friend Charles Lloyd, and his Ancestors. And thus the
Jailer jeered him; and the poor Informer traveled great Part of that Day from
one Friend's House to another, to see for me, till he came to Dolobran, where
we were met upon the Church Affairs, and as we were coming from the Meeting, I
met him at the Door, and discoursed a little with him; he told us, that he was
going for a Warrant against us to Edward Lord Herbert: I felt the Power of God
was over him, and Truth reigned among us. He went to the said Lord, and desired
a Warrant against the Quakers; the Lord asked him, what did ^he Quakers do? He
said, they Preached. He queried of him, where did they Preach? He told the
Lord, they preached in his House, which was their Prison. The Lord answered,
let 'em Preach there as long as they will, what have I to say to them? But the
Informer told the Lord, that they did meet at Cloddiecochion; he asked him,
whether those there were not Prisoners? He answered, they were, Then said the
Lord, what do they do at Cloddiecochion? do they Preach there? He said, No,
their Way was to sit down, and to look one upon another. The Lord answered,
thou art but a Fool; the Quakers be a loving People, they went to visit their
Children, and to eat Bread and Cheese with them.

So the Lord took his Cane, and went from him with his Gentleman to walk in his
Park; this Informer followed them, and spoke again to the Lord, and said, Will
you be pleased to grant me a Warrant against the Quakers? The Lord asked him,
who sent him there for a Warrant? And he said, Dr. Davies. [This was the
present Priest of Welchpool, and a peaceable Man, and no Persecutor.] The Lord
asked him again, whether he had a Letter from him? The Informer said, No, he
thought his Word might be sufficient to get a Warrant against the Quakers. Upon
this the Lord with Indignation (it is thought) would have spoiled him had not
his Gentleman interposed. The Lord said to him, Is it not sufficient to put my
peaceable Neighbors in Prison? Must I give a Warrant to make such a Rogue as
this is rich, by uining them and their Families? So the Informer returned Home,
and as I was going by his House, he desired me to walk in, for he had something
to say to me: So I went in with him, and he said to me, I am sorry I did you so
much Wrong, for I Intended much Evil against you; I was put on to be an
Informer, which proved to be mine and my Childrens R^in; for my Neighbors took
their Work from me, and when my Children went to their Doors, they would scarce
give them my Thing to relieve them: And now I desire you to pray to God to
forgive me; and I pray you to forgive me also; for I think most of our Bishops
are Papists, and there is no Trust to be put in them. I desired him to have a
Care what he said, and not lay the Fault there; for it was the Enemy, the
Adversary, the Devil, that begot that covetous Mind in him against his
peaceable Neighbors. So I desired the Lord to forgive him; and as for me, and
my Friends, we would forgive him; and I desired him to go his Way, and to do so
no more. So he never informed against us afterward.

And thus the Lord helped us, and preserved us through great Hardships and
Difficulties. There was nothing taken from us at this Time, upon this
Informer's Account.

About the Year 1675. we heard that there was a severe Persecution by Informers
in Merionethshire, especially in Penllyn, near Bala; in which Time our Me^ings
did increase there, and many People came to them; and there lay a Concern upon
my Friend Charles Lloyd and me (...) visit those Meetings, and there we had a
Meeting on the First Day of the Week at Cadwalader Thomas's, called Wern-fa^^;
there was abundance of People, more than the House could hold. Two Informers
came in, and staid there all the Meeting while; and after we had cleared
ourselves, by Way of Testimony, the Understandings of the People were very much
opened in the Things of God, and the Way to his Kingdom, in the Welsh Language
in which I conclued the Meeting, the Lord owning of us with his great Power and
Presence, to our great Comfort, and the Satisfaction of the Auditory. The two
Informers kneeled upon their Knees with us, while I was at Prayer, and one of
them (called Robert Evans) did exceedingly tremble; and when I had concluded
the Meeting the said R. Evans took a Paper our of his Pocket, and stood before
us with much Trembling and Shaking, and could say nothing to us, but a Warrant,
a Warrant, a Warrant; and Friends stood quiet in the Possession of that Life
and Power, that God had blessed them withal that Day; and we said nothing to
him, for some Time, nor he to us, which was almost in Amazement to the
Spectators, for he was a spiteful, envious Man, that had ^oe much Spoid upon
Friends in those Parts, and at last I spoke to him, and asked him, what he had
got there? And he told me, He had a Warrant I desired him to let us see it; but
he was not wiling we should; but said, if we did (...) a little farther (...)
^ur Way, we should see it: So we told Friends, we are not bound to follow him;
and we desired Friends to depart to their own ^^bitations. But our loving,
tenderhearted Friends would not part with us; Charles Lloyd and I had a great
Mind to (...) what the Tenure of his Warrant was, and who the Justices of the
Peace were what did sign it. So we went along with him to the House, where he
said we ^^oul I see it; but the Man of the House not being within, he was still
loath we should see it: We told him, He should ^we it fase again, and at last,
he let us see it: And we saw that one Colonel Price of Rhiwlas, and one Colonel
Salisbury of Rug had granted it. We went that Night to John Thomas's of
Llaethgwn, and we were concerned to go and visit these Justices. In the first
place we went to see whether we could speak with Price of Rhiwlas, to lay the
Sufferings of Friends, that were his Neighbors and Tenants before him, for
many of them were his Tenants; but we could not see him, though we heard he was
at Home. Thence we went to Rug, where this Colons Salisbury lived; and we
enquired, before, we came to the House, whether he w^ (...) Home? Some told us
he was: But when we came there, they perceived we were these People called
Quakers, by our Habit and Language; and he being conscious to himself what he
had done, and what Spoil was made upon Friends Goods, would not admit us to
speak with him. We desired one of his Servants to acquaint him, that we had
come a great Way to visit our suffering Friends in that County; and my Friend
Charles Lloyd bid him tell him who he was; for it seems he was his Relation,
and an old School fellow. From thence we went to John ap John's, near Wrexham,
in Denbighshire, and visited Friends there; and from thence we came Home to our
Families, where we found all Things well; and the Lord was with us in our
Journey.

Some Time after this, it lay upon me to go and visit Friends in London; and I
went to see the Lord Powis and his Lady (who dwelt then at London) they were my
particular Friends; and I acquainted them with the Sufferings of our Friends in
Merionethshire by Informers upon the sat Act? And they asked me, Which Way
they might be helpful to Friends? I told them, that if they would be pleased to
get a few Lines from their Brother the Duke of Beanford, who was then
Lord-President of Wales, to Colonel Price of Rhiwlas, I did not question but
that would moderate them very much: For the said Colonel was not in the main a
Persecutor, but was put on by some peevish Clergymen (so called) in a little
Time they got his Letter for me, with his own Seal thereon, but not sealed up;
the Tenure of it was thus: Sir, I have stopped the Complaint of his Majesty's
Subjects, call a Quakers, from coming before the Council Board, concerning the
severe Prosecution of the Penal Laws against them. So when I had this Letter, I
made what haste I could down into the Country, and gave it to a Friend and
Relation of Colonel Price's, who delivered it into his own Hand: And it had
good Effect; and the Lord was pleased thereby to stop the Rage and the Ruin
that was intended against Friends in that County: And the Justices of the Peace
called the Informer to an Account for what he had done to, and taken from
Friends, but he could not make up his Account; the moderate Justices followed
him so close, in Behalf of the King, that he was near ruined and undone
thereby. So it happened that himself fell into the Snare and Evil that he
intended against his Neighbors.

Some Time afterward, one Price, Priest of Llanvawr in Merionethshire, was
severe against Friends for Tithes, and some Friends came down to me to
Welch-Pool, with an Account thereof: I considered his Proceeding upon a Quo
minus from the Exchequer, and I caused an Attorney to appear for the Friends,
and he, in a few Terms, brought me a Writ of Charges against the Priest; and
when I had it, I was in a great Straight what to do with it, for I knew that if
the Priest was taken upon it, it would exasperate him against Friends; I sent
for some of these Friends to be at our Quarterly Meeting at Dolobran, which
they belonged to: I told them what my Judgment was in the Matter, and how, that
though there was a Writ obtained against the Priest, yet it was not expedient
to have it executed; but I told them. I thought that it would be more
convenient for them, to take the Writ, and show it to the Deputy-Sheriff, and
tell him the whole Case; but to take Care that the Writ should not be left with
him; which was well approved of, and Friends did accordingly, and kept the
Writ. The Deputy-Sheriff knew what would be for the Advantage of Friends, and
he was ready to do what he could for them: So he blazed it abroad, that the
Quakers had got a Writ against the Priest; and the poor Priest was afraid of
coming to the Steeple-House for several Days, to perform his Service; so he
employed somebody to come to Friends to make an End of the Matter, and I never
heard that he troubled Friends again for Tithe, while he was there.

About this Time, whilst I was at London visiting Friends, there sprung up a
new Informer, whose Name was David Maurice, he lived at a Place called
Pon-y-bont in Denbighshire, and was newly made a Justice of the Peace of the
County of Montgomery; he that recommended him, informed that he was a sober
Man, and not given to Persecution; but soon after he had his Commission, he
appeared to be a great Persecutor, not only of our Friends; but of other
Dissenters also.

He the said David Maurice (upon the 7th Day of the first Month called March,
1674-5.) came into a Meeting at Cloddiecochion, with about 14 or 15 Persons,
most of them armed, where a small Number of our Friends were waiting in Silence
upon the Lord, he requested us to de art; our Friend Thomas Lloyd requested of
him a Quarter of an Hour's Time before he dispersed them, which he readily
granted, and he and his Followers sat amongst 'em; the beforementioned Thomas
Lloyd uttered a few Words by Way of defining the true Religion, and what the
true Worship was; all which the said David Maurice approved of as sound, and
according to the Doctrine of the Church of England: Yet notwithstanding he
fined him the said Thomas Lloyd 20 l. for Preaching, though he was no
Magistrate of the Corporation, and he fined the House 20 l. and 5 s. a Piece
for the Hearers. And on the 16th of the 4th Month, 1675, he caused to be driven
from the said Tho. Lloyd, 4 Cows and a Mare, all worth about 16 l. by two of
his Servants, one of them being his Clerk, and the other his Tenant, and no
Officer of the Corporation, nor of the Parish, nor of that Allotment of the
Hundred, in Place with them; these Drivers were lurking near the Ground about 2
Hours before Day, and drove away the Cattle before Sunrise, and they were
brought out of the County into his own Demesns.

The same Day, about the Dawning thereof, the said Drivers, by a Warrant from
the said David Maurice, rudely broke through a Neighbor's Fields, to the
Ground of Thomas Lewis, of Cloddiecochion, aforesaid, and drove from him 6
Cows, 2 Oxen, and 2 Heisers: Alleging for his Offense, that the said T. Lewis
suffered a Meeting to be at his House, though the said David Maurice was at
that Meeting himself, and not only allowed of the Time, but approved of what
was spoken there.

About the same Time Charles Lloyd, of Dolobran, had Ten young Beasts taken
from him by John Jones, of Golynog, an Attorney at Law, who was that Year an
Overseer of the Poor in the Parish of Myvod, together with the Petty Constable,
etc. upon a Warrant from the said David Maurice, the only Informer, and busy
Justice, upon this mercenary Act, in our Borders, for Preaching at
Cloddiecochion, within the Liberties of Welch-Pool, the 14th of 1st Month,
1674-5. Though the said Charles Lloyd was not at that Place that Day, nor for
many Days before nor after at any Meeting. David Jones, of Branyarth, for being
a Hearer at the said Meeting at Cloddiecochion, had a Brass Pan for his own
proper Fines taken from him, and one Cow for the pretended Inability of others
convicted, upon a Warrant from the said David Maurice, of Pen-y-bont.

But nothing was taken from me, though my Family was at the Meeting, and I
lived within the Limits of the Corporation.

Now I being at this Time in London, and my Service there pretty much in the
Time of the said hard Persecution; my dear Friend Charles Lloyd, sent me up a
full and large Account of the Sufferings of Friends there; by the said wicked
informer, David Maurice, and when I had read and considered them, I was under a
great Exercise, what Way to take to prevent the further intended Mischief of
this Man, and I laid their innocent and faithful Sufferings in secret before
the great God of Heaven, who has the Hearts of all Men in his Hand, and may
order them as seems Good to him.

Now after this, when the Time of the Quarter Sessions was come, the Clerk of
the Peace told the Court, he had received new Commissions; which being read,
and this D. M. being then present, and finding himself left out, fell into a
great Rage and Passion.

In a little Time the said D. Maurice went to London, and was put into
Commission again: But being made High Sheriff of the County this Year, he could
not act as a Justice of the Peace; so he fell into a great Rage, for that the
said Office was like to be chargeable to him. So that Year we had Peace and
Quietness; and when his Sheriff ship was over, he was coming through a Brook
called Lynlleth, near his own House at Pen-y-bont, and it was supposed that his
Florse threw him down, and he was carried down into the River Tannat, a
considerable Way, and there miserably perished.

In the latter End of the Year, 1674, I went to visit my ancient, dear Friend
George Fox, who was a Prisoner in Worcester, I passed through Herefordshire,
and had some Meetings there; I staid with my Friend G. F. for some Time; he
told me how he was taken Prisoner, and that he was indicted for refusing the
Oath of Allegiance, and how he had been twice removed by an Habeas Corpus to
London, and that he had had his Trial there, and no Error being found in his
Indictment, he was returned back again to his Prison at Worcester. And as he
was opening his Case to me, I thought there might be sufficient Errors found in
his Indictment to get him discharged; I told him of a Counselor, one Thomas
Corbet, who was a Friend of mine that was then at London, who was very
excellent at finding out Errors; so after some Consideration, he sent next Post
for a Habeas Corpus, which ca^^ down in a little Time, and the Sheriff was
served with it; so we set forward, G. Fox went in the Coach with the Sheriff
and Clerk of the Peace of Worcester, and drid on my Horse along with the Coach,
and no other Friend with us.

We came to London, the 8th Day of the 12th Month, and when we came there,
several Firends much admired, that he should be removed up again; for he was
something private in the Matter. So I desired the Friends, who had the
Management of the Business before, to let me have a Copy of the Record, which
was pretty difficult to be had; for seve al thought it was to little or no
Purpose: But G. F. being uneasy, was not satisfied till I had it. I had
acquainted Counselor Corbet of the whole Case, as far as I could understand
it, before I could see a Copy of the Record; and about the 10th Hour in the
Night, William Mead came with me to Counselor Corbet with it; and when he had
read it, he said, There were several material Errors in it; which put W. Mead
to a Consideration, how that could be; and he desired the counselor to show
him one Error. The Counselor s^'d him several Errors; and W. Mead seemed to
wonder that such great Errors could not have been found out by other Counsel.

The next Morning, being the 11th Day of the 12th Month, we went to Court,
where some other Counselors moved first on G. F's Behalf, and they were pretty
close upon some Things, but they knew not of any Errors in the Indictment: All
this while Counselor Corbet was silent. There was one Counselor Walcott, who
was against G. Fox (and fearing lest they should find some Errors in the
Indictment) he moved that the Oath should be tendered again to G. F. Upon which
Counselor Corbet stood up and moved, That there was no Imprisonment in Case of
Praemunire. Where upon the Chief Justice Hales said, Mr. Corbet, you should have
come sooner, at the Beginning of the Term, with that Plea. He answered, We
could not get a Copy of the Return, and of the Indictment. The Judge replied,
You should have told us, and we would have forced them to have made Return
sooner. Then said Judge Wild, Mr. Corbet, you go upon general Terms, and if it
be so as you say, we have committed many Errors at the Old Bailey, and in other
Courts. Corbet was positive, that by Law they could not imprison upon a
Praemunire. The Judge said, There is Summons in the Statute. Yes, said Corbet,
but Summons is not Imprisonment; for Summons is in order to a Trial. Well, said
the Judge, we must have Time to look in our Books, and consult the Statutes: So
the Hearing was put off till the next Day. As we were going out of
Westminster Hall, some Friends were much troubled, that the Welsh Counselor
should start such a Plea, contrary to the Opinion of the Judges, and all the
Counselors; and some of them said, they thought G. F. would have been
discharged if the Counselor had not put in that Plea: But honest, plain G. F.
said he had a fine Trial, and he was cheerful in his Spirit. I desired Friends
to have a little Patience, for I thought the Welsh Counselor would stand upon
his own Legs. So I went to the Hall again, and staid for Counselor Corbet till
the Court was up; and when I found him, I told him he started that up that many
thought he could not make good; and if so, it would be a Reflection upon me,
and the Welsh Counselor, as they called (...). He desired me to bring him that
Evening another Copy of the Record besides what he had. So I got one, and went
with it to him; and he writ in the Margent something in Brench, and give it me
again, and desired me to go with it to Thomas Rudyard, who was an Attorney in
London for G. F. and desire him to deliver it that Night to Judge Hales, and he
would take the other himself to Judge Wild; and then he thought there would be
little Discourse of that Matter more: And so it happened. For,

The next Day, they chose rather to let that Plea fall, and begin with the
Errors of the Indictment; and when they came to be opened, they were so many
and so gross, that the Judges were all of Opinion, that the Indictment was
quashed and void, and that G.F. ought to have his Liberty: Upon which
Proclamation was made, That if any had any Thing to say against G. Fox, let
them come forth and they shall be heard, otherwise he is discharged. And so he
was set at Liberty.

Counselor Corbet, who pleaded this Cause, got great Fame by it; for many of
the Lawyers came to him, and told him, He had brought that to Light, which had
not been kno^ before, as to the not Imprisoning upon a Preminire. And after the
Trial, a Judge said to him, You have attained a great deal of Honor, by
Pleading George Fox's Cause so in Court.

As we were coming out of the Court, I had an Opportunity to speak to some of
London, and to blame them for their Unbelief; because they could not believe,
that any Good could come from that Plea: I was then of the Mind, and still am,
that the Hand of the Lord was in it, more than the Wit and Cunning of Man; for
that Trial put an End to all the Premunires in the Nation. Our Friends, in this
County of Montgomery, were most of them under a Sentence of Praemunire for many
Years. Our Friend Charles Lloyd was not suffered to see his own Honse for
several Years, although it was but about five Miles from Welch-Pool, where he was
kept a Prisoner. And as for my self, I had the N^ of being a Prisoner on the
same Account for about Seven Years, but was not kept close Prisoner in all that
Time, but I had my Freedom and Lib^^^^ to be at London (as at this Time) and in
other Places of the Nation, as my Service was, and as the Lord made Way for me.
In this Time I visited Friends pretty much in their Sufferings.

So, Good is the Lord, and good is his Word, and worthy is he to be praised by
all that know him, from henceforth and for ever.

1677. Some Years after this Trial of G. F's at London, Counselor Walcott, who
was a Counselor against him, was made Judge of three Counties in North Wales,
viz. Merionethshire, Carnarvanshire, and Anglesey; he began his Circuit in a
Town called Bala, in Merionethshire, he caused several Friends to be brought
before him, and he tendered them the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, and he
did not intend to proceed against them by Praemunire, but said, The Refusal of
those Oaths was High Treason, and he would proceed against them upon that
Statute for their Lives the next Affizes; threatening, that the Men should be
hanged, and the Women burned. He was a wicked, hard-hearted Man, and intended
much Mischief to Friends, if the Lord had not prevented him. So Friends of that
County acquainted us here of the whole Proceedings in that Affair; it being the
Time that the Parliament was sitting; Friends concluded, that our Friend Tho.
Lloyd should go up to London immediately, and we desired him to advise with
Counselor Corbet (who was then in London) what to do in the Matter; and when
Counselor Corbet heard of the Business, he was much concerned about it, for he
was very well acquainted with this Walcott; and he said, By that Way they might
try us all, if Popery came up again; for they have (said he) the Law (or Writ)
De Haeretico Comburendo in Force, which was executed in Queen Mary's Days for
the Burning of Heretics, which was not repealed to this Day. So Counselor
Corbet and Thomas Lloyd went to the Parliament House, and acquainted several
Parliament Men of it, and that Sessions it was repealed; and Judge Walcott was
spoken to in London, and our Friends were no further prosecuted, but had their
Liberty: And blessed be the Lord, Friends had great Peace and Quietness in that
County for a considerable Time afterward. And in a few Years this Judge
Walcott died; and so there was an End of that Persecutor.

In the Year 1677. our Friend John Burnyeat came to give us a Visit in Wales.
and had a Meeting at a Town called Machynlleth in Montgomeryshire, where there
appeared an Informer, one Oliver Maurice of Drain Llwidion in Merionethshire,
and caused Disturbance there; and went afterward to one William Pugh of
Mathafern, near Machynlleth aforesaid, a Justice of the Peace for this County
(he was one of them that had his Commssion when D. Maurice was turned out, as
before related, p. 159.) who granted him a Warrant; and himself, together with
his Bailiff and a Constable, meeting John Burnyeat and Thomas Ellis upon the
Road, stopped them, and seized on their Horses, with their Saddles and Bridles;
so that they were constrained to travel on their Way on Foot. J. Burnyeat's
Mare died within an Hour and a Half after Seizure; and T. Ellis's Horse died in
the Informer's Hands in Half a Year's Time; in which Time also a Distemper
infected most of his Cattle, whereby he suffered very great Los^: the said
Justice likewise fined several other Friends at the same Time, though they
lived in another County. Thomas Ellis dispatched a Messenger down to me at
Welsh Pod, being about 22 Miles. The next Day, the Lord of Powis being at Home,
at his Castle of Powis, I went to him, and acquainted him thereof; and when he
heard it, he was very sorry. I desired of him, that he would grant me that
Favor to make Use of his Name, that he heard such and such Things concerning
the beforesaid Justice: Not only so, said he, but let Mr. Edmond Lloyd (this
was a neighboring Justice, and no Persecutor) write to him, and tell him, that
I am angry with him for such Proceedings. So I went to my Friend, that other
Justice, and I got him to write a few Lines to the said W. Pugh; so he wrote
effectually to him, and I sent it away by Night; by which Means the rest of the
Fines were stopped. But John Burnyaet's Mare was dead, as before related.

Some Time after there was in this C. of Montgomery, one Hughes, Priest in the
Parish of Hirnant, where lived a Friend, one John Rhydderch, an honest Man, who
conscienciously refused to pay Tithe: This Priest having got Judgment against
him out of the County Court, several of his Cattle were drove away on that
Account by the Sheriff's Bailiffs; but our Friend being well acquainted with
the Deputy-sheriff, informed him of the Errors in these Proceedings; and the
Sheriff ordered the Bailiffs to return the Friend his Cattle: The Priest was in
a great Fret, that he lost all that Charge. And after that, the Priest ordered
the Friend to besued at Ludlow Court, which was for the Marches of Wales. This
Court was a great Yoke and Bondage to Friends in this Dominion; for all Answers
were to be given upon Oath in that Court, which Friends could not do for
Conscience Sake. This Priest followed the Friend with one Contempt after
another, till it came to a Writ of Rebellion: We let him go on as far as he
could, till the Friend was ready to be taken; our Attorney that we did employ
gave us, an Account of it, and I desired the Friend to go to a Friend's House
in Shropshire, which was out of the Jurisdiction of that Court and stay there
till he should hear from me. And I sent to London to John Lloyd, Brother to
Charles Lloyd of Dolobran, who belonged to the Chancery Office, and he sent me
down a Prohibition, and I sent to serve the Priest and Attorney with it: The
Priest fell into a very great Rage, and his Attorney came to him for Seven
Pounds Charge that he laid out for him, but the Priest would not pay him; so
the Attorney sued him, and got Judgment against him, that the poor Priest could
not go to perform his wonted Service for some Time. Soon after which the Priest
died, and I know not (...) had one Penny of his Money; and that Friend was
never troubled after on Account of that Suit.

Our Friend Charles Lloyd of Dolobran, was sued for Tithe at the great Assizes
held for this County of Montgomery, by the Earl of Castlemain, Impropriator,
and Randal Davies, Vicar of Myvod, the Parish that our Friend Charles Lloyd
lived in; we were satisfied it was a Court of Record, and they might sue for
treble Damage for not paying Tithe: So we concluded to go with a Copy of their
Declaration to Counselor Corbet, who lived then at Welch-pool, and when he
read it, he said, he would demur to it; I asked him whether he could damur in
the Case of Tithe; he said, he would maintain a Demurrer to that Declaration;
so when the Court sat, he acquainted the Judge that he would demur to that
Declaration; the Judge said, Demur in the Case of Tithe? Yes, in this Case,
said he: Then the Judge asked him, whether he would demur special or general?
(...) said, when we join in Demurrer you may know. So they joined in Demurrer;
and when it came to be argued, he showed his Cause of Demurrer. So the Judge
and the Court were convinced of the Error, and they paid Cost, and mended the
Declaration, and next Assizes they obtained Judgment upon Nihil dicit. And so
Charles Lloyd's Cattle were driven for treble Damage, but the Priest was so
perplexed, and put to Charge and Trouble, that I do not know he ever sued any
Friend for Tithe again.

After this I went to London to the Yearly Meeting, and continued there
sometime, in and about the City, and so came leisurely down through several
Meetings, visiting Friends; and while after I came Home, Thomas Ellis and James
Halladay came to our Town, I told James it was well done in him to give us a
Visit in these Parts of Wales; they said, they came to visit us against their
Wills; I asked them, whether they were Prisoners? they said, they were: And
soon after came other Friends along with them, I took them all with me to my
House to refresh themselves; they told me, that James Halliday came from London
to South Wales, intending to take Shipping t^^^ for Ireland, to be at the
Half-year's Meeting, but the Wind proving contrary, he was necessitated to come
for North Wales to Holy-head, and having a Meeting in this County, near
Llamdlos, they were taken Prisoners and fined by one Ev^n Glyn, a Justice of
the Peace, and sent here; I was very much concerned for James Halliday that he
should be stopped in these Parts, and hindered of his Service. So next Morning
about 2 a Clock, I took Horse and went to this Justice's Father-in-law, one
Justice Devereux, and I found him at a Village three Miles from Welch-pool; he
asked me what was the Matter? I told him that his Son-in-law Glyn had committed
some of our Friends to Prison to Welch-pool, and fined them also; and I told
him I though it by the Law that no Man was to suffer twice for the same supposed
Transgression; he gave his Son-in-law hard Language, and desired me to see some
Way to get them off; so I went to a neighboring Justice, and got James
Halliday a Discharge, and brought it with me that Morning; so we hast'ned him
away with a Guide toward Holy-head, and I was informed he had a good Passage,
and got in Time to the Half year's Meeting in Ireland, as he intended

And as for Tho. Ellis, and the roast of the Friends, the Jailer (...) that they
should be forth coming at the next Quarter Sessions, at which Time Charles
Lloyd, and myself attended the Court, and went to the Clerk of the Peace, and
desired him to call our Friends first, which he did; and the Friends being all
at the Bir, no Prosecutor appearing against them, (Justice Glyn being not then
come to Town) they were soon discharged without demanding any Fees; and after
Friends had refreshed themselves in Town, they went homewards, some of them
toward, Radnorshire, and those that went toward Llanidlos, met Justice Glyn,
that had committed them, going toward the Quarter Sessions; he spoke to them,
and they told him, they were discharged, he seemed not to be sorry for it, for
he was not a Persecutor in the Bottom; but was put on by a peevish, proud,
informing Priest, and I know not that ever he did the like again.

I went to London, to the Yearly Meeting, in the Year, 1681. where Persecution
was very severe in the City, and elsewhere, in those Parts; at which Meeting it
lay upon my Mind, to move for a Yearly Meeting in Wales, and after some
Consideration about it, it was left to Friends in Wales, to appoint their first
Yearly Meeting, as in the Wisdom of God they should see meet, at their
Half-year's Meeting held at Swanzey, the 28th of 7th Month; an Account of which
my Friend T. Ellis sent me to London, as follows:

Dear Friend R. D.
IN the Love of God is my Remembrance of thee at this Time, with many others of
the like minded in and about the City, and especially those who from the
Beginning have been and still are most exercised under the glorious Weight of
the Care and Concerns of the Church of Christ, the Remembrance of whom has
diverse Times, and especially of late, as at this present, wrought both Eyes to
Tears, and Hearts to Tenderness. Although I was disappointed in my Expectation
of seeing thee here at this Half-year's Meeting, yet thy Letter to John ap
John, coming so seasonably, did so answer for thee, that it was both Joy and
Refreshment to many of us. We had a full Meeting of Friends from most Parts of
Wales; many having come upon the Account of the Yearly Meeting, which was
concluded to be at Haverfordwest, the Second-day of the Week called Easter Week
for the following Year. Here were E. Edwards, John ap John. W. Players, Francis
Lea, Philip Leonard and Richard Walter, who had Testimonies, and many other
Friends besides, from other remote Parts, all zealous for the Yearly Meeting.
We had Meetings here the three last Days. --

Thy Friend and Brother; Thomas Ellis.
Swanzey, the 28th of the 7th Month, 1081.

About the Year 1680, or 1681, there came one Dr. William Lloyd, late of
Martins in London, to be Bishop of this Diocese, called St. Asaph; Persecution
was very sharp and severe in several Places about this Time, upon Account of
Excommunication, and the Statute of 20 l. a Month. But this new Bishop thought
to take a more mild Way to work, by summoning all Sorts of Dissenters to
discourse with him, and to seek to persuade them to turn to the Church of
England; and among the rest, when he came to Welch-pool in his Visitation, he
sent for us; so Charles Lloyd, Thomas Lloyd, and myself, waited, seeking to
speak with him: But I was that Day bound for London, so I could not speak with
him; but my Friends staid till they had an Opportunity with him; and my Friend
Charles Lloyd gave me an Account afterward, of what passed, between them,
which was to this Effect, in short:

How that the Bishop was much displeased that I was absent, and when he was
told of my urgent Occasions to go, and ^y Stay on Purpose some while to see
him; he said, His Business was greater, whatever my Business was. That Day they
discoursed with him, his Chaplains, and other Clergy, so called, from about 2
in the Afternoon, till 2 in the Morning; afterward they discoursed with him,
two other Days at Llanvilling. The first Day, from about 2 in the Afternoon,
till Night; and the next Day, from 10 in the Morning, till an Hour in the
Night, publicly in the Town Hall. The first Day at Pool, our said Friends C.
L. and Y. L. gave their Reasons of Separation; but in none of the three Days,
would the Bishop and his Clergy defend their own Principles, or refute ours:
But only held the three Days, on the general Principles of Christendom, and the
Apostiles Examples of Water Baptism, and once a small Touch at the Bread and
Wine. Thomas Lloyd, held the last Day, our Reasons why we separated from the
Church of England: which were

1. Because their Worship, was not a Gospel Worship.

2. Because their Ministry, was no Gospel Ministry.

3. Because their Ordinances were no Gospel Ordinances.

But they would not join with him to prove any of them, though often solicited
thereunto; but Friends being Sufferers, submit to all Disadvantages: For they
had not any Notice beforehand of what Matters they should argue, till they
came to the Place of Dispute; and the last Day, they forced Thomas Lloyd, to
about 28 Syllogisms, all written down as they disputed, to be answered
extempore; and the Bishop said he did not expect so much could be said by any
on that Subject, on so little Warning. And he said, That he expected not to
find so much Civility from the Quakers; he highly commended Thomas Lloyd; and
our said Friends came off with them very well. They had also much Discourse
with the Chancellor, and with one Henry Dodwell, and the Dean of Bangor, now
Bishop of Hereford, very learned Men, who were also at the Dispute, with many
of the Clergy of the Diocese, with some Justices of the Peace, and Deputy
Lieutenants of the County, and a great Concourse of People, in the Town Hall,
aforesaid, in Llanvilling. Several of the Clergy, with whom I afterward
discoursed, seemed not well satisfied with that Dispute: For they said, they
thought that the Validity of Water Baptism was much weakened thereby; and
several noted Men, that were present at the said Dispute: said, that they
thought there could not be so much said against Water Baptism, as had been said
there: But it was agreed by Consent of all Parties concerned, that the Dispute
should not be printed.

About this Time I stayed a pretty while in London; and when the Lord made Way
for me, I took my Leave of the City Friends, letting them understand, that I
was preparing Homewards, intending for my Prison upon the Writ De Excommunicato
Capiendo, that was out against me, and our Friends, and other Dissenters, in
this Diocese of St. Asaph. A little Time before I came out of the City, there
came two or three grave Citizens (I suppose of the Independent Congregation)
and told me, They were come to let me know, that there was a Writ De
Excommunicato Capiendo out against me, and there was one of their Friends in
Prison already on the same Writ in our County, and if I would contribute with
them, they said, they knew how to make it void. I told them, I knew there was a
Writ out against me; and I did also know there was a Friend of theirs, one
Richard Trollus in Prison in Welch-Pool on that Writ. I told them, I thought
they might make the Writ void, but I would contribute nothing toward St; for I
told them I would hasten Home as soon as I could, and go to Prison, if
required: But they said, They were satisfied I had other Reasons why I would
not make the Writ void, and desired me to be free with them, and tell them my
Reasons. I told them, I thought they might make that Writ void with a great
deal of Charges; but, said I, how will you prevent the Bishop from coming on
again with another Writ, which you cannot make void? and if there be any Error
in their Proceedings in this, no Doubt but the Bishop and Chancellor will mend
it in the next: And whether do you think it is better for me to go to Prison on
this false Writ, or on a Writ that you can find no Error in? I said, if I go to
Prison on this erroneous Writ, and the Sheriff or Jailer gives me my Liberty
the Bishop or the Chancellor cannot justly sue them. And so those Men went away
well satisfied with the Reasons I gave them; and I know of no Money they spent
to make the Writ void.

I acquainted my Friend William Penn, and some other Friends, that I intended
to give the said Bishop Lloyd a Visit before I went to Prison, if the Lord was
pleased to make Way for me. So my Friend W. P. the Morning before I came out of
the City, sent me a Letter from the Lord Hide to the Bishop, with his Coat of
Arms on it, unsealed. So I took my Journey, and the Lord brought me safe Home,
to the Comfort of my Family and Friends, who were afraid I had been detained
from coming Home.

Soon after my Return (even the next Morning) I set out to see the Bishop,
without Interruption; though the Sheriff, one Geoge M^rcer, was very envious to
Friends, yet I escaped his Hands at this Time. I went to my Friend Tho.
Wynne's, who lived in a Town called Caerwys in Flintshire, not far from said
Bishop's Palace, and he went with me; and when we came there, the Bp's.
Secretary came to the Gate, I asked him, Whether the Bishop was within? He said
he was; and asked me, who would speak with him? I told him, That there was one
Richard Davies would speak with him: What, said he, of Welch-pool? Yes, said I:
What said the Secretary, my Lord Bishop: Bishop, as it signifies an Overseer,
said I, I am; but Lord Bishop, I deny. So the Bishop sent for us in; there were
several Clergymen with him, and among the rest the Dean of Bangor before
mentioned. The Bishop seemed to be dissatisfied, that I was not with them at
the Dispute at Llanvilling: We went soon to dispute about Water Baptism; I told
them, There was one Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism; and that Baptism was
necessary to Salvation; and that Water Baptism, which was John's Baptism, was
to continue and remain but for a Season. So this, and such like Discourse, held
us till it was late that Night; and then I went to my Friend's House, with an
Order to be there again in the Morning. So I came in the Morning, and we
disputed upon the same Subject: I said, If one should grant what they desired,
viz. that Water Baptism was necessary to Salvation, which I would not, where
should they have an Administrator, seeing that Paul says expressly, He was not
sent to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel; and thanked God, that he Baptized
none, except such and such, 1 Cor. i. 14, 17. And Peter, who Baptized many,
came so to see the Invallidity of Water Baptism, that he said, By Baptism we
are saved, (not the putting away the Filth of the Flesh, (which outward Water
could do no farther) but the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. iii. ^1? So they went from this to their
Ordination: I put them upon to prove, who sent them to baptize; and so the Dean
told me Such an One ordained him; and so he named from one to another. I told
him, I thought I should send him to Rome for their Succession and Ordination.
And they said, Yes, the Ordination might be good, though it came from Rome. He
bro't a Comparison; as, Suppose a Malefactor was condemned to die, and a
Reprieve was obtained, and it came down by the Hang-man's Hand; and though it
came so, yet (said he) the Pardon was good. Then said I, Your Ordination comes
not by the Spirit and Power of God. This Return made them somewhat uneasy; and
the Time being pretty far spent, I was willing to be discharged, having been
there in all Part of three Days.

I told the Bishop of good old David, who said, Psalm. xxvi. 6. I will wash my
Hands in Innocence, then will I compass thy Alter, O God; that with the Voice
of Thanksgiving I may publish and tell of all thy wondrous Works. Then I said
to the Bishop, Thou can not say, thou will wash thy Hands in Innocence, nor
compass the Alter of God, while thy Writs remain against so many innocent
People, that are willing to suffer till Death for the Testimony of their
Consciences toward God: And I said, Bishop Lloyd, if I go to Prison upon this
Account, I shall have more Peace there, than thou shall have in thy Palace. And
I said to him again, Suppose another Prince should arise, that would impose
something upon thee, that thou could not do for Conscience sake, what
would thou do? He said Then I will go to Pennsylvania, also (for at that
Time many Friends were about going there.) Then it came clearly to me, and I
said to the Bishop, Though thy Head be gray, yet thou may live to see
Liberty of Conscience in England; though, as to outward Appearance it seemed to
be very far from it at that Time.

Then the Bishop called for Pen and and Ink, and said, he would write to the
Chancellor for my Liberty; but I told him, I was not satisfied for myself to be
at Liberty, and my Friends to be in Prison: So he wrote to the Chancellor to
suspend the Execution of the Writ; and when he had done, he read the Letter to
me, and I owned his Kindness to us all therein. And then I took the Lord Hide's
Letter out of my Pocket, and gave it him; and when he saw the Superscription,
and knew from whom it was, he asked me, how I came by it? I told him, as I was
coming out of London, intending for Prison, a Friend of mine brought me that
Letter the same Morning that I left the City. When he had read it, he said, he
hoped I was satisfied that he had granted me the Contents of that Letter. I
told him, I was so, and I hoped he should have a Reward for his Well-doing.

Then I was dismissed, and had Leave to come Home, and brought a Letter to John
Edwards, Chancellor, a peevish Man against Friends, who lived at a Place called
Llanymynech, about eight Miles from Welch-Pool. When he received the Letter, he
did according to the Bishop's Order; and those Friends in the Diocese, that
were concerned therein, were not molested nor troubled on that Account any
more; and the Friends that were in Prison before were discharged. And we have
great Cause to bless and praise the Lord, for all his Mercies Kindnesses, and
Deliverances to us; for hitherto he has been our Eben-ezer, that is, the Lord
has helped us, 1 Samuel vii. 12.

In the Beginning of the Year 1682, my dear Friend Charles Lloyd and I went to
visit Friends in Herefordshire, Worcestershire, etc. and so came through their
Meetings to London, before the Yearly Meeting. I acquainted my Friends G.
Whitehead and W. Penn, that I intended to go to the Lord Hide to acknowledge
his Kindness for his kind Letter on my Behalf to Bishop Lloyd. G. Whitehead
said, There was some Service to be done for suffering Friends in Bristol, and
it was thought convenient, that Three of the City, and Three of the Country,
should go with the said Sufferings, and, desire the Kindness of the Lord Hide
to present them to the King; the three Friends for the Country were, Charles
Lloyd, Thomas Win, and myself for the City, G. Whitehead, Alexander Parker,
and one more. Our Friend G. W. told me, that my Countryman Sir Lionel Jenkin,
Secretary of State, was so cross and ill-humouv'd, that when the King was
inclined to Moderation and Tenderness to suffering Friends, he oftentimes
stopped and hindered the Relief that was intended for them: And when we came to
White Hall, we waited a long-Time before we could speak with them, they being
upon a Committee a considerable Time; but we had sent in by the Doorkeeper, to
acquaint the Lord Hide that we were there, and in Time they sent for us in: The
Secretary looked grim upon us. But I went to the Lord HIDE, and did acknowledge
his Kindness for his kind Letter on my Behalf to the Bishop. He told me, as if
I should tell the Bishop, there would be Liberty of Conscience in England. I
told him, I did say so; and I did believe it would be so in the God of Heaven's
Time. Then the Secretary Jenkins spoke in a scornful Manner, and asked me, What
was Welsh for a Quaker? I answered him, Crynwr, Crynwyr; it being the singular
and plural Number. But, said the Secretary, we had no Welsh for it, for there
were no Quakers in the Romans Days. Then my Friend Charles Lloyd answered him,
and said, if thou did ask my Friend the Question right, he has answered
thee right; for there is English, Welsh, Latin, Greek and Hebrew, for a Quaker.
The Secretary said, Sir. I understand Welsh pretty well, and English, and
Latin, and Greek, but if you go to your Hebrew, I know not what to say to you.
So in this Time I left my Friend C. L. to engage with this peevish Countryman,
and in that Time Represented the Lord HIDE with a long List of the Names of
both Men, Women, and Children, in their several Prisons at Bristol; I desired
him to be so kind as to present their Sufferings to the King, which he said he
would; and our Friend G. Whitehead spoke further to him. Then I turned to the
Secretary, and he directed his Words to me, and I spoke to him thus in Welsh:

Mae in ddrwg gennif, fod un o Hiliogaeth yr hen Frittaniaid; yr rhai
ydderbynioddy Grefydd Gristianogol in gyntaf in Loeger; in erbyn yr rhai sydd
gwedi derbyn y wir Gristianogol Grefydd yr awr bon. The English is Thus:

I am sorry that one of the Stock of the ancient Britains, who first received
the Christian Faith in England, should be against those who have received the
true Christian Faith in this Day.

He replied, He was not against our Friends; but he said, our Friends gave
their Votes for the Election of Parliament Men that were against the King's
Interest. I told him, it was our Birthright, as we were Freeholders and
Burgesses, to elect Men qualified to serve both King and Country; but how they
were corrupted, when they came within these Walls, I knew not. Then the
Secretary would have engaged farther with me in a Dispute about Religion: I
told him, He was an ancient Man, and that they had been a long Time there upon
their Business, and if he would be pleased to dismiss us then, and appoint what
Time we should some Morning wait upon him, we would, if he pleased, spend an
Hour or two with him in Discourse about Religion: Upon which he took off his
Hat, and thanked me kindly for my Civility; but we heard no more of the
Dispute. But upon the whole Matter, our Friend G. Whitehead told me, he was
more moderate to Friends afterward, than he had been before. The Number of
Prisoners that were in the said List delivered to the Lord HYDE to be presented
to the King, in both Prisons, amounted to 139, of which there were 18 aged
Women, from sixty and upwards, and 8 Children. In the latter End of the List it
was said, Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy.

I had my several Exercises this Year 1682. in London, both from false
Brethren, and otherwise: Once I was at the Bull and Mouth Meeting, and there
were in the Gallery several troublesome People, and none of our minist'ring
Brethren, that were in true Unity with us, but G. Whitehead and W. Gibson, the
Gallery being pretty full; one of them seemed to strive to keep me out, and our
Friends G. W. and W. G. perceiving it, made Way for me to come up to them;
another of them had been speaking long in the Meeting, and had made many weary
of him: I was under a great Concern in my Spirit for the Honor and Exaltation
of the Name of the Lord and his Truth, and the Ease of many that were under
Weights and Burdens; yet, for Quietness sake, I silently b^re the Weight and
Exercise that was upon me, till he had done; and then my Mouth was opened in
the Name and Power of God, and the Lord had Compassion on his afflicted Seed,
and caused the Light and Life of his Countenance to overshadow the Meeting, to
the Comfort and great Satisfaction of the Faithful. At which Time I was made to
detect the false Doctrine which one of them had declared to the People, viz.
"That the Children of God are destroyed for want of Knowledge." I told the
People, That the Children of God in these Days were the Children of the New
Covenant; and the Covenant that he makes with them is. That they shall know
him, from the Least to the Greatest, and the true Knowledge of God to his
People in these Days is Life Eternal, John xvii 3. Though Israel of old were
destroyed for want of Knowledge, because they did forget the God of their
Fathers, that brought them out of the Land of Egypt, and out of the House of
Bondage, insomuch that the Lord complained of them, and said, The Ox knows
his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib, but my People know not me, Isaiah i.
3. and elsewhere it is said, They have forgotten me Days without Number. These
were those Apostates that the Lord complained of, Jer. ii. 13. who had
committed two Evils, they had Forsaken him the Fountain of Living Waters, and
hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that could hold no Water. These were
such as the Apostle said, When they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
neither were thankful; but became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish
Heart was darkened: For this Cause God gave them up unto vile Affections, and a
reprobate Mind, Romans i. 21. And the Apostates in our Days (said I) have forgot
the God that first made them acquainted in Measure with him: So they having
lost the Sense of his Goodness, have separated themselves from the Love and
Unity of the Brethren: B^ the Children of God, who are faithful to the Measure
of the Grace of God in themselves, know it to be their Teacher and Leader into
all Truth. And these are not destroyed for want of Knowledge, though the World
know him not: there are Apostates in our Age who have lost the true Knowledge
of him; but the Saints in Light, have and remain in the true Knowledge of him,
being guided by the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot receive, because it
sees him not, neither knows him: But ye know him, for he dwells with you,
and shall be in you, John xvi. 17.

When I had thus eased my Spirit, a Concern came upon our Friend and Brother G.
Whitehead, and he sweetly concluded the Meeting in Prayer.

After this I was pretty well cleared of the City, and was willing to draw
homewards, and next First Day I came to Jordan's Meeting in Buckinghamshire,
where we had a Blessed Meeting; then I went and had one Meeting at Chesham,
from thence I went to Robert Jones's near Tring. And from thence I went to the
Quarterly Meeting at Weston-Turfield, not far from Aylesbury, where it opened
in me, to advise and counsel Friends, to keep to those Rules and Methods that
were agreed on among us, in our Men's and Women's Meetings. As I was declaring,
came in an opposite Party; however I went on, and showed them how it was agreed
among the Apostles, to send chosen Men, endu^d with the Holy Ghost, to set up
good Orders and Methods among them: So I delivered unto them, that it seemed
good to the Holy Ghost, and to us also, to set up our Men's and Women's Meetings,
that the Care and Concern of the Church of Christ, might be upon holy,
self-denying Men and Women, who might take Care of the Fatherless and Widows in
their Afflictions, and keep themselves unspotted from the World; which the
Apostle James says, is pure Religion, and undefiled before God, James i. 27.
And that the Care of all, both poor Strangers, and Prisoners in Affliction,
might be carefully and tenderly looked after, and supplied according to their
Necessities: And that the Ministers of Christ in this Day, might take the
Counsel of the Apostle, Acts xx. 28. Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and
to all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the
Church of God, which he has purchased with his Blood.

When I had ended what I had to say from the Lord among Friends, one of the
said Party stood up and spoke something by Way of Reflection upon what I then
delivered; and when he had done, our Friend Thomas Ellwood proposed to the
Meeting, that all should sit down, and wait to feel the Power of God among us,
and let that decide, whether I did speak in the Name and Power of God, among
them this Day. To which the Meeting agreed, and all were silent, after which
several Friends, as they were moved of the Lord, gave tenderly their Testimony,
that what was delivered that Day, was in the Name and Power of God; and that
his Presence was with us; as honest Robert Jones, and Richard Baker, who loved
the Lord, and his Blessed Truth, with all their Hearts, and several others
present in that Meeting. And there stood up a Young Man, that I knew not, whose
Heart was affected and much broken in Spirit, and he said on this wise, There
is a Man come this Day amongst us, I know not from whence he came, not where he
goes; but this I am satisfied, the Lord sent him here, and his Power and
Presence is with him, and his Testimony is for the God of Truth. I enquired
afterward, who that Young Man was? And they said, he was one John Thornton.
Upon this one of the Party broke in violently and disorderly against that, that
had been agreed upon among us, before the Meeting had fully cleared 'emselves
and smished their Testimonies: But it proved greatly to his Dishonor and
Disgrace, so that he was made manifest to those that did adhere to him. The
Meeting held a long Time, from about Ten in the Morning, till (as they thought)
Ten or Eleven at Night. But blessed be the Lord, that does not leave his People
without a Witness to himself; and he is the Preserver and Defender of all his
People that do wait upon him; and they that trust in him, are as Mount Sion,
that cannot be removed.

After this, I made what Haste I could Home, taking Meetings in my Way; as at
Banbury, and the Country about, and Part of Worcestershire: So, blessed be the
Lord, I came safe Home, to my Wife and Friends, where I found all Things well;
blessed be his Name for ever.

In the Year 1683 I went again to London to the Yearly Meeting, and staid there
some while after most of the Country Friends were gone out of the City. I was
engaged one First Day for Westminster-Meeting, and there was no Minist'ring
Friend there but myself, and several weighty Matters opened in me at that
Meeting; as concerning the Church of Christ, what it was, and on what it was
built: I said, some be of the Judgment, that the Church of Christ is built upon
Peter; and I opened to the Understanding of the People something of what is
written in the 16th Chapter of Matthew: And I showed them, that that which
revealed unto Peter, that Christ was the Son of God, was a Manifestation of the
Spirit of God which was in Peter; for it is said, Mat. xi. 27. No Man knows
the Son but the Father; neither knows any Man the Father save the Son, and he
to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. God revealed to Peter that Christ was
the Son of God; and he is the only Rock that his Church is built upon, the Rock
of Ages, the Foundation of many Generations, that the Gates of Hell never
prevailed against: But the Gates of Hell prevailed against Peter, when he
denied his Lord and Master in the Time of his Sufferings; and therefore was not
like to be the Rock which Christ built his Church on. It is said, 1 Cor. x. 4.
For they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was
Christ. And so Christ is the Rock, the sure Foundation, that his Church is
built upon. And Peter says, 1 Pet. ii. 5, 6. etc. Ye also as lively Stones,
are built up a Spiritual House, an holy Priesthood, to offer Spiritual
Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. And in v. 8. he acknowledged
Christ to be the Rock. Paul says, 1 Timothy iii. 15. "That the House of God, the
Church of the Living God, is the Pillar and Ground of Truth." This, said I, may
inform the blind and ignorant People of this Age, that Lime and Stone, and
Temples that are made with Hands, are not, as they say, the Church of Christ,
and the House of God; 'For God dwells not in Temples made with Hands,' as
says the Prophet, Isaiah lxvi. 1. and the Martyr Stephen, Acts vii. 48, 49.
Thus I was concerned to declare the Truth in that Meeting, with much more to
the same Effect. And after Meeting I went with some Friends toward the City;
and as we were going along the Strand, the Queen was coming from her Chapel;
and some of her: Lifeguard were very rude, and with the Staves that they had
in their Hands they did knock and beat Friends that had their Hats on, all
along as they came; and I received a Blow upon my Head that it swelled, and was
sore a considerable Time. But blessed be the Lord, in all our Exercises, and
Afflictions, his Life, and Power and Presence bore us up in the Midst of there
all; Praises be to his pure and holy Name for ever.

In this Time, before I came out of London, we met still with more Exercises
and Troubles: One First Day in the Morning I was not well, and could not go to
the Meeting, nor scarcely get out of my Bed; but when the Time of our Afternoon
Meeting came, it lay upon me to go to the Bull and Mouth Meeting; and I told
Job Bolton, with whom I lodged, that I must go to the said Meeting: He reasoned
with-me; but I told him I would go so far as I could; and he said he would go
with me. And as we went through the Passage to go in, I heard a Voice, that I
was satisfied was not the Voice of a true Shepherd; the Meeting being already
gathered, and many People there: When I went up to the Gallery, there was one
that was Preaching of Perfection, who said, Be ye perfect, as your heavenly
Father is perfect, etc. I staid to hear him but a very little while, till I
stood up and judged him, and told the People, That the Kingdom of God stood not
in Words, but in Power, Righteousness and Holiness. Then this Man went in a
Rage down out of the Meeting, land a considerable Company followed him; and a
Friend or two went after them as far as Fleet Street, to see where they were
going; and one of the Company saw the Friend, and desired him not to follow
them too close, lest they should do him a Diskindness: For we heard afterward
that there was a Wager laid that this Man (whom some said was a Jesuit) would
Preach in the Quakers Meeting, and that he should not be discovered; and had he
gone without Reproof, they would say, that a Jesuit preached in the Quakers
Meeting, and they could not discern him: But it was reported in many Places in
the City, how that he was detected in the Quakers Meeting, and he could not
abide there. We have Cause to bless the Lord for his Goodness to his People,
that gives them a discerning Spirit, to judge between Good and Evil, and
between those that serve God in Truth and Righteousness, and all deceitful
Hypocrites, who are to be judged and condemned by the Word of his Power.

In the Beginning of the Year 1685. King Charles died, and King James came to
the Throne, and the Statute of 20 l per Month, for absenting from the Public
Worship, (which I suppose was made against the Papists in Queen Elizabeth's
Days) had been and was very much put in Force against our Friends, whereby many
of them were almost ruined; the Sheriffs and their Bailiffs persecuted them so
severely, and did make such a Prey of them, that some that were worth many
Hundreds, were made so destitute, that they had scarcely a Bed to lie upon, but
were as it were robbed of all. And when King James came to be settled upon the
Throne, our dear Friend G. Whitebead, who always was much concerned for the
Sufferings of Friends up and down in the Nation, and who did not spare himself
to visit Kings and Parliaments, and all others, where he thought he could get
Relief for his Suffering Brethren. He went to King James, and laid the present
Condition of Suffering Friends before him; after some Consideration, the King
told him, That what concerned him, or came to him of those Fines, he very
freely and readily would remit: Upon which an Order was granted, to suspend the
Rigor of their Prosecutions. But it seems, when it came out, another Party of
People, that were at the Stern, called Roman Catholics, took the Advantage to
themselves; which was some Surprise to Friends, who had laboure^ in that
Service. Here I did see, they partly took the Benefit of that Order to
themselves, (for the Papists had been under Sufferings also upon the said
Statute in those Times.) George Whitehead hearing that I was in the City (at
this Time) came to me, and told me the whole Business; and understanding that I
had Interest with the Earl of Powis, who was great with the King, he thought it
might be of Service if I did go along with him to the Earl.

So next Morning my Friend G. Whitehead and I went to the Earl of Powis's House
in Lincoln's Inn Fields; when he understood that I was come in, he very soon
came to me; and when I had ended my Country-Business with him, I told him, I
wanted a little of his Advice, in a Case wherein our Friends were great
Sufferers, by a Law that was made against Papists, and that they were severely
whipped upon their Backs, by the Statute of 20 l. per Month, for not coming to
hear that which is called Divine Service; and I told him, that a Friend of ours
had waited upon the King, and had told him the whole State of Things, and that
the King was very ready to relieve us in what he could, and that an Order was
granted to that Purpose; but I told him, It seemed his Friends had taken the
Benefit of it, and excluded us, etc. So I desired his Advice, whether we should
proceed farther in it, or no: He answered by all Means (for, said he, I will
tell you, that there was taken from our Friends in Lancashire 8000 l. upon this
Statute, and the King and myself went to see how much of this Money came into
the Exchequer; and when we saw it, it appeared that the King was in debt to
that Account about 28 l. and all the rest gone.) Then I desired of him, seeing
it was his Advice that we should go on, and not be discouraged, that he would
be pleased to grant that a Friend of mine might come in and speak with him, who
was more able to give him an Account of this Business than myself, and who had
been with the King to get Relief in this Matter (for G. W. staid all this while
in an adjacent Room) so he bid me bring him up to him; and when George came, he
opened the Matter fully to him; and when he did thoroughly understand the
Matter, he soon got himself ready, and called for his Coach, and bid me come to
him at an appointed Time; and he brought an absolute Order from the King, to
stop all Proceedings by Sheriffs and Bailiffs on that Account in the Nation:
And in a short Time the Rage, Envy and Cruelty of such devouring Men were
stopped; and I know not that any have been troubled or suffered since upon that
Statute: Blessed be God, that hears the Cries of of the Poor, and Fatherless,
and Widows, and sends Relief to the Afflicted in his own due Time. And this I
must say, that the Earl of Powis and his Countess were very ready and willing
at all Times to do our Friends any Kindness that lay in their Way, and to help
them out of their Troubles and Afflictions; and I am apt to believe they did it
conscientiously, for there were many of our Friends in several of their
Lordships hereaways, and the Earl never sustered any of us to be fined for not
appearing in any of his Courts upon Juries, or any other Way or Manner.

In the Year 1688. it seemed good to King James to put out a Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience, and ordered the Bishops to send it to their several
Diocese, that it might be read; there were Seven of them who would not read it.
Bp. Lloyd aforesaid was one of them, therefore they were committed to the
Tower. Then I rememb'red that which I spoke to the Bishop at his Palace in the
Year 1681. when I queried of him, what if another Prince should arise, that
would impose something upon him, that he could not do for Conscience sake! And
that Year, when I went to London, I went to visit him in his Troubles; and he
said to me, I often thought of your Words, and I could wish I were in
Pensilvania now myself; he told me the Reason why they could not read the
Declaration, saying, It was arbitrary, and not according to Law, and that it
was a Matter of Conscience to them; and withal, others were to have their
Liberty by it besides Protestant Dissenters: He told me also, that they were
put on to do as they had done to Dissenters; but when I told him of it before,
he could not believe it, till it came thus upon them. I had acquainted him
formerly, that I had read a Sermon that was preached to prove the Church of
Rome to be a false Church, because she was a persecuting Church: And now, said
I, the Members of the Church of Rome, puts you on, not only to persecute upon
the penal Laws that were made against Dissenters, but by those Laws also that
were made against Popish Recusants; and by the same Argument may we and they
say, the Church of England is a false Church, because it is a persecuring
Church. The Bishop said, They did not consider nor know it then, as they did
now. And after I had staid some Time with him, I took my Leave of him, and he
did kindly acknowledge my Visit; and after some Time they were released.

And afterward the Bishop came to Welch-Pool in the Assize Week, and in the
Evening he sent for me to him, to the High-Sheriff's House; there being with
him most of the Justices of the Peace, and Deputy Lieutenants of the County,
with many of the Clergy, who were very civil to me. The Bishop told them, That
he sent for me, and that he was more beholding to me, than all the Men in the
Diocese, for I came to visit him in his Troubles; and he desired of them to do
me all the Kindness they could, and he would take it as done to himself. And
when Supper was over, the Bishop and the High Sheriff ( Edward Vaughan of
Llangedwin) took me into a pr^ Room with them, and there we discoursed a little
about the Times; and there was some Report of the coming in of the Prince
Orange, and in a little Time I had an Account that the Prince was landed, which
was great Satisfaction to the Bishop; for he said, there (...) that Prosecuted
him very c^ Life. And when the Prince (...) was made King of England, (...)
Liberty of Conscience was Established by Law, he and others were well satisfied
with it.

And now I think it is worthy to take Notice of the several Kindnesses, upon
Account of our Suffering Friends I received from this Bp. Lloyd, in his several
Diocesses: Whereas we do Record the Hardheartedness and Cruelty we found from
unmerciful and persecuting Bishops and Clergy, and how many they have made
Poor, Widows, and Fatherless, I think it is Justice and Equity in us to Record
all Mercy, Tenderness and Compassion, we find from those that are conscientious
and charitable among them: As for Instance.

This Bishop Lloyd being at a Visitation in Llanvilling, in this County of
Montgomery, there were four peevish Churchwardens of Welch-pool, did intend to
prosecute (...) Son-in-law, Jacob Endon, for not paying toward Repairs of
their Worshiphouse; I and he went and waited on the Bishop, and told him the
Case, and he called the Churchwardens, and told 'em, there was a Law, ordering
a more easy Way, by less (...) recover by Distress, than to drive (...)
^unications; he enquiring (...) I gave it him; and he turned (...) ^ause, and
read it to the Wardens, (...) told them, that he himself drew that Clause in
the Act; and he told them how they ought to go to a Justice for a Warrant: But,
said he, why will you go to the Charge of a Warrant? Cannot you go, and take a
Pewter Dish, or some other Thing near the Value? for I warrant they will never
sue you for it: For, said he, we must do unto them, as we would be done unto,
if we were in their Condition: So he quickly dispatched them. Then I told him,
I was come moreover in the Behalf of a Prisoner on the same Account, whose Name
was Richard Davies, near Ruabon, in Denbighshire; and he advised me to go to
the Chancellor (one Dr. Win) whom I should find, he said, a very fair Man; so
he called him to us, and lest us together: And then I took my Leave of the
Bishop, acknowledging his Kindness. And when I had fully discoursed the
Chancellor about the Prisoner, I found him very fair; and in a little Time
after I heard my Friend R. D. was discharged; and several Kindnesses I have had
of the Chancellor since. And when the aforesaid Wardens came Home, they
reported what Favor I had with the Bishop, and were troubled thereat; but
neither myself nor Son-in-law, were ever after troubled about those Repairs of
their Worship-house.

At another Time, when I was going to London, and visiting Friends in my Way, I
called at Timothy Burberough's, at Aino on the Hill, in Northamptonshire, where
I understood he was gone to Prison; I enquired the Cause of his Imprisonment,
and his Wife told me, The Priest of the Parish had left their small Tithes, and
other Tithes, till he thought they amounted unto a considerable Value, and then
he came and drove and took away near all that they had, and sent him to
Northampton Goal, where he had been sometime. I took a Memorandum of it, and
when I went to London, I thought of the Afflictions and Exercise of my poor
Brother: And my old Friend Bp. Lloyd being then at London, I went to his
Lodgings at Whitehall; and I must say, he was very ready to come to me; and
after some Discourse, I laid the distressed Case of my Friend T. B. aforesaid
before him; he answered, He did not know what to do in it, the Priest of Aino
was a Stranger to him, and out of his Diocese. I told him, If he would be
pleased to write a few Lines to the Bishop. of Peterborough (for it was in that
Diocese) he might peradventure write a few Lines to the Priest of Aino, to be
more moderate and conscientious, in not taking more than the Value of that
which he called his Due, and casting the poor Man from his Family into Prison
also. The Case I left with the Bishop, and he took care to send it to the
Bishop of Peterborough, who sent to the Priest of Aino; and Bp. Lloyd sent the
Priest's Answer, with a Letter from the Bishop of Peterborough to himself, in a
Letter of his to me near Welch-pool, which I took as a great Kindness and
Favor from him.

Not long after this, I went to London again, and I called at my Friend T.
Burberough's, where I found him at Home, being released; he told me the Priest
had sent an Order for him to come Home, and that he came to reason and
discourse with him. It seems he was not so unkind as he had been formerly.

In the Year 1700, there was a considerable Suffering on Friends in
Worcestershire, an Account of which was given me by my Friend Edward Bourne, of
Worcester, who desired me to use my Interest with Bishop Lloyd for the Relies
of one John Fowler and his Mother-inlaw, the Widow Banbury) who was a Prisoner
for Tithe in the out Countyprison in Worcester, and he sent me their whole
Case: When I understood it, I found a Concern upon me to make what Haste I
could to the Bishop, who was then at his Palace at Hortlebury, a few Miles from
Bewdley, I considered also what a Suffering our Friend William Sankey had been
under, by one Vernon, a cruel, ungodly Priest of the Parish he lived in, who
had cast him into Prison, when he had five or six small Children, and his Wife
lately dead: He several Times took from him more than treble the Value of his
pretended Due for Tithe. From Bewdley I went to William Sankey's, and I told
him I was to go to the Bishop, and desired him to go with me. So in the Morning
we went together; I enquired for the Bishop's Secretary, Francis Evans, who
very lovingly came to us, and brought us in, and said, He would go to acquaint
his Lord that I was there and in a little Time the Bishop came to us: And after
some Discourse, I told the Bishop, I was not only come to give him a Visit, but
I was come purposely from Home, in Behalf of some Friends of mine, who suffered
for Tithe in that Country; and that I was informed, that there had been three
committed to Prison in Worcester Goal by one Kerry, Priest of Tredington, and
that two of them were released, and the third remained a Prisoner: Released,
said he, how are they released? I told him by the Hand of their great Creator.
It seems then, said he, they are dead. And the same Man, said I, does prosecute
the Widow of one of them, (viz. William Banbury's) and has already put her
into your Court, for that which her Husband suffered, and died for; and we
reckon, that in Common Law, when the Prisoner dies in Prison, the Prosecution
ceases. I do not know, said he, but the Debt may be paid, but the Charge is
not; and I know not what to do with that Man, for I hear he is a very covetous
Man, and I have no Power over him, but once in three Years; I was lately in my
Visitation there, and had I known this then, I might have done your Friends
some Kindness. Then I said to him, If thou will be so kind as to write a few
Lines to him, and let him know what Complaint is made to thee of him, and how
thou art informed, that two of the three which he sent to Prison are dead; I do
not question but it might stop his Rage and severe Prosecution against the poor
Widow, if not be a Means to Release the other Prisoner. So he bid his Secretary
take Notice of it, and put him in Mind to write to him. Then I told him of the
Sufferings of William Sankev, who was there present, and I defired him to give
Leave to my Friend to open the Case himself to him, which he did; and then he
told how cruel the said Vernon had been to him in casting him into Goal, his
Wife being dead, and left five or six small Children: and he told him, that he
had taken from him Goods worth about 12 l. for abou^^ or 4 l. Demand for Tithe;
and about or 14 l. worth of Sheep, for the like Demand at another Time; and
several other Cruelties he had done him by this unconscionable Vernon. The
Bishop taking it into Consideration, caused his Secretary to draw an Order for
him to come there with his Account that was due to him from William Sankey, and
what he had taken from said W. Sankey toward that Account; and he gave the
Order to W. Sankey to deliver to the Priest, and desired William to be there
the Day appointed with the Priest: So when the Time came, as I was informed,
the Priest went there the Day before to the Bishop, and W. Sankey went the Day
appointed: And I was informed that the Bishop should say, There was no Help for
what was past, but he would take Care he should do so no more to William
Sankey; I heard that since that Time, he has taken it in Kind from him, with
more Moderation than before; and I heard that the Bishop was kind to W. Sankey
ever since.

And as for the Prisoner at Worcester, John Fowler, that was one of the Three
before mentioned ( Robert Grimes and W. Banbury being dead) he was discharged;
and as (...) the Widow Banbury, who was severely prosecuted by the Priest,
intending to get it to an Excommunication, that was stopped, and she was
troubled no more.

And at this Time, before I parted with the Bishop, I told him, That there was
a Friend of ours, one William Cattrill, that kept School in Worcester, who was
prosecuted very close by some, for keeping School without a License, and they
did intend to bring him under an Excommunicato Capiendo, and if he was not
pleased to be kind to him, they would put him to all the Charge and Trouble
they could. So the Bishop bid his Secretary take Care about it. So all that I
requested of the Bishop at that Time, was friendly and kindly granted me, and
Care was taken that they were not troubled nor molested on them Accounts. Then
the Bishop ordered us to dine there that Day, and we parted friendly and
lovingly with him; and he desired me, when I came that Way, not to be strange
to him. From thence I went to Worcester, and gave Friends an Account of my
Success with the Bishop: I staid with them a little while, and from thence I
went to Bromyand and had a Meeting there; so I went ^ough Part of Herefor^shire
to Lemster. And I can bless and praise the Name of the Lord, who was with me
all along in my Journey, and brought me safe Home to my Wife and Family; and
when I gave them an Account of my Journey, they praised the Lord with me, who
had been my Preserver and Defender.

In a little Time after, I went for London, and being at the Meeting about
Friends Sufferings, there was mentioned the Sufferings of Friends in Lancaster
Castle by the Dean and Chapter of Worcester, and they had been there for
several Years, though Friends had made Interest to get them off, and Friends at
Worcester used their Interest with the Chancellor, who seemed to be very kind
to them; yet, for all that, they could not have them discharged. So when I came
down from London, I went to the Bishop at Worcester; he was very free with me,
and in a little Time the Chancellor came in to us, and the Bishop gave me to
understand who he was; I told them, I was glad to see them both together; for
when I was lately in London, we had the Sufferings of our Friends in Lancashire
before us, for a small Matter of Tithe ^ledged to belong to the Dean and
Chapter of Worcester; and directing my Discourse to the Bishop, I said, that I
thought the Chancellor was not a Stranger to it; for I had heard he had been
often solicited on their Behalf. The Chancellor told him, he did understand it,
and that these Men were there for an inconsiderable Matter; and he said, he was
sorry that those Men died in Worcester, because in Conscience they could not
pay that little Tithe to the Priest of Tredington, and he was afraid these Men
would die there also, except some Way was found out for their Release: And the
Bishop asked, how long they had been there? and I think the Chancellor said,
Four or five Years. So the Bishop said, Discharge them, discharge them; and
ordered them to be discharged without paying any Fees. So after a little Time I
parted with the Bishop and Chancellor, and acknowledged their Kindness: And I
went to Friends in the City of Worcester, and told William Pardoe what Success
I had with the Bishop, and desired him to wait on the Chancellor to get the
Order, that it might be sent speedlly: And in a little Time I heard they were
discharged.

Hitherto, Reader, thou have had a short Relation of some of the Labors and
Services of our ancient and honorable Friend, Richard Davies, from his own
Account, which he finished a little before his Decease: It remains, therefore,
to give some Account of his last Years Travels, etc. together with the Time and
Manner of his Departure, etc.
IN the Year 1702. he went up to London, his Daughtet Tace Endon accompanying
him; and he staid in and about the City for several Weeks, visiting Friends in
their Meetings, and had many good and comfortable Opportunities among them. He,
together with Eleven Friends more, were appointed by the Yearly Meeting to go
to the Queen at Windsor, with an Acknowledgement from Friends for the
Continuation of their Liberty and Protection under her Government; at which
Time he in Particular spoke to the Queen. And when he was clear of those Parts,
he returned homewards, and came through Worcester, where he went to visit his
old Friend Bp. Lloyd, who was glad to see him, and that was the last Time they
saw each other.

After his Return Home, he often visited some Neighboring Meetings; and was at
the Yearly Meeting of Wa^ Spring following.

About the latter End of the Third Month, 1704. he went up to London again to
the Yearly Meeting, his Grandson David Endon attending him; he visited Friends
as he passed through Stowerbridge, Banbury, Aylesbury, etc. and staid in and
about the City for near two Months, being something weak and sickly; and when
he was clear of the City, he returned pretty directly Home, and came well to
his Family.

In the Beginning of the Year 1705. he met with some Exercise; for on the 1st
of the Third Month, his dear and honest Wife died, who had been very tender and
careful over him, and a Woman very serviceable to Friends and Truth in many
Respects: She was a plain, upright, and honest-hearted Woman, and was one that
loved Truth in Simplicity, and she left a good Report behind her, after they
had lived together about For the six Years.

In the First Month, 1706. he was at the Yearly Meeting of Wales at Llanidlos,
in Montgomeryshire, being the last Yearly Meeting he was at in Wales On the
15th of the Second Month following, he took his Journey, with his Grandson D.
E. toward Bristol; he had a Meeting at Lemster and at Ross in Herefordshire,
and thence went to Bristol, and lodged at Charles Harford's, jun. where he
visited Friends at their Yearly Meeting, and staid there about a Week; and
then, on the 30th of the Second Month, set forward toward London, and came to
French-bay, and had a Meeting there; and the First of the Third Month he had a
Meeting at Sadbury in Gloucestershire; the Fifth at Carencester; the Eighth at
Oxford, being the First Day of the Week, where many of the Scholars came in,
and were rude for some Time; but after our Friend Richard (...) had spoke a
while in the Meeting, they became more sober, and some of them sat down, and
staid till the Conclusion of the Meeting; and Friends took Notice that the
Meeting was much more quiet than usual. From thence he went to Henly, and had a
Meeting there; and so to Windsor, where he had a Meeting; thence he went to
London, and lodged at his Friend and Kinsman's Thomas Lloyd's: He attended the
Yearly Meeting, and staid in and about the City, visiting Friends at their
Meetings, until the 19th of the Fourth Month; at which Time he returned
Homewards, and had a Meeting the 21st at Chesham, where William Bingley was;
the 22d they had a Meeting at Aylesbury; and went thence to their Yearly
Meeting at Banbury, where were many Friends from diverse Parts. The 28th he came
to Worcester, William Bingley still accompanying him, where they had a Meeting.
The 30th he went to Droitwich, and had a Meeting there. The 1st of the Fifth
Month he had a Meeting at Bromsgrove; the 2d at Birmingham, and lodged at John
Pemberton's; the 4th he went to the Quarterly Meeting at Woolverhampton, and
passed thence to Stowerbridge, and lodged at Ambrose Crowleys: And so on the
9th of the 5th Month, 1706, he returned safe Home to his Family at
Cloddiecochion, near Welch-Pool, having been away near three Months.

After this Journey he continued mostly at Home and in his usual Health, and
visited several Neighboring Meetings. In the latter End of the 8th Month, he
was at the Burial of an ancient Woman Friend ( Anne Thomas) in Salop, and at
several other Burials near Home; at which Times he often had very good Service,
and People would hear him gladly, for he had a solid and grave Delivery, and
was wise and sound in his Matter, which, was much taking with most People.

His last Sickness was very short: For on Sixth Day of the Week he was at
Welch-Pool, and finding himself not well, went Home, and the next Day kept the
House, on First Day following, several Friends went to see, him from
Dolohran-Meeting, and had a little Opportunity to wait together upon the Lord
with him. He spoke very little to an^, and his Pain continuing upon him; the
next Day, being the 22d of the First Month 1707-8, about the 9th Hour in the
Morning he quietly departed this Life, being in the 73d Year of his Age.

The 25th being the Day appointed for his Burial, many Friends from diverse
Parts, and other People, met at his House at Cloddiecochion, and his Body was
borne by them to the Grave-yard near his own House, and there decently interred
near his Wife's Grave; and in the Grave-yard there was held a solemn Meeting
and several Testimonies were borne, in the Power and Life of Truth, to the
general Satisfaction of the People.

FINIS.
Public Notice is given by the Printer, JAMES CHATTIN;
THAT all Manner of PRINTING WORK is carefully done by him, at the
Printing-Office, next Door to the Pipe, in Church-Alley, Philadelphia; where
Subscriptions are taken in for a Public News-Paper, entitled, "The
PENNSYLVANIA INTELLIGENCER;" which Paper will begin to be Published by the said
JAMES CHATTIN, whenever a proper Number of Subscribers have entered.

NOTE, At said Office are Sold most Sorts of Blanks, and Ready Money is given
for clean Linen Rags.

Lately Published, and to be Sold by said Printer;

AN ESSAY on CONDUCT and EDUCATION. Recommended to the People called QUAKERS,
by J. F. To which is added, a Postscript to People of all other Persuasions.
The Third Edition. (Price 6 d.)

Also now in the Press, and speedily will be Published, and likewise Sold by
the Printer;

SOme MEMOIRS of the Life of JOHN ROBERTS. Written by his Son DANIEL ROBERTS.
The Third Edition.

** Women's Plat BONNETS and HATS are made and sold at the Printing-Office.


