Medicina Britannica: OR A TREATISE ON SUCH PHYSICAL PLANTS, AS ARE Generally
to be found in the Fields or Gardens in GREAT BRITAIN: CONTAINING A particular
ACCOUNT of their NATURE, VIRTUES, and USES.

Together with the Observations of the most learned Physicians, as well ancient
as modern, communicated to the late ingenious Mr. RAY, and the learned Dr. SIM.
PAULI.

Adapted more especially to the Occasions of those, whose Condition or
Situation of Life deprives them, in a great Measure, of the Helps of the
Learned.

By THO. SHORT, of Sheffield, M. D. To which is added, An APPENDIX: CONTAINING
The true Preparation, Preservation, Uses and Doses of most Forms of Remedies
necessary for private Families.

The THIRD EDITION.

With a PREFACE by Mr. JOHN BARTRAM, Botanist of Pennsylvania, and his NOTES
throughout the Work, showing the Places where many of the described PLANTS are
to be found in these Parts of America, their Differences in Name, Appearance
and Virtue, from those of the same Kind in Europe: and an APPENDIX, containing
a Description of a Number of Plants peculiar to America, their Uses, Virtues,
etc.

LONDON Printed: Philadelphia Reprinted, and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL,
at the Post Office, in Market-street. MDCCLI.

THE PREFACE.
SINCE the Times of Theophrastus, Aristotle, and Dioscorides, the first Writers
on Plants upon Record, that Subject has been largely canvass'd by a great
Multitude of learned and eminent Authors; but in a very different Manner.
Theophrastus treated of their Difference and Natures by their Parts,
Affections, Generation, and Life: But Dioscorides handles each Kind in
particular, gives their Names, Descriptions, Places where they grow, and their
Virtues; so that he is the ^ldest regular Writer now extant: Yet he has omitted
the Descriptions of some of the most generally known in his Country, at that
Time; as the Oak, Ash, Willow, etc. are with us. Galen, like our Dispensatory
Writers, and many others, have only given their bare Names a Place amongst the
rest of the Materia Medica, without either Description or Virtues; only adds
their Temperature and Faculties. Some have given the Names, Temperatures,
Virtues, History, and Figures; and mention the Authors that have treated on
particular Herbs. Some have given their Descriptions and Names; but say little
of their Virtues; as Pena and Lobel. Some have described the Plants exactly,
but omit their Faculties; as Cesalpinus. Some have omitted their whole (...)
History, and only concisely and nervously given (...), as Sch^^der. Some give
the general Names of a few, and some of their Virtues; and pass all the rest,
to make Room for a Multitude of Exotics; as Quincy, and other Commentators on
our present Dispensatories. Some have given a most exact and noble History of
their different Genusses and Species; but have been very sparing in their
Virtues, and wholly omitted the Uses of many; as the immortal Ray, the best
systematic Botanist that ever wrote in England. To their Natural History some
have added a Chemical Analysis, on which they have made their Virtues depend;
as Dr. Herman, Lemery, and the great Tournefort. In writing on Plants, some
have given us counterfeit Figures, says Johnson, as Mathiolus on Dioscorides;
and others counterfeit Cures, as Amatus Lusitanus; which Crato says, were
Potius fictae quam factae. Several have treated each only of one Plant, as
Antonius Musa on Betony; Formius on Maidenhair; Blotwitzch on the Elder-Tree;
Hertodt on Saffron; Scharfius on Juniper; Christoph. Petrus on the Blessed
Thistle; Franci two Pieces, on Trefoil, and Wood Sorrel; Dr. Walter Baley on
Peppers; Mc Kaile on Mace; Mollenbrotius on Scurvy Grass; Dr. Mich. Feher on
Wormwood, etc. each of which forms a Kind of small Dispensatory on his
favorite Herb. Some, in treating on the Virtues of Plants, have separated
their Uses; putting the Internal first, and the External ^ast. Others have
Wire-drawn their Discourses still further; not only in separating their
internal and external Uses; but, in different Sections, given the various Forms
in which they are used, and Examples of those Forms; and, lastly, their hurtful
Qualities; as Pemel of Crambrook. But this present Work not being intended for
the Learned, and Gentlemen of the Faculty; but chiefly for the Benefit of the
Poor, and their generous Benefactors (though, perhaps, the first may find some
Things in it not below their Notice) I have endeavored fully, clearly, and
concisely, to collect the Virtues of the following Plants from the most eminent
and approved Authors; as Dodonaeus, Turner, Gerard, Parkinson, Sim. Pauli,
Schroder, Ray, Tournefort, Herman, Clusius, Dioscorides, etc. which may perhaps
neither be an unacceptable nor unprofitable Labor; as it is,

First, An Essay toward reviving and restoring the Use of Simples; which are
now so much neglected, that many of them are reckoned not only useless, but
troublesome; to get clear of, or keep under which, the Possessors of Grounds
are often put to a yearly Expense and Labor. 2. The Neglect and Contempt of a
great Part of our own Plants has made Way for a Farrago of Exotics imported,
and palmed on us; which, being neither of our own Growth, Soil, nor Climate,
may probably not be so well suited to our Constitutions, as these produced in
the same Soil and Climate with ourselves. 3. From the encouraged and increased
Consumption of Exotics, and Neglect of the greatest Part of our own physical
Simples, we forget their Virtues and Uses: Hence they become Strangers to us,
whilst we familiarize ourselves to the Foreign. 4. As a Consequence of the
last, a Disuse of our Simples has produced a great Multiplicity of Nostrums,
the Possessors whereof still retain the Use of our Plants as great Secrets, and
often with such astonishing Success, as may put the regular and fashionable
Practisers to the Blush. 5. From this Neglect of our Simples, and running into
Mixtures of a Scantling of them with a Number of Exotics; or our Fondness for
Compounds, or trusting too much to the Production of the Furnaces; we must be
at an Uncertainty what to charge their Effects upon, whether they are good or
bad. 6. This Dependence upon Exotics, too many Compounds, and chemical
Preparations, in too great a Measure deprives the Poor of the Benefit of the
Gifts of kind Providence, to their too frequent Loss, and often Danger; and not
seldom disables charitably disposed Persons, of moderate Circumstances, from
doing that Service to their poor Neighbors in many slighter Disorders, that
they have both a Will and a Power to do. And it lies too hard on many Parishes,
who have Abundance of Poor, but little or no Trade; especially when so few now
know the common Virtues of our own Herbs. It is not only a Hardship upon the
Poor, that so few Simples are used in Practice, but must often disappoint our
Expectation, frustrate our Desire, and the Hopes of the Sick; such a small
Handful of Simples not being able to grapple with and vanquish such a Multitude
of Diseases and their Symptoms; though it must be confessed to be a very easy Way
for Tyro's to come at the Knowledge of a Profession, when a few Lines contain
all Necessaries for its Practice. And, since the present small Number of
Materials may suffice for Practice, any Person that can remember them may turn
Physician; and Physicians may become what they please besides. Not that I would
hereby encourage crowding Prescriptions with a great Number of Articles, where
different Indications require it not; for so, we could never be certain what
one or two Ingredients of the whole Jumble answered the Design; besides the
Nauseousness of such Farrago's, and Bulk of Medicines, thrust upon the Sick. 7.
To consult botanical Writers on the Virtues of Plants, is a Task beyond the
Reach of most private Persons, on many Accounts very obvious to the Reader.
8thly, and lastly, I have not only endeavored to give a fair, impartial View,
of the Simples here treated of; but, as every Age, and every Author, on this
large Subject, have made some further Discoveries and Additions; so I have
thrown in several from my own Observations, the Communications of Friends, and
from many practical Authors of the best Repute: And, had I made no other
Apology, it had been enough to say, that I have given the English Reader a good
Part of the Observations and Receipts communicated by several of the most
learned Physicians of the last Age to the excellent Mr. Ray, in his Historia
Plantarum; and of the faithful and ingenious Dr. Sim. Pauli, in his
Quadripartitum Botanicum, and Cruso's Medicamentorum Thesaurus: Many Articles
of the last are put together at the Ends of several Plants in the Notes.

To shorten the Work, and to bring it into as narrow a Compass as I could, and
yet to render it as easy and familiar as possible, I have, 1. Omitted all
foreign and imported Roots, Woods, Barks, Excrescences, Gums, Resins, Balsams,
Fruits, Leaves, Flowers, and Seeds; and took in only such as are now produced
in our Gardens and Fields. 2. By omitting all our own Productions, whose
physical Uses we know not, the Kinds and Species of which are very numerous,
and even some whose Virtues we lay little Stress on. 3. By omitting the
Descriptions and Enumerations of the various Species whose Virtues we formerly
knew and used. 4. By omitting such as are the Stores of Granaries, Kitchens and
Cellars; as Wheat, Oats, Rye, Barley, Beans, Pease, Coleworts, Cabbages,
Carrots, Parsnips, Vines, Spinages, Celeri, Shallots, etc. 5. By omitting the
civil, mechanical, social, and delicious Uses of those Things treated of; as
Navigation, Furniture, Utensils, Buildings, Wines, etc. 6. By omitting their
chemical Analyzes, Preparations and Uses. 7. By omitting their many officinal
Preparations, and the various Compositions in which they are used. 8. By not
separating their inward and outward Virtues and Uses, nor making distinct
Articles of their good and bad Qualities, nor insisting on the various Forms in
which they are used. 9. By omitting the many prolix Wranglings and Disputes
that have been raised about their Virtues, Uses, Preparations, and Properties,
for such and such Diseases, Forms, etc. 10. To consult the Benefit, and avoid
the Danger, I have omitted most of the poisonous Tribe; and, of the few taken
in, only so much of them as cannot well be wanted, and in that Manner wherein
they cannot readily do Harm. 11. By neglecting the Qualities assigned them by
the Ancients, of hot, cold, dry, or moist, in their several Degrees, and the
various Mixtures of those Qualities: And also the Whims of astrological
Practitioners, of the sundry Herbs being under the Dominion of such and such
Planets, and when they were to be gathered, prepared, and used, under their
respective, or opposite Planets, or their Conjunctions, or Oppositions. 12. By
passing by the idle, ridiculous, superstitious Uses ascribed to them, against
Sorceries, Witchcrafts, Possessions, and other Fooleries, the Product of
distempered Brains, wrong Heads, and Druids, etc. 13. I have industriously
concealed some of their most detestable and pernicious Uses, as how to provoke
Lasciviousness, Whoredom, and Uncleanness, unlawful and unseasonable; as how
by Violence to provoke the Menses, cause Abortion, destroy the Foetus, and
whatever might tend to the Increase of Wickedness. 14. I have avoided
lengthening the Discourse by an useless and pompous Quotation of a Crowd of
Authors, or extracting a Multitude of tedious Receipts. 15. Most of the cold
Applications mentioned for the Gout, Erysipelas, or arthritic Pains, etc. are
left out, knowing how dangerous and fatal they may be: Yet it is a Presumption,
that our Constitutions are dwindled from those of our Forefathers, who used
that Course with Safety and Success. 16. I have omitted a Rationale of the
Effects and Manner of Operation of Simples. I once designed that the Remedies
which appear to me, or I had found most successful in Practice, should have
been put in a different Letter; but, as that had been forestalling the Reader's
Judgment, and discouraging his further Progress in the rest, I omitted it.

Of the few Plants still retained in our present Catalogues, a great Part of
their formerly experienced and commonly known Virtues are omitted; because it
is objected, that our Ancestors ascribed far more Virtues to them than they
really had, or deserved; but then let it be considered, 1. That various
Constitutions and Habits of Body do necessarily produce a Variety and
Difference of Effects in Medicines on our Bodies, as we see from daily
Experience; the Bilious require one Sort, the Phlegmatic another, the
Melancholic a third; gross, corpulent Bodies, and hectic, atrophic Habits, must
be differently treated, and often in the same Disease. 2. The same Disorders,
in different Persons, arise from very different Causes, and so challenge
different Treatment, though the Diseases are the same. 3. The same Cause often
generates various Diseases, as Inflammations of the Brain, Throat, Sides,
Lungs, Midriff, Liver, Stomach, Kidneys, etc. 4. The same Diseases in sundry
Ages of Life challenge different Treatment: What is adapted to Infancy, is too
weak for the Aged: Fox-glove, Groundsel, Hellebore, Spurge, properly prepared,
may be safely given to the last, but sure none will adventure them on the
Stomachs of the first. 5. Things, that at one Time may be most advisable and
beneficial, may at another Time be as hurtful and mischievous in the same
Disease; as in hysteric Disorders, or where the Breast is stuffed with much
tough Phlegm: In the first, nervous and hysteric Things are best; in the last,
Attenuants, inciding and stimulant Pectorals; but what prudent Person would
advise either to be given uncorrected to Women with Child? 6. Sundry Stages of
the same Distemper require very different Courses; as, in the Beginning of a
Pleurisy, the Cough must be treated with Anodynes and Incrassants; but, when
they begin to spit Phlegm, Attenuants and Inciders should be used, to prevent
Suffocation; or, if the Fever runs high, the Sick very Asthmatic, and spit
profusely, if he takes Salt of Hartshorn, he is quickly choked. 7. The same
Distemper, in different Bodies, must be differently treated; e. g. Of two
Persons in a Fit of the Stone, one must have Lubricants and Anodynes, to check
the Irritation, and prevent an Inflammation; the other strong stimulant
Diuretics. Of three Patients afflicted with a violent, constant, tearing Cough,
in one it is catarrhous, he surely requires Incrassants and Anodynes; in
another it is phlegmatic, he wants mild Evacuants and Attenuants; in the third
it is nervous, and needs nervous and anodyne Things mixed. 8. Different Ways
and Employments of Life, and Use of the Non-naturals, demand a Variation in
Practice in the same Disease; he who has been accustomed to nothing but Water
and Milk, must have cooler Things in a Fever, than he who daily swallows Claret
and Punch. 9. The same Diseases, at different Seasons of the Year, call for
another Change; for Spring Fevers and Inflammations, when the Vessels are full,
require larger Evacuations, and a more temperate Regimen, than in Harvest, when
the Heat of the late Season, stronger Exercise and Labor, have exhausted the
Body more. 10. Different Constitutions of the Air must also be considered; for
in a long, moist, cloudy, rainy, blustering Season, Who will pretend to cure
Intermittents with the Bark and Salt Draughts, so as the Fever shall not return
as often? And in a droughty Season, with excessive Heat, no wise Man will
pretend to cure Inflammations by Bleeding; but, during, and immediately after a
great Frost, or during the Reign of dry, cold North and East Winds, scarce any
Man can fail of it. 11. Different Situations of Habitation must be regarded;
for the Inhabitants of low, wet, fenny Countries often want Diaphoretics more
than the Inhabitants of dry, rocky, parched Grounds. 12. In Acutes the
Tendencies of Nature toward a Crisis should always be consulted, but never
opposed; e. gr. To attempt a Crisis by the Skin when Nature indicates it by the
Bowels, or by the Bowels when it inclines to the Skin, would be unpardonable
and dangerous Practice. 13. Different Quantities of the same Simple, produce
different Effects. If Diuretics are given in too large a Quantity, by putting
the Blood in too great a Hurry, they prove Diaphoretics. Purgatives, given in
too large a Dose, by irritating too quickly, prove Vomits. 14. Different Forms
alter the Effects of some Simples; for Elder-Bark, infused or boiled, purges;
but, dried and powdered, is only a little diuretic. Green Asarum Leaves, eaten
raw, vomit violently, but their Decoction, long boiled, is deobstruent and
diuretic. 15. Different Preparations of the same Plant, often produce sundry
Effects: A Decoction of Elder-bark purges, but its Powder does not: A Decoction
of Ash-keys vomits, but the Salt of the Wood given with Diuretics is a powerful
Sudorific. No volatile Plants can bear boiling; nor Astringents, or Bitters,
Distillation. 16. The same Forms of a Plant's Preparation may differ in its
Effects, as to the Time of its Preparation: Thus, Asarum, slightly boiled,
purges; long boiled, it is diuretic: The more it is beaten, the more diuretic,
and less purgative; the less it is beaten, the more purgative. 17. Plants may
sometimes have different Effects, according to the different Times they are got
in; all Herbs, gathered too young, abound more with an Acid than they do after.
Carduus Benedictus, gathered in June, is vulnerary, but not so after: Unripe
Chestnuts purge, but the ripe do not. How many tender young Buds are eaten in
the Spring, which afterward cannot be so used? And are not almost all physical
Roots taken up either in the Springtime, when they begin to sprout, or after
their Leaves are fallen? And what are unripe Seeds good for? 18. Different
Mixtures will produce Effects different from the Simples used separately; thus
Elder-bark with Syrup of Poppies is sudorific; the same is the lixivious Salt
of Ashwood given with Diuretics. 19. The Time of giving them may likewise make
a Difference; for white Hellebore, given in a small Dose, may be safer on a
full Stomach, than on an empty. 20. The different Places of Growth of the same
Species of Plant make some Difference in its Effects: Wild Arrach is drier than
that in the Garden, which is cooler and moister: Sea Arrach vomits and purges
more than either of the other. English Tobacco is milder than that of America,
etc. 21. The several Parts of the same Plants very often have different
Effects; no Wonder then that we find sundry Virtues ascribed to it. Thus, e.
gr. The Leaves of Agrimony are vulnerary and deobstruent, the Root astringent,
the Seed detergent and attractive. The Oil of Sweet Almonds softens and
loosens; the Gum of the Tree conglutinates. Arrach Leaves cool and moisten; the
Seed vomits and purges unsafely. Green Asarum Leaves, eaten, vomit violently;
the Root vomits mildly. A Decoction of Ash-keys vomits, but that of the Bark
sweats. Beech Leaves are cooling and binding; the Nuts are warm and moist.
Betony Leaves are excellent and useful; the Root is quite loathsome, causes
Vomitings and Belchings. Barberry Berries cool and bind; but the Infusion of
the yellow inner Bark purges. Bullace Bark, Leaves and Fruit, are astringent;
the Flowers are purging. Unripe Chestnuts purge; the Root and Bark astringe.
Water Hemp Roots purge; the Tops in small Doses are alterant, but in great
Doses they vomit. Mugwort is an Alterative; but its Ashes vomit, purge, and
sweat. Primrose Flowers are anodyne, but the Root vomits. Yellow, fragrant
Primrose Flowers, are known to be cephalic; but those, without Smell, we know
not their Use. Elder-tree Flowers are cordial, emollient, and discutient; the
Wood binding and cooling; the Seeds vomit, open, loosen, and purge; the Berries
provoke Urine and Sweat; the Leaves purge; the Bark vomits and purges. The Skin
of a ripe Apple is fragrant, the Pulp almost inodorous. The like Observations I
might make on the different Parts of many other Plants. 22. As a Corollary to
the Whole, here we may see the great Pains and exact Observations of our
Ancestors on the Parts and Uses of Plants, and how faithfully they have
transmitted them to us for our Use and Benefit; which may reprove our
Ingratitude, in neglecting their Discoveries. Give me Leave to add, that, after
all that has been done, the History of the Virtues of Plants is still
incomplete: Who dare say, that all the Virtues of any Plants are yet
discovered, and that they have no more, or other, besides what we know? Of some
Thousands of British Plants, we do not know the Virtues of above four Hundred:
And, of the endless Tribes of Marine Plants, the little that we know of them,
bears no Proportion to what we know not: Time and Chance only, not Philosophy,
can make further Discoveries; but Philosophy, not Chance, must direct us to a
more extensive, beneficial, safe and regular Use of them, when discovered. But,
though we are Strangers to many, and perhaps the best Virtues of Plants, yet let
us always be cautious, that our Credulity may not impose upon us fictitious,
instead of real Uses.

I would here advertise the Reader, that, in several Places, for his Ease, I
have thrown a Heap of the most approved Simples in the same Cases, as on
Dropsy, Stone, etc. in the Notes.

Some may perhaps query, Why did the Deity crowd the Surface of our Earth with
such a Number of different Sorts of Plants, many of whose Virtues we are entire
Strangers to, if they have any; others we are uncertain of; others the fatal
Experience of many has proved to be certainly noxious; and those that we are
best acquainted with, we cannot at all Times infallibly depend upon their
salutiferous Effects; and by late Discoveries from improved Microscopes, we
have Reason to suspect that there are yet many Genusses and Species of minuter
Vegetables still undiscovered? Had it not been much better to have garnished
the Earth with just so many Plants as had been necessary for Food and Physic
for us, and the Creatures subservient to our Uses; each physical Plant having
been suited to the Cure of one particular Disease, and so had no more physical
Herbs than we are liable to Diseases?

Answ. 1. This sounds like a tacit Wish, that the Deity had been confined to
our Rules and Measures; that the supreme Being, who is not accountable to his
Creatures, had consulted them, that their shallow Capacity might have dictated
to his infinite Wisdom. But, 2. and more directly, Had that been the Case,
there had been a Defect of one of the most noble and entertaining Displays of
infinite Wisdom and Goodness: Wisdom in contriving, making, and suiting, to
different Soils and Climates, such a numerous Variety of Plants, all adapted to
endless, and, to us, unknown Uses: Goodness, in providing and accommodating his
whole Animal World with all Conveniences and Necessaries for their respective
Food and Physic; yea, for the Delight and Entertainment of our outward Senses
of Sight, Smell, and Taste. 3. They afford a good Man a large Field of
Meditation, even by viewing them, though cursorily; but especially when he
attentively and judiciously considers their Variety, Growth, Kinds, Beauty,
Uses, Nutrition, circulating Juices, etc he will rationally conclude, How
manifold are thy vegetable Works, O Lord? Yet in Wisdom have thou made them
all: So that thine invisible Things, from the Creation of the World, are
clearly seen, being understood from the Vegetables that are made, even thine
eternal Wisdom, Power, and Godhead. 4. Who dare pronounce any of them useless,
even to us? For, though we know not their Uses at present, yet they may be
designed for excellent Purposes, in due Time to be discovered. And though they
should indeed be useless to us, yet are there not many yet unknown Tribes of
Insect Animals to be supplied both with Food and Physic? And what is Physic,
or Poison to us, may be their Food; and what is their Poison may be our Food.
5. May not this suggest a Design to us, that, as he has created such Variety of
Kinds of little Animal Beings, and suited all with proper Sustenance and Helps,
as we see almost every different Plant and Shrub has its own peculiar Insect to
feed and cure, which, being removed from their own to any other Pasture, cannot
live: I say, this hints to us, as though he intended to confine every living
Creature to its own proper Food, without safely incroaching on the Rights of
another; lest, in Time, the stronger Races should monopolize all Nutrition to
themselves, to the Starving and Extirpating of the lesser and weaker Tribes,
and so have made a great Chasm in the Animal Creation: Man, and the Creatures
immediately subservient to his Purposes, pasturing at greatest Liberty, far
more Vegetables being nutritive, salubrious, and useful, than hurtful or fatal
to them, while probably it is otherwise with the inferior, lesser, and more
obscure Animals. 6. Even of the human Species there is a great Variety of
Tastes, Appetites, Ages, and Constitutions, to be served; hence a Necessity of
many different Vegetables to gratify and answer them. 7. Had there just been
the same Number of physical Plants created, as Mankind is liable to different
Distempers, and each Plant specifically adapted to its own respective Disease;
then, 1. All Men must have been of one Constitution, Habit of Body, had the
same Food, and Use of the Non-naturals, inhabited the like Climate and
Situation, and followed a like Manner of Business and Rules of Life. 2. Every
different Disease must have arisen perpetually, in all, from one and the same
respective Cause, and been attended in all with alike Symptoms, and been always
of near alike Duration; and these in all Nations, Kingdoms, and Countries, in
all Seasons of the Year, Constitutions of the Air, Conditions or Kinds of Food,
by Land or Sea, in City and Country: There had been no Difference between
Infants, Youth, Manhood, and old Age; none between Exercise and Rest, Male and
Female, Repletion and Inanition, etc. But suppose God had (which is not
impossible with him) created only one, or a few Plants, to have fully answered
all the Ends both of Food and Physic to all Mankind; yet, what must have
become of the rest of the Animal Creation, both for Nutrition and Medicine, if
a sufficient Supply had not been provided for them? They should either not have
been created, or made to starve, and be immediately extirpated; especially
Insects, and, to the naked Eye, invisible corporeal Beings. I may add, What
Room had there been for human Judgment, Invention, Reasoning? Where had been
one of the greatest Gratifications of our outward Senses that we now enjoy?

Mr. Bartram's PREFACE TO THIS WORK.
THE first Man that was famous for the Practice of Physic in the Grecian.
History, was Aesculapius, the Son of Apollo, who practiced an Age before the
Trojan War, and, as they say, was so skilful in his Applications, as to cure
Diseases, and raise the Dead; whereby he gained so great a Fame, as to have a
Temple built to him, where those People that were afterward cured of their
Infirmities, either by his former Directions, or their own Discoveries, wrote
their Method of Cure particularly, and reposed it in that Temple; from whence,
after Six Hundred Years, and about the Time of the Captivity of the Jews, the
famous Hippocrates, who was born and lived near the Temple, in the Island of
Coos, searched the medicinal Receipts, and by those Informations, and his own
Ingenuity, so enlarged his Knowledge in Practice of Physic, as to be to this
Day called, The Divine HIPPOCRATES; but the Christians say, that he learned his
wonderful Knowledge from the Writings of Solomon, and his Treatise of Plants,
which was procured from the captive Jews, or the Chaldeans, after they had
burnt the Temple: However, it is certain that most Nations, though never so
barbarous, have made use chiefly of Vegetables for the Cure of their Diseases,
and doubtless with good Success; and certainly we have in our Country, a great
Variety of good medicinal Plants, which may be administered to the People with
great Advantage, if properly adapted to the Season, Age and Constitution of the
Patient; the Nature, Time and Progress of the Disease: Without which Caution,
it is not likely that the Practice should succeed generally. But it is very
common with our People, when a Root or Herb has been given with good Success
several Times in a particular Disease, and the Patient recovered soon after the
taking of the Medicine, to applaud that Medicine exceedingly; then many that
are sick of the same Disease, or any other, that has near the like Symptoms,
apply directly to this famed Specific, expecting immediate Relief; which often
failing, by Reason of its improper Application, as to Time, Constitution, or
Nature of the Disease, many choice Medicines grow out of Repute again, are
disregarded, and little Use made of them, especially if they are common and
easy to come at; whereas if their Virtues were well known, and a skilful Person
had the Administering of them, who knew how to properly correct and fit them to
the Constitutions of the Patients, and join suitable Vehicles or Companions
with them, to lead them to the Parts of the Body, where the Distemper lies,
then those very Herbs or Roots, I suppose, might continue or increase in their
Reputation.

Medicina Britannica.
1.
ADDERS-TONGUE (Ophioglossum) is a notable Vulnerary, either taken inwardly in
Potions, or applied outwardly. The fresh Leaves heal Wounds and Ruptures, or
the Juice given in Horse-tail Water. But its Oil made in unripe Oil Olive,
either by Insolation, or a double Decoction, 'til the Herbs are crisp; then
strained, and a little Turpentine put to it, Parkinson says is a very valuable
Ointment, not only for fresh Wounds, but old Ulcers. The Herb is good for
Wounds of the Breast, Bowels, habitual Vomitings and Bleedings by Mouth, Nose,
or Stool. The Juice or powdered Leaf drank in Oak-bud, or Horse-tail Water,
checks Excess of the Menses, Lochia, or Whites. Its Infusion or Decoction in
Red Wine, either to wash or drop into the Eyes, helps their Watering, and cures
their Inflammations.

ADDERS-TONGUE. I have never seen it, nor heard of its being in this or the
adjacent Colonies.

2.
AGRIMONY (Agrimonia) is a noble Hepatic, Splenetic, and Vulnerary; it is
therefore often not undeservedly used in Disorders of the Liver, Cachexy,
Jaundice, and Dropsy. It Is also used in Catarrhs, Coughs, and obstructed
Menses: Outward it is put into Baths and Lotions. The Herb with strong Vinegar
takes off Warts; its Powder in Red Wine* Plantain Water, or its own Decoction,
cures such as cannot hold their Water. A Poultise of it boiled in Wine, or
Vinegar, and laid to the Cods, certainly takes off Inflammations of the Stones.
The distilled Water is a good Gargle for Ulcers of the Mouth; it is also good
to drink against the Stone. Doloeus says its Decoction in Water, drank, is a
Specific in Madness; in which Disease, the Ancients depended more on some Doses
of White Hellebore judiciously prepared. Two or three Ounces of Ground Ivy
Juice drank every Day, or Sala's Tincture or Decoction of Hypericon in Rhenish
Wine, small Beer, or four Ounces of the Decoction of Anagallis flore purpureo,
drank thrice a Day, all which are reckoned Specifics in this Distemper. The
Root of Agrimony dug up in May, has a most odoriferous Smell; the Herb warms
and dries, is of thin Substance, opens, cleanses and strengthens; it is a good
Stomachic and Purifier of the Blood: Its Decoction or Infusion is used in the
Lues Venerea; Fomentations of it are applied to ease Night-Pains of the Joints.
The Roots are good in a Scurvy, with a Laxness of the Vessels, and Toughness of
the Humors; in all weak, lax Viscera; in the Lochia; in Maids and Childrens
Diseases; in bloody Urine; Blood-spitting, or Dysentery; in Convulsions or
Falling Sickness. This Root may be used in Powder, Infusion or Decoction; the
last is excellent in all inward Bruises or Hurts, or Stoppage of Urine; it
cleanses the Breast, and helps a Cough. The Seed heals old Sores, and Ulcers of
hard Cure; draws extraneous Bodies out of the Flesh; strengthens luxated or
relaxed Members, and cures Ulcers of the Ears. I have often seen its Success,
both as it is an aperient and vulnerary Pectoral. -- For a Falling down of the
Anus, foment with a Decoction of Plantain, then fumigate with Ginger-Root;
lastly apply a Poultise of Agrimony Leaves, well beaten up with a little Red
Wine and Vinegar, it seldom fails. For the Itching of the Anus, foment with a
Decoction of Plantain, and a little Alum. For the Rhagades, foment with a
Decoction of wild Teasel. Cruso.

3.
BLACK ALDER-TREE (Alnus nigra) Leaves and Bark are cooling, drying, and
binding. Fresh Leaves laid on Swellings dissolve them, and stay Inflammations;
the Leaves put under weary Travelers bare Feet refresh them much; the Leaves
wet with Morning Dew laid in Rooms pestered with Fleas, they gather quickly
into them, so may they be thrown out, and the Room cleared.

BLACK ALDER. I don't remember to have seen in this or the adjacent Provinces.

4.
ALMOND-TREE (Amygdalus) Sweet Almonds nourish and fatten much; they sheathe
sharp Humors, increase Seed, are good for thin and consumptive Persons; they
are chiefly used in Emulsions* and, if designed to cool and compose the Body, a
Dram or two of each of the cold Seeds is added for a Quart of Water or
Decoction, for Drink, nor is any Harm observed if the Bilious drink of it. The
fresh drawn Oil is good in Hoarseness, or Roughness in the Throat; it is
excellent for the Lungs and Breast, and in Cholicks from hard Excrements, or
sharp Humors, given either alone, from two to six Ounces, or in fresh Broth;
it is beneficial in Pains in the Kidneys; it eases the Gripes, and is a fine
safe Remedy for Infants; it softens Hardness and Dryness of the Joints, or of
other Parts; it is useful to hectical Persons; and injected in a Clyster, it
relieves Heat of the Urine and Privy-parts; eases Women's Pains after Labor;
and, mixed with Oil of Tartar or Honey, takes off Spots of the Face, whether
they come from Cold or Heat. The Gum of the Tree is agglutinating, and good in
Bloody-Fluxes. The Meal, out of which the Oil is expressed, exceeds all Soap
for whitening and smoothing the Hands and Face. Useful Linctusses are made of
the Oil with Pectoral Syrups, for Disorders in the Breast; or with Syrup of
Althaea and Diacodium for nephritic Pains in lean Persons. -- Bitter Almonds
are hot and dry, attenuating, opening, cleansing and diuretic, good in
Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Sweetbread, and Womb; chewed and rubbed on
the Skin, they take off Spots, and ease the Headache; eaten before a hard
Drinking-bout, they sometimes prevent Drunkenness. They are fatal to several
Creatures, as Cats, Poultry, Foxes Cubs, etc. Their Oil is good to drop into
the Ears. They provoke Urine and Menses, soften the Belly, and with Starch and
Mint stop Spitting of Blood; with Water they are good for the Pain of the Back,
and Inflammations of the Lungs; with Turpentine, Honey, and Milk, they are good
in Obstructions of the Liver, Cough, or windy Cholick; Dose the Bigness of a
Hazle-Nut.

5.
ALTHAEA, MARSHMALLOWS, and MALLOWS being both of the same Nature, I shall
include them in one Article, only the former is much more efficacious than the
latter. Althaea Roots, Flowers, Seeds, and Leaves, soften, loosen, discuss,
ease Pain, ripen Swellings, blunt and correct salt and sharp Humors. The Root
is used in Disorders of the Kidneys and Bladder, in an Asthma, Pleurisy, Pains
in the Bowels, etc. And that either inwardly in Decoction, Syrup, Powder,
Conserve, etc. or outwardly in Poultises, Clysters, Ointments, Fomentations,
Baths, etc. The Decoction or Syrup of the Leaves, but especially the Roots, is
most useful for the Stone in the Kidneys or Bladder, either drank, or given in
Clysters, Baths, Ointment, or in any other Form prepared; for, by its abundant
slimy, smooth Juice, it softens, widens, relaxes, and makes the Passages
slippery. It is beneficial in Coughs, Shortness of Breath, Consumptions, and
Inflammations in the Breast. The Decoction of the Roots, or Mucilage of the
Seeds, is good in Erosions of the Bowels, Bloody Flux, constant griping Pains,
from sharp Humors. Its Poultise or Ointment softens, ripens, and eases the
Pain of hard Swellings. Its Conserve is proper in sharp Rheums, Hoarseness, and
other Disorders of the Windpipe. Clysters of the Decoction are a Specific in a
Dysentery. A Liniment made of the Roots heals chopped Nipples. A Mucilage of
the Root, in Rose Water, is good to drink for the Strangury after Blisters. The
Plant seems not wholly destitute of Sharpness, for a Poultise of the Root
boiled in Water, has been known to raise some small, red, painful Pustles,
which were healed by applying Frogspawn; but that might happen either from the
Poultise lying on too long, or from the Sharpness of the Person's Juices, or
from both. A Decoction of the Root has eased some old People in a Strangury,
and others in a Gonorrhoea. The Root is an Ingredient in most cooling,
softening, Pain-easing Ptisans for a violent Cough, with a watery, thin,
sharpish Spittle, and in Gravel Pains with Heat, Sharpness of Urine, and
Inflammation; but let Nitre be added to the Decoction. The Root is not to be
used too long, lest it thicken the Humors too much. Quercetan, Lemery, and
Charas, have very much improved the Preparation from this Root, both in Syrup,
Ointment, and Poultise. Dioscorides recommends this Root for Wounds, the
King's Evil, and Swellings on the Neck, and behind the Ears; in Inflammations
of the Breast, Excoriations of the Anus, Cramps or Convulsions; provided it be
boiled in Wine or Mead, bruise it and apply it; and the Decoction of it drank
at the same time: Or boiled, and with Hogs-lard, Goose-greese, and Turpentine,
reduced to an Ointment, it cures Inflammations in the Womb, which are cleansed
by a Decoction after the Birth; its Decoction in Vinegar, for a Gargle, cures
the Toothache. The Seed, mixed with Vinegar, clears the Skin from Morphew, or
other Discolorings. -- Mallows are possessed of the same Virtues, but in a
lower Degree, and may be used where the other is not to be got: A Decoction of
either, with Parsley and Fennel-roots, loosens the Belly, and brings Plenty of
Milk into Nurses Breasts. A Decoction of common Mallow-Seed, in Wine or Milk,
is fitter for hot Diseases in the Breast, than of Marshmallows, if to drink
for some Time. An Ointment of the Leaves with Camphire, is good for the
Achores. The Leaves, bruised and rubbed on any Part stung with Bees or Wasps,
take off Pain, Redness, and Swelling. A Poultise of the bruised Leaves, boiled
in Oil of Roses, with Bean and Barley-Flour, is good against hard Swellings and
Inflammations, Imposthumes or Tumors of the Cods, and other Parts, or of the
Liver and Spleen, and eases their Pain. Mallow-Juice, boiled in old Oil, and
applied, cures the Roughness of the Skin, Scurfs and dry Scabs of the Head, and
other Parts, and Falling off of the Hair; and is good for Scalds and Burns; and
for hot, red, and painful Swellings in any Part. A Decoction of the Flowers,
with a little Honey and Alum, makes a good Gargle for a sore Throat. A
Decoction of the Leaves is a fine Pediluvium for Rheums and Waterings.
Mallow-Tops, boiled in Milk, and drank, ease the Gripes in a Dysentery, take
off the Heat and Tension of the Belly, check the Blood, and sometimes cure the
Disease. I have known some Rustics, in a Fit of the Stone, dissolve an Ounce of
Althaea Ointment in warm Drink, and swallow it, with surprising Success. Mr.
John Cruso having, with great Labor and Pains, collected a great Number of
simple Medicines for most Diseases, out of one Hundred and Fifty-five Physical
Authors, I shall here and there in this Work throw several of his Articles into
Marginal Notes. And first to begin with the Stone; A Decoction of Agrimony
drank; Winter Cherries pounded and taken in White Wine* Bark of the Root of
Restharrow; a Decoction of Goose-Grass Roots in White Wine; an Infusion of
Garlic and Juniper Berries in White Wine, drank; or a Draught of the Infusion
of Garlic and Ground Ivy in White Wine, every new Moon; or Juice of the Roots
of Crows-Garlick in White Wine; or Infusion of Columbine Root in White Wine; or
a Decoction of Silver-Weed in Wine; or the expressed Juice of four Handfuls of
Silver Weed, and one Handful of Tops of green Rye, mixed with as much White
Wine, then filtered, and drank, the first three Mornings of every May; and
Poterius says, such as do this will never be troubled with the Stone. A Dram of
the powdered Seed of Star-Thistle drank every Morning in Wine; or a Dram of the
powdered Seed of St. John's Wort drank daily for seven Days, in White Wine; or
two Ounces of Lemon Juice mixed with six Ounces of Spanish Wine, and drank; or
the powdered Bark or Peel of Filberds drank in Wine; or a Handful of the inner
Bark of the Cherry Tree, cut and pounded, in six Ounces of White Wine, the
Liquor strained and drank; or a Decoction of Camomile drank warm twice a Day.
Or powdered Burdock Seed drank in Posset Drink, or White Wine; or an Infusion
of wild Carrot Seed in Table Beer for common Drink; or wild Carrot Seed and
Burdock Seed infused; or a Dram of Gromwell Seed drank in White Wine; or a
Decoction of Horehound in White Wine; or from Half a Scruple to Half a Dram of
Clubmoss Seed in White Wine; or a Dram of Bean-stalk Ashes in Wine, or Betony
Water; or Betony and Rupture-wort boiled in Broth, and eaten; or Birch Tree
Water, or its Wine drank; or a Decoction of Ladies Thistle, or a Dram of its
Seed in Wine; or Arsmart Water Drank; or a Lixivium of Bean-stalk Ashes in
White Wine; or a Decoction of Fern Root in Table Beer; or an Infusion of
Parsley Tops in Wine* or a Decoction of Horseradish Root; or a Decoction of
Fennel Leaves; or a Dram of powdered Haws in White Wine. Ash Seed is extolled;
or powdered Flixweed Seed, from one Scruple to two, in White Wine or Beer; a
Decoction of Herb Robert, or Powder of Vervain Root in Honey and Water. Or a
Clyster of the Decoction of Speedwell, twelve Ounces, May Butter, or Suet, one
Ounce, Sugar two Ounces, mix and give. The Decoction of Speedwell drank, or
Juice of Speedwell a Pound, of Ground Ivy six Ounces, of Purslain three Ounces,
with Sugar, make a Syrup; Dose two Spoonfuls, in the Morning, thrice a Week.
Powder of Violet Seed, or its Emulsion. Nor must we forget the Preparations of
Althaea, etc.


6.
ALISANDERS, (Hipposelinum) (falsely called Macedonian Parsley) the Herb is
eaten in the Spring to purify the Blood; the Root digests Crudity, and viscous
Humors on a cold Stomach, and by its Bitterness opens Obstructions of the
Liver, Spleen, and Womb; it expels Birth and Afterbirth; breaks Wind; provokes
Urine, and removes its Obstructions: The like does the Seed if boiled, or drank
in Wine; it is good in cold and phlegmatic Diseases; but far short of
Master-wort or Lovage. It is commended against the Sciatica; but outwardly, I
should sooner trust a Liniment of Castile Soap and Brandy, with powdered
Camphire, to anoint the Part with, Evening and Morning; or Leaves of Crowsfoot
bruised and laid six Hours on the Region of the Loins, till they raise a
Blister: Or an Ointment of Opodeldoch, with Ants Eggs: Or a Poultise of white
Bryony Root, with Linseed Oil, kept on the Part, which perhaps may be as proper
for a Sciatica, as bruised Ants Eggs, with the Juice of an Onion, and Gall of
an Eel, with Spirit of Wine, mixed and dropped into the Ear twice a Day for
Deafness.

ALISANDERS. Is a Garden Herb, but not in our Gardens in this Province.

7.
ANGELICA, the Root is an Alexipharmac and noble Cordial. -- The Herb, but
especially the Seed and Root, warm, dry, open, thin, are sudorfic and
vulnerary. It provokes the Menses, expels Birth and Afterbirth; it is good in
Hysterics, resists malignant and contagious Diseases, Poisons, and Plague; if
the Root is infused in Vinegar, held to the Nose, chewed in the Mouth, kept
under the Tongue, drank in Vinegar, or taken in Powder, or Infusion. To cure
the Plague, a Dram of the Powder, or Half a Dram of it, and a Dram of Venice
Treacle, is drank in small Wine, or Carduus Water, the Person must sweat
plentifully after, and let it be repeated every six Hours. The candied Root, or
young Stalks, are used as a Stomachic; it prevents Infection, and heals cold
Diseases of the Breast; Chewing it helps a disagreeable Breath; it is good
against Acidities, and in Diseases of the Head and Womb therefrom. The Tops and
Seeds infused in Brandy, or Water drawn from them, with Spirits, is Stomachic
and Cordial, revives the Spirits, takes off Headache, Dullness, Drowsiness, and
Vapors. The Root or Seed dissolves tough Phlegm, eases Pains caused by it,
opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and cures the Jaundice. It is used
outwardly in Baths and Poultises for the Uterus and Pudenda, and in Wound
Plasters and Ointments: Some use it instead of Pepper, which seems a good
Exchange. It is too hot for very lean hectical and consumptive Persons; Half a
Dram of the Powder causes Sweat; the Dose repeated brings the Menses. Juice of
Lovage Leaves expels the retained Afterbirth; a Syrup may be made of it
without boiling, to use in Winter. Half a Dram of powdered Angelica Root or
Seed warms a cold Stomach, promotes Digestion, wastes superfluous Moisture and
raw Humors, expels Wind, and eases Pains and Gripes, except from hardened
Excrements: The bruised green Root, made into a Tea, is good in Agues, and is
said to quench Thirst. The distilled Water is a good Gargle in a Qunsey; and
dropped into the Eyes, cures Redness and Dimness; and Spots and Freckles on the
Face, by washing with it. Lovage Leaves, bruised and fried in Hogs-lard,
quickly ripen and break Boils. Angelica is a good Herb in nephritic Pains, and
a good female Plant; it is proper in Surfeits; increases Milk in Nurses, and
Seed in Men. A learned and pious Divine highly prized the following Salve, and
did much Service with it both to Poor and Rich, in flatulent, nephritic,
hysteric, and convulsive Cholicks, Gripes, Stomach Pains, Want of Appetite and
Digestion, Pains, Aches, and Swelling from Cold. Take Root of Angelica,
Saxifrage, Avens, Elacampane, Lovage, Masterwort, Burnet, Spignel (Meum) of
each one Ounce; Leaves of Hart's-tongue, Maidenhair, Baume, Rue, Wormwood,
Coastmary, sweet Maudlin, Marygold, Plantain, Lavender, spotted Lungwort, Sage,
Ground Ivy, Millefoil, Germander, Burnet, Golden-Rod, Saxifrage, Holly Tree
Leaves, of each a Pugil; Flowers of Camomile Jessamine, Lavender, Broom, Elder,
Violets, Marygold, of each Half a Handful; Seeds of Gromwell, Dill, Anise,
Caraway, Cummin, Wild Carrots, Parsley, Grains of Paradise, of each one Ounce.
Slice the Roots, cut the Herbs, bruise the Seeds, let all be mixed and well
beaten in a Mortar; put the third Part of the whole in what Quantity of the
best new Butter the Maker pleases; boil them slowly in a close-covered earthen
Pot, till the Herbs are crisp; then strain them out, and put in another third
Part of the Ingredients, boil and strain as before; then put in the last third
Part; when that is boiled, and strained out, add one Ounce of Bees Wax to each
Pound; divide the warm Ointment in two Parts, the one for inward, the other for
outward Use; to the former may be added any proper chemical Oils, and cover the
Pot close with a clean Bladder tied down, and set in a cool Place. Dose from
two Drams to an Ounce, in any warm Liquor, at going to Bed: To the latter may
be added either warming Oils or Spirits, as there is Occasion. The great Number
of Ingredients is fully compensated by its surprising Efficacy, and it need
only be made once a Year.

8.
APPLES are grateful and useful to hot and bilious Stomachs, but not to the
cold, moist and flatulent; eaten raw, they move the Belly a little. A Poultise
of roasted sweet Apples, with Powder of Frankincense, is good in a pricking
Pain of the Side; or a Poultise of the same Apples boiled in Plantain Water to
a Pulp, then mixed with Milk, and applied, takes fresh Marks of Gunpowder out
of the Skin. Boiled or roasted Apples, eaten with Rose Water and Sugar, or with
a little Butter, is a pleasant cooling Diet for feverish People. An Infusion of
sliced Apples with their Skins in boiling Water, a Crust of Bread, some Barley,
and a little Mace, is a proper cooling Drink in Fevers. Roasted Apples, eaten
with Frankinencse, are good in an Asthma, Apples, eaten raw, roasted or boiled,
are good in Inflammations of the Lungs, Breast, and Sides, or in Consumptions.
Their Syrup is a good Cordial in Faintings, Palpitations, and Melancholy. The
Pulp of boiled or rotten Apples in a Poultise, is good for inflamed Eyes,
either applied alone, or with Women's, Asses, Goats, or Cows Milk, or with Rose
or Fennel Waters. The Pulp of five or six roasted Apples, beaten up with a Wine
Quart of Water, to Lambs Wool, and the whole drank at Night in an Hour's Space,
cures in one Night such as make Urine by Drops, with racking Pain and Heat; if
it cure not the first Time, repeat it the next Night, and it never yet failed,
says Gerard: I knew it tried, and it succeeded exactly. Apples differ according
to their Taste; the Sweet loosen the Belly, the Sour bind it, and provoke
Urine; the Rough strengthen both Stomach and Bowels. -- Crabs are very rough,
acid, and astringent; their Juice is used instead of Vinegar; it makes Fish
boiled in it firmer and better tasted. Crab Juice and Barm laid to
Inflammations are useful, or the Juice dropped into inflamed Eyes; it is a
proper Wash for scrophulous Ulcers, if they are wrapped up after in Wool,
moistened with Neatsfoot Oil; they bind the Belly, and strengthen the Stomach
of longing Women. A Decoction of the Leaves is a proper Gargle for the Mouth
when dry, rough and furred in hot Fevers, nor is it amiss if they swallow a
little of it; their Verjuice is good for Heat and Weakness of the Stomach, and
for great Belchings and Vomitings. Cloths wet in the Juice, and applied, draw
Fire out of Burns, etc.

9.
APRICOTS (Armeniaca) they are better than Peaches; they neither putrify, nor
turn acid, so soon on the Stomach, and are generally sweeter, and more grateful
to it; but too great Freedom with them will occasion short Fevers. The
expressed Oil of the Kernels is good to anoint the inflamed Piles, and for the
Swellings of Ulcers, Roughness and Chaps of the Tongue, Pains of the Ears, and
Hoarseness. Mathiolus says, that five Ounces of the Oil, with one Ounce of
Muscadine Wine, expels the Stone, and helps the Cholick. The Kernels infused in
Brandy make a fine Ratefee; but bitter Almonds are often substituted.

10.
ARCHANGEL (Lamium) or Dead Nettle, a Conserve of the Flowers of the white,
taken daily, is said to be good for the Whites, and for Melancholy. The Herb,
with the red Flower, bruised and applied, is said to discuss all Kinds of
Swellings, and heals Inflammations, Bruises, Wounds, and putrid Ulcers; and
some will have it, that a Conserve of the Flowers will stop excessive Menses. A
Handful of the Herb, with white Flowers warmed between two hot Bricks, and laid
to Tumors, opens them much in one Night, and, when opened, the following is to
be used; viz. six Spoonfuls of unripe Sallad Oil, an Ounce of May Butter, put
them in black Wool, moistened in Neatsfoot Oil, apply it; and let the Sick
every Morning and Afternoon drink Broomflower Water. This Herb is reckoned one
of the Specifics in the King's Evil.

LAMIUM flowers, until hard Frosts.

GALEOPSIS, or ARCHANGEL, with a red Flower, has a stronger Smell, both grow
in botanick Gardens in Pennsylvania.

11.12.
ARACHE (Artriplex) (stinking) is cooling and moistening, it is eaten boiled as
Cole; it is famous for opening the Belly; hence some number it with the five
opening Emollients, though it is mostly used in Clysters, and Epithems; its Seed
powerfully purges and vomits, but neither safely nor easily. Dioscorides gave
its Seed with Mead in the Jaundice. It is an Antidote to the Mischiefs from the
Use of Cantharides; its Juice applied to Tumors dissolves them; applied to the
Gout with Vinegar and Nitre, it eases the Pain, but it is not advisable. --
Sea Arache, from its being more salt, purges more, and is very troublesome to
the Belly; but eaten in fat Broth, it is good in a Dropsy; and prevents too
great Corpulency, and preserves from Putrefaction. The Smell of the former is
good for Women in Hysterics. The Herb or Juice kills Worms in the Sores of
Horses, Cattle, or Sheep. The Juice is useful in a Suffocation of the Womb, and
for Inflammations. The Seed vomits and purges severely, and with cruel Gripes.
The Wild Arache is as cold, but drier than the Garden Arache; it is used
outwardly for Inflammations.

ARTRIPLEX. In Pennsylvania the wild Kind is called Lamb-Quarter, the stinking
is rare in Botanick Gardens.

13.
ASARUM or ASARABACCA Roots, eaten raw, cause violent Vomiting, but boiled in
Water they open Obstructions, are diuretic, and the Remedy of slow Fevers,
especially from obstinate Obstructions in the Hypochondres. The Roots work more
mildly than the Leaves, whose Powder taken too freely, has proved fatal to the
Strong. The Dose of the Root in Substance is, from Half a Dram to a Dram; in
Infusion from one to three Drams; it brings up thick Phlegm, and Bile by Vomit.
The powdered Leaves are a good Sternutatory in an Apoplexy or Lethargy, as is
the fresh powdered Root of Masterwort, laid about the Grinders in the Mouth; or
the Infusion of dried Sage for common Drink; or Mustard Seed Posset Drink after
due Evacuations. Asarum Leaves are given in Infusion or Decoction from four
Ounces to nine. The Herb is a wonderful Diuretic, and Emenagogue, the smaller
it is beaten, more diuretic, and less purgative, it is; it has excellent
Effects in a Dropsy, Jaundice, Tertian, and Quartan Fevers, and is good in
Arthritic and Sciatic Pains, its Decoction in Wine or Water, being sweetened
and drank. The more it is boiled, the less it purges.

14.
ASPARAGUS is one of the opening Roots, it is diuretic, wastes the Stone, and
brings it away; it warms and dries a little, it discusses; it removes thick and
tough Matter from the Liver, Spleen, and Kidneys; for which Purposes the Root
is used in Decoction, as it is in Gargles for the Toothache, and to fasten the
Gums; the Seed answers the same Intentions, but is seldomer used. Dioscorides
says it is good in the King's Evil, and works powerfully by Urine; but all
Diuretics, long or much used, endanger the Ulceration of the Bladder; for which
Dr. Bowl mixed Vulneraries with them. Hoffman thinks it increases Seed, and
stimulates phlegmatic Persons, but has a contrary Effect on the bilious.
Parkinson prefers young Buds of wild Asparagus to those of the Garden and
Physic; it is also good against Difficulty of making Water, or making it by
Drops; and to ease nephritic Pains, and expel Sand and Gravel; for the
Jaundice; and taken in Wine it expels the Poison of the Phalangium and
Serpents; or, boiled in Vinegar, and applied, it braces up relaxed Arteries,
and helps the Sciatica. A Decoction of the Roots in Wine, drank, helps a
Frenzy, Falling Sickness, and Pain of the Uterus; boiled in Water, it clears a
dim misty Sight, and held in the Mouth, eases the Toothache; it cures Pains of
the Breast, Stomach, and Bowels, and drank every Morning, several Days
together, it excites venereal Desire. A Dram of its Seeds, -- and Cummin Seeds,
given in four Ounces of Wine, helps bloody Urine; some reject its Use in a
Dropsy. The Back and Belly bathed with a Decoction of the Root or Seed in Wine,
or sitting in it as in a Bath, has been found a good Remedy against the Pains
of the Kidneys and Bladder, Uterus, Cholick, or other Pains in the lower Parts
of the Body; and for Stiffness and Numbness of the Sinews or Cramps, Sciatica
and Convulsions. The Herb provokes the Menses, is stomachic, nourishes much,
and exhilerates; it must not be eaten too immoderately, especially by the
Bilious, lest it sharpen the Humors. There have been Disputes whether it
dissolves and expels, or generates the Stone; the last seems mere Theory. The
boiled Tops eaten, or their Decoction drank, loosen the Belly.

15.
ASPHODEL ROOTS are cleansing, cutting, opening, good to provoke Urine and
Menses, resist Poison, cleanse Ulcers, and resolve.

ASPHODEL. Grows several Kinds of them in curious Gardens.

16.
ARSMART (Persicaria) is plain or spotted; the first is mild, cooling or
drying, the last is hot and dry; it kills all Worms, both on Man and Beast, and
cleanses putrified Sores, if the Juice be dropped into them, or otherwise
applied; it consumes all cold Swellings, and dissolves coagulated Blood, from
Falls or Bruises. A Piece of the Root, or some of the Seed, put into an aching
Tooth, eases the Pain. The bruised Leaves laid to a Joint that has a Felon
takes it off, The Juice dropped into the Ears kills Worms or Fleas there
presently. The Leaves strowed in a Room kill or expel all the Fleas in it. The
Herb or Juice, rubbed on a Horse or Beast's Sores, drive away Flies, and all
Vermin, even in the hottest Summer. A Handful of the Herb, put under a tired
Horse's Saddle, makes him go fresh and vigorous. The mild Arsmart heals green
Wounds, is good against beginning Imposthumes and Inflammations; its Water
distilled from the Herb is excellent in the Stone.

17.
ARTICHOKE (Cinara) excites both Sexes to Venery. A Decoction of the Leaves in
white Wine Posset is an extraordinary Medicine for the Jaundice. The Roots are
opening, cleansing, and diuretic; the candied Stalks are said to be good in
stuffing of the Lungs.

18.
ARUM (Wake Robin, or Cuckoo Pint) is good in continued Quotidians; the Lees or
Dregs of the Root, instead of a Digestive, far exceeds all others. The Root of
the spotted Sort, whether dry or green, taken in Powder to Half a Dram, is a
good Remedy against Plague or Poison. Targus says, he knows not a more
healthful Herb, than its green Leaves, laid to a Bile, or Bubo. The boiled Root
taken with Honey, cures Diseases of the Breast from thick Phlegm, for it
powerfully expectorates thick tough Matter, therefore good in an Asthma; it
promotes the Discharge of Urine, and is said to cure Ruptures. The dried Root
is a noble Remedy for the Scurvy, and in Diseases of the Liver and Uterus, from
a cold Cause. A Poultise of fresh Leaves beaten up with Cow Dung, is good in
the Gout. A Water distilled from the Root, makes a fine beautifying Wash, takes
off Spots, and makes the Face shine; but the Juice of the Root, dried in the
Sun, and beaten into Meal, like a Ceruse, is far better. Ray says, that the
Root, mixed with Powder of Brimstone, is a sovereign Remedy in Consumptions,
and was a Secret, communicated by a dying Gentleman. The Powder, taken in Wine,
or other proper Liquor, or the Juice, or Powder of the Berries, or their
Decoction in Wine, provoke obstructed Urine, or Menses, purge Women after
Childbearing, and expel the Afterbirth. Taken in Sheeps Milk, it heals inward
Ulcers of the Bowels. In all which Cases the distilled Water is no contemptible
Remedy, a Spoonful whereof taken at a Time, cures the Itch, and an Ounce or two
of it taken daily, cures Ruptures. The Leaves, either green or dried, or their
Juice, cleanse all Sorts of rotten and filthy Ulcers, and the Polypus of the
Nose, and heal them. A Decoction of the Root in Water, dropped into the Eyes,
clears them from Films, Clouds, or Mists, that weaken the Sight* and hinders
their Watering or Redness. The Root made into a Poultise, and applied with
Bean-flour to an inflamed Throat or Jaws, relieves them. The Juice of the
Berries, boiled in Rose Oil, or the Powder mixed with Oil, and dropped into the
Ear, eases its Pain. A Decoction of Leaves and Roots in Wine and Oil, cures the
Piles, and Falling down of the Anus, or even Sitting over the Fumes of them
does it. The bruised Root distilled in Milk, affords a fine Face Wash. A Dram
of the powdered Root, given often with Cinnamon and Sugar, cures Paleness,
Cachexy, Scurvy, and Obstructions of the Viscera.

ARUM. Our People call the Kind we have, Indian Turnip, and though differing in
its Form of Growth from the European, yet is like it in Virtue.

19.
ASH-TREE (Fraxinus) Bark and Wood, dry and attenuate, they soften the Hardness
of the Spleen, and reduce its morbid bulk. Some with Success have substituted
this to the Jesuits Bark in Intermittents. The Juice of the Leaves and tender
Sprouts, taken daily in a small Quantity, is serviceable in Dropsies. The Salt
of the Wood, mixed with Diuretics, is a Sudorific, and so is the Decoction of
the Bark. The Seed (called its Keys) warms and dries much, is useful in the
Stone, Obstructions of the Liver, and Pleurisies. The Powder of the fully ripe
dried Keys is a most efficacious Remedy, not only for the Stone, but Jaundice
and Dropsy; Dose a Dram in Wine. The Bark or Leaves boiled in Vinegar and
Water, and laid to the Stomach, stay Vomiting; or boiled in Wine and drank,
cure the Liver and Spleen. A few of the Leaves, taken every Morning in Wine for
some Time, both cure and prevent Corpulency. The Bark boiled in Spring Water is
good in the Gout, being Diuretic and Sudorific. Its lixivial Salt, taken in
white Wine, moves Sweat, drives out the Measles, is good in a Dropsy* given in
a small Dose, it is Diuretic; in a large, it is Sudorific; it incides and
attenuates much. An Infusion of Columbine Root in Wine, or mixed with
Scurvy Grass and Water Cresses, is excellent in a Dropsy of the Belly, called
Ascites: And so is the Decoction of Silver-weed, or wild Tansy, or of Broom, in
Wine, and a Glass full taken every Morning fasting. In a general Dropsy over
the whole Habit, Ash-tree Seed, taken in Rhenish Wine, is an excellent Remedy;
the like is an Infusion of Wormwood, in Ale, or Wine, drank, or a Lixivium of
its Ashes, drank small, or a Decoction of Garlic, in Milk, and one or two of
its Cloves swallowed before: Forestus commends the Juice of Garlic drank; nor
are the Leaves of the Birch, used inwardly or outwardly, contemptible. A
Decoction of the Root of white Briony, in Wine or Water, drank, cures a Dropsy.
A Syrup of Root used is a Specific. A Decoction of Dwarf Elder Roots in Wine,
drank fasting every Morning for thirty Days, is good; or its inner Bark infused
in Wine drank. An Infusion of Ground Ivy and Wormwood in Table Beer, has cured
very Hydropic Legs, and the strain'd-out Herb may be laid warm to the Parts.
Fresh Juice of the green Roots of Flower-de-luce, from Half an Ounce to two
Ounces, drank in Wine or Small Beer warm, is excellent, but works very roughly.
White Horehound is a great Specific. Syrup of Pellitory of the Wall often used
is extolled, Elder Wine of the Juice of the Berries, or the Juice with Rhenish
Wine, is good. The frequent Use of Swallow-wort, boiled in Ale or Wine, is good.


20.
AVENS (Cariophyllata) the Roots boiled in Wine* and drank warm, ease Pains of
the Stomach and Intestines from Cold, or Wind; they are chiefly used to dry up
Catarrhs, and dissolve coagulated Blood. For a Catarrh take Roots of Avens, and
Chips of Sassafras, of each two Ounces, Rosemary Half an Ounce, infuse them
very warm eight Hours in good Wine; strain out; Dose a Wine Glass-f^ll Morning,
Afternoon, and Night: Or two Ounces of the Decoction of unripe Quinces,
sweetened with Sugar, every Night going to Bed.
The Root infused in Wine, or Ale, gives them a most delicious and pleasant
Flavor, is cordial and beneficial in Obstructions of the Liver, and Disorders
of the Stomach, from cold and gross Humors; it is somewhat astringent; its
Infusion in Ale strengthens the Joints and Bowels. The Roots boiled in
Posset Drink, and given two Hours before the F^t, cure Tertians; boiled in
white Wine, it brings down obstructed Menses. The Extract has the above
Virtues, and is used in Rheumatisms; it is a Specific in Pains of the Head,
from gross Blood, or much Phlegm.

AVENS. Is called Cariophyllata, because the Roots smell sweet, something like
C^oves. We have one Kind growing in most Parts of Pennsylvania, very like the
European, only the Roots don't smell so strong of Cloves, as the English.

21.
BALDMONY, Bawdwort, Spignel (Meum) is a glorious Plant to cold, phlegmatic,
and cachectic Constitutions, a Kind of Treacle or Panacaea, from its much
contained exalted Oil, and volatile or essential Salt; it therefore affects the
Heads of the Choleric or Sanguine, if taken in too long, or too large Doses.
The Root expels Wind, and discusses Flatulency or Belchings; it powerfully
provokes Urine and Menses, is excellent in Hysterics, Green Sickness, Catarrhs,
Gripes, and facilitates Venery much; it justly stands at the Head of
Antihysterics, Stomachics, Emenagogues, Carminative Warmers, and is far from
being the lowest of reputed Pectorals. The Powder given with Loaf Sugar, and a
Glass of its Infusion in white Wine, or Beer, or Water, taken Evening and
Morning some Days, mostly brings down the Menses and Lochia, facilitates the
Expulsion of Birth and Afterbirth, and eases a flatulent Cholic, after many
more pompous and promissory Things have failed. In Disorders of the Stomach
from Phlegm, raw, crude Humors, Wind and Relaxations, Pains, Want of Appetite
and Digestion, Belchings, Ructations, Nausea's, Cholic, Gripes, Retention of
Urine, etc. a close Decoction, or Infusion of this Root, far exceeds all the
Mint Tribe; it is a powerful Opener of Obstructions from Cold, as Cachexy, etc.
The Roots should be gathered when the Leaves begin to put forth in the Spring.
The Seed is rather stronger, and answers the same Use as the Root. The Leaf is
used outwardly in Baths, Poultises, and Fomentations. I knew, forty Years ago,
an old Practitioner of good Character and Success, who told me he raised and
maintained his Reputation from his great Use and Success with this Herb: What a
Shame is it that it is now disused?

SPIGNEL. Is a fine Aromatic Plant, but is difficult to raise in Pennsylvania,
our hot, dry Summers, scorch it, yet there is a Species of it grows in the
South of Europe; and Asia.

22.
BAUM ( Melissa) is a great Cordial, fit for Melancholics, it drives away
Sorrow, causes cheerful Dreams, and sharpens the Senses. The Arabians admired
it much in Faintings, Swoonings, Palpitations, Sadness, Grief, Lowness of
Spirits, Cares and Troubles on the Mind, and excessive Beating of the Pulse;
nor do they esteem it useless in a Palsy, and cold Diseases of the Brain, if
boiled in Wine, and drank, (but it consisting of thin, subtle Parts, will not
bear Boiling) some extol it for Rouzing and Strengthening the Memory, and
Sharpening the Judgment; it is good in Hysterics, and promotes Menses and
Lochia; it is put into Baths and Poultises for the Womb. Not only its Infusion,
but wearing it under the Soles of the Feet, hastens the Menses, and comforts
the Joints and Sinews; its Fomentation is good for the Stinging of Bees and
Wasps; a Conserve of it, Borrage Flowers, and Confection of Khermes, is very
good in Melancholy. A Handful of cut Baum, and Half a Dram of powdered Pearl,
infused in four Ounces of Spirit of Wine, and taken, two Spoonfuls at a Time,
was the Secret of a Family at Montpelier, for Madness, said Riverius. Parkinson
gives a Receipt for a fine Spirit distilled from it, and Boil teaches to make
an Essence from it to make old People young, but both their Processes are too
tedious to insert here. Hoffman praises it much for the above Uses. Tournefort
shows how to make it very diuretic. It makes a delicious Tea, only it is too
cheap and common to be regarded. For a Palpitation of the Heart, Baum and
Borrage Leaves, beaten up with a little Rose Water and Vinegar, and laid to the
Region of the Heart; or green Baum alone, sprinkled with Vinegar, and applied.
Or drink every Night two Ounces of Juice of Bugloss, with a little Sugar; or
the Powder or Decoction of Mother wort, with a Piece of Sugar; or Powder of
Hart's-tongue Leaves, with Sugar. Children have often Straitness at the Breast
or Heart, which is relieved by the expressed Juice of roasted Onions, with
Capon Grease in a Liniment, rubbed on the Breast and Sides.


23.
BAY TREE, (Laurus) Galen will have its Leaves to be hot and dry, but its Fruit
more so. The Bark is more bitter, and a little astringent. A Steam of the warm
Decoction of its Leaves, sitten over, is good in Diseases of the Womb and
Bladder; the green Leaves bruised and applied, are good for the Stings of
Wasps, Bees, and venomous Insects. The young Leaves beaten up with Flour, are
proper in Inflammations of the Eyes; or with Rue for Inflammations of the
Testicles; or with Oil of Roses or Orrice, for those of the Head. It was much
commended formerly for Diseases of the Breast, but of late it has been rather
intended for those of the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, and Bladder, being thought to
warm the Stomach, promote Decoction of raw Humors, excite languishing
Appetites, and cure Nauseating; to provoke Urine and Menses, and expel the
Afterbirth. A few Berries swallowed before Sleep, is said to promote an easy
Delivery. Their Juice in Wine, dropped into the Ears, cures their Pain, and
Dullness of Hearing. The Leaves bruised and smelled to, prevent pestilential
Infection. Bauhinus gives various Medicines from the Fruit and Leaves for
watery Eyes, Burns, Scalds, Deafness, Cholic, Relaxation of the Uvula, hard
Labor, Headache, Megrim, etc. Several Oils are prepared from it, which warm,
soften, expel Wind, are good in Flatulencies, all Diseases of the Nerves, Pains
of the Ears, and Rheum. But, in Disorders of the Kidneys from Cold, to anoint
with it, is a most safe, quick, and excellent Remedy. It is also good in a
Palsy, Cramp, and all cold Diseases; Inflammations, Cholics, with, or without
a Rupture, where all Symptoms portended only Danger, a Clyster, with a large
Quantity of the Berries and Cummin Seeds, boiled with Emollients, I have seen
do Wonders. Nor are they bad in a Diet-drink to cold, phlegmatic, flabby
Bodies, that have a Pain, Weakness, or Windiness in their Stomachs. Their Oil
cures Concussions, and dissolves coagulated Blood, and cures Scabs. Venomous
Beasts are said not to come near the Smell of the Ointment.

24.
BEECH-TREE ( Fagus) Leaves are cooling and binding, if applied to discuss hot
Swellings. The Nuts, being warm and moist, are good Nourishment to several
Creatures. The Water found in the Hollow of the Trees, used in a Lotion, cures
Scurf, Scab, and Tetters.

25.
BARBERRY-TREE, ( Berberis) the Berries cool, bind, excite an Appetite, and
strengthen the Stomach; beaten up with Sugar, they are helpful, in Cases that
require Cooling and Binding, as in Fevers, Fluxes, etc. Their Wine is sharper
than that of Pomegranates, it is good in hot Fluxes of the Belly, Coeliaca and
Vomiting; they quench Thirst in Fevers, and revive a languishing Appetite. The
Juice of the Berry, or Decoction of the Bark, and Juice of the Leaves, bruised
with Vinegar, is good in all hot Pains of the Teeth from Bile, or sharp Serums,
or laid to the Forehead in a hot Pain of the Head. The yellow inner Bark,
wrapped in a Linen Cloth, and infused three Hours in white Wine, and drank, is
said to purge Bile powerfully. Sim. Pauli tells us, how to make a fine Tartar
of them. The yellow inner Bark of both Roots and Branches, as before infused,
in Ale or white Wine, is a noble Remedy for the Jaundice. Or this, Barberry
Bark, and Chick-weed, of each alike, boil in middling Wort, to the Consistence
of a Syrup, mix in it Sugar Candy and Saffron; drink of it twice a Day; or take
Wormwood, Betony, Celandine, Dandelion, Barberry Bark, Roots of Garden Rhubarb,
of each a Handful; Senna Leaf twelve Drams, bruised Hog-Lice, an Ounce and a
Half, Saffron four Scruples; infuse all in four Pints of white Wine, or Small
Beer, for four Days, strain and drink hereof every Morning six Ounces: Or more
generally, take Tops of Fir, Broom, Elder and Buckbean, of each six Handfuls,
Juniper Berries four Ounces, Bark of Dwarf Elder, Barberry, and Tamarisk, of
each Half a Pound; Roots of Smallage, Liquorice, Monk's Rhubarb, Marshmallows,
Fennel, Asparagus, and Parsley, of each six Ounces; pick and slice the best of
the Herbs, and throw out the Pith of the Roots, and outer Bark of the Barks,
and boil them in a sufficient Quantity of Water, to press out four or five
Pounds, which strain through a Flannel, and evaporate to the Consistence of an
Extract, and add to it an equal Quantity of Honey; then sift in fine Powder of
the best Turkey Rhubarb, Turmerick, Earth Worms prepared, of each two Ounces,
Saffron, Hog lice prepared, and Seeds of Dwarf Elder, of each one Ounce; then
put to all, and mix Castile Soap, Alb. Sterc. Anserin. of each three Ounces,
Balsam Capivi one Ounce, make an Electuary. Dose from Half a Dram to two Drams,
in any Obstructions, or Foulness of the Viscera.

26.
BETONY (Betonica) is biting and bitter, it discusses, attenuates, opens, and
cleanses; it is a chief Cephalic, Hepatic, Splenetic, Thoracic, Uterine,
Vulnerary, and Diuretic; it is much used inwardly and outwardly, especially in
Diseases of the Head, says Schroder. Wood Betony Tea, with dried Leaves of Wood
Sage, and Ground Pine, sweetened, and drank warm, is a wonderful Remedy in the
Gout, Headache, and Disorders of the Nerves; if a strict Use of the
Non-naturals be observed at the same Time, and proper Evacuations used at due
Intervals: Nor is a Tea of dried Leaves and Flowers of Betony, and wild
Angelica, useless in the first Case. I have known obstinate Head-achs, that for
many Months had resisted all other most probable Means, cured by daily
Breakfasting, for a Month or six Weeks, on a Decoction of Wood Betony in new
Milk, and strained. The dried Leaf, smoked with Tobacco, has been serviceable
in some Diseases of the Head. The Roots are very different from all the other
Parts; they have a bad Taste, are offensive to the Stomach, cause Loathing,
Vomiting, and Belching. Antonius Musa, Physician to the Emperor Augustus, wrote
a whole Book on this one Herb. Pliny is in downright Raptures with it.
Dioscorides says it is good in innumerable Distem^^rs, for it cures those who
either loath, or cannot (...) their Food, weak Stomachs, sour Belchings, either
in Conserve, Infusion, Decoction, Powder, or Electuary; it is useful in the
Jaundice, Epilepsy, Palsy, Convulsions, Gout, and Dropsy; it is good in Coughs
and Colds, Wheezing and Shortness of Breath, and sharp Rheums on the Lungs; its
Decoction in Mead is good in putrid Agues, from Disorders of the Stomach; it
draws out Blood and Humors which fall on the Eye, and hinder the Sight; its
Decoction kills Worms, opens Obctrucctions of the Liver and Spleen, is
beneficial in Stitches, and other Pains of the Sides or Back, Gripes in the
Bowels, or windy Cholic; it brings down the Menses, Gravel, Stone, and Birth,
and is very good in Hysterics; boiled in Wine for a Gargle, it eases the
Toothache; it is useful against the Venom of Serpents or mad Dogs, used
inwardly and outwardly; it either prevents or quickly removes Drunkenness. The
Powder with Honey, and a little Vinegar, strangely refreshes the Weary; it
stops Bleedings by the Mouth, Nose, or Urine; bruised and applied to green
Wounds, it quickly heals them, or cut Veins or Sinews; it draws Splinters,
Thorns, or other Bodies, out of the Flesh; it, with a little Salt, cures Sores
and Ulcers, even the Fistulous. Turnefort says, the Herb is too full of
Sulphur, mixed with a little volatile oily Salt and Earth. A Tea of its Leaves
is not only advisable in the Gout, but in the Sciatica, Headache, Jaundice, and
Palsy. Palmarius's Powder for the Bite of a mad Dog: Take Leaves of Rue,
Vervain, Smallage, Plantain, Polypody, common Wormwod, Baum, Mint, Mugwort,
Betony, Hypericon, Lesser Centaury, all gathered in June, of each equal Parts;
dry in the Shade, powder and mix all, and, if the Patient has not been bitten
on the Head, nor the Wound washed with Water, give two or three Drams in Wine,
and apply bruised Parsley to the Wound; he says it is infallible. This Herb,
Ground Pine, wild Sage, and Bu^dock Root, make a good Tea in Arthritic Pains:
And a Decoction of Mugwort in Oil Olive, till almost dry, then strained, and
the pained Parts anointed with it: Or a Poultise of Garlic and House-leek,
pounded and applied; or the constant Use of Mugwort, or wild Succory in Broth;
or a Fomentation of Willow Leaves, and Bark in Wine; or a Poultise of fresh
Briony Root, twice or thrice applied; or a thick Poultise of Fresh Comfry
Roots; or a strong Ointment of Dwarf Elder Leaves; or a Fomentation of Henbane.
In the Headache Betony Tea is also good, or the young Buds of Hemlock worn
under the Feet, and renewed once a Day; or the expressed Juice of Primrose
Leaves and Flowers drank in new Milk; or a Bag of fresh Vervain pounded, and
hung about the Neck: If the Pain is from an Abscess, let Betony be boiled in
Wine, and laid on the Head at going to Bed; if from a hot Cause, let Spunges,
dipped in a warm Infusion of an Ounce of Henbane Seed, in five Ounces of
Vinegar, be tied on the Head; but opening first the frontal Veins, and then one
in the Arm is surer. If from Drunkenness, the greater Lettuce Leaves, steeped
in water, and applied to the aching Head; if from Flatulence, Turnips roasted
under the Ashes, and laid as hot as can be endured behind the Ears, and repeat
them as they cool, till the Pain cease; if from the Womb, take three Parts of
Millet, toasted or untoasted, common Salt parched before the Fire one Part, mix
and sprinkle with red Rose or Betony Water, and in a Bag tied warm to the
Forehead, and Root of the Nose. For a Weakness of the Head, (...) it often with
a Decoction of Betony. For a Lethargy or Carus, Savoury infused in Vinegar, and
laid to the Head, and its Decoction in Wine, Drank; or Mustard Seed, beaten up
with Vinegar, and applied to the Hip-Bones; or Infusion of Water Cresses often
used.


BETONY. Grows here well in Gardens; but that which is called here Wood-Betony
is really Cock's Comb, or Rattle Grass, very different from Betony; there is
another Herb planted in Gardens by the Name of Betony, which is a small Species
of Clary.

BILL-BERRIES, BLEA-BERRIES, or WHORTLE-BERRIES, (Vaccinia) are cooling and
binding, good for a hot Stomach, quench Thirst, abate the Ardour of Fevers,
stop Vomiting, cure a bilious Looseness, and are good in the Cholera Morbus;
but their Juice made into a Rob, with Sugar or Honey, is better than the
Berries, for they are cold, crude, and apt to offend a weak Stomach, and
disturb the Belly. I have often known poor People cured of bilious Loosenesses
by them. The Black-Berries are better than the Red, though the last are more
binding.

28.
BIRCH-TREE (Betula) the Juice of its Leaves, or their distilled Water, or the
Juice or Sap drawn from a Bore of the Tree in the Spring, all these, being
Diuretic, are good for the Stone, if drank some Time; and they are a good
Gargle for sore Mouths. A Lee, made of the Ashes of the Tree, is said to answer
the same Ends; no Preparations of this Tree should be used by Persons disposed
to a Diabetes.

29.
BISHOPS-WEED (Ammi) is warming and drying, and of thin Parts, and a bitter
sharp Taste; it digests Humors, provokes Urine and Menses, expels Wind, and
taken in Wine eases the Gripes, is good against Biting of Serpents, and
Mischiefs arising from the inward Use of Cantharides; mixed with Honey, it
takes away blue and black Marks of the Skin; being drank, it takes off too high
a Color of the Face; its Fume with Rosin, cleanses the Womb.

BISHOPS-WEED. I have not observed to grow in Pennsylvania, or the adjacent
Colonies.

30.
BISTORT-ROOT (Bistorta) is very binding, and used with Success where that is
required, as for Incontinence of Urine, excessive Menses, bleeding Wounds,
bilious Vomiting, Spitting of Blood, Bloody Flux, and other Fluxes of the
Belly; Rheum from the Teeth, Gums, Tonsils, and Jaws, if boiled in Wine; or
Half a Dram of the Powder given in Conserve of Roses; taken in the White of an
Egg, with powdered Amber, it prevents Miscarriage. The Powder (...) Sudorific,
and prevents pestilential Infection. This is near the same as Tormentil. The
Powder given is good in Rupture^ and dissolves coagulated Blood in any Part of
the Body, from Falls, Blows, etc. and eases their (...) The Leaves kill Worms
in Children; it thick^ns the Blood and Juices much, and checks their rapid
Motion.

BISTORT. Not in this, or the neighboring Provinces.

31.
BLUE-BOTTLE ( Cyanus) the Flowers and distilled Water are good in
Inflammations of the Eyes. The Juice dropped into foul Ulcers cleanses them
(...) is a vulnerary Plant, its Juice is good against (...) and Concussions,
though a Vein be broke, and Blood be spit; it heals Cuts and green Wounds. Some
use it for Jaundice and Retention of Urine; its Infusion or Decoction in white
Wine, drank Morning and Afternoon, is a famous Diuretic; so is Plantain Juice
drank alone, or with Lemon Juice, or a Dram of Burdock Seed, in four Drams of
white Wine, or powdered Columbine Seeds, in Rhenish; or distilled Water of
Holly-Tree Buds, or Powder of Southernwood Seed in Wine.

32.
BORRAGE ( Borrago) and BUGLOSS Flowers ( Buglossum) are both eminent Cordials;
the distilled Water and Conserve of Bugloss Flowers are said to strengthen the
Heart, and are good against Faintings and Melancholy; they cause Cheerfulness,
and purify the Blood. The Water is a Repellent in Inflammations of the Eyes,
and in all Fevers, if used inwardly, and so is the Conserve; and, dissolved in
white Wine, it brings down the Menses. Bugloss moistens, cools, and raises the
Spirits; it removes a Catarrh, and Defluctions from the Lungs, and the Juice is
good in obstinate Coughs; it is cooling and cordial in Tea, Ptisan, or Broth. A
Syrup and Conserve may be made and kept of the Flowers, for both are good
against Poison, putrid, malignant* pestilential Fevers, and Melancholy; they
open Obstructions, cleanse the Blood, are serviceable in a Jaundice, temper
Heat and Sharpness, are good in all adust Humors, and Diseases of the Skin
therefrom; both Conserves are good for feeble, weak, and consumptive Persons.

33.
BOX-TREE ( Buxus) a Wash of its Decoction in Lee makes the Hair grow
surprisingly. An Infusion of its tender Leaves in white Wine, strained, and
given to drink, quickly cures a flatulent Cholic. The distilled Narcotic Oil of
the Wood is much commended in the Falling Sickness, Toothache, and rotten
Teeth. Its Saw-dust is said to be drying and astringent, therefore its
Decoction is said to cure a Flux; its Decoction in Wine is a good Gargle for
cold Defluxions of the Teeth.

34.
BRAMBLE-BUSH ( Rubus) all its Parts are medicinal, Buds, Leaves, Flowers,
Fruit, and Roots, have all a binding Quality* but the unripe Berries are most
so, the ripe are far milder; they are good in all Fluxes of the Belly, Uterus,
Nose, or by the Mouth. The Leaves boiled, strained, and a little Alum or Honey
put to the Liquor, make a very good Gargle for Rawness, Heat, Parching, and
small Ulcers (...) the Mouth, or Throat, or privy Parts, or the Thrush; some
esteem them Antiscorbutic. The Juice of the Fruit, with Sugar, makes a good
Wine. Their Syrup is an excellent Medicine in a Dysuria. The Berries
immoderatly eaten are not only safe, but pleasant, and wholesome to lax and
choleric Bodies especially, and to Persons liable to Loosenesses, Excess of the
Menses, etc. A Decoction of the Leaves, for a Steam and Fomentation, cures the
Piles, and hard Knobs in the Anus. A Decoction of the Flowers, being diuretic,
is good in the Stone.

35.
BRANCURSINE or BEARS-BREECH (Acanthus) is a great Softener, often used in
emollient and Pain-easing Clysters, and Poultises, to Burns, and Luxations. The
Roots boiled and drank are diuretic, and stop Fluxes; they are good for
consumptive Persons, and such as spit Blood, or have got Falls, Blows, or
Bruises; they are much the same as Comfry Roots.

BRANCURSINE and BROOM. I have had flourish in my Garden, but the late hard
Winters have destroyed them Root and Branch.

36.
BROOK-LIME, or WATER-PIMPERNEL (Becabunga) has near the same Virtues as
Watercresses, but weaker, it warms and moistens moderately; it is chiefly used
in Diet-drinks, and Juices for the Scurvy; it powerfully expels Stones of the
Reins and Bladder, and brings down the Menses and dead Child; it is used
outwardly to Inflammations and St. Anthony's Fire; Rustics daily experience its
Excellency, in expeditiously healing green Wounds, if a little Salt and Cobweb
are added to it, and laid on like a Poultise between two very thin Cloths; but
its chief Excellency and specific Virtue lies in its wonderfully easing Pains
of the blind Piles, and other Excrescences of the Anus; in a poultise boiled in
Water or Ale, and applied, it cures frightful Ulcers of the Legs, if laid on
Evening and Morning daily, in Scorbutic Bodies.

BROOK-LIME. I have never observed it to grow in our Northern Provinces.

37.
BROOM ( Genista) is good in Diseases of the Liver and Kidneys, expels* watery
Humors by Vomit, Stool, and Urine; it is good in Obstructions of the above
Viscera, and in Dropsies, Catarrhs, and arthritic Disorders. The Twigs, Tops,
and Leaves, boiled in Wine and Water, or their Juice, is good ^n Obstructions
of the Reins and Bladder, purging both by Stool and Urine: A Dram of the Seed
does the same. Dr. Hulse says, that the powdered Flowers, with Honey of Roses,
in an Electuary, cure Scrophula's. Ray says, the powdered Seeds, taken in
Hydromel, do Wonders in a swelled Spleen, Dropsy, and Jaundice. The Salt of
Broom-Ashes in white Wine, drank, is extolled in a Dropsy, if the Lymphatics
are not broken, but it is not safe after the Waters are extravasated. In Want
of Broom, Heath, Juniper, Bean-stalk, or Vine Ashes, are as good, and Ferns, to
old dropsical, asthmatical, and scorbutic People. Take Tops of Wormwood,
Camomile, Sage, Broom, and Scurvy Grass, of each a Handful; Roots of Garlic,
Elacampane, Horseradish, of each two Ounces; Juniper Berries, an Ounce and a
Half; prepare and infuse all in white Wine, or Table Beer, for a Diet-drink, to
be drank thrice a Day. -- BROOM-RAPE, ( Orobanche) some call it Lung-wort, and
use it as a Medicine for the Lungs; but the powdered Herb is a present Remedy
for the Pain of the Cholic. The Herb candied, or the Syrup, is a sovereign
Remedy against Splenetic and Hypochondriac Passions; used outwardly, it sof^ens
hard schirrous Tumors.

38.
BUCK-THORN ( Spina Cervina) the Berries in a Syrup purge watery Humors, and
thin Phlegm violently, taken from Half an Ounce to three Ounces in a Dropsy,
Leucophlegmatia, etc. or their Powder taken from Half a Dram, to a Dram and a
Half; for this Purpose, some strong Rustics swallow 15 or 20 of the Berries.
The best Syrup is made of the purified Juice, with Honey, Sugar, Cinnamon, and
Anise, which may be used safely and successfully in the above Dose. If the
Stomach is weak, it may be taken with Cinnamon Water, and of the Syrup, each an
Ounce; Jalap Powder, 20 or 30 Grains; mix and give some (...) the Constitution
will bear it; take Gamboge Powder 12 Grains, Oil of Juniper two Drops,
Mithridate enough to make a Pill for a Dose; it works roughly, but is like to
be serviceable.

BUCK-THORN. Grows very well from Seed I had from Europe, but no where wild in
our Provinces.

39.
BURDOCK ( Bardana) the Root is chiefly used; they are, from good Authority,
vouched to be good in Stone, or Gravel of Kidneys and Bladder, and in Gout and
Arthritic Pains. Forestus has shown their surprising Effects, the powdered Seed
being taken to a Dram or two in white Wine, or in Chervil, Parsley, or Arsmart
Waters, and drank daily. Apuleius says, it is a Specific against the Bite of
venomous Beasts; its compound Water is extolled against the Plague, as being a
powerful Sudorific; it was in great Esteem for venereal Disorders, before many
excellent mercurial Preparations were known and used, and is now found to
relieve those Pains when raging much: This Herb is not only Diuretic and
Sudorific, but Hysteric, Pectoral, and Vulnerary. The famous Hollier used its
Root and Flowers in Pleurisies, with Success; he made the Sick swallow the
Sperm of a Dozen new laid Eggs, in a Glass of Burdock Water, and then drink
large Glass-fulls of this Water after. The Decoction of the Root purifies the
Blood; it is justly preferred to Scorzonera, in malignant Fevers, and the Small
Pox. A Conserve of the Root is said to expel Urine and Sand; some advise taking
the Root in Spitting of Blood, and purulent Matter. The Seed, either in white
Wine or Emulsion, is good in the Stone, nephritic Pains, and Cholick. The
Leaves cleanse Ulcers, and a Poultise of them roasted under the Embers, and
applied, eases the Gout; some boil them in Milk, and lay on. The Water, Juice,
Decoction, and Extract, are all good in the above Cases; a Tea of it, and wild
Angelica Root, drank daily, with a little powdered Gumguaiac, is a good
Preventative of the Gout. The Leaves not only cleanse Wounds, and obstinate
tedious Ulcers, but are good in loose Joints. In Gout or Gravel, the powdered
Seed should be daily drank for 40 Days. A Decoction of the Root has cured
several Quartans. The Leaves applied to shrinking Sinews, help them much; their
Juice taken with Honey, provokes Urine, and eases the Pain of the Bladder; the
Leaves, bruised with the White of an Egg, take out Fire or Burns, ease them
quickly, and heal them up; a Fomentation of their Decoction stays the Corrosion
of fretting Sores or Canker; they should be anointed after, with an Ointment of
the Juice, Lard, Nitre, and Vinegar, boiled up and strained. A Conserve of the
Roots is good in Consumptions, Fluxes, and Stone. The lesser Burdock Seeds
digest; the Roots or Seeds bruised, and often laid on hard Kernels in the
Flesh, dissolve them; the unripe Seeds bruised, and steeped in warm Water or
Wine, and the Hair moistened therewith (having been first rubbed with a little
Nitre) makes it yellow. I have often seen three or four Ounces of great Burdock
Seed boiled in Water, and strained (it would be better in Wine) and Half of the
Liquor given to drink, the other Half injected in a Clyster, has rescued from
the Jaws of Death in flatulent pituituous Cholics, when the small Intestines
were slipped into the Cods, and could not be put back, and the wretched
Sufferers in the utmost Extremity; though I have often known it used so in the
Cholic, yet never without Success: But its Decoction is so intolerably saltish
and bitter, that only strong Stomachs can retain it; it purges Phlegm and
Flatulency out of the Bowels roughly, but safely, and effectually; it kills and
expels Worms, with their Eggs and Nests: People often subject to Boils should
drink a daily Tea of this Root, and Rosemary Tops, it will cure them. The green
Leaves, worn daily under the Soles of the Feet, are reported to cure an
Anasarca.

40.
BULLACE-TREE ( Prunus Sylvestris Major) the Fruit is cooling and astringent,
it is not eaten till it is either boiled, parched before the Fire, or has got
Frost; preserved with Honey, it is good for a Looseness, or Bloody Flux, their
Wine and Decoction are for the same Use. The Flowers infused all Night in
strong Wine, and distilled, the Water is a singular Experiment for a Pain of
the Side. Vintners cannot be without this Fruit, for restoring their Wines. An
Infusion, or Syrup of the Flowers, is purging; Leaves, Fruit, and Bark, are all
cooling, drying, and astringent; hence their Use in Hemorrhages, Loosenesses,
etc. The Gum of the Tree dissolved in Vinegar, cures a Herpes. The richer
Germans make a Wine of the Fruit.

41.
BURNET ( Pimpinella) is either Cordial or Alexipharmac; hence infused green in
Wine, it gives it a fine Aromatic Flavor and Taste; it chears the Heart, and
resists the Plague, and contagious Diseases: Or it is binding and useful in
excessive Fluxes of the Menses, Bloody Flux, and Discharges of Blood; and in
drying and healing up Wounds and Ulcers. The Root or Herb powdered with Sugar
of Roses, is good in Bleedings of the Nose, Spitting of Blood, and Consumptions
of the Lungs. The Powder sprinkled on Ulcers hinders their spreading. Its
Conserve is excellent in bloody Urine: Some commend it as an Antidote to
Madness, from the Bite of a Mad Dog. The Herb is said to thin, warm, dry,
cleanse, and open Obstructions of the Liver, Kidneys, Lungs, and Uterus; it is
good in the Gravel, Strangury, Cholic, Cough, Asthma, Difficulty of Breathing,
beginning Inflammation of the Lungs, Crudities or Weakness of the Stomach; it
is an Antidote to the too liberal Use of Quicksilver; outwardly it cleanses off
Spots of the Face, increases Milk, opens Buboes, or cancerous Tumors, cleanses
and heals new and old Wounds. The Root fried in fresh Butter, used in a
Poultise, draws Balls out of any Wounds. Its Powder strewn on Cancers is good,
and so is Powder of Spurge Laurel steeped in Vinegar, dried, powdered, and
strewed on them, or Roots, Juice, and Leaves of Moonwort applied For an Excess
of the Menses, a Decoction of Ladies Mantle drank often is good, or a Bag of
Pimpernel, with Purple Flowers hung to the Pit of the Breast, or two Handfuls
of it held in the Hands till it is warm, stops all Discharges of Blood. Bistort
used any how is good, as its Powder with Conserve of Roses. The Juice or
Decoction of Shepherds Purse drank, and a Poultise of the bruised Herb laid on
the Sharebone, the inner red Rind of Chestnuts powdered, and Powder of Ivory,
of each two Drams, mix for two Doses, give in rough Wine, Powder of the red
Root of Dwarf Elder (not the Bark) given from half a Dram to two Scruples in
Wine. A Decoction of red Archangle drank, or a Tea, or Conserve of it. A
Decoction of Yarrow drank thrice a Day. Root or Seed of Water Lillies boiled in
red Wine, and drank, are wonderful: Or a Decoction of Burnet in Wine or Water,
drank thrice a Day: Or Juice of Plantain drank, and injected into the Vagina,
or 4 or 5 Spoonfuls of Juice of Plantain and Nettles mixed, drank often, or
five or six Ounces of Juice of Nettles sweetened, and drank every sixth Hour;
or Wheat Flour, with Plantain Juice, made into a Paste, and laid to the Groins:
Or a Poultise of Nettles warmed in a Drying Pan, and laid hot to the Sharebone.
-- For the Whites, or Fluor albus, every Morning, drink six Ounces of a
Decoction of Ladies Mantle, and, if needful, inject some of it into the Vagina.
Powder, or Emulsion of the Seeds of Ladies-Thistle, drank, is a Specific, or
used in a Decoction of Dwarf Elder. Powder of Dropwort Root, a Dram drank in
Wine often, or in a Decoction of wild Carrot Seed. Leaves or Flowers of Clary,
taken any how, or the Water of the Leaves distilled with Wine, or an Ointment
of its Leaves made with fresh Butter, rubbed on from the Navel to the
Sharebone, and a little of it put into the Vagina, and eat often the Leaves
fried with Eggs. White Archangel Leaves drank in Tea, are much commended. This
is very efficacious; Take Juice of Yarrow a Pound, best Sugar a Pound and Half,
make a Syrup, clarify it with the White of an Egg, Dose from one to two Ounces,
fasting, and an Ounce at Bedtime. Rosemary Tea drank often in a Day. A
Fumigation of Sage Leaves burnt, and the Smoke received into the Vagina. -- For
a Pain of the Womb, Roots of Water Lillies, boiled in Oil of Roses, is
excellent, or a Dram and a Half of Nettle Seed, given in Wine. -- For a
Flatulency of the Womb, a Decoction of Calamint, drank in the Fit, is very
powerful; Centaury Tops infused or boiled in Spanish Wine and drank; Powder of
dried Herb Robert in Wine, a Dram is good; Root of Masterwort infused, or
boiled in Wine, discusses it: Or a Fumigation of Nutmeg thrown on live Coals,
and taken into the Uterus, is good, if the Disease is from Cold taken at the
Uterus after Childbirth. -- For an Haemorrhage there, a Decoction of Oak
Leaves drank, stops it. -- For an Inflammation, a Fomentation of two Parts
Melilot, Agrimony, and Camomile, of each one Part boiled, strained and used, is
excellent. -- For a Relaxation, or Falling-down of the Womb or Vagina, Oak Bark
two Ounces, boil in Water, from four Pints to a Quart; toward the End add Bark
and Flowers of Pomegranates, red Roses, of each two Handfuls; when strained,
add Half a Pint of red Wine; use for a Fomentation two Hours before Rising, and
after going to Bed. -- For a Suffocation of the Womb, a Decoction of Feverfew
in Vinegar, used for a Fumigation to the Nose. Cruso.
.

We have a large kind of BURNET, which grows in shallow gravelly Swamps.

42.
BUTCHER'S-BROOM, or KNEE-HOLLY ROOT, ( Ruscus, sive Bruscus) is very useful in
Stuffings and Obstructions of the Viscera, especially the Liver, Spleen, and
urinary Passages. Hence it is good in the Jaundice, Dropsy, and Strangury; the
second whereof, of a deplorable Sort, has been cured in a Month, by daily
drinking a Decoction of this alone, or with Flower-de-luce, and Fennel Roots,
in Wine or Water; it is thought as powerful as Comfry in healing broken Bones,
or as Solomon's Seal. Though a Decoction of the Root has had such surprising
Effects in Dropsies in a few Weeks, yet proper Purges were, and always should
be given with it, as of Jallap-Root and Ginger, or Jallap and Syrup of
Buckthorn, twice a Week. Powder of the Root and of Dropwort, and Figwort, of
each a Scruple, infused in a Pint of white Wine, and drank daily, is good in
scrophulous Tumors. A Conserve of its Berries is commended in a Gonorrhaea,
taken from two Drams to Half an Ounce, for some Days; or Rose Water, four
Ounces, Juice of Lemons one Ounce, White of an Egg, mix and drink every fourth
Day.

We have no Kind of Butchers Broom growing in our Colonies, that I have
observed.

43.
BUTTERBUR (Petasites) is bitter, but not hot, the Roots barked and steeped in
Vinegar, till it is impregnated with their Virtue, then drank with Juice of
Rue, and Treacle, are good in pestilential Fevers: It comes also recommended in
Hystericks, a Cough, Asthma, and Worms; it expels Urine and the Menses. The
Roots are Sudorific, and Alexipharmac, good in Fevers, malignant, pestilential,
and contagious Diseases; they are Cordial, prevent Fainting and Shortness of
Breath; they are applied in Poultises to Buboes, and Plague Sores.

BUTTERBUR, White and Black BRYONY. I have not observed the true Kinds of any
of these to grow wild in any of our Colonies, nor will they flourish in Gardens
as yet.

44.
BRYONY (White) Bryonia alba) purges Phlegm and watery Humors strongly, from
its viscous Parts, sticking to the Coats of the Bowels; the Root opens
Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Uterus; expels the Menses, brings off
Water in a Dropsy, both upwards and downwards; brings away Birth and
Afterbirth; repels Hysterics, heals the Asthma, and is useful in the Gout.
Platerus took up the Root, just as it began to sprout in the Spring, peeled off
its Bark, sliced it, hung it on Threads, and dried it, either in the Sun or
Shade, then infused it in Wine, and dried it again; the same he repeated a
second and third Time; being thus prepared, it purged without any Trouble: Or
he powdered the prepared Root, and with a little Maluatic Wine, wherein Ginger
had been slightly infused, he made it into Troches, which, dried and powdered,
he used in Infusion, which made it as mild as Agaric; the Bigness of a Nutmeg
of its Conserve taken twice a Day, for a long Time, often conquers either
Epilepsy, or Hysterics; or a Bit of the Root put into the Cup, out of which the
Sick drinks. Formerly, some boiled and eat its first tender Buds, but it is too
rough, except for very strong Bodies. The inward and outward Use of the Root is
most efficacious in a Dropsy; a Poultise of it beaten up with Linseed Oil, and
laid warm to the Hip, and often renewed, does Wonders in a Sciatica; nor is it
less efficacious in dissolving and drawing out clotted Blood from Bruises,
Falls, and Blows, Slices of the fresh Root, laid hot to the pained Side in a
Pleurisy, eases it. Take Half a Pound of a large Root, slice it, and fry it,
till it is much dissolved; strain, and add Turpentine of the Fir Tree, Half a
Pound, Bees Wax four Ounces, make an Ointment, spread it on Linen, apply it to
scrophulous Swellings, and it either resolves or ripens, breaks and heals them:
Zacutus swears it never once failed. Doloeus says, in the Spring Time, lay open
the Ground round the Root, cut off the upper Part, hollow what remains in the
Earth, cover it with the Part cut off, and strew the Earth over all; next
Morning the hollowed Part will be full of Juice, a Spoonful of which drank,
purges gently downwards, removes Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen,
Sweetbread, and other Parts of the lower Belly, and if drank every Morning,
from one to three Spoonfuls, it does, and has cured abundance of Dropsies. The
Root, bruised and applied, draws Splinters out of the Flesh. The Leaves, Fruit,
and Roots, cleanse old filthy Sores, fretting, running Cankers, Gangrenes and
Tetters. The Root clears the Skin from all Spots and Discoloring; but, for all
its good Qualities, its inward Use requires great Caution, and should be very
well prepared; it, being so powerful a Purge, is fit to draw Humors from the
remotest Parts of the Body, therefore in a Palsy, Cramp, Vertigo, Convulsions,
and to expel Sand and Gravel from the Kidneys, and purge the Uterus, it may be
of special Service. The powdered Root, made into an Electuary with Honey,
clears the Breast from thick Phlegm, and is good in obstinate Coughs and
Shortness of Breath. The Berries often rubbed on, cure Tetters, therefore
called Tetter-Berries. The Root applied with a little Wine, breaks Boils, and
helps Whitloes, or Whitflows. A Poultise of the Root with Sterc. Caprill. or
Bubulin. and Vinegar, is good for a Schirrus, if used sometimes, and often
renewed; but Vinegar and Nitre harden it to a Cartilage or Bone: A Poultise of
the Root, Frogs, and soft Soap, beaten up into a Poultise, and applied to any
strumatous Tumor, promises fair to discuss it, especially on the Joints, where
a Suppuration may be dangerous.

45.
BRYONY (Black) (Bryonia Nigra) cuts and thins tough Phlegm, in Disorders of
the Breast. Hoffman says, that Dr. Lister often tried both Roots and Extract in
very large Doses, but never could observe they had any sensible Operation any
Way. A Poultise of the powdered Root, with Vinegar and Cowdung, eases the Pain
of the Gout; a Poultise of it, bruised, quickly cures Concussions: This Root
seems to have the like Effects with that of the White, but much weaker. The
bruised Root applied, is good for Aches of the Arms, Shoulders, Hips, and in
white Swellings.

46.
CAMOMILE ( Chamaemelum) digests, loosens, softens, eases Pain, provokes the
Menses, and Urine; its Decoction in Wine is of special Use in the flatulent
Cholic, Cramp, and Convulsions. Mathiolus says, it is wonderful how powerfully
its simple distilled Water discusses in a Pleurisy; outwardly it is of the
greatest Benefit in easing Pains, in softening and ripening Fomentations,
Poultises and Clysters: In the last Form it eases Pain of the Bowels
surprizingly, from whatever Cause; and in Baths for the Stone, Camomile Flowers
is the chief Ingredient. Its Oil softens and discusses hard Tumors, eases
their Pains, and takes off Weariness. Two Handfuls of the Flowers, infused in a
Quart of Rhenish Wine, on hot Ashes for two Hours, then strained, and as many
fresh Flowers put in a second and third Time, and strained; two or three
Spoonfuls of this Infusion, drank in warm Wine several Times, and at the same
time bathe in a Decoction of the Flowers, is a most sovereign Remedy for the
Stone, beyond all Simples; it is surprising how salt this Infusion is. A double
Infusion of Camomile in Brandy, strained out, and rubbed on every Night, the
whole Length of the Vertebrae of the Back, is very serviceable to weak
Children, which cannot walk. Two or three Spoonfuls of the Juice, with a few
Drops of Spirit of Vitriol, given in Broth just before the Fit, often prevent
it, and cure the Fever. The Ancients commend Camomile against bilious and
hypochondriac Fevers, and the Egyptians used it against all Fevers. A Decoction
of stinking Camomile ( Cotula Foetida) either for Bathing, Fomentation, or
Smell, is as good as Castor in Hysterics; used as a Plaist^r or Poultise, it
soon cures Wounds. Some have, with Success, used a Decoction of this Herb, for
Scrophula's; others have cured a Dysury with it. If the Breasts are hard with
coagulated Milk, let them be washed twice a Day with this Decoction, and lay on
after it a Poultise of Elecampane Leaves, Horehound, and Linseed, with Lard; it
is also good in Cramps. The Smell of the Herb is most offensive and destructive
to Bees; boiled in Milk, either it, or Mallow Leaves, are good for the Gripes
attending a Bloody Flux; its Decoction put in a Swine's Bladder, and laid to
the Breast, or Side, in a Pleurisy, eases Pain greatly; an Ointment of the
Herb, with Hyssop and Butter, eases a Pain of the Breast much, from violent
Coughing: A Drop or two of its Chemical Oil on Sugar, is a sure Diaphoretic,
gives Ease in the Cholic, or Stone, expels Wind, etc. but in many Cases the
simple Herb, or Flower, is preferable: A Bath of the boiled Herb takes off all
Fatigues, is friendly to the Nerves and Muscles, eases most outward or inward
Pains, allays Inflammations, mollifies and discusses Tumors; it communicates
Warmth to the Parts, digests and dissolves what is necessary, and gently
provokes Urine. An Infusion, or Decoction of the Flowers* is either a Vomit or
Sweat, as they are used in Strength or Quantity, and expel old Aches or Pains*
it brings the Menses. A Syrup made of the Flowers in white Wine, is good in a
Jaundice and Dropsy. The Oil of the Flowers, by Infusion, is used with great
Success for hard Swellings, Pains, Cramps, Aches, Dryness, or Shrinking of
Sinews, etc. In Clysters it expels Wind, eases cholical and nephritic Pains,
For the Cholic an Infusion or Decoction of Camomile, drank, is of excellent
Service; a Decoction of the prickly Leaves of Holly-Tree, in Posset Drink, is
of singular Use; roasted or fried Oats, laid to the Belly in a Bag, are good,
and so is Half a Dram, or two Scruples of Orange-Peel, with a little Sugar,
given in some proper Liquor to drink; or a Draught of Infusion of Caraway Seeds
in Spanish Wine; or a Scruple of the Root of Sweet Flag powdered, and given in
some proper Liquor to drink; or a Poultise of Chervil fried in Butter, and laid
to the Belly; or powdered Cummin Seeds, given from Half a Dram to a Dram, in
some fit Liquor; or Half a Dram of the powdered Sponge of the Wild or
Dog-Rose-tree in Wine; or the Decoction, Juice, or distilled Water of Heath in
Flower; or powdered Gentian, from Half a Dram to a Dram, in some fit Liquor; or
a Decoction of Elecampane Roots in Wine; or a Dram and a Half of powdered
Acorns in Wine, if the Belly is not costive; or from Half a Dram to a Dram of
the yellowish Skin of Walnut Kernels, in Wine, or some Carminative Water; or
the Powder of Cinquefoil Leaves, from one Dram to two, in Wine; or a Bag of
warm Wheat Bran, sprinkled with warm Vinegar, laid to the Belly; or a Decoction
of Coltsfoot, in Wine; or a Decoction of Speedwell, drank, and given in
Clysters; or a Decoction of an Ounce of Nettleseed, in a Quart of Wine, to a
Pint and a Half, strained; Dose three Ounces thrice a Day. Cruso.
or those from Excoriations of the Bowels: Anointing with it in Stitches, and
Pains of the Sides, very often gives Relief. This Herb was so great a Favorite
with the Egyptians, that Galen says, their Sophies dedicated it to the Sun; and
indeed, amongst all Herbs, none exceed it for extensive, inward, and outward
Services, in a numerous Variety of Cases. Elder seems to put in for the next
Competitor; in a Cardialgia, a Decoction of it drank warm in the Fit, cures; or
three Ounces of the fined Juice of Dill; or a Dram of powdered Acorns, in two
Ounces of fined Wormwood Juice. Some make a great Secret of the following
Ointment, and put as great a Value on it, for flatulent Stomachs, Indigestion,
Gripes, Gravel, or any cold or windy Disorder. Take Roots of Spignel,
Elecampane, Saxifrage, Parsley, Wild Valerian, Nettles, Angelica, Althaea, of
each three Ounces; Leaves of Pennyroyal, Rue, Thyme, Sage, Mint, Wormwood,
Ground Ivy, Hart's-tongue, Maidenhair, of each a Handful; Camomile Flowers, two
Handfuls; Broom Flowers, a Handful; Seeds of Anise, Nettles, Fennel, Wild
Carrots, Juniper Berries, of each Half an Ounce; prepare all to be made into an
Ointment, with fresh Butter, as the Cholic-salve, under Angelica, was made; to
every Half Pound of it, when strained the last Time, add Oil of Anise, and
Amber, of each a Dram, and mix well; Dose from a Dram to Half an Ounce,
inwardly, drank in some proper warm Liquor, in Bed, and anoint outwardly with
it at Bedtime, if needful. I have known it used, but never knew it useless, far
less hurtful. Such as use Theriacas, cannot blame the Multiplicity of
Ingredients in it. For the After Pains in Childbed Women, a Decoction of
Camomile Leaves or Flowers in Wine, drank, is excellent, if the Pains are from
a cold Cause; or a few Drops of Elixir Proprietatis may be put to it; bruised
Ground Ivy laid warm to the lower Part of the Belly. A Decoction of Calamint,
drank, if from Wind; A Decoction of Chervil, if from Retention of grumous
Blood. Powder of Nutmeg, cast on live Co^ls, and the Smoke received by a Funnel
into the Womb; or Half a Dram of Powder of Zedoary in warm Wine; or the Powder
sprinkled on Bread and Butter, and eaten. Cruso. But all these are incomparably
short of Liquid Laudanum given cautiously.


47.
CAMPIONS (Lychnis) Rose Campion, with a red, as it were blazing, shining
Flower, and single white Campion, their Juice snuffed up the Nose, provokes
Sneezing; from a Scruple to a Dram of their Seed taken in Wine, is good against
the Bite of Scorpions. Two Drams of the powdered Seed of the last, drank,
purges bilious Humors. The Herb boiled in Posset, is excellent in Children's
Convulsions.

48.
COCKLE ( Nigellastrum) Some ascribe the Virtues of Nard to it, and extol it
for curing Tetters, Ringworms, Scabs or Sores of the Skin, and for healing up
of Wounds and Fistula's, as well as its surprising Effects of stopping Blood
even by holding in the Hand, or under the Tongue, for which Sennertus and Sim.
Pauli deservedly extol it out of Measure for staying all Haemorrhages.
Haemorrhages or Bleedings to stop, Ladies Mantle used inwardly or outwardly. A
Handful of Male Pimpernel held in the Hand till it is warm, then changed for
fresh. Tutsan used internally or externally. Bistort Powder sprinkled on Wounds
does it. Lint Dossels dipped in Juice of Shepherds Purse, put up the Nose,
stops its Bleeding; or its Juice mixed with Vinegar or Verjuice, and the White
of an Egg, and applied to the Forehead. Powder of dried Comfry Root, beaten
with Water till it turn to a slimy Paste, and applied to the Bleeding Part.
Powder of Puff Balls sprinkled on the Part, and gently tied up, repeat it if
needful; or apply the Wool or Down on Quinces to it; or use Juice of
Horse-tail, as that of Shepherds Purse above. Strawberry Root held in the
Mouth, stops Bleeding at the Nose. Bloody Cranes Bill, used any Way is very
powerful. Powder of dried Cranes Bill, strewed on a Wound* stops Blood, and
cures it quickly. Powder of St. John's Wort Seed, from Half a Dram to a Dram,
drank in a Docoction of the Herb. Bruised Root of common Water Flag applied in
a Poultise, stops Blood. A Bay Berry held in the Side of the Mouth, opposite to
the bleeding Nostril, stays it. Beaten Darnel Root sprinkled with strong
Vinegar, and applied to the Forehead in a Poultise or Coronal Suture. An
Infusion, or Decoction of Yarrow Drink; or put to the Place fresh Cinquefoil
Root, held in the Hand till it is warm; Burnet is of great Service; a
Fomentation or Poultise of Plantain, with a little Vinegar or Crab-juice laid
to the Temples, and Forehead, stops Bleeding at the Nose. As does from two to
five Ounces of the Juice, drank daily in a Morning, cure all Bleedings; or, for
Bleeding at the Nose, hold Solomon's Seal, and Knot-Grass in the Hands till
they are warm, or longer, if needful; or their Decoction, drank, and a Poultise
of them applied outwardly cold; or Poplar Buds gathered in May, and thrown by
till they mould, which Mould stops Blood powerfully. Purslain, slowly chewed
and eaten, wonderfully cures Bleeding of the Palate, Gums, or Throat, in
Scorbutic Habits; bruised Primrose Leaves are good; or a Decoction of
Brambleberry Leaves, drank, cures inward Bleedings; or Burnet Leaves held in
the Hands. Two or three Grains of the black Excrescence on the Top of Wheat
Stalks, eaten, stops all Fluxes of Blood. A Dram of Spikenard Powder, taken in
Broth or Plantain Water, is a Specific. Powder of Limetree Berries snuffed up
the Nose. A Decoction of Tormentil Root, drank thrice a Day. Nettles, or their
Juice, put up the Nose, stays its Bleeding; or bruised and laid to the Palms of
the Hands, and Soles of the Feet; or the Root, held in the Mouth, stays
Bleeding at the Nose; or the powdered Seed, put into Wounds; or their Juice,
drank, cures Bleedings, Strawberry Roots held in the Mouth, stops Bleeding at
the Nose; or powdered Oak Moss put up the Nose; or the Moss of a dead Man's
Scull, held in the Hand, or hung about the Neck; or a dried Toad hung about the
Neck; or Powder of dried, or calcined Water Frogs, taken from one to two
Scruples in Drink, two or three times. -- For Spitting of Blood, Silver-weed is
good, and Juice of the whole Daisy, given from one to two Ounces, instantly
after a Discharge; or take lesser Daisy, stinging Nettles, Plantain, of each
three Handfuls; bruise all in a Mortar, pour an Ounce of Purslane Water on
them, express the Juice, and drink of it thrice a Day. Powder of Bistort Root,
in Conserve of Roses, is good. Dwarf Cistus used any how is a Specific in all
Bleedings. Bruised Germander infused in scabious Water and red Wine, strain off
the Liquor, and drink warm; boil Quinces sliced till they are soft, pour off
the Liquor, and express the Juice out of the Quinces; Dose of this last Juice,
from one to three Spoonfuls three or four Times a Day, after Bleeding; Half a
Dram of powdered Dog-rose, or wild Briar Sponge, twice a Day. A Decoction of
Horse-tail, drank daily. The Juice, Syrup, Decoction, or Conserve of Ground Ivy
is wonderful; or take Juices of Ground Ivy, Agrimony, Housleek, Plantain, and
Purslain, all clarified (by which they are spoiled) of each a Pound; Sugar of
Roses, double Weight of the Whole, or Loaf-Sugar and Powder of Roses, make a
Syrup; Dose two Ounces every Morning, in Milk-water, and at Night, in four
Ounces of Poppy Water; or an Electuary of Henbane Seed and Conserve of Violets;
Dose the Bigness of a Nutmeg every Night; or Powder of Yarrow gathered in the
Spring, from Half a Dram to a Dram twice a Day; or a Dram of white Poppy Seed
in Half an Ounce of Sugar of Roses, taken every Morning; or a Syrup of twelve
Ounces of Juice of Plantain, with eight Ounces of Sugar, use daily; or Juice of
Plantain given alone, from Half an Ounce to an Ounce; or take the Juice of
twelve Handfuls of Long Plantain or Ribwort, pour the Juice on six Ounces of
fresh Comfry Root, beat all in a Marble Mortar, and with Sugar make an
Electuary; it is a noble Medicine. A Decoction of bruised Purslane in Wine is
good. Syrup of Purslane Juice prepared as that of Plantain, is good; or the
Decoction sweetened with the Syrup, is excellent; or Pulp of fresh Comfry Root
and Sugar of each a Pound, boil slowly to the Consistence of Marmalade, and to
each Pound add Half an Ounce of powdered Nutmeg, it is wonderful; or Tormentil
and Yarrow Roots of each three Ounces. Burnet two or three Handfuls, boil in
Water to a Half, Strain, add to each ^ound of Conserve of Roses an Ounce, and
mix; Dose six or eight Ounces twice a Day; or two Ounces of Periwinkle Juice in
red Wine; or a Dram of powdered Teasels drank twice a Day, in Broth; or its own
Decoction; or a Conserve of stinging Nettle tops with the Seeds, is good; or
the crude Juice or Syrup are powerful; or five Ounces of the Juice, taken twice
a Day, sweetened, or a Decoction of the whole Herb. -- For Vomiting of Blood,
if in the Fit, Shepherds Purse is held in the Hand, and out of the Fit, worn in
the Shoes, it is good; or take Roots of Comfry six Ounces, Plantain twelve
Handfuls, beat all in a Marble Mortar, express the Juice, and with Sugar made a
Syrup without clarifying it; Dose one or two Spoonfuls often in a Day; or they
may be made into an Electuary as above; or take Rye-bread three Handfuls,
common Salt a Handful, and strong Vinegar enough to make a Plaster to lay on
the Breast and Stomach; or Juice of Nettles acidulated with Spirit of Vitriol;
or an Electuary of Peruvian Bark with Syrup of Poppies after Letting Blood; or
Lucatellus's Balsam: Nettle Juice, drank three or four times a Day, wonderfully
dissolves coagulated Blood on the Stomach. -- For making bloody Urine, a
Decoction of Agrimony in Water or Wine, drank, is a Specific. A Decoction of
bruised Shepherds Purse in Wine or Water, is good. A Decoction of Calamint
cures it; as does a Decoction of Ground Pine; or a Decoction of Comfry Flowers
in red Wine, strained and drank; or a Decoction of Horse tail, or Yarrow, drank
thrice a Day; or four Ounces of the Juice of Plantain, drank Morning and
Evening; or a Syrup of its Juice made with Sugar; or a Decoction of pounded
Knot Grass; or the Juice, Syrup, or Decoction of Purslane; or a Decoction of
Bramble-bush Sprouts, drank Morning and Evening; or four Ounces of the
depurated Juice of Nettles, drank with an Ounce of Syrup of the Juice of
Plantain, Mulberries, and Raspberries, of each alike four Ounces; Syrup of
Coral five Ounces; Marmalade of Quinces, Rob of red Gooseberries, of each six
Ounces, mix and use twice a Day; or Cows Milk on Mint, with a little Jelly of
Quinces, and Syrup of Cinnamon, drank twice a Day; or a Water distilled from
Astringent Herbs and Milk, drank with Syrup of Althaea and Comfry. -- For
Excess of the Lochia, Powder of Dropwort two Scruples, repeated as needful.
The last says that he was so successful in stopping Bleedings that attended an
Epidemic Fever in Denmark, in 1652, that he was taken for a Witch or Conjurer.
The bleeding Patient is only to hold a Piece of the Root under his Tongue some
Time. Its Decoction drank, stops the Menses, and expels Urine, Sand, Gravel,
etc.

49.
BARREN CAMPION (Sesamoides Salamanticum) with a Moss Flower, or Earth Star, is
wonderfully esteemed for the Bite of a Mad Dog; of three clean washed entire
Plants of it be given to a Horse the first Morning, five the second, and seven
the third, it surely prevents all Danger, and cures not only Horses, but Men,
and other Creatures. The whole Herb may be made up into Balls with Butter, and
taken.

50.
CAMPION or SOAP-WORT (Saponaria) The Root is hot and drying, attenuates and
opens powerfully, and is Sudorific; it is used for an Asthma, to cause the
Menses, helps Diseases of the Uterus, and for a Gonorrhoea. Outwardly it
provokes Sneezing, and discusses Swellings, in the Groins and Arms chiefly.
It Is also very cleansing, and by pressing yields a nitrous Juice, which
cleanses the Scab, and all Diseases and Deformities of the Skin. A Dram of its
Powder, taken before the Fit, cures the Falling Sickness, if taken once a
Month, for three New Moons. Its Decoction cures Tetters, Ringworms, takes
Stains out of Cloths, and cleanses and scours Woollen like Soap. It Is good in
the Jaundice, Hypo, and Madness. A Decoction of the Herb stops inward and
outward Bleedings, if drank and applied. It sends out obstructed Urine, Sand,
etc.

SAPONARIA. Grows prodigiously where it once takes Root.

52.
CARDUUS BENEDICTUS, holy or blessed Thistle. Though this is a good Herb, yet
Authors seem a little too lavish in its Praises, but I shall not follow them;
for Hoffman comprises all in few Words, viz. That its Decoction in Wine, drank
in the Absence of the Fit, is good in Intermittents; its Powder is less
available, and its distilled Water least of all. It Is commended in Pituitous
Disorders of the Head, as Megrim, Vertigo, Epilepsy, Deafness, Distillations on
the Breast, in a Dropsy, Quartans, and all long Fevers, which arise from
Obstructions. It is also said to be good in Cholics, Nephritics, and Sciatica,
partly by discussing, and partly by determining the Humors to the Urinary
Passages. But its chief Praise is for the Plague, used inwardly to provoke
Sweat, either for Prevention or Cure; outwardly for breaking Buboes or other
Imposthumes. If gathered in the Beginning of June, it is an excellent Vulnerary
for green Wounds, but answers not that Intent any other Time. The Decoction of
the dried Herb in Posset Drink, drank in small Doses, provokes Sweat; in a
large Dose it vomits. The Germans esteem its Wine an universal Remedy. Both its
Water and Powder bear a very great Character with Sim. Pauli, and Andreas de
Villa Nova, not only for healing putrid and obstinate Ulcers, but curing the
Cancer itself, whereof they produce Instances. It is certainly a good Stomatic
and Antiscorbutic.

52.
CARLINE Thistles (Carlina) Helmont says, its Root, Juice, or Extract, drive
away Sleep both healthy and morbid; this Thistle is Sudorific and Alexipharmac,
prevents Contagion, and cures pestilential Fevers; it is Diuretic, brings down
the Menses, kills Worms in the Belly, and is good in Dropsy and Hypo. The dried
Root boiled in Broth helps Defluctions of Rheum on the Eyes, Teeth, Nose, or
Lungs; but boiling loses its volatile Parts. It is good for Nerves and Womb;
drank in Wine it is an Antidote against Plague or Poison.

53.
The black CARLINE made into an Ointment with Vinegar, Flour of Brimstone, and
Lard, cures Itch, Tetters, etc. and all Deformities of the Face and Skin; it
helps foul Sores and stinking Ulcers: A Gargle of it is commended in the
Toothache; but, being a great Poison, and never used inwardly, I should not put
its Decoction in the Mouth.

54.
SOW THISTLE (Sonchus) green and tender, is eaten as Cole, says Galen,
especially its Root; a Decoction of the Stalks makes Nurses flow with Milk; it
helps Childrens Color, drank in Wine; it is good for Asthmatics, and such as
have the Strangury; the Juice dropped into the Ears eases their Pains. Its
Virtues are near the same with Lettuce. The bruised Herb laid on Warts soon
takes them away. The Juice prevents Curdling of Milk in the Breasts; three
Spoonfuls of it drank in white Wine, with a little Oil, causes easy and speedy
Delivery in Childbirth, and that the Woman may walk presently after. The
bruised Herb or Juice helps Inflammations of the Eyes, Pustules, Wheals,
Blisters, or other Eruptions on the Skin, or secret Parts; is good for the
Piles. The Water was used to wash the Face.

55.
CELANDINE the greater ( Chelidonium Majus) a Handful of the Root boiled in
Rose Vinegar, strained* and Venice Treacle put to it, and a Glass of it drank
in Bed, and Sweat after, both prevents and cures the Plague. Warts often rubbed
with the Juice of the Leaves, on the Decrease of the Moon, are effectually
removed. The Juice of Marigold Flowers does the same. The distilled Water of
this Herb dropped into the Eyes clears them, curing both their red Spots and
those of the Face. The Bigness of a Pinhead of the Extract of the Herb, put
into the Eye in the Morning in Bed, not only takes off its outward Specks, but
is most effectual in beginning Suffusions; three or four Ounces of the Water,
with two Scruples, or a Dram of the Root, is a successful Experiment in a
Dysentery. The Water, drank several Days together, cures the Jaundice, and
King's Evil. The powdered Herb cleanses and heals Wounds and Ulcers. Its Juice
rubbed on effectually cures a Herpes miliaris and Impetigines. Garenciers will
have it to be a Specific in English Consumptions, but Sim. Pauli fully shows
his Mistake, for it is not a pulmonary Consumption that is meant there, but the
Scurvy, in which it is as great a Specific, as in all Obstructions of the
Liver, and outwardly for a Scab, Scald Head, etc.

56.
CENTRY, or CENTAURY the lesser (Centaurium Minus) as it is intolerably bitter,
was formerly a Specific for Agues, and is still used as a Substitute to the
Bark, especially where it fails of Cure; as it is not to be depended on in long
rainy Seasons. The Ancients will have this Herb to be gently purgative, but,
however that is, we know it opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and is
mildly astringent, cleansing, and vulnerary; carries off bilious and phlegmatic
Humors, and discharges S^rosities by the Skin; hence it is good in Fevers,
Jaundice, Suppression of the Menses, Gout, Scurvy, Worms, and a Specific
against the Bite of a Mad Dog. Its Decoction in Clysters is of wonderful
Service in a Sciatica. A Decoction of the Herb and Flowers cures Discoloring
of the Skin. A Lee of it cleanses and whitens Women's Hair. Sim. Pauli says,
that the most excellent Remedy against Scurff, Dandriff, and Scab of the Head,
is to wash it often with the Decoction of this Herb in Water wherein Peace were
boiled, very tender; it at the same time kills and destroys all Vermin in the
Head. A strong Decoction of it in White Wind, drank every Morning, cures a
Jaundice. The powdered Leaves are good in a Dropsy. The green Leaves quickly
cure fresh Wounds, and cleanse and cure old Ulcers.

57.
CARAWAY SEEDS (Carum) are Stomachic, Diuretic, expel Wind, promote Digestion,
provoke Urine, strengthen the Brain, and cause much Milk; hence their Use in
the Cholic, Vertigo, to Nurses, etc. The Root, when tender, is reckoned as good
as the Seed to eat; it is pleasanter and more delicate than Parsnip; it affords
much distilled Oil, and much more acid than that of Anise. This Oil given on
Sugar is very good in Pains of the Belly, Dose five or six Drops. This whole
Plant is heating and drying, and consists of fine Parts. The dried Seed should
be used; but if dried in the Sun, its finest Parts are lost. Its Effects are
surprising in Cholic, Melancholy, and Vertigo; either Seed or Oil are good, but
its Water distilled in Rhenish is best. The Seed is good in cold Disorders of
the Body, powdered and made into a Poultise. It takes away black and blue Spots
from Blows, Bruises, or Falls. A Poultise of the Seed and Herb, fried, and laid
to the lower End of the Belly, eases the Cholic; or the Seed bruised and mixed
with the Pulp of a hot Loaf, and sprinkled with Brandy, and applied as the
last. The Seed is good in Hysterics, and chewed it helps the Sight.

58.
CALAMUS AROMATICUS, or sweet smelling Flag, is one of the Iris Tribe. It is of
thin Parts, warming and drying, much used in obstructed Menses, Cholic Pains,
and boiled in white Wine, with Borrage Juice, is a fine Diuretic. It is
pleasant to the Palate and Stomach, and good against contagious Diseases; and
in Catarrhs, especially Convulsive. It is a good Stomachic, but must not be
powdered. Its Infusion drank, or applied outwardly, hastens the tardy Menses. A
Decoction of the Root drank expels Urine, relieves Pains of the Sides, Breast,
Liver, and Spleen, Dysuria, Convulsions, and Gripes. Its Juice with Honey helps
Dimness of Sight, and Hardness of the Spleen. Its Root boiled in Wine, beaten
up, laid to the Cods, greatly abates their Swelling, Hardness, and Collection
of Humors; or the Decoction drank is good after grievous Fails, Bruises, etc.

59.
CHERRIES ( Cerasa) seem from Gerard to have been formerly in bad Repute in
England; but Ray has set them in a more favorable Light. Black Cherry Water is
of late fallen into Disgrace and Disuse. Since, by several curious and useful
Experiments, it is found to have the same fatal Effects on Brutes, as Laurel
Water has. Fresh sweet Cherries loosen the Body a little, but the dried bind
it. The rough and sharp are most grateful to the Stomach as Morella's; they
agree best with palled, phlegmatic Stomachs; for they brace a little, quench
Thirst, and excite an Appetite. Fernelius commends a Decoction of dried sour
Cherries, as exceeding good in the Hypo, and by it many have been cured. In
Diseases of the Head, but especially of the Tongue, Spirit of black Cherries
has been much extolled. Bauhinus says, some admire a Mixture of black Cherry
and Lime Flower Waters in Convulsions. The expressed Oil of the Kernels takes
off Spots of the Face; eases Arthritic and Nephritic Pains. The Gum of the Tree
drank in Wine cures old Coughs, mends the Complexion, sharpens the Sight and
Appetite, and expels small Stones. Sweet Cherries are more grateful to the
Taste, but not to the Stomach, for they soon putrify. Most Fruits should be
eaten before they are quite mellow-ripe, whilst they retain a sharp, brisk, and
quick Taste; for then they are less offensive to the Stomach, and not so liable
to speedy Putrefaction. But I would caution all Persons against swallowing the
Stones; a Custom that I have known fatal to some, and others have been restored
with great Danger and Difficulty; yea I have known the last the Effect of
swallowing Grape Stones. The Cure of both consists in a long Use of emolient,
relaxing, lubricating, and very mild Lenitives first; then stronger Purges
afterward to bring them away.

60.
CHESTNUT-TREE ( Castanea) Leaves, dried and laid to the Joints, ease their
Pains and Stiffness. They also discuss Swellings of the Testicles from Bruises,
or any other outward Cause, from their astringent Quality; they stop the Flux
of the Piles, by healing up the Mouths of the Vessels. The unripe Fruit, eaten,
causes a Looseness, which the Root and Bark of the same Tree cure. The
expressed Oil of the Nuts boiled, either taken inwardly, or applied outwardly,
excites an Appetite, and promotes Digestion. The same with roasted and beaten
Garlic, or coagulated Milk, fried and laid to the Anus, powerfuly quiets the
pain of the Piles. A Decoction of the Bark in Wine stops Fluxes, either of
Humors or Blood. The inner Rind of the Nut in red Wine cures Whites,
Gonorrhoea, and excessive Menses, correcting the Sharpness and Thinness of the
Blood.

61.
CHERVIL (sweet) ( Chaerophyllum) the common is of thin Parts, Diuretic,
provokes the Menses, wastes and expels Stone and Gravel without Pain, dissolves
coagulated Blood, and causes sweet Sleep, externally in Clysters, and
Poultises; It is good in the Cholic, and for Urine too long retained, if fried
in Butter, with Pelitory of the Wall and Parsley, and laid to the Sharebone.
The Juice drank in Broth, or in its own Water, thrice drawn, says Doloeus, is a
Specific in a Vertigo; and laid on as a Plaster, it dissolves coagulated Blood
from Bruises, etc. The whole Plant is sweet and fragrant, a little acrid and
sharp; mixed with other Garden Herbs, it gives them an agreeable Taste, and is
eaten both boiled and raw in Sallads with other Herbs; being a little pleasant,
it disposes to Venery; fried and laid to the Belly, it is a sure Remedy for the
Gripes. Two Ounces of the Juice drank every Morning in white Wine is good in a
Dropsy. For the Cholick its Juice is drank; its Decoction is given in Clysters,
and the fried Leaves are laid to the Belly, used in the same way; it brings
down the Menses, and expels the Stone. It cures Crudities and Loosenesses, and
discusses some inward and outward Swellings. The Herb opens Obstructions, is
good in Fevers, and purifies the Blood. The Root is not used.

62.
CHICK-PEAS (Cicer) is the only Pulse that neither breeds nor harbors Worms.
If they are roasted till they are black, then powdered and boiled in Water,
they are the only substitute that we have for Coffee, and drink very like it,
only a little bitterer, which is helped by making them and Coffee mixed of each
alike; Spanish Chick Peace are best for Coffee, and come nearest it. Chicks
contain much Oil and Salt; some eat them freely for Food, but they are a little
flatulent, stir up Lust, and some imagine they increase Seed. They are
cleansing, cutting, opening, and digesting; provoke Urine, and greatly expel
Gravel and Stone; and so must not be used where the Bladder is ulcerated. The
Cream of their Decoction in Water opens the Belly, provokes (...) and Menses,
increases both Milk and Seed. their Decoction with Rosemary is good for Dropsy,
J^^ndice, and Pains of the Sides.

63.
CHICK-WEED (Alsine) a despised good Herb, because it is common, and not
exotic* it is cooling, moistening, and very nourishing; some plead it to be a
little astringent. Its insipid Water was used to be given to Children, for
Fits, and its Juice is yet used for their Gripes. The Herb is profitably given
in Broth, and other Diet, for an Atrophy, Hectic, Consumption, Inflammations of
the Lungs, Breast, or Sides. It safely and powerfully cools all feverish Heats,
and Heat of Urine. Its Decoction in Wort has cured a black Jaundice, when other
Things failed. It is certain, that its Juice, outwardly applied warm, with
Cloths or Spunges, and often renewed, cools the Heat of the Liver, or other
Viscus, powerfully. The Herb applied in a Poultise, or its Juice used as above,
or its Decoction in Fomentations, are all wonderful and efficacious Coolers and
Discussers of outward Inflammations. But for this Purpose the best Poultises
are made of it, Rag weed, and Groundsel, roasted under hot Ashes in a
Cabbage-Leaf, for boiling dissipates their nitrous Salts, and weakens them
much. Its Decoction used outwardly, stops the immoderate Flux of the Piles, and
eases their Pain. Its Infusion or Decoction in Wine, is a great Restorative
after long Sickness, or violent Fevers. Its Powder is used for the
Falling Sickness; or laid to the Piles, it presently stops their Flux. The
Juice is vulnerary and cleansing, it heals sore and inflamed Mouths, and used
in Diet, is good against spitting of Blood. It dissolves and discusses
coagulated Milk in the Breasts. The Herb helps the Appetite and Digestion. The
Juice used as above, is effectual against all hot Imposthumes and Swellings,
Redness of the Face, Wheals, Pimples, Itch, Scab, Cramps, or Convulsions,
whether the Juice be used alone, or mixed with Lard; the last cures sore Legs.
For a strained Sinew, boil Chick-weed and red Roses in a Quart of Muscadine
Wine, till a fourth Part is wasted; then add a Pint of Sheepsfoot Oil, boil it
some Time, then strain and anoint herewith Evening and Morning, at a warm Fire.
The Juice dropped into the Eyes, cures their Heat and Redness. It eases Pain
and Heat from the Sharpness of the Blood, in any Part of the Body. It is good
in hot and virulent Ulcers, and Sores in the private Parts, or on the Legs. The
Herb boiled with Althaea, Foenugreek, and Linseed, made into a Poultise, and
laid on Tumors and Imposthumes, ripens and breaks them, or at least eases
Pain, and abates Heat and Swelling.

64.
SEA CHICK-WEED (Alsine Marina) cleanses the Reins and Bladder, provokes Urine,
softens the Hardness of the Uterus, and, used with Oil of Roses and Milk, heals
up Wounds. Taken with Oxymel, Dioscorides says, it is good in the Epilepsy. It
cleanses and purifies the Blood.

65.
CINQUEFOIL ( Quinquefolium) or five leaved Grass, is vulnerary, astringent,
and febrifuge; it stops Fluxes of the Belly, and Haemorrhoids; Bleeding of the
Nose, or Spitting of Blood, and a Cough. Some recommend it for a Palsy,
Consumption, Sciatica, and Jaundice. It is said to be useful in the Stone, and
Excoriations of the Kidneys, Ruptures, and Fevers. Its Juice dropped into
inflamed Eyes, or used in a Gargle for sore Throats, and loose Teeth, is good.
It is also said to cleanse malignant Ulcers. A Dram of the Powder taken a
little before the Fit, and often repeated, is excellent in intermitting Fevers;
for which Purpose before the Discovery of that noble Specific, the Peruvian or
Jesuits Bark, this, lesser Centaury, Camomile Flowers, Gentian Root, Wormwood,
Germander, Carduus Benedictus, wild Tansy, etc. were the best known. But for
the Sake of the Poor, who are most liable to these, and (without the Bark) too
often fatal Distempers, we might yet enquire farther, whether we have no Bark
of our own that would answer the same Intent, as of the Ash-tree, or Elm-tree,
taken off near the Root; or the Root-bark of the black Thorn, etc. for
Lemonade, Flowers of Sal Ammoniac, etc. have put off several Fits; and the Salt
Draughts have cured Thousands. A Gargle of Cinquefoil Decoction is wonderful in
a Thrush, and sore Mouth. This Herb, Silver-weed, Tormentil, and Strawberry
Leaves, are said to be pretty much of the same Nature. Four Ounces of the Juice
of this Herb, drank daily, for some Days, cures a Quinsy, Jaundice, Whites,
excessive Menses, Fluxes, etc. The Root boiled in Milk is best in a Dysentery.
Cinquefoi^ Juice, drank thirty Days together, is good in the Falling Sickness.
Hands daily washed often in its Decoction, cures their Shaking. For an
Inflammation of the Throat, gargle often with a Decoction of Cinquefoil; or
swallow, often and slowly, a Decoction of cut Mallow Leaves in Milk; or a
Gargle of a Decoction of Self-heal, with Sal-prunella, or Saltpeter. The Root
boiled in Vinegar, and applied, helps hard Knots, Swellings, or Lumps in any
Part of the Body; or Inflammations, Imposthumes, or painful Sores, that heat
and putrefy; or running and ugly Scabs or Itch; or boiled in Wine, the strained
Liquor drank, and the Herb laid on, eases Aches, and Pains of the Joints, Feet,
Hips, and Bowels, if continued some Days.

66.
CLARY (Horminum) is somewhat warm, drying, cleansing, and attenuating. A
Gargle of its Infusion clears the Gums from Putrefaction. A Decoction of
Berberry Bark, or clarified Scurvy Grass Juice, or a Lotion of Water Cresses,
infused in Wine or Cider, or a Decoction of small biting Stone-crop; especially
with a little Honey and Alum. Its Conserve is good for the same Case, and to
cure the Whites; though its distilled Water drawn with Wine is preferred in this
Case. Its Seed put into the Eyes clears them from Motes, and white or red
Specks. The Mucilage of the Seed made with Water, laid to Swellings, disperses
and dissolves them, and also draws out of the Flesh Thorns, Splinters, etc. The
Leaves used with Vinegar and a little Honey ease Inflammations, Boils, or
Felons, if applied before they begin to suppurate. The powdered Leaves provoke
Sneezing, and purge the Head. Both Seed and Leaves taken in Wine excite Venery.
It is said to help weak Backs, and strengthen the Reins. It is used in the
Kitchen like a Tansy. A Wine is made of it. The Herb put into Ale either
stupifies the Drinker, or makes him outrageous. It expels Menses and
Afterbirth; it is said to cure Barrenness, and is reputed a great Female
Plant. A Tea made of it is fit for those Purposes. I add Clivers, whose Water
or Infusion in white Wine is good in the Stone and simple Gonorrhoea, and Pains
of the Breast and Sides, etc.

67.
CLOVE-GILLI-FLOWER ( Cariophyllus) is Cordial, and good for the Head, and all
its Diseases, as Vertigo, Palsy, Epilepsy, Apoplexy, and other nervous
Disorders. In Faintings, Palpitations, Weakness, and Pain of the Stomach. In
Pestilential Fevers, either the Juice of the whole Plant given to three Ounces,
or three Drams of the powdered Root, is good, but at the same Time let the Nose
be well rubbed and bathed with its Vinegar. The Flowers drive away Worms, and
hasten the Birth. They ease Head-achs and Tooth-achs; they pleasantly and
powerfully cause Sweats, quench Thirst, and strengthen the Heart. They cure
Wounds of the Head, and draw Splinters out of the Scull; laid on outwardly they
are moderately drying and warm. The distilled Water is a noble Remedy for sore
Eyes. Its Decoction drank is excellent in malignant Fevers. The Flowers are a
fine Sudorific and Diuretic.

68.
CLOVER ( Trifolium) I find not the Assistance of any of this large and
numerous Class taken into Physic, except the common purple Meadow Trefoil, or
Field Honey-Suckle, and the white-flowered Meadow Trefoil. Some good Women lay
great Stress on a Decoction of them drank to cure Childrens Rash or Purples.
Some say their Decoction in Clysters is good for the Gripes, and to expel Phlegm
from the Bowels. A Poultise of them eases Inflammations. Their Juice dropped
into the Eyes clears them from Films, that begin to grow over them, and hinder
the Sight, and also eases Blood-shooting. Some for the Bite of Adders drink the
Juice, wash the Place with their Decoction, and lay on the boiled Herb in a
Poultise; for this Purpose some use an Ointment made of it with Hogs Lard. The
Herb bruised between hot Tiles, and laid on the Sharebone, provokes Urine. A
Decoction of the whole Plant drank a long Time cures the Whites; the boiled
Seeds and Flowers, made into a Poultise, help hard Swellings. Its Ointment is
good for Wounds, and to take away Soars.

69.
CLOWNS WOUND-WORT ( Panax coloni) Dr. Palmer says its Decoction sweetened up
is powerful against Hoarseness. This, or Iron-wort, are dry, and very great
Astringents, cures Haemorrhages, Fluxes of the Belly, Menses, Fluor albus,
Catarrhs and Distillations, and are wonderful Vulneraries used outwardly or
inwardly. They cure Childrens, or grown up Peoples, fresh Ruptures, and sour
Belchings of the Stomach, stop the Bleedings of Wounds, heals them up quickly,
and dry up the Moisture of old fretting Sores, and Ulcers; and the Juice or
Decoction of the Herb takes off their Inflammation. But the late Use of the
Friar's or Jesuit's Vulnerary Balsam seems at present to have expelled the Use
of our vulnerary Plants, and Herbs externally, out of Practice; such as have
tried it extol it much; this is its Preparation: Take Balsam of Tolu, or of the
Sycamore Tree, one Ounce; Styrax Calamita, two Ounces, Benzoin three Ounces,
Succotrine, Aloes, Myrrh, Olibanum, Roots of Angelica, Tops of Hypericon, of
each Half an Ounce; rectified Spirits of Wine a Quart; mix all, and infuse six
Weeks in the Sun in July, and August, or in Horse-dung, or a Week in warm
Water, or on a warm Sand Heat, in a close Glass Bottle, shake it often, strain
and keep for Use. It cures fresh Wounds, or old Ulcers (if first they are made
Wounds) only by dropping it into the Wound, without Cloth, Lint, Tow, or Tent.
It cures galled Horses Backs, Pricking in their Feet, etc. or given to People
inwardly, to thirty or forty Drops, it is no less prevalent against the Cholic,
Gripes, Bloody Flux, Gravel, and Disorders of the Lungs, without a Fever. If
other Medicines have been applied to the Wound before, let them be washed off
with Wine before this is dropped in. After the Balsam is strained off the
Ingredients, Verjuice poured on them makes a good Medicine for Strains. The
internal Use of this Balsam may be fatal, if used in hectical and inflammatory
Disorders of the Breast. I have not once known the inward Use of either this
Balsam, or of the Balsamic Tincture, or of the Balsams in Substance, succeed
well in those Diseases, though at first they are as tractable as any other of the
like Inflammations, if treated judiciously.

70.
COSTMARY, ALE-COST (Costus hortorum) and sweet Maudlin; the first is good in
Crudities of the Stomach, Belching, Vomiting, stinking Breath, Pain of Stomach,
or Head. Its Conserve is proper in Disorders of the Head from a cold Cause, and
in the Stone, or in Uterine Disorders, from Obstructions of the Menses. It is
also good in obstructed Viscera. Its Juice or Seed applied to the Navel kills
Worms. It is an Antidote to too great Doses of Opiates: and cures Wounds
speedily. A Balsam of this and Adders-tongue boiled in Oil, then strained, and
Wax and Rosin added, makes a noble Wound Balsam. A Stove of the dried Leaf
through a Funnel hastens down the Menses. The Juice outwardly kills Crabs, as
does the Juice of Rue and Tobacco, or Wormwood. It thins, cuts, divides, and
gently evacuates Choler and Phlegm, cleanses out tough and glutinous Humors,
and hinders their Putrefaction, or Corruption; taken in Whey it strengthens the
Stomach and Liver, is good against Agues, continual Pains of the Head, and
stays all their Rheums, by promoting Perspiration. It is good in a beginning
Cachexy. See Sweet Maudlin in its Place.

71.
COLUMBINE ( Aquilegia) a Dram of its Seed, given with a little Saffron in
Wine, is a certain Cure for the Jaundice, if the Sick keep in Bed and sweat.
Comfits made of the Seed and eaten are good in Obstructions of the Viscera, and
a Vertigo. For the Swimming of the Head, a Dram of Columbine Seed given in a
Decoction of Sage or Betony, is good; or dried powdered Southern-wood given in
Wine; or a Decoction of Primroses in Posset Drink; or Sage Tea drank warm
Evening and Morning, and the Head bathed with it; or Half a Dram or two
Scruples of Mustard Seed taken in the Morning fasting; or an Electuary of
Mustard Seed and Figs beaten up, and the Bigness of a large Nutmeg of it taken
every Morning; or a Dram of Misletoe Leaves powdered and drank twice a Day in a
Tea, or a Decoction of Sage, or Betony; or four Gallons of Table Beer made with
Leaves instead of Hops, and a Bag hung in it of Sterc. Pavon. Half a Pound,
Cloves beaten three Drams; use for common Drink; or if the Disease in young
People is from the Stomach, or from bad Diet, Mint used is a good Remedy.
Tragus says the distilled Water does the same, and is singular in Swooning and
Fainting; it discusses internal Abscesses, expels Poison, and eases griping
Pains. Clusius commends the powdered Seed given in white Wine in hard Labor. A
Decoction of the whole Herb, taken with a little Amber, is good in a seminal
Weakness. The bruised Seed boiled in Milk and Water, and drank, is used with
good Success to expel the Small Pox and Measles, or given in Powder, or in
Emulsion. A Dram of the powdered Root taken in Wine eases the Cholic. Some for
the Stone eat a little of the Root every Morning. A Decoction of the Seed makes
a good Gargle for a Quinsy, or Ulcers of the Throat or Jaws, or scorbutic
Putrefactions of the Gums. In eruptive Fevers, the powdered Seed given to Half
a Dram, or a Dram, in Carduus, or Fumitory Water, is good. An Emulsion of the
Seed, made in a Decoction of Raisins or Figs, is good in Diseases attended with
Malignity. Tournefort says a Tincture of the Flowers drawn in Brandy, or with
twice as much Spirit of Wine, in a Pint whereof two Ounces of Gum Lacca, and
two Drams of Mastick had been boiled a Quarter of an Hour, is the best Gargle
in the Scurvy to cleanse the Mouth, and heal the Gums.

72.
COLT'S-FOOT, or Tassilago, is a most eminent Thoracic, or Herb for the Lungs.
The green Leaves are temperate, the dry hot and sharp; it is good in Coughs,
Consumptions, Shortness of Breath, either in Syrup of the Juice of the Leaves,
or in Decoction, Powder, Electuary, etc. or smoaked like Tobacco, with Flowers
of Sulphur, and Amber; or eaten like Cole, or in Pancakes, like Tansies fried
with saged Butter. A strong Decoction of the Leaf, with Whitloe-grass poured on
Rosemary, and made into a Tea, and drank long, is a Specific in the King's Evil.
Alexis says, that the whole Plant beaten up with powdered Linseed and
Hogs-Lard, made into a Poultise, and renewed twice a Day on the Place, and all
the Sores shall be resolved into Sweat; after they are healed, wash the Parts
daily with white Wine. In Consumptions of the Lungs a Decoction or Juice of
this, boiled up alone to the Consistence of a Syrup, is good; or, in preparing
the Syrup of Turnip-Juice for a Cough, Colt's-foot Leaf and Ground Ivy, of each
a like Quantity, cut and laid in the Bottom of the Pipkin, and the shredded
Turnips put on the Top, and so stew them in an Oven, or boiling Water, the
Pipkin close covered; in a Spitting of Blood, Nettles and Horehound may be
added; and of the expressed Juice of all, make a Syrup with Sugar.

I never observed any of the true kind to grow in our Colonies, but many Plants
our People call by that Name.

COMFRY-ROOT (Symphytum) is a principal Vulnerary; it is very mucilaginous and
thickening, its clammy Juice sheathes the Sharpness of the Humors; its Virtue
chiefly depends on this Juice, which is good for Spitting of Blood, and for
Cure of Childrens and other fresh Ruptures. The Conserve, Decoction, or Juice
of the Root, is good in Fluxes, from sharp Humors, or in Catarrhs and
Defluctions of the Breast from sharp, salt, thin, hot Humors; or in
Consumptions therefrom. A Decoction of the Flowers in red Wine drank twice a
Day cures bloody Urine. A Poultise of the Roots to a pricked Tendon, or to a
Part most sensibly affected with Goutish Pains, or to spreading eating Ulcers,
Gangrene, etc. gives great Ease, and in the last Case much Relief. It is
wonderful in Diseases from Acrimony. But in the Gout Sim. Pauli gives a much
better Poultise from Sennertus, viz. of Comfry Roots three Ounces, of Althaea
Roots two Ounces, Tops of Southern-wood a Handful, of St. John's-wort two
Handfuls, of Camomile Flowers three Handfuls, of Elder Flowers four Handfuls,
or Fenugreek Seed two Ounces, of Linseed four Ounces; prepare and boil all in
Elder-water, to a Consistence; then add Ointment of Marshmallows to make a
Poultise, and a very good one. Comfry Root Bark bruised, and applied twice a
Day, has cured Ulcers that were deemed and pronounced cancerous, though recent.
The Root is most noted for speedy Healing of Wounds, and curing broken, or
strengthening luxated Bones. A thick Poultise of the Root spread on Leather
eases Pains of the Arms, or broken, or dislocated Bones; it is better if
Flix-weed be added to the Poultise, and laid on warm; and in a Gangrene; for
which Juice of Alisanders in form of an Ointment is wonderful; or rotten Apples
in a Poultise laid on warm; or of the Juice or Herb Scordium. A Poultise of
Comfry is also good in the Sciatic, and Pains of the Arms, though attended with
Privation of Motion. No^ has it been found useless in Venereal Inability. The
powdered Root, dissolved in Water to a Mucilage, is far from being contemptible
in Bleedings, Fractures, and Luxations. This, and Flowers of dead Nettles, are
good in a Diabetes. It is good in inward or outward Bruises, Wounds, ulcerated
Lungs, excessive Menses, or Whites, fresh Claps, or old Gleets. It cools the
Inflammations, eases the Pain, and stays the Bleedings of the Piles. Comfry and
Daisy Leaves beaten up to a Cataplasm, and applied to Carbuncles, is good. It
eases Women's Breasts pained by too much Milk. Its Juice, Powder, Syrup,
Decoction, or Conserve, are used; but its distilled Water is a Jest: A good
Ointment may be made of it, and an excellent strengthening Plaster; inferior
to none, by boiling the Root in strong Ale, 'till it come to the Consistence of
a Plaster, strain, spread on Leather, and lay on the Part shaven. It is a
Specific in Excoriations, or Ulcerations of the Kidneys, especially from
Cantharides, and to hasten the Callus of broken Bones.

74.
COCK'S-FOOT-GRASS (Gramen Dactyloides) bruised and applied, stays Bleeding
presently, from the Nose or Wounds; but if the rough Spike be put up the Nose,
and rubbed, it makes it bleed. Boiled with Lard and Household Bread, it heals
the Bite of a mad Dog, or applied to hard Tumors, it dissolves them.

75.
COCK'S-FOOT QUICK-GRASS is said to have all the Virtues of Quick-Grass.

76.
DEW-GRASS dissolves the Hardness of Women's Breasts.

77.
CORNEIL-TREE ( Cornus Mas) the Berries cool, dry, astringe and bind, whatever
Way they are taken; hence they are good in Loosenesses, and bloody Fluxes; and,
by their grateful Acidity, quench Thirst, and febrile Heat; a Dram of their
Powder stops Fluxes. An Electuary of them is good in Fevers, bilious
Defluxions, Thirst, and Want of Appetite. Their Powder mixed with unripe Oil of
Olive, or of Myrtles, made into a Plaster for the Stomach, presently stops
Vomiting, Looseness, or, applied to the Bottom of the Back, excessive Menses.
The Leaves and Buds of the Tree are rough, harsh, and very drying, fit to heal
up Wounds soon. The least Taste of the Flowers kills Bees. The Wood, or a Rod
of it, held in the Hand 'till it is warm, recalls the Madness from the Bite of
a mad Dog. Corneil is the Male, and Dog-berry Bush, the Female Tree.

CORNUS MAS. This I never observed to grow in our Colonies: our Dogwood-Tree is
very different; our Cornus-Fern is near the same with theirs.

78.
CORIANDER ( Coriandrum) there have been many and warm Disputes whether it be a
Poison or not; but as it is agreed by all Sides, that infusing it three Days in
Vinegar, not only destroys its poisonous Nature, but when dried, after the
Infusion, it be comes very useful; therefore it is better to have it prepared,
to prevent not only Danger, but all Suspicion, for then, taken in sweet Wine,
it kills all Worms in the Body, and increases Blood, and Seed. It heats and
dries the cold Moisture of the Stomach, comforts it, helps Digestion, and
represses Vapors arising from it; is good in the Cholic, for Stoppage of
Urine, expels Wind, and nourishes; it corrects a bad Breath, and prevents Hurt
from bad Air. It is best in cold, or moist Weather, to old People, or who have
gross sluggish Humors, but agrees not so well with hot and bilious
Constitutions. The powdered Seed, given in Pills, is good for cold, weak,
phlegmatic Persons. The Juice of the Herb (and also the green Herb) is said to
be as great and deadly a Poison as Hemlock; yet mixed with Wheat or Barley
Flour, and applied outwardly, it dissolves Knots and Kernels; used with Bread
it heals running and fretting Sores, Wheals, Carbuncles, and Botches rising up
in the Skin or Flesh; and either the Juice or green Herb applied takes away the
Swellings and Inflammations of the Cods. The same Things are done by an
Ointment made of the Juice with Ceruse, Letharge, Vinegar, and Oil of Roses.

79.
COW-PARSNIP ROOT (Sphondylium) softens and discusses Tumors of the Uterus,
Liver and Spleen. Surgeons mix the expressed Juice of the Plant with emollient
Ointments. Schroder would have it numbered with the five Emollients, and its
chief outward Use to be in Clysters, and other Anodynes, in any Form, but
chiefly of Poultises. Its Seed seems to be good in Hysteric Fits. Galen says it
is of a sharp and cutting Nature, good for a Cough, Shortness of Breath, and
Jaundice. The Root is much the same, and takes off the callous Skin that grows
on Fistulas, if strewed on them. The Seed also clears the Belly from tough
phlegmatic Matter; eases the Liver-grown, and Hysteric, either drank, or in
Fumigations; Smoke of the Seed rouses the Lethargic, and eases the Headache.

COW-PARSNIP. With us is much like the English, grows very rank in Bottoms by
Creek Sides, with great rough Leaves, thick tall Stalks, and great Umbels of
flat Seeds like Parsnips.

80.
CROSS-WORT, or MUG-WEED ( Cruciata) is drying and astringent, a chief
Vulnerary, used either inwardly or outwardly; and, drank in Wine, is good in
fresh Ruptures; it promotes the Expectoration of Phlegm from the Lungs. Its
Decoction is drank, and a Poultise of the Herb kept on, and daily renewed for a
long Time in Ruptures. Its Decoction is drank, and either its Juice, or
Ointment, applied to Wounds, Ulcers, or Sores.

81.
CUD-WEED, or COTTON-WEED ( Gnaphalium) its distilled Water is good for occult
Cancers of the Breast; Rags dipped in it, and applied once a Day, prevent their
Ulceration; some use Arsarum Leaves dipped in it for the same Intent. The Herb,
being somewhat drying and astringent, is good in Losses of Blood, Fluxes, and
Quinseys. The bruised Herb infused and boiled in Oil, the Oil is good for
Bruises or Falls, that make the Skin black or blue. It is a Specific for Beasts
that have lost the Power of chewing their Cud. Its bruised Leaves or Decoction
used to a Wound, heals it up quickly, and also helps foul Ulcers. Pliny says
that the Cud-weed impious, not only cures the Quinsey, but such as drink its
Juice in Wine and Milk, will never have that Disease again.

82.
CUMMIN-SEED ( Cuminum) resolves and discusses Flatulency, it is therefore good
in the Cholic, Tympany, and Vertigo; drank in sweet Wine they help Difficulty
and Heat of Urine. Boiled in Wine with Figs, they are good in a Cough, and
purge the Breast; put into Bread or Cheese, they help Digestion, and expel
Wind. Chewed much, they prevent a stinking Breath. Their Oil is a great
Antihysteric, either in or out of the Fit, whether given by the Mouth, or in a
Clyster. It gives immediate Relief in a windy Cholic, Gripes, or flatulent
Stomach; either given inwardly, or a few Drops of it let fall on hot toasted
Bread, and laid to the Navel. This Seed, and Bay Berries put into an emollient
Clyster, is wonderful in Rupture Cholics, from Wind, when the Intestines are
pent up in the Cods. A Poultise of the Seeds is used with Success, in flatulent
Pains of the Sides, and Pleurisies without Blood-spitting, or any great
Inflammation. A Poultise of it laid warm to the Scrotum swelled with Wind or
Water, and in any other windy Pains, or Swellings, if Barley-meal is mixed with
it, is very efficacious. Beaten up with Vinegar, it stops the Bleeding at the
Nose. Bruised and fried with an Egg, and laid to the back Part of the Head, it
eases old Head-achs; and hinders Rheums from falling on the Eyes, and cures
those that are Blood-shot. People that use it much look pale. Take bitter
Almonds a Pound, Cummin and Wormwood Seeds of each Half a Pound, bruise all in
a Mortar and mix; then in a Tin Vessel boil in a kettleful of Water four Hours;
then strongly express the Liquor, which is a green Oil; Dose two Drams, or Half
an Ounce, Morning and Evening, in Broth; and anoint the Belly often with it;
Hoffman says, it is a Secret in a Tympany. He also gives this for a Hiccup:
Take of Dill and Cummin Waters of each three Ounces, Oils of Anise, Dill,
Carvy, and Cummin, of each three Drops, with Sugar, or Salt of Wormwood; mix.
Dose, a Spoonful or two, Morning and Evening; but in a Weakness of Sight, and
Impotency, refrain it.

83.
CURRANTS (Ribes) the Berries are profitably used in ardent Fevers, and hot
Fluxes of the Belly (especially their Jelly dissolved in the Patients Drink.)
They quench violent Thirst, stop Vomitings, excite an Appetite, check the
Cholera Morbus; and are good in hot Loosenesses; for the Rob or Jelly checks
feverish Heat, tempers Bile, quenches Thirst, is good in Spitting Blood, and
Swelling of the Uvula.

84.
CYSTUS, or CISTUS ( Dwarf) or common small Sun-flower, with a yellow Flower,
is vulnerary and astringent; may be used as Comfry for Spitting of Blood,
Fluxes, Falling of the Uvula, immoderate Menses, and in all too great Losses of
Blood: The Herb, boiled in red Wine, with Comfry and Plantain, is good in the
above Cases. Its Decoction in red Wine, with a little Alum, is a good Gargle,
and Lotion for Ulcers of the Mouth, and privy Parts. It heals up green Wounds
quickly; is good in Ruptures; strengthens weak Joints, or Limbs, and the
distilled Water beautifies the Face.

85.
DAFFODILL (Bulbocodium) Galen reckons it a great external Vulnerary; a
Poultise of the Roots stamped with Honey, is good in Aches, Pains, Wrenches, or
Strains of the Joints, or Burns. Applied with Honey and Nettle-seed, they take
off Sun-burning, and Morphew: Beaten up with Lard and Leaven of Rye-meal Dough,
they hasten the Ripening of old, obstinate, hard Swellings. Beaten up with
Vinegar, and Nettle-seed, they cure Lentils, and Spots of the Face. The Roots
either eaten, or their Infusion drank, is a strong Vomit. Gerard.

86.
DAISY (Bellis) is cooling, moistening, and very astringent; it is a special
Vulnerary. An Extract, or Essence of the Plant, drank, dissolves, and sends off
by Perspiration, all coagulated Blood, either within or without the Vessels.
Mathiolus says, its Leaves cure all Inflammations of the Genitals, and commends
its Decoction, drank, in Wounds that penetrate the Breast. Sim. Pauli declares,
that he had often found it answer this Character; hence it is proved to be a
noble Vulnerary, whether it be used internally, externally, or both; especially
its Juice; yet it loosens the Belly. Its Root is with Success applied outwardly
in Scrophulous Tumors. Stalks, Leaves, or Flowers, of the great Daisy, or
Ox-eye, boiled in Posset Drink, and drank long, are reputed a Secret by some in
the Shortness of Breath, and Consumption, or ulcerated Lungs. A Decoction of
red Cole-worts, sweetened with Sugar, and drank, is good. A Decoction, or Juice
of the Herb Daisy, drank, is a Specific in Diseases from indiscreet Drinking of
cold Water, or other cold small Liquors, when the Body is too hot. A strong
Decoction of it in Ale, or Wort, to the Consistence of a Plaster, spread on
Leather, and applied, has cured broken Bones, which had been several Weeks
fractured, and could by no other Means be brought to a Callus. A Poultise of
Daisy Leaves, applied to the Cods, resolves their inflammatory Swellings. An
Ointment of it cures Ulcers in those Parts. A Fomentation of it, with Leaves of
Agrimony and Elder, is said to be good in a Palsy or Sciatic. It dissolves
Knots and Kernels, and cures Bruises in any Part of the Body. It is also good
in fresh Ruptures. An Ointment of it cures inflamed weeping Wounds. The Juice,
dropped into the Eyes, cures their Rheum. In the last Cases, the small common
Daisy is always preferred. A Decoction of Ox-eye Flowers, or of Colt's-foot,
boiled up to a Consistence of a thin Syrup, and drank daily, is wonderful in
Consumptions.

The Species of Daisy here mentioned, is the low Field Daisy, which I never
(...) to grow wild in our Colonies, but is in some botanick Gardens.

87.
DANDELION ( Dens Leonis) is good in obstinate, putrid Fevers. Tragus commends
its Water in Imposthumes, and ardent Fevers. Three or four Spoonfuls to a Dose.
It is good to take off Spots of the Eyes, and Inflammations of the Members,
Linen Cloths being dipped in it warm, and applied. The boiled Herb braces a
relaxed Stomach, draws it, and binds the Belly. The Juice drank prevents too
frequent involuntary Emissions of Semen. A Decoction of the whole Plant, cures
the Jaundice. The Root and Herb, boiled in Wine or Broth, is good in a Cough,
Tabes, Cachexy, etc. This ought never to be omitted in opening Decoctions, or
Drinks for Disorders of the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, and in the Hypo; it being
a more powerful Opener than wild Succory; it is also bitterer. It is a very
powerful Diuretic, causes plentiful Discharge of Urine; it is therefore
improper for Children and aged Persons; it is called Piss-a-Bed. For the
Jaundice, besides Dandelion, two Drams of bruised Columbine Seed, infused all
Night in white Wine, and drank off next Morning, and several Days repeated; or
a Dram of powdered Columbine Seed drank in white Wine fasting. (In the Measles,
Columbine blue Flowers, infused with warm Water, acidulated with Spirit of
Vitriol, let them stand till cold, then strain it off, and sweeten them a
little; drink a Draught of it every Morning and ^^^ernoon; or give its Powder,
from Half a Dram to a Dram, (...) Hydro^^l, or Fumitory Water, or Decoction,
are excellent.) In the Jaundice, Decoction of Silver-weed, or wild T^nsy, in
white Wine, often drank; or an Infusion of sliced Burdock Root in Ale, drank
freely, Morning and Afternoon; or a Decoction of Ladies Mantle, in white Wine
or Water; or a Decoction of Celandine Root, drank several Days; or the whole
Herb and Root used in Decoction, Infusion, Juice, or Syrup, is excellent. The
Juice of the Herb, from an Ounce and a Half to two Ounces, drank alone, and a
Draught of Al^ taken immediately after it every Morning; or mixed with the Ale,
and drank; or if the cleaned sliced Roots, and Raisins, be infused in white
Wine, or Cider, cold for four or five Days; then the Tincture filtered through
Cap Paper, and drank, every Morning and Afternoon, from four to six Ounces, is
very effectual; or two Handfuls of Celandine, and a Handful of Juniper Berries,
infused in Rhenish Wine, a Pint; express the Juice, Dose four Ounces twice a
Day. Juice of Succory, boiled up thick, is commended. A Decoction of the whole
Strawberry Plant, in white Wine, given twice a Day; or the Herb boiled in
Broth, and eaten; or three Handfuls of the whole Plant, and four Ounces of
Raisins, boiled in three Pints of Water, to two, for common Drink. Powder of
Ash-tree Seed, drank in white Wine, is commended; or sifted Ash-tree Ashes, as
many as the Urine of the Sick, made at once, will moisten, or wet; make three
equal Pills of it, which set in a close Vessel in the Chimney Corner, till dry,
Willis. Or Juice of Fumitory, drank daily; or Infusion of (...) Meat in white
Wine, drank nine Mornings, Dose four Ounces; or Syrup of Juice of Horehound,
drank with white Wine; or a Decoction of the Herb in white Wine, from seven
Pints to five, Dose three Ounces in the Morning, and before Supper; or use the
powdered dried Herb in Winter, with three Drams of Salt of Tartar; Dose, and
Use, as before. Burnet-Saxifrage, used any Way inwardly, is powerful. The
yellow middle Bark of Barberry-tree, infused in white Wine, is good. A Dram of
powdered Oak-fern Root, taken daily, is good. -- Celandine is not only
excellent in a Jaundice, but the bruised Herb, applied twice a Day to a Herpes,
or Shingles, cures it; as does the Juice of Mouse-ear, rubbed twice a Day on
the Herpes Miliaris; and Oil of Heath Flowers, rubbed on, cures Tetters;
especially if a Decoction of Fumitory, or Housleek, made in Whey, be drank
daily at the same time; or the Pulp of rotten Apples, with Women's Milk, and Oil
of Roses, mixed, and applied to the Part. Ex Crus^n. Collect.


88.
DILL or ANET (Anethum) the Seed (...) and discusses, ripens Swellings,
increases Milk, causes Rest, lessens Venereal Inclinations, cures Vomiting and
Hiccup; the tender Leaves and fresh Roots are Diuretic, and of great Service in
the Stone. A Decoction of the Seed in Oil and Water, drank, then a Crumb of
Bread, dipped in warm Water, and eaten, wonderfully helps, and refreshes, such
as are languishing in the Iliac Passion, from hardened Excremen^s, even though
they have vomited u^ their foetid Faeces. In a Hiccup, from a cold Cau^^^ take
four Drops of the Oil, and Half an Ounce of Oil of sweet Almonds, mix and
drink, it is very efficacious. The Seed is used in Anodyne Clysters. The Tops
boiled in Sallad Oil, and mixed into a Poultise with Anodyne and somniferous
Plants, is good for the Head. The Herb is very useful in the Cholic, and
nephritic Pains. For the Hiccup take Dill and Cummin Waters, of each three
Ounces; Oils of Dill, Carvy, Anise, and Cummin, of each three Drops, mixed;
Dose a Spoonful or two every Night and Morning. Such as have a dim Sight, and
are sluggish to Venery, should refrain this Herb. A Poultise of green
Dill-seed, discusses flatulent Tumors, if recent; but dry Seed must be used
afterward to discuss. The Seed increases Milk in phlegmatic Constitutions
only, but it must not be used inwardly in Inflammations. Cold, swelled Limbs,
rubbed with Oil of Dill, are much eased, if not cured by it.

89.
DOG-GRASS, QUICK-GRASS, or COUCH-GRASS, (Gramen caninum) is the most medicinal
of all Grasses. Its Decoction opens Obstructions of the Liver, Kidneys, and
Spleen; is good in Gripings and Inflammations of the Belly, or Stomach; washes
Gravel, Sand, or Sludge out of the Reins, Ureters, or Bladder, and helps their
Ulcers. The Roots, bruised and applied, heal Wounds. The Seed expels Urine more
powerfully, stays Vomiting and Looseness. It is judiciously added to all
Decoctions against Inflammations, and Obstructions; but let Nitre be always
added to the Decoctions for the first. Two or three Spoonfuls of the fresh
crude Juice of the Grass, drank every Morning, with a little Sugar, is
wonderful in Obstructions of the Gallbladder; or habitual, or often returning
Jaundices. Sheep and Oxen, afflicted with the Stone in Winter, are certainly
cured by eating this Grass in the Spring; hence we have a clear Proof of the
Excellency of this Grass in the Spring. Its Decoction is good in malignant
Fevers, and Childrens Loosenesses; outwardly it eases Pains of the Head,
Inflammations of the Eyes, checks Defluxions, is useful in the Toothache, and
discusses gouty Swellings. In a Word, it is one of the greatest and
powerfullest Openers of Obstructions that we have; especially as it both cools
and binds much; which are rare and singular Properties in Deobstruents. Its
Salt with Fern Root is a Specific in Worms. The Salt lies at the Bottom of the
distilled Waters.

90.
DOCKS (Lapathum) (sharp-pointed) the Root either dug up fresh, or dried in the
Shade (says Sim. Pauli) either boiled alone, for the Use of the more delicate
and cleanly, or with the White of Hens Dung; herewith wash the Hands and Feet
of such as have Scab or Itch; however mean and trifling this may appear, it has
not a Fellow; let the Scab be never so great, scurfy, or ugly, ten Nights
washing in this, and laying on the boiled Dock Roots all Night like a Poultise,
will cure it; this he saw from Experience. The fresh Roots must be cut, and
boiled to a Mucilage, and strained; in this Mucilage dissolve the White of the
Hens-dung. For this same nasty Disease, he gives us two good Receipts; first,
Take Juice of this Dock, Monks Rhubarb, and greater Celandine, of each a Dram;
Butter four Ounces; mix, and boil to the Consumption of the Juices; then add
Diapompholigos one Ounce, Cerus two Drams, Alum a Dram, Frankincense Half a
Dram, Flour of Brimstone a Scruple; beat them all in a wooden or leaden Mortar;
if it is too dry, add more Butter to bring it to a Liniment; second, Take of
this Dock Root, and of Althaea, of each Half an Ounce; Elecampane Root; two
Drams, Leaves of Birth-wort, Money-wort, Scabius, Plantain, of each Half a
Handful; boil all in Spring Water to a Mucilage, put it through a Hair Sieve,
and add Flour of Brimstone, two Scruples; Balsam Peru, to make a Liniment to
rub on. Powder of Dock Root with Vinegar, is a certain Remedy for Tetters,
Ringworms, rubbed with Dock Bark, are soon taken off. The Root infused in Beer,
and drank, is a special Antiscorbutic. A Decoction of the Root alone, or with
other Specifics, is of great Efficacy in the Jaundice. The toughest Flesh,
boiled with Dock, becomes very tender. The powdered Seed strengthens the Liver,
and stops Fluxes; especially if mixed with Tormentil Roots, and Sugar of Roses.
A Decoction of the Leaves, drank warm, loosens the Belly, like boiled Lettuce.
Its distilled Water clears the Face. A slippery Decoction of the Root, drank to
Half a Pint in a Morning, purges smartly.

91.
BLOOD-WORT is only a small red Dock, and has near the same Virtues of the last
Dock. Its expressed Juice, or the Leaves boiled in Broth, loosen the Belly. The
Seed powdered, and drank in any astringent Liquor, stops excessive Menses, and
other Fluxes.

92.
MONKS RHUBARB, or GARDEN PATIENCE, is another Dock; two Ounces of the powdered
Root, and a Scruple of Ginger, taken in a Morning, purge yellow Bile, and
watery Humors. Juice of the Root with Brimstone, cures Outbreaks on the Skin.
The Juice with Lupin Meal, cures Freckles, Spots, etc. on the Body. The Juice,
or Powder of the Root, taken in Wine, expels Sand and Gravel. The Seed stops
all Fluxes. Water or Decoction of the Leaf, cleanse and clear the Skin. A
Decoction of the Root, cures the Jaundice. The Juice, dropped into the Ears,
eases their Pain. Gargled in the Mouth, it cures the Toothache. The Seed cures
Pain and Loathing of the Stomach from Bile.

93.
The great WATER-DOCK (Hydrolapathum) which grows in watery, marshy, stagnant
Places, or in watery Ditches. The Root (if old) is thick, broad, round, spongy,
and juicy; divided below into several thickish Parts, compassed with Fibers,
black without, and, when just dug up fresh, it is white within; but in the Air
quickly turns yellow; and when dry it is brown. It has the fewest and longest
Leaves of all the Dock Kind, being from a Foot and a Half to two Foot long
each; and three or four Fingers broad; broadest in the Middle, and sharp at the
Point, of a leaden blackish Color above, and paler below; with palish green
Veins, of a thickish firm Substance, and hard to the Touch; they fall in the
End of August. The Stalks are from two to four Foot long; strait, round, green,
and hollow. The Flowers and Seeds are much like these of the common Dock. (See
Ray's Description of it, p. 172.) Muntingus will have this to be the true
Britannica of the Ancients; and all its Parts, Root, Stalk, Leaves, Flowers,
and Seeds, are all very astringent, indurating, and conglutinating; hence it
stops and cures all Putrescences, as St. Anthony's Fire, Herpes, Phagedenics,
Gangrenes, etc. It stops all Fluxes of Blood, Piles, Menses, etc. And inwardly
it does all that other cold Astringents can do. It cures the Nerves and their
Disorders, as broken, cut, contracted, shaking, Cramps, Palsies, feverish Heats
and Colds. It expels Venom, drives away Serpents, and cures their Bite; hence
it is justly reputed Alexipharmac; it is an astringent; it heals all Sorts of
Quinsies, Relaxations of the Uvula, and Disorders of the Mouth, Jaws and
Stomach. It cures Imposthumes, Tumors, and Ulcers; and stays sundry Rheums. It
cures Ulcers of the Legs, by applying green fresh Leaves to them every twelve
Hours. Its Juice may be dried in the Sun, or thickened at a slow Fire, for Use.
(See much more to this Purpose in Muntingus, Cap. 16. who seems extremely fond
of it.) The Scurvy being so rooted in some People, that a simple Decoction of
the Herb will not cure it: He therefore gives us the following Receipt, which
he says the World never had before, is more precious than Gold, and the
Medicine should be kept against all Suspicions of the Scurvy, is an inestimable
Treasure; it is this: Take Saffron, two or three Ounces, Mace, Liquorice,
Cinnamon, black Pepper, Gentian-Root, of each three Ounces; of this Dock Root
six Ounces; pound all grossly, and mix in two Gallons of Wine; strong Elder
Vinegar, two Quarts; three Yolks of Eggs: mix and infuse all in an earthen
glazed Vessel, well covered in hot Ashes for two Hours; or in Horse-dung, or in
a Sand-heat, which exceeds not Milk-warm; then set it by for Use; Dose from
three to six Ounces, every Morning, for fourteen, twenty, or thirty Days
together: Drink ordinary Rhenish Wine, (if accustomed to it) or fine, clear
Small Beer; with three of four Spoonfuls of the above Wine in it, when thirsty.
If the Person is feverish, or hectically disposed, leave out the Pepper; and
put in a double Quantity of (...): When the first Wine is drawn off, pour more
upon the same Ingredients. It is not only a good (...) in the Scurvy, but in
all nervous Disorders.

94.
DROP-WORT. ( Filipendula) A Decoction of its Root, expels Urine and Gravel;
gives great Relief in a scalding Heat, and making of Urine by Drops. The Juice
and Powder of its Root are commended in the Falling Sickness, and Swimming of
the Head. It, with Fennel-Seed, is good in a Shortness of Breath, and windy
Stomach. It is of special Use in the Whites, and excessive Lochia. Prevotius
often cured bloody Fluxes, with a Dram of its Powder. Its Decoction in Wine is
good in Fistula's, as is every Preparation of Agrimony; and the inward and
outward Use of the Juice of Dove's-Foot, or Crane's-Bill. Of all vegetable
Poisons, Dropwort, with a Hemlock-Leaf, is the most terrible; what still adds
to the Mischief, is, we know of no Antidote to it; yea the very Milk-white
Juice at the Root, is so destructive, that the least Drop of it, swallowed, is
immediately followed by a frightful and fatal Inflammation and Gangrene. The
Remedies against Arsenic, and Sublimate, may be tried; or large Quantities of
warm Water, drank; or warm Water and Oil; or warm Broth.

The Species of Filipendula, here mentioned, I have not observed to grow with
^s.

95.
DUCKS-MEAT (Lens Palustris) is cooling; good in Inflammations, and Childrens
Ruptures. Ray says, that an Infusion of it in white Wine, drank nine Mornings
together, six Ounces at a Time, was communicated to him by Dr. Bates, as an
infallible Secret in the Jaundice.

96.
ELECAMPANE ( Enula campana) Root is bitter, hot, drying, and aromatic. This
Root either in Decoction, Infusion, Conserve, Syrup, Electuary, or Powder, is
good for a Shortness of Breath, Cough, or Asthma. For an old Cough, Doloeus
extols its Decoction with Currants; eaten candied like Ginger, it is good
against the Plague. It is a fine Stomachic, and promotes Digestion. Its
Decoction, or Powder, taken with Sugar, expels Urine, and Menses. I have known
its Decoction, with Astringents, and Althaea Root, cure the making of bloody
Urine. Its Infusion in white Wine, is good in the Green Sickness. The
Decoction, drank, is proper for the Cramp, Convulsions, and Sciatica Pains.
Boiled in Wine, or the Juice infused in Wine, and drank, kills and expels Worms
of the Belly. The Root is an Ingredient in Lobelius's Syrup of Hedge Mustard;
whereby, he says, he has cured the most obstinate Hoarseness. It is a powerful
Drier of the Scab, if the Parts are either washed with its Decoction, or rubbed
with an Ointment made of it. It is a good Root for cold and windy Stomachs; or
for Stitches in them, or the Sides; or in Hysterics; or to expel Sand and
Gravel. It is somewhat laxative. It rouses the Spirits, and chears the Body. In
Wine it clears and strengthens the Sight. Its Decoction is good in Spitting of
Blood, and, boiled with great Daisies, it is good for Weakness, Slipperiness,
or Looseness of the Joints, after Fractures, or Dislocations; or in fresh
Ruptures. To expel Mercury lodged in the Body, take of this Root two Ounces;
Fennel Root, an Ounce and an Half; white Wine two Pints and an Half; infuse all
twenty-four Hours; then boil to a Quart; strain; Dose Half a Pint Morning and
Evening, in Bed; lie and sweat after it; the Sweat will be first yellow, but
continue it till it changes the Color. This Decoction is also good for the
Mischief from Fumes of Mercury, Sulphur, Cinnabar, or Antimony.

97.
ELDER-TREE (Samb^cus) our Climate scarce produces either a more useful, or
despised Shrub. Blotwitzch has wrote a whole Book on it, which deserves well to
be read; he thinks it contains a complete medical Chest. The inner Bark purges
watery Humors, and is good in a Dropsy. The young tender Buds boiled in Wine,
Table Beer, or Water, and sweetened, do the same, but more mildly; fitter
therefore for weak Bodies. The same, powdered and drank, only move a costive
Body; for in drying they lose their purging Quality, with their Moisture. An
Ointment of the inner Bark, is good for Burns. The Flowers discuss, soften, and
resolve; cause Sweat, and ease Pain; they are often used inwardly, to cure or
prevent St. Anthony's Fire, Inflammations, and Quartans; and outwardly in
Clysters for the Cholic, Burns, and Erysipela's in Ointment. A Vinegar of them
is grateful to the Stomach; excites an Appetite; cuts, and thins, thick, crude
Humors. The Berries are Alexipharmac, and Sudorific. Their Spirit is justly
ranked among the best Diaphoretics, and is a fine Febrifuge. Their Wine, mixed
with either white Wine, or Rhenish, is proper in Dropsies. Or their Juice mixed
with Chicken Broth, wherein much Parsley Root was boiled and strained out, is
not despicable for the same Purpose. The Seeds cleanse and purge violently
upwards and downwards. A Decoction of the middle Bark, given with Syrup of
Poppies, is a powerful Sudorific; for Narcotics, added to Diuretics or
Diaphoretics, render them strong Sudorifics. The Leaves boiled in Oil, with
Salt, for a Fomentation, cure Swellings, or Puffings up of the Feet. The
Flowers, candied with Sugar, are good in arthritic Pains. An Earthen Vessel
filled with Leaves, stretched out straight, without Folds, often pressed down,
and filled up, then covered, and set under Ground a Year, and taken up, at the
Top is a nasty Crust, at the Bottom a most noble efficacious Oil; often found
successful in arthritic Pains. Dwarf-Elder is both more disagreeable to the
Stomach and Smell, and purges more violently than Elder. A Rob of the Berries
is often used to prevent Dropsies, for it is a good Sudorific. Two Parts of
Elder-Flower Water, and one of Spirit of Wine mixed, are often used with
Success in a St. Anthony's Fire. Some use Elder-flower Water, beaten up with
Oil of Elder, and a little Spirit of the Berries; or Oil of Elder and Canary
mixed, and beaten up, answer the same Purpose. My eldest Daughter Mary, in a
dangerous confluent Small Pox, had all the Scarf Skin from her Wrists, to near
her Elbows, on both Arms, first rise up round the Arms like two full large
Blisters; then they broke, and came slipping off, like Tops of Gloves; when
other Means could neither mitigate the violent Pain, nor abate the dangerous
Discharge of Serum from the Parts, a Fomentation of Elder Leaves, boiled in
Water, and applied, quickly answered both Intentions with surprising Success:
The same good Effect it had on some others, and failed in none. Take Bark of
Elder Root, one Ounce; of Asarum, two Ounces; Cinnamon, a Dram and an Half;
boil all in Milk, strain, and drink it, just as the Fit of an every Day Ague
begins; it works upwards and downwards, and cures. The Leaves and tender green
Buds, are loosening; the middle Bark purges; the inner Bark purges strongly.
The powdered Seed, drank daily, a Dram at a Time, reduces too corpulent Bodies.
The Leaves, boiled in Water till they are soft, then add Linseed or Sallad Oil,
lay it on a Cloth, and apply it to the pained Piles, till it cool, then apply
another; so change them for an Hour or more; then put the Patient warm to Bed,
Gerard says, it has not once failed to cure at once or twice using. The green
Leaves pounded, and laid to hot Swellings, or Gout, give great Relief. A Dram
of the powdered Seed drank daily, in white Wine, does Service in a Dropsy. A
Poultise of the Leaves, and Barley Meal, cures hot Swellings. The Fungus on the
Tree, called Jews Ears, gathered dry, will keep good a Year. A Decoction of it
in Milk, or its Infusion in Vinegar, is used for a Gargle in a Quinsy; or other
Inflammations in the Mouth, Throat, Uvula, or Jaws. Given in Rose Water, or
Wine, Tragus says, it is good in all Swellings and Inflammations. Its Infusion
in Vinegar, helps Diseases of the Eyes. After Elder Berries are bruised, and
their Juice expressed, there may be an Oil got by Expression, which moves both
by Vomit and Stool; it is a curious Secret, and notable Experiment in a Dropsy.
To cure Blood-shot Eyes from a Stroke, take Elder Flowers, an Ounce and an
Half; Comfry Roots, six Ounces; Solomon's Seal, two Ounces; Bean-Meal, one
Ounce; boil them in Water, strain out the Liquor, and foment with it; and let
the Ingredients in the Bag be used in a Poultise. An excellent Pain-easing, and
ripening Poultise, is, Flowers of Elder, one Ounce; Roots of Althaea, white
Lillies, of each two Ounces; Leaves of Mallows a Handful; Powder of Linseed one
Ounce; boil them in Milk or Water to a Pulp; add to them an Onion roasted under
the Ashes, Ointment of Basilicon Half an Ounce; Oil of Lillies enough to make a
Poultise, and apply it. The middle Bark scraped off, and boiled in Oil to an
Half, then strained and used, eases general Pains, by anointing the Parts. For
old Ulcers on the Legs, apply Juice of Elder Leaves, or add Plantain Juice,
with Sugar of Lead to it; but let the Juice be daily fresh expressed; for, if
they are clarified to keep, they have not the like Effect. For the Dropsy boil
three Handfuls of the inner Bark in Milk Water to a Half, and drink it daily.
Pound and boil the inner Bark, gather the Liquor that swims on the Top, and,
after shaving, and strong rubbing, anoint the Head with it; it brings on new
Hair, where it was fallen off. Leaves of black Elder put hot into two warm
Sacks, and, the Sick complaining of general outward Pains, laid between them,
let him sweat freely; if they are not cured, let them repeat it again. A strong
Lixivium of the Ashes of Cabbage-stalks, and Roots, to wash the Head, restores
the Hair; or the shaved Head, often rubbed with raw Onions, and Honey; or a Lee
of the Ashes of Mallow Roots rubbed on, and Mallow Juice used after it; or an
Ointment of pounded Water Lillies, made with Butter, strained and used as
before; or the Juice of great Radishes often rubbed on the Head; or rub it with
the Decoction of Vervain in Oil. To cleanse the Head from Scales, and Brans,
use Powder of Spindle-tree Berries. To kill small Insects that eat the Hair
Roots, and make it fall off; use a Liniment of white Briony Root, and Honey; or
wash the Head with a strong Decoction of Master-wort Root; or with a Decoction
of Roots, and Tops of Mallows, made in the Person's Urine, to steam the Head.
For little Ulcers on the Head, wash them with a Decoction of Oak Leaves and
inner Bark. For slight Wounds on the Head, drink a Tincture of Betony Flowers
drawn in Spirit of Wine, in small Beer.

98.
DWARF ELDER, SWALLOW WORT, or DANE WORT ( Ebulus) answers all the Purposes of
Elder; but, as it has a more offensive Smell, so it is much stronger in
Operation. The Bark and Seeds purge Water strongly, therefore is a Specific in
a Dropsy, and in all Diseases from watery Humors. Its Infusion works more
violently than its Decoction; for in boiling it loses much of its purging
Quality; but both should be corrected. The Roots, Berries, and Seeds, work more
powerfully than the Leaves and Buds. The bruised Leaves laid on Burns heal
them. A Decoction of the Leaves, in some Lee for a Fomentation, eases gouty
Pains; but the expressed Oil of the Seed is better; three Ounces of the
distilled Water of the Roots, drank twelve Days together on an empty Stomach,
cures Pains, Infarctions or Stuffings of the Spleen; the Leaves used either in
a Fomentation, or Poultise, or both Ways, discuss hard Swellings; and used in a
Bath, or Stove, to sit over, they relieve Disorders, Pains, and Swellings of
the Uterus, or Belly. The Juice of the Root turns Hair black. The inner
Substance of the Roots, taken in red Wine, stops Whites and Menses. For
Obstructions of the Spleen, a Decoction of Dwarf Elder Roots in Water drank
thrice a Day, or a Decoction of Fern Root, or infuse the inner Bark of Ash-Tree
in Wine, then boil it, strain, and drink it often, fasting. The Leaves of
Archangel used any how. Hop Buds eaten like Asparagus, is good; candied
Broom-Rape, or a Syrup of its Decoction used; Tamarisk Juice drank in Wine, or
an Infusion of dried Wormwood in Water, a Pint and a Half for eight Hours,
strain and drink, two Ounces of it fasting, Afternoon, and at Bedtime.
Germander Leaves beaten with Wine, strained and drank, is good. Spleen swelled,
Ash-Tree Bark used as ab^^e. A Dram of powdered Roots of Polypody drank daily
with a little Cream of Tartar. A Decoction of Spleen-wort in Bean-water, drank
thrice a Day. Expressed Juice of Celandine given in white Wine, is good. For a
schirrous Spleen, a Bag of Hops, boiled in white Wine, and laid to the Part
often. A Decoction of Roman Wormwood in Bean-flower Water, drank fasting, and
after Meat; Elder Leaves boiled in Wine or Oil, and applied to the Sides; or
lay on Spleen-wort Leaves boiled in Wine, and drank daily: An Infusion of its
Flowers in Wine, fasting some Hours after it. Ex Crusonis Collectionibus.


DWARF ELDER. I never could find in any of our Colonies.

99.
ELM TREE ( Ulmus) Leaves, Branches, and Bark, are astringent. The Bark or
Leaves, beaten up with Vinegar, are powerful against the Leprosy, and heal
Wounds; but especially if the inner Bark like a Rowler is wrapped round the
Wound. A Decoction of the Root Bark brings Fractures quickly to a firm Callus.
The same Decoction softens Hardness of the Joints, and resolves Convulsions of
the Nerves. The Oil, that swims on this Decoction, cures Baldness from Hair
fallen off. An Ounce of the Bark infused in Water, or Wine, and drank, purges
Water and Phlegm, says Dioscorides. The Bark boiled in Water to the Consistence
of a Syrup, then strained and mixed with a third Part of Aqua Vitae, is a
singular Remedy against the Sciatic Pains, if the Part grieved be fomented with
it. The Liquor found in the Blisters of the Leaves, beautifies the Face, clears
off all freckly Spots, Pimples, spreading Tetters, etc. It, with Spleen-wort,
cures fresh Rupture^, if the Truss is set close to the Part. A Poultise of the
Bark boiled in Wine, beaten up, and applied warm, and left on 'till it is dry,
is good in Aneurisms. But of the prodigious Efficacy of this Bark, in Wounds,
Punctures, and Bruises of the Eyes, we find two astonishing, and almost
incredible Histories, in Hen. ab Heers Obs. Med.

100.
ERYNGO ROOT ( Eryngium) is good in all Obstructions of the Menses, Liver,
Spleen, Gall Bladder, and Kidneys; in the Jaundice and Cholic. The candied Root
is thought to be a Stimulus to Venery. The Root provokes Urine* expels Poison,
Sand, Gravel, Birth, etc. It discusses Wind, and promotes Conception in a cold
Uterus. It is useful in Cramp and Sciatica. The candied Root is used against
contagious Air, and to meagre consumptive Habits. Laid Plaister-ways on the
Belly below the Navel, it prevents Abortions: A Decoction or Powder of the Root
is mostly used for the above Disorders of the Liver, Spleen, Reins, Jaundice,
Dropsy, Cholic, Stone, etc. And this Decoction, drank every Night at Bedtime
for fifteen Days, helps Strangury, Dysury, and other Diseases of the Kidneys.

This Species of ERYNGO, grows on the Sea Coasts in Europe; but I have not
observed it on our Seacoasts: We have a lesser kind grows in our Marshes.

101.
EYEBRIGHT (Euphrasia) whether used as a Tea, or drank in Powder with white
Wine, or chewed and swallowed alone; or its Juice, or distilled Water is drank;
used any, or all these Ways, it is strengthening, and enlarges the Sight
greatly, and restores a decayed or weak one; either the bruised Plant applied
to, or the Juice or distilled Water dropped into inflamed Eyes, cures them.
Some in their Vintage make a Wine of the Herb for their common chearing Glass;
and find old, weak, or dim Eyes, made clear, young, and strong by it. The
Diseases of the Eyes being many, 1. A Tumor of the greater Caruncle in the
inward Corner of the Eye, whether it be ulcerated, and so a Lacrymal Fistula,
or not, fine Leaves of Rue; made into a Poultise, and applied; or a Poultise of
Service Berries beaten up and used. 2. Albugo, or white Specks, a Seed of Clary
put into the Eye at going to Bed cleanses i^ well; or a Drop of the Juice of
Fennel dropped in, or with it a Drop of Peruvian Balsam. 3. Dimness or Mist;
Foment the Eyes Evening and Morning with a Decoction of Betony; or drink an
Infusion of Elecampane Root in Wine fasting; or the Preparations of Eyebright;
or drop in depurated Juice of Rue two Parts, clarified Honey one Part, mix. 4.
Cataracts* take Tops of dry Eyebright two Ounces, Mace Half an Ounce, mix the
Powders; Dose, two Drams every Morning, after due Evacuations. 5. Involuntary
Tears; wash the Eyes every Morning with a Decoction of clean, fresh, young
Quince Leaves, in Water. 6. A Fistula; take daily fasting a Dram of Powder of
dried Betony Leaves in some fit Liquor. 7. Weakness of Sight; use powdered
Eyebright both in Meat and Drink, or Elecampane Wine; or drink every Day a
Glass of distilled Clary Water, and wash the Eyes with it warm. 8. Bleared
Eye^; Juice of wild Crabs dropped into them. 9. Spots on the Eyes; Camomile,
Hemlock, Rue, of each a Handful, Sea Salt two Spoonfuls, Leaven enough to make
a Paste, to be worn on the Wrists 'till it is dry; or Juice of Celandine and
Honey, dropped into the Eyes Evening and Morning; or a Drop of Rue Juice
dropped into the Eye. 10. Clouds; a Dram of powdered Betony taken in Betony, or
Eyebright Water, every Morning; or drink Betony Flower Tea; or infuse fresh
ripe Juniper Berries in Vinegar four or five Hours, dry and eat in a Morning,
and, with the Hand before the Mouth, cause the Breath to reach the Eyes. 11.
Inflamed; apply a warm Poultise of Wormwood Tops beaten up with the Yolk of an
Egg; or a warm Poultise of a scooped Apple filled with Wormwood Tops, roasted,
beaten up, and laid on: Or use blue Bottle Flower Water; or Juice, or distilled
Water of Heath, or bruised Leaves, Juice, or distilled Water of Stitch-wort; or
a warm Poultise of roasted or rotten Apples, with the white of an Egg and
Sugar; or with Rosemary; or a Poultise of Rue and Sage, beaten up with the
white of an Egg; or a Poultise of Housleek, beaten up, and laid on thick. 12. A
Suffusion; Juice of Brook-lime dropped into the Eyes; or Juice of Male
Pimpernel with Honey; or Eyebright used in any Form; or Rosemary Flowers put
fresh into a clean earthen Pot, close covered, set in the hot Sun, a fine Oil
will cover the Inside of the Pot, with it anoint the Eye. 13. Blood-shot; see
Hyssop.
But Casper Hoffman will only allow this Herb to be proper in cold Cases from
Phlegm and Rheum, for he thinks the Herb very hot and dry: But it is not its
Heat, Dryness, or Bitterness, that makes it beneficial to the Eyes, but the
Subtilty of its Parts, or perhaps some other yet unaccounted for Property. But
Fred. Hoffman says it is good in Suffusions and Dimness of Sight. The Herb,
boiled in Wine, and drank, is a Remedy in the Yellow Jaundice. Take powdered
Eyebright, two Ounces; Mace, half an Ounce, mix; after due Evacuation, Dose is
two Ounces. To this Dodonaeus adds Sugar and Fennel; it is good in Suffusions
and Cataracts. Fabric. Hild. says, that so great is the Virtue and Efficacy of
this Herb in Weakness of Sight, that he observed some of Seventy Years old, who
had lost their Sight by much Study and Watchings, recover it again. Dr. Tancred
Robinson says, that Oculists give it to their Patients in Sallads, Broth,
Bread, and infused in their Drink; and use it in Salves, and Fomentations. Its
Powder is preferred to its Wine: Dose, from one to three Drams in a Glass of
Fennel or Vervain Water. Parkinson says, the Herb helps a weak Brain, or
Memory. Some make a Conserve of the Flowers. The Herb infused in our Table Beer
may be used instead of its Wine.

EYEBRIGHT. I never saw it growing, neither in Woods, Fields, nor Gardens,
though I have often sowed it: Several Plants in this Country are called by that
Name, but erroneously.

102.
FENNEL, or FINCLE, ( Foeniculum) when we observe or suspect any Malignity
joined with putrid Fevers, that requires Opening and Discussing by Sudorifics,
Fennel is best; hence in small Pox and Measles there is nothing better than a
Decoction of the Seed. The powdered Seed, taken every Morning fasting with
Sugar, wonderfully strengthens the Sight; or if the Seed is infused in Vinegar,
dried and mixed with Sugar, and a little Cinnamon, it surprizingly preserves
the Sight, even to the very old Age. Nothing exceeds Fennel to cure Dimness of
Vision. The Juice of the Leaves and Roots, or the distilled Water dropped into
the Eyes, does the same. The Seed strengthens the Stomach, takes away
Loathings, and expels Wind. It is also good for Diseases of the Breast; for the
Plant opens, discusses, resolves, in diuretic, breaks Wind; expectorates tough
Phlegm, increases Milk, and softens the Throat. The Seed corrects purgatives. A
Decoction of the Root and Seed is good against Fumes of Mercury. Put powdered
Sugar Candy into the hollow Stalk of Fennel, Seal up the Stalk, and let it grow
'till the Sugar is melted, then pour it into a Bottle to be dropped into the
Eyes. The Seed provokes Urine, and eases Pain of the Stone. Leaves and Seed
boiled in Barley-water, and drank, increase Milk in Nurses. It is good in a
Hiccough; and cures Loathing. The Herb boiled in Broth, and used in Spoon-meat,
reduces or prevents Corpulency. A Decoction of the Seed, in Urine drank, is an
Antidote to the Biting of Serpents, and Poison of Mushrooms. The Seed and Root,
boiled and drank, open Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and Gall; therefore
proper in a Cachexy, Jaundice, Cramp, etc. The Seed is proper for a Shortness
of Breath, Wheezing, Stuffing of the Lungs, and promotes Menses and Lochia. The
Roots are much used in Drinks and Broth, to purify the Blood, provoke Urine,
cleanse the Liver, and restore a fresh Complexion after long Sickness. Four
Ounces of Fennel Juice, taken every Morning fasting for ten Days together, is
good in Quartans; but go immediately to a Warm Bed; in sundry Persons, it
operates variously, as by Sweat, Spitting, etc. A Decoction of Fennel Roots in
Wine, and applied to the Eyes, has cured a Suffusion. The Seed is good against
Abortion. The Herb, drank daily in Tea, is good for wandering Night Pains, and
disturbed, short Sleeps. Ashes of the Root taken alone, or mixed with Honey, is
excellent for the Thrush. Its Decoction, with white Poppy-seed and Liquorice,
promotes Spitting. Roots of Fennel, Burdock, and Sarsaparilla, boiled,
strained, and drank, cure Tremors from Mercury. The Seed and its Oil are
admirable in nephritc Cholics.

103.
HOGS-FENNEL ( Peucedanum) SOW-FENNEL, SULPHUR, or BRIMSTONE WORT, or
HARESTRONG, etc. its Root is impregnated with a resinous Juice, warming,
drying, attenuating, and expectorating; causes a Discharge of tartarous Matter,
and Bile. It is good in Diseases of the Breast, as Cough, Shortness of Breath,
Windiness, Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Kidneys; and is said to expel
Urine and Gravel. It is used outwardly for Megrim and Head-achs from Catarrhs;
for hard Swellings, and cleansing obstinate Ulcers. The Ancients valued it much
for all Diseases seated in the Nerves, as Lethargy, Epilepsy, and Phrenzy. A
Conserve of the Root is a noble Pectoral and Antihisteric Medicine. It is said
that the Juice of the Herb with Vinegar and Rosewater; or a little Euphorbium,
put to the Nose, is good in a Lethargy, Phrensy, Palsy, Vertigo, Epilepsy,
Chronic Head-achs, Sciatica, Cramp, or other nervous Diseases, if used with Oil
and Vinegar. Seeing foetid Gums in general are the best nervous Medicines, this
cannot be a contemptible One. The Juice dissolved in Wine, or mixed with an
Egg, is good for a Cough, Shortness of Breath, or windy Pains of the Body. It
opens the Body gently, expels Wind, and softens a hard Spleen. It is good in
hard Labor, and eases Pains of the Bladder, Kidneys, and Uterus. The Juice
mixed with Wine, and dropped into the Ears, or hollow Tooth, eases their Pain.
The powdered Root cleanses and cures foul Ulcers; it draws Thorns or other
Things out of the Flesh, and heals the Wounds, or Sores. It is good in healing
and warming Ointments. The Juice is stronger than the Root, which is balsamic,
oily, of a loose Texture, and smells like Turpentine. Five or six Ounces of the
Decoction of the Root purges gently. The Ancients used it much in Pleurisies.

HOGS-FENNEL. I believe we have none of it growing in our Colonies.

104.
FERN, MALE and FEMALE ( Filix) a Dram of their powdered Root boiled in Mead,
and drank, kills all Sorts of Worms in the Belly; and is the only grand Secret
boasted of by Mountebanks in this Case For Worms of the Belly, let Powder of
Southern-wood Seeds, or of the dried Herb, be given. Syrup of the Juice of
white Briony Root (that has stood 'till it is cleaned, and only the clear used)
from Half a Dram to a Dram. Of coarse Powder of Sea Coraline, given in Wine or
Milk. An Infusion of Coriander Seed in Wine drank. Give powdered Fern Leaves*
from Half a Dram to three Drams in Goats Rue Water, or any proper Liquor^ Or
drink Half an Ounce of Juice of Goats Rue. The Dust found on Dog-grass Roots in
the Spring, gathered, dried, and given; or a Decoction of the Roots drank* or a
distilled Water drawn from pounded common Grass; or Powder of Tops of St.
John's Wort in Broth; and a Poultise of it laid to the Belly; or Powder of
P^^slain Seed taken; Conserve or Syrup of Tansy taken some Days fasting; or
from a Scruple to a Dram of its Seed given; Powder of Zedoary Root, from a
Scruple to a Dram, drank in Wine or Aethiops Mineral, given in Powder, or
Electuary; or Water wherein Quicksilver was boiled. Ex. Cruson. Collectionibus.
. A Decoction of the Root in Wine drank some Days, cures Swelling and Hardness
of the Spleen; but it is injurious to big-bellied Women, causing Miscarriage.
The fresh Root bruised, or its Juice, or the dried Root sprinkled with
Rosewater, or Spring Water, is singular in all Sorts of Burns; for a slimy
Juice squeezes out of them that cures the Part. In a Famine a Meal is made of
the Roots, and Wash-Balls are made of the Tops burnt. The Root powdered dries
up foul malignant Ulcers, and heals them. The Root will afford an excellent
Ointment for all Wounds, Pricks, etc. The Smoke of the Leaves drives away
Gnats, etc. The Roots boiled in Wort are good against the Stone. Some will have
the Roots to be great Openers of Obstructions, a good Vulnerary, and proper in
Consumptions, and ulcerated Lungs.

105.
WATER FERN, or OSMOND ROYAL (Filix Florida) is most effectual in all Wounds,
Ulcers, and fresh Ruptures; and, being a little warm and sharp, is good in
Cholic and Spleen. A Decoction of the white Part of the Root, or it bruised in
Liquor drank, is wonderful in Wounds, Bruises, or Falls, etc. A Conserve of its
tender Buds is a Specific in the Rickets; especially if Male Fern Root and
Hart's-tongue be added. A Syrup of the Root is special in ulcerated Lungs, and
inward Imposthumes. This Root, steeped in Water, Gin, or Brandy, 'till the
Liquor become a thick, stiff Mucilage, has cured many most deplorable Pains of
the Back, that have confined and almost distracted the unhappy Sufferers, kept
close to Bed for many Weeks, and could neither move, nor be shifted; the
Mucilage was only rubbed on the Vertebrae of the Back, Evening and Morning, for
some Days. Why may it not have the like Effect in several other Pains?

106.
FEVERFEW ( Matricaria) its Decoction, drank, is useful in Uterine Disorders;
it expels Menses, Afterbirth, and cures Hysterics. It answers all that can be
expected from Bitters. The Herb, or its Juice, kills Worms as surely as
Wormwood or Centaury, and is useful in the Gout. Its Juice, taken to four or
five Spoonfuls, moves the Belly like all other good Deobstruents. Its Smell is
fatal to Bees. Its very Name declares it a Febrifuge. Its Leaves warmed in a
Drying Pan, and laid on the hinder Part of the Head, and renewed several Times,
ease the Megrim. Its Decoction brings down the Lochia, and if they either stop,
or come sparingly, or Hysterics supervene, a Decoction of this, with Camomile
Flowers and Mugwort, brings them down afresh, and all Pains, Stoppage, and
Symptoms, cease presently. I have often known its Decoction used with good
Success; the Liquor was drank warm at going to Bed, and the strained out Herb
applied in a Poultise to the Sharebone, to provoke the Menses: Or the Decoction
drank, and a Stove of the boiled Herb sat over: Or a Decoction of it and
Brook-lime drank, and a Poultise of the Herbs applied as before; they all
answer that same Purpose. It is also good for all Colds in the Uterus or
Pudenda. The Decoction, drank with Honey, is very good in Colds, Coughs,
Stuffing of the Breast, and to cleanse the Reins and Bladder from all Sand,
Gravel, Slime, or Stones in them. Its Powder, taken with Oxymel, purges Phlegm
and Choler mildly, and is good in Shortness of Breath, Hypo, and Lowness of
Spirits. Its Decoction or Juice, and Conserve taken, and the Herb bruised, and
laid to the Wrists, with Bay Salt, helps Spring Agues. It is an Antidote to
Opium and Henbane. It is among the chief of the Uterine and Antihysteric
Plants, To hasten the Menses obstructed, Juice or Syrup of Brooklime is a
Specific. Powder, or Emulsion of Columbine Seeds, used thrice a Day. A Dram of
Conserve of Borrage, and six Grains of Nutmeg, in a Glass of white Wine, drank
daily, fasting. Decoction of Calamint, drank, and the Sharebone fomented with
it. Two Drams of Conserve of Marygold Flowers, taken many Days together; or the
Juice, or Syrup, Decoction of the Herb: Or a Decoction of lesser Centaury in
white Wine, or Water, drank: Or a Decoction of Germander in Wine: Or a Handful
of Camomile, or its dried Flowers in Water, to a Pint, and strained; and drank,
three Ounces at a Time, thrice a Day; Or two or three Handfuls of Camomile
boiled, beaten up to a Poultise, and laid to the Sharebone: Or Flowers of Blue
Bottle infused, or boiled in Wine, or Water, and strained; drink of it every
Morning and Afternoon: Or a Pessary of a Scruple of black Hellebore Root
powdered, and put in a Silk, and used; but must not be kept in long at once. Or
Lovage Leaves, chewed, are good: Or use a Pessary of the soft Leaves of sweet
Marjoram, Feverfew, and Mercury, beaten up and used as black Hellebore was: Or
Tops of white Horehound infused twenty-four Hours in white Wine, and drink the
Wine thrice a Day, for three Days: Or Leaves of Feverfew beaten, and made into
a Pessary: Or Mercury used that Way: Parsnip Seed, boiled in white Wine, and
drank, provokes them wonderfully: Or the Infusion, or Decoction of Pennyroyal,
in white Wine, often drank, and the Herb worn in the Shoes. -- For a
Suppression of the Lochia, or Childbed Purgation: Take dry Orange Peel, an
Ounce; Camomile Flowers, Half a Handful; infuse and boil them slowly in two
Pints of Ale, to a Pint and a Half, strain, and drink hereof a Glass warm,
thrice a (...) A Decoction of Calamint drank thrice a Day, and the strain^^ out
Herb laid in a Poultise to the Sharebone: Or a Decoction of Feverfew, with a
little Camomile, or Mug-wort, drank warm: Or Powder of Myrrh and Saffron, drank
in Water of Mercury, with a little Honey. -- To hasten down the Afterbirth, a
Decoction of Calamint drank, and a Poultise of it laid to the Sharebone; the
Juice, Infusion, Decoction, Syrup, or Conserve of Marygold Flowers taken; or
give a Clyster of a Pint of Decoction of Ground Ivy, and an Ounce of Mithridate
mixed; it is surprising; or the Juice of Lovage Leaves beaten up with white
Wine, strained and drank warm; or its Seed powdered and given in white Wine to
drink; or a Dram of Powder of dried Parsnip Seed, given in Wine, is a Specific;
or the Juice of Hore-hound given in Wine. -- The Breasts hard; Chervil Leaves
beat into a Poultise, and applied warm; or Leaves of Deadly Nightshade used in
a Poultise. -- Pained; Ash Leaves boiled, beaten up to a Poultise, and applied
warm; or Bean flower, two Parts; Powder of dry curled Mint, one Part; with
fresh Butter, make an Ointment, and apply warm; it cures Abscesses of the
Breast. An Ointment of Deadly Nightshade takes away the Pain of the Breast. --
Inflamed; rub warm Juice of Plantain on it; or Elder Leaves warmed in a
Drying Pan, and when they begin to sweat apply them. -- Swelled; Ash-tree
Leaves used as before; or Turnip Roots boiled soft, beaten with a little
Hog's-Lard, and applied, are excellent. -- Cancerated; thick doubled Linen
Cloths, dipped in Water distilled from rotten Apples, and applied Evening and
Morning, give much Ease. Leaves of Deadly Nightshade, laid thick on a
cancerated Breast, are said to do Wonders; the Juice, a Poultise, or Ointment
of the Herb, all do surprising Things. -- Breasts too flabby; Linen Cloths
dipped in a Decoction of Ladies Mantle Leaves, laid often to the Breasts; or
Succory Juice rubbed warm on them; or tender young Hemlock Leaves, beaten to a
Poultise, and applied once a Day. -- For a Relaxation of the Vulva; receive the
Vapor of a strong Decoction of Ladies Mantle to the Part; or use the Juice,
Syrup, or Decoction of Comfry Root, inwardly, and the Juice warm to the Part.
Ex Crusonis Collectionibus. When Housleek, or Nightshade, are used to the
Breasts, take Care of the Child, and let the Breast be well washed before it
take them. -- Milk in Nurses to increase; a Decoction of Seeds of Dill, Anise,
or Fennel Leaves, drank often; or of Milk-wort; a Handful of Elder Flowers,
boiled in three Pints of Milk, to two and a Half, and strained and drank. Ash
Leaves, or Sow Thistle, increase Milk in Cows. -- Milk to lessen, or put back;
a Poultise of beaten Chick-weed laid on Cabbage Leaves, and applied warm.
Hemlock and Mint, beaten up together, and applied warm. Juice of Plantain,
rubbed on the Breasts, does it. -- For hard Labor, drink a Decoction of Dill,
or take a Dram of powdered Columbine Seed, in a Glass of white Wine; or
Mug-wort used in any Form; or a Dram of powdered Betony Leaves in white Wine;
or give Powder or Decoction of Mother-wort; or a Dram of powdered Gromwell Seed
in New Milk; or apply a Poultise of Vervain, boiled in Wine, or Water.
and is therefore a good nervous Herb. For a Pain in the Side after Fevers,
take Feverfew, or Mint, or Pennyroyal, boil in new Milk a Pint, strain it
gently, drink the Milk, and apply the Herb to the pained Place, it cures it.

107.
FIG TREE (Ficus) though originally an Exotic, yet is now planted in many
Gardens. Dried Figs are used in Coughs, Asthma's, and Disorders of the Lungs;
and in Decoctions, to Children in Smallpox, and Measles; and in Gargles for
Inflammations of the Jaws and Tonsils. Being laxative, they are eaten by
Big-bellied Women, from four to twelve at a Time, in a Morning; and they mostly
open the Belly. They also eat them roasted, daily, some Time before their
Labor, to make it easy, and facilitate the Birth. Applied in a Poultise, they
soften and ripen Imposthumes and Buboes, very much; but, being loosening, they
are very unfit for them that have too slippery Intestines, nor are they suited
to bilious Constitutions. A Decoction of Hyssop and Figs, in Water, causes easy
Spitting. Figs, Wheat-flour, Powder of Fenugreek, and Linseed, with Althaea
Roots, all made into a Poultise, soften, ripen, and break Boils, Buboes,
Imposthumes, and all hot Swellings behind the Ears, etc. Figs boiled in
Wormwood Wine, with Barley-Meal, and made into a Poultise, and put to the
Belly, are good in Dropsies. The Leaves, boiled with Althaea Roots, and beaten
to a Poultise, are good in scrophulous Tumors. The Milky Juice of the Leaves,
and Barley Meal, used in a Poultise, takes off the Discoloring and Deformities
of the Skin. This Juice with Grease, takes away Warts. This Milk, put in a
hollow Tooth, cures the Toothache, or laid to the Anus, it opens the Piles.
This Milk put into a green Wound, from the Bite of a mad Dog, or other venomous
Animal, presently eases the Pain, and cures the Part. Haec Gerard.

108.
FIG-WORT (Scrophularia Major) is bitter and stinking, resolvent, and
emollient, and fit to discuss the most obstinate Tumors, either cold, or
inflammatory. It is good for Wounds in the tendinous Parts. Its Juice cleanses
the most putrid Ulcers, even though carcinomatous. An Ointment made of the
Roots of this, and Pile-wort Tops, with Wax and Turpentine, to dissolve
scrophulous Tumors, and abate Pain, Swelling, and Inflammation of the Piles,
has wonderful Success; nor is it bad in Tetters and Ringworms; but then a Dram
of the powdered Root should be drank every Morning, in a Glass of its Infusion
in Wine. The Decoction, Infusion, or Powder, Ointment, Fomentation, or even the
bruised fresh Root, applied outwardly, do all give surprising Relief in the
Piles, and other Diseases of that Place; and also in the Scab, Itch, cancerous,
and malignant creeping Ulcers. The Root expels Worms. The Water cures the
Redness of the Face. Tragus makes an Ointment, of the Juice of the Root and
Plant, expressed in May, kept a whole Year in an unstopp'd Bottle; then made
his Ointment of Half Juice, and Half Oil and Wax; boiled till the Juice was
exhaled, then strained it, and kept it for Use. Sir Robert Sibbald gives us a
Plaster for the same Intention, made of a Pound of Hog's-Lard, Leaves of
Fig-wort, Hound's-tongue, white Dead Nettle, Fox-glove, of each equal Parts;
cut them all small, and bo^^ in the Lard with a moderate Heat, till the Leaves
are crisp; then strain them out, and put in more of the same Herbs fresh, boil
and strain as before; repeat it a third Time, then weigh the Ointment, and take
Half (...) Weight of Wax, and Rosin; Turpentine, two Ounces; Verdigrease, one
Ounce; dissolve all, strain them through a Linen Cloth, and keep it in a Pot,
to be spread on Leather, when used. The Herb taken inwardly, or applied
outwardly, dissolves coagulated Blood. An Ointment may be made of this, and
Pile-wort, and Toad-flax, by a triple Docoction in Lard or Butter, and
Beeswax, and Turpentine. A little Sugar of Lead may be added to the strained
Liquor, for the Piles. For the H^^morrhoids, or Piles, a Fomentation or
Cataplasm of Brook-lime, wonderfully eases the Pain of the Blind-Piles; as does
a Poultise of Onions roasted, mixed with fresh Butter, and discusse^ the
Swelling; or the Ointment, or Juice of Pile-wort; and the whole Herb dried, put
in a Bag, and infused in Table-Beer, for common Drink; or the Parts rubbed well
with warm Juice of Sow-bread; or the fresh Juice of Sow-bread, rubbed warm, or
bruised Leaves of Fig Tree, or their Juice applied, opens them; or a Balsam of
True-love Berries and Sallad Oil; or a Fomentation of a Decoction of
Henbane-seed, in chalybeat Milk, applied warm to the Place with Sponges; or an
Ointment of white Lilly Roots, made with fresh Butter, and Hens grease, and
Powder of Linseed stirred into it; it is a notable Easer of Pain. Or an
Ointment of Toad-flax Flowers, and fresh Butter, or Hens-grease, made by
setting it fourteen Days in the Summer Sun; then strain off the Liquor, and put
fresh Flowers in it, and set it in the Sun again; repeat it a third Time; after
this strain off, and keep for Use; or the fresh Herb bruised and laid warm to
the Part, is a Specific; or a Decoction of Yarrow, drank three Days; or use a
Fomentation of the bruised Herb, boiled in Water; or take daily, a Dram of the
powdered Herb, in Milk; or a Balsam of Balm Apple and Sallad Oil, made by
setting them forty Days in the Sun; or an Ointment of bruised Herb Twopence,
made with Butter; or bruised Purslane Leaves, applied warm, ease Pain, discuss
the Swelling, or heal the Ulcer. A Poultise of Leek Roots and Butter, well
beaten up, and applied warm; or Oak Leaves and Acorns boiled in Vinegar,
applied warm in little Bags, and often renewed. Boil Elder Leaves very soft,
strain off the Liquor, and foment with it warm; then anoint with Sallad Oil,
and apply a Poultise of the boiled Leaves; or Elder and Broom Flowers, beaten
up with May Butter, and set a Month in the Sun; then buried another Month under
Ground; take them up, boil, strain, and keep the Ointment for Use; or take
fresh Fig-wort-Roots, one Part, May Butter two Parts, pound them together, put
them in a close Earthen Pot, cover it well, and set them fifteen Days in a very
moist Place; then take them out, boil them gently, and strain out the Liquor
for a Liniment; or use a Poultise of the Roots boiled soft in Wa^^r; or its
fresh Root taken up in the Spring, and tied on the Loins to touch the Skin; or
the green, or dry Leaves, or Roots, taken in Meat or Drink, are all good; or
use a Fumigation of two Handfuls of greater Housleek, boiled in white Wine; or
an Ointment of Cork Ashes, ^inseed Oil, and the Yolk of an Egg, mixed and
applied; or Powder, Juice, or Syrup of Mullein taken inwardly; or its Flower,
in an Ointment with fresh Butter, made by setting them in the Sun; then boil
them softly, and strain out the Liquor for Use; or use a Fomentation of the
Plant in Blacksmith's Trough Water -- For too great a Flux of the Piles,
sprinkle on the Part, Powder of Birch tree Fungus; or of Puff-Balls strewed on;
or drink a Decoction of Burnet thrice a Day; or foment with a Decoction of
Mullein Flowers; or of Per^iwinkle, boiled in Blacksmith's Trough Water; or
drink two Ounces of Nettle Juice, twice a Day.


109.
FIR TREE ( Abies) though the dry and liquid Rosins of this Tree are much used
in Physic, yet, not being of British Preparation, I shall pass them. Fir Tops
are much used in Infusions in Diet Drinks, for the Scurvy, and Scorbutic, and
Arthritic Pains; and in Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Kidneys, which
it cleanses well.

110.
FLAX or LINT (Linum) the most wonderful and useful of all Herb^: With what
Oratory do Pliny and Bauhinus extol its Uses? But I shall only consider some
medical Effects of its Seed, which is Softening, Digesting, and Ripening, and
of moderate Warmth. It is of great Use in Coughs, Cholics, Gripes, Pleurisies,
and Consumptions; outwardly it eases Pain, smooths, softens, and ripens. The
Oil being mostly used inwardly, it should be purified before it is taken; which
is soonest done by mixing it with Spirit of Wine, and boiling both till the
Spirit is exhaled; this carries off the Acidity of the Oil. Two Ounces of this
Oil, drank in any suitable warm Liquor, is excellent in a Cholic, Pleurisy, or
Iliac Passion; some of the Oil at the same Time being applied outwardly. But
what is used inwardly, unpurified, should always be fresh drawn. Outwardly, it
softens Hardness, loosens Stiffness, and Contraction of the Nerves, and
mitigates racking Pains. The fresh Oil is a fine Remedy in Pleurisies; for it
makes Breathing easier, and promotes Spitting. It is excellent in Spitting of
Blood. It cures Cramps, and Convulsions; is good in Inflammations of the Lungs,
Sides, or Throat; outwardly, it loosens bound up Parts, softens the hard,
smooths the rough, and opens what was shut up. A Tea of the bruised Seed,
drank, sweetened with Honey, is good in a tearing Cough, in the Stone and
Gravel, Gripes, Cholic, Nephritic Pains, Inflammations of the Breasts or Sides,
Stitches, etc. An Electuary of the Seed, made with Honey, and a little Pepper,
drank daily, is good in a Cough. The bruised Seed, tie^ up in a Rag, may be
boiled in Ptisans for the Cholic, Gravel, Strangury, and Nephritic Pains. It
may also be used in Clysters for these Disorders; and for sharp and
inflammatory Diseases of the Guts and Bowels. Poultises and Ointments are made
of it to ease Pain; loosen, ripen, or discuss, any Swellings or Hardness. Baths
and Fumes are made of it for Hysterics. The Seed mixed with Nitre, or Salt and
Fig Tree Ashes, eases Pain, and Hardness of the Muscles, and Tendons or Sinews.
The Seed and Figs in a Poultise, ripen and digest. Mixed with wild Cucumber
Root, it draws Splinters, Thorns, etc. out of the Flesh. Boiled in Wine, and
applied to running fretting Sores, it prevents their spreading; mixed with
Olibanum and Water, or Myrrh and Wine, it cures watering Eyes; mixed with
Honey, Suet, or Wax, it discusses hard Kernels, or Swellings on the Neck, or
under the Ears; and clears the Skin from Spots, or Blemishes. The Oil, beaten
up with Rose Water, is good for Burns. The Oil or Seed is good for the Piles. A
Tea of the bruised Seed is often used for a Hoarseness, a thin Rheum and
Catarrh, in Contractions of the Belly, etc. That Flax is a violent Purgative,
the Inhabitants of Sterling felt to their fatal Experience, in 1716; when, from
Flax steeped in the Water that supplies the Town, there arose a raging mortal
Dysentery, which greatly depopulated the Place, and occasioned the Report in
the News, that the Plague was broken out there.

111.
MOUNTAIN, WILD, DWARF, or MILL-FLAX, (Linum Catharticum) the whole Herb
bruised and infused all Night in Water, Small Beer, or white Wine, in hot
Ashes, purges watery Humors violently. Its Decoction does the same. Country
People use it much, and have often seen good Effects from it. Dr. Bowl says,
that Powder of the dried Herb, taken with a little Cream of Tartar, and
Anise-seed, purges mildly enough.

112.
FLIX-WEED. (Sophia Chyrurgorum) A Dram of the Seed powdered, or boiled, or
steeped in Water, and drank, is a present safe Remedy for a Looseness. The Herb
is the same. They are both good in a Bloody Flux; or in any other natural or
unnatural excessive Loss of Blood. They are very proper in Wounds, or putrid
and malignant Ulcers. The boiled Herb is used to expel Gravel, Sand, and small
Stones. It is also good in Fractures and Dislocations. Its Decoction in Wine,
drank, kills Worms in the Body.

FLIX-WEED. Grows no where in our Colonies, but in curious Botanick Gardens.

113.
FLEA-BANE ( Conyza) is by some reputed a Waster and Expeller of Stone and
Gravel; a Vulnerary, and good in Bruises, Ruptures, inward Wounds, Pains of the
Sides, and Difficulty of Breathing. Strewed in a Room, it drives away Flies and
Fleas. Its Leaves rubbed on the Bite of Serpents help them. The Leaves and
Flowers infused in Wine expel Menses and Birth. Infused in Vinegar they were
used in making Urine by Drops, and in the Epilepsy, etc.

FLEA-BANE. One Species grows plentifully on the Salt Marshes.

114.
FLEA-WORT ( Psyllium) purges yellow Bile, and, being mucilaginous, it is
thought proper in Bloody Fluxes and Excoriations of the Bowels. It is the only
Purgative of a cooling Quality. Yet it is accused of Virulence. Hoffman doubts
it is of a poisonous Nature; but Alpinus says, the Egyptians use it in hot
Fevers. It offends the Stomach, causes Fainting, and is not without Danger of
killing, if too much used. The Mucilage of ^his and Quince-seed, in Rose and
Plantain Wate^, of each one Ounce; the White of an Egg beaten to a Water, and
Camphire five Grains; all mixed, and dropped into the Eye, is good in
Inflammations, and hot Disorders of the Eyes. Waters of it and Purslain are
good in Excoriations of the Palate, Uvula, and Tongue, from Heat. An Epithem of
a Mucilage of the Seed made with Rose Water is good in a hot Pain of the Head,
if applied to the Forehead. The Seeds, fried and taken, stop a hot bilious
Looseness. The Mucilage of the Seed, with Rose Water and Sugar Candy, drank, is
good in hot parching Fevers, and Inflammations; Hoarseness, and hot Disorders
of the Lungs. The Mucilage in Plantain Water, and the Yolk of an Egg, is good
in the Piles, and in Inflammations of any Part of the Body, and Pains from
Heat; as in a Megrim, Headache, hot Imposthumes, Swellings, or Outbreakings on
the Skin or Joints. And, applied with Oil of Roses and Vinegar, it was used in
Childrens Ruptures, and Navel-starting, and heals chopped Nipples, or sore
Breasts. Its Juice and Honey help running Ears, and hinder Worms breeding in
them; mixed with Lard, it cleanses filthy hot Ulcers. The Herb, being very
cold, should be used cautiously, that it do no Hurt.

FLEA-WORT. I had growing in my Garden, but it is now gone off. I never saw it
grow wild.

115.
FENUGREEK-SEED ( Foenum graecum) is a great Softener, Digester, Ripener,
Dicusser, and Easer of Pain; and either it, or its Mucilage, goes into most
Poultises of those Intentions. It is often used in emollient Clysters; for it
sheathes all Sharpness, smooths and heals the Bowels. Its Decoction is useful
in several female Disorders. Its Mucilage cures Blood-shot Eyes. The Seed
boiled in Mead 'till it is dissolved, then beaten up, and boiled again with
Honey, so spread on a Cloth, and applied, presently eases the Sciatica, and all
Pains of the Joints. The Seed is excellent in Diseases of the Eyes. Sweet
Apples, boiled up to a Poultise in Fennel and Vervain Water; then put through a
Hair Sieve, then add Mucilage of Fenugreek dissolved in Rose Water, with
Camphire and prepared Tutty, and Rose Water enough to make an Epithem for
Blood-shot Eyes. Sim. Pauli. Its Powder, with Smallage Juice, is good for cold
Tumors in Women's Breasts. In Clysters it expels Wind powerfully, and eases
Pain. Given to Horses with their Corn, is good for their Cough, Cold, Breath,
and fattens them.

FENUGREEK. Grows wild no where in our Colonies.

116.
FOX-GLOVE, ( Digitalis) some strong Rusticks venture on a Decoction of the
Leaves in Water, for a Vomit; it works upwards and downwards with great
Violence; sometimes causes a Superpurgation, Fever, Phrenzy, or other dangerous
Symptom; therefore should either be totally refrained, or used with Judgment
and Caution. Yet Parkinson affirms that two Handfuls of it, with four Ounces of
Polypody Root, boiled in Ale, and drank, cured the Falling Sickness in those
that had it severely for twenty-six Years. Both Leaves and Flowers are good in
the moist and running King's Evil, but not in the dry. But my Author would have
found it alike successful in both Kinds, if, instead of his Ointment, and
Praecipitates, he had taken the green fresh Leaves, cleaned, and spread them
three or four on one another upon the Sore twice a Day; he would generally have
found them to clean, draw, and heal, beyond all other Cleansers. Some make an
Ointment of the Flowers, by stopping as many of them as they can into May
Butter or Lard, and set them in the Sun the whole Summer; or bury them forty
Days under Ground; thus they preserve the Flowers with the Ointment, and spread
them on Linen, and apply to the Tumor, which they ripen and discuss; or
cleanse, fill up, and heal, the Ulcers. During that whole Time they purge every
fifth or sixth Day, and drink constantly a Decoction of Herb Robert. Let the
finer Part of the Ointment be laid on the inflamed Part of the Ulcer, and the
coarser Part be spread on Rags not to be changed during the whole Time of the
Cure. Some make a double or treble Decoction of the expressed Juice of the
first Sprouts, or Buds of the Herb, in May Butter, 'till the Juice is wasted;
this is preserved and used daily, and, though it make the Tumor larger at
first, yet afterward it will cleanse and heal it. It cleanses and cures other
Sores, Wounds, and Ulcers. The powdered Leaf is a strong and safe Sternutatory.
For the King's Evil, Take Hog's Lard half a Pound, Tobacco four Ounces, Rosin
as much, black Soap, and Bees Wax, each six Ounces; Fox-glove, Dandelion,
Pile-wort, Bay Salt, of each a Handful; boil the cut fresh Herbs in the Lard
and Soap, then strain, and add the Bay Salt to the Liquor, boil it, put in the
Wax, and lastly the Rosin, make an Ointment; spread a little of it on Leather,
or Linen, and lay upon the Sore once or twice a Day: It is good for Ulcers on
any Part of the Body, except the Back. It would be more effectual, should the
Sick daily take ten Grains of powdered green Lizards; or the following: Take
calcined Sponge Stones (or Sponge) nine Drams, Sal Gem, six Drams, vitriolated
Tartar, three Drams, mix them; Dose, two Scruples, twice a Day, for seven or
nine Weeks. If the Evil is not ulcerated, take Pidgeons-dung two Ounces, Figs
one Ounce, beat them together, and apply in a Poultise; it will ripen and break
either this, or any other Imposthume, presently. For the Kings' evil, a
Poultise of Goose-grass fried with Hog's-Lard, and applied, discusses; or a
distilled Water of the whole Plant drank. Smallage or Pile-wort Roots, often
used, in an Ointment made by a double Decoction in Hog's-Lard, till they are
crisp, then strain and anoint with it warm Evening and Morning. Powder of
Blue-bottle Flowers, taken daily in Wine, for a long Time; or their Tincture
drank. Root of Hounds-tongue used inwardly, and Poultises of it applied
outwardly; or the above Preparations of Fox-glove; or drink the Decoction of
Eyebright in Wine; or a Glass of Broom-flower Water, with Sugar, every
Morning; or an Electuary of dry Broom-flowers and Honey daily taken. For common
Drink, infuse and boil in eight Pints of Water, to six, the following, viz.
Herb Robert and Brook-lime, of each three Handfuls; dead Nettles, Six Handfuls;
of Liquorice Root and Anise-seed, bruised, each one Ounce; Raisins, four
Ounces; Senna Leaf, three Ounces; Carthamus, two Ounces; Agaric, six Drams;
strain; Dose three or four Ounces thrice a Day; Or an Infusion of Ground Ivy,
drank, thrice a Day. Two or three Ounces of the Juice of Hore-hound, taken
daily fasting; or the Syrup of its Juice made with Sugar, and long boiled; Half
a Dram of powdered Sponge of the Wild Rose-tree, taken with Sugar in the
Decrease of the Moon; or let the ordinary Drink be an Infusion or Decoction of
Rue-leaved Whitelow Grass. A Poultise of boiled or roasted Turnips applied
daily. A Tea of Rosemary drank. A Dram of powdered Root of Butchers Broom taken
every Morning in Wine; or a Powder of this and Drop-wort Roots of each alike.
Fig-wort Root used any how is good, as eaten in a Morning fasting for ten Days;
or a Dram of its fresh Powder (the Root dug up in the Springtime, at the
Decrease of the Moon) in a Glass of its Decoction thrice a Day; or slice it,
put it on a Thread, and hang it about the Neck; or make an Ointment of it with
fresh Butter, and use. A Decoction of Devil's-bit, drank; or Vervain Roots,
sliced, and hung about the Neck. Ex Crusonis Collectionibus.


This Species of Digitalis, grows only in curious Gardens with us in America.

117.
FUMITORY ( Fumaria) its Juice drank from five to ten Ounces; its Decoction
from eight to sixteen Ounces; its Powder from two to four Ounces, purge Bile
and adust Humors. It purifies the Blood much, especially boiled in Whey; hence
it is good in Diseases produced by these Humors, as Leprosy, Scab, Itch,
Ringworms, etc. It is very Diuretic, and a little Sudorific, therefore, in the
Plague, Treacle was given in its Water. It opens Obstructions of the Liver, and
sends off the Jaundice by Urine; for which Purpose its Conserve is of special
Service after Purging. Its Juice or Essence, taken daily in Whey, is good in
Melancholy. Its Juice or Water takes off Spots of the Eyes. I have often been
astonished at its Success, in Diseases from Heat and Sharpness of the Blood in
some; as in Hectics, Pleurisies, Peripneumonies, etc. When the Bark, and
testaceous Powders, exasperated the Diseases, and hastened the Exit of others.
The Herb is bitter and cooling, yields much volatile, concrete, fixed lixivial
Salt, and a very thick Oil; much Boiling spoils and weakens both it,
Ground Ivy, and Liver-wort. It is a Specific in Diseases of the Skin,
Melancholy, and Cachexy. It is good in a Dropsy. The Root cleanses and dries up
Ulcers in the Mouth. Its Syrup is good in Winter. An Ointnment made of the
Juices of it, Dock, and Elecampane Roots, with Lard, is good for Diseases of
the Skin. Dioscorides says, that its Juice, with Gum Arabic, rubbed on the Eye
brows, after the long Hairs are pulled out, hinders their growing again. It is
a Specific in Diseases from a mucilaginous, or acid State of the Blood. But,
for Melancholy, a Decoction of great wild Basil in Wine, drank, Morning, Noon,
and Night, is a Specific. In Madness, a Dram of powdered white Briony Root,
taken often in a Draught of Milk, with a suitable Regimen, is also a Specific;
or its Infusion in white Wine, with Syrup of Violets; or, after Evacuations,
nine Leaves of Lavender, cut, and given in Water; or a Decoction of Lavender,
repeated thrice a Day, and sweat freely; or four Ounces of Decoction of St.
John's-Wort, drank thrice a Day; or a Tincture of its Flowers; or a Decoction
of Pimpernel Leaves and Flowers; Dose four Ounces twice a Day. -- Madness from
the Bite of a mad Dog, to prevent or cure, a Poultise of Rue and Onions, beaten
up with Honey, and applied, is advised by Morrison; or a Powder or Decoction of
the Flowers of lesser Centaury, is commended as a Specific by Ray: Or two Drams
of the powdered Seeds of Ladies Thistle, drank in Wine, and Sweat after it,
Lindanus. Sennertus extols the Mad-wort, or Moon-wort, of Dioscorides; used any
how. Baricel^us says, the Root of the Dog Rose Bush is a certain Remedy. And
Maroldus extols Herb Burnet given any how, for some Days. Others advise a
beaten-up Poultise of Sage, Salt, and Vinegar, applied to the Place, and often
renewed. -- For the Bite of Serpents, besides many other Things, Boil commends
Horehound outwardly, and its Syrup taken inwardly. Morrison, a Decoction of
Fennel Seed, drank; or Juice of Goats Rue, drank, and the Herb applied in a
Poultise. Garlic taken inwardly, and applied outwardly.

118.
GARDEN-CRESSES (Nasturtium hortense) Herb and Seed are acrid, hot, and dry;
they attenuate, open, and cleanse; are good in Swellings of the Spleen, expel
Menses and Foetus, if the Infusion or Decoction is drank. The Decoction, Juice,
or Syrup of Marigold Flowers, are Specifics. They cut thin, and bring up thick
Phlegm from the Lungs; they are good in the Scurvy; and the Seed, given in
Drink, expels the Measles. They are used outwardly to purge the Head from
Phlegm, to cause Sneezing, and ripen hard Swellings. The Herb, bruised and
fried in Hog's-Lard, cures foul Scurfs or Scabs on the Head, or other Parts of
the Body; it brings off the thickest Scurfs in twenty-four Hours, and if the
Head be daily rubbed with Pissilaeum Indicum, it works a complete and easy
Cure. It is as powerful an Antiscorbutic as Scurvy Grass, or Water Cresses;
therefore Sallads, Diet Drinks, and Juices of it, are much in Request in the
Spring. In comatous and lethargic Fits, there is nothing better than this,
boiled and eaten in Sallads. The Herb, or Juice; cleanse the Reins or Bladder,
and provoke Venery. It heals inward Wounds; and, eaten with Oil, helps a Cough,
Shortness of Breath, and Pains of the Breasts and Sides. Chewed in the Mouth,
it eases the Toothache. The bruised Herb rubbed or laid on, takes Spots out of
the Skin. A Poultise of it is good in a Sciatica. It draws Bones, Splinters,
and Thorns, out of the Flesh; and checks the Corrosion of creeping Ulcers.
Boiled in Vinegar, and laid to the Throat and Neck, it is good in the King's
Evil; boiled in Hog's-Lard, and applied, it quickly ripens and breaks Plague
Sores.

119.
WATERCRESSES in the Spring are also used in Sallads, Broth, Juice, Diet
Drinks, or eaten alone to purify the Blood, as a Specific against the Scurvy;
and to expel Urine and Menses. They are thought useful in the Stone and Dropsy.
Their Juice strained, and drank, soon breaks inward Imposthumes. Snuffed up the
Nose, is good against a Polypus. In other Respects they are the same as Garden
Cresses.

120.
GARLIC (Allium) taken inwardly in Substance, or Infusion, heats the Body,
thins thick and gross Humors, cuts, digests, and consumes the clammy. It opens
Obstructions, is an Antidote to cold Poisons, and Bites of venomous Beasts. It
is good in Stuffings of the Lungs, old Coughs, Roughness of the Throat, and
Hoarseness. It provokes Urine; boiled in Milk, it kills Worms; it warms the
Stomach, and preserves from infectious and pestilential Diseases. Sitting over
a Steam of its Decoction, brings down the Menses, and Secondine. Beaten up with
Honey, and anointed, it cures Morphew, Tetters, Ringworms, Scald Heads, Scurf,
and Dandriff. Applied with Fig Leaves, and Cummin Seeds, it cures the Bite of a
Shrew. Boiled in Milk or Broth, it is good in a flatulent or nephritic Cholic.
Boiled in Honey and Water, it provokes Urine and Sweat powerfully. Boiled in
Milk, it is good in a Catarrh or Cough. The Roots stamped, and laid to the
Soles of the Feet, Sides, Wrists, Ulcers, or Wounds, may, in a few Hours after,
be smelled in the Breath. Some say that its Juice, drank, is Poison, but later
Observations contradict it. But to bilious, or sanguine Persons, or such as
have sharp Juices, it is certainly hurtful in all Shapes; for, besides its
intolerable Smell, it raises Thirst, Pains of the Head, and all the Instruments
of the Senses. But it is well adapted to cold, pituitous, phlegmatic, or aged
People; whose Juices are either very watery, and their Circulation slow; or
very thick, gross, or phlegmy. I have often ordered the following Diet Drink,
with good Success, to cachectic, aged, phlegmatic, asthmatic, or scorbutic
Constitutions, with swelled Feet, Legs, and sometimes Thighs; or in a beginning
Anasarca or Leucophlegmatia. Take fresh Roots of Garlic, Horseradish,
Elecampane, Knee-holly, of each two, three, or four Ounces; Tops of Broom,
Scurvy Grass, Wormwood, wild Sage, Camomile Flowers, of each a Handful; Juniper
Berries, an Ounce and an Half; fresh inner Bark of Elder, four Ounces; bruise
the Roots and Berries, cut the Herbs, infuse all in five or six Quarts of Table
Beer, or in a Gallon of white Wine; keep it close some Days, then bottle it
off; Dose, from a Fourth to Half a Pint, thrice a Day. It may be renewed till
the Symptoms vanish, which they mostly do pretty soon. Seafaring Men use
Garlic with Success, for Disorders occasioned by salt and stinking Waters, and
unwholesome or uncommon Foods; it is a good Stomachic to them. It is also of
Benefit in a Hoarseness. It makes the Skin red, and sometimes blisters it. It
is good to recover such as are almost lost by Cold or Frost. Its middle Stalk
quickly cures Corns, if stamped, or bruised, and laid on. The roasted Root, put
into the Ears, cures a beginning Deafness. A Poultise of Garlic, Bay, and
Juniper Berries, and Barley-Meal, laid to the Sharebone, is very Diuretic. The
Root is also good in the Toothache. For the Toothache, hold in the Mouth a warm
Decoction of Garlic, with a little Olibanum; or Garlic Juice, with a little
Venice Treacle, dropped into the Ear; or a small Clove of it put into the Ear,
on the same Side; or wash the Mouth often with a Decoction of wild Tansy and
Vinegar; or put a bruised fresh Leaf of Betony up the Nose; or bruised Leaves
of Shepherd's Purse, put warm into the Ear; or first wash the Teeth with Onion
Juice, then wash the Mouth with a Decoction of Sage in rough Wine. A Poultise
of fresh Comfry Root laid to the Temples; or let the Person peel the Bark off a
small Hasle-twig, and prick the Gums and Parts about the pained Teeth till they
bleed; then put the bloody Wood into the Place where it was cut out, cover it
again with its Bark, and paste it about with Clay, to keep out the Air; the
more quickly the Operation is performed, the sooner will the Pain be eased; if
a Hasle-tree is not near at hand, the Willow or Elder may do. Wash the Mouth
often with the Decoction of black Hellebore. Rub the Tooth well with the Leaf
of Bastard Hellebore, and it will presently fall out; but let it not touch the
sound Teeth. Wash the Mouth often with a Decoction of Fern Root, in Vinegar; or
of Ivy Berries; or a Decoction of Rag-wort in Wine, held warm in the Mouth; or
use the Gargle of a strong Decoction of Master-wort Root; or a Piece of dried
Dock Root, dug up before it put out its Leaves, held to the pained Tooth; or
use the fresh Root sliced; or gargle the Mouth with a Decoction of Hops and
Vinegar; or put a Bit of Bark of the Mulberry-tree Root into the hollow Tooth;
or use a Gargle of this Bark, or a Decoction of the Leaves; or Seeds of
Nigella, boiled in Vinegar; or of Cinquefoil Roots; or fresh Arsmart Leaves
steeped in Spring Water, and laid to the Tooth till they are warm, then buried
in the Dunghill, and, as they rot, the Pain ceases; or a Poultise of the
Leaves, boiled in Vinegar, laid to the Tooth or Jaw, some Hours, and then
buried. Wash the Mouth often with a Decoction of Mouse-ear in small Beer; often
snuff up the Nose Vinegar, wherein Primrose Roots were infused; or with a
Decoction of the middle Bark of the Sloe-tree, in Ale or Wine; or of Pellitory
of Spain Root, boiled in Vinegar; or of dried Oak Leaves. Hold a bit of
Crow's-foot to the aching Tooth. Turnips, prepared and used as in the Headache;
or hold in the Mouth a Decoction of Savine in Small Beer; or keep a Decoction
of Vervain in the Mouth; or lay bruised Nettles to the Cheek; or drop Garlic
Juice into the Ear. -- For the Eating away of the Teeth, Tobacco or Bean Ashes,
rubbed on them, whitens and cleans them wonderfully. -- To bring them out, put
a little Paste of Spurge Milk and Rye Meal, into the hollow Tooth; or Juice of
great Celandine breaks and expels it. Leaves of Helleboraster, bruised, and
held to the Tooth; Milk of Fig Leaves with Meal, put into the hollow Tooth; or
fill it with Ivy-tree Gum; or apply roasted Dock Roots to it; or wash the Mouth
often with a Decoction of Mint Roots; or rub it with the Root Bark of the
Mulberry-tree; or wash it with an Infusion of Crow's-foot; or of Pellitory of
Spain, in Vinegar. -- To fasten the Teeth, chew often Roots of Brook-lime; or
rinse the Mouth often with a Decoction of wild Tansy, in Vinegar; or chew
Mastic much. -- If the Teeth are set on Edge, or the Gums or Palate bleed
often, chew Purslane frequently, and easily. -- If there are Worms in the
Teeth, strew some Paste, made of Winter Cherries, and Wax, on a Plate of hot
Iron, receive the Steam in at the Mouth, and the Worms, with the Spittle, will
flow out of the Teeth and Mouth; or receive through a ^unnel the Smoke of
Henbane Seeds; or of it and Wax in a Paste, on hot Iron; or hold frequently in
the Mouth, a Decoction of Savine in Wine.


121.
GERMANDER (Chamaedrys) consists of fine and subtle Parts; it provokes Urine
and Sweat powerfully; it is therefore proper in Fevers, Scurvy, Jaundice,
coagulated Blood; To dissolve coagulated Blood, a warm Decoction of Daisy, or a
Tincture of its Flowers, with Phlegm of Vitriol, is excellent; or a Decoction
of Chervil, in Wine or Water; or drink thrice a Day, a Decoction of
Dove's-foot, Crane's bill, or a Decoction of Herb Robert; or of Self-heal,
drank; or a Poultise of Flix-weed.
but especially in Pains of the Nerves and Joints, and Suppression of Urine.
Mathiolus adds, that it is good in the Plague, Worms, and cold Diseases of the
Head. It is used outwardly to creeping Ulcers, raging Pain of the Piles, Ears
infested with Worms, Scab, and Itch. Its inward Use dries Catarrhs. Its
distilled Water, or Decoction in Wine, has been serviceable in the Gout; and is
little inferior to wild Betony. Its Decoction is celebrated for Stoppage of the
Menses: It is proper to be added to Decoctions against other Obstructions. Ray
says, about Cambridge it was called the English Treacle; being found an
Antidote against Poison. He says, one, noted for curing the King's Evil, gave a
Decoction of the Herb in white Wine, from a Quart to a Pint; Dose, two
Spoonfuls, Evening and Morning, for a Month. Then he gave Infusion in four
Pints of white Wine, of Rosemary and Hart's-tongue, of each a Handful, cut and
infused twenty-four Hours; Dose, eight Spoonfuls, twice a Day; and also
fomented the Parts affected, with their Decoction. The Egyptians admire its
Powder for Intermittents; and Country People have cured Quartans with its
Powder, taken some Days in Broth: Sim. Pauli says, a Woman, long racked with a
violent Pain in the Uterus, was cured by a Decoction of this Herb in Chicken
Broth; it loosened her Belly, and caused a large Discharge of Bile and Phlegm,
upon which she recovered. The Leaves of the common small Germander, are bitter,
aromatic, and very opening. It is a Febrifuge, Stomachic, and Diaphoretic. A
Handful of Leaves infused all Night in white Wine, with Half a Dram of
vegetable Salt, and drank fasting, is good in the Green Sickness. A Dram of the
Extract of the Leaves and Bark, and one or two Drops of the Oil of Cinnamon,
taken every Morning, with two or three Cups of Germander Tea, is good for the
Gout and Sciatica. Dioscorides says, the Powder with Honey, is good in a Cough,
for a hard Spleen, and for such as can hardly make their Water; and in the
Beginning of a Dropsy. Its Juice, with Honey, cleanses foul Ulcers. The Herb is
good for a Cramp, and Stitches in the Sides; in obstinate Head-achs,
Melancholy, Lowness of Spirits; a Spoonful of its Powder, taken every Morning
in a raw Egg, for some Months together, cures the Falling Sickness. The People
near the Alps, use Mountain Germander, to check all Kinds of Belly Fluxes,
Vomitings, Menses, Fluor albus, Haemorrhages, etc. A Stove of its Decoction,
eases Hysteric Fits, and stops the Whites. Its Oil cures Dimness of Sight, and
Moistness of the Eyes.

122.
GERMANDER ( Water) or SCORDIUM, warms and dries, cleanses and attenuates,
resists Putrefaction, is an Antidote to Poison, and pestilential Diseases, it
is a Sudorific; good against the Plague, malignant Fevers and Distempers;
prevalent in Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen; good for Lungs stuffed with
much Phlegm, or loaded with purulent Matter. Applied outwardly, it cleanses
Wounds and Ulcers, and eases gouty Pains. Some use it to bring down the Menses.
Its Powder or Juice, kill Worms in the Belly. But it is most eminent for
expelling Poison, preventing or curing the Plague, For the Plague, take two or
three Handfuls of Scabious and Devil's-bit, beat them well, and with two Yolks
of Eggs make a Poultise, and apply to the Carbuncles. Pour a Spoonful or two of
small cut Wormwood, mixed with Vinegar, on a hot Brick, and breathe in the
Steam; Willis. Or let the Sick, being in Bed, and well covered, take a Draught
of a Decoction, in Wine, of Male Pimpernel Leaves and Flowers; Ray. Or give,
from two Scruples to a Dram, of powdered Arum Root in Wine; Tragus. For a
Preservative, drink every Morning a Spoonful of Tincture of Marygold Flowers,
drawn in strong Vinegar; Bartholine. Or cover the Sick well up in Bed, and let
them drink three Ounces of Marygold Juice; Compegius. Or ^ Dram of powdered
Root of Carline Thistle, in a Glass of warm white Wine, with a Spoonful of this
antipestilential Vinegar: Take Roo^s of Angelica, Elecampane, Butterbur, and
Tormentil, of each Half an Ounce; Contrayerva, Virginian Snake Root, Zedoary,
of each three Drams; Leaves of Rue, Goats Rue, Scordium, of each a Handful:
Flowers of Marygold, of Cloves, of each Half a Handful; Seeds of Carduus and
Citron, of each two Drams; cut, bruise, and digest all in Vinegar, ten Days, or
longer; then strain off, filter the Liquor, and keep it for Use; Dose a
Spoonful or two in the above, or in Carduus Water; or with Milk, make a Posset,
and drink a Draught of it fasting, every Morning; carry also a Phial of the
Vinegar, and smell often to it; Willis. Or apply to a Carbuncle, a warm
Poultise of Onions and white Lilly Roots, boiled, or roasted under the Ashes,
with a few Figs; or with Scabious or Sorrel Leaves; Idem. Or give a large Dose
of powdered, full ripe Ivy Berries; Boil. Yarrow, taken any how, is a great
Preservative; Deodat. Or take often a Dram of powdered Butterbur Root; or
infuse Rue in Vinegar, and use as Wormwood was above; or boil Rue in white
Wine, and drink the Decoction with a little Vinegar. Hemmings.
or other epidemic, contagious Diseases. Many running and pestilential Buboes,
and malignant Ulcers, have been cured by the Use of its Powder only; and it has
opened many that were not broken. Its Decoction in Wine is good against the
Bites of all venomous Beasts, Serpents, and Insects; and against the gnawing
Pains of the Stomach or Sides, from Cold or Obstructions; and for the Bloody
Flux. In an Electuary with Cresses, Rosin, and Honey, it is excellent for an
old Cough, to promote Spitting; gives Relief in Cramps, and Ruptures. A
Decoction of the dried Leaves, and Tormentil Root, is good in the Bloody Flux.
A Tea of this Herb, drank, restores the Appetite, promotes Perspiration,
prevents the Gout, and kills Worms in the Stomach or Bowels. The Conserve is
good for them who spit purulent Matter, even though not yet come to a
Consistence. Half an Ounce of its Extract, or an Ounce of its Conserve, cause a
plentiful Sweat. It being a cleansing, vulnerary Plant, a Fomentation, Poultise
or Lotion of it, Wormwood and lesser Centaury, is good in a threatened, or
beginning Mortification. The bruised Leaf, bound or laid upon any Wound, heals
it soon and safely. A Poultise of it checks the Growth of Wens, and other
Excrescences.

123.
GITH or FENNEL. ( Nigella) Its Mucilage is very good to attenuate, and helps
to expectorate thick Phlegm, to increase Milk, or expel Urine, and Menses. But
its chief Use is in Quotidians and Quartans. It is inwardly useful for Pains of
the Head, drying up Catarrhs, etc. By putting up the Nose, and chewing it in
the Mouth, it resists Haemorrhages. Sim. Pauli, in Catarrhs and Coryza's,
advises it rather fried than raw. For Loss of Smell, Galen orders Powder of the
Roman Gith, beaten up in a Mortar with old Oil, and put up the Nose, with the
Head down, and the Mouth full of Water.

124.
GLADDON (Spatula foetida) or GLADWIN (stinking) is one of the Iris Tribe. The
dried Root powdered is good in Hysterics, Shortness of Breath, and Hypo, says
Dr. Bowl. The Root used inwardly, and applied outwardly in a Poultise, is of
great Service in the King's Evil, says Dr. Needham. In a Looseness, it is used
the same as toasted Rhubarb, and with the like Success; for, though it purges as
the rest of the Flower-de-luces do, yet it does so mildly, and binds after. It
is taken in Infusion or Decoction. The Juice snuffed up the Nose provokes
Sneezing, and a great Discharge of Phlegm; used in a Pessary it brings down the
Menses, and endangers Abortion. Drank in a little sweet Wine, it is good in
Diseases of the Lungs, and Cough, from thick Phlegm, and other gross Humors. A
Poultise of the bruised Roots, draws out of the Flesh Thorns, Pricks,
Splinters, etc. without much Pain.

125.
GLASS-WORTS ( Kali) are of a cleansing Nature without Heating; their Powder,
but especially their Juice, taken in Drink, purges phlegmatic, watery, and
melancholy Humors; they are Specifics in a Dropsy, and expel the dead Child.
They open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and cure their Hardness. their
Powder is sometimes used to consume fungous Flesh in foul Ulcers. Their Ashes
are a Caustic, and must be cautiously handled, or applied to the Skin. A Soap
of their Ashes, applied to the Soles of the Feet, like a Plaster, and tied on,
quickly brings again the Speech, when it has been casually lost, if
recoverable. The Powder, or its Solution, put into Horses Eyes, takes off Films
or Webs. Half a Dram of their Juice, taken thrice a Week, is a great Secret in
Dropsies.

126.
GOATS-RUE ( Galega) Dr. Herman says, its Juice cares the Epilepsy. Being a
famous Alexipharmac, and Sudorific, it is reputed a great Antidote against the
Plague, Poison, and pestilential Diseases. It expels Small Pox, Measles, and
other Eruptions. A Spoonful of its Juice, cures the Bite of Serpents, and kills
Worms, whether it be drank, or applied to the Navel. For its Effects, see the
Honorable Mr. Boil, on the Wholesomeness, etc. of the Air.

127.
GOATS BEARD (Tragopogon) Roots dressed like Parships, and eaten, are
pleasanter; either boiled or cold, or eaten raw as a Sallad, they are grateful
to the Stomach; strengthen and nourish the Thin, Lean, and Consumptive, or the
Weak after long Sickness. Tragus says, the distilled Water gives wonderful
Relief, in inward Imposthumes, Pleurisy, Stitches, or Pains of the Sides. It is
good for the Heart-burn, dejected Appetite, Disorders of the Breast and Liver;
expels Sand, Gravel, and Stone. The Purple are more bitter, astringent, and
detersive, therefore medicinal, and the rest more nutritive.

128.
GOLDEN-ROD (Virga Aurea) is a celebrated Vulnerary, whether used inwardly or
outwardly, preferred even to Saracens Consound itself. In outward Wounds it
brings off their ichorous or other Matter by Urine; as most vulnerary Potions
are Diuretics, which makes them much preferable to astringent Earth or
Minerals. Outwardly, it is an extraordinary Drier and C^eanser. Two Drams of
the Powder, taken every Morning in Wine, is famous in the Stone. Its Decoction
is good in all Obstructions of the Viscera, and Inclinings to a Dropsy. It is
also good in all Fluxes of the Belly, and internal Haemorrhages. It cures
Wounds and old Ulcers. It heals Sores in the Mouth, Throat, and privy Parts.

129.
GOOSE-BERRIES (Grossularia) besides their Kitchen Uses, they are boiled and
eaten with Broth, by feverish People, especially the hot and bilious. They and
Hedge Crabs, are good in the Loathings of breeding Women; they rouse the
Appetite, and are proper in Loosenesses, Iliac Passion, Haemorrhages, and
Whites, or applied to Inflammations. The unripe only are used in Physic and
Cookery. The ripe are greedily eaten by Children, the poor and gravid Women,
nor do many rich People despise them; for they are inoffensive and friendly to
the Stomach. Bauhinus says, he never heard of one that received the very least
Harm from eating them. The unripe should be eaten very sparingly, or not at
all; for they may easily occasion great Mischiefs to cold flatulent Stomachs,
by causing the Cholic, Gripes, or, by their acid Juice, corroding the nervous
Coats of the Guts.

130.
GOOSE-GRASS, or CLEAVERS (Aparine) the Juice of Stalk, Leaf, and Seeds, drank,
is good against Biting of Serpents; or dropped into the Ear, cures its Pain.
The Herb, beaten with Lard, and applied, discusses scrophulous Swellings; for
which it is one of the Specifics. Pliny says, it is good to stop Blood. The
distilled Water, or Herb, boiled in white Wine, is excellent for Sand, Stone,
and Gravel. The Herb, and a Calf's-spleen, dried in an Oven, and powdered, is a
Secret against Swellings of the Spleen, and Hypochondriac Flatusses; for which,
and Diseases of the Breast, the Water was formerly used. The distilled Water,
or Decoction, is good in a Jaundice, and Bloody-Fluxes. The Juice laid to the
Wound, stops its Bleeding, closes up its Lips, and heals it. The Powder has the
same Virtue, and also cures old Ulcers.

131.
GROMWELL. ( Lithospermum) Its Seed cleanses the Kidneys, provokes Urine,
wastes and expels Stone, Sand, Gravel, or Mucilage. Two Drams of it, taken in
Breast Milk, is good in hard Labor. It is powerful in a Strangury. The Juice
or Decoction of the Herb may be used, when the Seed cannot be got.

132.
GROUND IVY (Hedera terrestris) as Horehound is fit for aged and phlegmatic
Persons, and hurtful to the young, bilious, and sanguine; so, this being the
Reverse, is excellently adapted to the last, being a noble Vulnerary, both
outwardly and inwardly. It provokes Urine and the Menses; attenuates, and cuts
Phlegm, is good in the Jaundice, and in Clysters eases the Cholic. It relieves
in great and obstinate Coughs, and Consumptions. For a Cough, take red Tops of
Ground Ivy, gathered on a clear April Morning, beat it well into a thin Cake,
which dry quickly in the Sun, powder it, and keep for Use; Dose from Half a
Dram to a Dram, in Syrup of the Juice of the Herb, or in the pectoral
Decoction; Willis. This Herb, either in Syrup, or Conserve, retains its Smell
and Color, the longest of any other. Peeled Turnips three Pounds, Sugar one
Pound, put both in an earthen Pot, close covered, and a Weight set upon it for
twelve Hours, then express the Juice; Pharm. Batean. Or set the Pot and them in
a warm Place, till they are tender; then strain out the Juice, and let the Sick
drink two or three Spoonfuls of it, Evening and Morning; or take peeled, sliced
Turnips, and brown Sugar Candy, of each alike, put them in a Glass Bottle,
cover it with Paste or Paper, set it in an Oven among Bread, till it be stewed
enough, take it out, and express the Juice; Dose one or two Spoonfuls Morning
and Evening; Willis. Or take stewed Turnips as above; when cold express their
Juice, and to every Pint of it, clarified with Whites of Eggs, add Sugar one
Pound; melt and mix over a slow Fire; Dose as above. Take three Handfuls of
bruised Juniper Berries, boil them in three Pints of Ale to a Quart; strain,
and drink of it Morning and Evening; Stokerus. Take Leaves of Hound's-tongue,
three Handfuls* of Hyssop, Maidenhair, and Tussilago, of each a Handful;
Aniseed, Liquorice Root, of each six Drams; boil in six Pints of Barley Water
to four; strain, and add three or four Pounds of Sugar; Dose four Ounces three
or four times a Day; Pharm. Batean. Boil six Handfuls of Maidenhair, in Rain
Water, till it is strong, like a thin Extract; strain, and add Sugar, and
clarified Honey enough to a thin Electuary; Dose two Drams, let it lie in the
Mouth, and swallow it slowly^ Or in gross Phlegmatic Habits, use an Electuary
of Rue, made the same Way; Stokerus. Or an Electuary of Chestnut Meal, and
clarified Honey; Ray. For an obstinate Cough, use a Decoction of Horehound, in
Wine or Water; or the Leaves taken any how; Forestus. A Syrup of the Juice, or
an Infusion of the Flowers, or a Decoction of the Leaves of Colt's-foot, are
all Specifics; Etmuller. -- Cough from the Sharpness of the Lymph. The Pulp of
Marshmallows Roots put through a Hair Sieve, one Ounce; Pearl Sugar, Gum
Arabic, Tragacanth, and Starch, dissolve in common Poppy Water, of each two
Drams; Sugar of Penids, dissolved in Rose Water, enough to make Troches, a Dram
of each to be kept in the Mouth at Pleasure, and swallowed slowly; Moreton.
Decoction of Turnips, drank, is a Specific; Crato. -- For the Chin-cough,
Powder of Cupmoss, a Dram; Sugar Candy, a Scruple; mix and divide it into three
or four Papers, take one Morning and Evening; or Powder of Cupmoss, two Drams;
Lac. Sulphur two Scruples; Aniseed, one Scruple; divide it into six Papers, to
be taken as above; or take Cupmoss one Dram, boil it in Milk, to be taken at a
Dose Evening and Morning; or boil it in Hyssop Water, two or three Ounces,
sweeten it with Syrup of Ground Ivy, and take twice a Day; or take an Ounce of
the Powder, boil in the Pectoral Decoction, from a Quart to a Pint, strain, and
add brown Sugar Candy one Pound, and make a Syrup for Use; Willis. Take
expressed Juice of Pennyroyal, a Spoonful; a Bit of brown Sugar Candy, mix and
give it twice a Day, Boil. Or take fresh Juice of Parsley, Half an Ounce;
Women's Milk, one Ounce; Liquorice Powder, a Scruple; mix and give by Spoonfuls,
and repeat it; Forestus. -- For a Consumption, a Decoction of Ground Ivy in red
Wine, and sharpened with Oil of Sulphur, drank, is an excellent Remedy;
Etmuller. Or Juice of Ground Ivy, two Pounds and an Half, digested on a
Sand-heat, till it is clear; to the pure Juice, add Sugar of Roses, one Pound;
Penids, four Ounces; by a gentle Boil make a Syrup, Dose a Spoonful often;
Quercetan. Carefully dried Colt's-foot Leaf cut small, and with Flower of
Sulphur, Tobacco, and Powder of Amber, mix and smoke like Tobacco; Boil. Or a
Decoction of Colt's-foot Flowers, sweetened and drank, Half a Pint daily for
six Weeks; Burnet. Or take fresh Colt's-foot, eight Handfuls, Hysop, two
Handfuls, cut, and put them in a close covered Pot, and set them in an Oven
when the Bread is half baked; take out the Pot, and make a small Hole in the
Middle of the Cover, set a Funnel over it, and draw in the Steam by the Mouth,
and let it out by the Nose. Riverius says, it is very good; or use Turnips, as
directed above, for a Cough. Take Powder of dried Pellitory of the Wall, either
with Honey, or in Ale, or Posset Drink; Ray. Powder of dried Burnet, a Dram
taken daily in Broth; or with Sugar of Roses; or Syrup of St. John's-wort
Flowers, made up on a Sand-heat, is a wonderful Remedy; Riverius. Dr. Bowl.
Distilled Water of Male Pimpernel, and Cow's Milk, sweetened with Syrup of
Roses* twelve Spoonfuls of it drank daily* Evening and Morning, is good in a
Consumption, and Spitting of purulent Matter, Ray. The Juice of the whole Plant
great wild Daisy, or Ox-eye, expressed, and made into a Syrup; or the whole
Plant, boiled in Posset Drink, and drank, is a fine Remedy; or Birch Water,
prepared with Wine and Honey, as in the Stone, is good in a Scorb^tic
Consumption; Dr Needham. Ray. A Decoction of Bugle, in Mutton Broth; Riverius.
Pulp of Comfry Root, and brown Sugar Candy of each alike, beat up to a Mass;
Dose two Drams twice a Day; or the Syrup, or Root, boiled in Broth, are good;
Riverius. -- For Hoarseness, take Juice of red Cole, two Parts; Sugar or Honey,
one Part; make a Linctus, to lick often; or make and use a Linctus of the
clarified Juice, two Ounces of Sugar, one Ounce mixed; Codronchius. Or drink
often a sweetened Decoction of Turnips; or put sliced Turnips, with white
Sugar, into an earthen Pot, well covered, set it in an Oven, or on a Sand-heat,
till it is stewed to a thick Liquor, which strain, (...) drink; Etmuller. Or
powdered Mustard Seed, with clarified Honey, mix and make a Loch, to be often
taken on a Day; Stocker. Or Elecampane Root, infused close three Days in good
Wine, drank fasting in a Morning; or a Decoction of syruped Liquorice, boiled
in Barley Water, expressed and sweetened with Sugar, then set in an Oven, or
Sand-heat, and reduced to an extract; then add powdered Starch enough to make
it into large Pills, to lie under the Tongue till they be dissolved; Stocker.
Or a strong Decoction of Garlic, drank, Evening and Morning; or Garlic and
Lard, of each alike, well beaten in a warm Mortar, made into a Liniment, and
rub it on the Soles of your Feet, before the Fire; rub it well in, go to Bed,
and the Hoarseness will be gone next Day; Jungken. The whole Plant Hedge
Mustard, taken in a Decoction, Juice, or Powder, is a Sovereign Remedy; Lobel.
For Erosions of the Lungs, Comfry Root, used in any Form; especially its
strained Pulp and Sugar, as above. For their Ulcers, Bugle boiled in Mutton
Broth is good.
Laid to the Belly it appeases after Pains. Its Juice, snuffed up the Nose,
gives Relief in the most obstinate Head-achs. Infused in the Sun, in Oil, is a
noble Remedy for the Cholic, if both drank and injected. It fines muddy Ale
wonderfully. Bruised and given to Horses in their Corn, it kills Botworms. It
is used for the Stone. Its Tea is most agreeable, and beneficial in Fevers,
Inflammations, and great Thirst. A Decoction of it with Fumitory, and
Liver-wort, cures Scabbiness in Children, and young People, when Mercurials,
and Sulphurines, profit little with Safety. The same Decoction, with Agrimony,
sweetened and drank, is excellent in Inflammations of the Lungs, Sides, or
Breasts. It is a quick, sharp, and bitter Herb. It is opening, cleansing, and
rarefying; of singular Efficacy for all inward Wounds, ulcerated Lungs, etc.
either by itself, or with Agrimony, Hart's-tongue, Golden-Rod, Horse-tail,
Burnet, etc. Or on windy, choleric, hot Pains of the Stomach, Spleen, or Belly,
its strong Decoction drank with its Powder in it, gives Ease in a few Hours,
like a Charm. Drank in the Gout, Rheumatism, or Sciatica, especially by young
People, it is very useful. Its Decoction used in a Gargle, with Honey and Alum.
is good for Sores in the Throat, or privy Parts, washed with it. Bound on, it
speedily heals green Wounds. The Juice with Honey, and Verdigrease, cleanses
filthy Fistula's, or hollow Ulcers, and stops their Spreading. The clarified
Juice of this, Celandine, and Field Daisies, with a little Sugar dropped into
the Eyes, cures their Pain, Redness, and Watering; takes off the Pain, Web,
Films, or Spots growing on them; the same it does to the Eyes of Beasts. The
Juice dropped into the Ears helps their Noise, and restores languishing, or
decayed Hearing. In Consumptions, from inward or outward Losses of Blood,
Juices of this and Nettles, with expressed Oil of Linseed, Powder of Peruvian
Bark, and Henbane Seed mixed, is a Secret. I have seen general Rashes on young
People, attended with a strong Fever, taken off in twenty-four Hours, by
drinking plentifully a Decoction of this Herb; which if treated with the
testaceous Powders, Nitre, and the like Julaps, would have taken a much longer
Time, and might have been of worse Consequence; but the Neglect, or Contempt of
our simple Herbs, will still be found a greater Loss to the Sick. Its Powder is
a noble Medicine in Coughs, and Tubercles of the Lungs. Its Juice, drank for
Bloody Fluxes, is good. The dried Leaves infused in Brandy, filtered and drank,
is good in Hypo, and Hysterics. The same is a Dram of the powdered Catkins of
Walnuts, drank with a Drop or two of Oil of Amber; or a Spoonful or two of a
double Infusion of white Lilly Flowers, and Spanish Wine, both of them drank
every Morning, and in the Fit; or a Conserve of Powder of Hart's-tongue in Ale
or Posset Drink; or a sweetened Decoction of Turnips, often drank; or the
powdered Root of Gladwin is excellent; or powdered Seed of Wild Parsnip, two
Drams in warm white Wine; or Cichory Broth; or a Conserve of Garden Arrach; or
an Infusion of Wormwood in Water drank fasting, and before Supper.

133.
GROUND PINE ( Chamaepitys) strengthens all the Nerves; it is inciding,
attenuating, opening, and expels the Menses, Birth, and Afterbirth, but has
its greatest Reputation in the Gout, and Joint Pains, either infused or boiled
in Wine, given in Powder, or made into Pills with Venice Turpentine; outwardly
it discusses Tumors and Hardnesses; cleanses and heals Wounds and Ulcers. Its
Decoction is good against the Strangury, or inward Pains from Disorders of the
urinary Passages, and in Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. It cleanses
gross impure Blood, expels the coagulated, and mildly opens the Body. But
gravid Women have no Business with it till their nine Months are elapsed. Pills
of i^ and Hermodacts, with Turpentine, are good in a Dropsy, as well as in
Joint Pains, if continued for some Time; and for the Jaundice and Gripes, and
for Diseases of the Brain, from cold and phlegmatic Humors. The Herb is good
against the Poison of Nightshade, or other Plants; or of Scorpions or other
venomous Creatures; or in the Beginning of a cold Cough it easily procures
Sweat, says Pliny. A Diet Drink of it in Beer or Wine, or a Conserve, answers
the Uses above. The Herb, or its Decoction, softens Women's hard Breasts, or
other Tumors. The Juice with Honey cleanses and heals putrid, malignant, and
virulent Ulcers. Mathiolus gives a tedious Pill of it for the Palsy. For an
Empyema, a Decoction or Syrup of its Juice is good; or a Decoction of red
Cabbage, sweetened with Sugar, and drank daily.

134.
GROUNDSEL ( Senecio) is a despised Plant, but Sim. Pauli is liberal in its
Praises. He says it is a common Herb, but exceeded by none in the Cure of fresh
Inflammations, being cooling and digesting. A Poultise of it boiled in Wine or
Water, and applied, relieves the Pain of the Piles, and inflamed Breasts, and
Testicles. For a Pain of the Stones, fresh Pellitory of the Wall, beaten up and
applied in a Poultise Evening and Morning, is a certain Cure. -- For the Stones
inflamed, take Leaves of Rue, and Dwarf Elder, of each alike; beat them up to a
Poultise, and apply; Grulingius. Or a Fomentation of boiled Melilot, especially
if Agrimony and Camomile be added; Etmuller. Or a Poultise of Bean Flour,
boiled in three Parts Water, and one Part Vinegar, and applied Morning and
Evening; but, if the Vinegar chafe the Scrotum, boil first a little Litharge i^
it; Riverius.
In these Diseases he never found a more immediate and generous Remedy, than a
Poultise of this and Althaea Tops, boiled in Milk, and applied. Nor is it less
successful when the Parts are inflamed and swelled, after hard Labor. It is
also good for the Staggers, and Botworms, those fatal Enemies to Horses. Its
Juice or Decoction is a strong Vomit. Pliny says, drank in Wine, it is good in
the Jaundice, and Falling Sickness, in Pains of the Bladder, Stoppage of Water,
and to expel Sand and Gravel; its inward Use is very rare, for the Operation is
severe, and the Dose uncertain. A Poultise of it, with a little Salt, is said
to dissolve Kernels and Knots, in any Part of the Body. The Leaves and Flowers,
with Frankincense, is a good Vulnerary; its distilled Water was used for Rheums
and Inflammations of the Eyes; but no such insipid, muddy Stuff, should be
depended on. The Dose of the Juice is from one to two Ounces; it vomits, kills
Worms, and eases the Cholic.

GROUNDSEL. This Species grows no where wild in these Provinces, but we have a
large Species, as tall as a Man, grows plentifully in new cleared Ground, whose
Down blows all about in the Fall.

135.
HARES-EARS ( Bupleurum) The stiff-leaved Sort is immoderately hot and dry; it
is reckoned a Wound Herb, taking the Seed or Root, in Wine; or the Decoction,
in Wine, drank. The Leaves were used for the Biting of venomous Beasts, bathing
the Part wounded with them. It provokes Urine, and brings down the Menses.
They, with other Wound Herbs, heal inward or outward Wounds; whether fresh
Wounds, or old cancerous Sores and Ulcers. Their Seed, drank, is good against
the Biting of Serpents. A Hare's-Ear, with a very narrow Leaf, Leaves and Seed,
are bitter, warm, dry, and vulnerary, good in green Wounds, and for the
Falling-down and Swelling of the Guts, especially of the Navel; for swelled
Joints, and scrophulous Tumors, whether used inwardly, or applied outwardly.
Its Virtue consists in healing up, and strengthening the Parts. A Decoction of
the Herb in Wine, or its Powder, is given in Ruptures, or inward Bruises from
Falls; but it is chiefly commended for Childrens Ruptures, used inwardly and
outwardly. Used the same Way, it dissolves King's Evil Swellings. Schwenckfeldt
extols it in Fractures, Ruptures, and Erysipela's. Sim. Pauli cured a Navel
Rupture, with Through-wax, a Handful; Mouse-car, Rupture-wort, Plantain, Moss,
and our Acacia, of each Half a Handful; all boiled in Wine, and applied to the
Part affected.

HARES-EARS. I have not observed it in any of our Provinces.

136.
HARES-FOOT. ( Lagopus) All its Parts, but especially the spiked Heads, are
drying and binding; drank in Wine, or Water, they stay Fluxes of the Belly; or
bound on the Sharebone in a Poultise, it takes away the Inflammation of the
Belly, and its Pains. The powdered Head and Seed, taken in red Wine, stop
choleric Belchings of the Stomach, or Pains. A Decoction of the Herb with
Mallows, in Wine, is good for Pains of the Bladder, Heat of Urine, and its
Scalding. The Seed taken, helps Spitting of Blood. The Ashes of the burnt Heads
applied, stop immoderate Bleedings of the Piles or Anus; yea, if the Leaf is
only rubbed on them. It is so powerfully binding and drying, that it
wonderfully stops the Running of the Reins. A Decoction of Soap-wort, drank, is
also good in a Gonorrhoea; and is good in all well cleansed, foul, hollow
Ulcers, and to heal fresh Ruptures.

137.
HART'S-TONGUE ( Lingua Cervina) is used in the Rickets, for Liver-growing,
Swelling of the Spleen, Fluxes of the Belly, and Spitting of Blood. Outwardly,
it cleanses Wounds and Ulcers. Its Powder is good in Hysterics, Palpitation,
convulsive Motions, taken in Small Beer, or Posset Drink; or its Decoction in
Water, or Infusion in Wine. It is good in the Heat of Liver and Stomach, and in
a Gargle to stop Bleeding of the Gums, and cure the Falling down of the Uvula.
I have often used it with Success in Consumptions, and other Diseases of the
Breast, with other Vulneraries. Its Powder, made into Pills, with Balsam of
Gilead, Dose a Scruple, thrice a Day, is a Secret in Spitting of Blood.

We have none of this Species of Hart's-tongue in our Provinces, but we have a
smaller Species growing o^ cold North Sides of Rocks, very scarce.

138.
HAWK-WEED (Hieracium) is cooling, drying, and binding, good for Heat of the
Stomach, and Inflammations. The Juice with Wine, helps Digestion, expels Wind,
and Crudities of the Stomach; it is useful in Difficulty in making Water. A
Scruple of the dried Juice, with Wine and Vinegar, is good in a Dropsy. The
Decoction, with Honey, digests Phlegm in the Lungs, and with Hyssop, is good in
a Cough. Boiled in Wine, with wild Succory, it is good in a flatulent Cholic,
Melancholy, and a hard Spleen. It softly invites Sleep, checks Venery, and
venereal Dreams, cleanses the Stomach, increases Blood, and eases Disorders of
the Reins and Bladder. Outwardly, it is good for Women's Milk. It helps Diseases
of the Eyes. It is used for creeping Ulcers. Its distilled Water is a fine Wash
for the Face:

139.
HAW-THORN ( Spina alba) Berries or Seeds, drank in Wine, are said to be good
for the Stone, and Dropsy. The Flowers infused three Days in Wine, and
distilled, the Water is good in a Pleurisy, and inward Pains, and stays Fluxes.
Their Decoction in Wine, does the same. The Water of the Flowers is cooling,
and Sponges, wet in it warm, and applied, draw out of the Flesh Thorns, Nails,
etc.

140.
HAZLE-TREE (Corylus) the Nut Kernels, eaten unpeel'd, give a Cough, Shortness
of Breath, and Want of Appetite. If the Nuts are eaten old, they cause a
Headache, and Flatulency at the Stomach, except they are parched before the
Fire, which takes off the Rancidness of their Oil. The parched Kernels, made
into an Electuary, or their expressed Oil, with Mead, is good in old Coughs.
The parched Kernels, with a little Pepper, digest distilling Rheum. Two Drams
of dried Flusks and Shells, powdered and drank in Wine, cure a Flux, and stop
the Menses. The Powder of the red Skins, which cover the Kernel, is more
effectual. A Gargle of its inner Bark, or of the Barberry-tree, is good in a
Quinsey.

141.
HEATH or HEATHER (Erica) the Juice or distilled Water of the Flowers, take off
Redness, and Pain of the Eyes. Tragus gave them in the Cholic. Steams and
Bathes of the Flowers, are reputed proper in gouty and paralitic Disorders.
Mathiolus says, a Decoction of its Tops, drank daily, for thirty Days together,
three Hours before Meat, wastes the Stone in the Bladder insensibly; Dose five
Ounces. He says, it will do it more effectually, if, after that Time, the Sick
sit several Times on boiled Heath, in a Bathe of its Decoction. By this Means,
he says, he had seen some cured. Clusius says, that Rondeletius effectually
cured many inveterate Herpes, which covered the whole Face, with an Oil made of
the Flowers. The Scots Highlanders use it for a Bed to lie on; they lay the
Roots to the Ground, and the Tops up, which makes it as soft as a Feather Bed,
and restores weary Limbs to their full Vigor; such as lie down on it weary and
faint, rise up next Morning, light, n^^ble, and cheerful. The Oil made of its
Flowers, is good for the Shingles; a Wash of its Decoction, or of white Lilly
Roots, in Water or Wine, cures a red Face.

HEATH. I never observed this Species mentioned here, in any of our Provinc^s;
there is one Species grows near the Sea.

142.
HELLEBORE (white) (Helleborus albus) only the Root is in Use; it purges
upwards and downwards, with such Violence, that it is now rarely used, though
it was the Specific of the Ancients in Madness; we now use black Hellebore in
its Room. Tragus says, that the white, infused twenty-four Hours in Wine, or
Oxymel, then taken out and dried, may be given in Powder to Half a Dram, to mad
or melancholy People. Gesner says, that a Syrup of the Root, boiled in Vinegar,
and made up with Honey, is a safe Medicine, and he often found its wonderful
Effects; especially in phlegmatic Diseases of the Breast and Head, as Asthma,
Epilepsy, etc. for it loosens the Belly without any Trouble; is diuretic, and
even opens the Passages of the Skin itself. Hoffman says, that, in the Use of
Hellebore, we must consider, first, if the Disease be very obstinate; secondly,
whether the Patients have Strength to bear its Operation; for old People,
Children, Women with Child, delicate, tender, and weak Persons, cannot;
thirdly, that both Patient and Hellebore be duly prepared; it is not to be
taken fasting, or on an empty Stomach, but after Meat, and the Root prepared as
above. It expels much vicious, slimy, corrupt Humor. It brings down the
Menses, kills the Foetus, and causes Abortion. The Root prepared as above, or
boiled in fat Broth, and given, is good in the Falling Sickness, Leprosy, Scab,
Quartan Agues, Dropsy, old Cough, Sciatica, Cramp, Pains of Joints, and Sinews,
Pain and Swimming of the Head. Parkinson says, it is best prepared by Infusion
in Juice of Quinces, or put in a hollow Quince, and either baked in the Oven,
or roasted under the Embers, and Half a Scruple of it given at a Time: Thus
Mathiolus used it, and, if its Use threatened Danger of Suffocation, Juice and
Syrup of Quince were the Antidote to it* Dioscorides used it with other Things,
to help Dimness of Sight. The Juice dropped into the Ears, cures their Singing
and Noise. Its Decoction, to wash the Head, kills Lice, and cures the running
Scab, or Sores on it, if mixed with Flower, and a little Honey and Butter. Its
Decoction in Milk, set where Flies and Gnats swarm, kills all that touch it; it
is fatal to Poultry that drink it. Made up in Balls, with Honey, and put into
Mole-holes, it quickly destroys them, or other small Vermin. The powdered Root
alone, or with Marjoram, snuffed up the Nose, provokes violent Sneezing, and
cleanses the Head. A Gargle of its Decoction, in Vinegar, eases the Toothache;
and washing with it heals Itch and Scab on the Hands, and cleanses Sores and
Ulcers on the Legs, or other Parts. The Spaniards dip and poison their Arrows,
wherewith they kill wild Beasts, in the fermented Juice of this Root. It kills
all Animals instantly, but, being drank, it hurts not. Its only Antidote is
Quince. The Ancients prepared the Root for Use, by either giving it with a
triple Quantity of Radish, or the Radish was pricked full of this Root, and
left twenty-four Hours sticking in it; then they took out, and threw away the
Prickles, and used the Radish; or they infused the Radish pricked full of it in
Oxymel, and then used the Oxymel; o^ they pricked the Radish full of it, and
let it lie all Night; next Day they pulled out and threw away the Prickles, and
infused the Radish in Oxymel, and used the Liquor. It is certainly a noble
Medicine in many of the above Diseases, if rightly prepared, and cautiously
given. Such severe Medicines, being neglected by Physicians, fall into the
Hands of Empirics, who will be at Pains to prepare them, and furnish them with
some successful Nostrums, beyond the regular Practice; some Instances whereof I
have seen. Though this Root is not a Native of Britain, yet it is now planted
and thrives well in several Gardens, and perhaps being naturalized, will prove
of a milder Nature. Several of the lesser wild Sorts are Natives, as our
Lady's- Slipper (Helleborine) one with a white Flower, another with a greenish
white Flower, etc.

143.
HELLEBORE (black) (Helleborus niger) the Bark of the Root Fibers, is the only
Part used. The Infusion, Decoction, or Powder, powerfully purge melancholy
Humors; hence its Usefulness in Melancholy, Madness, Hypo, Cancer, Swimming of
the Head, Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Quartans, and Elephantiasis; but it must
be given in small Doses, as from ten to twenty Grains, and to strong Bodies. It
is corrected by Cinnamon, Anise, and Fennel. It promotes the Menses much, in
sanguine Constitutions, where Steel, and its Preparations are unsafe. It is
better used as an Alterative, than an Evacuant. Dr. Po ordered an Infusion of
wild white Hellebore in Vinegar, all Night, to be strained and given to mad
People, and repeated. For Redness, Wrinkles, and Pimples on the Face, he
ordered this Liniment, which cured them: Take Powder of both Hellebores, of
each a Dram; Litharge a Dram and an Half, Saltpeter, Sulphur Vive, of each two
Drams; Meal of Lupins, three Drams; Quicksilver, killed in Lemon-juice, three
Drams; Oil of Olive, an Ounce and an Half; Oil of Tartar, Half an Ounce;
Hen's-grease, an Ounce and an Half; two Yolks of Eggs, boiled hard; fresh
Butter, an Ounce and an Half; and Wax enough to bring it to a Consistence. For
Tetters take Juice of white Hellebore, Scordium, of each Half an Ounce; of
Mug-wort an Ounce and an Half; Powder of Arum Root, Antimony, Cerus,
Frankincense, Myrrh, Acacia, each a Dram; beat all up in a leaden Mortar; mix,
and anoint with it.

144.
HEMLOCK ( Cicuta) being a Poison, is not used inwardly, but outwardly, chiefly
in Swellings, and Inflammations of the Liver or Spleen. Its Poultise or
Plaster, ease Pains. It discusses hard Tumors, or Ganglions, powerfully. Dr.
Bowl gave twenty Grains of the powdered Root, in malignant Fevers, and in
Quartans, just before the Fit, and ordered the Sick to Bed; he says, it much
exceeds all (...) he ever tried. Its Plaster, with Gum Ammoniac, Hartman calls
the wonderful Plaster, for schirrous Spleens. A Poultise of the Leaves, laid
to the Cods, extinguishes Lust strongly; therefore it is neither applied in
Poultises alone to that Part in Man, nor to Women's Breasts in Inflammations;
but it is usefully and safely laid to any other inflamed Part of the Body; it
repels the Heat from creeeping Ulcers, occasioned by sharp Humors. The bruised
Leaves, laid to the Forehead, are good for red and moist Eyes, ease the Pain,
take away the Inflammation and Redness. It also takes off Pin or Web, grown
over the Eye. If any eat the Herb instead of Parsley, or the Root instead of
Parsnip, strong Wine is reckoned to be the best Antidote; I knew a Lady who was
very fond of Parsley, and eat a hearty Breakfast of young Hemlock Leaves,
instead of Parsley; the Mistake was quickly discovered, and she was made to
drink a Pint of the best French Brandy at once, yet neither did the Herb hurt
her, nor the Brandy in the least affect her. In Poultises, Plasters,
Ointments, and Fomentations, it is not only good in Inflammations, but in
Schirruses, Cancers, Hardness of Liver and Spleen. The Leaves boiled in Milk
are good for the Piles. A Poultise of the bruised Leaves, with Snails, and made
up with the four resolving Meals, is a Specific for Inflammations of the
Testicles, or Sciatica. Sleeping near, or on the Herb, disturbs the Head. A
Poultise of it is good in Ganglions.

145.
HEMP. ( Cannabis) Take Heads of great Hemp, Number five; Tops of Feverfew and
Pennyroyal, of each Half a Handful; boil in New-wort a Pint to a Half, strain
and drink it off going to Bed, repeat it for two or three Nights; it is a
Remedy to bring down the Menses minime fallax. I once ordered only the Hemp
alone, where they had been obstructed not only Months, but some Years, with
Success; and, when it could not break the Uterine or Vaginal Vessels, the Woman
threw up Blood from the Lungs, but had them naturally the next Time. If at any
Time any Thing more is wanting, it need only be powdered, Spignal Root and
Sugar mixed. Some pretend the following a great Secret against Pissing the Bed:
Take bruised Hemp Seed, three Ounces; Agrimony, Shepherd's Purse, Plantain,
Knot-grass, of each a Handful and a Half; boil all in six Pints of Water, to
four; strain, and add Syrup of dried Roses, four Ounces; Dose six Spoonfuls
every Night. A Decoction of the Seed, in Milk, helps a Cough; and boiled in
Milk till it burst, then strained, and five or six Ounces of it given several
times to drink, has cured the Jaundice in many. Its Emulsion is also good, if
there is no Fever, and given at first. Its Juice is the Bane of Insects, in
Wounds or Ulcers. A Decoction of the Seed, poured on the Ground, brings
Earthworms out of their Holes, the same as a Decoction of Peach Leaves, or
Walnut-tree Buds, does. Hens, fed with the Seed, lay Eggs plentifully all
Winter, and are very fat. An Oil expressed from it quickly, cures all Burns,
and draws out the Heat and Pain. The Juice, dropped into the Ears, eases their
Pain. An Emulsion of the Seed takes out fresh Marks of the Small Pox. A
Decoction of the Seed eases the Pain of the Cholic. It kills Worms in the
Bowels, or Ears of Man or Beast.

146.
HEMP AGRIMONY-WATER, or DUTCH AGRIMONY ( Eupatorium Cannabinum) is excellent
for the Liver or Wounds. It is used in Coughs, Catarrhs, Cachexies, retained
Urine and Menses. It is a noble outward Vulnerary. A Decoction of the Root,
drank fasting, moves the Belly once, but a large Dose of it, says Gesnerus,
causes severe, but safe Vomiting, and brings up much Phlegm. Its Juice kills
Worms in Cattle. People should use it inwardly, in a very small Quantity, if at
all. Rustics, in Flanders, drink a Decoction of it for the Jaundice, with great
Success. Two Ounces of the Juice of the Leaves, or a Dram of its Extract in a
Ptisan made of it, opens Obstructions of the Bowels, especially those that
succeed Intermittents. A Tea of its Leaves, drank, after the Legs have been
well bathed in its Decoction, gives Relief in a Dropsy. The Top with the
Flowers are very Vulnerary. A Whey, made with it and Fumitory, is good in the
Green Sickness, Itch, and Diseases of the Skin, only the Roots are purgative.

147.
HENBANE ( Hyoscyamus) is a great Narcotic, asswages Pain, allays
Inflammations, and mitigates the Sharpness of the Humors, but it disturbs and
perverts all the rational Faculties, and causes Madness; if taken in too great
Quantity, it causes certain Death. Its internal Use is very hurtful; outwardly,
it eases Pains in Parts distant from the Head, and discusses Swellings of the
Testicles, and eases the Pain of the Gout and Sciatica, if boiled in Milk. The
Leaves roasted under the Ashes, and applied to Women's Breasts newly delivered,
hinde^ ^he Flux of Milk to them, and discusses hard Knots in them; or the
Seeds, bruised in Wine, may be applied for the same Purpose in a Poultise; the
Oil expressed out of them does the same. The Temples anointed with its Oil is a
powerful Hypnotic. The Loins and Perinaeum, anointed with it, is good to stop a
Gonorrhoea, or too large a Flux of the Menses. If the Ear is sprinkled with it,
mixed with Saffron and Castor, it will ease its Pains, when milder Anodynes
will not. The powdered Seed, with Conserve of Roses and white Poppy Seeds, made
into an Electuary with Syrup of Poppies, is good in a Spitting of Blood. The
Smoke of the Seeds on live Coals, cures chilblained Heels, if they are well
squeezed after. The Seed is a Specific in Ulcers, of the Urinary Passages. The
white Seed is safer than the black, and the expressed Juice of the Leaves, than
what distills from them wounded.

148.
HERB-ROBERT (Geranium Robertianum) is an excellent Vulnerary both outwardly
and inwardly; it stops Fluxes of Blood, dissolves extravasated, clotted Blood,
cleanses Wounds and Ulcers, expels small Stones and Gravel, and eases Cholic
Pains. Fomentations of its Decoction sooth Arthritic Pains. It is commended for
curing Ruptures. Fabrit. Hildan used its Decoction with Success for cancerous
Breasts, chapped Nipples, and Ulcers of the privy Parts; for Bruises and
Wounds. For the first of these use the Decoction and Poultise; for the second
and third an Ointment and Poultise. For the Stone and Pains of the Joints, let
its Decoction be drank, and apply Poultises made of the boiled Herb. How it
came into Fuchsius's Head to imagine its Use unsafe, because of its Coldness,
is strange, when we see it not only used in Cancers, but it is one of the grand
Specifics in the King's Evil; as take of this Herb, white Horebound, Smallage,
Agrimony, of each a Handful; Dill-seed, Half an Ounce; boil all in three Pints
of Water to one, strain for four Doses, and squeeze forty Hog lice into each
Dose, which take sweetened, twice a Day, for a Month together; but it is better
infused in Wine. A Cataplasm of it, Celandine, and Pigeons Dung, is a certain
Cure of white Swellings of the Feet after Chronic Diseases. See Herb Paris,
Holy-tree, etc.

149.
HERBA PARIS, TRUE LOVE, or ONE BERRY. The Leaves and Berries cool and dry. The
inward Use of the Berries is Alexipharmac in the Plague, contagious Diseases,
and Poisons, taken inwardly. The Leaves are used outwardly, in Plague Sores,
and other Swellings, Felons, Whitlows, and inveterate Ulcers; says Schroder.
They gather the Berries before Sunrising, whilst it is in Gemini. The powdered
Berries taken, to the Number of five or six, in Lime-flower Water, are good in
the Falling Sickness; and Half a Dram is said to relieve Epileptics. Mathiolus
extols it against Witchcraft, if taken a Dram at a Time daily, for twenty Days
together. It was from its mere Shape accounted poisonous, till Pena and Lobel
by sufficient Experiments proved the contrary. The powdered Roots taken in Wine
ease the Cholic instantly. The Leaves discuss Swellings, allay Inflammations
speedily, and Tumors in the Scrotum, privy Parts, and Groin; they cure Wounds,
cleanse and heal Ulcers. Their Juice takes away Heat and Inflammation of the
Eyes.

HERBA PARIS. We have none of this Species in our Provinces; there is another
Species supposed, that grows toward the Heads of our Rivers.

150.
HERB ONE-BLADE ( Monophyllon) Half a Dram, or a Dram, of its powdered Root,
taken in Wine and Vinegar, and the Sick put to Bed instantly, to sweat, is an
excellent Remedy for those infected with the Plague, and have a Sore on them;
it expels the Poison powerfully; it is a Specific Wound-Herb, whether used
inwardly in Powder, Diet Drinks, or Decoctions; or outwardly in Ointments,
Lotions, or Plasters.

I have not seen any of this Species in our Provinces.

151.
HERB TWAY-BLADE (Bisolium) is a little astringent, has a clammy, sweetish
Juice; it is often used with good Success to cure both new and old Wounds, and
fresh Ruptures. Pliny says, it turns the Hair of the Eyebrows black.

TWAY-BLADE. None in these Provinces.

152.
HOLLY-TREE ( Agrifolium) ten or twelve of its Berries, eaten, are very good in
the Cholic; for they bring off, by Stool, thick, gross, and phlegmatic Humors.
A Decoction of the Prickles of the Leaves in a Posset Drink of Ale and Milk,
drank, cures the Cholic, when other more likely Things were tried before in
vain. Mathiolus commends a Fomentation of a Decoction of the Roots, for a
Hardness of the Joints, to dissolve Swellings, and heal broken Bones. The Bark
of this Tree affords an excellent Bird-lime, but fatal if taken inwardly,
because of its Glutinousness. A Dram of the powdered Leaf, drank in a Glass of
warm Liquor, is commended in Pains of the Back. For Gripes, Holly Leaves,
boiled in Posset Drink, and drank; or a Decoction of Vervain Mallows drank; or
Root of Master-wort in Infusion, or Decoction. A Servant Maid, who by Fits for
five Years had endured most terrible Pains of the Belly, which went off each
Time with a great Noise, like the Report of a Pistol, to the frequent Surprise
of Strangers, who knew not the Matter; for seven Days together I ordered her to
take each Morning, a Dram of the powdered Leaves in warm Drink; on the fifth
Day she passed, by Stool, seven large Globes or Balls, each wrought and
intorted like ravelled Thread, Hair, or Fibers, exceeding spongy and light,
like the Pilae Marinae, but so very tough, that break they would not, and I
with much Difficulty cut one of them; it had no Nucleus, but was the same
throughout; she was perfectly cured ever after. The Powder either of Leaves or
Berries, taken from one to two Drams in a Glass of Brandy, Evening and Morning,
for some Days, cures Stitches, violent Pains of the Sides, Back, Belly, or
Stomach* of longer Continuance, or coming, as this Woman's did, by Fits. One,
noted for the Cure of a Rheumatism, had no other Method or Secret, but the
tender Buds, or young Leaves of Holly boiled in Water, strained, and the Liquor
sweetened with Melasses; the Sick drank Half a Pound of this warm in Bed, at
each Dose, till the Pain was quite gone; it was a most powerful Sudorific all
the While, and Plenty of small Liquors were drank to dilute it.

153.
HONEY SUCKLES ( Periclymenum) Leaves and Flowers are cleansing, resolving, and
digesting; like Hyssop, Savoury, or Wild Marjoram. With Figs and Liquorice, it
effectually causes Spitting up of thick Phlegm that stuffs up the Lungs. The
powdered Leaves, or Flowers, or their Water, cleanse and dry up foul, moist
Ulcers, and clear the Face from all Discoloring or Deformity. The Oil of the
Flowers, by Insolation, is good in Cramps, Convulsions, Palsies, and other cold
Diseases of the Nerves. The Water given with Lavender Seed hastens the Birth.
It is a very hot and drying Plant. Border says, a Decoction of Honey-suckle,
Plantain, and Barley, strained, and a little Sugar of Lead put to it, is a fine
Gargle for sore Mouths; or a Lotion for Sores or Ulcers. In dangerous venereal
Ulcers of the Throat, after Mercurial Purge^ (...) took a Decoction of
Honey-suckle, six Ounces; Honey of Roses, two Ounces; Diamoron, one Ounce and a
Half; all mixed and sharpened with Spirit of Vitriol for a Gargle; or for
ulcerated Mouths, he used a Decoction of Honey-suckles, Plantain, and Barley, a
Pint; Honey of Roses, two Ounces and a Half; Diamoron, two Ounces; all mixed,
sharpened with Spirit of Vitriol, and used in a Gargle. If the Ulcers were
large and foul, he first touched them with Oil of Vitriol. For Ulcers on the
Lip like Cancers, he used washed Aloes, Half an Ounce; prepared Salt, two
Drams; Honey, four Ounces; mix and dress with it.

154.
HOPS (Lupulus) their first Buds boiled and eaten in the Spring, as Asparagus,
though they nourish little, yet open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen,
loosen the Belly, cleanse the Blood and Reins from Gravel and Sand, and take
off Stoppage of Water. The Tops or Roots boiled have the same Effect, but
hotter than the moister Buds; by purifying the Blood, they are of great Use
against Scab, Itch, Tetters, Ringworms, Morphew, spreading Sores, and all
Eruptions on the Skin, and Discoloring. A Decoction of the Flowers and Tops,
drank, is said to expel Poison. Half a Dram of the Seed, taken in Drink, expels
Worms, Urine, and Menses. The Flowers and Heads put into Women's Bathes, cures
Swellings of the Uterus, and Strangury. The Juice of the Leaves dropped into
the Ears cure their putrid Ulcers; steeped in Whey they gently purge off
Choler. A Syrup of their Juice cures the Jaundice, eases the Headache from
Heat, and tempers the Heat of Liver and Stomach, and is good in obstinate Agues
from Choler. Clusius gives a Receipt of them, how to recover Hair fallen off by
the French Pox. But their chief Use is for purifying, preserving, and giving a
vinous Flavor to Malt Liquors. But whether their Use in Drink contributes to
breeding the Stone, has been often and warmly debated; but it may be easily
answered, that Hops prodigiously improve Malt Liquor for the Use of gross,
corpulent, phlegmatic, cachectic, and cacochimic Habits, or such as live grossly
and easily; but greatly injure it to lean, hectic, thin, sanguine or choleric
Bodies, whose Blood being already too sharp, their Vessels want no Stimulus, as
those of the others do. Hence it is that the first laboring under the Stone,
want inciding, stimulating Remedies, as of Horse Radish, Leeks, Millepedes,
Cantharides, etc. The last, slippery, oily Anodynes, as Syrup of Althaea, Oil
of Sweet Almonds, Diacodium, Pil. Math. etc. to relax the Passages, lull the
Pain, and take off a too furious, natural Stimulus, stirred up for Expulsion,
but streightens the Passage, and increases Pain and other Symptoms.

155.
HOREHOUND (Marrubium) (common white) its Syrup or Juice, mixed with Honey, is
of great Use to asthmatic and consumptive Persons, and such as are troubled
with a Cough. The dried Herb, powdered, kills Worms in the Guts. It is
beneficial in hard Labor, and to bring down the Terms, or Lochia. It is a good
Stomachic, and either Decoction, Tea, Syrup, Powder, Juice or Pills of it, are
of great Service in Disorders of the Breast and Lungs, from much thick, cold
Phlegm, and in a Cachexy, Green Sickness, etc. An Ounce of its Conserve taken
daily for forty Days, in a Glass of its distilled Water, cured a schirrous
Liver, when all other Medicines failed. Two Ounces of the Syrup, with twenty
Drops of Oil of Tartar, taken every Day thrice, for some Time, is an excellent
Remedy for the Jaundice. The Herb opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen,
as well as purges the Breast and Lungs from Phlegm; or causes the Menses; and
expels the Lochia and Secundine; or outwardly cleanses, digests, and is good
for the Itch, and running Tetters; young People, especially bilious and
sanguine, must not be so free with it, as the old and phlegmatic. Too long and
free Use of it hurts or endangers the Kidneys and Bladder, and exposes them to
Exulcerations. Mathiolus says, that two Ounces fresh, boiled in three Pints of
good white Wine, till a Half is wasted, with Roots of Bugloss, Elecampane, and
Agrimony, of each a Dram and a Half; Rhubarb and Lign-aloes, of each a Dram;
Dose two Ounces every Morning, for nine Mornings, in the Jaundice; but he says,
aguish People should make this Decoction with Water. A Stove of the Decoction
of this Herb, sat over, is excellent for the Whites. A Wash of the Decoction
heals moist or dry Scabs. The Herb put in new Milk, and set in a Place pestered
with Flies, kills them all quickly. The Herb, used for the Menses, should be
used with Tincture, or Syrup of Steel, but not to the Sanguine. Ground Ivy, in
Diseases of the Lungs and Breast, should be used to the young Sanguine, instead
of the Horehound. A Decoction of Horehound, boiled up to the Consistence of a
thin Syrup, is good for Spitting of Blood. This Disease I knew cured in a young
Man, when all other Things failed, by the fine Powder of old dried Horse Bones,
boiled in Ale to a Consistence, then added Powder of Irish Slate, and
Sugar Candy; Dose Half a small Spoonful of it.

156.
HORSE-TAIL (Equisetum) which grows in open dry Fields, is well grown, and
comes early, is best. It is a very cooling, astringent Herb; hence its Powder,
the Decoction, or Syrup of its Juice, is a powerful, generous, and ready
Remedy, for Vomiting, or Spitting of Blood, bloody Urine, excessive Menses, or
Ulcers of Kidneys or Bladder. Its tender Buds, eaten as Asparagus, are good in
those Cases. A Poultise of it, laid on, heals great Wounds, even where the
Nerves are cut; whereof Sim. Pauli gives a surprising Instance. Casp. Hoffman
says, he and others have done Wonders with it in slow, and even in malignant
Fevers. A Dram of the Root powdered, given in Pomegranate Juice, Morning and
Evening daily, cures a Spitting of Blood; as does two Ounces of its Juice, or
two Ounces of it, taken the same Way, cure Ulcers of the Breast and Lungs. A
Dram of its Powder, taken often in Plantain Water, is commended in
Consumptions. Bauhinus says, it is good in Pains of the Stomach, for the Stone,
and involuntary Urine. For Ulcers of the Bladder a Specific, Horse-tail, six
Handfuls; three sliced Quinces, Sumach, Myrtle Berries, each an Ounce and an
Half; dried red Roses, an Handful and an Half; Balaustins, three Drams; boil in
nine Pints of Water to five, strain, and add Honey of Roses, Syrup of dried
Roses, of each three Ounces; Syrup of Myrtles, an Ounce and a Half; mix all,
and use thrice a Day.

HORSE-TAIL. We have several Species, but most of them grow in Marshes, or on
Banks near the Water; one Species is used for Scowering, and is like a rough
Rush.

157.
HOUND'S-TONGUE ( Cynoglossum) cools and dries; it is mostly used to stop
Fluxes of the Belly, and to dry Catarrhs, and Gonorrhoeas. It stops Blood. It
is useful for all Wounds and Ulcers. A Decoction of the Herb in Wine and
Chalybeat Water, of each alike, strained, to wash ulcerated Breasts with, and
the strained out Leaves applied in a Poultise, they cure. An Ointment of its
Juice, with Honey and Turpentine, is wonderful in old malignant and fistulous
Ulcers and Chops in the Anus. Being a narcotic Poison, like Opium, it is seldom
given inwardly, except with great Judgment and Caution, though it is used
outwardly with much Freedom, Safety, and Advantage, like Poppies. A Decoction
of the Root, drank, and a Poultise of it laid on outwardly, was used with great
Success in scrophulous Tumors. An Amulet of the Root hung about the Neck, is
good in the lousy Disease. The Bark is bitter, saltish, styptic, and glutinous.
The Pills made of it, stay all thin Defluxions of Rheum on the Eyes, Nose,
Stomach, or Lungs; they are good in Coughs and Shortness of Breath. A Decoction
of the Leaves in Lard, rubbed on, hinders Falling off of the Hair, and cures
Burns and Scalds. The Leaf bruised, and laid to a Wound, quickly heals it. The
Ointment, or Juice, heals the above Ulcers, or Inflammations about them. A
Suppository of it helps the Piles.

HOUND'S-TONGUE. The Species mentioned here, grows in curious Gardens, but we
have a wild Species or two, that grow on rich Hills (their Seed is very rough)
and is called Wild Comfry, by some Indian Tobacco.

158.
HOUSLEEK (Sedum) is very cooling and astringent; its chief inward Use being in
bilious Fevers, it quenches Thirst, and checks the Heat. The Juice is commonly
given with a little Sugar, or mixed; or the Herb is infused in Posset Drink. It
is also given in spotted and hectic Fevers. Tragus dipped Linen Cloths in the
Juice, and applied to Inflammations in any Part of the Body, as to the Head,
Eyes, Liver, Stomach, Kidneys, etc. It is also very good in Burns. The Juice
rubbed on Warts, or Corns, and covered with the Membrane of the Leaf, and kept
wet a few Days, takes them quite off, and cures them. For Ulcers of the Matrix
and Urethra, take four Ounces of this Juice, ten Ounces of Litharge, two Yolks
of Eggs, well beaten, mixed in a leaden Mortar, and applied; it has had great
Success. The Leaves stripped from their outer Membranes, and put on the
parched, scurfy, chopp'd Tongue, in hot Fevers, and often renewed, are of good
Service. The Juice or Mucilage of Quinces, held in the Mouth, is also
excellent. A Syrup of the Juice is good in a Quinsy. The Leaves bruised, and
laid to the Forehead, abate a Phrenzy much, and induce Rest; but, when the Sick
begins to sleep, remove the Poultise or Mixture; or four Handfuls of Sorrel
Leaves; four Ounces of the Root; an Ounce and an Half of the Seed, all bruised,
and boiled in Water to a Quart, strain, and add Current Juice, and a little
Sugar; drink hereof freely. The smallest insipid Housleek, with a white Flower,
was found to be a most efficacious Antiscorbutic in the Armies. The Juice of
the common Sort is excellent for a foundered Horse, if a Quart of it be poured
into him. A Gargle of its Water is commended in a Quinsy. The Juice, dropped
into the Eyes or Ears, takes away Heat, In^^ammations, or Rheum, falling on
them. And, being drank, it hinders Fluxes of Humors on the Bowels, or
excessive Menses. The Juice rubbed on, cures Shingles, Tetters, Ringworms,
fretting Ulcers, or the like. The Leaves, bruised and laid to the Head, soon
stop Bleeding at the Nose. The Leaves rubbed on any Part stung with Bees,
Wasps, etc. cure the Pain. But the Sting being taken out, either by the Hand,
or a Poultise of Ashes, Oil, and sour Leaven; Sennertus used Milk of Fig Tree
Leaves; or a Poultise of Ducks-meat and Vinegar, of bruised Water Cresses; or
of bruised Rue, applied. For the Bite of a Viper, he advises a Poultise of
Squills boiled in Vinegar; or of Garlic, Figs, and Venice Treacle; or powdered
Roots of Birth-wort, dry Centaury Leaves, Galbanum, and Vinegar; or of Round
Birth-wort Roots, Cassia Lignea, Bay Berries, and Pepper, of each two Drams;
Leaves of wild Rue, a Dram and an Half; Castor a Dram; Aniseed Half a Dram;
with Honey make an Electuary of the Powders; Dose from a Dram to two Drams,
with a Glass of Wine, and apply to the Part a Poultise of Goats Dung, with
Vinegar, Pitch, Wax, and Sulphur. He likewise advises either mixed, or
separately, Powders of Roots of Asphodel, Round Birth-wort, Briony, Gentian,
and Tormentil; Dose from one Dram to two in old Wine; or Powder of Costmary
Root, from Half a Dram to a Dram, in a Glass of Wormwood Wine, or a Decoction.
Dioscorides.

159.
HYPERICON, or St. JOHN'S-WORT, is a noble Diuretic and Vulnerary; boiled and
drank, it is said to cure Tertians and Quartans; it stops Blood-Spitting, and
dissolves coagulated Blood; expels Gravel, and kills Worms. A Decoction of the
Herb, drank forty Days, or the Seed powdered, cures Jaundice and Gout; it is
well adapted to the Stone, and enriches the Blood with a balsamic Quality* A
Tincture of the Flowers, drank, is a powerful Medicine, in Madness and
Melancholy, says Sala, etc. A Tincture of its Flowers, in Brandy, is extolled
for killing Worms in the Belly. Gerard prepared two Oils from it, which see in
his Herbal. The first whereof, he says, is a most precious Remedy for deep
Wounds, and these through the Body; for pricked Sinews, or any Wound made by a
poisoned Weapon. It is a compound Oil, than which, he says, the World has not a
better; no, not natural Balsam itself. It is made of white Wine, a Quart;
Sallad Oil, four Pounds; Oil of Turpentine, two Pounds; Leaves, Flowers, and
Seeds, of this Herb gently bruised, of each two Handfuls; put all in a large
double Glass, and set it in the Sun eight or ten Days; then boil them in that
same Bottle in a Kettle of Water, on some Straw; then strain out the Liquor,
and pour it back on a fresh Quantity of the same Parts of the Herb; but put in
no Wine, set it in the Sun, then strain and boil as before, and use for the
aforesaid Purposes. As the too bold internal Use of the Jesuits or Friars
Balsam has had fatal C^nsequences in inflammatory Cases of the Breast, and
other feverish Disorders; so from this Herb may be contrived one for internal
Uses every whit as successful, and infinitely more safe. Hoffman orders the
Essence of the Herb in an Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Melancholy, Hypo, and Green
Sickness; he will have it to be an Antidaemoniac, that as such he experienced
its Virtues. The red Venetian Oil is not only a singular Vulneray, but is good
in the Gripes from a cold Cause; three or four Drams of it given in Wine,
expels the dead Foetus. Its inward Use is good for Persons newly infected with
the Plague.

160.
HYSSOP ( Hyssopus) is hot and biting, it thins, opens, and cleanses; it is
mostly used for Cutting, Thinning, and Expectorating gross Phlegm, that stuffs
the Lungs, as in Hoarseness, Cough, Shortness of Breath, etc. Its Syrup or
Decoction, prepared in a very close Vessel, is excellent in obstinate Diseases
of the Breast, where Liquorice, Maidenhair, etc. are not strong enough to
answer the End. Outwardly, it is often applied to Eyes discolored by Blows or
Strokes; to cure the singing Noise of the Ears; to cleanse the Uterus, or
Mouth, by Gargle. Some esteem it a better Stomachic than Wormwood* It provokes
Urine, and is good in a Stoppage, Heat, or Dribbling of Urine. The boiled Herb
is wrapped in Linen, and laid on black Eyes at Bedtime, and tied on all
Night; next Day the Eyes are well. A Man who had his Thigh grievously bruised
by the Kick of a Horse, was cured of the Pain in a few Hours, and the Blackness
and Blueness of the Skin quite removed, only by a Poultise of the Leaves cut,
and beaten up with unsalted Butter. The Herb, close boiled with Rue and Honey,
is good in a Cough, Asthma, Wheezing, and Distillation of Rheum on the Lungs.
Hyssop, with Oxymel, purges gross Humors by Stool, and taken with Honey it
kills Worms in the Belly. Taken with new Figs, it loosens the Belly. It
restores the natural Color of the Body, when spoiled by a Jaundice, or
Cachexy. Taken with Figs and Nitre, it cures Dropsy and Spleen. A Gargle and
Lotion of it, boiled with Figs, is good in a Quinsy or sore Throat. A Gargle of
its Decoction in Vinegar is good for the Toothache. The Steam of its Decoction,
received by a Funnel into the Ears, cures their Inflammation. For the Falling
Sickness, Pills made of powdered Hyssop, Horehound, and Castor, of each a Dram;
Paeony Roots, forty Grains; Assafoetida, a Scruple; Juice of Hyssop, enough to
make Pills for seven Doses, to be taken every Night at Bedtime. Hyssop
provokes the Menses. I have known a small Quantity of it in Diet Drink, cause
Abortion. It breaks Wind, and eases sharp Ague Fits. The green Herb, bruised
with a little Sugar, and laid on, heals any gre^n Wounds quickly. Some boil a
Handful of Hyssop, two Ounces of Figs, and one Ounce of Sugar Candy in
Muscadine Wine, and strain it out, and drink of it every Morning and Evening,
for obstinate Coughs. In a Cough, Wheezing, Shortness of Breath, and Stuffing
of the Lungs, with tough Phlegm, of difficult Expectorations, some poor People
often find Relief from a strong Infusion of Hyssop, Rosemary-tops, and Sage in
Vinegar, strained, and sweetened with brown Sugar Candy. For a Cough, take
Tussilago, or Colt's-foot, Hyssop, and Maidenhair, each a Handful; Liquorice
Root, an Ounce; Liquorice Juice, Half an Ounce; stoned Rasins of the Sun, four
Ounces; and ten Figs; boil in four Pints of Water to three, then add one Poppy
Head with its Seed, boil to two, strain, and drink warm thrice a Day. Woodman.
For a Hoarseness take the Yolk and the White of an Egg, in three Ounces of
Hyssop Water, mix, and add Sugar Candy, one Ounce; dissolve and strain for a
warm Draught.

161.
HEDGE or WATER HYSSOP ( Gratiola) is a most powerful excellent Remedy for
evacuating thin, watery, or slow bilious Humors, both upward and downward,
even from the remotest Parts of the Body; hence its special Use in Dropsies,
Jaundice, Sciatica, and obstinate Spring Intermittents, given either in
Decoction, or in Powder, from twenty Grains to thirty; but being so violent an
Evacuant, it must be corrected with Ginger, Juice of Calamint, Cinnamon, or Sal
Gem, and, being very bitter, it kills and expels Worms of all Sorts. Bruised
and applied, it speedily heals up Wounds. Its Extract cures Quotidians and
Tertians.

GRATIOLA. We have a Species very like this; it grows in Places which are
mostly covered with Water in Winter, and Part of the Spring.

162.
JACK BY THE HEDGE ( Alliaria) is a Sort of Garlic or Scordium. The green Herb
provokes Urine. The Decoction of the dry, in wine, is good against P^ison. A
Linctus of it and Rosin, with Honey, is good against an old Cough. It
powerfully resists Putrefaction. Hence the Herb and its thickened Juice, in
Ointmment, and Poultise, is good against Gangrenes, and all putrid and
malignant Ulcers. Its Seed, laid Plaister-ways to the Sharebone, raises Persons
out of Hysterics. The Seed snuffed up provokes Sneezing, and makes the Nose run
freely. A Decoction of the Herb in Oil and Water, drank, is serviceable to
Asthmatics. A Clyster of the Decoction of its Leaves is good in cholical and
nephritic Pains, and Stone; Fabrit. Hildan. extols its Juice in Gangrenes,
putrid and malignant Ulcers, especially as it herein approaches so near the
Nature of Scordium, which is only to be got in some Places, and at one Season,
and mostly dry, and the other in most Places. The Herb, eaten, warms the
Stomach, and causes Digestion. Its Juice with Honey is thought as good as Hedge
Mustard for a Cough, to cut and expectorate Phlegm. A Decoction of the bruised
Seed in Wine, drank, is good in Cholic, Stone, and Hysterics.

ALLIAR^A. I have not observed any of it to grow in any of our Provinces.

163.
JUNIPER ( Juniperus) the rasped Wood is put into quilted Caps for the Head, as
being friendly to the Brain and Nerves. Of the Wood is made Ashes, through
which Wine being strained, becomes so powerful a Sudorific, that it drains
Water from the whole Habit. From the dry Wood is drawn an Oil by the Alembic,
whose outward Use is serviceable in nervous Diseases, Cancers, Wounds, and
Ulcers. The Berries eaten alone, or chewed in the Mouth, are good for a cold
Stomach, digest Phlegm in it, expel Wind, relieve Diseases of the Breast and
Cough, are very diuretic, and powerfully expel Sand, Stone, Gravel, and
Poisons; bring down the Menses, and gross Humors about the Hips. They are very
good in Diseases of the Head and Nerves. In Lapland they are infused, or
boiled, and drank daily, like Tea or Coffee with us, and are their chief
Physic. The Juice, extracted from the Berry, is good in all the above
Disorders. The Oil, made by the Alembic, is good in Gripes, Gravel, and Worms.
The outer Bark of the Berries broke and infused in Wine, makes a noble
antinephritic, if used daily for some Time. The Elixir of Juniper is both good
in the Stone, and a great Stomachic. The Berries are reputed good against the
Plague. Some substitute Juniper Wood for Guajac in the French Pox. An Infusion,
or Decoction of the Berries, is good in Hysterics, old Coughs, Chin-coughs,
Flatulency, etc.

164.
IVY (Hedera) is so hot, acrid, and astringent, that it is hurtful to the
Nerves, therefore it is not used inwardly. Its fresh Leaves are better for
Issues than Oil Cloth, and prevent their Inflammation, as well as promote their
Running. Pease of its Wood draw well, and last a Month. The Leaves are good in
Ulcers of the Nose (Ozaena) and to ease the Pain of Ulcers in the Ears. An
Ointment made of them is good for Scalds and Burns. A Decoction of Ivy
strained, and its Gum dissolved in it, or the Juice of the Tree to wash the
Head, hinders the Hair from growing, and so does the Powder of Nettle-seed with
Vinegar. The dried Berries sewed up in a thin Silk Bag, and worn on the Spleen,
is good for its Pain and Swelling; or the Leaves may be boiled in Vinegar and
applied. A Pugil of the Powder of the dried Flowers, taken in Wine, stops the
Bloo^^ Flux. Half a Dram of the Berry-stones, drank in Wine, provokes Urine,
and expels Sand, Gravel, and small Stones, surprisingly. A few of the powdered
Stones drank every Morning, for seven Days, in a Glass of Pennyroyal Water,
with a little Saffron, is a sure Remedy to bring down obstructed Terms. A few
of the Stones eaten before a Debauch, are said to prevent Drunkenness. The
Berries, eaten by strong Rusticks, purge violently upward and downward. A large
Dose of Powder of the unripe Berries is one of Alexis's Secrets against the
Plague; for a Dram in white Wine is a strong Sudorific. The Oil of the
distilled Berries is powerful against all Diseases of the Joints, provokes the
Menses, expels Gravel, and cleanses sordid Ulcers. From two Drams to four of
the Juice of the Tree digests and repels in a Quinsey. The Juice of the Leaves
snuffed up the Nose cleanses the Head effectually; it also eases the Pain,
stays the Running, and heals old obstinate Ulcers of Ears, or Nose; if it is
too sharp, it may be mixed with Oil of Roses. Take Ivy Leaves two or three
Handfuls, rough Barley as much, boil both close in Water, and pour them out
into a Pipkin, or narrow mouthed deep Vessel, to receive the Steam into the
Mouth and Throat for a Quinsy. A Woman was famous, and cured Hundreds of poor
People of a Quinsy by this: Take Powder of Album Graecum, Cinnabar, and Honey,
of each alike; make round Balls to hold in the Mouth, and swallow as they
dissolve; it seldom fails. For Deafness, take Gum Ivy rolled long, when hot and
moist; put it into the Ear in a Piece of very thin Tiffany, let it lie till the
Ear begins to run, and pull the Roll back: Dr. Po. For Corns, wash the Feet,
and cut the Corns in the Wane of the Moon daily, apply fresh Ivy Leaves to
them, and in fifteen Days they will fall out; or drop the Juice of Radishes on
them; or the skinn'd Leaves of Housleek laid on them; or, for watery Swellings
of the Feet, a Poultise of Herb Robert is sure. For kibed or chilblained Heels,
foment them with a Decoction of Turnip Roots; or anoint them with the expressed
Liquor from a Turnip scooped, filled with Rose Oil, and roasted under the
Embers; or apply a frozen Turnip, or roasted Turnip Peelings applied warm,
twice or thrice a Day; or a scooped Radish Root, filled with Oil of Roses,
boiled, and the Liquor expressed and used.

165.
KNAP-WEED (Jacea) being very much like Scabious, is thought to be much of the
like Nature; for, being of an astringent and drying Taste, it is good to stop
Fluxes both of Blood at the Mouth, Nose, or other outward Parts, or from inward
Wounds, or Breaches of Vessels, or Vomiting or Purging much, and checks the
Distillation of Rheum on the Throat, Breast, Lungs, and Stomach; and is good
for Bruises and Falls. Its Decoction, drank in Wine, and applied outwardly, is
good in Ruptures; and singularly good in all Kinds of Sores, cancerous or
fistulous; dries up their Moisture, and heals them. It does the same to Scabs,
sore Throats, and Swellings of the Uvula or Jaws. For an Inflammation of the
Uvula use a Gargle of beaten Hemp Seed, boiled in Posset Drink; or of the Herb
Dandelion, boiled in Water; or of Tormentil Root, boiled in small Beer; or of
Throat-wort Leaves, boiled and used as before; Etmuller. Or boil four Ounces of
the inner Bark of Elm-tree, in three Pints of Water, to a Pint and a Half,
strain, and add Syrup of Rasp-berries, and Mulberries, of each an Ounce and a
Half; mixed for a Gargle. -- For an Ulcer, boil two Handfuls of Speedwell in
Water, strain, and add a little Honey; make a Gargle: Idem. For the Uvula
relaxed, use the Steam of Ladies Mantle, boiled in Water, or of Comfry; or its
Syrup or Decoction swallowed slowly; Idem. For the falling down of the Uvula,
gargle with a strong Decoction of Wild Tansy in Vinegar; Morrison. Or a Gargle
of a Decoction of Dwarf Cystus; Ray. Or with an Infusion of Saffron, in the
Person's own Urine; or apply to the Coronal Suture a Poultise of
Walnut-Kernels, beaten up with Spirit of Wine; Crato. Or beaten Juniper
Berries, boiled in red Wine with Salt, used for a Gargle; Stockerus. Or apply
to the shaved Crown of the Head a Poultise of beaten Cole-wort; or gargle with
a Decoction of Hempseed, in Water and Vinegar; Sachfius. Or lift it up with
powdered Pepper; or Gargle with a sweetened Decoction of Oak Leaves,
Perriwinkle, or Throat-wort.
It stays the Blood, closes up and heals green Wounds.

166.
KNOT-GRASS ( Polygonum) is a Vulnerary, dries and astringes. It is used
chiefly to stop Fluxes or Haemorrhages, as a Looseness, Dysentery, Menses, and
Bleeding at the Nose or Mouth. It is used in Juice, Syrup, Decoction, Infusion,
or Powder; outwardly, it is good for Wounds, Ulcers, or Inflammations of the
Eyes.

167.
LADIES MANTLE ( Alchimilla) is among the chief Vulneraries, used either
inwardly or outwardly. It warms, dries, astringes, stops Blood, Terms, and
Whites. The Roots, Leaves and Tops, being all vulnerary, are used in Draughts,
Powders, Decoctions, Syrups, Plasters, etc. Linen Cloths, dipped in its
Decoction, laid on large, loose, flabby Breasts, purse them up. Its Decoction,
drank with its Powder, heals Wounds, and Children's Ruptures. It is more
cooling, drying, binding, and astringent, than Sanicle; therefore, better for
Inflammations, Wounds, and Haemorrhages. Its Decoction, drank six Weeks
together, often makes the Barren fruitful, by drying up the too great Moisture
and Laxness of the Uterus, and giving it a better Tone. A Bath of its Decoction
may be used.

ALCHIMILLA. I have not observed it to grow in any of our Provinces.

168.
LADIES BED-STRAW (Gallium luteum) (the yellow) is vulnerary and cleansing;
reputed good in the Epilepsy, as is its Tea for the Gout, and Syrup of its
Flowers to expel the Menses; and a Fomentation, or Bath of its Decoction, to
dry Childrens Scabs; and the Powder of the Herb taken for Haemorrhages, which
it stops; and to cure Cancers, or cancerous Ulcers. Its Flowers put into Sallad
Oil, and set forty Days in the Sun, afford a good Ointment for Burns and
Scalds; and to anoint the Feet of weary Travelers, whose Fatigue it quite
takes off. A Decoction of the Herb does the same. The Roots provoke Lust, and
excite to Venery. The common white Bed-straw is very beneficial in the Falling
Sickness.

LADIES BED-STRAW. It grows in Botanick Gardens.

169.
LADIES-THISTLE (Carduus Mariae) is thought to have the same Virtues, as the
holy or blessed Thistle. Its Decoction is used for Stuffings of the Liver and
Bowels; for easing, by Urine, Dropsy, Jaundice, and Nephritics. Tragus says,
its distilled Water cures Stitches, and other Diseases of the Sides. Its Seed
is used in Emulsions, for those Purposes, and the Water outwardly, to dip
Cloths in, to lay on fretting eating Ulcers. The Juice of the green Herb,
applied to beginning Cancers in the Breast or Nose, is as effectual for that,
as a Dram of Columbine Seed given at a Time, and often, is beneficial in a
Vertigo, or Small Pox, wherein it is justly esteemed a Specific; as a Decoction
of fat Figs, Number twenty two; Lentils, grossly bruised, one Ounce; rasped
Hart's-horn, Half an Ounce, all boiled in a Quart of Posset Drink, or Milk and
Water, and drank, ripens and fills the Small Pox most powerfully; and, if they
are only full of Water, a Decoction of Lentils, drank, exceeds all.

170.
LAMBS LETTUCE ( Valerianella) cools and moistens, is a little laxative, is
somewhat of the Nature of Lettuce, and used for it in the Spring.

171.
LAVENDER (Lavendula) being of subtle, fine Parts, is proper for Head and
Nerves; it is chiefly used for Catarrhs, Palsy, Cramp, Vertigo, Lethargy,
Shakings of the Joints, expelling Urine, Menses, and Foetus (for which it is
often prescribed to Women in Labor) and in windy Gripes of the Belly.
Outwardly, it is used in Lees to wash the Head and Joints. It is chewed to
repel the Catarrh to the Palate, that it fall not on the Breast. Its distilled
Water smelt to is a great Reviver of the Spirits; the Compound is good for the
Head, and a great Cordial. The Conserve of the Flowers answers the Purposes of
the Herb. The two following are taken for great Secrets in hard Labor: First,
Powder of Lavender Seed, Half a Dram; Seeds of Plantain and Endive, of each two
Scruples; Pepper, a Scruple; mix, and take in Honey-suckle and Endive Waters,
of each three Ounces: Secondly, Powder of Lavender-seed, Half a Dram; of
prepared white Amber and Borax, of each two Scruples; Oil of Cinnamon, six
Drops; mix for three Doses, to be given in Rhenish Wine. Oil of Spike, or any
other Oil rubbed on the Head, kills Lice. A Decoction of Lavender Flowers,
Horehound and Asparagus Roots, and a Stick of Cinnamon, is good for the
Epilepsy, and Swimming of the Head. Two Spoonfuls of the distilled Water of the
Flowers help such as have lost their Speech, and restore it. A Bathe of the
Lesser Lavender is good in Hysterics, and promotes Childbirth. The Oil of
Lavender is too hot for inward Use. The Herb and Flowers are good in all
Diseases of the Head from a cold Cause, but by no Means for a Hot, Bilious,
Inflammatory, or Acrid. It strengthens the Stomach and Liver. An Infusion of
the Flowers in Wine, helps a Stoppage of Urine. It is also a good Gargle for
the Toothache. It is good in Swooning and Fainting.

172.
LAVENDER-COTTON ( Abrotonum foemina) or Female Southernwood, agrees in Virtues
with Male Southernwood, being used in Obstructions of the Liver, Kidneys, and
Uterus. It cures the Jaundice. Either Herb or Seed, boiled in Milk, and drank,
kills Worms. Powder of its Leaves taken ten Mornings, then intermitted the
other ten, and repeated again, cures the Fluor Albus. It is good in discutient
Fomentations and Poultises; but it is chiefly used to adorn the Edges of
Borders in Gardens.

LAVENDER-COTTON. I have not observed it to grow in any of our Provinces.

173.
LEEKS ( Porrum) are somewhat of the Nature of Garlic, they thin, open,
incide, and dissolve the Humors. Outwardly they are good for Noise of the
Ears, and to promote Suppuration, and Swellings of the Piles. Their white Part
fried, and laid to the pained Side in Pleurisies, has relieved many. Their
Juice, mixed with a little Tartar and green Wax, and often put up (...) Nose,
is good for a Polypus. Its Juice, drank, is good for the Stone in gross,
phlegmatic Bodies. Their Use is liable to the same Inconvenience as Garlic, in
the like Constitutions, as are all the Onion Tribe. Leeks provoke the Menses
and Spitting, stimulate the Seed Vessels, and excite Venery. Laurembergius
says, that peeled Burdock Stalks, either eaten raw, or boiled very soft,
dressed, and eaten, excite Venery much. Earth Nuts, or Pig-nut Roots, either
raw, or boiled in Broth, eaten with Butter and Pepper, after they are peeled,
are pleasant, common nourishing Food, and provoke Venery. Trallianus. Juice of
Knot-grass, drank, provokes it much. Stockerus. Powder of Nettle-seed given in
warm Wine, from Half a Dram to a Dram, or of Rocket-seed, do the same. An
Ointment with Oil or Powder of An^s Eggs, rubbed on the Testicles, is also
good; or Stinging the ^art with fresh Nettles.
They prevent Drunkenness, and depress Vapors. Outwardly, they are good
against Biting of Serpents, and Burning. In cold Weather, they are proper for
phlegmatic, and old People; or such as have very gross pituitous Humors. Juice
of Leeks and Elder, of each equal Parts; Dose three or four Spoonfuls twice a
Day. It is a Specific in a Tympany. Juice of Lettuce, often held in the Mouth,
is good for a Swelling of the Tongue.

174.
LILLY OF THE VALLEY ( Lilium Convallium) its Leaves, but especially the
Flowers, are good against Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Palsy, Vertigo, and other
Diseases of the Head, from a cold Cause. Some reckon them Cordial. Their
Waters, either distilled alone, or with generous Wine, and Flowers of Lavender
and Rosemary. Such as want it stronger, distill it again with fresh Flowers.
Powder of Roots and Flowers is a strong Sternutatory. Flowers of this and Sage,
of each alike, distilled with Wine, and the Liquor daily rubbed on the whole
Backs of Epileptics, from Head to Hips, before a good Fire, has cured many
Epilepsies. Sim. Pauli.

175.
LILLY-WATER ( Nymphaea) There is the white and black; the first has a yellow
Flower, and white Root; the last a white Flower, and black Root; both of them
dry, bind and cleanse. The former dries most, the latter cleanses most. It
dries without Biting or Sharpness, therefore the Ancients used it not only in
Loosenesses and Bloody Fluxes, but for the Whites. The Roots and Seeds of the
white Lilly (which is mostly used when it can be got, but, in Want of it, the
other may be taken) cool, dry, and bind. The Leaves and Flowers cool and
moisten; both of them are of great Benefit in Fluxes of the Belly; but
especially seminal, nocturnal Pollutions, whether voluntary or involuntary;
whether from the Heat, Sharpness, or Thinness of the Seed or Blood: So very
powerful are they in subduing Lust, beyond any, or all other British Plants,
says Prosper Alpinus, that Monks, Nuns, Friars, and Hermits, that would live
chastely, drink daily, for twelve Days together, a Dram of it, and Syrup of
Poppies; this, says Pliny, deprives the Taker of all Desire, Inclination, and
Power of Coition; therefore do the Egyptians dread and avoid it. In a
Priapism, Galen always gave a little of it with Success. And Avicenna cries out
how it lessens Pollution, and quite erases venereal Desire; nay, even frequent
anointing the Genitals with it, or the Stomach, Reins, or Bladder, it will
produce the same Effect; and is therefore much better than a Poultise of
bruised Hemlock laid to the Testicles, which only abates the Fury of Lust for a
few Hours. This Root used in Ptisans is good in a Gonorrhoea, Heat of Urine,
and to lessen immoderate venereal Appetite. It is diuretic, by abating
Inflammations, or Sharpness that may stop, diminish, or suppress Urine. The
Root is cooling and emollient, very good in all Inflammations; the Syrup
disposes a little to Sleep, as well as cools. The Root and Flower, by their
viscous Parts, check a too violent Motion of the Humors. Their Decoction
sweetens the Blood; is good in burning Fevers; to stay Rheums. Outwardly they
soften and supple the Skin, easily cause soft Sleep, and are beneficial in
Inflammations. The Root and Seed of the white Lilly, boiled in black Wine, and
drank, powerfully stop the Excess of the Menses, even when all other Things
fail, and the Case is desperate. The green Leaves laid on slight Wounds, stop
the Bleeding. The Egyptians used the bruised Flowers and Leaves, wherever Heat
attended a Disease. The Juice mixed with Milk and Oil of Roses, eases Pain. In
Fevers and Watchings, the bruised Leaves, applied to the Head, and the
Forehead, and Temples, are anointed with its Juice and Vinegar: The Seed is
most powerful in all these Respects, though some use the distilled Water, and
that of the Flower chiefly; it is said to take off Freckles, Spots, etc. of the
Face. Feverish Heats are also allayed, and soft Sleep procured, by applying the
Leaves and Flowers outwardly, or washing the Feet with them; or laying the
Leaves on the Loins, Soles of the Feet, and Temples. We are told, that if
either of these Water Lillies are dried in the Northern Sun, and hung upon the
Bed of a convulsive Person, it will cure him presently. Some commend a
Decoction of the Roots, or their Extract, against Madness. The Water is very
useful in Excoriations of the Palate, Uvula, and Tongue, from a hot, sharp, and
adust Matter. The Flowers are the weakest Part of the Plant; of them is made a
Conserve and Syrup, which is not ^o somnific as Diacodium, but more so than
Syrup ^f Violets. A Pedilavium of the Flowers (or of ^he Leaves, when the
Flowers are not to be got) ^urslain, Camomile, and Willow Leaves, with a ^ew
Beech Ashes and Salt, is a surprising Somnific, ^ hot Fevers, with Watchings
and Delirium, ^here Opiates and Anodynes fail; let the Steam of ^he Pedilavium
reach the Bed, when the Sick have got unto it, till they fall asleep. There is
a small Sort, called the Ranae Morsus, or Nymyhaea Minima, but of its Virtues
we know nothing; it is never used, or wanted, being satisfied of the good
Effects of the other; which makes it surprising, that it is so little known in
the present Practice.

176.
LILLY (white) (Lilium album) The distilled Water of the Flowers, given in hard
Labor, with ^ little Saffron, expels Birth, and Afterbirth, two or three
Spoonfuls of it recover from fainting Fits. ^t is often used in Diseases of the
Lungs, as Cough, ^hortness of Breath, etc. A little Camphire, or Oil of Tartar,
dissolved in it, gives the Countenance a fine Color. Its Oil is made by three
or four Days Infusion in the Sun in Oil, then strain it out, and pour on fresh
Leaves and Flowers; repeat it a third Time, then express the Oil, and keep for
Use. It has surprising Effects in Pains, and all cold Disorders. It loosens,
softens, and eases Pain; is good in the Cholic, from the Stone, and Pleurisy;
but especially for contracted Sinews and Nerves; in a Schirrus of the Uterus
and Menses obstructed therefrom. The Root is much used outwardly to soften and
ripen Swellings; and in Ointm^^t to take out Corns of the Feet and Toes, cure
Burns, and soften the Pudenda of Women in Labor. Gerard says, that Barley
Bread, baked with its Juice, and eaten for a Month, has cured many Dropsies.
The expressed Juice of the bruised Root, given in Wine, and drank two or three
Days, expels the Venom of the Plague, and throws it out upon the Skin in
Bladders and Pustles. The Flowers not only digest and ease Pain, but, infused
two or three Days in Wine and distilled, they afford a most excellent Water for
the Hypo and Hysterics; Dose from one to three Spoonfuls. The Roots, bruised
with Honey, consolidate cut Sinews, or Tendons; waste, and cleanse Ulcers on
the Head, and the Scurvy on the Face or Beard. A Poultise of the Roots quickly
gathers, ripens, and breaks any Inflammatory, or other Imposthumes, but
especially if roasted Onions and Mushrooms be added to it.

177.
LIME or LINDEN-TREE ( Tilia) The Leaves and Bark dry, repel, and provoke
Urine. The Mucilage of the Bark, is excellent in Burns or Wounds, especially if
it is chewed and rubbed on. The Leaves bruised, and sprinkled with Water,
discuss Swellings of the Feet. They are also a sovereign Remedy for the Thrush,
and Windy Cramp, in Women with Child. Their expressed Juice, mixed with Wine,
and rubbed warm on the Parts, cures the Cramp. The Flowers contain fine Parts,
have a pleasant Smell, and their distilled Water is often used for the Falling
Sickness, Apoplexy, and Vertigo. Some advise it for a Palpitation, Pains of the
Uterus, Stone, and to dissolve coagulated Blood. The Powder of the Berries, is
much praised in the Bloody or other Fluxes of the Belly; beaten with Vinegar,
and put up the Nose, do stop its Bleeding. A few of them swallowed do the same.
The Leaves boiled in Water, strained, and a little Honey and Alum put to the
Liquor, cure Childrens sore Mouths. The Leaves boiled tender, beaten up with
Hog's Lard, powdered Fenugreek, and Line-seeds, made into a Poultise; apply it
hot, it cures hot Swellings, and ripens Imposthumes. Wheat Bran boiled in
Water, and applied in a Poultise, with a little Vinegar, Lard, or Butter,
quickly disperses Inflammations, and inflammatory Tumors. A Poultise of
Barley-meal does the same. The Charcoal of the Wood, mixed with prepared Crabs
Eyes, and taken, cures Spitting of Blood, from Bruises, Blows* etc. The inner
Bark, steeped in Water, makes a fine Mucilage, which naturally heals Burns, and
strengthens weak Parts. A Water, distilled from the Bark, is good for sharp
Humors, that cause Gripes or bloody Stools. A Conserve of the Flowers of the
Female Lime-tree, (for the Male is barren, and has none) is a Specific in
Childrens Convulsions.

178.
LIQUORICE ( Glycerrhiza) Root is a great Friend to the Lungs, and Kidneys, it
sheathes sharp Humors, from acrid and corroding Salts; promotes Spitting, and
smooths Roughness, by thickening the Humors; but its Use is dubious in
Spitting of Blood, and Weakness of the Vessels of the Lungs. It is mostly used
in Coughs, Pleurisies, Consumptions, Sharpness of Urine, and Excoriation of the
Bladder. It gently loosens the Belly of Infants. Some drink its Decoction in
Water, with a Stick of Cinnamon, for common Drink; after it has wrought like
Ale, it intoxicates as much. In Coughs, and Catarrhs, with only thin Rheum, or
a mere Froth, a Tea of Liquorice and Line-seed, thickens the Phlegm, causes
Spitting, and cures Hoarseness. This Tea is good in Pains of the Belly, from
sharp Humors, Salts, or Bile in the Bowels. A Ptisan of it, Maidenhair, and
Figs, is good in a dry Cough, digests and raises Phlegm, and heals Hoarseness,
Wheezing, and Shortness of Breath, from salt Humors falling on the Lungs. This
Root cures Ulcers in the Kidneys and Bladder, sharp, or bloody Urine. It is
added to most purging Infusions, Decoctions, and Diet Drinks. Its Juice is the
best and readiest Preparation; but it may be much improved by dissolving it
down in proper Decoctions, and adding several Powders suited to various
Intentions, and boiled up again for Use.

179.
LIVER-WORT (Hepatica) is a noble Vulnerary, used either inwardly or outwardly.
The green Leaves heal fresh Wounds and Ruptures, if given in a Decoction of
Horse-tail. Baptista says, the Powder of the Herb, given some Days, cures
Ruptures. It is not only good in Wounds, but its Oil made, either by being set
in the Sun in Oil, or a short slight Decoction of the fresh Leaves in Sallad
Oil, or unripe Oil Olive, till they are dry and crisp, is good in Swellings and
Inflammations. It is a wonderful Plant in all Diseases of the Liver, Spleen,
Kidneys, or other Viscera; or in a Saltness or Sharpness of the Blood, in hot
Constitutions especially. It cools, cleanses, and helps Heats and
Inflammations, Jaundice, and Whites, if boiled in Water, and sweetened. It is
excellent to stop the Spreading of Tetters, Runnings, Sores, Ringworms, and
Scabs. In these, Hectics, and Peripneumonies, I have often seen its wonderful
Effects. Stercus Pavonis is no greater a Specific in a Vertigo; or Juices of
Rue, Valerian, and Misletoe, in a recent Epilepsy; or Half a Dram of Powder of
Marum Syriac* in Juice of Ground Ivy, snuffed up the Nose for an obstinate
Headache; or a strong Bathe of Ants and their Eggs, in a Paraplegia; or a
Gargle of Woodsage Juice in Loss of Speech; than Lichen terrestris Ciner. cum
pulv. Piper. ana P. Ae. is to prevent an Hydrophobia.

180.
LOOSE-STRIFE, or WILLOW HERB ( Lysimachia) stops Bleeding at the Mouth, Nose,
or of Wounds. The Juice, dropped in, quickly heals them up. Its Decoction,
drank and given in Clysters, stops Fluxes of the Belly and Uterus. It cures
Sores in the Mouth or secret Parts. Dried and burnt in a Room, it banishes
Flies and Gnats. The distilled Water of the Purple-spiked, especially, is a
most effectual present Remedy for Hurts, Blows, or Pricks in the Eyes, which it
also clears from Dust, or any thing fallen into them. Make an Ointment of it,
May Butter, Wax, and Sugar, it speedily heals all fresh Wounds. Washing with
its Water, and applying the Leaves after, cleanses foul Ulcers, and stops
Inflammations. The Water, drank, and gargled, is good for a Quinsy and
King's Evil in the Neck; or used warm in a Wash, it takes off fresh Marks of
the Small Pox; and drank, quenches Thirst. Boiled with Honey, it is good in
Ulcers of the Lungs, Bloody Flux, and Whites, says Tragus. Mathiolus advises it
in Childrens Ruptures.

181.
LOVAGE ( Levisticum) is alexipharmac, diuretic, and vulnerary; strengthens the
Stomach, helps an Asthma, expels Menses, Lochia, and Secundine. The powdered
Seed brings away the dead Child, resolves tough Phlegm, and eases Pains
therefrom. It opens Obstructions of Liver and Spleen, and cures the Jaundice.
It is used outwardly in Uterine Bathes, Fomentations, Poultises, Ointments, and
Plasters for Wounds and Ulcers. It comes so near Angelica, and Master-wort,
that what is said of one, may serve for another. It helps Digestion, and expels
Wind and Flatulency. Half a Dram of the Seed provokes Menses or Sweat. Its
Powder is reckoned a Specific to expel the retained Afterbirth, given in white
Wine. It being exceeding heating, and digesting, eases windy Gripes, or Pains
in the Stomach or Bowels; therefore some use it instead of Pepper. The Root is
good against the Bite of venomous Beasts; and for a Distention of the Belly,
from the Menses stopped or ceasing; or in a beginning Dropsy from Flatuses, and
Crudities, and in a Stoppage of Urine, whether used in Drink, Poultises, or
Epithems.

182.
LUNG-WORT (Pulmonaria) or Sage of Jerusalem, tastes salt and clammy, and is
mostly used in Diseases of the Lungs, in Spitting of Blood and purulent Matter,
and the Spittle salt. It is also reckoned a Cordial. Outwardly, it is a
Vulnerary, cures Wounds, and is allied to Comfry, as a Vulnerary; and to the
great Daisy, as a Pulmonary. An useful Syrup may be made of it.

This Pulmonaria grows only in botanick Gardens, and with Care to keep it from
sharp Frosts.

183.
MADDER ( Rubia Tinctorum) is used in vulnerary Drinks; it, like Rhubarb, both
loosens and binds; from the former it is used for the Jaundice, Dropsy,
Obstructions of Urine, and coagulated Blood. On the latter Account, it is used
in Excesses of the Menses, Haemorrhoids and Bloody Fluxes. All Dyers Plants,
contain very fine Parts, fit to penetrate and open Obstructions; most of them
provoke Urine and Menses, and are good for Liver, Spleen, and Jaundice. A rough
Taste in Plants denotes their Astringency. Its Decoction is good in the Palsy,
Sciatica, Abortion, Bruises, Blows, Falls, etc. The Root is chiefly used both
inwardly and outwardly, as in Contusions, with Blackness and Blueness. Its
Seed, taken with Vinegar and Honey, is good in Swellings, and Hardness of the
Spleen. In a Stoppage of the Menses, a hot Decoction of the Leaves is good to
sit over. The Leaves and Roots, beaten and applied, take off Discolorings of
the Skin, as Freckles, Morphew, Spots, Scurf, etc. The Root, with the Oil of
Turpentine, makes a good Balsam for a Cough, in weak, stuffed, phlegmatic Lungs.

184.
MAIDENHAIR (Adiantum) boiled in Wine or Mead, and drank regularly for some
Days, cures Obstructions of the Liver, expels the King's Evil, clears Disorders
of the Lungs, is good for Difficulty of Breathing, expels Melancholy by Urine,
softens hard Tumors of the Spleen, and promotes the Menses. The Decoction,
Syrup, Conserve, or Powder of the Herb, check Fluxes of the Belly, and cool
Inflammations of the Liver. Its Decoction hinders Falling off of the Hair, and
is good in the Stone, and making Urine by Drops. The dried Herb is best, for,
used green, it is laxative, and brings away Choler, and Phlegm; eases the
Stomach, Liver, and Lungs; purifies the Blood, and gives a good Color; and
expels Humors that breed Obstructions in the Liver and Spleen. A Decoction of
the Herb, in Oil of Camomile, dissolves Kernels, lessens Swellings, and dries
up moist Sores. A Lee made of it cleanses the Head from Scurf, hinders Falling
off of the Hair, and makes it grow thick and fair.

185.
WHITE MAIDENHAIR, or WALL RUE, is of the same Nature as the other, good in a
Cough, Asthma, Pleurisy, Jaundice, and obstructed Spleen. It provokes Urine,
and expels Sand, Gravel, and Stone. The Powder, taken forty Days together,
helps Childrens Ruptures. It is the Soldier's Panacaea in the Scurvy. It is
green all Winter. Infused in Beer, and drank daily, Boil says it dissolves
King's Evil Swellings. A Powder of it, and Couch-grass, Maidenhair, and a
fourth Part of Dog-grass Roots mixed up into an Electuary, with Syrup of the
five opening Roots, Dr. Bowl says, is an excellent Remedy for the Rickets. As
is a Conserve of the tender Buds of Spleen-wort; or of the Buds of Asparagus;
or three Ounces of powdered Osmund-royal Roots, white Sugar an Ounce and an
Half, mixed, and two or three Drams of it given daily, in all the Child's Meat;
or a Conserve of its Buds, or of Fern Buds; are all most powerful, and
specific Remedies in the Rickets. As is a Decoction of Agrimony, drank thrice
a Day, for Ulcers of the Kidneys; or a Decoction of Calamint, in white or
Rhenish Wine; or their common Drink; a Decoction of the whole Strawberry Plant,
in Water, strained and sweetened; or the like Decoction of Tops of St. John's
wort, drank to Half a Pint a Day; or Half a Pint of a Decoction of Plantain, in
Water, drank Evening and Morning for a Week; are all good for Ulcers in the
Kidneys. Formius published a whole Book on Maidenhair in 1644, wherein he
makes it a g^neral Remedy.

186.
MALLOWS, ALCAEA, ABUTILON, KETMIA, etc. are all different Sorts of Mallows,
whose Virtues see briefly under Althaea. A Decoction of Mallow tender Buds, or
of Milk-wort, or of Mercury, all loosen the Belly; four Ounces of any of their
Decoctions, and an Ounce and an Half of Syrup of Violets taken, cure a Dysury,
or Pain of making Water with Heat; for which a Conserve of Mallow Flowers, is
good; or a Syrup of their Juice, or of Bramble Juice; or a Decoction of
Turnips; or Willow, or Lime-tree Ashes; or Juice of Ground Ivy, with Powder of
Althaea.

187.
MARJORAM wild ( Origanum) opens and cleanses; it is chiefly used in
Obstructions of the Lungs, Liver, and Wombs, of gross phlegmatic Habits; for a
Cough, Asthma, or Jaundice; it increases Milk; and, used before Bathing, it
purges off Ichorous Humors by Sweat. But it is more used outwardly in Bathes
for the Womb, Head, and whole Body, against Itch or Scab. The Herb is biting,
aromatic, and detergent; abounds with a volatile, aromatic, oily Salt. It is a
diuretic, and diaphoretic Plant, good to cause Spitting, and carries off gross
Humors. It is best used in Tea for an Asthma, Cough, and an Indigestion, or a
nervous Pleurisy. Washes of its Decoction, used to the Feet, are good in
Vapors, Green Sickness, and Palsy. The dried Herb, wrapped up warm in a Cloth,
and laid to the Head, and Neck, is good for a Crick in the Neck. The Heads and
Flowers, taken in Wine, are useful against the Biting of venomous Beasts. Its
Decoction drank with a few Cloves, and Sugar, gives great Relief in a Hiccup. A
thin Electuary of its Powder, with Saltpeter and Honey, makes the Teeth, often
rubbed with it, whiter, and faster. Its Oil is excessively hot, but, mixed with
milder Oils, it may be made a fine Warmer and Strengthener of the Nerves. --
The wild Marjoram is the hottest, and Pot Marjoram the mildest of the Class.
All of them have the same Virtues, but in different Degrees, according to their
Heat. Their Oil is used in Poultises and Ointments for cold Swellings, Laxness,
Weakness, Pains, Numbness, and Stiffness, etc. from Cold; and in Bathes and
Fomentations for the same Intentions.

188.
SWEET MARJORAM (Majorana) is of subtle small Parts; of an aromatic, lively,
and quick Taste and Smell; warms, dries, attenuates, and digests. Taken in any
Form it relieves the cold Distempers of the Head and Brain. The powdered Herb
is a Sternutatory, brings away much Phlegm, and strengthens the Brain. The
Juice of the Leaf, snuffed up the Nose, does the same. It is good in Disorders
of the Breast, strengthens the Stomach, and relieves the disordered Liver and
Spleen. It is proper in Diseases of the Womb, and expels Wind. Taken in Drink,
it provokes Urine, and sends off watery Humors. If chewed, or laid to the
Tooth, it eases the Toothache. A Handful of it, and Half a Dram of white
Hellebore, boiled in six Ounces of Water to four, strained, and the Decoction
snuffed up the Nose, from the Hollow of the Hand (the Mouth being full of
Water) often, is an excellent Errhine in a violent, but not mild Headache. A
Decoction of the simple Herb may be used the same Way for a Catarrh, but drawn
much higher up the Nose, by having the Mouth full of Water, and stopping one
Nostril, while it is snuffed up the other. A Decoction of this, with Pellitory
of Spain, and Long Pepper, used in a Gargle, recovers lost Speech. Its Oil
strengthens, and warms the Nerves much. The Herb is used in odoriferous Waters,
Powders, etc. for Ointments, and Pleasure. Pot Marjoram being milder, and not
so bitter, is scarce used in Physic, but chiefly in the Kitchen to relish
Meat, help cold Stomachs, and expel Wind.

189.
MAUDLIN. (Ageratum) See Costmary or Alecost, their Virtues being alike; as are
those of Chervil and sweet Cicely. It provokes Urine. Its Decoction cures the
Bite of Spiders. It expels Menses and Lochia. Boiled with Honey, and eaten, it
is good in Consumptions, and cleanses the Breast from thick Phlegm and Humors.
Its Decoction in Wine, drank twice or thrice a Day, preserves from the Plague;
for which Disease, and the Falling Sickness, there was formerly an Extract of
the Herb kept in the Shops. Its Root may be used against Contagion, instead of
the Carline Root. The whole Plant is good in a Cachexy and Asthma. The
Decoction purges the Blood; it is diuretic, dissolves tough and thick Matter in
the urinary Passages. The Juice is good for Bruises. A Poultise of it boiled in
Butter-Milk, is the chief Ripener. The powdered Herb, given often, cures
pissing the Bed.

190.
MARYGOLD ( Calendula) Flowers, are Cordial, Cephalic, Alexipharmac, provoke
Sweat, expel Measles, and Birth. The Water dropped into the Eyes, or Cloths
dipped in it, and laid on, cure their Redness and Inflammations. A Decoction of
the Flowers, used in Posset Drink, has been long taken as a safe Expulsive in
the Measles and Small Pox. The cut Flowers, eaten in a Sallad, with Oil and
Vinegar, are an Antidote against the Plague; and, for Cure, an Ounce or two of
the Juice of the Flowers drank fasting, and Sweat after it, this powerfully
expels the Poison of the Plague. Their Conserve is also excellent in this Case,
or their Vinegar used to the Wrists, Temples, and Nostrils. The Juice of these
Flowers, or of Celandine, rubbed often on Warts, certainly cures them. The
Leaves in a Bathe, hasten the Birth. The following was an ingenious Gentleman's
Method in the Want of Expulsives of Small Pox and Measles: Take Claret and
Vinegar, of each four Ounces; Ale and Milk of each Half a Pound; make a Posset,
and to the clear Whig, or Whey, add Marygold Flowers a Dram; (more if green)
Butterbur Root one Ounce; Grains of Kermes, two Drams; Cochineal, a Scruple;
Saffron, Half a Scruple; boil all an Hour in a close Vessel, strain; Dose from
one to three Ounces thrice a Day; boil the strained out Ingredients in their
common Drink, and give. It proved most successful. The green tender Herb
loosens the Belly, the dry binds it. The bruised Leaves, or Colewort Juice, put
up the Nose, are good Errhines.

191.
MASTER-WORT (Imperatoria) Root has a very hot Taste; it is opening and
thinning, prevents Poison, and provokes Sweat; it wonderfully discusses
Flatuses of the Bowels, and Uterus; hence its notable Service in flatulent
Cholics, in which Hoffman calls it a divine Remedy, beyond Angelica, and
Zedoary. Its chief Uses are in contagious, maglignant Diseases, the Bites of
venomous Creatures, in resolving and expectorating the thick Phlegm of the
Lungs, in correcting a stinking Breath, in phlegmatic Diseases of the Head, as
Palsy, Apoplexy, Lethargy, etc. in Crudities of the Stomach, Cholic, and
Quartan Ague, by taking Half a Spoonful of the Powder in Wine, before the Fit
comes on; go to Bed, and repeat it before each Fit, for several Times. Hoffman
says, in Dropsies, Quartans, and all long Fevers, it has not a Fellow. Either a
Gargle made of it, or a Piece of the Root, put into, or between the Teeth,
cures the Toothache, by drawing out Plenty of sharp Rheum. Its Fumigation is
good in Catarrhs, Tumors, and Nephritics. As it resembles, so it comes very
near Angelica in Virtues, but is stronger. Its Lotion is good for the Scab of
the Head, for inveterate Tetters (being first anointed with Lard) and drawing
forth extraneous Things out of Wounds. Its Powder and Decoction cure the Cramp,
and all Diseases of the Nerves, from cold Causes. They also cure the Cholic,
Asthma, and Hysterics, from that Origin. From the Warmth and Subtilty of its
Parts, it penetrates notably, and cleanses, and is a most powerful searching
Remedy; hence it cures cold Stomachs and Bowels, hastens the Menses, and
promotes Fruitfulness. Its Decoction in Wine, drank Morning and Evening, is
good against all cold Rheums, Distillations on the Lungs, and Shortness of
Breath. It provokes Urine, expels Gravel, Sand, and dead Foetus; and is good
for Vapors. The Decoction of the Root in Wine revives the almost extinct
Inclination and Ability to Venery; but Galen contradicts Tragus in this. What
grows wild in hot Countries, contains more Salt and Oil, than what is produced
in our Gardens. It has also much the same Virtues as Lovage, but stronger; it
burns the Mouth like Fire. A Tea of the Root is proper for cold, phlegmatic
Constitutions. Its distilled Water, Conserve, and Spirit, are all good. The
fresh Roots sliced, and hung about the Neck, are good in a Quinsy. The Water or
Spirit, dropped into green Wounds, or rotten Ulcers, though spreading, and
tending to a Gangrene, heals them up. It should always be in Fomentations for
Mortifications.

MASTER-WORT. I have not observed it to grow in any of our Provinces.

192.
MEADOW-SWEET (Ulmaria) is a Sudorific, and Alexipharmac, good in all Kinds of
Fluxes, Loosenesses, Bloody Flux, Excess of the M^^ses, and Spitting of Blood.
It resists the Plague, pestilential, malignant, and contagious Diseases. An
Infusion of the Leaves, in Wine or Ale, gives them a most grateful Smell and
Taste, like Burnet. The Flowers have a pleasant Smell, revive the Heart, put
into Mead, and give it the Flavor of Malvatic Wine. Sim. Pauli says, he saw a
mortal like Wound in the Bladder of a Maid, and another almost incurable
Fracture of the Arm, cured by this Herb. It is therefore justly esteemed a
Vulnerary, and such as Wurtz preferred to all other vulnerary Plants whatever,
for fractured Bones. It is said to alter and take away the Fits of Quartans,
and to cheer the Heart. Boiled in Wine, it relieves them that are troubled with
the Cholic. Its Decoction drank warm, with a little Honey, opens the Belly. The
Infusion or Decoction of the Root in Wine, drank, cures excessive Menses,
purging, or spitting of Blood, if daily drank for some Time; and this should
always be observed in the Use of all astringent, vulnerary, diaphoretic, and
alexipharmac Herbs, that we expect Benefit from. Tauvry says, a Dram of the
Extract of the Root taken, and repeated several Times, is good in malignant
Fevers; and its Decoction is better than that of Scorzonera. It is good for the
Botts in Horses. Applied outwardly, it heals old Ulcers, though cancerous,
eating, or fistulous; and Sores of the Mouth, or privy Parts, if used in
Gargle, or Lotion. Its Water is good for Heats, or Inflammations of the Eyes.

MEADOW-SWEET. I have not yet seen it grow, though I have often endeavored to
raise it.

193.
MEDLARS (Mespilus) answer the Purposes of Service Berries, against Vomiting,
Dysentery, and all other Fluxes. If the Mouth and Throat be washed with the
Decoction of the unripe Fruit, it hinders Defluxions on the Jaws, Teeth, and
Gums. Green Medlars, eaten freely, have cured many of Fluxes* says Forestus,
when all other Things have failed. They and Quinces are Specifics in epidemic
Fluxes, but Rhubarb, or a Vomit, should always be first used.

194.
MELILOT or KING'S CLOVER ( Melilotus) gently resolves, digests, softens, and
eases Pain; it is therefore used in digesting, and resolving Plasters,
Poultises, etc. Two Handfuls of this, one of Betony, two of Pellitory, boiled
in Water, and strained, make a noble Fomentation for the Breast in a Pleurisy;
it may be repeated. A Ptisan of it and Camomile, drank, is good in
Inflammations of the lower Belly, Cholic, Retention of Urine, Rheumatism, or
wherever it is necessary to facilitate the Course of the Humors by Lenifying.
Melilot is used in Carminative and Emollient Clysters, lenient and resolving
Poultises. If for the former, the Flowers of (...) Camomile, boiled in Tripe
Broth, strained, and a little Oil of Anise, or Cummin may be added, and
injected: For the latter, take two Roots of ^hi^e Lillies, a Handful of Hemlock
and Henbane Leaves, and three Pugils of Melilot Tops; boil all in Water to a
Consistence, put a little Oil of Tartar to it, mix and apply. The Juice or the
Infusion of the Flowers, in boiling Water, with a little strained camphorated
Spirits of Wine, abates the Inflammation of the Eyes. The Herb consists of
subtle Parts; which makes its Plasters proper after Blisters, to prevent
Mortification. Nothing exceeds a Fomentation of its Decoction with Foenugreek
Seed, in after Pains, which threaten an Inflammation of the Uterus; and indeed
it is a Specific in all Inflammations of the privy Parts of both Sexes. And in
Inflammations, or Swellings of the Uterus, Reins, or Hypochondries, What
outward Application can equal, far less exceed that excellent Plaster
communicated by Sim. Pauli from Jacob Fabricius? Which is this: Take Melilot
ten Ounces; Camomile eight Ounces; Althaea Root, and Foenugreek Seed, of each
six Ounces; of white crude Tartar, three Ounces; dry Figs, twenty Ounces;
Spring Water, twenty-four Pints; infused twenty-four Hours, in a close earthen
Vessel; then strain, and boil up to the Consistence of an Extract: Take of this
Extract twelve Ounces; Wax, and Sheep's Suet, four Ounces; purified Gum
ammoniac, three Ounces; Turpentine, two Drams; Oil of Bay, six Drams; expressed
Oil of Nutmeg, three Drams; Oil of Carraway Seed, and of its distilled Spirit,
each two Ounces; fine Powder of Melilot Flowers, Zedoary, Blessed Thistle,
Roots of Iris, Florentine, each one Ounce; mix, and make a Plaster. But, for a
Pleurisy, he recommended the following Fomentation; Take Melilot, Pellitory of
the Wall, or true Pellitory, each two Hand^uls; Betony, a Handful;
Marshmallows, a Handful and an Half; Camomile Flowers Half a Handful; mix,
boil in Water, and use to the Breast. He advises, that wherever we meet with
Melilot and Foenugreek absolutely, in Authors, only their Seeds are understood.
A Fomentation of a Decoction of Melilot, Agrimony, and Camomile, is best for
the Anus inflamed, except it is from some sharp Things applied to it, then use
a Fomentation of new Milk. For the Legs inflamed, a Fomentation of Melilot may
be used; but the Leaves of Elder, warmed in a Drying Pan till they begin to
sweat, then applied like a Poultise; or a Poultise of Oats boiled in strong
Wine, and laid on; or the warm Juice of Plantain, rubbed on, are much better,
says Stockerus: Who says, that, for Ulcers on the Legs, Powder of burnt Horse
Radish Root, sprinkled on, cleanses and heals the moist Sort. As Etmuller
extols, as a Specific, a Decoction of Self-heal, with Salt Prunella, used for a
Gargle in Inflammations of the Tonsils; for whose Ulcers, Grulingus commends
the Gargle of boiled Vervain often used: Who also orders a Poultise of Dwarf
Elder, and Rue Leaves, to be applied to inflamed Testicles.

195.
ENGLISH MERCURY, GOOD HENRY, or ALL GOOD. (Bonus Henricus, Lapathum unctuosum)
The Root is drying and cleansing, the Herb mollifying and loosening inwardly.
Sim. Pauli says, it makes an excellent Discussive, Digestive, and Anodyne
Poultise for gouty Pains, thus: Take of the fresh Leaf without the Flowers,
five Handfuls; dried Flowers of Elder and Camomile, of each two Handfuls; boil
to a Mucilage in Elder Water, then mix Powder of Gum Caranna, and Camphire, of
each Half an Ounce; make a Poultise, and apply. The Leaf, laid on Wounds or
Sores, cleanses their Foulness, heals and closes them up wonderfully.

I believe there are none of this or the following Kinds of Mercury in our
Provinces.

196.
FRENCH MERCURY, MALE and FEMALE, (Mercurialis Mas et Foemina) Their Leaves and
Juice are taken in Broth, or drank with a little Sugar to purge Choler, and
watery Humors. Hippocrates extols them in Women's Diseases. Applied to the
privy Parts, he says, they ease hysteric Pains. Its Decoction, drank, expels
Menses, and Afterbirth; a Stove or Fomentation of them does the same. He
applied the Leaves outwardly for Diseases of the Reins and Bladder, and for
sore and watery Eyes; and for Deafness, and Pains of the Ears, by dropping its
Juice into them, and then bathing them with white Wine. The Leaves, boiled in
Chicken Broth, are good against hot Fits of the Ague. They ^leanse the Breast
and Lungs from Phlegm, but offend the Stomach. The Juice snuffed up the Nose,
purges the Head of Rheum. A Glass of the ^istilled Water, drank fasting, with a
little Sugar, ^urges viscous and melancholy Humors. The Leaves or Juice, often
rubbed on Warts, take them ^way. The Juice, mixed with Vinegar, helps all
running Sores, Tetters, Itch, etc. Applied in a Poultise, it digests and spends
the Humors, and eases the Inflammation. Given in a Clyster, it cleanses the
Guts, as well as a Decoction of Senna. Seeds of Male and Female Mercury, boiled
with Wormwood, cure the yellow Jaundice speedily, says Mathiolus. Superstitious
People formerly believed, that if breeding Women used the Herb inwardly or
outwardly, for three Days together, after Conception, and the Menses stayed,
they should bring forth Children, Male or Female, as was the Sort of Mercury
used. Dog Mercury is seldom used, but answers the same Purposes as the French.

197.
WOOD MERCURY, or DOG MERCURY ( Cynocrambe) is more purgative, and often
vomits. I have heard of a Dose of it taken, that caused a Superpurgation and
Death; and others have used it with very good Success. Horstius commends the
following Clyster in the Stone, Cholic, and Hypochondriac Melancholy: Take
Mecury, Althaea, Agrimony, and Betony, of each two Handfuls; Pennyroyal,
Marjoram, Bayberries, of each a Handful; Senna one Ounce; Camomile Flowers Half
a Handful; boil to a Pound and strain; add common Oil, three Ounces; Salt, a
Dram or two; mix and inject. The Mercuries are rareley used inwardly, but only
externally. It and Beet Roots, boiled in Broth, loosen the Belly, if eaten an
Hour before Dinner.

198.
MILLEFOIL or YARROW ( Millefolium) being very Astringents, stop Blood and
Fluxes from any Part, as from Wounds, Nose, Mouth, Stool, Uterus, or by Urine
or Piles. It is also good in Vomiting, Retention of Urine; Stone, Gravel,
Whites, etc. Applied outwardly, it is good in the Headache, in the Cure of
Wounds, Piles, Ruptures, Tumors of the Yard, etc. It is so great a Diuretic,
that it causes bloody Urine, and its Leaf or Juice put up the Nose, make it
bleed. It is the rough, harsh Millefoil, that is the Astringent; and the
bitter, says Hoffman, that is the Aperient, which opens Obstructions, and
dissolves. It expels Urine, and kills Worms. Its Decoction, drank, prevents
Abortion. Its Juice clears the Redness and Bloodiness of the Eyes. A Draught of
the Decoction before the Ague Fit, three or four times, cures it, and helps
Incontinence of Urine. The Juice, drank in Goats Milk, cures the Whites. The
Powder of the dried Herb and Flowers cures bloody Urine. A Bag of the Herb,
worn on the Stomach, is vouched to cure Agues. Its Root, chewed in the Mouth,
cures the Toothache. It is so eminent a Vulnerary, that Hollerius tells of a
Rustic who had his Nose almost cut off; he had the loose hanging down Part
quickly put up, joined to the other, and, with the Herb bruised in a little
black Wine, he bound it clumsily on, the Blood was quickly stopped, and the
Wound cured with a pretty Scar. The bruised Herb, with a little Cobweb,
speedily cures Wounds.

199.
MINT, SPEAR MINT, GARDEN MINT, and MINTS ( Mentha) Its Infusion or Decoction
is greatly used in Weakness, and Crudity of the Stomach, Heavings or Vomitings,
Hiccup, Windiness and burning Heats, etc. in Ostructions of the Liver, Griping
of the Guts, and Swimming of the Head. It cures (...) Menses, and Fluor Albus.
It eases Childrens G^^^es, strengthens the Brain and Memory, and checks
immoderate venereal Desires; restores a lost Appetite and Digestion; it warms
and promotes Perspiration much; for all which its Tea, Infusion, Decoction,
distilled Water or Powder, are chiefly used. Applied outwardly it takes away
the Hardness of the Breasts, Curdling of the Milk, and cures Head-achs. The
Leaves, steeped in Milk, hinder its Curdling for Cheese. It hinders the
Curdling on the Stomachs of Infants, tender, sick, and weak Persons. Two Ounces
of the Water, drank, and repeated as often as is necessary, or as much of the
Tea of dried Mint, often stop the severest Vomitings; for which it is the next
Succedaneum to Riverius's Salt Mixture, and Opiates, which very rarely fail.
For Loss of Appetite and Loathing, an Elixir of Mint, with its own Spirit by
Infusion, with a little Sugar, is a good Remedy. Borellus gives it as a Secret,
that if Women, reputed barren, will, as soon as their Menses are over, apply a
Cake made of wild Horse Mint to their private Parts, in the Form of a Crown,
presently before Coition with their Husbands, and keep easy both in Body and
Mind, they will soon conceive. A Poultise of Mint, Rue, and Carraway Seeds,
boiled in Vinegar, dissolves coagulated Milk in the Breasts. Black or red Water
Mint, in Tea, or its Infusion in Beer or Wine, etc. is stronger, and more
stomachic, than Spear Mint; therefore preferred by such whose Stomachs can bear
it. But Pepper Mint Water has a far more agreeable Smell, and pleasanter Taste;
it is now in great Repute in private Families; it is an excellent Dram, and
upbraids not the Drinker; it is hot in the Mouth, and warms the Stomach; but in
two or three Minutes after it is drank, the Mouth feels cold, has little Taste
of Mint, and feels as it were glazed over with Oil. Its distilled Water, if
clear and fine, is so much worse, having its Oil separated from it; but that
which is whitish and muddy, has the Oil mixed with it. It is an admirable Water
against Surfeits, in Digestion, Flatulency, Belchings, Loathing, Palling of the
Stomach, Gripes and Cholic, etc. Juice of Spear Mint, taken with Vinegar, stays
Bleeding; it kills Worms, even the round Sort, says Dioscorides. In a Poultise
with Barley-meal, it dissolves Imposthumes. The Juice with Mead eases Pains in
the Ears. Its Decoction used for a Wash cures Eruptions on the Skin, yea Ulcers
on Childrens Heads, and heals Chaps in the Anus. It is good against Poison of
venomous Creatures.

200.
CALA-MINT ( Calamintha) whose Leaf (for the Root is never used) consists of
very subtle, volatile Parts; it is more hot and pungent than Mint. It is
chiefly used for the Stomach and Uterus. It provokes Urine and Menses, opens
Obstructions of the Liver, and is good in a Cough; and whether it be infused in
Wine, or its Powder drank in Wine, it discusses Flatuses. Some use it for
Shortness of Breath, bilious Gripes in the Belly and Stomach, and for the
yellow Jaundice: Taken in Wine it stays Vomiting; or with Honey and Salt, drank
in Whey, kills Worms in the Belly. A Poultise of the Herb, or Juice applied,
cures the Leprosy. A Pessary of it brings down the Menses. A Decoction of the
green Herb in Wine, the Liquor used in a Fomentation, and the boiled Herb
applied in a Poultise, cures black and blue Marks of the Skin and Face. Its
Decoction drank, and a Poultise of the fresh Herb, applied daily for some Time,
cures the Sciatica. Its Juice, dropped into the Ears, kills Worms there. Its
Decoction in Wine, drank, provokes Sweat, and opens Obstructions of the Liver
and Spleen. After the Body has been duly purged, the Use of this Herb cures
Tertians. Its Decoction, drank with Sugar, helps the Overflowing of the Gall,
old Coughs, Shortness of Breath, Hardness of the Spleen, or cold Disorders of
the Bowels; for which Disorders, its Infusion, Syrup, Decoction, or Juice, are
good. The low Cala-mint is very Opening, Cleansing, and Vulnerary; it expels
Urine and Gravel; it is best taken in Broth and powdered Sugar, or in its own
distilled Water. It is taken in Broth and Ptisans by consumptive People, and
such as make purulent Urine; it heals Ulcers. It is used in Extract, Syrup,
Conserve, etc. Cala-mint, Lady's Mantle, or Agrimony, boiled in red Wine, or
their Powders drank in red Wine, are good in a Diabetes. Cala-mint is also good
for the Cramp, for which Parkinson commends a Decoction of fresh or dried Roots
of Elecampane in Spring Water, to foment the Parts; or Verjuice rubbed warm on
the Parts. Boil recommends Tops of Rosemary.

CALA-MINT. We have not this Species growing in our Provinces; but some
Botanists think our Dittany a Species of it.

201.
CAT-MINT ( Nepeta) is aromatic, acrid, bitter, hot, and dry; contains small
and subtle Parts; thins and opens. It is chiefly used in Diseases of the
Uterus, as obstructed Menses, Barrenness, cutting thick Phlegm in the Lungs,
etc. It is mostly drank in Tea, or infused in Wine. Its Root chewed, Hoffman
says, makes mild Men fierce. Cats will destroy it, if not well fenced with
Thorns.

202.
MISTLETOE ( Viscum) is reckoned a Specific in the Falling Sickness, Apoplexy,
and Vertigo, either in Powder, Decoction, or hung about the Neck as an Amulet.
That of the Oak, from the Superstition of the Druids, has been most esteemed;
others prefer that of the Hasle. Dr. Bowl says, the Powder taken several times
in Carduus, and Poppy Water, is a Secret in Pleurisies. Some give it for Worms,
others for Quartans. The Powder or Juice of its Berries, strained into Oil, and
drank, gives present Relief in severe Stitches. There is a Birdlime made of it,
which made into a Plaster with Rosin and a little Wax, ripens Swellings in the
Groin, hard Tumors behind the Ears, or other hard Imposthumes. With
Frankincense it softens old Ulcers and Imposthumes. Sir John Colebatch wrote a
Treatise on its Usefulness in the Epilepsy.

203.
MONEY-WORT, or HERB TWOPENCE (Nummularia) is drying and astringent, a chief
Vulnerary. The Leaves and Flowers, bruised and laid on Wounds or Ulcers of any
Sort, cure them; or, taken in Wine, it cures Bloody Fluxes, Weakness of the
Stomach and Belly, Rheums, and Humidity, excessive Menses, all internal Wounds
and Ulcers, especially of the Lungs. It is a good Antiscorbutic; but taken in
Powder, and used outwardly in Ointment, it is chiefly intended for Childrens
Ruptures.

MONEY-WORT. I believe this Species does not grow in any of our Provinces.

204.
MOON-WORT THE GREATER ( Lunaria Major) especially the Seeds, are acrid and
bitter. The Roots are used in Sallads. It warms moderately, cleanses, and is
diuretic. The powdered Seed given in Lime-flower, or black Cherry Waters, is
good in the Epilepsy. The Leaves, with Sanicle, make a good Ointment for
Wounds, Moon-wort, with a Stockgilly Flower Leaf, and a larg^ oblong Pod, is
Dioscorides's Mad-wort; which taken in Wine, Broth, Meat, or any other Way,
cures the Poison of the Bite of a mad Dog. The Poultise is also useful in other
Cases, where Drying, Digesting, and Cleansing are required, and thereby clears
the Skin from Spots and Discoloring. Taken in Drink it cures the Hiccup, if
not from an Ague. It is also good for Wounds, dissolves coagulated Blood,
cleanses and heals old filthy Ulcers, and creeping Cankers.

LUNARIA MAJOR. Grows with us only in curious Gardens.

205.
LESSER MOON-WORT ( Lunaria Minor) is more cooling and drying than
Adder's-tongue; therefore more vulnerary, both inwardly and outwardly. A
Decoction of the Leaves in red Wine, drank, stops Women's Courses, Whites,
Bleeding, Vomiting, and Looseness; cures Bruises, Hurts, Falls, broken or
dislocated Bones, Sprains, and Ruptures. But it is mostly esteemed and used for
Liniments, Oils, Balsams, and Salves, to heal inward or outward green Wounds.

LUNARIA MINOR. This Species, I have not observed to grow in our Provinces; but
we have one Plant, that modern Botanists take to be a Species of it.

206.
MOTHER-WORT ( Cardiaca) provokes Urine and Menses, cleanses the Breast from
cold Phlegm oppressing it; kills Worms in the Belly, warms and dries up cold
Humors; digests and discusses such as are settled in any P^rt; cures Cramps
and Convulsions. Its Tea, Decoction, or Powder, are most beneficial in
Palpitation of the Heart, Spleen, Hysterics, and Hypo; for, in Diseases of the
Heart and Hypo, it is of great Efficacy; it warms, dries, thins, and discusses.
A Spoonful of the Powder, drank in Wine, wonderfully helps Women in Labor, or
in Suffocations of the Womb.

207.
MOUSE-EAR ( Pilosella) is rather too astringent and drying; it cures Wounds,
and causes Sneezing. It is added to vulnerary Decoctions, Drinks, Plasters,
and Ointments. It is said to be most powerful against the Stone. After proper
Evacuation it is excellent against the Bloody Flux, or Loosenesses of the Belly
or Uterus. It stays bilious Vomitings, and cures Childrens Ruptures. Some use
it for a beginning Jaundice or Dropsy. The Powder blown into the Nose stops its
Bleeding. Lemery says, its Root is good in a Fistula Lacrymalis. Bauhinus says,
a Conserve of the large flowered hairy Field Mouse-ear is good in the Falling
Sickness; and that the outward Application of its Leaves is good in a Palsy.

208.
MUG-WORT ( Artemisia) says Tournefort, besides several acid Liquors, affords
some volatile, concrete, and very lixivial fixed Salts, with much Sulphur and
Earth. Schroder calls it Uterine; it expels Menses, Birth, and Afterbirth, and
cleanses off Filth, whether used inwardly or outwardly in Bath, Fumes, or
Lotions. Its Decoction, with Sugar and Honey, eases a Cough, and wastes the
Stone. Three Drams of the Powder drank in Wine, says Parkinson, is an excellent
Remedy in the Sciatica; especially if a little Gum Guajac, Camphire, and Snake
Root, be added to the Powder, and the following Liniment used o^twardly, every
Morning, at the same Time: Take bruised Ants Eggs, Half an Ounce; Castile Soap,
an Ounce and a Half; best Brandy, six Ounces; pound the first two well together
in a Mortar; then mix with the Brandy over a Chafing Dish of Coals, and make a
Liniment; Camphire and Opium may be add^d. I know of no outward Application,
near so effe^tual. It has cured those that have been some Years Bedridden, and
under the most distracting Pains, and their Thighs and Legs emaciated; and why
may it not be as successful in other arthritic Pains, if tried for a Month? For
Sciatic Pains; Two or three Drams of powdered Mug-Wort given in Wine. A
Poultise of fre^^ white Briony Root, applied warm to the Part two or three
Times. A Decoction or Infusion of Elecampane Root drank. A Decoction of St.
John's Wort Flowers drank forty Days; or two Drams of the powdered Seed taken
often in Wine* An Infusion, Decoction, or Syrup of Lady's-smock ( Nasturtium
Pratense) or its expressed Juice, drank. A Poultise of bruised Comfry Roots
spread, and laid to the Parts. Elm Bark boiled in Water, to the Consistence of
a Syrup, and a third Part Aquavitae, or Brandy, put to it, for a Fomentation.
Stinging Nettles boiled in Ale, till they are soft, strain out the Liquor,
foment with it warm, and then apply the Nettles in a Poultise; or blister the
Part; or touch it with the actual Cautery. -- For a Suppression of Urine in
general, six peeled Cloves of Garlic beaten up in a Mortar, with Half a Pint
of Rhenish Wine; strain off the Wine, and drink in the Fit, repeat it. Drink,
fasting, and at Bedtime, a Decoction of the inner Bark of the Hasle-tree, in
Ale, from a Pint to Half a Pint; or from Half a Dram to a Dram of the outer
Rind of powdered Oranges, drank in Rhenish or white Wine; or a Poultise of
Onions, fried in Hog's Lard* or of Onions and Garlic fried together, and
applied to the Sharebone and Kidneys; or white Onions, beaten up the same Way,
and applied; or Onions roasted under the Embers, and beaten up to a Poultise
with Goose-grease, and applied to the Navel and Sharebone; or two Spoonfuls of
Onion Juice, drank in Half a Pint of white Wine; or lay to the Navel a Poultise
of good fresh Chervil Leaves, fried either in Hog's Lard, or in Oil of Walnuts.
Pickled Samphire is good. An Infusion or Decoction of Wild Carrot Seed drank in
white Wine. Powdered Acorns drank in white Wine. Six or Seven Winter Cherries,
bruised in a Glass of white Wine, strained and Drank; or Ivy Powder drank in
white Wine, from Half a Dram to a Dram; or Juice of three or four Lemons, mixed
with Water, sweetened a little, and drank; or Juice of Lemons, two Ounces;
Spirit of Turpentine, two Drams; white Win^ four Ounces; mix and drink it. A
Decoction of Mallows drank; or their Conserve taken. Sprinkle a hot Stone with
Vinegar, lay Pellitory of the Wall on it, and, when warm, apply it to the Root
of the Yard, or Sharebone; or apply to the same Place a Poultise of its Leaves,
fried in fresh Butter, or in Oil of Scorpions; or drink three Ounces of its
fine Juice at a Time; or an Ounce of Parsley Juice in white Wine; or a Dram of
the Root of Solomon's Seal, in Wine; or drink, at Pleasure, a Decoction of
Turnips sweetened with Honey; or Lime-tree Flowers, boiled in white or Rhenish
Wine, beaten up, and applied in a Poultise; or use a Fomentation of the
Decoction with Sponges; or drink an Emulsion, of Half an Ounce of Violet Seeds,
made with Barley, or Speedwell Water. -- If the Stoppage be in the Kidneys,
Juice or Syrup of Ground Ivy, is excellent; or take a Dram of Hedge
Mustard Seed in white Wine; or use Juice or Syrup of Pellitory of the Wall; or
drink the Juice or Infusion of Radish Roots in white Wine.
A large Dose of Mug-wort, or its Juice, is said to be an Antidote to too great
a Quantity of Opium taken. A Bath of its Decoction is a present Remedy for
weary Travelers, (and so is a Bath of warm Water.) It quickly takes off all
Fatigue; or the Herb put into their Boots, or Shoes, prevents or eases
Weariness much. When the Nerves are shattered by flatulent Cramps, racking
Pains, or great Fatigue, especially after malignant, or very tedious Diseases,
Sim. Pauli says, he never knew a better Remedy than a Bath of the Decoction of
Mug-wort, Agrimony, Sage, Camomile, and beaten Wheat. Baptista says, that on
Midsummer Day, there is like a large Coal under the Root of Mug-wort, which
taken up, and h^ng about the Neck, is an Amulet against the Epilepsy. Some,
only by a Fumigation of the dried Herb, have found Benefit in oedematous or
white Swellings. An Ointment of it, and Field Daisies, discusses Wens, hard
Knots, and Kernels about the Neck and Throat. A Tea of it, and Feverfew, drank,
is good in Female Disorders, and in Nervous Complaints, with wild Valerian
Root, etc. Ambrose Parey says, that a Scruple of Mug-wort Ashes, boiled in
Water, vomits, purges, and sweats. Tauvry says, that the Coal under the Root,
burnt and powdered on St John's Day, cures the Epilepsy. And Etmuller says,
that Frogs-livers dried in the Sun, on Cole-wort Leaves, powdered and given, do
the same. Dr. Po says, an Ounce of Mug-wort Juice, and Half an Ounce of
Scordium Juice, Powders of Arum Root, Antimony, Ceruse, Frankincense, Acacia,
of each a Dram, all beaten in a leaden Mortar, mix, and anoint, it cures
Tetters. The red Mug-wort is much preferable to the green, for Fineness of
Parts, and Use. If a Goose is stuffed and roasted with it, the Meat will be
very tender.

209.
MULBERRY-TREE ( Morus) the dry unripe Fruit of the black, cools, dries, and
binds much, therefore good in Loosenesses, Bloody Fluxes, Coeliaca, excesses of
the Menses, Spitting of Blood; and outwardly in Inflammations and Ulcers of the
Mouth, and Jaws. The ripe Fruit eaten before Dinner loosens the Belly, but
taken after Meat, it corrupts quickly, and is hurtful to the Stomach. The
Berries quench Thirst, and excite an Appetite. Not only the Fruit, but the
whole Tree, has something in it both loosening and binding; but the Bark of the
Root is most loosening; it is a little bitter, and kills broad Worms. A Gargle
of the Leaves, or of Leaves and Bark boiled, is good for the Toothache. They
and Oil make a good Ointment for Burns. A Syrup of the Berries allays Thirst
and Heat in Fevers much, and is very effectual for Inflammations, Pustules, and
little Ulcers of the Mouth, Throat, and all those Parts. Some use the Juice for
the Bite of Serpents, and the Eating of Nightshade. The Leaves with Vinegar
are good to lay on Burns. The Leaves of Mulberry, Vine, and early Fig Tree,
boiled in rain Water, are good to wash the Hair, and make it clear and fair. If
the naked Root have a little Slit cut in it, and a small Hole made in the
Ground about the Slit, in the Harvest Time, a Juice comes out of the Tree,
which being hardened, next Day is good for the Toothache, and to dissolve
Knots, and purge the Belly. The Leaves check Bleeding in any Part of the Body,
as at Wounds, Nose, Mouth, Piles, etc. A Twig of the Tree tied to a Woman's
Arm, at full Moon, restrains the excessive Flux of her Menses. The Leaves,
steeped in Urine, take Hair off the Skin.

210.
MULLEIN MALE. (Tapsus Barbatus, Verbascum) The Leaves are of a saltish,
styptic Taste, and smell like Elder. A Decoction of the Herb, drank, is good
for the Cholic. If boiled in Milk, it is good for a Tenesmus and Piles. Boiled
in Blacksmith's Trough Water, and two Cup-fulls of it drank daily, Clysters
injected, and Fomentations of it used at the same time, cure the Bloody Flux,
and other involuntary and expensive Losses of Blood; in which Cases, some add
Oak Leaves and Silver-weed to it. Aloes dissolved in a Decoction of this, then
boiled up to an Extract, it either irritates the Piles, or causes Loss of
Blood, which often makes its Use dangerous. Its distilled Water cures Burns, St
Anthony's Fire, Gout, and all Disorders of the Skin. a Poultise of the Leaves,
Leek Tops, and Crumbs of Bread, is good for pained and swelled Piles. Some
esteem the Herb a Specific for the Cure of a Tympany; others will have it to be
chiefly intended for Diseases of the Breast; as Cough, Blood-spitting, and to
heal Gripes of the Belly. Ray says, its Leaves, worn some Days between the Feet
and Stocking Soals, gently promote the Menses. Its Decoction, drank, is good in
Ruptures and Cramps. A Fumigation of the Seeds and Flowers, with Camomile
Flowers, and powdered Turpentine, thrown on live Coals in a Chafing Dish, set
in a Close-stool; and such as are troubled with the Piles, Falling down of the
Anus, Bleeding Haemorrhoids, bloody Flux, or Tenesmus, set over it, find it
very beneficial. An Oil or Ointment, made of the Flowers, is good for the
Piles. The Root boiled in red Wine, or Water wherein Steel was often quenched,
is good for a Flux, and takes off Stoppages of Water. A Decoction of its
Leaves, and of Sage, Marjoram, and Camomile Flowers, is a good Bath for any
Part of the Body that is stiff with Cramp or Cold. Three Ounces of its Flower
Water, drank Evening and Morning, for some Days together, is good in the hot
Gout. The Juice of the Leaf and Flower, or the Powder of the dried Roots rubbed
on, takes away rough (but not smooth) Warts. The powdered Flowers are good for
Gripes and Belly-ach. A Decoction of Roots and Leaves, is good for Swellings of
the Neck, and Inflammations of the Throat. A Poultise of Seed and Leaves,
boiled in Wine, draws out of the Flesh Thorns, Splinters, etc. eases the Pain,
and cures the Part. The bruised Leaves wrapped in wet Paper, and roasted under
hot Embers, and laid to any Blotch or Boil in the Groin, dissolves and heals
it. The Seed boiled in Wine, and applied to any lately dislocated, and new
reduced Joint, takes away Swelling and Pain presently. A Poultise of Leaves and
Flowers of white Mullein, boiled in Water, and applied, eases the Gout Pain.
The bruised Leaves, bound on a Horse's Foot that is pricked in Shoeing, heals
it surprizingly in a little Time. The Juice rubbed on, and Poultises of the
Leaves laid to any Bruise, quickly dissolve the clotted Blood, and take away
the blue and black Color of the Part. As do the bruised Leaves of Cud-weed,
boiled in Oil, and applied; or bruised Chervil Leaves laid warm to the Place,
etc.

211.
MUSTARD SEED (Sinapi) is an eminent Stomachic, Diaphoretic, Antiscorbutic, and
Antihydropic. It is a good Medicine in the Hypo, Green Sickness, Cachexy, and
sleepy Disorders. Chewed fasting in a Morning, it is good for such as are in
Danger of an Apoplexy. It recovers a flagged Appetite, restores a true Taste of
Meat, cures Loathing and Squeamishness (except from Whetting, Dramming, or
habitual Drinking.) It causes Sneezing, and penetrates most powerfully into the
Head, and Brain, proper therefore in Epileptic, and Hysteric Fits, Lethargic
Drowsiness, Paralytic and Apoplectic Disorders. It provokes Urine and Menses;
stimulates to Venery, prevents Ague Fits, removes Catarrhs, cures Hoarseness,
expectorates tough Phlegm, discusses Swellings, purges the Head, expels Worms,
cleanses the Viscera from Obstructions, carries off viscid, tough, slimy
Humors, out of the Intestines, if taken with Vinegar, but Sugar contradicts
these Designs. Bruised Seed, drank with Vinegar, is a great Antiscorbutic,
especially in Sieges, when from unwholesome and uncommon Foods there comes a
Difficulty of Breathing, Rottenness of the Gums, Blackness and Looseness of the
Teeth, etc. A large Dose taken in warm Wine three Hours before the Fit, and
repeated several Times, cures Quartans. An Ounce or two of the bruised Seed,
infused in a Quart of Sack or white Wine Whey, and drank freely (after
necessary Evacuations) is of special Use in the Palsy, Lethargy, Epilepsy,
Hysterics, Apoplexy, Dropsy, and Loss of Speech. The Seeds dissolve Tumors,
digest Abscesses, etc. The Seed, bruised and laid on Cupping with
Scarification, is good to raise the Sick out of an Apoplexy, Palsy, or
Lethargy; or to redden the Skin, to draw out the Humors that lie deep. Leeks
minced small, fried in Vinegar, spread on a Cloth, and Mustard Seed sprinkled
on it, and applied to any Part pained with the Rheumatism, is very resolutive;
or a Poultise of Turpentine, Pigeons Dung, and this Seed laid to the Gout, or
to the Jaws in a violent Toothache, is good; but, if too much Mustard Seed is
put to them, they will blister. It is also good to apply to the Hip, in a
Sciatica. This Seed is an Antidote to Mushrooms, and to the Sting or Bite of
venomous Creatures. An Electuary of it excites Venery. It is good for the
Liver, Spleen, and gnawing Pain of the Bowels. A Gargle of it helps the Falling
down of the Uvula. Its Poultise dissolves schrophulous Tumors about the Neck.
It is often used as a Blister to draw forth deep Pains, as in the Gout,
Sciatica, Joints, Sides, Loins, Shoulders, Arms, Legs, or Thighs. The Seed,
applied with Honey, dissolves coagulated Blood, and takes off Roughness or
Scabbiness of the Skin. The chemical Oil provokes the Menses powerfully, and is
an Antihisteric.

212.
HEDGE MUSTARD (Erysimum) Seed and Herb, warm, dry, attenuate, open, and
expectorate; is good in very thick Phlegm of the Lungs, and obstinate Coughs.
Outwardly it is good in occult Cancers, and hard Swellings of the Breasts. In
the Cholic, its Decoction in Wine, drank, is admirable. Its Decoction is good
in a Hoarseness, where the Voice is almost lost, and the Spirits low. A Syrup
of the Juice, made with Honey, is good in all the above Diseases of the Breast,
and in a Jaundice, Pleurisy, Pain in the Back and Loins, and in Gripes of the
Belly. The Seed is good against Poisons, Sci^tica, Gout, and other Joint Aches;
and in Fistula's, hollow Ulcers, and in eating or running Cankers, etc. It is
Vulnerary, causes plentiful Spitting, makes Breathing easier, etc.

213.
TREACLE MUSTARD ( Thlaspi) is Cutting, Thinning, Cleansing, and Opening,
expels Urine, Menses, Birth, and Afterbirth. It is good to break inward
Imposthumes; Clysters of it are much commended in a Sciatica. Its Powder given
from one to two Ounces, at different Times, is extolled in the Stone, and to
dissolve coagulated Blood. Outwardly, it cleanses all Running Ulcers; but it is
improper for Women with Child.

214.
COMMON MITHRIDATE MUSTARD (Thlaspi Vaccariae folio) is very hot, dry, and
cleansing; it is used to break inward Abscesses, expel the Menses, and cure the
Sciatica. Outwardly it cleanses all creeping Ulcers, and is sometimes used for
a Snuff. Being very diuretic, it is a good Remedy for Dropsy and Bloody Flux,
but hurtful to Women with Child. Bastard Mithridate Mustard has the same or
like Virtues.

215.
TOWER MUSTARD. (Turritis) Parkenson and Lemery think that it is Cutting,
Opening, Wind-expelling, and Sudorific; and seems, from its Taste, to be near
allied to Mustard and Cresses, and probably will produce the like Effects.
Tournefort and Lobel have increased the Species, and several others have added
to them. -- Myrrhis or Sweet Cicely, See before.

216.
MUSHROOMS (Fungi) roasted and applied in a Poultise, or boiled with white
Lilly Roots, and Linseed in Milk, are one of the best Ripeners of Boils and
Abscesses we have; for, from the Coldness, Clamminess, and Viscousness of their
Parts, they reverberate the perspiring Matter, shut it up in the excretory
Ducts, which fills and distends the secretory and small Vessels; hence must
ensue a Breach of some of them, and a quick Suppuration of the extravasated
Matter. Inwardly, they have always been reputed, some a more speedy, others a
slower Poison, for which, Pages of Testimonies might be quoted from the
greatest Philosophers, Physicians, Botanists, Historians, and Naturalists, who
have not been Slaves to Taste, and Pimps of Luxury. Their Poultises are of some
Service in Quinsies. They are chiefly used in inflammatory Swellings, which, by
too hot Applications, may easily be turned Schirruses.

217.
MYRTLE. ( Myrtillus) Though the internal Use of both Leaves and Berries be
almost laid aside, yet Leaves, Twigs, and Fruit, are all binding and drying,
whether used inwardly or outwardly, especially the Leaves; hence all the
Ancients agreed, that they were to be given for Spitting of Blood, or
Excoriations of the Bladder. The expressed Juice of the green Berries is good
for the Stomach, and provokes Urine. The Fruit boiled in Wine, and applied,
heals Ulcers in the extreme Parts of the Body. Mixed with Wheat Flour, and
applied, is good for Inflammations of the Eyes. A Wine made of the Juice of the
Berries, drank a little warm, is good in Surfeits, Relaxations, or Fallings
down of the Uterus, or Anus; and in the Whites. It cleanses off Scales, and
running Ulcers of the Head, chap'd Nipples, and prevents Falling off of the
Hair. A Decoction of the Leaves makes a good Bath or Fomentation for weak or
relaxed Joints, Strains, Fractures, or Dislocations, of slow Cure; or for Sores
behind the Ears. The Juice of the Leaves does the same; or if they are bruised,
sprinkled with Water, and laid to running Ulcers, or any Part oppressed with
Defluxions; or mixed with unripe Oil of Olives, or Oil of Roses, and a little
Wine, they are good in Tetters, Inflammations of the Testicles, and
Excrescences of the Anus. A Syrup of the Berries is used in Loosenesses, for
hot Catarrhs, or Rheums of the Breast. The Fruit and Leaves are good in
Ruptures. For hot Swellings, Ray says, that Rusticks with good Success apply
bruised Leaves of Woodroof, or bruised fresh Leaves of the Beech Tree, in a
Poultise. For hard Swellings, He says, that green Leaves of white Alder,
applied, discuss the Swelling, and check the Inflammation; or a Poultise of
Marsh-mallow Leaves and Roots softens and ripens. For Oedematous Swellings,
Etmuller commends bruised Celandine, applied in a Poultise alone, or with
Pigeons, or Goats Dung. Sim. Pauli advises a Poultise of Hops, boiled in Ale.

MYRTLE. Is only in curious Gardens, and, with Care, preserved from sharp Frost.

218.
ANTIDOTES to POISO S. Crude or preserved Garlic, swallowed with Wine; or
Calamint taken any how, Aetius says, is good. Morrison advises fresh expressed
Juice of Goats Rue, drank. -- For drinking Aquafortis, Forestus praises
Mucilage of Quince Seeds, drank. -- For Cantharides swallowed, Platerus gave a
Decoction of Linseed to drink. -- And Sennertus advises the inward Use of
Pennyroyal in any Form. -- For Hemlock eaten, after a Vomit or purging Clyster
given, He used Leaves of Wormwood, or Carrot, or Nettle-seeds, or Gentian Root,
powdered, and given in strong Wine; or boiled in Water, and given with Wine.
Others give a Draught of Vinegar, or of Brandy or Rum. -- Against Hellebore, He
gave a Vomit, of Broom and Elder Flowers, each two Pugils; Dwarf Elder Bark,
two Drams* Arrach and Dill-seeds, of each one Dram* boil in Hydromel, to six
Ounces, strain, and add Rue Leaves, one Ounce; mix and make a Vomit. If a
Clyster is needful, prepare it of a Decoction of Althaea Leaves, Lesser
Centaury, Plantain, and Rue: To the strained Liquor, add Oil of Dill, and Yolks
of Eggs, mix, and inject; or powdered Flowers or Roots of Water-Lilly, Half a
Dram given in Wine; or two Drams of its powdered Seeds. But Quince Wine, Syrup,
or Marmalade, are preferable. -- For the Gripes and Corrosions of Euphorbium,
give first a Vomit and a Clyster. Then he advises powdered Citron Seeds, a Dram
or two to be ^^ven in an Infusion of Elecampane Root, in Wine. But a Solution
of Gum Arabic, in a Decoction of Althaea Root, would not be amiss. -- For
Mushrooms, give the above Vomit. Then two or three Drams of sifted Vine Twig
Ashes, with a little Nitre in Mulse; or Lixivium of the Ashes, filtered, and
given to drink; Aetius. Sennertus says, that their Malignity is resisted
powerfully by taking Preparations of Garlic, Wormwood, Birth-wort, wild
Calamint, Hyssop, Cresses, wild Marjoram, and Rue. -- Against Quicksilver, use
first strong Exercise, then give a Clyster, or a strong Purge; then drink
Powder of Costmary Root in Wine; Guainerius. Or drink Juice of Burnet;
Schenckius. Or powdered Rue in Wine; Guainerius. -- Against drinking Frog Spawn
Water, boil the outer Bark of Walnut-tree, in Wine and Water, each twelve
Ounces, to sixteen; strain, and drink a Draught or two of it; or take powdered,
dried, white Briony Root in Wine; Gabelchoverus. -- For Glass, or Pins
swallowed, make a thick Gruel of Millet, with Milk, and eat freely; but nothing
after; Keckermannus. -- If any swallow Verdigrease, take a Vomit after, of warm
Water, with Sallad Oil or Butter; and give a Clyster of the Decoction of
Mallows, Althaea, Foenugreek, and Flea-bane Seeds, with a little Honey and
Sallad Oil; or drink two or three Drams of Juice of Acorus Root, or of Juice of
Smallage Leaves, or Half an Ounce of the Juice of Mint Leaves, or a Dram of
powdered Zedoary Root, taken in Wine. -- If corrosive Sublimate is swallowed,
drink Oil of Tartar after it.

219.
NAVEL-WORT ( Umbilicus Veneris) the Greater, with a tuberous knobby Root, is
much of the Nature of Housleek, cleansing, binding, and repercussive* (...)
Juice, dropped into Wine, and often applied, cures a Phymos^s. Outwardly it is
useful in all Inflammations, King's Evil, and Chilblains. It cools the Heat of
the Stomach. The Leaves and Roots, eaten together in a Sallad, are diuretic,
and said to break the Stone. Given with Honey, they are good in Dropsies. An
useful Gargle may be made of it for the Quinsy, and apply a Poultise of its
Leaves, bruised with River Crabs. Of its Juice, with Verjuice, may be made an
Uterine Injection, for a Descent of the Vagina, and to cleanse fistulous
Ulcers. A Bath, Fotus, or Ointment of it, with other proper Ingredients,
applied to the Part, is good for the Piles.

NAVEL-WORT. I have not.

220.
NAVEW ( Napus) is hotter than Turnips, but has much the same Virtues; it is
cleansing, opening, digesting, and inciding. It resists Poison, expels bad
Humors by Perspiration, provokes Urine, is good in the Jaundice, malignant
Fevers, and Small Pox. Taken in a warm Decoction, like Broth, it is good in an
obstinate Cough, Asthma, and Consumption. It is used outwardly in Poultises, to
digest, resolve, and ease Pain.

221.
NETTLES Stinging ( Urtica Urens) are a great Diuretic, expel all gravelly
Matter. They are an Antidote to Hemlock and Henbane; eaten boiled, they loosen
the Belly, cleanse the Reins, expel Sand and small Stones, promote Spitting,
and drive out the Measles. Their Juice or Syrup is extolled for Spitting of
Blood, if four Ounces is drank every Morning for a Week, and a Decoction of the
Leaves drank after. The distilled Water, with Spirit of Wine, stops Spitting of
Blood powerfully. The white Part of the Root put up the Nose, and snuffing
their Water after, stays Bleeding at the Nose. Outwardly, they help putrid,
gangrenous, and malignant Ulcers; discuss Hardness and Tumors. A Gargle of
them helps the inflamed Uvula. The lesser Nettle bruised, and put up the Nose,
or its Juice snuffed up, stops its Bleeding. The Seed is often used with
Success, in Diseases of the Lungs; as Asthma, obstinate Cough, Pleurisy, etc.
The Seed provokes Urine, Menses, and Venery, if the fresh Seed be boiled, and
eaten with Butter for three Days; or eat Hazle-Nut-Kernels, preserved with
Honey; or drink Birch Water, or Wine; or foment the Genitals with a Decoction
of Columbine Seed and Herb. A Conserve of Nettle Flowers and Seeds is good for
the Stone in the Kidneys, Diseases of the Breast, and Spitting of Blood. The
Root is good in the Jaundice. Its Decoction in Honey and Wine, is good against
cold Coughs, and Shortness of Breath. The Juice, given often with a little
Sugar, cures an excessive Flux of the Piles, when other Means fail. Their Sting
is cured by their own Juice, Sallad Oil, or Oil of Roses. People check too
violent a Fermentation of Malt Liquors, and defend them against Thunder, by
putting Nettles and Iron into the Casks. They should be put in all Decoctions
for Fomentations to Gangrenes. A Gargle of their Decoction is good for
Swellings of the Mouth and Throat. They kill Worms, ease Stitches of the Sides,
and help Windiness, or Weakness of the Stomach. The Juice with Salt, is good
against the Bite of venomous Beasts. It is also an Antidote to all cold
stupifying Plants, as Nightshade, Mushrooms, etc. and too much crude Mercury
swallowed down; and to Defilements of the Skin. The Juice is good for Wounds.
Charier says, that their Decoction in strong Wine, with Sugar, drank at several
Times a little warm, and a Poultise of the strained out Herb laid to the Side,
is a wonderful Medicine in a Pleurisy.

222.
NIGHTSHADE. ( Solanum) The Berries are more cooling, but repel more strongly
than the Leaves, which, as they allay and mitigate Pain, do also dissolve,
cleanse, and absorb. They afford much concrete volatile Salt. Nightshade
allays Inflammations, discusses Swellings, softens, and relaxes the Fibers,
under too great Tension. The bruised Herb is laid to the Piles, or the Part is
fomented with the warm Juice, which, being some Time stirred in a leaden
Mortar, is also laid to Cancers. It, with a sixth Part of well dephlegmated
Spirit of Wine, is accounted most efficacious to cure St. Anthony's Fire,
Tetters, Pimples, Pustules, and the like Disorders of the Skin. Nightshade is
added to most Pain-easing Poultises, as well as the Poplar Ointment.
Caesalpinus says, its Water may be taken inwardly, in an Inflammation of the
Stomach, and Heat of Urine; and that Waters of this and Wormwood, of each three
Ounces, discharge by Sweat. This Plant is always reckoned a Poison taken
inwardly. Tragus says, it kills Hogs, and would not have even its Water used,
under two or three Years old. Anciently it was used as a Food, and given
internally (but must be done with the greatest Caution and Judgment) and
externally, for the Cure of an Erysipelas, fretting and corroding Ulcers, the
Headache, and Swellings of the Neck. Dodonoeus justly condemns its Use in an
Erysipelas, because it is too cold, and too great a Repellent. Dioscorides
says, that its Juice, with the yellow Part of Hens Dung, fed in a Pen,
certainly cures the Lachrymal Fistula. A Liniment or Poultise of it is a noble
Remedy for venereal Inflammations of the Yard. The Application of the Juice to
the Wrists is said to cure Fevers. A Liniment of the Juices of this, and
Housleek, and the White of an Egg, beaten up and mixed, is wonderful in the
Cure of cold hard Tumors, bred in Women's Breasts.

223.
CLIMBING NIGHTSHADE or BITTER-SWEET ( Dulcamara) is used outwardly for the
same Purposes; it is diuretic, and beneficial in a Dropsy. Tragus commends it
for the Cure of even inveterate Jaundices, thus: Take a Pound of the Wood of
the Plant, cut it small, and put it in an Earthen Pot with three Pints of white
Wine; let the Pot-cover have a Hole in the Top, and all the rest be closely
cemented with Paste; set it on a gentle Fire, and let it boil to the
Consumption of a third Part; a Cup-full of the strained Liquor, drank Evening
and Morning in Bed, cures the Jaundice, and carries off the Humors by Stool
and Urine. The Juice, taken inwardly, dissolves coagulated Blood, and is good
for such as are bruised by Falls, etc. It is thought to open Obstructions of
the Liver and Spleen. Parkinson says, that he always found its inward Use cause
violent Purging. And Prevotius places it at the Head of Purgers of Bile. Mr.
Ray says, that Dr. Hulse informed him, that the following in one Night
dissolved a Tumor as big as a Man's Head, and healed desperate and dangerous
Contusions of the Muscular Parts. Take Leaves of Bitter-sweet cut small; four
Ounces of Linseed, finely powdered, boiled in Muscadine Wine, or Hogs Lard, to
a Poultise, and apply hot to the Part. For internal Ulcers, a Decoction of
Bugle in Mutton Broth, is wonderful; or a Syrup of the Flowers of St. John's
Wort, made by Infusion on a Sand-heat; or a Root of Comfry, boiled in Broth; or
its Syrup taken; Riverius. -- For malignant Ulcers, Juice of Pimpernel, boiled
with the Herb, and applied, cures perfectly; Poterius. Or use the Root of
Dragons, Eust. Rudi. Or wash and foment the Ulcers daily, Evening and Morning,
with a Decoction of Mint, then sprinkle fine powdered Rue on them; Rulandus.
Fresh Arsmart Leaves steeped in Water, then apply to the Ulcers, till they are
warm and dry then bury the Leaves in the Dunghill, and as they rot the Ulcer
heals; continue this Course for some Time; Paracelsus. -- For Phagedaenic
Ulcers, the expressed Juice; or the distilled Water of Female Fluellin, drank,
and applied, cures creeping and cancerous Ulcers; Lobel. The distilled Water of
rotten Apples, applied warm, with folded Linen Cloths, is good; Etmuller. --
For putrid Ulcers, Juice of Sauce-alone, or Jack by the Hedge, gathered in
April or May, dried one Day in the Shade, then beaten well in a Mortar, and the
Juice strained out in a Press, and put up in Glass Bottles topp'd with Oil,
will keep good three Years. In putrid and sordid Ulcers, or in Gangrenes, there
is not a more excellent Remedy; Fabricius Hildanus. -- For venereal Ulcers,
Juice of Arsmart, or Soap-wort, and best English Honey, mix and use; Dr.
Bowls. -- Old Ulcers, Decoction of Pimpernel, drank and applied, eases the
Pain, and heals them; Poterius. Juice of Mercury has a wonderful Power to
cleanse and heal them; Ray. Or sprinkle fine powdered Barberry Bark on them, it
cleanses and heals; Stockerus. Wash the Ulcers first with white Wine or
Verjuice, then apply the following Ointment twice a Day* Take Carduus, three or
four large Handfuls, beat in a Mortar, with a Pound of Ox-Suet; then add white
Wine Half a Pint; boil them till the Wine is spent, and the Leaves are crisp;
strain, and add of the best Oil, two Ounces; Venice Turpentine, one Ounce; make
an Ointment for Use; or wash them Evening and Morning with a Decoction of
Bramble Berry Leaves in Wine.


DULCAMARA. Grows only in curious Gardens with us.

224.
OAK. (Quercus) All its Parts are astringent, especially its inner membranous
Bark. A Decoction of it, or the Leaves, given in a Looseness (after due
purging) or Bloody Flux, or Spitting of Blood, is powerful. The Acorns have the
same Effect, though not to be used for Food, to rob the Swine, except in a
Famine. A distilled Water of the Leaves is used for the Whites, and raging
Dysentery. Some use a Powder of dried Acorns to expel Urine and Stone. The
Norvegians make a Meal, and Bread of them, to eat in a Dearth; or a Gargle of
the tender reddish Leaves, boiled in Wine, and used, cures a Toothache from
Defluxion. Lithotomists use a Decoction of the Bark, for the Patients to sit
in, to forward the Cure of their Wounds. In a Word, Leaves, Nuts, Bark, and
Wood, are all very astringent and useful, inwardly and outwardly, for Fluxes of
the Belly, Uterus, Blood, Semen, etc. Oak and Plantain Leaves, boiled in Water,
and the Liquor sweetened, is good for a Quinsy. The Galls are most astringent,
they restrain Fluxions in all the Parts of the Mouth, and heal its little
Ulcers. The Inside of them, put into a hollow Tooth, eases the Toothache.
Beaten up with either Wine or Water, and either drank or rubbed on the Belly,
they are good in a Coeliaca, or Bloody Flux; or their Powder drank in a Glass
of Wine. A Water, distilled from foreign Galls, has cured Ruptures, even in
grown up Persons. Oak Apples boiled in Wine, are good against all Fluxes, great
Moisture and Swelling of the Jaws, Almonds in the Ears, etc. Their Decoction is
also good for the Whites, Excess of the Menses, and Relaxation of the Vagina,
if a warm Stove of them is sat over. Oak Moss is a great Astringent; a Dram of
its Powder taken with a little Coral, in Claret, stays the Menses, and other
Fluxes; it is also good in Childrens Ruptures. Being drying and astringent, it
stops Bleeding, and heals green Wounds. It is often used for Diseases of the
Lungs, as Cough, Asthma, and Consumption, either in Syrup or Powder; or boiled
in Small Beer, it has been effectual in a Jaundice. Powder of Cup Moss, given
in a Syrup of this, is reckoned a Specific in the Chin-cough.

225.
ONIONS ( Cepa) are very pungent and volatile, of thick Parts, fit for them
that abound with cold and viscid Humors; they procure them Sleep, help
Concoction, and cure acid Belchings; they loosen the Belly of some, and bind it
in others; they carry off Obstructions, promote Urine, and insensible
Perspiration. But they are very injurious to the Bilious, affecting their Head,
Eyes, Sleep, and Stomach. Onions cut and steeped all Night in Spring Water, and
given Children to drink in a Morning, kills Worms. An Onion hollowed and filled
with Treacle, then roasted under hot Ashes, the outward Skin taken off, and the
rest beaten up to a Poultise, and applied, effectually softens and opens Plague
Sores, poisonous Ulcers, and other Collections of putrid Matter. Bruised raw
Onions, with a little Salt, laid on fresh Burns, not blistered, quickly draws
out the Fire, and prevents Blisters. The Head rubbed with raw Onions, Evening
and Morning, till it is red, then rubbing it after with Honey, brings new Hair
where it was bald. A white Onion cut through the Middle, steeped in Brandy, and
laid to the pained Part, cures Headache and Megrim. Onions boiled in Fat, and
laid to kibed Heels, cure them effectually. Onions boiled in Wine, then fried
in a Drying Pan, bruised, and laid to the Belly, give immediate Relief in
After-Pains. Bruised Onions, or their Juice, with Goose-grease applied, are
good for Swellings of the Feet. Onions, or white Lilly Roots boiled in Water
and fresh Lard, then beaten up with two Drams of Treacle, and applied Evening
and Morning, draw a Bubo. Bruised Onions without the Skins, either raw or
roasted, perfectly cure the dry Piles. Cut Onions roasted under the Embers, and
mixed with Cream, and laid to the Side or Breast, have cured several
Pleurisies. Onions boiled in Wine, and Sallad Oil, then bruised to a Poultise,
and put in three Bags, one laid to the Back, and one to each Groin, gives the
speediest Ease in racking Pains of the Stone and Gravel. Their Decoction is
commended in a severe Cough, and Spitting of Blood. Their Seed provokes Venery.
An habitual Use of the Root, wastes the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder,
excites an Appetite, and is good in an Asthma, Scurvy, and Dropsy. They quickly
ripen Abscesses. Their Use is fittest for cold Weather, aged and phlegmatic
People, whose Lungs are stuffed, and their Breath short. Roasted and laid on
the Ear, they, or the Juice of Elder Buds, ripen and break Imposthumes in it.
For the most raging Pains in the Ear, fill a scooped Onion with Juice of
Wormwood, Oil of Sweet Almonds, and Breast Milk, of each alike; shut it up, and
roast it in an Oven till it is black; express the Juice, put a few Drops of it
into the Ear warm, stop it with Wool and a little Musk, and lie on the opposite
Side; repeat this five or six Times. The Steam of Savoury boiled in Wine, is
good. For Deafness, put three or four Drops of Onion Juice warm into the Ear;
or fill a scoop'd Onion with Wine, seal it up, and roast it under the Embers,
express the Juice, and often drop it warm into the Ears. Juice of Betony, or of
Ground Ivy and Brandy, often dropped in warm. -- Onions are also good for a
Noise in the Ears; or the Steam of boiled Betony and Wormwood; or the Juice of
Black Hellebore dropped into them Morning and Evening.
Shallots have much the same Virtues, only they and Onions are weaker than
Garlic.

226.
ORPINE ( Telephium) is vulnerary and astringent, much used to heal and smooth
the Intestines excoriated by a Dysentery. The Root boiled in Wine with Honey,
cures Ruptures, and Burns. It eases Pain powerfully; the bruised Leaves laid to
Wounds, or inveterate Ulcers, have the like Effect. The Herb roasted under live
Ashes, mixed with Lard, and applied to Felons or Whitlows, cures them to a
Wonder. The fresh Roots sliced, and put on a Thread, and hung between the
Shoulders, often ease the Pain of the Piles, and all the Knobs at the same Time
decay and vanish with the Roots. Tragus commends its distilled Water in
Excoriations, and Gnawings of the Stomach, or Bowels, and to them that have
Ulcers in their Lungs, Liver, Matrix, or other inward Parts; these Diseases it
cures, if drank several Days together; its Decoction seems more suitable. Bound
to the Throat, it helps a Quinsy. The Leaf, applied to any green Wound on the
Hands or Legs, quickly heals it. For Wounds in General, Etmuller commends fresh
Agrimony beaten up to a Poultise, and applied warm; Poterius, a Decoction of
Pimpernel. Ray, bruised fresh Leaves of Woodroof, applied warm; or the inward
or outward Use of B^gle, and an Ointment made of it, with Sanicle and Scabious,
in Hog's Lard. Boil, the warm Juice of great Celandine. Morrison, the Juice of
Pilewort, in slight Wounds. Etmuller, the Juice of Herb Robert, beaten up with
a little Venice Turpentine to a Balsam; or the early Flowers of St.
John's-wort, one Part Flowers, of Mullein, Half a Part; infuse before a slow
Fire, in three Parts Spirits of Wine, till it be a fine Tincture; strain, and
add Venice Turpentine, and infused Oil of Male Balsam; mix and make a Balsam.
Thibaut says, take Myrrh, Aloes, and Dragon's Blood, in Powder, of each a Dram;
Spirit of Wine, five or six Ounces; digest in a Sand-Heat, till the Gums are
dissolved, then add a Pugil of St. John's-wort Flowers, let them stand a Day
and a Night, and, while yet warm, express their Liquor, add Venice Turpentine
Half an Ounce, and dissolve in a gentle Heat; it makes a most noble Balsam. Ray
says, the expressed Oil of St. John's-wort Seeds is inferior to no Balsam.
Etmuller says, the Juice or Powder of Yarrow, heals green Wounds quickly; or
the fresh Leaves of Tobacco laid on them; or Gerard's Oil of Adder's-tongue,
with a little Turpentine; or Arsmart Leaves, used as in Ulcers, cures
perfectly; or Gerard's Ointment of fresh Leaves of Clown's All-heal, made with
Hog's Lard thus; Take the fresh Leaves, four Handfuls; Hog's Lard, four Ounces;
Sallad Oil Half a Pound; boil all till the Herb is crisp; dissolve in the warm
Liquor, over a slow Fire, two Ounces of Venice Turpentine; keep it in a close
Po^; it is a wonderful Vulnerary. Etmuller advises a warm Poultise of pounded
Comfry Root to be applied. Ranzonius commends Periwinkle and Mother-wort, of
each a Handful; boil in a Quart of Ale to a Pint, strain, and give four
Spoonfuls of it warm Morning, Afternoon, and Night, to drink, and wash the
Wound as often with it. -- For internal Wounds, Hoffman gives us a sure Remedy,
an Infusion of Yarrow in warm Water, three or four times a Day to drink. Burnet
Leaves, boiled and drank, do the same; or bruised and applied to an outward
Wound. -- For putrid Wounds, Ray orders them to be washed, Morning and Evening,
with a warm Decoction of Agrimony If they heal too soon, and fresh Matter
gather under, apply a Poultise of pounded fresh Agrimony Leaves, and repeat it
till all is well; or pour into them fresh Juice of Bluebottle ^lowers. -- For
wounded Tendons, apply a Poultise of the thick Mucilage of Comfry Roots, boiled
in Water.


ORPINE. I have not observed it to grow in any of our Provinces.

227.
ORRICE, IRIS, FLOWER-DE-LUCE. Botanists reckon up only Eighty Species of this
Plant, besides about Forty Species more of the bulbous Kind; some of which are
cultivated in Gardens, others grow wild in the Fields; nor are all the first
Species of the same Nature, for the German, or wild Flower-de-luce, or the
worst common Purple Flower-de-luce, is exceeding hot and dry, purges Water, and
causes Sneezing. It is mostly given to purge off Water in Dropsies. Applied
outwardly, it cures Tetters and Ring-worms, and cleans the Skin from these and
other Spots and Deformities; but it is injurious to the Stomach and other
Viscera, therefore must be well corrected. It affords several Preparations, as
first, the expressed Juice purified by Digestion, and given fresh to purge.
Secondly, The Faecula, or Lees made of the Juice, which purges not so much as
the Juice. Thirdly, The infused Oil. The Root of Florentine Orrice, or
Flower-de-luce, hung in Ale or Wine, preserves the Liquors fresh, and gives
them a fine Flavor, like that of Raspberries. The Root of this Plant has many
Virtues; it dries, warms, cuts, thins, and expectorates, digests, cleanses, and
softens. It is chiefly used for Mucilage and Tartar, in the Lungs, for a
Shortness of Breath, Stoppage of the Terms, and Gripes in Children. Applied
outwardly, it cleanses the Skin. Mixed with Hellebore and Honey, it corrects a
bad Breath. The Juice taken from Half an Ounce to an Ounce and a Half, and
increase the Dose every Morning, till it comes to four Spoonfuls, it purges
Water strongly, and has cured many Dropsies. And Hollerius gives it for a most
sovereign Remedy, and great Secret. An Ounce of its Juice, says Schenkius, is
incomparable in a desparate Costiveness. It first purges Water, then Bile; but,
being so very hot, it inflames not only the Mouth, but the whole Body. But though
this is the Effect of the Juice of the common wild Sort, which ought not to be
given crude, but clarified, corrected, and given in Whey to cool it, whereby it
is made safe and successful; yet this is not the Effect of the Juice of the
white Florentine. The crude Juice of the other Kinds should not be given above
two Drams to a Dose. Issue-Peas are made of the Roots. The white Florentine has
a fragrant Smell, and makes a good Hair Powder. Its Powder is given to Infants
for the Gripes, from acid Humors. It is put into Electuaries to thin thick and
tough Phlegm, in Shortness of Breath, and old Coughs. Some commend it for the
Spleen, Convulsions, and Cramps. The Root, boiled up to a Poultise, and
applied, softens scrophulous, and other hard Tumors.

228.
The IRIS PALUSTRIS LUTEA, or Root of the yellow Marsh Flower-de-luce, is
temperate and very astringent, stops Bloody Fluxes of the Belly, Uterus, Urine,
or Bleeding in any Part of the Body; worn as an Amulet, it prevents them. The
Flowers of this Plant burn the Mouth intolerably. Schroder says, that the Root,
dug up in September, dries, warms, binds, strengthens, and resolves, and is
good for Diseases of the Brain and nervous System.

229.
The PALE-WATER FLOWER-DE-LUCE is so strong and acrimonious, though it smells
like Hog's Fennel, that Dioscorides says it is good against Wounds and
Fractures of the Head, and draws out of the Flesh, Thorns, Prickles, or Darts,
without Pain. Mixed with a third Part Verdigrease, and a fifth of Centaury
Root, with Honey, and laid on with Vinegar, it cures Swellings in
Inflammations. The bruised Root steeped in Sack, or any other sweet Wine, and
drank, is good for Convulsions, Cramps, Ruptures, Gout, or Sciatica,
Incontinence of Urine, or other Overflowings. Half a Dram of the Seed, drank in
Wine, provokes Urine powerfully. Drank with Vinegar, it is good for the Spleen.
The purging Juices are corrected by Honey and Spikenard; they kill Worms, ease
the Stone and Gravel, cure involuntary Loss of Seed, vomit and purge. A
Decoction of the Root, in Wine, expels Urine and Menses, and eases the Cholic.
The Juice eases the Piles. For a Swelling of the Cods, take four Drams of this
powdered Root, Cinnamon, and Dill-seed, of each two Drams, Saffron a Scruple,
mix and spread all on a scarlet Cloth, moisten them well with white Wine, warm
them over a Chafing Dish, and apply. The following Wine is said to have been
found successful in a Dropsy, a thousand Times: Take Roots of Flower-de-luce,
two Ounces; of Elecampane, Squills, of each Half an Ounce; Barks of Elder, and
Dwarf Elder, of each one Ounce; Winter Bark, two Drams; Senna Leaf, two Ounces;
Agaric, black Hellebore, of each two Drams; white Wine, two Quarts; mix and
infuse all for Use.

230.
PARSLEY ( Petroselinum) Root and Herb are both used, they help a windy
Stomach, expel Urine, and Menses, free Liver and Spleen from Obstructions; are
good in Dropsy and Jaundice. The Seeds thin, open, and expel Urine, Birth,
Afterbirth, and dead Child; dislodge Wind, Gravel, and small Stones, are good
against old Coughs, and repel Poisons. Outwardly, the whole Root resolves hot
Tumors; a Poultise of it laid to the Breasts, diminishes Milk. The Seed is
said to be good against the Bite of venomous Beasts, and an Antidote to
Litharge. The bruised Herb in a Poultise, laid to inflamed Eyes, gives them
Ease; and takes off the Blueness of Blows and Bruises. In all the above inward
Uses, Dodonoeus prefers the Seed to the Root. Tragus gives a Medicine for the
Jaundice, Epilepsy, Stone, and Gravel, viz. Seeds of Parsley, Anise, and
Carraway, of each an Ounce; Roots of burnt Saxifrage, Parsley, and Carraway, of
each Half an Ounce; bruise the Seeds, cut the washed Roots, infuse all in two
Quarts of white Wine all Night, next Morning boil away a third Part of it in a
close Vessel, strain it, Dose four Ounces Evening and Morning, and fast three
Hours after it. Parsley is best suited to old, phlegmatic, and melancholic
Persons; but agrees not with the young, hot, and bilious, or where the Blood
was too thin before. The distilled Water is as good as Saxifrage Water, against
Childrens Gripes, either from Wind or Bile. A Scruple of powdered Aniseed,
given in their Meat, eases Gripes much, and it is laxative. The Seed or Oil,
taken at Bedtime, is commended against Hag-riding; or a Dram or two of
powdered Paeony Root, or fifteen Grains of its Seed, drank in an Emulsion at
Bedtime. To cure Childrens gauled or excoriated Parts, powdered Cudweed is the
best.

231.
PEACH-TREE (Persica) some condemn, others commend the Fruit, but if eaten
sparingly before it is quite ripe, mellow, very soft or sweet, it is certainly
a pleasant, harmless, and grateful Fruit, with a Glass of Wine after it. It is
best preserved with Sugar in form of a Syrup; thus it is agreeable to the Sick
that have parched, dry, chap'd Tongues, and Mouths, Thirst, and in hot
Diseases. Brassavola gave one or two roasted under the Embers to his Patients.
Amatus says, they are a most delicious grateful Food to the Sick. Peaches are
preserved in Brandy, but then they are too hot for Physic. The Leaves boiled in
Milk, or bruised and laid to the Navel, kill Worms in Children. Parkinson says,
if taken in due Time, they loosen the Belly. A Syrup or Conserve of the Flowers
purge, but they often cause Vomiting, make Children sick, and disturb the
Bowels; therefore they are seldom used now. Some eat the Flowers in Sallads.
The distilled Water beautifies the Face. The Gum of the Tree is commended in a
Looseness, for Stone and Gravel; Swellings of the Jaws, Roughness of the
Windpipe, Spitting of Blood, Disorders of the Lungs, and Bloody Flux. Mathiolus
commends the Kernels for the Gripes, and eaten to prevent Drunkenness; rubbed
on with Vinegar, they prevent Falling off of the Hair. Their Oil induces Sleep,
eases the Megrim, and, either drank, or given in Clysters, it eases the Cholic,
Iliac Passion, and Stone. A Water made of Thirty of the bruised Kernels, and
One Hundred Cherry Kernels, and a Handful of Elder Flowers, all infused ten
days in three Pints of white Wine, in an earthen Pot, well covered, and buried
in Horse Dung, then distilled: Mathiolus calls it a wonderful Remedy to waste
and expel the Stone. Nectarines are much of the same Nature.

232.
PEAR TREE (Pyrus) the Fruit of the better Sort is grateful to the Stomach, and
quenches Thirst, if eaten raw; it is best eaten after Meat; before they are
ripe, they are better baked than raw. The dry Fruit, eaten, checks Fluxes of
the Belly, and of Blood. If Mushrooms are baked with them, they are said to
correct their Malignity; but I should be loath to try. They are either baked in
Ovens, or preserved like other Fruits to keep. Harsh and sour Pears, cool and
bind; the sweet loosen and nourish. The Ashes of the Wood, or the Lee of them
drank in Wine, is good for those that are in Danger of Suffocation, from eating
Mushrooms. The harsher applied outwardly, cool, bind, and heal Wounds,
preventing their Inflammation, or farther Trouble; for which Use, wild Pears
are best.

233.
MALE PIONY. (Poeonia Mas) The Roots, Flowers, and Seeds, are all used for
Diseases of the Head and Womb, as Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Incubus, Vertigo, Cramp,
Convulsions, Headache, obstructed Menses and Lochia, Retention of the
Afterbirth, After-pains, and Obstructions of the Liver. Galen gives a
surprising Instance of the Falling Sickness, cured by a Piece of the Root hung
about the Neck in an Amulet. Common People use it to this Day, to prevent
Convulsions, especially in Necklaces to Infants; they are also made of Human
Scull, Poppy Roots, etc. The husked powdered Seed, given in Wine, is said to
restore lost Speech. Parkinson says, for the Epilepsy, the Root is to be
infused Twenty-four Hours in Sack, then strained, and a Glass of it drank every
Evening and Morning, for a long Time, two Days before, the Day of, and two Days
after, every full Moon; but let the Body be first duly prepared with Posset
Drink, made of Betony. The red Seed beaten, and given in Wine, is good for
Fluxes of the Belly and Womb; and the black Seed for Diseases of the Head. Some
make the powdered Seed a great Secret in Convulsions, and sell it at an
extravagant Price. A Parcel of this grand Arcanum fell accidentally into my
Hands; I examined it several Ways (as I have done some other Nostrums that
seemed worth while) and found it to be this Seed. I gave it to several young
Epileptics, but without the least Success. I have with Patience and
Perseverance tried the Effects of this Root and Flowers, in Diseases of the
Head and Nerves, for near Thirty Years, but am still to find the Success,
whatever great Matters some may boast of it. Take powdered Roots of Piony, two
Drams; Stings of wild Bees, Number ten; mix both the Powders, and give eight or
ten Doses of this, it is said to cure Convulsions in Infants, effectually. But
others advise Roots of Piony, Human Scull, Membranes of a Foetus, or the
Afterbirth, of each alike; powder all, mix and use, Dose a Dram; others prefer
this: Take prepared Cinnabar Native, or of Antimony, three Ounces; of wild
Valerian Roots, two Ounces; and two Drams of Russia Castor; white Amber,
Man-skull, red Myrrh, Seeds of Piony, Rue, and Henbane, of each nine Drams;
Mosaic Gold, three Drams; prepare and mix all, and Dose a Dram thrice a Day,
after the Body is duly prepared. Weickard is for this: Take Piony Roots,
gathered in the Wane of the Moon, an Ounce; of Male Piony Seeds husk'd, Half an
Ounce; Elks Claws, three Drams; white Amber, and calcined Hartshorn, prepared,
of each two Drams; prepared Coral and Pearl, of each one Dram; Peacock's Dung,
four Scruples; Oriental Bezoar, a Dram; true Unicorn's Horn, two Scruples;
Filings of Hungarian Gold, a Dram; Saffron, a Scruple; Manus Christi perlati,
Half an Ounce; Oil of Mace, Half a Scruple; make all into a Powder, mix, Dose
from Half a Scruple to Half a Dram. And Schroder extols this: Take Powder of a
dried Secundine, five Drams; of calcined Man's Scull, one Ounce; Powder of
young Crows, two Ounces; Rennet of a Hare, a Dram; rasped Hartshorn, two
Drams; Castor, Half a Dram; whitest Amber, two Drams; Misletoe, gathered in the
Moon in the Wane, Half a Dram; Piony Root and Berries, gathered before the Wane
of the Moon, of each Half a Dram; Ambergrease, Musk, each ten Grains; Species
Dianthos, Letific. Galeni, prepared Pearl and Coral, of each a Scruple; make a
Powder, and mix.

234.
PELLITORY OF THE WALL (Parietaria) cleanses, cools, and astringes gently; it
is seldom used inwardly, except for a Cough, Difficulty of Urine, or to expel
Gravel; but it is often used in Clysters to ease Pains of the Belly, Womb, and
Reins, and outwardly to Swellings, Burns, etc. It is a good Healer of Wounds.
Powder of the dried Herb, in Honey or Posset, is good in obstinate Coughs, and
Consumptions of the Lungs. Its Powder is better than its Decoction. A Syrup of
this Juice, Etmuller says, is a Secret in a Dropsy.

PELLITORY OF THE WALL, and PELLITORY OF SPAIN. Neither of them, that I
observed, grows in these Provinces.

235.
PELLITORY of SPAIN (Pyrethium) with a Daisy Flower, is an excellent Remedy for
a Palsy of the Tongue, with Loss of Speech; and, for the Toothache, chewed in
the Mouth, to cause a short Spitting, but might perhaps be better taken
inwardly in small repeated Doses. An Ounce of the Juice in a Glass of Wine, and
laid to sweat an Hour or two before the Fit, certainly cures an Ague, at the
second or third Time using. The Root, put up the Nose, causes a great Flux of
Phlegm from the Head, and prevents Diseases of the Brain. The Leaves or
Flowers, in a Salve, or Poultise, take away Blueness or Blackness from Falls or
Bruises. Chewing Saxifrage, or Burnet Roots, cause also Spitting; or Mastich,
which has a pleasant Smell and Taste, fastens loose Teeth, is good in Deafness,
and gives the Breath a fine Smell.

236.
PENNYROYAL ( Pulegium) is a Kind of Mint, and has many of the same
Properties, only it is sharper, of thinner Parts, and more efficacious. It
promotes the Menses, expels Birth and Afterbirth, Gravel, Sand, and Urine. It
is good in a Jaundice, and a Dropsy; eases the Gripes, is excellent to promote
Spitting and raise tough Phlegm from the Breast. It is one of our best
Pectorals, and Antihisterics, either in Infusion, or distilled Water. A
Spoonful of its Juice sweetened with Sugar, and given to Children, at due
Intervals, is excellent in the Chin-cough. Six Ounces of its Infusion
sweetened, and drank at going to Bed, powerfully relieves a Hoarseness.
Outwardly, it is good for the Head, prevents Dullness and Sleepiness; it is good
in a Vertigo, Arthritic Pains, and cleanses the Teeth. It is a glorious Herb
for the Womb, Breast, and Head; especially when the Menses and Lochia are too
pale. Some give the Powder of the Afterbirth of the first Child (if a Male) in
an Infusion of this Herb, to cure Convulsions. Others for the same Purpose take
powdered Leaves and Flowers of Pennyroyal, Betony and Germander, of each two
Handfuls; of Hyssop, Blessed Thistle, and common Downy Thistle, of each a
Handful; Thyme and Rue, of each Half a Handful; Powder all, and with Honey make
an Electuary for Use. Pennyroyal drives Fleas out of a Room. It cures
Loathing, and is a good Stomachic. For Want of Appetite, young Beets, with
their Roots lightly boiled, and eaten with Vinegar; Ray. Take Tops of Roman
Wormwood, Half a Handful; Root of Dandelion, Half an Ounce; cut and infuse all
Night in Half a Pint of Rhenish Wine, strain and drink it; Forestus. Powdered
Seed of Bishops-weed, Half a Dram; taken in white Wine, four Mornings fasting;
Augenius. From twelve to thirty Grains of powdered Gentian Root, taken twice or
thrice a Day, and a large Dose in the Morning fasting; Boil. Syrup of the
Juice of rough Apples; Augenius. Powder, Decoction, or Infusion of Spignel,
drank, is inferior to nothing. Juice of Vine Leaves, drank alone, or in a
Syrup, or with Marmalade of Quinces, is a Specific for breeding Women's deprived
Appetite; Etmuller. -- For a Heat of the Stomach, sliced fresh Liquo^ice Root,
infused and boiled in Water, and used for ordinary Drink; Rulandus. Juice,
Syrup, or Herb of Purslane, eaten; Etmuller. Tops of Sloe-tree Twigs of the
same Year's Growth, ^hewed, and the Juice swallowed, or the tender Leaves
chewed, ^re good, especially to (...), in hot Weather; Joel. -- ^or Pain of the
Stomach, take Tops of Wormwood, Agrimo^y, Lesser Centaury, of each Half a
Handful; boil in Water, (...) five Ounces; strain, and add Sugar one Ounce;
drink it ^^sting two or three Mornings; or drink fasting, or in the Fit, ^our
Ounces of a Decoction of Camomile; or three Ounces of ^he Water of its Flowers
warm; Riverius. An Infusion in Wine of Sloe-tree Flowers all Night, distilled
next Day in a cold Still, for Use; Tragus. Or powdered Seed; or Oil of
Carraway, taken in warm Broth, and Sweat after; Etmuller. -- For Coldness of
the Stomach, Roman Wormwood, boiled in Wine, and drank; or Syrup of the Juice
of Blessed Thistle, made with Sugar, is a present Remedy; Weikardus. -- For a
Weakness of the Stomach, a cold Infusion of dried Wormwood in Water, for eight
Hours, strained and drank, two or three Ounces Evening and Morning, especially
after Dinner, and Supper; Dr. Bowl. Grevius says, that Wormwood Root is the
chief Stomachic. Boil says, that a warm Poultise, laid to the Stomach, of Tops
of Wormwood, Mug-wort, and Mint, is good. Stockerus advises sifted Powder of
curled Mint to be taken daily: or an Infusion of Nutmegs, in Spanish Wine, to
be drank fasting. For an Abscess of the Stomach, he advises Syrup of Scabious
Juice, to be drank every Morning -- For a flatulent Stomach, he prescribes the
above Infusion of Nutmegs; or Half a Dram of Nettle-seed Powder, drank in warm
Wine; or Dwarf Elder used any how; but especially its Root. For Wind in the
Bowels, Morrison, above all things, prefers Powder, (...) of Master-wort, in
Wine. For the Gripes, Cherv^^ Leaves slightly bruised, fried in Butter, and
laid to the Belly, is a certain Remedy; or Flowers of Camomile and Mullein,
applied to the Belly warm, either in a Bag or Fomentation. -- To strengthen the
Bowels, two or three Cloves of Garlic swallowed every Morning; Boil Or an
Infusion of Almond Roots, drank; Hulse. -- For a Pain of the Bladder, a
Poultise of bruised Pellitory of the Wall, laid to the Testicles warm, and
below the Navel, four or five Times, is a sure Remedy. -- For the Bladder
inflamed, drink, thrice a Day, a Decoction of Ground Pine, in Milk. -- For
Ulcers of the Bladder, take B^an Meal, two Ounces; Flowers of red Roses,
B^laustines, Cypress Nuts, powdered, of each two Drams; Saffron, ten Grains;
Rose and Plantain Water, with a little Vinegar; boil to a Poultise, and add the
Yolk of an Egg, and apply. And drink daily an Infusion or Decoction of
Liquorice Root; or a Decoction of Plantain Leaves; or a Decoction (...) the
whole Strawberry Plant. -- For an Excoriation of (...) ^ard, put a clean washed
Plantain Leaf between the Foreskin and Glands, and renew it, if needful. --
For small Ulcers of the Yard, fine Powder of burnt Rose Sponge, sprinkled on
them; or powdered Middle Bark of Barberry, sprinkled on them. Stockerus.


237.
PERRIWINKLE (Vincapervinca) is a good Wound Herb, and Astringent, proper in
Fluxes, Dysentery, Blood-Spitting, excessive Discharges by Piles and Menses;
against Bleeding of the Nose, and Whites, if three Handfuls of the Herb be
infused in a Quart of boiling Water, strained and drank with a little of its
Extract or Conserve dissolved in it. The bruised Herb, put up the Nose, stops
its Bleeding, if at the same Time a little of it be held in the Mouth. An
Infusion of it, Tansy, and Agrimony, in Milk, distilled, the Water is good in a
Dropsy. Dr. Hulse says its fresh Leaves laid on coarse Paper, and smoaked with
Frankincense, and applied to strumous Swellings, discuss them in a short Time.
The Leaves put into a clean Cask, and thick muddy Wine poured on them, they
restore its Color, clear and purify it.

PERRIWINKLE. CAMMOCK. LESSER CELANDINE. Grow only in a few botanick Gardens in
our Provinces.

238.
PETTY WHIN, REST-HARROW, or CAMMOCK, ( Anonis) the Root, but especially the
Bark, provokes Urine, wastes and expels small Stones in the Reins and Bladder;
consumes fleshy Excrescences in the Urethra; eases the Toothache, and either in
Powder infused in Wine, or boiled in Posset Drink, cures Obstructions of the
Liver. Sim. Pauli says it has no Equal in the Stone and Gravel. Its Infusion,
drank, cures the Piles and Excrescences in the Anus. Its Roots are put in
Broths, Ptisans, and Apozems, as a great Aperient and Diuretic; hence it is
good in the Jaundice, Stone, Menses stopped, and Piles inflamed. Two Drams of
the Root Bark, infused in white Wine, is good in a nephritic Cholic. A Dram of
the Root, taken in Broth daily, is commended in Carnosities, and for a
Sarcocele. A Decoction of the whole Plant is a good Gargle against the Scurvy
of the Mouth and Gums.

239.
PILEWORT, or LESSER CELANDINE (Chelidonium Minus) is good in a Jaundice,
Scurvy, and Flux of the Haemorrhoids. Outwardly it is a Specific in the Piles
and Excrescences of the Anus, whether its Juice, Powder, Ointment, Decoction,
Fomentation, or Poultise of it is used, or even the mere bruised Root be laid
to the Part; it is also a Specific in the King's Evil, swelled Glands, etc. The
fresh Roots, put into the Ulcers, extirpate them; for abounding with an acrid
Salt, it is hot and sharp. The Juice of the Root snuffed up the Nose, or its
Decoction with a little Honey, gargled, purges the Head effectually, and the
last purges the Breast from tough Phlegm, or gross Humors, and helps a running
Itch. The following may ease some in the Heat and Swelling of the Piles: Take
Linseed Oil four Ounces, boil in it Pile-wort and Flix-weed, of each what you
please; strain, and add Wax, three Drams; Poplar Ointment, Half an Ounce; Oil
of Box-wood and Opium, each a Dram; Ointment of Althaea, an Ounce; mix all,
and, when used, add a little Yolk of an Egg. Some take Oil of Juniper, drawn by
a Retort in an open Fire, from which the Spirit is separated by the Tunnel; rub
the outward Piles every fourth Hour with a Feather dipped in this Oil. But, in
the internal Piles, throw up by a Syringe a Fourth of a Spoonful of this Oil.
The Pain eases in two Hours, and the Swelling vanishes. Others make only a
simple Ointment, by a triple Decoction of Pile-wort, in Lard or Butter, and to
the last strained Liquor, add Turpentine and Wax, to give it a Consistence, and
always apply it warm on Rags dipped in it, and applied, and kept on with a
Bandage. Some to the Pile-wort here add Fig-wort, Flix-weed, and greater
Housleek. If the Heat, Pain, and Swelling be great, a little Opium and Sugar of
Lead may be added in using.

240.
PIMPERNEL (MALE) ( Anagallis) is used inwardly and outwardly. Its Decoction in
Wine, drank in Bed, causes profuse Sweat, and is ^ Preservative from
pestilential and malignant Diseases. Its distilled Water has cured many
Suffusions of the Eyes. This Water drank daily, with as much Cows Milk, and a
little Sugar, Dose twelve Spoonfuls, Evening and Morning, has been of great
Service to many in Consumptions, where the Lungs were ulcerated. Its Decoction
brings down the Menses, and relieves Childrens Gripes. The Feet washed in its
Decoction in Urine, and the boiled Herb applied in a Poultise, carries off a
Fit of the Gout. Willis reckons a Decoction of the Herb, with Purple Flowers, a
Specific in Madness. The Decoction in Wine drank in Bed is good against the
Bite of a Viper, or of a Mad Dog. The Juice may be used for the Decoction, it
is exceeding good in a Dropsy, and in Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and
Reins. It expels the Stone. It is also good in a Delirium coming in continual
Fevers. The Extract of the Plant has the same Virtues, and mixed with that of
Hypericon, it is good in an Epilepsy. The Herb is a fine Vulnerary, is good in
a Consumption, Ulcers, and Imposthumes of the Lungs, foetid and purulent
Spitting.

ANAGALLIS. Grows only in Botanick Gardens.

241.
WATER PIMPERNEL or BROOK-LIME ( Becabunga) as was said before, is good in the
Scurvy, Stone, and to hasten the Menses, and Expulsion of the dead Foetus. It,
with a little Salt and Cobweb, applied, heals Wounds. In the Piles or other
Excrescences about the Anus, a Poultise of it boiled in Water or Wine, and
applied, instantly eases the most racking or acute Pain there. Lay on the
boiled Herb in a Poultise; it is also good for Condylomata there. For the
Scurvy: Take Conserve of Scurvy Grass, an Ounce and an Half; Conserve of the
lesser Celandine, six Drams* of candied Citron and Orange Peel, each an Ounce;
Cream of Tartar, Half an Ounce; prepared Steel, two Drams; Specier. Aromat.
Rosat. a Dram, with Syrup of the five opening Roots, makes an Electuary: Dose
two Drams twice a Day; Arnisaeus.

BECABUNGA. I have not observed any where in our Provinces.

242.
PHILLYREA or MOCK-PRIVET. Its Leaves with others, as Plantain, Bugle,
Prunella, Knot-grass, autumnal Mallow-flowers, dried Roses, etc. boiled for a
Gargle or Lotion, are very cooling and astringent; are good in Relaxations of
the Uvula, etc. It is wonderful how much Mock-privet Leaves, boiled in
Blacksmith's Trough Water, and used in a Gargle with a little Alum: I say how
it strengthens loose flabby Gums, and fastens the Teeth. A Water, distilled
from the tender Buds early in the Spring, is much commended for the Cure of
Ulcers in the privy Parts, and especially with a little Alum; and for a
Cancer, Rags dipped in, and laid on both, ex. gr. Half an Ounce of Alum to a
Pint of the Water; this also cures Excoriations. The following was communicated
by an emin^nt Surgeon, as a great Secret in small Ulcers of the ^ose: Take of
Mock-privet and Nightshade Water of each an Ounce; Sugar of Lead, a Scruple;
Sugar Candy, Half a Scruple; Camphire, seven Grains; mix and use. Its Water is
also good for Burns. In Want of the Water, a Decoction of its Leaves may do, to
gargle with, which is also good in the Toothache. Sim. Pauli. Hac.

PHILLYREA. Grows in Botanick Gardens in Virginia.

243.
PLANTAIN (Plantago) is a cooling and drying Vulnerary, used chiefly in all
Sorts of Fluxes, Looseness, Bloody Flux, Menses, involuntary Urine,
Blood-spitting, Loss of Sperm, etc. It cleanses and heals Wounds and Ulcers
soon and safely. The Ancients used only the Seed and Root, we the Leaf mostly.
Twelve Handfuls of the Leaf beaten in a Marble Mortar, the Juice expressed, and
poured on six Ounces of fresh Comfry Root, with an equal Weight of Sugar, beat
all up into an Electuary with some Drops of Oil of Anise or Nutmeg, it is a
sure Remedy for Spitting of Blood. Juices of Plantain and Lemon mixed is a noble
Diuretic. The Essence of Plantain, drank in a Decoction of Sarsaparilla and
Sassafras, after due Evacuations, cured one of a Bloody Gonorrhoea, says Sim
Pauli. Mead is a wonderful Remedy, says Bayrius, against the Rigor of Chronic
Fevers. The fresh dug up Root of Plantain, washed, and a Piece cut with a
Knife, and put in the Ear, stops the raging Pain of the Toothache, like a
Charm, says Sim. Pauli. Powdered Plantain Seed given in the Juice, or a
Decoction of the Leaves sweetened, cures fresh Ruptures. The powdered Seed
taken daily, from Half a Dram to a Dram in Broth, or in an Egg, prevents
Abortion. The Juice is drank from one to four Ounces in the Beginning of
Intermitting Fevers. The Juice, with Rose Water and Sugar, is a good Collyrium
for inflamed Eyes. Its Decoction is a fine Gargle for the Mouth. The Leaves
boiled in Wine, and beaten up to a Poultise, is good in an Aneurism. It is an
Ingredient in Palmarias's Powder against Madness. Sim. Pauli says, that he saw
a Navel Rupture of a grown up Person cured by a Poultise of Oak Lungs, and
Sloethorn Bark. Take Juice of Plantain, and of Elder Leaves, of each a Pound
and a Half; clarify the Liquor over the Fire, and separate the Clear from the
Dross; to the first put Sugar a Pound; Honey, Half a Pound; boil all till there
rise a clear Skin or Pellicle on the Top, then add Sugar of Lead, Half an
Ounce; then take it from the Fire, let it cool, bottle it up for Use, and warm
it a little in a Spoon, dip Lint in it, and lay on the Place twice a Day; it
cures obstinate Ulcers of the Legs where the Bone is not affected, nor any
Fistula or Sinuosity.

244.
WATER PLANTAIN is said to cool, astringe, and dry, to cure fallings down of
the Anus; to ease a hot Pain of the Head, Spitting of Blood, and Bloody Urine.
Roslin says, that its Juice, applied to the Breasts, is a great and most sure
Secret to disperse their Milk suddenly.

245.
SEA PLANTAIN is cold and dry like the other Plantains, only the greater Sea
Plantain, with grassy Leaves, is good against Biting and Stinging of Serpents,
and venomous Beasts, and in a Dropsy, especially an Anasarca.

246.
BUCK'S-HORN PLANTAIN ( Coronopus) boiled in Wine, and drank, is good against
the Bite of Serpents, if the Herb be laid to the Wound. The Decoction, drank,
cools the Back and Reins of nephritic Persons, and so is good for the Stone. It
stops bleeding at the Mouth, Nose, Stool, by Urine, Womb, or Wounds. Its Root
strengthens the Stomach, and is good in Cholics. Its Decoction drank, and the
Root hung about the Neck, weakens Ague Fits till it cures them; or laid to the
Side, it eases the Fit. The Leaves and Roots, beaten up with Bay Salt, and laid
to the Wrists, do the same. Its Decoction drank sometimes cures Rheums and
Distillations on the Eyes. The Seed of creeping Buck's-horn takes off Warts.
For a Diarrhoea, or Looseness, or Flux, a Dram of Plantain Seed, in a poached
Egg, or red Wine, and repeated. Two Scruples, or a Dram of Powder of Holly
Leaves, in red Wine, powdered Flowers of Amaranthus, or Flower Gentle in Wine,
drank. A Decoction of Silver Weed. Powder or Decoction of the inner or red Peel
of Walnuts. Dwarf Sunflower taken any how. A Fumigation of Fleabane Leaves to
the Anus; or the Herb beaten up with Vinegar, and laid to the Stomach. Quinces
baked with Wax, or Gum Arabic eaten. Acorns boiled in Broth; and a Handful of
Juniper Berries, boiled in red Wine, a Pint and a Half, to a Pint, strained and
drank, and if needful repeat it thrice; or Medlers eaten; or the Powder of
Mulberries dried in the Sun; or Juice of Arsmart, or Housleek, of each three
Ounces, boil away to a third Part, and give in the Morning, it is sovereign; or
Plantain Leaves boiled in Mutton Broth; or lay Cloths to the Stomach, Belly,
and Back, dipped in a Decoction of Knot-grass, in Crab Juice, or Verjuice; or
Half a Dram of the Powder of thickened unripe Sloe Juice, in red Wine; or Half
a Dram of the Powder of Willow-sponge, in Wine; or Powder of Flix-weed Seed in
red Wine, drank; or powdered Leaves of Perriwincle, with a little Rhubarb, and
Conserve of red Roses. -- For a Dysentery or Bloody Flux, Wild Tansy used as
above. Bistort Root boiled in red Wine, and drank; or its Powder taken in
Conserve of Roses. A Decoction of Powder of Shepherd's Purse, Chestnut Peel, as
above. Quince a little scooped, and the Hole filled with Cochineal, and roasted
and eat (...) Two Drams of powdered Leaves, or Root of Dropwort, taken in Wine,
or in an Egg. Cudweed boiled in Wine. Three or four Ounces of Juice of
Ground Ivy. A Dram of Powder of Walnut-tree Buds, in Plantain Water. A
Decoction of red Archangel, drank. Powder of Dock-seed, a Spoonful in a poached
Egg or Broth. A Decoction of Hollyhock Roots and Plantain Leaves drank. White
cut Leaves of Millefoil and Plantain, boiled in red Wine, and drank. Clubmoss
used as in the Stone. Cresses Seed, given any how. A Decoction of Burnet in
Water, with Butter, drank twice a Day. Juice of Plantain, three or four Ounces;
or its Leaves boiled in Broth Apples prepared with Wax as in a Looseness. Oak
Leaves boiled in Vinegar, put in Bags, and laid to the Belly and Anus hot; or a
Dram of Acorn Powder given in Wine. Juice of ripe Elder Berries, and Rye-meal,
made into small round Pastes, and baked again, repeat a third time, then powder
them, and, to each Ounce of Powder, add a Dram of powdered Nutmegs; Dose a Dram
in a poached Egg, or with toasted Bread sprinkled with Wine. Flix-weed any how
used is an excellent Remedy; or a Dram of its Powder in Wine. Powdered Cork, in
an Electuary. Powder of dried Lime-tree Berries. Powder or Decoction of
Tormentil Roots. A Decoction of Perriwinkle. Ten Ounces of the Juice of unripe
Grapes, clarified by slow Boiling; take a third Part of it at a Dose. -- For a
Tenesmus. ^oment the Anus with a Decoction of Green Oak Leaves, in Blacksmith's
Trough Water; or let the Sick often sit over a strong Decoction of Savine; or
often foment with a warm Decoction of Lime-tree Leaves; or let the Sick sit as
long as he can on a warm Bag of Wheat Bran, boiled in Vinegar, and often change
it as it cools; or let him often sit over a hot Decoction of Mullein; or foment
with a warm Decoction of it.


247.
PLUM-TREE ( Prunus) the moist, ripe, sweet Fruit loosens; they afford not the
best Juice, they soon putrefy in the Body, and nourish little, nor should they
be eaten too plentifully at once, nor too ripe, but a little sharp and sour.
The sweeter and riper they are, the more laxative; nor do they agree with cold,
phlegmatic, lax Stomachs, but with the warm and bilious. Preserved with Sugar,
they are very grateful to the Stomach, and to feverish, sick People; but the
rough and acid are most so. Preserved Damascenes, if eaten sparingly, cool,
moisten, and open the Body, abate Heat and Thirst in Fevers. A Gargle of
Plum-tree Leaves, boiled in Wine, is good for the Tonsils, Jaws, and Uvula;
boiled in Milk, they are good for the Thrush in Children. The Gum of the Tree
is of an agglutinating Nature, and drank in Wine it wastes the Stone. All these
Fruits, however grateful they are to hot, bilious Stomachs, or to feverish and
hot People, yet they are by no Means suited to the cold, aged, phlegmatic,
weak, and palled Stomachs, except eaten very sparingly, and warmed either with
a Glass of strong Wine, or a Dram of Rum or Brandy.

248.
POLEY MOUNTAIN ( Polium Montanum) infused in Squill Wine cures such as walk in
their Sleep; being very acrid and bitter provokes Urine and Menses. It relieves
in Dropsy and Jaundice, and is good against the Biting of venomous Beasts,
abounding with a volatile Salt, Sylvius puts it among the second Rank of
Medicines against the Falling Sickness. Dioscorides says its Decoction is good
in the Biting of Serpents, and that its Fumigation, or strewing it in a House,
drives away venomous Beasts. Though it disturb the Stomach, and cause Pain in
the Head, yet it cures Spleen, Jaundice, and Dropsy, moves the Belly, and heals
Wounds. The yellow Sort is best, it containing much Oil and volatile Salt; it
is opening, good for the Head, causes Sweat, cures Wounds, resists
Putrefaction, fortifies the Brain, expels malignant Vapors from Head and
Heart, brings down Menses and Urine, says Lemery. Apuleius says, that Juice of
Poley, mixed with Vinegar of Squills, and the Body anointed with it, cures
Lunatics; that its Root hung about the Neck does the same.

POLEY MOUNTAIN* This Species is a Garden Plant in England, it grows not in our
Provinces.

249.
POLYPODY. ( Polypodium) That of the Oak is chiefly used, and of it the Root
only, with Laxatives, gently to carry off thick Phlegm, and adust Bile in
Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Sweetbread, and for Hypo and Scurvy; but
being very slow, it is only mixed with other Purges in Infusion or Decoction,
or in Broths with Beets, Parsley, Mallow, Cummin, Ginger, Fennel, and Anise;
this is also a very good Decoction in the Gripes. The Powder taken (to Half a
Dram daily, and fasting three Hours after) with Cream of Tartar, it is an
excellent Cure for the Spleen, Jaundice, and Dropsy. Some use its distilled
Water in a Cough, Asthma, Diseases of the Lungs, Melancholy, frightful Dreams,
and Quartans, drank daily for some Time. In the three last Cases, the Root is
to be boiled in Wine, and sweetened with Sugar and Honey. It is good for
chapped Hands or Feet. Pliny says a Snuff of the powdered Root wastes the
Polypus in the Nose. The Root, beaten small, and applied, helps Dislocations.

250.
POPLAR-TREE. ( Populus) An Ounce of the powdered Bark of the white Poplar,
drank, is good in the Sciatica or Strangury* The warm Juice dropped into the
Ear, eases its Pain. The young Buds bruised, with a little Honey, are good for
dim Sight. The black Poplar is more cooling than the white; its Leaves, bruised
with Vinegar, have been applied to the Gout. The Seed drank with Vinegar, is
good for the Falling Sickness. The Water, that drops from the Hollow of this
Tree, takes away Warts, Pustules, Wheals, etc. The early young Buds, bruised in
fresh Butter, and set in the Sun, then strained, beautify Women's Hair. Its
Ointment cools Inflammations and Wounds, and dries up the Milk in Women's
Breasts.

251.
POPPY ( Papaver) Leaf, Juice, and Seed, are all in Use* but, not to insist on
the Preparation of Opium here, which is imported to us, I shall chiefly insist
on some of the Uses of white Poppies: One, two, or three Dishes of Tea, made of
the bruised Seed or Head given at Night to Children, or feverish young People,
compose gently to Rest, beyond Opium, Laudanum, or Diacodium, which often
produce uneasy or disagreeable Symptoms. An Emulsion of the Seed prepared in
Milk and Lettuce Water, is an effectual Remedy, says Sennertus, against the
most raging Pains of the Inflammation of the Eyes. A Poultise of the Leaves,
boiled in Milk, quiets the severest Pains of the Limbs. Take Poppy-head and
Seeds, and Dill-seed, of each two Ounces; Tops of Hen-bane, Hound's-tongue,
Nightshade, and Camomile Flowers, of each two Handfuls; cut and boil in six
Pints of Water to four, and strain for Use, is Fuller's notable Anodyne
Fomentation for all violent Pains or Aches. It is also in his excellent
Fomentation, for spurious, pituitous, or flatulent Pleurisies, but does
Mischief in a true inflammatory Pleurisy. Our white Poppy, which is chiefly
used, is cooling, and moistens, procures Sleep in Disorders of the Breasts and
Lungs, as Cough, Hoarseness, and Consumption; is good in a Looseness, and in
great Pains, Watchings, Restlessness, and Catarrhs. The Turks use its spissated
Juice, very much, and in great Doses, to raise their Spirits, excite Courage
both for Mars and Venus. Some even use the Seeds in their Diet. In a Word, the
Tea, Infusion, Emulsion, and Syrup of the Seeds, are used in all severe
internal Pains, Loosenesses, Catarrhs, tickling Coughs from salt Rheums, Bloody
Flux, Spitting of Blood, excessive Menses, in all Losses of Blood,
Restlessness, Watchings, Gripes, etc. And a Decoction of the Tops, Heads,
Leaves, and Seeds in Baths, Pedilavia, Fomentations, Poultises, Ointments, etc.
in all external Pains, and in Watchings, Cramps, and Stiffnesses, (if not from
Cold, or cold Causes, etc.)

252.
POPPY WILD, or CORN POPPY (Papaver erraticum) cools powerfully, procures
Sleep, and eases Pain; it is used in Fevers, Pleurisies (for which it is a
specific Remedy) Quinsy, and other Diseases of the Br^ast; especially in
irregular Discharge of the Menses. The Infusion of the Flowers in Spirit of
Wine is very good. Some apply its bruised Leaves to the Liver, to stop Bleeding
at the Nose. It affords a good distilled Water, Syrup, Conserve, and Extract,
which are Specifics in a Pleurisy, and to quiet Ravings and Distraction in
burning Fevers, inward Inflammations and Quinsy; but, when by its Use the
violent Pain of a Pleurisy is removed, it must be left off, lest it stop
Spitting; and expectorating Remedies must be used, for which, Juice of
Horseradish exceeds all other Things. Juice and Decoction of Dandelion and
Chervil, with these Poppy Flowers, are also good; or their Syrup with Oil of
Sweet Almonds, or Sperma-ceti, with the Yolk of an Egg, may be added, and made
into an Emulsion. Tincture of Corn Poppies, with Camphire and Nitre, is good in
a Phrenzy. This Syrup, with the middle Bark of Elder, is a powerful Causer of
Sweat. The Tea, Infusion, or Tincture of the Flowers, is good in Rheums and
Catarrhs on the Breast and Lungs. For a dry Cough, a Decoction of Bugloss and
Dog-grass Roots, of each three Ounces, in two Quarts of Water; strain the
Decoction on an Ounce of Corn Poppy Flowers, and on some white Poppy Heads, cut
small, and put in a thin Rag to strain out.

253.
SEA or HORNED POPPY. ( Papaver corniculatum luteum) The Seed taken in Mead,
purges the Body gently. A Decoction of the Root in Water, to a Half, helps
Obstructions of the Liver, and Pain of the Sciatica; it provokes Urine, and
cures Water like Threads or Rags. The Leaves and Flowers cleanse foul Ulcers so
powerfully, that they must not be applied to clean Ulcers, and take off Scurfs,
etc. from ill dressed Ulcers. The same with Oil cleanses the Eyes of Cattle
that have Films over them. But observe the bad Effects of this Plant in
Philosoph. Transact. No. 242. p. 263.

254.
PRIMROSES (wild yellow) or COWSLIPS, ( Paralysis) the Flowers are friendly to
the Head and Nerves; they are used in the Palsy, Apoplexy, and Gout. Juice of
the Flowers take Spots and Wrinkles off the Face, and other Faults of the Skin.
The Water, Wine, Tea, and Conserve of the Flowers, are all Anodyne, and softly
dispose to sleep; all appease Pain gently, induce Rest to Children, weak and
tender Persons, especially in feverish Disorders. A Dram and a Half of the
Root, gathered in Harvest, vomits safely, and brings up watery, choleric, and
phlegmatic Humors. A Decoction of the Root in Posset Drink is a most powerful
and present Remedy in a Vertigo. The expressed Juice of the Flowers and Leaves,
drank often with as much Cows Milk, perfectly cured a most inveterate Headache.
A Decoction of the Roots is good in the Stone. The Juice of the Leaves is good
for inward Bruises, or Hurts; Conserve of the Flowers is excellent for Palsies,
Convulsions, and Cramps; and so is a Decoction of the Leaves in a Bloody Flux.
The Juice of the Root, snuff'd up the Nose, clears the Head, and cures the
Megrim; but this Disease is more effectually cured by Juice of Crow's-foot
Leaves, laid directly on the Part, through a Hole like a Silver Penny, in a
sticking Plaster, the Hair shaved off under it. A Decoction of Primrose Leaves
and Flowers, in Wine, is good in all Diseases of the Breast and Lungs. A
Poultise of them draws out of the Flesh Thorns, Splinters, or Bones. Ointment
of the Juice and Linseed Oil, cures all Burns and Scalds. The Flowers boiled in
Vinegar, and applied, discuss Scrophulous Tumors. A Gargle of their Decoction,
heals swelled Throats. The Cowslips, whose Flowers have no Smell, are not used
in Physic, says Sim. Pauli.

255.
PURSLANE ( Portulaca) is used in Sallads to allay the Heat of the Stomach, and
check the Re^undance of Bile; it is therefore used in putrid and malignant
Fevers, in the Heat of Urine, and for the Scurvy. It checks Lust, hinders
venereal Dreams, and nocturnal Pollutions, therefore good for the Lovers of
Chastity, and the too Lascivious. The Leaves eaten raw, fasten loose Teeth, and
cure such as are set on Edge; it is good for Children that have Worms, but must
not be given too liberally, for its Coldness and Moistness causes it soon to
putrefy on the Stomach, and relax its Tone. Galen advises its Use in hot Agues,
to stop bilious Fluxes, Women's Menses, Fluor albus, Gonorrhoea, Defluxions from
the Head, Want of Sleep, and Phrenzy. The Seed is better than the Herb, and is
very good for Heat and Sharpness of Urine, and to restrain excessive Leachery.
The Juice of the Herb is good in Inflammations and Ulcers of the private Parts
of both Sexes, if injected by a Syringe. The bruised Herb, applied to the
Temples and Forehead, eases excessive Heat and Pain, from Want of Sleep or
Rest. It takes away Redness and Inflammation of the Eyes. The Juice with
Vinegar cools those Parts where Pustules, Wheals, amd Pimples break forth, the
Juice with Oil of Roses, is good for Women's sore Breasts; for Burns by
Gunpowder, or by Lightning. The thickened Juice, made into Pills with Gum
Tragacanth and Arabic, and taken, is good against making Bloody Urine; some use
the distilled Water for the Toothache.

256.
QUINCE-TREE. (Cydonia) The Fruit, from its noble Astringency, is most
agreeable to the Stomach; it is good in a Coeliaca, and for them that have
Bloody Fluxes or Bilious, or Spitting of Blood, and in all Kinds of Fluxes; but
its Bracing and Astringency, is much lessened by Boiling. Eaten before Meat it
binds the Belly, but after Meat it loosens it. In hot Fevers, when the Gullet
is parched and Swallowing hurt, a Mucilage of the Seed made with Frog-spawn
Water is excellent. Though the Fruit binds, yet it provokes Urine; but in a
Heat of Urine, either with or without an Ulcer, it must be refrained. The Wine
of Quinces is astringent, grateful to the Stomach, Bowels, and Kidneys. The
Marmalade, often eaten, is good for Women with Child, for it not only
strengthens the Infant, and gives it a fine Complexion, but prevents Abortion,
and causes quick and easy Labor to the Mother. The Juice boiled up gently to
the Consistence of a Syrup, and Half an Ounce of it given to Infants, and more
to the grown up, fetches up tough Phlegm from the Lungs; or gives a very mild
Puke, or moves the Belly, and strengthens the Sick. Sylvius extols it highly.
The Seed sprinkled and softened with Rose Water, and brought to a thick
Mucilage, is good for Burns and Parching of the Tongue, Mouth, and Throat, in
Fevers, and for the Pain of the Piles, in Clysters, and for chapped Nipples. If
a little Vinegar be added to the Juice, Syrup, or Conserve, it rouses a flagged
Appetite; and, if some Spices be added, it strengthens and raises the Spirits,
and helps the languid Viscera. To make them more loosening, use Honey instead
of Sugar, and a little Rhubarb or Turbith to purge Phlegm, or Scammony for
Water. If to bind more, use unripe Quinces, with red Roses and Sloe Juice, with
toasted Rhubarb. Their Juice is a wonderful Antidote against deadly Poison,
especially of white Hellebore. Their Oil rubbed on the Stomach, Belly, or
relaxed Sinews, strengthens them much. A Decoction of their Down, in Wine,
heals up Plague Sores; or, used in a Plaster, with Wax, and applied, restores
Hair to bald Places, or prevents its falling off. A Poultise of its Pulp laid
warn to a pestilential Carbuncle, cures it; or Radish Root, cut and applied,
draws out the Poison powerfully.

257.
RAG-WORT or RAG-WEED, St. JAMES'S-WORT, STAGGER-WORT, etc. ( Jacobaea) is warm
and bitter, it cleanses, dries, digests, and discusses. Its Decoction, used in
a Gargle* is said to cure Sores and Ulcers in the Mouth, Tonsils, and Throat.
But Sim. Pauli rejects it for its Bitterness, and substitutes Throat-wort for
it, with Strawberry Leaves and Self-heal; or, if it be designed to discuss with
Warmers, he advises Origanum, Hyssop, Rosemary, etc. Fomentations and Poultises
of it are fit for Swellings and Imposthumations; it cleanses and heals them,
Quinsy and King's Evil. The Juice quickly heals green Wounds, cleanses and
cures old filthy Ulcers in any Part, stops fretting Cankers and Fistula's. It
is very serviceable for Aches and Pains of the Muscles, Tendons, and Nerves;
and either fomenting the Part with its Decoction, or anointing it with its
Ointment, is good for the Sciatica. It is said to be a certain Remedy for the
Staggers in Horses, but it and Groundsel in a Poultise with Vinegar and Lard,
applied to hard and inflamed Breasts, either from a Blow, or Milk curdled in
them, even where a Cancer is threatened, has surprising Success. Sim. Pauli
knew a Surgeon who cured an epidemic Camp Dysentery with its Decoction. Some
laid a Poultise of it to the Belly for the Gripes* and he owns it to be
excellent in that Disease; and would have it with other Sarcotics, used in
Clysters for Excoriations of the Bowels.

RAG-WEED. We have not this Species growing in our Provinces, that I know of.

258.
RASP or HIND BERRIES (Rubus Idaeus) are much the same as Brambles, but far
pleasanter to the Taste, and more cordial, and less astringent. Their Syrup,
Jam, or Conserve, are good in ardent Fevers, being cooling, cordial, and highly
grateful. They afford a good Wine in a Weak Stomach, Looseness, several
Disorders of the Jaws, Gums, Uvula, Palate, etc. They that are troubled with
often Vomitings should eat this Fruit, and lay a Poultise of the Leaves on the
Stomach. A Decoction of the tender Leaves, or the Leaves bruised and laid on,
and their distilled Water drank, ease and relieve all Inflammations. Though
this Bush affords a more grateful and cordial Fruit than the black Sort, viz.
The Bramble, yet it is not so useful and medicinal. Rasp-berries abound with
Sulphur, and volatile Salt, they are therefore diaphoretic. N. B. The Berries
putrefy soonest of most Fruit, breed Worms fastest, and they and Strawberries
should never be eaten unwash'd. Drinking freely of their Wine, gives a violent
Headache.

259.
RADISHES ( Raphanus hortensis) the Roots warm, dry, open, thin, and cleanse;
they are used to break and expel the Stone, provoke Urine and Menses, open
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen; they thin Slime and Phlegm in the
Stomach, promote the Distribution of the Chyle and Humors. They are applied
with Salt to the Soles in Fevers, and to the Neck in Pains of the Head, that
attend malignant Fevers. If in the Wane of the Moon Corns are cut to the quick
'till they smart, and the Juice of this Root is dropped on them, they certainly
vanish. Applied in a Poultise with Goose-grease, they draw Thorns and Splinters
out of the Flesh. Taken with Honey they ease a Cough, and are reckoned good
against the Poison of Toad-stools and Hen-bane. The Juice given with Honey to
drink, is good for Childrens Coughs, and Shortness of Breath. Two Ounces of the
Garden Root, shred, and Mead poured on it, and the expressed Juice given warm;
or rather three Drams of the Seed bruised, and Mead, Whey, or Barley Water,
poured on it, and squeezed off and drank, Fernelius says, is the easiest and
safest Vomit in the World. Four Ounces of Radish Water, drank daily twice a
Day, cures the Stone, and is good for a Dropsy; or for the Stone, Take Juice of
the Root, three or four Ounces; Honey, one Ounce; mix and repeat it three
Mornings; or the Root cut into Slices, and boiled over a slow Fire with Honey;
four Ounces of the Water running from them, is good to drink; or take an Once
of the Bark of the Root; Medlar Stones, two Drams; infuse them eight Hours in
four Ounces of white Wine; then drink it moderately warm, it is a great Secret
against the Stone. The Root is also good for the Scurvy and Dropsy, and in
Sallads. For a bad or depraved Taste, preserved Roots of Succory are good
eaten; or Juice or Syrup of Sorrel; or Radish Root eaten before Dinner. Juice
of Radishes, but chiefly of Water Cresses, or Tents dipped in the Juice of
Wake-Robin, are all three good for a Polypus, if put up the Nose. Assuerus
gives us this excellent Water for the Stone: Take Roots of Smallage and
Parsley, Cum toto, of each six Handfuls; Radish and Horseradish, Onions and
Nettles, of each three Handfuls; Juniper Berries, a Pound; Winter Cherries,
fifty; cut, bruise, and infuse, eight Days in Rhenish Wine, then distill in
Baln. Mar. and put up for Use. Sim. Pauli from Quercetan gives the following
for the Scurvy: Take Decoction of Barley or Barley Water, two Pounds; Rhenish
Wine Half a Pint; Horse Radish Roots sliced, four Ounces; Scurvy Grass, three
Handfuls; Water Cresses, a Handful; or Scurvy Grass and Cress-seeds, of each
two Drams; cut, bruise, and infuse all for twelve Hours in a warm Place, then
mash the whole, and without the least Boiling express the Juice strongly in a
good Press, and, instead of his Norway Spirit of Mulberries and Syrup, add Aq.
Raphan. Rustic. Dose two Drams Evening and Morning to the Poor.

260.
RADISH (Horse) (Raphanus Rusticanus) has the like Virtues, but is stronger,
therefore far more used and depended on, in all the above Cases. The Root
expels Urine, Sand, and Gravel; it is also commended for a Cough and
Consumption, and repeated is a Specific in the Scurvy. Its Juice or Infusion,
in Honey and Vinegar, drank warm, is certainly one of the best Vomits in the
World for a palled Stomach loaded with Phlegm, but especially where the Breast
is oppressed with much thick tough Phlegm. This Root is highly extolled in the
Stone. Bartholine says, its Juice dissolves the Stone taken out of the Body. It
is a good Stomachic, and brings down the Menses. The Juice drank, and laid to
the Navel, kills Worms in Children. A Poultise of it laid to the Navel and
Loins relieves in a Dropsy. If drank, and repeated several times before the Fit
of a Quartan, it alters its Course. A Poultise of it, beaten up and applied, is
good in the Sciatica, Gout, and other Joint Achs, and for Swellings of the
Spleen and Liver. Some use the distilled Water of the Root for all these
Intentions. But its Juice drank exceeds all Things in a Pleurisy, to cause
Spitting after the Pain.

261.
ROCKET ( Eruca) gives Sallads a fine Taste, and the same it does to Sauces and
Seasonings; it is grateful to the Palate, excites Lust, and is said to increase
Seed; the Leaves boiled, and a little Sugar put to them, are thought to be good
for Childrens Coughs. The Seed, bruised and drank with Wine, kills Worms, and
heals the Swelling of the Spleen. The bruised Leaves put on the Eyelids clear
the Sight. The Seed mixed with Honey, and anointed on the Face, takes off all
Spots and Scurfs, but more effectually if Ox Gall be mixed with it. Mathiolus
says a Poultise of the Roots, boiled in Water, draws out Splinters or Bones.
But Bauhinus prefers the Leaves here. Some use daily a Powder of Rocket and
Cummin, to preven^ ^n Apoplexy and Palsy. The wild Rocket is hotter and more
acrid than that of the Garden; they cut, thin, and rarify tough Phlegm, and put
up the Nose cause Sneezing.

ROCKET* Is a Garden Herb in Europe. I had it growing once; but the Winter
ki^led it.

262.
ROSA SOLIS ( Ros Solis) or Sun-dew; some extol its Sweat or Juice in
Consumptions, but I should be sorry to use it, or any such acrid, almost
caustic Medicine, in so dangerous a Disease; or in any Case internally; but
outwardly it may be used for Pain or Inflammation of the Eyes. Hoffman says, it
breaks the Stone in the Bladder and Reins, and removes a Dropsy, by carrying
off the Water. Ray says, if it is gathered when the Sun is in the Middle of
Leo, dry it, put it in a Bag, and lay on the Breast, it is a Secret against
Bleeding of the Nose. Schroder knew some who used its Infusion in Aqua Vitae
for an ordinary Cordial; and Gerard says, if it is distilled with Wine and
aromatic Spices, the Water is a fine Cordial; however, it is fatal to Sheep
that eat much of it, for it spoils their Lungs.

ROSA SOLIS. This is very scarce, and only to be found growing in Bog Moss.

263.
ROSES ( Rosa) red, whilst green, have a watery laxative Juice, which they lose
when dry, and are then astringent. But Damask Roses retain their purging
Quality, when dry. Roses, being a great Cordial, are beneficial in Tremors and
Palpitations of the Heart; they invigorate Heart, Liver, Kidneys, and all the
weak Viscera; stop Female Discharges, Haemorrhages, and all Fluxes of the
Belly. Their Tincture, acidulated with Spirit of Vitriol, checks immoderate
Sweating, as well as Spitting and Vomiting of Blood, or Bleeding at the Nose. A
Dram or two of their Powder, taken twice a Day in Plantain Water, cures
obstinate Fluxes. Their Leaves laid under the Back at Night check Lust, and
diminish Seed. Damask Rose Water is good in all Inflammations and Rheums of the
Eyes. The expressed Juice of ripe red Roses, dried and powdered, is excellent
in both Sorts of Uterine Fluxes. Preparations of Roses are good in Consumptions
and Diseases of the Lungs, in Fluxes of the Belly, in Fevers, Losses of Blood,
Wounds, Inflammations, Weakness of the Stomach and Bowels, Sweatings, etc. Rose
Water and Oil of Roses, boiled till the first is wasted, then rubbed on the
shaven Head of mad Persons, sometimes induces Rest, when Opiates either fail or
are injurious. Syrup of Damask Roses is a pleasant Laxative for Children, weak
People, and in hot Fevers. Their Water is a great Cordial and Reviver of the
Spirits. Syrup of dried red Roses is a great Astringent, as is the Syrup of
their Juice. Who want to see or know more of them may consult Clusius,
Parkinson, Monardus, Sim. Pauli, etc.

264.
ROSEMARY ( Rosmarinus) Leaves, Flowers, and Seeds, are all in Use; it stands
at the Head of the Cephalic, Nervous, and Uterine Plants, being good in
Diseases of all the three, as in Apoplexy, Palsy, Epilepsy, Lethargy, Vertigo,
Hysterics, etc. It sharpens the Sight, strengthens the Senses and Memory, helps
a disagreeable Breath, opens most powerfully Obstructions of Liver, Spleen and
Uterus; comforts the Heart, and is good in the Jaundice and Fluor albus. The
Fumigation of the Herb corrects a pestilential Air. The Seed drank in Wine is
good for the Jaundice. Dioscorides says, the Herb cures the King's Evil, if the
Patient drink a Decoction of it in Water, before Exercise; and, after Exercise,
let him wash, and drink a little Wine. The Infusion of the Herb in Wine, Beer,
or Ale, is good in a Palsy for common Drink. So is a Decoction of Fir-tops, or
a daily Tea of the Buds, drank in a Scorbutic Palsy. The Flowers, eaten with
Salt and Bread fasting, strengthen a weak Sight. The dried Plant smoaked like
Tobacco, is good in a Cough. Its Chemical Oil given from four to six Drops, in
a Decoction of the Herb before the Fit, cures Tertian Agues. The Herb is of a
thinning and cleansing Nature, cuts all thick and gross phlegmatic Humors, and
opens obstructed Passages; ^ence, besides the above Diseases, it is good in
Deafness, Asthma's, Inflammation of the Stomach, Cholic, Barrenness, and Green
Sickness. The Flowers and Leaves boiled in Wine and Honey till Half the Liquor
is wasted, then strained and drank at going to Bed, is excellent for an Asthma,
and Hoarseness. It also cures Rheums, and Putrefactions of the Teeth and Gums.
An Infusion of it in red Wine has cured a Looseness of three Months
Continuance. That noble, reviving, Cephalic Liquor, called the Queen of
Hungary's Water, is drawn from its Flowers. An Ointment made of the Herb is
good in cold Diseases of the Limbs and Joints, or any other Part. The Chemical
Oil is good for the same as the Herb, but, being so very hot, it must be used
cautiously. A Decoction of the Herb drank, is good in the Fluor albus. The Herb
beaten up to a Paste, and made up like two Balls, daily held in the Hand till
they are warmed, cures their Weakness. As a Fomentation of the Decoction of
Mug-wort, or St. John's Wort helps their Shaking, especially if a Tincture of
St. John's Wort be taken inwardly at the same Time. A Decoction of its Leaves
and Flowers, and Elecampane Root, is good in a Paraplegias; or a Decoction or
Tea of Sassafras Root. A Decoction of its Leaves and Flowers, or of Lavender,
or of Betony, with Juniper Berries, are all good in a Palsy. The Herb is biting
and bitter, and a little astringent. The following Empyrical Medicine has
sometimes been serviceable in a Cough: Take Powder of Rosemary, of Flowers of
Betony, Flowers of Sulphur, of Sugar Candy, of each Half an Ounce; Powders of
Liquorice, Elecampane, Horehound, Aniseed, of each three Drams; of Colt's-foot,
four Drams; Flowers of Benjamin, two Scruples; with Honey make an Electuary,
and take. Others extol this greatly, either in a Catarrh, raging tearing Cough,
or Asthma, either in Man or Beast: Take Powder of Rosemary, Liquorice,
Elecampane, Anise, and brown Sugar Candy, of each two Ounces; Figs and stoned
Raisins of the Sun, of each two Ounces and a Half; Oil of Sweet Almonds,
Linseed Oil, Aniseed Oil, or, (if it is a mere salt Rheum and Distillation
without Phlegm) Oil of Sulphur, by the Bell, instead of Anise Oil, of each two
Ounces; common Melasses Treacle, Half a Pound; first beat the Figs and Raisins
into a Pulp, then add the rest, beat till all is well mixed, then put up in an
earthen Pot, and cover it with a Bladder; Dose to a Man the Bigness of a
Nutmeg, to a Horse an Ounce in some Liquor.

265.
RUE ( Ruta) or the Country Man's Treacle, contains much exalted Oil and
volatile Salt. It cuts, thins, and discusses Humors, resists Poison,
pestilential and contagious Diseases; strengthens the Brain, promotes the
Menses; curbs excessive Venery; is good against Vapors, and windy Cholic, for
the Bite of Serpents, venomous Insects, and a Mad Dog. It is used inwardly and
outwardly. It warms and dries powerfully. It sharpens the Sight, is good for a
weak Stomach, and all Diseases of the Nerves, eases Pleuritic Pains, and expels
Wind. Outwardly it is laid to the Wrists in Agues, to the Bite of a Mad Dog, to
Carbuncles, to the Head in a Megrim, and to the Soles of the Feet in burning
and malignant Fevers. Women with Child must not be too free with it. Its
Decoction in Wine is a good Gargle for rotten Teeth, and scorbutic Gums. It is
a great Preserver of Chastity. It strengthens Sight much. Its Infusion in Wine,
drank, is a good Pr^servation against the Plague, malignant and epidemic
Diseases. A Drop of its Oil, given Children on Sugar, kills Worms. An Ounce of
its Juice, with Half an Ounce of Honey of Squills, is a present Remedy in the
Falling Sickness; for which Rue, but chiefly its Seed, is much commended. Its
Syrup or Conserve is good in Diseases of the Head and Stomach. So is its
Infusion in white Wine, to promote the Menses. Rue beaten up with the White and
Yolk of an Egg, fried and laid to the Navel, is good in Hysterics. A Decoction
of Wild and stone Rue is noted for expelling Stone and Gravel. The Seed is said
to be an Antidote against all dangerous Medicines, Poisons, or Diseases,
especially if Figs and Walnuts be added to it. Rue Leaves, eaten, sweeten the
Breath after eating Garlic, Onions, Leeks, or Shallots. A Decoction of it,
with dry Dill Leaves and Flowers, drank, and applied warm to any Part, eases
all Pains and Tortures. The same drank relieves the Pains of the Breast, Sides,
Difficulty of Breathing, a Cough, the tearing Pains of the Sciatica, and of the
Joints, if at the same Time a Liniment of the Herb and Juice, with Lard and
Camphire, be rubbed on and applied. Its Decoction or Infusion in Oil, given in
Clysters, eases the windy Cholic, and Flatulency; Hardness or Swelling of the
Uterus, and Hysteric Fits; if at the same Time some of the Oil be rubbed on the
Sharebone and Belly. A Poultise of it to the Hands or Feet is good in the Gout.
A Fomentation of it and Wormwood is good in a Dropsy, Gangrene, or Tendency to
a Mortification. The bruised Leaves, put up the Nose, stop its Bleeding. A
Fomentation of its Decoction, with Bay Leaves, is good for swelled Cods. Its
Decoction in Wine, with Pepper and Nitre, takes away Warts and Morphews from
the Parts bathed with it. Its Decoction in Water, with Alum and Honey, cures
the dry Scab, Tetters and Ringworms. Its Juice warmed in a Pomegranate Rind,
and dropped into pained Ears, eases them. Juices of Rue and Fennel, with a
little Honey and Ox Gall, mixed and dropped into the Eyes, helps Dimness of
Sight. An Ointment of it cures running Sores on the Head, and foul Ulcers on
other Parts. An Electuary of Rue, Nitre, Pepper, and prepared Cummin Seeds,
made with Honey, is good for Pains of the Breast, Stomach, Sides, Belly, Spleen
or Liver, and in Stoppage of Urine, and helps to prevent too great Corpulency.
In a Cholic from Viscidity or Acidity of the Contents of the Guts give this:
Take Powder of Rue, Sal Gem. of each alike; Honey, enough to make it into Pills
to take; or use his notable Secret: Take Leaves of wild Fig Tree, growing on
the Ground, Half a Dram; Elm Leaves, a Scruple; powder, mix, and give; it is
like a Charm in Nephritic Pains. And a Tincture of Sassafras Bark, or of
Ground Ivy drawn in Brandy; Dose two Spoonfuls; it expels Wind from the Stomach
in a Minute. It is very good in St Vitus's Dance.

266.
RUPTURE-WORT, ( Herniaria) the Juice drank, or the Herb eaten, or bruised, and
laid on Plaster Ways, helps the Bite of Vipers. A Plaster of it is excellent
in Ruptures. The distilled Water helps the Liver, and cures the Jaundice in
eight Days. The Decoction or Water is good for the Stone, and Toothache. For
Childrens Ruptures, Powder of Wall Rue, taken forty Days. Powder or Decoction
of Ladies Mantle, drank* Powder (or Decoction) of Cross-wort given in red Wine.
Two Drams of fine Powder of Tooth-wort, taken in Broth forty Days; or a Dram of
powdered Adder's-tongue, taken daily in red Wine; or powdered Root of Solomon's
Seal taken in Wine; or its Decoction in red Wine drank daily; or powdered Seed
of Plantain. -- In Children or grown up Persons, a Dram of powdered Arum Root
in Wine, and let the common Drink be an Infusion of Spleen-wort; or a Decoction
in rough Wine of Dove's-foot, and Carline Thistle Root in Wine, drank; or Half
a Spoonful of powdered Dove's-foot Tops and Roots in Wine, drank every Night at
Bedtime, for Twenty-one Days; or from one Ounce to two of Juice of
Rupture-wort, in red Wine; or a Dram of its Powder; or six Ounces of its
Decoction daily; or powdered Seed of Cresses made into a Plaster, with the
White of an Egg laid warm to the Part shaven, and a Dram of the powdered Seed
taken Morning and Evening in red Wine; or an Ounce of sliced Roots of Solomon's
Seal, boiled in a Pint of Broth, to Half a Pint, and eaten every Morning
fasting; or take from two Scruples to a Dram of its Powder in red Wine daily;
or Juice, Powder, or Decoction of Knotgrass, taken daily; and a Poultise of the
Mucilage of Comfry Root, renewed to the Part every other Day. But though these
Things may succeed in a Falling down of the Intestines, from a Relaxation,
either in Children, or weak Persons, after any long Sickness; yet in a Breach
of the Peritonaeum, that they may have any Effect, it is necessary, 1. That the
Disease be of late Standing or fresh. 2. That the Patient be kept open in his
Body, and not suffered to be bound. 3. That they lie as much on their Back as
they can. 4. That Adults have a proper Truss; or Children be well rolled with
broad Filleting, and kept from crying severely. -- For a fleshy Rupture, Root
of Rest-harrow consumes and wastes it, if a Dram of the Powder be drank daily
for a long Time. -- For a Navel Rupture, the Herb Through-wax is a noble
Medicine, whether taken inwardly, or used outwardly. Ex Collectionib. Crusonis.


267.
SAFFRON (Crocus) Flowers taken in a moderate Dose quicken the Senses, shake
off Dullness, but too much cause Watchings, Sleepiness, or Pain of the Head. As
they have done good Service in eruptive Fevers, so no doubt great Mischief, as
in the Small Pox and Measles, it is doubtful whether this, and the hot Regimen,
or the Distemper have been most fatal, from Paracelsus to Sydenham. All agree
that Saffron is a great Cordial, and causes Cheerfulness; it opens the Lungs,
frees them from Obstructions, and digests and promotes Expectoration of tough
Phlegm; hence it is useful in Consumptions, Cough and Asthma, but let Care be
taken that it exasperate not the Hectic or Peripneumony, or other Symptoms
^ttending. It is no less beneficial in a Shortness of Breath coming suddenly
without a Fever. It deserves the greatest Praise in Obstructions of the Liver
and Gall. It brings down the Terms, Birth, and Afterbirth, provokes Urine, and
excites Venery. Outwardly in Poultises and Plasters, it eases Pains, discusses
Tumors, and allays Inflammations; is good for Ach^s of the Ears or Eyes, in
Breast Milk, Rose or Fennel Water, and checks the Flux of Humors to them. Its
Success in a Jaundice, and hard Labor, has been long tried and known, and in
expelling Measles and Small Pox, when needful; and laid under the Chin to
prevent Inflammation, and Translation of the Matter to the Lungs or Windpipe;
and laid on Poultises to ease Pain, or promote Suppuration. Its Dose in
Substance inwardly, from one to ten Grains. It is given in Powder, Tincture,
Spirit, Extract, Tea, or Syrup; or it is put in Pills, Powders, Electuaries,
Boluses, Draughts, etc. It is excellent in Poultises and Plasters for the
Sciatica, Gout, and red, fiery, painful Swellings, that resist both Discussers
and Suppurators. Ten Grains of it, and two of Musk, are wonderful in an Asthma.
In hard Labor Rhasis gave its Powder to two Drams with great Success; but
Sav^narola blames such a Quantity, seeing these Drams are fatal. It is not to
be used in acute Fevers with a Phrenzy and obstinate Watchings; yet it is a
wonderful Cordial never to be enough praised. It is excellent in Tremors and
Palpitations of the Heart, Dullness, Lowness of Spirits, Hypo, Terms stopped,
too sparing or irregular.

268.
SANICLE (Sanicula) is a chief Vulnerary; it is of a hot, dry, bitter, and
rough Taste. It is used inwardly and outwardly, in vulnerary Decoctions; and
for Wounds, Eruptions of Blood, Ulcers, Bloody Fluxes, and Ruptures, both
drank, and applied. Its Decoction in red Wine, is with Success applied to
Childrens started Navels, made and applied in a Poultise, and a Poultise of
fresh Comfry Root, bruised and laid to the Back opposite to it. The Herb is
used for Fistula's, Ulcers, and Erosions, taken inwardly, and used outwardly.
It is said to give the speediest, and surest Relief where the Lungs or Throat
are affected, or putrid or stinking Ulcers infest these or the privy Parts, by
gargling the first, and washing the last with its Decoction in Wine, or with
Honey. It stops the Terms, and all Fluxes by the Mouth or Stool. It cures
Ulcers of the Kidneys, or Pains of the Bowels. It is as powerful in binding,
restraining, healing, heating, and drying, as Comfry, Self-heal, or any of the
Astringents. It contains much Oil and essential Salt. It is chiefly used in
Decoction, and may be used outwardly in Juice, Poultise, Ointment, Plasters,
etc. to Wounds, Ulcers, Ruptures, etc. Boerhaave says, it is a most excellent
Plant for curing of Wounds, having a gentle balsamic Virtue, joined to its
astringent Quality. It may be drank as Tea.

269.
SAGE (Salvia) Leaves, well washed, are often eaten in the Spring, with Bread
and Butter; its Tea is also common. Trembling or Shaking of the Hands is
great^^ relieved by often washing them in the Decoction or Infusion of Sage.
Sim. Pauli says a Decoction of a Handful of it, two Drams of the best Tobacco,
and a Pugil or two of dried Barley Meal, in Alegar, is an excellent Gargle, to
wash the Mouth and Teeth, when they ach. Three Spoonfuls of ^^ge Juice, taken
fasting with a little Honey, presently stop Spitting or Vomiting of Blood. The
following Pills are commended in Consumptions, viz* Spikenard and Ginger, of
each two Drams; Seeds of Sage, a little toasted at the Fire, eight Drams; of
Long Pepper, twelve Drams; powder all, and with Sage Juice make a Mass of
Pills. Dose a Dram Evening and Morning. The Juice often used, is good for a
Palsy of the Tongue. Mathiolus says, Sage is very effectual in all Pains of the
Head, from cold Rheums, and for the Pains of the Joints, whether used inwardly
or outwardly; therefore it is good in the Falling Sickness, and Lethargy, and
for such as are dull, heavy, or paralytic, or are troubled with Defluxions and
Distillations of Rheum from the Head; and for Diseases of the Breast, Sage and
Nettle-Leaves, bruised and laid on Imposthumes behind the Ears, mitigate and
ease the Pain much. Sage Juice, drank in warm Water, cures Hoarseness and
Cough. The Leaves boiled in Wine, and laid on any paralytic Part, and the
Liquor drank, are of special Service. Sage both brings down the Menses, and
checks their superfluous Discharge. It is good in the Stings and Bites of
Serpents, and kills Worms bred in the Ears, or in Sores. Sage warms and
quickens the Senses, and so strengthens the Memory, either in Infusion, Powder,
Electuary, or Conserve. For the Fluor albus; Take Powders of Sage,
Sarsaparilla, and Balaustins, of each alike; mix; Dose a Dram in a Morning
several Days. A too moist Uterus is helped, by taking every Morning two or
three Spoonfuls of Sage Juice, with a little Salt; this both cures Barrenness,
and too frequent Abortions from that great Moisture and Laxness, but I should
prefer a little Alum to the Salt. The Juice is also good in a bad or infected
Air. Its Decoction, drank, facilitates the Birth, forwards the Menses, and
expels Urine.

270.
WOOD SAGE, WILD SAGE, or GARLIC SAGE, (Scorodonia) Its Decoction provokes
Urine and Menses. It is a chief Vulnerary, whether taken inwardly, or applied
outwardly. Its Virtues are much the same with Scordium. Gesner prefers it to
Scordium, and Hildanus extols it wonderfully in gangrenous Ulcers, and
substitutes it to Scordium, but in a double Quantity. Some in the Lues Venerea
use its Decoction, because it causes Sweat, digests and dissipates the Humors,
Swellings, and Nodes in the Flesh. A Decoction of the green Herb is a safe and
sure Cure to disperse and void coagulated Blood from Falls, Bruises, or Blows;
and, if any Vessel is overstretched, it heals it. It is also a good Remedy for
the Palsy. The Juice and Powder of the Herb, is good for most Ulcers and Sores
on the Legs. It is as effectual in curing green Wounds. The Leaves are bitter
and aromatic, with a faint Taste of Garlic. It is a very opening, diaphoretic,
resolvent, and vulnerary Plant; wherefore Tragus commends its Infusion in Wine
to strengthen the Stomach, kill Worms, provoke Urine, cure the Jaundice, and
some Tertians. It is used in Paris for a Dropsy, drinking every four Hours a
Glass of its Infusion in Wine; in which Disease the Pulv. Bufon. calcinat.
given to a Scruple, is much commended. But especially the Juice of the Herb
Kali, given to Half a Dram, thrice a Week; or a Spoonful of the Ova Formicar.
boiled in Butter-Milk, and drank with Sugar, or Juice of Lemons, six Ounces; of
Scurvy Grass Half an Ounce; of Liver-wort, Plantain, and Syrup of Violets, of
each two Ounces; mix, and Dose four Ounces every three Hours.

SCORODONIA. It grows only in botanical Gardens in our Provinces.

271.
SARACENS CONSOUND or WOUND-WORT ( Solidago Saracenica) is a warming, drying
Vulnerary, of the first Rank, not inferior to Bugle, or Sanicle. Its Decoction
in Wine, cures Obstructions of the Liver; is good in a Jaundice, and beginning
Dropsy, and all internal Ulcers, Wounds, and Bruises, in any Part of the Body.

272.
DORIAS WOUND-WORT is of the same Sort, but not so powerful; and may be used in
the room of them, or they for it, in all the like Cases.

273.
SAVINE (Sabina) Its distilled Water clears off all Spots of the Face. Some
commend it for a Vertigo. Its Powder with Honey, applied to running Ulcers,
heals them, and cleanses black and foul Ulcers. The Powder mixed with Cream,
cures scabby and scald Heads. It too powerfully expels Menses, Birth and After
birth. Its Oil anointed on the Belly, or its Leaves bruised and applied to the
Navel, or its Decoction drank, all kill Worms in Children; or a Spoonful of its
Juice, drank in Milk, rarely fails, being almost infallible for that Intent in
Horses and Beasts.

274.
SAVOURY ( Satureia) being of a hot and biting Taste and Smell, is reckoned
heating and drying, of the Nature of Hyssop and wild Thyme. It thins, opens,
and discusses, provokes Urine and Menses; is good in Disorders of the Stomach,
as Crudity and Nauseating. In cold Constitutions it is good in an Asthma. It
sharpens the Sight, provokes Venery, externally it discusses hard cold Tumors,
and eases the Ear-ach. Strewed in Beds, it is said to kill Fleas. It is good
for Hysterics, expels Wind, and eaten, or smelled to, it is good for Women with
Child. It promotes Expectoration of tough Phlegm. The Juice, snuffed up the
Nose, is good in a Lethargy. The Juice, with Oil of Roses, dropped into the
Ears, eases their Noise and Singing. A Poultise of it with Flour, applied to
the Sciatica, or a paralytic Member, is good. It has a fine Taste in Meat, but
apt to upbraid the Eater. Its Decoction, or the expressed Juice of Turnips, is
excellent in the Thrush.

275.
SAW-WORT ( Serratula) is good for such as are inwardly or outwardly bruised,
or have some Blood vessels broken by Falls, Blows, etc. It stays Bleeding,
eases Pain and Soreness thereby, if either its green Leaves be boiled, or their
Powder taken in white Wine. A Decoction of its Leaves and Roots in Wine, drank,
wonderfully eases Gripes in the Bowels. It speedily cures fresh Wounds, and
cleanses and heals old Ones, or filthy Sores, if the Decoction is both drank
and washed with. Its Decoction drank, washed with, and a Plaster of the Root
and Herb applied, is good in Ruptures. A Lotion of its Decoction in Wine is
good in swelled painful Piles, after Leeches have been applied.

SAW-WORT. This Species grows no where that I have observed in these Provinces.

276.
SAXIFRAGE ( Saxifraga) warms and dries very powerfully, is diuretic and
opening; it is chiefly used to waste and expel Stone, Sand, and Gravel; and to
thin the Mucilage that gathers in the Kidneys and Bladder. It is given for
Terms obstructed, and used outwardly in diuretic Baths. A nitrous Spirit from
the fixed Salt of the Plant is commended. The Roots are infused or boiled in
white Wine for the above Uses. It is said to hasten the Menses, and to cut and
dissolve thick Phlegm in the Lungs. The Root contains much Salt and Oil, which
cause its Heat in the Mouth. Boil commends Mountain Saxifrage, infused in
Small Beer, to drink some Time for the King's Evil. He says it cures without any
sensible Evacuation, by wasting the Humor, easing the Pain, discussing the
Swelling, and drying up the Ulcers. Then it must be very cleansing, and gently
promote Perspiration and Urine; the whole Plant affords an useful Water. The
first Saxifrage, here meant, is the white round leafed Saxifrage, of a pale
yellow Color; the other has a Leaf cut into three Segments.

SAXIFRAGE. This Species is very difficult to keep in Gardens; it soon goes
off; we have no Plant like it in Woods or F^elds.

277.
SCABIOUS ( Scabiosa) its Decoction in Wine, or its Juice, is good in
Imposthumes, Cough, Pleurisy, and other Diseases of the Breast, and in a
Shortness of Breath, Quinsy, etc. But it is chiefly designed against Scab and
Itch. The Herb is Alexipharmac, Sudorific, Opening, Cleansing, and Vulnerary.
It promotes Spitting when the Lungs are stuffed with thick, tough Phlegm. For a
Pleurisy, the Syrup of Scabious Juice, drank in the Morning fasting; Stockerus.
A Dram of powdered Burdock Root, drank in warm Water in the Morning, and Sweat
after it, quickly eases the Pain and cures Alex. Benedict. Or a Dram of
powdered Seed of Ladies Thistle, drank twice a Day; Oil, or the distilled Water
of Corn Poppy Flowers, drank, but especially the powdered Flowers; is a
Specific; Ray. Or three Handfuls of the fresh Flowers infused in their
distilled Water, with a few Drops of Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur; strain off
the Liquor, and sweeten it with Sugar or Syrup of Corn Poppies, and use. If the
fresh Flowers are not to be got, pour hot Water on the dried, sprinkled with
spirit of Vitriol; infuse, strain out, and sweeten as before for Use; Etmuller.
Tinctures may be made the same Way of Columbine or Daisy with the Flowers;
powdered Misletoe given in Carduus, or Corn Poppy Water, three or four times a
Day, is a Secret; Bowl. -- In the Scurvy, Scabious is very useful; or a Diet
Drank of Fir-tops, infused in Table Beer, and drank long; Dr. Needham. Or take
Fir Apples or Cones, Number four; cut each into Quarters, add Leaves of green
Wheat, two Ounces; boil in white Wine Posset Drink, three Pints to two; to the
strained cold Liquor, add Spirit of Scurvy Grass, Half an Ounce; Syrup of
Oranges and Apples, each Half an Ounce; mix, and Dose four Ounces twice a Day;
Bates's Dispensatory. Or Juices of Sorrel, Fumitory, and Water Cresses, of each
four Ounces; let them stand in a close corked Bottle till they settle; Dose six
Ounces of the clear Liquor drank fasting daily; or Juice of Fumitory and Water
Cresses, of each two Ounces, prepared the same Way; Riverius. Or Juice of
Fumitory, Brooklime and Cresses, of each an Ounce; Loaf Sugar two Drams; mix
and drink fasting; Idem. Or Columbine Root infused in Wine alone, or with
Brooklime, Scurvy Grass, and Water Cresses, makes an excellent Antiscorbutic;
Etmuller. Or take Leaves of best Sea Scurvy Grass, three Ounces; white Sugar
six Ounces; Salt of Scurvy grass, one Ounce; beat all up together, and add
Juice of Oranges, six Ounces; mix and relish Meat and Drink with it; Bates's
Dispensatory. Juice, Infusion, or Tincture of Garden Scurvy Grass, are all
good; especially for the Inhabitants of Fenny Countries, and such as live much
on Salt Fish; Ray. Or a Handful of cut Scurvy Grass, infused all Night in a
Quart of strong Ale, and Part of it drank in the Morning, and the rest to Meat;
Boil. Or take twelve Leaves of Scurvy Grass, fresh Horse-raddish, cut, two
Drams, six stoned Raisins, half of a sliced Orange; infuse all in a close
corked Bottle, with a Quart of Ale, and drink for common Drink a long While;
but it is better to make two or three Gallons at once, and often prepare a
fresh stock, to have it always ready to drink fine; Sydenham. Or take two
Handfuls of the Leaves, of the Seeds, and Horse Radish Roots, of each Half an
Ounce; Pulp of one Orange; beat all up in a Marble Mortar; and pour on
gradually a Pint of white Wine, express the Liquor and bottle it up; Dose three
or four Spoonfuls, in every Draught of common Drink; Idem. Or take three or
four Gallons of Scurvy Grass Juice, put it in a vessel, and put the best Barm
to it, make a very quick Fermentation, then shut up the Vessel, and set it six
Months in a cool Cellar; then draw off into bottles, cork, and keep for Use;
Dose, from two Ounces to four, twice a Day; Willis. An Infusion or Decoction of
Fumitory in Whey, drank in the Spring, is excellent; Ray Or the Infusion of a
Bag of dried Dock Roots, in Table Beer, drank, is a Specific Antiscorbutick;
Willis. Bramble Black Berries, eaten or used any how, are good; Ray. Wall Rue
in Powder, or in other Forms taken, is very beneficial; Dr. Michael. Wall
Pepper, or small biting Stone-crop, its Decoction strained and drank, has
astonishing Success in the Cure of Camp Scurvies; Ray. -- In Scorbutic Pains,
Infusion of Brooklime, in Goat's Milk Whey, drank for a Month, is extolled by
Hoffman. Take Flowers of Camomile, Leaves of Water Cresses, and Juniper
Berries, of each alike; boil in Cream, make a Poultise, and lay to the pained
Part; Balth. Brunner. Or boil two or three Handfuls of tender Leaves of
Henbane, very soft in Milk, beat and put it through a Hair Sieve, and in the
same Milk boil up again to a Poultise; and apply it Morning and Evening to the
pained Parts; or anoint them with expressed Oil, of the dried beaten Seeds;
Hoffman. He says Wall Rue, used any how, is good; or a Tea of Water Trefoil,
drank every Morning, is good; Sim. Pauli. Or boil two Handfuls of Elder Flowers
in Wine, with two Drams of Venice Soap, make a Lee to bathe the pained Parts in
warm, and wring Linen Cloths out of it, and apply; Brunner. Two Handfuls of
Elder Flowers, boiled in a Pint and a Half of Cow's Milk, to a Pint, strain,
and foment with it three or four times a Day, cures a Swelling of the Prepuce,
with a depraved Erection of the Penis; Etmuller. -- For Scorbutic Spots, fresh
Brooklime, beaten up or boiled, and used either in a Fomentation or Poultise,
takes them away; or it cures Scorbutic Swellings of the Feet; or let the Sick
drink, fasting, an Ounce of Juice of Brooklime, in a Draught of Goat's Milk,
for several Weeks; Etmuller. Or Turnips, used outwardly, are good; Dr. Needham.
-- For Tetters, Infusion or Decoction of Fumitory in Whey, drank, or the Syrup
of its Juice; Ray. Or fresh Root of Master-wort and Hog's Lard, of each alike,
beat them together, and set them in the Sun; then boil gently, strain out, and
make an Ointment to rub the Parts; Etmuller. -- Juice of sharp-pointed Dock and
Vinegar, of each alike; a little Salt, mix all, and use as before; Stockerus.
Or use a Liniment of powdered Dock Root and Vinegar; Hoffman. -- For the Itch,
Garlic Root beaten up with Hog's Lard to the Form of an Ointment, and anointed
with thrice; Stockerus. Elder-tree Bark, beaten up with Vinegar, and rubbed on,
cures in a few Days; Ray. Or two Handfuls of its inner Bark, beaten up with a
Pound of May Butter, and Half a Pint of white Wine, boiled up to the
Consumption of the Wine, then expressed, and anointed after Purging; Sennertus.
After Purging, wash the Parts with a Decoction of Chick-weed, or rub them with
the Herb; Etmuller. Or rub with an Ointment of five Ounces of fresh Elecampane
Root, and Half a Pound of Lard; Amatus Lusitanus. Or Roots of Dock and
Elecampane, of each a Handful; cut and boil in a close Vessel, from four Pints
of Water to one, strain out the Liquor, and rub the Part affected twice a Day
with it; Boil. Or wash the Parts with the Water found in the Hollow of the
Beach Trees; Ray. Or take Juices of Dock and Fumitory, a little Vinegar, and
some Honey, made in a Liniment to anoint with; Ray. Or wash the Parts with a
Decoction of Dock Root; Schroder. Or wash the Parts with a Decoction of inner
Bark of Elder, in Goat's Milk; Sennertus. Or Juice of Fig-wort, kept a Year in
a close earthen Vessel, then take of it, Wax, and Oil, of each equal Parts;
make an (...)
From three to six Ounces of the Juice, with a Dram of Treacle, and ten Grains
of Camphire, is a powerful Sudorific. A Syrup of Scabious Juice is good for
Diseases of the Skin, provided the Body is bathed with a Decoction of the Plant
at the same Time. The Decoction sweetened with a Syrup of its Juice, drank, is
also good for Ulcers of the Bladder, or other Viscera, and to wash Wounds. To
ripen all inward Imposthumes, and to carry them off by Urine, make an Infusion
all Night in a Quart of Wine or Water, of a Handful of the dried Herb,
Liquorice scraped and cut, one Ounce; Figs washed and cut, Number twelve; Seeds
of Anise and Fennel, of each an Ounce; Orrice Root, Half an Ounce; next Day
boil away a Third, strain and sweeten with Sugar or Honey, and drink a Draught
hereof every Morning; or use only the Syrup of its Juice fasting, for an
Abscess of the Liver; as a Dram of powdered common Dock Root, drank every
Morning, is good for a weak Liver; or a Decoction of whole Strawberry Plant,
drank, is good in an obstructed Liver; or Hop-tops, eaten in the Spring; or a
Fomentation of the Decoction of Cross wort is good for a Schirrous Liver. A
Poultise of the Herb, laid to Plague Sores, dissolves or breaks them in three
Hours. A Decoction of the Root, or its Powder, drank forty Days, helps such as
have dangerous running or spreading Scabs, Tetters, or Ringworms. The Juice or
Decoction of the whole Plant, drank, and an Ointment of it used outwardly,
cures Scab, Itch, etc. It is also good in all inward Wounds. Its Syrup may be
kept and used in Winter. The said Decoction helps all hard, cold Tumors, and
shrunk Sinews. The Juice, with Borax and Camphire, cleanses the Skin and Face
from Freckles, Pimples, etc. and, with Fennel Juice, helps Redness and Spots in
the White of the Eyes. It is also good for Scald Heads. The Juice heals green
Wounds, and old Sores. The Herb, bruised and laid on, loosens Splinters, or
other Things in Wounds, and makes them be easily drawn out. In the cure of
Diseases attended with Malignity, Scabious yields to no Herb, and Fallopius
would never have it neglected in the Cure of Carbuncles.

278.
DEVIL'S-BIT ( Morsus Diaboli) is Alexipharmac and Vulnerary. Its Gargle is
famed for a slow ripening Quinsey; and, in Tumors of the Tonsils, both its
Juice, and Decoction, are good. It is celebrated in the Epilepsy, Plague, Pain
of the Uterus, coagulated Blood, hidden Abscesses, etc. The Root is bitter and
styptic, yet it expels the Menses. It is a Scabious, and of the more powerful
Sort answering all Purposes that they do. Pained Arms rubbed with this Juice,
warm, are much relieved; or the Steam of boiled Oats, one Fourth of an Hour to
the Arms, then the warm Oats applied about the Arm, this do Evening and Morning
for a Week. -- SCORDIUM. See GERMANDER.

I never saw thi^ Species of Devil's-bit, in my Travels: There are several
different Plants so called.

279.
SCURVY GRASS ( Coch^^aria) called by Pliny, Britannica; but Munting^us will
have that to be the great Water Dock. Scurvy Grass, or Spoon-wort, is hot and
biting, abounds with volatile Salt, whereby it thins tough fixed Humors, and
makes them volatile. Its Juice, Infusion, or Sallad, (if eatable) is good in a
cold Scurvy, but is as injurious in the hot inflammatory Kind. It is a good
Herb in the Hypo, and tartarous Diseases, and greatly resists Putrefaction. It
should not be infused above four or five Days in Beer or Wine, till it be taken
out. Such slight Infusions should be the constant Spring-drink in cold
Scurvies, or where Phlegm, or fixed Salts, abound in the Juices, which is too
often the Case of the Inhabitants of low Fenny, Marshy Grounds, especially Sea
Coasts, and Eaters of Salt Fish, and Smoke-dried Meat. The bruised Herb and
Juice, laid to the Face, takes off Spots in six or eight Hours; then it must be
washed off with Bran. It with spirituous Spices, but especially its plain
Spirit, wonderfully nourishes the Parts disordered by the Epilepsy, Cramps, or
Convulsions. The Juice, with burnt Alum, is excellent to rub scorbutic, or
swelled Gums with; or, in Want of this, a Decoction of Stone-crop, with Alum
and Honey, is every whit as good. Its Conserve, Infusion, or Juice, are the
only Forms in which Country People can preserve it; for the Fire spoils its
Syrup or Extract. In violent Scorbutic Pains of the Joints or Muscles, Sim.
Pauli gives this efficacious Fomentation, or Bath, from Brucaeus: Take bruised
Juniper Berries, Water Mint, both the Cardamons, Winter Cresses, and
Scurvy Grass, of each two Handfuls; Camomile Flowers, three Handfuls; Mugwort,
Baum, Rosemary, Thyme, Hyssop, Marjoram, of each a Handful; boil all in a very
close Vessel in Water; when cool enough, bathe the pained Parts in it. His
Father Henry Pauli used this: Take of Mallows, and Marsh Mallows, each three
Handfuls; Brooklime, Fumitory, fresh Scurvy Grass, Water Cresses, and Camomile,
of each two Handfuls; Mallow Roots, three Ounces; Elder Roots, two Ounces;
Juniper Berries, a Handful; bruise, cut, boil, and use as before.

280.
SELF-HEAL ( Prunella) Its Leaves and Flowers are bitterish, warm and dry,
cleanse, heal, and are exceeding Vulnerary, much used in Wounds of the Lungs,
and coagulated Blood. Outwardly in Wounds, and in a Gargle for the Quinsey, and
Diseases of the Mouth and Jaws. The dried Root rubbed on an aching Tooth, till
it brings Blood, eases the Pain, if it be thrust into a bored Willow, and the
Hole shut up with a Piece of Willow. It and Fluellen cured a Pissing of Blood,
when all other Things failed. It is scarce credible how efficacious a Remedy
Self-heal is, in burning and in hectic Fevers; Sim. Pauli, Solenand. The Leaves
bruised and applied, or their Juice used for a Wash and Bath, to the Part
affected, is a Sovereign Remedy in all Sorts of Ulcers and Sores, whether new
and fresh, or old and inveterate, even in Gangrenes and Fistula's; or, made
into a Lotion, with Honey of Roses and Alum, it cures all Sores of the Mouth
and Gums, be they never so foul, or of long Continuance. Its Decoction, with a
little Salt Prunella, is the best Gargle for an inflamed Mouth. Used inwardly
and outwardly, it greatly eases such as have broken or dislocated Bones. An
Ointment of it, Scabious, and Bugle Leaves, made with Hog's Lard, till the Herb
is boiled crisp, then strained and kept for Use, is of wonderful Service for
all Hurts in any Part of the Body. Such, as are so kind as to keep and
administer such Helps to the Poor, cannot keep a better Salve.

281.
AS BUGLE ( Bugula) resembles Self-heal in Figure, Shape, and Virtue, I shall
place them together. Bugle is a Vulnerary used inwardly and outwardly; is good
in the Jaundice, Obstructions of the Liver, Retention of Urine, Ruptures, etc.
It is added to vulnerary Decoctions, and applied outwardly to Venereal Ulcers
of the Privy Parts, with great Success. It is very useful in Fractures,
Convulsions, and Bruises. Potions of its Decoction dissolve and discuss
coagulated Blood. A Gargle of it is a present Remedy for the Thrush, and
creeping Ulcers in the Mouth. A Decoction of its Leaves and Flowers in Wine, is
good for all inward Wounds, Thrusts, or Stabs in the Body or Bowels; for
Obstructions of the Liver and Gall, and to strengthen the Parts. The Leaves,
either bruised and applied, or the Juice used to wash and bathe the Parts, is a
wonderful Remedy, for all Sorts of Ulcers and Sores, new or old, even Fistula's
or Gangrenes* or, made into a Lotion with Honey of Roses and Alum, it cures
all Sores of the Mouth and Gums. It is good for Spitting of Blood, Bloody
Fluxes, Whites, Ulcers, Sores and Inflammations of the Mouth and Throat. Its
clarified Juice has the same Virtues. It is also used in Plasters, Poultises,
and Ointments. A Decoction of Sanicle, Self-heal, Bugle, and Peruvian Bark,
drank with the following Powder, is said to be infallible in a Diabetes,
Bed-pissing, and in all Discharges of Blood from within, either by Mouth,
Stool, Uterus, or Urine: Take white Henbane Seeds, five Ounces; Japan Earth,
and Peruvian Bark, of each two Ounces; Windpipes of Sheep, cleansed and dried
in an Oven, two Ounces; Windpipes of Capons, so prepared, one Ounce; rasped
Ivory, and Seahorse Tooth, of each an Ounce; Sugar of Roses, four Ounces; mix
all; Dose a Dram thrice a Day, with a Wine Glass full of the Decoction,
sweetened with Syrup of dried Roses. As this is extolled for the Bite of a mad
Dog; Take Leaves of Rue, six Ounces; Roots of Garlic, London Treacle, of each
Half an Ounce; Powder of Tin, four Ounces; boil all in unhopped Ale, from four
Pints to two; Dose two Ounces, twice or thrice a Day; lay Cloths dipped in it
to the Wound or Bite. Another pretended infallible Remedy for Bed-pissing, is
Roots of Comfry, red Roses, Powder of Mice dried in an Oven, Hog's-Hoof, Stag's
Pizzle, of each alike; powder all and mix; Dose Half a Dram in a glass of the
above Decoction in red Wine thrice a Day, for four Days, new and full Moon, and
lay a strengthening Plaster on the Loins and Sharebone.

282.
SERVICE-TREE BERRIES (Sorbus) are a Specific, and present Remedy against the
Gripes and Bloody Flux, being a great Astringent. They are also good in
internal Haemorrhages. A Rob made of them is a generous Specific in epidemic
Diarhaeas, or Loosenesses, and also in Fluxes from eating too much Fruit. Some
keep and use a Powder of the unripe Berries, for all these Purposes. The Wood
either laid up in the House, or carried about the Person, was formerly the
dernier Resort against Witchcraft.

283.
SHEPHERD'S PURSE ( Bursa Pastoris) is cooling, drying, conglutinating, and
astringent; is very good in Bleeding at the Nose, Spitting of Blood, Bloody
Flux, Bloody Urine, and excessive Menses. The bruised Herb laid to the fresh
Wounds heals them up presently, without either an after Inflammation or
Suppuration. Either put under the Armpits, Nape of the Neck, or under the
Tongue, and Pledgets dipped in the Juice, and put up the Nose, stops its
Bleeding. An Ounce of the Juice, or two Ounces of the Broth of the dried Herb,
cures bloody Urine, or Spitting of Blood. And Sim. Pauli says, it infallibly
cures a fresh Clap. A Poultise of it to the Wrist is said to cure Agues;
without Doubt it is an excellent Astringent and Vulnerary. The greater
Shepherd's Purse, with a waved Leaf, contains much volatile concrete Salt; more
Lixivial, and more Earth, than most other Plants; hence it is fit to dissolve a
too thick grumous Blood, whether rendered so by too much Acid, too hard Labor,
which had strained off the more watery Parts through the Skin, or by its being
overcharged with earthy Principles. In Losses of Blood, its Juice should be
drank from three to six Ounces; or in Fluxes with Inflammamations.

284.
SILVER-WEED, or WILD TANSEY (Argentina) cools moderately, astringes, dries,
and heals. It is good in Spitting of Blood, and in all Fluxes and Loosenesses
of the Belly, or Uterus. It notably wastes the Stone in the Reins, and is good
for Wounds and Ulcers. It is famous for easing the Pain of the Toothache,
preventing Putrefaction in the Gums. Applied in a Poultise with Vinegar and
Salt to the Wrists, and Soles of the Feet, it abates the heat of Fevers
powerfully. Its distilled Water is a Wash to beautify the Face. The Herb
restrains all Fluxes so powerfully, that many have been cured both of those of
the Belly and Uterus, only by wearing it between their Feet and Stocking Soles.
It is good for fresh Ruptures. A Poultise of it boiled with Salt, and applied,
dissolves clotted Blood, by Falls or Bruises. It cleanses all Wounds, Ulcers,
and Sores.

ARGENTINA. This Plant I saw growing on the Salt-plain, four Miles beyond
Onondago, and no where else.

285.
SLOE-TREE. (Prunus Sylvestris) All its Parts are binding, cooling, and drying;
stop Bleeding at the Nose, Mouth, Stool, Uterus, or by Urine, and all Fluxes of
the Belly, and ease Pains of the Sides, Bowels, and Back, from excessive
Purging. A Decoction of the Root, Bark, or of the dry or green Sloes, is most
used. Conserve or Syrup of Sloes, has the same Effect. A distilled Water from
the Flowers infused in Sack, and drawn in the cold Still, eases all Gnawings in
the Sides, Heart, Stomach, or Bowels; or Gripes or Pains in those Parts, if
drank warm in small Doses, when they are pained. A Decoction of the Leaves is a
good Gargle for sore Mouths or Throats, and to stop the Defluction of Rheum on
the Eyes, or other Parts; to bathe the Head and Temples with, to cool the Heat
and Inflammation of those Parts, or of the Head. The distilled simple Water of
the Flowers, or the thickened dried Juice of the Fruit, or the Water of the
unripe Berries; or their Pulp, boiled; or the Powder of the dried Leaves or
Bark, do all cool, brace, bind, and stay all Fluxes, or Haemorrhages, or ease
their Pains. The Juice of the Fruit is a good Substitute for the Juice of
Acacia, and it is better than the Juice of Sumach, or Myrtles, which some
substitute. Some give their Raisin, or Elder, or other made Wines, the Color
and Roughness of true foreign Wines, by putting the Juice of the ripe, or near
ripe Sloes.

286.
SOLOMON'S SEAL. ( Polygonatum) The Root is vulnerary and astringent, stops all
Fluxes, and heals broken Bones. The Root boiled in Wine, and drank, is very
good in Contusions, Fractures, and Ruptures. Outwardly it clears off Spots of
the Face, makes the Skin fair, and dissolves and gives Vent to clotted Blood.
The Berries vomit and purge. The Root preserved with Sugar, and eaten, is
excellent in the Whites. Boiled in strong Ale, it is good in the Sciatica. Some
put it in the sixth Class of Antiepileptics. A Decoction of the Root in Milk,
eaten several Nights for Supper, is good in the Piles. It stays Vomitings and
Bleedings, cures Wounds new or old, luxated Joints, and strained, or relaxed
Nerves, or Tendons. The Root takes out Measles, Spots, and Scars of late
Wounds. The Roots infused in Bean Flower, or white Lilly Flower Water, a
natural Day, the strained off Liquor makes a good Wash for Women's Faces; but,
if the Infusion is longer, it excoriates the Skin. Agricola says, the distilled
Water applied, with Rags dipped in it, dissolves coagulated Blood under the
Skin, and takes Spots out of the Skin, The Root beaten up to a Poultise, or
boiled tender, or powdered alone; or it and Comfry Root, boiled, and made a
Poultise of; or the Pulp of Burdock Root, in a Poultise, all of them take out
black or blue Marks from Strokes or Blows. Dr. Henry Pauli's Cosmetic was this:
Take Flowers of Lilly of the Valley, Broom and Lovage, Roots of Solomon's Seal,
Asphodel, Briony, white Lilly, of each a Handful; cut, and bruise all; add
Honey, four Ounces; Rhenish Wine, two Pounds; let all stand in Infusion till
they putrefy, then distill by the Alembic, throw the distilled Liquor thrice
back on the Ingredients in the Still, and draw off afresh each Time; then to
the distilled Water, Powder of Camphire Half a Dram, it makes a most precious
Face Water. Mathiolus's Cosmetic is this: Take Dock and Pumpion Waters, of each
two Pounds; ten Swallows Eggs, beaten with them; Saltpeter, Half an Ounce;
white Tartar, two Ounces; distill all, with the Water wash the Face every
Morning, and at Night anoint it with Oils of Tartar and sweet Almonds mixed.

287.
SORREL (common) ( Acetosa Vulgares) being acid, is cooling, and drying,
excites the Appetite, checks Choler, quenches Thirst, resists Putrefaction, is
most beneficial in bilious, simple, and pestilential Fevers, its expressed
Juice, or a Decoction of its Leaves, being mixed with Spoon Meat. The Seed is
binding; it and Scurvy Grass are good against the Scurvy, boiled in Broth. It
is good in all Inflammations, and Heats of the Blood. Its Emulsion quenches
Thirst, cools, and is good in ardent Fevers. A Decoction of the Root is useful
against the Jaundice, Gravel, and Stone. A Syrup of it, Fumitory, and
Liver-wort, is excellent in Children's Scab or Itch, for which, its Juice and
Vinegar are good outwardly, and for Chafing, Tetters, and Ring worms. Its
expressed Juice, often given, cures Excess of the Menses. A Gargle of the Juice
is good for sore Mouths. The Leaves wrapped in a Cabbage, or Dock Leaf, and
roasted under the Ashes, and laid to Boils or Imposthumes, ripen and break
them. The Root, boiled in Water, makes it red like Claret.

288.
WOOD SORREL (Lujula) lays feverish Heat, quenches Thirst, and cools the Heat
of the Stomach, Liver, and Heart, either in Decoction, Syrup, or Conserve.
Some, from the greater or smaller Number of the Leaves of this Herb, pretend to
foretell what the next Summer will be; if it send out many Leaves, say they, it
will be wet, if few droughty; as they do from Frogs Spawn, for, if it lies near
the Side of Water, the next Season will be rainy, if in the Middle dry. An
Infusion of this Herb quenches Thirst wonderfully, cools Heats and
Inflammations, and is good against contagious Sickness and Plague. Applied
outwardly in a Poultise or Decoction, it cools much. A Decoction of Wood
Sorrel, Violet, Strawberry Leaves, Self-heal, and Liver-wort, is a noble Ptisan
in hot Fevers. Gesnerus held the following to drink a great Secret in hot
Fevers: Take Herb Sorrel thirty Handfuls; Wood Sorrel, fifteen Handfuls;
Dandelion and Plantain, with their Roots, Lettuce, Cichory, Fumitory, Violets,
of each five Handfuls; Flowers of Water Lillies, three Handfuls; cut and infuse
in sixteen Pounds of distilled Rain Water; of strong Wine, four Pots; distill it
for Use. In hot Fevers: Take four Handfuls of Sorrel, or four Ounces of the
Root, or two Ounces of the Seed bruised; boil in Water to two Pounds, strain
and sweeten for common Drink, add a little Juice of Rasp or Black Berries to
it. Leaves or Roots of Wood Sorrel may be used the same Way; or Syrup or
Conserve of Barberries; or inner Walnut-tree Bark steeped in Vinegar, and laid
to both Wrists and Soles of the Feet^* or Conserve, Syrup, or Jelly of
Bilberries. -- In continual Fevers, the strained off Infusion of Burnet, in
warm Wa^ter, drank some Time. -- For Intermittents; Powder o^ Camomile Flowers,
given in its Decoction, and often repented ^ or drink six Ounces of Camomile
Water every Morning; or drink an Infusion or Decoction of Root and Herb
Dandelion, drank before the Fit comes. -- For Quartans, two Drams of Betony
Powder, taken in a poach'd Egg four Hours before the Fit; repeat it four times.
St. John's wort-Seeds given from two Scruples to a Dram, in Wine, before the
Fit; or Half a Dram of Master-wort Root, given in Wine, an Hour before the Fit;
or give Half an Ounce of Juice of Feverfew in Wine, or Wormwood Ale, before the
Fit; or Powder of Misletoe of the Hawthorn-tree, given in Wine before the Fit;
repeat it, if needful. -- For Tertians; a Head of Garlic peeled, infused in
four Ounces of Spanish Wine, then beaten up to a Poultise with sour Leaven, and
laid to the Soles of the Feet before the during the Fit; repeat it three or
four times; or take bruised Garlic, an Ounce; Soot, a Dram; Pepper, a Scruple;
Saffron and Camphire, of each Half a Scruple; mix and lay to the Wrists. Give
Powder of Angelica Root, from Half a Dram to a Dram, two Hours before the Fit.
Shepherd's Purse, beaten up with Salt and Vinegar, and laid to the Wrists
before the Fits; or Powder of Centaury Tops, and Flowers, given from a Scruple
to a Dram; or the inner Bark of Hasle Boughs, steeped in Vinegar, and laid to
the Wrists; or four Ounces of the Decoction of Camomile, drank an Hour before
the Fit, and repeated; or cut Groundsel Leaves small, put them in a thick Paper
Bag, pricked full of pretty large Holes on one Side; put this Bag in a thin
Silk or Linen Bag, lay it on the Stomach (with the holed Side next the Skin)
two Hours before the Fit. Take Ash-tree inner Bark in fine Powder, from Half a
Dram to a Dram; Salt of Wormwood, Half a Dram; Carduus Water, three Ounces;
Spirit of Sulphur, Half a Scruple; mix, and drink an Hour or two before the
Fit; or Pu^sla^e and Cichory Waters, of each two Ounces; Powder of Ash-tree
inner bark, two Scruples; Salt of Wormwood, Half a Dram; Spirit of Sulphur,
twelve Drops; mix, and drink. A Handful or two of Millefoil, boiled in Milk,
beaten up to a soft Poultise, and laid to the Wrists before the Fit; and repeat
it; or mix Juice of Water Cresses, and good Vinegar, of each alike; a little
common Salt; mix, and drink before the Fit; or Powder Cinquefoil Root, a Dram
given a little before the Fit; or apply a Poultise of the whole Herb and Salt,
beaten together, to the Wrists; or a Poultise of Mouse-ear, Salt, and Vinegar;
or hang a Bag of long Plantain about the Neck, and renew it every two or three
Days; or give a Dram of its powdered Leaves in D^ink, before the Fit; or lay a
Poultise of beaten Knot-grass to the Wrists; or of beaten Stone-cross. -- For
the Hiccup, four Ounces of Decoction of Dill, drank at thrice in fifteen
Minutes; repeat it, if needful. Boil two or three Drams of Dill-seed in Wine,
eight Ounces, whereof, drink Evening and Morning. Smell often to the bruised
Seed, tied up in a thin Linen Rag, and carried about. Mint taken any how is
good. Eat preserved Damascenes with their Syrup. -- Thirst to quench: Leaves of
Sorrel, boiled in Broth, or their Juice mixed with it; or Spoon Meat; or Drink^
or Ba^berry Juice, given in bilious, ardent, or malignant Fevers; or cleaned
cut Dandelion Roots, boiled in Posset Drink^ to a Half; let the Sick drink Half
a Pint at a Time often; or boil the whole Plant in Spring Water for common
Drink; or infuse a Pound and a Half of ripe Strawberries, in a Pint of warm
Water, and Half a Pint of Wine, one Ounce and a Half of Sugar, as much Syrup of
Lemons; let all stand three Hours, then strain off, and give to drink; or Syrup
of Violets, with Spirit of Vitriol, and Barley Water. -- To procure Sleep; lay
a Poultise of Henbane and Poppy Seeds, beaten together, to the Forehead. -- For
Vomiting, an Infusion of curled Mint in Vinegar, drank, or laid to the Stomach;
or take four Leaven, three Ounces; Powder of Mint, one Ounce; Powders of
Masticks, Cloves, Cinnamon, of each two Drams; and of two Nutmegs, with
Vinegar, make a Poultise and lay warm to the Stomach; but the Salt Draughts
taken often, with Liquid Laudanum given; and Fuller's Corroborant Stomachic
Fotus is best of all, after necessary Evacuations.


289.
SOUTHERN-WOOD MALE (Abrotanum Mas) (See LAVENDER COTTON, the Female) is
sub-astringent, and very discutient, resists Putrefaction and Poisons, cures
the Bite of venomous Beasts, kills Worms, provokes (...), relieves in
Hysterics, and discusses the King's Evil; the Tops boiled in Wine or Mead, and
Honey added to the strained Liquor, and drank, cut the thick Humors of the
Lungs, and give Ease in an Asthma, and Difficulty of Breathing. It is used
outwardly to dry and strengthen the Bones, and in a Wash to prevent the Hair
falling off. The Seed bruised, and drank in warm Water, helps Ruptures in
Children, Cramps, Convulsions, Sciatica, Difficulty in making Water, and brings
down the Menses. The Herb, boiled with Barley Meal, clears the Face from
Pimples, Wheals, etc. The bruised Herb draws Splinters, or Thorns, out of the
Flesh. Its Ashes dry and heal up old Ulcers, that are not inflamed, and the
Sores in Men or Women's privy Parts. The Ashes or Juice with Oil helps Baldness
or Falling off of the Hair. The same does a strong Decoction of Wormwood, and
Vervain, or an Ointment of white Lilly Roots, made with Butter. Its Oil kills
Head Lice, (and so do all other Oils.) Its distilled Water is good in the
Stone, Spleen, and Hysterics. It is a special Herb in warming Fomentations,
Poultises, or Ointments. The Female Sort is mostly used inwardly. The Leaves of
it and Rue, made with Butter into small Balls, and swallowed, kill Worms. --
Tarragon (Abrotanum Linifolio acri and odorato) has a pleasant, hot, aromatic
Taste. The Leaves are heating and drying, good for cold Stomachs, therefore
eaten in Sallads to expel Wind or Menses, and to provoke Urine; but seldom used
inwardly; otherwise, half a Dram of powdered Southern-wood and Nitre, drank, is
wonderful in a Suppression of Urine.

290.
SOW-BREAD ( Artanita) cuts, cleanses, and opens, digests and draws; its Juice
put on Wool, and applied, opens the Piles freely; and if put into the Anus, it
moves strongly to Stool. Infused and given Clyster-ways, it expels tough
Phlegm. It is deservedly mixed with other proper Things, to bring down Swellings
and hard Tumors in any Part of the Body. The Juice mixed with Honey, and
dropped into the Eyes, takes off Pin, Web, etc. Snuffed up the Nose, it purges
the Head, cures Headache, Megrim, etc. The Belly bathed with the Juice is
loosened. The Root is weaker than the Juice, yet either drank, or applied
outwardly, it hastens the Menses. Three Drams of the Root powdered, drank in
Mead, cures the yellow Jaundice, if the Sick go to Bed, and sweat freely after
it. The distilled Water, snuffed up the Nose, stops its Bleeding. Six Ounces of
the Water drank, with an Ounce of fine Sugar, wonderfully stop the Bleeding of
the Breast, Stomach, or Liver. To prevent its violent Purging, it should be
mixed with Mastich or Nutmeg, or a Scruple of Rhubarb. It is also of great
Service in the Cholick, and hard Swellings of the Spleen. The Roots beaten with
a few Peach-stone Kernels, and bitter Almonds, and infused three Days in
Aquavitae: A Drop or two of this expressed Cream, dropped into noisy or deaf
Ears, has a very good Effect. A Gargle of the Juice, with Honey or Plantain
Water, cures all Sores in the Throat, Mouth, or Toothache. The Herb warms,
dries, cuts powerfully, and purges the Head. It is given inwardly with great
Caution, but mostly outwardly. -- SOW THISTLE. See CARLINE THISTLE.

SOW BREAD. Is very difficult to keep in our Gardens, and wild no where in our
Provinces that I have observed.

291.
SPEEDWELL or FLUELLEN ( Veronica Mas) the Male is bitter, Sudorific,
Vulnerary, Cleansing, Diuretic, and fit to ease the Lungs, loaded or obstructed
with glutinous or purulent Matter. A Spirit of the Infusion of the Herb, some
Days in Wine, drawn off by the Alembic, two Ounces of this Spirit, given with a
little Treacle, in malignant Fevers, sweat very powerfully. The distilled
simple Water of the Herb, drank, is excellent for Ulcers of the Lungs, Stone,
and Vapors, especially if a Dram of the Herb, and as much of the Middle Bark,
of Bitter-sweet ( Solanum scandens, vel Dulcamara) be infused in two Ounces of
the Water. A Syrup or Extract of this Herb purifies the Blood, and is good in
all Diseases of the Skin; but the Parts should be washed in its Water or
Decoction at the same Time, or in some vitriolic Solution. A Pint of its
Decoction, and an Ounce of Butter and as much Sugar, mixed and given in a
Clyster, is a Specific in Cholic Pains, if duly repeated. Some, for this
Purpose, boil it in Milk, with Camomile, and then add the Sugar. This Herb is
not only mixed with the Vulnerary Plants, in Broths, Potions, and Ptisans, but
many drink it as a Tea, and find great Benefit by it; its many rare Virtues
challenge a far more general Use of it. Its Decoction, drank plentifully for
some Time, cured one of the Stone who had it lying in the Kidneys sixteen
Years. A Woman, who had been barren many Years, drank the powdered Leaves in
its distilled Water for some Days; she soon conceived, and communicated the
Secret to several of her Female Acquaintance, in the like Circumstances, who
used it as she did for some Time, with like Success, for ten out of twelve
conceived. This Water cured a Fistula of the Breast, which had eluded the Power
of all other Remedies. Cloths dipped in this Water cured the most violent Pains
and Inflammation of an Ulcer of the Leg for many Years. Extracts of this Herb,
and Juniper Berries, mixed, and given in Pills, after the Use of some Laxatives,
and Aperitives, is a sovereign Remedy in all Obstructions of the Viscera, and
Diseases of the Breast; for it carries off the morbid Matter by Urine. Linen
Cloths, wrung out of this Water, have succeeded in curing dry or moist Scabs,
when other Methods have failed in Children, especially if the Nurse or Child at
the same time drink a Decoction of Fumitory in Whey. The Tops and Flowers of
the Herb may be preserved in Conserve, Syrup, or distilled Water. Schroder
Extols the Herb in Erosions, or Obstructions of the Lungs and Spleen, in the
Cholic, Consumption, Scab, Itch, Plague and Wounds. A Decoction of the Herb
sweetened is good in a Quinsy, and in a Thrush, with Honey; outwardly, it is
most celebrated in cleansing Wounds in Cholic, and Hardness of the Spleen.
Crato says, the frequent Use of Clysters of a bare Decoction of this Herb, with
a little Sugar, will do more Service in the Stone and Cholic, than many
Medicines taken by the Mouth; nay, even than the most costly, pompous, and
generous. Sim. Pauli solemnly attests the same from his own Observation. The
Powder and Water of the Herb greatly helps the Memory; is good in a Vertigo,
and Pain of the Head. It is powerful in a Jaundice, it cleanses Ulcers in the
Reins, Bladder, and Uterus, and heals them. It provokes Urine; speedily heals
fresh Wounds, Tetters, and other foul, old, fretting or running Sores and
Ulcers, of long Continuance, and hard Cure. It stops all Fluxes of Blood,
dissolves Tumors, and Swellings of the Neck. A little Alum, dissolved in the
distilled Water, and sprinkled on Cloths, keeps them from Moth-eating.

292.
FEMALE SPEEDWELL ( Veronica being the Male, and Ela^ine the ^emale) The
expressed Juice of this Herb, and its distilled Water, used inwardly and
outwardly, are said to check, and perfectly heal sordid and cancerous Ulcers;
as some very near to Mutilation have joyfully experienced. The Leaves are
bitter, astringent, and drying, and more cooling than those of the Male. A
Poultise of the bruised Leaves, with Barley Meal, applied, stops Defluxions of
hot Rheum on the Eyes. The Herb is also good in all Defluxions, or Fluxes, as a
Looseness, excessive Menses and Lochia, Bleeding at the Nose, Mouth, Urine,
etc. or Bleeding from a broken Vein, a bruised or hurt Vessel, or where the
inward Parts want Healing and Strengthening. It not only heals green Wounds,
but* filthy, fretting, spreading Ulcers; even a cancerated Nose, doomed to be
cut off, to save the rest of a poor leprous Carcass, was by a poor Surgeon
cured by this singe Herb, given inwardly, and applied outwardly, and, says
Pena, he had his Leprosy cured into the Bargin.

293.
SPLEEN-WORT, or CETERACH ( Asplenium) is used for Diseases of the Spleen; is
good in a Stoppage of Urine, or Pissing by Drops; it wastes the Stone, and is
good in the Jaundice. It is used to prevent Women's Conception. A Dram of the
Dust, on the Backside of the Leaves, with half a Dram of powdered Amber, taken
in Plantain Water, quickly helps the Running of the Reins. The Herb, boiled and
taken, is good in Melancholy. Its distilled Water is reputed good for the
Stone. A Lee of the Ashes, drank some Time, is very good for Spleneticks. It is
also used outwardly for those Purposes.

294
SPURGE ( Tithymalus) the whole Class contains a milky Juice, of a sharp,
caustic Quality; they inflame and exulcerate the Parts, offend the Stomach, and
occasion torturing Pains in the Bowels; so as they must not be taken inwardly,
except with great Judgment, Caution, and Preparation, by steeping it in
Vinegar, or other Acids; then it evacuates bilious, phlegmatic, and watery
Humors; and is good in the Gout, Dropsy, and other obstinate Diseases. Applied
outwardly, they eat and corrode the Skin, but cure Warts, To cure Warts; let
them be well rubbed with fresh Agrimony, beaten up with Vinegar, then applied
in a Poultise or often rubbed with Juice or Leaves of Marygold, and washed
after with Horse Piss; or four or five times apply a Poultise o^ green Woodbind
Leaves; or rub them as often with the Mill of Fig Leaves; Riverius. Or with the
Juice of Mercury Ray. Or rub them with, and apply a Poultise of Purslane
Formius. Or rub after with the Juice of Elder Berries; or lay on them, and
renew often, peeled Leaves of the greater House leek; Etmuller.
and other Excrescences; cleanse foul and carious Ulcers, running Sores, and
remove Scurf, Scab, and all other Deformities of the Skin. If one shakes the
expressed Juice, and smells to it, it will raise violent, and often mortal
Sneezings. The Leaves and Roots, bruised and thrown into a Pond or River, kill
or stun and stupify the Fish, so as they swim, and may be taken up; the
broad-leafed Spurge is best for this. From ten to twenty of the Seeds,
swallowed whole, purge much; if chewed they heat and inflame the Parts. The
Root Bark, infused twenty-four Hours in strong Vinegar, is given in Substance
from one Scruple to two. In Infusion to two Drams, corrected with Cream of
Tartar, or some Drops of the Oil of Sulphur. But it is so injurious and
dangerous a Plant, that it is much better let alone.

295
SPURRY-SEED (Spergula) is said to be a Vomit, and to cleanse the Stomach from
much Phlegm and viscous Humors. The Herb, applied to green Wounds quickly
heals them; it fattens Cattle and Poultry much, brings Store of Milk and Eggs.
-- SPIGNEL. See BAWDMONY.

296.
SQUILLS (Scilla) their Root, either in Oxymel, Vinegar, Wine, or Infusion,
exceeds the whole vegetable Kingdom, for cutting, thinning, dissolving, and
expelling out of the whole Body Phlegm, or gross Humors, by Spitting, Peuking,
Urine, and Stool; and for stimulating and rousing up Action and Motion, in the
languid, dull, lax, and weak Solids; hence its amazing Success in restoring
phlegmatic, bloated, cachectic, asthmatic, hydropic, icteric, and cacochymic
Habits; whether put into Electuary, Julaps, Infusions, Decoctions, or Apozems,
or given alone in a moderate Dose, it is an admirable Vomit to all Ages and
Constitutions; it loosens the Belly, and provokes Urine at the same time. It is
therefore most proper for Stuffings of the Lungs, or Loading of the Breast with
tough, thick Phlegm; for a palled and relaxed Stomach; for the Jaundice, and in
a begun Dropsy, mixed in any of the above Forms of Medicines. In stuffed,
bloated, worn out Habits, where the Case was quite desperate, and all other
Helps proved useless, I have known a Solution of Gum Ammoniac, in Tincture of
Saffron, drawn in Treacle Water, with Oxymel of Squills, have surprising
Effects. I have known a Peuk of Oxymel, given every other Day to Children in
the Chin-cough, have good Success.

SQUILLS. Grows in the South of Europe, and no Plant like it in these Provinces.

297.
STAR-WORT (Sea) (Tripolium) two Drams of it in Wine purge off watery Humors
by Stool and Urine. The Root is hot and sharp, an Antidote against venomous
Poison. It is a good Vulnerary for green Wounds, Ulcers, Sores, Hurts and (...)

298.
STAVES-ACRE, or LOUSE-WORT (Staphisagria) is excessively hot, and acrid, even
caustic; it purges, but with Danger of Suffocation from its Heat; hence its
inward Use is entirely laid aside. It and Pellitory of Spain Root are tied up
in a Rag, and chewed in the Mouth for the Toothache; for it draws forth much
Rheum. The Powder sprinkled on Childrens Heads, or mixed with Lard, or Oil,
kills Lice, being rubbed on the Head or Body. Twelve or twenty Grains of the
Seed purge upwards, downwards, and salivate at once; hence it may be good in
the French Pox, but it inflames much. The Seed boiled in much Water, and the
Liquor used for a Gargle, for two or three Days, may raise a slight Salivation.
--

STAVES-ACRE. Grows no where in our Provinces, it is a Plant natural to the
South of Europe.

STINKING GLADDON. See GLADWIN.

299.
STINKING ARRACHE. See ARRACHE.

300.
STOCK-JULY FLOWER ( Leucoium) and Wall Flower, are of a cleansing Quality, and
subtle thin Parts. The green or dried Garden Flowers, boiled in Wine and drank,
are good in Disorders of the Liver and Reins; they bring down the Menses* ^are
the Hardness and Pains of the Uterus, and expel Birth and Afterbirth, the Seed
and Juice being taken in a Draught of Liquor, or a Bath made for Women to sit
over. Their Decoction, drank twice a Day, strengthens and restores any Member
that is weak, lax, and had been lately dislocated. The Roots boiled in Vinegar,
and the Liquor drank, and the Roots laid to the left Side* help Hardness of the
Spleen. The distilled Water is said to have the like Effects, and to purify the
Blood, and comfort the inward Parts; to ease Pains, and cause Cheerfulness. The
Juice dropped into the Eyes clears them from Mists, Clouds, and Films that
begin to grow over them, and impair the Sight. A Decoction of the Flowers with
Honey, and a little Alum, is a good Gargle for Ulcers, and Sores in the Mouth;
or to wash Sores in any other Part of the Body. -- Wall Flowers consist of very
small and subtle Parts; they discuss and cleanse, are good to comfort Heart and
Nerves, ease Pains, cause the Menses, and facilitate the Birth. The Flowers may
be distilled infused, or made into a Conserve, or Tea. The Oil prevents an
Apoplexy, cures the Palsy, greatly eases Pains of Wounds, or Inflammations of
the nervous Parts, and in Uterine Diseases. The Oil made by Infusion is good in
Rheumatisms.

301.
STRAWBERRIES ( Fragaria) are cooling and moistening, proper for thirsty and
bilious Persons. They are best eaten with Sugar and Wine, or Cream and Sugar;
but, if eaten alone in too great a Quantity, they are apt to putrefy in the
Stomach. Tragus says their distilled Water chears the Heart, cleanses the
Breast, is good in the Epilepsy, purges the Blood, is good in Ulcers of the
Mouth and Throat, and wastes the Stone in the Kidneys. Hoffman says, an Ounce
of the Water, drank every Morning, cures a red pimpled Face, and the dry
itching Scab, whether in one Place, or over the Body; it cools and cleanses the
Reins. Put the ripe Berries into a Bottle full of boiling Water, let them stand
forty Hours, strain, and put fresh Berries into the same Water, and so leave it
close covered, that no Steam evaporate; but let the first Berries be strongly
squeezed through a Linen Cloth, and keep the expressed Liquor by itself; when
you would use it, Take a full Spoonful of it with Sugar Candy, three or four
times in a Month, it is a very pleasant and efficacious Cure of the Stone; and
so must the Berries of the second Infusion and their Water be used. The whole
Herb is cooling and drying, bitter and a little astringent, very diuretic, and
often used in the Stone, and in Gargles, Baths, Poultises, etc. to stop Fluxes
of Blood, to cleanse filthy Ulcers, and check Catarrhs and Fluxions. The
Decoction of the whole Plant, either used alone, or with other proper
Ingredients, is with great Success given in a Jaundice. Rulandus, after he had
purged the Body with Extract of Dwarf Elder, gave this Decoction with stoned
Raisins. Sim. Pauli used the Herb in a Poultise with old Wine, to the Sharebone
and Perinaeum, for the Whites in Women, and involuntary Emissions of Semen in
Men. The Berries should always be washed before they are eaten. The Water or
Juice are good for most Inflammatory Diseases of the Eyes, and Eruptions of the
Face or Skin. The Herb is a surprising Remedy in the Jaundice, either of
Children, or especially Pot Companions, Whetters, and Drammers. For Children
thus; Sim. Pauli: Take of the Herb and Dodder, of each a Handful; cut and
bruised Currants, two Ounces; white crude Tartar, half an Ounce; boil in Barley
Water to a Pound, strain, and sweeten with Syrup of Barberries. It is also good
for feverish People.

302.
SWALLOW-WORT ( Asclepias) the Root is a special Alexipharmac and Sudorific; it
is chiefly used in the Plague, and other malignant Diseases; in obstructed
Menses, Palpitation of the Heart, Fainting, and Dropsy. Its Seed is commended
in the Stone; the Root, Flowers, and Seeds, are used outwardly in foul and
malignant Ulcers, Ulcers of the Breast, and Biting of venomous Beasts. Half a
Pound of the Root steeped all Night in Wine, then boiled to a third Part, and
drank warm, and Sweat encouraged, Water is thereby expelled so powerfully from
under the Skin, that it bursts out at the very Soles of the Feet. A Decoction
of the Root in Wine cures the Gripes, Stinging of Serpents, etc. A Poultise of
the Seed cures sore Nipples or Breasts. A Decoction of the Root is preferable
to that of Scornozera; it works powerfully by Urine and Perspiration, and its
Infusion in Wine sweetened, brings the Menses. It is used outwardly in
Poultises, Lotions, Ointments, etc. to Ulcers and Tumors, as well as
Birth-wort.

This Species of ASCLEPIAS, grows only in Botanick Gardens, as I have observed.

303.
SUCCORY ( Cichorium) is a choice Plant taken any Way; for a too hot and
obstructed Liver, whether eaten raw in a Sallad, or boiled, or the Juice,
Decoction, or Powder, is used; for they attenuate, cleanse, and cool, and brace
a little. Crato extols the Use of its Root in Hectics. The Waters of the
Flowers are excellent in Inflammations of the Eyes, and Dimness of the Sight.
Wood Succory is good in the Gout. Spigelius says, In a hot Disorder, there is
nothing comes up to, or can exceed the Powder of wild Succory, gathered in May,
and dried in the Shade, if a Dram of it be daily taken in Chicken Broth, four
Hours before Dinner, and at going to Bed. Sim. Pauli and Rhodius say, it is
also good in the Hypo and inflammatory Gout. A Handful of its Roots and Leaves,
boiled in Wine or Water, and drank fasting, expels choleric and watery Humors,
opens Obstructions of Liver, Gall, or Spleen; helps the Jaundice, Heat of the
Kidneys and Urine, the Dropsy, and Cachexy. A Dram of the Powder, drank before
a Fit of the Ague, is a Febrifuge. The Water is good in all hot Eruptions on
the Skin, but especially the Decoction, both to drink and wash with; and for
Nurses sore Breasts, from too much Milk

304.
TANSY ( Tanacetum) is much of the Nature of Feverfew, (as sweet Maudlin was of
Costmary) it is a good Vulnerary, Uterine, and Nephritic. It is mostly used for
Worms, Gripes, Stone, and Gravel, obstructed Menses, Wind and Dropsy. Its Juice
heals Chops on the Hands and Feet, and scurfy Ulcers. Its Seed, with Wormseed,
is a good Destroyer of Worms. A Conserve of its Tops resists Putrefaction,
opens Obstructions, chears the Senses, and is good for the Spleen. Its Juice,
with Oil, helps Contractions and Pains of the Nerves; or, drank in Wine, it
cures Stoppage of Urine, helps weak Reins, expels Flatulency from the Stomach
and Bowels, provokes the Menses, and, applied to the Sharebone, prevents
Miscarriage. It is an aromatic, acrid, and bitter Herb, but the Root is not
bitter. It contains much Oil, volatile Salt, and Sulphur. It is a good
Sudorific, as well as Febrifuge; two Drams of the Juice in Plantain Water cures
Agues. It is good for Tetters and Scurf. A large Cup of its Tea, drank, is good
in malignant Fevers and Diseases of the lower Belly. It purifies the Blood, and
its Conserve is good in a Vertigo and Epilepsy, for a Cachexy, Dropsy, or Green
Sickness. Its Juice or Infusion is good, as is a Fomentation of the Legs in a
Dropsy, with its Decoction; in Wine. The Powder of its Flowers and Seeds, or
the bruised Leaves, made into Balls, and given, or a Poultise of it, Wormseed,
Colocinth, and Ox Gall, laid to the Navel, are all three good in Worms. Its
Decoction is good to wash old* and malignant Ulcers. In a Falling down of the
Anus, first fumigate the Part with Colophony and Frankincense, then foment it
with a warm Decoction of Tansy in red Wine, and apply the boiled Herb in a
Poultise; or, which is better, foment only the Part with the Decoction, then
sprinkle it with Powder of Mastich. For the Pining or Wasting of any Member,
wash and foment it daily with a Decoction of Tansy, or rub it with Nettle
Juice, afterward wrap it up in a Plaster of black Pitch.

305.
THROAT-WORT ( Cervicaria) being a little astringent, a Gargle of the Root is
good in Ulcers of the Mouth and Throat or for the swelled or relaxed Uvula or
Palate; and, the Decoction being mixed with Honey, Wine, and Alum, they cleanse
and heal all Sores in any other Part of the Body.

306.
THOROW-WAX (Perfoliata) is most useful to Surgeons for all Bruises, Wounds,
old Ulcers, and Sores, if its Decoction in Wine or Water, or Powder, or Juice,
drank, and a Lotion of it used outwardly to the Parts, and an Ointment of its
Juice be applied. The above Decoction, or Powder of the Herb, drank, and
bruised, and with Meal and Wine laid on the Place, it is singular in curing
Ruptures, especially of the Navel, and to discuss scrophulous Tumors, and heal
Fractures. Sim. Pauli cured a Navel Rupture with a Decoction of this
Rupture-wort, Mouse-ear, and Acacia, of each half a Handful boiled in Wine, and
applied.

This Species of PERFOLIATA grows only in Botanick Gardens* there are several
Plants in these Provinces called by that name by fanciful People, very
different.

307.
TOAD-FLAX ( Linaria) moves the Belly, and expels Urine strongly. A small Glass
of the distilled Water of the Herb, and Flower, with a Dram of powdered Dwarf
Elder Bark drank daily, with a little Cinnamon, for some Time, is so powerful a
Diuretic, that it is a singular Remedy for the Dropsy. The same Water, drank,
loosens the Belly, and discusses the King's Evil, for which, and Obstructions
of the Liver, its Decoction in Wine drank is more effectual. This Water, or
Juice, dropped into the Eyes, takes away their Redness and Inflammation. The
Juice, or Water, injected into foul Ulcers, whether cancerous or fistulous, and
the Parts washed with it, cleanses them to the Bottom, and heals them up
safely; the Juice, or Water, used by themselves, or with Powder of Lupines,
clears the Skin from all Deformity, as Leprosy, Morphew, Scurfs, Wheals,
Pimples, Spots, etc. The Herb used gives certain and efficacious Relief, not
only in recent Jaundices, but in those tending to a Dropsy; some for Quartans
wear the Herb between their Stockings and Feet. A Decoction of the Plant
relieves such as by Falls, or Bruises, have coagulated Blood; the Plant is a
Specific for easing the Pains of dry Haemorrhoids, or Piles, for which Use it
affords the following singular Ointments, viz. Boil the bruised Herb and
Flowers with Hog's Lard; when cool enough, add the Yolk of an Egg, spread it on
Wool, and apply; or, by a double Decoction, make the Ointment very green, and
mix the Yolk of an Egg as it is used. In a Stoppage of Urine, or Dropsy, the
Herb is good to wash the Urinary Passages from Stone and Gravel; its Decoction
in Wine expels Menses, Birth, and Afterbirth, as well as moves the Belly, and
opens Obstructions. Tournefort says, it resolves extravasated Blood, softens
the Fibers, takes off their Tension, and eases Pain. Caesalpinus extols this
Herb for scrophulous Swellings, and the Leprosy, Cancers, Tetters, and the
Dropsy, if three Ounces of the Juice, or six of the distilled Water, be daily
drank twice a Day; its Tincture, or Extract, is taken to a Dram; an Ointment
for Piles, Ulcers, or King's Evil, is made by infusing the Leaves 24 Hours in
White Wind; press out the Liquor, and boil it to a third Part, add Hog's Lard,
and boil to an Ointment, with a little Wax, to give it a Consistence.

TOAD-FLAX. This Species is called by our People Ransted's Weed, or Dog Piss
Weed; a troublesome, stinking Weed, is no Native, but we can never I believe
eradicate it.

308.
TOBACCO, as it is an American Plant (though much used in Britain) is very
common, and Samples of it cultivated in several Gardens, I shall be brief with
it. It cleanses, attenuates and dissolves, is somewhat astringent, and resists
Putrefaction; it is good for the Cure of Ulcers, both in Man and Beast, whether
its Juice, Balsam, or Ointment, is used. Its Ointment is also good for Scab,
Itch, Tetters, scrophulous ulcerated Tumors, inveterate Ulcers, or fresh
Wounds. Its Powder, snuffed up the Nose, causes strong Sneezing in those that
are unaccustomed to it; Tobacco Ashes put into a hollow Tooth, quickly eases
the Toothache; it is chewed and smoaked, as well as snuffed, by which it brings
away abundance of Phlegm, is good in a Catarrh, Rheum, or Defluxions from the
Head, and so is very beneficial to sluggish, sleepy, dull, phlegmatic, watery,
gross, and cold Habits, and so Tipplers, especially of Malt Liquors; it is
proper in rainy, haizy, foggy, moist Weather, and in low, wet, fenny Grounds,
and against the Infection of contagious epidemic Diseases, as Plague,
pestilential and malignant Fevers; but thin, temperate, laborious Persons, have
no Benefit to expect from it, in a clear hot dry Season especially; such as
swallow the Spittle from it have always an open Belly; its Juice, Decoction, or
Powder, rubbed on the Body, or any Part of it, or dropped into the Ears, kills
Lice, Crabs, Worms, or any Sort of Vermin; or wash the Head or other Parts
daily with a Lee of Hemp Seed Ashes; or Root of Hound's-tongue hung on a Thread
about the Neck, and renewed once a Week; or Powder of Spindletree Berries
sprinkled on the Parts; or a Liniment of powdered Barberries and Vinegar,
rubbed on the Parts; or the Head washed with a Decoction of yellow Henbane; or
a Decoction of Fleabane to wash with; but for the Crabs, a Lee of Lavender
Ashes to wash, or a Decoction of Rue, Wormwood, Tobacco, and Salt, is enough;
or Snuff of Tobacco, or Spanish Snuff rubbed on* Tobacco cures Scratch, Itch,
or little Ulcers; its Infusion, Decoction, or Syrup, vomit and purge violently,
and are good in Apoplexy (after proper Bleeding) Lethargy, Palsy, Suffocation
of the Womb, Stomach, or Breast loaded with Phlegm, Stomach palled or relaxed,
Shortness of Breath, without Fever, etc. Scroder recommends its Syrup and Water
in Fevers, Obstructions of the Lungs, and Asthma; the green Leaves are balsamic
and vulnerary, the dried vomit and purgseverely; they must therefore be used
with great Judgment and Caution; the American is much stronger than the
English; the Leaves, bruised and applied to the Part, eases the Pain of the
Gout, they being of a very narcotic Nature; their Juice rubbed on the Stinging
of Nettles, cures it. The Oil of Tobacco, dropped into a Dog, Cat, or other
Creature's Mouth, kills them mostly, either in a shorter or longer Space; its
Infusion in Wine, rubbed on a paralytic Limb, is excellent. Willis commends the
Use of Tobacco in a Camp, both against Scarcity of Provisions, and Camp
Diseases, as Cholic, Looseness, Ulcers, Pains of the Head and Joints, Scurvy,
and its Symptoms. Its Decoction cures the Scab in Beasts. Its Ashes rubbed on
the Teeth whitens them much. Its Juice drank is good in a Dropsy, for it vomits
and purges both by Stool and Urine; hence it cleanses the urinary Passages from
Sand, Gravel, and Mucilage. If the Dregs left in the Still (after the Water is
drawn off from the bruised Herb) be first set a Fortnight in Horse-dung, then
hung up in a Cellar, the Liquor that drops from it, is good for Cramps, Achs,
Gout, Sciatica, Scab, Itch, Ulcers, Cankers, and Sores, etc. Its Smoke, drawn
up the Anus, is good in the Iliac.

309.
TORMENTIL, or SEPTFOIL (Tormentilla) dries and astringes powerfully, hence no
Herb is more used in all Fluxes of the Belly or Uterus, taken any Way; it is
also a Diaphoretic and Counter-poison, therefore used against all Poisons,
Plague, pestilential and contagious Diseases, especially if attended with a
Looseness; it is also added to all vulnerary Drinks, Ointments, Plasters, etc.
It heals old and putrid Ulcers and Abscesses; its Extract given from half a
Dram to a Dram, after the Use of Rhubarb, excels most Medicines in an epidemic
Dysentery or Looseness. The Juice of the Herb, but especially of the Root,
stays all Fluxes and Bleedings in any Part, and expels most malignant Poisons,
if a Dram of the powdered Root be taken daily. A Decoction of the Herb or Root
in Wine (if no Fever attend, for then it must be given in Water, as the white
Decoction) answers the same End. If, after any violent Heat by Exercise, or
hard Labor, a Person's Urine seems covered with Fat, Grease, or Oil, the
Person being feverish at the same Time, a Decoction of this Root, drank, cures
in a few Days; it is said to cure Sheep of the Rot, and several other Diseases;
its Juice opens Obstructions of the Liver and Lungs, and is good in the
Jaundice. A Bath of its Decoction, often sitten in, prevents Abortion; or its
strong Decoction, sweetened with Syrup, or Conserve of Roses, drank; or, if a
Plaster of it and Vinegar is laid to the Back. Its Powder, drank in Plantain
Water, is good against Incontinence of Urine; it is also good in Ruptures, and
to dissolve clotted Blood, and for Wounds, Sores, Bruises, and Hurts; outwardly
used, is said to be good in all Knots and Tumors about the Neck, Throat, and
Ears; given inwardly, it is good for Catarrhs and Whites; the Juice, with
Vinegar, is good to rub sore and scurfy Heads, and to wash the Piles, either
the Leaves of Cinquefoil, or Roots of Bistort, are very good and sufficient
Substitutes to this. Tormentil Root is also a Substitute to Oak Bark for
tanning Leather.

TORMENTIL. This virtuous Plant I never saw grow in all my Travels, neither can
I get it from Europe.

310.
TREFOIL (Marsh or Water) (Trifolium Palustre) its Infusion or Decoction in
Wine, Ale, or Water, is of singular Service in all arthritic and rheumatic
Pains, if drank long enough; it is also a great Stomachic and Antiscorbutic,
good in Dropsies, Intermittents, and Catarrhs. Its great and extensive Virtues
make a sufficient Recompense for its Bitterness. It is an universal Remedy in
the Northern Countries, in all Diseases; a Glass-full of its Decoction in Ale,
drank every four Hours during a Fit of the Gout, gives very great Relief. Dr.
Tancred Robinson says, He has observed the Powerfulness of this Herb in
hydropic Cases, by seeing scabby and consumptive Sheep driven into Marshes
abounding with this Plant, and they were perfectly healed by eating it.

TRIFOLIUM PALUSTRE. We have had it from Europe, but it soon went off; I once
saw one Root of it in a Cedar-Swamp natural.

311.
TURNIPS (Rapus) stewed in their own Juice in an Oven, and the Liquor poured
off, and sweetened with Sugar, have often given Relief in a Cough. Our first
Colonies in America, when grievously afflicted with the Scurvy, were cured by
Turnips, says Ray. They are a good Pectoral Diuretic, and increase Seed; half a
Dram of the Seed, drank, excites Venery, and expels Smallpox and Measles; the
Parings of the Root roasted, and laid behind the Ear, is a Secret both for
Toothache and Headache; applied outwardly, they are good in Ulcers of the Legs,
Tumors of the Breast, or other scorbutic or scrophulous Tumors. Etmuller
extols their Decoction drank in the Iliac; the Juice, sweetened with Sugar, is
good for sore Mouths, and for a Cough from too much Acid. These and Navew are
much alike. -- Tussilago. See Colt's-foot.

312.
TUTSAN or PARK LEAVES (Androsaemum) has, by Country People in all Ages, been
accounted a sovereign Plant to heal Wounds, or Sores, either outwardly or
inwardly, and, therefore, never was omitted in Wound-drinks, Lotions, Baths,
Oils, Ointments, etc. for green Wounds, old Ulcers, or Sores, in all which, the
Experience of past Ages has found it admirable; but, at present, this, with
most of our other Simples, are neglected or despised. The Herb is moderately
warm and dry, yet its Seed is of a cleansing Quality; it purges choleric
Humors, like St. Peter's- wort, for it agrees with it in easing the Sciatica,
Gout, and in healing Burns. Either the bruised green Herb, or Powder of the
dried, applied, stops bleeding of Wounds. Tournefort says, it is opening,
vulnerary, resolutive, fit for the Stone, to expel Worms, resist Poison, and
prevents Madness. He says, it contains much Oil, some Salt, and Phlegm.

TUTSAN. I have often had Seed from Europe, but it never came up, and I never
saw it grow in any of our Provinces.

313.
TIME, or THYME ( Thymus) eaten with Salt and Vinegar, gently expels Phlegm by
Stool; its Decoction is good for Shortness of Breath, and Asthma. It expels
Worms, Urine, Birth, and Afterbirth. An Electuary of its Powder, and Honey,
causes easy Expectoration of thick Phlegm; it dissolves fresh Swellings. The
Juice, with Vinegar, rubbed on, dissolves clotted Blood, and takes away hanging
Warts. A Poultise of it, with Wine and Meal, cases the Sciatica; it is good in
Dimness of Sight, and in Meat or Broth; it is a good warming Stomachic; half an
Ounce of the Powder given in Oxymel, fasting, brings down much Choler, and
sharp Humors, and eases the Gout; a Dram of it with Mead, eases the hard
Swellings of the Belly; it is good in Pains of the Sides, or Hips; a Poultise
of it in Wine, applied, is good for swelled Cods. Pliny says, its Smell rouzes
Epileptics out of their Fits.

314.
MOTHER OF THYME, OR WILD THYME ( Serpyllum) is much the same as Thyme, being a
hot and dry Herb, it moves Urine and Menses; it is good for the Head, Uterus,
or Stomach, for Spitting of Blood and Cramps A Bath, with much Thyme in it,
brings the Menses; it is used outwardly for Watchings, Headache, and Giddiness.
For a St. Anthony's Fire, common People drink its warm Decoction, and fall into
a Sweat, whereby they mostly get well. Hoffman prescribes a good Water against
Catarrhs, of the Tops of Thyme infused in Marshmallows Wine, and set a
Fortnight in the Sun in a Jar-glass, then distilled; put the Water that comes
off on fresh Thyme, infuse in the Sun, and distill, as before, and to each Pint
of the Water put half an Ounce of shaved Sassafras; Dose, a Spoonful at Night
when the Catarrh begins to be troublesome; he says, it also prevents Apoplexy,
Epilepsy, and Palsy. A Handful of it infused in Rose Wine, and strained, and
drank with four Drops of Oil of Sassafras, cures the Green Sickness. The Spirit
of the Herb, and its distilled Water, are good in sleepy Diseases and Vapors.
A Dram of the Powder provokes Urine. For an inveterate Cough or Rheum, a Tea of
it at Nine o'Clock at Night, with a little Virgin Honey, or mixed with Cow's
Milk, is good. Thyme and Savoury, being much alike, may be used as such.

315.
VALERIAN (wild) (Valeriana) the Root is alexipharmac, sudorific, and diuretic,
good for the Plague, if mixed with Venice Treacle and Mithridate; beneficial
also for weak Sight, an Asthma, old Cough, and Pleurisy, used with Liquorice,
Raisins, and Anise. It is prevalent in Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen,
Uterus, and Jaundice. Its Decoction in Wine, dropped into the Eyes, strengthens
their Sight, and takes off all Spots. It eases the Headache, brings down the
Menses, moves Sweat, etc. by Bathing. By Fumigation it helps Catarrhs; it draws
out of the Flesh Splinters, or any other foreign Body. Schroder says, it
cleanses inveterate Ulcers. Hoffman will only allow it to be diuretic. Half a
Spoonful of the powdered Root in Wine, Water, etc. cures the Epilepsy. Sylvius
justly prefers it to Peony. Its Leaves cure slight Wounds. The Root is a good
Antihysteric, gives great Relief in the Vapors, in all convulsive Motions, and
in the most violent nervous Asthma, if a Wine Glass full of its Tea, or
Infusion, is often drank warm. The Leaves are said to cure the Thrush in the
Mouth. It is certain, that wild Valerian Root, in Powder, Infusion, Decoction,
Tea, Extract, or Tincture, are of most extensive Use, in all nervous Disorders,
Fevers, nervous Pleurisies, dry Asthma's, Hysterics, Hypo, Cramps, Convulsions,
Epilepsy, For the Epilepsy, half a Spoonful of Valerian Root Powder in Wine, or
any other fit Liquor; or the distilled Water of Southernwood, often given; or a
Knife Point full of Powder of the Coal at the Root of Mugwort, taken up on St.
John's Day, or a Piece of it hung about the Neck; or, after a Vomit, from a
Scruple to a Dram of powdered Hasle moss; or powdered Catkins of Hasle given in
the same Doses, but purge after it three or four times. Juice of Goat's Rue
drank to half an Ounce; Powder of True love Berries ( Herba Paris) from half a
Scruple to half a Dram in Lime-flower Water; or powdered Henbane Seeds given
forty Days in fresh Juice of Housleek; begin with six Grains, and add a Grain
to each Dose till it comes to 24. Let the Sick carry Juniper Berries in his
Pocket, and eat a ^ew every Morning fasting. Take Juniper Berries a Pound,
sprinkle them often with the best Malaga Wine, and dry them; then let them be
dried the last Time in the Oven (after the Bread is drawn) without Burning; but
taken out moist, and sprinkled with Sacchar. Chrystallin an Ounce, Ambergrease
half a Dram* mix all well, and keep in a glass Bottle, to be taken every
Morning, from 10 to 16 Berries daily, for a Month; drink a little maced Ale
after, and walk; or, a Spoonful or two of Spirit of Lilly of the Valley (as
prescribed by Hoffman) in a Glass of Wine; or, half a Dram of Powder of
Club-moss in Wine; or, an Amulet of Male Peony Root, taken up between the Hours
of 11 and 12 of the Day, between July 11 and 22; or, a Tincture of its Flowers,
prepared with Spirit of Wine. After the Sick has used Henbane Seed 40 Days as
above, then take Juice of Rue, and of the inner Bark of Elder, of each half a
Pound; white Wine three Pounds; boil in a close Vessel to a Half; Dose, two or
three Spoonfuls fasting daily, till it is all taken. Juice, or Powder of Rue,
long taken, is of great Service; Powder of Soap -wort Seeds, given in some
proper Liquor, is good, from half a Dram, to two Scruples, or Ashes of near
ripe Grains of Wheat in Peony Water.
Apoplexy, Palsy, and Vertigo. It contains much volatile, oily, aromatic Salt.
Its Decoction, drank, is of special Use against Plague, and pestilential
Fevers. It expels Wind in Stomach or Belly, and is good for inward Sores, or
Wounds, or outward Bruises and Hurts. It abates the Swelling of the Cods from
Cold or Wind. It is called the Countryman's Treacle. If the Bark (being
necessarily given too soon after Fevers) cause a Stiffness, Pain, Contraction,
or Numbness of the Joints or Muscles, put the Person to Bed, and give three or
four Doses of this powdered Root, and drink Sack Whey, or Posset Drink after;
he will soon fall into an easy fine Sweat, and will be well in a few Hours. I
have often tried and seen its Success herein.

316.
WALNUT-TREE ( Juglans) its inner Bark, dried, is a strong Vomit; the Juice of
the Root is a violent Purge; the Nuts are certainly an Antidote against Plague
and Poisons. A Decoction of the outer Bark of the Nut, poured on the Earth,
makes Worms creep out strangely. Ray says, the Nuts have a peculiar Faculty to
bring down the Menses, when other Medicines have been used in vain; first soak
them in warm Water, then blanch them, put the Kernels two Days in Aqua Vitae,
and eat two or three every Morning ten Days before the Time. A Decoction of the
Leaves, used externally, is good in the Evil, if a little Sugar is put to it,
and Cloths dipped in it, and applied to the Sores. Nothing exceeds the Oil of
the Nut, in the Stone, whether given inwardly, or in Clysters. The Powder of
the dried Catkins, from a Scruple to a Dram, given in Wine, is surprising in
the Strangulation of the Womb; and good in a Bloody Flux.

Water-pempernel. See Brook-lime and Male-Pimpernel. Water-Plantain. See
Plantain. Water-Hyssop. See Hyssop. Water-Germander. See Germander. Water-Dock.
See Dock. Watercresses. See Cresses. Water-Lilly. See Lilly. White-Lilly. See
Lilly. Wild Flax. See Flax. Wild-Sage. See Sage. Wood-Mercury. See Mercury.
Water-Fern, or Osmond-Royal. See Fern. Water-flag, or Flower de-luce. See
Orrice. Water-Mint. See Mint. Water Hemp, or Water-Agrimony. See Hemp.

317.
VERVAIN ( Verbena) formerly called Herba Sacra, was much admired, being good
in Diseases of the Head, from cold Humors; in Diseases of the Eyes and Breast;
in obstinate Coughs, in Obstructions of Liver, Spleen and Jaundice; in Gripes,
and Bloody Flux. It wastes and expels the Stone, suppresses Lust, cures
Tertians, eases Arthritics, heals Wounds, and forwards the Birth; outwardly it
is a noble Vulnerary; it is good for Pains of the Head, Toothache, Baldness,
Melancholy, Weakness, Dimness, and Redness of the Eyes. It is also useful,
applied in a Poultise, to the Throat, for a Quinsey, or Hoarseness; for a
Gargle, in Swellings of the Throat; in an Ointment, for Pain of the Spleen,
etc. For a Swelling of the Spleen, make it into a Poultise, with the White of
Egg and Barley Meal, and apply; laid under the Head at Night, or a Plaster of
it, sour Leaven, and Oil of Roses, laid to the Head, cures the Headache, from
hard Drinking. Its Decoction is thought good against the Biting of Serpents,
and venomous Beasts, Plague, Tertian, and Quartan Agues. It kills and expels
Worms, causes a good Color of the Face and Body, and, drank with Peony Seeds,
is very good against a Dropsy, and the diminished Office of Reins and Bladder;
by cleansing them from viscous and slimy Humors; applied outwardly with Hog's
Lard, it cures Swellings of the Privy Parts. The Juice, or Leaves bruised,
cleanse the Skin wonderfully from all Spots, Freckles, or inflammatory
Eruptions. The distilled Water from the Herb, in its full Growth, is said to
answer most of the above Intentions. The Leaves make a very good Tea for the
Vapors. The Water, dropped into the Eyes, is good for them.

318
VIOLET ( Viola) is a Cordial Flower, and a Pectoral; it moistens, softens, and
loosens, moderates the Heat of Fevers, and Pain of the Head arising thence;
they are good in a Cough, Roughness of the Throat, and Pleurisy. The Flower is
most used, and it is the Navel of it that gives the Syrup a laxative Property,
but the Root of it loosens more, for three Ounces of it, infused all Night in
hot Wine, or Water, strained and drank, purges; but a Dram and a Half of the
powdered Seed does the same, for they all gently bring off easily moveable,
watery, or bilious Humors; hence they are chiefly used for Children, Women
with Child, feverish, sickly, and weak Persons. The powdered Seed, taken daily,
was the famous Dr. Butler's great Secret to waste and bring away Stone. The
Root is saltish, the Seed salter, all the Parts have a glutinous Sap, which
prevents the Loss or Flying off of the other Parts. It is a diuretic,
loosening, and cleansing Herb. The Leaves, as an Emollient, are often used in
Clysters, Fomentations, and Poultises, and sometimes in hot Fevers; their
Decoction is drank as a safe Cooler. Salt of Wormwood, put to the Infusion of
the Root, draws out its Principles; more Salt makes it more purgative, and
gives it a better Tincture. A Dram of the powdered Flowers loosens the Belly,
but the Root purges upward and downward. The Syrup is not only cordial and
loosening, but good in Diseases of the Breast, from saltish and sharp Humors,
if it is made without Boiling. Some prepare a pleasant loosening Conserve, with
Juice of the Flowers and Manna, from two Drams to four, which keeps the Belly
open, and is an excellent Cordial. The Seed of Violets, Quinces, and Dog-grass,
afford an excellent Emulsion for the Stone. Both Leaves and Flowers are good to
cool any Heat and Inflammation of the Body, either internal or external,
whether drank in Infusion or Decoction; or, applied in a Fomentation, Poultise,
or Ointment, they are good for a Pain of the Head from over Watching; in Heat
and Thirst, from Fevers and Inflammations. The Flowers of the white Violet
ripen and dissolve Swellings. Their Seed resists the Poisons of Scorpions. The
green, or dry Herb, and Flowers, are good in a Pleurisy, Diseases of the Lungs,
and Hoarseness; to blunt and soften sharp Humors, Heat of Urine, Pains of the
Back, Kidneys and Bladder, and for the Liver and Jaundice. A few Drops of
Spirit of Vitriol, put to the Infusion or Decoction, make it more cooling,
quench Thirst, and allay Heat more, and give them a more grateful Color and
Taste.

319.
VIOLA TRICOLOR ( Heart's-ease) or ( three Faces under a Hood) is a little
warmer, yet very temperate, and by its glutinous Juice mollities in a lower
Degree than Mallows, as they are weaker than Marshmallows. This is also
reckoned good in Diseases of the Lungs, and for Convulsions and Epilepsy, and
that its Decoction is good to wash scabb'd, or itchy Parts. Some Old-fashioned
Folks use its Juice or distilled Water, for green Wounds, and old Sores.

320.
WHITLOW ( Paronychia rutaceo folio) Grass, is not only good to be applied,
either bruised, or in a Poultise, to the Whitlow on the Fingers Ends, (which is
often the Crisis or Dregs of some other Disease, and, as such, requires to be
treated with Alexipharmacs and Sudorifics; see Sim. Pauli) but used with
Success in an Ointment for the King's Evil. The honorable Mr. Boil says, that
Whitlow-grass cures a Brochocele, or great thick swelled Neck.

321.
WILLOW-TREE ( Salix) besides its House Uses, may be used in Medicine; for its
Boughs, set about the Bed, or Leaves strewed on the Room Floors of Persons sick
of raging Fevers, are very reviving. The Bark, Leaves, Flowers, and Juice, are
all cooling, drying, and somewhat astringent; hence they are good in
Blood-spitting, excessive Menses, and other Fluxes in either Sex, if boiled in
Wine. The Bark infused in Vinegar cures Corns, and other Risings on the Feet
and Toes. A Juice gathered from the Bark whilst in Flower, used to the Eyes,
takes away such Things as hinder the Sight.

322.
WILLOW-WORT; it is a Lysimachia or Loosestrife, but so called, because it
grows among Willows, or on River Brinks, very tall, with a purple Flower. Its
distilled Water is a present Remedy for Hurts or Blows on the Eyes, or for
Blindness, if the chrystalline Humor, or Sight itself, is not perished or
hurt. It clears the Eyes from Dust, or other Things blown into them, and
preserves the Sight from much Danger. An Ointment of it, May Butter, Wax, and
Sugar, is good for Wounds and Thrusts; boil of the last three, of each two
Drams, to each two Ounces of the Water, till all the Water is exhaled, dip
Tents or Pledgets in the cold Liquor, and apply. It heals all Sorts of foul
Ulcers and Sores, and stays their Inflammation by washing them with Water, and
laying on them the green or dry Leaves. The Water gargled, and sometimes drank,
cures Quinsies and Evils in the Throat. It also takes off all Spots, Marks, and
Scars in the Skin caused by Measles, Small Pox, or the like, or drank when
thirsty, or on a Journey, it quenches Thirst. The Plant is astringent,
vulnerary, cooling, strengthens the Eyes, is proper for Inflammations, etc.
says Lemery.

323.
WINTER GREEN (Pyrola) Leaves are cooling, drying, healing and vulnerary. It i^
celebrated both for inward and outward Use, says Schroder. Being very
glutinous, it is a good Remedy for green Wounds, which it speedily heals,
whether the bruised Herb, Juice, or Ointment of the Juice, with Lard, or Oil,
Wax, and Turpentine, be applied, which last is a most effectual, sovereign, and
expeditious Ointment. Its Decoction in Wine, or Water, with other Vulneraries,
as Comfry, Horsetail, Betony, Golden-rod, Agrimony, Daisy, etc. is no less
effectual for inward Wounds, or Ulcers as of Kidneys, Bladder, etc. which it
wonderfully relieves. It stops Fluxe^, either of Blood or Humors, and Bleeding
of Wounds, and takes away Inflammations on the Pains of the Hurt; if presently
applied, as soon as the Hurt is received, Inflammation is prevented. It is also
famous for Ulcers of hard Cure, Cancers, and Fistula's. The distilled Water,
dried Herb for Decoction, or the Powder, answer the same Ends.

PYROLA. The Species mentioned, grows in our cold moist Woods, two Inches high,
with round thick Leaves, like a Pear Tree Leaf.

324.
VIPER'S BUGLOSS ( Echium) is reputed an Antidote to the Biting of Scorpions,
venomous Beasts, and Poison. It expels Sadness, Melancholy, exhilarates, and
mitigates the hot Fits of Agues. It increases Women's Milk, eases Pain of the
Loins, Back, and Kidneys; the Roots and Seeds are best for these Uses. Its
distilled Water, when in Flower, is used inwardly and outwardly, and a Syrup of
the Herb, Juice, and Flowers, is used in these Cases; but the Juice is so
slimy, that making the Syrup requires some Art, viz. that the Herb be well
beaten, then set forty-eight Hours in a Cellar, then strained, and the Juice
clarified with Whites of Eggs.

325.
WOAD ( Luteola) is bitter, but not sharp, binding and drying, full of Salt;
the wild Sort is most so, and resists Putrefaction more. The cultivated Woad
stops Bleeedings of all Sorts, either upward or downward. The Decoction (but
rather of the wild) in Wine, cures the Hardness of the Spleen, especially if
the Part is ^omented with it The manured is better for green Wounds than the
Wild, it quickly heals and closes up their Lips; it powerfully represses the
corroding malignant Qualities of foul eating Ulcers, Cancers, and the like. It
allays and discusses all hot Inflammations, St. Anthony's Fire, and hard
Tumors and Swellings, and is of excellent Use in Quinsey and Scurvy.

326.
WOOD-ROOF ( Asperula) Infused in Wine, makes merry, drives off Melancholy, is
good for the Stomach and Liver, opens Obstructions, and causes an Appetite. It
is said to expel Phlegm, and defend the Vitals from Infection; bruised and
applied, it dissolves Imposthumes, cures Cuts, and fresh Wounds.

327.
WORMWOOD (Absinthium) is of extensive Use in Physic; it is warming and drying,
strengthens the Stomach and Liver, excites an Appetite, opens Obstructions, and
cures Diseases arising therefrom, as Jaundice, Dropsy, and putrid Fevers;
expels vicious Humors by Urine and plentiful Perspiration, and kills Worms and
Moths in Clothes. It is good in all Agues, for which it is given in Decoction,
or Infusion in Water, Ale, Wine, or in the Juice only: but its Infusion in Wine
or Ale (if the Disease will allow of Malt Liquors (is an easy, and as good a
Preparation as any. Its simple distilled Water is good for little. There is
little more in its Salt obtained by Incineration, than in any other lixivial
Salt. Its Decoction, Wine, Extract, and both Oils, are good, and its compound
Water not bad. Its Juice is more watery and detergent, the Herb more
astringent, only the dried Herb should be infused in Wine, or Ale. The
Infusion, drank Evening and Morning, for some Time, helps Hysterics,
Obstructions of the Spleen, and Weakness of the Stomach. Its Oil, taken on
Sugar, and somewhat drank after, kills Worms, resists Poison, and is good for
the Liver and Jaundice. The Use of the Herb checks immoderate Venery. The Root
has a slow Bitterness, which affects not the Head and Eyes, like the Leaves;
hence the Root should be accounted among the best Stomachics. The Extract, mixed
with the Precipitants and Absorbents, or fixed or volatile Salts, is good in
Tertians or Quotidians. Oil of the Seed, given from half a Scruple to half a
Dram in some Liquor, or a Spoonful of the Juice in some Wine, taken before the
Fit comes on, and the Person is put to Bed, cures Quotidians and Quartans. In a
Looseness from eating too much Fruit (after the Use of Rhubarb) Wormwood Wine
is excellent. A Woman raised, spread, and maintained her Reputation for the
Cure of a Megrim, by only using a Fomentation to the Part of green Roots of
wild Cucumber sliced, and Wormwood, of each alike, boiled in two Parts Water,
and one Oil; strain and use, and lay a Poultise of the strained-out Herbs to
the Part, after it is fomented. A Fomentation of Wormwood boiled in Water, and
strained, has been successfully applied to a spreading Gangrene, for which some
extol a Decoction of Fimi Equini in vino vel urina used after deep
Scarification, adding Spirit of Sal-armoniac inter utendum. Green Wormwood,
worn in the Shoes, has been found useful in cold Distempers of the Stomach. The
Extract has cured several Dropsies. I have cured some of Anasarca's, by causing
them to drink every Day three times, for five or six Weeks, a Decoction of
Wormwood, Broom-Tops, and Camomile Flowers, strained out and Horseradish
infused in it after. Its Ashes, infused three Hours in white Wine, strained and
drank often, cures an Anasarca. Whenever I have any great Expectation from the
Use of Wormwood, I always order the common Sort, for the Roman comes far short
of it in Virtue. That hot Rheum which runs down from the Eyes, and excoriates
the Skin of the Cheeks, is cured by Juice of Wormwood, beaten up with the White
of an Egg, and applied. A too habitual and free internal Use of this Herb dims
the Sight for some Hours. I have known Poultises of Wormwood boiled in Grease,
Baum, or Wine, and applied with good Success to white Swellings. It boiled in
Lard, and laid to Swellings of the Tonsils and Quinsey, is serviceable. A
Poultise of the s^ft Leaves, beaten up with Whites of Eggs, is good in a
Strain; or if it is boiled in Ale, and laid on; or a Poultise of Wheat Bran
boiled in Vinegar; or a Tincture of dried Roses in Vinegar, used with wet
Cloths to the Part. Its internal Use is good in such Diseases as come from a
gross Blood, or Obstructions in the Capillaries, or in Viscidities, or Phlegm,
which line the Insides of the Stomach, Bowels, or Vessels, or in too great a
Sharpness of the Blood, by its opening Obstructions, cleansing, bracing, and
promoting Perspiration and Urine. It is admi^able against Surfeits. It not only
cures Pain of the Stomach, Weakness, Indigestion, Want of Appetite, Vomiting,
and Loathing, but hard Swellings of the Belly. This, with Rosemary, Saffron,
and Turmeric Root infused in Rhenish Wine, is a Cure for the Jaundice, and
brings down the Menses; or a Decoction of it, Broom-tops, greater Celandine,
white Horehound, lesser Centaury, Flowers of Hypericon, Barberry Bark,
Turmeric, and Madder-Roots, strained, and Hog-lice Wine added, is not ill in a
Jaundice. Wormwood and Vinegar are an Antidote to the Mischief of Mushrooms and
Henbane, and to the Biting of a Shrew, and of the Sea Fish called Draco
marinus, or Quaviver; mixed with Honey, it takes away the Blackness after
Falls, Bruises, etc. All other Wormwoods, the nearer they approach in Taste to
pleasant or palatable, they are so much worse, for they are weaker, their Use
requires so much longer Time, larger Doses, and yet less Success* The Herb and
Pellitory of the Wall boiled in Water till soft, then strained, and a
Fomentation of the Liquor used, and the Herbs laid on after in a Poultise, ease
all outward Pains; or the Herb boiled in Oil till almost the Oil is wasted,
strained, and anointed, cures the Pain of the Back.

328.
WOUND-WORT (Vulneraria rustica) Lemery says, contains much Oil, and a moderate
Quantity of essential Salt. It is cleansing, good to heal Wounds, and
strengthening. The Germans used it much both inwardly and outwardly, for Wounds
and Hurts. Some commend it for the Gout.

329.
JESSAMINE ( Jasminum) (having been omitted in its proper Place, I shall insert
it here) The Oil of its Flowers is said to discuss crude Humors. It is good
for cold and catarrhous, but not hot and sanguine Bodies, if its Smell cause
not a Headache and Bleeding at the Nose. The Oil is good for hard and contracted
Limbs; it warms, softens, and opens the Nerves and Tendons, if used either in a
Liniment of the Parts, or taken in Drink, or Clysters. It removes Diseases of
the Uterus, and is of Service in old pituitous Cholics. A Poultise of the
Leaves, boiled in Wine till soft, dissolves cold Swellings, hard Tumors, etc.

FINIS.
The ENGLISH and LATIN Names of the PLANTS here treated of.
A
ADd^rs-tongue, Ophioglossum. 2 Agrimony, Agrimonia. 3 Alder-tree, Alnus. 4
Almond-tree, Amygdalus. 5 Althaea, Althaea. 6 Alisanders, Hipposelinum. 7
Angelica, Angelica. 8 Apple Tree, Malus. 9 ^^^icock-tree, Malus Armeniaca. 10
Archangel, Lamium, Galeopsis. 11 Arrach, Atriplex. 12 -- See Atriplex Marina.
13 Asarum, Asarum. 14 Asparagus, Asparagus. 15 Asphodil, Asphodelus. 16
Arsmart, Persicaria, Hydropiper. 17 Artichoke, Cinara, Scolymus. 18 Aron, Arum.
19 Ash-tree, Fraxinus. 20 Avens, Caryophy^^a^a.
B
21 Badmony, Spignal, Meum. 22 Bawm, Melissa. 23 Bay Tree, Laurus. 24
Beech-tree, Fagus. 25 Barberry tree, Berberis. 26 Betony, Betonica, 27
Bill-berries, Vaccinium. Vitis idaea. 28 Birch-tree, Betula. 29 Bishops-weed,
Ammi. 30 Bistort, Bistorta. 31 Blue-bottle, Cyanus. 32 Borrage, Borago. 32
Bugloss, Buglossum. 33 Box tree, Buxus. 34 Bramble, Rubus sylvestris. 35
Brancursine, Acanthus. 36 Brooklime. Beccabinga. 37 Broom, Genista. 37
Broom-rape, Orobanche. 38 Buckthorn, Rhamnus. 39 Burdock, Bardana major. 40
Bullace-tree, Prunus sylvestris. 41 Burnet, Pimpinella. 42 Butcher's-broom,
Ruscus. 43 Butterburr, Petasites. 44 Bryony white, Bryonia alba. 45 -- black,
Bryonia nigra.
C
46 Camomile, Chamaemelum. 47 Campions, Lychnis. 48 Cockle, Nigellastrum,
Pseudomelanthium. 49 Campion barren, Lychnis segetum. 50 -- (Rose) Lychnis
coronaria. 51 Carduus, Benedictus. 52 Carline-thistle, Carlina. 53 -- black,
Chamaeleon niger. 54 -- Sow-thistle, Soncus. 55 Celandine, Chelidonium. 56
Centaury lesser, Centaurium minus. 57 Carway, Carum. 58 Calamus aromaticus,
Acorus. 59 Cherry-tree, Cerasus. 60 Chesnut-tree, Castanea. 61 Chervil,
Chaerephyllum, Cerefolium. 62 Chick Pease, Cicer sativum. 63 Chickweed, Alsine.
64 Sea Chickweed, Alsine marina. 65 Cinquefoile, Pentaphyllum. 66 Clary,
Horminum. 67 Clovejuly Flower, Caryophyllum. 68 Clovers, Trifolia pra^ensia. 69
Clowns Wound-wort, Sideritis tuberosa radix. 70 Costmary, or Alecost, Costus
hortorum, Balsamita mas. 71 Columbines, Aquilegi^. 72 Coltsfoot, Tussilago. 73
Comfry, Symphytum, Consolida major. 74 Cocksfoot Grass, Dactyloides. 75
Cocksfoot Quick grass. 76 Dew Grass, Gramen. Mannae esculentum. 77
Cornelian-tree, Cornus mas. 78 Coriander, Coriandrum. 79 Cow Parsnip,
Sphondylium. 80 Cross-wort, or Mugweed, Cruciata. 81 Cudweed, or Cottonweed,
Gnaphalium. 82 Cummin, Cuminum. 83 Currant-tree, Ribes. 84 Cystus-dwarf,
Helianthemum.
D
85 Daffodil, Narcissus. 86 Daisy, Bellis, Consolida minor. 87 Dandelion, Dens
Leonis. 87 Devils-bit, see Scabious, 88 Dill, Anethum. 89 Dog Grass, Gramen
caninum. 90 Dock, Lapathum. 91 -- Blood-wort, Lapathum Sanguineum. 92 -- Monks
Rhubarb, Rhaponticum. 93 -- Water Dock, Lapathum aquaticum. 94 Drop-wort Male,
Filipendula. -- Female, Oenanth* 95 Duc^s meat, Lens palustris.
E
96 Elecampane, Helenium, Enula. 97 Elder-tree, Sambucus. 98 -- (dwarf) Ebulus.
99 Elm tree, Ulmus. 100 Eryngo, Eryngium. 101 Eyebright, Euphrasia.
F
102 Fennel, Foeniculum. 103 -- Hogs, Peucedanum. 104 Ferns, Filix. 105 --
(Water) Osmonda regalis. 106 Feverfew, Febrifuga, Matricaria. 107 Fig Tree,
Ficus. 108 Fig-wort, Scophularia. 109 Fir Tree, Abies. 110 Flax, Linum. 111 --
wild, Linum montanum. 112 Flixweed, Sophia Chirurgorum. 113 Fleabane, Conyza.
114 Fleawort, Psyllium 115 Fenugreek, Foenum graecum. 116 Foxglove, Digitalis.
117 Fumitory, Fumaria.
G
118 Garden Cresses, Nasturtium. 119 -- Water Cresses, Nasturtium aquaticum.
120 Garlic, Allium. 121 Germander, Chamaedrys. 122 -- Water, Scordium. 123
Gith, or Fennel-flower, Nigolla. 124 Gladwin, Xyris, Spatula foetida. 125
Glasswort, Kali Salicornia. 126 Goats Rue, Galega. 127 Goats-beard, Tragopogon.
128 Golden-rod, Virga aurea. 129 Goosberry-bush, Grossularia. 130 Goose-grass,
Aparine. 131 Gromwell, Lithospermum. 132 Ground Ivy, Hedera terrestris. 133
Ground Pine, Chamoepitys. 134 Groundsel, Senecio, Erygerum.
H
135 Hares Ears, Bupleurum. 136 -- Foot, Lagopus. 137 Hart's-tongue, Phyllitis,
Lingua cervina. 138 Hawkweed, Hieracium. 139 Hawthorn, Oxyacantha 140
Hasle-tree, Corylus sylvestris. 141 Heath, Erica. 142 Hellebore, white,
Helleborus albus. 143 -- black, Helleborus niger. 144 Hemlock, Cicuta. 145
Hemp, Cannabis. 146 Hemp Agrimony, Eupatorium Cannabinum. 147 Henbane,
Hyoscyamus. 148 Herb Robert, Herba Roberti. 149 Herb Paris, Herba Paris. 150
Herb One-blade, Monophyllon. 151 Herb Tway-blade, Ophrys bifolia. 152
Holly-tree, Agrifolium. 153 Honeysuckle, Caprifolium Periclymenum. 154 Hops,
Lupulus. ^55 Horehound, white, Marrubium album. 156 Horse-tail, Equisetum. 157
Hounds-tongue, Cynoglossum. 158 Housleek, Sedum. 159 Hypericon, Hypericum. 160
Hyssop, Hysopus. 161 Hyssop (Hedge or Water) Gratiola.
I
162 Jack by the Hedge, Alliaria. 163 Juniper, Juniperus. 164 Ivy, Hedera
corymbifera.
K
165 Knapweed, Jaccea. 166 Knot-grass, Centinodium, Polygonum.
L
167 Ladies Mantle, Alchimilla. 168 Ladies Bed-straw, Gallium luteum. 169
Ladies Thistle, Carduus Mariae. Ladies Slipper, See Hellebore. 170 Lambs
Lettuce, Valerianella. 171 Lavender, Lavendul^. 172 Lavender-cotton,
Chamaecyparissus. 173 Leeks, Porrum. 174 Lilly of the Valley, Lilium
Convallium. 175 Lilly (Water) Nymphaea. 176 Lilly, white, Lillium album. 177
Lime or Linden-tree, Tilia. 178 Liquorice, Glycyrrhi^a. 179 Liver-wort, Lichen,
Hepatica. 180 Loose-strife, Lysimachia. 181 Lovage, Levisticum. 182 Lungwort,
Pulmonaria.
M
183 Madder, Rubia tinctorum. 184 Maidenhair (black) Trichomanes. 185 --
(white) Ruta muraria. 186 Mallows, Malva. 187 Marjoram wild, Origanum. 188 --
(sweet) Marjorana. 189 Maudlin, Ageratum, Balsamita foemina. 190 Marygold,
Caltha, Calendula. 191 Masterwort, Imperatoria. 192 Meadowsweet, Ulmaria. 193
Medlars, Mespilus. 194 Melilot, Melilotus. 195 Mercuries, Mercuriales. 196
Mercuries, Mercuriales. 197 Mercuries, Mercuriales. 198 Millefoil, Yarrow,
Millefolium. 199 Mint, Mentha. 200 -- Calamint, Calamintha. 201 -- Cat-mint,
Cattaria. 202 Misletoe, Viscum. 203 Moneywort, Nummularia. 204 Moonwort,
Lunaria. 205 -- lesser, Lunaria minor. 206 Motherwort, Cardiaca. 207 Mouse-ear,
Pilosella, Auricula Muris. 208 Mugwort, Artemisia. 209 Mulberry-tree, Morus.
210 Mullein, Verbascum, Tapsus Barbatus. 211 Mustards, Sinapi. 212 Mustards,
Sinapi. 213 Mustards, Sinapi. 214 Mustards, Sinapi. 215 Mustards, Sinapi. 216
Mushrooms, Fungus. 217 Myrtle^tree, Myrtus.
N
219 Navel-wort, Cotyledon, Umbilicus Veneris. 220 Navew, Napus. 221 Nettles
(stinging) Urtica. -- dead. See Archangel. 222 Nightshade, Solanum. 223 --
Climbing, Dulcamara.
O
224 Oak-tree, Quercus. 225 Onions, Cepa. 226 Orpine, Telephium, Crassula. 227
Orrice, Flower-de-luce, Iris. 228 -- yellow, Iris palustris lutea. 229 -- pale,
Iris palustris pallida.
P
230 Parsley, Petroselinum. 231 Peach-tree, Malus Persica. 232 Pear Tree,
Pyru^, 233 Paeony, Paeoni^* 234 Pellitory of the Wall, Parietaria. 235
Pellitory of Spain, Pyrethrum. 236 Pennyroyal, Pulegium. 237 Perriwinkle,
Vinca, Pervinca. 238 Pettywhin, Anonis. 239 Pilewort, Scrophularia minor,
Ci^lhdonium minus. 240 Pimpernel, Anigallis. 241 -- Water -- aquatica. 242
Phillyrhea, Mock-privet. 243 Plantain, Plantago. 244 -- Water -- aquatica. 245
-- Sea, -- Marina. 246 -- Buckshorn, Coronopus Vulgaris. 247 Plum-tree, Prunus.
248 Poley Mountain, Polium. 249 Polypody, Polipodium. 250 Poplar, Populus. 251
Poppy Garden, Papaver hortense. 252 -- Corn -- erraticum. 253 -- Horned --
Corniculatum. 254 Primroses, Primula Veris. 255 Puislane, Portulaca.
Q
256 Quince-tree, Malus cydonia.
R
257 Ragwort, Jacobaea. 258 Rasberry, Rubus idaeus. 259 Radishes Raphanus
hortensis 260 -- Horse, Raphanus rusticanus. 261 Rocket, Eruca. 262 Rosa Solis,
Sun-dew, 263 Roses, (red and white) Rosa. 264 Rosemary, Rosmarinus. 265 Rue,
Ruta. 266 Rupture-wort, Herniaria.
S
267 Saffron, Crocus. 268 Sanicle, Sanicula. 269 Sage, Salvia. 270 -- Wood,
Scorodonia. 271 Saracens Confound, Solidago Saracenica. 272 Dorias Woundwort,
Doria. 273 Savine, Sabina, 274 Savoury, Satureia. 275 Saw-wort, Serratula. 276
Saxifrage, Saxifraga. 277 Scabious, Scabiosa. 278 Devils-bit, Morsus Diaboli.
279 Scurvy Grass, Cochlearia. 280 Self-heal, Brunella, Prunella. 281 Bugle,
Bugula. 282 Service-tree, Sorbus. 283 Shepherds Purse, Bursa pastoris. 284
Silverweed, Argentina, Potentilla. 285 Sloe-tree, Prunus sylvestris. 286
Solomon's Seal, Sigillum Solomonis, Polygonatum. 287 Sorrel, Acetosa. 288 --
Wood, Acetosella, Alleluja. 289 Southernwood Male, Abrotanum. 290 Sowbread,
Cyclamen, Artanita. 291 Speedwell, Male, Veronica mas. 292 -- Female, Elatine,
Veronica foemina. 293 Spleenwort, Asplenium, Scolopendria, Ceterach. 294
Spurge, Tythymalus. 295 Spurry, Spergula. 296 Squills, Scilla. 297 Star-wort,
Tripolium. 298 Staves acre, Staphisagria. 299 Stinking Arach, Atriplex olida.
300 Stockjuly Flower, Leucoium. 301 Strawberries, Fragaria. 302 Swallow-wort,
Asclepias. 303 Succory, Cichoreum.
T
304 Tansy, Tanacetum. 305 Throatwort, Cervicaria. 306 Throw-wax, Perfoliata.
307 Toad-flax, Linaria. 308 Tobacco, Tabacum, Nicotiana. 309 Tormentil,
Tormentilla. 310 Trifoil (Water) Trifolium aquaticum. 311 Turnips, Rapum. 312
Tutsan, Androsae^um. 313 Time, Thymus. 314 -- wild, Serpyllum.
V W
315 Valerian, Valeriana. 316 Walnut-tree, Juglans. 317 Vervain, Verbena. 318
Violets, Viola. 319 -- Hearts-ease, Viola tricolor. 320 Whitlow-grass,
Paronychia, rutacco folio. 321 Willow-tree, Salix. 322 Willow-wort, Lysimachia
spicata. 323 Winter-green, Pyrola. 324 Vipers Bugloss, Echium. 325 Woad,
Luteola. 326 Woodroof, Asperula. 327 Wormwood, Absinthium. 328 Wound-wort,
Vulneraria rustica. 329 Jesamine, Jassminum.
AN INDEX OF DISEASES and REMEDIES.
N. B. The Figures denote not the Pages, but the Number of the Plants. Where
the same Disease is mentioned oftener than once, in the same Number, the Figure
or Number is thus distinguished, twice or thrice, etc
A
ABORTION, or Miscarriage, to prevent, 30, 100, 102, 183, 198, 243, 256, 269,
304, 309. See Astringents. Abortion to cause. See Birth and Afterbirth to
expel. Abscesses, 71, 277, 278. See Ulcers, Aches, 7, 46, twice, 45, 308* See
Pains. Absorbents, 5, 117. See Humors sharp to blunt. After-Pains to ease, 2,
41, 132, 193, 225, 233. Agues, 7, 13, 19, 20, 26, 46, 51, 56, 70, 106, 121,
154, 160, 161, 196, 198, 211, 222, 236, 243, 246, 255, 265, 287, 303, 304, 310,
324, 327. See Intermittents, Perspiration to promote, Sudorifics. Ales or Wines
to fine, preserve, restore, or give a delicate Flavor, 20, 41, 192, 221, 132,
227, 237. Alexipharmacs, 7, 41, 43, 52, 93, 97, 121, 126, 149, 181, 190, 192,
277, 278, 302, 315. See Plague to prevent, or cure. Pestilential Fevers.
Poisons, to expel. Sudorifics. Animals to fatten, 4, twice, 14, 24, 115, 127,
145, 295. Anodynes, 4, 5, 6, twice, 97, 110, 144, 147, 176, 251. See
Emollients. Pain to ease. Sleep to cause. Antidote to too much Opium, 70, 106,
202. -- To Toadstool and Henbane, 144, 221, 259, 327. -- to Nightshade, 33,
209. -- to Hellebore, 142, 256, twice. -- to Mushrooms, 102, 221, 211, 232,
thrice, 327. -- to Litharge, 230. -- to Mercury lodged in the Body, 96, 102,
221. -- to prevent Danger from the habitual Use of Aloes, 210. Antihysterics,
7, 12, 21. See Hysterics, to prevent, relieve, or cure. Anus excoriated, or
ulcerated, 5, 157, 199 238, thrice, 241. See Excoriations. Erosions. Ulcers. --
fallen down, or relaxed, 18, 135, 210, 217, 244, 304. Appetite and Digestion to
raise, or restore* 23, twice, 58, 59 60 63, 77 122 127 129 138 162 twice, 181,
187 199, twice, 209. 211, 225, twice, 256 287, 296, 326, 327, twice, See
Vomiting. Belching. Apoplexy, 67, 143, 159, 174, 177, 191, 202* 211, twice,
254, 261, 264 300, 308, 314, 315. See Cephalics. Arthritic Pains, 13, 37, 39,
59, 148, 164, 212, 236, 310. See Pains. Gout. Sciatic. Aperients, 14, 17, 87,
102, 118, 173, 187, 200, 213. 220, 238, 270, 274, 276, 277, 290. See
Obstructions to open. Asthma, 5, twice, 8, 18, 26, 37, 41, 43, 44, thrice, 50,
54, 72, 79, 80, 94, 96, 102, 103, twice, 106, 107, 113, 118, 124, 142, 155,
157, 160, 162, 176, 181, 184, twice, 185, 187, 189, 191, thrice, 200, twice,
220, 221, twice, 224, 225, 227, 249, 259, 264, twice, 265, 267, thrice, 274,
277, 289, 308, twice, 313, 315, thrice. See Cough, Lungs stuffed. Astringents,
1, 2, 30, 34, 40, 56, 65, 69, 80, 84, 86, 93* 99, 164, 165, 166, 167, 198, 203,
207, 209, 217, 219, 224, 226, 228, 234, 137, 256, 263, twice, 282, 283, 284,
285, 286, 292, 301, 305, 308, 309, 322. Atrophy, 63. See Consumptions.
Attenuants, 19, 50, 66, 97, 118, 123, 132, 133, 227, 308, etc. Achores, 5.
Acidity to correct, 7, 103, 289, 237. -- Acrimony to correct, 73, 157, 178,
167, 251, 293, 209, 16, 110, 129.
B
Back to strengthen, or its Pains to ease, 46, twice, 66, 105, 152, 177, 212,
285. Baldness to cure, 5, 33, 97, 99, 154, 157, 184, twice, 217, 231, 256, 289,
thrice, 317. Balsamics. See Vulneraries. Barrenness to cure, 66 167 191 199
twice 201 264 ^69 291 twice, See Womb to cleanse, or brace. Barrenness to
cause, 175 273 293. Bath Astringent. See Astringents. -- Emollient 46. See
Emollients. -- Hysteric, 7 21 181. See Hysterics. -- Emmenagogic. See Menses to
provoke. Bees and Wasps Stings to cure, 5 22 23 158. Bees fatal to them, 46,
77, 106. Belching and Vomiting, 8, 22, 26, 69, 70. See Vomiting* Belching, and
Loathing to cure. Belly to loosen, or Laxatives, 5, twice, 8, 9, 11, 12, 59,
60, 86, 91, 96, 97, 103, thrice, 106, 107, 121, 133, 142, 146, 154, 160, 170,
178, 192, 195, 209, twice, 211, 225, 231, 232, 247, twice, 248, 249, 253, 299,
301, thrice, 308, 312, 313, 318, thrice. -- to bind, 59, 87, 225, twice, 256,
twice, 287, 309. See Fluxes to cure. -- swelled, 313. See Dropsy. -- inflamed
136 twice, 193. See Inflammations. Bilious Constitutions, good for, 34 128 132
twice, 136 158 179 207 247 255 287 301. See cooling and moistening, and cooling
and drying. -- bad for, 14 78 88 107 120 132 155 171 173 225 230, and all hot,
acrid, stimulant, saline Plants. Binders and Bracers. See Astringents. Birth
and afterbirth to expel, 6 7 twice, 21 26 36 44 66 67 100 106 113 133 142 153
159 171 thrice, 17^ 181 twice, 190 twice, 191 196 208 213 233 236 241 267 269
300 twice, 230 273 307 313 317. See Menses to provoke. Biting or Stinging of
Vipers, Serpents, Scorpions, etc. to cure, 26 29 39 47 68 93 102 113 120 twice,
122 twice, 126 130 133 135 twice, 173 181 187 191 199 209 211 221 230 240 245
246 248 thrice, 265 266 269 289 302 318 324 23. See Alexipharmacs, and Poison
to expel. Bite of Mad Dogs to cure 26 twice, 41 twice, 49 twice, 56 74 107 179
204 240 243 265 twice, 281. -- to recall its Poison, 77. -- of a Shrew, 120
327. Bite of a Spider, 189. Bladder excoriated, 217, 277 291. See Excoriations
and Erosions. -- pained 134 twice, 136. See Pains. -- inflamed. See
Inflammations. -- ulcerated, 147 twice, 178 twice, 192 196 200. See Ulcers. --
to blister, 211. Blisters of the Small Pox dangerous to cure, 97. Bleeding of
Wounds to cure, 69 twice, 84 157 165 twice, 167 175 180 198 199 twice, 205 210
224 243 246 292 312, See Blood to stop. Blood-shot Eyes, 82, See Eyes red and
inflamed. Blood to purify, 2 6 32 twice, 39 61 64 102 109 117 twice, 118 119
133 154 184 179 189 209 287 291 301 304. -- to stop, 30 81 93 209 228 268 275
286 290 301 323. See Astringents, and bleeding of Wounds to cure. -- coagulated
to dissolve, 30 86 108 121 133 148 159 177 183 204 211 213 223 270 278 280 281
284 286 twice, 307 twice, 309 313. -- Spitting and Vomiting to cure, 1 2 26 30
35 39 40 41 63 65 72 73 83 84 96 110 112 136 137 twice, 147 twice, 155 156
twice, 159 165 177 180 188 198 209 210 217 220 221 thrice, 224 225 228 231 243
thrice, 244 246 251 256 263 269 281 twice, 283 284 285 290 292 314 321. See
Astringents. Vulneraries. Bleeding at the Nose to stop, 1 26 41 65 74 82 158
165 166 177 180 198 237 207 221 twice, 228 246 252 262 263 265 281 283 twice,
285 290 292. Bleeding by Stool to cure, 1 2 4 5 thrice, 30 40 41 156 165 198
237 246 292 55 65 77 94 112 114 122 twice, 130 148 164 166 175 177 180 183 209
210 twice, 224 thrice, 231 237 243 259 192 twice, 193 203 207 214 254 256 257
268 281 twice, 282 283 284 285 291 301 317 323. See Fluxes. Bloody Urine, 2 14
26 41 96 112 156 165 166 178 198 twice, 228 237 244 246 255 280 281 283 twice,
285 292. Boils or Buboes, 18 41 43 44 50 51 66 107 twice, 118 122 149 150 210
twice, 225 thrice, 265 277. Boils habitual to prevent, 39. Bones broken to
strengthen soon, 42 86 twice, 152 286. See Limbs dislocated or fractured.
Bowels excoriated, 114 115 257. See Excoriations and Erosions. -- pained, 14
twice, See Cholic. Gripes. Bott-worms in Horses to kill, 132 134 192 273.
Breast pained, 14 265 twice, 319. See Pains. -- Women's Breasts inflamed, 5 134
254 257 318 319. See Inflammations. -- Breasts hard with coagulated Milk, 46 46
63 73 ^6 133 199 257 303. Breast, its hot Diseases, 5 291 318. Pleurisy, and
Lungs inflamed. Breath stinking to help, 7 70 78 82 191 264. Breath to sweeten,
after Onions or Garlic, 265 twice. Brain to strengthen, 57 101 102 133 199 248
26^ 265 291 304. See Cephalics. Breasts too large to brace up, 167. -- hard and
cold Tumors, 222. Breasts swelled to cure, 212 311. -- sore to cure, 114, 118
157 255. Bread to substitute in a Famine, 104 224 twice. Breeding-Womens
Longings, 129. Bruises, Blows, Hurts, or Falls, 2 10 16 35 57 73 81 105 113 135
148 160 165 180 twice, 181 189 205 223 thrice, 254 257 270 271 275 280 306,
309, 315 210. Bulimia, 327. Burns and Scalds, 5 8 35 39 85 97 twice, 98 104 110
145 157 158 164 168 173 176 177 twice, 205 twice, 210 225 226 234 242 254 312.
-- by Gunpowder, 255.
C
Cachexy, 2 18 21 70 102 117 120 146 155 178 189 211 303 304. Cancers, 51 73 81
108 143 twice, 144 148 163 168 169 192 212 222 242 257 292 301 323 325. See
Ulcers. Canker 39 twice, 204 212 292 308. Cantharides swallowed, 11 29 299.
Carminatives, 21 See Wind to expel. Catarrhs, 2 twice, 5 twice, 20 42 37 58 69
73 77 110 120 121 123 146 157 165 188 191 211 217 251 twice, 252 301 308 309
310 314 315 324. See Rheum. Cough. Caustics 125 294 298. Cephalics, 7 20 22 26
68 70 96 121 160 187 188 191 264 274 313 314 317. Chapp'd Hands or Feet, 249
304. Cherries, their Difference, 55. -- their Stones not to be swallowed, 59.
Chilblains, 164. See kibed Heels. Childrens Color to mend, 54 59 256. -- Male
or Female to conceive, 196 twice. Chin Cough, 163 224, 236 296. Chl^ros^s. See
Green Sickness. Cholera M^rbus, 83. See Vomiting. Cleansers, or Detergents, 50
62 63 66 122 128 132 133 153 160 twice, 168 175 179 187 195 196 200 204 208 213
214 219 227 257 264 277 280 284 290 291 300 twice, 308 312 318 328. Cloths to
keep from Moths, 200 twice, 327. -- to take out their Stains, 50. Coagulated
Blood under the Skin to dissolve, 20 23 44 61. See Coagulated. Cods swelled or
inflamed, 2 51 58 60 78 82 86 149 229 265 313 315 317. Coffee its Substitute,
62 twice. Colds. See Cough, Catarrh, Rheums. Cold phlegmati^ Diseases to cure,
6 7. See Inciders, Warmer^. Cold Humors on the Stomach to digest, 6 78 twice.
See Stomachica. -- Swelling to discuss, 88. See Swelling. -- of the Uterus or
Pudenda, 106. -- almost lost in 120, Cholic, 37 41 51 61 twice, 88 105 132 141
145 148 149 152 twice, 162 176 191 192 193 197 twice, 199 210 212 229 231 246
264 265 290 291 four times, 308 329. -- from hardened Excrements, 4 39 71 88 97
110 twice, and all softening, slippery, oily Things. Cholic flatulent, 7 21
twice, 23 26 33 39 twice, 46 thrice, 57 twice, 58 61 78 64 82 twice, 97 120 138
191 thrice, 265. See Wind to expel. Gripes. -- from sharp Humors, 4 14 97 100
110 thrice, 132. See Absorbents. Emollients. -- nephritic. See Stone. Anodynes.
Emollients. -- hysteric. See Hysterics. -- bilious. See bilious Constitutions.
-- phlegmatic. See Phlegm to dissolve. Inciders. Phlegm to expel. Bracers. --
from Ruptures. See Wind to expel. Looseners. -- convulsive or nervous. See
Convulsions. Hysterics. Complexion to mend, 102 twice, 317. Conception to
cause, 100. See Barrenness to cure. Consolidants. See Wounds. Consumptions* 5
18 24 32 35 39 41 63 65 twice, 7^ thrice, 73 86 twice, 87 110 twice, 132 twice,
137 156 189 200 220 251 254 263 269 295. See Cough. Contraction, 281 304 315
twice, 329. See Cramp. Convulsion. Contusions, 23 45 96 286. See Bruises.
Convulsions, 14 26 44 46 47 58 59 63 137 twice, 142 153 171 175 206 227 229 233
four times, 236 twice, 254 279 289 315 319 229. See Cramp. Falling Sickness.
Coolers, Dryers, and Binders, 3 16 25 27 40 77 86 89 134 150 157 159 252 175
twice, 205 209 232 234 243 244 245 250 283 28^ 285 twice, 303 321 322 323 225
292 200. Cooling and Moistening, 11 32 63 86 95 134 170 175 179 247 251 255 ^99
twice, 301 318. Cordials, 7 twice, 20 22 32 twice, 41 43 67 171 174 182 190 248
258 twice, 262 263 264 267 300 30^ 318. See Spirits to raise. Corns to cure,
102 120 158 170 twice, 259 321. Corpulency to prevent, 19 97 265 twice, 299.
Cosmetics, 286. See Freckles. Spots to take off the Face. Costiveness, 6 227.
See Looseners. Cough 26, 32 41 43 44 59 65 72 82 87 96 twice, 103 106 107 110
thrice, 115 1^8 120 twice, 121 122 132 133 138 140 142 145. See Consumptions.
Cough to excite, 4 5 212. See Inciders, Phlegm to dissolve, etc. Coryza, 123
twice. Crabs to kill, 70 twice, 308 twice. Cramp, 5 14 23 44 46 thrice, 63 96
100 102 103 110 121 122 142 153 155 171 150 177 178 191 200 206 209 210 twice,
227 229 233 254 279 twice, 281 289 308 314 315. See Convulsions. Cud-chewing
lost, 81. Cutters, or Inciders of Humors, ^62 264 296. See In^^ders.
D
Deafness, Noise, and Tingling in the Ears, 4 6 23 51 132 twice, 142 160 164
twice, 173 196 163 274 290 twice. Delivery to make easy, 23 54. See Birth to
expel. Delirium, 240. See Sleep to cause. Deobstruents. See Obstructions to
open. Detergents. See Vulneraries. Cleansers. Diabetes to cure, 76 200. -- bad
for, 28 279 twice. See Astringents. Diaphoretics, 3^* 43 51 52 56 23 26 121 168
181 218 265 277 335. See Sudorifics. Digestives, 46 62 88 96 115 153 190 twice,
206 211 220 221 259 289 290. Digestion. See Appetite. Dim Sight, 14. See Sight
dim. Discussives, 3 5 10 11 14 46 60 63 88 102 115 144 147 149 172 200 206 257
twice, 267 274 twice, 290 300 329. See Swellings to discuss. Diseases
contagious, 7 twice, 58 128 149 189 191 192 265 288 308 309 326. -- epidemic, 7
122 308 309. -- malignant, 7 71 192 265 twice, 277 308 309. See Fevers
malignant. -- pestilential, 7 191 192 265 277 288 308 309. See Fevers. Plague.
-- from cold Causes in the Phlegmatic, 6 7 20 21 57 264 twice. -- in the Hot
Bilious, and Sanguine, 8 11 46 303. See Bilious, etc. -- from drinking cold
Liquors, when hot, 80 twice. Dislocated or fractured Limbs to strengthen, 2.
Dribbling Urine by Drops, 8 14 113 121 160 184 230. See Urine. Diuretics, 4 13
twice, 14 twice, 15 17 22 28 31 34 35 39 52 57 58 61 87 88 117 142 159 189 198
204 223 225 291 311 318 102 120 121 128 twice, 163 181 187 214 218 221 238 276
301 315. See Urine to provoke. Danger of Diuretics too long continued, 14.
Dissolvers, 46 308. Dogs and Cats fatal to them, 308. Dropsy, 2 12 13 19 twice,
26 37 thrice, 38 42 thrice, 44 twice, 46 51 52 56 61 62 97 four times, 98 107
117 119 120 121 125 twice, 133 138 139 142 146 160 161 168 176 183 191 208
twice, 211 214 219 223 225 227 twice, 229 230 236 237 240 245 248 249 259
twice, 262 265 260 twice, 271 294 296 299 302 303 304 thrice, 307 thrice, 308
310 thrice, 317 327 thrice. See Diuretics. Obstructions to open. Drunkenness to
prevent, 4 26 164 173 231. -- to cause, 66 201. Dry or rainy Summers to
foresee, 288. Dullness or Drowsiness, 7 121 236 267 269 308 314. See Lethargy.
Dysury, 34 46 58 94 100 178 twice, 1^6. See Heat and Stoppage of Urine.
E
Ears pained, 9 18 23 twice, 130 174 199 twice, 225 242 250 265 274. --
inflamed, 160. See Inflammations. -- ulcerated, 2 114 154 164 twice, 217 225.
See Ulcers. Fleas, Worms, or Insects in them to kill, 16 114 121 145 200 269
308 twice. -- Noise in them. See Deafness. Emmenagogics, 21. See Menses to
provoke. Emollients, or Softeners, 4 5 23 35 46 79 97 108 111 115 175 176
twice, 194 four times, 222 227 318 319. Epilepsy. See Falling Sickness.
Errhins, 235 thrice, 239 290. Eruptions on the Skin, 54 92 twice, 222 303
twice. See Fevers eruptive. Scab. Itch. Excoriations, or Erosions, 5 twice, 46
65 175 178 226 twice, 257 261 268 291. Expectoration, or Spitting, to promote,
80 107 110 122 123 153 twice, 160 162 173 178 thrice, 187 189 191 twice, 211
212 221 227 226 239 252 259 260 267 274 276 277 296 twice, 313. Expulsives,
133. See Cordials. Rash. Eyes red or inflamed, 1 7 8 18 26 31 32 54 63 65 67 86
89 97 twice, 101 102 110 114 115 thrice, 132 twice, 134 138 141 144 twice, 149
158 166 190 192 194 196 198 207 230 243 246 251 255 262 263 twice, 277 292 301
303 307 317 twice. -- inflated, 20. -- swelled or bruised, 99. -- discolored
by Strokes or Falls, 160 thrice, 322 twice. -- when their Rheum excoriates the
Skin of the Cheeks, 327 twice. -- Films, Spots, Webs, etc. to take off, 18 55
twice, 68 87 117 125 132 144 253 290 300 315 317 321 322.
F
Faintings, 8 22 32 67 71 twice, 171 176 302. See Cordials. Falling Sickness,
or Epilepsy, 2 14 26 33 44 50 51 63 64 65 67 94 103 113 116 121 126 134 142
thrice, 143 149 159 160 168 twice, 171 174 twice, 177 twice, 179 202 204 twice,
207 208 four times, 211 twice, 230 twice, 233 thrice, 240 248 250 264 265 269
278 279 286 304 twice, 313 314 315 319. Falls and H^^ts, 1 10 16 31 twice, 58.
See Bruises. Febrifuges, 68 97 106 121 304. See Agues. Intermittents. Feet
swelled and puffed up, 97 225. See Cachexy. Fellon to expel, 16 66 149 226
twice. See Cordials. Fevers, 56 65 77 121 25^ 259 263 twice, 308 315. -- ardent
83 87 252 258 265 280 284. -- bilious and hypochondriac, 46 255 287. --
intermitting, 7 13 65. See Tertians, Quartans, etc. -- malignant, 32 39 43 67
89 102 122 144 156 192 220 255 259 265 291 304 327. -- pestilential, 43 twice,
52 67 287. See Plague. -- slow from Obstructions, 51 87 89 156 191 -- eruptive,
71. See Smallpox. Measles. -- Feverish Heat and Thirst to abate, 27 83 175 288
four tim^s, 318. See Thirst. -- Drink, 8 thrice, 32 63 77 114 129 132 158
twice, 209 247 288 301 318. Fish to boil firm, 8. -- to stupify, 294. Fistula
to cure, 48 268 94 280 281 291 323. See Ulcers. -- Lacrymal, 207 222 twice.
Fleas or Worms in the Ears to kill, 16. See Ears. Flesh to boil tender, 90 208.
-- fungous to waste, 125. Flies to expel or kill, 3 16 113 155 180 274. Fluor
albus, or Whites, 10 50 65 66 68 69 73 94 121 twice, 129 155 167 172 175 179
198 twice, 199 205 217 224 twice, 237 255 263 twice, 264 twice, 269 281 284 286
301 309 321. Fluxes, 4 25 30 33 34 35 46 60 65 twice, 69 73 77 81 83 84 90 91
twice, 92 112 121 128 136 137 139 140 157 158 165 166 175 177 180 184 192 193
twice, 210 224 thrice, 232 twice, 233 237 243 255 263 thrice, 268 282 283 284
twice, 285 twice, 286 292 309 twice, 321 323. See Astringents. Bloody Stools.
Foetus and Secundine to expel, 125. See Birth and Afterbirth. Fractures and
Luxations, when reduced, to cure, 73 99 112 135 192 twice, 205 217 281 twice,
306. See Bone^ broken. Freckles, Spots, Pimples, Wheals, etc., on the Face to
cure* 4 thrice, 5 7 18 twice, 41 44 54 55 59 63 84 85 90 twice, 92 99 108 110
138 143 thrice, 153 175 176 183 twice, 231 254 273 277 279 284 286 thrice, 289
301 twice, 307 317 twice. Friars Balsam, 69.
G
Gall overflowing, 200. See Bilious. Gangrenes, 162 twice, 191 221 265 270 280
281 327. See Mortification. Gnats to kill, or drive away, 104 142. Gonorrhoea
and Lues Venerea, or Clap and Pox, 2 5 42 66 136 147 157 175 243 255 283 twice,
293. See Venereal Disease. Gout, 11 18 26 twice, 39 four times, 44 45 56 73 98
106 121 twice, 122 132 133 141 159 168 210 thrice, 211 212 229 240 250 254 260
265 294 303 308 310 313. Green Sickness, 21 26 96 twice, 121 twice, 146 155 159
187 211 264 304 314. See Menses to provoke. Gripes, 4 5 7 14 21 26 29 46 twice,
58 61 63 68 71 82 89 110 thrice, 133 159 163 171 177 199 200 210 twice, 212 227
twice, 230 231 236 240 249 251 275 282 302 304 317. See Cholic. Wind to expel.
Gums and Teeth to fasten, 14 71 279. -- bleeding, 139. See Teeth loose.
Gunpowder to take out of the Skin, 8 255. See Burns.
H
Hair to make grow. See Baldness. -- to prevent its Growth, 117 210 2^5. -- to
turn it yellow, 39. -- to make it white, 56. -- to change it to black, 98 151.
-- to make it fair, 209. Hair to beautify it, 246. Hands shaking, or Tremors,
65 202 264. See Pal^y. Hardness to soften. See Emollients. Headache, 4 7 20 25
26 thrice, 59 67 70 thrice, 79 82 88 89 103 twice, 114 twice, 121 thrice, 123
132 154 171 179 188 twice, 198 199 222 225 233 244 254 259 265 269 290 291 308
311 314 315 twice, 317 thrice, 318. See Megrim. Vertigo. Palsy. Headache, to
cause, 25. Heartburn, 127 46. See Absorbents. Heat and Scalding of Urine, 4 5
63 82 94 136 175 222 255 twice, 256 303 318. Hectic, 4 63 117 158 179 280 303.
See Consumption. Hellebore how prepared and used, 142 six times. Haemorraghes,
41 50 twice, 69 121 123 128 129 130 132 166 167 168 263 282 285. See Bleeding.
Herpes to cure, 40 48 141. See Tetters. Hiccough, 82 88 thrice, 102 187 199
204. Hoarseness, 4 5 9 69 96 110 114 120 twice, 160 twice, 178 twice, 212 236
251 264 269 317 318. See Cough, etc. Hogs fatal to them, 222. Horses weary to
make go, 16 206, twice. -- foundered, 259. -- pricked, 210. -- Staggers, 257.
Hot Diseases of the Breast, 55 158. See Plurisy, etc. Humors adust, 32 117
249. -- to dissolve, 283. Humors bilious to expel, 47 56 70 92 106 114 117 121
154 161 184 196 197 223 249 294 303 312 313 318. -- phlegmatic to expel 70 106
121 125 142 152 160 184 249 256 thrice, 294 290 313 326. -- melancholic, 117
125 143 196. -- watery, 37 38 39 44 five times, 56 79 92 97 four times, 98 99
110 111 125 161 196 197 227 twice, 256 294 297 303 318. -- sharp to blunt, 4 5
twice, 63 73 110 115 144 147 175 178 twice, 179. Hypochondriac, 37 50 52 59 87
106 124 130 132 143 159 176 206 211 279 303 315. See Spleen. Melancholy.
Hysterics, 7 12 21 22 26 39 43 44 twice, 46 57 79 twice, 82 twice, 96 103 106
twice, 110 121 124 132 137 162 twice, 163 174 173 176 187 191 196 208 211
twice, 236 264 265 thrice, 274 289 twice, 291 299 308 314 315 twice, 317 327.
I
Jaundice, 2 7 11 13 14 17 25 twice, 26 twice, 31 32 37 42 twice, 46 50 55 56
twice, 62 63 65 twice, 71 79 87 89 90 92 95 100 101 117 121 130 132 133 134 145
146 154 155 twice, 159 161 168 172 179 181 183 185 187 190 196 200 207 212 220
221 223 224 230 thrice, 236 238 239 248 249 266 267 281 287 290 291 twice, 299
301 twice, 317 twice, 293 296 307 twice, 315 318 327 four times. Jaws inflamed,
108. -- swelled, 224 231. See Quinsey. Iliac Passion, 88 110 129 131 311. See
Cholic. Inciders, 21 43 89 91 92 96 104 117 183 199 201 227 238 209 249 259 268
302. Incontinence of Urine, 2 229 281 twice. See Urine to cause, or keep.
Inflammations, 5 twice, 8 10 12 twice, 16 36 46 63 65 66 68 69 73 86 87 89
twice, 95 97 twice, 110 114 129 132 134 144 thrice, 147 149 158 twice, 167 175
thrice, 177 twice, 179 180 184 twice, 196 210 219 222 229 232 242 252 255 258
263 267 285 287 288 299 318 322 323 325. Inflamed Breasts, 5. See Breasts. --
Lungs, 8 63 110 132. See Lungs inflamed. Piles, 9. See Piles. -- Uterus, 5 110.
See Uterus. Insects to kill, 145. Joints dry and hard, 4 99. -- pained and
stiff, 60 65 85 96 110 115 133 twice, 142 152 164 279 twice, 308 twice, 260. --
weak and relaxed, 84 96 135 164 208 217 286. Issues to cause run, 164 twice,
227. Itch to cure, 18 63 90 twice, 117 121 142 14^ 155 196 239 277 287 291. See
Scab.
K
Kernels, Knots, etc. about the Neck and Throat to discuss, 39 65 78 86 twice,
110 134 184 208 twice, 209 211 291 309. Kibed Heels to cure, 14 147 219 225.
See Chilblains. Kidneys and Ureters, to cleanse, 5 thrice, 7 42 64 300 301
twice. See Stone. Urine to provoke. -- inflamed, 5 twice. See Inflammations. --
ulcerated, 268. See Ulcers. -- to ulcerate, 155. -- pained from Cold, 14 twice,
23. King's Evil, 5 8 10 14 37 44 twice, 46 55 72 thrice, 86 107 108 four times,
116 twice, 118 121 124 130 twice, 135 twice, 148 177 180 184 211 219 222 227
237 twice, 239 254 257 264 276 twice, 289 306 307 308 316 320 322.
L
Labor in Childbearing, 71 103 107 131 134 155 171 206 267. See Birth and
Afterbirth. -- to make easy, 256. Laxatives, 262 263 290 twice, 296. See
Looseners. Legs ulcerated to cure, 36 63 93 97 142 twice, 243 thrice, 270
twice, 291 311. See Ulcers. Leprosy, 79 103 twice, 118 171 191 211 four times,
264 269 274 308, etc. Leucophlegmatia, 38. See Cachexy. Dropsy. Liver to
cleanse from tough Humors, 14 15 18 79 102 127 199 300 303 326 327. -- its
Obstructions to open, 2 4 6 7 13 17 19 twice, 20 199 211 226 238 253 271 300
303 317. See Jaundice. Obstructions. -- its Heat to cool, 63 137 287 288. See
Inflammations. -- its Swellings to discuss, 79. See Swellings. -- to
strengthen, 70 90. Lochia to bring down. See Menses. Looseners, or Laxatives, 5
59 60 86 91 ^6 97 103 twice, 106 107 121 133 142 146 154 160 170 178 190 195
209 twice, 211 225 231 247 twice, 248 249 253 299 301 thrice, 308 313 318 four
times. See Purgatives. Loosenesses to cure or stop, 27 34 46 77 83 89 twice,
112 114 124 129 166 192 205 207 209 217 221 224 231 243 251 twice, 258 264 282
292 308 309 twice, 327. See Fluxes. Bloody Fluxes. Longings of Breeding Women,
8 129. Lungs stuffed, 17 102 106 120 122 160 twice, 184 188 196 twice, 267 277
291 twice, 296 301 308 twice. -- inflamed, 8 114 twice, 132 179 41 63 twice,
110 117. See Inflammations. -- tubercled, or knotted, 132. -- ulcerated, 73 86
104 twice, 105 122 156 180 182 203 226 twice, 240 thrice, 263 268 291. Lunacy,
248. See Madness.
M
Madness, 2 thrice, 22 50 142 twice, 143 175 twice, 239 311. -- to cause, 147.
Madness, Melancholy, 8 10 22 twice, 32 twice, 57 117 121 138 142 twice, 143 159
twice, 184 197 twice, 240 249 293 317 324 326. Megrim, 51 103 106 114 225 231
254 twice, 265 290 267. See Headache. Melilot why used after Blisters, 193.
Members or Limbs dislocated or fractured, 2 39 73 twice, 96 210 249 280 289
300. See Dislocations. Fractures. Menses and Lochia: Women's monthly Terms, and
Child* bed Purgations, to promote, 2 4 5 7 twice, 13 14 15 18 20 21 twice, 22
23 26 29 32 36 43 44 46 twice, 49 52 56 58 61 twice 62 66 70 twice, 77 96 100
102 twice, 106 four times, 113 118 119 120 121 twice, 122 123 124 132 135 142
twice, 143 145 twice, 146 154 155 160 163 164 thrice, 168 173 176 181 twice,
183 184 189 191 196 200 206 208 210 211 213 214 221 twice, 233 236 238 240 241
248 twice, 259 260 265 267 269 270 273 274 276 278 289 twice, 290 300 302 304
twice, 307 314 twice, 315 316 twice, 327. See Birth and Afterbirth to expel.
Menses or Lochia to check or stop, 1 2 10 30 34 40 41 48 65 69 73 84 91 93 94
112 140 147 156 158 159 166 167 175 twice, 183 192 twice, 199 200 203 205 207
209 twice, 211 twice, 224 twice, 225 227 229 230 237 243 251 252 255 263 268
269 281 283 284 285 292 309 321. See Bleeding to stop. Mercury lodged in the
Body to expel, 96 102 221. Milk in Women's Breasts to increase, 5 7 41 54 57 88
twice, 102 123 138 187 295 324. -- to diminish, or put it back, 147 230 244
250. -- its Curdling to prevent, 199. -- curdled to dissolve, 54 62 199.
Mollifiers, 46. See Emollients. Morphew to cure, 85 120 153 307. See Scurf.
Mushrooms their Antidote, 102 120. See Antidote, Mortification, 122. See
Gangrene. Mouth to cleanse, 160 289. -- its sores to heal, 28 34 63 97 153 177
224 25^ 281 287. See Ulcers of the Mouth and Privy Parts.
N
Neck a Crick in it, 187. Nephritic Pains, 4 5 twice, 7 thrice, 14 46 twice, 51
59 88 102 110 120 162 twice, 163 169 191 225 238 240 246 265 304. See Cholic.
Stone to expel. Nervous Plants, or Nervines, 7 20 23 26 43 52 70 121 187 199
21^ 213 233 235 236 264 268 270 302 327 229. See Cephalics. Nervous Diseases, 2
7 20 21 23 26 93 twice, 103 106 171 209. See the Diseases of the Head. Nerves
friendly to, 46 67 99 133 163 twice, 171 187 188 191 208 228 254 265 300 315
twice, 329. Nettles stinging, 221 twice, 308. See Stinging. Nipples chapp'd to
heal, 5 114 148 217 256 302. Night Pains, 102. See Pains to ease. Nose to make
bleed, 74 198* -- its Ulcers to cure, 242. -- its Bleeding to stop. See
Bleeding at the Nose. -- Blood to stop. Haemorrhages. Nuts hurtful, 140.
O
Obstructions of the Liver, Mesentery, and Viscera, to open, 2 4 6 7 13 17 18
21 25 26 32 37 41 42 44 twice, 50 51 55 56 61 70 71 80 89 twice, 100 102 103
104 109 117 120 121 122 125 128 132 133 183 184 187 188 200 twice, 211 223 225
230 233 240 249 259 264 twice, 267 281 291 303 304 307 309 315 327. See Liver
to cleanse. Jaundice. Cachexy. -- of the Spleen and Viscera, 42 44 twice, 56 70
89 100 102 103 109 122 125 133 188 206 249 284 291 303 315. -- of the Kidneys
and Ureters, 42 89 100 102 103 109. See Stone and Gravel. Kidneys to cleanse.
-- of the Womb, 41 44 70 188 264 291. See Menses and Lochia. Ozaena, 164 twice.
Opium Antidote to it, 106. See Antidote.
P
Pain to ease, 5 46 twice, 73 97 110 four times, 114 115 twice, 147 twice, 175
176 twice, 193 194 209 twice, 210 220 222 226 234 251 four times, 252 254 257
265 twice, 267 twice, 275 300 twice, 307. See Anodines. -- of the Eyes, 103
267. See Eyes red and inflamed. -- of the Ears, 9 54 92 103 145 196 267. See
Ears. -- of the Teeth, 103. See Tooth ach. Pain of the Sides or Breast, 8 58
122 127 152 194 28^ twice, 313. See Stitch. -- of the Belly, 20 46 57 139 152
265 268 28^ twice. See Gripes. Cholic. -- of the Breast, 58 265 261 318. See
Pleurisy. Stitch. Cough. -- of the Back, 318 324. See Back to strengthen. -- of
the Womb, 103 121 194 265 267 278 300. See Uterus. Hysterics. -- flatulent, 103
194 265. See Cholic flatulent. Wind to expel. -- of the Legs and Arms, 73 76
160 208 251. See Night Pains. Scurvy. -- of the Kidneys and Bladder, 103 138
194 267 318 324. See Bladder pained, or excoriated. -- of the Gout* 11 122 195
299 308 212. See Gout* -- of the Nerves and Joints, 121 208 300 304. See
Joints. Nerves. -- arthritic, 97 twice, 279 308 317. See the last Article
Joints. Gout. Pain of the Liver and Spleen, 58 265 317. See Liver. Spleen.
Jaundice. Obstructions. -- of Wounds, 300. See Wounds. Palsy, 22 23 26 twice,
44 65 67 86 103 twice, 141 153 171 174 179 183 187 191 207 211 thrice, 254
twice, 261 264 twice, 269 thrice, 270 274 300 308 twice, 314 315. See Apoplexy,
etc. Passages to render smooth and slippery. See Emollients. Relaxers.
Palpitation, 8 22 67 137 177 206 263 267 302. See Cordials. etc. Parotids, 5
107 202 269. See Kernels. Pectorals, 21 39 44 102 103 110 117. See Cough.
Pleurisy. People mild to render fierce, 201. Perspiration to promote, 199 220
225 327. See Diaphoretics. Pestilential Diseases, 7 32 265 302 309 515. See
Plague. Cont^gious Diseases. Phlegm to thin and dissolve, 7 18 21 44 45 118 124
138 160 163 173 181 191 201 206 227 259 260 264 279 290. See Expectoration.
Attenuants. Inciders. -- to thicken, 5 178 252. See Ca^arrh. Rheum, Anodynes.
-- phlegmatic Persons good for them, 120. Piles inflamed, 9 54 73 108 110 114
134 144 219 22^ 238 239 241 286 307 319. -- swelled, 18 34 36 73 108 twice, 210
twice, 217 222 225 226 239 275 286. -- painful, 60 63 73 97 twice, 108 thrice,
114 12^ 134 157 21^ 224 241 249 256 286 275 307. Piles to open, 107 173 222 226
229 290. -- bleeding, or ulcerated, 60 63 twice, 65 7^ 13^ 183 198 twice, 210
thrice, 221 237 239 twice, 286. Phrenzy, 14 103 twice, 158 252 twice, 255 265.
See Coolers. Phymosis, 219. Plague to prevent, 7 18 23 30 41 52 55 96 117 120
121 122 twice, 125 149 150 163 164 176 189 190 192 240 264 268 twice, 278. See
Alexipharmacs, etc. -- to cure, 39 51 52 55 122 twice, 126 159 190 278 202 509
115 twice, 316 317. See Sudorifics. Pleurisy, 5 twice, 19 39 44 46 twice, 103
110 thrice, 117 127 132 139 173 176 178 185 187 194 twice, 202 212 221 thrice,
225 twice, 251 252 twice, 260 318* See Pecto^^ls. Cough. Inflammation.
Expectoration. Polypus, 18 249 173. Poison, 53 157 221 78 94. -- to expel, 4 7
18 32 71 120 121 12^ twice, 128 142 twice, 149 150 154 162 163 193 212 220 230
265 289 197 309 twice, 312 316 317. See Antidote. Privy Parts inflamed, 193.
See Cods, etc. To purge the Blood. See Blood to purify. Purgatives, 25 90 142
146 164 209 223 twice, 231 286 294 298 299 thrice, 308 316 318. See Laxatives.
Looseners. Putrefaction to prevent, 12 66 71 93 122 162 248 264 279 twice, 284
287 289 299 304 308 325.
Q
Quinsey, 18 65 71 81 twice, 93 97 158 twice, 160 164 thrice, 180 210 216 219
226 252 254 257 277 280 twice, 317 twice, 322 325 327. See Throat. Kernels.
Inflammation. Quartans, 39 51 97 102 121 123 142 143 144 159 191 192 202 211
249 260 307 317 twice, 327 twice. Quotidians, 18 97 twice, 123 1^1 327 twice.
See Agus. Intermitting.
R
(...), 68 132. See Cordials. Ratifee, 9. Repercussives, or Repellents, 219.
See Attenuants. Emollients and Astringents. Relaxers, 46 97 176 194 222 227
307. See Emollients and Anodynes. Rejuvenation, 22. Resolvents, 15 97 102 108
110 173 194 four times, 198 227 270 312 153 307. Rheumatism, 20 132 152 193 211
300 310. See Pains. Rheums, or Defluxions on the Eyes, Nose, Mouth, Jaws,
Throat, Breast or Lungs, 23 26 twice, 30 32 33 51 52 70 82 93 110 134 140 157
160 165 175 178 191 193 twice, 203 217 246 251 252 255 263 264 269 285 292 298
308 314 327 twice. Rickets, 165 137. See Aperients. Vulnera --. Ringworms, 48
50 55 90 108 117 120 153 158 179 227 265 277 287 308. Rigor of chronic Fevers,
243, etc. Ripeners, 5 110 thrice, 115. See Swellings to suppurate. Ruptures, 1
18 twice, 30 65 69 73 80 84 86 95 96 99 105 114 122 135 thrice, 136 148 150 165
167 179 twice, 180 185 198 200 203 205 207 210 217 224 twice, 226 twice, 229
243 twice, 266 268 twice, 275 281 284 286 289 306 309.
S
Scabs, or Scabbiness, to cure, 23 48 50 53 55 63 65 89 twice, 96 108 117
twice, 121 132 142 thrice, 154 155 165 twice, 168 179 196 211 265 277 thrice,
287 291 twice, 301 308 thrice, 319. See Scurvy. Itch. Scald-Head, 55. See Scab.
Scurf, etc. Scalding and Heat of Urine, 4 5. See its Heat and Scalding, Dysury,
etc. Scars of Wounds to take out, 286. Schirru^* 37 44 144 twice, 155 176.
Scurfs, Scabs, Dandriff, etc* 24 53 90 twice, 118 twice, 120 142 twice, 184 2^7
261 273 277 294 304 309. See Scald-Head. Scabs. ^etters, etc. Scurvy, 2 118
twice, 36 37 51 55 56 71 twice, 90 93 109 119 121 158 176 185 203 211 twice,
225 238 239 241 twice, 255 259 twice, 260 279 287 308 310 311 325. See Blood to
purify. Scabs. Obstructions, etc. Seed to increase, 4 7 14 62 twice, 78 261 311
twice. See Venery to excite. Seed to decrease. See Venery to diminish or
extinguish. Seminal Weaknesses; nocturnal, involuntary, too frequent Emissions,
71 87 175 224 229 243 301. See Astringents. Back to strengthen. Senses to
strengthen, 22 264 267 269 304. See Brain to strengthen. Sheep fatal to, 262.
-- to cure of the Rot, 309. Sciatica, 6 13 14 twice, 22 44 51 56 65 73 86 96 99
100 103 116 118 121 132 142 twice, 144 147 161 163 183 200 208 211 212 213 214
229 250 251 253 257 260 265 267 274 286 289 308 312 313. See Gout. Pains to
ease. Pains arthritic. Sight to sharpen, strengthen, or restore, 14 57 58 59 96
101 thrice, 102 twice, 121 142 250 261 264 265 twice, 303 313 315 twice, 317.
See Brains to strengthen. Eyes. Films and Spots to take off. Sight bad for, 88
264 274. Sinews dry and shrinking, 46 277. -- numb and stiff, 14 22 twice, 39
46 110. -- strained, 63 85 205 286. -- contracted, 170. -- cut asunder 176. See
Emollients. Astringents. Vulneraries. Skin discolored, 56 81 107 118 153 154
160 204 twice, 261 265 286 322. -- blue, black, or livid, 29 32 183 200 twice,
230 twice, 235 327. See Bruises. Blood coagulated. Sleep to cause, 61 138 147
175 five times, 225 231 251 thrice, 252 255 263. -- to prevent, 52 236. --
disturbed, 102. Small Pox and Measles to expel, 39 71 102 107 118 126 169 180
190 thrice, 220 221 267 311. Smell lost, 123. Sneezing to provoke, 47 50 66 116
118 124 142 162 164 174 188 196 207 211 227 235 261 294 308. -- to soften, 5 23
46. See Emollients. Sores hot, 65 78 80 165 196. -- on the Head, 265. Speech
lost to recover, 125 171 179 188 211 233 235. etc. Spirits to raise, 7 14 22 32
41 96 121 171 192 21^ 252 256 263 267 300 twice, 301 324 326. See Cordials.
Hypo. Hysterics. Spitting to promote, 21 10^. See Expectoration. Errhines.
Spleen, 18 19 37 twice, 58 92 98 103 104 105 121 125 138 160 164 181 185 211
229 300 304 317 327. See Aperients. Obstructions to open. -- swelled, 79 118
130 twice, 137 183 twice, 184. -- hard 200 260 261 290 291 293 317 325.
Stimulants, 2 18 19 20 21 23 56 89 96 102 137 118 145 146 154 122 160 181 185
191 198 200 211 212 220 238 249 259 260 265 274 289 296 298 314. See
Attenuants. Stinging of Bees and Wasps, 5 22 23 158. Stinging of Serpents and
Vipers, 23. See Bites. Stitches in the Sides or Breast, 8 26 40 46 62 82 96 106
110 113 121 127 169 173 202 221 265 twice. Stomachics, 2 7 four times, 21 25
twice, 26 41 46 51 57 58 97 102 120 121 132 155 160 162 twice, 163 171 181 188
191 twice, 199 thrice, 200 211 twice, 217 236 246 256 260 264 265 274 310 313
314 326 327. See Appetite. Stomach pained, 14 20 21 46 70 122 132 136 156
twice, 191 twice, 199 twice, 200 265 327. -- raw, crude, and relaxed, 21 twice,
23 thrice, 102. See Stomachics. Astringents after Vomits. -- flatulent, 82. See
Wind to expel. -- hot 137 154 219 223 255 287 2^8. See Coolers. -- cold, 129
289. See all warm Stomachics. -- weak, 67 78 87 96 203 256 258 260 263 265 270
308 327, twice. -- cold, moist, and windy, 78 163 308 327. Stone, Gravel, Sand,
or Mucus to expel, 2 4 5 five times, 7 9 14 twice, 19 26 28 36 39 four times,
41 42 44 46 thrice, 48 59 61 twice, 62 65 70 71 88 89 twice, 92 96 100 102 104
106 110 112 113 118 119 127 128 130 131 134 139 141 twice, 146 148 154 156
twice, 159 twice, 162 163 twice, 164 thrice, 173 176 177 184 191 197 twice, 198
200 207 208 211 213 219 221 twice, 224 225 thrice, 229 230 twice, 231 thrice,
234 236 238 twice, 240 241 246 247 254 twice, 259 five times, 260 twice, 261
265 266 276 284 286 288 290 thrice, 292 twice, 300 four times, 301 303 307 308
twice, 312 317 318 twice. See Urine to provoke. Stoppage of Urine, and
Strangury, 2 4 7 14 37 41 46 54 106 110 131 133 138 154 171 210 211 234 250 265
289 twice, 293 304 307. See Urine to provoke. -- after Blisters, 5 twice.
Sudorifics, or Sweat to cause, 7 twice, 19 30 39 43 46 50 51 twice, 52 67
twice, 97 thrice, 117 121 122 126 133 163 164 181 187 190 191 192 200 222 240
248 252 270 277 twice, 291 twice, 302 thrice, 304 315. See Alexipharmacs.
Plague to cure. Surfeits, 7 twice, 99 217. See Stomachics. Obstructions to
open. Swellings to discuss, or repel, 3 5 10 11 24 46 twice, 61 66 68 74 93 98
108 114 133 135 152 177 twice, 191 199 211 twice, 222 223 227 230 234 257 270
290 299 302 311 313 318 326 329. See Discussives. -- to suppurate, 5 7 10 46 63
85 88 107 twice, 110 thrice, 118 276 thrice, 177 twice, 189 202 216 twice, 225
227 287 318 115. -- inflammatory, 3 27 63 97 234 267. -- white 208 327. --
cancerous, 41. See Cancer. -- Gout, 89 97 267. See Gout. -- hot, red, and
painful, 5 24 46. -- from Cold, 7 16 46 327. -- of the Womb to discuss, 79 154.
-- of Women's Breasts, 155. Sweating to stop, 263 twice. Suffusion of the Eyes,
101 102 240.
T
Teeth to fasten, 65 187 twice, 241 256. See Gums and Teeth. -- to set on Edge,
255. -- rotten, 265. See Scurvy. Tenesmus, 210. See Flux. Looseness. Tertian
Agues, 20 159 161 200 264 260 317 twice, 327 twice. See Agues. Testicles
inflated, 23. -- inflamed, 134 144 147 217. See Cods swelled. Tetters, 24 44 48
50 53 55 90 108 127 120 143 154 155 158 179 191 196 208 222 227 265 277 287 291
304 307 308. Thirst to quench, 25 59 67 77 twice, 83 132 145 158 180 209 232
247 287 301 twice, 311. See Feverish Persons. Thrush to cure, 65 177 102 247
281 315. See Ulcers in the Mouth and Throat. Tongue parched, rough and dry, 9
158 231 256 twice. -- swelled, 173. Toothache, 5 14 twice, 16 25 26 33 53 67 82
92 107 118 142 160 171 188 twice, 191 198 209 211 224 twice, 235 238 242 243
twice, 266 269 280 284 290 298 308 311 317. Throat sore, 5 65 71 102 153 twice,
165 221 238 254 281 285. See Ulcers in the Throat. -- inflamed, 65. Tremors,
102 171 168 twice, 264. Tumors flatulent to discuss, 88. -- of the Yard, 198.
-- cold, 277. Tympany, 82 thrice, 173 181 210. See Dropsy.
U V W
Warmers, 6 7 20 21 23 29 66 265. Warts to cure, 2 54 55 107 158 190 twice, 196
210 twice, 246 250 265 2^4 313. Watching from Rheum, 5 175 twice, 314. See
Rheum. Catarrh. Sleep. Weariness to relieve, 3 26 46 141 twice, 168 208 twice,
317. Venereal Disease, 39 42 50 66 73 136 163 222 270 281 298 twice. Venery to
excite, 14 17 21 61 62 100 118 168 173 191 211 twice, 221 225 261 267 274 311.
-- to diminish, 88 twice, 138 144 175 thrice, 199 255 263 265 twice, 317 327.
Venom, or Poison* to expel, 14 15 93 100 324. See Poison. Antido^e. Vertigo, or
Swimming of the Head, 44 51 57 61 67 71 82 94 103 142 twice, 143 169 171 twice,
174 177 179 199 202 233 236 254 264 273 291 304 314 315. Wens their Growth to
check, 122 208. Whitlow to cure, 44 149 226 twi^e, 320. Wind to expel, 6 7 21
23 29 46 twice, 57 78 82 102 103 115 138 160 163 twice, 181 188 191 199 200 220
230 265 twice, 274 289 304 315. Wines, or Ale, to cure, or give a fine Flavor
to them, 20 41 192 237 180 224. See Ale. Witchcraft to prevent or cure, 149
twice, 159 282. Ulcers to heal, in general, 1 2 9 10 15 16 18 26 31 39 41 44 50
51 53 (...) 63 65 69 73 80 81 89 93 103 twice, 104 (...) 114 116 twice, 117 121
twice, 122 (...) 133 135 twice, 136 137 138 145 148 (...) 157 twice, 162 twice,
163 164 166 176 (...) 181 200 204 twice, 212 213 214 217 (...) 222 225 226 239
243 253 257 265 (...) 270 277 twice, 280 281 twice, 284 289 291 twice, 292
twice, 294 297 301 302 twice, 304 twice, 305 306 308 four times, 307 309 twice,
312 315 322 323 325. See Vulneraries. -- of the Mouth, Throat, and privy Parts,
34 84 86 93 128 132 133 148 180 192 209 thrice, 242 268 twice, 280 twice, 289
300 301 305 311. -- of the Bowels, 18. See Bowels. -- of the Kidneys or
Bladder, 156 twice, 291. See Bladder and Kidneys. -- of the Womb and Yard, 158
226 291. -- not to spread, 41 78 110 118 132 144 154 169 204 257. -- of the
Ear, 2. See Ears. Womb to cleanse, 4 5 18 22 23 29 41 44 50 160 196 269 304 314
315 324. See Menses and Lochia. -- fallen down, 217 219 224. -- Hardness to
soften, 64 98 196 265 329. See Emollients. -- inflamed, 5 177. See
Inflammations. -- and Kidneys or Sides inflated, 194 200. See Wind to expel.
Vomiting, or Spitting of Blood, 1 2 69 177 180 192 twice. See Blood-Spitting.
-- Vomiting to cause, 11 12 13 44 46 51 85 116 134 twice, 142 146 229 254 259
260 286 295 296 308 316. -- Belching and Loathing to cure, 8 19 21 27 30 70 77
88 83 89 121 136 165 193 198 169 200 205 207 225 258 286 327. See Stomachics.
Worms to expel, 67 108 255 265 312 313. -- to kill and expel out of the Body,
26 30 39 43 52 56 70 78 96 104 106 112 120 121 122 twice, 126 134 145 146 154
155 159 160 161 163 172 198 199 200 202 206 209 211 221 225 229 231 260 261 265
270 273 289 304 twice. -- to bring out of their Holes in the Earth, 155 316. --
or Flies on Beasts Sores to kill, 12 16 299 308. Wormwood not to affect the
Eyes, 327. Wounds to cure, 1 2 16 26 31 36 41 46 48 51 55 56 64 64 69 70 73 77
80 81 84 86 89 99 104 105 108 112 118 122 twice, 128 130 132 133 135 137 145
146 148 149 150 151 156 157 twice, 159 160 161 163 165 166 167 177 179 180 181
191 198 203 ^04 205 207 221 twice, 224 226 twice, 232 234 237 241 243 248 277
270 271 272 275 280 281 283 284 286 291 twice, 295 297 306 308 312 315 317 319
322 323 325 326 328. Urine bloody, 2 14 73. See bloody Urine. Urine to provoke,
6 7 15 18 21 23 28 29 31 43 46 twice, 48 50 57 58 61 62 64 68 78 87 89 94 96
100 102 103 119 120 121 123 132 135 154 160 162 164 168 171 177 181 183 185 188
189 191 194 198 200 206 211 213 217 221 224 225 229 230 238 248 253 256 259 267
269 270 twice, 274 275 281 289 twice, 291 296 302 307 314 327 318. See Stone.
-- involuntary to cure, 30 145 156 189 198 243 309. See Incontinence of Urine.
-- greasy at Top, 208. -- to make by Drops, 113 121 160 184 192. See Dribbling.
Uterines, 7 13 22 43 52 58 70 121 154 155 175 183 187 199 201 206 208 236 302
313 314. See Womb. Uterine Fluxes, 180 224. See Menses and Lochia, to stop.
Vulneraries, 1 2 5 7 9 31 39 56 63 65 67 69 73 85 86 89 104 113 122 128 132 134
14^ 148 159 twice, 166 167 168 179 182 183 192 195 200 205 207 221 226 268 270
271 272 280 28^ 283 286 291 297 304 306 308 309 312 317 318. Uvula relaxed to
cure, 83 84 93 97 137 165 211 221 242 265 278 305 327.
AN INDEX of the NOTES: Wherein the Number of Plants, and not Pages, is
referred to.
No STONE and Gravel 5 Dropsy 19 Catarrhs 20 Headache 26 Excess of the Terms 41
-- of the Whites 41 Pains of the Womb 41 -- Flatulency of it 41 -- its
Haemorrhages 41 -- its Inflammations 41 -- its Relaxation 41 its Suffocation 41
Cholic 46 After-Pains 46 Blood to stop 48 Spitting of Blood 48 Vomiting of
Blood 48 Bloody Urine 48 Lochia excessive 48 Vertigo 71 Jaundice 87
Obstructions 98 Tumors 98 Schirruses of the Spleen 98 Eyes their Diseases 101
Worms 104 Menses obstructed 106 Lochia 106 Afterbirth to bring down 106
Breasts hard to soften 106 -- pained to ease 106 -- inflamed 106 -- cancerated
106 -- loose and flabby 106 Uvula relaxed 106 Hard Labor 106 Milk to increase
106 -- to decrease 106 Piles pained 108 Piles swelled 108 -- inflamed 108 --
dried, or bleeding too much 108 King's Evil 116 Toothache 120 Teeth eaten away
120 -- to bring out 120 -- to fasten 120 -- Worms to kill 120 -- set on Edge
120 Consumptions 132 Venery to excite 173 Ischias, or Sciatica 208 Suppression
of U^ine 208 Ulcers ^23 Wounds 220 Ears their Pain and Noise 225 Stomach its
Diseases 236 For a Looseness 246 Bloody Flux 246 Tenesmus 246 Ruptures 266
Pleurisy 277 Scurvy 277 Scorbutic Pains 277 -- Spots, etc. 277 Tetters 277 Itch
277 Fevers continual 288 -- intermitting 288 -- Quartan 288 -- Tertian 288
Hiccough 288 Thirst 288 Watchings 288 Vomitings 288 Warts 294 Convulsions 315
Epilepsy. 315
APPENDIX.
HAVING said enough in the Preface of my Medicina Britannica to recommend the
Use of Simples, or British Remedies, for the Benefit of the Poor especially, I
shall here give some general and necessary Directions; first, for the
gathering, preserving, drying, and keeping of Simples; then for the
Preparations, Uses and Doses of the several Forms of private or Family
Medicines; a Thing which has hitherto been omitted, or neglected in Essays of
this Kind, and thereby, in a great Measure, either frustrated the whole Design,
or by ignorant and injudicious Management rendered it abortive; but that Defect
being here supplied, it may be hoped will much contribute to make this Work of
far more extensive Use and Benefit.

Of the gathering, drying and preserving of Plants.
Without any Regard to Astrological Whims of Herbs being under certain Planets,
or to be taken up at fixed Ages of the Moon; we are to gather them when in
their full Vigor and Perfection in Smell, Color, Taste and Growth, and their
Vessels full of mild well concocted Juice, some when they begin to flower,
others when in full Flower, as Fumitory, Lesser Centaury, Pennyroyal, Hyssop,
Thyme, wild Thyme, Majoram, Origanum, Germander, Ground Pine, Calamint, etc.
their Vessels not being yet sticky or woody. They must be cut down in a
Sun-shiny or dry Day, when they are free from Moisture or Dew; this must happen
at several Times and Seasons, according to the Growth of different Plants. All
Herbs that afford little or nothing in Distillation, from the Grossness,
Viscidity, or firm Attachment of their Earth and Salts, or whose Parts are
separated with Difficulty, as Astringents, Bitters, Emollients, etc. may be
dried in the Sun, but such as consist of thin, easily separable, volatile
Parts, as the aromatic, cephalic and uterine, and ^doriferous Flowers, which
readily send their Virtues over the Helm, must be dried in the Shade, spread
out on a dry boarded Floor, and several times turned over; or if they have dry,
sticky Stalks, tied up with Packthread in small Handfuls, and hung up. When
dried, both Herbs and Flowers (woody Stalks excepted) should be put clean up in
Paper Bags, and laid up in Drawers or Chests in a dry Place, till used: If
Plants are gathered too young, they contain little else beside a watery, acid
Juice, having attained neither Maturity of Growth, Principles, nor Virtue; if
too old, most of their Principles are either descended to the Root, or exhaled,
they becoming dry, woody, and fibrous. But some will not dry at all, as
Aquatics, Antiscorbutics and succulent Plants; these are only gathered for
present Use, as Watercresses, Brooklime, Scurvy Grass, Housleek, Orpine, etc.
for they will either continue growing till their Juices are wholly exhausted,
as Orpine, or they will run into Putrefaction, or Fermentation. -- Roots should
not be taken up after they have put out their Sprouts, or Stem, till that and
^ne Leaves begin to wither and dry, for during that time the Root is sapless,
tough and pithy: But when they are full of Sap, and of proper Age, they should
be taken up, cleared, sliced, put on Thread, and hung up to dry. The Roots of
perennial Plants should be taken up in the Spring before they bud forth, and
Annuals in the latter End of Harvest, when their Stalk and Leaves are fallen;
Roots at these two Seasons, are full of Juice, and if of proper Age, their
Principles and Virtues are come to Maturity, but if Annuals stand longer, they
are apt to be killed with the Frost, or rot in the Earth. Some Roots indeed may
be taken up at any time, Winter excepted, as of Sorrel, Althaea, Dragons,
Aserum, Sowbread, Bugloss, etc. Bulbous, succulant Roots, will keep but one
Season, and so should be gathered every Year, as of Onions, Lillies, etc.
aromatic and odoriferous Roots also lose by long keeping: Inodorous, gummy,
resinous, firm, ponderous Roots, will keep good some Years. In taking up Roots
in the Spring, Slips should be cut off from their Tops, and put down in the
Earth to grow again; by not attending to this easy, plain and necessary
Caution, both Roots and Herbs are often extirpated and lost in many Places.
Most Flowers, but especially thin-leaved and odoriferous, must be carefully
dried in a dry Shade, and when dried, put into Paper Bags, laid up in Drawers
or a Chest. Seeds should be gathered or shaken when they are full ripe, and
begin to dry before they shed or shake, put up in Paper Bags, and hung up in a
cool dry Place, that they neither sprout nor turn rancid, and many of them will
keep their Virtues eight or ten Years. Fruits should be got before they are
quite ripe; such as have a very soft Pulp should be dried in the Sun or Oven to
keep, as Cherries, Plumbs, Grapes, etc.

Of the Preparation and Use of Domestic Medicines.
The first and easiest domestic medicinal Preparation of Herbs is in Broths,
either without Flesh, as in Fevers or Inflammations, which will not allow it,
or with Flesh, as in chronic Disorders without a Fever. In Diseases of the
Breast very proper Assistance may be given by Broths prepared with soft,
lubricating, aperient, pectoral Herbs. In flatulent Cases, Wind Expellers may
be added to them. In Dropsies, Diuretics may be put in; in case of
Obstructions, Deobstruents may be used; in nervous Distempers, or Diseases of
the Kind, Cephalics may be used; in habitual Costiveness, Laxatives joined are
proper; in a bloody Flux, or Looseness, Astringents should be added; in a great
Weakness, Restoratives come in good Play; in an alcaline State of the Blood,
Acids are greatly beneficial, or in bilious Cholics, or rather Redundance of
Bile; in windy Cholics, Carminatives and Cracers; in too great a Heat of the
Blood, Coolers: Thus we see the profitable Use of proper Broths is very
extensive, and has this double Advantage, that Food and Medicine are both
carried into the Blood together, and commix with it over the whole Habit, and
may be persisted in longest with the least Offense, and that Medicine thus
conveyed into the Body is most agreeable, familiar, easy, and least nauseous;
but then it is necessary not only that Herbs proper for the Distemper be
pitched on, but that they be rightly prepared, for if they are such as afford
their Virtues by Distillation, they lose all their Flavor and Virtue by (...),
and only leave their earthy, insipid and (...) ^rateful Parts behind, as Baum,
Costmary, Mau^lin, sweet Chervilor, Cecil, etc. Such should be cut small, and
put into the Soup or Broth ready prepared, keep all hot, without boiling, in a
close covered Vessel, so as they may infuse or soften, then dish them up, and
eat them; but such Plants, as communicate nothing by Distillation, may be
boiled freely, and make the Broth medicinal, though not savoury, but always avoid
such as are too bitter, ungrateful, or nauseous to the Stomach, especially
those in large Quantity, lest the Sick naus^ate what is necessary to be
continued for some time. If the Herbs are green, the Broth must be made daily,
or they will be sour, which entirely changes their Nature, except for cooler or
Acids. The Quantity of the Herb used must be according to that of the Broth
made, the Strength and Design of the Plant, the Case, Strength, Taste and
Stomach of the Sick. For a Quarter of a Handful of some Herbs is as much as
three or four Handfuls of others; ex. gr. All Pectorals, Coolers and
Restoratives, require a larger Quantity, than Cephalics, or nervous Medicines,
as from one to two or three Handfuls of Maidenhair, Liver-wort, Sorrel, Ground
Ivy, Chick-weed, to two Quarts of Broth. Whereas half a Handful of the odorous
Aramatics will suffice, or from two Ounces to a Quarter of an Ounce of Roots;
or from a Dram to two Drams of Seeds.

The next easily parable and familiar Form is Juices; these are prepared either
by gathering a H^ndful or more of the green Plant in its Season and Growth,
early in the Morning, cleaning, cutting, pounding it in a Mortar, and straining
out its crude Juice, and giving it immediately with a little Piece of Sugar,
dissolved in it, from one to four or five Spoonfuls, once or twice a Day; and
every Dose must be fresh made, as Juice of Nettles, Plantain, Millefoil,
Shepherds Purse, Horse Tail, etc. in involuntary Losses of Blood, Ruptures,
etc. Where the Stomach is weak, and cannot bear such thick crude Juices,
another Way is, gather and cleanse any Quantity of well grown Herbs as before,
put them into a glazed earthen high Pot, cover and paste them close, put them
into an Oven, not too hot, let them stand till it is cold, take out the Pot,
pour off the Liquor through a Hair Sieve, sweeten it with Sugar, Dose from one
to three, four or five Spoonfuls, once, twice or thrice a Day, at the physical
Hours, which are Morning early, three or four Hours after Dinner, and going to
Bed; thus may Juice of Ground Ivy, or other green succulant Plants, or of
tuberous Roots, as of Turnips, be prepared. A third Way is, to pound and
express the Juice of any green Herb as before, let it either stand a few Hours
till it settle, then pour off the clear, and give as before, or boil and
clarify the expressed Juice, let it settle, pour off the clear, sweeten and
use; but both the last Ways are far short of the first, for much of the best
Part of the Plant is lost by the Sedepurations and Clarifications; therefore
the former two are best, especially the first, if the Stomach will easily bear
it.

Infusions are the next common and easy Form; the use of Tea has made the
Preparation of these so well known, that every Housewife has the Art of drawing
them; odoriferous, sapid, aromatic, cephalic, uterine, etc. Plants, which
cannot bear Boiling without the Loss of some of their valuable Parts; or whose
boiling renders them too ropy, slimy, thick, muddy, or otherwise ungrateful or
nauseous, are fittest for this Form, dried Herbs are best here. Put the cut
Herb, or sliced or bruised Roots or Seeds, into a Tea-pot, with its Spout
stopped or corked; or other like close Vessel* pour on them a sufficient
Quantity of Water, just ready to boil, cover it close up, and set it at some
Distance from the Fire, from half an Hour to two, three, four Hours, or all
Night, according to the Density, Solidity, Oleaginousness, or Resinousness of
the Subject, or as the Herb or Root is green or dry, has volatile or fixed
Parts; when it has stood a due time, pour out some of it into a Tea or other
Cup, sweeten it, if proper, and give of it to drink, as often as is needful, as
in Fevers every Hour or two; in Coughs, Catarrhs, and Pleurisies, once in two
or three Hours; in chronic Cases, two or three Dishes, once or twice a Day.
Such Plants, as will bear Decoction, without the above Inconveniences, a
Decoction of them is better, especially of the Woods, except Sassafras, which
is lost by boiling; dry oleaginous, balsamic, saponaceous, resinous Roots, will
give out their Virtues much better, when rubbed in a Mortar with a little Salt
of Tartar, or if the Salt is put into the Water; but this must not be done,
when cooling, correcting Bile, alcaline Salts, or Acrimony in the Blood, is
intended; for Plants proper in these Cases want it not, and it either retards
or frustrates these Designs; nor will mucilaginous Plants bear this Addition,
or stand so long in Infusion, for they become nauseously ropy and slippery.
Noviscous and austere, astringent, saponaceous, restorative Subjects, are
properly suited for this Preparation.

The next familiar domestic Form is Diet Drinks, and sure nothing was ever more
injudiciously managed than these, and simple distilled Waters, have been. This
Article includes all medicated Wines, Meads, Ales and Wheys, but the last two
are chiefly used in the Spring, and next to Broths is certainly the most
agreeable Way of conveying Medicines into the Body, and all the animal Juices,
in chronic Diseases (for they have no Place in Acutes) as they are to be
continued some considerable time. The Quantity of Herbs put in, is ordinarily
four Handfuls to a Gallon of Ale or Whey, Seeds from half an Ounce to an Ounce,
Roots from half an Ounce to two Ounces if dry, but of green double the
Quantity. The Ale, with the Ingredients, should be wrought in a Vessel that
admits only Air enough to carry on the Fermentation, where odorous, or volatile
Ingredients, are in the Composition; nor should the Liquor stand longer on them
than three, four or five Days, after the Fermentation, but be bottled off, and
well corked. The time of drinking them, if purgative, is chiefly the Morning;
if laxative, Morning and Afternoon, if only laxative, at all the three
medicinal Hours. The common Dose, when made with Wine, is from one Ounce to
four, according to the Age, Strength, and Constitution of the Patient, and
Intention of the Medicine, if made in Ale or Whey, Dose from two to eight
Ounces. If Diet Drinks, made with Ale or Whey, are rightly prepared, there are
often some Ingredients fit for boiling, others for Infusion, if the latter are
boiled, they are lost, and only leave their Phlegm or earthy Parts in the
Liquor; if the former are infused, their Body is not opened, nor the Cohesion
of their Parts loosened and dissolved to mix with the Liquor; (...) latter are
all Things, fit to bear boiling, as Woods, dried, heavy, solid, inodorous Roots
or Herbs, Astringents, Bitters, Stiptics, some Emollients, austere earthy
Ingredients, Cream of Tartar, etc. Of the former kind are Aromatics, such as
have volatile Parts, or pungent light, readily separable Salts, as
Antiscorbutics, the Action of Fermentation is sufficient to loosen, open, and
draw out their Parts, which would be lost by Decoction; Fermentation is
sufficient for green Herbs; but such Herbs, as will bear drying, are best
dried, their Infusion is more agreeable, both to Sight and Taste, and keeps
longer, but some cannot be dried as Antiscorbutics and succulant Plants.
Infused Ingredients should be cut, Roots bruised and sliced, Seeds and Berries,
a little pounded, and all put loosely in a Bag, and hung in the Liquor during
Fermentation, the Bag should be taken out several times, squeezed into the
Liquor, and put in again. Acid Juices, or Herbs, as of Citrons, Lemons,
Oranges, or Limes, Sorrel, Liver-wort, etc. should never be boiled at all. If
Jalup Root is put in, it should be grossly powdered, rubbed in a Mortar with
Salt of Tartar, and boiled; Senna Leaf, with a little Salt of Tartar, may be
infused, to prevent griping. If Agaric, Methoacan, or such others as are
unfriendly to the Stomach are added, with them should be put in not only Seeds,
but some Cinnamon, Quince, or a little Ginger, Diet Drinks, Infusions, or
Decoctions, are often crowded, either with too many Ingredients, Articles of
different Nature, and Intentions, or too great a Quantity of one Thing; but I
would here observe that a Liquor may easily be over-loaded with any one
Article, for all Liquors are porous Bodies, whose Pores or Interstices may be
filled with other Matter of any one Figure, till it can contain no more of
that, and the rest is lost; but will still receive and contain new Particles of
a different Figure from another Subject, and so from a third and fourth, as we
see Water may have its Pores so filled and surcharged with Sea Salt, that they
can sustain no more, yet will dissolve fresh Sugar readily, till its
Interstices are full of Matter of that Figure; yet it will dissolve Nitre, then
Alum, etc. so that after the Pores were filled, the Remainder is lost. But if
too little of any one Salt is dissolved in Water, short of the Intention, it is
too weak, and either will not answer the Design, or do it too slowly; so Diet
Drinks, or other Preparations, may be under done, or too weak. This also shows
us, that a few Articles, judiciously calculated to the Purpose, are better than
one, for they make the Liquor more powerful and medicinal; but an impertinent
Jumble or Farraga is always to be avoided, as it shows want of Judgment in the
Orderer, may have contrary Effects, and may disappoint the Design.

Another Form is Decoction; this is of one or more Herbs, Roots, Seeds or
Flowers, which by boiling communicate their Strength and Virtue to Water. In
this, both the Order of the Ingredients, Liquor used, and Degree of Heat, may
be varied, as the Ingredients give out their Virtues more slowly and
difficultly, or easily and quickly; the former require longer boiling, the
latter less, or should be put in when the others are near boiling. Dried Herbs
are fitter for this Use than green. All Plants are not fit for it, viz. Such
whose Virtues consist in an easy, separable Salt, or essential Oil, or abound
in volatile Parts, or resinous, or sulphurous Substances, or are of a very
mucilaginous, or viscous Nature; the Virtues of the first Sort are lost in the
Preparation; the second kind will not communicate their Virtue to Water, for it
cannot open their Body, loosen, separate, nor sustain their Parts; and the
last, if much boiled, spoil, thicken and muddy, the Decoction; tender,
odoriferous Flowers, are also improper, they, and such as belong to the first
Class, are fit only for Infusion, or Distillation, in both which they readily
communicate their Virtue to the Water; the second Sort should be infused some
time in hot or boiling Water in a warm Place, with some alcaline Salts, which
may soften and open their Substances, prepare and loosen their Parts, and
expedite their Separation and Communication to the Water; and after this
Infusion, they must have both a stronger and longer Decoction, as Woods, Barks,
dry, hard and inodorous Roots, earthy Substances, etc. The third Class, if much
boiled, make the Liquor slimy and ropy, as Seeds of Line, Fleabane, the cold
Seeds, Mash-mallow, Com^ry, or Do^k Roots, except they are either used in such
a small Quantity as answers very little Purpose, or be put in near the latter
End, or they will turn the whole to a mere thick jelly. Purgatives should be
infused in boiling Water with Carminatives, or rather boiled slightly with a
little Salt of Tartar, otherwise their austere, acid Salts, being drawn out by
long boiling, causes grievous Gripes, and sometimes Discharges of Blood; which
often happens from a Decoction of Colicinth drunk. The Liquor used in Decoction
is mostly Water, or clarified Whey or Wine, which is almost lost by boiling.
The Quantity of Liquor and Ingredients used i^ according to the Quantity
designed to be made; gr^en Ingredients are not so proper as dried that will
keep good, for their Decoction is neither so fine, nor so pleasant, nor keeps
so well, but should be made in less Quantity, and oftener. Herbs, whether green
or dried, must be cleaned and cut; Roots and Seeds must be grossly bruised, put
into the Water, and boiled away sometimes to three Fourths, other Times to two
Thirds, or a Half, as the Ingredients let out their Virtues more readily, or
slowly, then take them from the Fire, when cold, strain, and if for drinking*
sweeten it a little, if needful, as two or three Ounces or Sugar to a Quart of
Liquor, or two or three Ounces of distilled compound W^^^rs, or Brandy, or half
a pint of Wine, to preserve them. The Quantity of Ingredients to the Liquor
must be adjusted to the Number of Articles put in, the Nature of the Plants,
and Uses of the Liquor; if only one or two Articles are used, a Handful, or a
Handful and a Half, is sufficient for each Quart of Water; or from one to three
Ounces of dried Herbs; from two Drams, to an Ounce or two of dried Roots, from
a Dram to two of Seeds or Flowers: The Dose is from one to six or eight Ounces;
the Time of drinking them is the same as in Diet Drinks, o^ Infusions. If
prepared with Wine, and dry Herbs, they will keep good some Weeks or Months, if
with Water, and no Sugar, Waters or Brandy put ^o them, not above one, two or
three Days; Syrups are improper, for they excite Fermentation, disturb and
sharpen the Bile. All Herbs should be gathered yearly, especially odorous and
aromatic; Antiscorbutics must always be got fresh, for they will not keep, as
Water-cr^sses, Brooklime, Scurvey-grass, etc. Such as the following bear
Decoction well, Wormwood, Cinquefoil, Cranes-bill, Dandelion, Dwarf Elder and
Elder, Endive, Fern, Fumitory, Tormentil, Wood Sorrel, Speed-well, Succory,
Ground Ivy, St. John and St. James's Worts, Knot-grass, Nettles, Plantain,
Roses, Quinces, Camomile, Mallows, Marshmallows, Lesser Centaury, Horehound,
Maidenhair, Hart's-tongue, Poppies, etc.

Distillation is another Operation belonging to the Preparation of domestic
Remedies; and here we are to consider what Things are fit and proper for it,
that we spend not Time and Labor in vain, and our Expectation, and that of the
Sick, be not disappointed. Distillation and Decoction are direct Opposites,
for, in general, whatever will not bear the former, without Loss of its Parts
and Virtues, is the proper Subject of the latter, and what will afford nothing
significant, either for Food or Physic by the latter, is to be used the former
Way. The cooling, stiptic, emollient, astringent, consolidating, nutrimental,
healing Plants, afford not their Powers and Virtues by Distillation, but must
be used in Infusion, Decoction, Extract, or Substance. Sweet, watery, ^lat,
acid, bitter, rough tasted Plants, ^mit nothing worth Labor, as Juices of
Elder Berries, Grapes before Fermentation, Juices of Citrons, Lemons, Oranges,
Strawberries, Plumbs, Cherries, Currants, Barberries; Herbs, Succory, Sorrels,
Purslain, Beets, Colewort, Lettice, Ladies Mantle, Ladies Bed-straw, Plantain,
etc. Wheat, Oats, Barley, Rice, Pease, Millet, etc.

Some few inodorous Things indeed, which have no aromatic Smell, do yet
communicate considerable and unexpected Virtues to their Water, as Corn
Poppies, Arsmart, to which add Frogs Spawn, though no Plant.

The Virtues of some Plants are partly volatile, partly fixed, as lesser
Centaury, Germander, Camomile, Blessed Thistle, Ground Pine, Mugwort, Scordium,
Sage, Wormwood, etc. To obtain their medicinal Parts, they may be first
digested, then distilled; when the Water is come off, the Fire would be
stopped, and the Ingredients let stand in the Still till they are cold, then
take all out, strain off the Liquor, boil it up to the Consistence of thin
Honey, and mix with the Water, so have you the Virtues of the whole Plant,
except its Earth, and perhaps a little fixed Salt.

When heavy, solid, tough, resinous, or gummy resinous Wood-barks or Roots, are
to be distilled, they must first be cut or sliced very thin, or grossly bruised,
and put in a very close Vessel, pour boiling Water, with a considerable
Quantity of Sea Salt upon them, to loosen and open the compacted Body of the
Ingredients, and prevent their Putrefaction, stir all well together, shut the
Vessel up close, let it stand three, four or five Weeks, in a warm Digestion,
then distill the Water off.

The aromatic, strong smelling, resinous, oleaginous, balsamic, gummy Plants,
which retain their natural Fragrance, may be dried a little in the Shade; then
cut them grossly, and put them in the Still, and keep them in a warm Digestion
seventy Hours, then draw off their Waters, as Baum, Hyssop, Pennyroyal, Mints,
Rosemary, Marjoram, Origanum, Sage, Rue, etc.

Thin tender Herbs or Flowers, which spend their Virtues by sending out their
Smell to Distance, should be gathered early in the Morning, while their Dew is
upon* them, and their Vessels well fed in the cool of the Night, and full, put
them immediately into the Still, and distill presently without Digestion, for
either that, or their lying in the Air, hurts and weakens them, as Flower of
Roses, Jessamin, Borage, Bugloss, Lilly of the Valley, white Lillies, etc.
These Flowers should be got before they are quite opened, or begin to shed. The
different Color of distilled Waters is from their Oil, for Camomile Water is
blue, and Wormwood green. Saponaceous Plants communicate not their Virtues by
Distillation, for these, consisting in an intimate Union of their Oil and
Salts, rise not; some Plants are as good for Decoction after Distillation as
before; red Roses retain their Astringency after; Wormwood, its Bitterness,
etc. Having thus proved the Way, and shown what Plants are proper Subjects of
Distillation, and the several Ways they are to be managed to the best
Advantage; come we next to the Operation itself, which is of three Kinds,
either by simple Distillation, Cohobation, or Fermentation; for the last we are
obliged to Daniel Ludovicus, and all of them have been much improved by the
late learned and great Boerhaave.

Let the Herbs designed for Distillation be gathered in the Morning, while the
Dew is yet upon them, and their Vessels turgid with Juice, before their
volatile Parts are lessened and dissipated by the Day, sure Light or Heat; the
Herbs being at their full Growth before the Flowers appear, or Seeds come on;
grossly cut the Herbs, and fill the Still two Thirds full of them, then pour as
much distilled or rain Water upon them, as just covers them, or fills up the
Still to the same Height, put a Piece of fine, thin clean Linen, over the End
of the Still Head Pipe, let the Still Head fit close, be put on exactly, and
lute the Nose of the Still to the Worm, with a stiff Paste of quick Lime, and
the white of an Egg, or Linseed Meal and Water, the Room being first well
cleaned by running boiling Water through it, fit a Receiver close to the lower
End of the Worm, that no Vapor fly off, and during the Operation, keep the
Worm Tub constantly supplied with cold Water. Things being thus ordered, let
all stand in a warm Infusion for twenty-four Hours, then gradually raise the
Heat till the Water boil, which is known from its hissing Noise, the Heat of
the upper End of the Worm, the smoking of the Water in the Worm Tub, and the
dropping of the Worm till it come to a small, thread-like Stream; then raise
the Heat no higher, for a lower Degree will not raise the necessary and
expected Virtue of the Plant; by a greater Heat the Plant is suddenly raised
into the Still Head, and either fouls the Worm, or distilled Liquor, or plugs
up the Head, and throws the Herbs and Liquor about; in which Case, if the
distilling Ingredients are oily, tenacious, gummy, or resinous, as the Fire
required to distill these must be greater, the Explosion will be stronger, and
not only the Subject will be lost, but the Operator's Life, if near it, will be
in Danger; but the just Degree of Heat being observed and kept up, and all
Things going on regularly, whilst the Water distilled into the Receiver is
white, thick, sapid, frothy and muddy, it is good, and should be carefully kept
by itself. That which follows is thin and clear, destitute of much Taste or
Smell of the Plant; it is rather fouled and tartish, a white dreggy Matter,
whose Acid will corrode the Copper-head, if not well tinned, and the Water
thereby become green and nauseous, having a Degree of Poison (from the
dissolved Copper) is dangerous to Children weak or sick People especially, whom
it violently works upwards and downwards, with severe Gripes, which are only
relieved by plentiful Draughts of Milk sweetened with Honey, or of
mucilaginous, emollient Decoctions. The first Water contains the Oil, and
presiding Spirit of the Plant, and somewhat saline, which is mostly acid, but
in pungent Antiscorbutics, it is a volatile Alcali. The Fire and Water, by
Digestion and boiling, dissolve the Oil of the Plant, and reduces it to so
small Particles, as are carried up by the help of the Water, along with the
other Parts of the Herbs, which by this Means become volatile, and in close
Vessels, all these Parts being closely united, will come over without much Loss
or Alteration, having the Smell, Taste and Virtues, of the volatile Parts of
the Plant, but has neither all the Parts nor Virtues of its Juice. If the first
and second Waters are mixed, both are spoiled, therefore in distilling the
Receiver should be often changed, that as the Water alters the Process may be
stopped. The second Water is only cooling, and by the Solution of the Acid of
the untinn'd Copper, it kills Worms, but the Experiment is dangerous. The first
Water should neither be fined nor filtered to clear it; for that robs it of its
vegetable, aromatic Oil, weakens it, nor will it keep long after, nor should it
be kept in Bottles papered over the Mouth to keep out the Dust, but well corked
with the best Corks, for what comes over the Helm in distilling, its lighter
Parts will evaporate in the Air, and weaken the Water. And because some People,
either ignorantly or wilfully, will distill such Plants as afford little, beside
a little Phlegm, or Acid of the Herb, which cannot preserve the Water from
mothering, if they will have such they should have a little powdered Salt Petre
to keep it. Thus we may observe, that the volatile Oil, Salt and Spirit of
Plants, are lost by Decoction; and that the Decoction of pungent, saline
Antiscorbutics, is ridiculous; and that odoriferous, sapid and aromatic Plants,
should not be boiled. That by the Force of Fire, and too long Continuance of
the Operation, very opposite Virtues may be raised from Plants, or a Water
obtained of very different Nature and Effects, and that different Ingredients
require different Ways of Management, and various Degrees of Fire to obtain
their useful Properties. This also intimates a Way how to substitute distilled
Water, in Cases where no great Stress is laid on their Use, besides a Vehicle;
thus, drop a few Drops of the distilled Oil of the Plant, as of Mint, Fennel,
Pennyroyal, (whose Water is wanting) into rectified Spirit of Wine, so as the
Oil be dissolved wholly, and mixed with the Spirit, put two Drams of this
Spirit into a Quart of Water, shake and mix them, and you have the Water
wanted. Or if for immediate Use, drop some drops of the distilled Oil on a
Piece of Sugar, or Salt of Tartar, rub it well in a Mortar, and mix with Water,
this Wa^^r will not keep; and as the Virtue depends only on the Oil, one, two,
three, or four Drops of it, according to the Heat and Strength of the Oil, is
much better given in a Bolus. This also teaches us how to improve the Strength
of simple distilled Waters, viz. By adding a Dram or two of the above
dissolved, distilled Oil, and rectified Spirit, to each two or three Pounds of
the Water. But this is done far more effectually by Cohobation, which may be
made even to exceed the Virtues of the Plants from which it is drawn, thus.

The Distillation being over, take out the Plant, and Water remaining in the
Still, press them strongly in a Strainer, till all the Liquor is expressed, pour
the distilled Water into it, put both back into the Still, having first put as
much of the same Plant fresh got into the Still as before, and if needful, put
in as much fresh Water as will make up the first Quantity, clean the Worm as
before, cover the Hole in the Still Head-pipe, lute the Pipe and Worm, close up
the Vessel well, let all stand in a gentle Heat three Days and Nights, till the
separable Parts of the Plant are opened, loosened, and disposed to communicate
its Virtues to the Water, then observing more exactly the Rules in the former
Process, distill it as before, only as this Liquor is richer and stronger than
the former, it requires a less Degree of Heat and Fire, till half the Quantity
of Water put on is obtained; then stop the Process. This Water is whiter,
thicker and muddier, than the former, has a stronger Smell and Taste, as well
as richer, is more durable, and may have its Virtues still exalted by repeating
the Operation oftener with Herbs; and if renewed a great many Times, the last
Liquor may be taken out of the Still, strained off, and in an earthen, or well
tinned Vessel, set on a slow Fire, that it neither burn, nor carry off its
remaining Parts, and boiled up to an Extract of the Consistence of Honey or
Melasses, this mix exactly with the Water obtained by several Distillations,
thus will the Virtues of the Plant be concinerated and brought into a little
Room, and a Medicine not only far surpassing the Virtues of the Plant, but
scarce otherwise imitable.

The third Way of Distillation is by Fermentation, which alters them very
little, and makes them very penetrating and volatile. It is thus, Take any
aromatic or odoriferous Plant, cut and bruise it, if needful, put it in a large
Oak Cask, leaving four or five Inches empty Space at Top, in cold Winter
Weather, pour on warm Water with a sixth Part Honey dissolved in it, if a mild
Season, one Eighth Part; but in Summer use the like Quantity of coarse,
unrefined Sugar, or four Ounces of Barm, or light Yeast, to every Gallon of
Water, fill up the Ca^k to the same Height with this Liquor, let it stand
upright, and cover the Bung-hole in the upper End, with a Piece of loose Board,
let it stand warm, and continue in this State till the Herbs, which at first
rose to the Top, subside, and fall to the Bottom, which will be in four, five,
or six Days, then distill directly as before, observing all the Rules there laid
down. This Liquor being much stronger and spirituous will rise sooner, and with
greater Force; therefore must be distilled more slowly, especially at first, it
requires less Heat, and greater Caution. There comes over first a very strong,
clear, penetrating Liquor, which is best for Use; then a dark, muddy, milky
Liquor, possessed of some little Taste and Smell of the Plant. Lastly, a thin,
acid, scarce odorous Liquor; all which must be kept separate, what remains in
the Still is chiefly the Substance of the Honey, Sugar or Yeast, and little of
the Virtue of the Plan^, to make an Extract from. The first Liquor, though clear,
yet mixed with Water turns Milk white, which shows, that it has brought over all
the Oil of the Plant; and that the Whiteness of distilled, simple Waters, is
owing to that Oil, and when cleared by fining or Filtration, the Water is
effete and spoiled.

Thus we see what Plants will afford us by simple and cohobated Distillations,
viz. The proper Water of the Herb, the Spirit contained in that Water, and the
volatile Oil of the Plant, which turns its Water white, and a thin, separable,
volatile, acid Liquor; most of these are lost in their open Decoction. What
remains behind all this, not to be obtained by Infusion, Distillation or
Decoction, is the constitutive Oil of the Figure of the Plant, which binds its
earthy Parts together, and gives it its Form and Cement; a great deal of its
proper, native Salt, and that Part which by Fire is changed into a fixed
Alcaline, and a great Part of its constitutive, elementary Earth, though it has
lost some in the Decoction, which may be found both in the Oil, and Liquor left
in the Still. Could we obtain all the fixed Oil by Distillation or Decoction,
the cementing, or cohesive Principle, would be lost, and the Plant lose its
Figure and Form, and having only Earth left, would fall down to Dust, the fixed
Salt going with the Oil, these two being the soapy Part of the Plant. To obtain
this fixed Salt, take the Herbs strained out of the Liquor after Distillation
(for I here suppose the strained Liquor made into an Extract, if not so used,
take both Liquor and Herb out of the Still) put them into a clean Iron Pan over
a slow, clear Fire, which raise by Degrees, there will first arise a Fume, then
the Plant turns black, then takes Fire and burns, glows, sparkles, and leaves a
white Ash; thus is consumed the fixed Oil of the Plant, which gave its Parts
Cohesion and Figure. Take up these white Ashes, which are only the Earth and
fixed Salt of the Herb, put them in Water, let all stand till the Water is
clear, then pour all into a filtering Cup, so will the dissolved Salts and
Water go through, and leave the Earth in the Cup; evaporate the filtered Liquor
in an earthen, or rather glass Vessel, in a Sand Heat, or over a slow Fire, it
leaves a white, alcaline, lixivial Salt, which was in the Plant, but now
altered by the Fire, mix this Salt with the distilled Water; so have you all
the Parts of the Plant except the fixed Oil and Earth, which can only be got by
using the Plant in Substance in Powder, Pills, or Electuary. The Liquor and
Herbs left in the Still from Distillation, by Fermentation with Honey or Sugar,
afford not this Salt, for Honey burns to a Coal. The cold Still is only fit for
tender Flowers, which yet are better distilled by the Alembic, with proper
Care. English Plants fit for Distillation are, Angelica, Baum, Spirement,
Pepper-mint, Calamint, Hyssop, Pennyroyal, Rue, whose Water is good for little
without several Cohobations, which is admirable in hysteric Convulsions;
Camomile, Calamus Aromaticus, Chervil, Clary, Dill, Dittany, Fennel, Feverfew,
Jessamin, Lovage, Lilly of the Valley, white Lillies, Marjoram, Masterwort,
Motherwort, Tansey, Maudlin Tansey, Origanum, Savory, Roses, Sage, Spinnel,
wild Thyme, Savin, Juniper Berries, Corn Poppies, etc.

Besides those Extracts made from the Residum of distilled Waters, several
other excellent Ones might be prepared the same Way, as of Elecampane,
Wormwood, Berberry Bark, Broom, Lesser Centaury, white Horehound, Tormentil,
Liquorice, Garden Rhubarb, Mugwort, St. John's Wort, Rue, Feverfew, Elder and
Dwarf Elder, Barks, Plantain, Maidenhair, ^^^mitory, Hart's Tongue, Arsmart,
Rest-harrow, Gentian, Juniper, Camomile, Coltsfoot, Pilewort, etc. Which might
be given in Waters of other Herbs, of the same Intentions. But remember that
mucilaginous Plants are not easily reducible to this Form, for they will burn
before they come to a due Consistence, without very great Care and Judgment, as
Roots of Comfrey, Althaea, Serra, Fern, Osmond Royal, Linseed, Flea-bane, etc.
Red and damask Roses are both distilled, but very idly, for the latter affords
much the best Water, yet neither much worth, only a little light, separable Oil
of the Flower is brought over, that gives it a Smell, which makes it little
cordial and reviving, but without any regard to Distillation, a good astringent
Extract may be got from the former, and a lovely, laxative Syrup, from the
latter, better than that of Rhubarb, for no Purgatives are worth distilling,
that Part of the Plant being too gross or ponderous to come over the Helm. The
Dose of distilled Waters is from Half an Ounce, to two, three, or four Ounces,
according to the Age of the Patient, and Nature of the Water, the Dose of
Extract is from ten Grains to a Dram. Thus much for Infusions, Decoctions,
Distillations, Extracts and Incineration, as they relate only to domestic, not
officinal Remedies.

Syrups are another Form, they are in a great Measure deservedly neglected in
the present Practice, except Anodynes, Laxatives and Purgations; for
alexipharmac, diaphoretic, cordial, antiscorbutic, cephalic, nervous, etc.
Syrups, are a mere Jest and Fraud, that Form being so loaded with Sugar, that
^^ey seldom reach farther than the first Passages. One great Use of them was to
render several Forms of Remedies more palatable, which is now mostly answered
by using Sugar or white Syrup, (which is only made of Sugar and Water) in their
Room. No Plants proper for Distillation, or consisting of volatile Principles,
can be used in this Form without the Loss of these Parts; therefore those only
fit for Decoction are proper for it; these are the best which are of a saline
and earthy Nature. Dried Herbs (if they will bear drying) are much the best,
for only the Phlegm, or Water of the green, being dried away, they will
communicate more of their saline and substantial Parts to the Water, so that
the Syrup will be both stronger of the Ingredients, finer, and keep longer. But
the best of them, if not boiled up to a due Consistence, will turn acid and
four, moldy or spoil, especially if made of green Herbs, so that saving Sugar,
Coal and Time, is bad Husbandry here* but Syrups made of the Juice of Herbs is
far worse, for in drying nothing is lost but the Phlegm, but in the Juice some
of the Parts are not disposed to separate so easily from the constituting
earthy Part of the Plant, and of those that depart from it, several are lost in
the necessary Purification, and Clarifications of the Juice, and still the
Syrup is more unsightly, and not so pleasant. The several Ways of clarifying
Infusions, Decoctions, or Juices, are, either to let them stand some Hours in a
cool Place, in a clean Vessel, well covered, till they let fall their gravelly,
earthy, or other gross or heavy Parts, then pour off the clear, or pass them
several Times through a Hyppocras Bag or Strainer, till they become clear, but
though they are hereby made finer, yet some of their gummy, resinous or viscous
Parts, may be lost, which is the Reason that purging, mucilaginous, and anodyne
Syrups should never be clarified. Or mix fresh Whites of Eggs with the
Decoction, and whisk them long together, then boil all, and as the Whites of
Eggs harden in boiling, they entangle the grosser Parts with them, so that the
strained Liquor put through a Hyppocras Bag is clear. Syrups should be prepared
either in earthen or well tinned copper Vessels. -- Some useful Family Syrups
are made without any Heat, and little Trouble or Expense, as these of Snails,
or Earth Worms, which are gathered in a dewy Morning, the former are taken out
of the Shells, and slit; the latter are washed and cut; to a Pound of either of
them, put half a Pound of fine powdered Sugar, mix them well, and hang all up
in a Bag in a cool, moist Cellar, and let the Syrup drop from the Bag into an
earthen Vessel under them; they are good for weak, hectical Children, Dose from
half a One to two Spoonfuls. -- Syrups of fragrant Flowers of thin, loose,
volatile Parts, as Roses, Violets, Clove-gilly Flowers, Cowslips, Peach
Flowers, etc. are made by pouring as much boiling Water on them as will scald
them well, let them stand ten or twelve Hours, or all Night, in a close,
well-covered, glazed, or well-tinn'd Vessel (though all Metals are in Danger to
spoil their Color and Beauty) strain them off, and to every Pint of the
Liquor, add a Pound and a Half of Loaf Sugar (which is enough for Family Use,
if made yearly, and too much Sugar spoils the Design of the Medicines, (if it
meant any thing.) Set all on the same Vessel, cleared on a Sand, or other
gentle Heat, till either the Sugar be well dissolved and mixed, or they come to
the Consistence of a Syrup; Dose of the Syrup of Violets, pale Rose, and Peach
Flowers, from half an Ounce to two Ounces, but the Second is the best; the
first is little worth, except to give Mixtures a fine Color or Flavor, or
with Oil of sweet Almonds, or Linseed, to give Children for a Cold; the third
being found too churlish and griping a Purge for Children, is mostly laid
aside, and in making it requires four or five Infusions of the same strained
Liquor on fresh Flowers. The Dose of the rest of those Syrups is what you
please, for they will neither do Good, nor Harm. Syrup of Corn Poppies is made
by a double Infusion of four Pints of Water, on two Pound of the Flowers; or
rather by pouring just so much as will scald them; a Pound and a Half of Loaf
Sugar to each Pin^ of Water may suffice, and made as above, for boiling spoils
it, Dose from one Quarter of an Ounce, to two Ounces, in Poppy Water
especially. -- Some Syrups are made with Sack, or Canary Wine, as Saffron, an
Ounce to a Pint, shake both well in the Bottle, cork it close, and set it two
or three Days in a genle Heat, then strain off the Wine, and dissolve it in
twenty Ounces of Sugar, it is mixed with other cordial Medicines, an Ounce to
eight or ten of a Julep. But it would be better Husbandry to take two or three
Ounces of what remains in the Still after the Spirit is drawn off; to two
Ounces of this, put eighteen Ounces of Canary, mix them well, and filter the
Liquor, and with double Quantity of Sugar make a Syrup, Dose as above. -- A
good pectoral Syrup may be made by infusing two Ounces of Liver of Sulphur,
three Days in a Pint of Canary, then filter it, and add a Pound, or a Pound and
a Half of Sugar, melt it without boiling, Dose from one Quarter to one Ounce.
-- Several Syrups are made of the Juices of Fruits, as of Rasberries, Quinces,
Berberries, Mulberries, Elder, Buckthorn, etc. They are made by putting a Pound
and a Half of Sugar to a Pound of Juice, and boiling them up to Syrup, Dose of
all these what you will, except the last, which is from half an Ounce to an
Ounce or two, but it is too harsh for most Children, this Juice is neither to
be clarified nor made with Loaf, but coarse Sugar. -- Many Syrups are made by
Decoction, or boiling the Ingredients, but most of them are good for naught;
but such as are in love with the Form may take the Roots, dried Herbs, Flowers,
or Seeds they intend, cut or bruise them, pour boiling Water on them, to the
Height of three or four Fingers above the Ingredients, cover them up, and let
them stand a Night or two; then in a tinned Vessel boil away the Water to two
Thirds, or a Half, strain out the Liquor, and to each Pint of it, a Pound, or a
Pound and a Half of Sugar, is enough for Family Use, boil all up to a Syrup,
and if it is neither for vomiting, nor purging, nor for sleeping, Dose what you
please under a Pint, it only cloys the Stomach and Bowels, except in Coughs and
Colds, the Sugar may make them of some little Use, as Pectorals. Stomachics,
Vulneraries, Styptics, Astringents, Balsamies, etc. are used to unspeakably
better Purpose in Decoction, and Diuretics, Cephalics, Uterines, etc. in
Infusions, or Diet Drinks. There are one or two good Remedies in this Form,
viz. simple Oxymel, which is only a Pound of Honey to three Pints of Water, and
a Pint of White Wind Vinegar, boil them up to a Syrup, but the next is far
better, it is Oxymel of Squills, or two Pound of Vinegar of Squills boiled up
with three Pound of Honey, to a thick Syrup, Dose from a Dram, to two or three
Ounces. Vinegar of Squills is made by infusing the bruised Root in Vinegar.
Other Vinegars are made by infusing a Pound of Flowers in twelve Pound of
White Wind Vinegar, or strong Aligar, for forty or fifty Days, and straining it
off for Use; medicinal Honeys are only thick Syrups boiled up with Honey,
instead of Sugar.

Medicated Wines may be contrived to supply the Place of solider Forms, with
which the Stomach has either been jaded out before, or are nauseous to it; they
are not only given easier to Children, but save a Vehicle to the grown up, and
go sooner and further into the Blood and Vessels, carry less useless Parts
along with them, and many of them are easily prepared, as Steel Wine, which is
pouring a Pint of white Wine on an Ounce of Steel Filings, let them stand and
infuse three or four Days, in a warm Place, uncorking and shaking the Bottle
several Times, pour it off, and filter the Liquor, Dose from two Ounces to
four, once or twice a Day. Or infuse two Ounces of dried Squills in a Pint of
white Wine forty Days, decant the Liquor, Dose from half an Ounce, to four
Spoonfuls. Variety of Wines may be made by warm or cold Infusions of Roots,
Herbs, Peel, Barks, Fruits, or Seeds, Dose from one to four Spoonfuls, or more.
-- But if the Ingredients are solid, ponderous, resinous, etc. they must be
infused in Brandy, Rum, Spirits, or rectified Spirits, in a cold or hot Place,
as the Virtues of the several Ingredients are more or less fixed to their
Earth; such are called Tinctures of Elixirs, the first from their Color,
whether from the Subject, or by adding some coloring Articles to it, as
Cochineal, red Saunders, etc. Many Tinctures are also drawn in Water only by
mere Infusion of Things of loose Texture. But as we have few domestic
Vegetables of such a compact Nature, a^ require either rectified, or acid, or
alcaline Spirits, to extract their Virtues, I shall omit them; Water, Wine,
Brandy, Rum, or Spirits, being sufficient Menstruums for domestic Use.

Conserves, how much soever admired by some, are, in the general, a very
useless Form, on which there is no Dependence in taking from half a Dram to a
Dram, whereof a Man may eat from four to eight Ounces of the most of them,
without either Good or Harm, if so much Sugar offend not his Stomach. Only they
serve as a Basis to make up, or give a Form to other Medicines, as Bolusses, or
Electuaries; or to mix with other Things, as Conserve of Roses and Lucatellus's
Balsam, or Sperma Ceti. The Use of many of them will never answer Expenses in
Families, except of a very few for Sweetmeats in Winter, as of Hips. And
instead of three Pound of Loaf Sugar to every Pound of Roots, Herbs, or
Flowers, ^o be made into Conserve in private Families, equal Weight of Sugar is
sufficient for the drier Sort, as Flowers of Rosemary, Lavender, Baum, and a
Pound and a Half of Sugar to a Pound of the moister, as of Borrage of Bugloss.
The Flowers to be conserved, should be gathered before they blow, clipped from
their White, cleaned from their Seed, and well pounded with Sugar in a Marble
Mortar, till the Flowers and Sugar are so incorporated, as to be indiscernably
separate. Herbs, Roots, or Peel, should be got in their proper Seasons, when
fullest of Juice. Peel to be conserved, should be taken fresh pared off from
the Fruit, put in an earthen Vessel, with as much Sugar, and let stand a few
Weeks in a Cellar, till the Rind mellow, then it will be much easier made.
Fruits, as Hips, should be gathered ripe, laid up till well mellowed, then
picked, cleaned, and with equal Weight of Sugar, beaten to a smooth, fine,
clear Pulp, or Conserve, having first pulped the beaten Fruit through a Hair
Sieve, before the Sugar is put in. Conserves of Elecampane and Comfry Roots are
both done this Way, only they are boiled first in a little Water till they are
soft. Sloes are first baked in an Oven, then pulp'd, and put through a Hair
Sieve, and if still too moist, boiled a little over the Fire, and stirred all
the while, till they come to a due Consistence; then put the Sugar to them, and
beat it up. All Conserves should be kept in a dry Place, that their Sugar draw
not in Water from the Air, and so melt and spoil the Conserve. Sugar of Roses
is only a Pound of Sugar dissolved in Rose Water, and an Ounce of fine powdered
Rose Leaves added, with a few Drops of Spirit of Vitriol to brighten and
preserve the Color, mix all well, lay it on a Marble, roll it out, and cut
into small Pieces, lay them on Paper, dry them, and keep them, to give to
consumptive People, or to mix with Asses Milk, from half a Dram to a Dram. The
common Conserves are made of red or Damask Roses, Flowers of Borrage, Bugloss,
Mary-gold, red and white Dead Nettle, Rosemary, Lavender, Primroses, Clove
Gilly-Flowers, Tops of Rue, Sage, Roman Wormwood, thin Outtersline, Rinds of
Oranges, Leaves of Scurvy Grass, Wood Sorrel, Roots of Elecampane, Comfry, or
any others a Person pleases, or is willing to bestow Money and Time on.

Powders must be prepared of Roots, Herbs, or other Ingredients, well cleaned
and picked from Stalk or decayed Leaves, or other Parts. Flowers should be as
fresh as they can be dried, and well cleaned, seeing all that passes the Sieve
is to go into the Stomach. Let the whole Subject or Ingredient designed for
Powder, be powdered and sifted at one Time, and not at several Times; for if
the Ingredient consist of different Textures and Cohesions, these may have
various Effects, and should be given in different Doses; for Instance, should
one Part purge upwards, and another downwards, and one of these should be
powdered, and not the other, both given, the Patient would be deceived in the
Operation. As Things used in this Form are given in Substance; Ingredients of a
volatile and aromatic Nature, should be powdered only in such a Quantity as is
used at once, that they may be always fresh and good, what remains must not be
put into wide-mouthed Glasses, papered over, as is too much the Custom, for
they either lose their pungent, volatile Parts, and become effete, as Powder of
Arum Root, or turn rancid, as of the cold oily Seeds, which not being reducible
to a fine Powder, should never be given in that Form, but in Electuaries, fresh
Emulsion, or Troches. The most medicinal and effectual Parts of Aromatics, are
often their lightest and loosest, which fly off in powdering, therefore should
be greatly moistened with just so much Spirit, as will hinder their flying off,
without making them ball or cake under the Pestle, like resinous Substances,
unless the Mortar and End of the Pestle be easily greased with a little Oil
first. Compound Powders, made with several Aromatics, are called Species.
Acrid, bitter, resinous, nauseous and ungrateful Ingredients, must be avoided
in this Form, as much as may be; nor should it consist of Ingredients of an
opposite Nature, as Allom and lixivial Salts; and all confused, inconsistent
Jumbles and Farrages, must be guarded against, especially of different
Intentions and Operations; Powders are given from a few, as five or six Grains
to a Dram or two, according to their Nature and Intentions.

Electuary is a Form of various Ingredients powdered and made up into a soft
Consistence, either with Syrups or Honey, but they must be made stiffer for
keeping, than for present Use, it is called Electuary of Treacle, or Opiate,
though nothing be in it to induce Sleep. When Honey is used, it should be first
boiled and well scummed, and so should all Syrups be, especially these with
coarse Sugar or Honey. Salts, whether lixivial or acid, espeically both
together, must not be mixed with Electuaries, for they generate Air, swell the
Medicine, and apt to cause it to ferment, if not used instantly. If Pulps are
to be added, they should first be boiled, and then put through a Hair Sieve;
Honey must be first warmed to thin it; if odoriferous, chemical Oils, are to be
put in, let it be with the Powders, and work all together carefully, with a
wooden Pestle in a Marble Mortar; if Salts are wanted, let them be put in when
they are to be used. Let as few ungrateful Things be put in the Form as may be.
Their Dose is the same as of Powders, only allowing for the Quantity or Weight
of the Syrup or Honey in them. Bolusses or Morsels are only a small Portion of
Electuary made (for the present Purpose) into one, or a few Doses.

Pills are another Form, wherein often Things are put of a disagreeable Taste,
sticking in the Teeth or Mouth, or cannot be otherwise safely taken, as
Bitters, Gums, Mercurials, etc. whose Dose lies in less Bulk, being from a
Scruple to two in Purgatives for grown up Persons, or to a Dram or two in
Alteratives, but such large Doses must be made up in Rotulae or little Balls.
Some Opiates, Diuretics, Alexipharmacs Emenagogues, Pectorals, Openers of
Obstructions, and some Medicines against Worms, Cephalics, and Uterines, are
capable of this Form. No volatile, or fixed Salts, should be put in them, for
they cause them to ferment, huff and break. The fewer and smaller they are
taken more easily; their Consistence should neither be too hard, nor too soft.
Laxative Pills are taken at Night, Purgatives early in the Morning, other
Alteratives Morning and Night, in the Pulp of a roasted Apple, in a Raisin,
Wafer Paper, or in the Flesh of Prunes, and drink something after to wash them
down; a little aromatic Oil, as of Cloves, Anise, or the like, may be put to
them to give them a finer Flavor, and expel Wind. -- Troches, or Lazerges, are
made to hold in the Mouth till they dissolve slowly, and swallow their
Solution, either for a Cough, or other Disorders of the Breast, or Heart-Burn.
They are prepared of several Powders made up into a hard Pas^^* with Mucilage
of Gum Tragacanth, or with ^ugar dissolved in the Mucilage, or with the Juice
of some Herb. The Paste is rolled out, and cut into small Pieces, laid on
Paper, and dried in the Shade, or in a cool Oven; they are seldom used now.

Of Oils, only these by Insolation, or Decoction, are of domestic Preparation.
The former are made by infusing Flowers, as of Roses, white Lillies, St. John's
Wort, or Mulewort, in four Times their Weight of Oil in a close Vessel, set
them several Days in the warmest Sun, strain off the Oil, and pour on fresh
Flowers and Tops (except of white Lillies) and set in the Sun as before, at
last strain out for Use; thus you preserve both Virtue and natural Smell of the
Parts without Loss or Burning. But the Virtue of green Plants must be drawn out
by a single, double, or triple Decoction in Oil, over a slow Fire, till they
are crisp; this both spends the watery Part of the Plant, prevents its burning,
and that nasty yellow Color, which they have; but to avoid all three, strain
out the Oil into a clear Pan, set it over a gentle Fire, let it simmer, till a
Drop taken out of it be a fine pure green. Oil obtained from Fruits, as ripe
Bayberries, whilst undried, must be boiled in Water, and the Oil scummed off as
it rises to the Top, till it is all gathered, then put it into a clean Vessel,
and simmer it over the Fire, till the Water in it is exhaled, or no more Smoke
or Reek rises; then put it up for Use. Oils from Animals, as new whelped
Puppies, or Earth Worms, is made by boiling them in Oil, till the former fall
to Pieces, and the latter are crisp.

Ointments and Liniments differ chiefly in their Consistences, the former being
the stiffer, the latter the softer, is made by putting in a little more Oil
into the made Ointment to soften it, or by putting in less Turpentine and Wax
in it: Liniments are also made by mixing Oils and Ointments, or Spirits and
Balsams with Ointments, and incorporating them well; (...) by melting down a
Plaster with more Oil to soften it. The same Cautions are requisite here as in
Oils, to prevent the Burning, and obtain and preserve the Virtue and Color of
the Ointment, and to make them stronger by a double or triple Infusion or
Decoction of the same fresh Ingredients in the same strained off Oil, or Lard.
Ointments are made with Butter, or Hog's Lard. Some Ingredients must be infused
or boiled in Vinegar first, to open their Body, but it must be well exhaled in
boiling; the Wax, Resin and Turpentine, should not be added till the Liquor is
strained off. Very few of this Form will answer all domestic Purposes;
Exercise, Bathing, and Friction, taking up now a great deal that was ascribed
to them. Ointments that have Wines or Juices in, must have these well exhaled,
as well as the Juice of Herbs or Vinegar, or they will hinder the Color of the
Ointment, as well as spoil it. Embrecations, Fomentations and Baths, are now
mostly used for Ointments, and sometimes succeed better, and are more sweet,
cleanly and neat, but neither should be rejected; for I have often found, that
where one of those would not answer, another would; and diseased, pained, lame
People, will readily sacrifice a little Cleanness to their Ease and Health.
Embrecations are only a Mixture of several Sorts of Spirits, sometimes with
resinous, gummy, or soapy Things, added to them, to be rubbed and chauffed into
the Part, to attenuate the Humors lodged there, stimulate and invigorate the
Vessels, to propel them: Fomentations are a Decoction of three, four or five
Handfuls of Herbs, with some Berries or Seed in three Pints of Water to two,
then strained off, and some Spirits put to it, and used warm in Flannels wrung
out of it, one Flannel on the Part, and another ready to take out of the
Liquor, when the other is cool; twenty or thirty Flannels may be thus applied.
Fomentations loosen the Fibers and Vessels of the Part, open its Pores, whilst
the Skin admits some of the thinner Parts of the Liquor to dissolve and thin
the Humors, fit them for Perspiration and Circulation; sometimes Fomentations
are immediately followed by Embrecations, as soon as the Parts are rubbed dry.
All Fomentations used to relaxed, weak Parts, should be applied hot; but to
stiff, rigid, or contracted Parts, tepid or Milk warm; this Degree of Heat
relaxes, the other contracts. Baths are only general Fomentations, where
instead of Flannels, the whole Body is immersed in the Bath; in which they may
continue according to its Degree of Heat and their Strength, from fifteen
Minutes to an Hour.

Plasters are made chiefly of Oils, Lard, Waxes, Resins and Powders, in making
of which it is necessary, 1. That if there are any Minerals in them, as
Letharge, it be first boiled in Vinegar, till it is almost dry, before any Oils
or Lard be added. 2. That if there are any green Herbs used, they may be
infused in white Wine, then boiled in the Oil till crisp, and strained out, and
their Humidity exhaled, before any other Ingredients be put to the Oil. 3. That
when Juices or Mucilages are used, they be boiled in the Oil till their
Humidity or watery Parts be spent, before other Articles are added. 4. Gummy
and resinous Substances are not to be put in before all humid or watery Parts
of the former Ingredients are exhaled. 5. Indissolvable Powders are not to be
put in till the Plaster is taken from the Fire, and cooling. 6. Plasters must
be constantly stirred whilst making, or some Parts will often burn; the whole
not incorporated, the Color lost, and the whole spoiled. 7. If a Plaster is
boiled too much, it should be lowered with more Oil; if too low boiled, and
come not to a Consistence, let it either be boiled higher, or have more Powders
sifted into it; if brittle and crumbling, that it will not stick, put more
Turpentine, white Pitch, or other tough Body to it. 8. When Quicksilver is
added, it must be exactly mixed with Turpentine, or it and liquid Styrax in a
Mortar, then put to the Plaster when almost cold and well mixed. 9. When Opium
is added, it must either first be dissolved in that Vinegar which is boiled
with Minerals, or dried, powdered and put in, or dissolved in the Wine strained
from Herbs, or dissolved in the Juices to be boiled. 10. When Plasters are to
be spread, they must not be made too hot, lest they either burn, or become
brittle, that they will not stick. 11. Many Plasters are much better kept in
Pots well bladdered over than in Rolls. 12. Several, especially warming and
discussing Plasters, should be spread pretty thick.

Glysters and tepid Bathing in common Water are too much neglected in the
present Practice, especially as it has not yet supplied us with better
Succedantures. Glysters are used of tepid common Water, to relax, dilate, or
mitigate Irritation, or of fresh Broth, or Milk and Sugar, for an easy
Laxative; or of the common Decoction of Emollients and Purgatives to purge; or
with Emollients, Turpentine, and some Drops of liquid Laudanum, in reaching
Pains of the Stone without Inflammation; or of the same Decoction, and Nitre,
and Laudanum, with Inflammation; or made of the bitterest Decoctions, and given
without Oil for Worms; or of the most stimulating, acrid Ingredients in
Apoplexies or Lethargies; or of Astringents and Balsamics in Dysenteries; or of
most nutritive, liquid Food, in Pains of the Gullet, or other Stoppages of
swallowing without Inflammation, etc. Quantity thrown in at a Time, is from two
Ounces to a Pound, according to the Age of the Patient, and Intent of the
Glyster. If Purgatives work not within three Hours after they are taken, let a
Glyster be injected; if the Person cannot retain it, but it comes away
immediately, give another: Two, or at most, three in a Day are sufficient
(except in extraordinary Cases) at four or five Hours Distance. But if one
answer the End it is enough. When it is intended to lie long in the Body, as in
the Gravel, bloody Flux, etc. it must be given in small Quantity, as from four
Ounces to six* But if several Glysters of different Purgatives are given in one
and the same Day, without Operation, give a small one of six Ounces of tepid
Water, and from two Drams to six of Sea Salt, mix and throw up, it will work
immediately.

Suppositories are useful, either when Glysters have been given in vain, or the
Person cannot retain Glysters, or cannot be laid in a right Posture to receive
them. But they are not proper where Costiveness is from much hardened
Excrements in the Rectum; or from a Crump, Convulsion, or Contraction of the
Sphimter. They may be made of Salt and Honey boiled up so stiff, that they will
roll up; or of the small End of a Candle dipped in sweet Soap, and put up; or
of Salt and Hierapicra boiled up in Honey; they should be dipped in Oil before
they are put up.

Injections are sometimes Decoctions of Roots, Herbs, or Seeds in Water,
strained and mixed with other Things, as Honey, to throw up with a large
Syringe or Glister pipe into the Womb or Yard; or are sometimes of distilled
Waters and Honey; sometimes of Powders and Water, as Rhasis, white Troches and
Camphire, of Sugar of Lead, etc. or of mere Emulsions made with Turpentine, the
Yolk of an Egg, and Linseed Oil, with Water, etc.

Pessories are made with proper Powders mixed with the Yolk of an Egg to the
Consistence of an Ointment, and rubbed over a Piece of Gentian, or other spungy
or stimulant Root, or scattered in Wool, and put up; or Juice of Herbs and
Powders, and Wool dipped in them. They should have a String tied to their lower
End; if sharp, they should not lie in above an Hour, if mild, all Night; they
are fittest after bathing. If they give Pain, use Oil of Violets and Mucilage
of Fleabane after; Gravids should not use them.

Gargles are used, either for Inflammations of the Mouth and Throat, as cooling
acid, sub-astringent Washes, or for cleansing the Mouth and Throat from Phlegm;
or for cooling, softening, and moistening, as in Fevers. All these are made,
either of boiled Herbs and Vinegar, Spirit of Vitriol, Honey, or Syrups put to
the strained Liquor. Or of soft, smooth, mucilaginous Decoctions and Syrups. Or
of Simple Waters, Syrups and Acids, etc.

Eye-waters are chiefly for cooling and repelling sharp Humors, as of
Rose Water and Rhasis's, Troches, or Rose Water, with Sugar of Lead; or a few
Grains of white Vitriol in Rose Water; or le^vigated Tutty, or Calumy Stone
calcined, and put in Rose Water, or a little Aloes dissolved in it, etc.

The Reader, by comparing this Appendix with the foregoing Work, may observe
what Forms or Things, gathered from ancient or modern Writers, are either
obsolete, rejected, or retained in the present Practice; though in Complaisance
and Justice to several former eminent Men, I have given several Things in their
own Forms, yet herein advertised the Reader what of them are useless, or
thereby spoiled. Out of a Multitude of Services done my Neighbors and Poor, in
a Series of many Years Practice and Observation* chiefly by our own British
Vegetables, or Product, I have given the few following References, wherein the
first Figure indicates the Page, the second the Line; and here observe, that
where the Number of the Line is in Roman Letters, it shows a more frequent
Success. Many more might have been added, but these are sufficient to justify
the Design, recommend the Work, and encourage the charitably disposed to a
frequenter Use, greater Dependence upon, and better Management of our own
Simples, especially as they have here several valuable Receipts never published
before. I heartily wish the Sick and Poor great Advantage from the Whole.

PAGE 1. l. 22. -- p. 2. l. X^XV. -- p. 14. l. V.34. -- p. 5. l. 6.12.13 -- p.
6. l. 33. -- p. 8. l. III. l. VIII to XII. -- p. 9. l. 16. -- p. 10. l. VIII.
-- p. II. l. 18. and l. XXVI. l. 29. -- p. 16. l. 10.20.26. -- p. 18. l. 27. --
p. 20. all after l. 9. -- p. 23. l. XII. -- p. 24. l. 11.14. l. XVII. l. XXIV.
scarce ever fails in curable Cases, after Mercurials, Tartar regenerate, etc.
have failed. -- p. 25. l. 14 and 22. -- p. 28. l. II. -- p. 30. l. 26. -- p.
31. l. XXVII. -- p. 32. l. XVI.XVII. -- p. 33. l. 4. -- p. 34. l. XXX. -- p.
37. l. V. -- p. 39. l. 33. -- p. 40. l. XXXV. -- p. 42. l. 4. -- p. 24.26. and
l. 28. and l. 30.34. -- p. 43. l. 2.10.12.13. -- p. 44. l. VII. -- p. 45. l XV.
-- p. 50. l. 1. -- p. 51. l. 1.XXI.24.25. -- p. 53. l. 11.6.17. -- p. 55. l.
IV.31. -- p. 56. l. VII. -- p. 57. l. 16.XIX. -- p. 58. l. X.33. -- p. 62. l.
XXI. -- p. 63. l. 25.30. -- p. 64. l. 5.XVI. -- p. 65. l. 32. -- p. 66. l.
XXII. -- p. 67. l. XXIV.28. -- p. 71. l. 9.11.XV.XVIII.21. -- p. 73. l.
XXIV.XXXII. -- p. 74. l. 11.28. -- p. 76. l. 1. -- p. 77. l. XI.XXXII. p. 78.
l. III. -- p. 77.35. -- p. 82.3.17. -- p. 83. l. 18.20. -- p. 84. l. 5.XXVII.
-- p. 85. l. 10.XXXII. -- p. 86. l. 1. -- p. 87.XIII. -- p. 92. l. 1. -- p. 95.
l. XXV.XXX. -- p. 96.XX.29. -- p. 98. l. 1. -- p. 99. l. 9.12.18. -- p.
100.13.20. -- p. 101.X. -- p. 103. l. 24. -- p. 104. l. 14.26. -- p. 107.19. to
108.9.28. -- p. 109 5. -- p. 110.5. -- p. 111.31. -- p. 113.XXIV. -- p. 124. l.
1. -- p. 125. l. 1.V. -- p. 126.2.9. -- p. 127. l. 2.7.IX.13. -- p. 129.1 to 8.
-- p. 137.XXXI. -- p. 138. l. 6. -- p. 142. l. 10.21. -- p. 143.10. -- p. 145.
l. 29. -- p. 147. l. 23. -- p. 151.34. -- p. 152.3.11. -- p. 153.1.14. -- p.
156.XXII.26. -- p. 159. l. XXXIII.XXXV. -- p. 161.30.32 -- p. 162. l. 1.11. --
p. 166.XVI. -- p. 169. l. 6. to 9. -- p. 173. l. 6. -- p. 176. l. XIII. p. 128.
l. 27. -- p. 180.VIII.12.13.33. -- ^ 190. l. XVII. -- p. 191. l. 6. -- p.
192.6. -- p. 196.XXIII. -- p. 198.XXIX. -- p. 200.33. -- p. 202. l. VII. -- p.
209. l. 5.27. -- p. 210.10. -- p. 215. l. 24. -- p. 218. l. XXII. -- p. 224. l.
XIX. -- p. 225. l. 25. XXXV. -- p. 232. l. 32. -- p. 233. l. 6. -- p. 234. l.
4. -- p. 239. l. 6. -- p. 241. l. XXXV. -- p. 246. l. 5.11. -- p. 248. l. 7* --
p. 252. l. 17. -- p. 268. l. XXII. -- p. 270. l 10. -- p. 279. l. 21. -- p.
286. l. 28.30. -- p. 295. l. 8. -- p. 304. l. 11.26. -- p. 305. l. 8.

Mr. BARTRAM's APPENDIX: CONTAINING Descriptions, Virtues and Uses, of sundry
PLANTS of these Northern Parts of America; and particularly of the newly
discovered Indian Cure for the Venereal Disease.
ARALIA, called by some Spikenard, by others Wild Liquorice; this bears large
Clusters of Berries, ripe in September, which are pleasant and wholesome to
eat: The Roots are of a balsamic Nature; the back Inhabitants use them to cure
fresh Wounds; they bruise the Roots, then pour a little Spring Water to them,
mixing them together, which brings the Mass to a mucilaginous Balsam, which
they apply with good Success; the Roots chewed, and the Juice swallowed, help
the Pains of the Loins.

Aralia Caul Nudo, commonly called Sarsaparilla, has a long creeping Root,
something like the Spanish, but is really a very different Plant, yet of great
Virtue. The Decoction daily drank as Diet-drink, is much commended for
cleansing the Blood, and curing a Dropsy; and outwardly applied is extolled for
curing of the Shingles, and cleansing and heali^g of Ulcers.

Erigeren, used by some for the Bite of a Snake; it bears a white Flower in the
Spring, something like a large Daisy, about a Foot high, the Roots run under
the Surface of the Ground in small Fibers or Threads, of a hot Taste: The
Indians pound this Root, and apply it to cold hard Tumors to dissolve them.

Saururus. Some of the Dutch call it Aristolochia, I suppose, because the Shape
of the Leaf has some Resemblance to that Plant. It grows in wet Places, and
produces a long Spike of white Flowers; the Root is spungy like a Rush, and
runs near the Surface of the Mud.

IT is of excellent Virtue; being made into a Poultice, and applied to sore and
imposthumated Breasts, it ripens and heals them. The dried Leaves made into a
Tea and drank, is commended for the Pains of the Breast and Back.

Collinsonia. This Plant grows five Feet high; has, in the Fall, after
Harvest, a Smell, something like Hops; the Seed is much like Sage Seed. This,
in some Parts of the Country, is called Horse Weed, not only because Horses are
very greedy of it, but it also is good for sore galled Backs. The Root is hard
and knobby, and is much commended for Women's After-pains, being pounded,
boiled, and the Decoction drank.

Chelidonium, or Sanguinaria, called by the Country People, Red Root, or
Turmerick. The Leaves broken yield a yellow Juice, like the Garden Celandine;
the Flower is white, and opens early in the Spring; the Root dried and powdered
is commended by Dr. Colden, as a Cure for the Jaundice, the Powder being given
to the Weight of a Dram in Small Beer; and by others, for the Bite of a
Rattle-Snake.

Virga-aurea, or that Species of Golden Rod, that is so famous for the Bite of
a Rattle-Snake. This elegant Species has slender purple Stalks, rising a Foot
high, with a Spike of fine yellow Flowers for near one third Part of the Length
of the Plant; the Flowers grow out of the Bosom of the Leaves, three or four in
little Tufts. This is extolled as a very effectual Cure for the Bite of a
Rattle-Snake; the Herb boiled, and the Decoction drank, and the warm Herb
applied to the Wound. It is used with good Success to cure the Swelling of the
Throat and Neck, and Pains of the Breast, it being a powerful Dissolver of
viscid Humors.

Jacea, called by some Throat-wort, because of its Virtue for the Cure of
Sore-Throats. The Roots are as big as a Hiccory Nut, with some small Fibers;
the Stalk is about four or five Feet high, without any Branches, with long
narrow Leaves growing alternately thereon; the Flowers put forth toward the
Top, surrounding the Stalk in a long Spike of purple Flowers.

THE Root bruised and boiled in Water, and the Decoction drank and gargled in
the Mouth, and the Root applied, with warm Cloths dipped in the hot Decoction,
to the Throat, gives Relief, it being of a warm discussing Nature.

Uvulary. It was formerly taken for a Species of Solomon's Seal, having smooth
Leaves like it; but the Stalk grows through the Leaf, and the little yellowish
Flowers something resemble a Lilly; it grows about a Foot high, the Root is
white, and spreads like a Crow's Foot; some People call it by that Name for
that Reason; it is a good Root for gathering and breaking a Boil, and makes a
fine Salve for healing Wounds and Ulcers; it makes a sine maturating Poultice.

Triosteospermum, called in our Northern Colonies Dr. Tinker's Weed; in
Pennsylvania, Gentian; and to the Southward Fever Root, where it is used for
the Fever and Ague: With us it was used with good Success for the Pleurisy, and
in New England, for a Vomit. It is a powerful Worker, a little churlish, yet
may be a noble Medicine in skilful Hands.

Blazing-Star, as it is called by the back Inhabitants, by others, Devil's-
bit, both fanciful Names; the Leaves spread on the Ground, four or five from
one Root, and are three or four Inches long; and near one broad; in June it
shoots up a Stalk eighteen Inches long, with a fine Spike of white Flowers six
Inches long; it grows plentifully in the back Parts of the Country, on dry rich
Soil; the Root is white, and about as thick as a Pipe-shank, and extremely
bitter.

THIS precious Root is a great Resister of fermenting Poisons, and the grievous
Pains of Bowels, taken in Powder, or the Root bruised and steeped in Rum, of
which take a Spoonful at once, and (...) often as Need requires, until the
Pains remit.

Star-Grass. This has some Resemblance to the last, but the Leaves are
narrower and more pointed, and in Winter more yellow, and this grows in moist
Places, amongst Hurtle-berries, very plentiful in Jersey, and some low Grounds
in Pennsylvania and Maryland.

THE Decoction of this Root drank, eases the Pains of the Stomach and Bowels.

Liriodendrum, commonly called Poplar. The Bark of the Root steeped in Rum, and
the Rum drank, is much commended for the Cure of the Fever and Ague; and to the
Northward, for the Gout and Rheumatism.

Apocinum. From the Roots that run deep in the Ground, arise several hairy
Stalks about two Feet high, with narrow long Leaves set alternately round
thereon; at the Top grow large Tusts of orange-coloured Flowers, which are
succeeded by long Pods, containing flat Seeds, joined to white Down, which is
by the Wind carried away when the Seed is ripe and bursts open; this has been
for many Years used with good Success for the Cure of the Bloody Flux; the Root
must be powdered and given in a Spoonful of Rum, or rather as the Indians give
it* bruise the Root, and boil it in Water, and drink the Decoction: Peter Kalm
says it is excellent for the hysteric Passion.

Orchis. It has a Root as big as an Onion, it has one or two Leaves green all
Winter, which are six or seven Inches long, and two broad, striped with white
Lines from one End to the other. This Root bruised and applied to the Ears,
eases the Pains thereof, and helps to break Boils.

Contuarium Luteum, commonly called Ground Pine. It grows about a Span high,
its slender Branches spread all round from one small fibrous Root, like our
Pennyroyal, but as small as Wire, or the Leaves of Pine, from which it had its
Name; the little Flowers are yellow, succeeded by little red Pods on the Tops
of the Branches; it smells as strong as the Leaves of Pine; it commonly grows
on old poor Clay Ground; it is of excellent Virtue, being made into an Ointment
with Pennyroyal, Hemlock and Henbane (or it may do alone made into an
Ointment) for Bruises and Strains, if it be green, for it loses much of its
Virtue when dry, it being of an active penetrating Nature.

Elichrysum, called also Cotton-weed, or Life-everlasting, is very good for
Baths or Fomentations for cold Tumors, Bruises or Strains; it may be mixed with
Ground Pine.

Lobelia. This curious Plant rises from a fibrous Root to three or four Feet
high, with a Spike of blue Flowers surrounding the Stalk for near a Foot in
Length: It grows in rich shady Ground; i^ is a scarce Plant in many Parts of
the Country.

THE learned Peter Kalm (who gained the Knowledge of it from Colonel Johnson,
who learned it of the Indians, who, after great Rewards bestowed on several of
them, revealed the Secret to him) says, That the Roots of this Plant cures
the Pox much more perfectly and easily than any mercurial Preparations, and is
generally used by the Canada Indians, for the Cure of themselves, and the
French that trade amongst them, though deeply infected with it. They take a
Handful of the Roots, and boil them in a Quart of Water, and drink the
Decoction, beginning with Half a Pint at first, if the Patient be weak, then
increase the Dose every Day as he can bear its purging; but if he cannot bear it
every Day, let him omit it a Day or two, then take to it again, as he finds
Occasion, until he is cured: They wash the Ulcer with the Decoction; but if it
be deep and rotten, they put some Powder of the inner Bark of the Spruce-tree
into it, which helps to dry it up; but if the Disease is inveterate, they drink
the Decoction of Ranunculus Folio Reniformus. An old Sachem told Colonel
Johnson of another Shrub, with a red Root, from which proceeds several slender
Branches, eighteen Inches or two Feet long, on which grow Spikes of white
Flowers, which produce three-square black Seed-Pods; the Leaves some of our
People drink as Tea, and some smoke it with Tobacco; the Roots of this, bruised
and boiled, and the Decoction drank, the Sachem said, he rather preferred to
the Lobelia; but the Lobelia seems to be of the most general Use, and with
extraordinary Success.

More particular Directions how to use the Lobelia- Root for the Venereal
Disorder, obtained from the Indians, by Col. J.

AFTER making a Decoction of it, the Patient is to drink about-two Gills of it
very early in the Morning, fasting, the same before Dinner, and Bedtime. Add
or diminish as you find it agree with the Patient's Constitution: The third Day
begin Bathing, and continue it twice a Day, until the Sores are well cleansed,
and partly healed, then use the Lotion but once a Day till quite well;
observing all the Time to use a slender Diet (vegetable Food, and small Drink)
as in other Courses of Physic, a Salivation excepted. These are the Directions
I have had from the Person who gave me the Secret.

Veronica Spicata. This Plant, from a fibrous Root, raises two or three Stalks
from three to five Feet high, with three or four Leaves set at one Joint (if
they are set across) with a long Spike of white Flowers on the Top of each
Stalk.

ONE Handful of the Roots of this Plant, boiled in a Pint of Milk, and drank,
is used by the back Inhabitants for a powerful Vomit.

Eupatorium Folium Perfoliatum. This Plant grows in moist Places; the Stalks
grow (through the Leaves, which are rough and pointed) two or three Feet high,
branching out toward the Top, producing a large Bunch of white Flowers, which
are succeeded by fine Down, which blows away with the Seed.

THIS Herb boiled in Water, and the Decoction drank, is commended for a Vomit
in intermitting Fevers, and used as a Fomentation for Pains in the Limbs.

FINIS.

