A LETTER TO A FRIEND: CONTAINING REMARKS ON A DISCOURSE Proposing a
PREPARATION of the BODY FOR THE SMALLPOX: AND The Manner of receiving the
INFECTION.

With some PRACTICAL HINTS relating to the Cure of the DUMB AGUE, LONG FEVER,
the BILIOUS FEVER, and some other Fevers, incidental to this Province.

Non Satietas, non Fames, neque aliud quicquam, quod modum naturae excesserit,
bonum. HIPPOCRAT. Sect. 2. Aph. 4. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN, and D.
HALL. MDCCLI.

A LETTER TO A FRIEND, etc.
SIR,
IN Answer to your Request, I have sent you my Sentiments upon the late
Pamphlet, entitled, A Discourse on the Preparation of the Body for the
SMALLPOX, etc. I had resolved at first to confine myself to what had been said
in our Newspapers; but upon a Review, I found nothing touched upon would give
you the Satisfaction I conceived you might expect; the Foibles and little
Vanities of the Author, which I found chiefly insisted on in those Papers, were
not of that Consequence, as the Methods proposed by the Author, for securing
Mankind from the dire Effects of that malignant Disease: I resolved therefore
to take an impartial View of the whole, with that Candor and Clearness (the
Bounds of a Letter would allow me, in a Matter of such Importance) which in a
cursory Manner, you will find in the following Lines.

DISCOURSE, Page 8. My principal Design is, to offer some Things concerning the
Preparation of the Body, and the Manner of receiving the Infection; which, from
any Thing I have yet seen, appears to me, never to have been considered with
that Attention the Importance of the Subject deserves.

REMARK. This Charge against the Learned of the Faculty, upon due
Consideration, will be found a Mistake in our Author himself, for want of
Attention to the preparatory Methods, previously to be considered; which cannot
be fixed upon, before the State and Condition of the Humors of the Body is
known, which upon the first Invasion of the Disease, is to be collected from
the Disposition of the Fever arising from thence; and as it is different in
different Subjects, General Rules of Diet, without Regard to particular
Constitutions, are absurd. Arbuthnot, second Edit. Fol. 218.
no general stated Methods for preparing the Body, previous to the Invasion of
the Disease, can promise any real Advantage to the Patient: And if the
Gentleman will consider the Writings of learned and experienced Physicians, he
will find, they have treated this Subject, as the Nature of the Case
necessarily indicates, not only with Attention, but with a superior Judgment,
above the Reach of those, whose natural Genius, or perhaps Opportunities of
receiving Instruction in the Art of Healing, may not render them capable of
understanding, much less able to prescribe Precepts, or Rules of Practice in a
Science, which as it is the most useful to Mankind, so is it the most worthy to
be esteemed before all others; and therefore not to be prostituted to the vain
Chimeras of a doubtful Hypothesis.

DISCOURSE, Page 10. It looks inflamed and sizy, exactly like the Blood of a
Person in a Pleurisy, or any other inflammatory Disorder; so nearly allied are
the Symptoms of this contagious Fever, to that of a simple inflammatory One.

REMARK. By our Author's Manner of here expressing himself, one would be led to
imagine he took a Pleurisy to be a simple inflammatory Disease; but this,
perhaps, may be for want of Attention to the antecedent Word Pleurisy,
otherwise it would represent the Author guilty of a capital Mistake, in his
Theory of Diseases: For a Pleurisy has always been looked upon, and treated by
the Learned of the Faculty, as an Inflammation of the worst Kind: But our
Author takes the Effect for the Cause, when he tells us (Page 10. Line 14.)
When the Disease is violent, the dangerous Appearances are all of the
gangrenous Kind, arising from a putrid Dissolution of the Blood. What putrid
Dissolution of the Blood there can be in a variolous Fever, before the
Appearance of the gangrenous State of the Pustules, cannot be easily
apprehended; for a variolous Fever is not ranged by Physicians among the Number
of putrid Fevers, but among those of the inflammatory Kind; and notwithstanding
the visible Putrefaction occasioned by the critical Discharge of the Pustules,
which determines the Inflammation to the Skin, and membranous Coverings of the
Throat and Viscera; yet the Putrefaction attending the Disease, is evidently
the Consequence of the gangrenous Appearances, and cannot be said to take its
Rise from a putrid Dissolution of the Blood, a Priori.

DISCOURSE, Page 11. Putrefaction is always occasioned by too much Heat.

REMARK. It is an undoubted Mistake, to suppose Putrefaction is always
occasioned by too much Heat, since it is known that Mortifications from a
Defect of natural Heat, in low dispirited Cases, have produced the highest
Degree of Putrefaction. In a History of the Plague, written by a Citizen of
London, in the Year 1665, we are told, that it was a common Thing to see
Persons drop down dead in the Streets, and in their Families, without any
previous Complaint, or Appearance of a Fever attending them, yet upon viewing
their Bodies after Death, or even when they were yet expiring, there appeared
the highest Degree of Rottenness and Putrefaction visible upon them: And it is
sufficiently known, that in a Deficiency of animal Heat, after large
Evacuations in the Dropsy, etc. the worst Symptoms of a Gangrene, and a
Putrefaction of both Solids and Fluids, have appeared: And it is also the
Opinion of eminent Physicians, that those fatal Symptoms of Putrefaction
attending the Plague, do arise from a Deficiency of animal Heat, being
extinguished by the deleterious Miasms of the Disease, by which the Motion of
the Blood is retarded, and the Humors do consequently putrify.

DISCOURSE, Page 11. Line 26. But Milk, and all Vegetables by Heat turn acid,
which is directly opposite to Putrefaction.

Page 12. Line 6. Blood, prepared chiefly from a sub-acid vegetable, or Milk
Diet, must be in general that State of the Body which is best fitted to receive
an inflammatory Distemper.

REMARK. It is a Mistake, to suppose Milk and vegetable Diet is always opposite
to Putrefaction, for it is known to Physicians, Arbuthnot's Essay on Aliments,
Chap. v. Sect. 16.
that Milk, but especially vegetable Diet, will turn to Putrefaction, and by a
faulty Digestion of the Stomach, will be converted into an acid Acrimony, the
immediate Cause of Head-achs, Deliriums, Pleurisies, Peripneumonies,
Ophthalmies, Tormina's of the Stomach and Bowels, and the worst Kinds of
inflammatory Disorders; from hence may prove as unfit a Preparative for
receiving the Infection of the SMALLPOX, as Food of either Fish or Flesh; it
is no easy Task for the most accurate Physician, to say, what Sort of Food or
Medicine is the most proper Preparative for receiving the SMALLPOX, without
previously knowing the true State of the Humors in the human Body: Idem, Chap.
iv. Sect. 1.
The Blood in Health, from the many Observations made upon it, has no
perceivable Alkaly or Acid to be found in it; so that Food or Medicine, which
may dispose the Humors of the Body to an acescent State, which Milk and
vegetable Diet may possibly do, must in Proportion dispose the Humors of the
Body to something contrary to Health, or what may be called morbid, and unfit
to undergo the Severity of a malignant Disease, of which Kind the SMALLPOX is
known to be; and also to prescribe a low, spare and refrigerating Diet, as
herein recommended, below what the Patient had been accustomed to, under a
regular Way of living, free from any known Disorder attending the human Frame,
must necessarily subject the Body to new and uncertain Changes; the Momentum of
the Blood (by substracting the accustomed Aliment) will hereby be reduced below
the necessary Standard of Health: From hence the animal Secretions will become
irregular and imperfect; and those Secretions, which otherwise would have been
made at the cuticular Glands and Extremities, will be made nigher the Heart,
and Fountain of animal Life: From hence the sensible and insensible
Perspiration, the gentle Breathings and benign Sweats, greatly conducive to the
carrying off the variolous Effluvia, will be lessened, if not wholly
suppressed: Hence the Miasmata, for want of the necessary Impetus of the
circulating Fluids, will be inverted: And from hence it is those dire Symptoms
afflicting the Brain and vital Parts do necessarily arise, which when attended
with an acid Acrimony, the common Case of Children and young Persons, do
frequently terminate in Inflammations, Gangrenes, putrid Fevers, Convulsions,
Deliquiums, etc. which often resist the most powerful Remedies: Alexipharmacs,
and the warm Expellers used to throw the variolous Disease on the cuticular
Glands, finding no Passage through their excretory Ducts, which are now become
dry, rigid and shut up, serve only to heighten the Inflammation and threatening
Symptoms: To attempt to reduce these Disorders by Bleeding or any other
Evacuation, in this low State of the circulating Fluids, is adding Strength to
the Disease, and exposing the Life of the Patient to the utmost Danger; which
fatal Consequences, from a low milk -- and especially vegetable Diet, have been
observed to happen in Europe, as well as in the Colonies of North America.

DISCOURSE, Page 14. It would be of the greatest Benefit to Mankind to find out
a specific Medicine which would either expel it entirely, or alter it so, as
to render it quite innocent, or mitigate its malignant Quality.

Page 15. But the Trial of an easy operating antimonial and mercurial Medicine
as a Preparative, can be of no Danger.

REMARK. That excellent Physician, Dr. Mead's Discourse on the Smallpox, Page
58
Dr. Mead, has sufficiently exposed the Folly of hunting after Specificks, the
common Amusements of Ignorance, or Tricks of low Craft, to draw Pence out of
the Pockets of the unthinking Populace, who generally admire those most who
have the Art of deceiving them best. To receive a Medicine as a specific
Preparative, Alterative, or Expeller, etc. in a Case where Life is at Stake,
from the bare Conjecture of one Person only, especially one, who we have Reason
to think has been deceived, in his high Opinion of a milk and vegetable Diet,
which he recommends as the most beneficial Preparative, in receiving the
Infection of the SMALLPOX, would be as Idle as to take a Journey to the Moon,
because certain Astronomers do conceit it is inhabited, and which upon Trial
may prove of as little Advantage to the Healths of Mankind, as the many
Nostrums, and Specificks, for the Cure of Cancers, and other extraordinary
Diseases, which we daily hear pretended to, by boasting Quacks, and bold
undertaking Mountebanks: As to the Discovery of the Specific here pretended
to, especially the Mercurius Dulcis; it has of a long Date been approved of as
a beneficial Medicine in the SMALLPOX, by the excellent Ludovicus, Etmuller,
and others; which also has been long and repeatedly made use of in this Case,
in Philadelphia, with the Addition of an antimonial Preparation; and though it
may be allowed the Place of a good Preparative (by cleansing the Viscera and
Organs of Secretion) being given immediately before the variolous Fever
appears, or in the Manner Ludovicus advises, i. e. so as to open the Body with
a Stool or two, upon the first Invasion of the Disease, yet the benign Effects
of this Medicine, will not admit of the high Character of a Specific, by
performing the mighty Feats our Author is led to imagine; or will it deserve
the Pains of writing a Discourse on purpose to recommend the Use of it, as a
specific Medicine in the SMALLPOX, without some other more interesting
Consideration, which, perhaps, might have been in our Author's View.

DISCOURSE, Page 16. I gave them a Fortnight's Preparation in the Manner
aforesaid, and then they came freely into the Room where the others were. Two
of them took the Disease, yet in the most moderate Manner, so as never to lie
by an Hour with it: But the Third could not catch it at all, notwithstanding he
slept in the Bed with his Brothers and Sisters, with the SMALLPOX upon them.

REMARK. (...) no uncommon Case, where there are several Persons in a Family to
have the SMALLPOX, to see them differently handled by the Disease, so that
some will labor under the most severe Symptoms, when others will either have
the Disease very favorably, or perhaps no Appearance of the Disease at all,
except a small Fever, and this very often scarce perceivable: Nor is it an
unusual Thing, where a malignant Disease is epidemical, to see Persons who are
first taken ill of the Disease, in a Family, Dr. Sydenham's Works, 7th Edit.
Fol. 137.
as well as in a populous City, to have the Disease in the most severe Manner,
whilst those who were not touched with the Disease at its first Appearance,
have had it very lightly, and some not at all, at least not to be perceived:
And this, any one who has read the History of the Plague in London, of the Year
1665; or Dr. Sydenham, on the SMALLPOX; or has had the Opportunity of making
the least Observation himself, will find a Truth not to be disputed. And
therefore the Case of the Family which the Author of the Discourse relates, can
be no certain Proof of the beneficial Effects of these preparatory Medicines,
or Methods he had made use of, in the Cases he is pleased to lay before us.

DISCOURSE, Page 17. The more hot and putrescent the Blood is, the more tense
and active the Vessels are, the apter they will be to imbibe any thing applied
to them; an Instance of this we see in acute Fevers, where that is the State of
the Blood and Vessels; let a Person in this Condition drink as much as he will,
the Moisture applied to the Vessels of the Mouth and Throat is sucked up, and
they quickly again feel parched and dry, which evidently shows this Power of
Absorption in the Vessels.

REMARK. It is an Absurdity scarce reconcilable with Common Sense, to
attribute the Thirst and Dryness of the Mouth and Throat, in ardent Fevers, to
the Absorption of the Vessels, when it is visibly owing to a very contrary
Cause; i. e. the Obstruction of the excretory Ducts of the salival and
sublingual Glands, and Vessels of the Mouth and Throat, being shut up with a
dry and viscid Lymph, the Consequence of an ardent Fever; in which Case, the
Liquids taken into the Mouth, instead of our Author's imagined Absorption,
being rarefied by the Heat and Dryness of the Parts, fly off in a Vapor,
without the Possibility of finding Admittance into the Pores or inhalent
Vessels, which are now entirely shut up; from hence the Mouth and Throat
necessarily feel parched and dry, so that we might with as much Propriety of
Reason and Philosophy, say, That a dried Chip, whose Pores and Surface were
filled and smeared over with a tough and adhesive Glue, would therefore suck up
more Water into its Pores and bibulous Tubes, than a Chip of the same Kind
would do, whose Surface was naked, and its Pores open and free from any foreign
Encumbrance.

DISCOURSE, Page 22. Should the Crisis be principally determined toward the
Arm, where the Inoculation was performed, the vital Parts will be in more
Danger of partaking of it, than if it was determined toward the Legs and Feet,
etc.

REMARK. This, upon a due Consideration of the Case here proposed, will appear
a Mistake; for it is known to Physicians and Men acquainted with the Art of
Healing, that Issues, Cupping-Glasses, Scarifications, Blisters, etc. applied
to the Arm, are frequently made use of to determine Pains, Inflammations and
Disorders of the Head, to the Inflammation brought on by their Application to
that Part; and it is equally reasonable to suppose, that the Scarifications
made on the Arm, in the Case of Inoculation, will have the same Effect; and
that the Derivation of the variolous Symptoms usually affecting the Head, will
by this Means be thrown on a less noble Part, and as a depending Part by its
near Situation, must be best suited for that Purpose; by which the
Inflammation, Delirium, etc. usually attending the Disease, will with more
Certainty be relieved, than can be expected at so great a Distance as the Leg
is known to be, from the Seat of those often fatal Symptoms: And it may here be
observed, that the fatal Symptoms, so justly complained of by our Author, are
such as is supposed by himself (Page 20) to attend the Disease received in the
natural Way only; but he has not produced us one Instance of these fatal
Symptoms attending the Disease under Inoculation in the Arm; nor do we believe
it is in his Power to produce one in an Hundred, or perhaps double that Number,
who have had the fatal Symptoms which he labors with the utmost Stretch of his
Imagination to support; except in those Cases, where large and deep Incisions
have been made in the Arm, with the Intent of giving a Drain to the variolous
Infection, which has been known to produce the very contrary Effect, by
contaminating the Juices of the Body, and producing Symptoms of the worst Kind;
but when the Inoculation has been performed by a Puncture in the Manner used in
Turkey, and in some other of the Eastern Countries, or by a small Incision, it
has not been known that any ill Accidents have happened to the Patient from an
Incision made in the Arm, simply considered, without some intervening Accident
arising from the Misconduct of the Patient, by exposing himself to cold Air, or
from the Physician's Prescriptions, in directing a low vegetable Diet,
Specificks, preparatory Doses, or such like Fooleries.

BUT it is still a Point of no small Difficulty to reconcile, How Inoculation
in the Arm should produce worse Consequences, than if the Operation had been
performed in the Leg; when, at the same time, our Author informs us (Page 22.
Line 14.) That the Operation performed in the Leg, is frequently attended with
Sores extremely difficult to heal, giving forth a corroding Matter, which both
cats and inflames the adjacent Parts. To remedy which he proposes his
Catholicon, the Jesuits -- Bark, the common Refuge of Ignorance, which too many
make use of in almost every Case, when they arrive to the Ne plus ultra of
their Practice: But notwithstanding our Author's high Opinion of this Drug, it
may deceive us; for it is no uncommon Thing to see putrid Ulcers so insect the
Humors of the Body, as to produce Hecticks, Mortifications, Atrophies, and
other fatal Diseases, which do frequently resist the Force of the most powerful
Remedies: Medical Essays, Edinb. Edit. Vol. 5. Page 104.
Doctor Monro himself, the mighty Advocate for the Use of the Bark in
Mortifications, Ulcers, and also in the SMALLPOX, frankly owns it is not
infallible; he ussures us, he has known it fail both in Mortifications and in
the SMALLPOX; and in this last Case recommends it only as useful in bringing
the variolous Matter to a kindly Digestion, and no farther. It must therefore
be the highest Degree of Imprudence and Folly, to hazard the Healths, and
perhaps the Lives of Mankind, upon the single Recommendation of a Medicine,
which upon Trial of its Effects may deceive our Expectations; especially when
we are assured of a Method, if rightly pursued, will not lay us under the
Necessity of running the Risque of a probable Evil, for the Sake of an
uncertain Good.

IT may not be an unnecessary Digression, to farther take Notice of an
Observation in Dr. Friend's Comment. on Fevers, Page 86, and 87.
Dr. Friend's Commentaries on Fevers, That a young Person seized with the
SMALLPOX, was on the ninth Day suddenly taken with Deliriums, Spasms in all
his Limbs, and a violent Fever; on the twelfth Day the Fever abated, upon which
the Bark was administered, and repeated in the Intermissions of the Fever, for
four Days successively, notwithstanding which, the Spasms, Fever and Delirium,
continued, without any Hopes of an Amendment.

MUCH the same has been observed in a Fever, which of late Years has appeared
in this Province, called by some People the Long Fever, or Dumb Ague, which are
chiefly different Appearances of the same Disease; for the Cure of which the
Bark has commonly been insisted on; and although it did sometimes give a Check
to the Return of the Fever-fits, it scarce ever wholly vanquished the Disease,
yet it has been found upon Trial, in many Cases, that the Preparations of
Tartar, Nitre, and gentle Cathartics, given in small Doses, and frequently
repeated, with Blisters to the Wrists, etc. have happily overcome the Disease,
which clearly shows the mistaken Opinion of those great Admirers of the Bark,
with Regard to its Nature and physical Use: And this Method of Practice is
agreeable to the Nature of the Disease; which from the Returns of the Fever,
(very often) without the usual cold Fits, and the critical Sweats not regularly
succeeding, shows that the Humors were highly viscid, through which the Glands
became crowded with an adhesive Lentor, mixed with a heated Bile; Tertiana
Febris, ab ea quae ardens nominatur, humors faciente non dissert, utraque enim
a flav^ bile fit. Galen Comment, in Aphor. Hippocrat, Book 4. Aph. 59.
which Galen, in his Commentaries on Hippocrates's Aphorisms, says, is the
Cause of a Tertian, as well as an Ardent Fever, the last of which does not
greatly differ from the Fever we are now treating of, except that the Dumb Ague
partakes more of what is called by some Physicians, a Glutinosum Spontaneum,
wherein neither the Heat or Motion of the Blood is so predominant: In which
Case to administer the Bark, can promise no real Advantage to the Patient, but
must render the Disease more fixed, and heighten the Symptoms attending it; and
by its Astringency purse up the Mouths of the Glands, and imprison the Disease;
by which it will not be so much removed, as for a Time suppressed, to farther
increase its morbid Viscidity; in which Case nothing can so effectually remove
the Disease, as promoting the Discharge of the intestinal Glands, where (as Dr.
Friend's Comment. on Fevers, Page 120.
Dr. Friend says) there is a less Resistance, and a freer Passage at the Mouths
of these Glands, than in any of the excretory Ducts of the whole Body: And
therefore when the Secretion of the cuticular Glands, or those of the Liver and
Viscera, by a Viscidity of the Fluids, are obstructed, nothing so effectually
removes the Disease, and relieves the Patient, as purging Medicines; which by
insinuating themselves into the Blood, do cause it to flow with a greater
Velocity, and at the same Time do attenuate and dissolve the Cohesion of the
Humors: Hence the morbid Lentor is dislodged from its Seat, and discharged
through Means of the Stimulus given (by the Cathartick) at the Mouths of the
intestinal Glands; and by increasing the Force of the Purge, Idem, Page 121.
will increase the Secretion of the Liver, as 1 is to 12; by which also the
yellow Bile, supposed by Galen to be the immediate Cause of this Disease, as
well as the morbid Viscidity, will be removed: And it is certain that those
Fevers which take their Rise from a Glutinosum Spontaneum, arising from a
Defect of Heat and Motion in the Blood, or an inflammatory Lentor of the
sanguinary Fluid, which last comes nighest, by its dry and feverish Heat, to
that Species of the Disease called the Long Fever, after using nitrous
Preparations, which cool and liquify the heated Lentor; and the tartarous Ones,
which greatly dissolve Grumosities, and cleanse the Glands of the Liver,
Spleen, Pancreas and Mesentery, from the viscid Humors, especially Salt of
Tartar, mixed with some proper Vehicle and diluting Drinks, suited to the
different Stage of the Disease; or (...) Cream of Tartar, with sometimes also
the Addition of Camomile Flowers, the Testaceae, Cinnabar of Antimony,
Snake-Root, AEthiops Mineral, Flowers of Sulphur, or even the Bark itself,
which may be necessary to digest, attenuate or dissolve, or by their Weight
dislodge or prepare the Disease, by which it may be more effectually overcome;
these regularly given, as the different State or Species of the Fever may best
admit: Nothing, we are certain, from repeated Trials, will so safely remove
these Dumb Agues or Long Fevers; and also some of those of the putrid, as well
as those of the bilious Kind, as proper Catharticks, and Blisters to the
Extremities, with the above Alteratives and diluting Drinks, suited to the
particular Nature of the Disease; in which Cases to administer the Bark alone,
is without doubt a Contra-indication in the Cure of these Diseases, especially
before the morbid Viscidity of the Humors are removed: And we have frequently
known this Method effectually remove a Tertian Fever, when the Bark alone, has
afforded no real Advantage to the Sick; except frequent Returns of the Disease
might be thought a Benefit to the Patient.

Dr. Friend's Comment. on Fevers, Page 112, and 113.
TO this Place might be referred, a Disease called by Dr. Friend, an Erysipelas
of the Head, attended with a high Fever, Delirium, and an Erysipelas; which
overspreads the Face, Neck, and Ears, with an intense Redness, which swells to
an exceeding Bulk, in which Case Cathartick Medicines were found the most
effectual, in removing the Disease: Which Case might very probably have been
the same, of which a young Person in the SMALLPOX, was in an extraordinary
Manner afflicted in this City.

IT is to be observed, that the above Digression being chiefly intended to
oppose the Mistake of some Physicians, in their depending on the Cortex Peru,
as an infallible Specific in the Cure of some particular Diseases; it became
necessary to show from Reason and Experience, that Medicines of a contrary
Nature were the only effectual Means for the Cure of those Diseases, amongst
which the Yellow Fever is justly enough mentioned, as one of that Number; but
as this Disease is of a more complicated and malignant Nature, it will be
necessary to call in further Aids and Assistance, in overcoming this truly
pestilential Disease, and therefore we thought it proper in this Place, to give
a short History of the Methods used by us in the several Kinds and Stages
thereof.

THE first Appearance of the Bilious Fever (called also the Yellow Fever) in
this Province, was in July, 1741. and in August, 1747. it made a second Visit;
at its first Appearance it seemed, especially after three or four Weeks, to
show a Disposition more inclining to a remarkable Inflammation of the animal
Spirits, than at its Return in the Year 1747, in which Year, the animal Spirits
seemed not so much exasperated by an inflammatory Heat, as extinguished by the
deleterious Miasma of the Disease, which introduced Gangrenes and
Mortifications on the Stomach and Viscera, succeeded with black Vomits and
cadaverous Stools; in both Cases the Malignity seemed to exert its dire Efforts
on the Stomach and Liver: Which of the two was the first Receptacle of this
cruel Disease, we cannot say; but certain it was, that a much heated acrid
Bile, was the proximate and instrumental Cause of the tragical Appearances.

To reduce what we have farther to say on this Disease into as narrow a Compass
as possible, we shall give as brief a History of the Disease, in the two Years
in which it visited this Province, as the Limits of our Letter will allow, to
show the pathognomick Signs, and Difference of the Disease, as well as the
different Methods of Cure used in each.

IN the Year 1741. the Patient generally complained of an excessive Pain and
Heat in his Stomach, a great Anxiety, and Disquietude, with a Pain of the Head,
a quick tremulous Pulse, and a feverish Heat, which seemed to take its Rise,
not so much from an Inflammation of the sanguinary Fluids, as from the animal
Spirits, and nervous Bodies being stimulated and disturbed by the acrid and
overheated Bile, lodged in the Stomach and Viscera; that this was the Cause of
the Disease, appears very probable from the Case of a Person (now living) taken
ill of the Disease, who frequently would jump out of Bed in a seeming delirious
Surprise, attended with great Anxiety and Horror, who, when he came to himself,
said it was occasioned by something darting like a Flash of Fire from his
Stomach, through the Muscles of his Side and Neck, and discharged itself with a
shocking Explosion into his Brain; which Description of its Passage from the
Stomach to the Brain, shows, I conceive, that the nervous Fluid being heated,
rarefied, and put into a tumultuous Disorder by the Mediation of the Parvagum
Nerves in the Stomach communicating with the Brain, and being perhaps propelled
by Means of an electrical Effort, or by Sir Isaac Newton's elastick Spirit, was
the Cause of this surprising Sensation: From hence, and from the universal
Tremors, Anxieties, and Disquietudes: the great Disorder of the Spirits and
nervous System were clearly manifest; in which Case to administer Vomits,
greatly exasperated the Symptoms, and instead of relieving the Patient, brought
on an irremediable Vomiting, Hiccough, and Inflammation of the Stomach; yet
sometimes a little warm Water, to cleanse the Stomach from the acrid Bile, was
of Service; Bleeding the Patient, with a View to abate the feverish Heat, was
succeeded with a Debility of the Pulse, and Sinking of the Spirits; no warm
Cordial or Alexipharmacs, did seem to agree with the Disease; in this Case a
Dose of Glaubers Salt, dissolved in Sack-whey, or If the Heat at the Stomach
was great, in Barley-drink, and repeated daily for three or four Days
successively, greatly conduced to the removing of the Pain and Heat at the
Stomach, with large Draughts of Chicken-broth, Sack-whey or Barley-drink, used
in the Working; which Purge was generally succeeded with a large Discharge of a
green acrid Bile, which sensibly relieved the Patient: And in the intermediate
Times of taking the Salt, the Patient had frequently given him, a Spoonful of
Riverius's Anti-emetick, which was made with Half a Dram of Salt of Tartar
dissolved in two Spoonfuls of Juice of Lemons, with the Addition of a little
Treacle-water, and Spirit of Mint; and sometimes Lapis Contrayerva, judiciously
mixed with Nitre, Saffron, Cochineal and Castor, given every four Hours in
Sack-whey; and after the Stomach and Bowels had been sufficiently cleansed from
the distempered Bile, Blisters to the Neck and Wrists, with Sudorificks,
Restoratives and Pearl Juleps, rarely failed of bringing the Patient to a happy
Recovery.

IN the Year 1747. the Pain and Heat at the Stomach was not so generally
complained of by the Patient, especially in the first Days of the Illness, as
in the Year 1741. but the Pains of the Head, Back and whole Body, like
wandering rheumatick Pains, were more perceivable; nor was the nervous Heat, or
deadly Vomitings so frequent, especially in the first two or three Days of the
Illness, nor was the Pulse altogether so weak and tremulous; so that in a
Plethora it would sometimes bear once Bleeding; gentle Vomits of warm Water, or
Carduus-tea, etc. upon a Sickness at the Stomach, might be taken with Advantage
to the Patient: But although those Symptoms were not on the first two, or three
Days violent, yet very often when the Patient was thought to have past the
worst of the Disease, he was seized with all the fatal Appearances of
Malignity, viz. Hiccoughs, Anxieties, violent Pains of the Stomach, feverish
Heats, and black Vomitings, succeeded with cold Sweats and Faintings, which
generally concluded with cadaverous Stools, the fatal Presages of a deadly
Mortification of the Stomach and Viscera; in which Case the above Medicines and
Methods used in the Year 1741. judiciously made use of at the first Appearance
of the Disease, were found to answer the wished for End. But when, from the
flattering Appearances of the Disease, or mistaken Expectations from the Use of
other Medicines, the proper Methods had been neglected in the first Days of the
Disease, the Malignity so far prevailed, as to resist the most powerful
Remedies.

IT may be necessary further to observe, That the Fever of the Year 1747. of
which we are now treating, did distinguish itself from the preceding Year 1741.
by a large and copious Discharge by Vomit, and sometimes by Stool, of a grumous
Fluid, not much unlike Coffee-grounds, which sometimes appeared mixed with
Blood and rotten Membranes, this was called the Black Vomit, which before the
Mixture of Blood and rotten Membranes did appear (which were deadly Symptoms)
would often yield to the Use of the above Remedies; but when it proved
difficult to be stopped (which would greatly aggravate the fatal Symptoms) the
only Remedy which appeared effectual in the Case, was a Mixture of distilled
Vinegar and Spirit of Mint, which sometimes would put a Stop to the Vomiting,
even when the fatal Symptoms had made their Appearance. And it is farther to be
observed, that in the Disease of the preceding Year, acid Medicines, even Juice
of Lemons, were for the most Part disagreeable to the sick Patient; yet in this
Year 1747. they had a better Effect, and were generally, both more acceptable
and useful to the Patient, especially Spiritus Nitri Dulcis, mixed with a mild
Cordial Julep, which greatly cooled and refreshed the sick and much disturbed
Stomach; to which Purpose, Tartar-whey greatly contributed; and sometimes a
gentle composing Draught, which much refreshed the Sick, after the violent Heat
and Rage of the Disease was over; provided the low and vapid Condition of the
Spirits (which in this Case was very perceivable) did not forbid the Use of
this otherwise comfortable Medicine.

FROM the above I think it is evident, that Catharthicks, by promoting a
Secretion of the distempered Bile, and cleansing the Stomach and Viscera, were
the most advantageous. Medicines in the Cure of this Bilious Fever, especially
since it appears, that the Disease was of a Nature which would not admit of
waiting, for either Digestion, or critical Days; so that to have rigorously
obeyed the Aphorism of Hippocrates, Concocta non cruda, medicanda sunt, would
have exposed the Patient to the utmost Fury of this most destructive Disease.

As to our Author's supposed Excellence of the Bark, in the Cure of putrid
Ulcers, notwithstanding the Recommendations of Dr. Monro, and others, it has
not been found, in many Trials which have been made of it in that Case, to do
more than might have been expected from Wine medicated with Cinnamon; and yet
much short of an Aqua Calcis suited to the Temperament of the Patient, and
other Circumstances attending the Case: And it is highly reasonable to believe,
that the Cures supposed by Dr. Monro, Medical Essays, Edinb. Edit. Vol. 3. Page
38. Idem Ibid, Vol. 4. Page 53, 59, and 62.
to have been effected by the Bark, in Mortifications, might with as great
Probability of Truth, been attributed to the Scarifications, Fomentations, and
the other Remedies; which they at the same Time industriously made use of in
that Case; which are known to be often effectual in the Cure of this much
dreaded Disease: And indeed it is not improbable, that this may be the real
Truth of the Matter, since we daily see Men so fond of an Hypothesis they have
once entertained, that they will shut their Eyes against the clearest Evidence
of Reason and Sense.

BUT to return to our Author: It will here be worth our Notice to consider, how
the variolous Infection applied to an Incision, made in the Arm, should affect
the Brain, by Means of Arteries terminating in the Part, where the Incision was
made: The Arteries (says our Author, Page 22. Line 2.) which supply the Arms,
come from the Subclavians, and they derive their Original from the ascending
Trunk of the Aorta. But how an Artery at its Extremity, should convey the
variolous Infection to Parts far above it, will be as difficult, as to say, by
what Means a Stone shall raise itself up into the middle Region of the Air,
without the Help of a mechanical Power, to repel the Force of Attraction: The
Blood in the Extremities of the Arteries (by their Anastomosis with the Veins)
is returned back to the Heart, where by Means of the ascending and descending
Trunks of the Vena Cava uniting in one, they discharge their Contents into the
right Ventricle of the Heart; where the whole Mass of refluent Blood is there
mixed, and from thence is conveyed by the Aorta into all Parts of the Body; so
that from the stated Laws of Circulation, it does not seem very possible, that
the Infection should be conveyed toward the Head, rather than the more
inferior Parts of the Body; therefore what the Gentleman supposes, That it
would be much to the Benefit and Safety of the Patient, is an Imagination not
founded on the Laws or Principles of physical Learning, which he so highly lays
Claim to.

THUS Sir, I have finished what I at first proposed, which was to give you my
Sentiments upon that Part of the Discourse, which more particularly relates to
the Preservation of Persons laboring under that too often severe Illness, the
SMALLPOX; and if what I have done may conduce to give you a just Caution to
avoid the Vanity of Hypothesis and ill grounded Conceits, I shall have my End:
For I do assure you, it was neither Vanity, or an Itch of Writing, which led me
to undertake a Task of this Nature; but to detect Mistakes in a Matter which so
highly concerns the Welfare of Mankind.

SIR, Your most respectful humble Servant, JOHN KEARSLEY.


