Mr. Mather's FUNERAL DISCOURSE On Occasion of the Death of His ROYAL HIGHNESS
The PRINCE.

A Funeral Discourse PREACHED On the Occasion of the Death of The High,
Puissant and most Illustrious PRINCE FREDERICK LEWIS, Prince of Great Britain,
Electoral Prince of Brunswick-Lunenburgh, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall,
etc.

In the Audience of The Honorable SPENCER PHIPS, Esquire Lieutenant Governor and
Commander in Chief, And the Honorable His MAJESTY'S COUNCIL, Of the Province of
the MASSACHUSETTS BAY: On May 22d. 1751. At BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND.

By Samuel Mather, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Boston.

Maximus Ille quidem -- Spes publica vixit:
Et, qua natus erat, Gloria summa Domus:
Sed Mortalis erat.
OVID. ad LIVIAM. BOSTON: Printed by John Draper, Printer to His (...) and
Council. 1751.

At a COUNCIL held at the Council Chamger in Boston, on Wednesday the 22 d of
May, 1751.
VOTED,

THAT Josiah Willard, Andrew Oliver, and Thomas Hutchinson, Esqrs. give the
Thanks of this Board to the Rev. Mr. Samuel Mather, for his Sermon preached
this Day on Occasion of the Death of His Royal Highness the PRINCE OF WALES;
and to desire a Copy of him for the Press.

Copy examined, per J. WILLARD, Secr.

A FUNERAL DISCOURSE Upon the Death of The High, Puissant and most Illustrious
PRINCE FREDERICK LEWIS, Prince of GREAT BRITAIN, etc.
ROMANS XI. 33. O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of
GOD! How unsearchable are His Judgments and His Ways past finding out!
Honorable, Reverend and Beloved,
WHEN the sorrowful Tidings concerning the Death of his Royal Highness, THE
PRINCE, reached us, and caused the Hearts of this most loyal People to contract
and their Faces to gather a melancholy Gloom; These Words of the holy and
learned Apostle came into my own pensive Mind, and engaged for a Season my own
retired Sentiments.

There was not at that Time a single Though It in my Heart, that it would fall to
my Lot to perform such a mournful Office for the ROYAL SON, as I was once
called to undertake for his ROYAL MOTHER, the late gracious Queen CAROLINE;
whose Name yet lives esteemed, whose exalted Virtues are yet had in Renown,
whose distinguished Merit is yet gratefully approved and owned, and whose
Memory is yet, and will continue to be, blessed among us.

But, when I perceived it to be the Appointment of his Honor, The Commander in
Chief, and the Honorable His Majesty's Council for the Province, that the
Religious Part of the Funeral Obsequies of this Day should be committed to the
Trust of one, who is so unmeet for it, and in all Respects so unequal to it;
and that, as I suppose, because it fell in Course to me this Week to preach
publicly; then from a Sense of Duty I submitted to their Appointment,
acquiesced in their Pleasure and resolved in the Divine Strength to endeavor a
Compliance with their Order and Expectation.

And then, The inspired Passage, which has been read unto us, recurred again
immediately to my Mind: And, as I apprehend, that a suitable Discourse from it
must be seasonable on the present Occasion; This is the very Thing to be now
endeavored.

THE immediate Occasion of the Words before us was the foregoing Argument of
the Apostle concerning the Rejection of the Jews for their Infidelity and
Wickedness and the Reception of the Gentiles into the Church of the living GOD;
which was a Mystery hidden for many Ages and Generations before the Time of the
great Apostle of the Gentiles. There were indeed Predictions and Prophecies of
these Things in the Writings of the old Testament; which either were not
understood, or if understood were not believed, by the Jews. But it was given
by Inspiration to the holy PAUL to understand these ancient Predictions and
Prophecies, and to confirm them in a sure and incontestible Manner.

And when our Apostle, toward the Close of the preceding Chapter, and
throughout This before us, had written clearly concerning the Calling of the
Jews at first, and afterward of the Gentiles, and assigned the Original Cause
thereof, even the Goodness and Mercy of GOD; He then draws to a Conclusion of
his whole Argument, exclaiming as in the Text, O the Depth of the Riches of the
Wisdom and Knowledge of GOD! How unsearchable are His Judgments, and His Ways
past finding out!

In which Expressions his devout and holy Soul seems to be rapt up in Wonder
and Amazement; or rather, according to the Figure in the Text, to be plunged,
swallowed up and overwhelmed with Admiration and Astonishment. O the Depth,
cries He! Like one in an unfathomable Abyss, that can find no Bottom. And what
is it, which is so very deep? It follows here, O the Depth of the Riches both
of the Wisdom and Knowledge of GOD! q. d. O how profound, and of what vast, as
well as deep, Abundance are the Treasures of Divine Wisdom and Knowledge! As
the Divine Majesty perfectly knows whatsoever comes to pass in the World; so in
his Wisdom He superintends, disposes and governs in all, but indeed in such a
Way, and after such a Sort, as w(...) to the humane Race truly wondrous and
incomprehensible: For -- How Unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past
finding out!

These then are the Instances, which the Apostle produces, wherein the
unsearchable Riches of Divine Wisdom and Knowledge are displayed, namely, in the
Divine Judgments and Ways.

By the Judgments of GOD; or, as the Greek runs, TA KPIMATA, we are to
understand his Decrees, says the learned Grotius: And so we may take it
concerning the Counsels and Purposes of the Divine Mind with regard to Nations,
as well as particular Persons: Which, though some imagine, that they can clearly
understand them, and hence arrogantly venture on minutely explaining them; yet
they are certainly deep Things, and by the Sons of Men unsearchable.

And, by the Ways of GOD, we are to understand the Footsteps and Passages of
his Providence in the moral Government of the World. These are His Ways, which
are past finding out. The Greek Word here, which we render past finding out,
properly signifies not to be traced, or by no distinct Marks and perfect
Characters to be found. And some of the more critical Interpreters acquaint us,
that the Term is metaphorical, and taken from sharp-sighted and quick-scented
Hounds, who are apt to stop and pause and show themselves at a Loss, when they
have neither Scent nor Track of the Game which they have been pursuing. And
thus it is with regard to the Children of Men: For however earnest, sharp and
eager we may be to find out the Ways of the ALMIGHTY, yet we cannot trace them.
-- Indeed we may soon perceive enough concerning them to satisfy us, that in
all His Ways, in all the Footsteps of His Providence, He proceeds as becomes
Him; and as He has infinite Reason for all his Conduct toward Mankind; so He
is Righteous in all His Ways and holy in all His Doings.

But although all the Divine Ways, as well as the Divine Counsels and Purposes,
be the Result of perfect Understanding and unerring Reason; yet many are the
Respects and Instances, wherein we cannot trace the Divine Conduct, nor find
out the Grounds and Reasons of the Divine Dispensations.

And now the important Truth before us is, That in the Ways of GOD, or Passages
of His Providence, there is such a Depth of Divine Wisdom and Knowledge as is
not to be traced and investigated by us.

And, in order to illustrate and confirm this Truth, so as that by the Blessing
of GOD it may be firmly established in your Minds; our first Attempt shall be
to set before you some of those Ways of GOD, which are not to be traced and
investigated by us: And the next shall be to make it evident, that such is the
Divine Wisdom and Knowledge in these Ways as is (...) be traced and investigated
by us. And, having (...) these Things, we shall then endeavor to produce such
Reflections upon the whole as may be fit and natural and useful to us.

In the First Place then, we shall endeavor to set before you those Ways of
GOD, which are not to be traced and investigated by us.

And here it must be proper for us to begin with mentioning those Ways of GOD
in calling and rejecting the Jews, and afterward receiving the Gentiles to be
His People. For These are the Ways of GOD, These the Passages of His
Providence, to which our Text has an undoubted and special Reference.

Why then, Sirs, was GOD pleased to call the Posterity of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, to ^^ke them near unto Himself, to know them above all the Families of
the Earth besides, and to confer signal Advantages and Glories on them? -- Was
it because they were such a numerous People, and so powerful a Nation? No
verily! For they were the fewest of all People. And, at their greatest
Seize of Wealth, Power and Grandeur, They were not equal to many other
Kingdoms in Substance, Strength and Extent of Dominion. -- Was it then on the
Account of their su^^^ior Piety, and surpassing Righteousness, that they were
so distinguished and honored of Heaven? No surely! For they were an impious and
unjust Race; they were a disobedient and gainsaying People all the Day long,
even almost from the Time of their becoming the People of GOD to the very Time
of their ceasing to be so. And hence, after They had been His peculiar People,
and even His only People, for the Space of above fifteen hundred Years; He
then, for their obstinate and incurable Infidelity and Wickedness, rejected
them. -- This is a most remarkable Event, which was predicted in the Law and
the Prophets: And GOD in His governing Providence has bro't it to pass
accordingly.

And now the righteous and good Governor of the World has received the Gentiles
into His Church, and taken them to Himself for a peculiar People. But why? This
at the first was so wondrous and amazing a Providence to the christianized
Jews, that they could hardly believe it. And indeed it was so strange and
incredible a Dispensation, that they knew not how to account for it, nor cared
they to admit it, though conscious to the Certainty of the Fact. -- But however
it was in the clearest Manner reveled to our Apostle PAUL; and he faithfully
published it in the third Chapter of his Epistle to the Ephesians, as well as
in the Chapter before us.

And what now has been the Issue and Consequence of these unsearchable Ways of
GOD, in rejecting the Jews and receiving the Gentiles as His People? Alas! The
Former have continued in their Infidelity and Rebellion ever since; and so
under the Displeasure of GOD, and their Rejection from Him for considerably
above sixteen hundred Years. And, whether They will ever again be owned as the
People of GOD, and received into his special Favor and Protection; This is a
Point, about which very learned and pious Men have a Diversity of Sentiments.
But, as we have no Inclination at present to enter into the Controversy, we
shall therefore leave it.

Here then let these Ways of GOD, though unsearchable, yet be duly heeded by us.
Let us behold the righteous Severity, and wondrous Goodness of our GOD: On
them, which fell, Severity; but toward the Gentiles Goodness, if They continue
in His Goodness: Otherwise what should hinder but that They should be cut off
also, if they continue in their Infidelity and Wickedness?

But, having thus noted the special Ways of GOD, to which our Text has a
peculiar Reference; we may now, as I humbly conceive, very fairly and without
any Room for just Exception, speak of some other Ways of GOD, which are not to
be traced and searched out by us.

Thus, The Ways of GOD are past finding out, when He sometimes accomplishes his
most holy Counsels and Purposes by such Means, and in such Ways and Manners, as
are improbable, and in humans Apprehensions altogether unlikely. The Divine
Ways in this Regard are not as the Ways of Men: But, as the Heavens are high
above the Earth, so are the Ways of GOD higher than our Ways, as well as his
Tho'ts above our Tho'ts. In Pursuance of his most holy Counsels, He, by such
Ways and Means as appear to Men improbable, and even in their Apprehension
impossible, sometimes effects Things, and produces Events in the World.

As for Instance here: It pleases the supreme Ruler of the World and Head of
the Church to make the Prosperity of his and his People's Enemies the Occasion
of their Ruin. O the Depth of this Counsel! And how unsearchable are these
Divine Ways! It surely becomes us to admire at them; and with admiring Tho'ts,
and adoring Language, to say with regard to them; O LORD GOD, How great are thy
Works! Thy Tho'ts are very deep. A brutish Man knows not; neither does a
Fool understand This: When the Wicked spring as the Grass, and when all the
Workers of Iniquity do flourish; it is that they shall be destroyed forever.
But it is good for me to draw near to Thee; and I have put my Trust in Thee,
that I may declare thy wondrous Works, and own thy Ways unsearchable.

And sometimes, by oblique Ways, and seemingly contrary Footsteps of Divine
Providence, GOD proceeds to accomplish his Purposes, and his Goings cannot with
ease be traced. Joseph, you are sensible, who was envied and hated of his
Brethren, was Divinely advertised, that he should be raised and advanced to
great and high Dignity: And yet by what strange Means, and in what unlikely
Ways, was it accomplished! He was sold for a Slave and carried into Egypt:
There, by reason of false Accusation, he was unrighteously cast into Prison and
bound in Irons. And how improbable was it now, that he should be released; and
how much more unlikely, that he should become a great Man, and be advanced in
Dignity and Power, even next to the superb Monarch of Egypt? And yet GOD in
His governing Providence promoted his Advancement by the very improbable Ways
and Means preceding it, and made all the seemingly insuperable Hindrances and
Obstacles to it effectually to further and complete his admirable Designs and
Purposes.

And in the like wonderful Ways does it sometimes come to pass, that the
Projections and Attempts of the great Adversary and his Instruments to ruin the
Churches and People of the Son of GOD are baffled and turned into Foolishness.
So when it was the real Intention and vehement Endeavor of the Pagan Roman
Emperors, by repeted, long continued and horrible Persecutions to root
Christianity out of the World, it was all to no Purpose. No! What then was the
Issue of their cruel Design and their bloodily earnest Endeavors? See, Sirs,
and admire the mysterious and wonderful Ways of GOD! An ancient Writer justly
remarked with regard to this Affair Quoties metimur, plures efficimur; The more
we are mowed, says Tertullian, the more we are increased. -- And it cannot have
escaped our Notice, that, the more the Church of Rome have attempted to root
out the Protestant Religion, it has the more commonly and powerfully prevailed;
and that maugre all the deceitful Measures projected and all the Methods of
Violence and Cruelty used by them.

Besides; By such Ways and Means as Mankind would apprehend not to be so
proper, nor so adapted to answer the Ends proposed, does it please the LORD of
all sometimes to produce great Effects in the World. Who could have imagined,
that Naaman the Syrian would have been restored to perfect Health by a Method
so easy and gentle? Yet He was thoroughly and most wondrously recovered by it.
And who could have hoped, that the Walls of Jericho should totter and fall into
spreading Ruins in such a Way and by such Means as were used for it?

Nor yet is This all; But it sometimes pleases GOD to produce great and
mavelous Effects by such Means as Men judge not only to be unlikely, but even
to be foolish and contemptible. Thus, without mentioning any other Example of
it; it deserves to be remarked, that many Thousands and even Millions of People
have been converted by the Foolishness of Preaching; that is to say, by the
Preaching of a crucified and Risen JESUS, which in the Account of the Jews and
Greeks was only Foolishness.

Now how exquisite and unsearchable are these Divine Ways? Who can accurately
trace them, and who can find them out unto Perfection?

In the next Place, Though GOD is pleased to permit moral Evil in the World, yet
He takes Care by Ways which we cannot trace and investigate to bring great
moral Good out of it. -- Thus when it pleased Him, that his Son should be put
to Grief, and He suffered that egregious and horrible Crime to be perpetrated,
the Crucifixion of the MESSIAH; it was permitted and came to pass, that We
might be redeemed from all Iniquity, and purified to Himself a peculiar People,
zealous of good Works. -- And so, in his governing Providence, He often causes
the Sins of His People to be the Occasion of vast moral Good and spiritual
Advantage to them. He so disposes and orders Matters, that Occasions of Falling
and Temptations to Sin are presented before them: And they, not sensible of
their Weakness and Hazard, and hence not lifting up their Hearts to the GOD of
all Grace to guard them against the enchanting Circumstances before them, and
to deliver them from the Evil, are through Inadvertence and Surprise caught, as a
simple Bird in the Snare of the Fowler. Then they are abashed and confounded:
And they are thus humbled and proved; and for the future they grow more
prayerful, circumspect, vigilant and holy in all Manner of Conversation. -- So
wondrous are the Divine Ways in this Affair as not to be traced by us.

But we proceed to observe, in the Third and last Place, Unsearchable are those
Ways of GOD, and not to be found out, which seem not to agree with His Word. By
these Ways of GOD, we mean such Passages of Divine Providence, as seem to be
inconsistent with the Divine Promises and Threatenings.

There is frequently such a State of Things to be found with regard to good and
wicked People in the World, that it is not so very easy* from the Word of GOD
to account for it. -- Is not Good promised to the Pious, and is not penal Evil
threatened against the Wicked? How then comes it to pass, that the Wicked are
often and long in easy and comfortable Circumstances; while the Good are
frequently afflicted and exercised with great and long continued Sorrows?

These Things, though they be not really repugnant, are yet seemingly
inconsistent and contradictory. And hence very wise, as well as very good, Men
have been puzzled and perplexed with these Divine Ways, and utterly at a Loss
how to trace and how to account for Them. So it was with the pious Asaph, who
declares himself to be at a Loss about the Divine Conduct in these Instances,
as in Psalm lxxiii. 16. When I though it to know This, it was too painful for me;
or rather, according to the emphatical Hebrew Expression, it was Labor to mine
Eyes h. e. It greatly fatigued my Mind to look and search into it. And the
weeping Prophet, while He allows the Righteousness of these Divine Ways, yet
begs leave to Reason with his GOD concerning His Judgments, h. e. His holy
Purposes and the Execution of them. And then He proceeds wondering and
enquiring, as in Jerem. xii. 1. Wherefore does the Way of the Wicked prosper,
etc? -- And another holy Prophet, while He acknowleges the Divine Purity and
moral Rectitude, yet at the same Time admires at the Divine Conduct in the
Instance before us and enquires as wanting to be resolved about it; saying as
in Habak. i. 13. Thou art of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and can not look
upon Iniquity: Wherefore look Thou upon them that deal treacherously, and
boldest thy Peace, when the Wicked devoureth the Man that is more righteous
than he?

But, now for preventing any Confusion of Sentiments, We must be a little more
distinct and particular.

On one Hand then, It is observable, that the Ways of GOD sometimes do not
appear to be according to His Threatenings: And in this Regard His Dealings are
not easily to be traced. It is Divinely threatened, that it shall go ill with
the Wicked, for the Reward of his Hands shall be given him: It is the Divine
Threatening, that there shall be many Sorrows to the Wicked; and concerning
those, who are Wicked over much* it is said, that they shall die before their
Time. And yet is it not frequently otherwise? Have not the Wicked often many
Advantages and Comforts, and that too sometimes in a constant Series and long
Succession of them? It is a plain Case. The Wicked often are not in Trouble as
other Men, neither are they plagued as others, who are good and upright: Their
Eyes stand out with Fatness: They have more than Heart could wish. Yea, such
and so unsearchable are the Divine Ways, the Wicked sometimes live and become
old, and grow mighty in Power.

But then, on the other Hand, The Divine Ways seem sometimes to be inconsistent
with the Divine Promises and even contrary to them. There was a remarkable
Instance of this Truth in the Divine Ways particularly with regard to the
Family of David* Which Ways were so mysterious and perplexing, that they were
not to be traced. For it was promised to David, and we have the Promise
recorded in Psalm. lxxxix. 36 and 37. His Seed shall endure forever, and his
Throne as the Sun: It shall be established forever as the Moon before me, etc:
And yet we find in the 38th* and some following Verses of the very same Psalm
those sorrowful Complaints and melancholy Moans, But Thou has cast off and
abhorred: Thou have been wroth with thine Anointed: Thou have made void the
Covenant of thy Servant: Thou have profaned his Crown by casting it to the
Ground. All that pass by the Way spoil him: He is a Reproach to his Neighbors:
Thou have covered him with Shame, etc. How dark were these Ways, and how
puzling these Dealings of the Great GOD! That the Family of David, to which
such signal and glorious Things were promised, should be for a Derision and
Scorn among the Pagans. Is This, said they in a taunting Manner to the poor
Captives in Babylon, Is this your high and mighty King? And where is now your
everlasting Family; from which ONE is to descend, who is to rule ever all and
reign forever? Verily at that Time Things looked very discouraging, nor was
there any finding out of the Divine Ways.

But there is, as you are all sensible, a more general Promise made to the
Pious, that it shall be well with them. And yet, such is the Conduct of Divine
Providence, it is the Portion of many good Men to see evil Days: Yea few and
evil are often the Days of their Pilgrimage here below. And indeed it is no
rare and unusual Thing for them to be persecuted for the very sake of their
Virtue and Righteousness: This it is, which causes the Children of Craft and
Cruelty to deprive them of their worldly Interest by Fraud and Violence: And
hence they are constrained to live in abject Poverty and piteous Wretchedness;
whereas it might have been quite otherwise with them, if they could
licentiously trespass on the Laws of Truth and Virtue! And there is a general
Engagement concerning such as fear JEHOVAH, that their Days shall be prolonged.
And yet how many have there been, whose Lives have been shortened and the Number
of whose Days have been finished; because, from the reverential Fear of GOD,
they would not act an immoral and wrong Part? This was the Case of Righteous
Abel who on this very Account was murdered by his inhuman Brother.

And, besides such general Engagements, there are some particular ones with
regard to the Children of Virtue and holy Obedience. Thus there is an apparent
Promise of long Life to such as are dutiful Children: And it must be allowed,
that in many Instances it has been accomplished. But yet have there not been
valuable and very pious Children, so dutiful to their Parents as that for the
whole World they would not in Action or by a Word offend them, who nevertheless
have not been suffered to continue with them by Reason of Death?

And there is also the Promise of the Life that now is, or of worldly and
temporal Blessings, to Piety, and such as exercise themselves unto it. And yet
how many have suffered as to their worldly Affairs and Interests for this very
Reason, because they have steadfastly chosen, and would resolutely practice the
Things which are pleasing to GOD?

But some, as we are aware, will be ready to start and say, How can these
Things be, and how can they be reconciled? The glorious GOD, who is the GOD of
Truth and without Iniquity, cannot lie: And hence all the Promises, as well as
Threatenings, of his Word must be sure and faithful. But how then comes it to
pass, that the Wicked prosper? And, when it is engaged to the Pious, that it
shall be well with them, and temporal Blessings shall be conferred on them;
nevertheless they have worldly Enjoyments witheld from them, and have many
Afflictions and much Tribulation in the World?

It is usually said in answer to such Enquiries, that, as the Threatenings of
GOD shall sooner or later take Place; so shall the Divine Promises. For These
are not to be taken absolutely; but they are to be understood in this
restrained Sense, so far as shall be most for the Divine Glory and the Good of
the Pious. All indeed must allow, that, as the Divine Wisdom is infinite; GOD
knows what is best upon the whole; and in particular whether worldly Prosperity
is best for His faithful Servants -- It may indeed be good and very desirable
in itself, and it may be of no small Advantage with regard to others. And yet
it may not be convenient, nor yet safe, for good People: For it is possible,
nor at all unlikely, that, if they had a large and affluent Supply of worldly
Comforts, they might be forgetful of GOD, as well as of themselves; and so give
the Reins to criminal Appetites and Inclinations, and hurry on their own Ruin.
And as GOD perfectly knows whether outward Prosperity would be thus dangerous
and hurtful to them; so we cannot say, that, supposing This would be the Case,
GOD has promised to give it unto them. -- And besides, it is probable, that an
adverse State of Things may be very good for them: For they may, by Means
thereof, be considerably advanced in Wisdom and Virtue; and so GOD may be more
glorified by them in this World, and They may gain a higher Degree of Glory in
the happy Apartments of the invisible World. And hence an afflicted and
sorrowful Condition in Life may be really better for them than a State of
outward Prosperity.

But, with regard both to the Promises and Threatenings of the Eternal GOD,
there is one Thing to be considered, which greatly serves to remove Objections
and solve Difficulties as to the Article before us: Which is, that both the
Promises and Threatenings of GOD shall receive their plenary and perfect
Accomplishment in the future State.

As then to the Threatenings of the Divine Word against those, who go on
impenitently and securely in their Sins, These shall surely, punctually and
fully come upon them in the future State. -- The well-meaning, but ill-judging,
Friends of the upright and inflexibly good Job insisted indeed on it, that
signal Calamity must come on the Wicked even in this World: And it must be
granted, that so it sometimes comes to pass. -- But yet it is frequently
otherwise: They are often preserved from deserved Plagues and Miseries: Though
they are sometimes kept from lesser Judgments, that they may be overwhelmed
with greater in the present World. But, in the future State, they shall have
all those Plagues and Miseries, which are threatened against the wicked and
impenitent, inflicted on them; and, as it is expressed in the prophetical and
figurative Style, The Smoke of their Torment shall ascend forever and ever.

And then, As to the Promises of the Faithful GOD, that the Righteous shall
flourish and see Good, that their Days shall be prolonged, and they shall
rejoice and be glad always; if He see it to be fittest and best for them, that
these Promises should be accomplished unto them in this World, He will
doubtless take Care in His governing Providence that They shall be so. But, if,
for the most wise and gracious Purposes and Ends, He sees cause not to fulfill
these Engagements in this World; yet He will certainly and to the full, He will
completely and forever make them good in the heavenly World. There they shall
enjoy many Days, and see good and rejoice in them all: There they shall not
lack any good Thing, but have all their Wants supplied, and all their Desires
satisfied: And there their Joy always shall be overflowing, and yet ever full:
In thy Presence, O Incarnate GOD, is this Fullness of Joy, and at thy Right Hand
are these Pleasures forevermore.

We have thus been instancing in some Passages of Divine Providence, which seem
to be inconsistent, with the Word of GOD, and to run counter to it: Which Ways
of GOD are indeed very difficult to be traced. We have indeed offered a few
Sentiments, which may serve in some Measure to clear and vindicate the Divine
Conduct. But yet, after all, O Thou First, Thou Greatest and Best of Beings,
who art the supreme Moderator of all Things, and our Lord and Father, we must
confess, that, after all we have heard, it is but a small Portion of thy
Conduct which falls within our View: And, as Thy Judgments are unsearchable to
us, so Thy Ways are past finding out by us.

But, having thus endeavored to set before you some of those Ways of GOD which
are not to be traced and investigated by us; our next Attempt must be to show,
that the Knowledge and Wisdom of GOD in these His Divine Ways is not to be
traced and investigated by us.

And now,

This must appear evident to us from the Nature and Reason of the Thing: For
the Knowledge and Wisdom of GOD is infinite and eternal And it therefore becomes
us devoutly to acknowledge and adore before Him. Great is our LORD, and of great
Power: His Understanding is infinite; and it is everlasting. And, because it is
so; therefore it is not to be traced and investigated by us. Indeed the Wisdom
and Knowledge of GOD is His Nature. And although it is common with Divines to
ascribe Ideas to the Divine Intellect, and state the Order of them after the
Manner of Men; against which we have no Design to controvert and contend, though
we ourselves are afraid of being so presumptuous; yet the Truth is, that the
Divine Knowledge and Wisdom is but GOD himself. Therefore His Wisdom and
Knowledge must be infinite and unchangeable, eternal and incomprehensible by
Creatures: And hence how is it possible, that the Ways as well as Purposes of
this Knowledge and Wisdom should be investigated by us?

And, as the Wisdom and Knowledge of GOD is infinite; on the other Side, The
Knowledge and Wisdom of Creatures, and that of even the most knowing and wise,
is but limited and finite. And consequently the most wise and knowing of them
can only perceive and apprehend the finite and limited Effects of Divine and
Infinite Knowledge. And verily the Knowledge and Wisdom of the most wise and
knowing Creatures, when compared with the Understanding of the only wise GOD,
is but Foolishness, but Ignorance, and less than nothing and Vanity. And is it
then probable, or indeed is it possible, for such low Beings, and of such
contracted Minds, as Men at best are, and for such as stand confessed to be
sinful Worms of the Dust, to search out the Purposes of infinite Wisdom, and
trace the Knowledge of the Divine Ways?

But, although we must be sensible of these Things, if we duly attend to the
Dictates of Nature and Reason; which we ought very highly to prize, and for
which we ought to be very thankful to the essential Word of GOD, who so
enlightneth every Man that comes into the World: Nevertheless we have a more
clear Discovery and full Revelation of these Things in the inspired Writings,
that the Knowledge and Wisdom of the Divine Purposes and Ways is not to be
traced and investigated. And here will your Goodness bear with me and can your
Patience last, while I bring to your Minds some Passages of the Book of GOD,
which serve to establish it, that the Wisdom and Knowledge of the Divine
Counsels and Days is unsearchable? Hear then the Wish of Zophar with regard to
the pious Job, in Chapter xi. of Job, 5th and 6th Verses, O that GOD would
speak, -- and that HE would show Thee the Secrets of Wisdom, that are double to
that which is! The Secrets of Wisdom here are the Divine Counsels and Reasons
of the Divine Proceedings: These we do not know, nor may we pretend to
investigate them: For They are out of our Sight, nor can we trace them. And
these Secrets of Divine Wisdom are double to that which is; that is, They are
much more than what is discovered to the humane Race: And very little indeed is
it, that Men can perceive and know, to what is really in the Wisdom and
Knowledge of the Divine Counsels and Ways. And, when the most penetrating and
enlightened Persons on Earth have searched as far as they could into these
Things, and reasoned in the best Manner they could concerning them; they have
at length been constrained to acknowledge and exclaim, as in Job xxvi. 14. Lo,
These are Parts of His Ways: But how little a Portion is heard of Him! --
Again; we read in Psalm xxxvi. 6. Thy Judgments, Jehovah, are a great Deep: Thy
Judgments, that is to say, Thy Counsels and Thy Ways in the moral Government of
the World, are a great Deep; so that it is not for any mortal Eye or finite
Understanding to reach them: No! They are impervious and unfathomable to humane
Minds. -- It is also acknowleged to the Divine Glory, as in Psalm lxxvii. 19.
Thy Way is in the Sea, and thy Path in the great Waters, and thy Footsteps are
not known: The Sense and Meaning of which Acknowlegement, as we take it, is,
The Wisdom and Knowledge of thy Counsels and Ways is so exquisite and
unsearchable, that we cannot investigate them and follow Thee close in them:
The Footsteps of thy Providence are soon lost out of our View; and we are as
much at a Loss to recover the Traces of them as if Thou did tread on the Sea,
and walk over the great Waters. -- Let us also attend to what is delivered by
the perfect and upright Man upon this Article: He, having enquired, where shall
Wisdom be found, and where is the Place of Understanding? And, having repeted
the Enquiry a little afterward, in Job xxviii. 20: He then adds upon it, in
Ver. 21, It is hid from the Eyes of all living; that is, it is not only hid
from all the Animals beneath us, but from all the humane Race, and even all the
living Beings who are superior to them in Rank and Understanding. But who then
knows it? It follows, in the 23d and 27th Verses, GOD understands the Way
thereof; and He knows the Way thereof: He prepared it: Yea, He searched it
out: The Meaning of which, as we humbly conceive, is this, Although no one else
has, yet GOD has, a most clear, comprehensive, full and perfect Knowledge of his
own Wisdom and Understanding; as Angels and Men gain the Knowledge of the Things
which they have thoro'ly searched.

Now from these Things it should seem, that it is too much for vain Man, and it
will not do for them, to think of searching out the Wisdom of the Divine
Counsels, and the Knowledge of the Divine Ways. And accordingly some of the
wisest, as well as the best of Men, have been duly sensible of this, and
humbly acknowleged it with regard unto themselves. Such Knowledge, says the
sweet Psalmist of Israel in Psalm cxxxix. 6, is too wonderful for me: It is
high: I cannot attain unto it. And although Solomon, the most celebrated Man for
the Character of Wise, searched after this Wisdom, yet he could by no means
investigate it to his own Satisfaction: I beheld, writes he in Eccles. viii.
17, all the Work of GOD, that a Man cannot find out the Work that is done under
the Sun: Because, though a Man labor to seek it out, yet he shall not find it:
Yea further, though a wise Man think to know it, yet he shall not be able to find
it.

Thus it has been our Attempt to show, that in the Divine Ways, as well as
Counsels, there is such a Divine Wisdom and Knowledge as is not to be traced and
investigated by us: And, if our Attempt has in any Measure succeeded, O GOD and
Father of the Spirits of all Flesh, Not unto us, not unto us, who are feeble
and vile; but to thy Divine Power and the unsearchable Riches of thy Grace be
the Praise and Glory.

But we are now, in the last Place, to reflect in a suitable Manner upon what
has been offered.

In the First Place then, Since the Counsels of GOD are unsearchable, and His
Ways past finding out; hence let not any of us too busily and curiously pry
into these Secrets of the Deity. Secret Things, we are expressly informed,
belong unto GOD, but Things revealed belong to us and to our Children. And yet,
such is the Vanity of human Minds, and such the Corruption of Men's Hearts, that
they do not give a suitable Attention nor pay a proper Regard to Things
revealed; while at the same Time they are for entering into the Palace of the
immortal King and enquiring into the impenetrable Secrets of His Cabinet, and
they have even the hardiness to divulge their own Discoveries. But this is
quite wrong and vain in us. -- It ought to humble us, that the least and most
common Things in the World are beyond our through Knowledge and Comprehension:
And how then can we expect by the most careful Researches to comprehend the
Nature of GOD, His moral Government and the Manner of His Influence upon his
intelligent and moral Creatures? O let not our Eyes be lofty, nor Hearts so
haughty and vain as to exercise ourselves too much in these Things, which are
too great and high for us. There is a good Passage to this Purpose of one of
the greatest Divines, that has lived since the Days of Inspiration, with regard
to the Divine Counsels and the Divine Manner of influencing moral Agents, which
we may do well to entertain and keep in our Minds for suppressing their Vanity
as to these Matters; If, says he, in his Catholic Theology, any particular
Manner thereof offer itself to your Minds, as that which probably seems to be
the Right; it may afford you Reason therefore to suspect, that it is not the
Right; Because it is certain the Manner is beyond our Reach: And what Man can
comprehend is infinitely below GOD.

However in the next Place, let us not hence conclude, that, since the Ways, as
well as Counsels of GOD, are past finding out, therefore we may be careless or
negligent about making any Enquiry concerning the Divine Conduct and the Works
of Divine Providence. There are indeed some of the Divine Ways which escape our
View and exceed our Comprehension: But then there are others, which can more
easily be traced and better understood. Thus it is particularly as to those
grievous Calamities, with which GOD is pleased sometimes to visit a faithless
and rebellious People: For he, that runs, may read Part of the Divine Intent
and Meaning in them, and perceive in some good Measure wherefore God contendeth
with them: It Is this, as Divine Inspiration has given it unto us, in Psalm
xxviii. 5, Because they regard not the Works of the LORD, nor the Operations of
His Hands, the LORD will not build them up, but destroy them.

And,

In the Third Place, As it appears, that the Counsels of GOD are unsearchable
and his Ways past finding out; let us hence have a Care of misinterpreting the
Divine Methods and Ways, and so making a wrong Use and Improvement of them. The
Divine Majesty, who rules and who does whatsoever He pleases among the
Inhabitants of this World, as well as governs in the Armies of Heaven above,
may seem sometimes to frown upon his People, and to smile on their Enemies. But
what then? Shall we hence imagine, that GOD approves of wicked Men, and is
regardless of the People whom He loves? No* This would be a wrong Construction
and Sense of the Matter: And it would be very irregular and sinful to act from
such an Apprehension. And, in order to guard us against any such
Misapprehension and bad Conduct, let us attend to what the Divine Being has
reveled by one of His Prophets, in Mal. iii. from the 14th V. Ye have said, It
is vain to serve GOD: And what Profit is it that we kept his Ordinance, and
that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? And now we call the
Proud happy: yea they that work Wickedness are set up, yea they that tempt GOD
are even delivered. Then they, that feared the LORD, spoke often one to
another; and the LORD hearkened and heard, and a Book of Remembrance was written
before Him for them that feared the LORD and that though it upon his Name: And they
shall be mine, says the LORD of Hosts, in that Day when I make up my Jewels;
and I will spare them, as a Man spares his own Son that serves him: Then
shall ye return and discern between the Righteous and the Wicked; between him
that serves GOD, and him that serves Him not.

Moreover, and in the last Place, Let us all, upon the whole, prepare and
ripen, by the Assistance of Divine Grace, for the happy Time, wherein we may
enjoy more clear and full Discoveries of the Divine Counsels, and the dark and
mysterious Ways of Divine Providence.

We live in a World, wherein gloomy and perplexing Events do ever and anon
occur: And such are sometimes the Ways of Divine Providence, so dark and very
intricate are they, that in vain do our Understandings try to trace them, and
find out the particular Intent and precise Meaning of them.

And now,

My Honorable, Reverend and Beloved Hearers,

I am very well persuaded, that you consider the Death of the High, Puissant
and most Illustrious Prince, FREDERICK LEWIS, Elder Son of our most gracious
Sovereign King GEORGE the Second, Prince of Great Britain, Electoral-Prince of
Brunswick-Lunenburgh, Prince of Wales, etc. as a very darksome Event, and one
of the mysterious Ways of GOD which is not to be investigated by us.

'Twas on the Night of Gloominess, Clouds and thick Darkness preceding the
Twenty-first of March, between eleven and twelve o'Clock, that He departed this
Life, to the utmost Grief of His Royal Parent, His Illustrious Consort, and the
whole Royal Family; and to the inexpressible Sorrow, as well as unspeakable
Loss, of the Public; who had conceived highly concerning Him, who expected good
and great Things from such a wise and merciful Prince, and were ready to say,
This same shall hereafter more considerably and extensively comfort us.

But ah! How are our fond Hopes withered! How are our pleasing Views and
Expectations at an End! For the lovely Prince, as well as the rough Peasant,
dies and returns to the Dust. -- Thus, LORD GOD, have Thou turned our promising
Hope and Joy into Disappointment and Mourning: Thou have deprived us of
Gladness, and girded us with Sackcloth: Thou do hide thy Face from us; and we
are troubled.

It cannot be reasonably expected, that we, on this Side of the wide Atlantic,
should be able, from a through Knowledge of the dear PRINCE, to give Him his
entire and just Character: And hence we shall not be so aspiring as to
undertake it.

But however, since there are sundry Particulars relating to Him which have
reached us; and as it is fit and right, that These should be rehearsed; and
that not only out of Respect unto Him, but from a Religious Regard to the
Prince of the Kings of the Earth, that so the Glory of His Gifts and Benefits
may redound unto Him; therefore we cannot well be excused from piously
declaring these Things.

As the best Care was taken with regard to his Highness's Education; so his
Improvements in Wisdom and Goodness were answerable to it: For He soon
discovered, that He carried a Mind within Him beyond his Years, and manly
Tho'ts and Concerns in the Bloom of Youth: And, as apprehending Himself born
for greater Things than those, about which young People generally employ
themselves, He behaved Himself accordingly. And, on these Accounts, He soon
became no less dear to his Royal Parents, than on the Account of his Descent
from Them.

It was no Disadvantage to the PRINCE, that He was of a sweet and engaging
Aspect, and a very agreeable Air and Deportment; For, by means of These
external Circumstances, He at once drew and allured the Affection of all, who
had any Sense of what is amiable and becoming.

But it was much more to his real Character and Credit and Glory, that he was
of a humane, benevolent and kind Temper of Mind: And hence He was easy of
Access, courteous of Speech and condescending in Behavior: For, although He were
next in Dignity to his most excellent Majesty, the KING, Yet He considered
Himself as a Man and a Subject, in common with the Rest of his Fellow Subjects
beneath Him: And hence He conversed and acted in the Palace and abroad with
continual Mansuetude, Humility and Gentleness.

As He very well knew, that Political Knowledge and Wisdom was requisite to
qualify one for the Government of others; therefore he was careful and
industrious to acquire this Knowledge and Wisdom, both from the most able
Preceptors and from approved Authors: Though at the same Time other Branches of
Science were not neglected by Him.

Behold Him at length commencing Man; and, through the tender Care of our
gracious Sovereign, happily married to a Princess of matchless Form, of
surpassing Accomplishments, a shining Pattern of Virtue and of incomparable
Merit in the Esteem of all around her. And now how careful was he to perform
the Offices of the wedded State, and set a bright Example of connubial Fidelity
and Tenderness, in the midst of an adulterous and profligate Generation. And it
surely demonstrates a prodigious Degeneracy of Manners and a shameless
Effrontery in Vice, that so many would still licentiously break the Nuptial
Bond; while they had the Example of the PRINCE, as well as the Laws and
Threatenings of the immortal GOD, against them.

The worthy PRINCE, as not born for Himself but Others, was studious to behave
aright and well toward them. Hence He was devoted to his Royal Parent and the
public Good: And as He wore the Motto on his Arms as Prince of Wales, Ich Dien,
or I serve; so He fulfilled it: For He though it it his Honor to serve the best of
Kings, as well as of Parents; and, while He was the Delight of all Mankind, He
was willing to serve and help them all.

He gave the World some Specimens and Proofs of his Disposition to promote the
Trade and Commerce of his Royal Parent's Kingdoms, and to encourage Learning
and useful Arts in them: And it was doubtless pleasing to His Majesty's good
Subjects at Home, as it has been to us in these distant Lands, that He, on
these Accounts, received such fit Acknowlegements and public Testimonies of
Respect and Gratitude. Besides his being the first Commissioner for building
the Royal Hospital at Greenwich, and Governor of the British white Herring
Fishery; He was chosen the Chancellor of the University of Dublin, and a Fellow
of the Royal Society in London, and received other Testimonies besides of
national Esteem.

It must be mentioned to his Renown, that He in an exemplary Way attended on
the public Offices of Religion: Nor was He ashamed, as too many of the great
Ones of the Earth seem to be, to acknowledge his Maker and Lord, as well as
ours, in private with his Household.

And besides, He was a Prince in Goodness and Benignity, and exhibited a high
and mighty Pattern of Christian Love and good Works. Among the Proofs and
Evidences of This, New England has some to produce and utter with singular
Delight and Satisfaction. His Royal Highness was pleased to send a very
handsome Gratuity toward the School for the Education of Indian Children at
Housitonock under the Care of the late pious and learned Mr. Sergeant. And, as
we understand, it was the expressed Design and Purpose of the PRINCE to grant
to the Successor of the same reverend and very valuable Missionary, if properly
recommended, a very handsome Annuity as long as He lived. So that the Goodness
and Charity of his Royal Highness, like the pleasing Light of the Morning Star,
was not confined to the other Hemisphere, but shone over the vast Ocean, and
reached to the distant Wilds of these American Regions.

His Royal Highness, the PRINCE, thoroughly understood, that, although Government
was of Divine Institution, yet the Form of it is an humane Ordinance: He knew,
that the British Monarchy was not absolute and indefeazable, but elective and
hereditarily so: He saw clearly, that nothing was lawful in the Administration
but what was allowed by the Laws of the Realm; and that He, who wears the Crown
by the National Consent and Choice, is not above the Laws, nor at Liberty to
dispense with them. -- Nor have we any Doubt, but that his Royal Highness was
confirmed in these Sentiments and Views from the Administration of His most
Excellent Father and Grandfather, and so established in his Purposes by the
Will of GOD to rule and govern according to them.

Thus was his Royal Highness prepared to be the Father of his People, before He
was really so: And, by all that we can collect, He was inflexibly determined to
do nothing that might prove detrimental to the Interests of Great Britain, and
it is Dependencies; nor to neglect any Thing, which might promote, secure and
protract the Welfare and Happiness of the People to be his future Charge. His
future Charge, did I say? Alas! He must be just fitted and qualified to receive
them as such; and yet, so unsearchable is the Divine Conduct. He must be
removed from them, nor inherit their delightful Homage and Subjection.

These are a few, of the many valuable Things, relating to His Royal Highness;
which endeared Him unto us while living; and which, at his Decease, cause a
general Concern and Grief, and the suitable Expressions of it among us.

We are now therefore dutifully following our gracious Sovereign and Father,
the KING, and our Mother Kingdoms, though with more late and unequal Steps, in
paying our mournful Respects on the Account of the PRINCE's Exit.

His Majesty's good and most dutiful Subjects of this Province, who enjoy the
Benefit of the Civil Establishment in Favor of our Religious Rights and
Privileges; and who are as a People, if we understand our own Principles, the
most through Asserters of the just Liberties of Mankind, are to a Man inviolably
attached to His Majesty King GEORGE, and the Protestant Succession in his Royal
House: To a Man therefore we unite in deploring the Loss of his Royal Son: And
it is our united Wish and most fervent Prayer, that His Majesty may be
supported under this grievous Bereavement; that He may gain spiritual Good by
it, and that, by the Loss of his own desirable Son, He may be further
influenced and animated to espouse the Cause of the Son of GOD, and promote His
Kingdom and Interest not only at Home, but in other European Nations also.

We have also a most tender Sympathy with Thee, Illustrious Princess AUGUSTA,
who have lost thy well beloved and excellent Prince; and who, as long as Thou
did enjoy Him, did exhibit a great and engaging Pattern of conjugal
Affection and Obedience. The LORD GOD Almighty strengthen Thee, and uphold Thee
by the Right Hand of his Righteousness! The Prince of Life be with thee, thy
constant Guide and kind Supporter! May He never forsake, and never fail Thee!

At the same Time we condole with his Royal Highness the DUKE, with the
Princesses and the Rest of the Royal Family; heartily desiring and entreating,
that the GOD of all Grace and Comfort would afford unto them Spiritual Supplies
and Consolations, which are indeed no small Things; but unspeakably greater and
more glorious than all the Delights and Grandeurs which this World can afford
them.

Our Hearts too are properly affected in thinking of the Posterity of his Royal
Highness: And we are much grieved for them, that They are so early and soon
deprived of their meritorious Parent; and so They may not be allowed any longer
to be instructed by his Counsels, and charmed and led along by his Example. We
bless however the Divine Arbiter and Sovereign LORD of the World, that He has
not left Great Britain and its Dependencies to bewail a broken Lineage and a
doubtful Throne: For his Royal Highness has left five Sons and three Daughters
as Pledges of Peace and Comfort unto us. And it is now our humble and earnest
Prayer, that his Royal Highness Prince GEORGE, sweet Youth, our FREDERICK now,
who suceeds his Father as Heir apparent to the Imperial Crown of Great Britain,
and that his Royal Highness's Brethren and Sisters also may be the Special Care
and Charge of Divine Providence, that they may be preserved for eminent
Blessings, and that the Superior Wisdom and heroic Virtues of their long and
glorious Train of Ancestors, from his present Majesty, whom GOD preserve, even
back to the Times of the Reformation, may be inherited and possessed by them.

We have thus been discharging our Duty to a most valuable and excellent
Prince: Grieved am I, and ashamed, that my Part has been performed no better;
yet hoping, that an honest Design and Endeavor to do well will not be
contemned by those of greater Abilities.

But, since it appears, that a most sorrowful Event has befallen us; the
Question is, What is the Improvement that we are to make of it? What are we to
do for the Support of our Minds under it, and to keep them from sinking under
the Pressure of such a heavy Bereavement, as well as all other grievous
Dispensations.

Hear now then the Conclusion of the whole Matter. Let us all both Rulers and
Subjects, both high and low, both rich and poor together, by the Aids and
Assistances of Divine Grace most heartily implored and thankfully improved, not
put our Trust in Princes, nor any of the Sons of Men, in whom there is no help:
For their Breath goes forth: They return to the Earth, and in that very Day
all their Tho'ts concerning us perish. But let us put our Trust in the almighty
Power and infinite Wisdom and Goodness of GOD: For although an excellent Prince
has left our Earth, to sit, as we trust, with Princes above, even with the
Princes of the heavenly Court; and, on the Account of This, as well as the sad
moral State of Things at Home, and in our Land, our Minds cannot but be clouded
and filled with Perplexities and Fears; yet we ought, from a clear Apprehension
of the infinite Wisdom, Ability and Readiness of GOD to appear for us and
protect and bless us, to make These, as well as His Promises through JESUS
CHRIST, our Hope and Trust and unfailing Refuge: And accordingly, let us, from
a real Conviction and hearty Sense of these Divine Perfections and Promises,
commit the Case of our Nations and this poor Land to the Divine Being, with
Hope in his Mercy, as well as Dependence on His Power and Wisdom, yet to save,
defend and prosper us; but with an entire and profound Resignation to His
sovereign Will. -- And let us all acquaint our selves with our GOD and be at
Peace: Let us think on our Ways, and turn our Feet into the Divine Testimonies;
let us make haste and make no Delay to turn to GOD through the only Mediator, and
to glorify Him on the Earth and serve our Generation according to His Will, as
well as to work out our own Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

These Things are essentially fit and right: And They are good and profitable
unto Men: And, if we do these Things, and continue constant and faithful unto
the Death in them; Then, we shall have an open and abundant Entrance ministered
to us into the everlasting Kingdom of our great LORD and SAVIOR: Then, The
dark Events of relative Time will be explained to universal Satisfaction; and
those Counsels and Ways of GOD, which have been inexplicable, nor to be
investigated by us, will be unfolded and appear in a Light unspeakable and full
of Glory: And, in Fine, Then, Then, All the intelligent happy Creation will
with one Consent render due Acknowlegements and Glories to GOD and the Lamb:
And may we all, without one of this great Assembly missing, join the Heavenly
Throng, saying, Blessing and Honor and Glory be to Him that sits on the
Throne, and to the Lamb forever and ever, AMEN!

FINIS.

